[Music]
Hello, Graham Hancock. Welcome. Hi. Hi,
Mark. Good to see you again. You, too.
You are certainly a man that needs no
introduction.
Well, that's that's uh nice of you to
say that. Um
I don't know. Yeah, I don't know. The
the the um the the issue of needing no
introduction is um is a poison chalice,
you know. Uh it uh it it it it's it's
great. I'm I'm so grateful and I I feel
so privileged that people know of my
work uh all all over the world and and I
get so much love sent my way. But I also
get so much hatred sent my way at the
same time. I guess that's just that's
just the world we live in. That's the
internet. That's the big target that got
painted on my back after my Netflix
series. It's, you know, it's part of
it's it's it's part of the deal. But uh
but it but it can be it can be
exhausting and and dispiriting
sometimes.
Yeah, I guess that fame is a
double-edged sword, right? Uh yes. Uh
yes. Yes, it certain it certainly it
certainly is. It's not something that I
ever sought. Um I I I never I never had
had in mind that that might happen and
and by by comparison with fame, I'm a
very minor
celebrity today. Um but even that never
never occurred to me as a as a
possibility. I I I was just pursuing my
passion and and and and writing books
about it. And you know luckily what I
wrote re resonated with uh with with a
large number of people. I do think you
know luck is a is a significant factor
in in any kind of success. Yes, success
is most unlikely without hard work. Uh,
and it's most unlikely without some sort
of inspiration, but it's also most
unlikely without a bit of luck as well.
Uh, and, uh, you know, I think I was
lucky.
Yeah, the Ancient Apocalypse, it was
such a massive hit. Um, I didn't realize
it was that big of a hit because I I'm
just very interested in this stuff. So,
I thought, you know, people in my circle
are into it. I didn't know it was like
this global phenomenon.
Yeah, it it was a global phenomenon and
that and that um I think speaks to to to
a worldwide interest uh in the human
past and and in the mysteries of our
past and and and a worldwide rejection
of the notion that there is no mystery
about our past. I I I I think that that
that idea is one that more and more
people just will not accept. It's
extraordinary to be alive at all. Uh
just to, you know, to be in a human
body, to exist, uh to be able to feel
love and and hunger and and uh enjoy
one's grandchildren. You know, all all
of this is a
is a miracle and and a mystery and
that's wrapped up in the in the larger
mystery of of what we are as a species
and the origins of of of of human
civilization. And I think it is it is
something that people are more and more
interested at the same time at the same
time there's a huge trivializing effect
at work in the in the mass media and on
social media today as well. So so even
though my work has attracted a fair
amount of hostility from from
archaeologists I'm I'm glad that it's
encouraging people to think seriously
about the past whether they agree with
me or not.
Yeah. I think looking into the past is
an important part of a spiritual journey
because like you say, we are a mystery
to ourselves. Yeah. And I first
discovered you um when you did a TED
talk at White Chapel. I think it was
2013. That's right. And uh it got banned
which it was so weird. It was so it was
so weird. Rert Sheldrake was speaking at
the same time. And uh you know Rupert
and I have known have known each other
for a long while but but there's there's
lots of areas in which our work does not
intersect at all. Um and and but there
is one one area where it does intersect
and that is the mystery of consciousness
and and uh specifically whether you know
consciousness can be definitively
defined as as being local to the brain
or whether it's non-local. Um and that
was the common factor between the two
talks that we gave um at uh at that
TEDex event uh was was this mystery of
consciousness and and can it simply be
reduced to an epiphenomenon of brain
activity or is it something much more
complicated than that? And that seemed
to cross some kind of red line for TED
because they took my talk down and they
took Rbert's talk down as though it was
somehow forbidden somehow some some
terrible heresy to consider the
possibility that that that uh you know
consciousness might not be an accidental
byproduct of brain activity. It might be
something much more complicated than
that. It it seemed like there was a a
dogma that had been threatened there.
And then there was a massive public
reaction to that. and and and I I think
Ted realized that they that they made a
propaganda mistake by doing it the way
they did. Uh it it it didn't look good
for them. So So they tried to they tried
to backpedal and and and they put they
put the sites in what what Rbert rightly
referred to as the naughty corner on
their website. They put our talks back
up in this sort of isolated corner on
the website so they could claim that
they hadn't taken this offline. Uh
although of course they had and they and
they were forced by public opinion to
put it to put it back online. Um but it
was that um it was it was that notion of
a of a mystery in in in consciousness
and and and that this is not something
you know we can simply take for for
granted and and that and that it is not
necessarily the case that everything can
be reduced to matter. Uh that there that
there are
non-material areas of reality. And and
this seems to be it seems to confront a
a major scientific dogma of today which
is scientific materialism. And that same
dogma uh is is at work in uh
attempting to reduce the human past uh
to material processes again without
really considering all the other aspects
of being of being a human being. So the
kind of the kind of evidence that
archaeologists admit uh into into an
inquiry tends to boil down to material
artifacts and the interpretations that
can be put on them uh and and and
uh most other issues like like the
spirituality of those people um or or or
or their myths and traditions are kind
of relegated to secondary or zero
importance in the in the archaeological
inquiry. And I I think that's a mistake.
Yeah. I think perhaps you and Rupert
touched on some major insecurity in the
scientific field because it's so
materialistic. It's it's leaned so
heavily into that materialistic field
that it's kind of reduced humans down to
these machines that are just a bunch of
mechanical parts. It unfortunately has
those has those wider implications. You
know, I think that that there was there
was
a a rightful and and proper rebellion
against religious dogma uh which which
uh dominated so many cultures for so
many centuries and still dominates many
cultures to today. A a feeling that you
know we shouldn't just take what we're
told as true that we should we should
investigate and inquire and science
played a very very important role in
that. But I think I think in
in overreacting to religious dogma that
the baby got thrown out with the
bathwater. Uh that sci that science um
be became over materialistic
overdetermined that there should be
nothing even hinting of spirituality
uh in in in anything to be done with.
It's one of those ironies that, you
know, archaeologists often sh claim to
be champions of indigenous peoples. Uh,
but very few archaeologists that I've
met who claim to be champions of
indigenous peoples. Very few of those
archaeologists uh believe in spirits uh
or demons or non-physical entities which
is the fundamental basis of shamanistic
belief systems. uh you know so while on
the one hand those archaeologists are
saying that they champion indigenous
peoples on the one hand they utterly
reject what those indidi ind indigenous
people experience and believe uh and
those experiences very often brought on
in deeply altered states of
consciousness by substances like
iawasa. I do think any archaeologist
working on working on shamanism as a as
a subject should be obliged uh to
experience deeply altered states of
consciousness which can be brought on by
a number of means and and and ways but
they're so fundamental a part of the
shamanistic experience that they should
be a part of archaeological inquiry as
well.
Yeah. And your talk that night was on
the war on consciousness and this you
know it's been 13 years since then and
I'm curious to know like where do you
think we are in that war? Is that still
happening? Yeah. Yeah. I I mean
obviously I I chose that title
deliberately to to echo the notion of
the war on drugs and I don't think it is
a war on drugs. I think it is a war on
consciousness and I think it is a war on
adult sovereignty uh that is being that
is being waged here. Uh
When I talk about this issue, it raises
all kinds of alarms. Uh but I but I do I
do feel strongly that that it is not
correct for the state to assume
responsibility uh for adults over their
own bodies. Uh I think I think that
responsibility should lie with the adult
alone as long as those adults do no harm
to others. You know the m the moment
harm is done to others there may be a
role for state intervention. There is
and we already have, you know, masses of
laws uh that that that that cover
negative behavior to towards others. But
personal decisions that we make as
adults about what we put into our own
bodies, whether or not that substance is
deemed to be harmful in any way, I don't
see that as the business of government.
I see that as the business of free and
independent adults. and and and it
perplexes me why the Republican party in
the United States which which which
speaks to individual freedom and liberty
is so reluctant to decriminalize drugs
because that's what should happen all
drugs should be decriminalized all of
them uh then it becomes possible to have
reasonable dialogue about the risks and
dangers of certain substances then it
becomes possible to remove from market
all kind of bad actors who are who who
are bringing in uh substances that have
been mixed up in in ways that are you
know obviously dangerous. The the the
legal framework is all wrong around this
and the philosophical basis of that
legal framework is is all wrong. We
should we live in a society
where freedom should be paramount and
fundamental amongst those freedoms is
the freedom of adults to make decisions
about their own bodies, their own health
and their own consciousness. And I think
that's that's why uh when I look at the
war on drugs, it's a completely failed
effort. It has done absolutely nothing
to reduce the consumption of any quote
unquote drugs. It's a it's appallingly
bad. It's done no good whatsoever. It's
cost billions of dollars. It's harmed
huge numbers of people, particularly in
ethnic minority communities. Absolutely
useless exercise. So what's it all
about? And what it's all about is not a
war on drugs. It's literally a war on
consciousness. It's it's about saying we
the government tell
you you supposedly sovereign adult
individual what you may or may not
experience. We'll allow you to
experience this but we won't allow you
to experience that. Uh this is this is
philosophically deeply corrupt and I
don't understand why it's not understood
more widely in in in the world today.
There are better where there are harms
in drugs. And I I make this very clear
just as there are harms in climbing
cliff faces or or jumping out of
airplanes with small parachutes. I make
it I make it very clear that people
should research and investigate this
subject very very carefully before
indulging in in any kind of drug
activity. But at the end of the day, it
should be the free sovereign decision of
adults whether they do that or not. If
while doing that they cause harm to
others then by all means there's there's
a role for the law but private
individual experiences what we do with
our own health and our own bodies th
those should be our own business. So it
is a war on consciousness. It's part of
the dumbing down of our society. I think
psychedelics
uh were particularly targeted
uh because there was such an upsurge of
interest in them in in the youth
community back in the 1960s. Uh and and
um uh I think that the powers that be
understood that psychedelics
uh are much more than just a fun trip.
Uh what a real psychedelic journey about
is deeply and profoundly questioning
everything about the nature of reality
and and the course of your own life. uh
and I think the powers that be what else
can I call them which which put these
laws into place in the first place and
maintain them to this day. I think
there's a fear of people asking
questions. I I think I think that's what
making psychedelics illegal is all
about. And and uh you know personally
I've never experienced and I do not wish
to experience cocaine. I don't I don't
know. I I it doesn't attract me. It
sounds like a sort of noisy meaningless
conversation in a bar. I I'm just not
drawn to it. Um
but I would not seek to make it to
criminalize another human being because
that human being is drawn to it. That's
their choice. And part of the process of
being an adult and living and living
life is making mistakes and learning
from our mistakes. You know, if
government is a sort of nanny figure in
our lives and and and protects us in
every or tends to protect us in every
way and and protects us from making
mistakes, then it's also protecting us
from learning from our mistakes. And you
know, all of this has not been properly
taken into account. So, yes, definitely
not a war on drugs, a war on
consciousness.
Yeah. Well, thanks to you, I think we've
made a lot of progress in this field.
Yeah. Yeah. Thanks thanks thanks to in
part to me my my my role has purely been
what it always is as as as as a writer
and and and and and as a reporter you
you know I'm I don't regard myself as a
fundamental player in this field. There
are there are terrific scientists
working in this field right now. uh
looking first and first and foremost
what you know what has changed it was
already changing by 2013 but it's
changed much more since then is the is
the realization
uh of the therapeutic effects of
psychedelics that that that that really
harmful conditions such as
post-traumatic stress disorder and deep
depression uh can be healed can be
permanently healed uh with
uh the targeted careful use of
psychedelics and sometimes that targeted
careful use means a heroic dose. Uh
that's that that it's interesting that a
single heroic dose of psilocybin proves
more effective than than than micro
doing uh in in dealing with long-term
depression. Um of course these studies
need to be
continued, you know, is the is the
transformation permanent or is it
something that will fade after a while?
Well, even if it fades after a while,
it's still a transformation which is
needed. Depression is getting locked
into a a very narrow circle of negative
thinking and you keep going round and
round and round and you're just locked
in that place and you and and no matter
how you try to escape from it, your mind
brings you back to it again and again
and again. I speak from experience. I've
suffered from depression. I think what
psychedelics do
um the whole the whole group of
tryptoines do actually uh in this in
this sense is they they allow a kind of
resetting of the brain but they they
they break that
cycle and they allow you to step away
from it and that's why people with PTSD
and depression have have been very
positively affected in the trials that
have been done particularly by by
psilocybin.
you know, we can no longer have uh
government claiming, oh, these things
are terribly dangerous. They're terribly
harmful. You know, they're going to make
you jump off buildings because
scientific scientific studies are being
done and they're showing that they have
incredible therapeutic and healing
potential. Um, but that's just part of
the journey. There's there's the the the
the other part of the journey is the
recognition that it it is the sovereign
right of adults to make decisions about
their own consciousness. And if those
decisions include a decision to use
psilocybin or LSD or DMT, it's absurd,
crazy, and completely wrong that that
should be
criminalized. Yeah, I see a lot of
parallels with this uh war on drugs, war
on consciousness, and the fight for our
past. And um George Orwell has this
quote that made me think of you. He said
um those who control the present control
the past, and those who control the past
control the future. Yeah. So, it seems
like there's this great deal of energy
invested in trying to control this
narrative of the past. It's a very
strange thing and I I've been aware of
it I've been aware of it for quite a
while.
Um I the first book that I wrote which
which kind of touched on the possibility
of a lost civilization and which
switched my interests in that direction
was was the sign and the seal. um my
quest for the lost arc of the covenant
and and particularly the Ethiopian claim
to possess it which was published in
1992. Book was a minor hit. Um was the
first book I'd ever got into a
bestseller list. Um and it didn't cause
a lot of controversy. In fact, there was
there was generally quite a bit of non-
negative interest in it. There were very
there were very few people pouring scorn
upon me for for exploring the Ethiopian
claim to possess the Ark of the
Covenant. Um, and the kind of labels
like pseudocientist and hoaxer and liar
and so on that are routinely applied to
me by my opponents today uh were not
applied uh in the case of the sign of
the seal. Um, but that only got to
number six on the bestseller list. Then
came Fingerprints of the Gods published
in 1995. And that's, you know, I think
where an element of luck came into play.
I I think I did I did write a good book,
but but uh I I think I was lucky as
well. It it it was number one for six
weeks in Britain. It was number one for
six weeks in Italy. It was a huge number
one bestseller in Japan, all over the
world. It was a phenomenon. It created a
a tide of interest. and and that's when
I started to experience uh real push
back in this field from from the
archaeological community. And what I
found from the beginning is that that is
that that push back either deliberately
or stupidly
misconstr. they they they they seem to
imagine that I am claiming that there
was this giant advanced empire uh that
existed during the ice age and I regard
that as a fact. I don't claim that and I
don't regard that as a fact. I think the
past is an open mystery. I think there
are so many messages that come down to
us from the past which which invite us
to consider possibilities other than
those that have been considered by
archaeologists. That's what I that's
what I've wanted to pursue. And and I'm
happy that readers have come along with
me. But I'm not some kind of prophet,
you know. I'm not claiming I'm not
claiming, you know, all of this is 100%
a fact. I'm saying this is a mystery I'm
investigating. Come along with me on
that mystery and see what you feel about
it. And please do some investigation
yourself as well. So, you know, the the
from from the beginning there's been
this attempt to say that um that I'm
making all of these grandiose claims. Um
those who haven't even the faintest
acquaintance with my work often say that
I'm claiming that aliens were involved
as well, which I've never done. Um but
but by and large it's a misconr of my
work or or a misrepresentation of my
work or a straw man of my work which is
then viciferously attacked and you know
unless people actually bother to read my
books and to get to grips with what with
what I say in those books uh it's very
easy just to accept this the straw man
as me. Um and and it's been like that
since
1995. It rose to a peak around about
1998 1999 2000 BBC Horizon which is
BBC's leading science program did a a
kind of detailed documentary
uh on me and Robert Bval primarily the
documentary focused on on me and on
Robert Bval and on our work together um
and it it it presented itself as a as a
debunking exercise. there were some
inaccuracies in it. We, you know, it's
it's
um when people attempt to debunk
something, they do their best
to rule out to avoid any inaccuracies,
but there were inaccuracies in the in
the BBC's approach, particularly
concerning the Orion correlation. Um,
and uh this resulted in the program
having to be re-edited and and
re-released. It was the one of our
complaints specifically regarding the
Orion correlation was upheld by the
Broadcasting Standards Corporation which
meant the BBC had to eat a little bit of
crow and remake uh the documentary
somewhat. Um but nevertheless that was
uh you know that was a a serious
coordinated attempt uh to tell the
public to have the public believe that
Bval and I were just full of and
that there was no point in any of them
even listening to a single word we said.
Fortunately the public are generally
capable of making up their own minds. Uh
at at least those who are interested in
in in our work. uh but but you know that
was that was the nature of it. Then um I
wrote a book called supernatural
meetings with the ancient teachers of
mankind which was about psychedelics and
about shamanism in
general. It wasn't a big hit but uh it
it's it's carried on being of interest
to substantial number of people. It's
recently been reissued under the title
visionary uh in the United States. Um
that book had although in many ways one
of the most controversial books I've
ever written I would have thought um
attracted very little criticism from the
academic community almost none uh except
perhaps because I was willing to buy
into the notion that those entities
construed as spirits by shamanistic
societies uh might have a reality to
them. uh that it's you know we shouldn't
we shouldn't just dismiss all of this as
fantasies and hallucinations. It's a
much more complicated issue than that.
But that book was was was not massively
criticized. And I I then went away and
wrote some novels. Um and nobody paid
any attention to them. Uh and and
actually I I was I was so disillusioned
with the
whole lost civilization field with with
the with the reactions to it from
mainstream academia. Um it's not that I
want them to accept my theories. I just
I just would prefer not to be smeared
and insulted and lied about. That's all.
It wears you down after a while. It wore
down John Major Jenkins. John Major
Jenkins with his with his work on on the
Mayan calendar. John passed away in 2017
with with with with cancer. John John's
life was ruined by these so-called
debunkers. You know, it it wore down
Robert Bval, one of the great geniuses
of our time. these constant insults,
lies, smears, attacks that the the
relatively small group of I think
envious and jealous archaeologists and
their acolytes
uh- spread spread around. It's very it's
very unfortunate that that things that
things work that way. Anyway, sorry, I'm
getting No, that was a that was a far
better answer than I could have asked
for.
Um, yeah, I do notice a lot of straw
manning where they they dump in things
like aliens into your theories and then
they argue with that straw man instead
of contend with things that it happens
all it happens all the time and you know
I've had to apart from apart from a a
video that I've released on my YouTube
channel which is called factchecking
flint dibble which goes point by point
through a number of issues
uh in the so-called debate that I had
with Flynn Dibble. Um, apart from that,
I've not really responded publicly much
on all of this. So, I've been asked
questions about it on podcasts and I've
talked about that, but I haven't I
haven't
really made much in the way of a formal
response except the formal response that
I made to the Society for American
Archaeology Open Letter uh where the
Society for American Archaeology back in
2022 when season 1 of Netflix of of
Ancient Apocalypse was released, they
they wanted Netflix
to reclassify it as science fiction and
they said that it was dangerous and that
that it was misleading the public. Uh,
again, a direct attack on on me and on
and on my work. And of of course, if the
Society for American Archaeology had
succeeded in bullying Netflix into
reclassifying a documentary series as
science fiction, it would have had far
less viewers. Um, and that was the that
was the objective. But but fortunately,
Netflix were not to be bullied. Uh, and
and uh you know, it went ahead. But I
replied point by point to that open
letter. And you know, frankly, in plain
language, it's full of It's full
of It's full of It's full of straw
men and it's full of guilt by
association and and all kinds of There's
a playbook. There's a playbook. John
John Major Jenkins himself wrote a book
about this shortly before he died that
the the the the playbook that
self-styled debunkers use. Um you'll
find the word conspiracy theory comes up
again and again and again. almost to the
point of being boring, you know. It's
like it's like automatically apply the
word conspiracy theory, apply the word
racist, you know, and and just to keep
applying those words and apply them
often enough. Uh and and and hopefully
you'll drive people away from that idea.
So, I don't understand why why
narratives need to be controlled. I
mean, we're not dealing with state
secrets here, are we? Uh I don't think
so. I I I don't get why the narrative of
the past needs to be controlled. Why
can't it be a free-for-all? Why why
why, you know, why do archaeologists
regard themselves as the as the sole
interpreters of the truth about the past
for the public? And why do they get
their nickers in a twist, you know, when
somebody else comes up with a different
idea uh about it? Why I I I just don't
understand it. Why not welcome these
other ideas? by all means criticize
them. But the smear techniques, the
lies, the innuendos, you know, the straw
men, all of that, all of that stuff,
that's not straightforward science. That
is propaganda which is being used. And
and it's still weird to me that that
archaeologists feel the need, any of
them feel the need to engage in this.
Many of them don't. And yet they do not
criticize their colleagues for doing so.
They circle their wagons. they circle
the wagons around the debunking minority
in archaeology. Uh they will not be seen
to criticize them in any way. Uh and
therefore I think archaeology as a whole
has to take responsibility for this
problem which frankly is driving the
public away from archaeology in droves
right now.
Well the the saying you say that it
resonates with so many is that we are a
species with amnesia. And it it makes me
wonder let me be clear that saying has
has its own history of ideas behind it
because that that saying comes from
Velikoski mankind in amnesia a book that
Velikoski wrote um and um I simply
changed it to a species with amnesia
when I was working on fingerprints of
the gods and it's it's one of the
subtitles in one of the chapters of
fingerprints of the gods as a species
with amnesia. Since then, I've seen
other people pick that up that that idea
up and and and and and and use it. But
the the history of ideas is clear.
Velikovski, mankind in amnesia, was the
originator of that concept. And I think
it's a brilliant concept. I think we are
a species with amnesia. Uh and what are
our memory banks? Our memory banks are
quite limited when we go back before
6,000 years ago. Round about I've just
come back from Iraq. Round about 6,000
years ago uh Kunea form began to be
written by the the early Sumerian
civilization maybe even a little earlier
than 6,000 years ago
uh on baked brick. Um and it's it's
astonishing. You know, you can still you
can wander around these sites today.
Many of them are in the state of
complete ruin and collapse. And all over
the ground are potshurds and bricks
covered in kaiform writing. These are
all messages from the past that have
that have come come down to us in
written form which fortunately we can
interpret. Uh it's been it's been
possible it's possible to read kunea
form and the various resentions of kunea
form that came after the sumerians you
know with the acadians and the Assyrians
and the Babylonians. Kune form kept on
being used. Um just in the case with
with with ancient Egypt, you know,
thanks to the Rosetta Stone, uh we can
read the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs
because there was a key that allowed
those hieroglyphs to be un unlocked. The
the Rosetta Stone, one of the languages
in which the same text was written was
Greek and therefore it was possible to
break the whole code of the Egyptian
hieroglyphs from from from that. Um but
there are other scripts like the Indis
Valley script or the Easter Island
script and it is a script in my view uh
that we can't read that we don't have
the key to yet. Maybe artificial
intelligence will will solve that. But
then what about the time before scripts
before there's any surviving scripts?
Let's go back earlier than 6,000 years.
Let's go back 10,000 12,000 15,000 years
ago. What memories do we have of that
time?
uh and I just feel very strongly that
our attempt to grasp that time should
not be limited to the material artifacts
that archaeologists can find in a few
locations around the world. We should
have a broader apprehension of that time
and that's where myth and tradition come
in very important. Oral traditions have
the capacity to survive for millennia.
Uh a a good story is a great survival
vehicle for information. it can carry
information down to the future. I've
just been rereading the Epic of
Gilgamesh. Um, and you know, first and
foremost, it's a brilliant story. It's
really compelling reading. Even though
I'm reading something that's five plus
thousand years old. Um, it it's it's
it's compelling as a story. The charact
the characters come across, but embedded
in it is information. uh and that
includes information about astronomy and
that includes uh again and again
repetitively very powerfully the story
of the global flood uh that comes down
in the Gilgamesh epic. Um and and um I
don't think it's a good idea for
archaeologists just to dismiss all of
that and say, "Oh, those ancients were
somehow massively impressed by a local
flood and they decided to say that it
had happened all over the world." uh and
to ignore the fact that essentially the
same tradition appears all over the
world. Uh it it it appears in Peru, it
appears in China, it appears in India,
it appears in Australia amongst the
Aboriginal peoples, it appears
everywhere. The story of a global flood.
Why? Why is this why is this compelling
story that has come down to us from the
past so easily dismissed as pure fiction
by archaeologists? Yes, it may be
embedded in stories which contain some
fiction, but that hard core of the story
is information that's passing down to us
from the past. So when I talk about
myths, traditions and and spiritual
ideas, they are also vehicles through
which the past can speak to us. And
that's where I don't appear to have any
meeting of minds with archaeologists. In
fact, they regard me as rather silly uh
for for for for thinking so and and and
for imagining that
peoples in the distant past during the
ice age uh might have done things in
different ways from the ways we do them
today, you know. Anyway, that's I don't
know where that went with your question.
Oh, no, that was brilliant. And one
thing that we see in many different
ancient civilizations is certain numbers
popping up and I've loved your work on
that. Well, you see, this was this was
another one of the things that that drew
me into this to exploring this
possibility and I insist it's only a
possibility which I believe is worthy of
exploration. You know, I'm not some kind
of guru claiming that this is a
fact. I'm somebody following my
instincts in an inquiry into the past.
One of the things that led me into that
inquiry was material that I came across
while I was writing the sign and the
seal the book about the ark of the
covenant in
Ethiopia. Another was being confronted
by the great pyramid of Giza for the
first time which happened when I was
writing the sign and the seal. But third
and perhaps most important was reading
Hamlet's Mill by Giorgio de Santidana
and Hetha Vondeshand.
Now back in the 60s highlevel scholars
were a whole lot more high level than
high level scholars today. I mean
Santidana Giorgio de Santana and Hetha
Vandeshan he was professor of the
history of science at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. She was the
professor of the history of science at
Frankfurt University. This was the
1960s. They were very open-minded
inquirers. And with that openness of
mind, they went back into myth and
tradition all around the world. And they
found again and again and again the same
imagery cropping up and the same
numbers. And the imagery in one form or
another was of a kind of whirling
turning churn, a mill if you like, uh
grinding or a
grindstoneone. Um that's the imagery.
It's a rotating process. Uh and it can
be it can be visualized in various ways.
It's it's the serpent vazuki wrapped
wrapped around mount mandera in anchor
watt with gods and demons pulling on
each end of the serpent and churning the
milky ocean. Um or it can be Horus and
set in the the scene wrongly interpreted
as the uniting of the two lands where
they're clearly turning a drill uh
together. uh and that then combined with
numbers and those those numbers are all
based on the number 72. This is not my
discovery or my investigation. I'm
reporting what Santana
Aandesin reported and investigated in
Hamlet's Mill and which had a profound
effect on my work. And fundamentally
what they're saying is that this was an
ancient language uh astronomical
language that contained hard data about
the phenomenon called the precession of
the
equinoxes. The what is supposed by
astronomers today to result from a
wobble on the axis of the earth because
the earth is the viewing platform from
which we observe the stars. Changes in
the orientation of that viewing platform
uh change the star field, change the
time of year at which particular stars
rise. For example, they might not rise
on the equinox 2,000 years ago, but they
might rise on the equinox today because
of that that that that wobble. Um and
they argued that there was an ancient
system of knowledge of detailed
knowledge concerning the precession of
the equinoxes. that it used a codified
system of symbols uh and that it
expressed it through a system of rounded
numbers and those numbers are based on
the number
72 which is the rounded number of years
in which one degree of precession takes
to unfold. Uh and and um
25,920 years is 360 degrees of
precession. Uh and in between you get
all kinds of other numbers.
2,160. That's 30° of procession. That's
effectively one house of the zodiac. Uh
the the stars that hold the sun on the
on the spring equinox changing down down
the ages. So they argued that and they
attributed it to what they called some
almost unbelievable ancestor
civilization that had first begun to
understand the world in terms of number
and measure had originated this system
and that later cultures including the
Samrians the so-called first
civilization that later cultures had
been the inheritors of this knowledge
including the ancient Egyptians
including many others including in far
away, Mexico and South America as well,
a globally distributed system of ideas
um encoding specific astronomical
knowledge which
supposedly was not discovered until the
time of the Greeks around 2,100 years
ago but in the estimation of Santana and
Vesh and was thousands and thousands and
thousands and thousands of years older
than that. Uh, so that, you know, had
had had a great effect on me as as as
well in my in my work.
Yeah, I' I've been intimidated to read
Hamlet's Mill, but I it's on my list,
but it's an intimidating read. I I mean,
everybody has to be warned on this. Um,
it's it's a project to read Hamlet's
Mill. Um, it t it takes time. I I I've
read it several times and I still find
new new things in it. Um, but it's not
to be confused with entertainment. It's
it's really quite hard work, but it's
worth it. It's worth persevering and
it's worth and it's worth at the same
time respecting the openness of mind of
those two scholars back in the 1960s who
even then it was a revolutionary idea.
Um, and and and now it's an idea that's
almost completely ignored by by
archaeologists, which I think is a pity.
Well, I think numbers are a clue into
something much deeper. Um, well, in this
case there there perhaps there could be
other explanations for this constant
repetition of the sequence of numbers.
Look, it's 72. Half of 72 is
36. 72 + 36 is 108. 108 divided by 2 is
54. These are the kind of numbers that
keep on cropping up again and again and
again in very ancient myths all around
the world. And they're all numbers that
are generated by the cycle of
precession. Uh and they're all very
frequently accompanied by this this same
imagery. So it it looks it looked to
them and it looks to me like there was
an ancient civilization. I'm going to
call it a civilization. Please, my
detractors will immediately add on
airplanes, you know, flying ships,
temples, pill, I don't know. I'm just
saying that a civiliz a civilization
that was more advanced than they give
credit to for the people of the ice age.
That's what I'm talking about. I'm not
I'm not imposing upon it any ideas about
whatever kind of machinery it had or
whatever its level of our kind of
technology it had. I'm suggesting it was
a very different civilization to our
own. But there are bits and pieces of
evidence which said it knew stuff that
human beings were not supposed to know
during the ice age. And part of that
stuff is knowledge of the precession of
the equinoxes. And another part of that
stuff is ancient maps which um are
copied from even older maps which were
copied from even older source maps now
lost. Those maps contain accurate
relative longitudes. That's another
thing. Those maps show the world very
often as it looked during the last last
ice age with much larger land masses
than we have today and good relative
longitudes. our civilization didn't
solve the longitude problem until the
18th century. So what I'm saying is
possibly possibly possibly we've got the
history of science a bit wrong just as
Santidana and Vondeshin powerfully
argued in Hamlet's Mill that there's a
missing chapter that there was a culture
back there in the ice age which got to
grips with problems that later
technological cultures didn't solve
until relatively recently. Antarctica
appears on those maps. Antarctica. Our
culture didn't discover it until 1820.
So what's it doing on maps drawn in the
1500 based on much older source maps?
You know, what's it doing there? It's
very hard to explain. Right. The Piri
Ree map. Well, the Pir Ree map is the
least good example. Uh yes, it does it
does uh arguably show an extension of
South America into into an icebound
Antarctica. It does arguably show that,
but but much more much more effective is
the is the Arontius Phineas map. Um,
which which uh puts Antarctica in
exactly the right place uh at the tip of
South America and at the tip of South
Africa where it belongs, much larger
than it is today. Um and and um there's
an interesting legend written on that
map by the printer about how this map uh
reveals information that hitherto had
been hidden in darkness. Uh and that was
unknown to some of the great geographers
of the past but that had hitherto been
hidden in darkness. Well, one can put
many interpretations on that, but the
interpretation I put on that is that the
source map had been hidden away for a
long time and was was rediscovered uh in
1500s 1600s thereabouts or perhaps
earlier perhaps perhaps one may
speculate the library of Alexandria.
What's the true story of the library of
Alexandria? What was really in that?
Was was material taken out of the
library of Alexandria when it went
through sever several catastrophes I
believe but but was material shipped to
Constantinople for example? Was some
stuff taken saved from the library of
Alexandria and taken off to to to the
capital of the of the Eastern Roman
Empire uh and and kept there for a few
hundred years until the time of the
crusades. There was a crusade that that
that entered
Constantinople. Um, is that when these
maps came back into global circulation?
I'm interested in mysteries like these.
Uh, you know, there may be there may be
nothing to them, but I love to follow
them and and pursue them and see and see
where they lead and see what pos
possibilities they might open open up.
And I I
think archaeologists can can can do what
they like. At the very least, I would
prefer not to be constantly smeared and
lied about. But, uh, my my advice to
archaeology would be to be just a a
little bit more open to the other voices
of the past. Of course, the material
artifacts, the the the arrowheads and
the bone tools. Of course, these are
important. They're very important. But
keep your ears open for other messages
from the past, too. It's not only
limited to material artifacts.
When you mentioned Antarctica, I
immediately thought of pole shifting.
And that's become a big topic lately.
Um, I'd love to get your thoughts
because some of these ancient maps show
Antarctica with no ice.
That's right. It's a it's an issue that
I went into in Fingerprints of the Gods
uh in the most depth. Um,
and I definitely owe the fact that I got
into that at all uh to the work of a
number of scholars. um Rand and Rose
Flemath
uh and behind them Charles Hapgood uh
and their work on Charles Hapgood's work
uh was of particular interest to me.
Uh it raised the extraordinary
possibility that the that the crust of
the earth might might from time to time
shift in one piece. Uh, and the the
image we're asked to call to mind is of
a a nice luscious orange, you know, with
a thick
peel and and somehow some force causes
that thick peel to rotate around the
fruit. So if that's the earth and that
thick peel is the crust of the earth,
then it would be conceivable that
Antarctica could be in a tropical zone
and could be shifted by an earth crust
displacement into a
freezing Antarctic zone. Um and that
that's the that's the notion of earth
crust displacement which which which the
fundamental credit belongs to Charles
Hapgood. He was the first person who
investigated this and Charles Hapgood
also must be credited for his work on
ancient maps. Uh and and I highly
recommend to anybody listening to this
the maps maps of the ancient sea kings
uh by Charles Hapgood. This is a
fantastic book and it's a very deep
investigation of the mystery of these
these ancient maps based on on older
source maps. Now, what happened after
Fingerprints of the
Gods was I
was increasingly unable to find evidence
that confirmed that would really confirm
that Antarctica had been shifted from a
tropical into a into a freezing zone. I
I within perhaps if we go back hundreds
of millions of years, yes, but within
the lifetime of the human species, I I
found it very difficult to find that
confirming confirming evidence. And I
began to wonder what I what
fundamentally I was looking at. And this
was the heart of fingerprints of the
gods really was was a stupendous global
cataclysm that occurred around 12 a half
thousand years ago about
10,500 BC in our calendar. And at the
time when I was writing Fingerprints for
the gods, I thought Earth crust
displacement uh provided a very
interesting and very plausible
explanation for that.
Um I haven't completely rejected that
idea. Uh I added to it um in
uh an appendix to Magicians of the Gods
I think and and also in an article on my
website by Flavio Barbierro. Uh Flavio
is a is an ex Italian uh Navy admiral.
Um and he makes a strong case that a
glancing blow from a comet uh on the
crust of the earth could cause a a
displacement effect uh rather as
described by by Hapgood. So I haven't
completely let that idea go. But I began
to look for other ideas uh which might
which might also account for my
fundamental issue which was a global
cataclysm memorialized in the traditions
of the great flood and of darkness and
of great freeze that came upon the
world. And that's when I became aware of
the work of the comet research group and
the younger dus impact hypothesis. My
focus had always been on the younger
driest. 12,500 years ago is right near
the beginning of the younger dus. This
bizarre climate episode where until
12,800 years ago, the world had been
coming out of the ice age and then
suddenly boom, it went back into a
radical deep freeze and you have this
widescale extinctions of of ice age
megapora all around the world and and
clear disruption of of of human
populations as well. So my focus was on
that period anyway. And here now was a
group of very well-credentialed
mainstream scientists, not writing in
the 1950s or 1960s, but writing in the
2000s, uh, presenting papers in in
highly regarded journals, uh, making the
case that, uh, the earth was struck by a
comet swarm uh, around 12,800 years ago.
And by that I mean and what they mean uh
is that uh it's a typical behavior of
comets to break up into multiple
fragments particularly when they enter
the gravitational field of a of of a
star or of a large planet. Uh and and uh
we all saw that with comet Scheme Levy 9
in uh 1994 which broke up into 21 pieces
before it hit Jupiter. Um and and the
argument of the comet research group,
the youngeras impact hypothesis, is that
a very large uh interstellar comet or
certainly a comet that had come out of
the the wood cloud very far away uh from
from the center of our solar system
entered the central solar system about
20,000 years ago. This object they think
might have been as much as 100
kilometers in
diameter. Very dangerous if it were to
hit the earth directly. Uh but instead
what it did was it began to break up as
all comets do into multiple multiple
fragments. Some being quite large
kilometer or two in some cases five or
six km in diameter like comet enki which
is still part of the remnant of this um
and and some much smaller just just dust
particles and the argument is that what
we call the torid meteor stream today is
the remnant of that disintegrating
comet. And the further argument is that
that meteor stream 12,800 years ago
bombarded the earth that the earth we
still passed through the torid meteor
stream twice a year. We were passing
through it twice a year 12,800 years ago
as well. Um there are lumpy big bits in
it as well as small dust bits in it. And
the argument of the comet research group
is we encountered some of those lumpy
big bits around 12,800 years ago. Most
of them blew up in the atmosphere. They
didn't hit the earth. They were air
bursts. Uh you
which which don't leave a detectable
crater. Um like the Tunguska event in
198 over Russia. That was an air burst
of a of a a meteorite
fragment quite probably from the torid
meteor stream. It occurred on the 30th
of June 198. That's the peak of the beta
torids. Uh entered the earth's
atmosphere and exploded at an altitude
of a few kilometers above fortunately an
an un uninhabited area of Siberia.
um flattening 2,000 square miles of
trees in the
process. Where that to have happened
over a major city, it would have been a
cataclysm on a horrific scale. Um but
it's a kind of warning of what can
happen again. And it's the suggestion of
what happened 12,800 years ago that
there may have been hundreds of of
objects of that kind of size that blew
up in the atmosphere as well as a number
that hit primarily the north what was
then the North American ice cap and the
northern European ice cap. But the
majority of it was air bursts of objects
that might have been less than 200
meters in diameter which didn't have
enough power to hit the earth but which
blew up in the sky with the force of 20
50 100 Hiroshimas. uh and not just one
of them but many many of them all over
the world all the way you can track the
youngeras boundary all the way from the
west coast of the United States as far
east as Syria uh and the site of Abu
Herrera in Syria which by the way is is
only a few hundred kilometers from
Geeklete in in in Turkey. Uh so so so
this became this became to me uh a
matter worthy of further investigation
and a matter worth reporting on. Uh so
I've since I became aware of the younger
dryus impact hypothesis. I've been
focusing on that. I haven't completely
abandoned or thrown away earth crust
displacement. It's there. I never go
back and rewrite my past books.
Fingerprints of the gods is exactly the
same book that it was in 1995. It might
have a new introduction or a new
postcript but that's that's it. The
basic text remains the same. Um my
position remains the same. My work is
there for people to read and make up
their own minds on and hopefully do
their own further research on. Um I I
hope in for those who wish to pour scorn
on my work, which they're welcome to do,
that they would at least actually read
it.
Well, I I'm wondering about these pole
shifts. Do you think it happens
instantly or is this a gradual thing?
Well, look, there's again there's
there's a confusion here because there
there's magnetic pole
shifts do not necessarily mean
geophysical pole shifts. The fact that
the magnetic pole can flip 180° doesn't
mean that the earth's turning upside
down. It's a it's a magnetic shift. Now,
is the Earth's magnetic field connected
in some way to its rotation? I would say
pretty likely it is. Pretty likely it
is. So perhaps magnetic pole
shifts are accompanied by physical
events which don't just affect the
needle on our compass but but which uh
affect the world we we live in. Um but
but the the argument that Hapg good put
forward uh in
um earth's shifting crust uh was that it
was the result of the buildup of
ice, the asymmetrical buildup of ice in
certain areas during the ice age uh in
North America and Northern Europe which
caused this which caused the whole
global sphere to become unbalanced and
led to pressure on the crust that led to
the movement of the crust. That that was
Hapg goods that was Hapgood's argument.
Um but it was and and therefore it was
it was something to answer your question
it was it was something that built up
slowly but happened suddenly.
It reached it it reached a a point of
potential where it could happen and then
it the event was very quick. uh
literally overnight it would have been
were that to have happened global
tsunamis, massive weather effects, the
the effect of a of a true pole shift uh
would be cataclysmic beyond belief. Um I
like to leave that question open. uh
since certainly 2013 my work has been
focused on the younger dryers impact
hypothesis which is again it's important
to stress is is a hypothesis not not a
fact you know what's a fact what we what
we do seem to know for sure uh is that
there was a very weird climate episode
between 12,800 years ago and 11,600
years ago and that's the episode called
the younger dry and the mainstream view
is that it was caused by um the melting
of ice dams on glacial lakes on the
great ice caps of North America, north
and northern Europe. And that the flood
waters entered the world ocean and
stopped the global meridian overturning
circulation in its tracks. Best known
part of that is the Gulf Stream, which
is part of the central heating system of
our planet. And you know, I think
they're right about that. I think the
the cutting of the of the global water
circulation was key to the sudden plunge
in temperatures that took place at the
beginning of the younger dryers. But the
question is rarely asked is is really is
that melting of ice dams that breaking
of ice dams on glacial legs is that
enough to explain what happened uh or
are we not looking at are we not looking
what's the cause behind that? Why why
did that happen? Why did it happen all
at once so suddenly? And that's where
the comet research group with its with
its argument for impacts of substantial
fragments not air bursts but impacts of
substantial fragments on the North
American ice cap which was then 2 km
deep. That that argument helps to
explain that sudden gush of freezing
melt water into the world ocean which
then caused the the sudden plunge in
temperatures. So the the those two ideas
aren't ne necessarily mutually
exclusive. And then there's another idea
and and all tribute to geologist Robert
Shock here. Robert Shock as we know has
has done incredibly important work on
the great sphinx and you know has has
stuck his neck out and taken all the
risks that you have to take in this
field in order to in order to present
evidence that the mainstream don't like
uh evidence that the great sphinx is
thousands of years older than
Egyptologists claim and I have huge
respect and and admiration for Robert
Shock's work in that field. Now Robert,
brilliant scientist has come up with
another suggestion uh for for the
younger drius climate weirdness. Uh he
attributed to solar
outbursts. Maybe he's right. You know,
in many cases the evidence for solar
outbursts and the evidence for comet
impacts in the form of proxies is rather
similar. Uh maybe both are possible.
Maybe it was a comet impact at the
beginning of the Younger Dryus and a
massive solar outburst at the end of the
younger dry. Um, I you know, it's an
open question, but what we do have is
very clear evidence that the planet did
pass through a a cataclysmic event in
that 1,200 year period between 12,800
and 11,600 years ago. And the extinction
record of Megaporna alone uh is enough
to bear witness to how bad that was.
And there's a energy paradox too, right?
like where did all that energy come from
to melt all that ice instantaneously?
That's where I think that's where I
think the younger dus impact hypothesis
really has something useful to offer in
this sphere. And that's again where
where I find this toxic atmosphere of of
science so-called debunking so unhelpful
um because because you know there are
there are are many scientists who've put
forward all the evidence for the younger
dus impact hypothesis but there are also
a bunch of scientists who really hate
their work and do everything possible to
undermine and dismiss it. Um and and and
uh wouldn't it be better if different
scientific groups who who who've got
skin in the game of a particular
theory recognize that others may have
skin in the game of a different theory
and see if they can find some common
ground rather than this this constant
sort of pissing contest that goes on
between scientists and that and that
goes on
um against those of us who are not
scientists but are proposing points of
few that are not accepted by by
mainstream archaeology. I'm just going
to glance at my other computer because I
want to reference you to something. One
second.
No problem. Yeah, this is great.
What I
um what I wanted to mention to you is a
an article in um uh nature. Of course,
nature is a highly respected scientific
magazine.
Um and and it's to talk and the title is
science's gllum effect. PhDs bear brunt
of territorial behavior. It's all about
how scientists have this kind of
Gollumlike wish to possess their field
and will do anything including unethical
things to stop other people uh entering
their territory. this this incred
precious my precious you it's it's
actually something I think you could
animate with considerable with
considerable the the Gollum effect of of
of in science and the Gollum effect is
incredibly strong in archaeology
archaeology has got about I don't know
15 Gollums uh who are all goulluming
around trying to make everybody else
miserable and they they don't actually
seem to do any real work themselves but
what they devote their entire lives to
is trashing the work of other people.
What a pity. What a waste of intellect.
Why not look for what's good in somebody
else's work rather than what's bad in
it? Yeah. One of the problems in
academia I see is that everybody's so
specialized that they get in such a
small narrow world that they kind of
miss the bigger picture and it it's very
valuable to have people that that can
zoom out and just see look at myths,
look at astrology, astronomy, geology
and combine all these things and just
see the whole landscape. Yeah. so that
we don't have a mono narrative, but we
have a we we we have a narrative that
respects the the diversity and
complexity and mystery of the past.
That's what's needed. And and this fight
to create a archaeological monar about
the past um is in my view increasingly
sinister. I don't I I I don't understand
why why people have that mindset uh and
why they
feel fundamentally at the heart of it is
a is a is a very sneering dismissive
attitude towards the intelligence of the
general
public. Don't these so-called debunkers
realize that adults can actually make up
their own minds on things? They don't
need to be told what to think. What
people need these days is a variety of
views and then go through that variety
of views and come to your own opinion
about it.
So if you were suddenly given a trillion
dollars and you were put in charge of
our archaeology, what what would be your
move?
Um I think
that first and first and foremost um I
would like to see the unders the areas
of the world that have been underserved
by
archaeology. Um I would like to see them
extensively
investigated not just
with passing site surveys but with
thorough and detailed investigation.
Um, I've been I've been accused of
presenting a God of the gaps argument
when I say that archaeology hasn't done
enough. But the gaps that I draw
attention to are really important gaps.
One of those gaps is the Sahara Desert.
Yes, archaeology has been done in the
Sahara Desert, but not enough. Not
nearly enough. Not nearly enough to take
account of what we now know about the
environmental history of the Sahara
Desert as we go back to the last ice
age. That there were periods when the
Sahara Desert was green and fertile. Uh
the story of the Sahara Desert is barely
been touched by archaeology. Uh and I
would like to see much more being put
into
investigating the whole question of the
origins of civilization.
in the Sahara Desert. Let's have a look
at that that whole area. But it's not
the only area where we should be looking
for the origins of civilization where
archaeologists haven't looked yet. Uh
another that uh I draw attention to is
the Amazon rainforest.
And again the work that is now being
done in the Amazon, you know,
fortunately a wonderful philanthropist
named Eugene Yong uh who you may have
met in in Sedona, um has provided the
funding necessary for for Marty Parsonan
and I'll say Ramani and their team uh to
do the necessary lidar work uh exploring
more and more of these extraordinary
earth works that are appearing in the
Amazon rainforest when nobody thought
that any kind of organ ized society had
existed and suddenly we have these huge
geometrical earthworks that are being
revealed by lidar and that then can be
ground trouthed by small archaeological
teams who do do no harm or damage.
Evidence of huge cities in the Amazon is
beginning to come out. I think we're
just beginning to hear the we're just
getting the beginning of the grand story
of the Amazon and its role in the
origins of human civilization. And
again, I would like to see much more
effort put into that investigation. And
coupled with it, uh, I think the world
needs to understand how precious a
resource the Amazon rainforest is.
precious resource of biodiversity, a
precious library of human knowledge uh
in the peoples, the indigenous peoples
of the Amazon who hold a heritage going
back thousands and thousands and
thousands of years, far longer than
archaeologists would allow. Uh we have
to we have to recognize the problem in
the Amazon is fundamentally the poverty
of urban
dwellers particularly in Brazil who who
who understandably wishing to feed their
families head off into the Amazon and
slash and burn and and and plant a farm.
Why are they doing that? They're doing
that because of economic need. The
international community has so many
economic resources. Cannot cannot we
cannot we make it worth the while of
those who are presently driven to
desperate slash and burn techniques.
Cannot we not make it worth their while
to treat the garden to treat the Amazon
as a garden to care for it to love it to
be its caretakers to to to make sure
that no further damage is done to it.
That would be a that would be a great
thing for the international community to
invest in the people make rational
economic decisions. If it if it's in the
rational economic I if it's if it's a
rational economic need for those who are
being driven by poverty into the Amazon
to burn the rainforest and plant farms
that'll only be fertile for a decade or
so. If they see it's in their economic
need not to do that and that they can
economically benefit from not doing
that, that's what they will do and the
Amazon will be safe. Uh but instead, you
know, this this this madness goes on. So
there's a there's a huge untold
archaeological story in the Amazon and
thanks to people like Marty Parson and
I'll say Oranzi that story is now
beginning to be told and I think it's
going to just open up grand vistas uh on
on on our past. And and last but not
least um the uh submerged continental
shelves uh the areas that were above
water during the ice age when sea level
was 400 ft lower than it is today and
that are underwater now. uh which
include the whole of the vast
peninsula, ice age peninsula that that
geologists refer to as Sunda land which
incorporated the Malaysian peninsula,
all of the Indonesian islands and
extended as far as uh almost as far as
Papu Nina where you have Sahel, a
connection between New Guinea and
Australia as well. These areas would
have been prime real estate during the
ice age. Northern Hemisphere was a
pretty horrible place to be at the peak
of the ice age. I mean really, it was
arid. It was
cold. I mean, it was an awful place to
be, but down near the tropics, that was
the place to be. That was the place to
be during the ice age. That's kind of
places we should be looking for a lost
civilization. And Sundand, the submerged
area around the Indonesian islands and
the Manian Peninsula, that area is
almost continent in size. uh would be
one of my my prime targets. I'd like to
see much more investigation there. I'd
like to see much more underwater
investigation off the coast of India as
well. Uh I've already done some myself.
I've dived at Pimpahar. I've dived at
Mahabalapuram. Uh there are man-made
structures underwater there. The
visibility is very poor, but there's no
doubt they're man-made. It's even been
confirmed by India's National Institute
of Oceanography. Much more work needs to
be done. Much more work needs to be done
up in the northwest in the Gulf of
Campbe uh where sonar surveys have
clearly identified man-made structures
at a great depth. Uh and at Dwarka uh
all of these places are connected by
traditions of a global flood. Uh we
should be looking at them much more
closely and paying much more attention
to those traditions. So, if I were in
the position to influence the course of
archaeology, I'd say guys, carry on
doing what you're doing, but do this as
well.
Well, I'm so encouraged by this new
technology of LiDAR and Doppler um that
we're able to investigate these sites
without really damaging them at all.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. This this is
certainly the case certainly the case
with lidar and and you know we're we're
we're we're seeing um you know very
interesting results from
from satellite scans uh which much more
work needs to be done uh before before
there's any certainty about those
results but they're extremely
interesting right now. So I guess I've
got to bring up the million-dollar
topic. There was a discovery underneath
Egypt recently and that's gone
completely viral. There's a lot of
sensational takes out there and I don't
think I've heard you publicly say
anything about this discovery. I have.
You have? I have probably said
something. Oh, good. I'm going to I'm
going to tell you about it just a
moment. Um because I remember being at
your event, everybody was asking you
about it and you were this was like a
month ago. You were cautious to talk
about it then. I said I said look at my
blog. So, what I
said in my blog on the 17th of April
um was that for those who've asked, I'm
far from ready to take a position on the
recent claims of underground structures
detected beneath the Cafre Pyramid at
Giza. I'm not even sitting on the fence
because there isn't a fence to sit on
yet. Much more work needs to be done.
What is clear,
however, is that critics of Filipo
Byondi's findings have misunderstood the
potential of the method used and have
been too hasty in dismissing it. In my
opinion, the importance of Beyond's work
is not that it proves anything at this
stage, but that it should act as a spur
for further research, which I have
reason to believe will soon follow. So,
I I could read more of it, but it's on
my website. that is in my blog and that
that that is my statement of position. I
don't know enough about the technology
but I have been working with a number of
other people who know more a lot more
about it than I do. Um and and it's
beginning to be clear that
the massive instant allergic reaction of
dismissal that came from all the usual
skeptics about this these Philip
Beyond's
work that that instant rejection that
that instant hostility that instant
sneering was yet another example of
premature rejection in science. It's too
early to reject this idea. The idea
actually has quite a number of very
interesting things going for it. Um, and
I I will be appearing uh with uh
Philippondi
um sometime next week uh with him and
Armando May and Kuran do Malanga uh and
my colleague Manosv Zada as well. uh and
and um pra primarily uh we want to
understand their method better. We're
we're we're not amongst those who are
saying oh this is rubbish go away. Uh we
think it's interesting. Uh and and there
are a number of ways to validate it or
invalidate it further and those that's
that's what needs to be done next. Uh
nobody should be jumping to any
immediate conclusions either one way or
the other on this. What we have here is
an interesting, innovative, actually
quite brilliant uh use of two
technologies uh to arrive at at
subsurface imagery. Will that brilliance
check out completely? More work needs to
be done. Right now, I just think it's
really interesting. It's worth exploring
further and I intend to stay on top of
what's happening. Is there resistance
from Egypt over looking deeper into
this?
Um I think that I think in Egypt the the
the the issue is that they again when I
use the word allergic reaction
um it's part it's partly because people
in these fields have been whether it's
archaeology or or Egyptology which is a
sort of subsp specialcialism of
archaeology
um have been bombarded over the years
with so much and quite honestly rubbish
you know from from from people with
badly thought I thought through ideas uh
about for example Giza and what what it
might mean that it's become a kind of
automatic reaction on their part now to
just dismiss everything that sounds in
any way you know fanciful or or or new
age. Um, and that's most unfortunate um,
because they should they should realize
that just as there is a diversity of
opinion within archaeology, there's also
a diversity of opinion on the on on on
the opposite sides. And there are some
very serious people working on, you
know, what I I I can't I don't have any
choice but to characterize as the
alternative as opposed to the mainstream
side of archaeology. Um, and and I think
it's it's unfortunate that the
mainstream side of archaeology is so
dismissive. What would have been much
better would have been if they said
nothing and got to grips
with Filipo beyond his method and what
he's actually doing, the science that is
actually involved. If they got to grips
with that first before pouring scorn on
it, so much the better. But they didn't.
They just instantly reacted and poured
scorn and again attempted to shape the
narrative so that nobody will take this
seriously. Uh, and that's that's that's
too early for that to happen. This this
is potentially a very interesting method
and we need to see where it's going to
take us though. I hope to learn more
about it when I when I talk with the
instigators uh next week.
Yeah, I' I've heard theories that the
pyramids could be a power plant. Is
there any validity to that?
Um look, I mean was it was it um
Christopher Dunn? Was it was it Obama
who said that he could walk and chew gum
at the same time? Um, the reason I'm I'm
citing that is maybe the pyramids are
more than one thing, you know, maybe
they're not just maybe they're not just
one thing. Um, there's a lot of there's
a lot of possibilities and the Great
Pyramid is just a lot. it it that
there's so much to take in in the Great
Pyramid and and the detailed intricacy
of its inner corridors and passageways
and and and and its hidden shafts and
and its bizarre extraordinary well shaft
that that that connects the bottom of
the Grand Gallery to to to the
subterranean chamber. It's really I mean
it it is the most the most extraordinary
thing. Um, I have no doubt in in my own
mind that
amongst the tasks that the great pyramid
serves is fundamentally a spiritual task
that this is that this is fundamentally
um a piece of spiritual machinery that
we're looking at here that the ancient
Egyptians saw and understood um a
relationship uh between the living and
the dying uh between the afterlife and
this life and uh that they depicted it
in certain ways. You can you can see on
ancient Egyptian tombs uh for example
the the tomb of Thoses III you can see
depictions of the duat of this of this
underworld realm uh or celestial realm
because it appears weirdly to be both.
Uh and they very much resemble the
interior corridors and passageways of
the of the great pyramid. I I I just
don't think it's possible to separate
the Great Pyramid from from the
spiritual connection that the ancient
Egyptians undoubtedly attached to it and
saw it as serving. But
um could it have done other things as
well? Why not? Uh I I think Chris Dunn's
work is fascinating. I've known Chris
since the early 1990s. He's a very
thorough researcher. He knows his stuff
when he's talking about machine tools.
Um and uh he sees level of levels of
machining and accuracy uh in the great
pyramid that that he doesn't see why
that would be necessary for spiritual
purposes. Um but but but it might be
necessary to serve a material function.
So I'm open to that. It's just not where
I've gone with this material. I'm I'm
I'm I'm regarding the Great Pyramid um
as a place of spiritual manifestation. I
think I think it was used for that uh in
ancient Egyptian times. Uh I think the
role of altered states of consciousness
uh in ancient Egyptian spirituality is
one of those matters that needs to be
further investigated. We know they used
um psychedelics of various sorts. Um but
but uh I I think
that the prospect of the initiate being
placed alone in the heart of the great
pyramid in total darkness with all the
doors that then existed closed. uh that
would be a place where an altered state
of consciousness peak effect would be
would be achieved. Um and so I think
that some of the what sound like out-of-
body journeys that are described in the
ancient Egyptianerary texts in the
pyramid text for example uh may be based
on on direct experience by ancient
Egyptian priests if you like uh out of
body journeys brought on perhaps by
psychedelics. Of course, my critics will
laugh at that. Uh, but you know, I
suggest they go take a pipe of DMT and
see how they feel after that.
Yeah. I uh recently went to the pyramids
and uh went into the king's chamber and
got into that stone that looks like a
sarcophagus and laid down and there we
went with a stonemason expert and he
Yeah. made his voice resonate in this
frequency that seemed to make the whole
room change. And u I could definitely
feel like a shift in consciousness when
he did that. I I I think that's that's
fundamentally what it's about. Uh I I
think you you know people who work
regularly with psychedelics know that
the setting in which the psychedelic
experience unfolds is at least as
important as the substance itself. Um,
and I can't think of a of a more
powerful setting uh to explore the
mystery of consciousness that
psychedelics open up than than the Great
Pyramid. Uh, that's that's just that's
just my view. Um, but you know, it's a
very complicated place and and uh those
who created it. I don't I don't
personally think that the Great Pyramid
is the work of 23 or 28 years. I think
it's a work of hundreds of years. I
think the great there's no doubt that
the fourth dynasty were involved with
the great pyramid intimately involved
with it. Uh but I think the what the
evidence supports is that they were
involved with the end stages or
completion of a monument that had
already been there developing over a
very long period of time.
I I think it's just so hard for us in
the modern world to wrap our mind around
the pyramids and these ancient sites
because they were in such a different
state of consciousness than we are now.
You know, everything that we do is so
temporary and it's all about efficiency
and instant gratification and Yeah.
Yeah. And and we and we retreat from the
mystery of death. Uh the ancient
Egyptians did not. They they um regarded
that as the single most is important
issue in any human being's life. Uh that
was not intended that we should live
life in a gloomy way. That was intended
that we should live life with joy and
celebrate this gift of life that we were
that we were given. They they put their
best minds to work for thousands of
years on the problem of death and and um
science today just sees no problem. You
know, we just meet robots and when the
robot breaks, that's the end of our
story. Uh well, I prefer the ancients
view on these matters.
Yeah. One thing that I noticed in a lot
of these ancient cultures is human
sacrifice seems to be a very common
theme.
Um, I wonder, do you have an opinion on
why that pops up in so many different
cultures?
Well, before commenting on that, let's
let's remember that human sacrifice
crops up in Christianity, too.
Um, people were still being bent at the
stake into the 18th century uh for
heresy. Witches were being burnt at the
stake in the 1700s in
England. Burning at the stake is a form
of human sacrifice.
Those Christian concistadors who went to
Mexico and condemned the Aztecs for the
human sacrifices they carried out. Those
concistadors were carrying out human
sacrifices all the time. They were
constantly burning people at the stake
in the glory of their god. It's no
different, you know. Um why does it
happen? I think you have to look
intonosticism to to get some kind of
coherent answer to this that there are
that there are forces at work in the
universe. Um and not all those forces
are good. There are dark and negative
forces at work too. They're very
powerful. Um, the body of thought that
that investigated this most thoroughly
wasnosticism and the Nagamadi texts uh
are particularly enlightening in this
respect and and absolutely shocking uh
to to anybody who has not encountered
them before. They're they're quite
disturbing in in in what they picture uh
and and in how they they show humanity
as been having been under a veil of
illusion for thousands of years. Uh that
that what we worship as good is in fact
evil to the core. Uh and what we've been
taught to regard as evil is in fact
good. And and uh you know this is a very
difficult idea for anybody to take on
board. Most difficult of all for
Christians uh to take on board is the
gnostic take on the garden of Eden. Um
which I will simply share with you
without comment. The gnostic take on the
garden of Eden is that the serpent is
the good guy. Uh what happens in the
garden of Eden? Uh what do they what
does what does Eve eat of? It's it's the
tree of knowledge of good and
evil. And why does she eat of it?
Because the serpent encourages her to
eat of it.
Christianity sees the serpent as Satan.
Uh the Gnostics saw it completely
differently. They said it's impossible
to live an authentic human life to
benefit from this gift that the universe
has given you if you don't know the
difference between good and evil. You
must you must be able to make choices
between good and evil. If you if you're
if those choices are denied to you, then
you are not a full you're not living a
full human life. Um and and therefore
from the gnostic point of view the
serpent was introducing Adam and Eve to
a painful necessity that they had to
have knowledge of good and evil in order
to benefit from human life. Uh otherwise
it would be a complete waste of time. Uh
and in those Gnostic texts the entity
that we've been taught to call Yahweh or
Jehovah um is referred to as an archon.
He's seen as a sort of minor jumped up
supernatural who's managed to delude
humanity into worshiping him and
carrying out all kinds of evils uh in
his name. I'm simply reporting to you
what the Nagamadi texts say. Uh I would
suggest that uh anybody interested take
a look at them and uh for a shortcut
read um John Lamb John John Lamb Lash's
book not in his image uh which is an
excellent introduction to nnosticism.
Wow. That I've never heard that take
before. That's um brilliant. And it
reminds me of symbols because the
serpent is used in such a a good and
evil way. you know, we often associate
it with evil, but then you have things
like the kaducius, which is associated
with health, and it's a very divine
symbol. Yeah. Um, yeah, I think I've
I've been looking a lot into Carl Young
lately and symbols and numbers pop up a
lot in that work and um it made me think
that maybe that's why these numbers pop
up in uh universal traditions. Yeah. The
the the notion of a the notion of an
archetype. Um, did you know Kyle Yum
wrote a book on flying sauces as well? I
didn't know that. You got to read it.
Oh, yeah. He did write a book on flying
sauces and and he he tried to
encapsulate them within his archetype
idea.
Um but he was forced to confess that
from time to time a trace appears on a
radar
screen and he he said when I look at
those traces a bottomless abyss opens at
my
feet. So he he he wanted it to be just
an archetype but then he was recognizing
that there's some physical reality to
this. Um and and so it's it's well it's
well worth reading. I I got to know it
when I was writing my book uh
supernatural back in the early
2000s. Um so the numbers come from an
archetype some I don't think so. I I
looked into this possibility as well.
It's not only it's not only it's not
only numbers if we get into altered
states of consciousness. There
are there's a very important work being
done right now um at Imperial College in
London uh and at the University of
California at San Diego and I believe
another team is going to start up in uh
Denver or Boulder, Colorado very soon.
Um giving extended state uh DMT uh to
volunteers. Uh, in other words, those
volunteers are not just puffing on a DMT
vape and going to the other side of
reality for 10 minutes. They're they're
having it be introvenous infusion and
they're staying at the peak DMT state
for an hour plus. And uh what's already
what's already remarkable is the
um degree of coherence between the
reports of volunteers from all over the
world who aren't comparing notes of what
they experience and particularly I mean
Terrence McKenna was one of the earliest
onto this this issue of entity
encounters the machine elves as he
called them under the influence of DMT.
um and and more and more the science is
moving in the direction of saying no we
are not going to label these as just
hallucinations. Is it possible that
another area of perception is being
opened up for us just as we can't see in
the infrared? You know, maybe there's
whole areas of reality we are just not
structured to see. uh and and and maybe
what DMT does is it pulls those veils
back and allows us access to a
freestanding reality uh that we normally
don't have access to. This it sounds
very strange but this is this is where
the science is going at the moment in
parallel with the work that's being done
on the therapeutic effects of
psychedelics. Is there work is the
witness being done on the role
psychedelics can play in our
understanding of the nature of reality
and what it is and what and what we are
and that's the most exciting work that's
being that's being done. I'm I'm hoping
that I can I suffer from late onset
epilepsy uh which meant that I wasn't
able to enroll in the London trials. Um
but I'm hoping uh in one of the US
trials that I might be able to enroll.
Um I think it would be be a very
interesting experience although slightly
daunting uh to be at peak DMT state for
an hour. Apparently you can always
signal that you want out you know if you
want them to reduce the dose.
Yeah. What I really appreciate you is
that you are willing to put your feet in
the fire and actually get your hands
dirty and you go to these places, you do
the Iwasa, you you immerse yourself in
it. And the only way I can Yeah. There's
a big debate right now about who's
allowed to have an opinion. Um, you
know, do you need to actually go to the
site and put your hands on the ground in
order to be able to talk about it? And
I'm curious to get your opinion on like
who is allowed to to talk. And I think I
think every I think everybody's allowed
to talk. sites sites reach reach out to
us and we can reach out to them without
physically being there. Everybody
everybody should be allowed to talk.
There there should be nobody who's not
allowed to talk. Um and and and who
knows whether whether somebody who's
never been to a particular site might
might have a sudden insight that could
illuminate the whole field. Why should
we deny ourselves that that opportunity
of that person's brilliance? Uh so so no
I I I I don't think it's it's a must for
me.
As a writer, if I'm going to write about
a
place, I'm going to do it much better if
I've been
there. It's the dust has got into my
nose. I felt the place. I I have a
connection with it that I wouldn't have
if I were simply looking at at uh
scholarly articles in journals. Uh so
it's important for me to do the travel,
but I'm not saying that it's essential
for everybody.
I think I think when
somebody expresses huge confidence and
knowledge about a place they've never
been to, it's right to ask that person
whether they've been to that
place, you know. But if they're
tentative about it and they say, "Well,
I think it might be I've not been there,
but I think it might be this way."
That's okay. But but but to to to to
claim to know about a place to have all
the facts and yet never have been there,
that's a bit of a reach in my view.
Yeah. Perhaps everybody's should have an
opinion or allowed to have an opinion,
but if you're going to make a career on
it, you probably should do a little bit
more deeper digging. Well, again, I
mean, you know, like it or not, we live
we live in a an open marketplace and and
and and ultimately um people will
consume what they wish to consume. Uh
there's really no way to that that's why
all all these attempts to control the
narrative are so bizarre.
um in in this sort of society we live we
we we should
not there should be no controlling of
narratives. Every narrative should be
out there in the freefor-all and those
that are worthwhile they will sooner or
later stand the test of time and those
that are not worthwhile will be gone.
That's that's what will happen. Maybe
it'll take a decade, maybe it'll take a
hundred years,
but all those ideas should have their
place in the sun and their opportunity
to be considered. And that opportunity
includes not being deliberately lied
about and smeared. That that because
that's propaganda. That that opportunity
being here is an idea. We don't agree
with it, but let's look and see what
what might be in it. Not in instantly
start insulting the person who's put
that idea forward.
Yeah. For a long time, it seemed like
the narrative was easier to control, but
once the internet really took hold, like
the floodgates just flew open. and flood
gates have flown open in in every in
every area. Um and
um you know this is this is
fundamentally a good thing. Um like any
I think we have to compare the internet
to you know any great power like
electricity. It's a it it's it's it's a
universal power. Uh it can be used for
you can use electricity for really good
things and you can use it for really bad
things too. And and um it's the same
with the internet. uh can be it can it
can be used for very good things and it
can be and is used for really bad things
as well. Uh I don't know I don't know
what's to be done about all of that. It
it is just a reality of the world we
live in. Um uh first of all you know
what's the Roman saying caveat emptor
let the buyer beware. Uh anything that
anybody reads on the internet should be
double triple fact checked uh before
being taken as truth. Uh they and that
includes my work. That's that and that's
what I invite invite anybody to do. But
double triple check factchecking doesn't
include only listening to videos by
people who hate me. Uh it actually
involves reading my books.
Yeah. In your work you've u you've paid
careful attention to
prophecy and you know a lot of modern
scientists they dismiss prophecy
completely and I'm I'm curious to know
like what is the importance of looking
into prophecy?
Well, again this is also an area where
my work is misrepresented by others. Let
us call these fringe subjects like
telepathy
uh telekinesis for example
um sigh powers
uh I I've devoted very little of my work
prophecy I've devoted very little of my
work actually to these issues. I think
if you were to go through all the
thousands of pages I've written, you'd
be lucky if you'd find 40 with which
cover which cover those topics. But
where I do cover them, it's with it's
with this notion
that when looking for a missing chapter
in our
past, we should not be looking for
ourselves. That would be that would be a
waste of time and effort. We can we we
we should assume that what we what what
we're looking for that the feeling the
haunting feeling I have that there's
something there that there's something
missing whatever it is it's not us we
need to look for something different and
that's why I refuse to close my mind
completely to traditions that have come
down for us from the past that speak of
um priests levitating large blocks in
the air using chanting for example that
speak of magician s performing certain
extraordinary tricks for example. Um we
shouldn't ignore those completely. Um
and and amongst those is is prophecy.
The notion prophecy of course in a
materialist reductionist western science
frame of reference is impossible. It's
impossible. We cannot know the future.
We cannot we can we can make informed
guesses about how the future might turn
out but we can't prophesy the future. we
can't have a revelation about what the
future will be. That's the view of
mainstream science. Well, I'm not sure
that's necessarily correct. I' like I
like I say, I share with Rupert
Sheldrake the view that consciousness is
not local to the brain that the brain is
a receiver of consciousness rather than
a generator of consciousness to use that
model. And if that's the case, if that
model is right, rather the mainstream
model is the generator model, but if
it's a receiver of consciousness, then
it is possible that the consciousness
field is much larger than we imagine. uh
and that that information might come in,
we don't really understand time and
space that well. Uh so while it's ne
never been a main focus of my work, uh I
really doubt if more than 40 pages could
be found, probably less on these kind of
subjects in my books. It's not a subject
that I've closed my mind to completely.
H well you've uh read th prophecy a few
times and the first time I heard you
read it really yes that that that
that particular vision of the future
um is so resonant with how we are today
with how with how the world is today.
You did an illustrated version of that.
Yeah, it deeply moved me. Yeah, it is
deeply moving. It deeply it deeply moves
me. Um and and um it's the it's it's the
hermetic lament really. That's that's
that's that's that's that's what it is.
Um, is it a prophecy of future times?
Um, if you were to think about it, it
could be almost any future times. I
mean, consider what the world went
through in the 20th century. Um,
consider consider what the world went
through in the Middle Ages, you know,
all the horrors that were perpetrated
then. Um, I think it I think it's
speaking to the human condition. um that
we go through these cycles or we go
through these cycles where we imagine
ourselves elevated to the highest
possible level and then we make some
terrible mistakes and we plunge down to
the absolute end the abyss and and and
and in that process there's a cleansing
and out of that emerges a new prospect
for the future. I think that's what the
hermetic lament is touching upon. Um,
and and that's why that re resonates so
much for me. But is it a prophecy of a
specific time in the future
eerily? The kind of world that's
depicted in that in that amazing piece
of poetry does feel like the world we
live in today. It really does. Yeah. You
know, maybe people in the Middle Ages
would have felt the same if they'd known
the prophecy B. Yeah. There was a line
in there plague coming down upon us, you
know, with the second the second world
war, you know, that that felt like the
end of the world to many people. Yeah. I
distinctly remember there was a line in
there that said that there will come a
time when death will be preferred to
life. Yeah. And that line just because I
see that all the time when you see
factory farming or you see the people
cutting down the Amazon for the it's
it's like we live in that we live in
that time. Um, it it it feels it feels
like it's directed at us. That's as
close as I'll get to being spooky on it.
Yeah, it feels like it it feels like
it's directed to us. It feels that way
to me. That's why that's why I read it.
Uh, and and it also feels like a wakeup
call. Not um a gloom and doom warning,
but a wakeup call. This doesn't have to
happen. Prefer life more than death. You
know that's that's the message that
comes out of it. Glorify in this
beautiful gift that the universe has
given
us.
Repay what we were given by the
universe. The way human beings are
behaving now. This this constant mutual
negativity. This constant attacks and
destruction. the absolute failure to
recognize human beings from another
ethnic or religious group as actually
being human at all. Uh this is a
terrible terrible problem that the that
the world is facing today. It it it's
it's
it's we are a species that can
absolutely bring about our own
destruction. We are capable of doing it.
We don't need a comet coming in at
60,000 miles an hour. We can do it all
ourselves. Uh we've got enough feckless
leaders with their hands on nuclear
buttons now around the world. Leaders
with the mentality of enraged
teenagers nevertheless have the capacity
to end human
civilization. Now it's up to us. Do we
do we accept that kind of thing in the
future? Are we just going to be passive
pawns in this game that may mean no
future for humanity? Uh, are we going to
trust our
leaders? Is their behavior
trustworthy? I look at a bunch of macho
macho teenagers. Really, that's what
that's what the leadership of the world
feels like right now. Utter failure of
leadership on every continent.
Maybe we give them all Iaska.
That's the trouble is that they they
would never do that. Um I I've I've
often jokingly suggested that that that
um a dozen sessions with Iawaska would
would be helpful to any politician. Um
help to clarify why they're doing what
they're doing, why they say what they
say. Make them confront their own dark
side, make them real take responsibility
uh for their actions and behavior. Um
but there are some people who are so
thickheaded that even mother can't get
through to them, you know. Um so I don't
know. uh but but uh it is it is clear to
me that we when I say we as a
civilization I mean the whole
technological civilization of the world
is really one civilization now there's
different levels of wealth but there
really is one one one one global
civilization um we have major choices in
front of us uh at the moment there is
too much sheep
behavior people have we all have these
big brains but too few people are
thinking for themselves ves and and
and you know putting truth to power,
speaking truth to power. There's too
little of that of that happening. And at
the same time, we're saddled with a gang
of completely irresponsible leaders. Uh
and we have been trained into following
the leader into accepting accepting
leadership. I'm not sure how much longer
we need leaders. I'm I'm not sure how
much longer leaders are going to serve
the human species and and how much
longer they're actually going to act as
agents for the destruction of the human
species. I hope that those who have
their hands on the red button right now
are going to see that this climate of
hatred that is being spread in the world
is not helpful. I hope very much that
that will be the case, but um I'm not
confident.
Does our modern civilization mirror um a
past civilization that maybe before like
Atlantis before they got wiped out?
Again, you know, we talked about the
hermetic lament though to prophecy and
and and now uh of course Plato's
Atlantis and and and um you know what
what what what's fundamental in that
story for me at this at this level of
discourse um is is his notion that that
Atlantis, whatever it was, um was was
once a beautiful civilization that that
honored and nurtured spirit. um was kind
and generous, but that it became
corrupt. The corruption crept in little
by little uh and it became arrogant and
it became cruel and it began to impose
its power upon others all around the
world and in a ringing phrase that it
ceased to wear its prosperity with
moderation. In other words, it became
conceited, arrogant, overp proud, and
that was why the universe struck
Atlantis down in Plato's story. And if
there's any civilization that ticks all
those boxes today, it's ours. It's the
technological civilization that
unfortunately is running the world
today. I'm not against technology.
Technology does wonderful things. It
just needs to open up. We need to we
need to honor our spiritual part and we
need to realize that there that there's
more than one way of doing that. That
the that the mainstream monotheistic
faiths may be one way but they're not
the only way. We we need much more
tolerance all around the world in every
way for for for the differences and the
similarities between human beings.
I guess I'll just ask the simple
question. Are you optimistic about the
future? I have to be because I have nine
grandchildren. I have to be. And I see
the joy in their eyes and the way that
they're embracing the world and just how
wonderful the world is. This is the eyes
of a child that everything is new. It's
so exciting. It's so it's so there's so
much energy goes into it into the
appreciation and the love of that that I
have to be optimistic for the future. I
have to be optimistic that those who are
presently misleading the world will turn
a corner. uh and and will start to
emphasize the shared qualities that all
human beings have rather than our
differences.
Well, I think you've played a great part
in creating an optimism for the future.
I I can say for myself, you know, these
theories that or these scientific ideas
that we're just machines with no free
will and we're just mechanical parts and
then you come in and say we're actually
part of this greater thing, this great
tradition and this universal culture and
you know, you can be part of it and you
can explore it. You can go to these
sites and touch it and learn for
yourself. It's very inspiring. Good.
Well, I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm glad if I've
been helpful in in that way. Yeah. Do
you have advice for the younger
generation to carry this torch on? Uh,
yes. The the the advice is is never to
be discouraged from following your
passion because that's what it's all
about. Never be never be talked into the
safe
option. Consider all options
carefully, including risky ones. Don't
take unnecessary risks, but but realize
that life itself is a risk and it's an
it's an opportunity and has to be
grabbed with both hands and the best
made of it. But but fundamentally more
more important than than all of that is
just being a decent human being, you
know, not not carrying too much toxicity
with you uh as you go through life
shedding all of that
Well, that's brilliant. And um I greatly
appreciate you and I I appreciate your
time and um I hope we cross paths again.
I hope so too. I I I realize that we
have actually more or less come to the
end of our the end of our time. Um we
have and I've very very much enjoyed
I've very much enjoyed talking to you
Mark. Very very interesting. Same. Um
and uh we should we should talk about
more animations. Oh absolutely. I I
would love to do more. Great. Anytime.
Well, listen, good luck with everything
you're doing. Let me know when you're
going to put this out. All right, I hope
you enjoyed this episode of the Before
School podcast. It was a complete honor
to have Graham Hancock on. When I began
this podcast, I had a short list of
dream guests that I would like to get
and Graham was at the top of that list.
So, I'm really humbled and thankful to
have him on. We mentioned quite a few
times throughout this podcast Th's
Prophecy, which is one of the most
profound videos I've ever encountered.
Uh I animated this in 2018.
and I wanted to leave you guys with this
video. So, take it
[Music]
away. We uh we live at a crossroads.
There's no doubt. We all feel it. We all
know it.
I don't think it's the first time that
mankind has stood at such a crossroads,
but here we are now facing
it and
hopefully dealing with
it. I'm going to close with a reading
from the Hermetica, from the Hermetic
texts. Hermes was the Greek version of
the ancient Egyptian god Th. The Romans
knew him as Mercury. And uh in a
dialogue, the Hermetica, many of them
are dialogues between th Hermes and
various pupils of his. And in one called
the eskeipius,
uh a lament is
presented and it's like a prophecy. It's
a bit like the Mayan
prophecy. Egypt seems to stand as a
metaphor for the whole
world in this and to my mind for the
world in our time. This lament, this
prophecy is speaking directly to us.
So it's Hermes speaking and he's saying
to Eskeipius this. Do you know Eskeipius
that Egypt is an image of heaven? Or to
speak more exactly in Egypt all the
operations of the powers which rule and
work in heaven are present in the earth
below. In fact, it should be said that
the whole cosmos dwells in this our land
as in a sanctuary.
And yet, since it is fitting that wise
men should have knowledge of all events
before they come to pass, you must not
be left in ignorance of what I will now
tell
you. There will come a time when it will
have been in vain that Egyptians have
honored the Godhead with heartfelt piety
and service, and all our holy worship
will be fruitless and
ineffectual. The gods will return from
earth to heaven. Egypt will be forsaken
and the land which was once the home of
religion will be left desolate beereft
of the presence of its
deities. Oh Egypt, Egypt, of thy
religion nothing will remain but an
empty tale which thine own children in
time to come will not believe. Nothing
will be left but graven words and only
the stones will tell of thy
piety. And in that day, men will be
weary of life, and they will cease to
think the universe worthy of reverent
wonder and worship. They will no longer
love this world around us, this
incomparable work of God, this glorious
structure which he has built, this sum
of good made up of many diverse forms,
this instrument whereby the will of God
operates in that which he has made,
ungrudgingly favoring man's welfare.
This combination and accumulation of all
the manifold things that call forth the
veneration, praise and love of the
beholder. Darkness will be preferred to
light, and death will be thought more
profitable than life. No one will raise
his eyes to heaven. The pious will be
deemed insane. The impious wise, the
madman will be thought a brave man. And
the wicked will be esteemed as good. As
for the soul and the belief that it is
immortal by nature or may hope to attain
to immortality, as I have taught you,
all this they will mock and even
persuade themselves that it is false. No
word of reverence or piety, no utterance
worthy of heaven will be heard or
believed. And so the gods will depart
from mankind, a grievous thing. And only
evil angels will remain who will mingle
with men and drive the poor wretches
into all manner of reckless crime, into
wars and robberies and frauds and all
things hostile to the nature of the
soul. Then will the earth tremble, and
the sea bear no ships. Heaven will not
support the stars in their orbits. All
voices of the gods will be forced into
silence. The fruits of the earth will
rot. The soil will turn barren and the
very air will sicken with sullen
stagnation. All things will be
disordered and arry. All good will
disappear.
But when all this has befallen
Eskeipius, then God, the creator of all
things, will look on that which has come
to pass, and will stop the disorder by
the counterforce of his will, which is
the
good. He will call back to the right
path those who have gone astray. He will
cleanse the world of evil, washing it
away with floods, burning it out with
the fiercest fire, and expelling it with
war and pestilence.
And thus he will bring back his world to
its former aspect so that the cosmos
will once more be deemed worthy of
worship and wondering reverence. And
God, the maker and maintainer of the
mighty fabric, will be adored by the men
of that day with continuous songs of
praise and blessing. Such is the new
birth of the cosmos. It is a making
again of all things good, a holy and awe
inspiring restoration of all nature. And
it is wrought inside the process of time
by the eternal will of the
creator. I don't know whether we're
going to face some terrible global
catastrophe or not. I certainly hope
not. I hope it will not come down
to misery and horror and awful, awful
things. because there's enough of that
in the world already. But I do remember
what all the ancient texts say. There
isn't a single flood myth. There isn't a
single story of the destruction of past
civilizations that don't implicate
humanity in the story somewhere. Our own
behavior, what we do is part of what
we're bringing down on the world right
now. We are what we are what we are
manifesting in the world. That is what
is coming towards us. We are the authors
of this thing and we can change the
story if we want to change it. I firmly
believe
that. Are we looking at the traces of a
forgotten episode in human history? I
think so. I think that's that's what's
going on
here. And because we've forgotten it
because we are a species with
amnesia, because we are
so much a mystery to ourselves. Perhaps
it's because of that that we're so lost,
so troubled today, so haunted
by this sense of something missing,
something that we need to know uh about
ourselves. For the ancient Egyptians,
the essential mystery of human existence
concerned our spiritual essence.
um that we are participating in this
theater of experience that we call life
and the world in in an immense endeavor
aimed at the perfection uh of the
soul. I've tal talked with shamans uh in
the Amazon and when I've asked them what
what do you think is the problem with
the world? What what's the problem with
the west? They say it's it's very
simple. You've severed your connection
with spirit. You've cut the link and you
have to restore that
link if you're going to move forward
from here. You can't you can't move
forward from the place you're in if you
don't restore the connection to spirit.
And that seems to me the most the most
fundamental task uh that that all of us
now now face.
Not these exterior trappings of power
that have brought such horror and misery
to the
world. This is the moment of crossroads
that we stand at. None of us can affect
changes on a macro level. It's
impossible to do
so. Um but we can make changes on a
micro level. We can make changes in our
own lives. We can make changes in our
immediate surroundings. Changes for the
better. Changes
driven by
love. So overwhelming is the notion of
of of global destruction. No, I can't
stop that, but I can stop what I'm doing
to contribute to it. And if we all do
that, then I believe a huge change in
consciousness will come and the world
can move on and we can look forward to a
future for our children and our
children's children and once again bring
this bright beautiful jewel garden of a
planet. Bring it back to the place it
should be in our
lives. Okay. Wow. Yeah, that one's
powerful. And um when I made this video
back in 2018, it had a profound impact
on me and just the way I saw myself in
the world probably a decade ago, I I
thought a lot about how I wanted the
world to change and what the world owed
me and maybe if certain things changed,
it would get a lot better for me. But
from teachings like this, I really
realized that I have to be the change.
The only thing I can control is changing
myself.
So, it's an incredibly powerful prophecy
that touch touched me, changed me, and
uh I'll leave you guys with this. And um
I hope you enjoyed this conversation. It
was an honor to talk to Graham, and I
hope you have a great day. Thank you.