The bankers are likely not our biggest
enemy anymore. They want us to believe
it's about the bankers. The goal is a a
slow overthrow. They want to get us to a
civil war. This financial industrial
complex is building financial weapons of
mass destruction to centralize as much
Bitcoin as possible. Once someone goes
into a Bitcoin ETF, they're never coming
back. Trump is delivering crypto
capital, centralization of as much
Bitcoin as possible, um, and getting
ready for false flag operations. The
biggest enemy that [music] we have is
this culture of celebrity and idol
worship. Some of our friends, Simon,
that sit at the table with us. They're
the bad actors. We now have let the
enemies into the gate. They're coming
for our privacy cuz they know that's the
best way to innucleate Bitcoin. [music]
And that's what the Samurai case really
is all about. That should have scared
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of everybody.
&gt;&gt; Good morning, gentlemen. Thank you so
much for joining me today. I want to
dive right into it. This is very
exciting for me. You got a meeting of
two incredible minds here, and I think
there's a lot of signals going to come
out of this. So, just to kick things off
here, um Simon, you've warned that Black
Rockck has become the CEO of the proof
of weapons network, a stateless mafia
more powerful than any president, army,
or law. It's the bankers and the debt
merchants who can crash nations, start
wars, and now own a substantial amount
of Bitcoin through ETFs and and other
products. And Dr. Cruz, while I believe
you share that sentiment and your
concerns about the financial cartel, I
would suspect that you put the real
threat maybe isn't necessarily in the
boardroom, but perhaps it's more like
the DARPA Zionist, the transhumanist
trying to hijack our minds and turn us
into compliant slaves, even if we hold
our own keys. So, Simon, just starting
with you, who is the actual threat to
Bitcoiners and our freedom? Ultimately,
who are we up against here? And is
Bitcoin held in self-custody used as
money sufficient to break free?
&gt;&gt; Uh yeah, well that is the battle. So
I've been I've been involved in Bitcoin
since 2011 and the latest round of
Bitcoin attacks because it's been
attacked ever since I first got
involved. Um is certainly from what I
call the financial industrial complex of
which I see Black Rockck as the most
important node in that network. Um and
uh you know that can change uh but it's
a it's a complex of venture capital,
private equity, investment banks,
commercial banks and then the asset
managers have um kind of found
themselves on top of the chain in the
latest iteration of financialization,
securitization and now tokenization.
Um but uh you know Black Rockck I I I
classify
um as the CEO
um and yeah this financial industrial
complex is building financial weapons of
mass destruction to centralize as much
Bitcoin as possible. One of those nodes
is the ETFs. Um because once someone
goes into a Bitcoin ETF, they're never
coming back. Um, you're not going to
sell your ETF,
have a tax hit, then try and figure out
how to get it out of Black Rockck into a
bank, then into an exchange, then into
purchasing Bitcoin. That whole iteration
will get your bank account shut down in
the process. Um, the other is Bitcoin
treasury companies and this is, you
know, raising finance from the financial
terrorists in order to purchase Bitcoin.
So you can put it in a Wall Street
wrapper and then structure debt
instruments around it and perpetual uh
you know obligations of fiat currency uh
so that then they can use that in order
to uh manipulate the short-term price of
Bitcoin. Um the other is obviously
leverage. You've got uh the derivatives
complex that is being built around
Bitcoin. Um and then you've got other
nodes where um companies like Strike are
now offering Bitcoin back loans. Um, and
so therefore you can get margin called
into uh giving up your Bitcoin. Um, and
when you combine all these together with
stable coins, which are essentially
investing in Bitcoin and Bitcoin mining
using the government's yield, you've
created an entire complex. Um, and you
all you need now is to add banks that
can create paper Bitcoin. And the battle
is centralized Bitcoin within the
financial industrial complex versus
self-custody. Uh, and we need to win
that battle. And we need a certain
amount of the network to prop up
self-custody running nodes in order to
win that battle because they want to
centralize as much Bitcoin as possible.
&gt;&gt; Beautiful. Um, Dr. Cruz, your thoughts?
I think he described 99% of the pyramid,
the 1% he missed, which is the top where
the gold leaf is, is the control aspect.
It's where the transhumanist comes in.
And if you understand like the things
that I've talked to breed love about,
things I talked to you about last time,
is that [clears throat] um
you you don't need to control assets to
control people. They're now that's what
Meer Lansky did back in the day. That's
exactly what Roy Conn did um in the in
between frame between Meer Lansky and
and Epstein.
Uh and now the layers that you have, you
have the the Google layer. Uh clearly uh
Simon and I are aligned on the Sailor
ETF think layer. But I think the the
more important part that I think maybe
Simon is missing, now I wouldn't say
missing. I just don't think he
appreciates it, um, the most important
part of the control aspect is what Trump
told us in Nashville. You're going to
have your Bitcoin. You're going to do do
everything you want with it, but uh,
we're still going to be able to control
it, and they're going to use computer
interfaces. That's where the AI stuff
comes in. So, let me give you the
evolution so we're all on the same page.
Lansky famously, like if you read
anything about him as the accountant for
Murder, Inc. said that uh I don't need
to control assets. I need to control
people. Uh that was probably best shown
in what happened with uh Groves, what
happened with the Rothchilds in 1969.
And then I think probably the best uh
analogy is what he did with Jay Edgar
Hoover. Okay, where did the next
iteration come in? Roy Conn, most people
may not know this. I put a tweet out
this morning about it. Uh, and I don't
know if Simon knows it because it's more
US- ccentric, but Roy Conn uh was a
Russian um Zionist immigrant who became
very famous because he was Trump's fixer
before uh all the other lawyers were the
fixer. and he used uh Joe McCarthy as
part of the Top Gun um I would say
defense. Let's bring them closer so that
we can uh infiltrate the US army. Uh and
this goes into the part of the story
where DARPA fits in and everything else.
The other thing is we need to also
inucleate the power of the US military
for wrench attacks so that they'll do
the bidding of the Zionists and in
Israel. So what did he do? Um Roy Conn
took a playbook out of Lansky. This is
the evolution until you get until
Epstein and he basically
uh saw to it that they would um use the
idea of getting communism in by fighting
communism. So he was the lawyer for Joe
McCarthy for McCarthyism in the United
States. And what did he do? He set up a
a scops. And so we're clear. I know we
talked about the last time you and I
talked. What's a scops? Scops is uh the
hook, but they only show you the bait.
So what was the the bait? The bait was
what everybody in the United States and
Britain and the Western powers saw that
the United States was going against
communism in the 50s and 60s. But that's
not really what Roy Conn was doing. Roy
Conn um was the perfect scup because he
put he helped put two Jewish people to
death. The spies from World War II, the
atomic spies, the Rosenbergs
and many Jews in New York, many Jews in
the United States, many Jews in Tel Aviv
thought that he was a traitor. That's
exactly what the Zionists wanted people
to think. And what did Roy Con do? He
worked with McCarthy. He set McCarthy
up. If you know anything about the 190
hours they were on TV together, um 80
million people in the United States,
just so you know, that's half of the
United States in the 1950s watch this
unfold. And basically the undertone of
the whole thing is Con was a known um
sexual deviant. And the guy that they
put him on TV with, they sold through
Time magazine and the New York Times as
also a deviant. And what was the whole
point? Because I know a lot of people
don't know the context of this. This guy
uh Chilled, who was a really
good-looking dude that looked like a
Greek god,
got an appointment with the US military
in 1953 because he was one of McCarthy's
friends. Roy Con set this whole thing up
to make McCarthy look like a useful
idiot. What was the real issue?
McCarthy was correct that the Bolevik
communists were infiltrating the United
States at this time. But Cohen wanted to
make sure that he disgraced McCarthy.
And he did that because what did he do
with Chilled? Um
he knew that in 1950s America the only
thing people hated more than bolevik
communism was gay people. So he used
himself as the target and he allowed
um the process to unfold on TV. What do
you need to know about this? What does
Simon need to know about this? This is a
classic Fabian maneuver with Simon being
um um tied to the Commonwealth. He
understands what and who a Fabian is.
They're trying to get incremental
change. What was the change that he was
trying to do? He was trying to get
communism fully infiltrated all the way
through. But what was the big thing? He
really wanted to get the US army
infiltrated with uh beta females and
males.
And what the goal was um was to change
that. So if you know what's happened in
the United States from 1950 to current
day, you'll see what what happened with
Trump or General Millie when Millie
said, "Yeah, I'd rather protect and
connect the CCP to break [snorts]
ranks." That, you know, to a 1950s
American was kind of crazy talk. Today,
everybody's okay with it. And you have
to know how that process started. And
just so we're all clear, none of this
happened with money, Simon. not one damn
thing. Everything happened with Bernay's
propaganda. Everything happened with uh
Zionist media relations. Specifically,
it was Time magazine and the New York
Times that they used to do this. And
this is the most amazing part of the
story, at least for me, for Bitcoiners
to understand. McCarthy was destroyed by
this because
um Cohen also controlled Jar Hoover. And
it turned out McCarthy didn't know that
and he gave a picture of these two guys
chilled and and coned together. Um and
the lawyer for the US military,
specifically the army, his name guy
named Joe Welsh said to uh con on
cross-examination something about the
pixie. And that's when McCarthy spoke up
and said, "What's a pixie? I don't
understand." And he goes, "Well, it's
another name for a fairy.
What happened right there? That was when
all the politicians right and left
realized the homosexual undertone and
they came after McCarthy. They didn't go
after Con. And the interesting part of
the issue was if you look at all the
numbers after that everything crashed
and cratered, the whole story about
communism was over. completely over,
which is what the Zionist goal was.
And then um what happens after that?
Um Con takes the bullet. But when you
look at history now, because you know
Con is dead now. Con became a fixer
later for Trump, which I think everybody
knows. But what do you need to know,
Simon, so that you can put the the top
of the pyramid where it belongs?
um nothing happened to con like
McCarthyism got taken out. What was the
effect of this scops is to basically
make the US military
an asset that could not take Israel out.
And they were very effective doing that
without seed phrases, without money. And
then what happened eventually from 1953
on, we spent we sent each Israeli
citizen
$10 million a day from the United
States. So what does a Fabian do? They
rob from one to give to another. And
when you see how this happened, the
point that I need to make to a guy like
you is I know what you know. I'm already
way past the Bitcoin phase and I think
you need to get past it too because I
don't think you really understand that
the guy who's the next iteration after
Epstein, he's the most important one.
That's the guys running Google because
what did they do? They took Lansky and
Con's idea and said, "Hey, can we remove
the people from this and do this through
search?"
And when I see your phone next to me,
Simon, if we ever meet, you'll notice
that our feeds are quite different about
the same Twitter topic. I told Nathan
the last time we talked, if he was there
from Canada, what he would see is
different. So our reality
is driving our perception. And the thing
is that cames directly out of the same
time frame. That's 1950s MK Ultra. This
was all going on at the same time. So
now you have these new guys. Who are the
new guys that are the real bad actors?
You I've heard you say many times that
it's fake Sailor and I agree, but
they're the level below the guys on the
top level. That's the Palunteer cats,
especially Karp. Uh especially Peter
Teal. In fact, some of our friends,
Simon, that sit at the table with us,
they're the bad actors. We now have let
the enemies into the gate. And the point
that I tried to make to Nathan and his
buddy last time is that when you let
those actors in and they're able to use
the things they use, they don't need
your seed phrases. That's the reason why
Scott Bessant famously said,
"We'll just take their Bitcoin."
Because they don't need any of that. If
you don't believe me, I'll give you a
perfect example
that just happened. All of us saw it
unfold. Two guys last night released
something about Samurai Wallet. That
should have [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] scared the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out
of everybody. Why? Because we have a
constitution. We know that that was not
a money transmitting business. But what
did the Southern District of New York
do? They said, "We don't give two
fucks." Do you know why? Because it
started with Roy Conn. Roy Conn is the
one that changed all that, made it
acceptable for us to put people in jail.
Now, back in in Europe, people are being
thrown in jail for tweets. So, the point
I'm trying to make to you is this poor
guy is going to jail for 5 years. We
know the charges are [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] In fact,
I will tell you I have a Bitcoin
developer that's sitting right next to
me who I made listen to this cuz I knew
we were going to talk about this today
and he's madder than hell. He's more mad
about this than we were about Ross. But
do you want to know what Ross was? Ross
is another scops that Trump gave us.
It's all it is. And the bottom line is,
as I told Nathan, what's the real plan
that I I think we all need to go because
Simon, Nathan, me, everybody, Marty B,
we're on the same team, but I don't
think we're all thinking about this the
right way. Um, I think the SCups we have
to be worried about now is they're both
sides, left and right. Doesn't matter
who you want to put as your evil empire.
They're coming for our privacy because
they know that's the best way to
inucleate Bitcoin. And that's what the
samurai case really is all about because
what did they have to do? They had to
take his server to to to knock it down.
Coin joins is going to be the next thing
they go after because that's effectively
doesn't matter what your seed freight
is. Doesn't matter how much Bitcoin you
got. The bottom line is if they can turn
every localal into a place where they
can turn it into the Southern District
of New York, we're all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And
that's the real game that we should be
talking about. I I think the sailor
black rockck thing I think all of us
know I think Max Kaiser has done a
phenomenal job at warning all of us that
to make a market in Bitcoin for a nation
state you know like Samson and and Jan 3
guys are talking about you have to have
about a million million and a half
Bitcoin to do that well that's where the
treasury companies and sailor comes in
so basically they're the useful idiots
for the nation state players that we're
talking about and The key is in the
grand scale of things. I don't think and
and sailor really play a huge role here
when you understand it's really about
how we think. Can we maintain Bitcoiners
as first principal thinkers to
understand how we need to do things?
Because the bottom line, even if they
take everything away
that they're attempting to take away,
because that's what I think the samurai
case really shows us, that we're still
still going to have peer-to-peer access.
they're not going to be able to turn the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] internet off. That I can tell
you. Um because they need it actually
more than we do. And I think when you
begin to understand that the case that
I'm trying to make, Simon, is that
we have to be wiser than everybody else.
And I I said to Nathan, and I don't know
how he felt about it because we haven't
talked about it, but I think everybody
is a Bitcoin needs to get Sunzu's book
and really look at it because let me
tell you something. What Roy Conn did in
the 1950s to the people in the United
States was absolutely [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] brilliant.
And just so you're clear, so you know
the history, the guy that Roy Conn set
up this SCOPS with, do you know what he
became famous for after it was all over?
Made a movie called The French
Connection. That was his payoff for
being part of the SCOPS. The Top Gun
story that you just heard. Um, remember
how it comes when he said to the guy, "I
want to bring you closer." Do you know
who just bought Tik Tok, right? Ellison,
his his son this morning just did a
hostile takeover. Do you know who's the
guy that spoke out about
uh Paramount buying Netflix?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; David Ellison, his son. So now, guess
what? Tom Cruz who talks [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about this
now he is in the crosshairs. So what am
I trying to say to you? History has a
really interesting way of repeating it.
Never repeats exactly. But what you're
seeing going on right now with Ellison
is exactly what Roy Conn did to McCarthy
and what Roy Conn eventually did uh for
Trump. And you have to realize if you go
back, I grew up in New York City while
Trump was ascending, you know, through
the Kushner Empire, the the Aden Empire,
and uh the Silverstein Empire. Why was
he given the access that he was given?
Because he also is a useful idiot. And
remember, he's the useful idiot that we
all kissed ass. I mean, Nathan heard me
say probably some things that a lot of
Bitcoiners were pissed off at me about
when I talked about David Bailey. I
look, David Bailey is a good guy, but
David Bailey got [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fooled. And
it's about time that we sit down and do
podcasts like this and sometimes we have
to call out our own. You've had your own
issues. You got fooled by Mashinsky. So,
let's let's all be up and up about this.
You're still my brother. Nathan's still
my brother. We're in this together. If
we want to win, we got to understand
that the people that we're fighting,
they're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ruthless and they will
stop at no end. And if you think it's
just about the money, then you don't
really understand what the capabilities
of wireless technology, screen
technology, and brain interfaces are.
Then you'll understand really what Karp,
really what Elon Musk, really what
Neuralink, what SpaceX and all that's
about. They really believe they can
control people
and it doesn't matter about the money
anymore. It's no longer the Rothschild's
mindset that if you give me the money
supply, I can control everybody.
technocracy now believes that they're
more powerful than the money changers.
So, the bankers
are likely not our biggest enemy
anymore, Simon. That But I got news for
you. The reason I tell you this story
and the reason I tell this, Nathan, I
want you to remind yourself about Roy
Conn. They want us to believe it's about
the bankers. And I'm telling you as an
old man that I live through many, many
different scops. And I'll explain to you
why humans are fallible for sciopsis.
You probably know in my day job I'm a
brain surgeon so I not know a lot about
how the brain works. We're very subject
to the Dunning Krueger effect. The only
way to go against the Dunning Krueger
effect is become a first principles
thinker. So the case that I'm laying out
to Bitcoin is I think that the reason
why I'm a Serbic and why people get
pissed off at me is because I lay this
stuff out. But I want to lay this out so
that we all understand before I shut up.
I want you to think about a chef and a
cook. Okay. First principle of thinking
is a chef will go and buy all the best
ingredients he possibly can. He will
come up with a meal that is absolutely
outstanding and unique.
A cook is a person that will go to the
store, follow a recipe in a book,
they'll make you a meal,
but there'll be nothing spectacular
about it. Okay, that's how most people
learn through analogy. First principle
thinking goes, no, I'd rather have
something unique. I think there's one
thing that we can all agree on. What
we're facing right now in the financial
world is the most unique problem that
the world has ever faced. So that means
we need a lot of chefs and not a lot of
cooks. And the only way you do that is
through the first principal thinking.
And the people who are first principal
thinkers in Bitcoin, we need to elevate
them. We don't need to put the retards
on podcast and have them tell us the
same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over and over again. And I
think that's part of the reason why I am
a pain in the ass for a lot of people,
but also because people understand that
I do have a mastery of the history. I do
have a mastery of how the technocracy
has gone above the money issue. And when
you understand that then the way in
which we think about the things that are
unfolding say right now with treasury
companies and with Michael Sailor takes
on a totally different nuance. And I
will tell everybody who listens to this
when they speak listen to him. Alex Karp
is not lying to you. Sergey Brin is not
lying to you.
Ellison is not lying to you. They have
set up an unbelievable control grid that
will completely control just about
everything about us. And that includes
our money and our seed phrases. Um, and
I will remind you, uh, this is probably
the last thing I'll say, but before I
I'm quiet. I want to remind you
specifically, Simon, the samurai guy's
going to jail and they never got his
seed phrases, but he's still going to
jail,
&gt;&gt; Simon. Yeah. Okay. So, a a lot to unpack
there. Yeah. Um absolutely. There is um
you know, the next wave of power is
certainly coming from the technical
industrial complex. Um and you quite
rightly pointed out um the key players
there. Um, I think the samurai I was
just on a call with the samurai guys
like um seeing what we can do um for
support um because you know they
confiscated the servers with the Xpubs
um and uh you know this is certainly a
case um that is being put forward in
order to chill people into using these
coin joins um and various other
innovation um that is important as a as
an essential defense there. Um, I think
it's uh I think it's really interesting
the Trump case because it pulls together
a couple of attack vectors. I've quite
often said the biggest enemy that we
have it from Bitcoiners and podcasters
right now is this culture of celebrity
and idol worship. Um, people seem to
think that Michael Sailor is the messiah
or Trump is the messiah or Kelly is the
messiah or um any of these people are
coming along. And if you look at what
Trump's done is firstly he created with
the executive order uh the environment
for mass confiscation of Bitcoin to
build up the Bitcoin strategic reserve.
And I know that because uh I was one of
the victims alongside a bunch of other
people in the Bitfinex exchange hack uh
which I believe was a Zionist operation
um in order to steal 119,000 bitcoins.
Um and what did we launch from that? a
security token. Um, and that was the
world's first security token that was
launched on top of Bitcoin. Um, and
obviously they bought from Brock Pierce
Tether. Um, and Brock Pierce part of the
Bitcoin Foundation that then goes back
into the Epstein networks when they try
to infiltrate the core developers. Um,
and so we're all going interestingly
full circle. And so what did Trump say?
He said, "We want all Bitcoin to be made
in America. That means centralization of
as much Bitcoin. We used to debate
around the power of China in the
ecosystem through Bitain, Jihon Woo, the
different miners, the mining pools. Um,
obviously there was the operation that
then put 40% of the hash power
centralized into Texas. Um, and now
there's all these public companies that
are emerging. Uh, there's all these
different parts of the ecosystem. So now
we have a problem with as many Bitcoin
being made in America. What else do they
do? Uh well in the Genius Act there was
language and clarity around targeting
coin joints and targeting unique wallets
through hardware wallets uh to you know
anonymize every transaction as a unique
transaction. Uh he also put language
which came from the finance and bank
lobby um that gave the banks the ability
to use the funds held at the Federal
Reserve um to back a stable coin. and
you have to have a banking license in
order to pay yield on that stable coin.
And then he launched his own stable
coin. Um, and then started working with
the Tether community. Um, which is
essentially taking the yield on the
government debt to build out the largest
private Bitcoin mining operation as well
as having these uh more uh, you know,
centralized uh, public miners as well.
And so we got that legislation and all
of that was around this Stargate
project, the Larry Ellisons and you look
at the next generation of tech bros
emerging. You had Steve Wickoff who was
uh connected to funding um for urban
movers for the 9/11 operation and the
MSAD operation. His son is now being put
in charge, you know, of and working with
Trump through World Liberty Financial.
You also had uh you know Howard Howard,
his son takes over Caner Fitzgerald.
Caner Fitzgerald is the investment bank
that's building all these treasury
companies holding the bonds and the
reserves for these stable coins and
encouraging people to borrow against uh
their Bitcoin. Now obviously we know
Howard Lutnik is the the was the
neighbor of Jeffrey Epstein uh deeply
connected. Caner Fitzgerald was the
company on the top of the towers. He was
away that day. The Silverstein
connections. Um all those different
things of anyone that's actually um
looked into this. So he's also saying
let's make America, you know, the the
crypto capital of the world. Crypto
capital is integration into artificial
intelligence, programmable money and the
social credit score that Elon is
building as well as the artificial
intelligence that Peter Thiel is
building. And so, and who did he put in
charge? He put David Car. So now you've
got the complete PayPal tech bros and
that are building this AI and crypto
strategy while simultaneously having as
you quite rightly point out these lower
level nodes in the network try and
centralize as much Bitcoin. Now why I
think the Trump um connection is really
interesting is because of the Charles
Kushner connection. Um and so anyone I'm
sure you know um anyone that you you
said you were around in New York. Well,
Charles Kushner was the one that
weaponized these sex blackmail
operations and married into the Trump
family his daughter to Jared Kushner.
Now Jared Kushner currently right now is
the one behind um Affinity Partners
which is the fund which is funded by the
Gulf countries the $2 billion fund at
the moment um which is launching you
know and uh Affinity Partners is the one
that is facilitating
uh much of this investment um in order
to put the Middle East into the next
wave because they're looking at building
out data centers within the Middle East
as Well, and so if you look at some of
the sovereign wealth funds like the Abu
Dhabi sovereign wealth fund, the UAE
sovereign wealth fund, David Bailey
invited me to speak at Bitcoin Mena
right now, which I politely declined and
sent them a video instead. Um because,
you know, we're we're seeing as well a
lot of these pod and operations. You
talked about Ross Albbright, absolutely
a honeypot um operation. uh but also
what we're seeing um with the world
liberty uh financial um and Binance as
well. So Binance um if you look at it,
it was alleged that it was doing money
laundering for Hamas. Um they had
suddenly came up with these signal um
screenshots. Uh Binance was taken out
and what was part of the Department of
Justice settlement, they have to install
um a compliance division. Uh this gave
by of the US government this gave them
access to 280 million Bitcoin users.
What was the first thing that they did
with that? Sorry, crypto users. What was
the first thing they did with that?
Well, they actually started to shut down
the accounts of Palestinians, Lebanese,
Turkish um all around and they put
together a request um where MSAD and the
Israeli government managed to get all of
the you know the the account shut down
and freeze all of those monies while
simultaneously running a starvation
campaign and a genocide. What technology
was used for that genocide? Well, it was
Palanteer that did uh genocide as a
service in Gaza, occupation as a service
in the West Bank, drone integration in
Ukraine, um crowd control in Saudi
Arabia for the annual Haj pilgrimage, um
integration into the UK government uh
for the pre-rime agenda and also using
scraping social media data in order to
arrest people based upon what they think
they're going to do based upon their
social media media profiles, open
border, closed border operations within
the European Union. Um, and you can take
your pick and go further and further.
So, this whole SCOP of open borders in
order to radicalize the Americans into
pushing forward these ICE um
surveillance state at the moment. And
what did they do? They integrated it
with the private prison section in El
Salvador, which is also a palunteer
operation as well. So you got Palanteer
that is managing the open border closed
borders in America. You got the
surveillance state. You got the digital
IDs. You got the pre-rime agendas.
You've got Doge which was essentially
Elon Musk pretending he could pay off
the national debt when obviously you
can't because the dollar is a Ponzi
scheme. Um and what did he do?
integrated that data of all the the
American um government data um into some
of these social credit scores um and
artificial intelligence networks. So you
can see that Trump is uh delivering
crypto capital centralization of as much
Bitcoin as possible um and getting ready
for false flag operations in order to
radicalize people into opting into this
covert stable coin central bank digital
currency in America as well as what's
happening in Europe where the digital
euro um is essentially becoming a CBDC.
So I absolutely agree that this
technology um is being built together.
Um and what I find interesting with the
with the the Jared Kushner, Charles
Kushner um is the operation that
happened throughout Bitcoin's history in
order to try and infiltrate the core
developers um through some of these uh
blackmail um operations. And I know
firsthand because I was around um seeing
some of the people um and the different
types of compromises um that was
happening there. So I I'll pause there
and we can go through some of the
Epstein operations um and these
connections.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; I I I would uh I would say you know to
that point I think you we have to take a
step back in history because Simon laid
a lot out. What happened with the Genius
Act? If I cut through the chase, the way
I see it, this is exactly what happened
uh when the first uh charter bank, the
Bank of England was made, you know, in
the Netherlands. Um what was the goal
there? Everybody knew that they were
going to drive debt up and they were
just going to pay, you know, people a
yield for perpetuity as an annuity. If
you take away all the fancy terms, the
modern terms we have because of the
financialization that happened from that
time from 1666 onwards,
uh understand that the the key mechanism
of the bank uh charter, the bank of
England was basically to make a debt
based system. That's exactly what the
Genius Act does for crypto and Bitcoin.
And when you understand that that the
people that set the system up will be
able to get, you know, an annuity paid
to them, what we're seeing is that
because the fiat system is being
imploded and a new one's being placed,
they want to make sure that they still
get the vig on top that they got when
they established the Bank of England.
And I think most people who are
Bitcoiners understand how the Bank of
England um went through all the
centralized monarchies. It wound up in
the United States. The same people that
set up the Federal Reserve. What did
they do? They sopsed Woodro Wilson. So
Woodro Wilson and Donald Trump have a
lot in common. And I I've been telling
people to go back and look at what
happened with Woodro Wilson before the
Federal Reserve Act. You'll notice that
even some of the same policies were in
place like tariffs and things like that.
You'll you'll be stunned about the
immigration policy as well. Uh you'll
see many many things. But Americans are
not really good at knowing their
history. Why? Because remember who
controls education in the United States?
The government. They only teach you what
they want you to know. And they really
want you to be an obedient idiot. That's
really the whole goal of the centralized
system in every facet. So it does take
the first principal thinker to go back
and put this together. And like I've
been on in rooms and in spaces where you
know I heard Simon arguing with you know
some pretty famous Bitcoin lawyers, Zack
Shapiro to to be quite frank. And one of
the things that I think people need to
understand that some of the people that
are in our family still can be our
problem. And that's why I I mentioned to
you, Nathan, that we just had
Thanksgiving here in the United States.
And you know, you can hate your uncle
Joe, you know, if he just doesn't see
the whole picture. And I I think the
thing that I like about doing this
little conversation between all of us,
this is really beneficial for the
audience because they get to think about
all the pieces that they know, but
they're also getting to hear about the
pieces they don't know. And the pieces
they don't know begins to explain some
of the geopolitics that are around. For
example, what's the main goal that Simon
brought up about the open border policy?
It's not a scops. It's actually this one
is more direct. They to have a one world
government, you can't have militaries
going in and destroying people. So what
do you do? You take people with brown
skin and put them in white countries
that use fiat money and let them do the
destruction. What's the key? The key is
what Blly told people of the seat
backing. Make sure you don't fix the
judges. Make sure you don't fix the AG.
Well, Trump didn't do that. So what's
the rhetoric? The rhetoric is I'm going
to fix and I'm doing gonna do MAGA, but
he's not really fixing it. He's got
Christy Gnome on there with her pretty
face. It's got ICE people running around
and you think that they're fixing all
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that Clinton, Obama, and Biden
did? That's total horseshit. Uh the goal
is a a slow overthrow. What's the real
key, Simon, that I would put out to you?
What's going on in the United States? I
think it's even more simple to
understand.
The real big problem that I see for the
United States is is amendment one, two,
and four. Four is a real pain in the ass
for the people in the government. So,
what would they really like to do? They
would like to divide us along lines of
left and right um between Clinton,
Obama, Biden, and Trump. I think you can
see that those lines develop. They want
to get us to a civil war because if
you're a Brit or part of the
Commonwealth, what do you know about the
Magna Carter and civil wars? Like the
British already had their civil war when
they killed Charles the first and they
had Oliver Cromwell in there. What
happens? You write new charters. Guess
what the one world government really
wants to happen in the United States?
They want us to go to a civil war. So,
we'll write new foundational documents.
You want to know the truth? American
patriots that own Bitcoin. We don't want
that to happen. We have to get rid of
the occupiers. Who are the occupiers?
This story goes all the way back to the
Roman Emperor Augustus.
They're the proletariat. They're the
guys that have the knife in the back of
the people that we see on our TVs. Those
are the people behind Mcronone. Those
are the people behind uh Trump. Those
are the people that are are behind
Obama. We see Obama going to London
right now. The London power base is
where all this begins. And and you know,
for all the the venom that people have
and they talk about the Jews versus the
Zionists, I will remind you, Simon, of
this key historical point, because I
think we need to to fasten it down.
The people who are the original
proletariat for the real banking cartel,
the Templars,
they were based on the land that Israel
is based on right now.
Don't forget that this story is as old
as human history.
Okay? They are they are running the
biggest game you can imagine. And
Fabianism is not something that a lot of
Americans understand, but it's exactly
what's happening to us. It started
really with the Federal Reserve Act and
that from that time forward, the real
goal of the Fabians that were locked
inside the United States was to import
more communists, more Fabians into the
government. They are now everywhere.
They're in all three branches. But you
know what the the real message for
Americans is? The real message, how do
we take the transhumanist agenda apart?
realize that our system here of
governance is good. I will tell you,
Simon, if we get really smart about
this, we can actually use the Top Gun
strategy on them because they're
centralizing Bitcoin in America. When
America stands up to the occupiers,
guess what happens?
They're the ones that get top gun. So,
the case that I made to Nathan the last
time I was here,
this may sound dire to a lot of
Bitcoiners. I actually think it's pretty
good. And the reason why I'm pretty
optimistic is because we are going to be
a powerful force in the future. Your
children, Nathan's children, my
children. What we have to do a better
job at, Simon, instead of arguing with
Zach or arguing with American Huddle or
arguing with British or arguing with Ben
or or whoever. We need to listen to each
other carefully using first principle
thinking and then we need to come up
with a coordinated plan. Why? Because
now we're the farmers in the United
States with pitchforks. We know how good
they are, but they don't know how good
we are. And I think when you understand
the game that's being played, it doesn't
emulate what's happened in the past, but
it sure rides. And I see a lot of the
same parts there. the control vectors
that they have aren't as good as you
think and there's ways to take them
apart. There's ways for you to become a
better first principal thinker with your
own brain because the difference between
Alex Carb and Palanteer system is that
its neural network is not like mine and
yours. This one is the most amazing one.
Why? Because it learns from new
information. Their system only learns
from the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they've put into it. And
there in lies a big weakness. And that's
not the weakness that most Bitcoiners
are focused on. They're focused on
number go up and going to these
conferences where basically they're
putting Karp and Palanteer's targets
right on our faces. We can't we can't
keep playing into their scheme anymore.
And I think when people understand this,
you'll begin to understand what happens.
We just had, you know, two big
Bitcoiners, you know, killed uh in
Europe who were from Russia. Why?
Because they weren't supposed to be
there. I told Nathan the last time, just
like my my developer friend that's here,
about the story of uh the Chinese
hackers with ETH, remember when all that
crazy thing showed up? I talked about it
on another podcast and people thought I
was crazy that they were able to use a
computer interface for this guy to spend
1.65 65 million ETH over time and then
even put crazy messages in the
blockchain about this. Why did I bring
that up to you, Simon? I'm bringing it
up to you because that's exactly what
the future is going to be. They're going
to let you keep your ETH and your
Bitcoin. What they're doing now is
compliance tests to make sure that they
can use technology to make sure that you
still do what they want you to do.
That's the point. That's the real point
here. you're you're not playing
um by rules that we think the the
Rothschild and Rockefeller rules, dude,
they're very dated and they know that
they they were told that by Meer Lansky
in 1969.
They now have all opted to go allin on
the technocracy space. So what do we
have to do as orange people? We have to
understand the limitations of what
they've decided to yolo in on. And I can
tell you that there's ways around this
and we need to organize and we need to
do podcasts talking about stuff like
this. Simon, I want to get your response
to all that, but I also want to throw in
there too, we mentioned a few times like
corruption and manipulation and the
occupiers as well too. I just want to
ask, is there any is there anybody from
the proof of weapons network? Is there
anybody that's currently an occupier
that is in the Bitcoin space that isn't
actually all that known or do we have a
fox in the hen house anywhere basically?
And then your response to Uncle Jack as
well.
&gt;&gt; Well, from my side, anybody that's um
promoting, look, we got lots and lots of
useful idias because I don't think
there's a people that are um able to put
this stuff together. Um, but at the same
time, we've got people that are
genuinely being pushed um into, you
know, taking their Bitcoin, putting them
in these Bitcoin treasury structures.
Um, we've got, I mean, look, anyone that
comes from a cipher punk movement like
Adam Back that was mentioned in the
white paper that is promoting stable
coins, Bitcoin treasury companies, and
all sorts of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in the code. like you
know you would ask yourself what
happened to that person and again like
people go down this celebrity worship
route of thinking I'm attacking this
person that you love that's not the
point blackmail is blackmail like payoff
is payoff incentives are incentives if
someone's going to wipe out your family
you know you're going to look after your
family that's the reality of this so
Bitcoin was built on a don't trust don't
trust verify and so really the canary in
the coal mine is all these people that
are looking to others and just going
down this celebrity worship culture um
and not realizing that they're being
incentivized
you know into these uh centralizing
forces
um you know I think that the whole um I
the computing implementations and the
not versus core debate is an important
debate that people should be engaging
with uh we need enough people holding
Bitcoin in self-custody and enough
people um running these nodes because
there is going to be a core network of
people that are going to have to um
fight against um these you know these
attack vectors. Um and as I said one of
the interesting things I think is if you
look at this whole concept of a one
world government well clearly there is
an operation to do what they did to the
British Empire. The Bank of England
bankrupted the UK government and then
they switched the world order over to
the Federal Reserve. Um, and then they
installed the Soviet Union after the
Bolevik Revolution. They put the Federal
Reserve in America. Um, and then they
also funded, you know, the the fascist
side. And then obviously we won't talk
about it because this probably going on
YouTube, but what happened in World War
II was significantly different um to
what we were told. Um but they had those
different ideologies
um you know funding all three. Um and uh
what I think we're witnessing right now
is the dismantling of the dollar like we
saw the dismantling of the pound uh
they're doing it on several attack
vectors. Firstly um the the the more you
can weaken the dollar which is what
Trump is. Trump's an agent of chaos. You
know, I'm sorry. The reality is is that
the dollar is a debt-based Ponzi scheme
that requires a perpetual debt cycle,
the IMF covert operations in order to
continually roll over that debt. Um, and
so when you take on quote the deep state
and you take out USID, you're weakening
the dollar uh because it is propped up
by these covert operations in order to
force people into dollar enslavement. Um
but they're coming after you know
they're they're coming after three
things. So they're breaking the petro
dollar. The way they're doing that is by
Scott percent strategically weakening
the dollar in a managed transition. And
the com the countries in the world the
Hong Kongs the Saudis the various other
um Emiratis
uh when they peg their currency to the
dollar they're currently subsidizing the
peg. So if you look at Saudi, they're
selling their gold and selling their
treasuries to maintain their peg. Now
the weaker the dollar gets, they're
going to have to depe at some stage. Uh
they're also because of this shift in
power, you know, they want to plug all
these AI data centers into the Middle
East and harness all that energy. uh
we're getting resolutions around, you
know, these uh you know, these
investments and these colonial
investments within the Middle East and
they're relocating some of the crypto
bros over to UAE at the moment. They're
also breaking the Japan carry trade. So
by hiking those rates um we're getting
the repatriation of those dollars that
need to sell their treasuries um in
order to uh you know sell uh to to buy
Japanese yen and then they're getting
yield on their Japanese yen. At the same
time, we're saying this this narrative,
this false narrative via Zalinski, who's
just an agent for the
military-industrial complex, um, in
order to make it look like America wants
peace and Europe is pushing war at the
moment, but clearly that's to break the
Euro dollar. There's a trillion dollars
that they want to make from
destabilizing Europe. um Europe is you
know just is fully subordinate um to you
know you know people people look at the
power structure and the power dynamics.
The way that I see it at the moment is
you obviously have the bank for
international settlements. The most
important node in the BIS is the Federal
Reserve. The Federal Reserve is owned by
the private banks. Those private banks
are now public companies. Those public
companies are owned by the asset
managers. You have to have perpetual
money printing of dollars. Um you have
perpetual investment and inclusion in
the index funds and you have to have ma
manipulation in order to maintain those
power structures. But at at the top,
Black Rockck, you know, the Federal
Reserve is using Black Rockck's Aladdin
technology and that's how Black Rockck
ended up with the ETF's um department of
Barclays during the global financial
crisis to end up with all these board
seats and voting seats. Um you got the
Treasury that was using Black Rockck's
technology during COVID. So they've got
both fiscal policy and monetary policy.
They've also got all of the different um
money managers and fund managers that
are using their technology. And so you
got peak centralization at the Black
Rockck level. Now where it becomes
interesting is this technical industrial
complex. Many of those players are still
subordinate to the capital flows they
need and they've obviously got to get
continual Pentagon budgets which is the
big beautiful bill. um they got to get
continual capital flows which is why
you're seeing this AI bubble essentially
within there's two K-shaped economies
within America you got the rich getting
richer and the poor getting borer the
debt slaves and those that own the
assets and then within the within the
stock market you got the S&amp;P where
stocks are doing dismal but it's going
up because all the money is going into
the tech bros um and so you've got this
K-shaped economy within the index as
well um And you know that requires this
constant flow of Pentagon budget um and
capital flows that we're that we're
seeing at the moment. But by
simultaneously breaking the dollar,
you'll notice that the number one funer
of US treasuries right now that's
propping up this market is Cayman
Islands. And Cayman Islands is just the
hedge funds. It's not the economy. It's
got UK and Japan is reducing. China's
reducing. Everybody's selling. um Saudis
having to break a peg. Um and so now you
just got Cayman Island and stable coins
as well as the nodes they control like
the UK. And so by having this, you know,
escalation
um with Europe right now, which is going
to be a war zone, no doubt about it,
they just want to assk
their man um in order to try and
repatriate some of this funding. They're
also breaking the Euro dollar. So
they're breaking the Euro dollar,
they're baking the petro dollar, they're
breaking the Japan carry trade. What
that means is a managed weakening of the
dollar just like we saw in the Bank of
England which drives these capital
outflows out while simultaneously
Nvidia is building out all the data
centers. Palanteer is building out all
the technology and everybody's
integrating into these stable coin and
crypto real world asset rails. um which
essentially is, you know, uh they they
also gave us freedom of speech but not
freedom of reach. What was that? That
was essentially we're not going to
cancel you anymore because we want you
talking. We want to know what you
actually think. We don't want to cancel
you because that's your social credit
score. that's your that's feeding the
algorithm so that we can reward you with
higher interest rates or lower interest
rates based upon your language and what
you're saying you know and then you've
got the AI integration and that's all
coming together um into this
technocratic Orwellian nightmare that's
being built by you know manipulation of
Trump through these blackmail operations
and rings. I mean, you don't really need
to blackmail Trump. He's in it for the
money anyway, but he's married in. If
you look at who funded Trump in his
campaign, his number one donor was Elon
Musk. His second donor was the Bank of
New York Melon family. His third donor
was um Mariam Adlesen. And so, you've
got the Israel first, you got the bank
first, you got the technical first, and
the technical is kind of merging into
the military-industrial complex through
these cyber security and artificial
intelligence warfare. And so it is 100%
managing that transition and it's
happening right in front of our eyes
right now.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Cruz.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I was just going to say that I
mean what Simon just hit on is actually
the top 1% of the pyramid that I don't
think Bitcoiners are making the
calculation that we actually are helping
do this. We're feeding the information
in to the system. We need to stop doing
the talking that we're doing and we need
to start being a lot more strategic
about how things happen. Why? Because
when you understand your enemy, you
become the enemy. And we need to start
feeding in this machine that they're
building bad data. And that's really
important. That's where counter
intelligence really matters. And when
you really truly understand this,
that's when podcasts get really
interesting. Okay? In other words,
there's going to need to be, we have
some very smart cryptographers that are
not tied
to the folks that we've brought up in
this podcast. It's going to be very easy
to reverse engineer an Enigma M machine
to take apart these transhumas. They're
smart, but I got news for you. There is
a weakness to their game plan and you
need to understand what that weakness
is. And unfortunately, I think the only
people that are going to be capable of
doing this are going to be Bitcoiners
down the road. But I have to tell you
that the Bitcoiners that we listen to,
um, be careful who packs your parachute.
I think that's really my message. And I
think when you understand some of the
history, like for example, I agree 100%
with Simon about Adam back. I don't I I
don't think if I was a meeting
organizer, I would ever invite Adam back
to another meeting if you want to know
the truth because I think it's obvious
that he's cooked. Another guy that I
know is cooked is uh Vitalik Buterine. I
happen to know things about Vitalik that
probably would make your guys head spin.
Why? Because some of the people that uh
I got involved with in CO uh where we
were able to out that the SV40 promoter
was in some of the jabs. Uh you may be
shocked to find out that Vitalic
Buterine's money is now funding their
lab.
So realize
that the people and the web that's here
is way deeper than you think. It's still
it's still I'm not telling you this to
scare you. I'm telling you this so that
we're wiser about what we do. The the
future in my view is not survival of the
fittest. It's survival of the wisest.
And I have to tell you right now,
Bitcoin, the core of Bitcoin is focused
on survival of the the fittests. And if
we continue to do that, we're going to
turn into a sausage grinder. And we
can't do that. And I think
podcasts like this are designed
to give you something to think about and
talk about with your family over the
holidays. Uh, and you know, I don't
think Simon or myself are trying to tell
you that we have it all right. What
we're trying to say is that we made a
diagnosis and we're throwing that
diagnosis out for you guys to kick it
around and do what Bitcoiners do. Proof
of work, due diligence. Tell me why
Simon's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Tell me why Uncle
Jack's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Because guess what?
That's how we improve
this AI right here. And that's how we're
going to improve Nathan's children's AI.
We're going to turn them into something
smarter than anything that Peter Teal or
Karp can make or smarter than Tether's
plan with Lutnik and Besset. Like there
are ways for us to react,
but we have to be smarter about how to
do it. And there are still oasises out
in the world that have not been touched
by this yet. I can promise you there are
places that you need to be careful, you
know, with, but you have to know who
your enemy is. And unfortunately,
um I don't think Bitcoiners like to pat
themselves on the back a little bit too
much and say, "Look, we made the big uh
big move because we put our money in
Bitcoin." Great. But that's not the
beall end all. I think that was really
the key point that I tried to make to
you, Nathan, before. It's kind of like
the thing I I think I needed to say to
Simon because I've heard Simon speak
about many of these things before,
especially to other Bitcoiners. And I
think the reason that Simon's not
landing his punch, especially with some
of those Bitcoiners, is because that top
1% is the missing loop for the whole
issue. And I think what's happened in
the past with the Bank of England, with
the Federal Reserve is actually being
built right now through all the laws
that you saw come in through this
administration.
And I don't believe that
Clinton, Obama, and Biden, and Trump are
much different. I think they're the same
animal, but you get a different Twitter
feed to think they're different. And I
think you need to understand that that
the game is always about control
and it may not be about control of the
money now. May actually be about control
of your behavior with the money and
that's all they really care about.
&gt;&gt; It's very interesting. I want to unpack
a few things. I do want to go to also um
Dr. Jack Cruz, I want to go to the Oasis
and see about where in the world we
should be setting up citadels. Before I
get there, Simon, I want to get a little
bit more clarity on what we're
transitioning to or what they're trying
to transition to if they're breaking the
dollar. If we went from kind of UK pound
to then US dollar ccentric, where are
they trying to move us to? And
additionally, you mentioned the idea
that we're going to see false flags. I
was wondering um going [clears throat]
forward, what kind of events or things
could we see that would be evidence to
support this thesis? Like if we see this
pop up in a year or six months time that
would suggest yes, they are continuing
on this path. And the last thing I just
want to tie in there because you guys
are covering so much is like
cryptography and gunpowder and even
Bitcoin currently. My viewpoint is that
AI is going to be used to control us and
manipulate the way or think the same way
our feed and our search feed uh does as
well too. Is it possible for us to
basically open source these large
language models, recapture AI and
actually use it as a tool for our
freedom rather than centralized ins
enslavement? A lot of stuff there.
&gt;&gt; Um I want to pull on this um control
thing because I've seen it firsthand.
Um, I was when when I first got into
Bitcoin, um, I wanted to support the
ecosystem. Um, you know, Bitcoin was
about $3 when it went up to about $300
and various other things. Um, I started
investing in all the companies because
this was pre all of the venture
capitalists coming along. You couldn't
get VC funding. You know, the first
company I invested in was Bitay. Um now
I then I later did like Coinbase and
blockchain.info and Kraken and all many
many others about hundred of them in
total. Um one by one I saw them all get
compromised and by compromised I mean
the VCs come along you have the Silicon
Valley sausage factory um and then they
financialize and securitize them into
something where they're now subordinate
to their shareholders. once they
subordinate it to their shareholders,
they have fiduciary duties in order to
fulfill um whatever they can profit
maximize
um within that. So you end up going down
shitcoinery, you end up going down all
sorts of stuff. Um but originally uh
when you wanted to fund a Bitcoin core
developer, you know, the we had Gavin
Andre and various other ones um they had
QR codes, you would fund them, but that
wasn't consistent enough. So, Bitay, one
of the companies I invested in, decided
uh that they'd like to put some of their
budget and a percentage of their revenue
into funding Bitcoin core developers.
Now, that was fine. That was all good.
But then as a community, we were like,
well, that's kind of centralized in a
company. Now, company, they want to
lower transaction fees. We had the birth
of the block size debate, you know,
during this whole thing. And so, then
you started to find the VCs come along.
Suddenly Peter Thiel founders fund
started investing in all these
companies. Um then you know that was
around about the 2012 2013 2014 era and
then what happened is the Bitcoin
Foundation came along and said well why
don't we uh as many companies want to
get together and they contribute to a
foundation and all these different
people can contribute to a foundation
and we had the Bitcoin Foundation one by
one uh you saw every single member
compromised
um or attacked. So what was the what was
the first one? You had M Capellis. Now
Mor Capellis, many people think of him
as the guy that stole 800,000 Bitcoin
and found 200,000 under a mattress
through Mount Gots. Well, actually he
bought that exchange. Who did he buy it
from? He bought it from Jeb Maleb. Jeb
Maleb was the one that created XRP and
Stellar and these other shitcoins. Um
and when he bought it, there were 80,000
Bitcoin missing from the exchange. He
actually emailed Jeb Maleb and said,
"What do I do about the 80,000 Bitcoin?"
He said, "You better buy it." And the
price went up like crazy, which meant
the Mount Gox was a Ponzi scheme. And
then they started building bots, Willie
bots, in order to manipulate the price,
so you could try and recover. But these
are the types of tactics. And suddenly,
what happened to Mount Gaus? It was
taken out. He's in prison in Japan. We
had Charlie Shrem. What was Charlie
Shrem do? Well, Charlie Shrem created a
company called Bit Instant. Um and he
was creating a pipeline so that you
could get money into Mount Gaus further
uh you know faster and then he would
issue you credit so that you could then
start trading on Mount Gaus. Uh they
Charlie Shrem had to plead guilty just
like the market samurai guys had to
plead guilty. Why? Because the
Winklevoss twins you know ended up
getting uh 5,000 uh Bitcoin. Um, and
then when they when they arrested him,
uh, they made sure that his money goes,
so he can't afford defense. And then you
say, well, um, will you admit that your
money went into Silk Rose, the Honeyball
connected to Ross Albbright? Russ
Albbright, the same guy that the Trump
administration pardoned that's making up
part of the Bitcoin strategic reserves.
What do they do with a bunch of those
bitcoins? They sold it to the Silicon
Valley VCs, the trim, the Tim Drapers,
um the P, you know, these are the the
Peter Thiels. Um these are some of the
early Bitcoin wallet addresses that
you're seeing moved right now as they
engage in some of these market
manipulation um activities. So, you had
Charlie Shrem taken out. You had um you
you had Mark Capellis taken out. Who
else was around? You had Gavin Andre.
What did Gavin Andre do? Well, a guy
called John Matonis, who was the
chairman of the Bitcoin Foundation, he
told us, "Hey, I've got this um
surprise. I know who Satoshi Nakamoto
is." And he went and publicly brought
Dr. Craig Wright and told us that Dr.
Craig Wright was Satoshi Nakamoto. And
who said and who verified that it was
Satoshi Nakamoto? Gavin Andre. And so
Gavin Andre, the first Bitcoin developer
that met with the CIA when Satoshi
Nakamoto left the project, uh, told us
that I have cryptographically proven
that that he controls the Satoshi keys
after John Matonis comes along and says
it's Dr. Craig Bright. Now, one of the
early Bitcoin um, investors was Roger
Ve. Roger Ver was involved in the
Bitcoin Foundation. He said, um, you
know, with Jihon Wu, who created Bitmain
in China, that had just received funding
from Sequoia Capital, um, but here's
another version of Bitcoin so that we
can fork away from that. And that ended
up being called Bitcoin ABC that was
rebranded as Bitcoin Cash. And who who
came along and said it was Satoshi
Nakamoto, it was Roger Ve, it was Gavin
Andre. And so you had all of these
attack vectors. Now, what happened um at
the end in order to completely dissolve
the Bitcoin Foundation? Well, it was
Brock Pierce. And so, where did Brock
Pierce come from? If you look up Brock
Pierce, you'll see all sorts of
connections. He was in the Hollywood
industry. He was a child actor. Um we
know what Hollywood is. We know the
connections how you make it in
Hollywood. Um and then suddenly he had a
Silicon Valley startup that looked like
in the dotcom boom and bust like the
Wolf of Wall Street in terms of exotic
parties um and allegations of underageed
women that said there was sexual abuse.
You know that was settled in those
accusations. Now recently in the Jeffrey
Epstein email leaks who was the only
person that met with Jeffrey Epstein? It
was Brock Pierce. And what's what
happened after the Bitcoin Foundation
dissolved? Well, they had to find a new
funer. Who was the new funer? It was
MIT. MIT had a division called DCI. MIT
was funded by Jeffrey Epstein. And we
haded a bunch of Bitcoin core developers
um that you know started moving and
engaging in the next phase of the debate
that led to the hard forks and the
various other infiltrations of trying to
take down Bitcoin through Bitcoin Cash.
And then you had Bitcoin SV and you had
all these things. Now Adam Back also
created Blockstream at the time. And
what I'm saying is think about how these
different operations work. You fund both
sides of a war. You know this is the
classic story, right? Communism,
capitalism, fascism, you fund it all and
you create like Operation Gladadio, if
you've read Paul Williams book,
strategic tension and strategic um in
order to create these civil wars. And so
all this to say I lived through all of
that. I sat down I was at a conference
that you know uh David Bailey who asked
who I met with in China for the first
time uh he asked me to uh you know we
went to a conference and meet Brock
Pierce and Brock Pierce sat down with me
for four hours and tried to persuade me
that Satoshi Nakamoto was Dr. Craig
right you know um and you know so all
I'm saying is all of this to say is it's
all about control and that's what we're
saying here so you can't trust we don't
trust verify and what is this this is
why we got to look at the node
infrastructure the development ecosystem
uh where is mining who's mining um what
are the where are the bitcoins being
centralized fortunately you know you
talked about vitalic uh vitalic cause a
scop in order to try and fork this off
into proof of stake because once you
control the stakes you control the
network you know that's why black rockck
is approving the bitcoin ETF and
applying for staking we remained as
proof of work we didn't turn out as bit
you know into into bitcoin cash but all
I'm saying is we are always under a
constant state of attack um where we
need to remain the different parts of
the ecosystem
where we're sufficiently asking the
right questions s because just from the
parts of the ecosystem and I haven't
been deeply involved in the whole not
versus core but I can see a a control
and a scop operation and we need to be
very very vigilant and very very aware
um of these manipulations that are
happening and all around trying to get
as much control as possible. So I I end
with a bit of your question you were
talking about where we go next. We're
moving to multiparity and the British
Empire handed over to the American
Empire. The American empire is handing
over to what? A multi-olar world which
can have a global agenda, a global
central bank digital currency. Um, but
the reality is is that Bitcoin is the is
the resistance in multiparity.
While we're weakening the dollar, we
need to make sure that we've got
sufficient levels of hash rates. We got
about 21% in China, 40% in America. Um
we got a small amount in Iran, about 11%
in Russia. We got to maintain that this
is, you know, as these different players
are getting involved that we're always
spreading out the network.
Unfortunately, I believe Bitcoin um in a
multipolar world is going to make sure
that we push out some of the parts of
that ecosystem globally and we need to
support um other parts of that um uh
that ecosystem as well.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Cruz, I want to get your response,
but I just want to add quickly too your
point about uh civil war in the US in
order to undermine the constitution.
Wouldn't it also make sense then to try
and fabricate a civil war in Bitcoin to
try and undermine it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean, obviously
once you understand what game's going on
here, that it's the one world
government, the really the antidote to
that that whole thing is Bitcoin, you
also have to realize that the node
issue, I think I think is a a really
interesting
debate that people need to start
thinking about and how we do things and
where we go. Like Nathan, I want you you
to remember when we talked about, you
know, citadels, maybe where we go, why
we have to have 60oot catarans because,
you know, all of us talked offline and
said, you know, there's no uh places
here in um I don't know, New Zealand in
Auckland. Why why don't we send a couple
of our patriots that are orange, you
know, down there to start a mining pool?
I do. I believe that's going to happen.
I believe it is going to happen. The the
key right now is to protect our state
from transhumanists from the AI world.
There's things that we can do. Guns are
one thing. I don't think guns are going
to be as effective, but are there other
weaponry that we have to do? Do we have
to stay smarter, wiser,
then who's there? Because remember, one
of the things that they're doing in the
control uh section is the people that
are protecting them, you know, that
they're getting sicker.
They're they're defenses are also down.
And that's part of the weakness of their
plan. They don't see those things. And
the reason why is because they're very
confident they're going to win. Why?
Because they've been winning for 500
years. But that doesn't mean they're
still going to continue to win. Because
remember, the rules of engagement
change. When you move the rules of
engagement to different locations,
different latitudes, different
altitudes, different zip codes, guess
what? The battle's different. The battle
that Simon will fight, the battle that
Nathan will fight, the battle that I
will fight, I don't believe are going to
be the same battle. But what's the end
point? The end point is we are lock
stock unison together because we
understand
how to destroy a one world government.
It is through multiple axises and
control. And here's the irony to circle
back to your point. It's what the
founding fathers found. Tripart
government made the United States
extremely stable. What are they trying
to do? Get rid of tripart government,
which they've been very successful at.
they're going to do the same thing with
Bitcoin. And and that's what we're kind
of laying out in this podcast. We're
trying to explain to you that the
covenant between Satoshi, the white
paper, and all of us is also constantly
under attack. And many people don't
realize it, and they need to. There's so
many people, at least in my country, in
the United States, who are oblivious to
this. I mean, I've seen Simon fight with
them in rooms, and you know, I wanted to
get on Twitter space and say, "Look,
stop arguing with them because a lawyer
from New York City is never going to get
it, Simon. You're wasting your breath."
Um, the thing is, is he going to
influence other people in our community?
Yeah. But what does that mean? That
means Nathan, yeah, I'm just going to
say Nathan's got the job to parse out,
you know, the people on the podcast to
say, "Look, he's the Bitcoin mentor, you
know, do we really want to listen to
this guy packing our parachute, you
know, that's, you know, storing his
coins all on Coinbase. Does that make
sense to us?" You know, by posing those
difficult questions
and listening, you know, to different
podcasts. To be honest with you, I
appreciate coming on and doing this
because it's very very clear. I'm
probably more optimistic having talked
to you guys because I think we're all on
the same page on this. I think the
difference is is that we just got to
tighten up how we think about those
different things and and the the the
things that we talk about in the future
because remember the the AI for us
that's coming, these are new bitcoins,
Bitcoiners that are not minted yet. We
have to make sure they're able to buy
Bitcoin. And if they can, then we have
to start thinking about making sure that
our peer-to-peer network abilities to
share with them is intact and capable.
Um, I think the way we need to think
about our nation state needs to be
codified as well. If you want to know
the truth, I think if we all get
together and do meetings or we do it
like this, we have a round table and get
people's best ideas. We do it like the
Continental Congress did. we get in
there and fight with each other and say,
"Look, this is what I think needs to
happen." Why? Because I do think we need
to be more unified and more wise about
how we do it. There's it's almost an
oxymoron to say that decentralized
people need to be more centralized and
consensus, but the beautiful part of
Satoshi's white paper is the consensus
is built into the white paper. As long
as we do that, we're good. we're not
going to have to worry about anything
that takes away, you know, from the
security of the network. We need to
actively go after and support. And
that's, you know, part of the reason I
say this, Nathan, is you remember last
time I was on, I made a couple of
controversial points about, you know, I
can like pe people like uh, you know,
Peter McCormack that took the job. Why?
He's still team orange, you know, but I
need Peter and his his ilk, his progeny
to realize there's a battle that we're
all going to fight down the road. And
right now, what we're talking about, I
feel like in America, this is like uh
we're in 1760
before King George really, you know,
slammed the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] down. And you know, Ben
Franklin and Thomas Jefferson are with
the French talking to them about what
the age of enlightenment really was
because they had to get that idea.
The greatest idea the United States has
ever given the world as far as I'm
concerned is that our inaliable rights
come from God, not from [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
government, not from anybody else. And
you know, I feel the same way about
Bitcoin, to be quite frank with you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The fact that we're having all
these attack vectors is a positive
thing. if we if we weren't important, we
wouldn't have all these attacks. And the
fact that we're an anti-fragile network
is an important thing. Now, one of the
things that I think, you know, even
Peter McCormack is a a classic example,
he still thinks that there's a political
solution and that the government are in
charge. Like, we're telling you who's in
charge. You've got the tech bros, you've
got the finance bros, you got the
military bros. You know, this is the top
of the structure. All our governments
are owned by them. Like you talk about
this tri government, you know, you
&gt;&gt; just remember that podcast. I mean,
let's just let's be let's be frank with
it because, you know, we say this, you
know, people in the audience are going
to be you have to realize part of the
reason why I said I wouldn't go on
Tucker Carlson and why I wouldn't go on
Rogan. Palanteer owns Rogan. Anybody
who's looked into it knows it. So why
would a Bitcoiner really want to go on
Rogan's show? I'd much rather come to
Nathan's show because I think, you know,
BTC Sessions is not a douchebag. The
only my only complaint is that I don't
think he engages enough. He's too
Canadian. I want him to fight more like
the hockey players do. And you know,
that's part of the reason I like you
because I like when you go after other
Bitcoiners because you know what? I
Nathan said this on the last podcast,
steel sharpens steel. And I think that's
kind of the message that I really want
to get out that I could still talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
about you, but it doesn't mean I don't
like you. I mean, I still respect your
opinion. Uh, I look at what we're going
through right now just like I look at an
Eminem conference. You're trying to make
me a better neurosurgeon by pointing out
maybe what I'm missing. And that's a
good thing. It's not a bad thing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, and just on I want to close
the loop on the Jack Zack Shapiro thing.
Zach Shapiro is part of the Bitcoin
Policy Institute. Uh the Bitcoin Policy
Institute, he's a Zionist for a star um
by ideology. I called him out on that
publicly. Um and secondly, if you look
at his team in the Bitcoin policy
institute um it is around you know you
got XCIA people in the team um you know
in in plain sight but also with the
things that he was doing. He was
bragging to me about the projects he was
involved in. Apparently, he was saying
that he was standing up for the Market
Samurai case. And so, the Market Samurai
case was where he was saying, "Yeah,
we're trying to make sure that you get
self-custody. We're trying to stand
against central bank digital
currencies." And so, you got to
understand that these are, you know,
these are within our community. Um,
these different, you know, and and
they're trying to raise finance from the
Bitcoin community. Um, and that connects
to the market samurai thing. Even the
current debate around not versus core.
Just think about it. What is the core
essence of the debate? You've got one
faction of core that says we want the
ability for everyone to put [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] on the
chain and spam on the chain. What does
spam on the chain mean? It means
tokenized real world assets. It means
NFTts. It means shitcoins. It means
stable coins. It means central bank
digital currencies. Um, and that's one
side of, you know, the debate. What does
Larry Frink want to do? He wants to
tokenize everything. They want stable
coins. They want all these covert
operations. Um, now what's the, you
know, what's the the other side of the
debate is that they're saying, well, we
want to maintain the ability to take out
the spam. Now, if you're someone that's
looking to control Bitcoin as much as
you can, you're thinking about we
control it through the spam, but also we
control it from the other side. If
somebody has can filter out spam, then
we can force them to filter out other
things. And so, you got both sides of
that debate. And depending on which side
of the celebrity worship you're on,
you're going to bow down to one of your
celebrities and say, "Yeah, you know,"
and that's why I say it is critical
thinking. Remember what Bitcoin is.
Bitcoin is an opensource boardroom with
competing different factions that is not
perfectly decentralized, but the most
decentralized thing we have in the
world. And there is constant constant
attacks.
The other thing I I want to point out
for the people in the audience probably
have gray hair like me. What Simon just
said, that's the the modern evolution of
what's going on, but this is very
similar to what we just saw happen with
Ukraine and Zolinsky. What's the real
point there? The point is to steal money
from the United States through the
NOS's. Why? To make us more in debt so
that we'll be more compliant for what's
coming next. I would tell you the same
thing is true what happened in the
Samurai case or or the cases with
Charlie Shrem. Let's make it so we put
him in house arrest, take all his money
away so that he can't defend himself.
That is like the most unconstitutional
thing you can do. And in the samurai
case, remember they actually hid the
fact that when the DOJ went to Finson
and asked them, is the samurai wallet a
tool of moneyaundering? The answer was
no. And they buried that in discovery
for one year. So that is a Brady
violation. So that tells you the mindset
of the people in the US government. They
give two [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about the rule of law.
Why? Because they know they have so many
judges in place that they can still run
this game. It's the ultimate wrench
attack. And what's happening to us
through history? Money has been coming
out. What is inflation? It's the same
thing that's going on with Zilinski.
What you really want to take it uh so
people wake up. This is exactly what
China and Japan have been doing in North
Korea. You want to know where all the
uranium and and and rare earth metals
are coming from? They're coming from the
people who are shitcoiners
that had control in China. That's why
that market's broken. And remember that
market is going to be really important
to the people like Karp and Palanteer.
But are Bitcoiners paying attention to
that? The Bitcoiners understand what
David Sax is really doing. Like the next
iteration of this multipolar world that
Simon is talking about is gonna be based
in stable coins. If you want to want to
know what Lutnik's whole game is, that's
it. He went from the primary broker
dealer for treasuries. Now he wants to
run the show in stable coins. That's the
game that's being played.
&gt;&gt; It's very interesting. I wanted to um
kind of tease two things out there.
I had this thought while you were
talking that with regards to the
multipolar world. Is the distribution of
hash kind of giving you a little bit of
a hint of who's going to be the big
players in the multi-polar world? Okay,
perfect. And then additionally,
[clears throat]
um Simon, I'll start with you. Um I feel
like things are going to escalate and
again you can always see like doom's
kind of on the horizon, but I I do think
that particularly with the samurai case
that we're going to see at least and Dr.
Cruz to your point from last time, the
Kubaya moment for Bitcoiners in the US
might be coming to a bit of an end here.
Um, I have a sneaking suspicion that
that kind of is going to coincide with
the end of the debt cycle. I'm wondering
one if you see escalation on the horizon
in terms of regulatory outright attack
on Bitcoiners. Um, and then two, where
you think we are in the debt cycle at
the moment.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, um, the good thing about uh,
Bitcoin is that the elites and wealthy
want Bitcoin for themselves as well. Uh,
so they try and create a two-tiered
structure just like AML and KYC, right?
You don't want anyone doing money
laundering and you want so you create
all these honeypotss through regulated
institutions but in the meantime Jeffrey
Epstein is fun is banking through JP
Morgan or PCCI or the Vatican bank and
those networks. So it's about creating a
monopoly. Um but it's a it's a bit like
um you know the the islands of um the
British you know colonies they still
want safe places
all of them
&gt;&gt; right that's where all safe
&gt;&gt; places
&gt;&gt; yeah that I totally agree I I hope
people really understand that point
you're making because you know we're
seeing it in those banks like you go to
Jersey you go to Gernzi you you see the
aisle of man what's going on you can
even look at barb Barbados, Bermuda,
like all the tax shelter havens. The
same shit's going to go on in the in the
crypto shitcoin world that Lot's trying
to build.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, so, you know, that's the
thing. The elites still want Bitcoin.
You know, this is they don't want to
kill the golden goose, but they just
want different rules for everybody else.
They want to self- custody, but they
don't want you to self custody. And so
they're launching these idols for you to
worship and say and creating tax
incentives like you know and all these
different types of loopholes for you to
put your money with them. I want to
leave people with different acts and you
talked about the AI side as well. Look
the reality is is that nothing stops
this trade. Like I mean the the the
trillions that are being invested into
taking us down this world is something
that we can't stop. But what can we do?
What can we learn from? Look, if you
want to boycott the Federal Reserve and
the Bank for International Settlements,
then you own Bitcoin. If you want to
boycott Black Rockck ETFs, you own it in
self- custody. If you want to boycott
the banks, then you don't borrow against
your Bitcoin and you stop mining fiat
currency by putting it with a custodian
and borrowing against it. If you want to
boycott this artificial intelligence,
then run your own LLMs on your own local
environments because you're not going to
compete by staying outside the system.
We're moving to this AI world. Nothing
stops that train. But what can you do?
You can run your own LLMs. If you want
to boycott the globalists, the Zionists,
whatever your different iteration, the
Fabians, we all have different, you
know, where the the source are. Uh then
you spend local. You move to places
which are rural. You build your own
communities. Like people are funding to
get. You don't borrow from the bank. You
get 30 people together that are rich
Bitcoiners and you, you know, put some
in and you build your own community and
you build and you s you shop from
farmers and you support local. Like this
is, you know, this is where we chip. Our
vote is not voting for a politician and
expecting Trump or Mandani or whoever
the lo the the next person is. It's us
looking after oursel, building our own
community, spending local, not
borrowing. You got to you got to boycott
the systems. Um and that's what we need
to do. And so our own LLMs, our own
investments in decentralized technology,
our own self custody. And here's the
thing, they ain't going to take it away.
They're only going to allow the elites
to have it. So, you got to stack your
Bitcoin and become one of those elites
because there's only ever going to be 21
million and you become one of those
elites and then you can that's how we
influence the system. Um, you know, and
that's what that's the resistance that
we need to understand and we need to
look at every attack vector that's
happening in Bitcoin and understand that
these idol worship. We don't worship the
idols. We don't trust, you know, we
verify. We fight it out. It's an
open-source boardroom. You can accuse
everything you want. If you want to
create a conspiracy theory about Simon
Dixon, you can look at all the different
companies I invested in. You can look at
all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] things that I did. I
invested in Celsius. That was a Zionist
operation. But I'm open source sharing
my experience. And you don't trust me.
You recognize that I could be
compromised because we all can be. And
we make sure that we get the best
outcome by making sure that all these
different parts of the ecosystem are as
decentralized. There is never going to
be anything more decentralized than what
we have here. So just because we're
we're we're pointing out the attack
vectors. We're pointing these out
because we're I'm not going to do what
Michael Sailor does. I'm not going to
say we got the perfect Bitcoin and
everyone should custody it and everyone
should borrow against it and you should
buy my stock and we should borrow as
much fiat currency so that JPing Morgan
has complete leverage over me. I'm not
going to say that. We got to get closer
and closer to the way that Bitcoin was
designed which is money you can own,
money that has a fixed supply, money you
can spend, and constant attack vectors
to try and change um those core things.
We have nodes, we have miners, we have
users, um we have companies that try and
centralize it. And we just need to make
sure that we're vigilant and we're
talking about the real [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and we're
pointing out the compromise and attack
vectors that people are worshiping and
falling for head over fist right now.
And it has to be global. We can't
centralize this all into one honeypot um
ecosystem. This has to be, you know, we
in a multipolar world, you have
countries that hate each other mining
Bitcoin so that when one um goes out of
control, the one that hates each other
sees an opportunity.
&gt;&gt; Amazing. Dr. Cruz, anything you want to
add to that list?
&gt;&gt; No, I was going to say now that uh we've
laid the podcast out, I you probably
can't mark at the end of this because we
really agree. I mean, if you really
think about it, um, I don't think
there's a big disagreement. I mean, the
same thing is true in, you know, the
communities that I'm building. I I'm way
ahead of that game. I've been doing that
for 20 years. Uh, do I think you have to
hold passports from people that hate
each other? Yes. Turkey and Iranian
passports are really good. Do you want
to drive a Mercedes-Benz or, you know,
Lamborghini? No. because they sent all
the information back to Peter Teal to
put in the algorithm. So maybe you go
buy a Changen or a GWM car. I don't give
two flex if Mao has my my information.
But that's the the kind of thing that we
need to start to talk about on podcast
instead of talking about I don't know
the next great wallet or hey are you
involved with MSTY? You know what's your
point there? You know, I just think that
um the future is bright. I don't want
anybody to leave here and think that
it's not because it is. I am very
bullish about humanity, the human
blockchain, and I'm extremely
extremely bullish that that human
blockchain is powered by Bitcoin. That's
the key.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's beautiful. The last thing I
just want to ask you, Dr. Cruz, but in
time I'll let you jump back in as well
too is that you spoke about we need to
basically we need the savages to
coordinate. We need the the the somewhat
centralization of our decentralized. Do
you have any thoughts on strategies or
tactics for Bitcoiners to coordinate to
deal with this situation?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I do. Um I probably don't want to
out it right here, but I would say
you've started it today with me and
Simon. Uh, I also would say like when
Max and Stacy have a golf tournament,
um, if Simon doesn't play golf, he
should still come because it's the
things that we're going to talk about
there that are going to be interesting.
Do I think signing up for a ticket to
go, I don't know, to Bitcoin Las Vegas
makes sense? No, I don't think it makes
sense at all. Why would you want to have
a meeting in a place where, you know,
they try to kill NBS, you know, uh, and
gave you a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] SCOP story there? We
have to be smarter about this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And
do I think there's going to be
opportunities for us to meet? I told
you, Nathan, and I'm telling you again,
maybe we can let Simon in on the the the
game. I think maybe we need to buy a lot
of 60oot camerans and meet each other in
the ocean, you know, outside of
Madagascar. Maybe let's go see what
Antarctic is and what they're doing down
in the holes in the ground there. We
need to get out and see the world and
build the world that we want. I mean, we
all know that the world is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up in
very many ways, but we have the ability
to change what they're doing. We
absolutely do. If you didn't get
anything from this podcast, please at
least get that. And we all have special
abilities. We all know history in
different ways and different epochs and
how they fit together. You need to
understand the evolution and what's
coming because guess what? When you
think we're done, then we need to do
this when I'm probably on my deathbed.
You're you got gray hair and Simon has
gray hair because we're going to have a
new generation of Bitcoiners that we
have to teach how they try to screw us
in the 1990s, 2000s, 2010s, you know,
and 2020s. We need to tell them the
story about what happened with the
treasury companies, what happened with
Lutnik, what happened with Trump, and we
have to be honest about it. Um, I think
that's really the benefit. And I, you
know, I I applaud you and Ben for
putting this together on short notice
and doing this because it sounds like
it's the audience that asked for this. I
I don't know how happy the audience is
going to be when they find out that
Jack, Nathan, and Simon really aren't
that far off and and where we're
thinking about things. I think it's a
good thing. And just know that I think
our union is strong. I really believe
that the Bitcoin union is strong because
we're savages.
&gt;&gt; Agreed, Simon.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I want to I want to add to that as
well. Look, um, the very fact that
people are excited about us doing a
Jerry Springer show and you getting some
entertainment is a problem in itself
because we're here. I'm a ser I'm a
serious guy and Bitcoin is a serious
topic. We can have fun. I'm not saying
that. But this is a serious topic. you
know, we're talking about something that
is probably the last hope um that we
have in terms of a technology that can
resist against this. Um so, you got to
understand, you just got to be smarter.
Now, we have an open- source boardroom
where we call everything out. But if you
find yourself tuning in for
entertainment for a Jerry Springer show,
then you're not utilizing your time
correctly, you know, because you are in
an algorithm and they're going to scroll
you and they're going to make you hate
people. They're going to hate you hate
Muslims. They're going to make you hate
the Democrats, the crazy radical lefts,
the Republicans, uh the women. They're
going to they're going to they're doing
things. Your algorithm is trying to make
you dumb, stupid, hateful. Um, have your
mind where you're eating all the wrong
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] injecting yourself with vaccines,
like doing all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's going to
make you weak. Um, they they want you,
you know, they want you a vegetable
essentially. Why? They don't want you
having children. They literally they're
flooding us. The Zionists are flooding
us with a live realtime genocide while
they're blowing up children in real time
backed up by a network that is
trafficking our children through
pedophilia rings. So what I'm saying is
if we have one thing on this earth that
we are meant to do and I don't know your
spiritual belief because I do believe
there is a greater plan and evil has an
elastic band. When it gets too damn evil
it flicks right back. Um, but if you if
we have one thing that we're meant to be
doing, we're meant to have our children.
We're meant to look after our children.
We're meant to be looking after our
body. We're meant to be staying mentally
strong. And everything they need for you
to win is weak with no children. and
that you're having sex with some kind of
bot that Elon Musk is creating, addicted
to pornography, while you're injected
with a vaccine, eating some kind of
weird type of food that's giving you
cancer so that they can fix their
pension crisis.
&gt;&gt; So, just so you know, I didn't pay Simon
to say any of that. Okay, Simon, that's
been my message for 20 years. That's you
basically described MK Ultra, the Brain
Health Initiative, uh, and the Stanford
Research Institute. that that whole
program is the reason why Peter Teal and
the transhumanists are in power and all
the algorithms. That's the reason why
Google was built. All of this is part of
that story. And I I can't I can't
disagree with anything you said. I just
thought it was funny hearing it come out
of you because it usually comes out of
me.
That's absolutely beautiful. I love it.
So stacks, see the sun. You need seven
daughters and seven sons. That makes
that's exactly the mission that we got
to go on. We're ready to jump on some
boats and maybe have some conversations
in the future. Gentlemen, this has been
fantastic. I would really love to do it
again maybe like next year in a couple
months or something, particularly if
there's any big events that we can give
an update on kind of where the existing
system is currently pushing us and what
people in Bitcoiners need to be on the
lookout for. So with that, Simon, please
tell me everywhere everybody can go
check out your stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, I go live once a week as a
discipline and I cover this week in tech
and bitcoin, this week in macro and this
week in geopolitics and I try to funny
the uh follow the trail and connect it
all together. Um, I publish that on
YouTube so you can subscribe to my
YouTube channel, Simon Dixon. Um, and
uh, I also have a bunch of backups in
case all those networks get taken down,
but I put everything on simonix.com.
Um, and I'm regularly on X and uh, you
know, if I get taken off of any of
these, uh, different channels and
networks, then I've got a whole, um,
decentralized system for publishing. And
at some point, um, I know I'm using X
and I know I'm breaking all the rules at
the moment, but at some point we're
going to recognize we're really building
our social credit score and we're going
to get knocked off these networks and
we're going to have to go decentralized
at some point. So, everyone be ready for
that. Um because uh you know this ain't
going to last forever for us to be able
to talk like this.
&gt;&gt; Agreed. Uncle Jack, tell them where they
can find you.
&gt;&gt; Jack Cruz.com
uh or cruise destin.com. I'm been
building this community. It's fully
decentralized already. That I am my own
LLM. Um I have servers in many different
places. So I give two [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what they do
to me. Uh you can find me with my big
mouth on Twitter.
But I'm always Dr. Jack Cruz on every
social platform. I think for the biology
stuff, my website is still probably the
best place to go. But I think for the
stuff we talked about today, until Elon
Musk muzzles me, probably Twitter is
probably the best place to get the live
feed of what my stream of consciousness
is that Hey.