[Music]
Tim Ferrris.
&gt;&gt; Yes, sir.
&gt;&gt; Welcome to the show, man.
&gt;&gt; Thanks for having me. Great to be here.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for coming.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. My pleasure.
&gt;&gt; This is uh this a little surreal for me.
So, it's uh very cool to meet you in
person. Really, really cool. So, me and
my entire team have been really pumped
about this. So,
&gt;&gt; awesome.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; But um man, I want to kick it right off
with an introduction here. So everybody
gets an intro. Tim Ferrris, one of the
most interesting people in the world.
This could easily be a 4-hour
introduction. Host of a monster podcast,
The Tim Ferrris Show, with worldclass
guests and over a billion downloads.
Author of five number one New York Times
and Wall Street Journal bestsellers, all
aimed at helping people improve
performance across many domains. A
Princeton educated polyglot. You speak
five languages to five different
degrees. An early angel investor who
wrote checks to Uber, Shopify, Twitter,
and Dualingo before before most people
knew what they were. An early advocate
for psychedelic therapy and the
philanthropist behind the Sassi
Foundation, pushing boundaries of mental
health treatment. You put real skin in
the game. Did I say that right?
&gt;&gt; Size, excuse me. the first American his
first American in history to hold a
Guinness book, a Guinness World Record,
and tango spins. And uh Tim, I started a
book myself. It's called The Never
Ending Work Week. So
just Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Can send them as a We can sell them as a
pair.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But uh um
a common thing that I think that
everybody sees in you is you are always
early to the game, man. You are always
ahead. And uh it's really cool to see.
&gt;&gt; Thanks, man. Yeah, I just try to track
what the weirdos are doing on the
weekends with their free time.
&gt;&gt; I mean, you were talking about hormones
and cold plunge and all this stuff way
way way before
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; all the influencers came out. So,
&gt;&gt; yeah, it's been uh yes, the for our body
was 2010, which meant I started writing
in 2008. So, I remember having a first
generation continuous glucose monitor.
This was back when I basically had to
fall off the back of a truck because
Dexcom was only selling to type 1
diabetics. And the older continuous
glucose monitors basically had these
prongs looked almost like something
you'd use for a barbecue that you had to
put under into your abdomen sideways and
then you had this no smartphone beeper
like device to track it. So unpleasant.
So
&gt;&gt; how long did you have that thing on?
&gt;&gt; I remember reading the book. I feel like
it was like 10, 15 years ago.
&gt;&gt; It was a long time. 2010 is when it came
out.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, it was
&gt;&gt; So, I was using it. I was using the
device quite a bit before that. Had to
tape plastic over it to allow me to take
showers. I probably had that in for a
good month or so. It was It was enough
time to make it worthwhile. I mean, more
recently, I've done lots of tests with
much more pleasant wearables and so on,
but a lot of that holds up like the the
durability of the stuff in that book,
like there are a few tweaks I would
make, but by and large, everything has
more scientific support now.
&gt;&gt; No kidding.
&gt;&gt; Uh, and it's not super surprising. Like,
sometimes people in the field get things
wrong. But if you want to track, let's
just say what is going to be more
validated by exercise science and
randomized control trials five years
from now, it's like go talk to the
coaches on the field, right? Actually
see what the athletes are doing. The
people who have huge incentives to win.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The people who are playing that game,
like they're always going to be pushing
the envelope and they might be trying
nonsense. So you have to have some
framework for separating nonsense from
like plausible like this might be a
thing. But if you do that, somebody
wanted to write the equivalent of the
four-hour body. Now it's like, yeah,
just go to the front lines.
&gt;&gt; Right on.
&gt;&gt; Figure it out.
&gt;&gt; Right on.
&gt;&gt; Tim, I got a couple of gifts for you.
Everybody gets a gift.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; You ready?
&gt;&gt; I'm ready.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; All right. First gift.
&gt;&gt; Everybody gets this.
I doubt you'll eat them.
&gt;&gt; But it's Vigilance League gummy bears.
Made in the USA. Legal in all 50 states.
Still to this day. I love gummy bears.
&gt;&gt; Good.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; And then um you know I
&gt;&gt; This will be next Saturday for me.
&gt;&gt; I know you're I I think you love picking
up new hobbies.
&gt;&gt; I do.
&gt;&gt; So I got you a little something. I got
some buddies over at Sig Sauer. One of
them's named Jason.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; He's a huge fan of yours.
&gt;&gt; And so am I.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; So we thought we thought you might enjoy
this.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
Amazing. You know, I was just going to
sell my M&amp;P45
and this is the perfect replacement.
&gt;&gt; Perfect.
&gt;&gt; So, I am very excited about this.
&gt;&gt; Hold it up. That's the uh Sig P211 GTO.
It's a 2011 pistol. It's Sig's uh first
attempt at the 2011. I think they did a
fantastic job.
&gt;&gt; Beautiful.
&gt;&gt; And that's the uh new optic. So, maybe
we can break that thing on uh on the
break.
&gt;&gt; Would love to.
&gt;&gt; Cool. Let's do Thank you so much. And
who is your friend?
&gt;&gt; Jason.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, he's over at sick.
&gt;&gt; Got to learn learn how to use these
professional mics.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Jason. I appreciate it, man.
&gt;&gt; That's beautiful. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; And then before we get too in the weeds
with the interview, I have a Patreon
account. It's a subscription account and
uh we've turned it into one hell of a
community. So, one of the things I do is
um I offer them the opportunity to ask
every single guest a question. So this
is from Scott
J. Batigoli.
In the last 5 years, what new belief,
behavior, or habit has most improved
your life, and how would you relate it
to the struggles of young men just
starting out in life?
&gt;&gt; Good question. Behavior, belief.
I'm going to throw out a few. I'll give
people a grabag. So I would say I'll
start with the first thing that comes to
mind which is
on the physical side
and I've really changed how I think
about this after doing a lot of
experimentation. Intermittent fasting,
this is going to seem like a strange
place to start. Intermittent fasting, so
timerestricted eating where you're
fasting. In my case, I'm fasting until 2
or 3 p.m. every day more or less. and
doing that for say even 3 months
did a few things and end of one so your
mileage may vary but there's a lot of
good science around intermittent fasting
uh Mark Madson is one scientist comes to
mind and
there are certain issues that I've
always had with my blood work certain
issues I've had with uh for instance
fasting glucose insulin and and you can
measure these things. If you're just
doing blood tests, I would also I'm not
a doctor. Don't play one on the
internet. But consider asking your
doctor about something called an oral
glucose tolerance test.
And
no matter what I did, I could be vegan,
I could be carnivore, I could be
something in between, there were certain
numbers that always looked bad. They
would just not change. Seemed to come
from buggy code DNA genetics.
And a few months of intermittent fasting
gave me the most immaculate
corrections to those markers that I and
my doctors have ever seen. I've been
tracking no kid a very long time.
&gt;&gt; Furthermore, and here's why it ties into
more than just the physical because the
mind and the body or at least let's just
call it the brain and the body are
really one interconnected super oranism,
right?
the mood swings, the dip in energy in
the afternoon that often leads people to
drink coffee, which then affects their
sleep architecture, which then can
create lack of sleep, depression, etc. I
mean, all these things cascade.
All of those ups and downs just vanish
completely.
And I think there's some good reasons
for it. And part of the reason people
feel sharper on GLP-1 agonists like the
Ozmpics and MARA of the world is they're
more ketoic. They're producing more
ketones. So, the reason you want to fast
for at least 16 hours is to deplete your
liver of glycogen. And so, you get that
metabolic switching into using ketones.
And that's relevant to mental health
because most people will experience a
lot more mood stability. All right. So,
that's the first thing. Intermittent
fasting. If you want to talk about
fasting, we can talk about it because
I've done much more extreme versions of
that. But intermittent fasting, I think,
is pretty easy in the sense that you
don't have to change what you eat.
You're just changing when you eat. That
makes it I think
&gt;&gt; I know I don't I know that everybody
does this.
&gt;&gt; I've not looked into it just I don't
know why just because I just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do
it every day because
&gt;&gt; not because I'm trying to intermittent
fast just because I don't have time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But um
&gt;&gt; so what what I mean what are the
benefits of it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So I'll I'll say a few things. The first
is what you're discussing like
intermittent fasting by default.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Is seems to be super common in former
like tier one military. Like a lot of my
friend almost all of my friends who are
former SEALs or former Marine Force
Recon, they're just like, "Oh yeah, I
forgot to eat and I'm just going to eat
at 5:00 p.m." Right? And and they're not
affected by it. Which leads me to wonder
like how much of it is cultivated in the
course of being in service versus like
part of what allowed you to make it
through is that type of physiological
resistance where you have like a certain
degree of stability. I don't know. Uh so
the benefits are and we're still so far
from understanding these things well in
part because it's very hard to get
intermittent fasting you can do but
doing extended fasting studies in humans
is incredibly difficult for getting
ethical approvals from IRB and so on
&gt;&gt; but
I'd say the simplest way of describing
it is and we could certainly talk more
about this but if you look at say my
family and very common neurodeenerative
disease
It's not just tangles and plaques and so
on that cause problems. It's metabolic
dysfunction. So if you have chronically
elevated insulin, glucose, etc. It's
basically an amplifier for any possible
problems and those compound over time as
your body just accumulates garbage. This
is a very simple way of putting it. But
if you are developing the metabolic
machinery for that switching I was
talking about, your body gets better at
things like autophagy, mphagy, sort of
cellular self-cleaning.
So your cleanup crew gets better, if
that makes sense.
&gt;&gt; It's a very simplistic way to put it,
but I think it's a fair way to think
about it. And that is part of the reason
if you look at and I don't want to
oversell this but you know fasting a
sense is the oldest cure. If you look at
animals if they get sick what do they
do? At least mammals most like onullets
like deer and so on they fast and
&gt;&gt; if we get sick we don't want to eat.
Their appetite's gone.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But then we'll we'll often force
ourselves to eating by the clock. And I
would say that the details do matter.
Like that depletion of liver glycogen
from at least the the reading and
research I've done seems to matter a
lot. So much like a ketogenic diet, if
you do it halfway,
you're actually not getting a lot of the
benefits that that the protocol seems to
offer. Um so I I would say that's one.
Um I'll switch gears for a second. And
I'm happy to come back to the
intermittent fasting, but I would say in
terms of beliefs and behaviors, I would
say a focus on just to really zoom out,
focus on investing in and I have very
specific ways that I do this
relationships.
And the way that looks is if I do a past
year review as I'm doing right now,
looking back on the past year, and I
look through my calendar week by week
and identify the energy giving and
energy draining activities, right? Where
were the peak positive and where were
the peak negative, but also what types
of things in my calendar drained me
versus energized me? And then creating a
do more of column and a do less of
column. It's very easy to do it on a
single piece of paper. But the the the
crux piece of that that I ignored for a
long time was all right, if you have a
parking lot and that parking lot has 5
to 10 slots for your most important
relationships, family, closest friends
last year, did you spend as much time as
you would like to with those people? If
the answer is no, which it usually is,
then I'm going to schedule time in
advance, book and pay for things for the
following year, calendar it before it
gets crowded out immediately. And so
that could be long weekends, could be
group dinners, it could be, as I'm going
to be doing soon, hosting friends, it
could be time in Montana wilderness,
which was a couple of months ago, but
getting all that stuff on the calendar
and creating some loss aversion by
whenever possible, paying in advance.
Doesn't have to be expensive,
but creating
a situation where it's very hard for you
to cancel and get out of things. uh that
I think is the
facet of self-help in quotation marks it
gets lost. If you focus on the self, the
paradox of self-help is if you
excessively focus on the self, it is
almost inevitable that you're going to
be miserable. like humans are not int
the self-sufficiency
sort of mantra of self-help if you
combine it with like the rugged rugged
individualism of the US which has a lot
of upside but if you take both of those
in excess people end up feeling very
isolated and so the investing in
relationships and I do mean investing
like really blocking out that time in
the last 5 years that's been that's been
the single domino that tipped over
changes everything
Last thing, the third thing I'll mention
and then I'll stop my TED talk is how
many relationships do you manage?
&gt;&gt; Not many. I really prefer
very deep relationships over a broad
network.
&gt;&gt; I'm the same way. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How do you determine who you're going to
spend your time with?
&gt;&gt; I mean, I'm asking now I'm now I'm
learning. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And so I am very curious. I mean, you
have a huge name. You're a huge
household name. You've been been around
for a long time. A lot of people want to
get to you. They want to talk to you.
They want to pick your brain. They want
something from you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How do you how do you determine who
you're going to give your time to?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I'd say there are there are
different tiers. So, I do have let's
just call it shallow is not the right
word because that sounds very negative.
I do have a wide network and I just set
parameters around what is allowed and
what isn't allowed uh in those
relationships that might have more of a
purely business context. But at the very
top I would say I am giving the most
time to people who are more than happy
to call me on my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Tell me my
baby's ugly. whatever I might be
precious about or really excited about,
they're happy to tell me that it's a bad
idea if it comes down to it. So, that is
non-negotiable,
right? Otherwise, right, if if someone's
not willing to do that, raises a lot of
questions about what motivations might
be.
&gt;&gt; Like, if if the emperor has no clothes,
I want to know that I'm naked.
&gt;&gt; Even though in the moment I might find
it very annoying, right, if I'm really
attached to something, but
&gt;&gt; you need those people around you. So,
what that means is they're very often
old friends. These are people I've known
for 15, 20 years, first met in sports
competition or in school or something
like that. Then I would say it's really
simple. It's energy in versus energy out
cuz there you might have somebody at a
dinner party who's happy to tell you all
your ideas are terrible, but that
person's also terrible. Or maybe there's
just something slightly off in your
spider sense. Doesn't know what it is.
can't put a finger on it, but for
whatever reason, whenever you come away
from them, you feel just 10% drained and
you don't really want to have a second
dinner with that person. I pay a lot of
attention to that. I feel like language,
analysis, spreadsheets, all helpful, but
relative to our entire evolutionary
apparatus, that's really new. So, I I
pay a lot of attention to the millions
of years of am of of animal sensitivity.
If it if that's and I used to be I'm so
I used to view emotion and
intuition is basically kind of horseshit
for lack of a better description. Like
things that would always lead you
astray. Therefore, you need structured
thinking and so on which there's a place
for. I'm not saying there isn't a place
for it. But if I get a weird feeling
around somebody like I pay a lot of
attention to that even if on paper they
should be
&gt;&gt; You do pay attention to intuition. I
thought you were okay.
&gt;&gt; No no no I pay I pay more and more and
more attention to it. But for decades I
was just like yeah look like emotions
are a liability. They can lead you
astray. And in excess again in excess
that's true. But I would say in terms of
determining who I'm going to spend time
with, it's like if that person calls
you, do you want to pick up the phone or
not? And if you're like, h like, um, not
now, maybe I'll get back to them. Like
that's not a small thing.
&gt;&gt; Like some of my friends who are really
good investors call it the beer test.
And the beer test, it's really simple.
It's like if if you're walking around
like if you're walking outside at a mall
and somebody a founder you invested in
is walking the other way, are you going
to do you going to do this or are you
going to walk over and be like, "Hey
man, so good to see you. Hey, we should
grab a beer." Which one is it? Because
with say startup investing and everybody
should treat their relationship this
way, but in startup investing, just to
give a concrete example, it's like the
biggest successes for me take 7 to 12
years. That is longer than most
marriages.
And
smart isn't good enough. Hardworking
isn't good enough. You could have
somebody with low integrity
who's very smart and very hardworking.
That is a dangerous person.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. So like the beer test, okay? Do
they pass the beer test or not?
&gt;&gt; Uh but it's even easier than that. It's
like you go through your calendar and
it's like, do you have a whole body yes
to this person or not? And if the answer
is yes, then
not just the question of who you spend
time with, but the question of what you
do gets a lot easier. Because if one of
those people invites me to do something,
even if I think it's the most hair brand
idiotic idea, I am default. Yes. Based
on the who, not on the what.
&gt;&gt; Um, so that that's like the very very
top, right? Those that's the five to 10,
maybe 15 parking spots. And then one
level down, I would say
broadly I'm looking for as much learning
as possible and
combined with sort of honesty and EQ. So
if I can find those three things, the EQ
is not trivial, right? Um then I will
invest time in those people.
&gt;&gt; Right on. But
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; what do you It's easy to get squeezed.
It's easy to get squeezed out of your
own life.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Though it is. So, this has been
fine-tuning over decades. Uh cuz
otherwise it's just like email becomes
everyone else's agenda for your life and
your calendar evaporates. Boom. You're
done. Which is why at the beginning of
the year it's like block out that time
with those close relationships. Book it.
Invite people. So, you're going to look
like an ass if you cancel. Like get
things in motion so that ships out of
the harbor.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then and then you have
defensible space in your calendar that
you will defend. Yeah.
You'd mentioned intuition, but where do
you think intuition comes from?
&gt;&gt; Oh man,
I'm going to buy myself a little time to
tap dance. Where do you think intuition
comes from?
&gt;&gt; I think it's a combination of
something you're born with and
the ability to self-reflect on on
situations in your life to gain the
experience.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
So, it depends on on how into crazy down
we want to go, but I'll I'll say that
on at least one level,
100%
am on the same page in the sense that
it's pattern matching born of
experience, right? So, that's that's one
piece of what we might call intuition,
&gt;&gt; very fast judgment based on pattern
matching,
pattern recognition.
Then there's another piece of it that I
think is,
you know, along the lines of maybe the
gift of fear, Gavin Debecker type stuff
where there's an evolved sense, there's
a sensitivity that perhaps you can't
verbalize,
maybe can't even justify. Maybe it runs
counter to the conclusion you would come
to analytically, but is just some
gnawing feeling. I don't know how to
explain that. I just I I think it's a
byproduct probably of evolution. Then
there's
then I think there's there are other
other ways we could think about
intuition that I have a much harder time
explaining. But
like what like remote viewing? Uh well,
we could yeah, remote viewing or uh you
could look at
people who seem to have and I recognize
there are a hundred ways
to
put up a pretty good steelman argument
against these things. But people who
seem to have experiences of
precognition, but we don't even have to
get out into that territory. We could
look at animal behavior. There's a great
book I recommend to everyone. It's a
beautiful book called of wolves and men
&gt;&gt; about effectively the the history of
wolves and men,
but it dives into the biology
of wolves, their mythological
significance, how they're viewed by
various indigenous cultures, and it
redefined what was possible within
non-fiction writing. It's by someone
named Barry Lopez. Incredible writer. I
I recommend this book to everyone. It's
an older book. It's a few decades old.
When that book came out, people in,
let's just call it that category of book
were like, "Oh,
&gt;&gt; okay. There's kind of a before this book
and then after
&gt;&gt; because he's shown what is possible."
And in that book, I think it was the
Nunvut people, could be mispronouncing
that, but he was talking about their
observations of wolves and and hunting
patterns and how also with modern
technology and radio callers and so on,
you'll see sort of let's just call it
wolves traveling and then to intersect a
herd of caribou, they'll turn perfectly
from a 100 miles away and then
intersect, right? Right? And so you
could try to explain that through scent.
You could, but it it it starts to fall
apart pretty quickly, right? Uh or you
look at
let's just say kind of spontaneous
coordination of starling or
uh fish school behavior.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
and
sort of phenomena that are very
difficult to explain
mechanistically
exist. They just they just do. And so
you you don't even need to necessarily
step into things that people some folks
are going to get very hot and bothered
about like remote viewing, which I do
actually think is very interesting. But
if you just look at animal behavior,
what we might call instinct,
uh, becomes very hard to pin down. Um,
so that's a very fancy way of saying I'm
not really sure, but whatever whatever
the inputs might be, I just I have
started I have paid more and more and
more attention to it. I pay attention to
it with everything, people, girlfriends,
investing,
&gt;&gt; right? Sometimes it's the flip side,
right? You've had Toby of of Shopify on
the show and it's like when I spent time
with Toby and Harley, I got this sort of
physiological quickening. I don't get it
much. It's not like this happens all the
time.
Uh you do have to be careful about not
fooling yourself, right? It's very easy
to fool yourself and to look for
evidence, confirmation, bias, etc. to
support what we already believe. But in
in cases like that, I was like, there
was there was like a physiological
quickening. And I had my analytical kind
of hat on looking at Shopify as a
business and stuff when they had like
nine or 10 employees, but also just
being around those guys. I was like, "Oh
yeah, these are good horses to bet on."
Really good horses to bet on.
&gt;&gt; Um, so it's not just a warning system,
right? It can also be a go signal. Um,
but it it for people who may not
find this to make any sense, I would say
you can
reaccess these things that you had as a
kid. You can cultivate those
sensitivities.
It just takes practice. And you can
start by doing a past year review. Go
through and be like, "All right, what
gave me energy and what didn't?" That's
usually pretty straightforward.
&gt;&gt; And if it's if you're not sure, if
you're like, "Uh, I'm not sure d's your
answer, right?
I don't know if anybody's seen the movie
Ronin. Some really great chase scenes
and so on with Robert Dairo, but there's
a quote in there that I'm paraphrasing,
but I'm pretty close. Like, when in
doubt, there is no doubt.
So, if you're heming and hawing, it's
like, yeah, there's your answer. It's
not a yes. That's not a whole body. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Do you think we've lost intuition
over time? The human the human species?
I would say
&gt;&gt; if you look at animals they all I can't
think of anything that doesn't
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I think I think that humans have
in some ways
understandably like obsoles
intuition or allowed it to atrophy in
the same way that if you become
dependent on Google maps
&gt;&gt; you no longer need to develop that
faculty.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. If you look at for instance some
of the literature that's been published
recently looking at cognitive
performance pre and post AI right or
looking at rather
degrees of AI usage or LLM usage and
cognitive performance it's like yeah
okay if you're relying on something
you're using an exoskeleton for walking
what's going to happen to your legs
you're going to atrophy of course your
body's really smart doesn't want to put
calories and building into anything
that's redundant right you take
exogenous testosterone If you're getting
injections, guess what? Your balls are
going to turn into raisinets. Body's
smart. It's not going to say, "Yeah,
let's pump a bunch of hormones to the
liic cells to produce testosterone." No,
it's very, very, very smart. So, I'm
very cautious of the technologies that I
adopt. And actually, there's a great
guy. If you've never talked to him, you
should meet him. He's he's fascinating.
Has a big Amish looking beard named
Kevin Kelly. older guy,
&gt;&gt; but he's a technologist who's one of the
most incredibly accurate futurists I've
ever met. Like his ability to predict
things is off the charts. He's like the
American technostraamus or something.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. What's his name?
&gt;&gt; Usually Kevin Kelly.
&gt;&gt; Kevin Kelly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. He's in his 70s now. And
he is, by the way, probably 10 to 20
times more popular in China than he is
in the US, which is a whole separate
conversation, but they pay a lot of
attention to him.
Nonetheless, he has literally spent time
with the Amish to study how they accept
or reject technology.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. He was a founding editor of Wired
magazine. You think that he just would
adopt everything and let trial and error
sort itself out in his own life, but no,
he studies how the Amish evaluate
technology. Because despite what some
people might think, it's not like they
don't actually use technology. They're
very, very methodical about how they
evaluate it. So
that is the way I would think of any of
this augmentation
whether it's what people would consider
no tropics and smart drugs or any type
of enhancement which would include
Google maps AI etc like right now for
instance I write
AI is LLMs are getting incredibly good
at writing and I saw a piece recently I
think it was in the New Yorker but a
&gt;&gt; some like a Pulzer prize winner or some
incredible writer
tested an LLM and provided very educated
test readers with sample pros and the
vast majority couldn't tell the
difference.
&gt;&gt; No kidding. Yeah. Wow.
&gt;&gt; Trained on uh his or her own writing.
So, the temptation to use it is there
and I'll use it for editing suggestions,
but as soon as I use that as my primary
mode of writing,
it's just going to be too tempting. It's
like digital heroin. And ultimately I
may travel down that path. But the point
is that I'm I'm being very cautious with
it because I know that that certain
faculties will atrophy.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And I don't know what the consequences
of that are because if those faculties
start to atrophy
&gt;&gt; and I'm not a lite like I use tons of
technology. I invest in tons of
technology on the cutting edge. But what
are the secondary or tertiary effects of
that? It's probably not just writing
essays,
right? There's probably a higher cost to
be paid and I want I just want to have a
better understanding what that cost.
&gt;&gt; How will you find out what that unders I
mean how will you find that?
&gt;&gt; I'll probably hang out for a while at
the periphery and see what people are
finding, right? Talk to researchers. It
is not hard to talk to researchers. Uh
I'll also use, you know, I'll kind of
use certain AI enabled tools to evaluate
the AI itself. So there are like
websites like consensus.app or open
evidence. There are tools you can use
that make it a lot easier to interrogate
published scientific literature with
just basic queries that kind of anyone
would come up with or could come up
with.
&gt;&gt; So
uh with certain things I like to be on
the cutting edge. With other things like
what we're talking about I really like
to be on the dull edge. I don't want to
be one of the first thousand monkeys
shot into space with a
I'm going to wait. You know, you want to
colonize Mars? Great. I'll maybe I'll be
I'll be I'll be two billionth in line.
&gt;&gt; I'm right there with you.
Go spend Go spend a month in Antarctica
in the winter first and tell me how you
like it. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I I am with you on that.
&gt;&gt; I want to talk about a piece of gear you
probably use more than anything else,
but never think about it. Your wallet.
Before Ridge, I was carrying a bulky,
beat up leather wallet that was falling
apart and so thick it was actually
throwing off how I sat. Switching to
Ridge completely changed that. The first
thing you notice is how thin it is. It's
a slim, modern design that still holds
up to 12 cards plus cash without feeling
like a brick in your pocket. It's made
from premium materials like aluminum,
titanium, and carbon fiber, so it's
built to last. Ridge also has over 50
different colors and styles so you can
find one that fits your look. What
really sold me was the peace of mind.
Every Ridge wallet has RFID blocking
technology to protect against digital
pickpockets, and they back it with a
lifetime warranty. This is genuinely the
last wallet you'll ever need to buy,
which explains why they have over
100,000 five-star reviews. And if you're
someone who's always misplacing things,
the Air Tag attachment is a gamecher.
Ridge also makes key cases and suitcases
with the same sleek, durable design. For
a limited time, our listeners get 10%
off at Ridge by using code SRS at
checkout. Just head to ridge.com and use
code SRS and you're all set. After you
purchase, they will ask you where you
heard about them. Please support our
show and tell them our show sent you.
Again, that's 10% off your order when
you go to ridge.com and use code SRS.
&gt;&gt; You know, I wanted to ask you, you know,
it's the it's the it's new year, you
know, we're about a week in to 2026 and
so I wanted to ask you, I don't know
about fear setting versus goal setting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I'd love to chat with you
about that. What is it?
&gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. So fear setting
is something that
I
effectively found through stoicism.
So the philosophy of stoicism and uh
people can certainly find a lot of of
great books written contempor you know
in a contemporary sense by Ryan
Holidayiday the obstacle is the way. I
actually produced the audio book for
that book in the day. And one of his
first early writings on stoicism was a
blog post on my blog way back in the
day.
&gt;&gt; Uh and
uh at that point we resonated on
stoicism because I had been traveling
almost always with a copy of letters
from a stoic which are the moral letters
to Lucille by Senica the Younger. Now,
Senica the Younger, controversial
character for a bunch of reasons, but
very very very skilled writer and
proponent of stoicism.
And
in effect, one of the practices that he
would encourage is
he had a number of them, but it was it
was in effect defining your fears,
thinking about the worst case scenario.
So, there's a mental component to it.
There was also a practiced component
which would which would be and actually
Kevin Kelly does this as well. So in in
effect practicing the theor the thing
that you most fear like poverty. So like
Kevin Kelly this is a good example
like he sometimes will go a week or two
just as a practice like sleeping in his
living room in a sleeping bag eating
like rice and beans and instant coffee.
And Kevin isn't really afraid of most
things, but what you realize, and you
realize this too if you go on a week-l
long camping trip, you're like, "This is
actually pretty sweet, right?
&gt;&gt; I don't actually need that much."
&gt;&gt; Simpler times,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; That's what I've noticed. And when you
prove that to yourself,
you recognize that the downside risk on
a lot of what you might be considering,
taking a new job, proposing or ending a
relationship, whatever it might be that
you're nervous about that you might be
procrastinating or putting putting on
pause has very limited downside. This
the systematic way of doing that. I
needed something a little more concrete
for myself. Uh, I have been
hypervigilant my whole life. I can there
are good reasons for that that we can
get into, but I've been very
hypervigilant my whole life. Also have
diagnosed OCD, which did not surprise
any of my friends when it uh came about
a couple years ago.
They're like, "Yeah, well, you know, big
surprise."
&gt;&gt; Duh.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Duh. Uh, I had the same
response. But the the the point is that
with generalized anxiety plus OCD, if
you have that hypervigilance plus OCD,
you ruminate
or I'll keep it personal. Like I don't
have the handwashing thing. I'm not
flipping light switches, right? They're
different manifestations of OCD, but I
have these kind of endless ruminative
loops and they tend to relate to
imagining worst case scenarios. All
right? And that can be really paralyzing
if I want to bias towards action which I
prefer to do right bias towards action
instead of inaction.
So what do you do? Well reading the
stoicism and so on started to develop
this approach fear setting I'll explain
what it is. So the the what makes goal
setting effective? What makes goal
setting effective? There are different
frameworks for this but you know like
the smart framework like specific,
measurable, achievable, right? With
timelines and so on. Okay. Like there
there there are better and worse ways of
defining your goals to make them more
likely to be achieved, right? If you
have accountability and you have
timelines, you have a deadline, you have
deliverables, etc. All that makes goal
achieving easier. All right. Well,
what's fear setting? Fear setting, it's
really simple. So, if if you have the
thing that you're worried about, and
this is what I still do to this day. I
probably do it once a quarter. The thing
you're nervous about could be
starting your own business. Could be
writing or finishing a book. Could be
getting cancer.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Could be getting cancer, right? It
could be getting older. could be uh one
of your parents dying, could be whatever
it might be.
&gt;&gt; Uh and to be clear, fear setting doesn't
doesn't automatically solve all of these
things. But here's here's what it does.
It defangs a lot of them so you can take
action. Let me explain what I mean. So
fear setting is super simple. Let's say
the example is in my case, I'll give a
real like one of the very first huge
examples was Id started my own company.
I was I was completely burned out around
2003
2004.
Had been working seven days a week and I
wanted to take four weeks off. All
right. Running my own business. How do
you do that? Right? I've created this
monster. I'm running it. I have single
point of failure. Me. And so all of
these disasters came to mind. Right?
So what did I do? I wrote them down. And
there there's an alternative approach
called morning pages which is slightly
different but I'll I'll explain it.
That's from Julia Cameron who wrote the
artist's way. Really really incredible
practice but I'll come back to that. So
in fear setting like at the top I would
put taking four weeks vacation. That's
the thing I'm considering. Then in the
in the first column just write down all
of the things that are freaking you out
that could go wrong in in as much detail
as possible. Right? So I would write
down
I'm going to be overseas and I'm going
to miss a letter from the IRS and then
they're going to shut do this and this
and I'm going to get audited and blah
blah blah. Okay, write it down. Boom. I
some miss IRS letter blah blah blah blah
blah. All right, what's the next one?
Next one is there's going to be some
supply chain problem and like blah blah
blah blah blah. Okay, write that down.
All right, like the president at the
fulfillment company is going to get sick
and then boom, like orders aren't going
to ship and there's going to be this
huge disaster. Okay, write it down. And
so you write down all these things like
aim for volume, right? Like 10 to 20
things.
All right, that's column one. Then
column two is what could I do to
decrease the likelihood of this
happening? Like anything I could do to
try to prevent this. All right, great.
So for the letter at the time, this is
back in the day, keep in mind, early
2000s, but there still were services
where you could have mail shipped, they
would scan it, and they would email you
&gt;&gt; PDFs. It's like, okay, well, let me test
out one of those services. I could do
that. Okay, what about supply chain? All
right. With supply chain issues, there
were a few there were a few components
that I could basically stockpile in
advance in case things were disrupted
and that would reduce like 80% of the
risk. Okay, I can do that. All right.
And you go down the list and there's
probably something you can do to
decrease the risk of that happening. All
right. So now you have two columns. All
the worst things that could happen, the
things you could do to decrease the
likelihood of them happening. All right.
Next column. Next column is if it
happens, if that thing happens, what
could you do for damage control? What
could you do to possibly get back up on
your feet? Right. So, it's like if you
start a company and it fails, what could
you get a bartending job?
&gt;&gt; Could you
&gt;&gt; So, you go through every contingency
plan.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, then it's like, what can you
do to repair the situation just to get
back to like
life support, right? If needed, what can
you do? There's always something you
could do. So, you write that down. Okay.
Then you you have to ask yourself two
follow-up questions. All right, so if I
did this thing I'm considering the four
weeks of vacation.
What are the payoffs and how durable are
they? Right? Like what's the upside?
I've talked about you know I've written
down all the downside. What's the upside
and what's the durability? Okay. Well,
if I went on a four-week vacation and I
figured out how to run my business and
automate things, I would come back and
all those systems would still exist.
Like I would have taken myself out of
the machine. I would no longer be the
Wizard of Oz having to control
everything. Like, well, I mean, that
could last years in terms of benefits,
right? Okay. Boom, boom, boom, you go
down the list. What are all the
benefits? How durable are they? And then
you look at all the downsides and you're
like, "All right, how temporary or
durable are these? What is the real
downside risk?" And I'll be done with
this in just a minute or two, but it's
important because people can do this.
And I I gave a TED talk on this for
people who want to really dig in, but
the what you realize often is that the
thing you're considering if it works is
like a 7 to 10 on a scale of 1 to 10 in
life-changing impact with durability.
Like it lasts for a while.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And the things that you're scared of are
like 2, three, four in temporary pain
and they're either reversible or
completely survivable. The last piece
and this is new in the last I would say
15 years for me uh is
on a separate piece of paper you write
down status quo if I can just consider
if I can just continue doing what I'm
doing what is my life what are the costs
right financially emotionally
relationally
in one year from now in three years from
now in 10 years from now and you write
that stuff down because we're very good
at thinking about the risk of doing
something, but we're not as trained to
think about the risks of just continuing
doing what we're doing, right? And so
when I looked at that, I was like,
I don't think I can make it 5 years,
10 years, forget it. My life's a
complete utter disaster. It's like,
okay, so now it's not a question of if,
it's just a question of when.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Now when I look at these two
things, right, is doing this thing risky
compared to status quo one, three, five
years from now, it's like, oh, this
thing that I thought was scary is much
lower risk. And then you do it and like
that is what kicked off all these
adventures that led to the first book
and like here we are. If I had not taken
that vacation, I would not be sitting
here.
&gt;&gt; That's interesting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How do you find the balance though? How
do you find the balance? cuz I could
see, you know, um people going,
"Fuck, I'm going I'm going for 16 weeks
of vacation, you know."
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I here's what I would say is
that fear setting much like doing goal
setting doesn't achieve your goal.
&gt;&gt; It's almost daring yourself to do what
you want to do.
&gt;&gt; It's it's daring yourself. Here's what
it is. It's daring yourself. What it's
also saying is some of your fears will
be wellounded. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; There's certain things that could be
catastrophic, but it's like 1%. Like, do
not let your fears put an emergency
break on your life without
cross-examining them.
&gt;&gt; That's all it says is like most of your
fears are these fantasms in the fog that
are scary because it's like the
boogeyman. The lights are out. You
haven't looked at it clearly.
&gt;&gt; As soon as you write it down,
&gt;&gt; you realize, flip the light switches on.
boogeyman's not there and then you can
take action. But sure, there's certain
things that are going to be scary no
matter what, right? Losing a relative to
Alzheimer's, right? Someone you love or
suffering some horrible injury, right?
These are all things that have real
consequences, but your ability to
survive and thrive, like your resilience
is a lot greater than I think you
realize in most cases.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And you have a track record. Like
anyone who's made it this far, who's
watching this right now, like you've
survived a lot and you've figured out a
lot even when plans went sideways. So
the fear setting fundamentally is is is
a tool that you can do in like an hour.
Doesn't even take an hour.
That takes the emergency break off.
Doesn't matter how good your goal
setting is if you've got the emergency
break on. Um so that's that's I say the
the principal purpose.
&gt;&gt; That's very interesting.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; You know you had mentioned earlier about
your friend who practice being in
poverty.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And then found out this isn't so bad.
&gt;&gt; It's a lot simpler. Sounds like you
maybe have experienced that as well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I do it every year. I do it every
&gt;&gt; year.
&gt;&gt; You do it every year.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. I mean well part of the reason
I do the fasting too. I might do like 7
to 10 day fasts.
Uh certainly try to live a very
minimalist existence for you know weeks
at a time throughout the year to remove
the hadonic treadmill that we're all
vulnerable to, right? It's like if you
man if you live where we're sitting
right in the United States, not for
everyone, but broadly speaking, it's
like if you were born here, my god, did
you win the lottery, right?
&gt;&gt; And you look at these comforts and
amazing privileges
&gt;&gt; and
it's easy to believe that whatever your
kind of latest level of comfort is that
that is necessary for happiness. that is
necessary for safety, that is necessary
for fill in the blank. And by and large,
it's just not. So, I really try to,
you know, get out in the woods, get
filthy, do something hard, experience
some physical pain, not excessively so,
but just like through training and so
on, you're like, "Okay, yeah, little bit
of pain, a little bit of fasting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; if I lost, you know, half half what I
have, 75, 80, 90% of what I have, I'm
fine.
So, doesn't mean you just go to Vegas
and put it all in black. It doesn't mean
that. It means that a lot of these
things you're considering, if they go
totally wrong, and it's actually
surprisingly hard to fail completely, if
you're pretty smart and have some
ability to improvise,
completely survivable, right? Um, and
for a lot of what I do, you just you you
don't make it unless you have that
unless you cultivate that view on
things. And you can't be stupid and
reckless, but it's like in startup
investing, it's like 70 80% of those are
going to go to zero even if you put
seven to 10 years in, right? And so
I I like startup investing as a metaphor
for life because you don't need to get a
lot of things right to have an amazing
life, an incredible life. You don't need
to get a lot of things right. You just
need to get a few high leverage things
right. Those 10 relationships,
health.
All right. Like if you get those two
things right, guess what? Like I know a
lot of billionaires, decad billionaires,
you're going to have more than 90% of
those guys in terms of durable wealth.
What I would consider wealth. Oh yeah,
if you just get those two things right,
it's like sure, money's money is
important to a point, right? I don't
want to minimize that, but uh don't
underestimate what you can do by getting
a few things right. You can be wrong a
lot of the time.
I mean, I've been wrong tons, tons,
tons, tons. It's a damn good point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I love that. I love that
fear setting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I still I I I I am,
you know, I'm not just the president,
I'm a client, you know, hair club for
men.
&gt;&gt; You got a great haircut, I must say.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I use it. Uh yeah, we go to the
same stylist.
Uh I I still use this and because I
promised it, I want to close one loop.
Morning pages. Julia Cameron. This is
even simpler. People can try this. Maybe
this is the appetizer before fear
setting every morning. That monkey mind
with all the worries and things
ricocheting around that might be
producing anxiety or whatever it might
be. Just vomit that onto a page
longhand. Write for two to three pages.
That's it. You don't have to do
anything. You don't have to remember it.
You don't have to go back to it. You
don't have to solve anything. Just trap
that monkey mind on paper so you can get
on with your day. Do that for two to
three pages a day. the arguably the most
one of the most productive writers
creators in Hollywood even though he
lives in New York but Brian Copelman
co-created Billions was was uh was
behind Rounders along with his writing
partner I mean the guy's super prolific
and he does transendal meditation and
morning pages every day
uh we could talk about meditation
separately but I recommended I won't
mention him but like the right hand of a
pretty well-known politician who
basically is like the COO of everything
that politician does which is
incredible right in terms of just like
track record endurance output and he did
morning pages based on my recommendation
which I got from Brian for 6 months and
he wrote me back and he said this is the
closest thing to a magical effect that
I've ever found.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; No [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; So simple. So simple.
And what does that have in common with
fear setting? It's taking these kind of
nebulous
problems inside your head and putting it
on paper. That's it. It's very simple,
but consistently, right? It's not going
to the gym once and then you're like, I
guess I'm fit now. It's like, no, this
is this is
&gt;&gt; this is kind of like flossing your
teeth. You don't necessarily have to do
it every day. Although if you do morning
pages for a week or two, it's shocking
what effect it can have on your
well-being and productivity. And then
you you could view that as the flossing.
And
&gt;&gt; why do you think that works? I mean, I'm
going to try this. I'm going to try.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Well, you should.
&gt;&gt; Why does it work?
What would be the difference whether I
think it
&gt;&gt; I think the way it works this is this is
my perspective on it is that this is
part of the reason why writing is so
helpful also in general is that it's
incredibly difficult to cross-examine
your own thoughts while you're thinking
them. They're too fleeting moves too
quickly. It's very hard to look at them
dispassionately almost as an observer,
right? It's like if you hang out with
your friends and they've got problems,
you're like, man, you can sort out their
problems like that, right? And just like
why don't you just do this, this, and
this. You can see it so easily. But it's
very hard for us to like look at
ourselves in the same way, especially
with with the speed of thought. So the
simple act of freezing it on paper
allows you to look at it for what it is.
And nine times out of 10, you look at
it, you're like, "Okay, that's kind of
ridiculous." Or it's not ridiculous. But
once you've put it on paper, I feel like
subconsciously there's part of you
that's like, "I rem I I have that
written down. I don't need to remember
or think about it."
And
whatever that tendency is, and some
people more than others, certainly I
have a lot of it, to kind of white
knuckle grasp onto a thought
&gt;&gt; so that it becomes this merrygoround.
Writing it down just allows you to relax
your grip and let it go. And if you can
do that for a few hours, I mean in
today's world, if you can single task
and focus on one thing for a few hours
without notifications, without getting
distracted, without looping on some
future anxiety or past depression or
whatever it might be, if you can do that
for a few hours, my god, like in the
next few years, especially post AI,
&gt;&gt; uh like you're going to have such an
enormous competitive advantage. Huge.
&gt;&gt; Huge. Huge. Like potential advantage.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's already a fascinating conversation.
&gt;&gt; Love it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Love it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. It's just
&gt;&gt; Let's get into your story a little bit.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, sure.
&gt;&gt; Where where did you grow up?
&gt;&gt; I grew up on Long Island, so Eastern
Long Island. Uh rat tail and all.
&gt;&gt; A rat tail. Nice.
&gt;&gt; I had a rat tail. I had some terrible
haircuts growing up. um didn't realize
it at the time, but grew up on eastern
Long Island, way out by Montuk. So, uh
people associate that with like rightly
so, you know, hedge fund managers and
out by the Hamptons, you know, like
tennis with Steven Spielberg kind of
thing, right? These hundred million
dollar mansions. And that's part of it,
but a lot like any
any tourist town that has a lot of
second or third or fourth or fifth homes
like Nantucket or wherever, they're all
over the place. You've got the people
who come there on the weekends or for
the summers and then you got the locals,
right? So the local side, it's mostly
people working in service industries,
etc. You know, most of my friends
fathers were like fishermen, carpenters,
landscapers, that kind of thing.
&gt;&gt; So, I grew up working in restaurants.
Started started bus boying pretty early.
Not even sure it was legal. Probably 14
14 or so. Uh I think everybody should
work a service job. I think everybody
should have to work a service job. Uh
but uh that's where I grew up, Eastern
Long Island. And uh school was not
great. I mean, you don't really realize
you have no reference point, right? Like
whatever's in front of you is kind of
your reality. School was not was was not
good. So, eventually, uh, one of my I
got really lucky, man. You just think
about all these things that have to line
up for either of us to be where we are
and these
these these sliding door moments. One
friend, if I had been two years younger,
two years older, this wouldn't have
happened. But one guy managed to escape
Long Island and his parents sent him to
a school in New Hampshire, which was a
private school. And he came back and he
was like, "You have to leave this
place." And I was like, "What are you
talking about?" And then a math teacher
was like, "He's right. You need to
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] get out of here." I was like,
"What?" And uh started looking into it
and ultimately got some scholarships. My
parents were very supportive. It was all
my idea. Um like the whole extended
family chipped in. I was able to uh
transfer to a private school in New
Hampshire and that was a huge lifecher
and inflection point. I mean that's
where suddenly instead of just being
able to study Spanish, you could study
anything, right? And that's how I ended
up studying Japanese and class six days
a week, right? Seated meal with coat and
tie. I mean,
&gt;&gt; wow.
&gt;&gt; You had mandatory sports and then in
some cases you had sixth period which is
classes after sports. So, you'd finish
school like whatever 6:00 p.m., go back
to your room, like splash water on your
face, get on a suit and tie, and then go
to seated meal chapel in the morning,
right? I mean, it the the workload, the
intensity was unbelievable. I was
accustomed to doing really well in
school without having to try very hard.
And suddenly, I was like barely keeping
my head above water. And it was great
for me. It was great for me. Uh it was
really hard, but
having a few male role models in
particular who were like, "You can do
it. Yeah, it's hard." Like, "Yeah, you
can do it." And just like having to push
through that initial sunburn
like too much sun exposure in terms of
stress.
&gt;&gt; Uh what were you into as a kid?
&gt;&gt; Uh I mean at that point I mean I was I
was very interested even at that point I
was very interested in neuroscience. So
I wanted to be a neuroscientist
uh cuz I'd seen my my grandmother
disintegrate with Alzheimer's
and I was also very interested just in
learning in general and how you could
accelerate learning from a very young
age because
it just seemed like there was a wide
open field of possibility there that
folks weren't exploring and we can dive
into that. I was also a wrestler. That
was the only sport I was ever any good
at.
&gt;&gt; Oh, really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I was born premature. I was tiny,
super hyperactive. And one of my mom's
friends were like, "You got to put that
boy in kid wrestling
&gt;&gt; to tire him out." And because I was so
puny, I just got the crap kicked out of
me all the time until about sixth grade.
And uh
like team sports were out. I would just
get massacred.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. I mean, I wouldn't even go out to
recess until probably like fourth or
fifth grade because it was just it was
just like being out in the prison yard.
I' just get the crap kicked out of me.
So, I would just stay inside safely near
the teacher and read books mostly on
marine biology. Um,
&gt;&gt; because my parents, actually, this is
something my parents did. I want to give
them credit. We didn't have a lot of
money, but my mom said, "If you want
books, we always have budget for books."
And so we would go to the bookstore and
there were remainder tables, you know,
these books that the bookstore is trying
to get rid of and like that was the
permissible real estate. It's like, all
right, you get to choose from these
books like 40, 60, 80% off and got a big
hard coverver book called Fishes of the
World and out on eastern Long Island.
Maybe people don't know this, but lots
of sharks lot and great white great
whites and the crazy shark fisherman
from Jaws who's actually based on a guy
named Frank Mundus who is a
&gt;&gt; no kid
&gt;&gt; rod andreel shark hunter off of Montalk
and so my mom took me to meet him. I was
fascinated by sharks and um that is just
a roundabout way of saying for a long
time I I it was not safe for me to go
into kind of like group sports. So my
mom threw me into kid wrestling weight
class, right? It's like puny kid versus
puny kid. Perfect. And uh that stuck all
the way up until the beginning of
college. And so uh wrestling wrestling
was
the the center of my athletic life.
&gt;&gt; Gotcha.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Just if you want to
&gt;&gt; get good at suffer fest, wrestling is a
good way to do it.
&gt;&gt; I was a wrestler, too.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Very familiar. Also a puny.
So yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so I would say those are a few
things that I was into. I was very
interested in drawing. I think just
genetically there's there's my
grandfather was a sculptor seems to be
something just in the bloodline for
that. So I was always drawing. So I was
I I I was I kind of had I guess three in
tandem, right? The neuroscience and
cognitive performance and stuff that was
that was an interest. Um, and I thought,
"Oh, man. It could be really interesting
to be a scientist." And then there was
the marine biology also, right? The
intersection of science. Uh, but then
there was comic book pencellor. I wanted
to be a comic
&gt;&gt; comic book pencellor.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I still have all my comic
books from when I was a kid. So, I
wanted to be a comic book pencellor. But
this was pre-Marvel Studios. Like before
I mean, you were basically signing up
for poverty if you were a comic book
pencellor back in the day. Uh,
nonetheless, still a lot of icons and
idols to this day. I have so much
respect for Jim Lee was one of my
favorites. So, I still I still draw like
I still I still get into it. But for a
long time, I wanted to take that path.
&gt;&gt; Right on.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that's those are some of the
early stages. I mean,
I have that
I think it was in childhood,
bipolar disorder,
&gt;&gt; OCD, Russian.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; How did you overcome those things? How
did how did they how did they pop up on
your radar?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, it's it was sort of the
water that I swam in, right, in the
sense that I didn't know life was any
different for most people.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So a lot of bipolar, major
depressive disorder, a lot of addiction
in my family. So you've got, you know,
alcohol induced cardiomyopathy
on in one uncle. So he drank himself to
death. Had early onset dementia. My aunt
died of alcohol plus percoet. Um,
&gt;&gt; pretty messy. So a lot of addiction and
which I think is really and gabbor mate
I think has the right framing on this.
It's before we ask why the addiction, we
should ask why the pain, right? And so I
think a lot of that is undiagnosed
psychiatric disorders, right? And
uh so that was always part of my
experience, right? This anxiety, this
kind of OCD like dysregulation and
rumination, worrying, hypervigilance.
Um, I was also very badly abused as a
kid, not by my parents, but um, that's
we can get into that if you want, but
that turned everything up.
&gt;&gt; How were you abused?
&gt;&gt; I was sexually abused by a babysitter's
son, like weekly for a couple years.
&gt;&gt; By a babysitter's son.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How old?
&gt;&gt; Two to two to four.
&gt;&gt; Two to four years old.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
So,
&gt;&gt; do you remember it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, sadly.
Yeah, be better if maybe better if I
didn't. But um
so you take you take like out of the box
hardware that's already predisposed
and then you add some type of traumatic
event like that. It's not a great combo.
And I would say that
I was
driven, right? and I wanted to get out
of Long Island, etc., etc. Money issues
were always kind of a a problem in the
household. Like, that was always a
conversation. So, I was like, "All
right, I need to make money." So, there
was like, "Get out of Long Island, be
good at school, that's your ticket,
right?" That was kind of the narrative
in the household, which I think was
actually a helpful narrative. It's like,
"You got it. If you're good at school,
you can write your tickets." It's like,
"All right." So, I took all the rage. I
was a very angry kid, very angry human,
I would say, up until probably
2013
15 around.
&gt;&gt; Wow. After the book, after your first
book.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. I didn't
start to deal with any of the trauma
until probably 2015 in any meaningful
way. Uh but the the the anger and the
rage,
even though it's not a clean fuel, I
don't think it's a clean fuel. Like you
do a lot of damage to the vessel, but
it's a fuel, right? like it's a it's a
propellant that I used. So I was just
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] intense, super intense and took
that experience and everything
compartmentalized it and I was just like
okay like no rearview mirror forward
that's it and I think for
that can work for a while you know it
can work for decades in some cases
ultimately I think if you want a
semblance of peace and well-being you
kind of have to pay the diaper
&gt;&gt; and deal with it. And um I have been
surprised. I mean look
how many
of the friends I have who are veterans
who operate at a very high level came
out ended up for any host of reasons
doing say I gain or other psych
psychedelic therapy who in the process
of doing that realized that it wasn't
principally say PTSD
often some component of TBI but there
was some type of trauma they didn't deal
with. Super common. Super common. I
would say 80% of the guys I know.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And um so it's it's it's it's really
like the numbers are staggering. And the
people who kind of survive as opposed to
like self-destructing
at least in the beginning I think are
get really good at compartmentalizing
right. But compartmentalizing, while it
can help you with performance for
relationships, for friends, for family,
it doesn't work very well. You end up
being emotionally cauterized.
And you know, the armor that you develop
to keep things out keeps a lot of things
in and it keeps a lot of people out. So
to answer your question though, things
that ended up really having a positive
impact
would include
psychedelic assisted therapies. So we
can talk about that because they're not
a panacea. They're not for everyone and
there are real risks depending on the
compound that is u
in question.
Brain stimulation like accelerated TMS.
I literally just did another round of
accelerated TMS two days ago, so we
could talk about that. Very fresh. But
different types of non-invasive brain
stimulation. Incredibly interesting. So
microchips over medicine in a sense. I
think bio bioelectric medicine is is one
field where I'm paying a lot of
attention.
&gt;&gt; Bio electric medicine.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So, where can you use
stimulation?
Doesn't automatically have to be
stimulation. It could be something more
like ultrasound. How can you use
non-invasive technologies or even an
implant to say
change how your brain is firing or to
inhibit or excite a certain part of the
brain or to stimulate the say vag nerve
in some cases uh related to autoimmune
dysfunction or rheumatoid arthritis for
instance there's there was a piece on on
the cover of the New York Times not too
long ago about this
how can you use
electricity in effect to treat issues
with fewer side effects than pills
or injectables or IV or whatever it
might be. Um, so the accelerated TMS
specifically, uh, I think is very
interesting. There's a protocol called
the Saint protocol. It's been modified
in a couple of different ways, but the
primary or one of the best known
researchers behind that unfortunately
committed suicide. uh a few months ago a
friend of mine Nolan Williams uh
developed a lot of these approaches
along with his team but you see in some
cases after a week 70 80% remission of
treatment resistant depression.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Wow.
&gt;&gt; With just as much if not more durability
than psychedelic experiences.
&gt;&gt; Wow. uh I have a lot of a lot of time
on the research side also on the
experiential side with psychedelic
assisted therapies and have taken
copious notes for well over a decade on
everything and know a lot of the people
who are at the top of that field and I
would say that bioelectric medicine is
just as interesting that has had a huge
impact on my life uh very early days
very early
But that is certainly of interest. Uh
and then I would say the
therapies and tools like
morning pages. It's so simple. Morning
pages and fear setting. These are not
small things guys. At least not for me.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. like if your life is ruled by fear
because what I realized is for me
personally
I mis in a sense I was mistreating
myself by focusing on the depression and
what I only realized in the last 5 years
is that the depression was downstream of
other things I had anxiety right which
was maybe out of the box like I have
family members who make my OCD look like
amateur hour like they're so over the
top
when you combine that with hyper
vigilance, like your life is ruled by
fear and worry.
And
when you have that as one of your
defaults,
something like fear setting, something
like morning pages is not a small thing.
Like it is actually a very big deal. And
when you start to look at
psychedelic assisted therapies or
frankly honestly off the rack regular
anti-depressants like SSRIs or uh you
know selective like SNRIs I mean there
are many different types for some people
those are a godsend right
uh but when you start to combine some of
these things with medical supervision
with therapies right whether that's CBT
there's one called DBT which I think is
very interesting. Peter Tia, MD, is uh
is a big proponent of DBT.
It's it's the combination of things plus
investing in relationships,
right? Uh I think Tony Robbins said once
I heard at one of his events, I've only
been to two of his events. They're
they're a bit too much stimulation for
someone who's pretty introverted. It's a
lot a lot of stimulation. But he was on
stage and he said, "Yeah, I I I me me
gets to be a really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] boring song
after a while." And I was like, "That's
the way to put it."
And
I think the best way to help the self is
to escape the self sometimes. Not by
doing coke, not by getting plastered
every night, but by doing what we're
evolved to do, which is spend time with
other people,
right? doing things, not just like
sitting there in a circle like AA
talking about all your worries and
pains, even though AA is actually
spectacular
organization and format. It's incredibly
impressive. But you don't necessarily
have to do that. You can just be a bunch
of dudes sitting around a fire not
making eye contact, making fart jokes,
and talking about hunting. Like, that's
fine. That's actually incredibly
therapeutic.
It's like people process things in
different ways. It doesn't have to be
like not everyone has to do it the same
way.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Sleep affects everything. Your focus,
your recovery, and how you show up
daytoday. That's why I've been paying a
lot more attention to my nighttime
routine lately and started using Beam's
Dream Nighttime Cocoa. Beam is an
American company that makes clean,
sciencebacked products designed to help
people perform at their best. Dream is
their sleep formula, and it's loaded
with ingredients your body actually
needs to recover. rayi, magnesium,
epigenine, eltheanine, and melatonin,
but dosed intelligently. What really
surprised me was how enjoyable it is to
use every night. Best of all, it tastes
incredible. My favorite flavor is cocoa,
but they've got plenty of options. I mix
it up in my favorite mug and drink it
about 30 minutes before bed for optimal
results. Like I said, it takes great,
it's smooth, and it actually feels like
part of my nightly routine. Now, if
you've been struggling with sleep, this
is an easy place to start. And right
now, there's a great offer. For a
limited time, I've got my listeners an
exclusive discount of up to 50%. Go to
shopbeam.com/srs.
Use my code SRS to get 50% off. This is
the best discount Beam gives out. Black
Friday sales are done, but my listeners
are still getting 50% off. So remember
to go to shopbeam.com/srs.
Use code SRS. With my code SRS, you can
grab some Dream for just 3250. That's
about $1 a night for the best sleep of
your life. Try it today.
Want to stay up to date on all things
SRS? You bet your ass you do. Our
newsletter brings you the latest SRS
news and critical updates. Get instant
alerts on the newest episodes. Never
miss a beat. Exclusive intel briefs from
counterterrorism expert Sarah Adams.
You've seen her many times on the show.
She's going to give unfiltered insights
on global terrorist activity. For
Patreon exclusives, you're going to get
epic range days with me and damn near
every guest that's come in the studio.
You're also going to get behindthescenes
content and guest updates. You're going
to get first dibs on new merch drops and
limited edition items that will never be
sold again, plus exclusive offers from
our partners you won't find anywhere
else. So, subscribe to the Vigilance
Elite newsletter right now.
So th those are a few thoughts, but
yeah, I mean came very the almost killed
myself in college. Had a date in the
calendar, had a plan, knew exactly how I
was going to do it to make it look like
an accident. I mean,
&gt;&gt; how are you going to do it?
&gt;&gt; I I won't I won't mention it because
it's too good and other people will copy
it. It's it's I I I've never I've uh
never wanted to discuss it because there
are people who are probably watching
this who are in pain and until I give
them maybe a glimpse of how I got out, I
wouldn't want to give them any
blueprint. It's just too risky. I
wouldn't want to feel the responsibility
for that. But
uh I got really really lucky. Once
again, one of those sliding door
moments. If it had been two or three
years later, I wouldn't be here. The
reason is I went to Firestone Library at
Princeton where I went undergrad. Um,
funny story, but my guidance counselor
in high school was like, "You should
definitely not apply to Princeton or any
heart schools for that matter. We can
talk about that if you want, but misline
incentives." Anyway, got in and
um was reserving a book on assisted
suicide from Firestone Library, but
someone else had already taken it out.
some other student was reading it and
I put in a request. So you put in a
request with the library. What do they
do at that point in time? They would
mail you a postcard.
But I was taking a year away from school
at that point. Took a break from
undergrad, which is what the what the
school and what a lot of schools will
encourage you to do if they think you're
having if if you claim any mental duress
because they don't want suicide on their
watch on their campus, right? might not
help you, but they don't want that as a
blemish on their record, so to speak.
So, the actual postcard got mailed to my
parents at home. I'd forgotten to change
my mailing address at the register's
office. So, postcard goes to my parents
house and it's like, "Congratulations,
your book is now in on assisted suicide,
whatever." Mom called me freaking out
and I tap danced and I lied and I was
like, "Oh, it's a friend at Ruters who
couldn't get the book and I was just
trying to help him out." D. But it
snapped me, it broke the spell. It
snapped me out of it because when you're
in that much pain, you think nothing can
fix it. You think you're fundamentally
broken, that you're uniquely flawed.
You become so I I I me me that all you
want is the pain to stop. Anything can
must be better than this. So, let me
just close the curtain and turn the show
off. And when my mom called, I realized,
oh, if I do this, number one, now I
can't make it look like an accident.
Number two, even if I tried to make it
look like an accident, doing what I had
planned to do would have been like
putting on a suicide bomber vest,
walking into a room of all the people I
care most about and detonating. Like,
psychologically, emotionally, that would
have been the impact. And so, I didn't
do it. and
quadrupled down on physical training,
which is how I ended up doing the going
to the nationals for uh Chinese
kickboxing in the US. I was like, you
know what? The only thing I know how to
do that gets me out out of my head is
train under imminent threat of being
kicked or punched in the face. Like, I
am not allowed to daydream under those
circumstances. So, I'm just going to
train hours a day. And that's what I
ended up doing. And ultimately
everything was fine. Like there was a
there there were there were some reasons
for me getting as deep into that hole as
I did. Not all my fault. And much later,
this is probably only 10 years ago, I
wrote a post called some practical
thoughts on suicide. And like if
anyone's feeling really dark, like go
read that post. Like it it has saved
hundreds of lives. Uh and it doesn't
sugarcoat anything. The reason I wrote
that is I was at an event in San
Francisco at the time being interviewed
on stage. I got off and a couple people
came over and there's a small circle
around me. They wanted books signed and
things like that. And this really nice
guy, you know, dressed up in a suit and
everything for the event gave me this
book and he's like, "Oh yeah, I just
wanted you to sign this for my brother."
And I was like, "Sure, no problem. What
would you like me to say to your
brother?" And he just kind of froze. And
it was like a weird
um
interaction. I couldn't quite figure it
out, but I was like, you know what? I
tell you what, let's chat afterwards.
You can think about it for a bit. I'll
sign it afterwards. And then I went on
and interacted with everybody else. And
then as I was walking back to the
elevator to leave, he joined me and he
was like, "Yeah, I'm really sorry I
froze, but my brother killed himself."
And my mom has kept his room exactly as
it was. And he was such a huge fan of
yours and I just wasn't sure what to put
in the book and
ended up signing the book. I gave it to
him and he's like, "Have you ever
thought about talking about anything
related to mental health?" He's like,
"Because my brother listened to you."
And I was like, "Fuck."
Okay. And it took me months. I was not
committed to publishing it, but I spent
months working on this piece, some
practical thoughts on suicide. And then
uh like my parents didn't really know,
right? Because I'd lied.
&gt;&gt; Family didn't know. Best friends didn't
know.
And um and I certainly like the
two things that I would say I'm proudest
of in terms of publishing
probably if I had to pick two.
If I had to pick two, it' be the blog
post on suicide,
right? some practical thoughts on
suicide and then the podcast during
COVID on the childhood abuse which also
like parents didn't know about nobody
knew about
&gt;&gt; only parents didn't know about that
&gt;&gt; nobody nobody knew cuz I didn't want
them to blame their themselves I I had
intended to like write a book after they
passed away so they wouldn't blame
themselves and then during co right this
is early co people don't know what's
coming like it's scary right like
and
I was I was I remember I had flown
and I was I was I remember I had flown
to Costa Rica to have some optionality
in terms of travel. I was like, "All
right, let me figure out what's going on
here." Like a friend of mine who works
with a lot of hedge fund managers had
given me a very early heads up on CO and
I was like, "Oh, this is bad. This could
be really bad. Let's try to preserve as
much optionality as possible. We're
leaving now." So I ended up in Costa
Rica and we're sitting there having a
meal and somehow this came up because
she knew about it. There were two
girlfriends like longterm long long-term
girlfriends cuz as I was mentioning
earlier when you're like cauterized and
compartmentalized like there are a lot
of relationship costs. So there's a that
works up to a point and then you hit a
wall and suddenly it doesn't work.
&gt;&gt; And so with these girlfriends who are
you know three, four, five, six years,
right?
There was a point where I shared with
these two women specifically
uh I guess it was three long-term
girlfriends about the abuse and this
this this one girlfriend
I was talking about writing the book and
she's like you know we're sitting in the
middle of co she's like have you ever
thought about how many people are going
to die of natural or unnatural causes
before you ever write that book like
it's going to be 10 years 15 years she
was like why don't you do podcast and I
was like
cuz I don't want to talk to my parents.
I don't want to talk to my friends. Like
it's too vulnerable. It's too
vulnerable. But ultimately
uh I had had a friend Debbie Milman
amazing human being, incredible graphic
artist, teacher. Uh Design Matters is
her podcast been running even longer
than mine. And when she came on my show,
I had noticed in all my research she had
never really talked about her family.
And so I asked her before we started
recording, I was like, "Would you be
open to talking about your family at
all? I've noticed a huge glaring
omission." And she was like,
"Maybe." She's like, "You can try it."
And then if I'm open to it, we'll talk
about it, but if not, then not. And we
were friends.
And we got into it. And she opened up
for the first time really publicly about
horrifying
sexual abuse like throughout her entire
childhood. And
&gt;&gt; it's crazy how many kids go through this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's awful. And I mean, the
numbers are staggering. Like, it's
really high.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I know. 50% of the people that have
been on here
&gt;&gt; have talked about it.
&gt;&gt; And then there's another percentage that
won't that will that will talk about it,
but not on camera.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's it's pervasive. And so I
asked Debbie if she would be open to
having a conversation with me about how
we've both tried to overcome or address
this cuz she and I took very very very
different paths and used very different
tools. And so we recorded the
conversation and I told her in advance I
was like look Debbie I don't know if I'm
going to ever publish this. She was like
that's totally fine. And we recorded it
eventually. I was just like,
"All right, here goes nothing."
And
published that, stayed off of all social
media. I was told my team, I was like,
"I don't want to see any feedback unless
it's from people I care about and it's
positive feedback." I was like, "I'm too
It's too raw. Like, I don't want to
Internet's a nasty place, right? It's a
It's a full contact sport where every
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] village idiot has been given
like a halbird and a mace, right? It's
it's not pretty. So I was like, I'm
staying off of everything.
&gt;&gt; But the opposite happened, didn't it?
&gt;&gt; Well, I ignored everything except the
only people who could reach me were my
close friends. So what happened? I would
say
somewhere between 25 and 35% of some of
my oldest, closest friends reached out
and left me the most heart-wrenching
voice memos and voicemails you can
imagine about their own abuse that
they'd never told anyone about.
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] horrible. Uh,
I had anticipated bad behavior on the
internet, so I stayed away. I did not
expect such a high percentage of my
really close friends to
confine me. That was that was that was
really hard. Um
but I have a lot of for whatever reason
capacity for like that
with friends with people I care about. I
have a lot of capacity for handling
that. So uh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] man. How did it feel?
It felt it felt the and I had to decide
in advance what would what the what
feeling would make it worth it, right?
Because no outcome's guaranteed. You
have no idea what's going to happen when
this thing gets released into the wild.
So, it was like it was an unbburdening
for myself, right? Wasn't expecting
apologies from anybody. I wasn't
expecting a make good. I wasn't
expecting
any Harry Potter magic spell to do
control- z undo on these experiences.
I just I was exhausted by carrying the
weight of that secret around.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And
furthermore, I had had this um very
skilled therapist tell me at one point
um and maybe she just didn't realize
that this would stick. I guess we very
seldom realize these little things we
might say that actually can make a big
difference to people. She said, "Take
take them take the pain and make it part
of your medicine."
And
by taking my own experience
and turning it into something hopefully
that would help people, it gave it some
redemption. It gave it some meaning. Am
I glad it happened? No. Right. When
people say it's like, "Well, it made me
who I am." [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that. Like if I could
remove that, I would remove it for sure.
The amount of damage that's done is
unbelievable.
And it certainly contributed to the near
suicide in retrospect, right? I thought
I had 17 different problems, but when
you look back hindsight 2020, it's like,
oh yeah, all that stuff makes sense. It
was one like it was like hardware like
genetics plus trauma. Like is that
&gt;&gt; Did you learn that through psychedelics?
That's part I I would say it's one of
the tools that made it very clear where
I was able to see how these seemingly
disconnected pieces of puzzle fit
together perfectly.
And
um
psychedelics are are are fascinating for
a lot of reasons. Um, I've stepped
outside of the public discussion of
psychedelics largely in the last few
years because, um, I've just been
disgusted by all the infighting and
humans being humans. Like there's
humans just cannot resist
soiling the nest, peeing in the pool,
choose your metaphor. It's like all of
the infighting and nonsense and politics
and power grabbing that you see in any
group of humans, you also see within the
psychedelic ecosystem, right? So, anyone
anyone who thinks you just need to put
LSD in the water supply and we're going
to have world peace, like I'm like, you
should go to a psychedelic go to a
psychedelic go to a psychedelic
conference and see all the assholeery
&gt;&gt; and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of foot and trust me, I can
assure you that that will not work. Um,
and at the same time, I mean, some of
the most beautiful, wonderful,
inexplicable, and also painful
experiences I've ever had have involved
psychedelics.
And uh, you do need to be very, very
careful with them. I I really feel like
as uh, one of my good friends who passed
away due to cancer, but Roland Griffiths
of John's Hopkins, he's he said in
effect like you're using
psychological nuclear power
It's like it doesn't just bend one way,
right? Like it's inducing a level of
plasticity and suggestability and
malleability,
but how you shape that Play-Doh once
it's heated up matters a lot. So, you
can't just dose and run.
&gt;&gt; It's like the experience does matter.
Experience itself does matter. But the
way I encourage people to think about it
is number one, like treat it as if you
were going in to have brain surgery.
You're not going to find a shaman on
Facebook for your brain surgery. So if
your friend's like, "Bro, yeah, I got an
awesome shaman who's coming in and like
come sit this weekend." And it's like
three days till the weekend. Like you
would never do that if you were having
your skull opened up. don't do it in my
opinion without a lot of prep and
consideration.
&gt;&gt; So you have a very healthy respect. I
have a very healthy respect because
uh and this isn't scaremongering. It's
just a fact of the matter. There's a lot
of surv survivorship bias in the sense
that in in
you tend to especially up until a few
years ago, you hear about all the
amazing transformations.
The people who get their psyche
shattered and who have some type of
persistent perceptual disorder,
they're not necessarily showcasing that.
They're not sharing it. They might be
ashamed. They might get criticized by
friends who are proilitizers for
psychedelics who take their difficult
experience as a risk to the quote
unquote movement. Right? There's there
are a lot of forces at work and dynamics
at play that make it challenging for
people who have hard experiences to get
the help they need. But as someone who
I mean I had a podcast in 2015 about
Ibgain and Ibane in Mexico specifically
and
I've been around these things certainly
not as long as many like there are
facilitators who have tens of thousands
of sessions under their belts over 40 50
years. I mean these people know
infinitely more than I do. And certainly
ind indigenous practitioners are coming
through practices handed down from
generation to generation for hundreds of
thousands of years. We haven't even
begin to not beginning to scratch the
surface there. But I've had enough time,
I would say, as someone who's taken it
very seriously and
effectively had researching and
experiencing and experimenting around
psychedelics as my unpaid full-time job
for 10 years to say that once I had a
platform,
the number of emails that come over the
transom from people who have been
destabilized is not trivial, right?
&gt;&gt; No [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's not trivial. And you can you
can
you can mitigate some of the risks.
There are better or I should say safer
and less safe ways of approaching
different psychedelics. And it depends
on the compound, right? Like a
psychedelic is not a psychedelic is not
a psychedelic.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Like these are as different
as completely separate classes of drugs
in some cases in my opinions and even at
different doses they behave very
differently.
So it's like 10 micrograms of LSD is
very different than 200 micrograms of
LSD as an example. But I I would just
say that take it seriously, right? And
if you're going to consider these tools,
the way I put it with folks because a
lot of friends come to me to discuss
this is I say you should look at this as
like you're having the neurosurgery
example is a good one, but let's use
perhaps a better comparison in some
respects, which is you're about to have
both knees or both hips replaced.
Okay? So, you're going to do a lot of
homework on who's going to do that
surgery, and you're going to understand
all the risks involved. You're going to
understand the durability, right? You
might need to get those hips replaced
later again.
And what are you going to do? You're
going to do a lot of rehab.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; It's like the surgery is the catalyst,
but it's like if if you have both knees
replaced and you don't do any rehab,
that could have a worse outcome than not
having surgery in the first place. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So what you do afterwards really matters
and there's a lot of uh I think
compelling research and a number of
theories around this that I think
I think are very credible from say Gul
Dolan who is a researcher who I believe
now is at UC Berkeley used to be at
Hopkins who looked at MDMA extensively
among octopuses also
&gt;&gt; and how octopuses and how octopuses
would which are very asocial or
antisocial most of the time. But how
even with a completely different nervous
system, how they would dis display
pro-social behavior just like humans on
MDMA.
&gt;&gt; Oh,
&gt;&gt; really fascinating stuff.
&gt;&gt; But what she is also looking at now is
how you might use psychedelics to and I
might be getting some of the details
wrong, but I'm not that far off to say
help stroke patients to redevelop motor
control.
Is there an application there? And
the reason that she's looking at
potential applications like that is that
she believes certain psychedelics open a
a reopen a critical period or a critical
window. Much like if kids don't learn to
say speak a language within a certain
age range, right? It's much later to do
later. There's a there's a critical
developmental window for certain things.
Can you reopen those windows using
psychedelics? And it seems like the
answer is yes. In which case, all of the
advice that the old-timers have been
giving about integrations for people who
might be familiar with iawaska in a
traditional context, the diets
afterwards, abstaining from certain
things
for a few weeks. What does that sound a
lot like? sounds a lot like what science
is only beginning to scratch the surface
of which is the reopening of these these
critical periods or critical windows
within which you can start to rewrite
behaviors
like before the concrete sets. So, I'm
very, I would say,
mind blown and impressed with what these
compounds can do
as part of a larger context of some type
of therapy. There are a lot of different
approaches to this. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um, and the westernized version of like
neo shamanic practices is very different
from what they actually do in whether it
be the Amazon or Africa or fill in the
blank, right? Like the practices are
very different or the Metexs in Mexico,
etc. So, I would say I'm very impressed
and I'm also very conservative. And the
vast majority of people who come to me
and they're like, "Yeah, yeah, I really
want to do psychedelics." I talk them
out of it, not into it
&gt;&gt; really.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The vast majority I talk out of
it. Um,
which is not to say I think the the
risks outweigh the benefits, but there
there are certain people if you have
family history of schizophrenia or
borderline personality disorder, I do
not recommend using these things, which
is another reason why I'm so excited
about the different types of brain
stimulation or vag nerve stimulation
because or this is another one actually
that I'll throw out there, metabolic
psychiatry using diet, the ketogenic
diet specifically. There's a associate
professor I think he's still an
associate professor at Harvard named
Chris Palmer
who has looked at this very extensively
for certain let's call it people aren't
going to like this some folks but
chaotic
psychiatric disorders so let's just say
there's a river and you can swim in the
middle that's like complete normaly
that's pretty much no one and then on
one side you have hyper rigidity let's
just say which is like OCD
depression chronic anxiety anorexos
which are all characterized in a sense
by a certain looping and rigidity.
Uh which is part of the reason why I
think psychedelics are mysteriously
effective for this constellation of
seemingly different diagnosis, right?
They're on this rigidity side. I think
classical psychedelics can be very very
helpful for that side of things. Then on
the other side of the river, you've got,
let's just call it, a more chaotic
constellation of disorders, which would
include schizophrenia, borderline
personality disorder.
On that side of the river, it would seem
that something like metabolic psychiatry
is very, very interesting. You see
people who have been on dozens of
medications and they're on the ketogenic
diet for four weeks and then they get
off of all of their medications.
&gt;&gt; Are you serious?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it is shocking. Shocking. So like
the three let's just call it current it
could get replaced but pillars of the
mental health like technology stool for
me that are most interesting
ketones and metabolic psychiatry
brain stimulation or bioelectric
medicine more broadly bioelectric
medicine and then psychedelic assisted
therapies but I'm tool agnostic like
psychedelics at the time were most
interesting most compelling because of
some of the effects that you were seeing
and the durability, right, with PTSD,
with major depressive disorder, with
alcoholism through like NYU addiction,
which by the way is not new. We were
doing this research with LSD in like the
50s.
&gt;&gt; Were we really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. 50s and 60s. And then once Nixon
signed it off into prohibition era, that
all went away.
&gt;&gt; And there were a lot of political
motivations behind that. It was not
there was there was not a scientific
reason for that. was more politically
motivated. But um the point being that
I'm very excited about what the future
holds for psychedelic assisted
therapies. Um but I've been most
interested in the science once it turns
into like policy and politicking and
grandstanding and befriending the right
special interest groups.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's not I have zero patience for that
stuff. I just can't I have a lot of
trouble with it. So I prefer to just
deal with the scientists
and the practitioners. Like I've been
very heavily involved with uh groups
like the uh Amazon conservation team and
looking at indigenous land rights and
really trying to the extent possible to
support and reciprocate these groups who
effectively gave the world these things
that are now being medicalized. Right. I
I do think that's important. Do think
that's really important. Um especially
since some of these folks operate in
such hostile territories. I mean you've
got like illegal mining interests,
you've got uh logging, agriculture,
narcos, like you know these folks are
routinely assassinated indigenous
leaders all over the place. You look at
Brazil, you have Colombia, Mexico, it's
it's a it's a very very tough world that
they inhabit in a lot of ways.
&gt;&gt; What got you interested in psychedelics
to begin with? I've always been
interested in altered states of
consciousness ever since I was a little
kid
&gt;&gt; and
I don't know exactly where that comes
from. Uh I think it was just suspecting
that there was on some level I think
researchers like Donald Hoffman, he's a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Bronco he could have on. But I
there was always part of me that kind of
suspected that this was what we're
looking at here and experiencing like a
a user interface. It's like a desktop on
a computer where it's like, okay, we
have these icons and so on that
represent something, but that this is
just a one interface, right? If we were
a mantis shrimp or a different animal,
like it wouldn't look or feel like this,
&gt;&gt; right? So this is a reality but it's not
the end all be all objective reality. I
always just had that feeling. Uh and
you can explore that f through through a
purely scientific
physicalist lens, right? You don't have
to get out there. You you don't have to
be running around the full moon swinging
a dead cat over your head with a hawk
wing, right? like you don't have to get
into pure woo territory to qu to ask
some questions about things. Uh, and
then I would say later,
uh, I was always interested in mythology
and my my mom got me this crazy book. I
think it was on the remainder table
called a lyanthropy reader. And a
lyanthropy reader was a historical
collection of essays on
the mythology and belief of
shapeshifting,
which you see in pretty much every
culture, right? whether it's like
North American plains Indians or Siberia
or wherever right and there were
chapters in there about uh the use of
different plants so Mandre Belelladana
Henbane etc by quote unquote witches or
werewolves right who would basically go
on these incredible psychotropic
journeys and then come back with stories
of shape shift
which are still very common in the
Amazon by the way, these this belief and
these um these types of stories.
Uh I mean they would they might call
them skills or powers, right? I mean
dieting certain plants is intended to
help you with some of this stuff. So
that opened the door to me asking like
okay let's just assume for the time
being that people cannot turn into
animals but like
the idea that you could ingest a plant
or put on a salve that would so
fundamentally change your consciousness
that you would come back with complete
belief that you had done it was also
interesting to me.
&gt;&gt; Right. So I then became this sort of
intrepid,
very amateur
biochemist looking at how that might
happen, right? And so you combine that
then with the fear of Alzheimer's in my
family and it just led me to really want
to focus on brain function and
a few things happened around the same
time. Towards the end of high school, I
read a book called Exploring the World
of Lucid Dreaming by Steven Leberge.
And
still to this day, I think it is one of
the most impressive books
I have found
uh for teaching a skill in a systematic
way. And it teaches you how to induce
lucidity in your dreams. And it's it's
nothing
mysterious. I shouldn't say that. It is
it is provable within the confines of a
laboratory
that you can cultivate the ability to
control your dreams and become conscious
in your dreams. And and the way they
demonstrate the way they demonstrated
this is like got an EEG
&gt;&gt; or other means of confirming that
someone is in a sleep state and you
devise in advance for instance eye
movement. Like when you're asleep what
happens? rapid eye movement, right? Your
eye movement still correlates to what
you're doing in a dream. So, you
determine a in advance a sequence
between experimenttor and subject where
it's like morse code basically. It's
like right, right, left, right, right,
left, right, right, left, and then when
the person's in the dream, they just
perform that eye sequence.
&gt;&gt; Are you kidding me?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So,
as I started really once I got accepted
to college, I was like, I can do
whatever I want now. like he's just he's
just basically wrestling. All I wanted
to do was compete and go to nationals
and do well and lucid dreaming. That was
it. And uh with within pretty short
order, I'd say within a month or so,
some people come to it very naturally.
Within a month or so, I could get to the
point where I was inducing lucidity like
once or twice a night. And
that is a
that is a bizarre experience when you
get to the point where you can actually
modify your dream at will or extend your
dream in certain ways. And at first I'm
going to tell everybody in advance what
you're going to do. You might protest,
but what everyone's going to do is
they're going to do two things. They're
going to fly as much as possible and
they're going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] as many people as
possible. Those are the two things
everyone's going to do. So then you'll
like you'll fly around and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
everybody for a while and then you can
and then and then you can start messing
around in some really peculiar ways. So
what I was doing at the time, one of my
favorite wrestlers, just a phenom, John
Smith from Oklahoma,
famous for lowle attacks. Never met the
guy, but I watched tons of video. So at
night in my dreams I would have
wrestling practice with John Smith
&gt;&gt; and it and it improved my wrestling in
real life.
&gt;&gt; Uh so there are some really unexpected
levers that you can pull and corners you
can explore just through lucid dreaming.
And it does take work. You have to train
up to it. You have to have a very
scheduled way to record dream content.
Like it it is a practice. But that also
kind of raised a lot of questions like
huh okay well if I learned something 10
years ago could I use lucid dreaming to
go back and pull those books off the
shelf? Is that possible?
Maybe. Uh and then I would say very
early college. So this would have been
actually no it was it was still in high
school in at the very end of high school
I had my first experiences with
psychedelics
with mushrooms first and LSD and after
that I was like oh
okay
I don't understand how my experience of
time
can be cut up into slices and rearranged
in the way that I just experienced it
last night
&gt;&gt; that is
that is
it it doesn't really fit with my
consensus experience of this reality. So
what does that mean? I have no idea. But
I'm interested in exploring what that
might mean. So when I went to Princeton,
I went to Princeton for a couple of
reasons or I applied to Princeton early
action which is like an exploding offer.
In retrospect, I think I would have been
much happier somewhere else. Princeton
was a very difficult, stiff environment
for me. But I went there because they
had one of the best East Asian studies
departments in the world. Really
phenomenal
uh Japanese, Chinese, Korean, etc.
They had a very very strong psychology
and neuroscience program. So like Danny
Conaman was there. Uh there was a guy
named Barry Jacobs who had done a bunch
of research with LSD
uh and did a lot of research also on the
serotonin system involving cats and
stuff because cats kind of sleep all the
time. I really wanted to work in his
lab. And then thirdly,
uh there was something at the time I was
very sad that it ended up getting wound
down maybe a year after I got there, but
there was something at Princeton called
the the the pair lab. P E Princeton
Engineering Anomalies Research
Laboratory where uh I think I could be
getting some of the details wrong, but
I'm pretty at one point they had
military funding or you know threeletter
acronym funding. They also had money I
want to say from like SRRI International
to use
sort of computational and quantitative
measures to study things like
telekinesis, remote viewing, etc. And
literally that had been started by I
want to say professor John J ahn I
believe it was and somebody should fact
check this but I'm getting pretty close
I think he was the former dean of the
engineering department or engineering
quadrangle and one of his post not
posttos but one of his grad students had
looked at human influence on random
number generators and he was like
really he was like he's like like if you
want to waste your time on this, it's
not going to help you with anything.
Like looks like a terrible idea to me.
And then when all the data came back, he
was like,
&gt;&gt; "Okay." And ultimately became so
interested that he spearheaded this
engineering anomalies research
laboratory.
And I wanted to know what the hell they
had figured out. I wanted to get a read
on what they felt like they had figured
out. And this is a I mean this is a
high-end
incredibly credible engineer, right?
This isn't some rando. This is someone
who was on the far side extreme skeptic
end of things who ended up then
spearheading this. You can still end up
with beliefs that you want confirmation
for. So again right the purpose of the
scientific method which is really a
framework for thinking is to pre is to
prevent you from fooling yourself right
um but all of those things came together
to answer your question and I was like
you know what I think that I think all
of these things if for the moment we
provisionally say that maybe some of
those phenomena have something to them
right in the anomalies research
laboratory Okay. Even if you exclude
that psychedelics, lucid dreaming,
certain types of like religious
experience that I'd read about, I was
like the I feel like there's a
possibility these are all touching like
the hem of the same garment.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And perhaps that's all internally
generated. Maybe it's like a temporal
lobe epilepsy kind of seizure. Like when
you look back at a lot of scripture,
it's like, hm, that sounds a lot like
seizure.
But does that invalidate it? I don't
know. Like some of the most creative
people we've ever known have also had
something very similar. So it's like,
all right, all of it meant like I want
to know what the hell is going on in
here,
&gt;&gt; if that is even possible.
&gt;&gt; How do you even study it?
&gt;&gt; It's like three pounds of fat sitting in
this skull. What do you even do to study
that? So, I mean, all of those things,
uh, I would say catalyzed it. Then
went went pretty hard in the paint with
all of that for a while and then, uh,
since I had no certainly no training, my
friends and I had no training in how to
structure psychedelic experiences. And I
had a terrifying experience of coming
out of a mushroom psychedelic experience
in the middle of the night because my
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] friends, so the three of us, had
wandered off on some like hike and I was
left alone in a house and I started
looping cuz I was on a very I'm sure we
weren't even measuring doses at the
time, but I'm sure it was in retrospect
I would say it was probably like six to
eight grams of dried sllosy mushrooms,
which is a lot for people who don't
know. And so I was looping, looping,
looping. Wandered over to my parents
house. My and my friends were like, "You
definitely didn't go over there." And
then the next day my mom's like, "Big
night, huh?" And I was like, "What do
you mean?" So that was already a
problem, right? I'm tripping my balls
off sitting on like the kitchen floor
with my parents. Like that's bad enough.
But when I was walking back to this
other house where I was staying with my
friends, uh, I came out of my trip in
pitch blackness, walking in the middle
of the road, and almost got hit by an
oncoming car. like the headlights coming
at me is what woke me up. And then I
like jumped out of the way and I was
like, "Okay,
we're done." And I stopped and the only
reason I got back into it, the interest
always persisted and the other things,
the lucid dreaming, the neuroscience,
the interest, all of that continued. But
I was like, psychedelics, that's
&gt;&gt; off piece. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh and then in 201
12, probably 2012, my girlfriend at the
time
went on retreat to Peru
and did three nights of IASA and came
back and was just a different person.
And I was like,
okay.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's interesting. And she said, you
really need to do this. And I was like,
I don't think so. And she said, "It's 20
years of therapy in two or three
nights."
And I was like, "Damn, you know me too
well. That's a pretty good pitch."
And I was like, "Okay." And I keep in
mind, this is before I unpacked all the
trauma stuff, but she was aware of it.
And I was just white knuckling with my
compartmentalization. I was like, "No,
I'm fine. I'm fine." And then just
basically around 2012 just like you know
the re-entry from outer space like the
front of the halls getting red hot and I
was like oh okay I'm at risk of blowing
apart here and two things simultaneously
happened. One a friend of mine very one
of the most successful photo extreme
photographers in the world said you need
to try some type of meditation. He's
like go pay someone and do
transcendental meditation. And I was
like, "Uh, really? I'm going to pay like
whatever it is, 500 bucks, 1,500 bucks
to have some guy give me a mantra and I
have to give him flowers. Are you
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] kidding me?" And he's like, "You
can afford it." I was just like, and
he's like, "Really?" He's like, "Look at
yourself." And I was like, "All right,
fine." So, I started doing TM, which was
actually an incredibly good investment,
and the money matters. Why? Because you
don't want to lose that money, and you
have the accountability, so you're
actually going to do it.
Secondly, I started thinking about a
re-entry into the playing field of
psychedelics. And I was like, "All
right, if I'm going to do it now that I
know how to read research properly and I
have access, I was living in the Bay
Area. I'm like, I am in the epicenter in
North America for exploring this type of
thing. I'm going to do it in a really
conservative stepbystep
buildup leading to but not committed to
potentially Iawaska. And so just thought
about how to structure it safely, you
know, interviewed for lack of a better
term, like was hiring for a job,
different facilitators, had people help
me with the vetting, got reference
checks. Like I, you know, I really went
over the top because that experience in
the middle of the street had rightfully
scared the hell out of me. Like I could
have very easily been hit by a car.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And it's like bad things do happen. Like
people jump out of windows. Like
&gt;&gt; I hate to say it, but like those things
do happen.
&gt;&gt; So I wanted as many safeguards as
possible. And so that was sort of
starting in let's call it
2011 2012 was the re-entry onto the
playing field.
&gt;&gt; Right on, man. Yeah, but being much more
much more methodical about the whole
thing.
&gt;&gt; Are you a Christian?
&gt;&gt; I I would I wouldn't identify as
anything from a organized religion. Um I
&gt;&gt; was asking you brought up scripture a
couple times.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Well, I mean I think scripture
I think doesn't matter if you're
religious or not. I think you should
read scripture. Um I think there are
different ways to approach it but uh I
mean if something is sort of the one of
the foundations of western civilization
it's like yeah maybe you should get
familiar with it right like if you
haven't read the constitution maybe you
should read the constitution too
&gt;&gt; it's like these are you know
constitution's a much shorter read so
maybe start there uh but uh
&gt;&gt; what do you think when what do you think
happens when we die
&gt;&gt; uh what do I think happens when we die I
I find it increasingly difficult to
believe that
we simply have a machine that gets
turned off. So
I think that's informed by some of the
experiences on psychedelics.
And I recognize I could take and I think
it's important if you have a strong
belief,
I think it's really important that you
try to attack that belief with the
strongest possible version of a critic's
arguments. Right? I really think that's
important. If you want to become a
better thinker and a better human, I
think that's important. So, I recognize
that I could also make a bunch of
arguments for why it should just be
lights out. Uh,
but if I'm looking at
some of the documentation around
near-death experiences, if I'm looking
at like the sort of
CCTV like view from above where people
are able to confirm things that
happened, where objects were placed,
what people said while they were
clinically dead. It's hard to explain
that with like hypoxia and
death rattle spasms in the brain and
erratic neuronal firing.
&gt;&gt; Seems pretty hard to explain and there's
enough of there there's enough in terms
of documented cases where at the very
least
it raises some interesting questions. So
what do I think happens when you die? I
I mean the the best placeholder that I
have is that consciousness is
fundamental just like matter. I'm not
even convinced time is fundamental, but
yeah, Carlo Realli, I think his name is
like there's there's some really
interesting writing from physicists on
time. Like it's it's not as static
uniform constant as as one might like to
think. But if consciousness on some
level is fundamental kind of Max Plank
style, then I think when you die, it's
like a drop return to the ocean.
&gt;&gt; You think what? I think that your
consciousness is like what we experience
as sort of a skin encapsulated ego that
we associate with our self and all of
that can dissolve and go away on
psychedelics,
&gt;&gt; right? And you become you have the
experience of something you might call
consciousness without
&gt;&gt; collective consciousness. Is that what
you're saying?
&gt;&gt; What was that?
&gt;&gt; A some type of a collective
consciousness.
&gt;&gt; Something like that. Yeah. Where it's
like Yeah. Okay. You're a drop of water
and you just get returned to the ocean.
What does that subjectively mean? No
idea, right? I mean, what's it like?
What's it like a few months before
you're born? Like, I don't know.
&gt;&gt; I don't know, right? What is that like?
Not the slightest clue, but you know,
I've had conversations with people like
the incredible biologist, also computer
scientist,
and you talked to this guy, Michael Lean
out of Tufts,
who is on the cutting edge of of more
things than I can even list off at this
point. But if you're looking at the
development of a human from embryo, I
know I'm getting seemingly a little off
off track, but I don't think so. like
the the development of consciousness
which we kind of need to define but
let's just let's just think of it as
having an identity of me an I that is
separate from the outside and maybe
you're aware that you're aware right
which might distinguish humans from
other species in some way okay well when
does that happen right is there just a
point in the process where it's like
Frankenstein
galvanizing it's like lights on and
suddenly or is it does it actually exist
at a at a cellular or subcellular level
and it just scales up to what we
experience kind of like a beehive.
I tend to lean towards the ladder,
right? And I think Michael Leven would
lean towards the ladder like very good
scientists. These aren't people running
around at Elin with tinfoil hats on. I
love Elsen, by the way. No smack to I've
been there before. But it's like these
are people who have some of the most
analytical, critically minded
brains in the scientific field.
&gt;&gt; Um, and these are these are open
questions. So,
uh,
what do you think happens when you die?
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, I'm a Christian, so I
think you die and you either go up or
down.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um, but
&gt;&gt; but I don't know. I mean, when I did
psychedelics, I did I mean, I was uh I
don't know if I would say I was an
atheist. I wasn't an atheist.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I I believed in something. I just wasn't
sure. Actually, I I don't know. I don't
even know how to explain. I didn't I
didn't think about it. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know, and um I didn't think about it
until I did IEN
&gt;&gt; and 5 DMT.
&gt;&gt; Climb the Mount Everest of psychedelics.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then um
&gt;&gt; I want to go skiing. Okay, I'll do
without oxygen down Everest. Let's go.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then and then we did, you
know, 5 MEO after that, which is a death
experience. And um it did made me
realize, oh, there's definitely
something after all of this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And uh and so
that's where I landed.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so I I would say I was for a
period of time like a for lack of a
better descriptor like a militant
atheist. Um one of my friends I was not
raised religious. The school I went to,
the private school was uh Episcopal, so
nominally Christian, had chapel every
morning outside of one or two days, but
that was really for like roll call and
announcements. And you could go to
religious service, and I would
occasionally actually go to religious
service.
&gt;&gt; Uh,
but
a friend of mine a few years out of
college was getting divorced and he
joined a church that was very, very,
very extreme. And for I would say a
weaponized version of religion like very
extreme.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I was incredibly worried for him.
But he was very very very is very very
very smart.
&gt;&gt; And so he had done all this reading. He
had kind of prepared himself for every
possible counterargument. And I was like
well I got to stock up on some materials
here. So I bought all these books and
like Burch and Russell and this this and
this and we would have these long
debates and I'm trying to kind of
prevent him from being weaponized in
this church cuz he was like the air
apparent like got a really smart guy,
very intense, super aggressive in
everything he did. And I was very
concerned but ultimately realized that
at that point in time he he had no
safety net. He was going through this
horrible divorce. His life was falling
apart. His family was having all these
problems. U meaning his family of of
origin.
And I was like, I think if if this gets
taken away, I'm not even convinced I can
take it away, but if I were to be able
to take it away, then what?
And I was like, I'm not willing to I
would rather him roll the dice with this
particular church than have on my
conscience that he killed himself or
&gt;&gt; something horrible happened.
&gt;&gt; But from that point forward, I had this
really bad taste in my mouth. And so I
had really strong conviction around
&gt;&gt; not necessarily atheism, but like hyper
skepticism, which I think I still have
and it served me well. But
after
some of these psychedelic experiences
and also just frankly after spending
time with some of these indigenous
groups with the recognition that like
some of these groups also use what we
might consider like stage magic, right?
Like there are performances that a
mentalist or someone could potentially
try to replicate, right? Just like
someone can mimic remote viewing, right?
Like there are people who have done
this. There's a great documentary called
Honest Liar that people should watch. U
but
I've just seen too many things now and
experienced too many things. Not
entirely on drugs, dead sober a lot of
time where I'm like there's just more to
the story and we've never known the
whole story. Like there's we are very
very very early
&gt;&gt; in neuroscience and psychiatry, right?
Like it's like surgery 500 years ago.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; I mean the reason I was the reason I had
asked you that is I was I was going to
follow that up with you know what do you
think?
Are you
are you solely into the science of
psychedelics or is there potentially
some type of spiritual component?
&gt;&gt; Oh there's a huge spiritual component. I
just don't usually talk about it because
I've got so much I want to do on the
scientific and policy side that if I
sort of show my full hand, then people
are going to be like, "Oh, that guy's a
wackadoodle."
So, I haven't I don't usually talk about
the the stuff that I can't really defend
with like randomized control trials. I
don't talk too much about typically, but
there's a huge spiritual component.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I don't love that word spiritual, but I
don't know a better replacement.
&gt;&gt; I don't know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know a better replacement,
but
I think that if what you're looking for
is relief from something like
depression, OCD,
GAD, generalized anxiety disorder, I
think the brain stimulation is
incredibly compelling and that the
effects with a successful treatment and
there are some really there are some new
approaches to that which make it really
interesting like single day stimulation
a few minutes per hour for 10 hours
straight predosing with a drug called
descloeran. That's it. Like that's the
treatment one day. Um and you might have
durability for 3 to 12 months. Like
anxiety from 10 to one.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Wow.
&gt;&gt; Like they're not I can't say that for I
can't say that reliably for any
psychedelic.
Um, so if you're looking for relief from
those symptoms
functioning in in this world,
I think there are a lot of tools in the
toolkit, which is good news, right?
Metabolic psychiatry would be another
example.
If you're looking to
tangibly
touch something that feels timeless,
whatever that is, right? even if it's
just a hallucination.
But if you're looking to touch something
timeless and lose your fear of death,
I think a lot of human suffering is
wrapped around
being, as far as we know, the only
species that is aware of its own pending
death, right?
I don't think you get there through
brain stimulation. Uh I do think you can
get there through psychedelics.
Um but we start getting into
&gt;&gt; Are you saying take away fear of death?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Do you fear death?
&gt;&gt; No. I fear certain declines to death.
But actual death, no. I do not. Do I
fear something like neurodeenerative
disease? Yes, I do. But death, like,
nah. I mean, I I think that
you can get more out of life if you
assume that you were going to die around
the age of your grandparents,
great-grandparents, great great
grandparents. And if I look back at my
family, 85 for men,
&gt;&gt; more or less, right? It's like, okay,
great. We have antibiotics. Cool. In
mortality way down, great.
But there's not a whole lot we've found
that really extends life a lot. We could
talk about some things I find
interesting like sure rapamy might be
interesting for people who have
metabolic dysfunction and don't exercise
much. Metformin may be interesting.
Intermittent fasting and so on. Sure.
Okay. I think there might be benefits,
but they're all question marks in
humans.
And
if you just assume you're going to die
at 85, I think you make more potentially
make better use of your time. Then if
you're pleasantly surprised, great.
Scientists come up with some like
injectable cloth or gene therapy related
to cloth, which is a really interesting
protein. Fantastic. All right, great.
You can avail yourself of that when it
comes out. But until then,
read on the shortness of life by Senica
and it's like make every minute count
cuz uh I think you can do a lot to
extend your health span like how long
you can function at a high level and I
think certainly you have a copy of
Outlive by Peter on your shelf. I would
recommend people check that out. Oh
yeah,
&gt;&gt; Peter is
&gt;&gt; he is a he is a credible
&gt;&gt; former scientist and physician who
really pays attention to the details and
does not sell hype. If anything, he
undersells certain things which I
appreciate. So I do think there there
are ways and Peter's a better resource
for that, but he's also my doctor. So
&gt;&gt; nice. Um we I've known him since 2008.
Uh so yeah, make the most of your time,
but like when your clock is up, your
clock just might be up.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, Tim, let's take a quick break.
When we come back, I'd like to dive into
uh conception of time.
&gt;&gt; Let's do it. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Perfect.
&gt;&gt; Listen up. 2026 is the year you finally
launch that business you've been
dreaming about. Don't let February
arrive with the same old story. Taking
action is the key. Let this be the year
you become an entrepreneur or founder.
One move puts your future in your hands.
Starting a business with Shopify. Maybe
it's an idea you can't shake. A craft
everyone tells you to sell or a store
you've already designed in your head.
With Shopify, 2026 is when you make it
real. Shopify gives you everything you
need to sell online and in person.
Millions of entrepreneurs have made this
leap. Take me as an example. I started
using Shopify to sell gummy bears and
now I run my entire e-commerce business
on the platform. And you can too. You
get the tools to easily build your dream
store, customize a beautiful template,
launch quickly, and use Shopify's
built-in AI to write product
descriptions and headlines. As you grow,
Shopify grows with you. More orders, new
markets, all from one dashboard. In
2026, stop waiting and start selling
with Shopify. Sign up for your $1 per
month trial and start selling today at
shopify.com/srs.
Go to shopify.com/srs.
That's shopify.com/srs.
Here your first this new year with
Shopify by your side.
Want more from the Shaun Ryan Show? Join
our Patreon today for more clips and
exclusive content. You'll get an
exclusive look behind the scenes where
you can watch the guests interact with
the team and explore the studio before
every episode, plus unlock bonus content
like our extra intel segments where we
ask our guests additional questions, our
new SRS on-site specials, and access to
an entire tactical training library you
will not find anywhere else. And the
best part, Patreon members can ask our
guests questions directly. Your insights
can help shape the show. Join us on
Patreon now. Support the mission and
become part of the Shaun Ryan Show's
story.
All right, Tim, we're back from the
break.
Getting ready to move into perception of
time. We were having a a mini
conversation about I think I cut you off
at breakfast cuz I was like, "Oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
we got to talk about this on." So, I
mean it is it's a fast it's a I mean I
think about it all the time. A lot of
the things that we've discussed already
today I've been thinking about a lot. Uh
especially the slowing down thing
&gt;&gt; or not the slowing down thing, the the
simplification, pretending that you're
in poverty and then realizing, oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; I can survive.
&gt;&gt; This is nice.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's nice not having [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to do. It's
nice not having an agenda. It's nice not
being in the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] grind all the time.
&gt;&gt; Yep. And uh but it's interesting. As
nice as it is, we for some reason refuse
to pull ourselves out of it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I think that um
most of us, if we're attempting to have
healthy social fabric, live within the
context of a society or a culture, and
there are certain norms, there are
certain expectations, there's certain
rewards,
&gt;&gt; and
it's very difficult. and also probably
undesirable to operate completely
monastically outside of all of that. But
what that means is at every turn, every
moment, you will have temptation to do
something that is probably not serving
your long-term interest.
&gt;&gt; You know, I mean, you're you are 100%
agree with that. You're a welltraveled
guy.
&gt;&gt; I'm a welltraveled guy. I am very
curious.
Let's say there's a happiness scale.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Where does the US lie compared to a
lot of the other places that you've
been?
&gt;&gt; And then I'll share my
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I would say
in the last I'll back up and just say in
the last
10 years in particular, I've been
exploring a lot of the US. It is a huge
country with so much diversity and I
don't don't mean diversity in the DEI
sense. I mean diversity in the cultural
sense where if we take culture to be a
shared set of beliefs and behavior. It's
like going to Louisiana versus going to
Upper Peninsula Michigan versus going to
Maine.
They might as well be different
countries. Sure, we ostensibly have the
same language, but they're really really
different. So I think the
the default baseline of happiness that I
observe
throughout the US varies quite a lot. Um
but I would say if we're looking at
countries I don't know if I'm going to
get myself into hot water with some
folks but this is just what I've
observed. I would say that
where you have rich social fabric and
human interactions
combined with some sense of safety.
There are different types of safety you
could have. That could be physical
safety. That could be a social net of
some type with healthcare as would be
the case say in a Denmark for instance.
Those things combined
which offer a certain level of
predictability. Not predictability
across the board but
I'm not sure how heavily to weight
various polls
and happiness reports but you might have
say for instance a few years ago you had
Singapore which is fascinating little
country right a little postage stamp but
like from swamp to what it's become is
fascinating. So, Kwan Yu and so on.
Nonetheless, like highly structured,
quite strict, predictable, but
purportedly a high level of
self-reported happiness. Okay. Then you
take that and you compare it to say a
Denmark
and you could point out a lot of
differences.
But if you talk to Danes about why they
might rank highly on these happiness
report cards, you'll get some serious
responses uh mostly around like the
social safety net. frankly specifically
as it relates to healthcare I would say
and physical safety so they don't have
to worry about their kids running around
outside etc. Uh, I did have one friend
because you might guess from the size of
my head, I've got some Scandinavian
jeans. So, one of my Danish friends
who's like I said, "Why are you guys so
happy on these reports?" And he goes,
"Low expectations."
&gt;&gt; So, now I think there's actually
something deeply profound about that in
a way. If happiness,
&gt;&gt; low expectations. Well, if happiness is
if happiness is, and I'm not the first
person to come up with this, but reality
minus expectations, it's like, well, you
can work on both of those, right?
&gt;&gt; What do you expect? What do you feel
entitled to versus your reality? And you
can you can work on either side if that
is in fact.
&gt;&gt; Do you think entitlement is the same as
high expect? I mean,
&gt;&gt; they're not the same. They're not the
same. Okay.
&gt;&gt; I would say that entitlement is a ex a
perverted type of high expectations
in excess. Uh so there's
there kind of different windows through
which you can look at high expectations.
I have high expectations. Look, if like
someone's working on my team, if I'm
working with someone, if I'm in a
relationship, like I have high
expectations of myself and I have high
expectations of pretty much everyone
around me.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
uh in terms of let's just call it in the
professional context like certain core
tenants commitment to excellence
shipping and meeting deadlines right
certain things that are non-negotiable
uh when you feel like you should have a
b and c I deserve e and f I think that's
where you get into murkier waters
&gt;&gt; uh but uh then if you look at like at
Costa Rica right which was also in the
report that I looked at top
What do they have? Very rich social
environments, right? Whether it's
extended family or walkable
neighborhoods, etc. You can find a lot
of these things in the US, maybe minus
the healthcare piece, but you can find a
lot of those elements in the US. So, the
way you might
interact with people in say Indiana or
Boulder is very different from how
you're going to interact with people on
like the Upper East Side, right? I
wouldn't say the happiness seems very
high on the free side. Would not say
that. Um so what's your what's been your
experience
&gt;&gt; with with happiness and travel in the
world?
&gt;&gt; Happiness in other places. I mean some
of the happiest people I've ever met
have been two come to mind. Um
Ethiopians in the in the Tigra area
which is like I don't think you can even
travel there right now. Dirt poor in
villages and Shangan people in South
Africa also. I mean not quite as
destitute but very rough situation
displaced people. Um
&gt;&gt; I would say and this is just my
perception you know what I mean? So
&gt;&gt; um
minus the war torn countries that I've
been to. I've been to a lot of third
world you know countries and extreme
poverty.
And I really I have to say that I I
think that the countries in poverty seem
to be more happy
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; than we are here at the US who have
literally every [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing we can
think of at the
&gt;&gt; Yeah. our fingertips.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, if I'm going to armchair
quarterback this, which why not since
I'm sitting in an armchair, uh I would
say I think that having
everything is part of
the recipe
for dissatisfaction, right? You start
fearing having those things taken away.
I do think your level of entitlement
goes up. And there's a great book by
Sebastian Younger called Tribe. I really
recommend everyone read this. I mean,
Sebastian has been through some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; That's about That's about That's about
PTSD. And he wrote a book on PTSD. I
don't know if it's called Tribe. I I
know who this is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, Tribe. Sebastian Younger.
&gt;&gt; It's about veterans, I believe.
&gt;&gt; Uh it includes a lot of discussion of
veterans. U tribe really talks about
social cohesion. But if you look at for
instance I think the example there there
are a number of examples he gave but
looking at World War II bombing in the
UK and how di admittances to hospitals
now there number of different ways you
could explain this but effectively the
incidence of mental illness suicide etc
all seem to plummet while the city's
being bombed. What's going on there? And
you see a similar pattern in other
places. Well, I think that when you have
seemingly everything,
you by default almost necessarily
can easily end up majoring in minor
things, right? Because you don't have
any major problem to deal with. But
humans love having problems and solving
problems, right? In order to solve
problems, you have to have problems. So,
I think humans are problem solving
machines. But the the dark side of that
is you can become a problem seeking
machine, problem creating machine. So
these small things take on the
proportion of something big, right? It's
kind of like I'm sure a lot of people
had the experience where it's just like
there's there's some old cat lady in the
neighborhood who's part of the HOA and
man is she just a pain in the balls.
Like she's just like every okay so and
so didn't put out the recycling bin. So
and so didn't whatever. It's because she
doesn't have anything else to do that is
bigger, right? that is kind of forcing
her hand. So if you're really way up on
Maslo's hierarchy of needs, I think it's
easy to become more sensitive to slight
turbulence in life, which is also part
of the reason for practicing not just
minimalism, not just necessarily
poverty, but like subjecting yourself to
shared privation, right? Like like the
things I do with friends are definitely
type two fun, maybe type three fun,
right? It's like, sure, okay, we might
do like a ski touring trip.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's mostly suffering. It's It's like,
yeah, you're going to spend an hour and
a half going up the hill for six turns
down. Like, if you just want to ski,
that's a terrible way to do it. Uh, but
you get through that experience. You're
stuck in a snowstorm. It's white out.
I'm not, by the way, suggesting that
everyone do this. There are there are
scaled down versions of it, but
&gt;&gt; it creates a bond.
&gt;&gt; It creates a bond. It creates a bond
because you have overcome some type of
adversity.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So in a world or in a an
environment that doesn't offer you those
things. And by the way, there are lots
of reasons why you would want a more
comfortable experience. I'm not saying
go move to Sierra Leone, right?
So, I'm incredibly grateful for just the
number of of miracles effectively that
ended up with me being born here, having
opportunities, etc. Right? Hugely beyond
grateful. I do not take it for granted.
And I do think that in the absence of
real environmental stressors, we are
built to overcome and adapt to stress.
And there's a book called The Comfort
Crisis, I believe, that that really
delves into this, but it's like there is
a great argument to be made for
engineering certain stress into your
life, including physical stress. Um, and
&gt;&gt; I think veterans are uh amazing at that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I'm amazing at that. So
&gt;&gt; yeah, I should say also,
I mean, you know, obviously
multitudes more veterans than I do, but
a couple of my best friends are vets.
And I think that
if you don't very explicitly,
consciously engineer
suffering,
it sounds strange to put it that way,
but it really is like adversity,
suffering, stress into your life.
There is, I think, an innate push to
manifest it subconsciously while while
it seeps through the edges. And that
might take the form of slowb burn
workcoholism, right? It might take the
form of certain types of self-sabotage.
It might take the form of blowups and
arguments with your wife. It might take
the form of fill in the blank. And
I have just found it so incredibly, and
I've seen this too in a lot of my
listeners and readers over decades, like
when you engineer in periods of stress,
some of those other things just resolve
themselves
uh in a in an unexpected way. It's not
always the case. I mean, you still need
to be able to talk to your wife, but uh
but it's like if you're a working dog,
like you need a job, right? Can't be a
border collie stuck behind a laptop all
day. You're going to go crazy, start
chewing on the couch.
&gt;&gt; Are you happy? I I feel like I am the
happiest. I We could definitely pull
apart that term and what it means, but I
would say I am the most at peace.
That's that's more my goal than
happiness, I would say. Uh, you're
reluctant to say that you're happy.
&gt;&gt; Well, I feel like I'm reluctant to say
happy because
I'm such a stickler. This could be the
OCD kicking in, but for terms, right?
When people are like, I just want to be
successful, I'm like, let's talk about
that.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Very carefully, right? When people get
into fights about God, I'm like, you
guys talking about the same thing? Like,
let's make sure we're talking about the
same thing. Uh, I am very happy right
now. I have great relationships. I have
you know taken care of people I care
about doing meaningful work very happy
but I think happiness comes and goes so
looking for a steady state of smiles I
think is a fool's errand because you're
going to be disappointed and if we come
back to the sort of let's say long-term
durable happiness is uh reality minus
expectations if my expectation is I'm
never going to have hard days I'm never
going have moments of self-loathing then
in the long term I think I'm
handicapping my peace of mind. Does that
make any sense? If for instance right I
can give a lot of examples of this. If
you're trying to learn a language which
I think I think people can become let's
just say native English speakers
conversationally fluent in a bunch of
languages in like 8 to 12 weeks if
they're really dedicated themselves.
There's no magic trick involved. Like
there's a very methodical way to do it.
&gt;&gt; I mean look at the Defense Language
Institute in Monterey. like the stuff
they can do is incredible
&gt;&gt; with language instruction.
&gt;&gt; They're very interested in bioelectric
medicine, too, by the way.
&gt;&gt; Uh potentially is an augment. But
if you're going to learn a language, if
you expect your progress to look like
this, right, weight training, same
thing. Doesn't skill acquisition, it's
going to be lumpy, right? You're going
to have predictable setbacks. It's like,
okay, you memorized 100 phrases,
fantastic. Or 100 words. man, you're
going to be making rocketlike progress.
But as soon as you start introducing a
little more complicated grammar, which
you need to do to make it for the long
game, you're going to feel like you're
getting worse, right?
&gt;&gt; Your ability to juggle those balls, is
going to take time for adaptation, and
you're going to get worse. Boom, boom,
boom, and then up and then down, and
then maybe there's more of a plateau.
And if you know these in advance, you
can kind of plan for them, right? in the
service of the long-term goal of being
fluent in the language. But if you have
a teacher who's trying to do the right
thing and they tell you everything's
going to be great, you know, just one
step in front of the other,
you know, slow and steady wins the race
and you expect it to be this linear
progression, you're going to get crushed
as soon as you suffer a setback.
&gt;&gt; And I feel like psychologically,
uh, this is where stoism is is such an
incredible arrow in the quiver. It's
just expecting people to be like Marcus
Aurelius meditations like effectively
like when you go out like expect people
to be insolent and rude. Expect people
to disappoint you. Expect A, B, and C.
And it's a there's a thin line between
that and just being
pessimistic or nihilistic, right?
&gt;&gt; But I think you're just talking about
drive,
personal drive.
&gt;&gt; There's Yeah. I mean, if if it was easy
and the incline was like this
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; said it a thousand times,
&gt;&gt; everybody would [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well,
&gt;&gt; then you hit a setback
&gt;&gt; and 75% of the people [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] quit.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know what I mean?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But the drive keeps the 25% going.
&gt;&gt; Totally. And I think that there's
there's just like baseline drive. It's
like, okay, what kind of engine do you
have? And then there's
how do you drive the car? And it's
almost like rally racing. Like I did a
little bit of training in rally racing,
which is incredibly dangerous, but also
&gt;&gt; No [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The whole team here is going to the
&gt;&gt; Where did you go to rally racing school?
&gt;&gt; I went to New Hampshire,
&gt;&gt; dude.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You went to O'Neal?
&gt;&gt; I went to O'Neal.
&gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] awesome. I went to O'Neal.
&gt;&gt; He's great. He's amazing. That school.
&gt;&gt; Hilarious. So, yeah. So, I went to
O'Neal, as you know. Pretty pretty risky
endeavor. What do you do? Okay. What
does that look like? Well, you have a
navigator in the case of your own life.
Like, you are both the driver and the
navigator.
And are you going to take a rally course
race at high speed without studying the
course? [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] no. You need to know if
it's like right three or right one,
right? Or you're going to hit a tree
because you need to plan for all of
these subtleties of the course in
advance. So, all I'm saying is there if
you have this drive, which is like the
base engine, right?
Some of some people I think are just
born with a huge engine, right? Like
they're born in a Ferrari.
Uh other people might be born in like a
Miata, but guess what? It's like I've
seen pro drivers in a Miata smoke people
in McLarens on a driving course.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Why? They know the course. They've
trained. They know
&gt;&gt; fundamentals.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And similarly like I don't think
in some ways I think I have certain
advantages but I do not have like a huge
psychological buffer. Some people have
incredible inbuilt I really think
psychological resilience like they have
a lot of margin of safety. I don't have
that right. I do not have the batteries
and infinite endurance of some serial
entrepreneurs I've seen or professional
athletes. Right. It's just like they
have different like Kobe Bryant or uh I
mean you could look Travis Kalanic Uber
or whatever like just like different
batteries. These guys are coming to the
table with a different engine. But you
can give yourself a competitive
advantage if you know the track. So for
me with anything it's like know the
track. What does that look like? What
does that mean? Well, kind of apply it
knows like it's identifying in advance
if you're learning anything, doing
anything, like where am I going to be
most likely to quit? What are the
failure points? Why do other people
quit? When do they quit? And then if you
know in advance, like, okay, it's very
likely 3 months into this that I'm going
to hit like a crisis of meaning and I'm
going to plateau and I'm going to be
tempted to quit. If you know that in
advance, when you hit it, your little
engine is enough to get you past that
plateau.
&gt;&gt; So, I just I think about that a lot,
right? It's like if people aren't
following, why do so many people quit
diets? Why do so many people make New
Year's resolutions and then by February
1, they're long gone. Smoke, exhaust in
the rearview mirror. It's like part of
it is they have these very optimistic,
well-intentioned visions of what they're
going to do where they go to the gym
three times a week. It never gets
interrupted. They don't they never take
need to make a phone call. They never
get into an argument about who's going
to watch the kids.
And
as a result they don't have any type of
safety net on that plan. Um so I would
say you know these are some of the ways
that uh that I think about it. I know
there's a lot there but
&gt;&gt; well I mean one thing you said about
happiness is um I think you said this I
know this high expectations can be a a
roadblock.
&gt;&gt; Yeah it's a double. You said you have
exceedingly high expectations.
&gt;&gt; So, I'm curious.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How did you overcome those high
expectations to find happiness?
&gt;&gt; Uh,
&gt;&gt; I struggle with this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I struggle with that.
&gt;&gt; I have extremely high expectations.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I've struggled with my whole
life. I think I have found certain
approaches and tools that have helped me
to use the double-edged sword without
holding the blade as a handle. Right.
And I expect, here's the other thing. I
expect this will always be a challenge.
So, I'm not going to beat the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out
of myself if I don't eradicate it like
polio once and forever, right? It's
like, right, it's like this is this is
part, I think, of my hard wiring. I
really do. This is not not to belabor
the dog.
&gt;&gt; You wouldn't be where you are without
high expectations, though, either.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. And you know, I I think
that I'm at a point also where it's like
the incremental dollar or whatever, the
incremental media mention is not worth
as much as the incremental
hour or even 15 minutes with someone I
deeply care about. And those are very
mastering. Sounds strange to say this,
but
becoming good at
those two sides of the track are very
different things. They require different
skill set. So for me, I would say the
first of all,
I think high expectations can be great.
I think it can be amazing. And um you
know, while I guess archaeologous way
back in the day, right, we do not rise
to the level of our hopes, we fall to
the level of our training. Like I think
that's a real thing. So hope alone is
not enough. Expectations alone is not
enough. But uh
I would say that for me
what realizing that what you do matters
a lot more than how you do any one thing
is critical. What do I mean by that? So
what you do versus how you do seems kind
of strange. In other words, you can get
really really good at high having high
expectations for things that don't
matter very much and being perfectionist
about little things,
&gt;&gt; but that doesn't really move the needle
for you or other people.
&gt;&gt; You can spend your whole life focusing
on little things. I think that's going
to become the default for mo most of
humankind in the next few years with AI.
Like the idea that we're all going to
have this incredible leisure class with
tons of free time, complete nonsense.
It's never happened with any technology.
&gt;&gt; It's gonna get worse. The parents are
coming out. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, so I would say that
&gt;&gt; there's a book called the 8020 principle
by Richard Kosh K.
Read that. It comes back to what I
mentioned earlier, which is you really
don't have to get a lot of things right
to have an amazing life. So, I used to
overoptimize. I would attempt to
optimize almost everything because I
felt like I had the bandwidth to do it.
Maybe I did, but that can make you an
insufferable son of a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Not just to
other people, but to yourself,
right?
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh because if you have
unreasonable, unhelpful expectations in
environments that you cannot control,
interpersonal relationships, your
girlfriend or wife or husband or
whatever, your kids,
um you're going to drive not only
yourself, but the people around you
completely insane. So,
you know, when I sat down here, you
might remember this. There was a little
piece of paper stuck in here from a
prior guest, the serenity prayer,
&gt;&gt; and I folded it up and I was like, "Oh,
I like the serenity prayer." And I put
it in my pocket.
&gt;&gt; Serenity prayer is stoicism,
right? Being able to, you know, separate
things you can control versus things you
can't control and then the wisdom
hopefully and experience to be able to
tell the difference. And
I've realized that being incredibly
forgiving while knowing your
non-negotiables upfront with
interpersonal relationships
is for me at least so far like the path
to intimacy and longevity and happiness
and peace. And then with other types of
compartment I shouldn't say
compartmentalized silos in my life.
Let's just say maybe it's writing a
book, having like unforgivably high
standards but with a deadline so that
I'm not allowed to procrastinate forever
because if I don't have a boss and I
don't
that perfectionism can turn into
permanent
&gt;&gt; meaning you're not shipping anything.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, uh, I still apply super high
standards for myself with certain
non-negotiables related to physical
training or to
building a cultivating and developing
conditioning a mental reserve, right? To
hopefully stave off things like
neurodeenerative disease. Those are all
non-negotiable. But with human
interactions, I think I have really
learned through [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it up over and
over and over again.
Uh, I mean, really, it's just like, God,
I look back at some of my past
girlfriends, I'm like, God bless you,
you saints. Like, God, I was such a pain
in the ass. And I was so convinced I was
right. So convinced I was right about so
much. And guess what? It doesn't matter.
Maybe I was right, but I really
encourage people to check out there's an
amazing therapist who is brutal, but
decades of experience and I don't agree
with him on everything, but Terry Real
is his name. He's got to be one of the
highest paid couples therapists in the
world. He has to be.
But he has a number of books. There's an
audio book. It doesn't even have a print
version called Fierce Intimacy that I
really recommend people listen to. So
they have a toolkit for communicating in
intimate relationships because I don't
think men and women were ever meant to
spend as much time together as they do
now.
&gt;&gt; That's a very unnatural situation. I
think
&gt;&gt; and as a result we need tools that we
did not historically need
&gt;&gt; and I think Terry is very good at
providing a toolkit for modern
relationships. But one of his tenets is
like there's no place for objective
reality in most relationship disputes.
And he gives this example of like
husband and wife go out to dinner.
Waiter comes over to take the order.
Waiter leaves and the husband's like,
"Honey, you don't have to yell." And
she's like, "What? I wasn't yelling."
And he's like, "No, you were yelling."
And then so it turns into one of these
things, right? It starts to spiral out
and now their date has turned into a
heated debate where people are getting
ramped up. And the point Terry makes is
he's like, "The husband could say like,
"Honey, I knew you were going to say
that." So actually I hired a team of
professional aiologists and recording
artists. They have miked our table and
everything around us and based on this
decibel level you were in fact yelling
like you think that's going to help
things.
&gt;&gt; I don't probably not.
&gt;&gt; I don't think so.
So once you I think
even as a test an experiment ask
yourself all right well if if objective
reality doesn't exist in most conflicts
and your only job especially as a male
is to try to understand your partner's
position I think men are particularly
pigheaded about this women can be pretty
bad too but I think men are much worse
and to really understand why they feel
the way they do. What if done
differently would have changed anything?
It's like, man, so many of the problems
just go away.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's kind of like meditating where it's
like, don't fix anything. Just like
actually don't try to fix anything. Just
sit there and develop more awareness and
they're like, oh, all these problems go
away. Oh, my friend's chronic pain went
away. What's going on? Who cares about
the mechanism? is like going from
problem solving, right, which is closely
related to problem seeking
to
understanding someone's inner experience
as opposed to trying to like validate
your objective reality
might sound a little squishy, but like
listen to Terry Real gives you a lot of
practical tools and language you can
use. That is a a huge part of life as
I've already talked about that I've I've
revamped my entire way I think about my
calendar, the entire way I commit time,
defend time, say no to things around
these most important life-giving energy
giving relationships.
And that means how you navigate those,
how you interact with people, how you
cultivate your EQ,
how you feel what someone is saying, not
just listen to what they're saying.
preparing to offer them some words of
condolence. Maybe that's not what they
need. Um, like bearing witness to that
person in a true felt sense is it's like
if my 20-year-old self could hear me
saying this, like would have vomited in
his mouth. But it's like at that time I
was a bull in a china shop. I was
leaving just a wake of collateral damage
in my relationships. Not because I was
abusive, like was not abusive. I saw
enough of that. Didn't want to, you
know, no thanks. But I wasn't available,
right? I was I was very very concerned
with being right.
And I think if you're instead, even in
the case of work, like dedicated to what
you put out in the world, but it's
someone else's idea or if you just want
if they need to believe it's their idea,
fine. Sure, why not? Could just be
getting older and softening around the
edges. I don't know. Not as much piss
and vinegar. talked about saying no to
certain things, but I want to go there,
too. But first, I'm about 45 minutes
ago, we were going to talk about uh the
perception of time, how fast it goes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, these are all tied together also.
&gt;&gt; Sounds like you've done a lot of
thinking about that. I've
&gt;&gt; done a lot of thinking, done a lot of
what I call it flight time
in different states, too, which can
stress test a lot of the subjective
experiences we have around time.
I would encourage it can be hard. You
can watch his TED not TED talks. You can
watch his YouTube videos and so on uh
before digesting videos, but Carlo Ralli
is a physicist. I believe he's most
focused on quantum gravity and he has
some really thoughtprovoking writing on
time. Uh I think one of his books is
called the order of things.
But
you realize pretty quickly that even
within the halls of
quantum physics and mathematics like t
time is not this straightforward thing,
right? Like a clock at your head runs at
a different speed than a clock at your
foot.
And
um
when you start to look at these
fundamental equations, I'd say maybe
especially quantum gravity, um time
becomes this very slippery thing, right?
Like it's kind of like money. Like money
is real in practice, but it's actually
an abstraction.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. Like you can use it, but it's
it's really an abstraction. If you think
about like the there's a book called the
the biography of a dollar about the
history of money, which is worth
reading. like it's a very useful
abstraction, but it's an it's an
abstraction.
And
so you can you can certainly just from a
secular scientific perspective from
credible sources like Carlo read enough
where you start to scratch your head and
you're like, okay, well, wait a second.
Okay,
does that mean that in certain
experiments like A comes before B, but B
also comes before A until they're
observed? like, okay, that's strange.
Um, and you is it possible that time is
actually more like a book? And sure,
we're on page 237, but like all the
pages are already there. We just happen
to be in the middle. Like, is that
actually something that
&gt;&gt; interesting
&gt;&gt; could be defensible? In which case,
let's just say, right? And again, I I'm
very careful with this stuff, but if
that were the case, then is something
like pre-cognition that crazy? Uh I
don't know. I don't know. Is it even
precognition or is it just cognition?
Uh and uh look, I I've I've spent a lot
of time around magicians and
illusionists and people who are
incredible at mentalism because I don't
want to fool myself, right? I want to
know if you wanted to fake this, how
would you do it? If you want to try to
replicate these phenomena and fool an
audience, how would you do it? Um, but
there's still like a flickering of a
sliver of some examples that are pretty
interesting along that raise more
questions than they answer. Same with
UAPs and stuff, right? Uh,
so, uh, you can really bring this down
to Earth, though. It's like, "All right,
sure. I could read about quantum
gravity, but what does that mean for
me?" It's like, "Well, we've all had the
experience of
a day that seems to last forever." Or
you go on a trip and you're like, "Wow,
did we really only get here 2 or 3 days
ago? Man, it feels like it's been 2
weeks." We've also had the experience of
saying, "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] where did 2025 go?"
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; My god. Like, did the frame rate change?
Like, what happened? It seems like that
was just a commercial break. It was
2024. There was a commercial break. And
now it's 2026. What happened?
And
you know, I was just in Silicon Valley
for a few weeks. Hadn't been back in
like 8 years. Uh, and just wanted to
kick around, check it out. It's having a
real renaissance at the moment because
of AI. Very exciting.
And have a lot of old friends there.
And
folks have probably seen this in the
news, but a lot of billionaires are
preoccupied with living forever. Right
now, rich people have always been
obsessed with living forever.
Uh, and some of them are funding very
interesting research, okay? But the goal
is extending biological lifespan.
So far, I think there are some things
that are interesting,
but certainly not definitive. Nothing is
conclusive yet in humans.
People have been trying to find the
founding youth for a long time and every
generation somebody seems to have the
answer. And so far they've all been
wrong. Right? But what if that example
that I mentioned where you experience
two or three days and it feels like two
or three weeks. What if you could
increase the number of experiences like
that? So, the way I've been thinking
about it is you have biological
lifespan. Uh, I'm very skeptical that
we're going to be able to extend that
meaningfully, at least before you and I
kick the bucket.
Very, very skeptical. So, all right.
Well, if I make it to 85,
sure, there are certain things I can do.
I'm not going to eat ho Hos all day.
Fine. U, but could I increase instead of
my biological age, what about increasing
my experiential age? Right? So, if
someone's preoccupied, they're anxious,
they're depressed, right? When they're
having dinner, they're thinking about
what they're doing after dinner. After
dinner, they're thinking about the work
they're doing the next morning. That's
how your weeks feel like days. But what
if you can make your days feel more like
weeks? All right. Well, let's look at
some of those experiences,
right? Whether it's like a trip where
things have a lot of novelty. Okay.
Novelty may be interesting. What else
could be
uh duress stress? Like if I put somebody
on a stationary bike and I'm like, "All
right, you're going to do a Norwegian
4x4. What does that mean?" It's four
minutes of sprinting. Like minute one,
hard. Minute two, oh wow, this sucks.
Minute three, I don't think I can make
it. Minute four, like I'm being chased
by wolves and I'm going to die. And
you're going to do four rounds of that.
Those
those four sets of four minute sprints
effectively are going to feel a lot
longer. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, I do think there's a certain
element of stressor.
Okay. What else?
&gt;&gt; Well, it's like I I don't hunt often,
but I hunt maybe like once or twice a
year. Okay. What's happening? You're
waking up in the dark, right?
Probably depending on what you're doing.
If you're at high altitude, I mean, for
me, high altitude. If you're whatever,
11,000 ft and it's the middle of the
day, haven't had any luck, what are you
going to do? You're probably going to
eat some junk food, which is like
hunting's largely an excuse just to eat
eat a bunch of energy gels and garbage
that you have. Okay, sure. So, you eat
your your granola bars that you
shouldn't have. That's fine. And then
you're going to take a nap. All right.
Then you wake up. So, these breaks that
are basically separate chapters of
daylight, I think also make a big
difference. And if you're going to like
Italy for a few days, what are you
doing? You're generally going to be
making the most of that day and you're
going to have these kind of breaks, but
you're also on vacation. Might take a
nap. What else is happening? Lots of
location switching, also true in
something like hunting or hiking or ski
touring. There seems to be something
related to context switching that
increases the frame rate. So that your
experience is more it's closer to
slow-mo than than the reverse like fast
forward. So I do think there are ways
that you can begin to do your past year
review. look at experiences that felt
like a lot more than they were. I had an
experience like this in Japan recently.
So, a number of my friends, it's been a
dream of theirs since I was 15 and went
there as an exchange student. They've
always wanted to go to Japan with me,
but uh some of them have tighter
financial situations than other. No way.
All right. So, how do I spend money?
It's like I'm going to take those guys
to Japan, like cover everything. They
have to have a little skin in the game.
So, it's like, all right, we're all
going to get there. You have to get
there, but then once we get there, I'm
going to pay for everything. And there
was one day on that trip where all of us
were like today felt like 7 days and our
minds were blown. Like the amount of
time dilation versus like time
constriction, time dilation was so
extreme. It was like we sat at dinner,
had a couple beers, we're just like what
just happened, right? So like do a
little dissection of those experiences.
And I really feel like if you're able to
turn days into the feeling of weeks
enough in a given year, it's like your
experiential lifespan
&gt;&gt; could go from if you're a preoccupied
person who dies at 85, maybe you live
40, 50 of those years, maybe you get to
120 experientially.
And I challenge anyone. It's like if I
put an eye shade on you and give you
some psychedelics, tell me if tell me
that feels the same as the four to six
hours you spent the day before.
It's not
&gt;&gt; never does.
&gt;&gt; It's going to feel like a lifetime.
Okay. But I certainly don't want to do
psychedelics every day.
&gt;&gt; And then you don't want it. Well, I
don't I never want it to end.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, this is Yeah. I mean, that's
a whole separate conversation, right?
when navigating or putting yourself into
these spaces, uh, you know, what
safeguards and intentions do you have
around it? Because there are times when
it's like, wow. I think for me at least
that feeling
and this this might sound strange but
I'm just like oh yeah this is probably
what it feels like to be dead on some
level when there's there's no there is
an observer there is an experiencer but
there's no space there's no time there's
no Tim I'm like yeah it wouldn't totally
shock me if it's something like this and
in some of those experiences like you
experienced 5 m DMT depending on the
experience but it's Like if you think
back like could if it gets abstract
enough where you feel like you're
looking at machine code, could you
recall playbyplay what happened? Like
no, no way. Okay. Can you recall what
happened a month before you were born?
Like nope. Maybe something like that.
Who knows, right? And and there are lots
of I would say I mean have you heard
about we just talked about this with
this um with Chase Hughes I think I was
talking about this where um have you
heard about this guy I think it wasn't 5
m what's another what's another
psychedelic
&gt;&gt; oh there are lots DMT NMT
&gt;&gt; no it's I can't remember the name of it
&gt;&gt; I was 2CB LSD
&gt;&gt; no it's it's it's something like the 5
MO experience I can't remember the name
of But any and it may have been five but
this but he did it and he had
experienced an entire life
kids child all of it.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Like
70 years maybe. I don't you know had hit
had a 70 year experience from child to
getting married having kids
&gt;&gt; probably. I don't you know what I mean?
Yeah. an entire
lifespan.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And then comes out of it and misses it
was like 15 minutes and then misses
where he just came from that he thinks
he experienced 70 years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you know, we've been
talking about lucid dreaming and time
dilation, all this. It's part of the
reason why like Inception, love that
movie.
By the way, Christopher Nolan, when he
was a student way back in the day, take
a quick sidebar here, would wake up
early in the morning. He would work all
through the night and he'd wake up early
in the morning to get free food. There
was like a free breakfast at school or
whatever. So, he would like work all
night, wake up, have breakfast, and then
go back to sleep. And what did he start
getting good at? Lucid dreaming.
&gt;&gt; Cuz that is unbeknownst to him. It's one
of the techniques where you basically
take a break at like four and a half
hours of sleep, stay up for like 20
minutes, go back to bed. That's what he
was doing accidentally. So yeah,
Christopher Nolan, if you're listening,
I want to talk to you about a lot of
things. But the uh there are some very
very very very strange reports of things
on psychedelics. There are also some
very strange reports. If you want to
look at
what has been done at UVA, professor, I
think his last name is Grayson
has one of the best databases in terms
of documented near-death experiences and
he's very clinical. Um
if you look at that in the same also at
UVA they've looked at and I recognize
how easy it is to poke holes in these
things but there are again out of maybe
a hundred quote unquote documented
examples there there might be like one
or two where you're like that is
incredibly hard to explain. Some of the
others you' be like, "Okay, sure." If
you had a team, David Blaine's
David Blaine is an illusionist team,
like they could, yeah, okay, cool. They
could maybe come up with 99 of these.
Okay, sure. But that one, I'm not so
sure. And you have stories of
reincarnation
that are specific to children in India
and other places where they'll like
recount this whole life. This is a like
little kid
&gt;&gt; and they're like, "Yeah, I had such and
such village and I was this old and my
wife is this name and this and this."
And then they go over and like lo and
behold, like this is not actually
infrequent like this. Okay, now people
could also be making this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up,
right? I recognize this. A lot of people
send me the telepathy tapes and all this
stuff. And I'm like, people also want to
believe there's more than this because
guess what? The real world is a suffer
factory.
And it's very it's very comforting to
believe that there's wonder and awe and
some type of salve for that that's just
beyond our reach even though we can feel
it's there. I recognize that parents
might lie. They might train their kid to
lie. Blah blah blah blah blah. Okay. But
on psychedelics, man, you see some you
if you get enough reps, right? And I say
enough reps because I really like I
not to get on like a high horse, but
it's like when people do psychedelics
once or twice and then they become
proitizers. I'm like stop. You have gone
skiing twice. You didn't have a
catastrophic accident and now you're
teaching the world how to ski. I was
like don't do that. I was like and it's
like cuz skiing on ice in New England is
different from skiing in forgiving
champagne powder in Utah. By the way,
it's like if you're on a groomer, that's
different from the moguls. If you're
back country with avalanche risk, that's
a different thing. And it's like if you
start to get more reps, like you're
going to have accidents and then you're
going to realize the different species
of accidents and so on and so on and so
on, right? So, when you have enough
repetition, when you have enough flight
time, to put it another way, in enough
environments, you just start to see
really, really strange things. Um,
I mean, I know I I don't want to dox
him, but like this is a friend of a
friend. Like, this is not a game of
telephone. This is a direct friend of
one of my best friends. Had an
experience with an NDMT. So, if it if it
lasted 15 minutes, chances are it was 5
MODMT or DMT. It's kind of it's a bit
confusing because the the
phenomenological experiences, right? The
subjective experiences are very
different with NNDMT, which is also what
people experience through Iwasa or 5 AOD
DMT. They're very different
uh in terms of their effects. But if
it's 15 minutes, it's probably one of
the two. But this particular guy had
this experience with with NDMT.
feels like he gets this huge download
related to physics and production of
uh I'm trying to protect this guy.
Something related to physics at like the
very outer bounds of physics.
&gt;&gt; This guy has no no history in physics
whatsoever.
&gt;&gt; Uh seems really destabilized after the
event.
&gt;&gt; Disappears. Won't talk to his friends.
It's just like online trying to watch
YouTube videos about physics. write down
what he supposedly downloaded, blah blah
blah blah blah. Fast forward like two or
three years, the guy's a co-author on a
peer-reviewed public
at like the cutting edge of physics,
&gt;&gt; all based on the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that he
saw.
&gt;&gt; How [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wild is that?
&gt;&gt; On an experience.
&gt;&gt; And what do you talk that up as?
&gt;&gt; I have no idea. I have no idea. It's
It's But when you when you see that or
you see someone
like spontaneously singing in a language
they don't speak, you're like, "Okay."
Uh, and there are also non-drugrelated
examples of like I think it's called
something like immediate savant
syndrome. Like someone jumps into a
pool, hits their head, they wake up and
they can play the piano.
Like
what is going on here? Like the and
that's not
&gt;&gt; that is not out on the fring conspiracy
theory. Like there are multiple
documented cases of this.
&gt;&gt; What is going on? I don't know. I mean
it would certainly seem to imply that
not all of our
perception, access
or experience to reality is mediated by
something local. I I I mean
like it's
&gt;&gt; although maybe it is although maybe it
is. I mean I mean there are people
within the exploration of psychedelics
uh who think of the uh the mind more
like a receiver right so it's like yeah
you can damage the brain
&gt;&gt; and cause tremendous dysfunction right
you can do that for sure
&gt;&gt; but maybe that's not because the brain
itself is generating something much like
a television screen like the television
screen isn't generating the images
you're watching it's a receiver of some
at least back in the day for those
people who are old enough.
And
at the same time, you have documented
cases of people with minimal brain
volume, right? Like their brains should
not function and yet they have average
IQ
and we don't really have, as far as I
know, a good explanatory frame framework
for allowing that to be possible.
&gt;&gt; So I I I don't know. I mean, this is
part of the reason why
like my my position is always
kind of impossible until pro proven
otherwise, but I'm open-minded about it.
And that's why I've poured so I mean
millions of dollars into science, right?
Because I'm like I want to better
understand this. I recognize as Richard
Fineman, Nobel Prize winning physicist
said like it is important not to fool
yourself and you are the most you're the
easiest person to fool, right? Like when
you want something to be true, even if
it's 1%.
&gt;&gt; Experimental bias and everything, it's
real.
&gt;&gt; Convince yourself that it's Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You can just or just look for
evidence that something is real. Um,
which is why I I I do value the
scientific method and see and have you
seen Carl Popper and all falsification
all that stuff is so so critical for us
to have arrived where we are right like
western medicine is the greatest healing
system that has ever been devised.
Period. Full stop. But is it the full
picture? No. Like 50, you know, any MD I
think this is an ongoing joke, but it's
it's kind of like 50% of what we know is
wrong. we just don't know which 50%.
&gt;&gt; Like that that's like a accepted sort of
joke within medicine and science.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's always been true. So,
&gt;&gt; um I mean just as much research as
you've done into psychedelics, you were
talking about downloading machine code.
Have you
&gt;&gt; if you read about the laser, the ones
and zeros inside the laser?
&gt;&gt; I looked at that. So, I haven't
experienced it, but there was a I want
to say he was like a
laser crystalallography expert or
someone who explained it just purely
through optics and like how that could
be the case even if you're not on drugs.
So, I think there might be a a a purely
mechanical explanation for this for for
people who don't know. I did watch this
cuz it got sent to me. You would
imagine, right? You can imagine all my
friends were like, "Bro,
same here." And so I got this video and
I was one of those and so there's this
guy
&gt;&gt; who looks shockingly similar to Lionel
Messi. I don't know if I'm the only
person. I was just like what is Lionel
Messi in the psychedelic game now?
Anyway, uh and he would would use DMT
probably still and then
direct this laser at a wall and get in a
certain position and basically had this
and he had people who could replicate
this, right? they would see the same
thing or claim to see the same thing
which looked like some type of matrix
like code.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And he had drawn them out and
everything. Um, there was I went down
the rabbit hole in this cuz I was
getting asked about it so much and I
found a very long what appeared to be
defensible
engineering explanation for how that's
how that's how that is a a
explainable phenomenon without needing
access to matrix code. Uh so who knows
maybe uh but I would say
even without that like it's just
stuff is weird stuff is really weird and
I mean you don't have to go very far. Uh
trying to remember his name Fabritzio
Benadetti maybe. Uh,
I think that Ashley, no it's not Ashley
Vance. There's another author. But read
any book written by a credible scientist
or science journalist about the placebo
effect.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; And
I if if that is not one of the weirdest
&gt;&gt; collections of verifiable
data you've ever seen. I mean, you look
at any given study with an intervention
like a drug or whatever. You look at the
supplemental materials, like there's
there's almost always going to be
someone in the control arm with a
placebo who showed just as much effect,
&gt;&gt; man.
&gt;&gt; With nothing with nothing, whether it's
a surgery, whether it's a powerful drug,
psychedelic even. And so there are a few
questions that come to mind, right?
Well,
these are just normal people. They're
not biochemists. They couldn't tell you
how psychedelics act on the brain. So,
it's not like they're
rolling their eyes back and going in and
trying to
affect certain enzymes or whatever. They
have no idea. And yet they are reporting
the same not just effect but magnitude
of effect as matches the other people.
What the hell is going on? I don't know.
I have no idea. But like the you don't
have to go very far to get into
really terrain incognito
like unknown there be dragons un uh
waters. It's actually very easy. You
don't you don't have to get out into
remote viewing or whatever. Even though
again I'm very like interested in that
stuff but it's like just look at the
placebo effect which gets understandably
right because people are trying to
assess something.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And that is the intervention in
some of the RCTs that I fund, let's just
say. But the fact that there are
commonly people who produce the same
effect, same magnitude of effect with a
sugar pill or placebo or a sham surgery
is incredibly strange. Yeah, it is super
super strange. Um, so I will say
not to be the broken record citing
Richard Fineman and the it's easy to
fool yourself, but it is easy to fool
yourself. So it is a challenge to be
to attempt to be radically open-minded
while also being suitably skeptical,
right? Because there are a lot of
conseal
people out there. Um
there's a lot of bad science out there.
There's a lot of pseudocience. Like God
saved you if you're getting all your
health advice from Instagram. Uh and uh
so it's it's a challenge to navigate. I
I do there's there's something for Peter
Tia actually. He did a series of blog
posts called studying the studies. And I
also put out uh a blog post related to
Peter about scientific literacy. And I
would say one of the best investments
you can make for your life and for the
people you love or care about is to just
invest like a week. And now you can use
AI to make this easy. There's a company
I actually invested in called Obo.
Ob.com. They'll create a course for you
and it's just like teach me how to read
science. Boom. And like spend a week,
hour or two a night doing that and that
will pay dividends for decades. It will
help you sift
the signal from the noise. Um anyway,
but yeah, the weird stuff is
interesting. Um it's probably the
understatement of the year.
&gt;&gt; You had brought up
you were going with the power of know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The power there. I mean I feel
like so I started
at the behest of my friends and some of
my audience
um started working on a book about
saying no that's it like six years ago
and I started doing that because people
just kept asking me for help a lot of my
friends even very successful ones and
over I'd say probably a decade
I was using Evernote, um, which I was
the first adviser for. Didn't quite pan
out as I had hoped, but still pretty
interesting tool. Anyway, every time I
got a rejection from somebody that I
thought was really artful that left me
feeling neutral or better about the
person than worse, I'll be like, "Oo,
that's good. I'm going to steal that."
So, I'd like copy and paste it. So, I
had this swipe file, which is just a
term that some people use for like I
used to do it for advertising. Like
whenever I bought something, I would
save the advertisement, put it into a
three- ring binder so that I would think
about how this convinced me to buy
something and then I would use that for
designing my own ads. Right? So similar,
I had a swipe file. I had hundreds of
these examples of polite declines I
called them
and thought they're really useful,
really incredibly useful. Copy and
paste, make your own. So I was putting
together this book and then it just
became too hard cuz I thought a lot of
my friends were going to help and they
were like, "Me? I'm terrible at this.
You need to write the whole book
yourself. And I was like, "Oh, okay."
So, I stopped. I sheld it. I gave up.
Returned the advance. The biggest
advance I ever got in my life. Returned
it. It's like real money. Returned it. I
was like, "I'm sorry. I can't do it."
And shelved it. And then over the last
handful of years as I've watched people
to fray watched people start to fray at
the edges because back in the day it was
one inbox. Then it was two or three
inboxes. Then it was like, "Oh man, all
right. Well, I'm just going to tell the
people I really care about to text me."
Uh-oh. All right. So then it's text, and
then it's text plus Google Voice. Then
it's text plus Google Voice plus signal
plus Telegram. And you see where this is
going, right? And then it's like social
media DMs and all of a sudden you're
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
And uh it's not just the interruption or
the burden of those messages. It's the
temptation to triage,
right? It's like you you're spending all
your time triaging injuries as opposed
to actually getting up and marching
where you're supposed to march. So,
I want to write a book about how to say
no because there are tons of books on
how to say yes. And I just don't feel
like writing another book about how to
say yes is very helpful. Although, when
you start to look at how to say no, it
very quickly becomes
an exploration of how to say yes to a
few things and how to say no to
everything else.
And
uh still working on the book. It's long
AF. It's like 750 to 800 pages now. Um,
but uh
have if if if people might want to check
it out. I mean, they can get a bunch of
free chapters. I don't know when the
full thing is going to be published, but
they can if they go to tim.blog/notebook
and it'll be o tim.blog. It's not a
typo. Notebook. Bunch of free chapters
people can get which will help them cuz
I've had proof readers read this thing
and I I kind of put it on a shelf. Well,
it's done.
&gt;&gt; It's close to done. But here's the
thing. A book is like a marathon where
it's like you get to mile 20. You're
like, "Congratulations." Or 20 mile, you
know, 22 and you're like, "Wow, you're
almost done. Congratulations. You only
have 50% left." Like that last getting
back to like the high
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; expectations.
&gt;&gt; Oh, okay.
&gt;&gt; Right. Like that last polish, it's like
Yeah. to make the sculpture out of clay
as a rough model. Yeah. I'll do that in
an afternoon. I create the finished
piece in full scale to put in a museum
like Yeah. Okay. Gotcha.
&gt;&gt; So, it's going to it's going to last
the to polish the book's going to take
at least two or three.
&gt;&gt; So, what's going to be in it other than
nice ways to tell people to
&gt;&gt; Oh, there's a lot more to it because
that doesn't do the job. That doesn't do
the job. Uh, right. Because I could tell
you, okay, and Martha Beck, who's like
one of the an amazing woman, was like
Oprah's life coach and all this stuff.
incredible lady in her own right for a
lot of different reasons.
And you know, she turned me down for
something and she was like, "Sorry, I
can't make it due to life Tetris." And
I'm like, "Oh, that's very short. You
don't you're not giving them something
that they can negotiate against." I'm
like, "Great." I'm like, "Life Tetris.
I'm definitely going to use that."
Simple, to the point.
But I when you give people templates,
what I and I realized this with the
4-hour body because I was writing 4-hour
body. Everything in there works. It's
been tested with hundreds of people. now
thousands, tens of thousands of people.
And I had very busy CEOs of companies I
was working with who'd be like, "Hey, I
don't have time to read a long book.
Like, give me the index card. Tell me
what to do and I'll do it."
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I did. Success rate 0%. Why? Because
if you give people the prescription, but
you don't help them change their
behavior, which also goes down to
changing their beliefs, it's just not
going to stick. It won't be durable. So
for instance, if you don't say no
because the story is I'm too nice for
that. I'm a kind person. I'm generous. I
like helping people. Okay, that can be
true. But that can also be a
justification for saying yes to way too
many things and being a martyr. Right?
If your answer is, well, must be nice
for you. I'm not successful enough yet.
Okay, we can start to tease that apart,
but I know people who have hundreds of
millions of dollars who still say that.
So, part of the reason this book has
taken so long and it comes down to we're
talking about like the drive and
predicting the bumps in the road and
using the engine to the bet your
capacity. Just having an index card,
which is kind of what the internet
largely does. Not everyone, but they're
like, "Here are the three tricks to
mastering crypto tomorrow before the
crash, you know, whatever." And uh I
mean, look, I'm interested in a lot of
things. Not to malign crypto like I've
been interested in a long time. But the
the the point is if if your goal is like
durable behavioral change which also
comes back to the psychedelics, right?
Like you need frameworks and you need to
be able to put your beliefs which are
like your underpinning philosophical
guide rails under some degree of
scrutiny. And if you don't update those,
right, like if your story, for instance,
in the in the realm of physical fitness
is, well, I'm good at my job. I'm a good
father, but like, you know, my whole
family has big bones and I'm just it's
just the way it is, right? You accept
that partial completeness, right? and
you're like really type A and
like problem fixing oriented in a
positive way in other areas of your
life, but there's this one that you
don't touch because that's just the way
things are. If you don't fix that,
no number of books on strength training,
no number of gym memberships is going to
fix it. Um, so a lot of it is unpacking
and this also like everything kind of
ties together, right? The fear setting,
right? It's like, okay, you don't want
to say no. Why? Okay, you're worried
that person's going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] talk you to
somebody you care about. Okay, you're
worried they won't send you
opportunities anymore, right? They sent
you one, but it's really a bad fit.
Doesn't align with your priorities.
You're worried they're not going to send
you an opportunity in the future. Okay.
Uh, you're worried that you will become
irrelevant, right? Like that's another
dangerous catchphrase like staying
relevant.
That's a that's a that's a very u
pitfall laden path. Okay. So then it's
like so what and then what and what's
the worst thing that happens? Right? So
it's kind of a unstructured approach to
fear setting. But when you start to
really unpack it and instead of saying
all right you're going to go to the gym
five days a week for the rest of your
life. It's like okay you're going to go
twice a week. You're going to do less
than you think you can do, but for two
weeks you're going to go on a no diet
and you're just going to copy paste one
of these three templates and you have an
assignment which is like you're going to
do it three times in the next week or
your buddy gives a hundred bucks to your
most hated politician and your name.
Okay, now we have structure, right?
&gt;&gt; Now we have structure. And I ended up in
the last, I guess, year or so
collaborating with a friend of mine,
Neil Strauss, who wrote The Game
Emergencies. He's written like 10 New
York Times bestsellers. Terrible at
saying no. He was pressuring me to write
this book. And I was like, we were both
kind of drunk at the time. And I was
like, Neil, he was at a busting my balls
at a table. I was single at the time and
he's kind of like embarrassing me a
bunch in front of these women. And I'm
just like, Neil, if you're such a hot
shot, I see what you're doing. You're
doing this lame power play in front of
these girls trying to impress him. I was
like, which is not totally true, but I
was just like, "All right, you want you
want you want to spar? Let's go." And I
was like, "If you want to write this
book, if you want to read this book so
badly, why don't you help me finish it?
Get off the bench." And he was like, and
then the next day when we both sobered
up, he's like, "Hey, if you're serious,
like, let's talk." And so he became kind
of like the student and I would have him
test these things. And then like 50% of
the time he'd [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it up. He'd fumble
it. He'd create some mess. Uh, but what
ended up happen or he wouldn't do the
homework. you would not do the homework.
And I was like, "Oh, this book doesn't
work. Okay, well, I need to make this
book work. So, how do I make it work for
this guy? If I can make it work for this
guy, it'll work for other people." And
then started testing it with a private
community of about 100 people also and
ultimately got it to the point where
it's like that guy is different now.
Like after a year working together, like
his life, how he interacts, he still
sends me texts to this day. He's like,
"You would not believe what just
happened. It is a different life." Like
before you have the shield of no and
after you have the shield of no wielded
artfully they are two different
experiences of life. And this also if
you want more time dilation right if you
want more experiential lifespan you want
more intimacy you cannot do that if you
have a porous mesh through which
everyone else's agenda filters to you
&gt;&gt; that you feel morally obligated for
reasons that are unclear
&gt;&gt; to say yes.
&gt;&gt; Do you say no more than you say yes?
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Yeah. I have to I have to on a
lot of levels. And if I if I if I if I
give you sort of a sterile example be
like in the world of startup investing,
if I don't say no to 80 90% or more of
what comes my way, I run out of money,
right? I have to play it like a smart
blackjack player. It's like, okay, like
yeah, I can try to learn how to count
cards and I know you're not supposed to
do that, but sort of like bringing down
the house or the movie 21. It's like,
okay, like you can try to like get
better at it and then you need to know
when you have a hot hand. You need to
know when the deck is in the right
place. You need to know your statistics,
but you're not going to bet on you're
not going to bet heavy on every hand.
You'll run out of bankroll. So, in the
startup investing, it's just an
existential imperative, right? You have
to say no to those things. So, you have
to have rules. And what are those rules
grounded? And they're grounded in
certain principles. And then what are
those grounded? They're grounded in
certain beliefs. And I'll give you an
example of a belief. And the one belief
would be there are plenty of
opportunities. You can wait for a fat
pitch. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; along the lines of Warren Buffett.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; But if you've been taught and
conditioned yourself to have this fear
of missing out,
&gt;&gt; game is lost.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; It's lost at the belief level before you
ever get to the principles, before you
get to the strategies, before you get to
to the tactics. So, a lot of it is
solved with fear setting.
&gt;&gt; How do you pick your investments? I
mean, you were early on what, Facebook,
Shopif, a whole bunch of companies.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Facebook, Twitter, Shopify,
Duolingo,
uh Clear, the biometric security
company, and all the airports,
uh, Alibaba, like a whole bunch.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh,
&gt;&gt; so, how am I early? Uh,
&gt;&gt; were you seeking them out or they see
they sold?
&gt;&gt; Both. So, uh there there are a few
things that I think are
maybe uh
copy and pasteable and then some things
that are are probably not as copy and
pasteable. Um the things that I think
are copy and pasteable and there's a
book coming out soon by a legendary
venture capitalist named Bill Gurley
called Running Down a Dream I believe is
the title of the book which really makes
this point well. But going to the ep
epicenter of the action matters. It
really matters in real life. So, me
packing up after college with my piece
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] handme-down Plymouth Voyager
minivan, like so beaten up, like
hundreds of thousands of miles. Like,
the back seats got stolen out of a
parking lot when I first got to the Bay
Area. I mean, you know, my my my got
ruthlessly made fun of by my co-workers,
but it's like I picked up and I was
like, I am going west to Silicon Valley.
to make my riches. And that didn't
happen quickly. But what it did do is it
put me in the very center of the pinball
machine where I could bump into things.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I could bump into things by
volunteering. Like you don't have no you
don't have any network. Get creative.
What do you have? You have time. Okay.
You've got endurance, right? You're
young in that case, right? What are your
advantages? You always have advantages.
All right. Well, like design something
around your advantages. So in my case, I
volunteered for a number of startup
nonprofits like the Silicon Valley
Association of Startup Entrepreneurs,
the Indis Entrepreneur, which Sriram
would know, past guest, really nice,
brilliant guy. The Indis entrepreneur
almost wholly focused on the in the
Indian diaspora and entrepreneurship
around that, right? And like the the
numbers of of amazing entrepreneurs who
come out of India who have chosen to
come to the US just unbelievable,
&gt;&gt; right? I'm not Indian as you might have
guessed, but I would go there and I'll
be like, "Hey, I'll do anything. I'll
fill water. I'll punch tickets. I'll
rearrange chairs. I just want to be in
the room with these speakers, right?"
And as a volunteer, if you do more than
someone asks you to do, you're going to
get noticed by the people running the
event. You don't have to do very much,
but I would just do a lot more than they
asked me to do. And eventually they're
like, "Hey, do you want to help organize
one of these events?" Like, "We're not
getting paid. We have a day job." Like,
"Do you want to help?" I'm like, "Can I
I I would love to." Uh, but really what
I like to do is at least organize the
speakers. They're like, "Sure."
So now I get to reach out to people way
above my pay grade who ended up in some
cases being long-term relationships. I
mean Jack Canfield, the co-creator of
Chicken Soup for the Soul, who I met
through a nonprofit by volunteering and
doing a little bit extra. He later years
later introduced me to my book agent who
after whatever 30 plus rejections sold
the 4-hour work week and I just had Jack
Canfield on my podcast like a few weeks
ago. uh whatever it is like 24 years
later, right? All from volunteering and
doing a little bit more than anybody
asked. Um so the network matters.
&gt;&gt; Exceed the expectations.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Exceed the expectations and be in
the center of the action. So it's like
if you're really serious,
um there are other people who have said
this. Scott Galloway I think puts it
really well. It's like it's it's better
to be average at something in the center
like fashion in New York. comedy in LA
or New York, whatever. We can give a lot
of examples. Then to be great in a tiny
town in the middle of nowhere
&gt;&gt; and
so putting myself in the middle is
important and I I could give very
concrete examples of that. That's
something people can model, right? Not
everyone, but some people can. You can
also do it in virtual space and places
like subreddits and so on. But so that
that's one. The second is,
and this is harder to model, of course,
but the 4-hour work week when it had its
explosion in 2007. I very deliberately
targeted very tech-savvy, initially
males, say between the age of like 25
and 35 in Silicon Valley and then New
York. And then that bled out to both
genders, no problem. That was an easy
hop. And then it began hopping to other
cities like LA and Chicago. But I wanted
to focus on people who could broadcast
the message most effectively. And that's
relevant because the success of the book
especially targeted at startups is what
led to for instance being in the
switchbox in Silicon Valley. I started
going to events like Railscom related to
Ruby on Rails. I'm not a programmer but
there who did I meet? I met Toby of
Shopify when they had like 8 to 10
employees and he had read the book and
that was a context for a conversation
and then ended up becoming you know
their first I believe adviser and
so that's an example I do think that you
can engineer that type of thing just by
cultivating a network which by the way
just like my friendships is like a few
people very deep, not a scattershot
collection of business cards. I don't
think that works
&gt;&gt; very well at all. And it comes off as
what it is, which is transactional and
superficial. Um because here's the
secret. The secret is if if you are f if
you develop true friendship
with someone you love like a brother or
sister or could who could become one of
your true long-term friends and they
happen to be an A player at something. A
players in one domain tend to know A
players in a lot of domains. You don't
need to know everybody,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; You really don't. Um, okay. So, there's
that. I'm trying to answer this question
in in the least longwinded way I can,
but it's it's it's it's nuanced. So, in
terms of selection, so then I start
seeing startups, but I don't have very
much money at the time. Got a little
bit. And I had fantasized about going to
Stanford Business School for a lot of
reasons. So I was like, I would have
been so much happier at Stanford than
Princeton, which I think is probably
true. And it's gorgeous. It's got like
Palm Drive. It's an amazing campus and
it's completely integrated with venture
capital and startups, right? They have
real operators to teach at that school.
So I went through the application
process twice and then for one reason or
another, I was like, I just can't do it.
I just don't want to be back in school.
And then I was helping a friend of mine,
Mike Maples Jr., who who was a super
angel. He was a very good angel
investor. I had met him through one of
my professors at school just by asking.
A lot of people don't get what they want
because they don't ask for it. And uh he
wanted to lose some weight. So I was
this is well before the 4-hour body. So
I was helping him get in shape. And I
was like, "Hey, do you mind if we just
like after the workouts or whatever?
Like we can trade information on that."
He also wanted to know about PR and
launch for the 4-hour work week. So we I
would I would share all that and I'd
say, "Can you just explain the deals
you're doing? Like how are you choosing
them? Why yes, why no? And eventually at
one point I was like, "Hey, I'm willing
to put skin in the game and I can be
really cheap labor. Like, is there any
chance I could invest small amounts
along with you into some of these
startups
and help them with go to market
strategy, whatever." And he's like, "I
can ask." And what I decided to do was
rather than go to graduate school, I
would take the cost that I would have
paid out of pocket, sunk cost. So, I
think Stanford Business School is like
60K for two years. 60K, 60K, 120. And I
was like, "All right, I'm going to make
the Tim Ferrris fund." I put it in air
quotes because it's not a real fund, but
I'm going to spend I'm going to plan on
spending 120K over two years in small
checks.
I assume the money is all going to zero,
but what I'm optimizing for is skills
and relationships.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Just like business school.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And that's how it started. Then there's
a question of what do you say yes to?
What do you say no to? I only said yes
to things where
the ones that worked out. I made a lot
of mistakes, but the ones that worked
out which then became
rules for me were can I be a power user
of this product myself. Does it solve a
problem or help me achieve a goal
personally? Right? Even if I weren't
involved, would I use this? And by
extension then that means through the
books I built the blog back when blogs
were huge. Some blogs are still huge but
like my blog is one of the most popular
in the world. I was like okay can I help
them through the blog? Now that would be
podcast social media but can I actually
help them directly to increase the value
of the company and therefore the value
of my equity. Okay. Um, and ideally,
ideally, this doesn't always work, but
is it a premium product so that there is
more room for error, more margin of
safety? I do not want to be in a race to
the bottom
situation where the company is suddenly
commoditized and they're competing on
price and just get pressed down.
Um, and that's about it. And then the
price has to be right also. Uh, and
just to address this also,
2008 when I really started, that was a
great time. That was a great time to be
investing. That was a great time to be
investing. And it was not a crowded
playing field because it was in the
middle of what people might consider
a.com depression.
&gt;&gt; So, the fair weather entrepreneurs, the
fair weather
venture capitalists and angels, they had
all run for the hills. They were like,
"Screw this. I'm going back to
investment banking or consulting or
whatever, right? This is this is this is
too risky, right? IPO market's dead.
Like uh but
um it's harder now. It is harder now,
especially right now with the froth
around AI which has contagion into other
things making them even great companies
if they're too expensive, it's a bad
investment. M
&gt;&gt; uh depending the the specifics matter
but uh I do think people can use a lot
of what I'm talking about investing in
what you know something you would use
like it applies to I hesitate to say
people should do any stock picking
because that's a dangerous game I think
most people including myself I put I do
a lot of passive lowcost index investing
I think that's the right move for a lot
of people but
uh if you just look at how you spend
what you're spending more money on now
than 3 years ago, where you're trying to
cobble together solutions for something
that doesn't exist. Like just looking at
your own personal behavior can inform
how you think about investing. And I'm
not a registered investment advisor or
anything. I'm not giving investment
advice, but it's like if you stray
outside of what you know, you will
probably get your face ripped off.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
good advice.
&gt;&gt; Rule number one, don't lose your money.
Don't run out of bankroll.
Damn good point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Damn good point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, Tim, it's a fascinating interview.
I got one question left.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; You have three people you'd like to see
on the show. Who would they be?
&gt;&gt; On your show or my show?
&gt;&gt; On my show.
&gt;&gt; Three people. Who would I like to see?
&gt;&gt; I should start asking that question. I'm
tucking that away in my swipe file.
I would say
someone who is genuinely part of
some mystic tradition.
&gt;&gt; Um, who has never been on a podcast,
but who is a good communicator. And you
know, we talked very early on about
scripture and you were like scripture
like uh if you look at the Christian
mystics, you look at say Sufism within
Islam, you look at you know Cababala and
so on within Judaism, it's like when you
start to read even the poetry produced
by all three, they seem very very
similar. and having someone on who could
speak intelligently
and they need to be good with words to
do this but to describe their firsthand
experience of the divine I think would
be a service to listeners. So that would
be one um love that idea. Yeah, I'd say
second. I'm trying to really go off menu
here.
So, you've covered a lot of ground I
enjoy already uh with a lot of your
interviews.
I would say
probably dealer's choice, meaning you're
the dealer, but old traditions, like
really old traditions, um, who have not
been exposed or picked over by a lot of
other podcasts. And that could be just
about anything cuz my my approach to,
you know, whether it's investing,
explorations, it's kind of a barbell
approach like Nasim Taleb's investing,
right? like super super safe or super
super speculative is how I do things.
I'm not saying everybody should do that.
But also with respect to my own
intellectual exploration and scientific
exploration, I'm like I'm typically
cutting edge or I'm looking at things
that have been around for hundreds or
thousands of years that are durable
and
I think exploring
the really old stuff is interesting. So
the mystics are kind of one example of
that, right? This has just been a
consistent feature of humanity for
millennia.
&gt;&gt; Might be something there. I don't know.
I think there is. Uh, so I would say
uh this is this is getting very close to
the same territory, but you could
interview
like and you'd have to pick them very
carefully, but give you an example like
a Greek Greek Orthodox
church singer
&gt;&gt; who knows a lot about droning
and uh or a musicologist who can speak
to I recommend one. He's a wild card. U
I'll I'll say it off off camera just
just so you can do your due diligence,
but someone who for instance has
knowledge of historic use
cross-culturally of harmonics or
overtones
for
religious experience and altered states.
&gt;&gt; That would be interesting. who could who
could speak not just to the
the cultural context but also to like
what we actually know from a musicology
perspective from potentially uh
neuroscientific perspective.
&gt;&gt; Very interesting.
&gt;&gt; There's some like you do not need drugs
to have some shockingly alarming altered
states of consciousness. Uh music has
been one major tool in toolkit for a
long time. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um, so that could be interesting. Uh,
and then number three, who's lucky
number three? I would say a physicist
focused on time. Not just a science
communicator. There are physicists who
have certain credentials who are
primarily science communicators, but
like a working physicist,
somebody who's still an operator,
&gt;&gt; okay,
&gt;&gt; who's kind of at the forefront of
work that involves consideration of time
fundamentally.
I think would be
squirly enough to be fun for you and
mindbending for listeners because
it's weird. It's very strange.
&gt;&gt; Fascinating topics.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think all three and because
at the at the at the very end of the
day, it's like what can we be certain
of, right? Like how do we know we're not
a brain in a jar in a simulation, right?
What can we actually know is true? And I
think one of the few things we can know
is true is that we're aware of the fact
that we are aware
and therefore
maybe it makes sense to really put that
under a microscope try to understand it
which mindfulness and meditation
practice has done for millennia as well.
Uh so that would be if I had to pick a
fourth just to round out the dinner
table. Uh someone who has a lot of
experience. I've known one guy in
particular, Henry Shookman, um, who I've
ended up doing some collaborations with
because he just blew me away. But, um,
who's specifically a Zen practitioner,
which is like layering weird on top of
weird, uh,
but in ways that are, uh,
oddly productive, like coons and so on.
What a strange thing. Uh, so I'll leave
it at that, but those would be those
would be uh four I'd put around the
table.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; You have a fascinating way of thinking
about things. I really enjoyed this. So,
thank you for coming.
&gt;&gt; Thanks for having me, man. I really,
really had a great time. Thanks for the
gifts, also.
&gt;&gt; My pleasure. Let's go break that thing
in.
&gt;&gt; Let's do it. Cheers. Thanks.
[Music]
No matter where you're watching the
Shawn Ryan Show from, if you get
anything out of this at all, anything,
please like, comment, and subscribe. And
most importantly, share this everywhere
you possibly can. And if you're feeling
extra generous, head to Apple Podcast
and Spotify and leave us a