Joe Rogan podcast. Check it out.
&gt;&gt; The Joe Rogan Experience.
&gt;&gt; Train by day. Joe Rogan podcast by
night. All day.
&gt;&gt; We just missed a fabulous conversation
about your hair. The best hair.
&gt;&gt; We talking.
&gt;&gt; I would not wear headsets if I
&gt;&gt; Are we recording right now?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we're going now.
&gt;&gt; So, did you ever know Wayne Dyer?
&gt;&gt; No, I didn't know Wayne Dyer. Do we Wait
a minute. Do we have Wayne Dyer on the
podcast ever? Like way way way way back
in the day.
I was uh I was on a cruise with we had
the same publisher Hay House is our
publisher and we were on a cruise just
off Australia. Of course the sun's out
there and Wayne came out and he's got a
very shiny head. He said uh Greg Braden
I said yeah. He said you see this and I
said yeah. He said this is a solar panel
for a sex machine.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And and I I couldn't I couldn't match
that, you know. So I said I said well
you see this? I said these are every one
of these every one of these hairs is a
highly advanced finely tuned antenna to
higher dimensional state spaces
information. And so that was our joke
about hair and and no hair.
&gt;&gt; Imagine if like that's what made you
enlightened how much air you had and
when it started to fall out you got
dumber.
&gt;&gt; Like I said they they every decade of my
life they're saying if you have it this
decade you can keep it. So when I hit my
70s they said you got you got this this
you can probably keep it. So
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. if you have minoxidal like if
you got like really good at it today and
there's a bunch of different uh DHT
inhibitors that are topical that they
could use my friend Derek from Derek
more plates more dates it's a website he
got a bunch of like protocols and how to
save your hair so people want to save
their hair um but we were talking about
art bell when we came in here because
there's a photograph of art on the wall
that like was one of the most important
things for me to put up like we talked
about it and Jamie and I were like ah
you got to get we got to get a metal
picture of Art Bell because that was the
guy, man. When I was driving home from
the comedy store at like 1:00 in the
morning and I was listening to AM radio,
coast to coast with Art Bell from the
Kingdom of Nine.
&gt;&gt; It was my favorite. This is like all for
me was kind of pre- internet, too. Like,
you know, the internet existed, but it
wasn't the thing that it is now. There
was no podcasts. No, but you know the
crazy thing is the stuff that was on
that program that was all fringe is what
everybody's talking about every day at
lunch at lunch right now.
&gt;&gt; Area 51, Bob Lazar, totally mainstream.
&gt;&gt; You know, he was so kind to me. He had
me on this program before I had my first
book. I self-published my first two
books and I was doing talks uh all over
up and down the west coast uh up in the
Vancouver and he had heard somebody in
his shop had been to one of those talks
and he invited me on no book and uh and
then he had me on a number of times
after that and so I I was very honored
to be on there and you know we talked
about everything man he could that was
the thing you could talk about anything
anything you wanted to talk about
&gt;&gt; it was it was also like art was a show
where You could get real information and
you could also get complete horseshit
and you had to be able to discern what
is what. But Art treated everyone with
equal respect. Like you could call him
up, Art, I'm a werewolf. You're like,
interesting. Tell me more.
&gt;&gt; It was never like, "Bitch, you're not a
werewolf. You're just mentally ill. You
need to get some Prozac or whatever they
give you."
&gt;&gt; Well, you still you still got to be
discerning today. You know, I think I
say it's important
&gt;&gt; well today you more so than ever because
of AI and because of bots and
&gt;&gt; you know I always say what's going on I
think it's important to have have an
open mind but not a gaping mind and uh
&gt;&gt; and there unfortunate use of terminology
but uh yes I I agree wholeheartedly
&gt;&gt; you know part of the reason for that and
you know this we we have a global
audience uh a lot of those people are
very hurt unresolved hurt they're right
on the edge they're very fragile
personalities Yeah, that's true.
&gt;&gt; And what they hear on the radio can be
interpreted in a million different ways.
And it's
&gt;&gt; uh you know, I think there's
responsibility that comes with saying
things. If you're going to say it, make
sure it's accurate.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And your intention, like what are
you trying to do? Like I'm never trying
to hurt someone's feelings. If someone's
listening, I'm I want you to have a
better life. I want your life to be
better. You know, it's this is an
interesting thing about whether it's
bots or whether it's, you know, an
actual human being talking about stuff.
The way you approach life, um, and the
way the people around you approach life
is very contagious. And if you're doing
it in a very positive and a loving way,
and a friendly way, and a communal way,
that's contagious. It's really good.
It's good for everybody. But if you're
bitter and shitty, it's bad for
everybody. what Art was was like very
friendly and and you know and fascinated
by all these things and he was a real
pro, you know what I mean? It's just
like so when I did his show, it was like
one of the highlights of my life and I I
got to do the internet version. I never
got to do the radio version.
&gt;&gt; So he was on the internet at the at a
time. I don't think he was maybe he was
on some radio stations, but mostly I
think it was an internet thing. But I
was like, "Yes, I'm on with Art Bell."
&gt;&gt; Mine was all by phone. It was all
landlines. Yeah, I was at my phone, too.
I didn't Yeah, I did it from my house on
the internet, you know. I think I did
it, you know, with a headset or
something, but I did
&gt;&gt; Well, he paved the way and we're here
today.
&gt;&gt; Well, he made interesting subjects, you
know, like I remember when they were
talking about uh things like the face on
Mars and you're like, "What? That sounds
so kooky." And then you see pictures,
you go, "Hey, man, what is that? Why
don't I hear about that in school?"
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, we had Richard Hogland on
night after night after night after
night for weeks on end. when that came
out and actually that face on Mars had a
lot to do with my my career path
actually.
&gt;&gt; So what is your take on all this?
Because one of the things that happened
was with the face on Mars is the initial
images were very grainy but fascinating
cuz it did kind of look like a face but
maybe even more remarkable because
sometimes there's faces like in the side
of a rock it looks like a face. More
remarkable was the the geometric pattern
of the base of it. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And so I I kind of dismissed that when
the second images came out. So this is
the original image. This is the original
image that freaked everybody out. They
were like, "Oh my god, there's a face on
Mars." And then they came up with these
upgraded images and I was like, "Well,
that's not a face. It's just weird
shadows and it's probably just a
mountain." But man, that's an odd shape
&gt;&gt; or that face has been doctorred.
&gt;&gt; It could be true. Yeah. But also then I
looked at it and was like um that shape
is interesting like it it almost looks
unnatural. Then the new images from very
close to Sidonia that show a very clear
square.
&gt;&gt; This one's nuts cuz this one is
&gt;&gt; somewhere in the neighborhood of between
three it's plus 300 m. like they don't
know how much longer it is than 300 m,
but it's the minimum size of this thing
is 300 m across and it's a fullon
square.
&gt;&gt; Right angle, right angle, right? It's
like what the hell is that?
&gt;&gt; Well, as pull that picture up, Jamie,
&gt;&gt; as a geologist, I was fascinated when
Hogland uh first started talking about
what was happening here. So,
&gt;&gt; what's up, Jamie?
&gt;&gt; Which one?
&gt;&gt; Oh, that one. Yeah. Yeah, the one that
we bring up all the time.
&gt;&gt; Well, which one?
&gt;&gt; Oh, it don't matter. Some of them are
click on any of them.
&gt;&gt; Some of them are doctorred though.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, the non-docctored one. The one
next to it like right there. Look at
that. That's absolutely crazy.
&gt;&gt; So, I don't know if you I'm very
familiar with this image. I don't know
if you can see with your mind's eye.
You're looking the lower left. That's a
90° angle. If you can see the rest of
the 90° angle up at the top and over at
the side, if you can trace out, that is
one massive right there. Yeah, now you
can see it. Yeah, the computer has
cleaned it up. Nature does not work in
90° angles. So you're not going to get
wind erosion. Wind is called aolon
erosion. Fluial erosion is water
erosion. You're not going to get 90°
angles from from wind or water. So one
of the tenants in archaeology when you
see 90° angles, there's an
intentionality underlying that that
structure. If if it were a one-off, you
could say maybe it's a fluke. And it's
not. And this is on Mars. Jamie, I don't
know if you can do this. uh through
Freedom of Information, NASA had to
release all of the lunar images up
through the Clementine mission and they
didn't want to do that. And when they
did release them, they end up pixeling
out a whole bunch of stuff which made it
look even even more obvious than than it
was.
&gt;&gt; They're just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with us at this
point.
&gt;&gt; So, you got to say, what is it on on the
lunar surface that we paid for with our
tax dollars that we're not supposed to
be seeing? I mean, these were these were
uh tower structures. Do you can you see
the Clementine?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know which one.
&gt;&gt; Are there any undocured unblurred
versions of it that some
&gt;&gt; I haven't seen them in the public
office? I haven't seen them in the
public domain,
&gt;&gt; but you've seen them privately.
&gt;&gt; No, but what I'm saying is what through
Freedom of Information, what
&gt;&gt; Have you ever seen the undoc forced to
release? Why in the world would they be
pixelating the images that are on there
that that actually make them look even
even more obvious than they are? So, so
what we're seeing, what Hogland was
talking about, what you're seeing on
Mars is not happening in a vacuum. It's
happening, we're seeing the same thing
on on the lunar surface to varying
degrees. On Mars, there were
three-sided, four-sided, five-sided
pyramids.
&gt;&gt; Look at the one in the upper right hand
corner. That's odd.
&gt;&gt; It's the same thing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's very odd. So, here's here's
the kicker. We're sending the Viking
probes, Viking 1, Viking 2 in the 70s
went to Mars. 19,000 images were
captured from the orbiting uh part of
the mission. The other craft landed on
the surface and I can just imagine being
on the surface seeing this. It's like
this. This thing is like a spider comes
down the cloud of dust and this little
tube pops up and some sticky dental
floss stuff shoots out and then they
reel it in to collect dirt and microbes
and they reel it into broth because
they're looking for evidence of life on
Mars and it's happening next to massive
monuments and geometric structures that
are now dated about 50,000 years BP
before present. So they're looking for
microbes and signs of life next to the
most massive signs of life, you know,
that that you could imagine.
&gt;&gt; These, you said they're dated to 50,000
BC. These structures BP before present.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So how do they know that?
&gt;&gt; Those were uh when the Sidonia mission,
the that's the Sidonia scientists are
are estimating 50
&gt;&gt; 50,000 years. And the same with the the
lunar
I'm hesitating. the Sidonian, how are
they estimating that if they're using
probes from that far away?
&gt;&gt; They're using probes and I think
geologically they're they're using it's
relative dating. You know, they're
looking at strata and things like that.
And from the lunar sites, you know, they
brought back samples and
&gt;&gt; yeah, I'm hesitating. I don't know how
deep you want to go with all this, but
the as deep as you want. Well, the you
know the samples that came back from the
lunar surface had traces of um of metals
that do not occur naturally in ma in
nature naturally in nature. They are the
product of um you know advanced uh
machinery and
&gt;&gt; which what metals are these?
&gt;&gt; These were metals that came back when
they they brought back from the Apollo
mission. Uh and I think they brought
back oh I remember the names. That's one
Jamie can look up what the metals were
that that came back and and they don't
know where those those metals.
&gt;&gt; So, is this metals from Sidonia or is
this metals from the moon?
&gt;&gt; This is from the lunar the lunar sites
in the crater.
&gt;&gt; So, the structures on the moon, how old
they they think they're the same age as
the structures? They're estimating
50,000 BP. You know, there's a race for
the moon right now. And I'm fascinated
by this. You know, there was a time only
two nations on Earth had the money and
the technology to to go to the moon. It
was a former Soviet Union and former
United States because neither one's the
same country anymore. And um both those
countries have been so broke they
haven't been able to do it. India and
China are now sending the probes to the
moon.
We were going to the moon during the
cold war and it was it was a crazy time.
It was actually a very civilized war. I
mean the governments were at war but the
scientists were still cooperating
and there was an agreement that we would
not share publicly what was found on the
lunar surface and Russia did the same
thing. China was never part of that
agreement. So China has said when they
land they're going to televise
live what they find on the lunar surface
to the people of the earth. My sense,
Joe, and this is this will lead into a
whole conversation we're going to have
here. I think they'll find uh the
archaeological structures that we know
are there that we've seen in the
photographs. the inscriptions on those
on those structures we're going to be
able to read because there there's a a
thinking that those structures are from
ETSs from another time. But the evidence
suggests they're from us from a time in
our past, a cycle of civilization where
we did great and beautiful things by
working together until we destroyed one
another through war. And that we're
repeating that cycle again. So when they
is
&gt;&gt; that like drawing a lot of conclusions.
Isn't there other possibilities for what
happened to them?
&gt;&gt; Well, here's this is where I'm going
with this. When they when they see
what's on those temple walls, they're
they're going to see inscriptions in
languages that we already recognize and
and that will be the the smoking gun
like
&gt;&gt; why do you think that? because this is
what the
this is what the the researchers who are
working on these projects right now. And
they're combining this with so many of
what the ancient texts have always told
us. And this is where, you know, it gets
into a really
uh a kind of a sticky conversation
because it depends on how, you know,
people interpret these things. I'm
excited for it for this reason. I This
is obviously no ordinary time in the
history of our world and and they're
pushing for war. We're on the the verge
of global war. What would it mean if we
found on the surface on the lunar
surface evidence of us humans from
another time uh leaving a message in our
own languages ununiform Sanskrit uh
those kinds of things it could be one of
the most unifying factors right when
we're on on the the precipice of of war
&gt;&gt; I completely agree but we have to make a
lot of leaps in order for that to be
real like we haven't seen any writing so
why would they assume that there's a
bunch of different kinds of writing in
different languages.
&gt;&gt; Actually, I think they have seen um
&gt;&gt; who's that?
&gt;&gt; Well, when our space program
I think you've had guests on have talked
about this in the past, I think when our
space program was active, uh there were
broadcasts
from the lunar surface uh that were cut
off and astronauts had seen things that
they were not allowed to see and not
allowed to share.
&gt;&gt; That's what I heard. It sounds fun. It
sounds really fun. I want to believe
that.
&gt;&gt; Well, and some of them are leaving this
world now and on their,
&gt;&gt; you know, on their deathbed there. They
can't believe that this hasn't been made
made public already. So, there have
been, you know, recordings and videos
and things and I I think they're
authentic,
&gt;&gt; right? But this does it like we haven't
got boots on the ground in Sidonia,
right? So,
&gt;&gt; no, not not Sidon. Sidonia is Mars.
&gt;&gt; Well, exactly. So, how are they seeing
these inscriptions? So you saying these
inscriptions are on the moon?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, lunar surface. I'm sorry. I was
confused.
&gt;&gt; I was confused. So these astronauts are
saying that on the surface of the moon
they saw writing.
&gt;&gt; They've seen structures.
&gt;&gt; Structures.
&gt;&gt; Massive structures.
&gt;&gt; But what about the writing there?
&gt;&gt; They
[Laughter]
there were reports that they had seen
the writing, but we can't verify those.
We can't verify those.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So this is just uh pod talk.
&gt;&gt; Well, you know, yes,
&gt;&gt; kind of a little bit. A little bit
because we if there's no evidence at all
that there is not even an interview with
a guy who talks about when I was on the
moon, I saw writing.
&gt;&gt; Well, then this is where you start going
into the ancient texts,
&gt;&gt; okay,
&gt;&gt; and the traditions that are
relating our our relationship to
intelligences from from beyond this
world.
&gt;&gt; Yes. There's a lot of that
&gt;&gt; and there's there's a lot of that.
&gt;&gt; There's a lot of that in various
religions, too. It's it's very
fascinating.
&gt;&gt; Well, this is this is what I think is
important there. It is in religions, but
I think you can break out their
historical text and there's religious
text. So, if you're reading the Bible,
there's religion and history in the
Bible. If you're looking at Sumerian,
uh, Aadian, um, Babylonian text from the
Mesopotamian era, they're telling
similar stories. and and you've had
guests on talking about this where the
stories are similar, but the the
religion uh is not part of that. And so
I think what we're doing, we're kind of
beating around the bush to a deeper
conversation here. And that's why I've
hesitated a couple of times because I I
just don't want us to,
you know, to um to get so far down one
side that
&gt;&gt; Oh, don't worry about that. That's what
this show's all about. Okay. All right.
&gt;&gt; This all We should call the show rabbit
holes.
because people are always in the middle
of talking about one thing and they
pivot. It doesn't matter.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think this is all tied into
disclosure and what's happening, the
reluctance to to have the full
disclosure,
&gt;&gt; right? We've talked about that multiple
times. You I'm sure you were you in that
documentary, the age of disclosure.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; No. You've been in a lot of
documentaries.
&gt;&gt; I have been in a lot. I've been in a lot
and a lot of what I've said was left on
the cutting room floor
&gt;&gt; always.
&gt;&gt; And there's a couple reasons for that.
One thing I learned, Joe, and maybe
you've learned this as well. If you're
going to be in the documentary, ask if
you are on the front end of the filming
or the back end of the filming.
&gt;&gt; What does that mean?
&gt;&gt; Here's the reason. Are you one of the
early interviews or are you one of the
later interviews? Okay.
&gt;&gt; And here here's the reason.
&gt;&gt; They'll develop an arc in a story line.
&gt;&gt; And if you're early on, they're going to
ask you questions to support that arc in
that story line. Five interviews down,
somebody's going to come on and they're
going to introduce something. and and
the producer going to say, "Oh, there's
a new arc and new storyline, and now
everything that you interviewed for uh
may not be relevant in that conversation
anymore." So,
&gt;&gt; well, I don't think you can control
that. So,
&gt;&gt; you can ask, you just ask, you say,
"Where am I in the in the shooting
process?" And if if you're the first
one, say, you know, maybe come back and
and interview me.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This episode is brought to you by
Happy Dad Hard Seltzer. Most hard
beverages overcomplicate everything.
Happy Dad keeps it simple. Low
carbonation, gluten-free, and only 100
calories in every can. Barbecues, golf
rounds, hanging by the pool, chilling
after work, Happy Dad is perfect for
whatever you're up to. Everyone is
drinking all these skinny cans loaded
with sugar. But Happy Dad only has one
gram of sugar in a normal can. You can
grab a variety pack featuring lemon,
lime, watermelon, pineapple, and wild
cherry. And don't sleep on the grape
collab with Death Row Records. It's a
fan favorite for a reason. Happy Dad is
now available nationwide in the USA and
Canada. Go to your local liquor store or
visit happydad.com.
For a limited time, use the code Rogan
to buy one Happy Dad Trucker hat and get
one free. Enjoy a cold Happy Dad. Must
be 21 plus. Please drink responsibly.
Happy Dad, hard seltzer, NT malt,
alcohol, Orange County, California. So
&gt;&gt; a little bit later on,
&gt;&gt; is it your belief that there was a
civilization on Mars that were us and
that we migrated to Earth and then
eventually populated Earth? Is that what
you're thinking? Or that we coexisted in
both places?
&gt;&gt; I think we did.
&gt;&gt; And it sounds so crazy to say and Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, it does. It does. Well, you
you you probably travel in different
circles, but I mean to to the rational
rational people, most people hear that
and they go, "What? There were people on
Mars?" But as time goes on and more and
more discoveries, we we find out just
about the structures that are on Earth
and how old they might be and the actual
age of Homo sapiens, like how old we
might actually be where a lot like they
found that skull in China the other day
that was uh they just have you seen
this?
million-year-old homo sapien skull, but
apparently there's some debate about it.
It's going they're going back and forth,
but at the very least it's in the
conversation of human beings possibly
have existed at least in this form for a
million years, which is kind of nuts.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I find that the other day.
&gt;&gt; Oh, the found.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, they found it in 1990.
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What? I found it the other day.
&gt;&gt; No,
&gt;&gt; I read it on the BBC.
&gt;&gt; I know. I was going through the story
yesterday. What happened was some team
reconstructed parts of that skull with
new methods that are now available
&gt;&gt; and they suggest that it could say that
it was I think it was actually one of
those we've talked about the big head
the longe
&gt;&gt; oh right
&gt;&gt; it's one of those
that one's fascinating because that's a
larger human being
&gt;&gt; was it homo sapiens
&gt;&gt; yeah well they're
&gt;&gt; a branch from the denosovven so this
yeah this is the thing they
&gt;&gt; what is it called n
I get confused. I just saw I remember
long was the thing that they were saying
this
&gt;&gt; Julian. Okay, that is the other one.
&gt;&gt; That's it. That's the big headed one.
&gt;&gt; Uh I point I'm skeptical about those
because they find one fragment and
there's a lot of interpretation that's
going on there. The the consensus has
been for a long time that we we
appeared. Uh I'm just going to preface
this by saying I'm a degreed geologist.
I believe in evolution. Evolution is a
fact. I've seen it in the fossil record
for plants, animals, insects. Darwin's
theory of evolution breaks down when it
comes to humans. And it breaks down for
this reason. Uh we now can do what used
to sound like science fiction. If you
ever saw the first Jurassic Park
&gt;&gt; where they pulled the DNA out of the the
fossilized remains of ancient forms of
life in the movie, they brought them
back to life. I to the best of my
knowledge, we haven't done that. What we
have done is we can extract that DNA
from the bone marrow of fossilized
remains of beings that we used to
believe were our ancestors. And what's
happening is, and this is a mind-blower,
we know that we didn't descend from
Neanderthal. We shared the earth with
them certainly and and some people have
some Neanderthal DNA because of that,
but we did not descend from them. And we
didn't descend from many of the other
forms that you see on those traditional
trees. You know, you've got modern
humans here and all these all these
lines connecting, but if you look close
at the lines, most of them are broken
lines, Joe, because there's no solid
evidence. It's called inferred or
speculative relationships. Uh cycle I've
got I've I've got a picture of it here
if we want to see that. But but what
they're showing is that um we showed up
about 200,000 years ago. Now, there's a
little evidence that may have been back
as as far as 300,000.
But the the kicker is that we can now
look at the DNA and reverse engineer it
and say, "What did it take to get where
we are?" And what scientists are now
calling the the smoking gun, and there's
still a lot of controversy around this,
is human chromosome number two. Human
chromosome number two is the second
largest chromosome in in every cell of
the body. It's got about 1,200 or so
genes in that chromosome and just one of
them uh gene TBR number one is
responsible for most of the brain that
we have for our neoortex. So our
humanness, our empathy, sympathy,
compassion, love, our cognitive
abilities, uh the mirror neurons, all
these kinds of things are because that
one gene. Well, where this gets really
interesting is where did chromosome 2
come from? And scientists have the
answer but they don't like the answer
because chromosome 2 is the product of
of a fusion. Uh proceedings from
national academy of sciences the volume
genetics says this very clearly. We
conclude that the origin of human
chromosome 2 uh is the product of an
ancestral fusion
of telomeir to telomeir fusion of two
pre-existing chromosomes. That does not
happen in nature. It can't happen in
nature. So here's here's what they're
saying. You got two fully
two fully formed fully functional
chromosomes and on the end are the the
telomeres uh that protect those
chromosomes when the cells divide.
And that's why they're on the end. They
take the hit. It's a trauma in a cell
when those when those chromosomes are
pulled apart and some of the DNA doesn't
make it. So nature puts telomeres on the
end to take the hit. So the good DNA
remains intact and that's why it's on
the ends. Human chromosome 2, those
telomeres are right in the middle of the
chromosome where they shouldn't be
because those chromosomes were fused
together
uh about 200,000 years ago when we
&gt;&gt; when we appeared. And if that was the
only one, you could say, well, maybe
it's a fluke. Chromosome number seven.
I'm a musician when I I'm not doing what
I'm doing now. Long before I was a a
researcher. And one of the things I
always used to to wonder about, you
know, we share 98% of our DNA with
chimpanzees,
but you don't hear chimpanzees sing. You
know, you're never going to hear
chimpanzees sing Led Zeppelin Stairway
to Heaven.
&gt;&gt; And you ask, well, why not? I mean, 98%
of the DNA is we share with them, but
it's because of of chromosome 7. And for
about 175 million years, this chromosome
was stable. And all primates, all of
them, orangutang, gorilla, chimps, all
the primates, all of a sudden there was
this little this little switch of a
couple of genes that connected our
tongue and our brain and our jaw. And we
can sing and we can have complex speech
like no other form of life. It happened
200,000 years ago. What are the odds of
that happening when chromosome 2
&gt;&gt; is is fusing?
&gt;&gt; So
I' I've worked with scientists uh my
whole life both in academia and in uh in
the corporations. I was a problem solver
for Fortune 500 companies uh through the
late 70s, 80s and and 90s. And one of
the things I've seen about scientists,
it's it's fascinating
is that there is is one way of thinking
that says we take all the evidence and
we force it into a pre-existing model
like all the new discoveries trying to
force that into Darwin's theory of
evolution or
we allow the new evidence to lead to the
story that it tells. And this is where
science is stuck right now because the
old theory Darwin's theory of evolution
is in trouble and it's the DNA is is the
reason it's in trouble. It's no longer
superficial or you know fossil evidence.
I mean the DNA is telling the story. Uh
and the new story suggests at the very
least a scientist has to say there's
been some kind of intelligent
intervention. And this is where science
gets stuck because science says it's not
equipped to talk about any kind of an
intelligent intervention. But that ties
in to everything that's happening now.
You know, if we're going to talk about
ancient civilizations or if we're going
to talk about we've been here before,
are we going to talk about
uh you know what it is that is the
disclosure? All of those kinds of
things. So science is kind of at a
crossroads right now. There
there is something called the standard
model and that applies to evolution and
what the evidence suggests is that we
are the product of an intelligent and an
intentional act. Who or what that is,
that's where it gets it can get sticky.
Uh the universe, we've had physicists on
here and and really good physicists that
and some of them are not aware of some
of the new information that's come out
now.
When I was in school back in the 50s,
60s and and 70s, I was taught that the
universe is dead, inert just cold. Uh,
and we happen to be lucky biology. You
know, that's that's kind of what they
used to teach. Now, physicists are
suggesting universe is alive. It is
intelligent and it's conscious. And one
of the reasons for this, and you can go
to the NASA website, and you can you can
look at some of these images. the James
Webb Space Telescope, they're showing
galaxies that are in proximity of of
something that is dangerous to them,
like an exploding, you know, whatever.
And what they'll do is they'll create
jets from the center uh both directions,
these jets that actually move them out
of the way. And I talk about I've got a
new book and I talk about that in the
new book. Uh so it's documented in in
the book. they actually move them to a
safer place. And you say, well, maybe
that's a fluke. It's a one-off. And now
that they have found that, they found it
happens time and time again.
&gt;&gt; So space itself is conscious in some
form.
&gt;&gt; Conscious. Okay. Conscious and
intelligent. Those are two two very
different things. But that is a very
different story. If if our universe is
alive and intelligent and conscious and
we are the product of an intentional
act, we solve our problems, Joe. We
build our world based on the way we've
been taught to think about ourselves. We
use our resources. We um we apply our
technology based on the way we've been
taught to think about ourselves. And we
have been taught that we are a flawed
form of life.
That uh we are powerless victims of the
world around us. And because of that,
this is going to lead into this whole
conversation. Because of that, we need a
savior. And that savior is being touted
as technology. So now we are living at
this time where we're being encouraged,
indoctrinated, coerced, mandated
sometimes to embrace
the technology outside of our bodies
because we have been conditioned to
believe that we are are a broken, flawed
form of life. And you're seeing this
play out in the AI conversation. you're
seeing it play out in um what's called
the transhuman movement, the the
intentional movement to replace our
humanness with computer chips in the
brain, chemicals in the blood, RFID
chips under the skin. Uh and it's all
playing out right now, Joe. I mean, this
this can't go on for, you know, another
20 years because it's moving too fast.
This is the generation, right? And this
I'm very passionate about this. The
experts are saying unless we change our
trajectory right now, we very probably
are the last generation of pure humans
that the world will ever know. That by
2032
when you go to the supermarket or go to
the airport, the people you talk to will
be some hybrid, maybe some more and some
less, but will have some kind of
technology embedded into their into
their bodies.
I was on a panel recently and I was with
a group of scientists and they said,
'Well, what's wrong with that? You know,
isn't that the next step? Isn't that our
our natural step and and uh and our
evolution? And I said, no, it is not.
And here's the reason. When we replace
our natural biology with synthetics,
our natural abilities begin to atrophy.
Cells will, let me just give a perfect
example.
Um, we used to be taught
when I was in school, I was taught that
we're we're born into this world with a
fixed number of brain cells. And every
every beer I drink in college,
&gt;&gt; yeah, I remember that.
&gt;&gt; All right, you're I'm I'm going to lose
some brain cells. Well, what I'm going
to say next is not a reason to drink the
beer.
&gt;&gt; But what they found, there's a part of
the human brain, it's the hippo campus,
that is producing new brain cells until
the last breath we take on this this
earth. There's a catch and the catch
tells the story.
If we do not use those new brain cells
in a meaningful way within about seven
to 10 days, the body says, "Oh, you
didn't use it, so you must not need it."
And those cells will atrophy and die.
&gt;&gt; That makes sense because I always feel
dumber when I come back from vacation.
&gt;&gt; Are you drinking beer on the on
vacation?
&gt;&gt; Not this time, but sometimes. Yeah. Uh,
in the octagon, it only takes one second
to change everything. One punch, one
choke, one shock no one saw coming. And
at UFC 320, DraftKings Sportsbook, the
official sports betting partner of the
UFC, puts you right in the middle of the
action. Ankalia versus Pereira 2
headlines a stacked night of fights. New
customers, this one is for you. Bet just
$5. And if your bet wins, you'll get
paid out in $200 instantly. Download the
DraftKings Sportsbook app and use the
code Rogan. That's code Rogan to turn
five bucks into 200 in bonus bets if
your bet wins. In partnership with
DraftKings, the crown is yours. Gambling
problem, call 1800 gambler. In New York,
call 8778 hope and wire or text hope and
Y467-369.
In Connecticut, help is available for
problem gambling. Call 888-789-7777
or visit ccpg.org. Please play
responsibly. on behalf of Bootill Casino
and Resort in Kansas. Fees may apply in
Illinois. 21 and over. Age and
eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Void
in Ontario. Bet must win to receive
reward. Minimum minus 500 odds required.
Bonus bets expire 7 days after issuance.
For additional terms and responsible
gaming resources, see dkg.co/audio.
But that principle, so it's called use
it or lose it. We've all heard that.
That principle applies to every system
in the human body. It applies to our
cognitive abilities, to our reproductive
system. And when we replace our natural
biology with these synthetics,
this is exactly what's happening. Uh,
and it we've been doing this long
enough. Virtual reality goggles, for
example, they've been around long
enough.
&gt;&gt; Psychology magazine has published
article after article. If you take young
kids with malleable brains, parents are
busy. They want to entertain them. So,
they sit them on the floor, put a
virtual VR goggle on, you know, three or
four hours a day and say, "Hey." So,
here's the kid. They're just sitting
there like this and they're seeing
images that they would never see in
their backyard and colors and sounds and
situations. But here's the thing, it's
all being done for them. They are not
using their imagination like you and I
did when we were kids. They're not using
their imagination. So, so now what's
happening is there are parts of their
brain that are atrophying. So, they are
uh diminished cognitive abilities,
diminished language skills, diminished
communication skills. But listen to
this. The visual cortex, which is what
they're using to watch everything, is
enlarged in the brain. the visual cortex
gets bigger because that's what
&gt;&gt; that's what's getting exercise.
&gt;&gt; That's that's what they're doing now
because of epigenetics. All of that can
be reversed when the kids are put into a
healthy environment. Go outside and play
with your friends.
&gt;&gt; You know, they're young enough that they
can reverse that,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I spent a lot of time with shamans in um
in the Yucatan and in um in Peru, Costa
Rica, places like that, and they they
found the same thing. uh the shamans
that maybe do
you know 5,000 IASa journeys because
they're leading groups and every time
the group does it they do it. So you
know they're doing that their visual
cortexes are are enlarged but their
other abilities are diminished. Now, if
you're a shaman in the jungle, maybe
that's no big deal. But if you're a
software engineer in Silicon Valley
writing code for nuclear triggers and on
the weekends, you know, this is what
you're doing every weekend chronically,
uh, it could be a problem.
&gt;&gt; Have they done studies on that where
they've shown the declined ability or
cognitive function due to psychedelic
use?
&gt;&gt; Uh, yes, they have. Um,
&gt;&gt; any specific psychedelics?
Iawaska was one and and I hesitate
because there are different different
kinds of of Iawaska different it's
called a brew different kinds of of
brew.
&gt;&gt; So is the idea that people are overdoing
it they're doing it too much.
&gt;&gt; Well I want to be clear about this one
off I don't think there's any any
problem if it's done therapeutically.
I'll give you a perfect example. I I was
speaking at a facility. I was invited as
a guest speaker to go with a cohort uh
through 7-day programs
and part of that program was Iawaska,
part of it was breath work, part of it
was body work, part of it was natural uh
raw food, uh you know, the the whole
gamut. And there was a woman and her
husband who came and they were both
healthy. They couldn't have a baby. They
couldn't conceive. Her eggs were good.
His sperm was good. the doctors couldn't
figure it out and they said there's
there's something else going on. So,
they came to to this program and the
woman and one one time she had a plant
medicine experience and in that
experience a being came to her and
reached in and pulled her heart out and
it was all black and had stuff all over
it and and the being cleaned it off and
put it back in. did the same thing with
the womb. And she had had she had been
traumatized as a child, had been abused,
uh had not resolved that apparently, uh
you know, on a deep emotional level. And
so there was a part of her that felt
that she wasn't worthy to conceive and
it was being it was shown up that way.
And in her plant medicine experience,
this is what worked for her. And they
they conceived shortly. I think they
conceived that week while they were
there when they they did the numbers
backwards.
Now, as a scientist, can you prove that
or you can say there's a high
correlation
between the time that an individual has
an experience like that and when, you
know, when they successfully conceive.
But that's a one-off. And I I don't that
therapeutically, I don't think there's
anything. It's It's not going to be
harmful one-off. It's the chronic use
&gt;&gt; for recreation. That's where we get into
&gt;&gt; Well, it seems to me the people that uh
I have encountered that use it maybe a
little bit too much uh they seem to have
a loss of a perception of how other
people see them.
&gt;&gt; They they they get slippery like the
world gets slippery. They they act weird
and they don't know they're acting
weird. And it seems like there's like a
a a piece of the interface has been
damaged. If that makes any sense. It
makes total sense. And I knew no matter
where we go in this conversation to
start with, it's going to bring us back
to to the same to the same place. And I
can show you exactly where that
slipperiness comes from in just a
moment,
&gt;&gt; okay?
&gt;&gt; When when we get there because and I'll
just I'll say it right now, there's a
part of us that doesn't live inside the
body, but that the body
tunes to. And I'm using that from an
engineering perspective that the body
tunes to through the antenna of neurons
and DNA.
And this is where it gets fascinating
conversation.
Scientists now there a segment of
scientists are beginning to look at the
human body
as more than soft, sticky, wet, gooey,
mushy, you know, cells and and skin. And
Joe, they're actually looking at us from
an IT perspective. Now, this sounds
crazy, but they're looking at the human
body from the perspective of information
passing through and communicating with
the world around us
that we are such an advanced form of
life. We're not primitive computer chips
and wires and chemicals. We're more than
that. We're neurons and cell membranes
and ion potentials moving across cell
walls.
And the ability for us to self-regulate
what is now being called soft. We are a
soft technology.
The ability to do that is the core of
all the ancient and cherished spiritual
traditions in the mystery schools. How
we go about regulating this this
technology. So now let let me just break
that down. Okay. A little bit. I
mentioned during the cold war it was a
very civilized war. I remember was 1980s
I was uh I was working I was civilian
working on contract for the DoD and with
a civilian security I had a yellow
badge. It was not high secret clearance.
It wasn't like top secret or anything.
But we had access to research papers
that were coming in from the Soviet
Union. Even though we were at war on one
level, the scientists were still
cooperating.
And the Soviets were the first that sent
these diagrams of a human cell as a
circuit diagram. Now, this is a
mind-blow. I mean, it it wasn't a
metaphor. Literally, the every human
cell is a gated circuit. It's got an
input and output. It has transistor, the
the equivalent of transistors and
resistors and capacitors. Every cell
produces about 07 volts of electrical
potential. And you say, well, that's not
very much. And I agree. And then you do
the math. We got about 50 trillion cells
in the body.
50 trillion cells times 07 volts. It's
about three three and a half trillion
volts of of electrical potential in the
human body. Every cell is the equivalent
of uh of a transistor. Every cell is the
equivalent of a resistor of a capacitor.
We're photon emitters and there's a
whole science now about reading the
photon emissions from humans and we're
photon receivers and we store
information just like a computer chip.
And uh this goes on blockchain
technology. Our DNA stores information.
And the way that it's described is that
it is secure, it's transparent, and it's
immutable and it's distributed. And
those are exactly the terms being used
for blockchain technology today because
blockchain technology in the world
actually mirrors the technology of human
DNA.
We have a a record and you and I every
human body we have a record of every
successful genetic transaction
for our species. It is transparent. It's
immutable. If you know how to look for
it, it's not hidden. It's secure and
it's distributed across all the nodes
that we call humans. This goes on and on
and on. The point is that we are the
only form of life that can consciously
self-regulate
all of this technology and apply it to
our healing, to our intuition,
to our resilience, to change, to any of
these kinds of things. And the ability
to do that is the secret that has been
hidden within the mystery schools,
within the religions. Uh and it is the
reason for everything you're seeing
happening in the world today. There's a
concerted effort, Joe, to deny us our
ability to express our humanness.
And part of that effort is replacing our
humanness with technology. So that's a
big statement and I I know we'll
&gt;&gt; but that's fairly recent, right? The the
effort to stop people from expressing
their human humanness, that's not
recent.
&gt;&gt; Well, so now now we're going to get to
the crux of it. Okay.
&gt;&gt; So here's and I wasn't sure how we'd get
into this.
I lost my mom to COVID uh just a couple
of years ago and right before she died,
she looked at me and she said, "Greg,
the world is going to hell in a
handbasket."
And I always got the going to hell part.
I never knew exactly what the handbasket
&gt;&gt; I never understood that phrase. What is
that phrase?
&gt;&gt; I I don't know, but I knew what she
meant. And what she meant was it the
world looks scary to her, Joe, and it
does a lot of people. It looked like
things were happening for no reason, for
no apparent there was no parent
structure. It looked like things were
just popping off here and there out of
control. Look crazy. And she she said,
you know, this isn't my world anymore.
Well, we are in the middle of a process.
The process has a beginning. It has an
end. We're in it. The only way out of it
is to go through it. And that's why I'm
excited to have this conversation with
you. There two two parallel themes that
are playing out on our on our world
right now and we we can explore both of
them. One there is a concerted effort
for the first time in the history of our
world to remake the stated intent to
remake our world and to remake our
bodies.
Now we've never had the technology to do
that but we we do now. So that the
intent to remake the world and remake
our bodies, that's one conversation. The
other conversation, the best science of
the modern world, is showing us that
we're not what we've been told. We're so
much more than we've been led to
believe. And we're about to give our
humanness away to the technology before
we even know what it means to be human
if we remake our bodies. So this is and
this is in this generation. this this
cannot drag on for you know 5 years 10
years because all the tech is being
pushed on us so quickly. I'm a systems
thinker and rather than get in to the
weeds of the Democrats and the
Republicans and liberals and
conservatives and which is all important
and we can have that conversation, but
there's something much much bigger
that's playing out here and it literally
we're in a battle for our humanness and
if we don't claim our humanness, there
are powers and forces that will stop at
nothing to deny us our humanness. One of
the reasons they're denying it is what
we just said. Because it's through our
humanness that we have these
extraordinary potentials
that empower us as sovereign, critically
thinking, self-regulating human beings.
And it's very difficult to play out the
agendas that are proposed for the world
upon populations that are sovereign,
critically thinking, self-regulating
human beings. So just like
&gt;&gt; well the problem seems to be power and
control. That's the problem. And the
only way to have power and control over
people is to limit their ability to
express themselves and then keep them at
each other's throats.
&gt;&gt; And that that is those are two things
that are happening all the time with
with social media. People that manage
social media are consistently trying to
limit the reach of people that have
voices or narratives that don't approve
that they don't approve of. And
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; ultimately what you're seeing in other
countries is moving to digital IDs. This
is just implemented in Europe and in the
UK. You're seeing in a lot of places
where you're going to have to need that
to work and vote and travel and
&gt;&gt; and it'll be even more of a constriction
on your ability to express yourself.
Particularly when you think about the
UK, which has had more than 12,000
arrests for very mild social media
posts.
&gt;&gt; Isn't that crazy? I mean, I can't
believe it. I I've been watching this
stuff play out.
&gt;&gt; Fascinating. And the the the fact that
the our mainstream media is relatively
silent on this is insane. You're you're
seeing a a complete total attack on one
of the most fundamental principles of
the Western world, which is your ability
to express yourself and your ability to
call out that you think that the
policies that are being implemented in
your country are destructive. That
that's people have always been able to
do that. These people are not calling
for violence. They're not they're being
arrested for wild things. People are
being arrested for liking posts. Y
&gt;&gt; they're being arrest some people were in
investigated for viewing posts.
&gt;&gt; 12,000 people arrested by the police in
the UK, the same place that just
implemented digital ID. I mean, this is
an Orwell nightmare coming to life right
in front of our face. And no one's
flinching. No one in America is freaking
out about what's happening in the UK at
all. I mean, you get people online that
are kind of freaked out by it, but
they're way more freaked out by
nonsensical things like whether or not
what Jimmy Kimmel said in his monologue
was offensive.
&gt;&gt; They'll they'll go to the ends of the
earth to fight that. Like,
&gt;&gt; well, they're programmed. That's the
programming.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's easy. That's a that's a
simple thing and it doesn't freak you
out. Like, if you could get Jimmy Kimmel
canceled, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] him. If you could do
that, like you have some power. You you
have power. But what you really don't if
you look at what's going on like in the
UK, what what they're what they're
learning over there is that they are in
a tyrannical government and it's slowly
but surely. It's got it's got its back.
It's got the hooks in. It's putting the
rear naked choke in. It's got them
locked up. They've got to do something
about that.
&gt;&gt; Why do you think that's happening?
&gt;&gt; Why? Because of what we talked about.
Power. power and control in resources.
And a very limited amount of people are
controlling a a huge amount of people. A
limited amount of people with fantastic
access to resources and the ability for
the first time in human history where
you have individuals that are in charge
of companies that are they can shift the
entire narrative of the world. So
they're doing it through these tech
companies for the first time ever.
Totally unanticipated. 20 years ago
didn't exist. So I'm saying for the
first time the tech allows for the
remaking of our humanness.
&gt;&gt; Well, it allows for new methods of
control and resource extraction. And we
found out that data itself is a
fantastic resource and worth billions
and billions of dollars. So some of the
richest companies that have ever
existed. They're data companies now.
That that's kind of nuts and that's like
a we miss that. But this is all the same
thing that happens with kings and with
emperors. It's control. You got to limit
the people's ability to rebel. Limit
their ability to gather resources. Keep
them at each other's throats
ideologically. Keep them fighting over
the dumbest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] possible, including the
color of their skin. Fight over
everything. What what what gods you
believe in, what foods you eat, what
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] computer you use. Keep them
fighting over everything. And then get
social media bots to continue that fight
going all day long. Meanwhile, closer
and closer and closer to total control
of the population where they're even
openly stating it. Hillary Clinton said
in an interview, "If we lose if we we
can't control social media, we lose
control."
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Like, yeah, you're not supposed to have
control over other human beings. Yeah.
You're going to lose the thing you're
not supposed to have. An elected
official is supposed to be a
representative for the people. You're
supposed to be a person who's a public
servant where you go out and you do this
incredibly moral and ethical and
beautiful thing where you sacrifice your
time for the betterment of your
community and your society instead of
just a means of extracting fantastic
wealth that is totally unprecedented and
that shouldn't exist in the first place.
You shouldn't be able to take that
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] job and then immediately go and
start working for some Fortune 500
company making billions of dollars. Like
that's crazy if you're a a government
employee in involved in any regulatory
fashion and then you go and work for the
very industry you were regulating. Or if
you're a person who runs for office and
you get in office and then all of a
sudden you're worth hundreds of millions
of dollars when your salary is $170,000
a year. Like it's it's real obvious
what's going on. It's just wealth
extraction. And the way that the way to
do that is with control. You have to
have control over people and you have to
be able to censor them because you're
going to call that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out.
&gt;&gt; Everything you Yes. And everything
you're talking about is part of a bigger
picture.
&gt;&gt; So how deep you want to go?
&gt;&gt; All the way to the bottom.
&gt;&gt; So do but do you think the bigger
picture is natural? Like these are
natural patterns that human beings
follow when they get power and control
over people because that that does seem
to be the case. It's just on a much
grander scale. Now,
&gt;&gt; I think what you're talking about, power
and control, lust and greed, there are
individuals that have a propensity for
those things that are going to fall into
those roles very easily. They're pawns.
They don't even know that they are
supporting something much darker than
&gt;&gt; What do you think is the source of this
much darker threat?
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, this will open the door to
answering Sidonia
&gt;&gt; and everything else that we've done. So,
we're not we're not totally beating
around the bush. We're going to bring
this all together.
&gt;&gt; I wasn't sure how deep you want to go
with this, Joe. And and what I'll say is
I'm going to acknowledge things we're
talking about for a lot of people is a
very different way of thinking. And it
certainly is different from what I was
conditioned. I was born and raised in
northern Missouri, a rural community. um
my first degree is in geology and
computer science. This a very different
way of thinking and it's where the
evidence is leading us.
What the our most ancient and cherished
texts whether you're talking about
religion or or not religion,
they say that we are born into uh an
ancient struggle that began long before
we ever got here.
uh and for lack of a better term and
this is where words
words are powerful and they carry a lot
of baggage. It's it's a struggle between
good and evil. All right, we're born
into the struggle between good and evil.
It's not a religious struggle.
When we talk about evil,
I think it's important to quantify what
that evil is. And to do that, we have to
talk about who we are. There's something
inside of us, Joe. And this is where
science is stuck. This is where science
and spirituality come together in a
beautiful way. And this is where
language may fail me. So I'm going to do
my best. There is something inside of us
that is so rare and so precious and so
ancient and sacred and powerful and
beautiful that there are forces that
have in history and are currently
working to to deny us access to this
force. The force is the reason for the
ancient texts, the spiritual traditions.
And there there's two ways that we we
can have this conversation.
You can say we can do it from a biblical
perspective and talk about angels and
demons. We could do it from a high-tech
perspective and talk about an advanced
civilization from another world in
another time. and you're talking about
the same thing, exactly the same
conversation
as to our origin. Uh there was an
intentional intervention that created
this. Biblical traditions are giving us
one perspective.
The Mesopotamian texts are telling us
that we are the product of the blood of
of a higher form of life. And now the
archaeological sites are revealing that
those what's reported in those Sumerian
texts actually existed. Uh I I was a
member back in the 90s.
&gt;&gt; What specifically did they report in
those?
&gt;&gt; Well, archaeologically
&gt;&gt; the Well, let me say I I was a in the
90s I was a member of an organization
called BAR, Biblical Archaeology Review.
And the idea is that you you follow the
in the the the instructions in the text
and you go someplace and you dig and
there is what the text is talking about
from 3,000 years ago. So they use that
to try to validate the events, not not
the religiosity, but the events in the
Mesopotamian texts when we talk about
the king's list. you've had guests on
that have talked about the the king's
list um in Sumeriia that talks it
literally says when when the kingship
descended from the heavens to the earth
and then it gives the list of the kings
uh and then there was another flood and
they evacuated and they came back and
then they created humans and it it
actually lines up datewise with the 200
250,000 years of when we were created
but there's no religion involved. Um, so
two different languages. Are we talking
about an advanced civilization
uh and our relationship to them a long
time ago? Are we talking about angels
and demons from a long time ago? Are we
talking about uh beings with uh with
wings in the religious tradition or or
when you look at the Samrian traditions,
the kings all had wings as well,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; But they're telling the same story. And
what the story is is that we
are an intent. We're the product of an
intentional act and we were imbued with
a force that was greater even than those
who created us and there has been an
effort from that time to deny us that
force.
&gt;&gt; Well, how do you know that our force is
greater than those that created us?
&gt;&gt; I don't know this.
&gt;&gt; Where are you getting that from?
&gt;&gt; That is from if you're familiar with the
Gnostic texts uh in the Gnostic texts
the
so the the Dead Sea Scrolls were
discovered in 1946 47. The oldest
unedited records of the Old Testament
push push the date back a thousand
years. The in 45 and 46
the oldest records of the New Testament
and the texts that were excluded were
discovered in the little village along
the Nile in Egypt called Nag Hamadi. Uh
it's can I just tell it's a crazy story.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
There's not much firewood
uh along the Nile in Egypt. And there
was a a woman uh who needed kindling to
feed her family, to build the fires, to
feed her family and heat their home. And
she she told her son, "Go find some
kindling." And he was very resourceful,
no trees. So he found an old tomb. And
in the tomb were clay voses. And he
opened those voses and there were uh
documents that were very dry and brittle
and made great kindling.
&gt;&gt; Oh no. And we don't know how many were
lost uh before the authorities were
noted, but right now there are 13 bound.
&gt;&gt; They they cooked a bunch of them.
&gt;&gt; They burned they used them for fuel.
&gt;&gt; Oh my god.
&gt;&gt; But but so here but here's here's what's
left. What's left? There were uh 13
bound books representing over 50 texts.
They were the oldest records of the New
Testament. Uh, and they were the records
that were excluded by the the Catholic
Church.
&gt;&gt; Are there any images of these books?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Jamie, can you find those?
&gt;&gt; I've got them on my
&gt;&gt; I brought this for you.
&gt;&gt; All right.
Look at them. But
&gt;&gt; yeah, so there's there's the 13 uh bound
texts. So among these were things like
the gospel of Thomas which is considered
the second most heretical book uh in the
Nagamadi library. There's the gospel of
John also called the secret book of John
also called the apocryphan of John which
is considered the first most heretical
book. Uh there are books from Gnostic
women. Thunder perfect mind is a book by
a gnostic woman that's in there. The
Gospel of James is in there. So these
these and I'll be very clear uh if you
had Wes Huff here who I know you've had
before and I think he's he's brilliant
scholar uh he would say that these are
not accepted
um because of they're not accepted by
the church because of dating and because
of you know there's a lot of reasons but
there's a lot of new research showing
that
uh that these are worthy of um of
exploring
uh with the same validity that we give
to the other texts that we're
&gt;&gt; What are they dated to?
&gt;&gt; The they're dated the late 1st early
second century somewhere right around
there. some some of them later. Um the
the uh the book of John, the the secret
book of John, what makes it so
exceptional is that he believes he said
that it was dictated to him by uh Jesus
of Nazareth after his crucifixion. So it
wasn't before, it came after. But the
gospel of Thomas, the gospel of Thomas
is one of the probably the most
controversial. It's 114
sayings
um
that were recorded by uh by Thomas and
the book says Ditimus Thomas was uh was
the name and it's almost like it it's
different from all the other books in
that it is each saying is is a teaching
unto itself
and
what he is saying are
again I'm hesitating because we're
covering so much ground here.
What
Yeshua was his name. What he was
teaching was so profound for his time.
There were outer teachings and inner
teachings. The outer teachings were for
the masses. And it's primarily what you
see in the gospels. The inner teachings
were for those initiates that could
really understand what it was he was
saying. And that's what the gospel of
Thomas uh appears to be. It did come
from a later time. I don't think it
invalidates that uh uh you know what it
is that that is being said in there.
&gt;&gt; What is it being said that's so
controversial?
&gt;&gt; Well, there's 114 sayings in there, but
the bottom line and this is one I think
that is probably one of the most
well-known where he says what you have
what you bring forth from within you
will save you and what you don't bring
forth from within you will destroy you.
He's saying there's a power inside of us
that has to be expressed. And these
texts are all about how we awaken that
that power. Okay? So the name I'm going
to use a word and then I'll I'll define
it. The name that is given to that power
traditionally is called divinity. But it
has nothing to do with religion. So that
association is made because there are
schools of divinity that make that and
they're they're great schools. They do
great things. But the contemporary
definition of divinity, I I love this.
The ability to transcend perceived
limitations and that's it. So the
ability tr to transcend to become more
than perceived.
Joe, you and I, our listeners, we are we
are living limits that probably aren't
even real. We're living within limits
that we have been indoctrinated to
accept about ourselves. Divinity is our
ability to become the best version of
ourselves. expressions of divinity,
imagination. I mean, no other form of
life can do what we do with imagination.
I want to talk about that in just a
moment. It's more than just a picture in
your mind. An an image in the mind is
setting in motion a cascade of chemical
effects in the human body that literally
change us. We are changed in the
presence of the right kind of
imagination. And the books tell us how
how to do that. So imagination,
creativity, innovation, empathy,
sympathy, love, compassion, healing,
forgiveness,
these are expressions of human divinity.
It's what sets us apart from all our
forms of life and makes us such powerful
beings.
the purpose of evil. And this might be
the most important thing that that we
say today because it's a nebulous
concept, good and evil, until until you
give it a benchmark.
The purpose of evil is to deny human
divinity. The purpose of evil is to deny
us our greatest expressions,
imagination, creativity, the ability to
communicate and share ideas, empathy,
sympathy, self-healing, all of those
things. So in a very real sense, Joe,
anything that denies those things is an
expression of evil. So when we find that
algorithms are denying us the ability to
communicate our ideas from this
perspective, that's an expression of
evil. When we find we put something into
our bodies that prevents us from healing
our own bodies, that is an expression of
evil. What the Gnostic texts are saying
is that we are in a process that has a
beginning and an end. And the purpose of
the process is to deny humankind
our own humanness that has been playing
out over eons. And now the technology is
allowing it to play out to a greater
degree because things like AI, things
like misused, I'm not anti- AI, it's how
it's used, uh things like computer chips
in the brain, computer brain interface,
all these things. What they're doing,
Joe, is they are denying our humanness.
Use it or lose it. We've if we're using
technology in place of our imagination,
for example, and the psychology journals
are are full of articles about this.
People that chronically use artists,
musicians.
My wife is a voting member of the
Grammys, and we just had this
conversation.
Uh you've got musicians who go to chat
GPT and say hey write me a song and now
put some music to that song and now you
enter it with a Grammys and you are
competing against a human who has
labored 30 or or so years to master
their voice and and an instrument and
you say is that fair? Well they're
they're struggling with that right now.
So these are all expressions of of
anything that denies our humanness
uh from that perspective is an
expression of evil. Who is doing that?
That is what those texts are all about.
That's what the texts are are are
talking to us about.
&gt;&gt; Here's an interesting uh this is Gospel
of Thomas 11:14. This how it ends. Simon
Peter said to them, "Let Mary go away
from us, for women are not worthy of
life." Jesus said, "Look, I will draw
her in so as to make her male so that
she too may become a living male spirit
similar to you. But I say to you, every
woman who makes herself male will enter
the kingdom of heaven."
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, what they're what is going on pull
&gt;&gt; I'm just pull up I'm not sure why you
chose that one. I I just
&gt;&gt; let me Can you pull up number six?
&gt;&gt; That's a very interesting part.
&gt;&gt; We can talk about it because he it's in
code. He and he's talking about the the
marriage the sacred marriage of
masculine and feminine. Uh and it's when
you he said when you make the two one
and the inside like the outside then you
will say the mountain move and the
mountain will move. And what he's
talking about is is
honoring the masculine and the feminine.
And that's more than just a metaphor. I
mean there's a whole thing that goes
with that. Can you bring up uh saying
number 70?
&gt;&gt; 70. Sure.
&gt;&gt; Or number 10.
&gt;&gt; Oh, start 70.
&gt;&gt; H.
So 70 says Jesus says if you bring it
into being within you, then that which
you have will save you. If you do not
have it within you, then that which you
do not have within you will kill you.
Jesus says, "I will destroy this house
and no one will be able to build it
again."
&gt;&gt; This is the thing. He's in the the
Christian doctrine, we're led to believe
that he was a peacemaker. And what it
says very clearly in the Gospel of
Thomas, he he says, and if you go to the
early
&gt;&gt; as far as when I was looking it up, this
uh the Catholics say that some of this
stuff Jesus did say,
&gt;&gt; oh, he said it. They
&gt;&gt; some of it he did not say, and some of
it's flatout made up. They have a
problem with the with the dating, but
they also have a problem. It doesn't
support the narrative that was this is
what so there were two councils. There
was a council of Carthage and the
council of Naa. Uh and this is where
they excluded these documents, but they
had been accepted prior to that just
just like uh Enoch. You've had people in
here talk about the book of Enoch and
that was accepted before these as well.
&gt;&gt; So these were what these are, they're
inner teachings not meant for the
masses. um based upon the the concepts
that he's sharing and this is where he's
saying there is something inside of us
and the rest of the gospels this is what
Philip and Thomas are talking about is
that we are imbued with this force given
to no other form of life it's a a light
uh it is an intelligence and when we are
fully empowered in in this intelligence
we are sovereign critically thinking
beings and we are no longer susceptible
to and vulnerable to the agendas and the
ideas of others and and there are
multiple agendas that are out there. So
from this time and now if when you go to
the the Samrian text they say the same
thing. They're saying when they beheld
what it was they created it had more
light more power than those that created
it. Then you get into the whole
conversation Genesis, you know, where it
says God created
man. But that's a translation error
because the original texts say Elohim
and Alohim is a plural. Some people will
say it's not. There's exceptions to
that. But it says Alohim
said, "Let us create man in our image."
So even if Alohim is not plural, us
implies more than one God. So the point
of all of this and we can drill down
into the weeds and all of these, but it
appears that there was a collective of
intelligence
that is responsible for for us. Okay,
that's not science. That's the text. Now
you look at the science. The DNA is
telling us that 200,000 years ago there
were mutations that cannot happen in
nature that imbued us with the ability
to communicate with one another and all
of these things that we're that we're
talking about. And almost from the
moment that we were imbued with these
things, there was an attempt to deny us
our power. And that attempt continues
today. So I think a good case can be
made. Everything you're seeing happen in
the world. It's all important.
The wars,
uh, the economies, all the conversation
of climate, it's all important. And
there's a level where it has become a
distraction to keep us spun up and in
fear so that we because we're so close,
Joe, we're so close as a species to
awakening this fundamental force within
us.
The closer we get to that awakening, the
more chaos you see in the world to keep
us distracted. And I'll give you a
perfect
&gt;&gt; what is causing this awakening?
&gt;&gt; I think consciousness is um So here
&gt;&gt; So is this the battle that we have to
fight though? Is this like because it
seems like there's always a pull and a
push,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I think it's it's a battle um or a
struggle depending on on what language
you want to use.
There's a deeper conversation and I
think we're going to get to this in in a
minute, but what I I want to go back. I
said I would I would elaborate on this.
There's a part of us that doesn't live
in our bodies. Science is struggling
with this, but there's a scientific
experiment. I've got it here, but if you
can bring it up, so let me just fine.
&gt;&gt; Let me just tell you about it.
Well, I labeled each one and I've got a
key sheet here,
&gt;&gt; but you'll be able to see it when it's
on there. So, here, this is a
mindblower. If you haven't heard this,
and if you have, let me know. I I don't
want to be redundant, but
&gt;&gt; Well, tell everybody else if I have.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, 2022. Well, let me ask this.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Do you remember when you were a kid a
game called Pong?
&gt;&gt; Pong? Like
&gt;&gt; Pong was It came I think it came out in
72.
And it was so primitive, Joe. It It's
like a
&gt;&gt; Sure, I remember.
&gt;&gt; It's like a tennis game on a screen,
&gt;&gt; but computers were new and we'd never
seen anything like I would go to work.
Uh I I was in a secure area, DoD working
on the Peacekeeper Missile Project after
lunch. Guys would come in on their CRT
screens and they'd be mesmerized. They
couldn't help it. They were mesmerized
with this game of pong. This little boom
boom boom boom. And that's all it was.
Okay. So, the point is Pong was perver
per pervasive in in our culture.
Everybody knew what it was. All right.
2022 scientists did an experiment and
I've got it uh he can find it or I've
got it on that. Uh you can bring it up
if you want to see it. I actually pong
is on there. If you bring up the Pong
file,
&gt;&gt; this is part of the problem with the
PowerPoint stuff. This this kind of
stuff happens. I don't think that's what
you intended to show. Is it?
&gt;&gt; Well, you can see you can see part of
it,
&gt;&gt; but that's
&gt;&gt; Well, can you back up? No, it's
&gt;&gt; back a couple of slides and there's
&gt;&gt; there is the there it is right there.
And you should be able to is it going to
animate it for us?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think most how pong works.
&gt;&gt; Okay, there it is.
&gt;&gt; And I used to have it when I was
&gt;&gt; I'm trying to say the thing you were
trying to get me to show, which is the
next slide, is it's it's got an error in
the
&gt;&gt; Well, so here so here's what they did.
2022 scientists took neurons,
but there was no human attached, and
they put them into a petri dish to keep
them alive, and they hooked up the
neurons to a computer chip. So now
you've got a a a biology technology
interface. All right? So the neurons are
hooked up to a chip. The chip was put
into a computer that was loaded with
pong. The neurons began playing the game
of pong. Even though there was no human
attached to the neurons and the longer
they played, the better they got. They
were actually learning how to play pong
better. And now the scientists are
struggling with a question. How does a
neuron not attached to a human in a
petri dish know how to play pong? Where
are the instructions? Okay. So, I
remember when I was a kid, Einstein had
died and they had his brain
thinsectioned in uh the University of
Kansas because they wanted to see what
made his brain different from everybody
else. And it looked pretty much like
everybody else's with one exception. He
had a whole lot of folds in his brain.
So, when you stretch those folds out, he
had more surface area. He had more
neurons.
So they're thinking, but there was E=
MC² wasn't in the brain. All right. So
now they're looking at those neurons.
They're saying, "Where's the
instructions for Pong?" You know, and
they're trying to figure out where it
is. Well, here's what this experiment is
telling us. The instructions aren't in
the neurons. The neurons are a
biological antenna, a molecular antenna
that tune to the place in the field
where pong is pervasive. All right. the
field. There was a time when the field
was a metaphor. You know, uh
metaphysical people, spiritual people,
you say, "Oh yeah, you know, it's it's
out in the field." July 4th, uh of 2012,
the CERN Superconducting Super Collider
made an announcement that they had
discovered a field that had been
predicted by Peter Higs, the physicist
Peter Higs,
&gt;&gt; Higs Bosan. And well, they found the
Higs Bosan and what that implied was
that there was a field supporting the
Bosan and now it's accepted science.
They say, "Oh yeah, there there's a
field." So, but here's the thing. I was
at a conference recently. Here's what
scientists are doing. This is a hoot.
They're still saying this. They're
saying, "Oh yeah, there's a field out
there that connects everything." And
their hands are doing this. The field's
not out there. We're the field. Okay. 50
trillion cells in the human body. Every
one of those cells has about a 100red
trillion atoms emerging from the field
and collapsing into the field. Right
now, you and I, we're constantly the the
atoms in our bodies are emerging and
collapsing into that field. We are the
field and that is what makes us so
powerful. This is why we can heal our
bodies almost instantaneously when we
know how to access
this part of ourselves because we hold
the blueprint that tells those atoms
how to express when they come into the
body. So if you got something you don't
like in your body, what you do is you
are using the gift of imagination to
create a new blueprint for that to come
into. And that sounds crazy to some
people and there's a lot of science
that's struggling with this. But when
you get into the quantum world, you get
into the fact that the Higs field
exists, you get in to the fact that
imagination
in the mirror neurons of the human
brain, mirror neurons were only
discovered in 2004.
And the the thing about mirror neurons
is they don't know the difference
between watching an experience and
having an experience. So for example,
you can be on the couch on a Sunday
afternoon watching the Joe Rogan show
with an exciting guest. You're just
laying there, but your heart might be
racing and your body's persspiring your
muscle or maybe you're watching soccer
because your neurons don't know the
difference between watching and having
the experience. This is why porn is so
addictive because the mirror neurons
don't know the difference between having
and and witnessing the experience.
They're going to kick up the same
addictive chemicals, the same dopamine,
the same uh levels of of adrenaline,
watching the image that they are having
the image. Here's where our power comes
from. Because the image can be imagined.
When we are able to hold an image of
ourselves fully enabled, fully
capacitated, fully healed, fully
awakened,
hold that image. What we're actually
doing is we're programming the body. And
this is something shamans know this. And
I live in northern New Mexico. Our
indigenous healers all know this. I
spent a lot of time in Peru in the
Andes. The uh the Andian Peruvians, they
use different language.
So, so the point of all of this is we're
not what we've been told and we're so
much more than we've been led to
believe. And it is the attempt to deny
that power that is driving so much of
what we're seeing happening in in our
world today. And
&gt;&gt; so you think the motivation of that
attempt is evil?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; That that's an actual force that people
are giving into. That's why they're
enacting all these levels of control and
that's why they're suppressing people,
releasing bots on the internet. It's
literally an expression of evil.
&gt;&gt; Evil evil is not dark, not necessarily
darkness. A lot of people confuse these.
Darkness is simply a polar force. We
&gt;&gt; we live in a binary world. We've got to
have light and dark, plus and minus,
boys and girls. You know, we live in it.
The darkness is a passive polarity. Evil
has an active stated purpose. And the
purpose of evil has always been, whether
you're looking at those ancient texts or
the Sumerian texts, uh, Mesopotamian
text, it's always been to deny,
to deny us the greatest expressions of
our humanness. And now we live in a
time, this is no ordinary time in
history there. None of this is happening
in a vacuum. We're barreling down the
road toward this convergence of so many
natural cycles and the date 2030 that
has been identified by the United
Nations, by the WF, by a number of
corporations, by Ray Kerszswhile
in terms of AI implementation. They're
all looking at 2030. And what you're
seeing are the powers and the forces of
the world jockeying to be in the best
position
when this date is upon us. And I'm not
saying it's like January 1st, 2030, but
the United Nations, for example, they've
got, and again, I don't know if I'm
being redundant here, but they've got uh
the UN SDG 2030, UN United Nations
sustainable development goals they want
implemented by the year 2030. They're
not getting much traction because
they're not good ideas. Uh the goals, if
you read them on the outside, Joe,
they're they're deceptively beautiful.
Who doesn't want
food security? Who doesn't want the end
of poverty? Who doesn't want the end of
disease? Now, you look at the fine
print. How will they achieve those
goals?
And that's where it gets very
concerning, right? They haven't had much
traction because the ide
the way to get there is concerning.
They're not good ideas. Now, we look at
World Economic Forum. I know you've had
people talking about WEF. They've been
around since 1971.
They meet once a year in Davos. You
know, they talk about what they would
like the world to look like and they
have every right to do that. Uh some of
their ideas are very dystopian in my
opinion. things like uh you will own
nothing and be happy. You know, we've
heard that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Or the the great reset uh is the term
that they coined or the fourth
industrial revolution.
Um they haven't gotten much traction,
but they recognized that their goals
were similar to the UN. So in 2019,
these two organizations joined forces.
They signed a formal document. So now
the WF ideas
are have traction through the UN uh
implementation of these sustainable
development goals and uh the goals can
be beautiful. I'm not against the goals
at all. It's how we go about do we honor
ourselves and do we honor our humanness
as we achieve those goals and there are
very different ideas about what you know
what it is that means. I have a video
clip uh WEF. Do do you see that on
there? Can we bring that video clip up
because in one sentence
uh Klaus Schwab states the the goal for
the fourth industrial revolution and if
he doesn't have I just want you to hear
it in his voice. He said the goal is the
merging of the natural world, the
digital world and the biological world,
our biological identity. He said, "The
goal of this fourth industrial
revolution is to merge all of those into
this massive
database run by AI." And uh here
&gt;&gt; put some heads.
&gt;&gt; You can hear it.
&gt;&gt; It should be the next.
&gt;&gt; It's at the end. What what the fourth
industrial revolution will lead to is a
fusion of our physical, our digital and
our biological
identities.
&gt;&gt; Did you hear how he paused before he
said biological?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Did you catch that? So, he's saying,
"Okay, the physical world's already
tokenized. We already we have a digital
ID for every elephant, all the forests,
the oceans, all of the the energy
resources. That's that's already
tokenized.
The digital world is already digital. So
that's tokenized. Then there's a pause.
He said, and of course our biological
identities because he knows the
implication of what he's saying. That's
us. And right now we are not fully
implemented in into that system. But
that statement and the reason I wanted
to share that that is what's driving
everything you're seeing happening in
the world. What all the the the
implementation of the technology that
statement is driving the implementation
of that technology. The AI uh the way
that we are being indoctrinated to
accept it first accept it in our lives
and then develop a dependency upon that
AI. Ultimately, there will be some kind
of compliance. We'll be told we need to
use the AI in order to, you know,
accomplish certain things, do our
banking or, you know, whatever it is.
It's all being driven by AI. That
sentence is a very very powerful
sentence. He's
&gt;&gt; also couldn't have been delivered by
someone who looks more like a villain in
a movie
&gt;&gt; or or sounds like one. Well, are you
familiar you're familiar with Claus
Schwab, by the way?
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. We have a photo of him in the
bathroom where he was wearing that crazy
Darth Vader outfit.
&gt;&gt; I saw that in the bathroom and I
It was dark in the bathroom.
&gt;&gt; Such an insane photo. Like, who the hell
would dress like that? Who would say the
things that that guy Jamie, find that
photo, please. Who would say the things
that that guy has said like that with
that accent and dress this way?
&gt;&gt; Well, this is exactly Well, this is this
is why we're having this conversation,
Joe. You know, I'm I'm advocating for
our humanness. Uh I believe we are
&gt;&gt; There it is. Like, what what are you
wearing, bro? Like, don't go out dressed
like that. When you talk like that, when
you talk like that, you got to wear
suits and you got to look real normal.
&gt;&gt; What are the What are the emblems? What
are the emblems?
&gt;&gt; At an event where everyone was wearing
that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, whatever. Don't wear it. If you
talk like Darth Vader, don't wear it.
&gt;&gt; But see, all of this is happening from
people
&gt;&gt; that crazy out there.
&gt;&gt; This is happening from people that
&gt;&gt; that are afraid
of our humanist. They don't know what it
means to be human. They're afraid of
dying. The transhumanists are afraid of
dying, so they want to live forever.
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, they're also extremely
wealthy and they want to control the
masses. And the best way to control the
masses, this is the control is doing it
this way.
&gt;&gt; There is a fundamental, it's a very
ancient, if you don't know this, the
world looks like it's spinning out of
control for no reason. When you begin,
and you don't have to think about it
every day, but when you look at the big
picture and you can see there's a
fundamental struggle between if you want
to use the language good and evil, that
it's a charged language and I know that
and and that's the language that we're
using. But the the denial of our human
potential. And so the the best way what
do we do about that is if the purpose of
the evil is to deny our humanness and
our divinity, we triumph by living the
best version of ourselves. We triumph by
imagining freely and sharing ideas and
creating and and don't be afraid to have
empathy and sympathy and compassion and
and and now you have a benchmark because
when something comes up on social media
or something we're asked to do something
we say well I don't know if this is a
good thing or not you ask yourself does
it affirm or does it deny my humanness
does it affirm or deny my ability to
imagine to create to love to forgive
empathy sympathy compassion to share
ideas, deep intuition, does it affirm or
deny those? And then that'll tell you
what you need to know. What you choose
after that is up to the individual, but
it won't be a blind choice. And I think
this is this is up for us right now. Be
okay. So now evil in technology and the
algorithms of social media that are
designed to break the social bonds that
have always held us together as
communities. And you know this this
began right around 2011 I think was the
Occupy movement and it pitted the rich
against the poor 99% against 1%. That's
a very real issue and we Joe we could
have used that and and come to the table
and had a conversation and a healing
that would bring us closer together as a
society but it was weaponized to drive
us apart. And then the same thing
happened. men against women, blacks
against whites, Christians against
Muslims, Jews against Muslims. Now it's
male against female, and the genders are
being blurred. All of this by design,
breaking the social bonds that hold
families and communities and societies
together because we're more vulnerable
when we lose these these bonds. and the
the algorithms that do this. I mean, I'm
fas as a computer scientist, I'm I'm
fascinated by this. We have what are
called
information silos.
So, say there's uh parents and their
kids and the mom goes to work and you
know, she goes on YouTube and and
queries a bunch of stuff and you know
what happens is the the algorithm just
starts feeding you. I mean, it's
everywhere. You're feeding one
perspective of what it is that you've
just queried.
Meanwhile, dad's at work. He's doing the
same thing. His algorithm has given him
a separate perspective. The kids are
doing the same thing. And now they meet
at the family dinner table. And
everybody believes that their story is
the real story. It's the right. It's the
true story. That breaks the social
bonds. And we're seeing this happen.
We're seeing this happen in our society.
And you know there is a it's following
an algorithm that's very easy. Are you
familiar with Saul Alinsky? I think
you're probably
&gt;&gt; rules for radicals.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Rules for radicals. This is
exactly what it's following. He said you
you choose a target, you freeze that
target, you isolate it, you personalize
it, and you polarize it. And that's
exactly what's being it's it's a simple
algorithm. And that's exactly you think
of all those things we just talked
about. All of a sudden it's all you see
in the news. You're freezing it for
everybody to see. You're personalizing
it. What is that? How how are you
getting ripped off and how is it hurting
you if you do that? Uh and then and you
polarize that and it just drives people
apart because they believe what they're
what they're being shown. And so my
invitation add that to the fact that
people are addicted to social media. So
they're addicted to being inundated by
all this propaganda
&gt;&gt; and all this all these various competing
narratives.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You can't leave your phone alone. It's
more and more addictive every time you
pick it up. The the newer ones are even
better. The screens are even bigger. Now
you got a foldable one. Opens up to a
tablets in your pocket. And people are
just full-on addicted to what is a lot
of negative information. Far more than
you would get just living your ordinary
life.
&gt;&gt; You don't see much information.
You don't see joyous information that
brings us together very often. Do do you
do you see anything?
&gt;&gt; Well, you can if you curate your feed
well. But the problem is if if you spend
any amount of time, you're going to be
you're going to be impacted by some
ideas that you don't like.
&gt;&gt; You know, there's going to be a lot of
negativity. Like there's a lot of things
that X shows me that I did not sign up
for this person's page. I do not know.
They just showed up in my feed. I do not
follow them. But all a sudden it appears
and I read it and I'm like, "Oh, this is
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] horrible. This is ter like what
a terrible take." And you see people
arguing in the worst most evil way
possible for ter celebrating people's
deaths and hoping more people die and
you're like, "Oh my god, I got to get
out of here." That is evil. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; If you I mean, I'm not saying that those
human beings are evil. I think most of
those human beings don't even know what
they're doing
&gt;&gt; exactly. This is
&gt;&gt; they don't even think of it as real
life. They think of it. It's called [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
posting. You know what [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] posting is?
&gt;&gt; You people just post things for for the
lulls. They just post it to get
reactions out of people. And there's a
lot of that going on. There's a lot of
people expressing their boredom with
negativity, expressing their frustration
with their station in life with
negativity online and then feeding into
it, arguing with other people instead of
addressing their own individual real
life problems. They start looking at all
these things that they're creating
online. That's their primary focus like
throughout the day is these stupid
ideological battles they're having with
people that might not even be real
people.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's evil. It's kind of evil.
&gt;&gt; It is. and and
&gt;&gt; because it's robbing what you're saying
it's robbing you of your opportunity to
achieve a higher level of humanity.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think what you said is really
important that many people are naive. It
because they have are participating
doesn't mean that they're evil people,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And even that even goes for for
&gt;&gt; I think most people even people that do
a lot of horrible acts I agree because
they're trapped.
&gt;&gt; But see then and this is why I said what
I said earlier. or we can tie into this.
People who have a propensity, they have
a spiritual weakness. This is a this is
a spiritual battle. Not religious, but
it's a deeply spiritual battle that's
playing out on earth right now. And it's
showing up in every facet of our lives,
whether we want to think about it or
not. People that have a propensity for
greed because that's their spiritual
weakness or a propensity for power or
control, they will fall into those
roles. They don't even know what and
I've worked with people and I've been in
organizations and I've seen it happen.
They're naive. Many of them uh some of
them know exactly what they're doing.
There are some that know exactly what
they're doing, but most of them are very
naive and they want to be relevant and
so they will follow the pack is is what
what they will do. And so this is where
I I think you can recognize. This is
where discernment comes in to recognize
it without judging it because
this is a spiritual battle.
And at the end of the day,
what matters,
Joe, is what do we become in the
presence of what the world shows us?
What do we allow the events of the world
to make us into? Do we allow an election
that didn't turn the way that we had
wanted to reduce us to the most primal
levels of hate and revenge and anger,
something we never do in a million
years, but we succumb to that? Or do we
do we recognize what it is that has
happened? It doesn't mean we have to
agree with it. Uh but the question is do
we make the decisions from our love
of the families behind us and our
friends and and and our community or do
we make our decisions from the fear of
what we perceive as our enemy in front
of us? And that happens every moment of
every day. I've been in I have been in a
business meeting with uh someone who is
pure evil. Pure evil. And the first time
it happened, it caught me off guard.
And then I learned and it will never
happen. Actually,
&gt;&gt; can you tell me what the meeting was?
&gt;&gt; Uh I can't um
&gt;&gt; give me some details.
&gt;&gt; It was it was a business. It was in this
industry that we're in right now in the
information industry, the publishing
industry. And I was with an individual
uh
who
um I'm hesitating the the words that I
use here. I found myself saying things
that I would never say in a million
years while that individual was looking
at me and smiling because he was somehow
inciting me to to say those things. Uh
it was almost like um in some way there
was a force that I had not learned to
reckon with. I have since learned.
&gt;&gt; Were you young at the time?
&gt;&gt; I was an adult. I was younger than I am
now. Yeah. And uh and you know this is
this comes up for all of us in different
ways.
&gt;&gt; So but you're not taking responsibility
for the words that are coming out of
your mouth. You
&gt;&gt; I couldn't stop it. That was the weird
thing. I couldn't stop.
&gt;&gt; Do you think that was anxiety? I mean
&gt;&gt; I don't I don't know what it was, Joe. I
heard I heard myself say I was
dissociated. I I heard myself saying
them and I didn't want to say them.
Couldn't you attribute that to a lot of
psychological factors like anxiety and
stress and
&gt;&gt; and you know the anticipation of this
moment?
&gt;&gt; I could except
&gt;&gt; power structures.
&gt;&gt; I could except that he was looking right
at me and he had this this smile
&gt;&gt; and when I saw him again he tried to do
the same thing again and it didn't work.
&gt;&gt; You tried to do it but see this is my
problem with this. You're not taking
personal responsibility for the words
that are coming out of your mouth.
&gt;&gt; I did.
&gt;&gt; Right. But you're saying that this guy
forced those words to coming out of you
and that that is where it gets a little
slippery because like why do you why
would you not just assume that it was
your own anxiety, their own stress
level? People behave out of pocket
sometimes. They think
&gt;&gt; outside of their own character sometimes
they talk out of character and then they
go I don't even know why I was saying
that. I'm sorry. You know that happens.
&gt;&gt; I agree. I agree with you 100%, Joe.
That's there are other circumstances
that I I I just can't talk about.
&gt;&gt; So, but you think this person was
actually an evil person.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I know. Yeah, I know that. I know
that this person was and and other
people have had similar experiences that
that um continue to have similar
experiences.
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't doubt that there are
legitimately actually fully evil people
in the world. And I think there there's
a lot of evidence that those people have
existed historically. I mean you think
about some of the atrocities that people
have done throughout history just
&gt;&gt; I mean the obvious one is Hitler but I
mean you you could go through history
you could Jenghask Khan I mean you you
could there's so many people that have
done unbelievably evil things in this
world
&gt;&gt; when that happens and it's happening
today I mean it's happening today you
don't have to look at look at history
&gt;&gt; look at Gaza
&gt;&gt; those Yep that's a perfect example to to
do what is happening there when it comes
human to human the only way that a a
human one human can perpetrate that onto
another is to to sever the relationship
to their divinity. All right? And we
have the choice to do that. We can we
can deny our divinity. We can have it
taken from us by those who have power
over us or we can technology can deny
our divinity. But someone who and
closely linked to the soul which is not
the spirit. So the soul is our localized
you know lifetime experience. when when
we
sever that relationship,
uh that is what what allows an
individual to carry out those kinds of
atrocities because
an individual who is connected to their
divinity and their soul could never look
at another human in the eye and hurt
them the way that we know that it has
happened in our lives. And and it has
it's happened throughout history. So, so
my my focus what I'm I'm really
passionate about and and it's not just
like any old time in history. We're on
the precipice, Joe. I mean, the
decisions are being made within the next
couple of years as to whether or not we
will give our humanness away to
technology or if we allow the technology
to serve us but not enslave us. AI is an
example of that. The brain computer
interfaces that are going on BCI, that's
a big conversation going on right now.
And if if we get lost in the weeds of
just AI or just the BCI,
it's easy to do that, but I think it's
important to keep there's a bigger
picture. There's a struggle. There's an
ancient struggle going on here. And it
is because, and this is what's so
powerful, it's because there's something
inside of us that's worth the struggle.
And our children are not being taught
that. Our our young kids are being told
that they're a flawed form of life. They
need something outside of our bodies. We
need to protect our kids.
&gt;&gt; What do you think that thing is? Do you
think that's what the soul is?
&gt;&gt; I think it's our our divinity
is the ability to express. And this is
going back to the Gnostic texts. This is
why they were heretical because the
Gnostic texts said that we have a
hotline
to a higher realm that we don't have to
go through uh an intermediary that we
are imbued with this spark or whatever
language you want to use uh nor given to
no other form of life. And that when we
awaken that that we we become godlike,
not god but godlike. And this was the
message of Yeshua in the gnostic texts.
And that's the the message that was
denied and called heretical because the
if we are that uh then we don't need an
intermediary.
So, so I think what we're looking at
right now is is do we love ourselves
enough? Do we love ourselves enough to
accept the gift of our humanness and
what it means to be human and what it
means to be divine and not bring
religion into the conversation, but and
maybe just find another word if if
people aren't comfortable with that
word. But I I really want people to know
and especially, you know, I do live
events with these young kids, Joe, and
they've been taught to worship
technology. The computer chip is God. AI
is God. And then I show them, and I'
I've showed some studies.
Um, SulkQ Institute in Northern
California did a study and they compared
a human brain to a microprocessor.
And you say, well, how can you make that
comparison? I said that the
microprocessor has about the same number
of transistors that the human brain has
of synapses in the brain. Interestingly,
it's about the same number. And so they
ran all these tests and what they found
literally the human brain, okay, the
computer chip, is it fast? Yes. Is it
efficient? Yes. Is it scalable?
You can only scale the chip. It'll only
run as fast as the physics
that of the stuff it's made of will
allow the silicon or whatever it is and
and then it tops out. The human brain is
it fast? Yes. Is efficient? Yes. Is it
scalable? What what is the top end of a
human brain? And the answer is we don't
know because every time we push a human
brain to what we think is the limit that
we've been taught to accept, this is the
beauty of our divinity.
What we do is we morph and adapt and
open up a whole new vista of of
potentials. The Tibetan monks a perfect
example of this. When I was in school
again back 50s and 60s, we were taught
that u the human brain maxes out about
40 hertz, 40 cycles per second. All the
medical books, textbooks, everything.
And then these Tibetan monks came along
and they said, "Well, if we do a certain
kind of meditation, you know, we'll
exceed that." Then they bumped they
doubled it. They went to 80 80 hertz.
The scientist said, "Okay, so maybe we
got it wrong once, but the human brain
can't possibly do any more than that."
And the the monks said, "Well, you know,
if we do a different kind of meditation,
you know where this is going." And they
push it up to 100 hertz. And then they
they had to come up with another brain
state called gamma. And then they push
it to 120 and 130 and 150 and one and
they 200 cycles per second. Now they
have to call it hyper gamma. But then
they even went the other direction. Joe,
this is a mind-blower.
We typically think when a human brain
shows less than one cycle per second of
processing, less than one hertz, that
person's not there anymore. And the
monks were able to consciously drive
their brain state to 0.5 hertz, less
than one. They're very conscious.
They're very awake. They're just in a
way different state of mind. And that
opens the door to a lot of questions
about, you know, what does it mean when
you see low brain activity? Is someone
actually in a healing state or are they
really not there? Or, you know, I think
it deserves more study. But the point of
all of this and there is a point is that
through nothing more than breath and
focus, so nothing external, no
chemicals, no machines, those Tibetan
monks demonstrated that we not only meet
but we are exceeding the brain capacity
that we thought we had in the past.
&gt;&gt; And the fascinating thing about them is
you would have to do what they do to be
able to understand how their brain
functions. you would have to have
meditated for 30 plus years in the same
exact way to achieve these states that
they achieve. Otherwise, you're just
guessing about what that's like. I'd led
groups in the Tibet from the
from the mid 90s to the early 2000s and
we we would go to to 12 monasteries and
two nunnies over 26 days and we would
sit with these people and through the
translators they would teach us and you
don't you could spend that kind of time
but the beauty is you don't have to.
&gt;&gt; So to to get to their level it's not
like other things like you get really
good at guitar by practicing for years
and years. It's not the same thing. It
is. No, there is practice and there is
discipline. Absolutely. I'm not denying
that at all.
&gt;&gt; What I'm saying is like there's an Eddie
Van Halen of being a monk.
&gt;&gt; You know what I mean? Like a regular guy
can't shred like that, right? You But
Eddie Van Halen played guitar for
thousands and thousands and thousands
and thousands of hours
&gt;&gt; with a incredible focus and became Eddie
Van Halen. You know, if you're a monk,
you know Eddie Van Halen.
&gt;&gt; I love this analogy. I do.
&gt;&gt; You know what I'm saying? to be a
virtuoso, to be a Steve Rayvon, to be a
Jimmyi Hendris, like it it requires
immense amount of time. And I would
imagine to get really good at that kind
of meditation, it it would be a similar
thing.
&gt;&gt; There's a discipline. There is a
discipline and um
&gt;&gt; but are there levels that get reached
like when someone's like a true master,
they've been doing it for 20 years, they
can do something, they can get to a
state that other people can't get to.
&gt;&gt; There are, Joe, and what I want to say
is there are levels that you and I can
do right this minute. Uh I think I don't
know if you've had any of the folks from
the Institute of Heart Math. Uh it's a
pioneering research organization
Northern California. Been around since
1994.
Uh I've worked with them since 95.
They explore the power of the human
heart beyond being simply a pump in the
body. That's probably the least of what
it does. And what they have done and
made very accessible to the average
person is the ability to create
coherence between the heart and the
brain. And that can happen in a
heartbeat. So here's what I mean by
that. 1991. By the way, I I want to
honor your time. Are we okay on time?
I'm not seeing you. Okay. Has it been an
hour yet?
&gt;&gt; We have more than an hour. Yeah, we're
almost two hours.
&gt;&gt; I know. I'm I'm I'm kidding.
&gt;&gt; Don't worry about anything. Just let's
talk.
&gt;&gt; All right. I'm having a great time.
&gt;&gt; 90. I'm too. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. 91. Fascinating. Yeah. 91 uh
scientists discovered
in the human heart. I mean 91 is not
that long ago.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; And scientists are thinking, "Okay, we
we got the body nailed. You know, we
know how this works. We do heart
transplants. They're successful. So, we
must have this all figured out." They
discovered 40,000
specialized cells in the human heart uh
called sensory neurites. And when I say
discovered, they'd always been there,
but nobody looked because they're like
neurons, Joe, but they're not in the
brain. And you think, why are there
neurons in the heart,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; They think independently, they feel
independently, and they process
independently from the neurons in the
human brain. And and so right there,
there's a whole conversation about when
we have trauma, our trauma is recorded
in two different places. You can do talk
therapy in the brain. If you don't
address the heart, it may feel
incomplete
&gt;&gt; to have that therapy. But so here's why
I'm sharing this. Now we've got two
neural networks, one in the heart, one
in the brain,
&gt;&gt; and institute of heart math uh made
available the techniques, three very
simple steps to harmonize
two neural networks into a single potent
system. And we are the only form of life
that can do this at will, on demand we
choose. We're the only form of life that
can sit in a chair and say in this
moment I choose to create the term is
coherence and the coherence optimum
coherence is a low frequency 0.1 hertz.
So we're the only form of life that can
choose to create 0.1 hertz between the
heart and the brain harmonizing two
organs become one potent system in the
body. And when that happens man there's
a whole cascade of things. So let me two
categories passive passive benefits just
from harmonizing the heart and the brain
you supercharge the immune system and
this something I've done at least once a
day since n 909 95 when I learned it and
sometimes multiple times a day
superimmune response
you awaken longevity enzymes that
everybody has in the body but often go
dormant for some people as as they as
they age you can wake them up pretty
quick. Stem cells, you can wake them up
pretty quick. Resilience to change. And
this is fascinating to me because when
young, we all know this, young kids are
really resilient to change.
I come from a very dysfunctional
alcoholic family. Um, we moved. My
father left when I was 10. We moved
every year and I went to a different
school every year and had to make new
friends every year. And it took a lot of
resilience to do that. I could do that
then. Uh, I probably have problems doing
something like that now because
typically as we age, we lose resilience.
That is directly linked to what's called
heart rate variability, HRV.
So, you know, every heartbeat that goes
bump bump is it's the QRS complex.
And the time from one peak to the next
to the next to the next varies.
When we're young, it varies a lot. And
that gives us resilience. When we age,
it becomes more regular. We lose our
resilience set in our waves.
Through harmonizing heart and the brain,
you can actually uh uh reset that heart
rate variability to to the point where
it was when you were younger. And it
doesn't take long to do that. So those
are are passive benefits. Now active
benefits once you're in that space and
this is where the really juicy stuff
happens. Deep intuition. So this is
where you do precognition.
You have the ability to your heart will
sense an event before it actually
happens. And there's science showing why
that is. Like so many people knew 9/11
was going to happen before it happened.
And I'm not saying they did this but
they they knew intuitively. This is a
way to awaken that kind of intuition on
demand. Uh, deep intuition on demand.
Um, there are 1300
positive biochemical reactions from
harmonizing the heart and the brain. All
right. And
&gt;&gt; and what is the method you use to
harmonize?
&gt;&gt; Three three steps. One is you shift your
focus from your mind into your heart.
And I've led groups with indigenous
people all over the world for 40 years.
And and the way they all do this is
they'll always touch their heart to
bring their awareness to their heart
center. Some some people use a finger or
two. If you're in the in the the Mayan
cultures in Mexico, they use a full
palm. Uh you see this in the Middle
East. Uh you people will greet one
another with a full palm or Buddhist
will do it like this and nestle that
prayer mudra right there. And the point
is that your awareness will always go to
the place on your body where you feel
the touch. Like if I touch my arm, all
my my awareness went there. Okay, that's
first step.
&gt;&gt; So you meet someone, you put your hands
on your heart to bring awareness to your
heart.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. You can do it do it that
way. This is what they do. So the first
step in heart brain coherence
uh developed by the institute of heart
math. Uh you shift your awareness from
your mind into your heart. First step.
Second step is to slow your breathing.
And the the key here, it's not just
enough just to slow it, but you exhale
for a period of time longer than you
inhale because we all breathe at a
different rate. So, for example, if we
inhale four four counts
and release six,
okay, that might work for me. Somebody
at, you know, higher elevation might do
it differently. But the point
&gt;&gt; the point is when you release when you
exhale for a period of time longer than
you inhale
&gt;&gt; that triggers the relaxation response
parasympathetic nervous system you're
telling your body it's a language and
what you're doing is you're telling your
body I am safe because that's the only
time you
&gt;&gt; right and hyperventilating is the
opposite of that. Yeah. You don't want
&gt;&gt; feel safe at all. Yeah. Yeah. So, so
second step
is you're you're breathing uh slower
longer on the exhale focusing as if your
breath is coming from your heart while
your focus is on your heart. Two steps.
The third step is where you create 01
hertz. You feel a feeling, a positive
feeling because you choose to feel the
feeling. And this is deceptively
powerful, Joe, because most forms of
life, including humans, only have a
feeling in response to what the world
shows to them.
We have the ability to have a feeling
because we choose to have the feeling.
And what the science is showing is that
the feeling of gratitude
almost 100% works for everyone. We all
can sense grat gratitude. I mean you can
think of words like compassion that
means different things different people
love means different things but we can
be grateful for for our children our
families our lives something like that
and when we feel that feeling it sends
a signal a very low frequency point 0.1
hertz from the heart to the brain in the
presence of the slower breathing and
that harmonization between the heart and
the brain
is what gives all the benefits that we
just shared everything you know
superimmune response stem cells
uh longevity enzymes all of those things
and it's also if people do affirmations
this is the place an affirmation
is a message to the subconscious and you
have to speak in a language that the
subconscious recognizes
and the the coherence between the heart
and the brain is like a hotline to the
subconscious, but you don't have to be
hypnotized.
So, when you're saying affirmations, if
you if you do it during that time,
they're even even more potent.
Uh, and you know, we could spend a lot
of time talking about the role of
imagination, mirror neurons, all of that
happening within the the presence. at
the point going back to what you were
mentioning about the Tibetan monks.
Yeah, you can study years learning what
they're learning and there are benefits
uh that we can access pretty quickly and
it's science-based. I mean this is all
peer-reviewed. This is the beauty of the
Institute of Heart Math. They publish in
peer-reviewed journals and um and
they've done much more. I'm just
scratching the surface. If anyone is not
familiar with that, I invite people to
go to wwwheart
e-rat.org
and it's all free. You can check it out.
&gt;&gt; So, do you believe that the connection
between the heart and the mind when you
achieve that state that it increases
your intuition?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
Between the heart and the brain.
&gt;&gt; What did I say? The heart.
&gt;&gt; Heart and the mind.
&gt;&gt; I said the heart and the mind. The heart
and the brain.
&gt;&gt; You said this is such a good question,
Joe. And here's the reason. And this is
one of the the places where it's so
powerful. I mean, you can use this stuff
in a a business environment for this
very reason.
When we look at the world and solve our
problems
from our mind, our brain, brain's left
and right brain. So, you know, you've
got logic and intuition over here. Those
are the ego loops. And the brain will
will always work in polarity. That's
where you're going to get your right and
wrong, good and bad.
success, failure, worthy, not worthy.
And the ego, man, it'll spin you up in
those loops for hours. But here's the
thing, the heart is non-polarity. It's
not it's not a polar organ. So when you
harmonize the heart and the brain, what
you're doing is you're bypassing the ego
loops. And here's where that can be
powerful. I did this in a corporate
boardroom. I was I was the the youngest
uh so I was the first tech tech ops
manager at Cisco systems 1990 when they
uh got the RFP for protocol converter so
that all the branches of the armed
services could computers could talk to
all the others before the first Gulf War
and when I would go into the boardroom
with an idea
and I knew that I was going to be
criticized
uh I'm also a Cancerian male And if you
know anything about
&gt;&gt; I've never heard anybody use that term
cancerian.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that's my I'm that's my
sign. My birth signs in cancer.
&gt;&gt; I understand what it is, but I've never
heard the term.
&gt;&gt; And um very uh emotion plays a big role.
Now, it doesn't have to, you know, it's
a it's a stereotype, but it happens to
be true for me,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Emotion plays a big role. Criticism
coming from an alcoholic family, uh my
father was the the abuser and the
criticizer. And I've spent my whole
life, you know, working to I'm still
healing, you know, from that. So when
somebody would criticize my ideas, you
know, it'd be hurtful. I' I'd take it
personally.
&gt;&gt; When you move into the coherence and
you're not taking that criticism through
good, bad, right, wrong, success,
failure. Now you can be much more
objective and you can listen to it. And
when they're finished, you can say,
"Well, you know, have you ever
considered this?" Because you haven't
reacted. And it's a really powerful
place to to
&gt;&gt; Well, it's certainly worse if you're
talking to a good faith actor, someone
who's really wants to talk about stuff
and has a legitimate criticism. But most
of the time when people are criticizing
you, they're trying to hurt your
feelings.
&gt;&gt; They are. I never read my book reviews
on Amazon.
&gt;&gt; That's a good move.
&gt;&gt; I mean, it's not that criticism is bad.
Criticism is critical. like you you can
learn a lot from intelligent people from
their um perspectives of things. I've
learned a lot from other people's
criticism.
&gt;&gt; But the difference between that and
dwelling on criticism, that's the part
where people get wrapped up in their own
identity and and also interpersonal
conflicts. if you if you're a kind of
person who like you're naturally
argumentative and then someone says
something like that's not [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] true
and you want to say something back but
it's just
&gt;&gt; it's a lot of negativity and a lot of
wasted time and the way I try to
describe it uh especially to uh emerging
famous people and I'm like you have to
think of your life as if like your
energy is a number like you have a
hundred energies for the day like it's a
unit
&gt;&gt; and if you're spending 30 or 40 of those
energies on 30 or 40 of those units on
social media and of criticism and of
negativity, it's going to rob the 60%
that you really enjoy. It's going to rob
your time with your friends, your
family, your hobbies, your job, your
community, whatever the whatever you
really love, hanging out with your dog,
you know, like there's people right now
that are going on a walk with their
sweet sweet dog and they're thinking
about some mean post that someone made
and the mean [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they're going to say
to get back at that person. Meanwhile,
they're with this beautiful animal and
they if you got on your knees, you're
going, "Are you having a good time?"
They give you kisses and they put their
paw on like you're having so much fun.
It's so beautiful and loving and you're
thinking about something stupid that has
no bearing on this moment and you can't
escape. You can't escape. You're like
psychically connected to this
negativity.
&gt;&gt; It's a tool. It's a powerful tool.
&gt;&gt; That's why I tell them it's not worth
it.
&gt;&gt; Bring Well, this helps to be objective
so you can hear the critic. I'm open to
criticism, but it should be one-on-one
constructive honestly one-on-one with
compassionate people.
&gt;&gt; Not my Amazon book review.
&gt;&gt; Well, there's people out there that are
critics and this is an important
distinction. They're critics because
they don't have anything to contribute
and they didn't want to be critics,
especially professional critics. A lot
of them wanted to be professional
writers, but their work was not good.
Like Roger Eert wrote one of the
craziest scripts of all time. Have you
ever read it?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Have you ever heard of it?
&gt;&gt; No, I know Roger Eert. I know the
script.
&gt;&gt; Very strange. Like out there. Like
wasn't it like hypersexual?
What was it about? Anyway, widely panned
as being [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] terrible. But this is
the guy that is the guy that back in the
day was the guy to review movies. And it
would be so snarky and so bite. But you
have to realize like look at him. Look
at these people. Look at the way they
talk. Do is this the kind of opinion you
value? Like why is this the thing that
gets elevated? Wouldn't you rather have
the opinion of someone who really enjoys
going to the movies and has great things
to say about perform? It's like someone
who's enjoying it, not someone who wants
to be pissed off so they can say the
snarkiest, shittiest. And have you ever
seen the videos of the two of those guys
arguing with each other off camera?
Those are amazing.
&gt;&gt; They called them bloopers and I I like
the bloopers better in the reviews.
&gt;&gt; Way better because that's the real guys.
They're really shitty guys. They're
They're super shitty to each other.
They're both so nasty to each other.
It's like, so those are the people that
are dictating what is good and bad in
culture. That's nuts.
&gt;&gt; That's the problem with criticism.
That's the problem with critics. A lot
of them are [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Yep. I
&gt;&gt; So you're getting the opinions primarily
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] But see, but what you're
doing through coherence is that you're
defusing
that the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
criticism from having the impact on you
so that you're thinking about it while
you're out walking your dog on a
beautiful day.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's a beautiful thing if you
can do that. If you could separate
yourself from what they said. But the
only way you could really do that is if
you are 100% happy with what you've
done. So if you write a book and that
book you you nailed it, you love it.
It's amazing. If someone's like really
critical of it, it's not for you. But
the thing that I made is perfect for the
people who like the thing that I made,
you know, and that's if you can get to a
place where you could do that, that's
great. But you have to know that you put
your all into what you did so that you
don't feel bad about other people's
negative opinion of it. I agree.
&gt;&gt; But if you have some thing like, I kind
of halfass that. I could have spent more
time on this. I I wasn't really
committed to that. If you're doing that,
then the criticism hurts because you
know it's valid. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, if you're if you're going to do
some I think whatever we do, book or you
know, music or whatever it is, uh we do
put a million% into it. I I learned
this, you know, my my dad left when I
was 10 and our family was devastated. My
mom uh was my mom, I have a younger
brother, four years younger, and myself.
And mom all of a sudden was raising, you
know, two boys and we knew we were in
for some pretty rough times, man. We
were we were more than broke. We end up
living in government subsidized housing
and you know it was it was a tough time
and and mom gave me a book at 10 years
old. She handed me this book and she
said I think that this is going to be
useful to you in in your life and you
may know this book. It was by a man
named Khalil Gabbron. Sure. It's called
the prophet.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And
I read it to this day and there are
different pieces that mean different
things to me throughout my life. But
there was one piece where he talked
about work. And in the environment I
grew up in, my father hated his job. He
hated work. My friends all hated their
work. They just wanted to make money.
And Khalil Gabbr, this is on every email
that I write right at the bottom. Khalil
Gabbron said, "Work is love made
visible." And I like that because it
means that
when we're going to do something, you do
it to the best of your ability and even
more or don't do it at all. if you're
gonna do it, do it really, really well
and find a way to give meaning to what
you're doing. So, you know, I went to
work. I used to work midnight to 6:00
a.m. in a a warehouse loading
I don't talk about this a lot, but I I
was loading 50 lb bags of um Pyina uh
catchow on the box cars so they could go
out in the morning to this distribution.
And the guys I work with, man, they
hated they hated their job. And I said,
you know what? If I do this just right,
50 pound bags, if I use my my legs, I
can get a pretty good leg workout out of
this. And then when I'm done with that,
after dinner, I'll come back and I can I
can get a good upper body workout and I
can use my arms and and all of a sudden
I was getting paid for a great workout
and they had a box car full of Purina
Cat Show and it was love made visible
and and that
&gt;&gt; that's a great perspective. Well, it has
stayed with me and and I'm saying this
because if I write a book or if I do an
event, anything I do. Uh if I'm going to
do it, I'm going to do it really to the
best of my ability. If I can't do it to
the best of my ability, I'll just if I
don't believe in it, I won't do it.
&gt;&gt; It's hard for young people to hear that
because, you know, they're doing a job
that sucks. They just want to get out of
there and go do what they love. And
sometimes a job that sucks is really
good motivation to get you to work
harder to go out and do the thing that
you want to do that you love. because I
I don't think I would ever appreciate
the life that I have now if I didn't
have a bunch of really terrible jobs
when I was young.
&gt;&gt; Well, we all did. And I think there is
there is something to be said if if for
a young person, I mean, I used to I used
to do lawns. I was a cook. Uh none of it
was my dream, but I said if I'm going to
do it, I want to do it really I'm going
to do this really well.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's great attitude.
&gt;&gt; I think that was like, oh my god, this
drains you of your life force. But we're
better. We're better for it if we can
approach it in that way. And then when
you don't do it anymore, you stop doing
it.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. I mean, if you have a
negative attitude about something that
you're doing versus a positive attitude,
you could do the exact same thing with a
positive attitude and actually enjoy it.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And just have fun.
&gt;&gt; And especially if you're working with
good people.
&gt;&gt; So, I have a question for you.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; When you invited me here, I I've got 40
years of of work. Was there one
particular facet of that work that you
wanted to explore and talk about?
&gt;&gt; I've seen your work for a long time and
I've seen you say a lot of really
interesting things for a long time. Um,
it wasn't any one thing.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Although there was uh a conversation
that you had uh recently that I thought
was very interesting. I don't know if it
was recently, but it it made it into my
social media feeds recently. uh where
you were talking to someone about
climate change and you were talking
about carbon in the environment and its
actual effect versus a lot of a lot of
the the narrative that you hear about
this Green New Deal stuff and just the
the climate the the the freak out the
climate freak out from the Al Gore film
which by the way freaked everybody out
and was totally inaccurate. It was
horribly inaccurate. This was a a film,
An Inconvenient Truth from
Was it 2005?
&gt;&gt; Before that,
&gt;&gt; it was it before that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, this film freaked Literally freaked
everyone out.
&gt;&gt; It was a PowerPoint. He did a PowerPoint
presentation
&gt;&gt; 2006. Oh, it was. Oh, wow.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. He just he gave a PowerPoint
presentation and recorded it.
&gt;&gt; And this film was all about how we are
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And by this time, the time we're
living in right now, 2025, the Earth is
supposed to be unlivable. I mean, not
I'm exaggerating, but like Miami is
underwater. The coast move. Meanwhile,
the coast haven't moved at all. And the
some of the wealthiest, most influential
people in the world buy property on the
coastline. So, like that, by the way, I
should tell you, you know, if the
billionaires are buying beach houses, I
think it's going to be okay in that
regard. Uh, but it's also like he made a
lot of money off of it. It became really
weird because it became he was speaking
everywhere and he made hundreds of
millions of dollars. carbon credits. He
he put he created the carbon credit
system. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The whole thing is kind of nuts when
you're that wrong and nobody even calls
you out on it. Like you freaked
everybody out from when I saw it in
2006. All my friends were like, "Oh my
god, we got to do something now." We
were all freaked out. 20 years later,
very little difference.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's not what he said wasn't true. And
there's a lot of weird inconvenient
things. One of the things that Randall
Carlson brings up is one of the things
about carbon is there's more green now
on the surface of Earth than there has
been.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; How many years? How many years has it
been?
&gt;&gt; 20. Well, NASA NASA says uh I have a
some slides called climate if and we
want to look at any of these.
&gt;&gt; If people don't know why that would be
well plants eat carbon dioxide.
&gt;&gt; So here's um
I mean we could do a whole three hours
on this. So I may we come back and do
that.
&gt;&gt; I'm I'm a degreed geologist and I'm I
began looking at climate 1979 when I was
in the energy industry uh in Denver,
Colorado. Climate change is a fact and I
want to be on record. I want to say it
is a fact. Um it's constantly changing
and earth is warming. Uh and if we
weren't, I would be concerned because
the warming is cyclic. And if we weren't
warming now, I wonder why we're not
warming now.
Uh, and I want to be very clear, we need
to find clean, green, sustainable forms
of energy. And we've had them, Joe, for
70 years. If we, if we were, it goes
even beyond thorium. I don't know if
you're familiar with thorium.
&gt;&gt; No. What's that?
&gt;&gt; So, the Manhattan Project
&gt;&gt; sounds like an anti-depressant.
&gt;&gt; No. No. This is It's a mineral. It's an
element. uh during the Manhattan project
when they, you know, did the crash
program for the weapon,
they went through the periodic table to
find out what elements could possibly be
used to create the energy. Uh, and they
chose uranium because the byproduct was
the plutonium that they needed for the
weapons and for the nuclear reactors.
But it's not the only element that would
work. Element number 90 is thorium.
Thorium uh is abundant in the earth's
crust. It's inexpensive. It's uh almost
every nation has access to it. So, it's
very easy to get. Uh it cannot melt down
like a Fukushima. It cannot be
weaponized, which is one of the reasons
that that they're not using it. The
waste can become the new fuel. It can be
recycled as the fuel.
&gt;&gt; What
&gt;&gt; uh thorium element number 90. And if you
look it up, this is why Wikipedia is a
problem. If you look up Wikipedia
uh and some of these other things,
they'll say, "Well, it's theoretical."
We had thorium reactors back in the 80s.
China, Russia, the United States had
them in Colorado. There was an Indian
River facility that was uh largely the
uh run on uh it's called thor thorium
salts is what they were doing. Uh and
that's just one example. So what I'm
saying is if we were serious about clean
green sustainable energy there are
technologies that they would have
allowed us to have that we haven't all
right so I just I want to say that when
it comes to this is part of our earlier
conversation we are being taught to
demonize carbon in general and our young
people are frightened of carbon they
think carbon is bad carbon is evil
carbon is what we're made out of and So
they have no problem relinquishing their
carbon-based, frail, fragile, flawed
bodies for the technology because
they've already been taught that carbon
is bad,
&gt;&gt; which is bananas.
&gt;&gt; Well, it is bananas. So here's
&gt;&gt; I can't believe it worked.
&gt;&gt; Well, we've got psych psychology.
There's a whole story behind that. So
I've got some images. I don't know if we
want to bring them up,
&gt;&gt; but that this narrow view of carbon is
so crazy. first right now. So CO2 levels
right now about 418 420 parts per
million which is higher than it's been
in 10 years, 20 years, 50 years. That's
true. Is it dangerously high? No. And as
a geologist, here's why I can say that.
When we go look at the the geological
record, there are times we've had CO2
levels have been a thousand parts per
million, 2,000 parts per million, and
Earth was lush, Earth was green. It was
definitely a little warmer. The ice
melted. The sea levels did rise. Okay.
That's a problem for people that build
10 ft from the sea thinking that the sea
is always going to be 10 feet away.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; All right.
uh some of the the most abundant times
for life during Jurassic period uh
Cretaceous
uh during during these periods and
what's interesting is you can have very
high carbon dioxide levels historically
and the temperatures are low and vice
versa you can have uh high temperatures
and the CO2 is low and the one of the
kickers is from the vastto ice cores so
Um,
we we recognized warming was happening.
Scientists went to Antarctica. Okay, I'm
going to back up for people that may not
be familiar with this. Every year
there's a new layer of ice that is laid
down in Greenland uh and Antarctica. And
in that layer of ice has captured little
air bubbles uh of the atmosphere
and particles of pollen and particles of
volcanic dust. And we can tell from that
layer what the the temperatures have
been, what the magnetic strength of the
earth has been, how strong the sun has
been. I mean all this stuff.
&gt;&gt; Amazing. It it is it's a mindblower. I'm
just amazed.
&gt;&gt; Uh we actually have ice core libraries.
So, I mean very cold uh refrigerated
rooms where they
&gt;&gt; I've seen that
&gt;&gt; they take the
&gt;&gt; videos of it. It's wild.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, scientists recognize the ice.
&gt;&gt; We can pull a video of that up. It's so
fascinating to look at if people hadn't
seen it.
&gt;&gt; I may have some pictures and it's under
climate on the the p the powerpoints. Um
so, what they did was they said, "Let's
we don't know what's happening is what
scientists said. Let's capture as much
information as we can before the ice
melts." So they drilled in Vastto,
Antarctica, uh, and they ended up going
back 420,000 years of of layers of ice,
continuous layers.
&gt;&gt; Whoa. How deep is that?
&gt;&gt; Um, I'm not sure how how deep that is.
It's It was They drilled below that was
Vastto Lake. So they went down as far as
they could before they hit the lake.
&gt;&gt; That's a hell of a pipe.
&gt;&gt; It is. And you can see uh so here's here
and this was in the the 80s and 90s they
were doing this and the real scientists
know what I'm going to say. The real
geologists that are not politicized
and are not beholden to
academic or corporate interests that are
are paying their paychecks. One of the
problems is
in those ice cores, the temperature
actually rises before the CO2 levels.
If the CO2 is causing that rise, that's
a problem because you would expect the
CO2 to rise first and then the
temperature. And that's not what the ice
scores. Now, I do have a slide of that
if he wants to to bring that up. Uh so
it suggests that something else is
happening. And when we look at um
it's it's this one, right? Um it's on
the lower lower left. The sec second
slide
&gt;&gt; on from the lower left.
&gt;&gt; Uh I can't see.
&gt;&gt; This is a lot of slides, folks. There's
28 slides.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, this is a present presentation
that I gave.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Right there. So what you're seeing
is the uh the red is temperature and
blue. Yeah. And the you can see that the
uh the red if you're coming from the the
past to the present the red is rising
first and then the blue follows. So the
temperatures are rising first and then
the carbon dioxide is rising. Now
there's a reason for that and a lot of
people don't like this.
What's driving climate change is under
our feet. Humans are not causing it. All
right? And I know that's a big statement
and it's different than what a lot of
people have heard and I'm going to
acknowledge that. Uh NASA said I've got
a slide showing that NASA's showing 90%
of the CO2 in the atmosphere. Joe is
coming from the outgassing of the
oceans. All right. We know from high
school science,
um, yeah, from high school science that
cold water holds more gas. The oceans
are warming, and that's a fact. And as
they warm, they're releasing that CO2
into the atmosphere. The kicker is
they're warming from underneath, not
from top.
&gt;&gt; So they're not You don't think they're
warming from whatever we're doing to the
atmosphere? No, we now we are definitely
contributing to CO2 in the atmosphere.
&gt;&gt; What would be the factor? Like what
would be the cause of the warming from
below?
&gt;&gt; We're going to go through this. I I
should probably just
go I have another one on there on on um
magnetic migrations. Okay. So, here's
&gt;&gt; Oh, Jesus. Here.
&gt;&gt; Now, you're going to freak me out.
&gt;&gt; No. Rand Carlson shifting deal.
&gt;&gt; No. No. And I don't see any evidence of
all the things to be concerned about
before the polls can shift, which they
do occasionally. Three factors have to
be in place and they're not there right
now. So, let me just say that right now.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for that cuz I've been
freaking out about that one.
&gt;&gt; No, they they uh but however, we're
asking the wrong question. They're not
shifting. They're migrating.
&gt;&gt; Oh, great. and the the migration what
happens
I'm not sure how far back to go. So what
we know is Paul Leviolet in the 1980s uh
I knew him before he passed. He was a
brilliant brilliant physicist. Wrote a
book called Earth Under Fire that was
ridiculed a lot in the 80s. And what he
said is that uh every once in a while on
a a clockwork basis there is a volley of
cosmic
cosmic rays that comes cosmic uh rays
that come from the center of our Milky
Way.
And cosmic rays like they're passing
through you and me right now because
we're mostly empty. You know, our we're
99.999%
nothing.
&gt;&gt; Nutrinos and stuff like that.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. And when they pass into the
crust of the earth, nothing happens in
the core. The core is so dense, Joe,
because of the pressure of the earth.
It's iron nickel. And it's so dense that
those they they can't pass through. And
it actually causes what's called
pertabbations.
Uh and it begins to heat the core of the
earth. And that causes uh it shifts
rotation and right now Japanese
scientists are saying that the the core
is slowed or possibly even stopped. I
don't know if your guests have talked
about that. And the as the core goes
through these cycles. So you look at a
cross-section of the Earth. There's the
inner core that's solid. The outer core
is molten. Then the mantle is about
1,800 miles thick and it's it's magma.
And then the crust is only about 36
miles thick. So
in the the the textbooks, the inner core
always looks like it's floating right in
the middle of the earth, but that's not
what's happening. When it goes when
those particles are hitting it and
heating it up, it actually bumps up
against the outer core causing ripples,
pertabbations is what they're called, uh
against the mantle, and the mantle
begins to seep into the crust. And it's
the mantle that is heating the oceans
from underneath because of that. happens
about every well about every 12,500
years. And that number if you talk to
Randall, we just did a conference in
Boulder. Uh he was in the conference
that we did up there and and that uh has
to do with the younger dus if I think
you've had guests talking about
&gt;&gt; so the last the younger dus was the last
time that this happened. It happened
12,500 years before that. 12,500 years
before that. You can I've got a chart.
You can see it's like clockwork. I'm
looking at that NA NASA thing and it
said I went to the website it says that
it's rising because the ocean is
absorbing the gases causing the water to
rise over time.
&gt;&gt; The the ocean is abs that's the
equilibrium it's outgassing
&gt;&gt; uh and it's also there's a an
equilibrium between what we're creating
in the at and we are creating in the
atmosphere. You have to be honest about
it. We're creating carbon dioxide and it
the ocean is is what's called the sink.
It's the CO2 sink that is is he that's
soaking that up. So what's happening,
Joe, is the mantle is is being
disturbed. It is heating the oceans from
underneath, releasing the carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere, and that's where
that's coming from. When we look into
the geologic history, uh we've seen this
happen before, and it's it's intense,
it's brief, and it's what comes after
that usually is a problem. It's not the
warming, it's the
&gt;&gt; Could you put that quote back up,
please?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That this was what was interesting
underneath it. It said, "Covering more
than 70% of the Earth's surface, our
global global ocean has a very high heat
capacity. It has has absorbed 90% of the
warming that has occurred in recent
decades due to increasing greenhouse
gases.
So, so this is acknowledging though that
there has been an increase in the
temperature because of our civilization.
because of greenhouse gases.
&gt;&gt; There's an increase in CO2,
&gt;&gt; but so but it's saying an increase in
warming
&gt;&gt; in warming
&gt;&gt; has occurred because of increasing
greenhouse gases. So what you're saying
is these greenhouse gases,
&gt;&gt; we're contributing to it, but it's not
the primary.
&gt;&gt; It's not the primary and the modeling is
the problem. Jamie, would you please
&gt;&gt; So what you can I go but before we go
any further, if we didn't exist at all,
if there was no industrial civilization,
we existed like hunter gatherers. Would
we have no impact? Would it be the exact
same thing or would it be a fraction of
a degree warmer because of human
society?
&gt;&gt; I think we have to be honest. Uh I don't
have the numbers on this. I think we
have to just be honest and say we are
contributing to some degree.
&gt;&gt; So to some but you feel like it's a
minor degree and if even if we were
hunter gatherers the same pattern of
earth warming would still be going on.
&gt;&gt; All we need to do is go back. There's an
orange chart on there Jamie and you look
at the Jurassic plea scene. We weren't
right there. Right here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you can see the black uh I
think is the is the black the CO2?
&gt;&gt; Yes. It says atmospheric CO2 and the
blue is global temperature.
&gt;&gt; How high it's been. And look at the the
temperatures times when it's it's high.
Uh look in the orange over here when the
CO2 is high. Temperatures.
&gt;&gt; What's up, Jamie? The 500 million years
ago.
&gt;&gt; I know. Nuts, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So So we weren't there. And this
is what you can see from We don't have
like a lot of data from back then, do
we? what was going on.
&gt;&gt; Uh data comes from different sources.
You've got ice cores and then
&gt;&gt; I know that's I mean just
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How are they getting data from 500
million years ago?
&gt;&gt; You get it from seafloor sediments.
&gt;&gt; Gez is one of the things you can do
there. There's a little sea creature
called the globgerina.
&gt;&gt; Are those tests getting better as we get
&gt;&gt; like more recently and
&gt;&gt; now I guess.
&gt;&gt; So so
we can go into this as as deep as you
want. What I'm want you to see here is
there's not a direct correlation between
CO2 and temperature in the past. We can
say that. And we can also see that CO2
levels have been higher in the past than
they are now. Uh and Earth was lush. It
was green. Uh life was flourishing.
&gt;&gt; As Randle Carlson always says, global
cooling is what's really
&gt;&gt; Now, now here's now I'm going to tie it
back in to what we began this
conversation with.
There's a concerted effort to remake the
world and to remake our bodies.
If I did a little experiment in January
of last year and I said, "Okay, what if
we met all of the climate goals? What
would Earth look like?" I'm not going to
push back against them. I just say,
&gt;&gt; let's just say, what would if you just
zero
&gt;&gt; carbon? We're only at 240 parts per
million right now, which historically is
low. We're we're on the low end right
now. If we were to meet those goals,
they want us to go back to we would meet
the goals. It would push it back to
aboutund and or 236 parts per million is
what they're looking at. 180 parts per
million is dangerously low. So they're
and this isn't something like you can
just take a dial and and adjust a little
bit here and there. They are are pushing
if we were to meet those goals, Earth
would have, by the way, they're also
pushing for global cooling of 10° global
average. We're at 56 Fahrenheit global
average. Right now, they want 46
degrees. The last time on Earth we had
those kinds of temperatures and that
kind of CO2 was the pleaene era. It was
not good for us. It's not good for life.
It's not good for humans. Who are they?
&gt;&gt; They are.
&gt;&gt; Why would they want to do such a
self-destructive thing? Do they know
this? Do they know this data?
&gt;&gt; Well, let's break it down, Joe. Let's
just let's step through this.
&gt;&gt; Okay, let's step through this.
&gt;&gt; Climate.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; If we were to meet those climate goals,
it's not good for us. All right, let's
put that
&gt;&gt; as a a human species.
&gt;&gt; As a human species, let's put that over
here.
&gt;&gt; Okay,
&gt;&gt; we're being pushed for war. And I think
you can see that.
uh and the nations of the earth that
have the capability for war are waging
that war. And what's happening is we're
depleting our resources as nations. We
are and I just did a search on this the
other night. Uh the superpowers are
dangerously low on weapons and on the
the ability humans to fight in those
wars. If Earth ever needed to fight, we
don't have what we need right now. So
our our weapons are being depleted.
Okay, let's put that over here. Now
there's a concerted effort to break the
social bonds that have held us together
as societies, as nations, as
communities, and that is working very
successfully. We're we're breaking down
those borders. That's not good for us.
That's not good for anyone. Now you look
at the transhuman movement to replace us
with technology, with machines to to
debilitate our ability for critical
thinking, our ability for imagination,
for creativity,
uh for all the reasons that we just
talked about, use it or lose it. When we
give our power away to that technology,
we're not the best version of ourselves.
That's not good for us. None of those
are good for us. So if I said that to
you,
what would you say to me? Who would that
be good for? If it's not good for us,
who's it good for?
&gt;&gt; Satan.
&gt;&gt; Well, now is where you go back and you
look at all those ancient texts, you
look at the the and depending on what
language you're using. If you're looking
at Sumerian texts,
this world um was never ours to begin
with is what those texts say. And there
is a good argument that can be made that
earth is being modified in ways that are
not necessarily good for us. Who are
they good for? That there's a whole
conversation that we can have, you know,
around around that. So,
&gt;&gt; so you think climate is a part of this
whole agenda of control?
&gt;&gt; I do.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well,
&gt;&gt; I think I think there's a comp and it's
not just my opinion. I think the
evidence supports that because why would
we want to push this planet back? I mean
NASA says we're greener now than we have
been in 20 years. Why would we want to
push this planet back to
uh to the environment of the plea to
scene era?
&gt;&gt; Well, we want to have control over
things all the time. And when you see
certain areas that become too hot for a
certain kind of agriculture or things
change or certain lakes dry up, there's
things like that that happen that people
freak out about because we want control.
That's why we want to bring animals back
from extinction. Like we we we want
control over everything around us
because it makes us feel better. But the
problem with this one is you're getting
people that are saying we're going to
lower the earth temperature. Like you
didn't we didn't vote on that. like ju
just because it's your idea and you
people are moving in this direction, you
have so much money, you're making a
decision for literally 8 billion
&gt;&gt; unelected unelected officials.
&gt;&gt; It's nuts. It's nuts that they think
they could spray things in the sky to
reflect particles, reflective particles
to to dull out the sun and lower the
temperature of the earth. Like that
that's an insane notion
&gt;&gt; and especially if we're moving into
cooler anyway. all of this. I mean, so
now we've identified these things.
&gt;&gt; I think it's useless to be angry. I
think what we do is we recognize, Joe,
that all of these applications of
technology are a reflection of the way
we've been conditioned to think about
ourselves. When we wake up to become the
best version of ourselves, then we
recognize it makes sense to go clean and
green. It makes sense to to grow our
food differently. It makes sense to have
different kinds of energy because we
recognize our relationship to ourselves
in the world around us,
&gt;&gt; right? Not because we're being
manipulated.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Exactly. It could be done the
right way. Like the real issue that we
have as a society, one of the not the
but war is obviously the but one of the
big ones is pollution. Like that is
undeniable. Oh yeah. when you see like
what's going on in India with some of
those rivers where it's just the the
entire river is just choked up with
plastic.
&gt;&gt; I've been there. I've seen that.
&gt;&gt; That is insane that as a as a human race
that we allow that. That's insane. Like
but then you look at places like is it
Singapore Jamie that we watched that
video where it was fascinating their I
believe it's Singapore. um where they
have like the most sophisticated
recycling program, like unbelievably
efficient. And they take that stuff and
use it to pave the roads. They they burn
things down, specific materials they
have. I mean, it's an insane job they do
of of taking the the garbage. So, we
know it's possible.
&gt;&gt; It is possible. So, everything we're
talking about is a consequence of what
happens when we give our humanness away.
and we believe that we are a flawed
species and that we need something
outside of ourselves to be the best
version of ourselves or that we believe
we're powerless. So, we say to someone
else, fix it and make it better.
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; We're now right now and the AI is
driving this conversation. We are at the
point where we are are being asked by
the conditions of the world to accept
the deep truth of what it means to be
human. And in that humanness, when we
accept our ability that there's a part
of us that doesn't live in here, what
that means is the more that we can honor
the antenna, the gift of the body to
access that, we become healthier. We
become the best version of ourselves, we
begin to live differently. We begin to
eat differently. We begin to recycle
differently. We use energy differently
because we're living in the world a
reflection of the new honor and respect
that we have for the gift of our bodies.
And nobody's telling our young kids
anything like this.
&gt;&gt; No,
&gt;&gt; we have to protect our children.
&gt;&gt; It would help everybody just to think
that way. It would help everybody.
&gt;&gt; Well, this is no matter what you're
trying to do with life.
&gt;&gt; Well, this is but the AI right now is is
the tip of the spear. This is what
they're using. they again uh the the
powers that be
because we're so close, Joe, for the
first time in a very long time on a mass
level to awakening to what it means to
be human. There are pockets
&gt;&gt; that are coming together and we're
saying no no to war. We're saying I
think in this generation I think you
will see us walk away from the use of
war to solve our problems. What happens
if they throw a war and nobody nobody
goes? I think you're going to see that
happen because people are saying this
isn't right. This isn't right.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's a very powerful message and
I hope you're right. Um but if there was
one thing that I feel like most people
would bet on is that there's always
going to be war.
&gt;&gt; I I think not the way not the way we're
seeing it. Not the way we're seeing it
right now. not the way this ties in to
the disclosure conversation because when
you talk to the people behind the scenes
in disclosure, we obviously I don't
think anybody
would have a problem with a flying
saucer in an air air force hanger
somewhere. We've we've seen it in movies
where, you know, I don't think anybody's
surprised, but I don't think anybody's
got a problem with with a a gray alien,
you know, in in an Air Force conference
room somewhere. But the implications
if we've had this relationship for so
long,
we know they didn't get here on a Chevy
V8 engine. I mean, they've got some
pretty high tech,
&gt;&gt; right? Uh and what the part of the
implications are that we are being asked
to step up
to become a different species to to meet
the intelligence that is being offered
to us. And
there are different forms of that
intelligence. some of that intelligence
is prone to war and that's not the ones
that we we want to to necessarily um
&gt;&gt; that's hard to believe that they get so
far they could travel from other places
in the universe yet they still have war.
&gt;&gt; That's the disappointing thing for me.
And so this is where we go back to the
ancient texts. They begin with a war in
the heavens
&gt;&gt; or what the Bible calls, you know, the
the fall.
&gt;&gt; And the war is what destroyed a planet
in our solar system. I think Randall's
probably talked about that.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's the the kooky theory about
Mars, too, right?
&gt;&gt; Mars used to have an atmosphere. It
doesn't anymore. And they believe that
um there is
a compelling argument that could be made
for war destroying. I think when we get
there and we see the archaeological
remnants that are there, uh I think
we'll have the answer to that. But that
is scary, isn't it, Joe? You have be so
advanced and still have the
still allow differences to be so great
that the only way to solve them is is to
hurt one another and destroy one
another.
&gt;&gt; But also makes for great science fiction
movies. It does because without the war
in space, you have no Star Trek, you
know, you have no Star Wars.
&gt;&gt; Well, maybe this is where we break that
cycle. Maybe maybe we wake up our
humanness and we accept the power of
human divinity and we accept what it
means. Uh and we imbue our children with
a deep sense of of and a healthy sense
that there's something very special
about them worth preserving so that they
care about themselves and then that
begins to inform the way we live in the
world and we would be living in a very
very different world. I think you're
right and I think you saying that is
very important because it gets that word
out there and people start to consider
it and think about it and I think that's
the only way people find these things is
for people like you come out and have
these conversations and spark thoughts
in people's head like maybe I'm thinking
and behaving and living the wrong way
and maybe maybe we could just
&gt;&gt; become more united and more positive and
recognize this incredible gift that we
have of this life
&gt;&gt; but look what the science see the
science the science science is is so
compartmentalized and I saw this when I
was working in even in the industry. So
a discovery is made in genetics
and it stays in that genetics box and it
gets published in some obscure
the new way of thinking is looking at
humans from an IT perspective. So there
are journals like the journal of soft
computing. I didn't even talk about
that. The journal of soft computing has
just come out and said that human DNA
three-dimensional human DNA is a fractal
antenna. Now what's that mean? An
antenna tunes to a signal. A fractal
antenna tunes to a vast array of signals
across a broad spectrum. We got 50
trillion of them in our bodies. And the
journal is saying that. But who reads
that? Who's reading the journal of soft
comput? Who has
&gt;&gt; Thank God you are. Who who has who has a
beautiful hardbound copy of the journal
of soft computing next to their bed like
I do?
&gt;&gt; Well, the fact that you know it, you
just told people now people know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's it's a very different way
of thinking. But if we can begin seeing
ourselves and really I think the
greatest task that we're cherish that
we're that we're tasked with right now
is to cherish
and honor and care for the gift of the
human body because I believe it is a
gift because there was an intervention
that created the mutations that give us
what we have today. We don't know who or
what, but we're not the product of
natural evolution.
And until we understand fully what that
is, Joe, why would we want to give that
away to technology before we even know
what it means to be human? And once we
give it away, we can never go back. This
is how you lose a species. And I think
we're worth preserving. And my that's my
message. I I'm advocating for our
humanness, for our divinity, for our our
love. Um because that's what sets us
apart from all our forms of life. And I
think we're worth preserving. I I agree
with you 100% and I appreciate you very
much and thank you very much for coming
on here. It was a lot of fun and let's
do it again.
&gt;&gt; Are you Are you saying we're finished?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we're done, man. We are almost
three hours.
&gt;&gt; Oh, wow. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Crazy.
&gt;&gt; All right, Joe. Well, thank you very
enjoyed it. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; You know, thank you. You are just an
amazing listener and I appreciate the
long format and the opportunity to flesh
out these ideas in their entirety. So,
thank you for that.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's my pleasure. Thank you for
being interesting so I could just
listen. It's like, but it's, you know,
uh, I only have people on the podcast
that I'm interested in. So, uh, when I
saw a lot of your stuff online, I'm
like, this guy's fascinating.
&gt;&gt; Oh, thank you.
&gt;&gt; And it was great. I really enjoyed it.
Thank you very much for doing our next.
&gt;&gt; All right. Thank you. We'll do it again.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]