- I like to say that physics is hard
because physics is easy,
by which I mean we actually think about physics as students.
You know, we took classes, we read books.
And it was hard because there's all this new stuff,
all these ideas, all these equations
that we don't come across in our everyday lives.
But the reason those ideas are hard
and those equations are there
is because physicists have a technique
that has been amazingly successful,
which is to take all the messy world around us,
with all its peculiarities and specificities,
and to boil it down to really, really simple systems.
I'm Sean Carroll.
I'm a physicist and philosopher
at Johns Hopkins University,
host of the "Mindscape" podcast,
and also author of a bunch of books,
most recently "The Biggest Ideas in the Universe" series,
including "Space, Time, and Motion" and "Quanta and Fields."
You might imagine or remember
when you were taking physics courses,
there were frictionless surfaces,
there were pendula that rocked back and forth perfectly.
We're always idealizing.
We're always imagining there are no complications
and then we're putting them back in.
That's a strategy that would completely fail
if you tried to do it for psychology,
or biology, or political science.
But for physics, it turns out to work incredibly well.
There's a joke that physicists like to tell each other.
They don't like to tell it to others
'cause it's not very funny.
But the idea is that a dairy farmer
wants to improve his yield, more milk out of the cows.
And for some reason, he approaches a physicist,
and says, "Could you look at my farm
and tell me how to get more milk out of the cows?"
And the physicist thinks about it,
and he comes back with a sheaf of calculations,
and he says, "Okay, first, imagine a spherical cow."
I know it's not that funny,
but the idea is that the first thing the physicist
is gonna do is try to imagine a simpler situation.
Real cows are not spherical.
It'll be a very different dairy farm
if the cows were spherical.
But you can calculate the volume of the cow
and the metabolic rate of the cow much more easily
if it were spherical.
And the joke of course is that that doesn't work
in dairy farming, but it works really well
when you're considering a spherical universe,
or a spherical solar system, or a spherical atom.
The first really huge revolution in physics
was the existence of classical mechanics,
handed down by Isaac Newton and others.
It took a while.
Newton was building on the shoulders of giants.
But before Newton, there was Aristotle.
And Aristotle says
that things have natural places they wanna be,
natural ways they want to move.
And Newton says something completely different.
He says if something is not acted on by a force,
it's gonna continue in a straight line
at a constant velocity forever.
And if it is acted on by a force,
I can tell you how it'll move.
I have an equation to do that.
Physicists like to simplify things a great deal.
But billiards, you know, the pool game,
is pretty close to being simple.
It's not exactly
because, you know, when you hear those balls
click against each other, that sound is giving off energy
and it's kind of wasteful.
But in principle, if you had no friction, no sound,
no air resistance, the balls bouncing around the pool table,
let's also imagine there's no pockets,
so the balls can just bounce off the edges
of the table forever, they would go forever.
They wouldn't stop, right?
The energy contained in the system remains constant.
And the laws of physics, as Laplace points out,
suffice it to predict exactly what the balls are gonna do
at every moment given what they're doing right now.
So to the extent that it's okay
to ignore friction, and noise, and things like that,
not only is it true that if you imagine hitting the balls
and watching them move,
you could predict exactly what's gonna happen
on the basis of the laws of physics,
if somehow you could take a snapshot later in their motion
so you know both where they are and how fast they're moving,
so maybe a little clip of a movie,
then the laws of physics would let you go backwards
and reverse engineer
what exact configuration the balls were in.
We don't perceive that in our everyday world
because the world is full of noise, and dissipation,
and air resistance, and things like that.
But in the pristine, perfect world
of imagined classical mechanics,
the past and future work equally well.
You can go from any one moment to any other moment.
It's interesting that Newton came up
with the framework of classical mechanics in the 1600s.
And people were very excited,
you know, physicists, mathematicians, philosophers.
They didn't really have physicists at the time,
they were all considered to be natural philosophers.
But they worked on it.
You know, they thought about the motions of the planets
and things like that.
And the implications of this idea are profound
for how we think about what physics is,
what physics tells us,
because it wasn't realized until Pierre-Simon Laplace
over a hundred years after Newton,
but the structure of classical mechanics
implies that if you knew the position and velocity
not just of one particle
but of every particle in the universe,
and you knew the laws of physics,
and you had infinite calculational abilities,
none of these are at all plausible,
but we're imagining right now,
then the laws of physics would determine what happens next
at the next moment, and the next moment,
and infinitely far into the future,
and for that matter, indefinitely far into the past.
So you can take any one moment
in the history of the universe,
according to classical mechanics,
and the information contained
in what is going on at that moment
is sufficient to fix what will happen
at every other moment in history.
And Laplace, who is quite imaginative about these things,
put it in terms of a metaphor.
He says imagine a vast intelligence,
later commentators dubbed it Laplace's demon.
He didn't call it that.
He was famously an atheist.
He didn't like to talk about demons.
But the demon, the vast intelligence,
who could know everything about the universe
at any one moment, Laplace says, to that vast intelligence,
the past and future are an open book.
You would know everything because what happens now
fixes the entirety of space and time,
the idea that the laws of physics
fix what's going to happen
in principle precisely and exactly
if you know what's happening right now.
So this became known as the clockwork universe paradigm.
The universe clicks along in perfect accord
with the laws of physics forever.
Now, this might bother you a little bit if you wanna think,
well, wait a minute, I'm a person, I'm a human being,
I have the ability to make choices.
I'm not determined by the laws of physics.
And both scientists and philosophers thought about that.
They still don't agree
on what the right way to think about it is.
But the favorite way to think about it is the following.
In principle, if you knew exactly everything
that was going on in the universe,
you could predict the future.
Now, classical mechanics isn't quite right.
Eventually we're gonna talk about quantum mechanics,
so that's another thing you have to keep in mind.
But to the approximation that classical mechanics is good,
you are determined in what is going to happen.
But guess what?
You don't know all the positions of all the atoms
and all the molecules that make up you.
Indeed, you literally cannot know them
because the memory storage capacity
to know all that would be at least as big as your brain,
if not bigger.
And if you made your brain bigger,
now you just have more molecules to keep track of.
It is impossible to actually have a real Laplace's demon
in the universe.
It's just a thought experiment
to make vivid the implications of determinism.
So philosophers have settled
on what they decided to call compatibilism
in the sense that, on the one hand,
the deep down, microscopic laws of physics
are perfectly deterministic,
or they're not if you're in quantum mechanics,
but they're pretty deterministic anyway.
But since you don't know it,
you should be asking yourself, what is the best I can do?
What is the best way
that I can try to understand human beings
given the vastly incomplete information I have?
I know about, you know, my friends' personality,
and, you know, their predilections, and their traits,
but I don't know every neuron in their brain.
And under those circumstances, you will model,
you will think about a fellow human being or about yourself
as an agent capable of making choices.
Everyone does that, and that's the right thing to do
because you are not Laplace's demon.
Isaac Newton, you may have heard, was a smart fellow.
And one of the interesting things
when you invent a whole new way of doing physics,
if you're right and it becomes successful,
then later on people kind of take it for granted.
They're like, "Yeah, this is how the world works
or whatever."
But at the time, you're still very careful,
and Newton was himself super-duper careful
about all the assumptions that went into his theory,
and what their implications were, and so on.
One part of classical mechanics
is the idea of space and time
both separately existing and being absolute.
There is a meaningfulness to that.
There's no preferred position in the universe.
You can be anywhere you want,
the laws of physics work the same.
There's not even a preferred velocity to the universe.
This was figured out by Galileo,
and Newton kind of took it on board.
If you started everything moving
at one mile per hour to the left,
the world will look exactly the same.
There's no actual frame of rest that you can measure.
But there is space and there is time,
and everyone agrees on what those two things mean.
When I say I am one mile away from a certain other point,
everyone in the universe agrees you are one mile away.
Yes, that is correct.
When I snap my fingers and say,
"At the moment I snap my fingers,
a certain thing is happening in Los Angeles,"
everyone agrees that indeed at that moment,
that's a well-defined concept to say
what is happening at some point far away,
not just Los Angeles but Alpha Centauri
or the Andromeda Galaxy.
It turns out those assumptions are not quite right.
And it was a journey to get there, as it often is.
It started in the 1800s
with the invention of electromagnetism.
So there are all these new phenomena
that people were thinking about
since Ben Franklin flew his kite
and studied lightning coming down.
It was James Clark Maxwell who put the whole story together
after work by people like Faraday, and Ampere, and so forth.
And what he realized is there's two fields
pervading the universe,
an electric field and a magnetic field.
And he wrote down some equations that these fields obey,
and they sort of play with each other
and push around charged particles and things like that.
People were very happy at the existence of electromagnetism.
They started thinking about what it all meant.
And what they realized is that the sort of way
that space and time are treated
in Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism
is different than the way they are apparently treated
in Newton's theory.
In particular, Maxwell's equations
predicted a special velocity.
There's no special velocity in Newtonian mechanics.
Every velocity is created the same.
Maxwell says there is something called the speed of light.
It is the speed at which waves
in the electromagnetic fields move.
And naively, you look at the equations
and everyone measures the same value for the speed of light.
It's a constant of nature.
How can it possibly be the case
that everyone measures the same speed for light
even if they're moving with respect to each other?
So for a long time, for decades, people, physicists,
bashed their heads against this problem.
They came with very elaborate schemes to get rid of it.
And it was Einstein, Albert Einstein,
in his great paper in 1905,
who first said you should get rid of the idea
of these waves traveling through a medium.
You should think of the electromagnetic waves
as really being the thing that exists.
And when the equations tell you
everyone measures the speed of light the same,
that's because they do.
Take that seriously.
All you have to do is entirely rejigger your thoughts
about what space and time are.
And in fact, it wasn't until two years later,
when Herman Minkowski, who was a mathematician
who had been one of Einstein's professors,
said, you know, the right way
to think about Einstein's theory
is to say that space and time aren't separate anymore,
to imagine there's one thing called spacetime.
And different people, different observers
moving in different ways through the universe,
will divide it up into space and time differently.
There's no objective true fact
about, when I snap my fingers now,
what's happening light years away.
That's gonna depend on who's doing the observing
and who's doing the measuring.
It can all be explained very beautifully
by imagining a single four dimensional spacetime
instead of separate space and time.
Einstein himself was not impressed by this move.
Einstein was a hilarious character
because he was a physicist's physicist.
He was very mathematically adept.
You know, don't believe the stories
that Einstein wasn't good at math in school.
He was very good at it.
But he wasn't in it for the math,
he was in it for the physics.
So he learned as much math as he needed.
And when Minkowski says,
"I have some new math that unifies space and time
based on Einstein's theories,"
Einstein himself was like, "Yeah, I don't need that.
That's like extra mathematical nonsense."
He soon changed his mind
'cause it turns out that that move
from space and time being separate to being combined
is super useful going forward, including,
10 years later he would invent
his general theory of relativity
that include gravity into the spacetime story.
When Einstein put together
what we now call the special theory of relativity,
the idea that there's no preferred standard of rest
in the universe,
but also, everyone thinks the speed of light is the same,
all you have to do is imagine ultimately
that space and time are glued together,
that was a radical reworking of the framework of physics.
You know, Newton's idea of separate space and separate time,
absolute and agreed upon by everyone,
had been there for hundreds of years.
And when you do that, when you say,
"Okay, I'm gonna completely invent space and time
in part because I wanna match this wonderful theory we have,
Maxwell's theory of electricity and magnetism,"
you have to go back to everything that was a success
in your previous way of doing things and say,
"Does it still work?"
The biggest success of Newtonian classical mechanics
was gravity, the famous inverse square law of gravity.
Newton posited that if you have two objects
with two different masses,
they have a gravitational force that will pull them together
that diminishes
as one over the square of the distance between them.
And that simple rule
plus the framework of Newtonian mechanics
is enough to match exactly what you see in the sky
in terms of the planets moving around.
It's enough to launch a rocket and get it to the moon.
So Einstein comes along and says,
"Well, okay, can I make a version
of Newton's theory of gravity that is compatible
with my new theory of special relativity?"
And after trying, he said, "No, I can't."
You have to do something much more dramatic.
And what he realized is that gravity
is a special force of nature.
You know, Maxwell talks about electricity and magnetism.
If I wanna know what the electric field is
at one point in space, it's very easy to do.
I put a positively charged particle,
a negatively charged particle,
they get pushed in opposite directions
by the electric field.
But Einstein realized that every particle
reacts the same way to gravity.
If I have a very heavy particle and a very light particle
and I drop them, Galileo showed that they drop
at exactly the same rate.
They're not pushed around in a different way.
So because of that, gravity seems to disappear
if you only look at it in a tiny region of the universe.
If you are in a sealed box
and you are dropping things and going,
"Oh, I have gravity here," you don't know that for sure.
Maybe you're in a rocket ship,
and the rocket's accelerating, and you're being tricked
into thinking you have gravity.
So Einstein, because he's Einstein, he's very smart,
you know, you or I would go, "Huh, that's interesting,"
but he says, "I think what that means
is that gravity is not a force on top of spacetime,
it's a feature of spacetime itself."
What feature could it be?
Well, my ex-professor, Minkowski,
says that spacetime has a geometry.
It's one combined thing.
And there are equations telling me how particles move in it.
Maybe that geometry is curved.
Maybe it's not like a flat tabletop like Euclidean geometry.
Maybe it's warped, and bent, and dynamical,
and changes in response to the existence of mass and energy
and things like that.
It's a good idea to have.
It takes you a lot of effort and a lot of mathematical work
to figure it out.
So 10 years later, in 1950, Einstein finally completes
what we call the general theory of relativity.
And the general theory of relativity says spacetime
is a four dimensional thing,
that four dimensional thing has a geometry,
it's pushed around by matter and energy,
and we experience the curvature of spacetime
as the force of gravity.
When Einstein and Minkowski figured out
that space and time are both two different ways
of slicing up spacetime, what does that mean?
What does that mean, like, in our guts, right?
What does it visually or measurably imply?
You know, in space,
there's something called the distance between two points.
If you say, you know, I'm here in Washington DC
and a friend of mine is in Los Angeles,
there's a distance between those two cities,
and we all agree on what that distance is
because implicitly,
we're imagining the shortest distance path, right?
The straight line that connects these two points.
But of course if you actually travel
between these two cities,
you won't exactly necessarily take that much distance
'cause you're gonna go right and left.
You're not gonna go exactly on a straight line.
So in space, we're all very, very used to the idea
that different paths have different lengths,
even if they start and end at the same point.
In special relativity, now that space and time are unified,
what that means is that time is like that.
The time you personally measure on your wristwatch
is very analogous to the distance that you travel
moving on some path.
What that means is that rather than being a universal thing
that everyone agrees on,
time depends on the trajectory you take
through the universe.
The most famous example of this is the twin paradox.
You imagine two twins, they don't have to be twins,
but it's more vivid if they are,
'cause you think of twins as being the same age, okay?
One twin just doesn't move, just stays home.
This is the lazy twin.
And they get older, like the rest of us all do.
The other twin hops in a rocket ship
that moves out very close to the speed of light,
you need to move close to the speed of light
to feel the effects of relativity, and then comes back.
And so they left at the same time, they were the same age,
they come back to the same point in space
and the same point in time.
But the twin who traveled is now younger.
The twin who traveled has experienced less time
than the twin who stayed home.
And the reason why is because they took different paths
through spacetime.
Space and time are similar to each other
but not exactly the same.
That's why, in space, the shortest distance path
is a straight line.
But in time, the longest time path is the straight line.
The twin who stays stationary and doesn't move,
that's moving in a straight line through spacetime,
that's the one that feels more time pass
before the other twin comes back.
When people hear this stuff about relativity
and moving through space and things,
what they want to say is, "Oh, so you're saying
that time moves more slowly
when you're traveling near the speed of light."
No, I do not want to say that.
I very much do not want to say that.
What is the rate at which time moves?
It is one second per second.
You're being tricked by your use of the English language
because you move through space
and it makes perfect sense to say
I am moving at one meter per second,
or two meters per second, or whatever.
The rate at which you move
is the number of distance you traveled per unit time.
But the amount of time you travel per unit time
is always one.
Now the accumulated time along two different trajectories
can be different.
That's the origin of something like the twin paradox,
or when gravity comes into the game,
the amount of total time you experience will be less
if you're deep in a gravitational field
than if you're out there in interstellar space,
where gravity is not that important.
So in general relativity,
being a strong gravitational field
is much like moving out there close to the speed of light.
If you had someone stay back here on Earth,
someone else go near a black hole, for example,
a black hole is the strongest kind
of gravitational field you can have.
Don't go in to the black hole
because then you can't come back out.
But if you go near it and then you come back,
you will be younger than the person who just stayed behind.
You will have experienced less time.
Your wristwatch is still clicking at one second per second,
but the accumulated amount of time is different
because you have taken a different path
through curved spacetime.
And "Interstellar," the Christopher Nolan movie,
this was wonderfully illustrated.
Kip Thorne, who is a Nobel Prize-winning physicist,
was the executive producer
and one of the instigators of that movie,
and he put all of his physics knowledge in there
about wormholes, and black holes,
and gravity, and time travel.
So up until the very last scenes,
when they're in the library and everything goes haywire,
all the physics in that movie is completely respectable.
One thing that is true
even in Newtonian ways of thinking about space and time
or in Einsteinian ways of thinking about space and time
is that these fundamental laws, as Laplace's demon shows us,
work forward and backward in time.
Knowing everything about the universe in one moment
predicts the past, as well as the future.
That's because what we think of
as the fundamental laws of physics
do not have a directionality to time.
They treat the past and future the same.
But there's clearly a direction to time in the world.
I remember what I was doing yesterday.
I might guess what I'm gonna do tomorrow,
but I don't remember it in the same way.
I have no photographs or memory books of the future.
I was younger.
I will always be older in the future.
What is going on with that?
And the answer is it's not the fundamental laws of physics,
it's the collective behavior
of many, many things in the universe
that start out in a special state.
It goes back to the idea of entropy from the 1800s,
the idea of the disorderliness of a system, the randomness,
the disorganization.
And entropy increases with time.
That's the famous second law of thermodynamics.
Why does entropy increase with time?
Because there are more ways
for a system to be arranged in a high entropy configuration
than a low entropy one, by definition,
and the universe started
in a very special low entropy state.
Nobody knows why that is true.
This is a mystery to cosmology.
But the entropy of the universe was very, very low to start
and it's been increasing ever since.
And us having memories of the past but not the future,
the ability to have records,
the fact that we age in the same direction,
this is all because entropy is increasing in one direction
rather than the other.
I'd like to think,
if you were a physicist circa 1895, okay,
the very end of the 19th century,
you would've been forgiven
for thinking that we were almost there.
We were almost having
a complete theory of nature in our grasp.
Because they had the idea of particles, right?
You know, the idea even of atom was a little bit sketchy
to a lot of physicists in the 1800s,
but they eventually caught on.
And they were beginning to realize
that atoms were made of other particles,
protons, neutrons, electrons, and so forth.
And then the particles which make up matter
are pushed around by fields, by the electric field,
by the magnetic field,
by the gravitational field, and so forth.
So you have this sort of two-part harmony.
Matter is made of particles, forces come from fields.
And all of the effort in the future of physics
would be figuring out what are all the particles,
what are all the fields, and then you'd be done.
There were a couple of clouds on the horizon.
One of them ended up being relativity,
the fact that the symmetries
of Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism
were different than the symmetries
of Newton's theory of classical mechanics.
But the others were that there were certain properties
of matter and materials
that didn't quite seem to make sense.
And I'm gonna be ahistorical now.
Let's pop forward to like 1911.
They were putting together the picture of the atom
that is the cartoon you've always seen, right?
There's a little nucleus at the center of the atom
and electrons are circling around it
like planet's orbiting a star.
This is called the Rutherford atom model,
after Ernest Rutherford,
who was a brilliant experimental and theoretical physicist.
And this was entertained and people liked the idea
that electrons were kind of like little planets,
but they instantly figured out it can't possibly be right,
because that electron orbiting the nucleus
would give off electromagnetic waves.
It's a moving particle.
Moving charged particles give off light.
All of the light you're looking at right now
came from some electron in motion, moving around.
So you can calculate.
You can say if the electron is moving around in orbit
around the atomic nucleus, if it gives off light,
it will lose energy and spiral into the nucleus,
how long should that take?
And the answer is every atom in the universe,
including the ones in the chair you're sitting on
or even in your own body, should collapse to a point
in a hundredth of a billionth of a second.
So that clearly does not happen.
The idea that electrons
are like little planets in a solar system is just wrong.
And this and other things,
black-body radiation and other experimental results,
convinced people that there wasn't this clean division
between particles and forces.
They said there's aspects of light,
which is supposed to be a wave, which are particle-like.
Einstein said that.
There are aspects of particles like electrons
that are wave-like.
Louis de Broglie, following work by Niels Bohr
and others, said that.
And this whole thing coalesces
almost exactly a hundred years ago in 1925
in the theory of quantum mechanics.
And almost right at the same time,
two different versions of it came out.
Werner Heisenberg had his version called matrix mechanics.
Erwin Schrodinger had his version called wave mechanics.
They show that they were actually mathematically equivalent.
But quantum mechanics, I like to say,
it was the second of two big ideas
in the history of physics.
The first big idea in physics was classical mechanics.
Relativity is a pretty big idea
but not as big as classical mechanics
or the second big idea, which is quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics throws away classical mechanics
and replaces it with something very different.
It says that electrons are not particles or waves.
They act like waves until you look at them,
and then they look like particles.
That is a very, very difficult thing to swallow,
and physicists are still trying to figure out
what to make of it.
It's so much fun reading the history
of how these ideas developed
'cause today we're just taught the final result,
but, you know, they didn't know
what was going on back in the early days.
In 1926, Erwin Schrodinger presents an equation,
what we now call the wave function.
It's a dopey name for a very important idea.
So think of that little electron,
instead of orbiting in a circle, it's a wave.
It has a profile around the center of the atom.
And the equation works very well.
It's still the equation that we use today.
But then you have to ask, okay, semi philosophical question,
what is the wave function?
What is it telling us?
And Schrodinger thought, well, okay,
in some cases electrons act like waves,
in other cases they act like particles.
Maybe the equation says that if you start
with an electron wave all spread out,
it will sort of localize itself near some point
and it will look like a particle.
It turns out not to be true.
The equations don't care about your feelings.
It's the opposite.
If you start out with a localized electron wave,
it will spread out all over the place.
So it was yet another physicist, Max Born,
different than Niels Bohr, who pointed out the right way
to think about Schrodinger's wave function.
He said think about what happens
when you measure a property of the electron,
like its position, or its velocity,
or whatever you wanna measure.
He says what the wave function is doing
is it's telling me the probability
of getting a different measurement outcome.
In particular, if you want the math,
you square the wave function,
that tells you the probability
of seeing the electron somewhere.
And this was just bizarre and crazy
for all sorts of reasons.
People didn't like the idea that probabilities
were involved at all.
Of course there's probabilities when you flip a coin,
but that's just 'cause you just don't know
everything there is to know about the coin.
Since the time of Newton and Laplace,
we thought that physics deep down
was perfectly deterministic.
And here's Max Born saying no, it's not.
That was difficult to swallow.
But the other thing that's difficult to swallow
is why in the world is the idea of measuring
or observing something
showing up in the fundamental laws of physics.
That had never happened before.
Of course you have to think about measuring things
and observing things, but it was always imagined
that if I measure the position of a planet
or something like that,
in principle I can do that measurement completely benignly
without disturbing the system in any way at all.
And what Born is saying
is that when you measure an electron,
you instantly and dramatically change its wave function.
And to tell me what the fundamental laws of physics are,
according to what became known
as the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics,
after the city where Niels Bohr,
and Werner Heisenberg, and others were doing their work,
part of those fundamental laws are a set of rules that say
here's what's what happens
when you measure the properties of a system.
So quantum mechanics is the only theory
in the history of physics
that has rules about measurement outcomes
and has measurement playing an important role
in what those laws are.
And if you ask, well, what is a measurement, what counts,
do I have to be conscious,
can a video camera do a measurement?
The answer is we're not gonna tell you the answer to that.
We don't have an agreed upon set of criteria
for when a measurement happens.
And this is known cleverly
as the measurement problem of quantum mechanics.
There's various plausible resolutions to it,
but we don't agree on what the right one is.
Very often in physics, learning physics,
teaching physics, doing physics,
it's very helpful to visualize things, either precisely
or maybe in some toy kind of metaphorical way
of doing things.
But we have to keep in mind it's not necessary
that there be an accurate way to visualize certain things.
We have to accept that the world is not here
to make things easy for us.
So when it comes to the wave function of quantum mechanics,
we're a little bit stuck.
There are simple cases,
like if you have one electron and that's it,
no other particles,
you're talking about the wave function of one electron,
you can actually visualize that.
If you just think about space as two dimensional
to make your life easy, the wave function is a function.
You're cheating a little bit
because rather than having a value, it's a complex number,
that means to say a real part plus I
times an imaginary part,
where I is squared to minus one, but okay, who cares?
What you need to know is there's a profile, there's a shape.
There's basically a value at every point in space
which says this is the wave function of the electron
at every point in space.
So go ahead and visualize it.
If you ever took chemistry class and you saw those images
of what are called orbitals in different kinds of atoms,
those are literally pictures of wave functions.
Those are values of the wave functions,
different shapes the wave function of an electron
can take in an atom.
But just to show you that the universe
is not gonna always go that easy on you,
sometimes you have two electrons that you care about.
And one of the most profound features of quantum mechanics,
which separates it from classical mechanics,
is that you don't have a wave function for electron one
and a separate wave function for electron two.
Because remember, the job of the wave function is to say,
what is the probability that I measure something, right?
So when I have two electrons, I can have the probability
of seeing one electron anywhere in the universe,
and I also have the probability I see the other one
everywhere in the universe, but they can be connected.
Maybe I know that the electrons are one centimeter apart,
but I don't know where they are, right?
If I measure one of them,
then I instantly know where the other one is,
but I don't know ahead of time where either one of them are.
This is the phenomenon called entanglement.
And what it means is that
rather than having one separate wave function
for one particle and a distinct one for the other one,
which would mean there's no connection between them,
the wave function tells me the probability
of both particles at once.
Mathematically, if you want the details,
you assign a complex number to every pair of positions,
the position of particle one
and the position of particle two.
You wanna visualize that?
Good luck.
You're not really gonna be able to do it
unless you can visualize complex functions
in six dimensional space.
But that's what it actually is.
We can write it down, and we can deal with it,
and we can go back to what things look like
when it's just one electron
if you wanna really wanna visualize things,
but at some point we have to trust
that the equations know what they're doing.
You would think, from the name quantum mechanics,
that quantum mechanics has something to do with quantum,
which is a word made up
to denote a discreet amount of stuff.
It comes from the fact that in the early days
of inventing quantum mechanics,
when you had radiation coming from hot, radiating bodies
or when you had electrons in orbits around atoms,
there were discrete possible energies you could observe.
Light is absorbed at certain frequencies by a gas
and not at other frequencies.
When an electron changes energies inside an atom,
it goes from a certain energy to another one
without being in between,
without sort of continuously evolving
from one energy to another.
So there was this idea of a quantum jump
from one state to another.
But that discreetness
is not fundamental to quantum mechanics.
It's not built in.
It's not because quantum mechanics
says the world is discreet, it's made of pixels,
it sits on a lattice, or anything like that.
It's because the opposite.
Quantum mechanics is a story of waves,
but sometimes waves only vibrate
with certain discrete sets of frequencies.
Think of a string attached to two ends,
like on a guitar, or a violin, or whatever.
You can pluck the string,
and given the tension of the string
and the distance between the ends, it will vibrate.
It will give you a certain note.
But the same string is also able to vibrate
at twice the frequency.
There's the fundamental frequency
where the string vibrates as a whole up and down,
and there is the next overtone
where it sort of vibrates half and half on different sides,
and then a harmonic series,
there's a way that the string can vibrate
so it goes up and then down and up again,
that's three times, and so on.
So a discreet set of possible frequencies
comes out of the motion of a continuous string vibrating.
And likewise, the continuous wave function,
in certain circumstances,
can only vibrate with certain discrete frequencies.
And so that's why electrons have discrete energies in atoms.
Now, quantum mechanics is a framework,
just like classical mechanics is.
Classical mechanics doesn't say what the world's made of,
it gives you the fundamental rules and you pick out,
oh, the world is made of particles, or fluids, or whatever,
and here are the forces acting on them,
and you plug that into the framework of classical mechanics.
Quantum mechanics is the same way.
Most of what you talk about
when you first encounter quantum mechanics,
electrons, and photons, or whatever,
you're applying the rules of quantum mechanics to particles.
But we've known, since the time of Maxwell at least,
that there are also fields, right?
There's the electric field, the magnetic field,
the gravitational field, maybe there are others.
So we can also apply
the rules of quantum mechanics to fields.
And lo and behold,
we get what is called quantum field theory.
Quantum field theory then is not a replacement
or an improvement on quantum mechanics.
It's just the rules of quantum mechanics
applied to fields rather than particles.
And what happens is you take a field,
so a field is the opposite of a particle.
A particle has a location.
A field exists everywhere,
but it has a value at every point.
So the electric field is a little arrow
at every single point in space.
It has a direction and a length.
And then you say, okay, that's a field,
I'm gonna apply the rules of quantum mechanics to it.
So I'm gonna invent a wave function for the field.
And I'm gonna say, what is the probability
the field looks a certain way doing certain things?
And the math just goes through exactly like an electron
sitting in an atom.
There are certain discreet vibrational frequencies
of the field.
And that shows up in particle physics experiments
as particles.
The field vibrates a little bit,
you think you're looking at one particle.
If the field vibrates a little bit more,
now you think you're looking at two particles.
And you can match up exactly the mathematical descriptions
on both sides.
So the resolution
to this early mystery of quantum mechanics,
why do electrons or photons behave like particles sometimes,
behave like waves other times,
the answer is, number one, they're waves.
That's what they are.
They're waves in a field.
Not only is there an electric field and magnetic field,
there's an electron field for the electron particle,
there's a neutrino field, there's a quark field.
Everything is made of fields.
But number two, when you apply the rules
of quantum mechanics to fields,
they show up in our experiments like particles.
So this is why it explains this distinction
that things act like waves when we're not looking at them
and appear to us as particles when we do.
If we think back to that late 19th century physicist
who thought matter was made of particles,
forces come from fields, what happened to that guy?
Like, where is he now in the world
where everything's actually fields,
but they look like particles
when you apply the rules of quantum mechanics to it?
Well, it turns out there are two different kinds of fields,
fermions and bosons.
And the difference is, are you allowed
to stack up vibrations of the fields on top of each other
to let them vibrate more and more?
That's what you're used to, right?
If I have a a violin string, I can pluck it a little bit,
I can pluck it a lot.
That is what we call a bosonic field.
Boson fields can pile on top of each other.
But fermion fields have this slightly interesting property
that there's only one kind of vibration at a time
going on in the field.
In the particle language,
we say that in any one region of space
or in any one quantum state,
we can have as many boson particles as we'd like.
But a fermions takes up space.
Fermions can only be one at a time.
If you go back to your chemistry class again,
why can't you put all the electrons in the lowest orbital?
There's a rule called the Pauli exclusion principle
that says that for any one shape of an atomic orbit,
only one electron can be in there at a time.
Technically it's two electrons
'cause it can be spinning clockwise or counterclockwise,
but that's the basic point.
Fermions take up space.
So the reason why our 1898 physicist
thought the world was made of particles and fields
is because really it's made of fields,
but those fields can be bosons or fermions,
and fermion fields kind of act particle-like.
They cannot pile on top of each other
to make a big classical field,
like electricity, or magnetism, or gravity.
The 20th century in physics,
it'll still be considered an amazingly important time
in the history of physics.
We're still teaching physics a thousand years from now.
The 20th century will be remembered.
Not only did we invent relativity and quantum mechanics,
but we figured out what particles and fields there are,
at least the ones that make up you and me.
You know, we started circa 1900.
We were trying to understand atoms.
We realized there's a nucleus,
and around the nucleus there are electrons.
And then we realized that the nucleus is not indivisible,
it's made up of protons and neutrons.
Skip forward to the 1960s and '70s
and we realized that protons and neutrons
are not elementary particles themselves.
Each proton and each neutron contain three quarks.
And the way it works is a proton
has electric charge plus one,
a neutron has electric charge zero.
There are a kind of quark called the up quark,
which has charge plus two thirds,
and a kind of quark called the down quark,
which has charge minus one third.
So if you sit down there at home
and try to figure out how can I make a proton,
how can I make a neutron,
you'll quickly figure out a proton
has two up quarks and one down quark,
a neutron has two down quarks and one up quark.
And that's a pretty good picture right there,
but it becomes complicated
by the fact that particles change identities sometimes.
This was again an exciting thing of the early 20th century,
radioactive decays, right?
If I have a neutron all by itself,
it can decay into a proton and an electron,
it doesn't quite work
because certain things like energy are not conserved.
We eventually figured out there's another kind of particle
called the neutrino that is created when a neutron decays.
Really, a neutron decays into proton, electron,
and antineutrino.
And how's that happening?
Well, neutron has two down quarks and an up.
A proton has two ups and a down.
Inside the neutron, one of those down quarks
converts into an up quark by spitting out an electron
and an antineutrino.
So that's a pretty good picture.
We have four different kinds of matter particles,
four different kinds of fermions,
up quarks and down quarks,
those are both inside protons and neutrons,
then we have electrons and neutrinos.
Okay, you think that maybe that's your complete picture.
Then we discovered, now all the way back in the 1930s,
a heavier cousin of the electron.
This is called the muon.
And famously, there was a physicist at Columbia, II Rabi,
who said, "Who ordered that?"
We did not know why the electron
needed to have a heavier cousin involved,
but now we know it's because this idea
of the two quarks, up and down,
and the two non-quarks,
which we now call leptons, the electron and the neutrino,
that pattern is repeated two more times.
So there are three families of particles.
There's the up quark and the down quark,
but then there's heavier cousins,
the charm quark and the strange quark,
and even heavier cousins,
the top quark and the bottom quark.
And then on the lepton side,
we have the electron and a neutrino
associated with the electron,
which we cleverly call the electron neutrino.
We have the muon, its heavier cousin, and a muon neutrino.
And then we have a tau particle,
which is heavier than the muon, and a tau neutrino.
Six quarks, six leptons arranged in three families.
And all of these particles,
these are all the fermions that interact via bosonic fields.
We have of course the electromagnetic field,
we have the gravitational field,
and then we have the nuclear forces.
Inside the proton and neutron, there are gluons
which carry what we call the strong nuclear force.
The gluons hold particles together,
hold quarks together in the protons and neutrons.
And that conversion of the neutron
into a proton, electron, neutrino,
that's the weak nuclear force.
It is carried by particles called the W and Z bosons.
So that's more or less the picture.
That was the picture of all the particles that we discovered
up until a few years ago.
We have six kinds of fermions.
We have four kinds of forces.
It turns out that to make the whole thing fit together,
we need one more particle,
which is of course the Higgs boson.
The Higgs boson is not really a force-carrying particle,
but it's not really a fermion either.
It's part of a field that exists all throughout space,
and the other particles are kind of swimming in it.
The other particles,
like the quarks, and the electrons, and so forth,
feel the influence of the Higgs field,
and it affects their properties,
like their masses and their charges.
So the Higgs field was finally discovered
in the form of the Higgs boson in 2012.
And that, as far as we know,
is all the particles that we're able to produce
here on Earth.
This puts together
in what we call the standard model of particle physics.
And if you do an experiment here on Earth,
it is so far, to date, 100% compatible
with the standard model of particle physics.
We look outside and we see that we need dark matter
and things like that.
Dark matter doesn't seem to fit into the standard model,
so we're optimistic that there are more particles
we haven't yet discovered.
But right now, we're doing a good job
of fitting the data that we have.
If you think about the standard model,
it's, on the one hand, amazing.
Like, everything fits together
like a really tightly constructed jigsaw puzzle.
Everything matters.
Everything is doing some purpose, et cetera.
But on the other hand,
it's kind of baroque and almost ugly in some ways.
So many particles, random-looking kinds of masses
and interactions for those particles.
We would like something a little bit prettier.
In fact, most of the particles in the standard model
don't play a role in your everyday life.
And that's simply because there's a feature
that if you have a heavier particle,
a particle with large mass,
it will be able to and want to decay into lighter particles.
The only thing that stops it
is there are quantities that are conserved,
like electric charge, and spin, and things like that,
that you just can't get rid of.
The total number of quarks in the universe
is conserved, for example.
So the electron is the lightest particle
with an electric charge, charge minus one.
The proton is the lightest stable particle
that has a non-zero total number of quarks inside.
The neutrino is the lightest particle
that has spin a half spin unit, as we say,
that makes it a fermion.
And turns out these are basically the particles
that make up us.
There's also the neutron gets thrown in there
because when you combine a neutron and a proton,
you can make a stable nucleus.
But if you think about the charm quark, the muon,
the tau, whatever, the top and bottom quarks,
the Higgs boson, all these particles just decay away.
They were there near the Big Bang
in the very early universe,
but then they decayed into lighter particles,
those lighter particles assemble into atoms,
the atoms turn around inside stars
and make heavier elements, and ultimately they make us.
So you don't need a lot of the ingredients
of the standard model to explain you.
You are made out of up quarks, down quarks, and electrons
held together by the strong nuclear force
and electromagnetism.
That's 99.99% of understanding you.
You need to understand some details about the masses,
and the Higgs boson, and things like that.
Gravity is important.
But it doesn't require that much.
And what's interesting is, of course you can imagine,
and particle physicists love to imagine,
that there are new fields and particles
we haven't yet discovered.
Dark matter in the universe
is the best evidence that we have directly
there must be some particle we haven't yet discovered
in order to account for the gravity we see in galaxies
and the universe.
We don't know what the dark matter particle is.
We know how much dark matter there is and where it is.
We don't know what kind of particle it is.
But we know it doesn't interact with you and your body.
How do we know that?
Because there are rules for what happens
when one particle interacts with another.
And if a certain particle could interact
with the things you're made of,
the electrons, the protons, and neutrons,
then we would be able to make it in the laboratory.
We would just smash other particles together,
watch what comes out, and the dark matter would appear.
Indeed, this is particle physicists' favorite thing to do,
look for new particles by smashing other ones together.
We haven't found anything by doing that that is not already
in the standard model of particle physics.
So there almost certainly are new unknown particles
and fields out there,
but they're either too energetic to make
in our best particle accelerators, they're too massive,
it just takes too much energy to create them,
or they only interact
with ordinary matters so feebly, so weakly
that maybe there's a chance of making one,
but we don't notice.
Either way, you are made of electrons, protons, and neutrons
interacting through electromagnetism,
gravity, and the nuclear forces.
One super fascinating thing about the way the physical world
has arranged itself
is this phenomenon we like to call emergence,
the idea that the air in this room,
I could describe by saying, well, it has a certain density,
a certain temperature, you know, a certain velocity perhaps.
But I know deep down that it's made of atoms and molecules.
But I don't need to tell you
the position and velocity of every atom
and molecule in the air
to tell you useful, interesting things about it.
I don't need to be Laplace's demon to get through the day.
We can have approximate
but really, really good descriptions of things
based on wildly incomplete information about them.
I can predict the motion of the Earth around the sun
without knowing the exact position
and velocity of every atom in the Earth.
So this is a good news-bad news situation for physics.
We know that particles that you and I are made of,
we know what is called the core theory of physics.
The core theory is basically Einstein's theory
of general relativity for gravity
plus the standard model of particle physics.
And that core theory suffices to underlie
all of the physics of the everyday world.
That's the good news.
There's two pieces of bad news.
One piece of bad news is it's hard to go beyond that.
We know that this theory is not the final answer.
We're not saying that the core theory
is the theory of everything.
It doesn't explain the Big Bang, or black holes,
or dark matter, et cetera, okay?
The other piece of bad news is,
in principle, it does account for chemistry,
biology, psychology, politics, who knows?
But in practice, that's completely useless information.
If you want to be a biologist,
knowing about the top quark is not important to your life.
Even knowing about up and down quarks is not that important
despite the fact that there are protons and neutrons
in nuclei, and there are nuclei in atoms,
and there are atoms in biological organisms.
If you wanna study biology,
your best bet is to study biology,
not to study particle physics.
So I think it's incredibly significant
how the different layers of reality depend on each other.
And we know one layer really, really well,
the layers of particles and forces
at the level of quantum field theory,
and atoms, and things like that.
We would like to do even better at that layer,
but we understand it very, very well.
It leads to the layer of chemistry and atoms.
The stability of the chair that I'm sitting on
ultimately comes down to the rules of quantum field theory.
Those atoms and molecules come together
with electricity and magnetism to make all of chemistry,
which is a pretty big deal.
Chemistry comes together to make biology,
and so up on the ladder.
We can both appreciate that these different levels
depend on each other
while appreciating also that to study them
and to understand them, we need to take each level seriously
for its own sake.
Physics is not just a set of true facts,
and equations, and things like that.
In many ways, it's kind of an attitude.
It's a way of thinking about different things.
So it can take you very far.
You can talk about the physics
of different kinds of things
all the way up to the physics of society.
You can model social groups, or voting, or things like that
using very similar ideas to statistical mechanics
and other ideas that came about in the 1800s.
So there should be and is a close cross pollination
between different disciplines.
There's a whole department at my university, Johns Hopkins,
called Biophysics, because physicists
and biologists working together
is an incredibly useful endeavor.
Having said that, that doesn't mean
that all ideas in physics are useful to biologists.
And in particular, the ideas of the Higgs boson
or the mass of the top quark, or spontaneous symmetry
breaking in the strong interactions,
these are not that interesting to biologists,
and they don't need to be.
They're specific ideas.
They're not general techniques.
The closest I could come to saying how useful is it
for a biologist to know a little bit
about the core theory of physics
is kind of in a negative sense.
There are things you might plausibly imagine
could be important to biology,
but the physicist can come along and say,
"No, that can't work.
It violates the laws of physics."
I'm thinking of something like bending a spoon
with my mind, right?
You know, we could imagine
that I have the powers of telekinesis.
I can use what's going on in my mind,
which, after all, the brain is very complicated.
We don't really understand a lot about how it works.
Maybe it's possible that it could give rise to some force
that could push things around without me touching it.
The laws of physics are here to tell you
that's not going to happen
because we only have a few ingredients.
We have gravity, we have electromagnetism, and so on.
We know certain limits on what is possible.
If you're an engineer,
you might be a very, very clever engineer,
you're not gonna design a rocket ship
that can travel faster than the speed of light.
You're not gonna build an engine
that runs with no fuel input or energy input forever.
You're not gonna build a perpetual motion machine.
You're not gonna violate
the rules of conservation of electric charge
and things like that.
So, sadly, physics puts limits on what we can do
that are a little bit more narrow than what we can imagine.
But also, it suggests new ideas
for things that might be possible.
And those can lead to some big surprises.
By the middle of the 20th century,
physics was in a funny kind of place
because we had the idea of quantum mechanics,
we even had the ideas of quantum field theory.
It was in the 1940s, early '50s
that people like Richard Feynman, Julian Schwinger,
Shin'ichiro Tomonaga figured out how to tame the problems
that quantum field theory seemed to have.
When people first invented quantum field theory,
it gave nonsense answers for very simple questions,
like what is the probability
that two electrons bump into each other?
So Feynman and his friends figured out how to fix that,
but it was really only for electromagnetism.
That was the one force of nature
that we really understood at the quantum level.
We knew there were other forces.
We didn't know about quarks,
but we knew that protons and neutrons
were kept together inside the nucleus of an atom.
And in fact, we had hints
that there was something called the strong nuclear force
and the weak nuclear force.
So what were they?
Well, an obvious thing to do is to say,
if electricity and magnetism works so well,
let's just generalize the idea
underlying electricity and magnetism,
which is something called gauge symmetry,
symmetry of rotating fields into each other
at different points in space and time.
So this is what Yang and Mills did.
They said we can go from electromagnetism a la Maxwell
to a whole bunch of other kinds of theories
that are different but similar.
Maybe one of them describes the nuclear forces.
The problem was, in electromagnetism,
the existence of that symmetry
predicts something very noticeable,
namely the photon has zero mass.
It's a massless particle.
Being a massless particle
means the force associated with that particle
extends very far throughout space.
And indeed, the two massless particles we know about
are the photon of electromagnetism
and the graviton of gravity,
both of which give rise to long range forces.
But the nuclear forces are not long range.
They're confined to very short distances inside the nucleus.
So other people said,
"Well, it can't be a similar gauge principle.
Like, electromagnetism has to be something different."
It turns out that indeed both the weak nuclear force
and the strong nuclear force
are due to gauge symmetries, much like electromagnetism,
but nature hides them from us in very clever ways.
And I like to say this is because the universe loves us.
And the reason why the universe loves us
is because it uses every possible trick in its book
to construct the standard model of particle physics
to make it the most rewarding it can be
when physicists figure it out
and when graduate students have to solve those problems.
So basically, if you want these massless particles
to not give rise to long range forces,
there's two different ways to do it.
One way is made use of by the strong interactions
and the other way is made use of by the weak interactions.
And the strong interactions is the gluons
that are carrying the strong nuclear force.
They are massless particles.
But they don't stretch out to infinity
because they keep bumping into each other.
The strong nuclear force is a strongly interacting theory.
So the gluons just zoom around in circles,
bumping into each other inside the protons and neutrons,
and you can't pull them apart.
That is why that force is short range.
For the weak nuclear force, it's the Higgs boson
that is doing the work.
The Higgs boson fills all of space
and basically confines the weak nuclear force
by absorbing it.
The lines of force from the W and Z bosons,
which would want to stretch out to infinity,
get eaten up by the Higgs field that is all around them.
So basically, nature uses every trick that it can think of
to make physics work in interesting ways.
And it really does give physicists
a sense of accomplishment at the end of the day
to figure it all out.
Quantum mechanics is weird because despite the fact
that we're celebrating its hundredth anniversary right now,
we still don't understand it.
(chuckles) We use it.
We put it to work with amazing success,
whether it's building Large Hadron Collider
or building, like, a semiconductor device
in a consumer electronics thing.
Quantum mechanics is there, tested, very, very reliable.
But remember, it has this idea
that when you measure something,
it changes the state of the quantum system you measured,
and you haven't told me what it means to measure something,
the measurement problem.
So of course the most obvious example
of measuring something is when I as a conscious human being
actually make a measurement of something.
So it was perfectly legitimate and absolutely tempting,
let's say in the middle of the 20th century,
to wonder out loud, "Does this mean that consciousness
plays an important role in the fundamental laws of physics?"
Now, all I can tell you is I don't think so.
(chuckles) I think very much the other way.
I think that consciousness
arises out of the ordinary interplay
of all the complicated things going on
according to the laws of physics.
But there is a school of thought
that says actually consciousness is responsible
for the collapse of the wave function in quantum mechanics,
or maybe I shouldn't even think about wave functions
as real things.
I should think about agents making measurements
as the real things,
and I use quantum mechanics as a tool
to predict what their measurement outcomes will be.
So on the one hand, I have my opinions
about what the answer to these questions are,
but on the other and even more importantly,
I think we don't spend enough time
and spend enough brain power addressing these questions.
We've kind of swept them under the rug.
There's this whole field
called the foundations of quantum mechanics,
what is really going on
in this, our best, most important framework
for doing fundamental physics.
And I like to sort of semi joke
that if you were to tell somebody
who didn't know anything about it,
"Oh, yeah, we have this wonderful theory of the world,
but there's a part of it which we don't understand.
We're still struggling with that,"
they would think, "Oh, it must be
that trying to understand that stuff
is the single most important goal in physics,
that the people who are specializing it
are the glamour scientists who are stolen away
by the best universities, with huge salaries and so forth,"
whereas the reality is the opposite.
If this is your specialty in physics,
you'll find it very, very difficult to get a job.
Most physics departments
don't wanna think about the foundations of quantum mechanics
because they can't figure out a way to make progress
by doing experiments.
So I'm glad that people have crazy ideas
about the foundations of quantum mechanics
even if those crazy ideas
somehow bring consciousness into the mix.
I don't think that's ultimately the way to go,
but we're not gonna figure it out
unless a lot of smart people
put a lot of effort into doing so.
I've said before that the late 19th century physicist
would be forgiven for thinking that they were almost done.
They almost had it completely under control.
By the way, very few people actually did.
You can find one or two quotes from physicists of the era,
but most physicists
are a little bit more cautious than that.
In fact, some were very explicitly saying,
"No, no, no, we're not done yet, hang in there."
It's happening again, right?
Now, over a hundred years later,
we're in a situation where we have a theory,
the standard model plus general relativity,
that fits all the data that we have.
But we know it's not the final answer.
You'll find zero physicists today
saying that we have the complete theory.
They might have different opinions
about how close we are to having the complete theory.
There's several obvious reasons
why we know we don't have the complete theory.
Dark matter in the universe
is the most obvious experimental result.
Even though we haven't detected dark matter
in the laboratory, we've seen its effects in the sky.
We can't fit it into the standard model.
So that's evidence that we can't be finished
with particles and fields yet.
On the theoretical side, I said that we have gravity
and we have the standard model of particle physics,
but we only understand quantum gravity
in a very limited regime
where the gravitational field is relatively weak.
We understand on the basis of quantum gravity
why the Earth moves around the sun
or apples fall from trees,
but we don't understand what happens
when gravity becomes strong,
like in a black hole or near the Big Bang.
This is the problem of quantum gravity,
and it's experimentally inaccessible at the present moment.
We know what energy you would need to have
at a particle accelerator
in order to make quantum gravitational effects
become obvious.
And it's way, way, way, way, way bigger
than what we can possibly do here on Earth
with present day technology.
There was this moment in the 1980s
when there was a lot of excitement
about what is called string theory, or super string theory.
And the excitement was entirely warranted
because people made the relatively bold conjecture
that instead of particles,
you should imagine that the fundamental units of matter
are little loops of string, and just follow your nose.
Plug that into the rules of quantum mechanics,
see what happens.
And what happens is absolutely amazing.
Number one, you inevitably predict gravity,
which is important 'cause gravity exists.
Number two, you inevitably have the room
for everything else, for all of the fermions, and bosons,
and all these fields that we see in the universe.
So the idea of a single unified theory of everything
seemed very attainable.
And they were very excited in the 1980s,
continuing on in the 1990s.
String theory, as it is called,
is still a very, very promising approach
to unifying everything we know about physics,
but we have completely failed
in connecting it with experimental data.
We were hopeful.
Back there in the '80s, people said,
"Okay, let's calculate the mass of the electron
according to string theory."
It turns out to be much, much harder
than we ever anticipated it would be.
And maybe that's because string theory is not right.
We don't know.
Maybe it's because nature
is just not being kind to us this time.
So I think that today, far fewer physicists
would try to predict how close we are
to the fundamental theory of everything.
I think there needs to be
a fundamental theory of everything
'cause there is the universe, there is the real world.
The real world does something.
The theory of everything
is just the list of everything the universe does.
And that may or may not be easy
for us human beings to figure out.
The "3 Body Problem" is this fun TV show
based on these wonderful novels by Cixin Liu.
And there's a lot of interesting ideas
that are related to physics and cosmology that come up.
I'm not gonna give you any spoilers or anything like that.
But I've consulted on various TV shows,
and Hollywood films, and things like that,
and people always wanna know how realistic the physics is.
And I say, you know, most often,
like, the unrealistic physics is that the star wakes up
after sleeping in their bed
and their pajamas are not wrinkled.
Like, that is completely incompatible
with the laws of physics as I understand them.
But it's this process of doing science
that is really unrealistic in a lot of shows.
And the "3 Body Problem" is no different.
A big plot point in the show
is that scientists have discovered
that there are data coming in that are incompatible
with their theories, and that they sort of panic,
and they don't like it, and, you know, they commit suicide,
or they quit physics, or whatever.
This is exactly the opposite
of what would happen in the real world.
There's nothing better in physics
than when your theory is incompatible
with a new piece of data, especially a theory
that has been working very, very well for a long time.
Now, if you are individually the person
who came up with the theory, you might be sad.
But as a community, that's how you make progress.
If you want to win the Nobel Prize in physics,
you don't show that Einstein was right,
you show that Einstein was wrong.
That's the way to get people excited.
And for whatever reason,
right now we're in a situation where in fundamental physics,
in cosmology, gravity, particle physics,
our theories are almost too good.
Our theories are fitting the data really, really well.
It's very different than the situation a hundred years ago
when we were chasing
all of these new, surprising experimental results.
That's when you can come up with better ideas.
The space of possible theories of physics
is way too big to just guess the right answer.
We need guidance from experiments.
And the kind of guidance we need is unexpected results.
So the only way to do that
is to build bigger and better experiments,
and that's what we're trying very hard to do right now.
It's an almost inevitable temptation
to think that when we build better computers,
whether it's literally quantum computers
or just much more effective
artificial intelligence algorithms,
that that will help us doing physics,
that that will give us new ideas,
maybe new input from somewhere.
I'm, on the one hand, super optimistic
about the usefulness of quantum computers and AI
as tools in physics, and at the same time,
pretty darn skeptical that it will lead
to new conceptual breakthroughs.
What computers are really good at doing
is solving well posed problems.
So in mathematics, for example, if you have a theorem
and you want to prove the theorem,
this is a lot of what mathematicians do, prove theorems,
I have no trouble imagining that computers
are gonna start becoming better
at proving theorems than human beings are.
Computers are better at playing chess and go
than human beings are.
Proving theorems is kind of in the same direction.
But doing math is so much more than that
because doing math involves asking the questions
in the first place.
Like, what if I put this thing together with that thing?
And physics is very similar.
What if I think about this particular system
in a completely new way?
They're not well-defined problems,
and those are the areas where computers are not as good.
Maybe they will get there.
I have no doubt that in principle
a computer can be just as good as a human being.
But because we human beings
don't even understand what's going on
when we make these creative leaps,
(chuckles) it's hard for us to train the computers to do it.
So in my lifetime, anyway, I don't think that my job
is in danger of being put out of work
by the computer revolution.
There's so many questions that are easy to ask
and hard to answer.
You know, people ask me on my podcast,
you know, if you'll just be having one physics result
from the future told you, what would it be?
Well, I wanna know the theory of everything, right?
Like, is that cheating?
Is that not giving an unfair answer?
I wanna know everything.
But if you wanna narrow it down
to like one aspect of everything
that we'd better to understand,
I wanna understand how to reconcile quantum mechanics
with gravity, right?
I wanna understand
what quantum mechanics itself actually says
and how gravity emerges from that.
I have some ideas about it.
We're working on it, you know, in our day jobs,
but I suspect that there's something deep
that we haven't yet guessed at yet.
And that's gonna be related to a bunch of other questions
like, what happened at the Big Bang?
What happens inside black holes?
There's many other questions you could ask,
but that's one group of questions
that everyone recognizes is really important.
We're all thinking about it very hard,
but we don't know the final answers yet.
(lighthearted music)
When we tell the history of physics,
you know, we try to keep things straight.
And we can't remember everything,
so we kind of give a lot of credit
to a relatively small number of individuals,
Einstein being one of them.
The messy reality of it
is that all of these very smart people,
including Isaac Newton, were talking to other people.
They were prodded by questions, and suggestions,
and partial progress made by other people.
In the case of Albert Einstein, for example,
he was thoughtful about the fact
that his former professor, Minkowski, said,
"You should think of space and time
as being melded together into spacetime."
It was Einstein's physical intuition that led him to say,
"I bet that's because spacetime is curved.
It has a geometry, and that geometry is gravity."
But then he looks around and says,
"That means I need to understand the mathematics
of curved geometries,"
which is less than a hundred years old at that time, right?
This was a first half of the 19th century invention,
non-Euclidean geometry.
So it wasn't taught in schools primarily.
It was a specialized topic.
Einstein had certainly never studied it.
But happily, a friend of his, Marcel Grossmann,
a friend of his from university, had become an expert in it.
So Einstein being Einstein undertook
to learn what we now call differential geometry,
the non-Euclidean geometry of curved spacetimes.
And he did it, but he couldn't have done it without help.
They didn't have YouTube at the time.
They didn't have online lectures and podcasts.
He needed to just talk to his friend.
This happens over and over again.
I mean, there's a similar story a few years later
at the birth of quantum mechanics.
I like to say that Einstein is, if anything,
underrated as a physicist, which is hard to imagine
given how highly he's rated.
But there is this part of the Einstein myth
that says that later on in life,
when quantum mechanics came along,
he was, you know, inflexible, and he was an older guy,
and he wasn't able to keep up.
I mean, the truth is he was like in his 30s and 40s.
He wasn't that much of an older guy.
And the more important truth is that Einstein understood
the deep truths of quantum mechanics
better than anybody throughout his entire life.
He just didn't think we were done.
He didn't think that the story
that we were telling ourselves in the 1920s and '30s
sufficed to be a fully blown, rigorous theory
of the foundations of physics,
for many of the reasons that we were talking about.
You're telling me that measurements are important,
but you haven't told me what a measurement is.
You're telling me there's entanglement
between different particles,
and Einstein says that means
that if I measure a particle here
that is entangled with a particle a light year away,
it instantly changes?
I'm Einstein.
I know that travel passing the speed of light
is not possible.
How did that occur?
And he's not saying it didn't.
He's saying, "Tell me how it possibly could."
And he lost that battle.
But I think he was right.
I think we should have been more effort
into thinking about those things.
So it's always interesting to see the evolution of ideas,
which is not exactly lockstep with the evolution of people.
Different people have different ideas.
They have different ideas at different times.
They get them from different sources.
That's the messy human reality of doing science.
We sometimes get the wrong impression
about the Great Man theory of science or physics,
because, look, Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein did a lot
and they deserve a lot of credit,
but think about the difference
between the development of quantum mechanics, for example,
versus general relativity.
General relativity was Einstein's great accomplishment,
and it was really his accomplishment.
No one else was even really competing with him that much
at the time.
But quantum mechanics, Max Planck points out
that you need to fiddle with the equations
to make the right predictions for blackbody radiation.
Einstein himself says, "Oh, I can understand
why light jiggles loose electrons sometimes."
Rutherford builds experiments and he detects
that there are nuclei inside atoms.
Niels Bohr says, "I can explain the different sizes
of the orbits of the electrons in the atoms."
Louis de Broglie says, "It's even better
if you imagine that those electrons are waves
rather than particles.
Werner Heisenberg says, "I can invent a theory
using matrices that explains exactly what's going on."
Max Born and Pascual Jordan say,
"We can improve the mathematics of Heisenberg's theory
to make it more general."
Erwin Schrodinger comes along and says,
"We can replace the matrices by waves."
And then Max Born comes again and says,
"Actually, these are useful for predicting probabilities."
Wolfgang Pauli says, "There's something called spin,
and that affects what the electrons can do in an atom."
Paul Dirac says, "I can invent an equation for the electron
that predicts what it will do
and fits it in with relativity."
Dirac's equation also predicts
an antiparticle of the electron.
Carl Anderson goes and discovers
the antiparticle of the electron
and also discovers the muon.
Enrico Fermi invents a theory that explains how neutrons
and muons can decay, called the Fermi theory of beta decay.
Fermi and Bose invent the idea of fermions and bosons.
Yang and Mills generalize the idea of electromagnetism
to other symmetry groups
and propose that this is an origin of the strong
and weak nuclear forces.
Lee and Yang say that maybe there is violation of parody
in the weak nuclear force,
the fact that a right-handed interaction
does not happen at the same speed
as the left hand interaction.
CS Wu detects experimentally that this is in fact true.
Peter Higgs, and Francois Englert, and Robert Brout,
and Philip Anderson, and others
used the idea of symmetry breaking,
which had been pioneered by Jeffrey Goldstone
and Yoichiro Nambu,
to explain why nuclear forces are short range.
Steven Weinberg fits the final pieces
of the puzzle together, along with Abdus Salam,
to understand the unification
of the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces.
Frank Wilczek, and David Gross, and David Politzer
do an analogous thing for the strong nuclear force
by understanding confinement,
why quarks are stuck inside protons and neutrons.
Murray Gell-Mann puts together
by inventing the idea of quarks, along with George Zweig.
And that's only getting us up to 1970. (chuckles)
So many developments in particle physics since then
due to many, many brilliant theorists and experimenters.
This idea that there are many people contributing
and many different parts of the pieces need to put together
is actually much more characteristic
of how physics is usually done
than the single person inventing everything
all by themselves.
I would say that Isaac Newton
was probably the greatest physicist of all time
in the sense that he basically invented classical mechanics,
and gravity, and the mathematics needed to do calculus.
But Einstein had something on him,
which was this amazing physical intuition.
I would put Einstein and Galileo
in my pantheon of people who just felt
what the universe should be like very, very deeply.
And this let Einstein make enormous amounts of progress.
But the thing is, once you use that intuition,
Einstein used his ideas about gravity
disappearing in small regions of spacetime
to invent general relativity,
but then you have the theory,
then you have general relativity, then you have equations,
and the equations don't care what your intuition is.
I like to say that the equations are smarter than we are.
Once Einstein writes down his equation,
anybody can solve it.
And indeed, Einstein himself looked at his equation
and goes, "I don't know
if anyone's gonna ever gonna solve this.
This is too complicated-looking.
It's too intimidating."
But a bunch of other people were not intimidated,
most famously, most quickly, Karl Schwarzschild,
who was a German astronomer who sat in on lectures
that Einstein gave in Berlin.
He taught himself general relativity,
came back from the Eastern Front in World War I,
and said, "Professor Einstein, I've solved your equations.
I've solved them for the gravitational field around the sun,
and now we can use that to predict the motions of planets
and things like that."
And this was brilliant, and Einstein loved it right away.
He got the fact that, oh, yeah,
you know, I should have figured that out, you're right.
But there was this interesting feature
that was right there in Schwarzschild's math,
which is that if instead of the sun,
you had a really, really small
but very, very massive object,
so if you took all of the mass of the sun
and squeezed it into something much smaller than the Earth,
then the equations predict
what we would now call a black hole.
They predict that the pull of gravity would become so strong
that there's a region of space and time
with the property that if you ever enter,
you can never leave.
Trying to leave would be like trying to travel faster
than the speed of light, basically.
And this was there implicit in the math in 1917,
and physicists did not truly understand it
until the 1950s, after Einstein had died, in fact.
It took an enormous amount of effort in thinking about it.
It was very far away from people's concerns, really.
Like, if you think about the years we're talking about,
the '30s, and '40s, '50s,
physicists had other things on their mind,
particle physics, quantum mechanics,
nuclear weapons, things like that.
But the black holes were there,
lurking in the equations, waiting to be found.
And then 50 years after that,
astronomy had developed to the point
where we actually had observational evidence
that black holes are real.
I suspect that if William Shakespeare had never existed,
Shakespeare's plays never would've been written.
But I'm pretty sure
that if Albert Einstein had never existed,
general relativity would still have been invented.
Indeed, I don't think it would've taken that much longer.
It's something about the progress of physics
that there are super-duper smart people
who are making these advances,
but they're also in the right place at the right time.
If you go back to the time of Isaac Newton,
when Isaac Newton first understood
that the inverse square law of gravity
predicts the planets move in ellipses around the sun,
so number one, he's building on prior progress, right?
It was Johannes Kepler who argued
that planets do move in ellipses and came up
with sort of some phenomenological rules about that.
But the thing is that it wasn't only Isaac Newton
who had this idea of the inverse square law.
Christiaan Huygens in the Netherlands
showed that there's a relationship
between how fast things move
and the strength of the force pulling on them.
Robert Hooke, who was going to become
a famous British scientist
and helped found the Royal Society in London,
he and his friends batted around the idea
that maybe gravity is described by an inverse square law.
It's just that none of them
were quite as mathematically adept as Isaac Newton.
And indeed, one of Hooke's friends was Christopher Wren,
the architect who built St. Paul's Cathedral,
and another one was Halley,
the astronomer who discovered Halley's Comet.
And they basically cajoled Halley,
who was a young striver at the time,
to go up to Cambridge from London, visit Isaac Newton,
and say, "Could you please solve this math problem for us?"
What happens if you have a planet moving
in an inverse square law gravitational force?
And of course Newton said, "Oh, I already did that.
It's an ellipse."
And so Halley said, "Would you please write that up
so that we can share it?"
And Newton eventually wrote the "Principia Mathematica,"
the most important book in the history of physics.
So even the great discoveries made by individuals
come about because of a social context.
And I think that knowing that
helps us try to be a little bit more thoughtful
about creating the best possible social context
for making more impressive discoveries toward the future.
- [Announcer] Wanna support the channel?
Join the Big Think members community,
where you get access to videos early ad-free.