I often talk about the virtual reality
headset metaphor. It's a very very good
step away from our assumption that space
and time and the world of objects that
we see around us every day is the true
nature of reality. It's not. There was a
moment in which I realized everything
that you've done, Don, all this
mathematics means anything that you see
in the world around you is your
construct. That hit me in the face so
hard. It is still of course taken me
decades now to emotionally recover from
that and to to come to terms with it and
years of meditation to let that go and
to to just think this is just all a VR
headset and I'm just rendering this
stuff on the fly. Plato says um what
we're seeing is at best like the shadows
flickering shadows of objects on the
wall of a cave and and he says that's
what everyday reality is like is only
seeing at best flickering shadows.
Plato's cave at the deepest level says
to me that there is ultimately no
scientific theory of everything. There
is no spoken theory of everything. It
goes exceedingly deep. The best I can
[music] put it in words because we have
to use words here. Whatever you are
infinitely transcends
anything that you could ever say or
experience. That doesn't mean that
you're divorced from reality. I'm saying
you are you are the reality.
Don Hoffman, I must also publicly do
this. It's always such an honor to have
you in the mind meld. You have such a
unique, brilliant mind, and you are
exploring questions that I I know that
I'm interested obviously in, but the
audience is also absolutely centrally
interested in. These are questions about
the nature of reality, questions about
consciousness, questions about what we
are, what we're doing here. But you
approach them from such a deep technical
rigorous level as well which is
something that is in extremely extremely
short supply. So really really excited
for this as always.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for having me Michael. It's
always a pleasure. It's my third or
fourth time now and it's always a
pleasure to talk with you and I love the
hard questions that you ask and it
pushes me in good directions. So thank
you very much.
&gt;&gt; I'll see what I can do. I'll see what I
can do. Um, I'm not going to start there
exactly, but I do want to acknowledge,
yes, we've been having this conversation
on and off for for years now. And and I
have seen your thoughts evolve for sure.
And in this new essay, you know, I was I
I did want to bring this up. You only
glancingly bring it up, but I was so
glad that you did glancingly bring it
up, which is essentially comparing
the way that we experience to the famous
Plato's cave allegory.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And my actually my most popular
video that I've ever done was on Plato's
cave. And I tried to go deeper into it
than this sort of, you know, surface
level analyses because it's so true on
so many levels and it's one of those
rare allegorories that it almost seems
like there's there's no end to how
accurate it is. Um, I thought maybe it
would be a good way to both review your
theory and your view of reality as well
as sort of like captivate the audience
with with what's really at stake here
and and what are we really grappling
with in terms of the limitations that we
perceive reality through.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So Plato's cave is extremely famous
and rightfully so. Plato suggests that
our everyday experience of space and
time and objects and the physical world
um which feels to us so real. It feels
like it is the ultimate reality
emotionally and we we live our lives as
though it's the final thing. We we get
excited about success. We get upset
about failures that that we feel the
stakes are very very high. We're really
we're really in this thing with both
feet and and fully immersed in it and it
feels very very real and our emotions uh
correspond to that. And yet Plato says
um what we're seeing is at best like the
shadows, flickering shadows of objects.
Uh so there's a fire in a cave and um
there are prisoners um looking at the
the wall of the cave and they and they
can't see the real world. They're stuck
in this cave. All they can see are
flickering shadows from a a fire and and
shadows cast by objects running in front
of the fire, people moving in front of
the fire and so forth. That's all they
can see. And Plato says someone then
leaves the cave and goes outside and
sees the real world and and can't
believe what they're seeing. Comes back
and tell the people in the cave and and
they don't believe that person either.
And and he says that's that's what
everyday reality is like is only seeing
at best flickering shadows on on the
wall of a cave. And I think if Plato
were around today, he would love the VR
virtual reality metaphor. He he used one
of the best metaphors he had at the time
and a fairly low tech version, but
that's what they had. And I think that
Plato was pointing to something
that even the VR headset metaphor and
the cave metaphor are still not strong
enough. It's it's really an a deeper
point of view that many spiritual
traditions have talked about. The Tao de
Ching says basically the towel that can
be spoken of is is not the true towel.
&gt;&gt; And what what these traditions say is
anything that you can talk about
&gt;&gt; is still at best a shadow on the cave.
Anything that you can talk about.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And and that's that when you start going
there, that starts to get a little scary
because, you know, it's one thing to
say, well, it's a VR headset to take it
off. Now I see the real world. No, what
you're seeing is still another
description. It's another something that
you can talk about and so it goes very
very deep and and I'll I'll point out
that this has something to do also with
the nature of the limits of our
scientific theories.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Right. So scientific theor and I'm a
scientist of course I love science and I
think that it's an incredibly powerful
tool and I encourage anybody with those
proclivities and talents to go into
science. It's it's we we need it. But on
the other hand, every scientific theory
starts with assumptions.
And it doesn't explain its assumptions.
It assumes them. And you can always then
say, okay, well, I'll give you a deeper
theory that can explain those
assumptions. And you can hopefully, but
when you do that, if you succeed, you'll
have new assumptions at the start of
your new theory. And this goes on at
infinitum. So Plato's cave is also
telling us something about the nature of
scientific theories as well. Yes,
&gt;&gt; if if we're going to talk, I think using
scientific theories is one of the best
ways to talk because it's rigorous. It's
mathematically precise. It gives us
tests to to show the limits of what
we're saying. It gives us, you know,
points to experiments and so forth. So,
allows us not to be dogmatic
um without some checks on our dogmatism.
It it gives us clean checks on
dogmatism. And of course, scientists are
people. We will be dogmatic now and then
you know like anybody but the science
itself done properly will put a
restraint on that and tell us when our
dogmatism is misguided and and dogmatism
is always misguided.
&gt;&gt; So so what it does then is it actually
says Plato's cave at the deepest level
says to me that there is ultimately no
scientific theory of everything. In fact
there is no spoken theory of everything.
So it's it goes e exceedingly deep. Now
I often talk about the virtual reality
headset metaphor because I think that's
a a very very important metaphor and
it's a very very good step away from our
assumption that space and time and the
world of objects that we see around us
every day is the true nature of reality.
It's not. It's not at all. and the the
VR headset is the current good metaphor
for that. But it's, you know, it's an
update of Plato's cave. But ultimately,
even that metaphor of the VR headset,
um, as scary as it might be to some
people, is not taking you deep enough.
You've got to go deeper. It's got, but
but it's a good first step. If you can
get used to the VR headset, that's going
to really help you think out of the box
for the next level of scientific theory.
And I'm very interested, of course, as a
scientist, in getting the next level of
scientific theory. But I have no
illusion that my next level is the final
level or even close or or that I'm even
approximating the truth. It's at best a
better description of a perspective of
reality at best. Um,
so, so there's this,
it goes very deep. I would say that what
it what it tells us is that there's
infinite job security in science. That
there's no scientific theory is even
close to being the theory of everything.
If you think there's a theory of
everything, you really don't understand
what we're dealing with here in science.
It's it's it's
and we you know, some scientists in the
past have thought, oh, we're close to
the theory of everything. And it it's
always embarrassing because two or three
generations later, people look back and
sort of giggle about what you thought
was the final theory. And that'll be
true of us. We think we're close to a
theory of everything. A 100 years from
now, they'll be talking about the
concept concepts we didn't even have in
mind that were foundational concepts
that weren't even anywhere in our
theories. And that's going to be going
on indefinitely in in science. So, it's
better just to be humble at every moment
and say the these are our best theories.
We're trying to get the cleanest, most
rigorous mathematical theories with the
cleanest experimental tests so that we
can move on and go past the um
inevitable limitations of our concepts
and our our ideas right now.
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; So Plato's cape goes goes very very deep
and I'm sure that all this stuff um I'm
sure Plato could um tell me much more.
Um he was pretty quite deep.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Particularly, do you remember the
divided line that's that's presented
along with Plato's cave by by Socrates
Plato?
&gt;&gt; So, remind me about the divided line.
&gt;&gt; You're you're going to love this, Don.
So, so essentially, it's both a
epistemological line and an onlogical
line. It's it's it's making statements
about
&gt;&gt; reality itself and it's making
statements about knowledge itself and
various sort of kinds and purities of
knowledge. But essentially as you go up
this divided line which maps over sort
of stages of the cave itself, you know,
you start all the way at the bottom. You
essentially have naive realism, right?
Like I'm seeing these shadows on the
wall, therefore it's real. Just above
that, you have uh like doca is the
Greek, I believe, and it it basically
translates to like opinion, right? Well,
this person said this and uh plus my
senses say that, so that must be
reality. But then you start to get into
the higher kinds of knowledge. And as
you get into the higher kinds of
knowledge, you get actually further away
from the physical and from your senses.
So then you get up to to Dionoya, right?
Which is like our uh not rational what's
the word they use uh uh discursive kinds
of reasoning, right? Where where we can
create logical arguments, we can create
mathematical formulas and and that's a
very high kind of knowledge. You can
make things abstract. You can make very
complex arrangements of ideas, but
that's not the highest kind of
knowledge. The highest kind of knowledge
is this mysterious thing called
noisesis.
And noisis,
I always have trouble trying to describe
it, but I'm actually curious how how you
might conceive of this. Sometimes
they'll say it's something like direct
intuitive apprehension of a form or it's
some kind of almost like instantaneous
knowing where once you know it, you
can't unknow it. And it's also sometimes
presented as a state of knowing and
being at the same time where where you
where sort of like epistemology and
ontology dissolve because it's like you
you are what what you know on some level
and um
&gt;&gt; Yes. I I I think that that to this day
for for me at least works unbelievably
well as a as a sensemaking mechanism,
but also it it attempts to explain
something that
almost stretches the limit limits of the
human mind to try to explain this this
weird state of you know like once
something clicks in your mind or
something you gain a skill or you it
becomes like a nonpropositional kind of
knowing that you no longer need You
know, every time you ride a bike, you
don't need to be like, "And then I put
my foot on the thing and then I pedal
and it's just like, no, you just you
just do it in this like like there's
this like logos over the top of the
whole process and it just unfolds
instantly or something and and try and
you can't put that in to any kind of
theory, right? Like it's something that
is like
&gt;&gt; over the top of a theory or something,
but it's it also transcends theories
completely. It it transcends the mind.
It it has to that's I I I agree. So you
you come to the end of theories even
mathematical theories even the most
abstract formal mathematical theories
you have to go even beyond that you know
Girdle's incompleteness theorem.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um tells us that you know as powerful as
mathematics is and and of course Girdle
loved mathematics that it's incomplete.
any formal system that we write down um
that is at least rich enough to do
arithmetic will be incomplete and that's
going to be true of any scientific
theory. It's any any scientific theory
is built on assumptions. those
assumptions will have a certain scope of
explanation which if if there if it's a
good theory. Um, of course anybody can
write down a bad theory with with no
scope but but a good theory will have
some scope of of explanation but there
will be there will be limits. And that's
not because we're in some kind of
logical bind here. We're not not for
example one might say well you you've
gotten yourself in a logical bind. You
assume the truth of your assumptions and
then you prove that they're not deeply
true. what you what you shot yourself in
the foot. And and Girdle didn't assume
the truth of the axioms. He only assumed
that they were consistent. And that's
what all we have to do in our scientific
theories. We assume the consistency of
our assumptions. We don't have to we
we don't have to assume that they're
true. In fact, I would say the the the
right scientific attitude is to assume
these are probably not true.
They're they're they're not the final
truth. But I want to make sure they're
consistent. And I want to see if I use
these tools,
what is the explanatory scope of these
tools? And the remarkable miracle is
that over and over again,
great scientific theories have an
incredible scope of explanatory
usefulness. And so we should take that
gift at the same time
enjoying it and using it, but at the
same time recognizing that that doesn't
mean we've got the truth. We just have a
consistent set of axioms that works for
a certain explanatory scope. And if they
if the consistent axioms are deep enough
and rich enough, then they will under
the work of someone as brilliant as as
Girdle show their limitations and show
that they, you know, that there's a
limit to what they can explain. So it's
it's very um common in the in the
philosophy of science um for for
philosophers to say that a scientific
theory cannot
prove the limits of its own assumptions.
And I disagree that that's that's the
whole in fact in some sense that's the
glory and power of science. So we're not
assuming that the assumptions are true.
We just want them to be consistent and
find their limits including the limits
of the the very assumptions themselves.
But on the spiritual realm that you were
mentioning, you know, it gets toward
what spiritual traditions are saying.
And I there's there's something that I
just learned a few weeks ago. Um
&gt;&gt; I was raised in fundamentalist Christian
spiritual tradition. So was um and
there's this very famous saying from
Jesus, repent for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand, right?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And so I looked at it
the message I got growing up was uh that
meant you sort of be very afraid God's
really angry with you and he's coming
back, right? That's sort of the ang
message I got. Um, and I decided a few
weeks ago, you know, it's easy enough
now with with AI to look at things in
the original Greek and understand what
the original Greek words are, right?
There's no reason for you to take it
secondhand anymore, anybody's
translation. You can go say, "Okay, what
was the exact Greek word? Okay, what
does it mean? You give me some context
from the original, you know, the time of
Jesus. What did that word mean back
then?" And it turns out the word repent,
which I thought means very afraid, God's
mad, it means nothing like that at all.
It's the word is metaninoi. You
mentioned no. Yeah. No way. It's it's
it's like metamorphosis, but it's so
metamorphosis is is in some sense a
transformation of the body. Metaninoi is
about transforming your mind. Jesus is
basic. He was saying um transcend
your thought processes. Transcend your
mind. In other words, let go of your
mind. the kingdom of heaven is already
within you. But see, he was pointing to
something very, very different. Not not
a mad god who's coming down because he's
angry. He was saying, let go of the
restriction of your thoughts. Step out
of Plato's cave.
&gt;&gt; Let go of your thoughts altogether,
and then you will find inside yourself
the kingdom of heaven, which is entirely
outside any thought. So that that rings
with what the eastern traditions have
been saying. It's just been because of
our English translations. We we didn't
understand what Jesus was saying in the
original coin a Greek um um version. Of
course, he didn't speak in coin a Greek.
He spoke I guess in Aramaic or something
like that, but the the earliest written
versions are in co Greek. So, that's
where the closest we can get to what he
originally said. And he's basically
saying not to be afraid, but to um
essentially let go of any thoughts at
all. And then you will find the deeper
reality that he calls the kingdom of
heaven. Remarkable.
&gt;&gt; So yeah, so well said. And I couldn't
agree more. I I I so deeply regret that
I didn't go into classics sometimes
because I am so into Plato and I'm so
into Helenic philosophy and the
neoplatonic tradition and even just you
know the small smattering of Greek words
that I've learned over the course of of
reading uh some of the dialogues and
looking up words exact same way as you
trying to clarify things you you just
realize the richness and and the depth
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; of these ideas that they were talking
about and and how much of a shortfall
all there is in English a lot of the
time and and you see like I see why they
chose that word but really you need like
four or five different words and to tie
them into all these different concepts
to to really get it and and
&gt;&gt; absolutely
&gt;&gt; speaking speaking of transcending
your assumptions.
Your theory in general is all about
transcending your assumptions about
reality particularly in a naive realist
kind of way. particularly in the kind of
way that there's a light there, there's
a camera there, there's a dawn right
there, and all those things are either
exactly as they appear to be or they're
at least some serviceable
representation of the reality that is
there, right? But your theory says no.
your your theory says not not only is it
not 1% of the reality, it is 0% of the
reality. And and that's something that
even my myself as someone like I I am
I've drunk the Don Hoffman Kool-Aid. I I
I think I I've immersed myself in the
Don Hoffman core to to various degrees.
But even still, you know, I I I listen
to you and I agree and I think, yeah, I
think Don is on the right track. I think
he's right. And then a little time goes
by and I and I I go back to, you know,
but maybe it is kind of like Plato's
cave where even though the shadow on the
wall is not clearly that's not reality,
right? It's derivative of something
real. It's derivative of the light
that's that's shining down. So there's
still something real there. But you
stick very closely to this point that
not only do we not perceive reality.
We don't see it. It's not reality at
all. There is 0% of reality within the
human experience.
&gt;&gt; Um, and I want to z I want to zoom in on
that. Why why isn't it like a little
tiny infantessimal uh really low
resolution
part of reality rather than absolut but
it's absolute zero?
&gt;&gt; That That's right. I I see no by the way
I would love to be able to say what
you're saying that there is some small
connection that we've got to something
that we can hang on to that's real in
our in our perceptions and as as far as
I can see there's anything that can be
talked about anything that can be
described by a concrete experience is
a flicker of a shadow on a cave and not
I mean so I understand where you want to
go and I would love to go there too and
I can't I it's just logic precludes me
from going there. What I can say though
I mean there is something that we would
like to hold on to and what I can the
best I think I can hold on to is is this
when I sit in utter silence and let go
of every thought
and I just am.
There's just I am with with no
commentary about what that I is and what
am is anything at all. Just just pure
existence.
That's the closest.
But but there's no description. As soon
as you put any word,
&gt;&gt; any experience kind of thing on it at
all,
&gt;&gt; then then you've stepped away from. So,
so the best I can put it in words
because we have to use words here is to
say that whatever you are
um infinitely transcends
anything that you could ever say or
experience infinitely. And that but
that's but that doesn't mean that you're
divorced from reality. I'm saying you
are you are the reality and to really
know yourself. So the the traditions
that say you know meditate and and let
go of thoughts that's really
the only way to be in touch with who you
are in in some sense directly. But my
guess we're here for, you know, it's not
an accident that we're here in a
three-dimensional
space, one-dimensional time world
experiencing the richness of what that
seems to be part of what we need to do.
And we seem to need to be lost in it. We
all almost everybody I know gets lost in
this. We believe that we are the little
you knowund 200lb body that we are and
and you know we we take ourselves very
seriously and our careers very seriously
or whatever you know our art or whatever
we're doing very very seriously uh even
though we know by the time you know a
100 years from now we're gone probably
no one's even citing your work anymore
no one's looking at your work you know
it's and if I asked you who was the
richest person on the planet you in in
1852.
&gt;&gt; I have no idea. Who cares? Right. And
that's so so so we have to it's
important for us to do this. And yet we
deep down know that ultimately we walk
away from this
&gt;&gt; and no one else is going to care what we
did.
But but yes, it's not useless. It's not
pointless. And my guess is that there's
an infinite number of these headsets
that we go through. we go through that
to really this is just one very rich but
very very limited perspective on who you
are. Enjoy it. You're going to take this
headset off and there's an infinite
number of others and somehow to know who
you are um involves looking at yourself
from an infinity of different rich
perspectives and getting lost in each
perspective and waking up and then
realizing I transcend that. And that's
the best I can say right now about how
to understand who you are. It's going to
take an infinite number of headsets. And
this one, as rich as it is, is probably
completely unlike other headsets. I
mean, you can't even think out of the
box big enough to think about what the
next headset would be like. You can't.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I was I was gesturing before
because I was going to say I completely
agree in my case, Don, but I think in in
your case, in a hundred years, your
ideas might just be starting to make
sense. Like your your ideas might
actually just be be starting to put into
actually
some applied permutations in terms of
where I think your science, your theory
could go. And for me, obviously, I'm
tracking for a lot of the people who are
um familiar with your work, I think
they're all tracking. But
before we move on from the sort of core
claims that you make about reality, um
I'm not sure if we hit all the regular
bullet points. You know, clearly we've
we've communicated the idea that not
only is this reality in air quotes that
we exist in limited, it really actually
represents 0% of the greater reality.
Um, but I don't think we've covered how
you've come to that conclusion and why
that must be the case and why it is that
materialism just utterly fails to
explain any of it. So maybe we could we
could take a side step there to just
review those points and then and then
move forward.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah, I came to it through a long
process of um re research and and
selfexamination. So, as I mentioned, I
was raised in a fundamentalist Christian
uh framework. My dad was for a while a
minister. And so, I I got that point of
view quite deeply. Uh but you know, in
college, high school, I was getting
something different. I was getting
Darwin's theories of evolution. I was
getting a very physicalist point of
view. And so was, you know, I decided by
the time I was 17 or 18 that I needed to
figure this all thing out for myself
because I was getting two authorities,
very, very different authorities saying
very, very different contradictory
things. And I decided I needed to figure
it out for myself. And I decided the
question I wanted to answer was, are we
just machines? That was how I put it to
myself. Are we just machines? And
I figured that the physicalist point of
view said we were just machines and the
spiritual said we we're not. And I would
go after that. And I figured the best
way to do that was to actually see how
far a machine could go. So I ended up at
MIT in in the artificial intelligence
lab. There we're building machines as
you know as deeply as we could at the
time. That was I was there from 79 to
83. So I I was lucky enough to to know
Marvin Minsky and take a class from him
at his house, the the founder of
artificial intelligence and to be
&gt;&gt; there um you know debating with him and
others at the found you know near the
foundations that had been going on for
you know the 70s. So by 79 it had been
going on for for a few years but
&gt;&gt; what did can I ask you sorry to
interrupt what did artificial
intelligence look like in those days?
Was it like largely theoretical? Um
because clearly you know computing power
was infantessimal compared to what it is
today. So what when you say you know
early days of artificial intelligence
what are we what are we talking about
&gt;&gt; right? So in the early days a lot of it
the the idea of neural networks was
known [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; but Minsky had a theorem about
perceptrons that showed fundamental
limitations in the computational power
of perceptrons.
And so for a while there neural networks
um weren't being explored because we
thought that they had certain
fundamental limitations. And it turned
out it was a limitation not of neural
networks in general but just of the
perceptron model. and and and so work
out of UC San Diego um in the 80s um
then showed you know MSY's serum of
course is true but but it doesn't put
anything limitation on on neural
networks more generally and then the
explosion on neural networks came but at
the time then at MIT we were trying to
build I was working on um computational
vision so I was working on how how could
we build basically vision systems that
could drive cars was sort the idea we're
we're you know that's here we are now in
in 2020s um and that's that technology
is is still not quite there right we our
cars still can't be driven safely by
themselves um
&gt;&gt; it's pretty good now it's pretty good
now
&gt;&gt; it's pretty good it's it's it's getting
there but we were so I I worked on how
in SE from 79 to 83 I was working on how
do we see in 3D how can I take
two-dimensional camera images and
compute a 3D world so that that was the
the stuff I was working and and that
kind of thing was was going on there.
There's a big um computational vision
group there. David Maher was the the
leader of it. He was my advisor and he
he died when he was 85 in in in he was
35 years old when he died
&gt;&gt; uh from leukemia. So it was a a great
tragedy. But I I was his last student.
Um and I got to to to work with David
and and Whitman Richards who is a
brilliant um psychophysicist. So looking
at the um
experimental aspects of human vision and
so we're trying to combine computational
models that would how in principle could
a computer system see in 3D from moving
images and then how in fact does the
biological vision system work. So it was
a a very very rich time. But the whole
field was still doing the kind of AI
where you're trying to build it all
yourself. You're not you're not trying
to build a neural network which will
become intelligence. You're trying to
solve the problem yourself. And and and
now we found that of course we still
need to do that as scientists to try to
understand these things ourselves
conceptually.
&gt;&gt; But ultimately to get these fast
useful machines neural networks have
proven to be um um very effective. once
we got past the perceptron limitations.
Right.
&gt;&gt; Very interesting. Yeah. And and I I just
want to take a side step to acknowledge
that it's it's really interesting how
similar of a path you've taken to Feder
Rico in some ways, Federico Fine,
because this is another person who came
deep out of computer science uh
investigating AI um was under the
assumption that you know, yeah, humans
are probably very complex machines.
They're probably a lot like computers.
But then something funny happens
seemingly when you become an expert in
the nuts and bolts of how AI and
computers actually work. You see the
limitations of those systems and why
they're very not humanlike and very
seemingly not conscious. Um
&gt;&gt; I know Federico.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
I love Fed Rico. He and I are very very
good friends. He um he supported my
research for several years, my my team
very generously. He's shared his
thoughts. So I I have only good things
to say about Feder Rico. He's he's a a
brilliant um scientist and of course
engineer inventing the the
&gt;&gt; microprocessor. I mean what how many
people can say I invented the
microprocessor. He he did it. So he's
brilliant and and uh I've benefited a
lot listening to his ideas about um
consciousness and and spirituality.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm a big fan as well. I've talked
to him a couple of times on the show.
Probably
at least at least one of the
conversations was since you and I have
spoken last. May maybe both of them
though. I can't remember time dilates
all of that all of that kind of stuff.
Um but anyway, so so yeah, you're you're
kind of explaining this trajectory of
how you got to where you are where
you've come to this conclusion that
not only do our our you know our senses
mislead us, but really we see 0% of
reality. So so that that was a little
bit of a sidebar there, but let's let's
continue down that path,
&gt;&gt; right? So
as I began to do the the more rigorous
research at MIT looking at what machines
could do, what what are their strengths,
what are their limitations,
[clears throat] what is it about humans
that might or might not transcend what
we could do with AI. So that kind that
kind of question was the way I was
trying to frame it. and and then I you
know also started um
in 2000 a little after 2000 to in
include you know meditation into my
daily life. So I started just exploring
meditation which was different. I mean I
that was not something I got from a
fundamentalist Christian point of view.
We didn't do meditation. In fact on
occasion some
pastor or something would say that don't
do that. They would explicitly tell us
that you shouldn't do that. So, so, so I
explored anyway using meditation as as
well and
began to look at the structure of the
scientific theories that I was looking
at and slow and then started looking at
evolution by natural selection, you
know, and the evolutionary theory. So,
you know, in in 2006,
I started to look at evolutionary game
theory and to really ask, okay, how
if if we evolved by natural selection,
um what's the chance that we're going to
see reality as it is? So, I was putting
all these, you know, AI, my own
meditation practice, evolution by
natural selection, uh understanding of
human vision, trying to put it all
together. And I I finally came to the
conclusion,
aha,
first scientific theories have
assumptions
and those assumptions are limited and no
there's not so there's no scientific
theory of everything. That's that's
that's a
you know a mic drop point for a
scientist. That's a real big
hurdle to get over. There is no theory
of everything.
When you really grasp what that means,
it's it's you have to stop and really
take it in.
Um and and it requires a balance. On the
one hand, I think science is one of the
the best tools that humankind has, and
it's a fantastic counterpoint to
dogmatism. And dogmatism is is horrific.
it it's it just holds us back.
&gt;&gt; On the other hand,
science is so rigorous that it tells us
that it can't be the final word. And
that's that's that's incredible. And so
I I've slowly came to the point of view
and and I I should say slowly because
you know what you're trained on as a
child is something that's deeply
ingrained in you. And at least in my
case, it it took years, decades for me
to be able to step back and get an
objective view of what I've been taught,
what I had been what I believe before I
was old enough to even be rational. So
you these things were already
pre-programmed in you, right? So it's
really a matter of looking at your
programming and and realizing it is just
programming. It's not the truth.
stepping it's a it's a big it's a big
emotional as well as intellectual
process and where I am in the process
right now is to to say um I cannot let
go enough of my preconceptions
&gt;&gt; the what I have learned is anything that
I think is true back away from it it's
it's it really have you have to step
back um but what I and and
Be prepared to be wrong. Try to be
precise so that you can find out as
quickly as possible what the limits of
your ideas are. That's the key, one of
the key things. Be as precise as you can
be so that others and yourself can
figure out what are the limits of your
ideas.
Every idea has limits. Every idea has
limits. No. And you might say, well,
aha, there there you've got an absolute.
What what what's what's interesting is
I'm saying that even my my it's it's
like girdle is incompleteness ceremon
literally I was thinking that
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; it's just it's just that it's saying the
mathematics is telling us I'm a
beautiful tool in fact I'm so beautiful
I can tell you my limits so use use this
tool but know that um there are an
infinite number of quote unquote
theorems that I can't prove
&gt;&gt; so use me to prove all there is a big
set of theorems I can prove And there's
an infinity that that I can't. And
that's sort of the perspective I I have
now. And and that's why I then look at,
you know, the various spiritual
traditions, eastern mystical traditions
very very clearly. The towel says the
tow that can be spoken of is not the
true towel. But when when I looked at
Jesus and and he uses the metaninoi the
no no word, that's also saying the same
thing.
&gt;&gt; Transcend the mind is what he's
basically saying. meta mind. You like
metamorphosis is transformation of the
body or transcending your previous going
from a caterpillar to a butterfly. You
let go of the whole caterpillar thing
climbing on a little thing. You can only
get a few feet off the ground if you
climb up. Now you go to a butterfly
that's in no none of those limits. It's
and that's what Jesus is really point a
meta no is basically whatever your mind
can do you got to meta that you got to
go beyond. So it's it's not the word
repent is a is a very very poor English
translation because to us it means be
very upset be you know self-
flagagillating you know there's an angry
god it has nothing to do with that at
all it has entirely to do with let go of
your preconceptions your thoughts your
judgments of other people let go of all
of it transcend your mind and then
you'll find that the the kingdom of
heaven and by the way that's not the
kingdom of heaven
as Jesus said is already inside you.
It's not some place you go to. It's that
that space beyond all be all all the
caves, all of Plato's caves, anything
that you can imagine beyond that is the
kingdom of heaven which is already
within you. So it's not about so so the
eastern myst mystical traditions say
this Jesus says it but we lose it in the
translation you know into English but
Jesus was basically saying the same
thing ultimately let go of your Plato's
cave of thoughts completely and all of a
sudden you will find that you're in the
kingdom of heaven there's it's not a
place that you go to it's a it's
something that's already in you is just
hidden
shrouded by all your beliefs and
thoughts let them all go And there you
will find the kingdom of heaven in you
and in your neighbor,
&gt;&gt; in every one of your neighbors.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Another one you might like, Don,
to to add to to your your repertoire,
which you you may be familiar with this
already, but have you ever come across
um the the singular fragmentaryary work
of Parmenities before?
&gt;&gt; A little bit, but I would I'm no expert
in Parmenities,
&gt;&gt; right? So it it's so interesting because
he's often considered to be like the
father of logic, right? Like his his
philosophical school was was very well
known to be this like logically rigorous
um form of philosophy. But his singular
extent work which is fragmentaryary that
we have from a whole bunch of different
later writers mostly is um it's usually
translated as something like on nature.
But what it is is essentially him doing
some kind of soulflight thing where his
consc his his consciousness
goes through some kind of um journey to
encounter this goddess and they I don't
think they ever named the goddess but
you sort of um get the impression that
she is this consciousness presiding over
knight or primordial some kind of like
primordial you know um very root level
of existence and she gives him this
speech about
there being two paths. One path is the
path of of nature and the way things
seem and the other path is the path of
truth. And the path of truth she says is
one there is no separation. There's no
beginning. There's no end. Don't ask
questions about where it came from.
That's a that's a ludicrous illogical
question. But then the other path is the
way things seem. The the path of
separateness, the path of degrees, the
path of hot and cold, life and death,
all these other things.
So that that's just like yet another
great example.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yes. There there's the way there's
there's the way that everything you ever
experience is going to tell you reality
is. But then underneath that there's a
truer level of reality that we seem to
only have access to through I don't know
some like I don't know boot boot level
or or some some very very lowlevel
I I don't even want to use a computer
metaphor but I don't know whatever what
better metaphor there is to use is it's
almost like it's it's before binary in
computer code even exists and it's like
the signal that you split to create
binary or turn on and turn off to create
binary. It it's something like that like
that that is the true reality underneath
all of this multi- multiplicity uh
fractal ever swirling uh forms that it
takes. There's some deeper truth
underneath all of that. And it's it's
just remarkable how
&gt;&gt; in in some ways we've known it for so
long,
&gt;&gt; but in other ways we're still grappling
to really put it into practical use. And
that's where you seem to be going is,
you know, no, like what if we take this
beyond the realm of ideas? What if we
take this beyond the realm of philosophy
and we actually ask questions about how
do we formalize that? And then how and
then once we formalize it, how might we
actually be able to shift reality in in
ways we can't even imagine? And maybe
that's for later in the conversation
because we're we're still sort of like
laying the foundation here. But that
that's where I see you being such an
incredible innovator is is
taking these deep philosophical truths
that I think we all in intuitively feel,
but we're not sure how to make them
operational. we're not sure how to turn
them into applied engineering or
science. And of course, before we get
there, we have to have, as you're
pointing to, these precise formal models
so that we actually can try to apply
them to reality and make sure they work.
And
&gt;&gt; yes, I
&gt;&gt; I think we sort I think I think we sort
of have
laid the foundation, but if I
interrupted you on on that track, please
please continue. Um
and yeah I I think before we get to the
practical part I do I do want to ask you
a couple more questions about your
personal trajectory actually
&gt;&gt; because so you have this fundamentalist
upbringing. You go into hard science.
You go to MIT. You get a PhD. You go
into cognitive science.
But one of the things I'm not sure if
I've ever asked you is is there a moment
that you that you kind of realize like I
think I'm an idealist. I think
consciousness is a fundamental thing.
Was was that a slow progression or was
there actually a catalytic moment that
that happened? Well, there there
actually was an aha moment. It came in
around 1987
I was working 1987 1988 I was working
with uh Bruce Bennett who was a genius
mathematician in algebraic geometry. Ju
just to know algebraic geometry you have
to be a genius but but he was a genius
among geniuses he was truly stunning and
and Chayon Pash we were working on a
book that called observer mechanics so
we published a book called observer
mechanics in 1989
and [clears throat]
and it was we were building on the
research that I'd done with computer
vision so we had all these math I've
been doing this mathematics of how do we
see in 3D and so Bruce and Chayan took
it to with me to a new level, right?
They're they're real mathematicians. So,
we were getting these very
specific rigorous theorems about how,
you know, take three or four frames and
four or five feature points to an object
and how to compute mathematically a
three-dimensional object explicitly. And
a as we we did that at one point in a
conversation with with Bruce Bennett
about this we we were talking about the
mathematics and something that he said
all of a sudden I I realized
everything that we were doing all the
math that we were doing meant that we
are
creating everything that we see. It was
it was there was a moment in which I
realized this means everything that
you've done don all this mathematics
means anything that you see in the world
around you is your construct and that
would that hit me in the face so hard
&gt;&gt; because we we tend to think that vision
is it's just a camera I'm taking the
picture in I'm just seeing what's there
and even though I done that that that
feeling that we're just getting an
objective picture of the world is so
ingrained into us that even though I'd
worked on computer vision myself for
years
I hadn't let go of it and I when but now
we had all these theorems it was like it
was in my face and something Bruce said
just sort of make me realize no the math
is telling me Don you create everything
that you see all the structure you see
it's not there until you put it there
Don and that was so stunning I literally
had to sit out because I I went from a
an old kind of realist that says I'm
just seeing reality as it is to I'm
making all this up. There's there are
constraints on how I make it up but
nevertheless I'm making it up. So there
was sort of a realist to idealist a
physicist to idealist flip
&gt;&gt; that for me happened immediately.
It sounds like a noises moment.
&gt;&gt; I'm sorry.
&gt;&gt; It sounds like a noises moment where you
just like some kind of holistic clicking
occurred.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Because it was almost like that
idea had never occurred to me before. It
was so it was so inconceivable. And so
all of a sudden, not not only did it
become it became conceivable and and you
know like probably true, but it took me
it is still of course taken me decades
now to emotionally recover from that and
to to come to terms with it and and and
and years of meditation because the
assumption that I
am just
immediately experiencing the truth when
I see you know a tree and the my chair
and so forth. Uh that that's so deep
conviction to let that go and to to just
think this is just all a VR headset and
I'm just rendering this stuff on the
fly. So here's how crit how crazy this
is. What I'm saying Einstein said, "Do
you really believe the moon isn't there
when it's not not perceived?" And that's
what I'm saying. You're right, Einstein.
The moon is not there when it's not
perceived.
The moon that I see and the moon that
you see are not the same thing. You
render your moon. We are interacting
with something, but it's not the moon.
It doesn't look like the moon. And and
so that's that's crazy, but the VR
metaphor makes it more easy to
understand. If I'm playing Grand Theft
Auto and you see a red Ferrari and I see
a red Ferrari, well, the red Ferrari
that I see only exists when I see it.
There's no red Ferrari in the
supercomputer that's running the game.
And when I look away, my red Ferrari is
gone. It literally only exists when I
perceive it. It doesn't exist otherwise.
My friend can see a red Ferrari that I'm
playing with um when I'm not seeing one,
but they're seeing their red Ferrari is
not the same as mine. And with the VR
metaphor, I think it's not hard for the
current generation to sort of get it
that my moon is not the same as your
moon, but for for my generation, this
was like a a slap on the face.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so to to stretch the the VR
video game metaphor as far as we can,
it's not rendered until you're
interacting with it or or until your
character is getting into the field of
experience that necessitates that thing
rendering. Yet, there is some deeper
logic in the code representative of the
moon, of the car, of whatever object.
And maybe we can get into
&gt;&gt; Mhm. the nature of that deeper reality
as we as we go in. But I I'm intuiting
that if I were a member of the audience,
I'd be like, "Well, holy if that's
not real, what is what what is this
thing underneath
&gt;&gt; the perception that is that is uniting
it?" Um, and
&gt;&gt; yes,
&gt;&gt; if if you think it's appropriate to go
there now, we can go there now. But I I
want I don't want to derail you from
because I know you're on sort of a
logical walkthrough of this.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. That's that's a perfectly next
good step to go. Absolutely. So, so I'll
just say that what you're pointing to is
yeah, if I'm saying this is a VR um
interface, then there must be some layer
of software outside there that we can
start to look at and and look at the
code
&gt;&gt; and
absolutely and in fact I think there's
an infinite number of layers. So what we
can only what we can do this again gets
to the idea that there is no scientific
theory of everything but it's going to
be layer after layer after layer that we
have to unpeel. So, we can start. We can
say, "Okay, we thought this space-time
world is the final reality." Okay, it's
not. It's just a VR headset. Can we
begin to take our first steps
as scientists, as people
outside of spaceime,
literally outside of spacetime? And now,
now what I've said this at conferences,
scientific conferences, I I I won't
mention anybody anybody's name. I don't
want to embarrass anybody. I'll say a
very bright scientist at at one point as
what in the world I could even be
talking about, right? It's just like I I
space and time is the final reality. I
mean everything is inside space and
time. What could you possibly be meaning
Don about talking about getting a theory
of science outside of spaceime? I've had
that from brilliant brilliant
scientists. And so I and I I completely
understand this is like spacetime is
everything. So what are you even talking
about? We need to go outside of
spaceime. That is everything.
Everything's in spacetime. And what I'm
saying is no, no,
this is the hard shift.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Spacetime is a trivial
trivial little data structure inside
you. Trivial compared to what you can
do. This is nothing. It's it's a trivial
headset inside of you. And we can begin
to reverse engineer. we can get the
first layers of software outside of
spaceime. Now, a very natural reaction
at this point is to say, look, Hoffman's
a cognitive scientist. He's not a
physicist. He's no expert in spacetime.
Why should we listen to this guy? I
mean, it's it's the high energy
theoretical physicists who are the the
you know, the experts in spaceime and so
forth. And and I I completely agree.
They are the experts and Hoffman is not.
So what what do the high energy
theoretical physicists say about
spacetime? And what's remarkable is
this three-word phrase, spaceime is
doomed. That's a quote. Neimar Connie
Jamemed says this. David Gross has said
this effectively. Um John Wheeler said
this that spacetime is doomed.
And the reason so so
the the those scientists
whose territory is spacetime they are
the experts on spaceime are the ones
that are saying spaceime has had a good
run and it's over. We need to find new a
new layer of science
outside of spaceime. what what is and by
the way the European Research Council um
the ERC it's a big European funding
agencies I guess like sort of the NSF um
&gt;&gt; has a I think it's a 10 million euro
initiative um for funding research on
what are called positive geometries
um that these physicists are finding
outside of spaceime so so the the good
news well the bad news is spacetime is
doomed the good news is these physicists
have something to say about what's
outside of spaceime. Literally out
literally outside of spaceime. They're
finding these positive geometries
outside of spacetime. And by the way, um
also beyond quantum theory. So, so the
idea is that spaceime is doomed and so
is quantum theory. Quantum theory is
doomed. It cannot be fundamental. So the
structures that they're finding these
positive geometries like the amplitude
associed
cosmological polotopes and so forth
these are structures that don't care
about locality that that's the key fun
key property of of spaceime and they
don't care at all about unitarity which
is a key property of quantum mechanics.
They don't care about any of those
things. So we're when these physicists
so this is not a cognitive scientist
step stepping outside of space time.
These are high energy theoretical
physicists. They know what they're
talking about. And I I'll tell you why
spacetime is damned in just a minute.
But what they're saying is we're going
to go someplace where we don't have not
only spacetime, we don't have quantum
mechanics. We have to show that quantum
mechanics and spacetime arise together
from a deeper layer of something. Right
now they're seeing positive geometries.
I'll just call it a new layer of
software outside of of the headset, but
their their language is positive
geometries. And and here's the the the
drop dead simple reason for why
spacetime is doomed.
When you use Einstein's theory of
gravity, his his curved space-time
theory together with quantum mechanics
um and you ask, you know, I would like
to look at something really really
small.
How do you do that? Well, you have to
use, you know, to see something really
small, you need a a more powerful
microscope, right? with with wavelengths
of light that are smaller and smaller
wavelengths because if the wavelengths
are too big you can't see the thing. So
you have to have small wavelengths to
resolve finer features. That's fine as
but it requires more energy. So as you
you know quantum theory tells us that uh
you know in fact Einstein told us you
know E= H new so as you as the frequency
gets higher and higher the wavelength
gets smaller and smaller the energy is
going up and up.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then Einstein told us uh with
general relativity that you're then
curving spacetime more and more and
more.
And what happens is when you get to 10
theus 33 cm when you try to get that
small then all of a sudden you've got so
much energy which is equal to mass
according to Einstein equals mc^²
so much mass into such a small region of
space that you create a black hole and
the very thing that you're trying to
observe
disappears into a black hole. So, so the
very concept of spacetime has no
operational meaning. At 10us 33 cm, 10
the - 43 seconds. It ceases to have any
operational meaning.
So, it's over for spacetime. It
spacetime falls apart exactly at at and
if you if you get frustrated and say,
"Well, let me um try harder. we try to
even a smaller wavelength of light and
put more energy. All you do is you get a
bigger and bigger black hole.
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; So what this [clears throat] is telling
us is that spacetime
is a a very shallow structure. It it it
doesn't go very deep. It goes to 10
theus 33 cm and then it just falls
apart. It's not like 10 theus 33
trillion cm. It's just 10us 33. So it's
so we thought it was the final reality.
No, it's a it's a a thin thin data
structure that we're that we're using
and and so is time. And that's a hard
one to wrap your head around. What what
in the world does it mean that time is
just a data structure?
So, so that's why spacetime is doomed
because our the our best theories of of
our best scientific theories of
spacetime tell us it's a very shallow
data structure and it it cannot be the
final
&gt;&gt; and so the physicists are now by the way
the ERC uh there have been conferences
that they've
funded where I think they're like a
hundred participants these are like PhDs
in mathematics and high energy
theoretical physics that are now
exploring what's beyond spaceime. So
this is not some crazy cognitive
scientist who's talking out of his out
of his field. These are the real experts
in the field saying let's put 10 million
euros in this and let's really get the
best and brightest high energy
theoretical physicists and
mathematicians looking for this what's
out outside. So [snorts] we're taking
the headset off. We're taking space-time
headset off. And what do we find?
We're finding
these monolithic structures out there.
So, it's much like um um 2001
a space odyssey, right? Where there's
&gt;&gt; we're the apes and there's this monolith
sitting there and we're we're we look at
it and go very significant. We're we're
cooting and hollering and pounding on
it. What does it mean? You know, by the
way, um I'm not calling these physicists
and mathematicians apes. They're
brilliant. But as as a species compared
to what we need to understand it it
feels like we're you know in the same
position as the apes were with the with
the monolith. I mean it's just like okay
we found this stuff. What what does it
mean? So that's where we are. We're
trying we got these geometries are
sitting there outside of spaceime like
the amplitude and soed and so forth. So
these genius I'm going to be very very
clear these genius mathematicians and
high energy theoretical physicists.
They're geniuses. They're finding this
stuff. But we don't we don't have any
dynamical theories yet. What what
dynamical theories outside of spaceime
&gt;&gt; could generate these positive
geometries? What what what do they mean?
What is it what are they telling us
about a deeper understanding of the
nature of reality? So I think those
questions are are are wide open
&gt;&gt; and it's even an interesting question to
ask what do we mean by dynamical
theories outside of spaceime? What is a
dynamical theory when you don't have the
notion of time? So that's yeah so that's
sort of um we're taking the first steps
outside and I I'm also working in that
same direction. And I'm trying to get a
theory of consciousness that starts
outside of spacetime. And I'm also
working with with some brilliant
colleagues Jayton Pash, Robert Prrenner
and and and and others um that I can you
Manish Singh and others to try to
understand how we could get a theory of
consciousness prior to spacetime and
then to show how spacetime could emerge
as simply a headset that's constructed
by by consciousness. But once again, we
have to have a mathematical model of
what we mean by conscious agents. Um,
yes, consciousness is outside of space
time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Beautiful. We we we've now
assembled a fantastic launchpad, I
think, for for where this conversation
can go. Uh and and just to sort of
summarize for the audience, Don is
saying not only do our perceptions
deceive us in terms of what the true
state of reality is, our best models
fail, spacetime fails, spacetime does
not tell us what reality is. Even
quantum theory and nothing within
quantum theory, particles, whatever,
none of these things are fundamentally
real. So with that being the case, the
question is okay, what is the next
deeper layer of reality after these
things and as you're pointing to it
seems to be these geometric structures
outside of space and time and the reason
it seems to be these geometric
structures is because these
mathematicians and physicists some of
whom work at places like CERN who are
like as you're pointing to these uber
geniuses who are trying to penetrate
into the deepest layers of reality or uh
or air quotes reality that that we can
are finding, wo, there are these weird
geometric laws that even these super
complex
scattering events seem to obey and you
can actually make fairly simple pictures
of these geometries that all of these
interactions obey. So there seems to be
these deeper geometric structures.
Even saying somewhere is is is deceiving
because it's not like a place you can
go. It's like a layer of several layers
of software down or hardware down or
something. Um, but they seem to be there
like like these almost these Pythagorean
or Platonic,
you know, sources that are kind of
controlling the very ground level of our
reality, of our simulation, our headset,
whatever, whatever word you want to use.
[snorts] And then, you know, you have to
kind of assume that even over the top of
that or even deeper than that, there's
something even more fundamental. And I
think unless you go the direction Don is
going where you assume
you're going to keep running into this
question unless you settle into the idea
that it's got to be consciousness. It's
got to be consciousness that's deeper
than any of these structures, any of
these realities, any of these models.
Because if it's not consciousness, what
I mean, what else could it be, right?
There's there's really no other answer
in my opinion other than consciousness.
And that seems to be where where you're
headed.
Yes. So I I agree the the high energy
theoretical physicists are finding these
these
geometries are like diamonds
highdimensional diamonds outside of
spaceime
&gt;&gt; and
the reason they're studying these is
because they're interested in trying to
find a way of describing how particles
interact inside spaceime. So at the
Large Hadron Collider and other
colliders, you take, you know, protons
or some kind of high, you know,
particles and smash them together at
high velocities and see what what
happens, all the particles that come out
of it. And that seems to be a really
good way of understanding nature at at
at small scales and the particle nature
particle nature of of reality inside
spacetime. And when you try to
compute mathematically the probabilities
of these kinds of particle interactions
and what's going to happen uh you can do
it with fineman diagrams there Richard
Feman came up with these ways of using
spacetime and quantum theory so locality
and unitarity to compute these and and
you can do it and and he gets the right
answer uh inside spacetime and but it
turns out that um when you do it that
way to just compute the amplitude
which is a fancy word for probability.
It's a it's a complex valued function
that when you take its amplitude squared
you you get the probabilities of the
scattering events to get these
amplitudes
for a very simple scattering process.
takes hundreds of pages of algebra
uh using fineman diagrams and and the
problem in in the 80s 1980s was they you
know they were trying to build these
colliders and the the experimentalists
said to the theorists look you know we
can't we have to look at millions and
millions of interactions and compute
things quickly you know several hundred
pages of algebra for each interaction
just isn't going to do it and no
supercomputer can keep up with that
&gt;&gt; so can you um please please simplify
things. And so a couple of
mathematicians Park and Taylor in the
mid to late 80s um came up with a a a
new formula for one class of particle
interactions that took several hundred
pages and cut it down to something
around you on the order of 30 pages. And
it was like a miracle. People were
going, you know, these guys are complete
geniuses. They it's and and then a
little bit later Park and Taylor they'd
spent so much time on this they guessed
&gt;&gt; a formula
&gt;&gt; it was just one or two terms and it
turned for this class of interactions it
turned out to be right and this is like
holy smoke I mean
&gt;&gt; you can do it with fman diagrams inside
space and time locality and unitarity ex
you know explicit and it takes hundreds
of pages of algebra but you get the
right answer or you can there's some
thing going on here. You can get it with
just one or two terms
that you can compute by hand.
And people, well, okay, this is, you
know, we we just got lucky. But then
there began to be a series of, you know,
discoveries u including something called
the BCFW recursion relations with
Whitten and and his graduate students in
the early 2000s or mid 2000s
&gt;&gt; began to realize that this was not just
a one-off. There was something going on
here that you fineman gives you the
right answers using space-time
computations
but there was something going on where
if you let go of the unitarian locality
so you let go of spacetime and quantum
theory you get the right answer and it's
much simpler so that suggested that we
should explore this and so then Nemo
Connie Hamemed and and other many other
physicists began to go okay we maybe
this isn't just a oneoff or a twooff
maybe this is really something that we
should explore and of course they were
brave because you know they're starting
to take a a a step out of spaceime so
they were very very brave to do that but
they've been rewarded they found you
know Nema and his colleagues um found
the amplitude published in 2014 so this
is not that old this is 12 years ago
that the first like clean positive
geometry came out and then in the last
12 years they found the associ
our usefulness cosmological polytopes
and and and other structures. So much so
that a couple years ago the ERC then
said, "Okay, this this looks real. We
need to put money into it." So, so, so
yeah, it's looking like
the physicists are finding
the high energy theoretical physicists
are finding these geometries outside
space time. But I would say the current
state-of-the-art is we know they're
useful because their their their
structure, their volumes, their surface
structure, their edge structure is is
coding for the scattering probabilities
inside spacetime and the kinds of
events. So it's really struct amazing.
Why is a structure outside of spaceime
that doesn't care about space and time
or unitarity? It doesn't care about
quantum theory. Why does that structure
code for um these scattering events? And
by the way, I should say that um there
this is still a work in progress. There
are scattering events that they haven't
yet got the positive geometries for. So
it's not that they we can say we've got
positive geometries for every scattering
event, but they keep finding that they
can do more and more and more. So that's
why it's very very promising. And
there's also something called there are
also combinatorial objects called
decorated permutations. So like normal
no shuffling cards or permutations and
these also in some cases are enough to
classify and describe um almost
completely certain kinds of scattering
um processes. So we have positive
geometries and these decorated
permutations
um that are structures that seem to
transcend spaceime and yet so this is a
hint about some kind of layer of
software or something outside of space
time and so the geniuses are on it and
and there but what what I'm what I'm
looking at then is to say we should go
back to something that Wheeler pointed
out and is yes his 1989 paper the it
from bit paper very very famous it from
bit paper wheeler was saying
we have to there he says fundamentally
there is no space no time and no
spacetime at this at the microscopic
level he he's very very clear right at
the start of his paper we're going to as
physicists we're going to have to set
understand that fundamentally there is
no space there is no time and there is
no spaceime
and somehow He said, "We're going to
have to understand
what he called observer participancy."
That
somehow the act of observation, asking
questions of nature, specific questions
of nature, and getting specific answers
back. That observer participancy process
is at the core of all science and is
going have to be at the core of our next
generation of of physical theories.
And he has this loop that we have
observer participants
generate information
generates space-time and spacetime loops
back to the observer participants. So
he's saying there's this loop between
observation information spacetime
observers in a in an infinite loop. And
he says we need
&gt;&gt; we have to crack that loop.
&gt;&gt; We've got to we have to start there. And
that's and and that's the
interesting thing about quantum theory
and also the previous theories and the
what is the role of the observer I
should say in science the observer is is
important
right we can't ignore the observer in
science because
scientific theories are created
based on our observations
We have to have careful experiments
with with welldesigned you know
equipment like the large hydron collider
or or you know the James web telescope
and so forth. We have to have really
precise equipment
&gt;&gt; but ultimately that equipment
leads to experiences
in the minds of the scientists. Without
those ex without those conscious
experiences in the minds of the
scientists,
there is no scientific theory because
the scientists are the ones who create
the scientific theory. And so we need to
have an understanding of how our
experiences
justify the kinds of theories that we're
going to have and how our theories then
close the loop that show that our
experiences and our theories all form
one coherent system.
Now the observer has been in in
Newtonian physics the observer was
assumed to be irrelevant in the sense
that it affected nothing and so you
didn't need to have a theory of the
observer
so it wasn't really even mentioned in
Einstein's
theories of um spacetime
the observers are mentioned Einstein
talks about observers but they're
basically clocks and coordinate systems
there's there's not the notion of an
observer interfering or affecting the
outcome only the motion of the observer
changing the time and you know time
dilations and length contractions. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; But in quantum theory, uh, the formalism
doesn't let you ignore the observer
anymore because
&gt;&gt; you have a linear differential equation,
the Schroinger evolution
um when you're not observing the system,
the unitary evolution. So it's linear
but it's unitary.
And then when you um observe
you get the wave function collapsing to
a single outcome.
&gt;&gt; Right. The most famous version of this
is the double slit experiment.
&gt;&gt; The double slit. Exactly. And
so so
the the problem is this and this is this
is an open problem in in quantum theory.
You have
a superposition of possibilities for
what you might see and what you might
measure
according to the shorting revolution and
it evolves unitarily.
When you actually observe you get one
outcome
one.
Now there have been attempts to say we
do something called decoherence. There's
a process of decoherence where you can
try
try to explain it but it turns out the
decoherence process will give you a um
it gets rid of the complex superposition
and it leads to a um a linear mixture
but it doesn't give you a unique
outcome. So so there are attempts to try
to make decoherence solve the
measurement problem and and they fail.
They they they get half of the way but
we we can't get half of the way. We need
to get to one answer and decoherence
does not get to one outcome.
And here's the problem.
Any physical system in quantum mechanics
must be described by the shortinger
evolution by unitary evolution.
That means that no physical system
described by the shortinger revolution
can collapse the wave function. Period.
Can't do it. Just can't do it. So we
have this strange thing that we're
starting we're assuming a physical
world. The physical world is described
by unitary evolution. Unitary evolution
cannot give you a unique outcome. So
that description of the physical world
cannot give you a theory of measurement.
Period. Unable to do it. And decoherence
doesn't get you anywhere near the
solution of that problem. So that's why
this has been a problem not for you know
a couple months. This has been 100
years. This has been a hundred years
since we've had Shortinger's equation.
&gt;&gt; 100 years.
&gt;&gt; And so that's I mean so and these are I
mean 100 years of geniuses working on
this thing.
&gt;&gt; So
so we have so and that's what was sort
of I think pushing on Wheeler. Wheeler
was saying okay look this measurement
problem can't be pushed under the rug.
We're going to have to start with
observer participency and the
information generated by observer
participants somehow get spacetime and
then have the observers fit into that
whole cycle.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So that's that's where I'm headed.
That's exactly where what I'm doing with
my team. We're we're saying uh we agree
with Wheeler. In fact, in his 1989 ed
from bit paper, he cites my book
observer mechanics with with Bruce
Bennett and Chayan Pash. So he cites our
book as the kind of thing that
directions that we might want to go in
this where we were trying to get a
mathematical model of what we called
participators observers that were
participating and trying to
&gt;&gt; so so he he cites our book and so that's
we can talk more about it but what I'm
trying to do just at top level now to
sort of give the big picture
&gt;&gt; is to say
&gt;&gt; we're proposing a dynamics of observer
participators we call them conscious
agents
So Wheelers, observer participators,
we're calling them conscious agents. And
the big picture is we're saying that we
think we'll be able to get the decorated
permutations and the positive geometries
as representations of the asmtoic
behavior, the long-term behavior of this
dynamics of conscious agent. So there's
a big dynamics. So the next layer of
software can be outside of spaceime. The
first layer of software outside of
spacetime is a bunch of conscious agents
in a dynamical interaction. And when you
look at their long-term behavior, you
can describe it in terms of decorative
permutations and positive geometries and
they're then they project into space
time. That's the big picture.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So, so again to try to
summarize for the audience and for my
own sake, there's this long-standing
problem within science of understanding
that the observer is relevant, is always
relevant, but then what is an observer?
Is it is it you know, and I I was going
to go down this the whole like sidebar
of there's all these different quantum
interpretations, right? like there's
there's the multiverse theory, there's a
Copenhagen interpretation, there's super
determinism, and they're all kind of
ways to try to
&gt;&gt; at least in part address that and and
other things. But let's not get lost in
that and just say no one has really
formalized this idea of what the
observer is and how exactly the observer
and you know the the inherent agency
involved in doing anything could
actually be made into a formalized
system. And and that's what you've done
with conscious observers is you've
actually
made mathematically precise statements
about what are these observers? What is
an observer? What effect do they have on
reality? What is their role um in in uh
making reality as we know it uh I guess
appear to us as as a at least in your
field as a cognitive scientist.
So you've actually done this. You've
created this system. And not only have
you created a system that relies on the
notion that consciousness is
fundamental, you've actually created a
model for what these observers are and
what these conscious agents are. Um, and
in doing that, you've actually taken the
first steps to showing how you can
derive all of physics from
consciousness. Not not consciousness
from as an epiphenomenon from physics or
from neuroscience, but flipping it
around to the other point of view that
no, all of this comes out of
consciousness. Um, so yeah, I think so,
so now we're in this like really
exciting new territory where we've got
this theory of conscious observers. Um,
and I don't know if this is a good place
to start getting into this new
development or if we're not quite there
yet, but
&gt;&gt; yeah, take it take it from there. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I'll just mention because you
did mention the um the other work that
other of my colleagues are doing on
consciousness from a a physicalist
framework. I I'll I'll just say one
little thing about that work f first.
They're my friends and my colleagues and
they're brilliant.
&gt;&gt; They're they're they're absolutely
brilliant.
Um but they've set themselves up an
impossible problem. They're trying to
start with physical systems inside space
and time and they're trying to boot up
consciousness and it's it's just not
possible. And
so the question I asked them um and the
question that you can ask anybody who
says they have a theory of consciousness
that's a physicalist theory is very very
simple. Great. You have a theory. What
specific conscious experience does your
theory explain? That's the that's the
only question you need to ask them. Can
you explain the taste of mint? What is
your precise scientifically precise
mathematical description of the taste of
mint? If it's integrated information
theory for example, what precise
maximally integrated cause effect
structure which is a markup matrix, what
precise matrix must be the taste of mint
and could not be the smell of garlic.
What are you know what how many um
states does it have?
&gt;&gt; If it has n states, what are the n
squared elements of the matrix? Why do
they have to be the those n squared
values to be the taste of men? That's
all I have to ask is what is your
specific
theory for a specific conscious
experience.
If I came to you and say, you know, I've
got a theory of particle particle
interactions, you go, "Oh, oh, great.
Okay. Um, well, give me one, Don. You
know what what specific interaction do
you can you explain?" Like photon
electron interactions. And I said to
you, "Oh, I can't explain any specific
experience. I just have a general theory
of particle interactions."
&gt;&gt; Yeah. you would rightfully say,"Well,
you know, Don, come back to me when you
have something interesting to say."
That's not a theory. And that's where we
are. And again, these are my friends and
colleagues. They're brilliant. It's just
not possible to boot up a theory of
consciousness from physical, you know,
from neurons, from from quantum states
of microtubules, whatever, whatever it
is, from an AI system. We can talk about
AI if you want. just not possible to
start from physics, physical stuff in
spaceime and build up um consciousness.
So if anybody says they've done it, then
say, "Oh great, give me a specific
example. Taste of mint, smell of garlic,
whatever it is. What is your concrete
example?" If they can't give you one,
then say, "Well, come back when you can
give me one."
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This is a linen mill thing
basically, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the Yeah. Like Livets had
this famous thought experiment where um
if you essentially the point that he's
trying to get get to is you could never
walk into any machinery or any construct
and explain the consciousness that put
it there. You can only talk about and
and this is and this holds true for the
for uh any technology. It holds true for
the brain. Um and and that's it. I did a
terrible job of explaining that, but
that hopefully
&gt;&gt; No, that's that's perfectly good,
Michael. It's perfectly good. and and so
but a lot of my colleagues will will
will say uh liess is wrong. Yes, we can.
We're working on it. We'll get you
neural networks or something like that
or quantum states of microtubules and
and and
they should they should try. Absolutely
they should try. But if they say to you,
I've got a theory of consciousness, then
the right question now. Now when as soon
as they claim to have a theory of
consciousness, that's a different game.
when they claim to have a theory of
consciousness, then it's time to be very
hardnosed and say, "Give me one. Give me
a specific example." And if they can't
give you a specific example, then um ask
them when they will give you a specific
example because that's when it's going
to be interesting. So, so there there is
literally nothing
on the table so far in in that u and and
I think it's principle. I think the
failure is principled. It's not because
they're not smart. They they are very
very smart and they're many of them are
very very good friends of mine. So, so
we have to step entirely outside of
space time and that's a big leap and but
what if we do that then what we want to
do
is to have
as simple a set of assumptions as
possible. So if I'm going to start with
consciousness outside of spaceime,
what's the simplest thing that I can do?
I don't want to have a Rube Goldberg
device.
You you want the most parsimmonious like
Einstein with his special theory of
relativity. He makes just two
assumptions. The speed of light is the
same in all um reference frames. Um and
the laws of physics are the same in all,
you know, for all observers, all
inertial observers. So reference frame,
I mean inertial reference frame. So two
two axioms and you're off to the races
with an incredible theory. That's what
you want, not some Rube Goldberg device.
So what's the minimum I mean when you
talk about consciousness you can you can
have lots and lots lots of axioms right
and you could proliferate axioms and
some some of my colleagues do that I I
think there's one axium there are
conscious experiences
taste of mint smell of garlic so forth
and they change you know I'm now I'm
experiencing the smell of mint or the
taste of mint and oh and now I'm having
feeling a headache Oh, now there's a I I
see the color red there. So, I have
experiences and then some changes of
experiences. That's the minimum that we
have. And so, how do we what's the
minimum most general formalism that we
could do right down for that? Well, I'll
list my experiences. So, here's my set
of experiences. Here's the taste of men.
So, I could have it turns out if you
look at human perceptions, um our best
psychopysics, psychophysics is the
scientific study of of of our
experiences. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um, and it's a it's a beautiful field.
It's it's a a very rigorous field. It's
been around since 1859 or 1860. Um, it's
a a wellestablished field. So, we know
we have on the order of trillions,
humans have on the order of trillions of
conscious experiences, distinguishable
conscious experiences. So, it's it's a
lot of it's it's a big set for us. And
and bats, you know, have echolocation.
What it's like to be a bat is probably
very different from anything that we can
experience, right? So it's not just
human experiences. We could imagine
other animals with that, you know,
electro reception. We know, you know,
they can see, feel electromagnetic
fields. Okay. Well, maybe they have
something we can't see.
&gt;&gt; Vvelt is one of my favorite concepts.
Like you really trying to wrap your mind
around the idea that
&gt;&gt; other organisms have a completely
different view and range of experiences
than what you have access to.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. that completely and and so
we can't
&gt;&gt; think big enough. We have to really go
beyond the human limitations. But even
with just humans, we have on the order
of trillions. So that's that's big
enough for for the mathematics that
we're about to do. So we have trillions
of experiences and and then the
transition. So I'm just going to the the
simplest mathematics that we can do is
something called a marov matrix where I
just list my experiences and then I list
for each experience what's the
probability that if I'm experiencing red
now that maybe I'll experience green
next or blue next and just write all
those numbers down. What are the
probabilities of the transitions? Very
very simple. So I'm assuming that's it.
Let me define an observer as a matrix
where I list the experiences and I list
the transition probability. Say if I
have this experience, I'll go to that
experience. Just the minimal thing I can
do. So I'm not talking about anything
more than that to begin with.
So
we decided to to go with that. We just
have these Marov matrices
and I'll call them conscious observers.
And what we've been doing is exploring
them. We um what we what we're what
we've discovered in just in the last
year and a half is we're starting to
look at the relationships of these
different conscious observers. So I can
imagine, you know, a conscious observer
with a trillion trillions of
experiences, but maybe there's a
conscious observer that only has a
thousand of those or 10 of those or yeah
or 50 five00 million of them, [snorts]
&gt;&gt; but but not a trillion of them.
How how are these observers related? How
could they? So, we'd like to have some
way of weaving them together.
And we discovered
a logic. So, this is actually a
contribution to the mathematics of Marov
chains that there's a logic that that
ties together every Marov matrix, all
all of them together. And we call it the
trace logic. And it's based on a a trace
operation. And the trace operation has
been known for many many decades. So
this is not new. Um
&gt;&gt; okay old books on on markoff chains will
talk about a trace operation. So if I
have a a matrix on suppose I can
see 10 colors that are you know red,
green, blue, yellow and so forth 10
colors and I have a matrix of how they
might change. But then suppose that I
can only see say red, green and blue
out of the 10.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So the 10
the matrix that describes the
transitions on 10. Suppose that that's
governing everything that's happening to
me. But even though that's what's
happening, I only see the red, green,
and blue. So I only see three things. So
I'm going to see some transitions
between red, green, and blue. That's all
I can see. So I'm going to want to
describe my experience in terms of a
three, you know, 3x3 matrix of those
transitions. But I want to have some
canonical way of saying if if these are
the transitions on the 10 x 10 then
there's got to be the the right answer
for the 3x3 of what I see right and
that's called the trace and there is a
formula I I can tell you the formula but
it may not be helpful if we want we can
go into the mathematical formula and
talk about it but so there is a a a
precise formula that you can write down
that says give me a big matrix give me
any subset of it states this formula you
crank the wheels and out comes the
little the smaller matrix which is what
you will see and that's called the
trace. So that's been known.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay.
&gt;&gt; What we discovered was
that the relationship of being the trace
of another matrix gives you a logic on
the set of all markoff chains.
So it like
the logic is non-bullan. So it's a it's
a it's a complex logic. A boolean logic,
you know, is something that we're more
used to. Ands and ors and nots and so
forth are are are distributive and
things like that. This logic is non
boolean. But if I take any particular
matrix,
&gt;&gt; say a 10 x 10, and I look at all the
matrices that are its traces. So there'd
be lots of traces of it that if I just
restrict attention to those matrices so
the top guy and all of its traces then
they form a boolean logic. So it's a
boolean sublogic. So the way we then say
it it's a huge it's an infinitely large
logic because there's an infinite number
of markoff chains that the number of
states can go to infinity. You could
literally, you know, in the, you know,
get trillion is small that humans only
have a trillion experiences, but we
could go to quadrillion, sexilian,
septillian, Google plaque, whatever, you
know, is
&gt;&gt; it's it's as big as you want. Um, it's
nonvoo, but if you take any matrix, even
you know, a seextilian
state matrix and look at all of its
&gt;&gt; the things that are under it in the
trace, they form a boolean sublog, a big
one. So it it is a logic. So that was a
you know nice contribution to the theory
of marov chains a fundamental
contribution mathematically. But then we
had that. So we're you know you you can
see we're trying to understand we have
this very simple model of an observer.
We're doing whater said we're going to
start with observer participency. We're
going to try to build up physics from
that. We got this logic that's tying all
these observers together. But we still
don't see how you can build physics from
that.
And but then we notice that if you um in
Markoff theory, it's standard. This is
not us again. It's it's standard that
you can just keep a counter every time
you change your experience in the Markov
chain. You just increment your counter,
right? So I see red now. So that's one.
Oh, now I see green. That's two. I went
back to red. That's three. So every time
the you update your experience, you
update your counter. So these are called
we call them enhanced markoff chains.
&gt;&gt; So So this is again standard. So these
enhanced markoff chains are just
standard in the literature. You can find
them. They're they're sometimes called
spacetime markoff chains, but we'll call
them enhanced markoff chains.
What I noticed year and a half ago, year
and a half ago was that if I take a
matrix markup matrix and it's running so
the 10 x 10 matrix for the color 10
colors and I only look at the 3x3,
notice that the counter on the 3x3 isn't
going to be clicking as often as the
counter of the 10 x10.
&gt;&gt; Right? It says because I in my the the
3x3 only clicks if I see if red, green
or blue up here, but the bigger counter
is clicking red, green, blue. Also
yellow, purple, orange, black,
&gt;&gt; seven other possibilities,
&gt;&gt; seven other colors, right? Yeah. So,
it's clicking quite a bit more often.
And
as I was looking at that, I thought,
wait, that sounds a little bit like time
dilation in Einstein's theory of
relativity, right? See, Einstein has
this notion that if
not just a notion, but he's got the
mathematics of spacetime built on this.
If you're on a train and I'm sitting at
the train station, you're on the train,
you're going past me pretty fast, and
you got a meter stick and a clock. I'm
sitting I'm sitting at the train
station, you're going past me, and I
look at you, I'll notice that your clock
is going too slow. And also notice your
meter stick is too short.
But you on the train, you're looking at
me sitting sitting on the at the train
station. You're looking at me and you
notice from your point of view, my clock
is going too slow and my meter stick is
too short. So we both think the other
guy's clock is slow and their meter
sticks are short. That's time dilation
and space space contraction. So I
realized, okay, this sounds a lot like
at least the time dilation part of
Einstein's theories.
Could it be could it be that somehow I
mean Wheeler is right that that it's
just the theory of observers observer
participency alone that could give us
the structure of spacetime. Could it
actually
no but but you know I would be a fool
not to to look. So I started to look
with Chayan Pash my my collaborator. We
looked at this and um
didn't seem to I couldn't find any I
mean any reason why it it shouldn't work
for you for a certain class of marov
chains not for every marov chain for now
let's I'll be very careful for
Einstein's special theory of relativity
to start with so this is you're you're
moving without gravity um so we're not
going to talk about gravity just a flat
spacetime
&gt;&gt; so we just started with flat spacetime
then we said Well, we have to have not
just a notion of time. We're going to
take this counter, this click counter is
something somehow somehow corresponding
to time in spaceime. And I'm seeing that
the counter dilation is going to somehow
correspond to time dilation in spaceime.
But what about length? What about that
meter stick? It has to contract. And
what Einstein tells us is in flat
spacetime, the contraction is the same.
The amount that the meter stick
contracts has to be the same factor that
the time is dilated. Okay.
So I said well first what is the you
know what is distance and one
interesting way to talk about distance
there is a couple ways to talk about
distance in in markov chains. If I have
two states like the red and the green
colors,
&gt;&gt; y
&gt;&gt; I can ask um how long on average how
many steps of the markoff chain will I
need if I if I see green now, how long
on average will it take for me before I
see red
&gt;&gt; and then get back to green? That's
called the commute time. The expected
amount of steps from green to red and
back to green again is called the
commute time. And you know sometimes
it'll take 10 steps maybe some one time
it'll take a 100 steps next time might
take three steps but on average how
long's that's called the expected
commute time and um some mathematicians
named Doyle and Steiner in in 2017
published a paper where they said the
expected commute time um maps to the
square of the uklitian distance. So it's
it's not the distance it's not the
distance but the square of the distance
um between the two states. So, so that
was an a very very nice result. And so
we asked then u okay.
So are there is there a class of marov
chains for which
the ukidian distances between states as
given by marov theory of steiner doyle
and steiner and the the contractions
that we get from this counter um would
give us the flat space times of manowski
space and it turns out there is there is
a class of markoff chains for which and
they're called the cyclic markoff chains
where you literally go um like if If you
if you can only see red, green, blue and
yellow, you go red, green, blue, yellow,
red, green, blue, yellow forever in a
cycle. That's a cycle marov chain. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; For those marov chains, you get Manowski
space.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, you get the contractions.
&gt;&gt; We're now I should say we're we're um
&gt;&gt; when I say we get Minowski space, of
course, that's saying we have a theorem,
&gt;&gt; right? Right.
&gt;&gt; So, what I can say is we've written down
a theorem. I would say um I think we
have a proof. I'm working with two
mathematicians um Jayon Posh and and
Nifa Hermanson. Um and and so I'm not
going to announce that we have a proof
until the mathematicians say that we
have a proof. So I will just say that
there's a cognitive scientist who thinks
that we're doing pretty well, but he's
waiting for the mathematicians to give
the thumbs up to say that we have the
proof. I see no obstruction. They have
told me there there's no obstruction,
but this is such a major result that we
are not going to say we've got it until
we've got it. So, I'll just say this,
it's very promising and I can't wait uh
until we nail it down, submit it for
publication and and it comes out then
then I can say but I will I will just
say this uh I see no obstruction um to
to this at all. It looks to me in fact
that it we're being exceedingly careful,
but it looks to me that it's it's almost
trivial.
&gt;&gt; The it looks like it's almost trivial,
but again, it's it's trivial when I have
some brilliant mathematicians working
with me on it and you know and then
they're doing the hard work. So, so
&gt;&gt; so yeah, to try to bring this home for
people and for myself and just summarize
again. So, you were able to from this
theory of conscious observers aka these
markoff chains. So the the markoff chain
equals conscious observer conscious
agent.
You were able to derive spacetime from
that. When you say manowski space, you
mean spacetime, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Flat spaceime.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Flat spacetime. [clears throat] So
So Don was able to show that you could
get spaceime. So like our model of this
reality from a more basic level of
consciousness, not the other way around.
And he was able to do this through
elegant math. Elegant
math that was so straightforward that
you and your mathematician collaborator
were like, "Nah, this is too this is too
good. This is too this is too beautiful
and basic. It can't this and it no it
seems to be correct."
&gt;&gt; So [clears throat] yeah, absolutely. It
seems it it seems to work and and again
I I'll defer to my mathematician
colleague collaborators to to make the
final pronouncement that we that we have
a clean theorem but um I I I don't see
any obstruction but notice that there
was only one class of markup chains that
that would do this right it's for flat
manowski space it's only the cyclic and
most markoff chains are not cycles right
they're most are going to be far more
complicated but what's interesting about
those is um they will lead to the curved
space times of general relativity
&gt;&gt; because there the length contraction and
time deations are different. So that and
and and I would imagine that there going
to be some of the many of those markoff
chains that won't even project into
curve space time. to curve spacetime
will only be possible for a subset of
these markoff chains and then there'll
be other markoff chains that just can't
be represented in spaceime at all
&gt;&gt; which is perfectly fine when I've been
saying the spaceime is just a headset
right it's it's just one little headset
that we that we use
&gt;&gt; so so this is now the the big picture on
this is that the very structure of
spaceime
as Wheeler proposed
is coming from the pattern obser of
observer participancy
and the relationship
among observers. And so we had to do to
understand that the we had to have the
trace logic to understand the
relationship among the observers. Right?
So that was what the trace logic did. It
says if you have this simple model of
observers as just these markov matrices
then you need to have understand their
relationships. Well, the trace logic
shows you this deep logical relationship
among them. And then with that, then you
start seeing how the time dilations and
length contractions that could lead to
space-time um arise.
Now this this is just the first step.
Now there's the notion of agency. So
this is like passive observation, right?
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; Now we need a notion of of agency.
And that takes
to a new level. So the way I'm thinking
about it now, we we published a paper
where we have um a loop where we have
agents, we have um a conscious agent
having a set of experiences, a set of
actions, and they're interacting with
this network of other agents. We have a
have a loop and and that's one
interesting model. But now that we have
the trace logic, I'm thinking right now
and I haven't written this up yet, but
I'm thinking now about a different way
of talking about agency.
Take the whole trace logic. So this
infinite set of observers with this
logical relationship
&gt;&gt; and define an agent on that. So agents
crawl around on the trace logic is the
idea. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So at any quote unquote moment an agent
is looking at the world through a
particular element of the trace logic, a
particular markup matrix
&gt;&gt; and it makes an observation. Then it
says, okay, the agency part is now I'm
going to change which matrix I'm looking
through.
&gt;&gt; Maybe I'll go to a little bit bigger
matrix. I'll I'll expand my horizon of
experiences or maybe I'll contract it.
Maybe I'll maybe I'll meditate and let
go of all experiences for a while. Maybe
maybe I'm gonna so I'm gonna meditate
and go to nothing
&gt;&gt; or I'm going to go to a brand new part
of the world and I'm going to expand my
experiences. I'm just going to be open
to nature. So you can imagine going
small, going big and and then starting
to have strategies for how you're
changing your observations and moving
around. So all of a sudden you get the
notion of agency as as crawling around
on the trace logic. And the way you'd
crawl around would be again using marov
kernels given my current
way I'm looking which which matrix I'm
looking through
&gt;&gt; I'll have a probability distribution
where I might go next which other ways
of looking might I choose. So that's
again a markoff matrix that does that
says for if I'm looking from this
element of the of the trace logic which
new element will I likely go to. So we
so it's going to be a we have the trace
logic on the set of all markoff chains
and then an agent is another markoff
chain crawling on the trace logic. So
it's it's
&gt;&gt; it's pretty pretty wild. So that's going
to be the notion of agency that I want
to explore. Um but I should say that's
an idea that I've only had in the last
few weeks and we have to explore it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But so so even within this though
so so it's very exciting from a
technical point of view but really what
it is is it's putting
more layers of technical understanding
and it's it's putting a lot more
resolution on what we've been saying
this whole time, right? Like we are in
this limited scope of perception. We are
essentially within this headset like the
the Markov chain that is me or or that
that I have access to within within this
field of possibilities is still limited,
right? But we can but we can crawl
around within a segment of of the trace
of this larger um overarching structure,
but we're still limited. We just because
we know this doesn't mean we now have do
you know the the Greek word hypoxis?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; So so uh when you if you look at some of
these so prolist was really this
neoplatonist who is very uh very logical
and technical and he one of his most
famous works is elements of theology and
he lays everything out like a uklitian
proof. like he starts out from a very
very similar axiom to you which is like
um there is a one everything
participates in some aspect of the one
&gt;&gt; but but then but and then he like lays
out hundreds of other he keeps walking
through this and eventually you get you
get to to this metaphysical notion
of there being something very similar to
what you're describing in a more
technical way which is that you have
these like grad ations of uh a agency
and ontological power. And that's like
kind of what this word hypoxis means is
you higher things on the chain have more
hypoxis and then there's other things
underneath those things that have less
and less as it goes down.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; So, so it puts us in this constraint
that you've been describing as the
headset, right? or that we again we
could think about as being within a game
as within Grand Theft Auto. But then
there's like limitations. There's
there's still these limitations as to
what we can do. But then the interesting
question is is are these insights that
you're talking about are these potential
ways to increase the scope of what the
headset can do? Like are are these ways
to expand what a human maybe even can
do? Or are we always going to be
limited? I mean, we're going to be
limited to some degree, of course. Like,
I don't think it's possible for us to
dissolve back into the one as a human
being and like continue to exist. But,
um, but do do you see that as a real
possibility that we're going to unlock
new faculties, new modes of perception,
you know, things we can't even imagine
right now?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. And so, I'll first start off
with a statement that's, you know, to
put some modesty on the whole thing.
that is this is just the first layer
outside of soft of software outside of
spacetime. So it's
&gt;&gt; so so I'm not claiming anywhere close to
a theory of everything or anything like
that but but I think with that proviso I
think that there's magic here that you
know this think about it this way if you
are a wizard inside Grand Theft Auto.0
Oh, you can do all sorts of amazing
things and people are impressed. But if
you're the geek that wrote the software,
uh you can do things that the wizard
doesn't understand. You can make their
car disappear. You can take the tires
off their car. You you can just do
magic, right?
&gt;&gt; Basically,
if what we're saying is correct, um
we're going to be unlocking incredible
magic. And so I I'll just give you one
example of the kind of magic that goes
on this time. time dilation stuff.
Suppose I'm I'm
able to use this big matrix. That's
that's me. I'm able I'm I've got this
big matrix. My time counter is going for
every one of those experiences. And
suppose that your matrix um is only, you
know, onetenth of mine, right? So you
only see
&gt;&gt; probably is to be honest.
&gt;&gt; Well, I should have turned it the other
way. So I'll turn it around. So you got
a big matrix and and Hoffman only sees
onetenth of Michael's. Who who knows
what it is? But so so so I'll I'll do
I'll do it that way. So, Hoffman has
only 10% of Michael's experiences. And
um what happens then is
for every click of time that I see,
Michael has could do 10 times many many
other things. He could do lots of other
things where I think nothing's happened.
For for Michael, it could be a thousand
years or a million years depending on
how how much bigger your matrix is. You
you could you could have a thousand
years to do whatever you want. And for
me, it's instantaneous. That that means
effectively that I'm a sitting duck,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Compared to you. I'm a sitting duck. I
mean, you can do whatever you want while
I'm just sitting there in hurt unable to
to do anything.
&gt;&gt; Well, where this gets really trippy is
if you ask yourself, what kind of a
being would that be? like like like you
know obviously this is a fun example you
and me but if we really try like this
really gives you some insight as to what
it might be to be a higher being like a
an alien an angel what whatever like
whatever word you want to put on it
might be something like this and maybe
that's why when people have you know
altered states experiences or numinous
experiences they see these things that
just completely stretch their ability to
conceive you know like in in like going
back to biblical examples
Angels always be not afraid. Like I know
whatever I'm looking like to you, it's
looking real crazy, but like try not to
freak out, you know? And and that's been
my experience too with altered states is
is it is absolutely
that um belvelt I was talking about
where I can easily make sense of
reality. It is shaking, man. It is it is
like, you know, trying as hard as it can
to maintain homeostasis and it can't
happen. So maybe that's what it's like
for for for us
&gt;&gt; in our trace
gaining a very low pixel resolution of
like what what that adding another
integer adding another possibility to
that space might be like it might be
this overwhelming
numinous uh mysterium tremendum kind of
experience absolutely and and I've only
talked about the time there's also the
space as you were saying like So when
you
you have much more dimensions of space,
if you have the big if you're the bigger
trace than mine, I'm just a small trace
than you, then my distances are
different from yours. I I've I've got a
limited set of time. I've got a limited
set. You're working in a much bigger
space than me as well as you got more
time. So you can do stuff outside where
I can't see. I You could do something
inside my trace. I see. So I see an
object inside the trace. you've let me
see it. And then um you then do
something so that all of a sudden it
looks like the thing that I see in my
trace moved at Mach 40,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Accelerated at impossible or or faster
than the speed of light. And
but inside your big matrix, you're
you're all within your own laws quote
unquote laws of physics in your in your
matrix. But because I'm at a much
smaller matrix, it looks like magic to
me and it looks like it's impossible to
me. So, literally, you could be doing
all sorts of stuff and I'm a sitting
duck. Um, you can So, there's going to
be uh the technologies that would come
out of this are you you can't think big
enough.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And Yeah. Right.
Well, what you just described, I don't
know if you want to go here, but what
you just described really sounds like
most people's UFO experiences when they
when they see one or they try to sense
one is these things are doing things
that from our vantage point seem like it
shouldn't be possible. It shouldn't be
possible to go from sea level to 40,000
ft and then back to sea level again all
within a second or two. But these are
supposedly things that uh fighter pilots
have captured on, you know, things that
that work well enough that we're using
them to like protect our our country and
our interests and fight wars. And those
instruments work well for those
purposes. So, it seems to be telling us
something about something as impossible
as it sounds, right?
&gt;&gt; Um, so maybe that's one of the only
explanations. Uh well, you know, I I
hadn't paid much attention to the UAP
thing until there there was the
um congressional hearing
&gt;&gt; in which
&gt;&gt; people under oath
&gt;&gt; said, "I have been part of this. I've
seen the technology. I've seen nonhuman
biologics."
And
so at that point then I gave myself
permission to think about okay.
Um there is now some
credible testimony here that these
things may actually exist. And it's very
very clear from the work that I've been
doing independently that this kind of
technology
is easily possible from from this
framework. If you're if you're if you
take spaceime as fundamental,
then it's hard to explain this
technology. It's just sort of like the
the laws of physics simply don't allow
this stuff. And it's there's no way that
we can see in a space-time framework. Of
course, we still haven't united, you
know, really united things that that in
a deep way. We don't have a theory of
everything in certain time inside
spaceime. the standard model goes so so
far but you know there are things that
we might try to to do inside but still
it's hard to imagine this kind of magic
happening but if you switch frameworks
space time is just a VR headset
&gt;&gt; and consciousness
is
the creator of this headset so and we
can start to describe a layer of
software outside the headset then it's a
no-brainer that if you are the VR
designer you Oh, how it's how it's
designed, then you can do magic inside
the headset as I was describing the the
so
so I I'm actually it's almost uh scary
the technologies that can come out of
this. So the the trace logic is um also
quite dangerous. So I think
understanding the the trace logic and
and and perhaps this notion of agency um
is opening up a Pandora's box because if
you think about it, this is a way of
thinking about technologies that we
simply have never had before,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; We we have all of our military systems
are designed with
physics inside spaceime. We've only used
what we know about the inside of the
headset. So we our our best military
equipment is because um you know we are
like the the really the the great player
of Grand Theft Auto. We know how to do
stuff inside the headset.
&gt;&gt; But as soon as you get outside the
headset and start playing with the
software itself,
uh the first you know the first country
to do that is is the winner in terms of
of technology. there's there's no
nothing that you could do to stop it.
So, this is a it's it's a it's actually
a Pandora's box um that that's happening
here. So, one can only hope that
[clears throat]
one of the big lessons
here is where did the trace logic come
from?
Where did the theory of consciousness
come from? It comes from the idea that
there is that consciousness is
fundamental and each one of us is simply
an avatar expression of of a deep
unified consciousness. And and so what
what comes out of the trace logic is
what spiritual traditions have been
saying for a long time. And Jesus said
it very very clearly. You'll love your
neighbor as yourself.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The implication being your
neighbor is yourself. Basically, we're
and and that's really the point the
trace logic does say all of us are in
fact the one consciousness looking at
itself through different headsets. So,
someone who is smart enough
to begin to use
the trace logic outside of spaceime to
build technologies hopefully also is
smart enough to understand what this is
saying. that is that the person that
you're going to use this technology on
is you. That person is you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And so be careful how you use this
technology because what you're doing it
that any harm that you choose to do is
harm that you're doing to um an avatar
of yourself. Ultimately,
&gt;&gt; you aren't your avatar. You you
transcend. But to the extent that you
don't want something to happen to your
avatar, you should not want something to
happen to the avatar of of another
person.
&gt;&gt; So I'm hoping that the the the that at
the same time that we get a
technological boost that we also get in
some sense a moral boost from from the
same place.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I suspect Don and and it seems
like that this is the only way I can
square the circle I'm about to describe
is within a lot of that same
conversation
one of the direct things you seem to be
hearing more and more is that
consciousness seems to be core to
whatever the UAP technology is and of
course that's very speculative and
handwavy but maybe it's something along
the lines of
if we do add another possibility
to our, you know, Markov matrix.
Maybe it's not just going to be some new
advanced physics technology. Maybe it's
going to be something that makes that
statement make sense. That there is
something about consciousness and
physics or about reality that's
intertwined in a way that right now
doesn't make sense to us. But maybe just
by unlocking one more gradation of
reality or one new possibility or
understanding suddenly there will be
some new noises. There will be some new
understanding of oh this is how these
pieces fit together. We we thought that
applied technology like this and my
qualia my conscious experience are two
completely categorically different
things. But maybe this is the thing that
closes the gap or closes the circle or
something like that. And along with that
would come all kinds of epiphies and all
kinds of new um hugely onlogically
reorienting understandings in terms of
what we are. And it wouldn't just be
like a a conversation. It would be I'm
I'm talking about like a knowing like a
new sense or a new thing that um of
course I can't describe because it's
like it's like how do you describe what
you don't know but but it's but it's I
don't know I that's the nebulous sense
that I get
&gt;&gt; right well first I completely agree in
in the following sense that what this
approach is saying is that what is
beyond spaceime is entirely
consciousness. It is entirely in some
sense psychological in the way that you
were talking about. So, so yeah to the
extent that the UAPs have been
associated with all sorts of
psychological phenomena that that also
follows immediately from this the
ontology of this whole approach of the
trace logic. It's consciousness all the
way down. And so in in fact all the
technologies that look physical
everything that looks to us physical is
ultimately from from this point of view
psychological. the the very spacetime
itself is entirely a psychological
construct. Everything inside spacetime
is a psychological construct. Once you
understand that then that opens up the
technologies um that that would seem
impossible in a physicist physicalist
ontology. Um, and I again I don't think
that we can think big enough out outside
of the the box, but I see no reason why
we will be limited to to um
the the technologies that we have right
now are going to seem um pre-industrial
[laughter] uh compared to to to what
we're going to have. And it will be by
the way also you know other experiences
like people on various drug experiences
like DMT and so forth. There are some
some cases they seem to be um having
experiences that are
perhaps in higher dimensional spaces you
know not just three dimensions right
they they might be seeing
hyperdimensional objects and and and so
forth and if
Einstein spacetime his curve spacetime
is the fundamental nature of reality
then clearly seeing in into a you know a
30-dimensional space is is only a
psychological hallucination. It's not
the truth. If if our ontology is that
maybe a string theory there's
11dimensional thing or something like
that but but yeah right now string
theory is not it seems to be on the
ropes um among the physicists
themselves. that it doesn't seem to be
working in um it's giving us a lot of
beautiful insights mathematically and
and beautiful insights physically but as
a fundamental theory of everything I I I
don't see physicists rallying around it
like they used to. So, so, so when you
have experiences in really high
dimensional spaces under now, it's quite
possible of course that those any
particular experience is just
hallucination. You just screwing up the
brain and you know, if you hit me on the
head, yeah, I'm going to see all sorts
of stuff. But it's also possible in in
the framework I'm working on that that
could be a genuine insight that maybe
&gt;&gt; if we take some drug um I mean so I I'm
perfectly open to saying some drugs just
screw your brain up and it's
hallucination and there's no insight
into a deeper reality period. Yeah. But
but I think that there it's certainly
possible and I'm not going to claim
claim right now any specific drug is
doing this. But I'd say it is at least
in principle possible in the framework
I'm working on to have a drug
molecule that is already in the brain
for example and we're tweaking it
&gt;&gt; right
&gt;&gt; and that then that's tweaking a
dimension parameter right now the
dimension parameter for space is d
equals 3. So D the the parameter D has a
value three in our headset
&gt;&gt; and we tweak this chemical now it goes
to five or 10
&gt;&gt; and all of a sudden um we have the same
kind of architecture but this one
parameter in how we build the headset
gets gets manipulated. So it could be
that some simple chemical manipulation
in the brain could switch from three to
10 because in when I'm actually looking
at the you know how how am I going to
actually build space time from marov
matrices so when we do these theorems so
we're trying to prove this theorem right
of how do we get mancowski space from
the theory of conscious agents
what are we doing it's not just a
theorem this is the first step in
building the headset. That's what we're
really saying. How in principle do we
build the headset? So, I'm already doing
this. We're we're we're saying,
yeah, in principle, we could build a
headset to actually prove these
theorems. We have to show how to build
the headset.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And when I look at that and I see, you
know, look at our theorems and it's
saying, okay, this is these are the
things you have to go through to to
build this headset. In the theorem,
there's this little parameter. I can
just switch that one little parameter.
I'm no longer in three dimensions. I'm
in five, 10. And the and the theorem
still goes through. That's the key
thing. I see the theorem is still going
to go through. Three is not special.
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; When I go to the curved spaceime of
Einstein,
now I'll be able to see how I can warp
your spacetime.
I I I can start to play with the
curvature of your spacetime.
We have several other theorems. So I've
got a number of conjectures.
We want to show exactly how quantum
theory and the Bourne rule arises from
this.
&gt;&gt; What's the Borne rule?
&gt;&gt; So the the quantum theory the Bourne
rule is um when you make a measurement,
what's the probability of the outcomes
that you're going to see?
&gt;&gt; Okay. And the and the Borne rule says if
you give me the amplitude
the amplitude squared
um and when I say these are complex
numbers you have to take the number of
times this complex conjugate and add
them up and so forth that the amplitude
squared is gives you the probability of
various outcomes.
&gt;&gt; So that's that's the B rule. How do you
turn a complex amplitude into a real
probability for what you might see? So
we So in other words, what what we have
to do first and and
we've got these conjectures written down
and and we're going after it now. We're
going to go after these one by one.
Minowski space, curved spaceime, quantum
theory, and the Borne rule, the big
bang. How do how do we get a theory of
the of the big bang? As we go through
and and prove all these theorems, what
we're doing is basically setting up all
the mathematics that's needed to begin
to reverse engineer the headset.
And so, so the so we want so here's
here's this is no messing around. This
is the real deal where I plan to go.
Spacetime is just a headset.
Give me the precise software. how is the
headset built? So, how how are we going
to do that? First, with these theorems,
we um by by proving the theorems, we
prove that it's in principle possible
and we get the outlines of the
construction of the headset.
to get the details.
We need a little bit more information
about the specifics of our I mean
because there's lots of ways to build a
3D space 1D time headset to get our
specific one for humans.
Um the direction I I think we want to go
and I'm I'm working with some
neuroscientists um on this. I am a
neuroscientist myself.
We have to look at the brain. There's 86
billion neurons, trillions of synapses.
Most of my colleagues are assuming that
that somehow gives rise to
consciousness.
I say no. No neural activity causes
conscious experience. It's just the
other way around.
The brain is a headset representation
inside.
&gt;&gt; So I'll be very explicit. I am a
cognitive neuroscientist.
I'm all for neuroscience.
We need more funding for neuroscience,
not less. We need more rigorous
research. And I also believe that
neurons do not exist when they're not
perceived.
And those are not contradictory. So
neurons do not exist when they're not
perceived. And we need an order of
magnitude more funding for for
neuroscience because it's far more
difficult. The real problem of
neuroscience is far more difficult than
neuroscience currently understands.
The brain is the headset representation
of how the headset is engineered.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to say that again because
that's that's
&gt;&gt; that is the key
new direction for neuroscience. The
brain is the headset representation of
how much of the headset is engineered.
Not all but our whole body is going to
be have to be studied as well. But the
brain is going to be a key thing. So we
have so the problem of neuroscience is
to reverse engineer the brain.
Not it's not just enough to understand
the wiring of the brain. Once we
understand that and the and the
chemicals and so forth,
&gt;&gt; that's just
a headset projection
of the software outside of spaceime
which is far more complicated.
&gt;&gt; So, so the big problem of neuroscience
hasn't even been started yet. And it's
crazy because it seems like every
dimension, no matter how deep we look or
how wide we look within this headset,
it's like hinting at that structure over
and over again. Like I'm sure you've
seen these how, you know, cliche images
at this point of how these big galactic
superclusters look very brainlike. And
to my understanding, they've done some
some deeper even like peer-reviewed
analysis of the similarities in
architecture between, you know, galactic
filaments and um galaxies and how
similar they look to the brain structure
in in not like a handwavy Yeah, that
looks similar way, but a very precise
way. And and it's the same thing when
you look down into the dirt, right? the
the the the
mcelial mat at the at the very root
level of the planet
looks the same.
&gt;&gt; So it seems like every level of
intelligence
&gt;&gt; at least within the the headset within
spaceime is showing us this fractal
layered intelligent structure at at
every level. And the question is is what
does that tell us about well there's
many questions but one of the questions
is what does that tell us about the
level of intelligence above this one?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. My um
my understanding from the trace logic
now is um our headset is one of the
cheaper ones, one of the more trivial
ones. we we we have and and this is a
really important point and it's it's one
that's hard to come to grips with
emotionally.
It's it's very easy for us to think that
we're sort of at the top of the
intelligence chain. Um I look down and I
see, you know, an ant crawling around on
the ground and the ant can't see what
I'm doing. It doesn't know much about
me. I I live in a whole world that the
ant could never conceive, I would think.
And so it probably knows very very
little about my world and my world is
far I would guess far superior and far
richer than that of the ant. But now
if you think about that how much do I
know about the ant? I don't know too
that that much about the ant. Well, I
can do some studies on it, but um it's
quite possible
that my headset,
put put it this way, I'm I know that I
I'm very much rich very rich in my
experience and my complexity and my
guess is that the ant's headset isn't
telling it very much about me, right?
I'm guessing that the ant's headset just
um doesn't grock Hoffman at all. But
given that logic, there's a chance that
my headset isn't grocking what I'm
interacting with when I see all I see is
an ant.
Maybe all the ant sees of Hoffman is an
ant. And it's not because Hoffman is
just an ant. It's just because the ant
headset can't see Hoffman very well.
Well, turnabout is fair play. Maybe I
all when I see something and I call it
just an ant. I think it's it's trivial.
I could be interacting with an
intelligence that if I actually
understood it, I would fall
&gt;&gt; before it in in in terror or or
amazement or whatever because this thing
completely transcends me. But all I can
see is an ant. So it's it's very easy
for us to mistake the limits of our
headset
for an insight into reality.
&gt;&gt; That's the key point.
What you see inside your spacetime is
entirely a function of the limits of
your headset. It is not an insight into
the ultimate nature of reality. When I'm
seeing a ladybug,
that's it's that's the limit of my
headset. What am I interacting with? If
I actually knew what I was interacting
with, I might fall down and worship it.
&gt;&gt; But all I can see is a ladybug.
So, so, so, so we have to be very, very
careful to think of ourselves. The very
fact that we think of ourselves as at
the top of the food chain shows how
benited we are.
&gt;&gt; To the extent that I feel that I am
really smarter than everything I see,
that is the key evidence that I know
next to nothing.
&gt;&gt; So, what what this mathematics is
telling me is our headset is one of the
cheapest headsets that I could imagine
in the theory.
&gt;&gt; It's only got a d parameter of three.
There's no reason why the d parameter
could go couldn't go to a billion. Why
shouldn't one thing I I I am frustrated.
I'm sure many mathematicians are
frustrated. I can imagine a
three-dimensional cube. And it's very
helpful to imagine things when I'm
trying to solve problems.
Try to imagine a four-dimensional cube,
a tesseract.
&gt;&gt; I can't do it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Me neither. And I I you know and
nobody can even a brilliant
mathematician has to work around this
limitation of our imagination. They have
to use mathematics and and tricks to you
and proof theorem and proof to get to
the properties of these higher
dimensional objects.
&gt;&gt; Wouldn't it be nice if we had
&gt;&gt; someone in the comments is going to say
yes I can I can No. Yeah. I'm joking.
I'm joking. Well, someone probably will.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Probably probably so. And I hope
that someone can and maybe you know on
the right psychedelic perhaps someone
can actually go to a fourdimensional
space and really see a test. I would
love to get data that you know for
someone you like a real mathematician
saying you so we get someone who's a
credible mathematician that says yeah I
saw a tesseract and now we're talking
about something really interesting. So
if if you know some psychedelic can do
that if you know psilocybin can do that
or whatever that would be very very
interesting.
&gt;&gt; There there was just a sorry to
interrupt but I just wanted to share
this and I'll I'll try to find the
graphic for it. There is a someone made
an animation
where there's hidden information that
you cannot see unless you're on I think
it might be psilocybin or it's
definitely some tryptoamine where
there's like there are basically like
these tracers moving and you can just
see the color of the tracers or
something. But if you but if you're on
whatever particular um
you know what whatever the alkaloid is
you can actually see that there's like
hidden information that reveals itself
under under that influence. So it could
it I I do suspect and to your point
earlier that that may be exactly what
we're doing with with a certain class of
substances that we are actually tweaking
and expanding the headset to some
degree. And I would love to say that I
think it's just a pure flow of
more real information, but I also think
there's probably interference from your
own mind and your own preconceived
notions about reality and your own
programming and your own fears and
thoughts and blah blah blah. That's
getting all mixed in there. So, you are
getting more, but you're also turning up
the volume on your own psyche and and
every and everything all at the same
time. And that that's sort of been my
experience is it's just like more of
everything. More of everything.
&gt;&gt; Right. And and and again, you know, I'm
a hard no scientist, so I'll I'll say
this. Of course, we have to be open
&gt;&gt; all the time to the possibility that the
psychedelic drug is simply addling your
brain and there's nothing deep to see
here. On the other hand, we should
should be open with rigorous
experiments, no hand waves, with with
credible subjects where we try to
explore is there something be beyond
just addling the brain. I think the the
mathematics I'm working on says there's
a good possibility that that's that we
might be able to find that kind of thing
and and if so we should we we should
study it. But it's [clears throat] not
enough to have informal descriptions of
psychonauts. We we have to have more
systematic hard-nose rigorous
experiments. Um and you know if there
are claims of interacting with entities
beyond space time
&gt;&gt; y
&gt;&gt; then we need to substantiate those
claims with hard-nosed experiments where
information is exchanged from one person
to the entities to some other person in
a way that could not possibly have
happened any other way. So so I'm very
very hardnosed about all this stuff. You
have to be both there. It's a balance.
You have to be completely open to all
these possibilities that might seem
bizarre and then you have to be
completely hard-nosed about testing
them. So, so it's a balance, completely
open, but but no BS at all in in the
experiments and and and you have to be
your own harshest critics. And so that's
one reason why I'm I'm going after this
with mathematicians and and it's a
matter of theorem proof theorem proof
thing about the big bang getting quantum
um
probabilities out of this just going
down systematically the positive showing
how the positive geometries come exactly
out of this. So this is all and if at
any point we can't do it, it's game
over, right? This if if I if we can't
get general relativity from the trace
logic and this theory of agency I talked
about. If if it's not possible, if we
can prove we can't do it, then um I will
have to say that um nice try, but this
wasn't it. Um back back to the drawing
board. So So this this is all fun. I'm
excited about it, but uh you know, we've
been disappointed many times before. So,
so we will see. It's got to be theorem
proof. Theorem proof. Not
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But you have to you do have to be
willing to think out of the think big,
think out of the box. It's hard to think
out of spaceime. Um and to be rigorous
at the same time. And so that's that's
the the tight rope that you have to
walk.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I love it, Don. and I I love
everything you're doing and I deeply
deeply appreciate that you are rigorous
when it comes to all this stuff and all
the nuance that you put on all of your
thoughts yet at the same time you always
display this epistemic humility and I
yeah I I just I'm just so glad you're
out there. I'm so glad you're doing what
you're doing. Um and but speaking of
theorem proof theorem proof I let's
leave people with something that's not
theorem proof theorem proof.
&gt;&gt; Sure. What what what has all of this led
you to think about the teiology of what
a human being is? Like I I know you you
clearly believe, you know, there is this
one and we are sort of permutations of
this one experiencing itself. We we've
talked about this before. I've heard you
talk about it on other podcasts, but
other than that, you know, why this
headset? Why this experience? I is there
something that's evolving that has this
like teological
path or is it really just momentary
thoughts in in the collective
mind that's trying things out or what do
you think based on all of your
experiences and all of your research at
this point?
&gt;&gt; That's a it's a great question. It's a
very deep one. It's one that I I think
about a lot. And
the the one proveso going into it is
that anything I say is just another
thought, right?
&gt;&gt; And so it will ultimately be only a
limited perspective. So anything I can
say is never going to be the truth.
But
what seems to me is going on here is for
some deep reason
this this deepest reality that we are
that you are that I am. So Michael and
Don are just avatars of this deeper
reality.
That deeper reality
that transcends any description period
nevertheless chooses
clearly to have this very very rich
description of itself and looking at
itself through Michael and Don avatars
and losing itself. I mean it's it's
it was a shock when I didn't when I was
let go of this is the a realist view of
this and started to think this might be
a headset. It was it was a total shock.
So, so here I am
an avatar of a transcendent reality. And
that transcendent reality has chosen to
let itself get so completely taken up in
a trivial game, a trivial perspective
that it's shocked to death when it
realizes that this is just a trivial
perspective. And most of us are in that.
So, so here is this transcendent being
that
if I could see you, Michael, as you
were, I would fall down prostrate in in
adoration, right? and and any any person
the the the the most insignificant
person on the planet if I really saw who
they were I would fall down in I think
CS Lewis wrote something about this
somewhere in one of he said if you
actually saw people as they really were
you would just fall down in in in
admiration and and and
humility be before them and I think
that's right so that that is the core of
you know love your neighbor as yourself
your neighbor the least what looks to
you like the least person is
transcendent. It absolutely the the
infinite.
So the infinite lets itself
in our experience here be completely
lost
to lose its identity
and then to slowly wake up
in a period of 70 80 years and then it's
over 90 years and and it's so it
and and my guess is this is just one of
an infinite number of headsets that it
tries on. So, so here's the best picture
I can say and again words are just words
and the infinite transcends it. So
that's the bottom line is to say even
this description even if it's
mindbending for you is not mind
mindbending enough. So I'm if I'm
bending your minds great but I'm telling
you I haven't bent your minds at all
compared to what it needs to be bent.
But but let's try this amount of
bending. There's an infinite number of
perspectives. And the one infinite
consciousness is
choosing to look at itself through an
infinite number of perspectives as a way
of knowing itself. And it infinitely
transcends that.
So, and my my Hoffman brain is just not
big enough to handle that. That just
just But apparently when we shed this
headset, we will be be that
&gt;&gt; and then we'll pop into another headset
perhaps.
What do you what do you think about
Feder Rico's idea of like the say you
know this idea that there's there is
sort of a um yes there is this one but
there's a something like a a non-local
version of you and a non-local version
of me that I mean it sounds much more
like a soul right it sounds much more
like something that persists across
physical lifetimes do are are you open
to something like that like that there
that there is some sort of like meta
conscious agent that is not bound to
space time that can that continues to
exist across multiple incarnations or
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I think um
Federico and I have talked about his
ideas for a long time.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And
he has this notion of the one that's
spinning off these
subp parts and part holes. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And
I think that there there could be
in in the trace logic there is this
notion that I'm part of part of a
particular set of traces and so the the
the direct things I'm traces of yeah
there could be that there could be a
relationship between that and his say
notion. Um but then the trace logic is
non-bullying. So there there going to be
infinite number of other boolean logics.
So there's an infinite number of these
different say. So there could be some
connection between his notion of say
which is informal. It's not a
mathematical. So that that's the
problem, right? His theory there is is
not mathematics. It's it's you know it's
it's it's informal. Um and but but yeah
there there it could work. Uh
I would say that Federico and I and
we've talked for many many hours and
we're very very good friends and I would
say that at at core we agree that there
is this one fundamental consciousness
that that it spins off different
perspectives on itself. You call them
say
or I call them headsets and so forth or
maybe um sequences of headsets that are
related in in the in the trace logic
somehow.
Um I where I disagree with Federico in
terminology is the notion of um fields.
&gt;&gt; I think I think it's the to talk about
fields could could be misleading in if
it's if people are thinking about like
quantum fields. Yes,
&gt;&gt; these are fields defined over spaceime
and and so if if um so I would just say
that the notion of fields on spaceime is
is just the wrong metaphor completely
for for consciousness. If we want to
think about fields outside of spaceime
if
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; then then then the use of of but then
they're then then they're not quantum
fields, right? So quantum fields are
fields defined in spaceime. So, so if so
that's just the thing it's a
terminological thing. Quantum fields are
are is just the wrong terminology
because that ties you to space time.
Quantum fields are defined over
spacetime. But the very notion of I
think Federico's idea about fields is is
a good idea and and a a good pointer
because any word is a pointer as long as
we completely completely dissociate it
from quantum fields because the very
notion of quantum itself disappears
outside of our headset.
The positive geometries that the that
these high energy theoretical physicists
are finding um couldn't care less about
quantum mechanics. couldn't care learity
is gone. Quantum fields are gone.
Nothing there. You get quantum as a
projection at the same time that you get
spacetime. So, so that's why we have to
be very very very careful. Tying quantum
somehow with consciousness
is tying it to the headset. Quantum is a
function of the headset. It does quantum
does not transcend the headset
&gt;&gt; and consciousness does. And so that's
the big and I think I think Federico
completely understands that. So it's
merely a terminological thing that I'm
being careful about.
&gt;&gt; That's my sense too. Now that you said
that, maybe it it just makes me wonder
maybe there's a positive geometry
outside of space and time that is like
the true the true nature of Don or the
true nature of Michael. And it and it's
that that is sort of the source of of
this of or uh uh another Greek word.
Have we talked about sunma or sud mata
before?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Um it really reminded me of this when
you were talking about if I could see
the truth of what a ladybug is, I might
fall down and and prostrate. That it's a
it it's usually translated as like
signature or a symbol
&gt;&gt; of something higher. And that was the
idea is that like everything is some
kind of symbol or signature emanating
from some kind of higher transcendent
um reality or source or or
consciousness. And then that includes us
supposedly. That's what that what
individuals are as well is just we're
we're a signature of something
&gt;&gt; something else something higher in the
in the Markoff chain or or just a trace
of of whatever that is. And I don't
know, at the very least it resonates
with me and it seems like you actually
are going
&gt;&gt; toward proving these kinds of things,
Don. So I I've taken a lot of your time
&gt;&gt; that's one point about the positive
geometry.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; I I I like your idea of talking about
them in this context outside of of space
time. But but I I would make be be very
clear the positive geometries like the
amplrin and so forth are modeling one
small part of our space-time experience
and that is scattering amplitudes.
&gt;&gt; So they're so these geometries aren't
really they're probably not up to the
the task that you were pointing to. I
mean we need a bigger the positive
geometries are going outside of
spaceimer. They're they're beautiful and
they're brilliant and they're
groundbreaking, but they're not big
enough for understanding the headset and
these this notion of Federico's notion
of assay. They're I don't think they're
up to that job. We have to have much
more complex structures which will then
have to show how the positive geometries
outside of spaceime come from these
deeper models of the sades outside of
spaceime. So and the idea will be that
the positive geometries only describe
certain asmtoics of the rich dynamics.
So we have this very very rich dynamics
but when you only look at the asmtoics
that's when you get these positive
geometries. So it's a really
um dumbed down simplified asmtoic
description. But what everything you
were saying was right in terms of the
ideas I just wanted to make this
technical point.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I can't even handle the
dumbed down versions. So, you Well,
thank God you think that because like I
said before, your epistemic humility
just makes me love you that much more,
Don, and love your work that much more.
I'm so glad you're doing what you're
doing. I I can't wait to see what comes
of this latest discovery because it
seems like a pretty significant one. Um,
and yeah, man, I I really hope we have
future conversations.
&gt;&gt; Me, too. Thank you very much, Michael.
It's a pleasure. Great questions as
always and a great pleasure to talk with
you.