Hey, thanks so much for watching. We
have so many more programs, so don't
forget to subscribe.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Hey everyone.
Thanks for joining us. We haven't done
one of these live stream Q&amp;A's in a
while, and I
I always enjoy them. I hope that you
enjoy them as well. Feel free to put
your question in the chat, and I'll try
to get to as many as I can. We've also
gathered some of your questions that
you've submitted earlier today on
Facebook, Instagram, X, and so forth.
So, I'll try to get to as many of those
as I can.
Today is of course an interesting news
day. We have
the Artemis mission, which is going to
be splashing down safely. We have our
fingers crossed, hopes, and prayers that
that will go smoothly. It launched
I guess on April 1st. I think we have
even a little bit of footage of that we
can show you here. So,
there it is, taking off,
heading on its 10-day mission, which
concludes today. I believe the
splashdown is
8:07
Eastern Time, but this will be off of
the coast of California, near San Diego.
You see the crew there
before they were astronaut in space as
well. And, you know, they've done some
wonderful things. We've gotten these
beautiful images of uh the Earth from
space. We've seen those before, but
these are sharp, stunning, absolutely
beautiful. They've taken a variety of
photographs as well from a vantage point
that is deeply unfamiliar. There you see
the Earth setting behind the cratered
moon, which is really just just so so
stunning, so beautiful.
They also Here's another version of
that, where you sort of see the uh
the Earth. I think they called it
Earthset. You know, the Earth setting
behind the moon. They also
had a beautiful photograph taken of the
silhouette of the moon with the sun in
the background. So, we here you have a a
version of a solar eclipse,
but at a vantage point that is deeply
unfamiliar. And I think this version of
totality, if I'm not mistaken, was 57
minutes long because the the crew was so
close to the moon. So, it's sort of a
beautiful image, where you sort of see
the the sun linking out there behind the
edge of the lunar landscape. And so,
this is a a wonderful
mission that, you know, we've not been
to the moon now for 54 years. We of
course went back in the '60s with the
the Kennedy goal of getting us to the
moon in a decade. We got there, and then
we kind of gave up a little bit, but
this is the start of a new era, which is
which is really wonderful and exciting.
And look, you know, I think you've
probably read more about it than I have.
There are these
potential issues with the heat shield.
Uh you hear that, and of course your
heart sinks, certainly if you're my age.
You remember the previous disasters with
a kind of visceral reaction, but uh
we're told that NASA has a wide wide
margin of error here. So, everything
should should go well with that. So, let
me with that get to uh the main point of
our gathering here today, which is to
address some of your questions. And I
see there's one immediately to do with
Artemis. So, could Artemis 2 and future
missions
help test fundamental physics like
quantum gravity, information
preservation, or general relativity
deviation during lunar flybys? What
insight do you hope Artemis will bring?
Look, we don't really look
Look, I I I If there were some
measurement that gave us some insight
into quantum gravity, we would be over
the moon, to use perhaps an apt phrase
for this particular context, but that's
not why the Artemis mission exists. The
issues with quantum gravity
emerge in extreme realms, realms that
are extraordinarily energetic,
extraordinarily small.
The kind of gravitational influence
that's relevant for Artemis, Isaac
Newton
could have done the calculations. And in
fact, for the most part, Isaac Newton
does do the calculations for us even
today, because Newtonian gravity, even
though we've gone beyond it with
Einsteinian gravity, general relativity,
and even though we're trying to push the
frontiers with quantum gravity, for
everyday situations, by which I mean
situations that are amenable to the
naked eye. If you can sort of see
things, you can see the moon, you can
see the Artemis spacecraft itself,
that's your big hint that ordinary
Newtonian gravity is all that you need.
So, yeah, is there always a chance that
some kind of anomaly that we didn't
expect crops up, and somehow we gain
insight that we didn't deserve? We
weren't expecting it. Is that possible?
It is. But, I don't think that that is
likely to be in the cards for us at all.
Another question.
Given that a single photon
has energy and momentum, is it
theoretically possible to create a black
hole by concentrating energy
through light into a single point? The
answer to that is absolutely yes, right?
So,
we talk about black holes in rough
language by the
idea of taking a ball of matter, often
thought about as a star, but it could be
anything, and crushing that mass to a
sufficiently small size. And Einstein
even gave us a formula
for how small you have to squeeze a mass
to get a black hole, right? And it's 2 *
Newton's constant G * the mass / C
squared. And so, that's the canonical
way that we think about black holes
forming. But, the reality is
both in special relativity and general
relativity, Einstein is emphasizing that
matter is one special kind of a more
general concept called energy, right?
And so, all you need is energy to create
a black hole. Energy is what sources
gravity.
And so, photons, radiation more
generally, they have energy. And so,
yeah, if you get enough of that energy
in a small enough region, you can create
a black hole. In fact, this very same
formula applies.
Now, just using E = MC squared, just
plug that in, and so you need E
to be the dominant entity that is
sourcing the gravity, as opposed to M,
which is what we normally think about in
the canonical way of thinking about
things. But, if you squeeze it to 2GE /
C to the fourth, you know, C to the
fourth now because of E = MC squared,
you can just go through it, then yeah,
you will have a black hole made of
light, right? It's kind of a cool idea,
right? A black hole that forms from
photons being sufficiently concentrated
in a small enough region.
If the universe were in absolute stasis,
would time still have meaning? Is time
an independent reality, or is it
entirely dependent on change and
perception?
So, maybe I'll give some names of people
who asked these questions. That's Mensur
Artha 4374.
So,
you know, it's a tough question.
We don't really know fundamentally what
time is. We don't know if time is
something that we somehow impose on some
external reality to organize our
perceptions in order to have some sense
of causality, of a cause and an effect,
and and things of that nature. So,
without a deep understanding of what
time is, it's difficult to answer that
question. But, from a practical sense, I
would say absolutely. Because time is
what allows for change, right? That's
the role that time plays in fundamental
physics. And so, if you're telling me
that there are fundamentally no change,
there's fundamentally an absence of
change, that we're fundamentally in a
realm of complete stasis, then the role
of time would drop out, right? I mean,
even to have a thought, there has to be
change happening inside of your head.
And so, if everything is frozen, if it's
total stasis, from any practical
standpoint, a notion of time completely
drops away.
Okay, if
space is inflating, asks Scott Tate
4968. If space is inflating, why isn't
the space around us and between us
inflating, too? That's a it's a good
question.
And here's the answer.
When we're talking about the expansion
of space, the driver of that is the
gravitational force.
In Einstein's theory in the original
version without using this more exotic
idea of inflation that you make use of,
it's the very fact that space can
stretch or it can contract and it is
matter and energy that sources those
changes in size. And that's
the origin of an expanding universe.
Inflation is the same basic idea. It's
just the source of the gravitational
force is a little different. It's a
uniform energy as opposed to clumpy
chunks of matter and uniform energy it
turns out in Einstein's equations gives
rise to a repulsive gravity that pushes
everything apart. But it's gravity that
is driving the change.
And so if you're in a realm like we are
right here, say our bodies just to be
concrete, our bodies are held together
by non-gravitational forces that are
stronger than the gravitational forces.
Our bodies are held together by the
electromagnetic forces, by the strong
and weak nuclear forces that are
operating within the nuclei of the atoms
and the molecules that make up our
bodies. And because those forces are so
much more powerful
than the force of gravity, our bodies
and the world around us is able to hold
together and not
succumb to the expansion of space.
That's the answer to your question. But
just to take it a little bit further,
there are
people who have studied theories
which are slight generalizations of the
say inflationary theory that you make
reference to in which the strength of
the gravitational force and more
specifically the strength of the
repulsive push that's driving the
universe to still be in a state of
accelerated expansion
that force grows more strongly over
time.
Given that, there's a chance that today
that force is much weaker than the
forces that hold things together. But
over time,
if it gets stronger, maybe it gets
stronger than the forces that hold
matter together. And if that's the case,
then in the far future the answer to
your question will be different. We will
expand from the gravitational force
that's driving everything apart. Even
individual atoms, the electrons, may
find themselves ripped away from the
nucleus because the little space between
them
is allowing for expansion that's
stronger than the electromagnetic
interaction that's keeping that electron
in orbit. This is known as the big rip.
It's one way that in principle the
universe might end. And if it does,
well, you know, that won't be that
pleasant. But we're talking about time
scales that are way, way off into the
future, so you don't have to worry about
it. But that's the answer to your
question.
If time has a beginning
and an end,
how would that affect multiple
universes?
Would different universes be on the same
timeline as us? This is coming from
Cranken 72.
Yeah, so if there are other universes,
that's a big supposition and
there are no doubt going to be other
questions along the lines as this is a
fan favorite topic. But if our universe
is just one among many universes,
then the language that we've long used
that, you know, time in some practical
sense
came into existence with the Big Bang.
That notion of time, of course, is only
relevant to our Big Bang, our universe.
If there multiple Big Bangs, say, giving
rise to universes at distinct locations
in some larger multiverse reality, then
time in each of those universes would
have come into existence in the same
sense with the Big Bang that drove the
expansion of space in that universe. And
so yes, the concept of time as we
normally use it would become a local
description. It would be relevant to the
reality that we inhabit, but it wouldn't
be talking about the reality in those
other universes. Now, you can still ask
a question, does that mean that there
might be some more universal, some
overall notion of time that would kind
of apply to the entirety of the
multiverse? And that's pretty tough to
work out in any way that makes sense
because one of the insights of Einstein
in general relativity is that
the flow of time,
although he didn't really use that
language, but the rate at which time
elapses is influenced by the conditions,
by the matter and energy in some region
of this larger reality. And so time here
can be very different from time over
there even in our universe, right? Time
near a black hole, very different from
the time that I'm experiencing right
here. Now, if I was at the edge of a
black hole, I wouldn't feel time
behaving strangely because everything
about time would be affected uniformly.
Even my thoughts would be affected. In
fact, they would be slowed down relative
to the thoughts that I'm having right
here, far away. But it's only by
comparison with your friend back on
Earth that you'd recognize that time for
you elapsed in a strange way. But the
point is this urge that we have to have
a universal conception of time that
applies to everything is misguided. The
reason why it has a partial home in our
universe is the fact that on the largest
of scales,
our universe is pretty homogeneous. So
yeah, if you look in the vicinity of the
solar system, Milky Way galaxy, you see
like a lot of matter and then in other
regions there's mostly empty space. But
if you look at a large chunk of our
universe, whatever, you know, 100
billion light-year box on each side,
and you look at the conditions in that
box compared to the conditions in
another such enormous box that's
someplace else in the universe, the
conditions are pretty much the same. And
because of that large-scale homogeneity,
there is a large-scale notion of time
that we can pretty much invoke. And
that's the one that we are using when we
say that the universe is whatever, 13.82
billion years old. You could easily have
said 13.8
billion years according to who?
According to whose clock, right? Because
clocks tick off time at different rates.
Answer,
we're talking about time on a clock
that's moving with the general expansion
of the universe and experiencing the
average conditions of matter and energy
spread throughout the universe that are
pretty much uniform. And that's the
clock that we have in mind. But if we
lived in a universe
that was heterogeneous completely, there
was no large-scale uniformity, then
there really would be no notion of some
large-scale overall universal conception
of time.
All right, I know this is off the wall,
but can an entangled particle be both
inside and outside of a black hole
resulting in gaining an ability to
somehow monitor the one inside by how
the one outside is acting. And this is
from MRX1278.
That's not off the wall.
MRX, you are
putting your finger on one of the most
contentious and interesting and fruitful
debates that physicists at the leading
edge have been having over the last, mm,
let's call it, well, you could call it
25 years, but over the last decade for
sure. So what's the idea? The The point
that you raised, just to bring everybody
onto the same page, if you have a black
hole, right? And you have an entangled
pair of particles. Remember from quantum
mechanics, that's the idea that you can
have two particles
that are each in a superposition, let's
say of being spinning up and spinning
down. So in a 50/50 mixture here and
then a 50/50 mixture here. And yet when
you measure one and it snaps out of the
haze and points up, the other one snaps
out of the haze and points down.
Regardless of how far apart they are,
they behave therefore as if they're
right next to each other. They have this
tightly choreographed way of behaving
that makes it appear that they're linked
even though they're far apart. So then
MRX
suggests, well, what if you do that,
entangle particles with one
outside a black hole and one inside a
black hole.
Then are you learning about part of the
universe that you're supposedly unable
to access by virtue of the entangled
partner on the other side?
And the most conventional answer from
general relativity is yes, right? So if
you measure that entangled member on the
outside and it's spinning up, then you
will have learned that the one on the
inside is spinning down. Now, that
doesn't actually violate any insights.
What black holes really stipulate and
they're defined by is a better way of
saying it is that
a light beam
can't escape. Nothing can escape.
When you do this, nothing's escaping.
You're learning about something inside
the black hole, but you're doing it
through this beautiful indirect quality
of entanglement that quantum mechanics
provides.
But the real
issue that people have argued about has
to do with Hawking radiation that you
may have heard of, which is this idea
that when you have a black hole,
it can cause, and we believe it will
cause, according to Stephen Hawking,
radiation from quantum physics to bubble
bubble up at the surface and stream
away. Number one, that's weird. That
means black holes are not completely
black. This is an idea that Hawking
introduced to the world in 1974, so
whatever, you know, more than 50 years
ago.
But, there are puzzles associated with
that because when particles bubble up
near the edge of a black hole, near the
event horizon, they are entangled, just
as MRX has asked us about. And so, when
one member of the pair flies away,
its partner flies in, and they are
entangled, exactly as in the question.
And so, people have wondered about the
issue of can they carry away the
information of whatever fell in to
create the black hole, or is that
radiation somehow in a thermal state
that doesn't carry any information. This
has been the issue that people have been
debating for some time, and it all
fixates on exactly the question you
asked. So, according to standard general
relativity, yes, particle inside outside
still entangled, but according to him
some more wild ideas that the debate has
inspired, some suggest that maybe the
event horizon of a black hole severes
severes the entangled relationship
between those two particles. They're no
longer entangled because of that, and
moreover, sort of like when you snap a
rubber band, you release energy. If you
snap entanglement, you also release
energy, which means that the surrounding
region of a black hole, the event
horizon, would be highly energetic.
So energetic that anything that gets too
close, falls in, would be incinerated.
And so, it's not that something falls
into the black hole in this new picture,
rather it's that the black hole sort of
the end, you can't go any further. It's
called the firewall. And so, people have
been debating this idea for some time.
All right. Um what do we have here?
Could the fundamental constants be
different in other universes? Dave Mart
asks this question. And yeah,
absolutely. So, we're used to certain
fundamental constants of nature. You
learned some of them in high school. You
know, you learned about
things like the speed of light. You
learned about Newton's gravitational
constant.
You learned about the electric charge on
an electron and
various other particular numbers that
seem vital to characterizing physics in
our universe.
When we study the possibility of other
universes, depending on exactly
how those other universes are formed,
there are examples of the multiverse in
which the other universes could have
different values for the electric
charge, different values for the mass of
the electron, different values for the
speed of light. In fact, you can imagine
universes where there's no notion of the
speed of light because there's no notion
of light in that, you know, universe.
And so, depending on how far you're
willing to go
in the mechanism by which other
universes are created, you can have more
or less latitude in the values of these
fundamental constants. And so, yes,
people have
wondered
about the possibility
that maybe, just maybe, what happens is
the following.
In most of these other universes, the
fundamental constants of nature in those
realms are such that the kinds of
structures necessary for living systems,
uh stable planet, stable stars, certain
biomolecules, at least life as we know
it. They give rise to amino acids that
give rise to the nucleotides of DNA and
so forth. Maybe in the vast majority of
those other universes, those structures
can't form because the constants of
nature are different, and with those
particular values, you don't get the
kind of material structures that life as
we know it requires. And that might give
you an explanation for why we're in this
particular universe with this particular
value of the electric charge and the
mass of the electron and the mass of the
quarks and the strength of gravity and
the strength of electromagnetic force.
Those are puzzles. Why those particular
numbers? Potential answer,
maybe
if the numbers were significantly
different,
we couldn't live. We couldn't exist.
Life as we know it wouldn't form. So,
why are we in a universe with the
particular values of the constants that
we observe? Because this is the only
kind of universe in which we could
exist. This is known as the anthropic
principle, and some people
find it repellent.
The reason they find it repellent is
they say,
"We should not be part of the
fundamental explanation for anything. We
are just the outcome
of the universe that we inhabit. We're
the kind of
afterthought. The fundamental
issues of why the universe is the way it
is should not depend upon us."
But, think about it. I mean, I get it. I
I I have a certain sympathy for that way
of talking about things. But, if there
are other universes
in which these numbers that puzzle us
have different values, and maybe all
possible values are realized across the
grand expanse of the multiverse, then
the nature of the question shifts. It's
not why does the electron have its
particular charge or its particular
mass? Because it doesn't. In other
universes, it has different values.
Then the question is, instead, why are
we in a universe with the particular
values that we happen to measure? And
the answer is may [clears throat] well
be, we simply couldn't exist
in any of the other universes. And so,
you have to, I think, leave yourself
open to this way of thinking.
If you can find a more fundamental
explanation, God bless you.
Write it up. Publish it. Go to
Stockholm. Fantastic. But, no one's been
able to do that. And so, in the absence
of a fundamental explanation, it may be
more of an environmental influence. We
have to allow that as a possibility.
Okay. Um
How are humans
and equipment on the moon for prolonged
periods be protected from meteors or
meteorites that regularly fall on it?
This is Tony from Facebook.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm not much of an engineer, so I
don't know if I know all the tricks of
the trade, but certainly
Well, look, you can imagine building a
lunar base that's under the surface.
That helps to protect you. But, if
you're on the surface, there are various
things that you can do to mitigate the
situation of being obliterated by a
meteorite. Now,
one among them is to first recognize
that there's more of a an issue on the
moon than there is on, say, the Earth.
The Earth has an atmosphere. And so,
many of the smaller meteorites they just
burn up in the atmosphere, or they're at
least slow down and they burn up, and
what's left, the the remnant, is much
smaller than what began at the top. But,
the atmosphere make it much less
dangerous.
And so, what you want to do on the moon,
since you don't have an atmosphere, is
you want to put something above
sensitive areas that will protect you.
Now, how do you do that? It's pretty
tough to have some hardened structure
that can take the impact of a meteor
that hasn't degraded by going through an
atmosphere. So, you want to degrade any
incoming meteors. How do you do that?
Well, mostly what people do is they
imagine you have a series of shields.
Okay?
And when the meteor hits the first
shield, you're not trying to stop it.
Rather, you're trying to cause it to
pulverize
so that the material is spread over a
larger area. Larger area means less
force per unit area. And then you can
have layer upon layer upon layer of
these shields, and the layers don't have
to do as much work as you would have
thought because the meteor was caused to
disintegrate upon impact on the first
shield. I think there's a strange name
for this design. Can't remember. I think
it Don't quote me on this. I think it's
called the Whipple?
Whipple shield? I don't know. Somebody
look it up and tell me if that's correct
in in the in the comments. But, I think
that is the basic idea for protecting
surface material on
a body like the moon that doesn't have
an atmosphere.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Okay, next question.
Geez, what is this one? From ideas
QFAJIT.
If I had a device to do live FaceTime
using quantum entanglement, let's say we
have one. Okay, this is a little tricky
for me to picture. One person near a
black hole event horizon and one on
Earth talking to each other, what do
they
see? Okay, I don't know if quantum
entanglement is so essential to what
you're saying. I think you're basically
saying, you know, if somehow we can have
a a FaceTime call
with someone on the edge of a black
hole, you know, sort of what would you
see? Well, the dominant thing that you'd
notice
is that your companion near the edge of
the black hole
would be in slow motion compared to you
because
you know, one of the deep insights of
general relativity that I don't think
has fully
spread throughout even the
scientifically savvy
part of our world, which is
distressingly smaller than we would like
it to be
is that what Einstein really showed with
general relativity is that you can think
about gravity
at least in the familiar context like
the Earth or even a black hole, you can
think of gravity
as that which slows the passage of time.
Especially near an ordinary body like
the Earth. That is the dominant way in
which gravity manifests itself according
to Einstein.
We often say that the Earth curves the
environment around you. You've seen
these images. I've used them myself all
the time, you know, the Sun causes the
fabric of space to curve and
then the the Earth goes in orbit around
the Sun because it's traversing a valley
in the warped spatial environment.
Between us, since we're, you know, all
here in good faith and friends, that's
really misleading. If you look a little
bit more closely in general relativity,
what really happens is not that space is
warped near the Sun or near the Earth.
It's time
that's warped in any sensible way of
describing it. You can always change
coordinates, but any sensible way of
describing it, it's time that's warped.
And so, the reason why an object falls
when you drop it is not that it's
sliding along an indentation in space,
which is easier to visualize, but rather
an object falls because if you don't
jump on me for using unnecessarily
anthropomorphic language, the object
wants to go to a region of space where
time elapses more slowly.
And time elapses more slowly near the
surface of a body because you're closer
to the source of gravity. Gravity pulls
on time, slows its passage.
Now, if you're near a black hole, back
to your question, well, the
gravitational pull there is strong and
so your friend, your companion near the
black hole will be talking in slow
motion and moving in slow motion, eyes
blinking in slow motion.
You'd also note that they are red
shifted because the light that they are
emitted is fighting to get out of the
gravitational field of the black hole.
And when you fight [snorts] against a
gravitational field and you are an
oscillating electromagnetic field, the
field gets kind of stretched out. The
wavelength becomes longer and that
pushes it toward the red end of the
spectrum. Those are the kinds of things
that you would see.
In quantum entanglement, Abby
AbbyDoodle2458
asks, "In quantum entanglement, do the
results
when you affect one of the atoms always
have to be opposite each other? Is a way
to determine what the pair is in
outcomes, whether they're the same or
opposite?" And AbbyDoodle, thank you for
asking that because
again, you know, I'm I'm guilty of it,
too.
We can get caught in our
ways of popularizing these unfamiliar
ideas and certainly using spin of a
particle like an electron is a very
familiar one. And indeed, even a moment
ago, I said, you know, if this one is
pointing up, this one's pointing down
and vice versa when you undertake a
measurement.
But Abby, you're completely right.
That's merely one example.
Even with electron spins, I could set it
up in a different quantum state
where they're both up or they're both
down. So now, it's more like this.
They can be in a 50/50 mixture of
spinning up and spinning down.
And when I measure one, it snaps out of
the haze and spins up and the other
snaps out
of the haze and spins up, too. It's not
so much opposite
or the same. It's rather the
choreography
is rigid. And so, how do you figure out
whether it's opposite, the same, or
something even more exotic?
That's where you have to look at the
details of the quantum mechanical
configuration itself. Any
undergraduate who takes a basic course
in quantum mechanics will learn how to
represent the quantum mechanical states
mathematically. And then it's a tiny
little exercise to figure out what the
quantum mechanical state looks like so
that two electron spins are like this
or like that or something far more
involved than electron spins. It could
even be the positions of a particle. In
fact, I should say
when Albert Einstein wrote the first
paper on quantum entanglement, this is
in 1935. He wrote it with two
colleagues, Podolsky and Rosen.
The word electron spin is not in that
paper.
They weren't using this or this as their
example. That came from someone named
David Bohm years later.
Rather, when Einstein wrote down
quantum entanglement, he did in terms of
more familiar qualities, position.
He set up things mathematically so that
the position of one particle was
entangled with the position of another
particle. When one particle is found
here, this one's found here. If this
one's found here, this one's found
there. A very precise relationship
between their locations. And so yes,
Abby, it's a great question. And indeed,
it is not that things are always same or
opposite, it's that they are tightly
correlated. That is the best way of
describing it.
Okay.
Dr. Green about the possible big rip.
Yes, we did talk about that a moment
ago. Gustavo
gust.av.o
Oh.
Hang on a second. It just moved on my
screen.
What would happen to the rest of the
other dimensions from string theory?
Would they be kept the same? What other
thing could be expected to happen?
Yeah, so it's a it's a it's a great
question, Gustavo. You're making note of
the fact
that different dimensions of space in
principle can expand or even contract in
different ways.
In fact, there are cosmological theories
within string theory that does require
extra dimensions where
&gt;&gt; [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; the three dimensions that we know about
can be expanding. But the extra
dimensions that we don't see with the
naked eye, but the mathematics claims
exist, those dimensions could be
contracting while our dimensions are
expanding. That wouldn't bother us
because we don't see those extra
dimensions. So we don't know what
they're doing. We don't even know if
they exist, of course. But assuming that
they do
they could be static, maybe, or they
could be contracting and they could be
expanding. So yes, can you imagine a
situation where there's a big rip
in our dimensions and not in the other
ones? Yeah. Yeah, it could be that the
repulsive gravitational push within our
three dimensions goes
larger and larger and larger, but in the
other dimensions, maybe the source of
gravity that they are sensing is
sufficiently different that they are
undergoing different behavior.
Absolutely possible.
If energy is universal and dark matter
forms stars and releases, will dark
matter
disappear?
Um
I'm having trouble grasping what the
question there with dark matter
disappear. Dark matter forms stars and
releases. I'm not sure exactly what the
question is, Ramond. If you want to ask
again, I'll try to come back to it, but
I'm having trouble grasping that one.
All right, Ignazio from Facebook. Since
string theory attempts to unify gravity
with quantum mechanics
how might precise measurements of
gravitational fields during Artemis 2
inform such theories? Again, similar to
before, not much I can say about Artemis
2 giving us the insight into string
theory or gravitational theory.
Unfortunately, I wish that we could.
Mateo Carrazi is one of one of our World
Science Scholars. It's a program that we
run at World Science Festival where math
kids from around the world who are
exceptionally talented are brought in to
our
realm and learn from some of the great
experts. In your view
Mateo asks, "What would it take to rule
out string theory conceptually? What
kind of failure would make you conclude
that the framework itself is
fundamentally
incomplete?" Yeah, it's it's a great
question. What would it take for me
to give up on string theory?
I wish I could sit here and say
in 5 years, there's going to be an
experiment at such and such a collider
or in 10 years, there's going to be an
observation by such and such space
station or space observatory. And if it
doesn't come out in a particular way,
I'll give up on string theory. I can't
say that. Nobody can. And the reason is,
I think as many of you know
string theory
has not yet developed to a point where
we can make the kinds of definitive
observational or experimental
predictions that certainly we hoped we'd
be able to do when I was a graduate
student back in the 1980s.
But in case you're interested and maybe
there are other questions, the
achievements in other domains of string
theory are so extraordinary
that we are compelled to continue
studying this theory. But just to answer
Mateo's question, what would cause me to
give up? Here's what would cause me to
give up.
If we find a mathematical inconsistency
within the equations of string theory.
If we find that there is an insoluble
mathematical collision between the
mathematical ingredients necessary for
the theory to function, that's the point
where we would be forced any rational
string theorist would be forced to say,
"Uh,
we have to give this up." Now, I gave a
little grimace here, and if I could roll
back time, I would take that back
because my true feeling
and I'm really being serious here. My
true feeling is
if some young kid,
I don't know, someone watching here in
the next few years
gets into string theory and finds that
mathematical flaw, I would bow down
to that esteemed researcher.
Because I don't care about string theory
per se.
I care about making progress toward
truth.
And so far as we can tell, string theory
has all the makings to take us in the
direction of truth.
If, however, somebody were to find a
fatal flaw in the equations, fantastic.
We would throw string theory away at
that point, and gleefully, well, that's
perhaps too strong a word, move on to
other ideas. We are nowhere near that
place at the moment, quite the contrary.
Anybody who knows anything about the
history of string theory knows that
there have been mathematical miracle
after mathematical miracle showing that
the equations fit together in such a
tight-knit manner, with such graceful
elegance, that you are compelled to
press on with a theory that after the
first time pushed together gravity and
quantum mechanics. And so, yeah, that
would that would be what it would take.
A deep mathematical flaw,
incommensurable, can't fix it,
unsolvable, absolutely telling us that
the mathematics is self-contradictory.
That's the point where you absolutely
give up.
Instagram question, what aspect of
quantum mechanics is fundamentally
contradicting relativity? Is it just the
collapse of the wave function or
something more? I don't have a name
here, but someone from Instagram. And
no, it's definitely more, much, much
more.
So, the collapse of the wave function is
a real issue with quantum mechanics
itself.
In quantum mechanics, I think at least
some of you in the audience know, you
describe the external reality in terms
of probabilities. Probability of an
electron being here, or here, or here.
And then the question is, when you
actually measure the electron, you
always find it at one location or
another. What happened to the other
possibilities that seem to be inherent
in the quantum mechanical description?
And so, people have talked about this
idea of collapse of the wave function,
or collapse of the probability wave.
When you measure the electron, you find
it here, the wave collapses, and all the
probability comes together and spikes at
the one location where you actually find
the particle. The problem with that idea
is that that spiking, that collapsing of
the wave here and spiking here
contradicts the fundamental equation of
quantum mechanics, the Schrödinger
equation. And moreover, nobody has any
idea how, whether, or if that actually
happens. This is a deep problem with
quantum mechanics itself, nothing to do
with gravity, relativity. The problem
with quantum mechanics and relativity is
really different. And I would frame it
in the following way. Einstein taught us
that the geometry of space and time can
curve. But the way in which the
curvature occurs is very gentle. Even
near a black hole, it's still relatively
gentle curving of space
and time,
except at the center of a black hole.
And the problem is when you bring
quantum mechanics
into the story, quantum mechanics is
anything but gentle, right? Heisenberg
and uncertainty tells us that there's
always a degree of fluctuation, a degree
of uncertainty, a degree of culmination,
these sort of these jitters in the
microscopic structure of the universe.
When you apply that to space,
quantum mechanics and gravity, you need
to bring quantum mechanics to bear on
space, as space is what communicates
gravity, space itself begins to wildly
fluctuate and undulate. And those
undulations in space are so significant
that Einstein's general relativity
simply can't cope. That's really the
heart of the conflict. And so, string
theory and other approaches, I'm not
saying string theory is the only
approach, have tempted to have attempted
to kind of quell
those quantum jitters in the fabric of
space. And that's the basic motivation
for string theory, to put gravity and
quantum mechanics together. I should say
that in more recent times, our view
has begun to shift. There are many who
think of
gravity as somehow, in some secret way,
having quantum mechanics already
embedded inside it.
And rather therefore than trying to
blend gravity and quantum mechanics,
it's more trying to understand how to
pull the quantum ideas out of gravity.
You may have seen one of our programs
with Raphaël Bousso. If you want to know
more about that, you should check out
that program, but he uses this nice
language that
gravity is kind of an oracle.
Gravity knows more things than you would
think it should. In fact, it knows some
things about quantum mechanics. And so,
this is right at the forefront of ideas
that we're developing, but that's really
what the issue is, not just the collapse
of the wave function.
"How can we know?" asked TLM9500.
"How can we know that the universe is 13
billion years old when we can't see more
than a specific range?" And And you're
right, we don't know that the universe
writ large is 13.8 billion years old. We
just know that
in our realm, the part that we can see,
the observable universe,
very important to have the word
observable in front, we see that the
observable universe is stretching, we
can see that. Observations.
And we can then use the understanding of
how quickly it's expanding to basically
wind the cosmic film in reverse.
And in reverse, using mathematics, we
can bring the universe smaller, smaller,
smaller as we go back in time, and we
can figure out how far back we have to
wind the film. How far back in time we
have to go for everything to be on top
of everything else.
And that is the 13.8 billion years. But
you're right,
outside of the observable universe,
there could be other universes, we
discussed that a little while ago.
There could be an infinite realm
that is somehow fundamentally different
from the realm that we have direct
access to. It could have been around
much longer. It could have been around
infinitely long for all that we know.
So, you're absolutely right. We can only
talk about the part of the universe that
we can directly see.
Okay.
Instagram question again, is AI and
brain-computer interfaces blur the
boundary between mind and machine?
Do you see the meaning of being human
fundamentally changing or remaining
continuous with what we are today? Well,
look, of course I I have no more
deep insight into this question than
anybody. So, it's really pure
speculation, but, you know,
that's what these sessions are for.
And so, here's my guess.
Right now, we're in a
period where it's a very much us and
them attitude, right? You've got us
humans, you've got the AI. You know, for
the most part, we're getting along
pretty well. We make use of these AI
systems in various ways to try to do
things quicker, better, sharper, faster,
and so forth, even in science.
AI is finding an increasingly broad
footprint in research undertakings,
absolutely.
All the same,
there are those who are worried, and
those worries are not misplaced. I I
don't share those worries deeply, but
sure, I mean, it's definitely a concern
that these AI systems may
find a way to have their own
desires, wishes, choices, the way they
want things to be, and maybe that will
be at odds with
the things that we want. So, then you
get this us versus them.
My suspicion
is that over time, that's going to start
to evaporate. I think we're going to
find ourselves so deeply embedded within
the AI world, and the AI world will find
it so deeply embedded in our world, that
you won't be able to draw a sharp
distinction
between them. I'm not necessarily saying
that, whatever, we're going to plug
these AI systems into our brains, and
maybe we will, right? People are working
on those sorts of things. But I just
envision that we will go forward, and
there'll be some hybridization of some
sort. Don't push me on the details. I
can't really provide any. Some sort of
hybridization where we are just this
thing which has both native intelligence
and artificial intelligence and it's
just integrated together. And at that
point, there's a chance that the us
versus them goes away because we have in
some sense evolved to a different
configuration. Now, some people find
that deeply distressing. You know, to
preserve our humanity. And look, I
I value humanity and and our human
nature as much as anybody. But I guess
I'm open [clears throat] to the
possibility that there could be a a
fruitful union that doesn't need to lead
to disaster or to
the elimination of the very things that
we humans today consider to be our
defining qualities. So, maybe I'm too
optimistic, but that's how I see that
potentially going.
AJ4RI,
is there a connection between the
expansion of space-time dark energy and
the non-zero expectation value of the
Higgs field? Wow, okay. It's a good
question.
So, what is the Higgs field? The Higgs
field, you remember from way back in
2012,
it's this field that suffuses space.
Finally, it was confirmed in 2012, July
4th was the announcement. And this field
is what imparts mass to the elementary
particles. The electron, for instance,
as it tries to kind of not a perfect
analogy, but as it tries to plow through
this Higgs field, it experiences a
resistance.
And that resistance is what you and I
would refer to as the intrinsic mass of
the electron.
Dark energy
is described using very similar language
as the Higgs field. It doesn't impart
mass to particles, but it's still a
field, an energy that is spread
throughout space. So, the natural
question is, is there a relationship
between the Higgs field, which spreads
energy through space, and the dark
energy, which spreads energy through
space? And in principle, there could be.
People have certainly written papers
trying to find connections between these
two things. We believe that the
energy in the Higgs field is
sufficiently small that it doesn't
give a major contribution to the
expansion of space where the dark energy
does, and that's sort of the main
difference between them. But in more
exotic theories, you don't just have one
Higgs field and some of the mathematics
we write down, you can have multiple
Higgs fields. And so, could it be that
one of those additional Higgs fields
required by some of these other theories
can have a tighter connection to the
dark energy? Sure. And in fact, there
are people who have studied the
possibility that the dark energy might
change in time.
It may not have a fixed value for all
time. And the way that you describe that
mathematically is you use the field
language for the dark energy. So, that
energy that's spread through space is
carried by a field.
And that field could have itself a
dynamics where the value of the field is
like slowly rolling down a hill, getting
smaller and smaller over time or getting
bigger and bigger over time. It could go
either direction. And so, in that case,
you'd be using exactly the same language
of the Higgs field, the field language
as applied to the dark energy. So, yes,
there could be a conceptually a profound
connection between the two of these
things.
Lamb Gratitude Becoming. Oh, I am
Gratitude Becoming. Sorry, my eyes are
the I looks like an L. What do you think
is the most beautiful feature
of our universe?
Most beautiful feature of our universe?
Well,
I think I would say the most beautiful
feature is that it's comprehensible.
Which, as many before me have noted, is
absolutely wondrous.
Right? We we
we take it for granted that when we
study a part of the universe, even the
entire universe, with sufficient
industry, dedication,
creativity, innovation, mathematical
dexterity, experimental prowess, we take
it for granted
that we'll figure it out or we'll make
progress in figuring it out. Because
that's what we have found, right? Isaac
Newton set us on this trajectory.
Although there are others before, of
course, but at least from the
mathematical standpoint, looks out at
the heavens and writes down his law of
gravity that works up there and down
there. Writes down his laws of motion.
Maxwell and Faraday write down equations
and experimental results that describe
electromagnetism and radiation and
light. And Einstein comes along and
starts thinking about all of that and
comes up with special relativity, which
we then confirm through observations and
general relativity and quantum mechanics
comes along and we're able to understand
the microscopic realm where you can do
calculations that predict or describe
the magnetic properties of electrons to
14, 15 decimal places and that agrees
with experiment. We take it for granted
that
the universe is comprehensible, but why
in the world should it, right? I mean,
our brains
evolved for one
purpose, not to do quantum mechanics,
not to do general relativity. Our brains
developed so that we could survive in
the ancestral world.
And why should it be the case that a
brain that's fine-tuned for surviving in
the ancestral environment, getting food
and shelter and social interactions, why
should that brain also be able to figure
out quantum mechanics? Now, there are
things that you can suggest for this.
We're not at a complete loss for this
beautiful quality of the universe.
Evolutionary psychology gives some
insight into these ideas and so forth.
But if you ask me, do I find that
stunning and beautiful? I do. It's a
beautiful fact that this thing called
the human brain
inside this cranial structure
with the most feeble intrinsic
sensations
and features that allow us to access the
world has been able to figure out so
much about the fundamental workings of
reality. That to me is the most amazing
thing.
Persepolis Persepo- Persepolis 8564.
Sorry about that. Why is there a speed
of light limit? Well,
I don't know that there has to be.
Somebody earlier asked about the
possibility of
other universes in which the fundamental
constants of nature might be different.
And you could imagine there's another
universe in which there isn't a speed of
light limit. Maybe there's no limit. I
mean, Isaac Newton didn't think there
was a limit to the speed at which
something could travel. So, it isn't
something that hits you right in the
face when you start to think about the
nature of reality. Now, in our universe,
it does turn out that there is a speed
of light limit.
And this emerges
from Einstein's special relativity.
And special relativity appears to work,
right? The math and the observations,
they agree
fantastically. And within that
mathematics, you can deduce that there
is a limit to the speed that any
material object can travel. Any material
object that starts off traveling slower
than the speed of light can be sped up
to near the speed of light. As you do
so,
the intrinsic heft, the resistance to
motion that that object exerts grows
larger. And so, if you want to go faster
and faster, you have to push it harder
and harder. And when you get right up
near the speed of light, it would
require an infinite push
to get the object to go any faster
still. So, concretely,
that's why you can't speed an object up
to and beyond the speed of light. But
did it have to be that way? No. You
could imagine a reality where that is
not the case.
Is it ever possible to conclusively 100%
know what is beyond our universe?
I won't try to pronounce this name
because I will get it wrong. No, we
can't, right? The only thing that you
can ever know are things that you can
directly test or measure. I mean, there
theoretical reasons for anticipating
that kind of what we see in our universe
is very similar to what we would see if
we were at the edge of our observable
universe and some of looking looking
beyond. But you know,
it could be the Truman Show, right? It
could be that, you know, we're in this
realm and if you were to break through
the edge of our realm, maybe you'd find
yourself in a radically different realm.
Now, that is a fanciful idea. There's no
reason to take that idea seriously, but
is it logically possible? Yeah.
Absolutely. Uh
M411EO,
what do you think is the biggest
conceptual blind spot in string theory?
Is it possible that the framework is so
mathematically rich that it's obscuring
a simpler underlying
idea? Sure. I mean,
we've seen it we've seen it before. I
mean, even with
things that we
understand and understood. I mean, when
when James Clerk Maxwell wrote down the
initial equations of electromagnetism,
it was like 20 complex equations that
now we can summarize in a very compact
form, usually with four equations or one
equation depending on how powerful the
notation that you use. And that's a case
where, you know, over time, you find a
simplified way of
articulating your insights. But could it
be that with string theory that we're at
an even earlier stage? That we're simply
missing the fundamental idea. Yeah,
look,
if you ask me why that might be, well,
look, it can always be the case, but
string theory was kind of discovered by
accident. Anyone again who knows the
history knows that it was,
you know, way back in the 1960s that
people were studying data from particle
colliders
and noticed a certain property of the
data
that they surprisingly were able to
represent mathematically in a very
simple equation.
They didn't know why that equation
worked, but it did. And then others came
along, including for instance Lenny
Susskind, who I'm going to be doing a a
live conversation with him in the next
few weeks, so watch out for that one.
Should be fun. Lenny Susskind looked at
that mathematical formula, this is way
back in the 1970s,
and he said, "Wait a second, I know what
that formula is really describing. It's
describing the vibrations of a filament,
vibrations of a string, string theory."
And then people studied string theory
more and more and found it had
remarkable properties well beyond that
initial formula that was motivated by
data emerging from strong interactions,
strong nuclear interactions that were
governing the properties of particle
collisions at these powerful colliders.
And so, it sort of fell into our lap or
into Lenny Susskind's lap, you know,
from this mathematical
articulation of data.
And so, we've been piecing together the
theory ever since. And so, could it be
that there's a far more
potent, powerful,
elegant,
unique description of these ideas that
has a radically different starting
point, not the one that we started from
accidentally? Sure. And could that
reveal things that current ideas have
missed? Yeah, yeah. Now look, we haven't
found that idea, but, you know, maybe
maybe it's not far away until we will
get there.
All right, hello Dr. Green. I hope you
are doing well. Thank you very much,
Elizabeth 8659. I've always heard that
time dilation slows time. Is there
something that speeds up time? Do
gravitational waves do both, slow speed
slow and speed up time? So, so you're
right. When you
take a course in special relativity,
you talk about this idea that a clock
that you are looking at that's moving
relative to you, time will tick off more
slowly on that clock.
Time dilation. And you also learn that
the person who is carrying that clock,
they look back at you, and from their
perspective, you're the one that's
moving in the opposite direction. And
they look at your clock and they say
that your clock is ticking off time more
slowly, time dilation. Again, it's
always the slowing
of time. Now let me note two things.
Number one,
whenever you talk about this idea of
time and the relative rate at which it
passes, it is always relative, one clock
relative to another. So, it's never sort
of intrinsically that time is slowing or
speeding, to get into your question.
It's rather relative to a another clock.
And that becomes all the more important
when we graduate from special relativity
to general relativity. Because as I
mentioned before, if your companion now
takes that clock and goes near the edge
of a black hole and you're far from the
black hole,
their clock will tick off time more
slowly because they're experiencing a
stronger gravitational pull. Yours
is no longer in a symmetric
relationship. They can't look at your
clock and say your clock is going slow
for the same reason because your
environment does not include the black
hole, which is far away.
And so, you will say that their clock
goes slow, but they will say that your
clock goes fast.
So, that's the sense. It's not that time
is speeding up per se, but relative to
the person, say at the black hole, a
clock that's far away from the black
hole is ticking off time more quickly.
And you may have
seen this, you know, there are various
stories that make use of. Even I have a
story that makes use of this a parable
called Icarus at the edge of time that
actually working on a on a version of
that right now, but more in the
Hollywood spirit, there's a film
called Interstellar, which I suspect
many of you have seen. And you may
recall that there is a scene in that
film where two of the main characters, I
think it was Matthew McConaughey and
Hathaway, if I remember correctly, they
go near a black hole, leaving their
mothership further away from the black
hole. And they don't spend that much
time near the black hole.
I don't know, an hour, 4 hours,
something like that. Then they come back
to the mothership and their their
companion, their crewmate, has aged like
23 years
because the crewmate's clock has gone
fast relative to theirs.
That crewmate didn't feel those 23 years
fly by. It's not like it was speeding up
for the crewmate because everything is
time as it always is. It's always the
time that you experience. But relative
to the clock near the black hole, which
is ticking off time slowly, relative to
that, the clock on the ship is going
fast. And that's why so many more years
have gone by on the ship.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Okay, what else do we have?
What is the difference, Archibn
asks, between dark matter and
antimatter? Well,
the difference should be thought of in
the following way.
For every piece of matter in the world,
we believe there is an antimatter
partner. So, for the electron, which has
a negative electric charge, there's a
positron, which has positive electric
charge. For the proton, there's the
antiproton, and so forth. You know, even
for for atoms, in principle, you've got
hydrogen and antihydrogen made up of the
antiparticles. And this is a basic
feature that comes out of quantum
mechanics, that for every species of
particle, there should be an antimatter
version of that. And this is true of our
understanding of the particles make up
the world. Dark matter
is introduced for a very different
purpose. Number one, we don't know if
dark matter is real. Antimatter,
absolutely real. But dark matter was
introduced because
people who have been studying
the motions of galaxies,
the way the galaxies rotate and the way
clusters of galaxies move, realized that
there's not enough
matter that we can see in space to
account for the amount of gravity
required to yield the kind of motion
that we see. And analogy that I like to
use is if you have a a bicycle wheel and
it's wet. As it spins, water droplets
fly off because there's not enough
surface tension to hold the water on the
surface of the wheel. Similarly, as a
galaxy spins, the galaxies, some of them
are spinning so quickly that stars
should be flung outward. And yet they're
not.
And so, we hypothesize
that there is additional matter that we
don't see, hence dark matter, invisible
matter, that is supplying the additional
gravitational pull that keeps those
stars from flying off, much as the water
droplets do fly off of the spinning
wheel. And so, we don't know if dark
matter is real. It's an indirect quality
that we think should be the best
explanation that we have at the moment.
There are many candidates that theorists
like me have put forward for what the
dark matter might be constituted of, the
kinds of particles. But you see how the
motivation for dark matter is to make
sense of certain very specific
observations, whereas antimatter is a
general feature that comes out of our
theories and has been confirmed by
observation.
All right.
How does bent time make gravity?
moonpie.studio
asks. Yeah, I mean,
I wish I could give you a deeper
explanation than the one that I gave you
before. It's basically the fact that
when you look at the mathematical
equations, the trajectories that objects
naturally follow are toward regions of
space where time elapses more slowly
than it does in the region from which
they are originating. Now you could say,
"Why is that?" And frankly, no matter
what answer I give you, you could say,
"Well, why that? Why that?" You know,
and this is the kind of sequence of whys
that, you know, we are familiar with
from young kids. And it's the scientists
who maintain that why why why urge to
have a deeper understanding that pushes
the frontiers of science. But according
to Albert Einstein, if you posit that
this is the description of gravity, you
can then make predictions for the
external world, and the predictions
work. So, in the end of the day, our
best explanation for why gravity can be
described in terms of warped or as you
call it bent time is
when you do so, you make predictions for
the motions of things in the heavens
that are borne out to fantastic
accuracy. But why is gravity described
in terms of warped time? Why is the
general theory of relativity the right
description of the world?
Don't know.
Okay, how can you tell the age of the
universe if time flows at different pace
under different conditions within it?
If you observe someone Yeah, good. So,
yeah. So, I'm I made reference to the
answer to this earlier, but I'll just be
explicit about it now. When we talk
about the age of the universe, we're not
talking about the age on every single
clock that might have been in any
environment undergoing any motion,
experience any gravitational field from
the beginning of time. No. We are
talking about a very specific set of
clocks,
which are the ones that are in a region
that experiences the overall average
mass energy influence within the
universe. And because the large-scale
structure of the universe is basically
homogeneous, if you're experiencing the
average, then you are experiencing that
average in exactly the same way here and
there and over there and so forth. And
it's those clocks moving with the
overall flow of the expansion of space
and feeling that average amount of mass
energy in the universe, those
are the clocks on which we talk about
the age of the universe.
All right.
A Facebook question.
Given
the landscape problem in string theory,
what is the most promising route toward
contain obtaining unique testable
low-energy predictions? So, Isaac from
Facebook asked this question, and you're
putting your finger
on one of the
challenges, but also one of the
opportunities within string theory. So,
look,
when I was a graduate student, what was
the dream? The dream was that the
equations of string theory would predict
a unique universe.
We would look at those unique
properties, compare them to the
properties that we measure through
experiment and observation, and if
there's a match,
fantastic. If there's not a match, it
means the string theory is wrong. That
was the image.
We're far from that image now because
clever string theorists and clever
mathematicians and clever physicists
have studied the mathematics of string
theory
and found that it doesn't yield, as far
as we can tell as of today, a unique
universe. It allows for many universes
with many different properties. And so,
it's harder to find observational or
experimental signatures when there isn't
a unique set of such signatures that
emerges from the mathematics. But I have
to stress,
this flexibility that I just described
in string theory is not intrinsic to
string theory.
The standard model of particle physics,
which is lauded as the most precise
and wondrous creation of fundamental
physics, able to describe all of the
known particles,
predicted the Higgs particle,
discovered, and so forth. The
fundamental equation or the rubric
within which the standard model lives is
called quantum field theory. The
standard model is a very specific
quantum field theory. Certain fields and
certain
interactions between those fields is
what defines the standard model. But
there are infinitely many different
quantum field theories, and there are
infinitely many different choices for
the interacting strengths between
the fields themselves. Even the standard
model of particle physics is just one of
an infinite number
of such formulations that can be written
down.
So, then how does the standard model
make predictions? Well, what we do is we
use observations
to limit the particular quantum field
theories that we consider to be relevant
to our world.
And so, we use data to help pick out
the specific quantum field theory, and
ultimately it derives us to the standard
model of particle physics. So, the same
idea in principle could happen in string
theory.
Using data, we could be able to limit
our focus to very specific incarnations
of physics within string theory. Now,
that trajectory from the data to
constraining the theory is much more
difficult in string theory than it is in
quantum field theory.
And so, we haven't made as much progress
in doing that.
But anybody who tells you
that the fundamental problem is that
string theory gives rise to all sorts of
possible universes, the same is true of
the framework of quantum field theory.
And so, this is not an unfamiliar
challenge. It's harder to deal with in
string theory, but it's exactly the same
kind of issue that you face. So, don't
be misled into thinking that this is
some fundamental failure
of string theory. It's a fundamental
failure of any theory that we've ever
written down, even Newton's theory of
gravity
has in it a certain number called G, the
universal gravitational constant. It's
one particular number, but in principle,
theoretically, it could have any value.
And we nail down to one through
observations that limit the choice of
that value. We don't have a theory that
comes to us so unique that it simply
describes everything in the external
world. You don't need to use observation
or experiment to winnow down the
possibilities. And so, the hope is that
as we understand string theory better,
we'll be able to winnow down the
possibilities in a similar way, and at
some point maybe we'll have one string
theoretic universe of the many that's
able to describe the observations that
we make in the experiments that we
undertake.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Okay, Dr. Greene, as far as we know,
general relativity relies on the
assumption that spacetime was a long
question. Spacetime is a smooth
continuous manifold in string theory
Planck scale physically meaningful What
precise mathematical role plays a
manifold
Okay. So, the question is, does string
theory, which incorporates quantum
mechanics Oh, I should say who asked
this question. Uh
Suraj. Oh, another World Science
Scholar. Good question, Suraj. You know,
string theory, which incorporates
quantum mechanics into general
relativity, does that change the
mathematical way that we think about
spacetime? Einstein
was
masterful
at going to the math library with
guidance of some of his friends and
picking out the right math books
written, you know, in the 1800s, the
books on so-called differential
geometry, and he took those math books
and found that the math was exactly what
he needed to formulate his general
theory of relativity. So, he had the
math to describe warps and curves in
space. That's what differential geometry
is. When string theory comes along, does
it change that picture? It does. It
introduces what we call quantum
geometry, right? It's not a particularly
creative name. Including quantum
mechanics to differential geometry
called quantum geometry. And we've
already over the years found startling
new features of quantum geometry
relative to the previous classical
geometry. Some of the work that I've
been involved with over the years, we
found, for instance, that the fabric of
space can tear apart in string theory
and then repair itself in a way that
differential geometry would not allow.
Einstein would not think it's possible,
but in quantum geometry, the string
theoretic and quantum mechanical
processes allow space to rip and
reconnect in a way that fundamentally
changes what's known as its topology,
its basic foundational shape. And there
are many other things that people have
found over the years, too. So, yes,
quantum mechanics does change our
understanding of geometry.
All right, let's see what we got here.
If some events, AdamZ5S8D
asks, if some events have no definite
time order according to Einstein,
how do you think about this, given that
time is supposed to order events? It
seems like an impossible situation. And
AdamZ 5S8D,
you would be right. It would be an
impossible situation if the order of
events that are in a causal connected
stance were to change. Cuz we all know
that there's something called causality,
cause and effect, right? I do something,
right? I throw a ball, it hits a wall,
and the fact that the ball hit the wall,
that was caused by my hand, and
therefore, it had better be the case
that the throwing of the ball always
precedes the ball hitting the wall. And
indeed, in special relativity, in
general relativity, that kind of
causality is preserved.
What is not preserved, if two events
happen,
but they're not causally connected,
right?
For instance, if I were to snap my
fingers simultaneously from my
perspective,
right? In my frame of reference, my left
and my right hand snapped at exactly the
same moment. A theorist talking to you,
of course, right? But if somebody was
moving relative to me in one direction
or another,
they would come to a different
conclusion. They would say that either
this
thumb snapped or this thumb snapped
first. They would not agree on
simultaneity. They would change the
order of the events. And those two
individuals moving in opposite
directions would come to a different
conclusion regarding which event
happened first. Does that mess things
up? That's your question, and it doesn't
because these two events are not
causally related. It's not that they
snapping of my right hand caused the
snapping of my left. Maybe reversed
relative to you, I don't know. It's not
the snapping of one finger caused the
snapping of the other. They're
independent events. And so if two events
are not causally connected, their order
doesn't matter as much. It's interesting
that their order can be changed, but it
doesn't mess up the requisite ordering
that your question assumed is necessary
to have a coherent description of world.
The only ordering that needs to
preserved is the ordering associated
with causally connected events.
That's
the answer to your question.
Okay, if one spaceship is going so at yo
yo boy, yo triple b o y.
Oh, you wanted your handle there to be a
palindrome. I get it. If one spaceship
is going at 65% the speed of light,
another is going in the opposite
direction at 65% the speed of light,
what would the relative speed of one to
the other be cuz it's going to be faster
than the speed of light, and you're
right, it is faster than the speed of
light, right? You know, if I got two of
these guys closing in, 65% 65% the speed
of light, yeah. This distance is
shrinking at 130% of the speed of light,
faster than the speed of light. You're
like, "Oh my god, what do you mean
faster
than the speed of light?"
Well,
what Einstein taught us is if you're
looking at an object, no object can go
through space at a speed faster than the
speed of light. But in this case, there
is no one object traveling greater than
the speed of light. It's simply this
concept of the distance between them
getting smaller at a rate that's faster
than the speed of light, but there's no
object
that actually
is traveling faster than the speed of
light. But then you say to me, "Well,
okay.
Let me jump into the perspective of
somebody on this ship here. Then this
person would say that this guy is
closing in at 130% the speed of light,
and that's not the case."
That's not the case. When you actually
go into one of the ships and look at the
other ship, Einstein tells you how to
get the speed of that ship. And what you
do is normally you'd say, "Well, you
know, I just take, you know, if I'm
looking at the situation and this is V1
and this is V2, right?" And it's V1 plus
V2. You say it's V1 plus V2. But if you
jump into this guy's point of view, it's
not V1 plus V2.
It's V1 plus V2
divided by
1 plus V1 times V2 divided by C squared.
That's the relativistic velocity
addition formula. And if you look at
that formula, V1 plus V2 divided by 1
plus V1 times V2 divided by C squared,
that formula ensures that that result is
always less than the speed of light. You
cut down the V1 by V2 by something in
the denominator that ensures that the
speed is seen by the person in any ship
relative to the other ship is always
less than the speed of light.
Okay. Hello from Bolivia.
Nask
Semler.
I would like to know how Albert
Einstein's theory of relativity has been
applied in the journey of the Artemis 2
crew. A lot of people want to know. I
like this. A lot of people want to
connect
fundamental physics to the Artemis
mission, which by the way, what time is
it? Oh, you still got a little time. The
splashdown is about 2 hours 2 hours and
change. I don't think I'm going to take
you right through to the splashdown. I
don't think I can last that long.
But the question of is general
relativity playing a role in the Artemis
2 mission? You know, not really. You
know, it is the fact that
when you go up into space and experience
gravity that's far less than what we
experience here on the surface of the
Earth, then time for you will elapse
more quickly. It's example of the black
hole scenario where like near the
gravity near the black hole like Matthew
McConaughey and Hathaway. And so the
ship, which is like their crew member
left on the mothership, is experiencing
less gravity at least during part of
their journey, and so time will elapse
more slowly. And so yes, you know,
they're moving fast, not really near the
speed of light, but sort of faster than
us. That also affects the passage of
time. And so yes, when the astronauts
come back, we could sit down and do a
calculation to determine the amount of
time that their bodies aged relative to
the amount of time that our bodies aged
here on Earth. And those numbers will be
different.
But it'll also be tiny. You know,
whatever, I a billionth of a second or
something like that. You know, I had a
conversation
with oh, you know, this the astronaut
My god, someone again can tell me the
chat, you know, his his He and his
brother, they're twins. Uh Scott, I
don't
senior moment here. I can't quite figure
out it. I can't remember the name. But
you know, there were the twin brothers.
You know, one is, you know, in in in the
government, one of you know, astronaut.
And you know, they like to joke that,
you know, because one of them was in
space for a certain amount of time
relative to the other, then their
relative age has shifted compared to the
time difference when they were born. But
you know, it's all silliness because the
effects of relativity, they just don't
come into play in situations where there
isn't sufficiently strong gravity or
speeds near the speed of light. So yes,
I wish we could say general relativity
is the key to what's going on, but it's
really Newtonian gravity that is the
dominant thing that is dictating the
physics.
Okay, what else do we see?
Do you see any connection, asks Mr.
Hoots56.
Do you see any connection between dark
energy, dark matter, and dimensions
beyond which we thus far can perceive?
That's a really interesting question.
I've actually worked on that question.
One way of thinking about it is I
mentioned that dark energy is
energy that is uniformly suffused
through space.
Now, if you think about extra
dimensions,
in most In fact, let me just give you an
example that you can sort of have in
mind for extra dimensions. In fact, let
me use this cup.
Fortunately, I've got to drain it.
So you see how this cup has two
dimensions, right? You've got this
dimension along the cup, right? And you
got this dimension which wraps around
the cup, this sort of circular dimension
and this long dimension. But now imagine
that this cup, the fact that it flares
is irrelevant. Imagine this cup is
really big, right? You know, and so you
have this long linear direction,
and you have this smaller curled up
direction. Now imagine that you also not
only make the cup really long, but you
make it really skinny.
Then you have a situation where at every
point along the line, there's a little
tiny tiny circle that's wrapped around
it.
Which means if this long dimension
is a stand-in for the three dimensions
that you and I can perceive with our
eyes cuz it's big, it's long, we can see
it. And if this circular dimension is a
stand-in for the extra dimensions,
especially if it's really tiny, that we
can't perceive because it's so tiny,
curled up to such small size. Notice the
following. If you want to have some
uniform energy along these dimensions,
one way to do it is to ensure that
there's some energy embedded within each
of the circular dimensions. So if each
of the extra dimensions carries energy,
that energy will be uniformly
distributed along the long dimensions,
the dimensions that we inhabit.
And so together with a physicist who you
may have read some of her wonderful
books,
Janna Levin, some years ago,
I think there's somebody else on the
paper, too, but I can't recall. Sorry if
I'm leaving someone out. We did some
calculations that maybe the so-called
Casimir energy,
which you may recall is the energy just
from quantum undulations in space, maybe
the Casimir energy in a curled up
dimension spread along a long dimension,
maybe that could provide the dark energy
that we invoke to explain the
accelerated expansion of space. And it's
it's a beautiful idea. I mean, I love
that idea.
I mean, how
economical
to start with a theory that has extra
dimensions, and as you know, string
theory requires it. There are other
approaches, Kaluza-Klein theory requires
it. And if the dark energy were a
natural consequence of extra dimensions,
you know, that's that's a beautiful
coming together exactly as the the
questioner asked.
When we did the calculations, it's not
impossible for this idea to work, but
it's pretty unnatural.
It's very hard to get the right amount
of dark energy. It's very hard to
stabilize the extra dimensions so they
themselves don't start to grow or
contract. So it's the execution
that makes it hard to really have any
confidence that it's the right way to
go, but it's a it's a beautiful
suggestion
from the audience that yes, there could
in principle be a connection between
dark energy and the extra dimensions.
Now, this is a different cup of water.
But yes, I like that idea a lot.
Okay, so
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; um
if energy cannot be created or
destroyed, asks Pendrimo,
if energy can't be created or destroyed,
where does the energy in a photon go
when it's cos mologically red-shifted,
right? So, we often That's a beautiful
question, right? So, we talk about
red-shift, right? I discussed it earlier
in connection to black holes, right? We
said that black holes emit Hawking
radiation. These photons, which are
little particles of light, they travel
away from the black hole and they get
red-shifted. They get red-shifted
because they're fighting against the the
gravity of the black hole. When they
fight against the gravity, their
wavelengths get stretched out. Also,
there's cosmological red-shift as the
universe stretches, right? Also,
photons get spread out. Their wavelength
gets larger, pushed more toward the red.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Now, energy, according to quantum
mechanics,
is something that is inversely
proportional to wavelength. You may
recall this famous formula that Max
Planck wrote down in 1900, E = H new. H
is Planck's constant, new is frequency.
Frequency is basically the inverse of
wavelength, C, speed of light divided by
wavelength. So, bottom line, as the
questioner rightly asks, if wavelength
gets larger, energy gets smaller.
Where's the energy gone? The questioner
rightly asks. Have we lost the energy of
the photon? And we don't believe we have
lost the energy for the photon.
The answer is basically the same answer
to the following analogous question. If
I have a baseball
and I throw it up into the air,
the baseball goes slower and slower and
slower, which means its kinetic energy
is getting smaller and smaller and
smaller.
Where does the energy go? The kinetic
energy is getting smaller. Now, any high
school physics student knows the answer
to that. It's not that the energy is
lost. The kinetic energy is not lost.
Instead, it gets turned into
gravitational potential energy,
right? So, the full energy of the
baseball is kinetic plus potential, and
kinetic goes down, potential goes up as
the ball is going higher and higher
upwards. Similarly, as a photon is going
further and further from a black hole,
let's replace the Earth with a black
hole. As the photon is going up, yes,
its energy from its wavelength is
getting smaller, but that's going into,
we believe, the potential energy, again,
the gravitational potential energy
because it is the gravity of the black
hole that is pulling on the photon
causing the wavelength to stretch just
as gravity is pulling on the baseball.
So, it's actually the same basic idea.
It's the energy interchange between
different kinds of energy, energy
associated with the photon itself and
the associated energy for gravity
itself.
Okay, what else do we have here? Um
uh if I
uh
Oh, here's one from
at JT009GV.
Wow, very creative names.
In the framework of infinite scenarios
in the universe, does a single scenario
repeat itself infinitely many times,
and would that be considered the same
scenario or different scenarios that are
yet identical? So, what the questioner
is asking is,
if space goes on infinitely far, there's
a beautiful
theorem you can pretty much prove
using the most basic qualities of
physics and mathematics,
that the reality that we inhabit has to
be out there someplace repeated.
Yeah, I mean, how can you prove
something like that? Here, let me just
give you the basic proof. It's it's so
straightforward. So,
in any finite region of space,
it's not hard to prove using basic
physics and basic quantum mechanics, and
it's not unreasonable even just to
intuit it, that there are only finitely
many different arrangements
of the particles in that region.
Finitely many different places that they
could be and speeds that they could
have. You do need some quantum mechanics
to really establish that fact. But let's
take that fact as a given. Any finite
region, finite arrangement of particles.
Now, if space goes on infinitely far,
and let's assume, assumption, that there
are particles pretty much uniformly
spread throughout this large infinite
expanse, well, in every region of that
infinite expanse that's roughly the size
of our region, there are also only
finitely many arrangements of the
particles. If space goes on infinitely
far, they can't all be different. Only
finitely many arrangements. Space goes
on infinitely far, there are infinitely
many chunks the size of ours. It's sort
of like the analogy I love to use is,
start with a deck of cards, right? The
deck of cards is some particular order,
right? You start to shuffle the deck,
you get a new order. Shuffle again, a
new order. Sooner or later, you've got
to get the same order because there are
only finitely many different orders of
the cards in the deck. And if you
shuffle the cards infinitely many times
or more than the number of distinct
configurations of the cards, you have to
get a repeat. Similarly, you've got to
get a repeat of the particle
configuration that is holding in our
realm. Now, if the particle
configuration repeats,
that means reality as we know it
repeats. I am a collection of particles
in some arrangement, as are you, as is
everything in the world around us. And
if the particle arrangement repeats,
then you repeat, then I repeat, and so
forth. In fact, it's even easier to have
a near miss, an almost complete
identical repeat, right? That's like
shuffling the cards and almost getting
the identical order with which you
began. It's easier, right? So, it's even
easier that there are realities out
there that are similar to ours, but not
exactly identical. So, the questioner is
asking, if there are these other copies
of us out there, and truly, if space
goes on infinitely far,
there'll be infinitely many copies.
They'll be widely spread out, but they
have to be there. Are those different
realities? And I think they are. I think
they are different realities, right?
Because they are located in a different
realm of the world, a different realm of
reality. They're far away from us.
And so, it's a mind-bogglingly strange
idea, but it's one that naturally
emerges. Now, look, there are a bunch of
assumptions. I assume that space goes on
infinitely far, maybe it doesn't.
I assume that particles are pretty much
spread out, and it's the same particles
spread Maybe physics changes out there,
and there are different species of
particles, or maybe there's nothing.
Maybe you go out of our realm and you go
sufficiently far, there's nothing out
there. It's total darkness, total
blackness. Is that possible? Yeah,
that's possible, too. But
under the mildest assumptions
that space goes on infinitely far,
there's no boundary, no edge, it doesn't
sort of curl back on itself like the
surface of the Earth, and there are
particles out there,
that [snorts] is where we go, which is a
strange strange conclusion.
Okay, what else do we have here?
Let's see, um
Oh, goodness. Um
if we can never see
an object fall into a black hole,
asks Waiting for Godot,
perfect question for at Waiting for
Godot.
Or Waiting for Girdle. I'm sorry. I
thought it was Waiting for Godot. That
would have been perfect. Waiting for
Girdle, eh, that's sort of good, but
it's a little bit different flavor. If
we can never see an object fall into a
black hole, does that mean that when we
see the black holes today, we see them
at the size they were
when they first formed? Holy smokes,
this is a great question. This is uh
This is a tough question. I'm not
I'm not sure how far to go with this
question, but I'll give it a shot.
So,
you're absolutely right.
When you have a black hole, right?
Naively, we say that the size of the
black hole
is dependent upon how much matter fell
in when the black hole was created. In
fact, there is this formula. I gave it
earlier. You know, that the radius of
the black hole is proportional to its
mass.
So, if more mass falls in to the black
hole, you'd say the black hole should
get bigger, right? Because of the exact
same reasoning.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; On the other hand, I also said to you
that
when something falls toward a black
hole, it goes slower
and slower because time slows down.
And indeed, if you follow this in more
detail, the object gets kind of spread
around the edge of the black hole, and
as it gets right to the event horizon of
the black hole,
according to the equations, the object
freezes. It stops.
Slower, slower, slower, stops right at
the edge. So, you never actually see it
go over the edge. So, if you never see
it go over the edge, do you ever see the
black hole get any bigger?
Oh, now we're in an interesting place
here. How does this work?
Well, there's this long-standing
confusion and insight and revelation
about black holes. Um
a lot of it was due to Roger Penrose. It
really helped us to think about black
holes. When you talk about black holes,
you're really in talking about the
entirety of space-time.
Not all of space,
but all of space-time. That includes the
far future.
And so when you have a black hole
solution, the location of the event
horizon really depends upon the far
future. Why is that? Well, because the
very definition of the event horizon
is the location
from which light cannot travel
to spatial infinity given infinite
amount of time. So you need to know the
trajectory of light beams infinitely far
into the future to really even talk
about the event horizon of a black hole.
Which means, weirdly enough when you
study this in more detail,
if you have a star or a spherical cloud
of matter that's collapsing into a black
hole,
the event horizon of the black hole, it
doesn't just suddenly form when the
matter is sufficiently close in. The
event horizon actually begins to form as
the matter is falling inward and it kind
of expands out to meet
the infalling
matter.
And so some people use the language
teleology,
that somehow
the
space-time of a black hole
knows about the far, far
future. And that makes sense because as
I mentioned, the definition of the event
horizon, the edge of a black hole, you
define it in terms of the far, far
future.
And so to really answer your question,
you have to note that as matter is
falling in, the horizon is already
accommodating that matter, assuming that
the matter does make it to the black
hole and thereby affects the trajectory
of light beams infinitely far into the
future. I don't think I should probably
go any further than this. This is deep
and wondrous stuff, but you can you can
find this discussed, you know, in the
textbooks in general relativity. And so
wonderfully confusing and rich fact that
black holes, at least in their pristine
description, know about the entirety of
space and time.
All right, what have we got coming up
here?
Do the equations of string theory have a
component that describes its impact on
the passage of time similar to general
relativity? And @JosephPowell
117625. The answer is absolutely yes.
And and this is really one of the claims
to fame of string theory.
I mentioned, I don't know
@JosephPowell, if you've been with us
for the entire session, but I mentioned
very briefly early on
that string theory
was discovered by accident. People
studying data from particle colliders
and
from that data guessed a formula which
then people realized described the
motion of a vibrating string.
Subsequent analysis of the equations of
string theory revealed, staring us in
the face,
Einstein's equations of general
relativity. You don't put general
relativity
into string theory.
General relativity emerges
from the motion of a vibrating string.
That is amazing. And that's wondrous and
that's beautiful. And I hope that gives
you, I don't know, one of those like
chills or tingles up your spine, right?
Albert Einstein spent 10 long years
between roughly 1905 and 1915
carefully developing the mathematics of
general relativity, right?
String theory, starting from something
that has nothing to do with gravity,
describes data at these particle
colliders, developed the mathematics,
and then within the math, you see the
equation that Einstein presented to the
Prussian Academy on November 25th of
1915.
It emerges.
When you see something like that as a
theorist,
that's a once-in-a-lifetime moment. I'm
serious [clears throat] now. I mean,
people wonder why we have gotten so
excited about string theory and why
we've stayed with it, just join me
in thinking about what I just described.
The greatest thinker, at least
scientifically speaking, that our
species has ever produced, Albert
Einstein, spends 10 years and comes to
the equations of general relativity,
right? Say it with me. R mu nu minus a
half g mu nu R equals 8 pi G c T mu nu
over c to the fourth, right?
That equation
then emerges
unbidden
from the equations of string theory.
And you're like, wow.
And so of course then the answer to your
question is, yeah. Anything that general
relativity predicts, string theory
predicts. Because the equations of
general relativity emerge from string
theory. In fact, more than that,
the equations
of string theory include corrections
to Einstein's equations that only really
come into play in the most extreme of
environments. In fact, I had a
had a high school student years ago. In
fact, just coincidentally, like two or
three months ago, I was entering
the lobby of my building here in New
York and she was coming out of the
elevator because she had been subletting
a an apartment in the building. It was a
wonderful. I hadn't seen her in
whatever, 15, 20 years. But she was
about the smartest
high school kid I've ever encountered. I
think she may have gone to Stuyvesant
High School. I don't I'm not going to
give her a name. Don't want to embarrass
her.
But she did a calculation
with me for a high school science
project. I forget exactly what it was
for, where she calculated the
corrections to the bending of starlight,
which is the key triumph of general
relativity. But the new term that string
theory gives, the corrections to
Einstein's equation give a correction to
that bending and she calculated that
bending. Of course, it's tiny. I don't
remember the answer, but probably like
one part in 10 to the 90th or something.
You know, not something that you're ever
going to observe, but it's just so
beautiful.
String theory gives Einstein's equations
plus new corrections that allow you to
update the very predictions that
Einstein put forward to test the general
theory of relativity. I mean, you
as they say, you can't you can't make
this stuff up. You can't write this
stuff.
And it makes you feel that the universe
is telling you something when this kind
of a development takes place. So yeah,
that's that's where the excitement comes
from.
If you could design one experiment,
Moon Pie Studio asks,
with unlimited budget, unlimited
technology, but it has to be physically
possible to resolve the deepest open
question in fundamental physics,
what would it be? Well, look, I mean,
since we're talking about string theory,
I'll stay there.
You know, in principle,
if uh
if you had a large enough collider
and you're kind of giving me infinite
leeway as long as I'm not contradicting
some fundamental law of physics. If you
have a large enough collider, you could
have arbitrarily high energies. Yeah, I
mean, I guess you're going to start to
create black holes and
yeah, don't hold me to all the details
here. But if you had a sufficiently
powerful collider
and you were able to collide particles
with energies near the so-called Planck
energy,
you should begin to see the effects of
string theory. So if you want to answer
whether string theory is the right
description, yeah, an arbitrarily large
particle collider would certainly be one
way of going about it. So it's just to
say,
when people say that string theory is
not testable,
what they really mean is that string
theory is not testable with any kind of
practical piece of equipment with a
practical budget or with a machine that
we could build with today's technology
and so forth. But a question such as was
just asked, if you take away
practicality and allow just the laws of
physics to be the only delimiting factor
in what you can actually do, then yeah,
string theory would be a testable
theory.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Dr. Green, we know from Bekenstein and
Hawking that black hole entropy is
proportional to its event horizon area.
Okay, I'm going pretty deep here.
Uh the question is, let me find it. I've
lost it. How many deep link between
gravity and thermodynamics? In string
theory, you have extra dimensions. Do
the microstates of the extra hidden
dimensions contribute to the entropy of
black holes?
And yeah, that's a that's a great
question, too, right? What Stephen
Hawking did back in 1974
was to answer a a puzzle that really
originated
maybe with John Wheeler and as indicated
in the question, his graduate student
Jacob Bekenstein. Here was the Here was
the question that John Wheeler asked.
John Wheeler was this. And I had I had,
you know, unfortunately he's passed on,
but I had lunch with John Wheeler when I
was writing my first book, The Elegant
Universe.
It was just so amazing.
He
he's the poet philosopher of physics.
He can do the mathematics,
but he has this way of
coming up with seemingly simple thought
experiments that wind up revolutionizing
our understanding. So here's a thought
experiment that he came up with back in
the 1970s. He says, "Look,
here's the thing, this black hole
solution that comes out of Einstein's
equations.
Things fall into a black hole, they're
kind of gone." That was the lore at the
time. So, he said,
"How does this
comport with the second law of
thermodynamics, which says that entropy
is always on the rise. Entropy can't go
down." He said, "Look, what if I have a
cup of tea?" The genteel
Professor Wheeler said, "The hot water
in the hot cup of tea has a lot of
entropy, a lot of disorder. What if I
throw my cup of tea," he said, "into the
black hole?
The disorder seems to go away. It's
gone, never to come back. Have I thereby
decreased the entropy in a way that
conflicts with the second law of
thermodynamics?"
He asked this question to Jacob
Bekenstein. Bekenstein comes back, I
don't know, weeks, months later and
says, "No, you haven't lost the entropy.
The entropy went into the black hole,
and the black hole responds.
The black hole's event horizon changes
in response to the entropy that went
inside."
And so, if you include the entropy of
the black hole and the entropy of the
cup of the tea the cup of tea, their
total doesn't go down. Sure, the the
outside entropy goes down, but the
inside entropy compensates. That was the
basic idea.
Stephen Hawking then looked at this and
got the radiation that we're talking
about. But the question
What if you do the same thought
experiment in string theory? In string
theory, you've got these extra
dimensions. Do the extra dimensions
themselves have the capacity to hold on
to entropy? And the answer is yes,
absolutely, in principle, yes. And in
fact, you can imagine that the extra
dimensions are bigger,
in which case the black hole is no
longer in four dimensions, it's really
in five space-time dimensions, four four
space and one of time.
And people can write down the black hole
solution in five dimensions. And in
fact, Strominger and Vafa used black
hole solution in five dimensions to gain
insight into the microstates of black
holes. It's a whole 'nother story, but
the point is, if those extra dimensions
are big enough, then they can hold on to
entropy, and the entropy
has to take into account the area, the
volume associated with the extra
dimensions themselves. If you make the
extra dimension smaller and smaller,
then it's harder and harder to excite
fluctuations, degrees of freedom in the
extra dimensions. So, the smaller you
make those dimensions, the higher the
temperature, the higher the energy you
need to actually to excite those degrees
of freedom. So, in that sense, they kind
of decouple in the limit that the extra
dimensions are brought down to the
Planck scale. But in principle, yeah,
the extra dimensions are there. Extra
dimensions do hold on to entropy.
Okay.
I was hoping to ask ask one of our
questioners asked about superluminal
propagation.
I remembered learning from your work
that this might be possible. How does
this work? Yeah, this is
E V Elgar who asked this question. And E
V, you're right. I wrote a paper a
couple years ago.
The result surprised me,
which showed that there are certain
geometrical
contexts
in which you can
have a light beam travel from one point
to another
at a speed that is faster than the speed
of light. So, but wait, if it's a light
beam, how is it faster than the speed of
light? Well, let me give you another
example over here. I wish I had a
pen handy. I should have brought one. It
doesn't matter. But imagine that you
live in this dimension. This one
dimension now is the three dimensions
that we live in.
If you want to send a light beam from
here to here, how do you do it? Well,
you could the simplest thing is just
send the light beam from here to here.
But you can also send the light beam in
a more exotic trajectory, if you think
about it. A light beam that kind of
circles around the extra dimension and
gets here. That seems like the long way.
So, you'd think this is the short way,
and this is the long way.
And therefore, you'd say this signal
should get there first. This signal
should get there second.
It turns out that this
signal that we're talking about here, in
certain circumstances, can get there
first, not second.
It does require that you have certain
ingredients from string theory, like a
membrane on which we live that's itself
moving in these curled-up extra
dimensions. But modulo those details, we
were able to show that in those
circumstances, the beam of light that
goes this way gets there before this
one,
which means that this signal
is going faster than the speed of light
according to observers in our
three-dimensional universe. And in fact,
we found
that the signal
This is crazy. The signal can get
to this location
before it was actually emitted.
It can actually go back in time.
Go back in time.
Now, you might say, "Okay, now
Professor Green's off his noggin. He's
talking nonsense, right? You're going to
ruin causality.
The
basic ideas of relativity are being
violated, but they're actually not." So,
what we found is you can send a signal,
get it here before it was emitted. But
then you say, "What about that person?
Can they send a signal back?" They can,
but it will always get here a little
after it was emitted. So, there's no
undermining physics in terms of being
able to sort of shoot the person before
they send the light beam. So, how was
the light beam ever sent out in the
first place? So, all those time travel
paradoxes
that you may be familiar with from, you
know, Back to the Future or just from
your own readings, all resolved in this
circumstance. But in a universe that has
curled-up dimensions,
you can send signals in a manner that
apparently is faster than the speed of
light.
All right.
Anything left in our list of questions?
If space has energy and the universe is
accelerating, doesn't this violate the
conservation of energy? And this is
Douglas W. Lip channel 5546. Now, well,
first of all, I I have to disabuse you
guys of one thing.
In any region of space, there is a
notion of conservation of energy, and
it's the one that basically you learned
in high school. Some of you learned
about conservation of mass. You know,
it's unfortunate that the instructor
didn't go on to conservation of energy.
But anyway, you've at least encountered
the idea that in a laboratory
environment, there's conservation of
energy. When it comes to the entirety of
the universe,
there actually isn't necessarily a
conservation law globally that tells us
that globally the total amount of energy
always is fixed,
only locally. And so, you shouldn't get
bent out of shape if there's a situation
in which there isn't global conservation
of energy. Now, locally, the way we
describe it is, yeah, when the universe
is expanding, it's again much like the
baseball analogy I gave earlier. That
was for a black hole, but you can apply
it cosmologically. As things move
further apart, right? There's energy
that's pushing them apart. So, you say,
"Well, isn't energy being expended? It's
going down?" Well, no, it's going into
the gravitational energy. Gravity is
what is facilitating the expansion of
the universe, and gravity itself has
energy. And so, again, it's the
interplay between the two that allows
you to avoid any local violations of
conservation of energy.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Greetings, Dr. Green. Imagine if an
observer is looking at our universe from
outside. Would it be like a vibrating
jelly due to gravitational waves? Well,
it not even have to be looking from the
outside, right? We have
gravitational wave detectors within our
universe.
And as you all know, we've detected
ripples in
the fabric of space. Now, we've only
detected them from specific
astrophysical events, right? We've
detected them from
neutron stars vibrate not vibrating,
rotating and slamming into each other,
black holes similarly
rotating around each other and slamming
into each other, giving rise to ripples
in the fabric of space.
What we've not yet detected are, for
instance, ripples in the fabric of space
from the Big Bang, the entirety of the
universe undergoing this rapid expansion
causing the fabric of space uniformly to
have this jittery, vibrating quality
coming from the disturbance of the Big
Bang expansion itself. We hope that we
will detect that from inside our
universe. That would be absolutely
wondrous. Like, one possibility is, you
know, this LISA experiment, the Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna,
that I don't know, people saying the
2030s, maybe.
It'll be out there, you know, these
three satellites forming, whatever,
probably an equilateral triangle I
assume the shape will be and the the
satellites will be able to monitor the
relative separation. So if a
gravitational wave goes by and causes
two to go together or other two to
separate those small differences will be
detectable. That device may be able to
detect ripples in the fabric of space
coming from the Big Bang and so yeah a
jelly-like phenomenon suffusing space
coming from this primordial creation
event. Yeah, you don't need to be
standing on the outside at Pawan Pandey
W4 if an atom
is 99% empty and we are made up of atoms
then are we empty? Well, let me give two
answers.
One is yeah.
You know, in this image that you know,
very classical image of an electron sort
of orbiting around the nucleus and
there's basically empty space
is the dominant quality of the atom then
yeah, we're made of those stuff. So we
would be mostly empty space. So the only
thing I want to
caution you on is that that classical
picture
can be misleading. Most of us
who are steeped in quantum physics
we tend to not think of the electron as
this little planet
orbiting the nucleus the Sun. Rather we
tend to think of the electron described
as this
probability mist this wave function and
that probability wave fills the space.
And so if you use that picture
it's not as empty as the classical image
might lead you to suspect. So basically
atoms are this electron probability
cloud that really extends throughout the
environment. It's a denser in locations
where the electron is more probable.
It's more suffused in regions where the
electron is less likely to be found but
in that sense quantum mechanic kind of
updates that very classical picture.
Hi Dr. Green, will you be tuning into
the Artemis return on Earth? This is our
nearest neighbor. Do you think we'll
ever visit the other planets? And Timini
yeah, and Timini you probably weren't
here at the outset. We started with a
little quick rundown of what the Artemis
mis- mission has accomplished. And
indeed the splashdown is happening I
don't know. I would look at my phone but
I have an incoming call which is taken
off the phone number. It's probably
still a couple hours from now I think.
So no, I'm unlikely myself in this live
stream to turn
to that. In fact, I'm just wondering
since someone just asked, can we bring
up the live feed
from
NASA? I mean, what do we got going on
here?
It's so this is the live feed. It's the
one that just looks like one of the
still images but they don't have
anything in uh
the Artemis craft itself I guess at the
moment. So
I don't know exactly what that is
telling us but um yeah, so not much
interesting happening in the NASA feed
so we can sort of take that off and go
back to ours.
But yeah, those of you who are
interested 8:07 Eastern time
is uh when the splashdown will happen.
And look, we've all got our fingers
crossed. I don't know if you all saw
this article in the New York Times. I
mean, I have not been diligently
following Artemis the way perhaps I I
should have but an interesting article
today raised some questions about the
heat shield.
You know, Artemis 1 apparently when they
examined the heat shield which was what
protects this entry capsule it kind of
had more damage to it than they would
have anticipated
but nevertheless it still protected the
capsule but it does
I don't know. Raises some
raises some
questions especially after the
disastrous that have happened in the
past but at least the article has a
number of NASA scientists saying that
the margin of error is so enormous here
that even if they're not in command of
all the details of the material
response to the fantastically high
temperatures on re-entry that there
isn't any danger. So
we hope they're right. We hope that they
are absolutely right. Okay, um what do
we got here?
Uh
So if measurements of space and time
vary we're asked between observers, how
do the laws of physics remain consistent
and universal across all frames
of reference? Yeah, this is a great
follow-on
to uh question that was asked earlier
which is you know, if the orders of
events can change, how do we maintain a
consistent description of the universe?
This is more general. You know, if the
if the observations of people in
relative motion really differ in terms
of what happened and why it happened and
where it happened and when it happened
how do you have a universal physics? And
and the beautiful thing is that
relativity does not make everything
relative. It makes relative things that
we thought were not relative. Right?
According to Newton duration not
relative. You and I always will agree on
how long it takes for something to
happen, right? Um the uh
uh the the uh the the total energy in a
situation is something that we can
differ on but there's a certain
combination of energy and momentum. E
squared minus P squared is a combination
of things that previously we thought
were invariant that itself remains
invariant even though the pieces that we
thought were unchanging do change.
And so these are the kinds of things,
right? I mean, there's a invariant
interval.
If you take delta T squared minus delta
X squared any observer in the world
regardless of their state of motion will
agree with any other observer on the
world in the square of the duration
minus the square of the spatial
separation
between events.
And so it's not that everything becomes
relative.
It's that the things that we thought
were invariant are not.
But there are new invariants that come
in and replace them and those are the
things that we can absolutely
agree on.
All right, anything else before we wrap
this up? I seem to recall some
interesting questions about
AI
that yeah, so there's an a question that
someone asked earlier the one around my
list about
how is AI going to affect physics
research?
And bottom line is I don't know.
But I will say
that there's a real possibility and
there are people serious people in the
field who I've heard say things like
we've got five years left as theoretical
physicist to really make our mark
because five years from now the AI
systems will be so powerful
that they will be taking the lead in
much of what we do. Do I really believe
that? I you know, I'm not 100% sure I do
but I'll give you one small story.
You know, I was working on a paper not
that long ago with a handful of
colleagues
and it we took a while to get this
result. You can look up this paper. It
has to do with unorientable manifolds as
compactifications.
I'm only giving the details because it's
a really esoteric subject
that involves mathematics that even many
cutting-edge physicists have never
needed. Therefore they don't know it.
And so it took us a while to work this
stuff out.
I then
after we had the result wondered how
long it would take
chat
viewed as a graduate student to get the
result. So I had a conversation with
chat and I really treated it like a
graduate student. Not giving the answer,
right? You don't give the answer to a
graduate student. The whole point is
that you guide the student toward a
direction of research and you hope that
they're able to push forward and and get
an interesting result. And that's really
what I did. A few pointers, a few
suggestions
and within a half an hour chat had the
entire answer.
And I was like, wow.
I've never encountered a graduate
student who could do that and it's
obvious why.
It would take the graduate student a
couple months just to learn the
necessary background mathematics to be
able to do the calculation.
But chat doesn't need any time to learn
anything because it knows everything.
It's read everything. It knows every
math textbook that's been on the
internet, you know.
And and so it's incredibly powerful even
today at least at the level of a
graduate student. A friend of mine Mike
Douglas
revered string theorist researcher
he described it. He said every physicist
today has sort of an army of a hundred
or a thousand of the best graduate
students you could imagine
at their disposal. And I think that's a
reasonable
the reasonable summary. Now it isn't the
case right now that AI can make that
creative leap that unexpected leap that
we like to think is really us
that no mechanical digital system is
ever going to be able to do that moment
of inspiration.
You know, that that allows us to do
something that no one's ever done before
but I have to tell you a lot of those
moments of inspiration what they really
are is
putting together things that are not
usually put together. Novel combinations
of things that are known but brought
into a novel context. Right? I mean
again, Einstein's general relativity.
The math was known, right? It was
putting it into a very different
context. You know, even special
relativity, the basic math was known and
it really emerged from studying
Maxwell's equations and understanding
their symmetries in a deeper way than
anybody had previously done.
And so a leap of insight is not
necessarily creating something from
scratch. A leap of insight can be
putting together novel qualities
or I should say putting together
existing qualities in a novel pattern, a
novel way. And that's the kind of thing
that these systems, you know, are are
pretty good at. And if they if these
systems get a thousand times more
powerful, ten thousand times more
powerful. I was having some conversation
in one of
our interviews, I think it was with Eric
Schmidt, who said, you know, ten
thousand times more powerful AI in a
reasonable span of time is absolutely
expected.
And so special purpose
AI systems that know all physics
research, all physics data, all
astronomical research, all astronomical
data.
Can I imagine that at some point they
take the lead in pushing the frontiers
of scientific understanding? Yeah.
And um we'll just have to see where that
goes. And again, it comes back to my
earlier prognostication.
Maybe it's really a union, not us versus
them, not us saying, "Hey, you're
stepping in our lane. You're stepping in
our turf. You're moving in my lane." No,
no, maybe it's, "Hey,
let's really get together." And that's
is what happening. You know, the NSF, I
believe now or DOE, they may have both
are having special grants for those that
are bringing AI into fundamental
research. You know, many of the big
companies are pushing into fundamental
research. So yeah, I think that may well
be where the future goes.
All right, I'm getting a little
exhausted. I don't know how you guys are
doing, but I think it's uh time that we
wrap this up. You should Thanks for
joining us and stay tuned. I've got some
interesting conversations the next few
weeks up. Sean Carroll we're going to
talk to, uh Lenny Susskind, uh uh I
think we're going to talk to Nick
Bostrom in uh the not too distant future
and so forth. So these will be uh fun
conversations coming up. So subscribe to
our YouTube channel if you aren't
already so you can be alerted to those.
And again, at 8:07,
let's watch the safe return to Earth of
four courageous astronauts who have gone
further than any human has gone before.
Thank you so much for joining us.
&gt;&gt; [music]