the water under goes a change. It's
actually a chemical change. So it starts
as H2O and what happens is in the
presence of light is actually the energy
I'm talking about. Just like plants um
you know are energized by light. When
there's light, what happens is the water
molecule splits and the O minus, it
splits into O minus and H+ and the O
minuses
gather together um and stick onto that
hydrophilic surface and they stick on
layer by layer. So each layer the O
minuses aggregate in such a way as to
give you a hex a sheet a honeycomb
sheet.
[Music]
Hello everybody and welcome back to
Chasing Consciousness. So today we have
the fascinating new science of water to
get into particularly the research
around the discovery of the gel-like
fourth phase of water which occurs when
it gets close to the so-called water
friendly surfaces. So changes chemical
structure and separates into positively
and negatively charged components. So
we're going to be finding out how this
particular form of water is used by
nature. How its structure can be charged
by infrared energy from the sun like a
solar cell becoming an energy source
that can actually do work.
We're going to be looking at
implications and the applications of
this for uh our technologies and for
health. And we're going to be separating
the wheat from the chaff on the
controversial memory of water claims of
Mazeru Emoto and the Nobel Prize winner
Luke Montani. And last of all, we're
going to discuss why there is just so
much resistance to this research despite
the ubiquity and obvious importance of
water in biological systems. Now,
fortunately, to navigate this cutting
edge research and avoid any wishful
thinking, we have the director of the
Pak Labs at the University of
Washington, one of the most established
labs studying water in the world, the
bioengineer, Professor Gerald Pak. He's
the author of over 300 scientific papers
and four books for the general public,
including Cells, Gels, and the Engines
of Life, The Fourth Phase of Water, and
his new book, Charge: The Unexpected
Role of Electricity in the Workings of
Nature. Now, I have wanted to speak to
Gerald ever since I learned of his
experimental proof of the fourth phase
of water. So, I just can't wait to get
into this. So, without further ado,
let's go.
[Music]
So, Professor Gerald Pollock, welcome to
Chasing Consciousness. Thanks for coming
on the show. How are you today?
&gt;&gt; I'm delighted and thrilled to be here.
&gt;&gt; Well, Jerry, I absolutely love to start
asking my guests about their first big
wakeup moments, the deep questions about
life, the universe, and everything that
really shook their world when they were
young. What big questions can you
remember from end of childhood, start of
adolescence that can jump out as you
look back?
&gt;&gt; Um u well I don't I don't have a good
answer to that one but a few years later
if that's per
&gt;&gt; that's definitely fine as we all have
them at different times. Many of my
guests just say I was not at all
philosophical until until I got got
older. So
&gt;&gt; well well and and I I I think that's
true. So this was um I was a graduate
student at the University of
Pennsylvania and I was studying um or I
was attempting to model um uh the
cardiovascular system and part of that
of course is the heart and uh um and and
uh the heart is essentially a muscle.
And so in order to do the modeling, you
had to understand um how muscles worked.
And and there was a um there was a a
famous
scientist uh more than just famous uh
whose whose model is still actually uh
still thought of today and still invoked
today. Um and and I I had to do the
modeling and and so I presumed that that
since this guy his name is Sir Andrew
Huxley and uh he was a Nobel laureate he
actually won the Nobel Prize prior to
his immersion in in the field of muscle.
Um and then he kind of liked
microscopes. He played around with them.
So he thought he'd u do a foray into the
field of muscle contraction and came up
with an idea and I presumed since this
this was um a great great man um
distinguished in so many ways part of
the a member of the Huxley family the
Nobel Prize uh president of the Royal
Society master of Trinity College
Cambridge etc etc he must be right right
I mean that's what you you'd presume and
uh and this Japanese uh guy uh came to
our department and his assignment um to
to for his PhD thesis was to take to uh
to start where I left off in my model of
the heart and um he told me for they
couldn't do that. I said why? He said
well the model's wrong. I said how could
it be wrong? I mean this is a you know
Nobel laurate a great man um a man who
uh when he walks into a room there's a
hush it's like God just walked into the
room um I found that out later when I
immersed myself into the muscle
contraction field um myself which is the
first two to three decades of my
scientific existence but this guy was
telling me and you know Japanese people
are mostly differential they they don't
uh uh they don't rebel um against
authority or at least they don't they
don't pretend that they rebel there
forever. They're polite. And this guy
was telling me, "Oh, the model's wrong."
And uh the theory is wrong. How how
could you I mean, how could you profess
that the theory is wrong uh when it's
put forth by by uh someone close to God?
He said, "No, no, it's absolutely
wrong." And and of course, I was highly
skeptical because um like everybody
else, you know, a theory put forth by so
distinguished a person is right. Uh you
know, that's the way we were we were
taught. Um and I I guess I was a good
student. I learned that. Um and so he uh
in I was skeptical of his his remark and
it took not more than five minutes for
him to convince me uh that he was right
in a a a very very simple uh kind of
way. Uh which which without a diagram
it's difficult for me to um to recount
what he said. But he said the muscle is
if it contracted the way Huxley
suggested it would be unstable and after
the first contraction it would fall
apart and never work again. As simple as
that. Now um that objection stands
today. Uh as far as I've seen it's never
been uh addressed by anybody and it has
been published uh but but nobody pays
attention to it. And so so that was a
that was a ma major um major force in
the direction of my life because I
learned from that that doesn't matter
you know how how important you are or
how many Nobel prizes you've won uh if
your idea doesn't make sense it doesn't
make sense if it's wrong it's wrong um
you know uh whether it's you or I or Sir
Andrew Huxley you know it's it's the
same the idea if it doesn't make sense,
forget it, start again.
&gt;&gt; But but perhaps worse is the realization
that the fact that it doesn't make sense
doesn't matter. The name, the
establishment that they're part of and
the respect they've built through their
career is somehow more important than
the evidence.
&gt;&gt; I I agree with you and unfortunately
that's the way it stands. uh even even
today there there there are lots of
people around who uh who know uh that
various theories are wrong. They don't
make sense. Uh they don't fit the
evidence and and and their views are not
taken seriously because of what what you
suggested.
&gt;&gt; So for me that was a turning point in my
life. I I I realized that it it doesn't
really matter how distinguished you are.
If your idea makes no sense, it makes no
sense.
&gt;&gt; So Jerry, although today's main topic is
the fourth phase of water, it would be
an injustice not to speak about your
brand new book that's just out, charged,
but in fact, it's actually great context
for the fourth phase water phenomenon,
which is caused by electrical charge. So
Jerry, it's an electrical universe. Life
is regulated by electromagnetic fields
and electric currents. give us a couple
of your favorite examples from the book
that sort of illustrate this central
idea.
&gt;&gt; The book uh consists of um elaboration
of uh halfozen or seven or eight
different themes. Um and the themes rest
on what we see on a daily basis. We look
out our window. So from my chair, I'm
looking out, I see a lake. Uh I see
mountains. Uh I'm privileged to uh enjoy
this this wonderful view. and I see
birds and and I know there are fish
sitting in the lake and and so the what
I address in the book are are the these
uh common things that we see and we
think we understand them uh like we
understand muscle contraction um you
know uh but um but there are phenomena
that don't fit the theory and and so
those are the ones that I address and
then I'm suggesting that maybe there's
another explanation that fits better and
the explanation has uh mostly to do with
electricity uh charge that's why the
book is called charge
um so to give uh let's see which which
is weather I deal with weather now um
you u maybe watch uh on your your phone
uh the weather forecast and and they'll
talk about um they'll talk about uh um
the uh um temperature and the pressure,
but they'll never mention the word
electrical charge. Never have I ever
heard the word electrical charge, but
clouds are charged. And you know um um
you know of course that during a
thunderstorm you the charge is pretty
obvious but the charge also exists
studied 50 60 years ago and completely
forgotten is that the clouds are charged
too. The clouds are negatively charged.
Um so questions arise that have never
really seriously been addressed. I'm
talking about starting starting from
fundamental physics and chemistry uh or
at least the physics and chemistry that
we can presume is true uh um and
building up to um to a hurricane, a
tornado or whatever. I've never seen it
addressed. So, I took up the challenge.
Um and I've got four chapters dealing
with that. Um, of course, I don't know
if my the ideas that I developed are
correct, but I think they are.
Otherwise, I wouldn't have put put them
forth because we need to know. So, for
example, uh you've got a cloud sitting
up in the sky. Um, and u question arises
very simple question what what keeps it
up? What keeps it floating? Um, now
clouds consist of little droplets of
water held together somehow. That's
nobody has ever figured out how I'm
suggesting a way. Um, but the little
droplets each each droplet um is heavier
than air. And you know, if you if you
were to take a long ladder that's high
enough to reach into the clouds, climb
climb up to the cloud level and take
your pitcher of water and pour it down
drop by drop. The drops will descend.
Um, right. That's comet experience.
you've climbed up a ladder and and
dropped some water, it goes down. It
doesn't stay up. So, questions, why does
it stay up in the cloud? Uh, and if
that's not enough, uh, then um um uh you
in England, I think, have um have uh uh
the same sort of weather that we have in
Seattle, especially the winter time. you
know, it's kind of kind of gray and we
can't really tell uh whether it's going
to rain or not rain. And the weather
forecast will vary will be typically oh
50% chance of rain. Well, what does that
say? Should I take my umbrella to work
or or not? You know, 50% chance uh um so
I take 50% of an umbrella. So, the
question is what turns on the rain? It's
cloudy up there, but is it going to rain
or is it not going to rain? One would
like to know um what it is. Is there a
master switch up there with some um aged
Nobel laurate uh who decides uh whether
to pull the plug or not pull the plug or
what? Um well, I deal with that as well.
And I I um I I guess wi without some
simple diagrams it's kind of hard to
there is a very simple way that this
works and um I'm fairly confident that
it it it's on target.
&gt;&gt; So that's we'll come back we'll come
back to this Jerry because obviously it
depends on the fourth phase of water
which we're about to get into. My my
favorite example is the Earth itself
having a negative charge and the
ionosphere having a positive charge. I'm
I'm I I'm almost certain you get into
this in the book.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; I've always I've always wanted to know
if that means that the Earth is
basically a giant battery.
&gt;&gt; What are some of the what are some of
the implications of the Earth not being
neutral?
Um well yes it's a giant battery and
that battery is critically important for
many of the phenomena that I discussed.
So you're you're absolutely right on um
and and the fact that the earth is
negatively charged. You know I started
my career in electrical engineering uh
and no professor ever even hinted that
the earth was anything but neutral. And
um um and it was in my laboratory only
maybe 10 or 15 years ago. I had a
Russian um a fairly senior Russian uh
scientist working in my lab and just
before he left he started talking about
the earth's electric field. Now that
fits with what you suggesting. Uh the
ionosphere out there is positive and the
earth is negative. And so it's like
plates of a capacitor. One plate is
positive and the other plate is
negative. So you have an electric field.
So he was talking to me. He mentioned
the earth's electric field. And I I
said, "Andre, you must you must mean the
magnetic field. I never heard of the
electric field." He said, "You never
heard of it? That's that's crazy. I
learned about this in in middle school.
Every Russian uh of middle school age
when I was educated knew that the earth
was negatively charged." And so I went
home that evening. He took off back home
for Russia and I I had trouble sleeping.
You negatively charged. What is electric
field? What what how how could this be?
And how come if it's true, how come I
never heard of it? Well, the educational
system in the US I think is deficient.
Um, maybe it better in Russia or maybe
it was better in Russia because although
I could confirm from other Russians of
similar age that they did learn that the
earth was negatively charged in middle
school, not anymore. It's not taught
anymore. So I I guess um either it's of
no particular significance
um or um the quality of Russian
education is is diminishing um to the
point of being sort of equal to American
education which is now on the verge of
plummeting for
&gt;&gt; but I believe but I believe you
mentioned that in it's actually in some
of Richard Fayman the famous noble
laurate um and the person responsible
for the electro
um
quantum theory. I mean one of the
greatest minds of the 20th century
confirms this in his books, doesn't he?
&gt;&gt; Yes, it's true. Um um
&gt;&gt; QE quantum electronamics theory, isn't
it?
&gt;&gt; Quantum electronamics. Yeah. Yeah. And
that that theory is actually been
applied uh to water as as well. You
might say it's a competing theory with
what I've brought brought forth. And u
so one of my u yeah this this is when I
came to believe that the earth is
negatively charged. It happened from
Finland's one of Finland's
uh lectures. So you know he he he gave
lectures in the it was a mid 1950s and
somebody recorded the lectures and wrote
them up into a three volume book. uh the
lectures of Richard Fineman
and uh um and so one of my students uh
uh had copies of or a a copy of the
three volume set and brought me volume
two and chapter 9 and in it is is just
filled with evidence. Now this is the
1950s filled with evidence that
obviously came before the 1950s that the
earth was negatively charged and there's
plenty of it. uh it's um abundant.
&gt;&gt; All of this charge talk links nicely to
your discovery of the fourth phase of
water in which water changes chemical
composition and separates into
positively and negatively charged
molecules.
&gt;&gt; Right. But just so we can understand the
consensus
into which your discovery is trying to
integrate, can you first tell us what we
think we know about water and the points
that those textbooks just fall short on
explaining? Well, before we get into the
fourth phase.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, sure. So, so everybody knows that
water has three phases, not four phases.
Solid, liquid, and vapor. And that idea
has persisted for so many years that we
we take it as gospel. I mean you know
water has three phases and because it
has three phases particularly in biology
um in which I'm well uh heavily im
immersed um the assumption is you know
since we're we're mostly water we're 2/3
water by volume um and if if you
actually count molecules
uh you know if you line up all the
molecules in the body or in the cell and
count uh you'll find that 99 out of 100
approximately are water molecules
because to fill that 2/3 volume you need
you need a lot of these small molecules.
Um and so that's what the count shows
and the presumption as seemingly as
absurd as uh that 99 out of 100
molecules in your body don't do
anything. The assumption is exactly that
that these water molecules
are there to suspend the more important
molecules of life. That's all. Uh that's
the the current view. And and we show
that that that view is erroneous that
water is is not only u so prominent in
all every every one of your cells, but
it's the center of all activity.
&gt;&gt; And so and this this
&gt;&gt; and an energy source. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Which no all of this we're about
to get into, Jerry. So this fourth phase
was theorized over 100 years ago, right?
By the chemist William Hardy. But your
lab was the first to experimentally
confirm that his hypothesis was correct.
Is that right?
&gt;&gt; Well, it's sort of right. Um um there
there um in between uh the two. And I I
must admit I don't remember details of
Sir William Hardy's um uh thesis. Uh but
most prominent um in the mid 1950s
especially or mid to late 1950s is
Gilbert Ling. Now I I don't know if
you've heard of Gilbert Ling. Gilbert
Gilbert Ling um was the one who inspired
me on whose shoulders I stand. And um he
also had an idea um with lots of
evidence and several books uh that the
water inside the cell was not like water
in a glass which is the the the current
current view. Um, Gilbert Ling, just to
give you some background, he came to the
US in 1948 from China. And uh um and at
at that time after World War II, the
Chinese government decided that they
wanted to send some promising young
scholars to study or um to advance their
studies in the US. Um and they picked
four of them in the first two years and
Gilbert Ling was one of the four. The
other three won Nobel prizes.
Gilbert did not win a Nobel Prize, but
people who know his work, many of them
think he should have won two Nobel
prizes for uh his idea was
revolutionary. He said the water inside
the cell is not uh like water in a
glass. He said that it's so-called
structured. It's kind of like a liquid
crystal. If you think of the water
molecule
as being a dipole that is like a bean
with plus at one end, minus at the other
end, you can you can understand how
these beans would stack upon one another
plus associating with minus. And he
argued that the water inside the cell
was exactly that. Uh the water molecules
stacked to two long um uh spans, long
distances, many of them. Um and the
current view is that next to a surface
um the water molecules do undergo some
kind of change but it's limited to one
or two molecular layers. And Gilbert
Lang was saying no no it's not one or
two molecular layers it's it could be
hundreds and we found millions u not
exactly as Gilbert Ling suggested but
but it was Ling's idea um that spurred
us on. I was in the field of muscle
contraction. I was happily u doing doing
my thing and we were making
contributions which um I must say u
because of the dominance of Sir Andrew
Huxley were not taken seriously by a
whole lot of people but we were having
fun uh doing it and I I think we we
found um there are some observations
that are uh really central for an
understanding of how muscles really work
but it hasn't been taken up by many
people in the
which is which is okay. But but uh when
I heard Gilbert Ling uh speak at a
conference and I heard him present and
his idea that the water was structured
in in this way. He had so much evidence
that um it just blew my mind to hear
what he had to say. And then at this
conference, some other people who were
studying uh water um in biology
presented additional evidence in support
of Ling's idea. So
&gt;&gt; So it was experimentally confirmed uh
before your lab took this up.
&gt;&gt; Yes, it was experimentally but what what
we found is that the the idea of u
structure and order uh was correct. But
but the kind of order that Gilbert Ling
was thinking of, we found that that was
not the case and it was a different kind
of order which turns out I think to be
much more interesting and dynamic.
&gt;&gt; So talk us through how normal water
makes this change of phase into this
gel-like structured water.
&gt;&gt; Sure. Um what happens? What we found
experimentally
uh many times over, we found first of
all that uh when water sits next to a
hydrophilic surface that is water loving
surface and and most surfaces are um of
that ilk at least uh to some extent
water loving. uh when water sits next to
it and you have the right kind of energy
which I'll um cite in a moment the water
under goes a change it's actually a
chemical change so it starts as H2O and
what happens is uh in the presence of
light is actually the energy I'm talking
about just like plants um you know are
energized by light when there's light um
at the appropriate wavelength uh when
there's light what happens happens is
the water molecule splits and the O
minus it splits into O minus and H+ and
the O minuses
gather together um and stick onto that
hydrophilic surface and they stick on
layer by layer. So each layer the O
minuses aggregate in such a way as to
give you a hex a sheet a honeycomb sheet
um where everything is hexagonal on the
sheet the oxygen and hydrogens's O minus
and meanwhile the H+ the other part of
the water molecule gets kicked off
kicked out in into the water beyond this
uh growing
uh uh array which we call um well we
we've given it two names Uh, EZ for
exclusion zone. Uh, I guess it doesn't
work in Britain. U, right. Z is zed. Or
am I wrong about that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. It doesn't matter. You know,
easy.
&gt;&gt; No, it doesn't matter because e E Z is
easy to remember. It's probably why it's
stuck. And later when we found out that
that this array uh of of of partial
water molecules O minus minuses um
because every measurement every type of
measurement we did showed showed um
physical chemical features that differ
um from
um ordinary liquid water. So we called
it a fourth phase of water. So fourphase
or easy water,
we use the term interchangeably. And a
friend of mine said, "Oh, those terms
are really not right. It should be
liquid crystallin LC, liquid crystallin
water." So So um I I think he's probably
right. Uh that that's a maybe a better
one. Anyway, all three of them. Um,
&gt;&gt; can you tell us, Jerry, can you tell us
about these more about these water
loving materials just so the listeners
can picture this?
&gt;&gt; What are their characteristics and just
how common are they in nature? I mean,
I'm imagining something that wouldn't be
water friendly would be something like
waterproof material of our skin, for
example, where it beads up uh instead of
flattening against it. How common are
these nonfriendly water lo you know
water hating materials or are we talking
like really the majority are actually
water loving materials? Well there's
actually all materials are somewhere in
between um uh the two and um the the u
hydrophilic water loving materials. You
can imagine a a surface like this. And
if you if you uh u drop a droplet of uh
of water, the water spreads out because
the surface loves the water and
therefore wants to have as much of of
the water in contact with with itself as
possible. And and the opposite is
hydrophobic. Like teflon for example is
hydrophobic. You drop water and it beads
up. Uh the surface of the droplet
doesn't want to. it fears uh uh the
surface or the surface fears the water
that's um hydrophobic.
But most surfaces are neither fully
hydrophobic or fully hydrophilic. They
may have regions um uh that are
hydrophilic and regions that are
hydrophobic. But most surfaces um um
have at least some hydrophilic regions
if not are entirely hydrophilic. What
what about cellular material? Is
biological living tissue hydrophilic in
general or again does that vary?
&gt;&gt; Well, it um it's mostly hydrophilic
because next to all um biological
materials is water. Um and the water
doesn't beat up um leaving a a vacule or
a gap. And and there there are ways of
judging uh the extent to which a surface
is hydrophilic or hydrophobic. It has to
do with the so-called contact angle. So
you know you you take a surface, you
drop some water and and usually the
contour of the water is kind of um hits
intersects the surface at an angle. And
if you measure that angle, if the angle
is a large uh one and it's hydrophobic,
if it's a small one, it's hydrophilic.
And most are somewhere in between. Now,
I should say also that not every
hydrophilic surface uh gives rise to
this easy water. And we're studying
right now exactly what is the
characteristic that allows it uh to to
be uh to build easy. and and we think we
know but it's maybe beyond the scope um
or I you know if you insist I can I can
tell you it's no secret it's just that
um maybe a little difficult to explain
without without a diagram um
&gt;&gt; no no I think I think that's fine to
know that that that research is
continuing le let's zoom in for a moment
on this structured component what what
is the new chemical composition you
mentioned there about these O minuses
and stuff. Um what's the new chemical
composition and what properties does
this structure give the exclusion zone
water that will be important when we
talk about the implications and
applications?
&gt;&gt; Well, it's uh actually it's H302.
Now, if you if you think of H2O, it's
neutral. However, we found by sticking
an electrode into the exclusion zone, we
found to our great surprise u and shock,
so to speak, negative charge uh in
almost all cases. Um there are some
exceptions again, but um mostly
negatively charged. And that seemed very
strange to us uh because you're starting
out with neutral water, you know, and
then you you immerse a surface
hydrophilic surface and voila, you got a
big region that's negatively charged.
That doesn't make sense because uh what
happened to the positive charges? you
know the sum of uh we started with
something neutral and so what you wind
up should be neutral also because where
you know
you're not insert inserting any charges
of any any sort. So we did a bit of head
scratching and we went on to find out
that beyond this zone. So you've got a
hydrophilic surface and you've got the
easy negatively charged easy building
layer by layer, sheet by sheet up to you
know easily a million sheets um a
macroscopic you can see it with your
your naked eye. And then we found that
the region beyond was positively charged
that that as the easy was building um to
to build what happened is the H2O
molecule had to divide into O minus and
H+ and the H+es got kicked out um forced
out you might say um and so what you
wind up with is a major zone um that's
negatively charged and beyond that is
another major zone that's positively
charged. If you got a negative charge
next to a positive charge, you have a
battery. And as I said, all of this is
built with the energy of light,
particularly infrared light, but red
light as as as well.
&gt;&gt; Apart from the charge, Jerry, apart from
the charge, are there any other
properties that we need to bear in mind
as we get into the implications?
&gt;&gt; Yes. One more uh another experimental
finding. If you if you start with water
uh like this and excuse me good timing.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. You need to hydrate it. Uh
hydration is really really important
more than you might think.
Okay. that if we take um a an electrode
that uh passes current into this water
here um this water will turn into easy
water. Uh it just needs electrons. So if
you can put in electrons any way any way
you can ordinary liquid water will turn
into easy water. Um we we confirmed that
experimentally. So if you if you have
reason to want to build easy water,
there are two major ways. One way is to
add light um and another way is add
electrons. So now returning to your um
your your statement uh below reminding
everybody about the earth's negative
charge. So if you connect yourself to
the earth and and it's not so easy to do
because we all have leather shoes and
leather is a great insulator. So even if
we walk on the beach or wet sand with
those shoes, we're not connected.
However, if you take off your shoes um
and and walk on wet grass or or immerse
them in the in and the salt water of the
of the sea uh or walk on walk on the wet
sand uh near near the sea, you're
connecting yourself to the negatively
charged earth. And as I mentioned, um I
if you if if your cells or your body
receives negative charge, um any water
that's in your body that's not uh easy
water will turn into easy water. And I
think that that's the reason why uh
earththing or grounding is as effective
as it is. It's been around now for quite
a few years and it's gained a huge
popularity and nobody really knows or
understands why it works, but it works.
&gt;&gt; Well, while we're on it, Gerald, is
there any um is there any experimental
uh evidence to support the benefits or
is it still in the realm of of
hypothesis?
you know, I I'm I'm not sure because I I
haven't looked into it, but um I I'm
confident there there are studies. Um
&gt;&gt; I've I've heard that there has been some
science. I was just wondering how how
credible it was cuz I haven't had had
the chance to look at that.
&gt;&gt; Now, there are obviously there are
obviously huge implications and
applications for this discovery for
health, for energy, for technology. But
I think my favorite implication has to
be the fact that Easy Water because it's
been separated into positive and
negative charge has basically become a
battery. And not any battery, but a
battery that can be charged as your
experiments show by infrared light. Now,
how does Easy Water absorb energy from
the infrared light? Is it something to
do with the fact that it now has
structure that it's able to do that? And
what does it do with the the output?
Like what does that energy then go on to
do in nature?
Um so
that's u multiple questions. um
&gt;&gt; input and output. Basically, those are
my two.
&gt;&gt; Well, it happens to be among my favorite
also. Um uh because if you if you think
about it, you could think of let me
answer that part first and then I can
get back to the part that perhaps I that
you've asked that I haven't answered
because your question is
multiffactorial.
Um uh so if you take a chamber um with
the right right setup that produces the
easy water in the positive region beyond
and you've got um um plus and minus you
stick two electrodes one in the minus
one in the plus you ought to be able to
get current out of that just like any
ordinary battery. We confirmed it. Uh I
I have a slide that I often often show.
You know, you turn on the switch and the
two wires are connected to an LED lamp.
Um and and uh the lamp lights up. Now um
the advantage of of of this is uh there
there are several. First of all, it it's
sort of like a solar cell uh but it runs
on water. There's no need for any of the
rare earth minerals. um you know that um
that are limited in supply and um if you
you need to remove them from the earth
um that's it. Um this just requires
water and the appropriate surface um
water and light and infrared light is
always around us. You can um you can you
can actually demonstrate that um where
you're sitting uh right now. Turn off
all the lights. Can't see anything. your
camera, cell phone camera or Zoom's
camera or or um your laptop's camera
don't doesn't work. Uh however if you uh
if you get an infrared camera that is
just like a regular camera but the
sensor is sensitive not to visible light
but to infrared light and you get a
beautiful image of everything um
including uh the sign chasing
consciousness and um and you and your
smile um and the microphone etc. you'll
see everything beautifully even though
there's no visible light and that's why
the military uses it um enemy uses it at
night um to check out the the location
of the tanks and other armaments um
because you can see everything with with
the infrared camera or telescope or
whatever binoculars
uh and so so it means the energy is all
around um you don't have to wait for the
sunshine as you need to do for solar
cells. Um and uh um not only that but
but you're just basically using water.
That's the only u you might say
disposable.
So so it has a lot of advantages but
even more than that even more than the
prospect of scaling it up. Now, we don't
know if it can be scaled up, but um
there's no obvious reason why it
shouldn't be able to be scaled up. You
can imagine uh providing all the energy
for a city or at least your house or a
village or or something using this
technology. It hasn't been attempted. Uh
but um there there's a pot of gold out
there for somebody um who who wants to
try it. Jerry, is there a reason is
there a reason your lab hasn't looked
into that? I mean, uh, it's it's every
lab's dream to find a technological
application of their discovery. Now,
certainly the university behind you
might might be pushing for it. Uh it's a
compl complicated uh response but uh
basically uh it requires money and a lot
&gt;&gt; and it's uh it's really difficult um to
get money for doing this because um um
you know the the National Science
Foundation, National Institutes of
Health um if you u well let let me let
me give you an analogy. Suppose um
suppose everybody knows that the earth
is flat, not round. Uh I can look out my
window and I see Lake Washington. It
looks pretty flat to me. Um and and you
come around uh and um and you you think,
"Well, wait a second. There's something
wrong with this idea."
um you know um it I've seen photos
satellite photos and it looks like the
earth has a curved curved uh shape to it
and I've seen photos taken from the moon
and and the earth looks like a coin a
round coin so it kind of looks and and
by the way you know I've traveled from
London uh I've gone west and I've gone
to New York and again to San Francisco
and then Tokyo and then back to London.
So I wound up where I started and that
doesn't seem compatible with with the
flat earth. So you decide this is really
important and um and I'm I I'm I'm going
to I want to study it uh further and you
decide and in order to study it you need
money um because you have to hire people
to do the experiments uh etc etc. Uh so
you put together a grand proposal and
let's say the grand proposal you you
spend a couple of months uh carefully
articulating what you want to study and
and articulating the preliminary
evidence which is the usual speak um uh
supporting your point of view and you
deposit it to um the gatekeeper at
whatever foundation it is and the
gatekeeper looks and oh Freddy I don't I
don't I never heard of this guy and wow
Wow. He's proposing something so
radical. Everybody knows that the earth
is flat and he's saying, "No, it's
round." And in order to be conscientious
in doing my job, I better hire
reviewers. You know, you always need
reviewers. Hire reviewers who are the
world's experts in the shape of the
earth because they'll be able to tell uh
whether Freddy is um you know, a
crackpot or he's serious, right? And so
who do they hire? They hire the experts
in flat earth
and and they receive an application from
you uh that no, they're wrong, you're
right. Now, how do you think the
reviewers are going to respond? They're
not going to be happy to be challenged
in that way because their entire careers
are based on um being the experts in the
little bumps in the otherwise flat
earth. So, you're not going to get your
money. and and um and there's a
generality to that that um uh if you
have a a radical idea in any field that
challenges the status quo, it's a real
challenge to get money because it's the
experts that make a decision um about
whether you're going to get your money
or not. And can
&gt;&gt; Jerry So Jerry, I've got to interrupt
and just ask the question I was going to
leave till later while we're on it. Then
why is you know obviously you've chosen
a very extreme example there Galileo's
and Bruno's famous example but
surely there's enough evidence now for
this to be taken seriously. What is the
resistance to this very very clearly
demonstrable phenomenon like what why
wouldn't somebody take that seriously?
&gt;&gt; Um well many many are taking it
seriously. uh there are still some
holdouts. You know, if you've if you
you've spent your entire career dealing
with water at interfaces and this uh
outsider from a different field comes in
and says um or implies
that you guys are all wrong. It's not
it's not the thing that I say but um you
know that's what comes out of it.
you I mean if you were in this position
just put yourself in the position your
whole career is based on on an
assumption about what happens at
interfaces to to water at interfaces
you're just not going to be happy and uh
the question is whether your ego is
sturdy enough to withstand this kind of
blow you know which essentially says
that your career has been worthless
because you're uh built on a a
foundation that's wrong and So there
have been half dozen or so papers that
have directly challenged um our our
findings. One of them
I I guess the the the region of highest
resistance is my own university u where
the first major paper something like a
100 pages came out and said basically
everything we've done is wrong. Um, and
uh, uh, I mean I I could go in into
detail and I'm not sure you'd like, but
there have been four or five other
papers that are kind of along the same
lines. And I guess my my question is
what is it what is being threatened in
their worldview here? because that'll
come up and we when we start talking
about energy in the body um what is it
about their worldview that this really
turns upside down? Well, the long range
uh ordering of water um is inconceivable
to them because um water molecules
undergo brownian motion. uh you know
they they wiggle around and because of
the Brownian motion um it's
inconceivable uh to them um that that
water molecules or are
what was formerly water deviations from
water molecules can line up to the
extent now we we've shown up to a
millimeter um and uh um a millimeter is
uh more than a million layers water
molecular layers. So they're thinking um
two or three layers is all that can
happen. And we've shown experimentally
that you know it could be millions um
under and even under extreme conditions
we've shown a meter uh that um this uh
easy water can extend out to. Um
&gt;&gt; it's also a complete change of chemical
structure. I mean, surely that could
help them feel better about it knowing
that it's no longer water as they know
it.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'll give you a list and you can
try to convince them.
&gt;&gt; No, I'm just I'm just interested because
uh we we do a lot of philosophy science
stuff here and I'm always very very
interested in the threat to world views
as a form of resistance to new data and
and I think it it comes up very very
often on the show.
&gt;&gt; So, let's get into that. So, let's get
into that. Jerry the there are lots of
implications and lots of applications.
Let's let's take a look at these one by
one. One that I find particularly
interesting is the idea of energy
generation in the body because if if
it's true uh that we do have easy water
in our cells uh rather than normal water
it throws into question the current
bioengineering consensus on energy
production in the cell in the
mitochondria. Right. So tell us about
the growing suspicion in the field that
ATP and ion channels are not a complete
model of cellular energy production. I
mean first of all what is ATP and and
what's the evidence for this criticism
of the old consensus? Well, ATP a
denisonin triphosphate um for those who
are not not so familiar um the idea it
was um a paper in 1941
41 by a guy named Libincott who was a
prominent um I guess chemist biochemist
and he found evidence uh that there was
a high energy uh that one of the three
phosphates in ATP triphosphate three
phosphates
that the bond uh had high energy. In
other words, when the when the bond
breaks um energy significant amount of
energy is delivered and and he theorized
that this is the energy um uh that the
body uses. So, so ATP molecules get
built up uh by food and such. Um and
then the energy is provided and it's
used. for example, um the the uh
phosphate bond is broken, releases
energy, and that powers, for example,
your muscles. Uh and everybody was
excited about that because until 1941,
nobody knew where our energy came from.
Clearly, we have energy, you know, we
can run a marathon. Um and and Lipigot
found out. Well, then a year after that,
um um there was a paper from another
equally prominent group said uh no,
they're wrong. They made a simple
arithmetic error. There is no such thing
as a high energy phosphate bond. And
then uh some 20 years later uh two
investigators whom I I know um I almost
did a post-doal fellowship with one of
them. They're in the muscle field. um uh
they did uh experiments to check to see
uh uh whether ATP had a a special high
energy phosphate bond and they found
that there was no evidence for that. Its
phosphate bonds were just like every
other phosphate bond. So um now there
was another paper one or two more papers
that came to the same conclusion but
those papers have been ignored. And so
we're now we're now at a point where um
um the the world accepts uh that ATP is
the source of energy and all of
biochemistry is built around that. If
the objectors are correct uh then all of
biochemistry is wrong.
&gt;&gt; What's the ion channel component?
because I understand that's part of the
way that people understand this negative
charge of the cell which obviously your
theory uh has a very different
explanation for but but there's a sort
of ion differential explanation right
this is the ion channel component
&gt;&gt; well it's ion channels it it's also and
mainly I think a membrane pumps or
transporters
uh and so the original idea um it it it
started from the fact that cells contain
high potassium and right outside the
cell is high sodium. So, how's it
possible? How's it possible that there's
such a gradient um of of these two
across the cell membrane? Um, and it's
reversed. It's high sodium outside and
high potassium inside. And so, the
natural idea was to think of a membrane
pump now called the transporter. And the
idea was that the pump would pump
potassium in and pump sodium out. And so
the so-called sodium pump was uh it was
called to start with was was the idea.
And it's a rational idea, you know,
because you got to figure out how this
how this is working. And so some someone
suggested there must be a pump. Now
Gilbert L, it was Gilbert Ling who I
think was the first to object to that.
He thought it was nonsense and he did
experiments and his experiments showed.
So what he did was um he knocked out um
chemically all of the agents that could
possibly be involved in supplying energy
to to um power the pumps. And still the
effects of pumping were there. And um
and he calculated u that uh g giving the
measure of generosity to his opponents
still there 30 times more energy um was
required than could possibly be
available in the the best case for his
his opponents. So, you know, if if his
experiment is right, then um the sodium
pump, which was the first one, um uh
there's not enough energy. The the cell
can't do it. And now um according to one
of my students who went into the field
of membrane pumps, he says there are
more than a thousand membrane pumps
apart from the channels, which is the
different issues. So, you know, it seems
if Gilbert Ling is right, and I, you
know, I have no reason to think he's
wrong, the idea makes no sense at all.
&gt;&gt; What you're suggesting is on the
contrary that the instantly available
energy stored in the battery of the easy
water in the cell might supply a portion
of this missing energy, right? I mean,
if true, if true, this would have huge
implications for health. Is it still a
hypothesis or have you been able to
demonstrate this in living cells
experimentally?
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah, we've been we've been able
to demonstrate um uh directly um in in
cells at least in um in in one instance
that this electrical energy is actually
used and um and in uh in in theory um
how how um it may be used as well in
another system. So the system published
um about a year and a half ago. It has
to do with the cardiovascular system,
&gt;&gt; right? That was my next question. So
just Yeah, go ahead. Tell us all about
that.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So we had a lot of fun with that.
Um uh and it all it all started when I
uh took a trip to Russia to see my
friend and colleague Vladimir Vikov who
runs the biochemistry department at
Moscow University
and uh we we enjoyed some vodka u and um
uh etc etc some Russian goodies some
caviar and he said okay it's time to go
to the lab. So he went to the lab and uh
um and he said first thing I want you to
meet my colleague down the hall. So he
telephones his colleague. his colleague
comes and and Vladimir served as the
translator and the guy the first thing
he says to me is there's a big problem
in the cardiovascular system you know
and um I I must admit I was very
skeptical because I did my PhD thesis um
on the cardiovascular system on you know
pressures and flows and and heart
contraction and I thought we had it all
worked out and I kind of was thinking um
you know what's he going to tell me
that's that's new and a a big problem. I
you know I never heard of any big
problem. So I had my nose up in the air.
Um and uh but I I I listened to him and
to my surprise in five minutes he had me
convinced that he was right. Uh so what
what did he tell me? He told me he said
think about um about the vessels the the
the capillaries and the red blood cells
have to go through the capillaries. A
red blood cell is typically six or seven
micrometers in diameter and the smallest
capillaries of which there are many are
half that diameter um you know u uh
three or four micrometers in diameter.
So you got a problem there because you
have to you have to push these great big
relatively speaking cells through
channels that are half the size. You
know, it's kind of like uh like your
toilet some sometimes getting uh
stopped. And so what do you do? You take
a plunger and and you you push. And so
same thing happens in the cardiovascular
system. You have to push those red blood
cells through. And uh you you think that
nature has made a mistake um making them
so big, but nature doesn't make
mistakes. So there must be a reason. And
I I think I know the reason. That's
another another story. But um you need
energy and he said you can calculate the
amount of energy because you know the
stiffness of the red blood cells. You
could uh you could figure out uh the
amount of force or energy that's
required to bend them to to to see if
they can get through. And he said if you
if you do the calculation um if if the
force pushing them through the vessels
um or the energy resides in the heart
alone um the heart would need to develop
a tremendous pressure on the order of he
said a million times your normal blood
pressure or even high blood pressure. Um
and so he said well you know even even
if I'm wrong by a couple of orders of
magnitude still it's an absolutely
serious problem and I don't think I'm
wrong my calculation.
Uh so and then he went on to talk about
um other possible modes uh wi with which
force could be exerted on on these red
blood cells to to push them through. And
I must admit I I wasn't listening. He
was talking about air bubbles and other
things that you actually find in the
blood. And the reason I wasn't thinking
is I was thinking immediately of
something we had just found in the
laboratory that if we take if we take a
tube just sort of like a blood vessel
made of hydrophilic material and we
immersed it in water um that the water
would flow through the tube you know
horizontally uh immersed in water. The
water would keep flowing through the
tube without stopping effectively
indefinitely.
And we did many experiments on that. We
published several papers and and um and
we figured out the mechanism. It had to
do with infrared energy um building EZ.
It was just inside inside the tube was a
ring of EZ um an annular uh ring and in
the core were the protons um just as I
had described before but in a in a
tubular geometry. And those protons were
sitting in water and they repel each
other and so they're pushing building
pressure to to push either out one end
of the cylinder or the other end of the
cylinder. Uh we're still not sure of the
determinance of which end exactly,
although we have some idea. Um but but
you could or we could imagine or I could
imagine uh that that this is happening
in the cardiovascular system. same thing
um that a vessel is just like one of
these tubes and if there's um infrared
energy which there always is um it it
powers the system and um and the
positive charges inside uh the the
vessel um will will will push the red
blood cells through. So we did we did a
test on that and um when I I I came home
uh the student who did uh Jen Lee um I I
told him about the idea and um he after
he did a successful series of
experiments he shared with me his
reaction when I first told him about the
idea um he said um he thought I was in
some kind of drug because it sounded so
preposterous because everybody knows
that the heart is the sole driver
of flow in the cardiovascular system.
But but the thing is and what he found
out soon after he checked the literature
um is that that's that's not the case
because um a half dozen different
investigators over the past hundred
years
um have produced results demonstrating
that when you stop the heart uh the flow
continues. I mean this is astonishing.
It doesn't continue at the same speed.
It's slower. Uh but it continues. So so
the heart there must be some driver
beyond the heart. And and I was thinking
that of what I I I just told you what we
had seen in the lab. So the signature
feature of this is it's powered by
infrared energy. Um, and so what Lee did
is he he uh he studied in the chick
embryo, three-day old chick embryo,
uh, where the cardiovascular system is
pretty well developed, but the
regulatory systems like hormonal and
neuronal are not yet developed. So it's
a pretty pure system. So the first thing
he does is to stop the heart. Uh, and
you can do that by adding potassium
chloride. heart stops right away and
flow continued just as those halfozen
people had reported in different
systems. So if flow continues, there
must be another source driving the flow.
And he tested to see whether it was the
same as we had found in the laboratory
in the in those tubes. And he did it um
by testing the signature feature which
is adding infrared. And when he added
infrared, the flow increased by three
three and a half times. And when he he
he stopped the flow went back to to its
ordinary or normal. It's not normal
exactly, but it's pre-infrared exposure
level. So, it doesn't prove that our
mechanism is operative. Uh, but it's
certainly consistent with the idea. And
we we can't think of another idea that
is able to explain it. So it looks as as
though this is one instance where
infrared energy uh or the the energy
supplied by the easy battery which is in
turn driven by infrared energy is at
work in our in our cells
&gt;&gt; and this reminds me Jerry sorry a quick
aside but it's important for perspective
is a point that harks back to your
earlier work with you know in the book
cells gels engines of life you know your
work in some sense brings us away from
the idea of the membrane as this
separator and the electrical
differential that kind of can explain
the negative charge inside the cell and
towards this idea of a cell filled with
negatively charged gel-like easy water.
Can you just explain what this means for
the old membrane approach to the way
molecules move uh between various cells
and across the membrane?
Well, the membrane is less important
than um you know than than we think. Um
uh I I I hesitate to say what I'm
&gt;&gt; really good,
&gt;&gt; you know, because um you know, it may it
may sound like um I'm a guy who objects
to every everything that ever appears in
any textbook. And that's not the case.
It's only when when things are so
complicated that I have trouble
understanding them myself then I I kind
of speculate that that um you know maybe
it's not limitations of my own brain but
maybe the idea is not correct um and
there there are a lot of these so so I
got to tell you perhaps you know about
Harold Hillman and his ideas about uh
the membrane and his idea is that
there's no evidence for the existence of
a membrane. Now, um I don't necessarily
hold that view, but I what I what I do
is ask people to recognize his work and
test it further on. And um and so if if
you'd like I can
&gt;&gt; I'm interested because the the the the
starting point for this question is
about the fact that we see negative
charge inside the cell and we've always
used this membrane differential as a
sort of excuse to explain that. And it
seems to me a very tidy parimonious
explanation that it's in fact easy
water. But if easy water is gel-like,
then that takes away a lot of the need
for the membrane to contain everything.
That's that's the question I wanted to
sort of put.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. And that that's why I look
um uh intently at at the work of Harold
Hillman. So So let let me explain what
what Hillman said. And again, uh I don't
know if he's right. I don't know if he's
wrong, but I do know that it's important
enough to pay attention to it and and
study it further to find out whether
truth lies there or doesn't. So at at
first, you know, a couple hundred years
ago um uh since the uh interior of the
cell um has as I said high high
potassium and the outside has high
sodium. Um it was theorized that there
must be something that separates the
inside from the outside and so it was
natural to suggest a membrane uh to do
that. There there was no evidence for
the existence of a cell membrane because
you couldn't nothing had enough
resolution to to to see it until the
advent of electron microscopy. That was
the middle of the last century. Uh so
now you have electron microscopy and
anybody who knows the procedures that
you need to go through to prepare um to
get an image from electron uh the
electron microscope knows that this is
not the original tissue. It's been dealt
a blow uh by a dozen different
expedients in order to prepare what you
see in the electron microscope. And uh
Hillman being an electron microscopist
um by by trade um said that you know
these dozen or so different steps you
have to check each step to make sure
that what you see is not some artifact
that's associated with with um w with
all the necessary preparation steps or
whether it's real because you're not
looking at the real thing. you're
looking at at at at the end point of a
string of procedures and he brings up
one example and that is uh the membrane.
Uh he does more than that but he talks
about the membrane. So we've all or most
of us have seen electron microraphs
showing the membrane. It looks like
looks like um a long railroad track uh
with two rails, you know, uh that
surround surround the cell and the
distance between the these these two
rails is always just about 10
nanometers.
So, so he um he raises a question. He
says it shouldn't always be 10
nanometers because if you think of the
cell, think of for example a spherical
cell. Now uh in order to prepare for an
electron microraphs you have to cut a
thin section. So lots of sections are
cut and you don't know where in the cell
you're actually cutting. So if you cut
uh at the equator you cut a section and
then ultimately you look down at at uh
the membrane that sits at the edge of
the cell. You see these two railroad
tracks and the distance between the two
tracks is the actual distance should be
the actual distance. However, if you cut
uh near the pole, you know, which you
could do just as frequently, see, then
it's no longer uh 10 nanometers, right?
Because the the um distance between
these two the orientation of the
membrane is considerably different from
the orientation at the equator, right?
And you look down on this and you should
see a distance that differs from 10
nanometers. He argues that all the
reports show 10 nanometers, you know, uh
therefore probably this is an artifact.
What you see is not the real membrane.
Uh but an artifact of electron
microscopy. Now um I don't know if he's
right or or not right, but I I do know
that uh his argument seems cogent and is
is worth checking. And what about your
evidence from the Yeezy water research
in terms of the gel-like nature of the
water that makes up the majority of that
cell?
Does that change anything about the way
we've used the membrane analogy or the
membrane understanding as a sort of
separator between the various states of
um chemistry either side of this
so-called of this of this separation?
Does the fact that it's a gel inside
make any difference to the way that
chemicals, molecules, charge moves
between itself and the outside?
Uh
uh well well yeah I mean um it's
possible uh that the gel like nature is
sufficient that maybe maybe a membrane
is not necessary because the separation
that exists between inside and outside
could conceivably be explained. It's
like a raw egg. you know, you break open
a raw egg and the the raw cytoplasm or
um the the egg white is is gel-like and
the gel itself could be a barrier,
right, in in preventing stuff from
getting across this this gel. So, um it
it could possibly I'm again I want to
emphasize that I'm not arguing for the
non-existence of the membrane. I'm just
arguing that uh it could be and it needs
to be investigated. Uh and I'm not I'm
not sure what the answer would be, but
if it turns out that there really is no
membrane, then you're on point. Um that
that the gel like nature of the
cytoplasm um could be responsible for um
creating an environment inside that's
different from outside and that could be
sufficient. And this very very different
nature between of the two different
types of water itself could cause
different properties that would cause us
to see a difference in the uh chemical
makeup of of within those two different
types of water.
&gt;&gt; Yes,
&gt;&gt; definitely to be definitely to be looked
into.
&gt;&gt; Okay, I want to get on to some of the
other cool implications and
applications. one because it's an
exclusion zone. Easy water can be used
to remove impurities from waters. Um
perhaps even to desalinate it. Can you
describe how that would work, Jerry? And
if if any other research projects have
have taken this forward into an attempt
to sort of technologicize technologize
this uh this this idea.
&gt;&gt; Well, you're so conscientious.
Uh um
you you've really studied this
phenomenon in great detail. Uh
&gt;&gt; I've just listened to your work and I've
just read and listen to your work.
Jerry, I'm not a specialist in any by
any means.
&gt;&gt; I'm really impressed. Uh
&gt;&gt; the way we first identified the
exclusion zone, called it exclusion zone
because it excludes. So it's basically a
liquid crystal you know and um if if you
start
the liquid it starts as a regular liquid
as say water um and if you in order to
to build a crystal to build a pure
crystal if the water has contaminants in
it it's got to exclude the contaminants
and so among our first studies we we put
in contaminants in the water we put in
microsphheres
and many others Um afterward
um these are little spheres commonly
used and they're about a micrometer in
in diameter and and um and we put the
water plus microspheres next to a
hydrophilic surface and we looked in the
microscope and voila we could see a zone
um in which these microspheres were
excluded and the zone kept growing and
growing and over five minutes or so it
grew to half a millimeter.
uh typically or something like that. So
there's exclusion that goes on. The EZ
uh tends to push out u all contaminants.
It's not just microspheres, but we we
tried many different substances
including some dyes and uh biological
substances. So it turned out it's a a a
general phenomenon. and then uh incurred
to us that we could use this phenomenon
to exclude um uh pharmaceuticals or
microlastics or whatever and and we
built a device to do it. What what how
the device works is the input of the
device um is the contaminated water.
contaminated, meaning it's got
substances you want to get rid of. And
and we have a a device which is
basically a series of con concentric
cylinders and um as as the exclusion
zone grows um it it pushes out these
contaminants and into a another
compartment. Actually, if you look at
the cross-section um of this, so it
starts with a uniform distribution of
contaminated water and it's moving this
way. And what happens is an exclusion
zone grows um right just inside in in
this annulus here. And as it does, it
pushes the contaminants toward the
center. And and so as this separated
water, one without contaminants, one
with contaminants at the center, we we
capture this in two cylindrical uh
chambers. The center one captures the
junk and we deposit it uh dump it and
the outer edge, which is the exclusion
zone water sitting initially next to the
hydrophilic surface of the tube. um we
collect that too and that one is
demonstrably free of contaminants and
and we could demonstrate that with a
single pass we could get a 200 to one
separation that was the best we're able
to do.
&gt;&gt; Extraordinary result and so many
applications but obviously the big one
here would be desalination. Does the
fact that sodium chloride is dissolved
in the liquid make it different to
exclude? Well, uh, yeah. So, um, yeah.
Yes and and no. We have some evidence
that it looks like it could work, but
only a little bit of evidence. So, it
needs to be studied more. But, but the
presumption that's once again in the
textbooks, uh, that you have sodium,
Na+, Cl minus, um, all dissolved in the
water. That doesn't fit the evidence.
the evidence um from a guy named Sedlock
um who presented several times at our
annual water conference which I
organized
um it's been in Portugal lately but um
we'll see what happens next. Anyway, he
came and presented and he presented
evidence that what you have is um are
big clusters of sodium chloride u uh
stuck together and he could demonstrate
that by light scattering. If you have
NaCl, NaCCl doesn't scatter light very
much. It's like the reason we don't see
the air um is that the light that's
coming in doesn't scatter very much
because the molecules are so small. in
order to scatter the the the scattering
agents need to be roughly the same um
the same size as the wavelength of the
light. This is well known in in physics
um chemistry whatever um and um and if
you have Na plus CL minus all of them
separated into distinct ions they're too
small to scatter but he finds that that
there is a lot of scattering u and so he
he uh came to the conclusion that what
you really have is clusters of a lot of
NaCCl u now that's if you think about
water about sodium chloride or salt as
being such cluster if that's correct um
then you
&gt;&gt; could be excluded it could definitely be
&gt;&gt; excluded. So, we just haven't had we
haven't had the support. You know, we'd
like to do that. Um, we formed a little
startup company. Um, against my better
judgment because I'm I'm more interested
in the fundamentals than uh
applications. But, uh, one of my
students convinced me and said, "Oh, you
won't have to do anything. Um, I'll do
everything." And so, um, we hired
someone, a CEO, a guy with a lot of
experience. We even had um RFK Jr. was
on our board. Um, which is kind of
interesting. Um and um and after we're
making good progress improving the
throughput uh of this by several orders
of magnitude and making progress and
then two people on the board um had a
disagreement and and I tried to be the
mediator couldn't resolve it and
ultimately uh we lost investment because
people didn't want to invest in a
company where two board members um were
fighting with each other. But Joe, it
strikes me that the place to look for
investment for somebody like this would
be countries with a lot of money but not
much water. So um some places like Saudi
Arabia where they they desperately need
dissalination technology to uh you know
for their farming, you know, maybe Saudi
Arabia could be interested.
&gt;&gt; Tell me who to contact.
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't know.
I'm just I'm just thinking practically
at this point, but they definitely got a
lot of money and they're definitely
trying desperately to bring bring water
to to their deserts.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. I mean, this is a real
problem, a security problem uh for them
uh for UAE also another country with a
lot of resources but not much water.
&gt;&gt; Um and um I even gave a talk there. It
was called the modulus lecture and it
was it was so interesting in UAE. It was
um uh in Abu Dhabi and it was in the
palace of the of the crown prince. Uh
you know it was a real high and um I
they said that I did such a good job uh
that they decided to upgrade me on the
flight back to Seattle first class. And
boy that's an experience let me tell
you. Um but but you know it it didn't
really help in terms ter terms of making
contact with with the right people but
you're right if you have a connection
there please uh uh do connect us at at
the same time you know the university um
um can't be um uh well it's it's it's
more complicated when the university is
involved in the commercial enterprise
and I really would like to spend my time
I I would rather let other people
develop this and we could do perhaps uh
some of the underlying scientific stuff
is which is what really appeals to me
and and let let the others um um spend
their time in commercialization and
perhaps um realizing um a small fortune
if if this actually works it has I'm
similar to you Jerry the only reason I
mention it is just because when we have
phenomena like this that are not being
you know uh fast enough assimilated.
Quite often we find that it's the
technological application that pushes
the absorption into the consensus
forward. And not only that, but we also
see um the the the way that that can
then go on to help people. And you know,
whether or not you're interested in the
money, knowing that this can help huge
amounts of people um to to access fresh
desalinated water must, you know, must
play on our minds as a motivation. And
that brings me to another crucial one.
Um cancer cells, back to the body for
the last interesting application. Cancer
cells have a lower negative charge than
normal cells, suggesting that there
could be less easy water in them. So if
true, this could mean healthy amounts of
easy water in cells could be a
prevention could be a pretor of cancer.
Have you been able to test this
hypothesis that easy water is related to
the lower negative charge in cancer
cells?
Uh we're working on that right now.
We've just be
&gt;&gt; we've just gotten some modest funding to
allow us to pursue that. And you know,
if we're right and um just merely
building additional easy water could
reverse certain cancers uh could be a
really easy way. It's it basically
amounts to hydration. A cell filled with
easy water is a hydrated cell. And we
all know that um you know that drinking
this stuff um produces hydration and and
to some extent uh you drink water to a
fair extent and some of this water gets
converted into easy water. So that's why
you play two two matches of tennis and
you're dead to the world. You drink a
liter of water and you could play a
third match of tennis.
&gt;&gt; And it plays back into the energy
question because if cancer cells uh do
have less easy water and that explains
their lower negative charge, that would
also explain why they're making less
energy of their own and why they're
seeking out that energy in parasitic
ways and they're such sort of glucose
hungry cells. It also fits with the
energy stuff, right?
&gt;&gt; It does. Absolutely. Um you put the
words in my mouth.
Now, Jerry, I've got to move on because
I've been keeping you too long. The big
question on everybody's mind is, can
water that has this particular
structured composition actually encode
information?
&gt;&gt; What does the research point to, Jerry?
Is it really like a liquid crystal? Is
it that simple that it can like a liquid
crystal actually encode information?
Well, information is definitely encoded
in water because now there has been
enough research,
different areas of research, all
confirming that that this is real. Um I
I could tell you about some of them if
you if you want to hear. Um and the
question is um how is the information
stored? Um and u the original arguments
uh against the possibility of any kind
of information storage have to do with
the fact that liquid water was thought
to be the only form of basically water.
And in liquid water according to the
current interpretation the molecules are
randomly oriented and they're bouncing
around a furious number of times per
second or millisecond or even phentoc.
Um, and that doesn't seem like um like a
substrate that could store information,
you know, because
um so if you if you look at if you if
you want to figure out what's necessary
for storing information, the way to go
is a digital computer. Uh like a thumb
drive, no. So how does a thumb drive
store information? Well, it's a a plane
one one plane of transistors and the
transistors are laid out in the plane in
a kind of rectal linear fashion. Um here
here here next line here here here here
and so on and the regular a regular
array and each element each transistor
uh can have two states. um we call them
zero or one or on or off or whatever.
And it's the distribution of zeros and
ones in this planer array that stores
the information. So you pull out your
your thumb drive and plug it in again
and it's got the information stored. So
the question is is there is there any
kind of water that can do the same
thing? And so the answer is yes. uh easy
water is almost exactly the same. So
what's easy water? What's the structure?
Uh as I I mentioned, it's a planer
structure. It's one plane, then another
plane, another plane. And each plane has
a distribution of oxygens and hydrogens
um that that um form a honeycomb, a
series of hexagons in that. So there is
a regular array in each plane just like
in in the thumb drive. And the question
is do any of the elements in that array
do they possibly have two different
states? Well the hydrogen's don't this
I've been able to find out from any
evidence. The oxygen do exactly. The
oxygen have not two but five different
states. they're called um oxid oxidation
states or charge states. So if you look
at a particular oxygen,
it can have a a charge of minus2. That's
the usual we call this veilance and
that's usually what we learn. Uh but if
we go one step deeper and read the
chemistry book, so this is not a
conjecture of mine. This is standard
information. Um oxygens can have five
different oxidation states. minus two
minus one zero + one + two. So it means
it means yes that easy water not only
has what it takes uh to store
information uh but it has it in spades
uh because it can do and the other
interesting thing is is is that um the
the elements instead of transistors uh
the elements are atoms. atoms are much
smaller and therefore you can imagine if
you can ultimately build a computer
built on easy water. Um it's it's going
to have a information density that's
hugely greater than what exists today.
And you could build a computer the size
of a pin head. I mean the the reason I
asked Jerry is because
we've got to get on to the controversial
claims about the memory of water uh of
Luke Montier and Maser and MTO and I'm
sure that you agree that their dismissal
has really influenced the skepticism
towards some of your research as well.
Yet in 2018 you shared a seminar with
the noble laurat Luke Montier at an
interesting meeting at the Royal Society
of Medicine and at the House of Lords in
UK called the new horizons of water
science. Tell us a little bit about
Montan's theory and how much evidence
you think there is for it.
First of all, how much evidence there is
for it? um his work has now or his
fundamental work has now been confirmed
by three different laboratories one in
China two in Italy so if you if you take
confirmation uh you know as evidence for
the reality then it's real of course um
you know a lot of lot of people um uh
like to confirm the work of a Nobel
laureate and so there's some incentive
to to get good results, but it it looks
as as though um it looks as though what
he's um what he's done is is real. Now,
what so what has he done? So his his
basic experiment um is is um to show
that that um the sequence uh of a strand
of DNA um um can be communicated
uh other than by chemical means. Now he
doesn't know it's either electromagnetic
energy or some other kind of energy. So
what he's done is he's taken he's taken
two um tubes sealed tubes sealed uh to
the extent that no there's no chemical
communication at all and one of them
contains DNA a short strand about 100
base pairs u suspended in an aquous
solution and nearby um is a container of
water um and his hypothesis is that the
information
um regarding the the sequence of DNA is
somehow being transferred uh to to uh to
this container and in the presence of um
some kind of neutral energy like 50 Hz
or 60 Hz or something like that to
energize this this system. So So then
they sit next to or near each other uh
for a day or so. He throws this away and
he's got what he says contains
information on the sequence of DNA. It
started just as water. Uh and he tests
it by using by putting combining this
with the uh components uh for the um u
um PCR reaction that you know we we we
know from COVID same sort of thing to
amplify DNA.
Um, and he he does that and he finds
that the sequence of the the amplified
DNA uh is the same as what sat here
originally near the water confirming
um his result.
&gt;&gt; But this was not easy water. This is
normal water. Well, normal water, but we
found um we found that if you um put an
electric field um on normal water, it
actually converts uh to EZ water. So,
we're not really sure that needs to be
tested, but I would presume that um that
it was converted um either by the 50 or
60 hertz um electrical energy um or by
the energy emitted from the DNA or water
surrounding the DNA that needs to be
investigated.
&gt;&gt; And when you spoke to him about this,
I'm sure you were keen to ask that same
question. What What did he say? Did he
did he suggest that that might have
something to do with how information can
be encoded because presumably without
the structure it it's physically
impossible?
&gt;&gt; I can't remember that we discussed that.
Um I um um I I often had difficulty um
um you know he he um he spoke with a
thick French accent and he spoke very
softly and even his um his partner u for
many years Suzanne M McDonald um we
we're once having a lunch together and
um and there were people sitting at
other tables
And I I had trouble hearing and I turned
to Suzanne. I said, "Suzanne, could you
please tell me what he's saying because
I'm I'm having trouble understanding."
She said, "I have to ask him a hundred
times a day to repeat what he's saying
because I can't understand either." So,
so we we we didn't have um so extensive
conversations. I wish I could answer
that, but um
&gt;&gt; but but I'm assuming at the at the
conference uh at the Royal Society of
Medicine, the first question was how
could
information of this kind be encoded in
the water given the brownie emotion
given the lack of structure? That must
have come out straight away as a
potential criticism.
&gt;&gt; Uh it probably did. Um and um I I can't
remember that that question was was
asked. Um there were um a lot of people
at that conference who would have been
sympathetic to his point of view. Um uh
and uh it would be mostly the people who
were critical uh of it um who would be
asking but you know it that was I think
five or six years ago and um I I can't I
can't recall every bit of conversation.
No, no, no, of course, Jerry. I was just
I was just imagining it being a very
very central point, the point we've just
mentioned about structure being required
to encode information.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um absolutely. I remember I
remember the reaction of a guy in
Seattle um a guy who himself won a Nobel
Prize uh in biochemistry and we're sort
of friends. uh he he passed on recent
rec recently at age above 100. Uh and he
told me that he went to a seminar where
Luke was talking. This is an annual
seminar that occurs um in Europe in in
which uh they invite Nobel laureates
from different fields.
um and they invite um uh some postocs um
who are highly recommended so they can
rub shoulders with with the Nobel
laureates and a few people are asked uh
to present and Luke presented for the
first time um uh his findings at that
conference and a guy from Seattle was
telling me you know I just got back from
a conference where Luke Montouier
presented you know and I know you're
interested in water and he was talking
about water too and he he presented had
the most preposterous idea. Um, and he
was the laughingtock of the whole
conference. So, he was telling me about
something I already knew. Uh, um, but
but and and so among all the Nobel
laureates who were who were there, he he
was kind of a laughingstock because it's
hard to believe, you know, it's really
hard to believe. But but it's been shown
now by multiple groups in a seemingly
convincing ways. Um each one using a
different different approach and
different technique. Even Jacques Benist
who actually was a friend of Luke Luke
started in this field um when Jacques
Beness died um because he was really
believing in what Jacques had had found
he wanted to continue his work. Um and
uh it was it was difficult. He he showed
that you could well he he was studying a
a reaction that u took place in certain
cells called basoils.
And uh you could take some antibodies
and the if you expose the cells to those
antibodies the basophils would secrete
something histamine. and and someone
showed him that you can take the
antibbody solution, you can dilute it
and dilute it and dilute it and dilute
it until all you have left is water um
and get the same same results. At first,
he didn't believe it, but the guy
demonstrated in his laboratory that this
was true. And so, he started doing
experiments himself. And of course, he
he found the same result. And he's the
one who coined the term water memory.
And Jock told me that was the biggest
mistake he ever made because it was too
provocative. He shouldn't have called it
water memory. He should have called it
something else.
&gt;&gt; But he was he was attacked uh by the
editor of nature who basically destroyed
his career. Uh and he died prematurely.
So Luke was his friend and um and Luke
was so impressed by what what he had
found um that he basically took over and
advanced the experiment to the point
where what I mentioned um
&gt;&gt; which is where is right now
&gt;&gt; what about Masero Emoto dismissed on
Wikipedia as a pseudocientist he's not
even been referred to as a researcher
was there anything true about his claims
As far as your judgment goes,
&gt;&gt; uh in my judgment is the answer is yes.
Um so um I I I never met him. Uh invited
him to our water conference and in fact
my late wife and I invited him to our
home for a dinner and he said yes. Um
and um he never showed up and he had a
good excuse. He died. Um so uh um now I
also had experience with his main
translator
and he shared with me that always there
was a question from the audience um how
repeatable is this experiment um and uh
and the translator had had to give the
response and he got tired of saying well
I'm not for emoto I'm not a scientist
I'm a spiritualist and I don't have to
conform to the same rules as scientists.
So, so what what what he shared was that
he would he would put his intention to
um in not one container of water but 50
petri dishes of water and he freeze them
all and he then in check them one by one
uh and um uh he picked out the one that
best illustrated what he wanted to
illustrate. Now that's the antithesis of
science. It's cherrypicking.
And so a lot of people particularly
scientists were highly critical of what
he was doing. On the other hand um
there's um um a a guy who uh Dean
Raiden. Yeah. um who's famous for doing
um experiments that um you know are
spiritually oriented and doing doing
them absolutely
um uh with huge in level of integrity.
So so what you get is really believable
and he decided to check. So what he did
was he assembled a group of people, a
neutral uh people and they were shown a
series of slides and they had to decide
is this image beautiful or ugly. Uh the
crystal that they were seeing that Emoto
had prepared and then he analyzed the
results. Um, and it turned out
statistically significant uh that that
the the the ones that were considered
beautiful are the ones that emoto had
shown and um and were designated as
having been the result of positive
intention and vice versa for the
negative one. So, so it looked like it
looks like finally um his work has been
confirmed um in in in reliable
experiments. And how do you think it
relates to your findings? Is there
anything important for I mean you
mentioned the spiritualist side. Is
there anything important for science
that we can take from from the potential
uh validity of his results?
I think it's one one more piece of
evidence that that um first of all water
has structure otherwise it wouldn't be
able to store information and um and
that there's information out there that
uh we don't know the nature of the
information but it looks like that
information um is stored in water uh
because Emoto uh demonstrated that. So
that's one one step of of advance. Uh
because this information has has been
known. Um so recently I u I I had some
meetings with u um one of the you know
the telepathic tapes have the telepathy
tapes. Do you know about that? I don't
but we have interviewed uh Dean Raiden
and uh people working on remote viewing
and and other such sort of intentionled
research um you know less less
interested in the in the spiritual side
not because uh spirituality is not
important but but just because it's very
difficult to to to convey in a
scientific context
&gt;&gt; but I don't know about these tapes no
&gt;&gt; well yeah so it's someone who actually
studied There are a bunch of autistic
kids, seriously autistic, who
communicate by telepathy. They can't
speak. And there's always someone like
mother who um um can communicate with
him. And all all telepathically they
they can know what the mother is
thinking. Um and uh the mother knows
what they're thinking because they can't
communicate verbally. Um, so, um, uh,
some of the mothers can, I'm I'm not
sure. Sometimes they'll write something
on a blackboard and that's how the
mother, uh, gets the information.
Anyway, I connected with one of those,
uh, a guy named Noah who was one of
these kids. He's now 25. Um, and and
someone who connects with him who's
local near near Seattle. And we had a
three-way conversation.
uh and and uh this just happened uh last
week or two. We'd had two two
conversations and he was telling me his
ideas about easy water and she was she
was translating um and it um his his
idea couldn't understand all aspects of
it. It was a more of a spiritual idea on
the creation of easy water. and he he
would be communicating with the
translator who was sitting beside me and
she'd draw a diagram of a circle here
and an oval there and and um and he was
telling her, "Oh, no, no, move the
circle a little bit to the left without
verbalizing it." And she would move it a
little bit to the left. It seemed uh
entirely real for me. And so um um and
they also think that that water has
something to do with this uh kind of
communication. So you you kind of need,
you know, to make some advances in
understanding what's going on in all the
realms that you just mentioned besides
telepathy, remote viewing, and and all
of the above. Um um you you you need to
begin with some hypothesis and and build
from there. And I guess the first
elemental hypothesis is that water is
somehow involved. So all the studies
that uh people are in engaging in um um
thinking about water and trying
contribute to um increased understanding
and maybe one day one hopes that
there'll be a really concrete hypothesis
uh that will help us understand what's
going on because right now it doesn't
exist.
&gt;&gt; Well Jerry, you have been so so generous
with your time. You've allowed me to go
into so much detail. And I really really
appreciate you answering so many burning
questions I had about this topic. So
important for the import for the future
of biology, for the future of medicine,
and for potential technological
solutions as well. Listeners, you must
go out and get Professor Pollock's new
book Charged. Might as well pick up a
copy of the fourth phase of water while
you're there as well. So Jerry, it just
remains for me to thank you on behalf of
the listeners for your time and we wish
you all the best with your future
research. Well, thank you, Freddy, and
thank you uh for being so um informed uh
uh regarding all the questions you you
asked. I really appreciate that. It
inspires me.
&gt;&gt; Professor Gerald Pollock, thank you very
much.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Freddie.
[Music]