joining me from El Salvador. No problem.
Um, actually, I wanted to start out by
just kind of telling you how I came to
invite you and how I came to learn about
you because it's kind of a kind of a fun
story, I guess. Um, but I don't I don't
know you that well. I've I've only sort
of recently discovered your stuff. I
kind of knew about you vaguely and I
started reading, but I haven't read that
much. And I kind of wanted to try and
capture you here at at the sort of the
beginning of me actually reading your
work. But the way that I came to you and
the way that some of this will probably
connect is, you know, I got my start in
in college. I studied evolutionary
developmental biology and I thought a
lot about some of the mysteries of
evolution including some of the patterns
in the evolutionary record that were uh
sort of defying explanation. And then I
did a PhD in neuroscience or I studied
feeding behavior and the control of
feeding in the hypothalamus. Obviously,
that'll connect into some of the stuff
that we discuss, but but some of your
work is starting make me has started to
make me rethink some of the things that
I thought I knew about in a new way. And
is that I mean, your history for me,
just so you know, I didn't know anything
about you to be honest with you. Um, you
know, Shantel just told me to talk to
you, but the fact that you have this
background, uh, and I know what you just
told me you wanted to talk about, I
actually think where we should start
then is the great oxygenation event
because I'm going to tell you that you
will be probably more fascinated how
that links your evolutionary
uh, scientific history to your
neurobiology. ology because that to me
is the greatest story never really told
science still doesn't understand. Okay,
we can start there. Let's start there in
just a second. So, let me just finish
because uh I want to give a shout out to
someone who introduced me to you
indirectly. Um so anyways, I finished my
PhD. I go in the private sector that
takes me to Seattle where I'm at now. Uh
and and you can imagine the light
environment I'm in. Maybe we'll get to
that. Um, I go into the cannabis
industry and I work in tech for a number
of years. Early on, I get introduced to
another science guy in cannabis named
Kevin Mccieran. Kevin and I kind of
become friends and we see each other at
conferences and stuff and, you know,
fast forward the COVID era begins and
very quickly after it starts as I start
learning more about the mRNA vaccines
and stuff. Obviously Kevin ties into
that story and so he's been on the
podcast a couple of times and you know I
sort of followed that whole saga with
him very early on catching things before
other people did in terms of what Kevin
noticed and and what we talked about and
then of course uh somehow I think Kevin
mentioned you or something and that's
when I first heard about you and and
kind of came in this direction but like
I said I haven't read too much and to
your suggestion let's start with the
great oxygenation event in terms terms
of that saga in evolutionary history and
I'll let you start wherever you want but
but there are some mysteries there that
that have probably defied traditional
explanation. Well, I think I think what
you should do is tell me about the
mysteries and then maybe we can start
the story because I think the story from
an evolutionary perspective
um actually is well thought out. The
problem is is where they went off the
rails. M um so my my perspective uh just
so you know um I think some of the work
that's being done by Michael Leaven and
TUS and also Nick Lane at University
College London
uh they're working back through the
tunnel where you and I are going to
start actually at the tunnel two domains
of life bacteria archa
working towards
what you learned in your PhD and what
they're teaching, you know, in their
lectures and what they're publishing,
you know, now I think so the audience
understands what we're doing here. We're
attacking evolution from both sides and
then we can let it all hang out from
there. Yeah. Yeah. No, I think that I
think that's good. So, you know, from my
perspective, when we look back in deep
evolutionary history, there have been
like a there have been a number of
things where there's this really
interesting pattern in the record, and
there is an explanation for it, but it's
perhaps not satisfying or fully
satisfying to everyone. One of those, I
think, is what you're talking about,
which is sort of the endo symbiotic
story about how mitochondria got into
our cells and what that might have to do
with environmental changes that were
happening at the time. That story to me
has always been a little bit vague.
There's clear evidence, right? The
mitochondria used to be free-living
organisms. They get into larger cells
and they become what we call ukareotic
cells now. But the details to there were
always to me kind of murky. It's just
sort of like well somehow these things
engulfed these smaller things and
they're simply with us now. Let me ask
you a question. Do you know do you have
any insight before we talk about why the
story is murky? Like what would be your
insight right now? I don't I don't have
much. I just know that you've got the
original endo symbiotic hypothesis from
Margulus I think right and remember who
remember who she was married to
Carl Sean reallyologist yeah so this is
the reason why you got lost and I want
you to understand this because it's
going to be important for the audience
and for you you your PhD is basically
set up by biochemists they have a
biochemical
uh bias
To understand endo symbiosis, you
actually have to have a
biofysical basis. Meaning that you do
have to know physics. And the problem
for people when we discuss this story,
they don't know enough about physics
when they're in these fields. This is
the reason why Michael Lean, Nick Lane,
and even you have struggled with the
murkiness. Why? because you don't
understand that Archimedes lover to
truly explain life is late and you have
to understand how it does it and the
evolutionary story of the GOE as far as
I'm concerned is the best place to start
it because then you can see it laid out
right in front.
Yep. All right. So, so start us off
here. What is this great oxygenation
event? Well, it happens we think between
2.1 and 2.4 4 billion years ago where
all of a sudden some of the
cyanobacteria that are in those two
domains because there's only two domains
at this time on Earth, remember life
started 3.8 billion years ago. So now
we're fast forwarding about a billion2
years and these bacteria start kicking
out oxygen and the
oxygen is what we call a holocaust.
That's the way I like to teach people to
do it. And if you understand that the
metabolic pathways back then worked
quite well in a hypoxic state where you
know glycolysis specifically or what I
would tell modern biochemists to think
of as a warberg shifted
metabolism and you have to add into the
go the big story of how sunlight, oxygen
and electricity become central to the
understanding of what happens. So, if
you remember, and I'm going to assume
you don't because you said you're new to
my work two years ago when I Rick Rubin
had me on his podcast with Yubberman, I
tried to explain to them the
evolutionary history of the
semiconductive proteins in us
specifically starts with chlorophyll,
then it goes to hemoglobin, then it goes
to melanin, then obviously the thing
that you wanted to talk to me about is
the leptin melanoin pathway. So that's
actually how these things link. And
these are the three major
semiconductors. So the first
semiconductor that shows up in the great
oxygenation event, believe it or not, is
not something that's to deal with oxygen
toxicity. It's to deal with CO2. And we
use CO2 and water to create sugar. Uh
that happens about 650 million years
ago. It's about 50 million years to 100
million years before the Cambian
explosion. The Camron explosion is where
we get ukarots and where we get 32 pho
of life that show up, you know,
literally overnight in the fossil.
That's one of the other great mysteries
is what explains that punctuated
pattern. It's not a mystery. It's not a
mystery to decentralized science. It's a
mystery to people who think Darwin was
right. M in fact the Cambrian explosion
in my view actually is one of the key
pieces that everybody who's a biochemist
should stop and say
um this makes no sense when we think
about what Darwin really taught us. And
that's good that if you have that
mindset this story that we're going to
weave is going to be even I think more
interesting for you to to ponder. So
anyway, what happens is oxygen tensions
for a long period of time go up, down,
sideways, they move back and forth. Why
is this important? Chlorophyll being the
first story. It's basically a porfin
that magnesium is in inside. You have to
know that magnesium is periodic table
number 12. It's got 12 electrons. The
story of magnesium, the reason why it's
selected is very simple. It's extremely
redox stable and meaning redox stable
means that not even strong light can
change you know its oxidation state
which is good because that made it
perfect for the photo stem that
basically is tied to the ribiscoco
enzyme which you know you know very well
what is the key story at this part in
the goe this is actually how we slow
light down capture its power by
increasing the electrical resistance
utilizing mass on this planet. This is
called chlorophyll. So that's the first
change in electrical resistance that you
see. And what happens when light is
slowed down like that? You get things
called food. So food is an
electromagnetic barcode of sunlight that
comes here. What's the other thing that
happens in the mid portion of the sun's
life? This is the part that you probably
didn't know that much about cuz you're
not cosmology person, but I will tell
you that Lin Margulus did know this. He
was married to a cosmologist. Um, it
turns out that our star is a G-class
star. And as a G-class star, when it
gets in its mid age, kind of like I
guess where I am now, it begins to kick
out more UV light, generally around 10
to 20%. That turns out to be a really
big part of the story because that UV
light with this oxygen starts to create
this thing that you've probably learned
about, Nick, which is that ozone layer
and how ozone does different things to
oxygen. It changes the terrestrial uh
spectrum of what happens between the sun
and the earth. So, these things are
going
on while chlorophyll is forming. And for
those of you who don't know, I'm not
going to get into all the weeds of this
because I want to weave the bigger
story. Chlorophyll has lots of different
forms. Okay. What's the next big thing
that happens on Earth? Magically, oxygen
tensions continue to rise, as Nick well
knows. And then what happens? Molecular
oxygen begins to really pound up. For
those of you who don't know, our
atmosphere is made out of 71% nitrogen
and 21% oxygen today. Back in this
period or epic that me and Nick are
talking about, it goes from literally
less than 1% all the way up to 21%. So,
so when life got started, it was a very
very different oxygen environment with
much less oxygen than we're used to. No
oxygen. If you want to know the truth,
the methanogens, this is where Nick Lane
has done great work. um you know we used
to use as a terminal electron acceptor
metal ions you know uh that's really the
key story and um you know life early on
was anorobic hypoxic
and oxygen in that scene is a toxic
electrical stressor. So let's do a hard
stop because this is generally not how
you know biochemists will learn about
what oxygen is. What do you need to know
about oxygen that makes it really unique
on Earth? First thing is oxygen is an
electrical uh stressor. So I think most
of you know that when you see
electricity in the sky during storms,
you you understand that when you see a
bolt of lightning hit the ground, it
makes an electrical pattern on the
ground. Uh and that pattern that it
makes is electrical resistance. Okay. So
oxygen also happens to be extremely
electrogative. It's the second most
electrogative thing on the periodic
table. What does that mean? It draws
electrons to it. Yeah, that's why it's
the electron acceptor in in the
mitochondria. And that's that's what's
really important. But as the electron
acceptor in mitochondria, it also means
it did something else. It quantized
metabolism. Meaning that when we began
to use oxygen, we stopped using
glycolysis, gluconneioenesis. We started
to favor the TCA cycle. Now the TCA
cycle is a relatively new member that
shows up from the Cambrian explosion on.
What is the TCA cycle all about? When
you go from the Cambrian explosion to
us, you have to begin to to use this
oxygen. So what's the the next
semiconductive protein that life
innovates which I think most of you know
uh that's called hemoglobin and it's
similar to to um uh chlorophyll in terms
of its basic structure. Right. Right.
Well, when you talk about its basic
structure, this is the key part that I
think uh where biochemists begin to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
the bed. Everybody knows that it's in uh
the same ring structure that magnesium
is in, but you know that iron has 26
electrons. So much more complex because
it can absorb more light. But there's
something very peculiar about iron that
people in biochemistry really don't
learn about, but people in physics do.
And it turns out that iron can only
carry oxygen. In the plus two oxidation
state, when it's in the plus three
oxidation state, it cannot carry oxygen.
That's when it becomes met hemoglobin.
Why is this a big story for for Nick?
Well, because of the great oxygenation
event that he and I just talked about,
remember I told you we went from 1 to
21%. So, what does that mean? The slope
of that line was not linear. Okay? In
fact, it was pretty much nonlinear and
chaotic, which is the reason why
biochemists, evolutionary biologists
still don't realize to this day why
breathing and why metabolism has to be
quantized because oxygen is the reason
why it had to be quantized. And it turns
out that light is capable of changing
the oxidation state of iron plus two to
plus three. This is what makes iron very
different than magnesium. It is not
redux stable like magnesium is. And the
reason it was chosen by nature is
because oxygenation levels changed. So
you have one state of iron that's
extremely beneficial for oxygenated
hemoglobin. Then what else did nature
do? There's some other uh radical
chemicals. And there's one other thing I
need to talk to you about. Oxygen that
uh I got thrown off a stage one time in
2014 by Dave Asprey. Oxygen's
paramagnetic. What does that mean?
Oxygen is drawn to magnetic fields. So
if you want to know why I told you a
little while ago that uh breathing is
quantized, you know that the FO head
spins when you're using TCA cycle.
That's 9,000 protons through the FO
head. the FO head from Faraday's laws of
electromagnetism that he found in
1851. The electron chain's got a current
that goes through it that's got a 30
million volt charge. That's Nick Lane's
work. This FO head spins 9,000 times a
second. That's how you make ATP. Turns
out that's discussed with TCA cycle
dynamics. you know as a biochemist
that's not true in glycolysis not true
in gluconioenesis not true in a lot of
other things but that's not important
for this story the point that I'm trying
to make to you is that the TCA cycle is
very selected for in a normoxic
environment that means when oxygen is
greater than 20%. Okay, so that's
important. And the fact that oxygen is
paramagnetic is never brought up in in
biochemistry. In fact, it's the only
paramagnetic atom on the periodic table.
Okay? And and I'm when I say that I mean
gas. So the spinning FO head creates its
own magnetic field. That is the reason
FO head for us. The FO head is the
spinning head of the ATP. That's the
fifth side, the the protein machine that
makes the ATP, right? That's the That's
the protein that Nick Lane has spent
most of his life trying to figure out um
all of its molecular biology and all its
evolutionary history, you know. And he,
like I told you, he's come through it
this way. I'm going to tell you that all
of this was determined by a quantum
evolution by what happened prior to and
during the great oxygenation event. So,
so you're saying you're basically saying
um in essence when the oxygen level got
sufficiently high, it sort of flipped
all of a sudden the evolutionary
pressure to use something like this as
the way to make energy. This it made it
made the TCA cycle better at making
energy. Correct. And and this gets to
the crux of the issue where now I'm
really going to I think surprise you cuz
I would say to you uh tell me what you
you think the flip of the switch
was have any idea?
No. Cuz I know you're a smart guy to
have the degrees you have can't be. So
this is the reason why I'm going to tell
you why understanding Jack Kruse has been
really hard for guys like you.
Paramagnetism turns out to be a big
deal. And as I told you, I got thrown
off the stage for this trying to tell
this story a long time ago, 11 years ago
in
Pasadena. Oxygen being paramagnetic
should make a biochemist say, "Okay,
what in life was
paramagnetic during the GOE that we
don't talk that much about?" And it
turns out the Nobel Prize was given for
that chemical in 1992. It's called
nitric oxide. also a free radical. And
here's the interesting thing. Do you
know that nitric oxide also has a
binding site on hemoglobin? And did you
know, Nick, that that binding site on
hemoglobin stops ATP from being made?
No. It actually stops oxygen from being
carried as well on hemoglobin. So, what
am I the picture I'm painting for you
right now? You're beginning to see a
taxi cab that nature used during the GOE
as we went from 1% to 21%. And guess
what? That uh quantum construction is
still in you to this very day. And
you'll be very surprised to hear that
the story I told you before about light
alone being able to change the oxidation
state of iron is important. But because
N is also paramagnetic, now you have two
moyes that are reacting very much the
same way. The difference is nitric oxide
works at a very focal level. Yes.
Oxyonation tends to work at a very
global level. Well, and there's some
there's some interesting tie-ins here to
stuff I've discussed on the podcast
before. Like I didn't know until about
last year or so that there's nitric
oxide stores in the skin and UV light
exposure liberates those. Correct. So,
what does that tell you that you just
described the basics of the leptin
prescription given what I'm giving you?
You're you're beginning to jump forward
in in the story because you just
realized that if you're able to bind N
to hemoglobin, you don't need as much
oxygen. If you don't need as much
oxygen, that means you don't need as
much food because guess where all the
electrons and protons come from?
So that's the basics of the leptin
prescription. And then you begin to ask
other questions, Nick. Say, well, this
makes sense why God or evolution put
leptin in our subq fat, which makes us
radically different than any other
primate. Then it starts to make sense.
Well, this is the reason why we lost our
hair for the same reason. Why? Because
that signal has to get there. But then
because I want to continue on the the
story that we first started because I
think this is the most important story
that you need to get down because then I
think your questions from there are
going to get really pointed. Mhm. Uh so
nitric oxide is the paramagnetic switch
that flips us from choices in
metabolism. So you know what that means?
That means that all metabolism happens
spontaneously and Archimedes lever is
the light that turns it on. So then you
got to ask yourself a big question. Are
we talking about light that comes from
our star or are we talking about light
that may come from inside of us? Now
remember I told you the story about Lin
Margolas and her husband. Mhm. That a
G-class star makes more UV light. You
may be surprised to know that this UV
light story is ties to N. You just said
it in your skin. And you know these
parts, but what you don't understand is
how it fits in the quantum design of a
cell. And what happens when this UV
light um shows up on Earth? Oxygen
levels spike further. Things are
selected out in our membranes,
especially in ukarats. That's where DHA
from the seas gets incorporated. DHA
meaning fish oil um in the marine food
chain is really really important. Why?
Because for us to use it meaning
ukariats it has to be in a specific
position. Comes in three different
positions. SN1, SN2 and SN3. And I'm
assuming your audience is is smart
enough to figure out what that means.
But define it a little bit for us
because we don't get into a lot of
physical chemistry stuff. Yeah. the
glycerol backbone of uh of lipids has
you know a carbon chain and the SN1, SN2
and SN3 position are which carbon it's
linked to. It turns out for ukarots like
us meaning primates uh it works and it's
only incorporated into the brain and
into the labdin melanoort and pathway
when it's in the SN2 position. Uh, so
that's the reason why people need to eat
fish and not take fish oil because fish
oil tends to be in SN1 and SN3. We need
the fish to do the job for us. So that's
the other reason you want to use algo
fish oil as well. And what's the quantum
reason that this is important? It turns
out the SN2 position is very planar. It
looks just like a copper wire. It has pi
electrons on the top and bottom, which
means that it works really well. So, you
need to know where is the most common
place. What's the place with the highest
density of SN2 DHA in the human body?
It's in the central retinal pathways
that connects your retina to that leptin
receptor that Nick's been wanting to
chomp at and get to. So, you're saying,
yeah, basically one one way of saying
some of what you just said is that we
talk about fish oil, we talk about
omega-3 fatty acids, we talk about DHA.
And from a biochemical perspective, you
might say, "Well, the DHA that's in my
fish oil is the same that's in the fish.
I could have eaten, but it's not.
There's a physical difference in in some
of the structure, right? And that's the
key word. The the word that you're going
to keep coming back to when you realize
how much you have to unlearn is
biochemistry taught you no bioysics."
Yes. And it turns out that when you
really see my decentralized perspective,
you're going to find out that there is
nothing in biology that's a fundamental
science. In fact, physics is the basics
of biology. And biology gets really easy
to understand when you understand this
key part. But this story that we're
going through, once you get hemoglobin,
then what are the hemoglobins that most
people know about? Well, you know about
myoglobin that's in muscles. Tends to be
more um hypoxic. Why? Because you have
lactate biology going on in those cells.
And then you have something called
metoglobin. met hemoglobin. I don't
think they learn too much about it in in
PhD biochemistry because I don't think
they understand too much about it, but
doctors do. And the reason why is
because sometimes we have to treat
people that have this type of
hemoglobinopathy. And what does it do?
It binds uh oxygen really good and
doesn't let it go at all. And it's a
real problem. And to treat those people
in the clinic, we usually have to give
them something called methylene blue.
And methylene blue unbinds the oxygen
and turns it back into oxygen carrying
hemoglobin. So what just happened there?
You just learned something about
methylene blue. What it does it really
do? It changes the oxidation state of
iron from plus three to plus two. Okay,
that's effectively what happens. So then
hemoglobin becomes able to deliver the
oxygen to the tissues who need it. The
point that I'm trying to make to you is
I just explained to you we have three
different hemoglobins. Now for the
people who are really paying attention
to the office there they probably
realize well there's thalismia there's
G6PD there's cickle cell anemia. Yeah,
these are all different hemoglobins that
evolved during the time of the GOE. And
at that time, they all had different
evolutionary
uh links and and key points. And all of
that pointed to the things that were
going on with oxygen during the GOE
until we get to the Cambrian explosion.
So Nick is probably saying, "Okay, Jack,
get to the chase. How the hell did the
two domains of life collide? This one is
the pretty simple one from a physics
perspective. Um, because oxygen is being
pumped in and now the sun is hitting
ozone up in the in the sky and creating
O2 and the oxygen
radical. It creates a huge
electrical resistance in the atmosphere.
that huge electrical resistance is
actually what joins the two domains of
life. And does physics work this out in
uh in different places? Yeah. Not so
much in biology, but they do it in um in
physical chemistry class. And the thing
I was always amazed that Lim Margulus
never put this together.
when you consider who she was married
to. Obviously, I was not privy to those
conversations. But also, Nick Lane is a
really smart guy and he like you is an
evolutionary biologist. I just don't
think he's strong on the physics side of
things cuz what can electricity do?
Electricity can actually cause things to
join forces. We know this through the
the buy frequencies that are present on
alpha helixes and on membranes. It it
creates tremendous uh voltages. And one
of the things that Nick Lane brought to
the world, I'd say probably 15 20 years
ago in his book Power, Sex, and Suicide,
he's the first person that ever
accurately
uh deciphered some of the things that
Lyn Margula said. But one of the things
that she clearly said in her work is
that the inner mitochondrial membrane is
really unique for two real things. First
thing is it has no DHA in It's one of
the only membranes in mammals that has
no DHA. It still retains its its
bacterial uh composition. And the other
thing is it's only five to six angstroms
big. So that means it carries a 30
million volt charge. So when you hear
that and you go, wait a minute, 30
million volts is the same kind of power
in physics that's in a bolt of
lightning. Mhm. We have, you know, in
some cells we have, you know, 36 to
15,000 mitochondria. The next question
should have been in
biochemistry. How do we protect our cell
from getting electrocuted? Mhm. Okay.
And unfortunately, that question was
never asked in your training or my
training. But when I started to, you
know, study the work very carefully of
Robert O. Becker, I began to realize that
the answer was staring me in the face in
the great oxygenation event. It turns
out the evolution of hem proteins was
the key. So hold just just to make just
to make sure so far. So basically oxygen
levels go up and this is a long time
ago. Um you've got ozone, you've got O2
and the oxygen radical and you're saying
electrical resistance increased. In
other words, the the physical
characteristics of the environment
literally in some sense pushed what
became mitochondria and and the bigger
cells together. Without without the GOE,
without the electrical resistance in the
atmosphere, um the joining of the two
domains of life never happens. And then
when when the two domains join, which is
where we're at now, then you have to ask
yourself, okay, how did the membrane
deal with the 30 million volt charge
that was in it? Obviously, that charge
is the thing that gets harnessed to
build the 32 filo that we already know
about. So, this is where the story that
I was getting into with you about heem
being important. He uh comes up with one
of its first proteins. What's that first
protein? It's called cytochrome c
oxidase. So I'm going to put my fingers
up. I don't know if you use videos in
your thing or not, but I know that you
know this. So right here is NAD
positive. That's the what I'd like to
call the opening salvo in a
mitochondria. And over here is oxygen.
So between these two things is all the
cytochrome proteins that are also
hembased proteins. But that 30 million
volt current is going through this. So
how did we protect ourselves? Well,
cytochrome coxidase has a very
interesting feature. It does two things.
The first thing that it does it makes
dutyium depleted water and it does that
at cytochrome C um oxidase via two steps
in the TCA cycle. The econase step the
fumemerase step and that's where free
water is made. The difference is
mitochondria are racist unlike
chlorophyll. Chlorophyll will use any
type of water to make sugar. um it does
it to different degrees but mitochondria
because they're reversing the process of
photosynthesis only deals with duterium
depleted water. So when I learned about
this, you know, 20 25 years ago, I asked
the simple question, why was nature
racist for the water that she put around
this 30 million volt current? I found
the answer in physics. Turned out that
water is the perfect insulator when it
doesn't have any ions in it and it
doesn't have any deterium. It becomes
something that retains that 30 million
volt charge. Explain explain detium and
detium uh depleted water explicitly for
us. Yeah, it's it's pretty simple to
understand. And the hydrarology cycle on
earth is very understandable. Um
physical chemists and ecologists have
figured it out. Um water on earth and
our oceans uh has 150 parts per million
medium. So you have to know a little bit
about water. Most people I think in your
field know water is H2O chemically. What
most people forget is that there's three
isotopes of hydrogen on Earth. One is
proteium which is light hydrogen. That's
the one we're interested in. Uh second
one is dutaterium. That's proton plus uh
an extra neutron. Then tridium which is
a proton plus two uh neutrons. That
one's radioactive. That one plays no
role in biology. Turns out that dutyium
does play a role in biology. So the
hydrarology cycle on earth the way it
works
is water evaporates goes into clouds and
then falls back down on us. I mean third
grade you learn that it's not hard. But
what you may not know is the atomic mass
which is doubled in dutyium uh makes it
evaporate at different rates. What's the
reason for that? Something called the
kinetic isotope effect. So this goes
straight back to something you didn't
learn in biochemistry that well that
funny guy from burn his name is Einstein
equals MC². When you double the atomic
mass of something, you reduce its
thermodynamics. So it turns out that due
to it's just it's literally just
heavier, right? Well, it's heavier, but
it has thermodynamic considerations. So,
what's the thermodynamic considerations?
Well, on the hydraology cycle on Earth,
that means that equatorial water has 150
parts per million when the rain falls.
When you go to the poles, that's the
most dutarium depleted water, it's right
around between 130 and 140. Why does
that make sense from the chlorophyll
side of the story? Well, you want to
have less chlor I should say less um
dutarium in the water when you're
chlorophyll so that you can make food.
Why? Because the the light the sunlight
at the poles sucks compared to the
sunlight at the equator. See, it's
quantized. And when you understand that
basic thing from the first
semiconductor, which is chlorophyll,
then you begin to understand why nature
is making dutyium depleted water around
this huge 30 million volt current. Why?
Because she doesn't want that electric
current to get out and electrocute
things in your cell or go down through
say nerve pathways or the neural crest
cells and electrocute those things just
like I told you that a bolt of lightning
does when it hits somebody in the back
creates an electrical resistance. So you
got you've got this
huge reservoir of power, this electrical
potential around the mitochondria and
basically the isotope that is present in
a water molecule will dictate how much
of that you can insulate against.
Correct? And then here's the the
beautiful part of the story. The other
part of the hem protein that I know you
learned but don't understand how it's
the feedback loop for the goe is CCO
also controls apoptosis. So what does
that mean? It means that when bad things
happen inside the mitochondria meaning
that it can't handle the TCA cycle or
it's Warberg shifted and things are not
going well.
um the planned demolition of apoptosis
gets rid of that bad engine. So that was
the feedback loop from the great
oxygenation event that happens over
probably 1.2 billion years if my math is
correct where we innovate this hem
protein and it turns out that's the
thing that saves your life if you get
oxygen toxic for some reason. So then
you should do a hard stop and say,
"Okay, Jack, what would make a TCA
living mammal get oxygen toxic?" Well,
I'll give you the first one that
everybody knows about. 1971, we sent,
you know, astronauts up to the moon.
They got in the space capsule. We used
100% oxygen in their capsule and they
all died when they got a spark. Turns
out that oxygen at really, really high
concentrations is really bad. Now, I'll
give you number two that you may not
know because you're not a doctor. Any
doctor knows about this deed called this
disease called ARDS. ARDS was it's
called acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Uh that's what most people
died from in COVID. So when we gave or
we give people with ARDS uh endotrachial
tube and we deliver an FIO2 which is
oxygen at a higher level. Why do doctors
do that? Because they use a pulse ox to
see what your oxygen level is. They're
taught what the biochemist tells them
that if your SAT rate goes down, you
need to give people more oxygen because
we are TCA mammals. What the doctors
don't know is that you have this little
switch in you that Nick and I were
talking about that nitric oxide story.
And it turns out that the pulseox, okay,
everybody who's a doctor now, and this
is for you too, Nick, you think that the
pulox is accurate to what's going on at
the mitochondrial level. I'm here to
tell you that the story that I've
already laid out for you. That's not
true. You know why? Met hemoglobinia is
not picked up by the pulox. In fact, in
critical care medicine, you have to have
a special pox to pick up this. Why?
because you can be fooled. And it turns
out that ARDS when you don't know this
and you give somebody high oxygen level,
you actually destroy every organ in
their body. Why? Because of the
mechanism I just told Nick. The electric
current gets out, the bolt of
electricity follows the path of least
resistance in the body and it goes and
destroys other organs. Right? All
because the doctors are not taught
because the biochemists don't know the
story about nitric oxide and oxygen
being quantized and being paramagnetic.
And it turns out when you know this
story and you're a neurosurgeon who
decides to go back in four years ago to
start taking care of all these people
that are getting told they're going to
die and
magically I know how to fix this problem
because I know about the
paramagnetism of met hemoglobinia and I
know how to flip the switch using a
paramagnetic drug. Guess what magically
happens? FiO2s come down. We can get
people off their dopamine drips. We can
get them back. The family gets told that
they're going to die and next thing you
know they're walking out of the ICU in
24 to 48 hours. What is the paramagnetic
drug?
Methylene blue, my friend. I already
told you that. And the reason why is
because it changes the oxidation state
from plus three to plus two. What does
that do? No, you can use that oxygen.
Knocks off nitric oxide and allows
oxygen to bind. Then the pulock is
accurate. What did I have to do? I had
to go back and teach every nurse and
every critical care doctor that I worked
with for four years that they really
didn't learn the things that were really
important, taking care of sick mammals
who they all thought were TCA dominant
people. I said, "No, in fact, that lady
right there, she's more like a
salamander." Okay? I if if you really if
we had an electron microscope and we
pulled her blood out, we would find out
that most of her hemoglobin was met
hemoglobin. And I bet you we would even
find in some of those people that they
also have nucleiated red blood cells.
And I tried to get some of the ICU
doctors to do peripheral blood smears on
these people and they wouldn't do it.
And why did I do that, Nick? Well, this
is something else you learned about in
evolutionary biology that you haven't
put together with this story. You know
that the only cell in mammals,
specifically humans, that doesn't have a
an a nucleus is a red blood cell.
Correct? Yes. Also doesn't have any
mitochondria, right?
Yes, that's my understanding. Okay. So,
let me ask you a question. What do red
blood cells in children look like that
are inside their mothers? Do they look
the same as yours and mine? No. Doesn't
there have to be a difference because
they have to be able to pull the oxygen
from the mother's blood into the No, I
already gave you the answer. I'm I want
you to stay with Uncle Jack. You ever
see a baby born, they're surrounded in
amnionic fluid. They're completely
hypoxic.
Completely. So, guess what? All fetal
hemoglobins are nucleated and they have
mitochondria in it. Guess what? that has
huge implications for this story because
it turns out that cell is what we would
call an adivistic um event. What does
that mean? That's you're going back in
time from when amphibians and reptiles
became mammals. And it turns out that's
why salamanders and frogs have nucleated
red blood cells. You know who found that
out? That you probably didn't learn too
much about when you were, you know,
studying to get your PhD. That's what
Robert Obecker found. He found something
that broke the central dogma of
molecular biology that you learned that
differentiation is impossible to happen.
Once a cell goes through
differentiation, it can't go back. Well,
it turns out, guess what? That's not
true, Nick. Because you know who proved
it in 1965 through 67 when he worked for
DARPA? Robert O. Becker. He found on his
limb regeneration studies of bone that
when he looked at the blastema after the
bone was broken that something very
unusual happened at the hypoxic injury
site that red blood cells seemed to
differentiate into more weaker forms and
he couldn't figure out what was really
going on. The interesting thing that he
did find out for DARPA is he found out
that bone is also electromagnetic. It
has a P and N semiconductor. That's
called collagen and appetite. And
there's two copper atoms that sit
electrostatically bound. And when those
copper atoms pop off, then appetite and
collagen disassociate. That's the
osteoporosis that the Russian astronauts
got. And that is the type of
osteoporosis that people on the planet
are getting right now from the use of
stuff like this. That's not the stuff
that me and Nick learned about when he
was in his PhD program and I was in
medical school. We learned about
osteoporosis from Piso electricity and
wolf's law. Turns out there's another
way and this other way happens to be the
bioysics of bone metabolism. And when
Becker showed definitively, and just so
you know, Nick, because you can fact
check this, this was published in the
journal of uh bone and joint research
and in electromagnetics in
1972. Becker showed that a red blood
cell went to a more permanent form and
that permanent form formed a stem cell.
From that stem cell, bone didn't heal,
it completely regenerated. Which is why,
remember Becker was an orthopedic
surgeon. If you had somebody who broke
their bone and say you had to go back
and operate on them, you would never
find a scar in the bone from where it
broke previously. And that's the reason
why. So the only time I can tell you
that that exists in humans, the f the
reason I got really interested in this
story when I was a young resident, um
this is when endoscopes first came out.
I had the opportunity to do a third
ventriculartomy in an inuterero baby.
Why? The OB/GYN found out that the baby
had hydrophilis and these new endoscopes
where you can make a small little hole
like that and pop it through pop it
through the uterus and then go to the
baby's head. We make a small little
incision right next to where the coronal
suture would be. We go down through the
germinal matrix of the frontal lobe and
we get into a place where something's
called the laminina terminalis which I
think you know is the anterior wall of
the third ventricle and right below that
is something called the bowser artery.
There's a membrane there in a fetus
that's really really thin and you can
see light through it and when we do this
surgery we shine the light look and see
the bowser artery through it. You put a
little hook through there and pull it,
open it up and that allows the CSF to go
from inside the ventricles to in the
subacoid space and you take everything
out and that's it. Here's the
interesting part of that case. You know,
when that baby's born, I got to see that
baby. Do you know that baby didn't have
a scar anywhere from the surgery I did?
Do you know that? No. It's the same
story as Becker. So, guess what? Turns
out the blastema and a fetus, what do
they share in common? They're using all
these paramagnetic
atoms for wound healing and
regeneration. It's the same story that
Becker found in the salamanders and the
frogs. Then what did Becker do in his
own work? He said, "Well, I know that in
uterero surgery is talked about being
done. Is it possible that I could
regenerate
and a mammal completely bone, skin,
muscles, and nerve?" So he took a
nine-year-old whose finger was amputated
to this level here. So you can see
that's the spine. Yeah. So it's down to
here. And he altered his technique. He
published this in 1972 in a
9-year-old using the techniques that I'm
telling you about
here through hypoxmia and nitric oxide.
He did differentiated the cells and was
able to regenerate the finger
completely. Hm. So, so the fact that
certain organisms like certain
amphibians are famous for being able to
regenerate limbs, it's not some
intrinsic difference between us and
them. It has to do with the oxygen
environment enabling this
differentiation to happen. It's not just
the oxygen environment. It turns out
it's also the current because if you
look at at Becker's setup, which I hope
you'll do after this, you'll notice that
he used a different atom than any of the
atoms that you and I have talked about.
He he winds up using um silver. And it
turns out that silver kept the wound
hypoxic longer so that the atavistic
effect of the differentiation could
occur to regenerate the limb completely.
And just to tie this to something else
you said and just to kind of repeat a
couple things and because this is sort
of a hot topic right now on on the
internet. So you mentioned methylene
blue. So everything you said implies
that whether or not methylene blue is
going to work or like be good for
someone is going to depend on the oxygen
levels whether or not they're in a
hypoxic state. It's going to depend if
you really understand this and this this
is why Becker's story is so interesting.
Um methylene blue can be radically
dangerous if it's in the hand of a
clinician who doesn't understand what
they're doing. Uh the same thing is true
with biohackers. The same thing is true
with mitohackers. The reason why
methylene blue is the paramagnetic
switch that actually turns you from
wound healing to regeneration. So
realize that that CCO cytochrome is a
really big deal. Really big deal. And it
turns out what happens when you leave
atism on warberg metabolism but you
never get to the regeneration pathway.
That's actually on ankcoenesis. And
that's effectively what's happening in
the world today. Why? Because it turns
out blue light and non-native EMF,
remember I told you the story before
that light is able to photo oxidize the
oxidation state of iron. That means
it'll keep it in the plus three state
too long. So you never get to the plus
two state. And it turns out plus two is
what you need to move oxygen around and
stuff, right? That's how you get back
from a hypoxic state to an oxygenation
state. Now, here's the part of the story
that I know. Okay. So, so because of
blue light and other things, people go
from that's the external stuff. Let's
let's let me let me go for a little bit.
Okay. Okay. So, that's the external part
because I'm weaving the story. So, let's
get back to your original question
because I don't want you to think Uncle
Jack forgot you. So, do you know that
leptin has got an absorption and
emission spectra that starts at 220
nanome nanometers? That should stop you
hard in your track if you're a
biochemist and go, "Wait a minute. I
learned when I was in sixth grade from
NASA that the sun only emits 250 to
about 3100. So why in the hell would we
put our major hormone in our subq fat
there if it's got a 220 nanometer
absorption spectra? Something doesn't
fit here. Well, it turns out it does fit
because there's this physicist in the
1950s and60s who finds out that through
the process of mitochondrial metabolism
that we make light inside of us from
oxygen radicals and from nitric
radicals, RNS and ROS. His name is Fritz
Pop. What does he decide to do? Fritz
pop takes every living tissue and puts
it in a photo multiplier and finds out
that as mitochondrial metabolism alters
through all the different pathways
you're expert in and I'm expert in that
we had to learn that it has a a spectra
of light that it emits and it turns out
the glycolytic pathways release 200 to
about a thousand and it turns out when
your TCA cycle you make a lot of extreme
low frequency UV V biopotons. In other
words, the spectrum changes as
metabolism changes. And it turns out,
remember what I told you before that
light is capable of changing the
oxidation state of iron by itself. Well,
that was really important in the story
in the GOE while we're
innovating chlorophyll and hemoglobin
because guess what? The original way we
were doing it was with light, which is
the reason why, Nick. Now you're
beginning to understand why Jack has
such a disdain for food gurus and
biochemists because they don't
understand that you don't need food. You
don't need it at all. When you
understand that light changes the
oxidation state, then you have to ask
yourself a question. Well, wait a
minute. If we create light inside of us,
doesn't that change the game a bit about
nitric oxide and what hemoglobin can do
in a hypoxic event with oxygen? The
answer is it does. And then it gets
really interesting. This is the the part
I wanted to get to before you go further
because this is where the tables are
really going to turn. Remember I told
you before about Nick Lane and me coming
at the problem through the different
tunnels. I'm going to tell you, here's
the big reason that this is a fractal.
Is light from the sun the same as light
from a
mitochondria at the nanoscopic level,
Nick. And I'm going to wait and let you
think about it for a minute.
Would you assume that it's the same? I
would. Yeah. The natural assumption
would be, yeah, it's light. It's not.
And it turns out the reason why is
because of the inverse square law. Why?
Because as the scale shrinks, light gets
stronger. It doesn't get weaker. As
scales get large, light gets weaker.
What do you mean weaker? Just what I
told you that the amount of energy that
it can impart reduces. So light at the
smallest scales becomes incredibly
strong. It's the same thing that happens
with the electromagnetic force, strong
and weak force in atoms. So, it turns
out light that's at the nanoscopic level
can target different things. So, you'll
probably be shocked to know that uh
light that's between 625 and 635 can
actually take cyanide and move it off uh
the electron chain transport. You don't
need anything else to do it. But it has
to be monochromatic laser light. So,
what am I telling you about these
biofotons that are made in us? They
actually make the biophotons that
actually marry up to 220 light for
leptin. Here's the other magical thing.
Do you know that the key biochemical
that you learned about in the inner
mitochondrial membrane which is NAD? NAD
is made out of what? Tryptophan. Do you
know what tryptophan's absorption
emission spectrum is? No. 200 to 400
nmter light. Right in that range. Did
you know that dopamine is also 240 to to
420? Also in the UV range. Turns out
that all the aromatic amino acids absorb
light that's stronger than our sun that
it turns out when our TCA cycle is
active makes 200 to 400 nanometer light
and that's been published just so you
know in the literature since the 1960s
but Nick I can tell from your face
you're like Jack I didn't learn that
envir I mean yes no one talks about this
Well, guess what? You're going to go
back when you do your deep dive and
you're going to see when Rick invited me
on to talk to Yubberman to to be the
teacher and him be the student. I asked
him one question. I said, "Your journey
through quantum biology should begin in
1927." I said, "There's a guy named
Alexander Gerwitch who is a Russian uh
biopysicist. He took an onion root, cut
it in half, put it a piece of glass in
between them and nothing happened. Then
he put a piece of quartz between the
onion root and you know what he found?
He got mitosis in the other side. Do you
know why that happened, Nick? Quartz
allows UV light to penetrate it. And
guess what he found? That UV light
stimulates mitosis to go through the
cell cycle. Do you think this might have
any implications for the story that I
told you that light is the real cause of
ankcoenesis? Why? Because light can
change the paramagnetic switch of plus
three to plus2 on iron and then get rid
of nitric oxide. In other words, I just
showed you how a baby goes from a sperm
and an egg, comes together, releases
light through the zinc release, which is
a dopin, and what happens? The baby
stays hypoxic in a Warberg shift in
metabolism with nucleated red blood
cells. The entire child becomes 9 lbs
after 9 months, builds out all its organ
systems by utilizing the biopotons
created there. Why? Because that is
biofotons are massively powered. Why?
Because they're at the smallest
scales. So guess what happens? Becker
comes along and says, "Okay, why do
mammal regeneration suck?" Because you
mentioned earlier, we have great
regeneration in bone and great
regeneration our liver. You should do a
hard stop and realize where those
nucleiated fetal red blood cells really
come from. My mom, where's that
umbilical cord connect to? Oh, the
liver, doesn't it? right through the
falsoparmm ligament and and all those
ligaments you learned in anatomy and you
go like yeah what the hell is the
purpose of this? Why does everybody have
a belly button? It turns out that ties
to this story too. So Becker realizes
that the DC electric current has to be
augmented some way. The augmentation is
what you started the podcast with with
me earlier. You said Jack I want to have
a discussion about the leptin melano
pathway. Well, guess how you get the
rest of the regeneration program. Turns
out the sun's light is the part that's
missing that we don't have that
salamanders have, that frogs have, that
everybody else has. Why? Because it
turns out when
melanin is hydrated by that duty
depleted water, it takes a current and
downregulates it to one trillionth of 1
ampere. Guess what the the size of the
current was in Becker's work? that
differentiated a red blood cell in us
one trillionth of one antmir. So guess
what? It turns out that the leptin
melano cordon pathway is actually the
regeneration loop. This is the evolution
of CCO in hemoglobin that you just saw
recapitulate in the leptin melano corton
pathway. And what does that mean for
mammals? Mammals scar. They don't
regenerate. The only places they're able
to regenerate is where the organ tends
to be hypoxic and they have a lot of
nucleiated cells around which bone and
the liver. Yeah. What's what's the cell
that doesn't? The one that you're a
neurobiologist and I'm a neurosurgeon.
That's the reason why when you put
brains constantly in blue light non
AVMF, what do we get? We get atrophy.
What does atrophy come from? You know
that answer. you're a biologist, that's
apoptosis. When you have unfathered
apoptosis, that's neurodeeneration.
That's not a good thing when it's in
your brain. It's a good thing when
you're in the fetus and you want your
fingers to separate because that's what
apoptosis does. But it's not good when
you're Nick and Jack talking via Zoom.
Uh we don't want that. We we don't want
people to get Alzheimer's, frontal
temple dysplasia, Parkinson's disease.
That's
effectively how the regeneration pathway
goes bad in us. Why? All because of a
paramagnetic
switch called nitric oxide that keeps
your stem cells in an atavistic state.
So the bofotons that are created from
mitochondrial DNA can sculpt your life.
That's the story of the GOE, my friend.
Brought to you now 2.4 4 billion years
to 2025.
Let's talk about the origin or the
radiation I should say of mammals
because this is another, you know, so so
the cartoon story here that I'll just
assume people have some familiarity
with. Dinosaurs rule the world, asteroid
hits Mexico, blocks out the sun, kills
most of the dinosaurs except the ones
that turn into birds. But then mammals,
which are essentially just little
rodents living in tunnels, they radiate
very very quickly after that
catastrophic event. And again, when we
go through the story, both have in
common. Just just tell the audience,
Ethereum mammals and theropod dinosaurs
are the two people that made it through
the fifth extinction. Yes. The question
that you need to pose to you and the
audience, what do they have in common?
Fur and feathers.
They both have huge mitochondrial
capacity in different parts of their
body. Turns out theropod dinosaurs have
it in their wings so they can fly. That
means they can go to where the sun still
is to eat. And why do mammals survive?
Because they when the T-Rexes are
walking around, they are underground,
not living in the sun because they're
hypoxic and they're able to make huge
amounts of light from inside themselves.
And they use this really cool gene in
them called pomcy to actually create
glucose from light through a process
called act and cortisol. They can make
glucose from light. How much? A lot. So
you're saying you're saying an animal
like this could survive in the absence
of food would be essentially what that
means. And remember there are small
little animals right that lived under
the ground. What do you know about in
the ground? Why do French people keep
their wine in in the earth? because
magnetic flux is higher. What does
magnetic flux mean for the ATPAS spins
faster. So that means you just offset
your need for food and then you're able
to through the cortisol cycle actually
make blood glucose there. Most people
don't know that light we always talk
about light that you and I are in which
is blue light now from LEDs. You don't
realize that the blue light that was
made in their mitochondrial DNA
stimulated them to make blood glucose.
This is the reason to this day you go
look at Nora Volcal studies where she
puts cell phones up to the side of
people's heads. It raises your blood
sugar, your insulin levels, and your
triglycerides without you eating
anything at all.
Right. You have you as a biochemist now
have a duty to me to say, "Wait a
minute. You're telling me, Jack, this is
published and I don't know about it."
That that's the hard stop. That's the
reason why I'm telling you the story I
just told you in the GOE is the biggest
story never told in biochemistry. And
that famous guy that I know you know
about in Boston named Michael Leaven
who's working on bio electricity and he
knows that polarization and
depolarization are important. What he
doesn't know that it's photobioelect
electricity that's the key. The light is
what determines that oxidation state. It
determines how the electricity is
distributed in the body through the
cells through the electrical resistance
pathways that are there. And guess what?
I'm going to tell you right now, Nick
Lane is a little bit ahead of Michael
Leven in Boston. Why? because he's
beginning to realize that this story
that I'm laying out for you, it's much
more biohysical than it is biochemistry.
Why? Because it turns out Nick Lane has
already figured out that all metabolic
fuels basically run their own game. They
don't need to be told what to do.
They're just cycles on top of cycles.
The interesting part is light is
Archimedes lever that tells these things
how to go and when to go. And it turns
out oxygen is the big one because when
oxygen is present, you're going to
default to TCA. That's the reason why
our most special organ, the one that I'm
an expert on, the brain, uses 20% of our
cardiac output. So it means it's an
obligate a road. Doesn't mean that go
back to the go event. It can, but it
suffers. It uses lactate. When you were
probably in school, they told you, "Oh
no, the brain needs to use glucose." We
now know that's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] We know that
lactate is used. Why? Because it creates
huge electrical resistance in the brain
that actually allows the brain to
function well for a long period of time
while we can't use the TCA cycle. So
even modern science is catching up to
Uncle Jack a little bit. But what they
don't know, Nick, and and I I want to
make sure you understand my perspective
fully before you critique it. I want you
to understand that you as an
evolutionary biologist need to look at
the GOE and what's happening today as a
fractal. The same thing that happened
then is still recapitulated in us. But
the way in which we're controlling the
levers is all through light and
biopotons. That's ultimately what makes
the choice. And the thing that the whole
process is quantized to actually is what
happened at the GOE. It's oxygen. Oxygen
being paramagnetic determines many many
things for sulfates in us. And it turns
out the most, you know, the time that
we're the most regenerative is when
we're inside an amniotic fluid bag. Mhm.
That should stun you and go, "Wow." And
then you should start thinking, "Okay,
now this starts to make sense why people
who are diabetic have no super oxide
pulse and have shitty nitric oxide
because they never go outside. They're
never in the sun. Mhm. That's why they
don't heal. They never get to Becker's
regeneration
currents. Duh. Because they're watching
Jerry Springer and they're inside behind
glass, which blocks what? UV and near
infrared light. Here's the the story
about near infrared red light from the
sun. Near infrared light penetrates all
the way through your body. Yeah. Yeah.
But it does. If you look at the
1992 Nobel Prize, do you know that when
you introduce near infrared light to
mitochondog, it disassociates from
hemoglobin, allows it to carry more
oxygen. Isn't that the fundamental
problem in diabetics? Yep. They're
hypoxic. And and the problem is when
your when your mitochondria is hypoxic,
but you have oxygen around you, that
means you have created a huge mismatch.
That mismatch fosters heteroplasm at the
mitochondrial level, which you can't get
rid of because apoptosis is broken.
That's the reason why diabetics get fat.
It's the reason why they get cancer.
It's the reason why they get P A. It's
the reason why they get [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] every
disease you can imagine. Why? Because of
the biopysics problem, not the
biochemical problem. So, so let's just
make this concrete for people. Let's say
someone is diabetic, type two diabetic.
What do they do in terms of their
relationship to different wavelengths of
light and the timing of their exposure
to help get better? Yeah, that's the
easiest thing cuz I've said it in every
podcast. The problem is when I say it to
you, I think now that you understand the
perspective, you'll understand this
better. You make like the Sphinx and eat
like a great white shark. Why? Because
when you make like the Sphinx, you're
grounded so that you're getting free
electrons off the Earth as the sun hits
there. So that replaces the food. You're
looking to the east because what happens
when you look to the east? That's how
you repair CCO every morning as a reset
default. You're creating duterium
depleted water. Keep that electric
current inside you and you're fixing
apoptosis so that the bad engines that
need to be taken out can be taken out
and you can undergo mphagy. That can't
happen when you're a diabetic. The last
part you want to stay away from the
fuels that make less water. Everybody
knows carbohydrates only if you take it
on a molar level they only make 55 grams
of water uh where TCA cycle makes about
105. So remember this story is about
re-establishing water production at CCO.
So of course we need more water. This is
the reason why what did diabetics get.
Nick you've heard the story when you
were a young man. polyypsia,
polyurea,
polyphasia because the mitochondria are
broken. They eat more because they can't
make the water and they can't get rid of
the bad engines. They piss more because
they can't retain their stuff at the
hypothalamic level. Why? Cuz vasop prein
is broken for them. Because what
controls that? The central retinal
pathways that we talked about earlier.
In other words, everything is shot. So,
they are like looking at a plant in your
backyard that has 19 holes in it and
your mom and your girlfriend keep
putting the water and the nutrients in
and it just leaks right through. That's
what they are. And all we are, when you
understand the story I'm giving you, we
are a little bit more complicated than a
house plant. That's what hemoglobin and
melanin really gave us from chlorophyll.
And when you understand that the same
things that control regeneration in
plants control regeneration in us, it's
the same story. A DC electric current
Becker showed was present in plants. So
did Burr where Becker got all these
ideas. And then when Becker started to
find out that hemoglobin was tied to
this, the first thing I did when I read
his book, The Electric Body, in in ' 85,
I looked at that picture that you
mentioned earlier. Man, this poor friend
ring looks really similar. You know,
there must be a story here. And the
story was I thought the story was always
going to be about the different number
of electrons and the photoelectric
effect. Turned out that's part of the
story, but the real part is the
paramagnetic switch. That's the real big
part of the
story.
H. So when the animals, you know, the
asteroid hits, the dinosaurs die off and
the subterranean animals start to come
up. They enter in to what is a new and
and now changing oxygen and light
environment. Walk us through the
radiation of mammals from your
perspective. Yeah. What happens then is
the mammals h now have norm oxic
environment. They're no longer hypoxic
as they were. the melanin that was
outside in their fur and their hair
actually begins to get sucked inside.
Why is that the case? They're now
sensing UV light. What's the UV light
sensor that innovates probably at the
time of the Cambrian explosion? Neurops,
I don't know how much you know about
that, but it's it's a UVA detector
that's present on mammals corneas and
their skin. And as you lose hair, what
happens? You become better UV light
detector. Mhm. So this is the stimulus
for palm seed. What is palm seed?
Proopio melanoortin. It's a it's a gene
in mammals that that is really what we
specialize in. And it turns out what
translates palm from our DNA? UV lights
the stimulus. Where does that light come
from? Most people think that it's from
uh the sun. I'm going to tell you in the
original animals that first come out
it's not only from the sun but it's also
from the ultra weak biopotons that they
make which tends to be in the ultra weak
um spectrum which is 200 to 400. How do
we know that? Because everything that is
about a mammal which is the leptin
melanocorn pathway and then this
hemoglobin story with the inner
mitochondrial membrane becomes sculpted.
That's where you have NAD to oxygen.
What's the the the change there? -400 to
positive 400 volts. But what's the other
thing? What's the emission and
absorption spectra of cytochrome 1?
Turns out it absorbs at 340 and it emits
in the blue range in the flavven range.
That's why the second cytochrome is a
blue absorber. It also turns out that it
makes the most super oxide pulse in all
of the mitochondria, which what are free
radicals? Remember, they're unpaired
electrons. What does that mean? It means
they all have absorption emission
spectra. So the other problem in
biochemistry we haven't got to but I did
sit down with a famous biochemist
probably 10 or 15 years ago that you
probably heard of Ray Peat and I tried
to tell him this story and his eyes were
glazed over when he told me all the
things he said. I said Ray I said do you
understand that anything that has an
absorption and emission spectrum means
that light has to be part of the story?
And I told him how old the story went. I
said do you know who came up with this
idea originally? said it was um guy who
also won a Nobel Prize for being wrong
about the KB cycle which was Albert Szent-Györgyi and he said the most interesting
thing at a meeting in 1941 in Budapest.
He said the only thing that DNA codes
for is proteins and he goes it's really
funny when you look at a protein they
have an electronic structure that mimics
a semiconductor. Do you know who was
sitting in the audience that day? Robert
Obecker literally within less than two
decades he proves that Albert Szent-Györgyi is
correct. Okay. And he def beyond a
shadow of a doubt. So when I gave the
story to Ray, I said, "Ray, all the
things that you believe are based on
this paradigm of you learning about all
these box cars, but as you said, Nick,
in the beginning of this podcast, you're
like, Jack, it's not clear to me how the
two domains of life came together, which
is now you're asking me the next
question, which is beautiful, cuz I know
you're understanding what I'm saying
now. So let's talk about what happened
to these mammals." Turned out these
mammals went from being hypoxic to TCA
masters with oxygen. And what did that
mean at the mitochondrial level? That
means they made chemicals and selected
for chemicals at a quantum biologic
level, not at Darwin's level, that had
emission spectras that were all in the
UV range. And now if the switch happens,
if the switch happens, you now have the
energetic potential to build more and
bigger complexity. You got it. And
that's exactly what the story of E= MC²
is. You know, I don't have to teach you
about that because you know energy and
mass and Einstein's equation are the
same. So the thing is if you're able to
have more energy in the system, which is
what Pigene's theorem is, he won the
Nobel Prize in 77. Basically, a a cell
is a quantum uh cell that's designed to
pump light into it. And what do we do
through electrical resistance? Photo
electrical resistance. That's how you
build the complexity. So, what are you
doing? The electrical resistance of
things in a cell slows the light down.
Those things harvest the power and then
we build the complexity from that. It's
no different than the story I told you
about what happens to a baby when it's
inside its mother. Okay? It's exact same
story. It's another fractal of the
story. And when you see it for yourself,
you start to look at biochemistry. You
start opening up your Lener biochemistry
and go, "Jesus Christ, I never learned
anything about absorption and emission
spectrums." And this is the reason why,
Nick, I'm such a pain in the ass for
guys like you that are in evolutionary
biology and biochemistry because I keep
pointing out these key features that
you're forgetting. And you guys know a
lot of the stuff I know. You know about
the GOE. You know about the Camron
explosion. you know about Darwin and how
the story doesn't marry up to the Camry
explosion, but because it's central
dogma, nobody wants to question it. Why?
Because if you're a PhD, you'll never
get any money from the NIH or from DARPA
or for anybody else. And I understand
that, but remember, we're doing this
podcast not to talk about how
centralized science went off the rails.
We're actually trying to teach people
the story of life. Yeah, that's what
this is a story about. And how we're
able to regenerate, how we're able to
wound heal, how we lost the ability to
regenerate as we became obligate TCA
animals that use oxygen. Doesn't mean
we've lost the ability not to do that.
How how can I tell you that's true? When
a kid comes in and drowns, like say
where you live in cold water, we code
them all the way for 45 minutes because
we know the other free radical chemicals
can act as terminal electron acceptors
like hydrogen sulfide, carbon monoxide.
Um, we can still save those kids. So, we
don't give up on them. But the thing is
that's from our evolutionary past. We
lose that ability as soon as they cut
the umbilical cord and the kid takes its
first breath of air because it's no
because then the hypoxy is gone. this
metabolic switch happens and yeah I mean
just switches everything. You got it.
And this is why this is why you use the
word change your environment. Yeah. You
change your environment to what we've
done now. You begin to realize that the
electromagnetic signals outside are
doing things to that oxygen oxidation
state on the inside. And what do we know
from norcals work? We know that
non-native EMF and blue light what's the
fundamental thing they do? They cause a
drop in NAD positive and pseudo hypoxia.
That's all you need to know because what
happens then? Blood glucose spikes. So
does insulin. And guess what? Then all
the food gurus are like, "Oh, it's all
about food." No, it's not. It's all
about light. And it's always been about
light. But you know what the problem is?
All the food gurus learned from who? The
biochemists. Mhm. That's actually, if
you want to know the most interesting
part of this story for me that recently
happened, a guy named Cameron Borg, who
runs his own podcast, interviewed Andrew
Marino, who, you know, Marino was
Becker's right-hand man. And the thing
that I was really disappointed with in
that podcast is Marino clearly didn't do
any of Becker's work. All the stuff that
I just told you, I basically finished
his
thesis. But here's the really sad thing.
He in that podcast said that he had a
discussion with Michael Leven when he
was a young scientist and he warned him
your mentor is one of the guys that
tried to put Becker to sleep and get him
out of science because Becker was
telling people that it was more about
the bioysics than the biochemistry and
your your mentor is one of those
biochemists.
So the reason I tell you this story
because I know you're a PhD and you've
listened to now the whole story. You
understand my perspective. You
understand now why when I talk to PhDs
in biochemistry and I know they don't
have this perspective because they were
never given. It doesn't mean they're bad
people. It just means that they went
through what we just all went through in
CO where they were told a half part of
the story. They didn't hear the whole
truth. And when you don't know the whole
truth, then it gets to, you know, the
stuff that where you and I got
entangled. We got entangled through
Kevin. Why? Um, I got entangled with
Kevin's life because Kevin didn't know
the whole truth about something he
should have known about that I knew
about. And I decided to drag him into
this story without him really knowing
about. And the reason these things
weren't discoverable was because they
were whitewashed from science. And what
am I telling you? The reason you don't
know this is not not because you're a
bad guy, Nick, or Michael Leven's a bad
guy, or you know, Jaffy. Jaffy was a bad
guy and so was Phil Handler. Um, cuz
they knew the truth and they buried
it. The real problem is if you don't
learn the stuff, I can't expect you to
know it. But I'm that one guy that's
been intensely curious about Becker's
work from when I learned about it. And I
told you a couple of key things that
happened. I did a podcast with Danny
Jones six months ago where I told the
story about how I saved a girl's life
after her head gets bashed in. And what
did I use? I used methylene blue to do
it. Turns out I never do that if I don't
tell know this story from Becker's work.
Why? Six, seven years earlier in 1992,
my mentor in neurosurgery made me go
learn about Becker's work. And guess
what? That's where I learned about the
paramagnetic switch. And I realized that
I could actually help save her life if I
did two things. I gave her methylene
blue and I used hypertonic saline in her
cardiovascular system so that I could
direct the current to organs that were
failing while she was having bone picked
out of her brain. And it worked. And it
turned out the lesson of the great
oxygenation event happened right there
in my surgical suite in front of my
eyes. I was stunned that it actually
worked. And then I started to wonder, is
this
operational in many more diseases that
are out there? And what did I do over
the last 20 years? Right before Becker
died, I went down and sat down with him.
Um, probably later this month, my whole
decentralized thesis that I've told you
today will be laid out with the
mathematics to prove that I'm
aimatically correct about this. And I
shared it with Becker before he died.
Why? He was the greatest scientist of my
generation. And he was stifled because
the government didn't want this
information out. Why? Because they were
moving from an industrial economy to an
information tech economy which was going
to make everybody hypoxic with and
dehydrated so that you would be war
shifted and you would no longer be the
TCA mammal you were supposed to be. And
that would lead to all the chronic
diseases that Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is trying to
fix by banning red dye number six and
Froot Loops, which is a total story. And
you have to
realize, you laughed, so I know you're
following the story along pretty well.
Now you understand why I'm pretty pissed
off about it. Because every time
somebody's tried to tell the
truth, you get [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] blocked by the
people that are controlling the
narrative. And I believe through the
process that I told you that you will be
able to go back as a scientist and fact
check Uncle Jack, seeing the pieces that
you were never taught, then putting them
together with the biochemical pathways
and the evolutionary biology that I know
you know, and you're going to go, "This
explains a lot of things." Yeah. That I
had questions about. Yeah. Well, there's
I just want to say this because it's it
just came to mind to me spontaneously.
So everything that that we just talked
about for the last few minutes, this
switch that happens depending on oxygen
levels due to the paramagnet magnetism.
There's this famous quote in when you
when you're in evolution development,
you learn about the history. There's
this famous saga that involves a man
named Ernst Heckle and he said,
"Anttogyny recapitulates fogyny." And we
don't need to get into the historical
details there, but there was this notion
that people argued about that the
development of an individual somehow
resembled the evolution of species
generally. And what you told me, Jack,
to the extent while that's true, what
you actually did kind of reminded me of
that because what you're saying is
actually the explosion in growth and
complexity that happens when the baby
goes from being hypoxic to oxygenated
actually is due fundamentally to the
same thing. It's the same pattern and
the same forces driving it as the
explosion that you see in say the
Cambrian explosion or the adaptive
radiation of mammals. You go from that
low oxygen to high oxygen environment
that unlocks the energetic potential to
drive that complexity. Nick, you make me
happy because now you begin to
understand when you open up Langman's
embryology book, why we used to look
like tadpoles. It's there. The whole
story is there. When you actually see
this story in totality and you sit down
with a glass of wine, you go, "Jesus
Christ, we have so much wrong." And it's
just because we're missing the key parts
of this story. And when you see the
parts put together, I mean, you'll see
the next year on my blog, I'm going to
take diseases that, you know, have no
answer, like keraticonus. This is one of
my favorite ones because you go to an
opthalmologist, they're like, "Yeah, why
does your cornea form what it does?"
Well, they have flesher rings. You know
what those flesher rings are made out
of? Hemaceterin. You know that hemicin
is paramagnetic. Think that might have a
a role to play in this story? Damn right
it does. That's why you create a volcano
in the middle of their their cornea. And
guess what? You go to an opthalmologist
say they have no earthly idea. Well,
guess what? I know what causes it. I
know exactly what caus it because it
changes the electrical resistance of the
anterior part of the eye. And and guess
what? What's the end report? at the end
result of broken down hemoglobin. You
know that answer. Turns out that's what
the flyering is made out of. And that
goes right to Becker's story. When you
begin to understand this paramagnetic
switch story and how it ties into
metabolic fluxes and switches, you start
to
go, what's built in us is absolutely
spectacular. What nature has put in us
is absolutely a fundamental physical
marvel. And the fact that we pay
attention to the environment, it begins
to make you realize that we really don't
know that much about membrane uh
biopysics. You know, you're going to
start questioning the cholesterol
narrative. You're going to start
questioning the DHA narrative. You're
going to start questioning sphingo
myelin. You're going to start thinking
about MS different. You're going to
start thinking about diabetes different.
And then the things that people need to
do, what I'm going to tell people to do
from a decentralized medicine standpoint
and what the centralized docs are going
to do that follow Maha completely
different.
I want to get to leptin stuff.
to get to left then you had to have this
story because now you
now we left we mammals and I should say
amphibians reptiles and then mammals
optimized hemoglobin hemoglobin and the
hem proteins in us I'm talking about the
CYP
uh proteins I'm talking about P450 all
that we got that down those are all
cytochrome proteins the thing that you
need to know about heem the nuclear heem
receptors rev her beta and alpha Those
are critical in the story. That's the
reason why modern mammals are going off
the rails because it turns out their
regeneration pathways that are built
into them couldn't be like the
amphibians and reptiles. So that's where
the leptin milano corton pathway becomes
paramount because it's the other part of
the story. You have to have a way to
distribute the 30 million volts to the
right channels in the cell. And it turns
out you have to know a little bit about
melanin. So melanin is made from alpha
MSH which is one of the 10 biochemicals
that comes and cleaves out of pomsy. And
what is special about alpha MSH? Well,
you know from your own admission before
we started that it has this weird factor
that melanin is tied to how much food
you eat and and satiety and appetite. I
think now you're beginning to understand
why that's the case. Uh, and the
interesting part is melanin when you
make it, who's studying it right now
more than anybody in biology, it's the
condensed matter physicists that are
working with Elon Musk. Why? Because if
you take melanin and use it as a solar
uh panel is the best conductor of
electricity on earth. Nothing is better
than not. It's on the order of graphine,
but it's way cheaper than graphine to
make. The interesting part of melanin
that you and I need to be interested in,
that's the part that I think you're
going to find tremendously interesting
is when it's hydrated with dutarium
depleted water, it loses its electrical
ability so that it gets pushed down all
the way. So if you understand from an
evolutionary standpoint, what nature is
trying to do, you've got a 30 million
volt charge you got to make some sense
out of. And what happens with that
dutyium depleted water and the melanin
sheets, you can take it down to one
trillionth of 1 amp mirror so that when
that current is distributed properly,
uh you're not burning the system out. So
the way I teach my members about this,
and it's the same way I would teach you,
I want you to think about a a 1920s
house that's built with the wiring from
them and then hook it up to a nuclear
power plant today. You know what happens
at a house? It disintegrates. It burns
down. It oxidizes. Well, this is exactly
the same story of really why leptin
melanoorton pathway innovates in the
last I would say really 65 million
years. We become true experts in
utilizing this because it forms all of
the most key thermodynamic pathways in
mammals so that you can get to the
mammal that's got a Ferrari engine in
its head versus our nearest cousins
which have no frontal lobes, you know,
and um don't have, you know, a lot of
fat. They're not born as a ball of goo
like we are. They're born differently.
And when you consider that they have
almost the same genetics, but
phenotypically they're radically
different, you begin to realize that the
story of melanin and leptin is born in
this story. And we, I would tell you,
are probably the first
generation true total TCA obligate
normoxic primates that live on Earth. We
still retain some of
our initial abilities like when we
drowned and things like that or we hold
our breath to go under the water uh or
we free dive. But that's not what we're
built for. We're built for living on the
tectonic plates and in the sun so that
melanin is absorbing that
electromagnetic radiation so that it can
be made useful in the electrical
resistance patterns that are present in
us.
H and I suppose that would tie to why
skin color evolved over time as we moved
further away from the equator. We need
to change our ability to to extract
that. I want you to think about what
else happened at that time because we
got to tie in Doug Wallace to this. As
you lose melanin on the skin, that's
where hlet types come from. It's also an
electromagnetic effect. Remember what I
told you that breathing is quantized. So
is mitochondrial hletype. So that's why
L0, L1, L2, and L3 are in subsaharan
Africa, right? At the East African Rift
Zone where there's three tectonic plates
where the monkeys got isolated from the
ocean. Okay. Then what happens? The
radiation occurs. We go all over the
world and what happens? We get blue
eyes. We lose more hair. Um we lose our
melanin. And what's the most amazing
part of the story for you as an
evolutionary biologist?
What is the first sign that non-native
EMF is a problem for our species,
meaning hominids? It's actually the
Neanderthalss. Why? They've never found
a skeleton higher than the 51st
latitude. The reason they're called
Neanderthalss is because it's the Valley
of Neander in Germany.
And what is special about Neanderthalss?
They have 125 grams more brain tissue
than us. Did you know that? Yes. And
when they got up to cold environments,
it turned out that that brain was
thermodynamically not favorable. So what
did they have to do when they got up to
high
latitude? They went inside caves,
covered their skin with animal skins,
and they started to make cave art and
they sat in light. That light was fire.
Fire was the first non-native EMF. And
what did that do? Created a hypoxic
event in them. And that is what shrunk
their brain 125 g. That happened 65,000
years ago. What was
the genesis event? That's good for us.
That's how we got Michalangelo. Why?
Because as melanin breaks down, my
friend, what does it become? Becomes
L-dopa and it becomes dopamine. So we
got more creative from destroying the
melanin sheets in our head.
That's where art and creativity in
humans comes from. And how do we know
that? Because the first time we ever see
art is when we start to see
Neanderthalss and humans living together
in caves. When it was cold and when
there was artificial light called fire.
And it turns out even fire
affects to this day. You do the
bioysics, it affects dopamine cycles and
also melatonin cycles. Where is
melatonin made? 95% humans at the
mitochondria level. There's your answer.
It goes all the way back to that story I
told you about biopotons. Roland Van
Wick, Fritz P, all the biophysics
stories is right there staring at you.
And then you think about where we are
now. What's the story of Neanderthalss
to us that's recapitulating in my clinic
every day? I'm seeing humans come in
with frontal temporal dysplasia like
Bruce Willis. seeing guys like uh
Michael Jackson who has to develop
vitiligo in his
neuroectom so that he can protect the
CMR2 of his brain and his neoortex.
That's actually what vitiligo is. Okay?
It's actually the brain protecting
itself. You know what cataracts are?
It's the brain protecting the central
retinal pathways from blue light. Do you
want to know what tinitis is? It's
protecting the transition of the cookia
where the strum vascularis has melanin
in it. Right. And you're going from six
layer neoortex which is human to old
paleo cortex which is three three
layers. Nick, what did you learn about
that in evolutionary biology? That three
layer uh neo I should say three layer
cortex has less mileination and less
mitochondrial density. So, isn't that
the same story I just told you about the
1920s house in the nuclear power plant?
So, why did nature put melanin in our
cookia when it's not exposed to the
sun? Cuz guess what? It's the feedback
mechanism to protect the oldest parts of
our brain that used to be
primate. How do you like
that? This story of melanin and leptin,
dude, is tremendous. And when you begin
to see this
you start to go, I need to question
everything. Everything that I thought to
be true. And that's what I've told
people in podcast for 20 years. When I
realized what I told you
today, I spent 18 months in the
Vanderbilt Medical School
Library, learning all the things that I
told you today, figuring it all out, and
then writing it and jotting it down.
I've got more blogs than you can
imagine. I've been doing this now for
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] 15 years. And dude, I got plenty
more blogs to go. I've been telling
people this story at a time. Piece at a
time. Piece at a time. If you look on my
website, the original document is called
the quilt document. Why' I use that
idea? Because of what I just told you.
It's piece by piece. It's the
evolutionary biology story of us laid
out piece by piece, fractal by fractal
by fractal so that you can eventually
see it for yourself when you have enough
pieces of the mosaic in front of you
where you go,
"Wow, how do you think
about how should people think about
according to you their optimal light
environment and sort of things I
things I'm thinking here is you know on
the one hand um you know our skin can
change and it's adaptable to light
levels but also there's differences
between people some of us are you know
from northern Europeans some of us are
descended from subsaharan Africans right
we have different intrinsic capacities
that are based on where our particular
lineage hails from in the world I look
at you and you're a light-skinned guy
but you're living in El Salvador how do
how do we think about sort of the the
type of light environment we should be
living in as individuals given our
background and given the extent to which
our systems can adapt to different light
environments. Believe it or not, I've
answered the question for you, but we're
going to put it together. So, when you
have melanin on your outside in the
integimement, you're going to do better
with sun. When you're northern European,
cold temperatures and using cold
thermogenesis is the way you create more
light inside of you. That's the basics.
If we go back to when humans first
became humans from Neanderthalss, I
would say let's just say two to four
million years ago. But why can't you
live with that story now? The
difference, Nick, with us now is we've
now interbred. We're interbred with
Neanderthalss. We've interbred with
people from different hllet types. Yeah.
This is where Doug Wallace's work
becomes really important. I need to know
what kind of engine you have. I need to
know what your snips and saps are. Why?
because that determines your CYP heem
proteins. Then I need to know what your
Fitzpatrick score is on the outside.
Why? Because I have a client who's a a
small little Jewish man that's got an L0
and he's white as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with blue
eyes. From an evolutionary standpoint,
Nick, he shouldn't exist, but he does.
And the reason why is because remember
this Ferrari engine in our head gave us
the
availability to actually migrate across
the tectonic plates. where uh alligators
and wilderbees can't do that. They
they're really stuck to their own
environment. But we've built airplanes
and and trains and things like that that
have allowed us to do things to break
the circadian biology that you and I
have just been talking about for
probably the last two hours. So I have
to know what those thermodynamic givens
are. And then here's another big one.
Then I need to know about the
transgenerational
epigenetics that comes out. So I'll give
you an for example. You know that babies
these days if they can be born without
an IVF uh issue because that's also a
leptin controlled thing. If they born
with jaundice, you know what that tells
me as a decentralized clinician from the
story I told you. Remember jaundice
comes from breakdown of hem proteins
that happens in euro when it's not
supposed to happen. That means that the
heteroplasmic rate in that child is off
the charts. Where'd that come from? Cuz
mommy and daddy made bad decisions
around light. So if that kid is born,
let's just say with an H from Northern
Europe like I am and they happen to be
born with jaundice, I have to treat that
kid differently than someone who's an
age who has blue eyes and white skin who
isn't jaundist. Why? Because the
heteroplasmmy load from the bofotons
that are in them are different. Do you
understand why this decentralized set of
circumstances that I explained to you
the first two hours really make this
very interesting? because there is no
single answer anymore for someone who's
black, someone who has a certain type of
hletype. It turns out that you as a
decentralized clinician, you as a
decentralized hopefully PhD someday,
you're going to begin to understand how
Billy Rubin and Billy Verton actually
tie into that paramagnetic switch. And
when you see that and you know that, oh
damn, those biofotons change, that means
this kid's heteroplasm rate is through
the roof. Then you'll understand why
kids are born with retinol blast. Then
you'll understand why kids are born with
Wilms tumor because I got news to you. 2
to four million years ago, that didn't
happen.
Let's just let's just see where that
where this goes. Um it sounds like you
you you know the hlet types. So I've got
paternal h group JM I've got maternal h
group H7 I've got lineages that go
through you know parts of northern and
central Europe and parts of down to
Greece right what does that mean for me
as a fairkinned person and I'll add
because I just sense that maybe you'll
have some insight here I also have
chronic plaque psoriasis on my elbows
for example does that surprise you no
not at all because you also have highly
melanated irises so you are a definite
what I would call mut in the ASBC BCA,
you're a mix. So, the thing that would
be best for you because you have enough
melanin in your hair, your eyes, your
beard, and you have psoriasis that you
have a extreme need for UV light. So,
you need UVA and near infrared light to
fix the the psoriasis. The only the only
thing that has ever worked worked for me
is if I go down to say Mexico or Latin
America and I and I get that intense UV
sunlight for a little bit each day.
Well, what you have to realize though,
once you fix the heteroplasm rate of
your skin and it goes away, that doesn't
mean it's going to come back. What you
need to do is remember when I told you
before about pureines dissipative
system. If you pour enough light in and
you're able to deliver the electrical
resistance at the basil level of your
skin, that problem will go away. In
other words, you just healed that
lightning bolt pattern on your skin. Do
you have it somewhere else? The answer
is yes. This is where you being an
evolutionary biologist is going to help
me because I think you'll understand it
better than you know just some regular
Joe Bloke
podcaster. Where does the skin come
from? Comes from the neuroacterm. Yeah.
So I would tell you things about you
that you would have problems in. I'm
worried about your melanin sheets
inside. I'm worried about your teeth.
I'm also worried about your brain.
Meaning there's parts of your brain that
could be warberg shifted that shouldn't
be. So, you'd be the kind of guy if you
paid me to be a patient, I would
definitely do an MRI of your brain with
and without contrast. What am I looking
for? I'm looking for white matter
changers in areas of your brain. What
else am I looking for? I'm going to look
at your dental history very carefully.
I'm going to look at your teeth. I'm
going to look at your periodontum. I'm
going to look at your carries exposure.
I'm going to look at things like that in
your oral cavity. That also then brings
me to cranial nerve number five. Okay,
that's the trigeminal nerve. That's
where I'm going to think you have an
issue. Then I'm going to ask you about
your sleep. Why? Because what is
associated between your neo cortex and
your skin? Something called the DLF, the
dorsal longitudinal faciculus. That's
where the neural crest migrates. So I'm
going to ask you about your sleep. Why?
Because that's that's one of the major
connections to the reticular activating
system. And if you've lost your melanin
sheets there, your sleep is going to be
really bad. The prediction from your
skin having psoriasis and you living at
the latitude you're at and having the
Fitzpatrick type, the H type, you're
significantly at risk for diseases
within your neuroacterm.
H what would be a better latitude?
Well, I think you already answered that
probably for you until you fix the
electrical resistance in your
neuroacttooderm would be probably in
between the tropic of Capricorn and
cancer. Now, how long you have to stay
there, I don't know, but you'll find out
your skin will give you a clue.
Generally with psoriasis because it's an
autoimmune condition due to this you
know warberg metabolism you're basically
your basil level of your skin has been
warberg shifted for as long as you've
had this and you have to be worried
because you know that psoriasis is a
premalignant condition based on what you
and I have talked about the first two
hours your eyeball should be like this
big now because you're like Jesus if I
stay in an environment that's blue lit
with non-native EMF Jack is basically
saying I'm a walking textbook for a
melanoma a basil cell or you know a
squamous cell and that's the truth you
are and the dermatologist will tell you
that the sun is going to poison you
you're saying I'm not getting I'm not
getting enough UV you got it and that
that is that should point out to people
listening to this podcast just how not
understanding the biopysics can lead a
clinician who's biochemistry based which
is what a dermatologist is to recommend
blocking the sun when I tell you you
want to do exactly the opposite. And so,
and I love the fact that you did that
for your own audience and you used your
own biology to lay out the thought
pattern so people could see it for
themselves. And ultimately, you already
know. You did the bio hack in your head,
which I appreciated. You said, "Jack,
it's kind of weird, you know, forget all
the drugs, but when I went to Mexico, I
did really well." Well, now you know the
reason why, my friend. Right. And it's
you're able to change the
biophotons at the the the substratum
corneium level so that it improved. The
problem is you need to continue to do it
because you're effectively using
Becker's
regeneration frequencies there to
improve all that basil level of skin
wherever you have the problem. Once you
reverse it, that's like you just put
spackle over that electrical resistance
so it will never come back. you may
develop it in other places that you have
the problem. And that's exactly what
happened to Michael Jackson. If you
think about it, his problem is vitiligo.
It's very similar to yours in a skin
problem. But where when he didn't fix
the problem, remember he couldn't sleep
and his brain went. So you begin to see
well his electrical resistance problem
moved from his skin to his brain to the
DLF and to other parts. And what did he
do? What's the classic mistake? He
bleached his skin with hydrogen peroxide
and that actually made his sleep and his
brain worse.
So when you actually begin to understand
that what he was doing was ruining his
bioysics, then you layer in he's the
king of pop. All his shows are at night
in blue light with electric [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] all
around him. You go, no wonder this guy
had the problems that he did. You know,
based on what you and I are talking
about.
Wow. Yeah. So I like if I've I've gone
to, you know, I was in Al Salvador for a
week. I've been in Mexico for, you know,
roughly a week at a time and I will see
an acute change. It happens right away.
And my body's telling me something.
Where do you live now? I found in
Seattle, remember? Yeah. This is what I
would tell you to do. What you could do
to improve this. I would tell you um get
yourself UVA light, near infrared light,
and then start drinking dutum depleted
water. Especially this time of the year
because you're in April. Uh, I would be
willing to bet you you could do it. And
if you really want to be a tool, uh, get
yourself, um, I don't know if you're
still working in science or not, but if
you can find yourself some silver
nitrate, uh, toothpicks, uh, they'll
have them in labs. You can probably call
one of your friends up, do that, and put
the silver nitrate on your skin while
you're doing the UV and near infrared
light. You may actually be able to
improve it even faster. Wow.
Interesting. So, I need the UVA piece
because I have the in near infrared
piece. Well, it'd be better if you got
UVB, but where you are in Seattle,
you're such high latitude and you have
so many clouds, you're not going to get
very much UVB. Yeah. I'd really rather
you have full scope UVA and UVB. And
then the parts of you that don't have
psoriasis, those are the parts that I
want you to get in ice cold water. Why?
Because then you'll make UV, you'll make
VUV, UVC, UVB, and UVA from your
mitochondria. Why? Because you're an
uncoupled holet type. So, I know you can
do it. That's all the magics that I try
to teach Huberman two years ago on
Rick's podcast, but you know, it flew
right over his head.
Mhm.
Interesting.
So, where should we go from here? Well,
there's a number of places we can go. I
want to get back to certain aspects of
leptin. So, we mentioned leptin, but let
let's kind of circle back and hook into
that in some different ways. Let's start
very basic for the people that don't
know. Just give us what is leptin and
what is it normally associated with when
we talk about what it does? Yeah, leptin
is the master hormone of the human body,
not of everybody else. It replaced in
evolutionary history uh um probably what
melatonin used to do for us. Uh leptin
controls um your fat mass. It in
controls your thermodynamics and
controls appetite. Here's the big one.
It controls ficcundity and fertility.
Um, so when you now know that 50% of
people below the age of 35 are
infertile, now you're beginning to
understand why that's the case. And what
do you need to know about leptin? That
it absorbs 220 nanometer light. So what
does that tell you? That's light that is
not in the sun, but it's in your subq
fat. And most people probably know that
UV light doesn't penetrate really past
the deepest layer of your epidermis. So
then you got to ask the question, where
the hell is that light come from? I
think Nick and I have already answered
that question for you definitively. If
you want to learn about that, you read
Roland Van Wick's book, Light Sculpting
Life. You'll learn everything you need
to learn about biopotons that you didn't
learn in biochemistry. And then you need
to read Fritz Pop's work uh and put it
together. But basically what leptin
does, it works specifically with the
third semiconductor which is melanin.
And melanin comes from alpha msh which
is cleaved from pomsy. Pomsy is the
single most important gene to the
mamalian tree. The mamalian tree is 200
million years old. We really got to be
specialists with melanin after the KT
event. Why? I believe that's when
neuropsin, the UVA detector that's
present on your cornea and on your skin,
which is important for Nick's story, uh,
is the link that links back to the
absorption spectrum of something else
Nick knows about that Daniel Sabatini
and Peter Aia don't. The absorption
spectrum of mTor is actually UV range.
So guess what? Anybody who's got an mTor
problem, anybody who wants to live
longer, you need to be in the sun
longer. If you look at my pin tweet,
Nick, that's on my page. What does it
say? There's been six metaanalysis shown
that in mammals, specifically
us, that longevity is a function of how
much sun we get. So, Brian Johnson is
literally doing the opposite of what he
should, which is why I make fun of him
all the time on my Twitter feed.
He's avoiding sunlight completely. To be
honest with you, Nick, I'm hoping after
you put this podcast out and the fact
that you put your two cents in for your
story and people know about Brian
Johnson's story again, you remember what
the dermatologist told you, stay out of
the sun and I'm telling you, go in the
sun. I know why Brian Johnson's being
told what he's being told. He's spending
$2 million a year to talk to people who
are morons. And why are they morons?
Because they're all have a biochemical
focus. They don't have the bioysics and
the biochemistry together. So the people
that Brian hires, they have the belief
that if you buy Prince's guitar that
somehow you can play guitar like Prince.
Turns out you can't. And what I'm trying
to teach you in this podcast and
hopefully your audience is that I expect
each and every one of you, especially if
you're a PhD, to go back and fact check
Uncle Jack. I am been waiting for 20
years for somebody to come tell me I'm
wrong. And when I sat down with Becker
and told him this entire thing laid out,
he just smiled and he goes, "Man, I wish
I would have met you in the 60s or 70s
because all the biochemists that ended
his career that worked for the military
in DARPA,
um, this is a story they didn't want
coming out." And you have to realize
that
humans, no matter who they are, we are
specialists, my friend, in the Leptin
Milano Corin pathway. We are we are like
the guys on the football team that
that's all we want to do. And it turns
out how we do it is a little bit
different. Like people that are
Equatorial Africans are going to be
different than a guy who's from Greece
that's got psoriasis. But here's what
I'm going to tell you. The story of
Becker that I laid out in this podcast,
I never want you to forget. No matter
what disease you have, you can
regenerate and fix it if you understand
the thermodynamic givens that Nick and I
talked about. You have to have somebody
to be able to put the biochemistry and
the biohysics together. That's what
decentralized medicine aims to do.
That's why when you look at my Twitter
feed, it says, I begin where functional
medicine, alopathic medicine end. And I
think I've proven that pretty well to
you in this podcast. Why? Because we
started at a place where I don't think
I've ever started another podcast, which
is at the great oxygenation event. And I
told you fully
understanding that event is so gerine
into you understanding the leptin melano
cord and pathway because what is that
semiconductor design around normoxia and
the TCA cycle and it turns out when you
get UV light and infrared light from the
sun you don't have to eat as much and if
you don't eat as much that's actually
the whole mtor biology ology story that
you hear from people because the less
you eat that means the longer you live.
The only way you can do that if you're a
human not a primate because remember the
mur story has only been proven in C
elegance. It's not really been proven in
us. Part of the reason why is the story
I told you with Becker. But do I believe
fundamentally based on the absorption
and emission spectra of all the
chemicals that I've pulled out of the
biochemical book that the more time you
spend in the sun, the longer you live?
The answer is yes. What else do I did I
learn from Doug Wallace's work on HLET
types and mitochondrial biology? I
learned the older we get, the less UV
light we can put in our system. In other
words, we can't bury that light at the
electronic state of the cell. That means
at the bonds and in the biochemical
levels. So that means we need more
light. The reason for that, I think,
Nick should be obvious to you because
you know that when a baby's born, it's
80% water. Me as an old man now, I'm
about 55% water. What did I tell you is
the story of retaining that 30 million
volt charge on the initochondrial
membrane. If you ain't got the water,
then you're electrocuting yourself from
inside out. So guess what? Isn't that
married to the story I told you? Because
your psoriasis's skin are about as old
as Uncle Jack. So what did I tell you to
do? Duterium depleted water and more
sun. The story that I told you is the
same as the the story that I'm trying to
tell you about the leptin melano
pathway. And when I break down the
leptin melanoorton pathway for people
that are not science smart, don't know
biochemistry and don't know bioysics,
very simple, make like the sphinx every
morning and eat like a great white
shark. If you do that, you are
fulfilling all of nature's wishes for
you being a TCA animal that's normoxing.
So the sphinx piece, you're talking
about the the the grounding piece there
and your orientation to the sun. What
does the great white shark piece of that
mean? Well, I'm going to tell you before
you dance over the sphinx thing. I need
to tell you one other thing because I'm
not sure you know this even though
you're a biochemist. Do you know that
there's a paper out 2021? I told all the
food gurus and all the biochemist that
you cannot use the TCA cycle if you
don't see the AM sun. Did you know
that's true? No. It's true. You cannot
use the TCA cycle. So, guess what? If
you're on a carnivore diet uh and think
that you're getting the benefit, but you
wake up every day at 8 or 9:00 or you
never see the sunrise, what's the point
of the sunrise, my friend? That's when
blue light and red light are perfectly
balanced. So, you're
repairing the heem that retains this.
That's the reason why you have to hit
the default switch every day. That's why
every podcast I do, they always say,
"Jack, what's the single most important
thing that you can tell people? You must
see the sunrise every day. Now, a guy
like you that's got psoriasis, what
would I tell you to do? The last hour
before the sun sets mimics what you see
from the red light perspective because
we need Nick's team proteins in him to
be optimized. Okay? Then the great white
shark part of the story is protein and
fat. Why? Because all those electrons
and protons come in at cytochrome 2.
You're bypassing cytochrome one. That's
what we want. And if you're getting
enough UV, what does UV do? You know,
you've already said it. Makes nitric
oxide. Nitric oxide binds to cytochrome
oxase. It slows electron flow. It mimics
what cyanide does to us except we don't
die. And we limit the amount of ATP we
need. Why? Because fundamentally, what
does a TCA animal that normic really
need? Less food and more sun. You do
that. That's how you live the longest.
So, so roughly speaking to give people a
sense here, let's say that uh I I moved
next door to you in El Salvador. So, my
light environment changes to that
degree. I'm going from Seattle to El
Salvador. How much less food do you
think I would need? You'll probably
within 6 weeks probably go from three or
four meals a day to two and then
eventually to one.
and and goes away. You're a bioch you're
a biochemist. Remember what I told you?
Why does your hunger go away? Because
your leptin melon pathway goes up. It
melanin takes care of all the problems
in your hypothalamus. You're not hungry
anymore. You don't even have to
snack. You're kind of stunned. In fact,
what I'll have you do is drink way more
water. Now, the one part of El Salvador
that's bad, we don't have duty depleted
water here. Why? Because it's a third
world country and that's expensive. You
can get a handle on that in Amazon at
home. So that would be an issue for you.
But remember the water you make is the
most important part and that's a
cytochrome sea oxidase story. So I'm
going to want you at the beach with your
feet especially a guy like you with
psoriasis your feet in the ocean sitting
in a beach chair out with a cooler of
dutium depleted water until you fix that
problem. And obviously then we got to
talk about the non-native EMF footprint
in the house that you're renting down
here. Why? Because remember you already
told me you have heteroplasm increased
in your skin. I'm worried about that in
you. Why? Because if it goes bad there,
it could go bad in your brain. It could
go bad in the CYP enzymes in your liver
and you may have problems with detox or
you may develop sleep apnea. You may
develop cataracts. For all the reasons
that I mentioned to you earlier, I am
trying to prevent you from getting those
problems. Can you still get them in El
Salvador? Say if you live in a house
with dirty electricity and all the
lights here are LED because they have no
access to incandescent. All those things
are still operational and a guy who's
got Warberg shifted skin.
Why are so many people Well, I
understand we're going to be treading
some things that we've already discussed
here,
but explain for people in the context of
the obesity epidemic. And this this can
tie into various things, but like most
people when they try to explain the
obesity epidemic, they are going to talk
about calories. They're going to talk
about lack of movement. You're going to
tell us a different story, but why is
leptin resistance such an issue today?
And how do you explain it in the context
of the obesity epidemic we've seen
unfold? Because our asteroid is pretty
simple. It's the light environment we've
created. Nobody's outside anymore.
Technologies brought everybody inside in
front of a a screen. So that's the
reason why this uh fact that I'm going
to give you exists. Every time we spend
10% more on technology since the 1950s,
the NHANES data for obesity has moved up
the same amount. Guess why? because
you're destroying the leptin melano
corton pathway. That's the the reason
why. So we know so you can starve
people, you know, you can give them ruin
Y bypasses, you can, you know, tell them
to stop eating Froot Loops and red dye.
It's not going to have any effect on the
obesity crisis. The obesity crisis
doesn't go away until we get our tech
diet under control. Why? Because it's
obvious that blue light and non-adv are
doing it. Because it destroys the heem
proteins in your body. When you destroy
the hem proteins, you can't make water.
When you can't make water, what happens
to melanin? It doesn't make one
trillionth of one ampmeter current. It
makes huge amounts of electricity. And
what does that do? It goes through the
neural crest and destroys things in the
hypothalammus, which is where pomsy is.
And when you destroy pomsy, you get
fat. That's that's where it happens. So
wherever the bolt of lightning like
Nick's bolt of lightning is in his skin,
my bolt of lightning happened to be in
the neural crest cells for pomsy for
obesity.
That's where it is. The electrical
resistance of the circuit where you get
the disease determines the phenotype.
That's exactly what Doug Wallace's work
for 50 years has said and nobody listens
to him. Why? Because we spend 99% of the
NIH budget on nuclear DNA studies.
Nobody is studying the mitochondrial
DNA.
Walk us through some aspects of your
personal story. So, so you just said
your lightning where your lightning bolt
was. Walk us through that. What was your
journey with weight loss and how did you
get things under control? Yeah. So, it
started about 20 years ago after
residency. Residency when I came out, I
wound up gaining a lot of weight. Um,
and if you know anything about nurse
surgery, which I think most people do,
we are up all night taking care of
idiots that are doing stuff they're not
supposed to be doing. And probably 5
years after residency, I wound up
putting on about 100 130 pounds. So, I
got really, really heavy. And at that
time, I was taking 10 days of trauma
call unpaid for the hospital because
back then that was what you were
supposed to do if you're a doctor. And
um, I went to my primary care doctor and
what did he tell me? exactly what your
dermatologist told you. Stop eating and
exercise more and you lose weight. So I
did that and I gained another 30 lbs. So
that's when I sat down and I
said, "This is like Einstein's idea. If
I keep doing the same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over and over
again, I expect a different result. It's
insanity. So I need to start thinking
about this." At that time, that's when I
started to think about all the things I
had learned about residency, all the
things I had learned about Becker. And
uh I decided to take my family on a
trip. Okay.
And this happened after a very specific
thing happened in my life. I was given a
talk in Birmingham, Alex uh Birmingham,
Alabama to a group of orthopedic uh
neurosurgery spine surgeons. I had
developed some minimally invasive spine
um techniques. And when I gave up to
give the talk, I got a horrible pain in
my knee. I had to have help to get to
the podium to give the talk. And there
was a lady that was sitting there that
worked for a biotech company. She was
married to orthopedic surgeon. And after
the the thing, she goes, "The guy's
examining me and said, 'Look, you got a
bucket handle tear of your meniscus.
That's why it happened." I'm going,
"Wait a minute. I just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] stood up.
How does this happen?" And the lady said
to me, she goes, "Well, I think you're
leptin resistant." I'm like, I looked at
her. I'm like, "Leepin, what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is
that?" And because when leptin was
discovered, it was discovered in New
York University, Rockefeller University,
um, in 1993 or '94. And for those
listening, for those listening, leptin
is basically a hormonal readout of how
much fat tissue you have, right? Yeah.
Well, I count it as an electron
accountant. That's the best way from the
decentralized way. I'm thinking about
the centralized way will tell you, yeah,
it's it's a relation to fat mass. Um,
and what happened there, I said, well,
if it was discovered here, I had already
graduated medical school by that time,
so no wonder I didn't learn about it,
but I was kind of stunned I didn't hear
about it in my residency. So she gave me
a book that was a fable and then six
papers about leptin. She goes, "Go read
it." So here I am on this plane now
going to Europe with my
kids. So I read the papers and I read
the book and at it's the last day of my
trip in Europe and I'm standing at the
foot of Michelangelo's David and I look
up at him. That's perfection 500 years
ago. And then I look at my fat ass. At
the time I was 6'2", 360 lb. Um, I said,
"What's the difference between
perfection and my fat ass?" And as I
looked up, cuz I was standing behind
him, I looked at his ass. There was a
window at the cornis in Florence. I saw
a ray of light from the sun and a bird
sitting on the end. And it hit me
immediately right away. I said, "Shit,
it's circadian biology." And the bird,
they've got mitochondrial capacity and
so does David. I said, "Wait a minute.
This is freaking this is a Becker story.
So I get back on the flight the next day
on Delta, take all their excess paper
and what did I start doing? I write the
quilt document. The quilt document to
this day exists on my website. It's
created for 30 different parts of cell
biology that are the levies that give
you the basic story that I gave you
today. And you need to master each one
of those. So I went back to the library
at Vanderbilt Medical School then
started studying all those 30 different
levies to the nth degree and after 18
months I came out and I realized
everything that I was taught in
biochemistry and medical school was
wrong. Now I think you know the reason
why I have that perspective and then I
came up with something called the leptin
RX. I said, "If I use sunlight to do
this and get naked in the sunlight, I
should be able to lose weight." So, I
did what any good clinician has done.
There's a book out there that somebody
gave me at this time called called Who
Goes First? Who goes first is the story
about how doctors have experimented on
themselves. And I knew the story of
Barry Marshall and how he won a Nobel
Prize for proving that, you know, ulcers
come from helicoacttor and not from
stress, you know, which is what I
learned when I was in residency, why we
used to do veattoies on people. And he
had to actually swallow helicoacttor
himself and then put a scope down his
own throat to actually figure this out.
So I got the idea from his story. He won
the Nobel Prize for this in '95. So I
knew that story really well. So I did
the same thing. I did the leptin
prescription on me. In 3 months I lost
77 pounds. Then I added the second step
to the leptin story which I already told
you. I used cold thermogenesis. I came
up with a cold thermogenesis protocol in
2005 that predates everybody else
including Wimhof. And I started soaking
myself in 140 pounds of ice and I was
losing weight like crazy. Within 11
months I lost 133 lbs. So I went from
360 to a pretty small guy. And then
everybody in the hospital started asking
me, "Dude, did you have a ruin y'?" I
said, "Bro, have you not seen me every
day for the last 11 months
operating?" And he said, "Yeah, but you
know, you changed your operating room
schedule. I noticed that you don't
operate at 6:00 in the morning anymore.
You start at 8 and you make sure you're
done at 3." I said, "Yeah, you're right.
Cuz I'm using the sun. I'm using cold."
And they're like, "That's how you did
this?" And the guy that talked to me the
most, the guy who is most open-minded is
a guy named Dan uh Don Lazus who's a
gastronenterologist. And he says, "Jack,
what you found here is amazing." He
goes, "Can I send you a couple of
patients to see if this would work?" The
first patient he sent me is somebody who
had einaphilic esophagitis, which is an
autoimmune condition like you got,
except it's in your esophagus. Did the
same thing. This person had been to the
Mayo Clinic, John's Hopkins, and uh
UCLA, Cedar Sinai Medical Center. Got no
answers. I did the leptin prescription,
the cold thermogenesis protocol. In six
weeks, the patient had no more
autoimmune condition. So, this continued
to happen. Then people started sending
me all kinds of non-neururgical things
and people were getting better. Then I
decided to do it on my son. Then I
decided to do it on my nephew. my son
because at the time he was only 15. He
lost 60 lbs in six weeks. My nephew who
was 21 years old at the time, his name
is Kyle. He wanted to become an Army
Ranger, but he was probably I I bet you
he was 100 pounds overweight. And he was
he was, you know, he's pissed off with
his life, you know, low dopamine,
nihilistic like a lot of the kids today.
And I said, Kyle, if you do this, I
think you can do it. And he did it. He
lost over 100 pounds, went into the
military and became a special forces
guy. So that's when I said, "Okay, Don,
you're right. I'm going to put this
information on the internet." So what
did I do? I took my decentralized
medicine and put it on a website for
everybody to look at themselves. That's
how it started in
2005.
Wow. Yeah. Yeah, I'm going to have to
read that quilt document because like I
said, I haven't read that much yet. But
I could tell that there was a lot
lurking uh beneath the surface here. And
some of it, to be honest, some of it I
think obscured a little bit by the fact
that, you know, you've got kind of a
reputation and people say that guy's
weird, that guy's kooky, that guy's
mean. And uh I guess I could see what
they're talking about. But but Nick, let
me tell you something. Trying to hide
stuff. I got to say this because this is
the perfect podcast to do because you're
a scientist. I don't think anybody who's
listening to this thinks it's kooky, but
this is what I do have to say because
this is truly how I feel. It's really
ironic that people who are centralized
PhDs and clinicians call me crazy when
you're just too [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] stupid and
ignorant to know that I'm right. And let
me just tell you something. When you
find out that a crazy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is
right, then you may find out why I'm so
angry and so pissed off that this story
was first found by Robert Obecker in the
1960s and buried buried from me, my
friend. You want to know why Kevin
McCannan and I are birds of a feather?
Because the things that he found about
SV40, he never finds out unless I tell
the story about where SV40 really came
from. when I did that podcast with Danny
Jones because I was at the university
where all that stuff happened. Wow. For
those that are listen for are going to
be listening, can you just briefly
explain what SV40 is so they know? Yeah.
SV40 uh is a Simeon virus. Uh there was
many of them found that originally was
placed in the polio vaccine by mistake.
It's famously categorized in something
that most of you probably never learned
about called the cutter event. The
cutter event occurred at uh Ashner
Medical Foundation Hospital where I did
my residency. Alton Ashner got the whole
entire medical staff together, injected
his grandchildren uh with the cutter
polio vaccine. That's the sulk version.
Um his grandson died in 8 days. His
granddaughter got polio in her leg. She
didn't die. And that kind of changed
everything in 1951.
Um eventually uh a very brilliant doctor
who's the first doctor that I can tell
you was canceled before Becker which is
Bernice Eddie. This is all the science
that Kevin never could know. Bernice
Eddie is the one that found that Simeon
viruses were in the polio vaccine. Why?
Because the polio vaccine that salt
created was very difficult to grow. And
remember this all went on when FDR was
the president in the 30s 40s and 50s.
This is in a pre-molecular biology age.
Remember DNA is discovered in 53. This
happened in 51. So when he grew the
polio vaccine on on monkey kidney cells,
he had no way of knowing he was
transfecting his uh their viruses onto
that vaccine. That vaccine then was
given to about 360 million people all
over the world. Then the blood supply
was polluted. So everybody got it. What
did we then find? The government knew.
Um, in 1951, Richard Nixon was put in
charge of this as the vice president for
Eisenhower. He was very good friends
with Alton Asher. Alton Ashner was a
very famous anti-cancer doctor. Turned
out that they found out that when you
irdiate uh SV40, it becomes more lethal,
meaning more cancerous. It's an
ankcoenic virus. And what happens then
in history? The first clandestine
bioweapons lab is opened up in New
Orleans. There's five different labs. Um
they uh Alton gets a lac linear
accelerator to try to get rid of the
SV40 from these animals to see if we can
reverse this process cuz Alton Asher and
everybody else in the military knows
that cancer is going to spike over the
next 50 years which it does. That's what
the old SV40 story. So if you want to
know about soft tissue cancers and
misothelium really where they come from,
it's not from asbestous. That's the
story you've been sold. Um and the real
story is that there's this huge spike in
the literature of SV40. Kevin and his
former critic Philip Buckolds who's a
molecular had no way of knowing this
story. Why? Because the NIH through
Bernice Eddie's bosses whitewashed the
whole story from 51 through 59. It only
comes out in the wash when Bernice Eddie
in 1957 is at a New York Academyy's
science meeting and casually says at the
end of it, this is a closed dooror
meeting to guys like you that by the way
the polio vaccine is is polluted with
SV40 and a lot of other polyoma virus.
Remember SV40 stands for 40. There's a
whole bunch of other ones. Right. Right.
So this whole entire thing is
whitewashed from the NIH website. Nobody
studies it until a guy named Michael
Carbone in the early 90s that I become
familiar with who's a PhD researcher uh
starts to look into this misotheloma
story and he finds a surgeon in
Washington DC who's got the largest case
history in the world of taking
misothelomas out of chest cavities and
he had this propensity to do something
unusual. He'd save some of the tumor
himself. So Corbone goes back and gets
over 400 samples and finds out that the
majority of these misothelomas have
remnants and pieces and parts of SV40 in
them. This gets again buried in history,
but you can still find it. But nobody
has ever been able to link this story to
the Ashner story. Why? Because the
Ashner story was a CIA FBI clandestine
operation. So how did Kevin get dragged
into the story? Unfortunately, I've
never told this publicly, but yeah, part
of the reason I went back to work in
COVID was not only to try to save people
from the graves, but it was to get
samples of one specific vaccine that I
knew was going to have SV40 in it
because of the patents. The patents for
Biioentech and Fizer, two different
legal definitions, and I knew exactly
what they were going to do based on the
patents for Madna. they were going to go
down to their genetics lab and they were
going to get the SV40 promoter because
they were behind the COVID scene and
they would use it and then take it out
uh utilizing molecular techniques. Now,
I'm pretty smart guy, but I don't have
any of that skill set. So, you happen to
know a guy in the cannabis industry
that's a pretty [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] smart cookie
that used to work on the human genome
project. Magically, he gets a couple of
vials and just by accident, he doesn't
check them. He waits till he has an own
his own problem in his own company and
says, "I need something that
can do this molecular trick for me." He
goes, "Oh yeah, I got these fizer
vials." Y he uses them, finds out that
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] SV40 is in it. He goes on Twitter,
you know the story, tells everybody,
everybody tells him he's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy.
Uh Philip Buck Holtz goes [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] nuts
on him. You know, they get into a huge
fight. I'm sitting back watching this
whole thing and I'm going, "Okay, let's
just go to the next step. Philip, get
off your ass. be a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] PhD scientist
and do what you need to do. And he did.
He tried to prove Kevin wrong by
stuffing tube socks in his mouth,
repeated the same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] study. And
guess what happened? Kevin's right.
Uncle Jack
smiles. Okay. Now, Uncle Jack, who never
tells this story for 30 years because
I've been sitting on
it for how I laid the story out on the
Danny Jones podcast, on Rick's podcast,
on um the Bullwark podcast, now your
podcast, uh Dr. Alexis Cowan, who's also
a PhD researcher. Like, now the entire
story is out. Why? Because what happens
magically? something that's supposed to
be new in science, which is the MRI
platform. Yeah. Has something old from
1951 in it. Yep. SD40 promoter. And
guess what? At the end of my last
podcast that I did with Danny Jones,
that was me and Mary Tally Bowen. I just
want you to go look at this, Nick. I put
up one slide and I show you the slide of
the
SV40 story, the 50-year spike of cancer.
And it ends right where COVID is. But
here's the most important part. The SV40
in the polio vaccine is a full
complement of the genome. It's got
everything in it. The SV40 that's in the
COVID uh MRA platform only is the
promoter. That's it. Nothing else is in
it. I want you to go look at the slope
of the line on that slide. You'll see
that it's asmmptoic compared to the
other one which is sloped. So what does
that tell you? Becker's regeneration
program is able to actually offset some
of this, but because we now live in a
non-native EMF world, the slope of that
line is going up like this. So, if you
want to know where the turbos of cancers
are coming from, the first two hours of
your podcast, I just gave you the
answer. Wow. Got it? Yes. Now you know
the whole story. Now you know why I came
out on Twitter two years ago and said
that Kevin McCirin deserves a Nobel
Prize. Now knowing Kevin now how I do,
he probably wouldn't accept the
centralized piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] prize
because they don't do anything except
give bad ideas prizes. They did it. What
What reason platform the MRA platform?
What reason is there? What are the
potential reasons one would use the
SV440 promoter? What is the purpose?
What was CO my friends? What was CO?
COVID was a compliance test for an
economic reset. We're $37 trillion in
debt. What's the best way to taper a
Ponzi scheme? Kill people. And you do it
slowly over time. Then you don't have to
pay them out social security. You don't
have to pay them out this. And then when
they die, you get estate tax
money. And how do you do it the whole
way to the bank? You make sure that
every US hospital has a cancer center in
it because it's a money printer for the
hospital. That's what centralized
medicine is built around, my friend. And
do you want to know they keep why they
keep guys like you and Kevin focused in
on the nuclear genome? Because what is
the story that I told you, Nick, all day
today? It's a story of the might,
you know. You starting to understand,
you know why? You know why they canled
Becker, but they didn't counter cancel
his other counterpart in the 60s, which
is Alan Fry. Allan Fry is the guy that
showed you the non-native EMF opens your
blood brain barrier, opens your gut
barrier, raises blood glucose and raises
your insulin level because they were
using that on you and they planned on
using it and they're using it on you
now. But they couldn't let you see
Becker's work because if you knew
Becker's work, guess what? You'd be able
to protect yourself from the Ponzi
taper. That's the story.
Wow. You have no idea how nefarious they
are. And I can tell you if you listen
and I hope your audience is probably new
to me. You listen to the podcast that
I've done with Abel James with the bull
work guys. I have particularly Nick
picked out not Joe Rogan, not Tucker
Carlson. Why? Because I know who
supports them and who they work for.
I go for the people that I know are not
complicit in this event. The reason why
I have disdain for some of the people I
have disdain for because remember you
know this better than anybody just like
Kevin does. Most PhDs are constrained by
funding. Now you usually have to default
back to the government, back to the
military. That's part of the reason
why decided I'm going to go to the
private markets, right? and you know how
successful he's become, but it's also
the reason why Kevin was my target. I
knew that he would do the right thing.
And boy, did he. Now, a guy like you
who's plugged in to that matrix, now you
can understand why Uncle Jack hates food
gurus, why he hates biochemists, why he
hates anybody who actually put Becker
out of business. So it turns out that
Michael Leven's mentor is one of those
guys. And the reason why Michael's work
is bio electric signaling, but Uncle
Jack's photo bioelectric signaling. You
will never get the story about the
paramagnetic switch that Becker found
from Michael Leven's lab. Cuz if he did,
he'd be defunded.
Well, Jack, you've given me a lot to
think about and a lot to read, I think.
Um, is there any final thoughts you want
to leave people with? Any thing that you
want to reiterate or condense based on
the whole arc of our discussion? Yeah, I
would tell you
that I say this a lot. It's the mark of
an educated mind to take something you
fundamentally don't believe, something
that you heard, like this could sound
hyperbolic to a lot of your friends that
have PhDs that know science. I want you
to fact check it and take it apart. Go
back to the literature and see if what
I've said to you is incorrect. And then
when you see that it is correct, then
you have a duty to me. You know what
that duty is? To tell people the truth.
Because if we're going to fix people,
because I know that's why you went into
science to begin with, you want to help
people. You're a PhD that's sitting
there with a premolignant condition on
your left elbow.
So, I need for you to get this story
because now you know the whole story and
you are going to be the perfect
megaphone where Joe Rogan and Tucker
Carlson aren't because they are getting
paid by media that's being paid by big
pharma. You're not. And when you know
the truth, all you need to do is share
it with savages. What am I trying to do?
I'm trying to make people
mitochondriacs.
I'm trying to let them know that there
is no defect in you. The defect is in
your environment and that's where the
diseases come from. And if you fix the
environment, the beautiful thing about
Doug Wallace's and Becker's work is you
can get back everything you've lost.
Dr. Jack Kruse, thank you very much for
your time.