[Music]
Welcome back to the book club. I'm
Michael Nolles. It has all led to this.
This entire show has led to this moment.
I was excited for it. I was dreading it.
I have picked up this book multiple
times in my life and until this show
made me finish it, I had failed. War in
Peace by Leo Toltoy. We had to bring in
a heavy hitter for this one. We brought
in Sir Neil Ferguson, a former professor
at Harvard. We don't have to talk about
that too much. The author of many books,
the giver of many lectures, and a man
really who needs no introduction. Neil,
thank you for being here.
&gt;&gt; It's my pleasure, Michael. It's great to
be here.
On this show, I ask the guest to give a
one minute summary of the books. Uh, if
anyone can do it, it's you. But I won't
hold it against you if you if you go to
62 seconds.
The plot of War and Peace is in fact
quite straightforward. It is about the
war between France and Russia that
Napoleon Bonapart starts. uh and that
culminates in 1812
uh with the French invasion of Russia.
The real point of the book is the way in
which this huge geopolitical shock
affects the lives of a group of
aristocratic Russian families. the
central character Pierre uh experiences
a whole series of philosophical
illuminations in the course of the
novel. The point of the book is how war
affects the lives of ordinary people.
Not that the aristocrats in the book are
ordinary, but it's really the
interaction between the war and their
lives, particularly their love lives,
that really make War and Peace the
greatest novel ever written. And as you
say, a a lot of the action focuses on
the aristocrats, but it's not only the
aristocrats. You also get some of the
surfs who crop up there. some of these
religious figures, Freemasons show up.
You've got people from Russia and
Austria and Prussia and Germany and
France. And it occurred to me, I don't
maybe about halfway through, a third of
the way through, I said, "Oh,
this book really is about everything,
which I should have known because the
title is war and peace.
That's pretty much all there is."
&gt;&gt; Right? So,
even when you mention the historical
aspect of it, it's hard to call it a
novel even though it's the greatest
novel ever written because you're
reading it and then all of a sudden you
get to a chapter and it's an essay just
about history and then all of a sudden
you get to a chapter and it's a treatise
on religion or on Freemasonry or on he
even delves into mathematics a little
bit and it's just
&gt;&gt; everything
&gt;&gt; in many ways. It's a building uh to use
the the German term, it's a a novel in
which an education happens. Uh and it's
the education principally of the central
character Pierre who goes from being a a
worshipper of Napoleon or at least an
admirer of Napoleon at the beginning to
seeing through Napoleon. He's a
Freemason along the way. he ultimately
arrives at a new understanding of life
and the book culminates with an essay on
free will and determinism.
The central essay of the philosophy of
history in my view. So the way to read
war and peace is as as an education. You
will be educated. Yeah. There are about
24 chapters that are purely
philosophical and they they pop up uh in
the midst of the the human drama of uh
the Rostovves and uh the other families
that you get you get to know. There's a
large cast of characters which makes it
challenging. Uh but as long as you are
careful and keep track of the key
characters who appear, Prince Andre and
Natasha, you'll be fine. and they're so
brilliantly realized as characters and
their their complex entanglements are so
movingly described that you'll be caught
up in that that human drama and you'll
almost welcome the moments when Toltoy
pops pops up and says, "Well, what does
this all mean?" Uh, is is Napoleon the
Antichrist? I mean, that's a great
moment when Pier starts to think that
that actually that's who Napoleon is.
and he and he then decides he has to
assassinate Napoleon to to to save the
world. So the the book is is a kind of
everything book as you've said Michael.
It's all there and u if you're a a man
you like the war chapters better and if
you're a woman you like the peace
chapters but my wife and I were
discussing that the other night but but
you have got to read it all because all
all life is there and uh I can assure
you the size should not intimidate you.
I think it's entirely gripping. I think
I've read it three times. I first
encountered it when I was 15 growing up
in Scotland. It's the reason I became a
historian. That that book is the reason
that I did what I decided to do because
it's all there and at the end of it you
are suddenly confronted with the big
question. What is the historical
process? What is the power that moves
nations is is Tulso's great question at
the end. Why did this all happen? Why
did the French uh invade Russia? Why was
there all this slaughter
and why did ordinary people's lives get
turned upside down? And that is that is
the big question.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; To to to your point on don't let this
intimidate you. as someone who had tried
multiple times to pick it up, I I was
recently talking to Rich Lowry, editor
of National Review, and while I was
reading this and he said, "Well,
Michael, the thing that you're going to
find is it's such a slog to really get
started, to really get into it, and by
the end, you're not going to want it to
end." And I found that certainly to be
true. It's probably the greatest novel
I've ever read because it's probably the
greatest novel ever written. And as you
just mentioned, by the time you get in
my copy to page 1274,
epilogue part two, you finally get the
question that Toltoy is after. What
force moves the nations? So what force
moves it? Is it the great men as was a
popular conception in the 19th century?
These individual heroes? Is it just kind
of tides of culture that we can't quite
pin down? Is it, as Toltoy points out,
what we used to think it was, which is
God and divine providence? Where does
the story come from?
&gt;&gt; Well, Napoleon thinks it's him. And
Napoleon is in many ways the villain of
the peace. Napoleon's egotism, his
belief that he issues commands and a
vast army forms and and invades Russia
is the the target of of Tolstar's
argument because Tolto wants to show
that although Napoleon appears to be in
command of these events, he's not really
and he's he's vain, egotistical,
uh cynical, in in reality, something
more powerful is at work. But you're
you're on a journey to realize that that
history is not about great men. In
truth, it's about ideas. Uh it's about
the interaction of of vast impersonal
forces. And because all the different
protagonists, all the different
characters are are taking decisions
about their own lives. History is the
sum of all those decisions. The
decisions on the part of the French
soldiers to accept the mission to invade
Russia. The decision on the part of
ordinary Russians like the peasant that
pure befriends to resist the the Russian
onslaught. That's the historical
process. And Tolto's conclusion is that
it's a delusion that someone like
Napoleon has the will to initiate such
enormous events in in truth. uh
something that no individual controls is
is at work.
&gt;&gt; So then does anything distinguish
Napoleon? In other words, Toltoy could
have written about any period he wanted
to. Uh there have been wars throughout
all of history. What makes Napoleon so
special? What makes Napoleon so special
for this question? You know also here at
in the essays at the end Toltoy points
out this apparent paradox which is that
Napoleon is a child of the French
Revolution and yet Napoleon as as the as
the flower of the French Revolution
undermines the French Revolution. He
actually suppresses the the the
revolution. So why him? Why now? Why
this war? Why would Toltoy devote his
his great work to this historical event
in particular? Tulso himself was born
some sometime after Napoleon's defeat in
1828. Napoleon was ultimately defeated
in 1815. The events that are described
in the book happened roughly 50 years
before publication.
So it's a little bit as if you, Michael,
decided to write a novel set at the time
of the Vietnam War.
That's important because it's not so
distant that it's completely remote from
us. It's not the Pelpeneian War. It's
sufficiently near that you could have a
conversation with older relatives who
might have had a firstirhand experience
of the Vietnam War.
&gt;&gt; There's a Count Toltoy in the novel
&gt;&gt; and and indeed Toltoyy's father whom he
did not know well because he died when
Toltoy was quite young had served in the
war. So that sort of helps you get a
sense of the distance between the author
and the events. They're not that remote.
They're they're as close to him as
Vietnam is to us. And I think part of
what's going on here is a reckoning a
generation later with the ideas that had
been so hotly debated at the time and
were still being debated in Russia in
the 1860s.
uh ideas about politics, how democratic
uh should a society be or should there
be an absolute ruler as Napoleon had
become. That was the central debate that
had gone on in France beginning with the
revolution and it had been resolved with
the utter failure of the the
revolutionary project and the emergence
of Napoleon as an authoritarian
absolutist ruler. But because Toltoy was
somebody deeply engaged with religious
and philosophical questions, he he
writes Warren Peace before his
transformation into a kind of Christian
fundamentalist pacifist, but he's on a
journey in that direction. Uh the book
is also about ethical and religious
questions as well as about the the
political questions. And I think it's
it's sort of more a philosophical book
than a than a political book. And what's
wonderful is that Toltoy gives us
philosophy by examples.
&gt;&gt; Uh he allows us to see the fundamental
conundrums, the dilemmas of the human
condition, but with with clear and
concrete examples and with people you
can identify with. Pierre, who's
intelligent but somewhat
self-indulgence, doesn't have great
self-discipline, uh is sort of a a
wandering scholar trying to find truth
and frequently taking wrong turnings.
He's also trying to find love. He's
trying to find social acceptance. So,
he's the sort of anchor character. And
then there's the the more noble and
admirable figure of Prince Andre uh
who's also on a kind of journey. Uh so
each character is confronted with the
problem. The the problem is that war is
coming or war is actually raging and how
will you act? What is your role going to
be in these world historical events that
you can't control? So, so you have these
two characters you've just mentioned,
uh, Pierre and Prince Andre, and there's
this wonderful contrast between them
because Pierre is an illegitimate child
of Count Bejikov, and he thinks that his
father doesn't even want to see him.
He's kind of a rascal and gets stopped
all sorts of trouble. But as the count
is dying, he leaves his whole estate to
Pierre. So, all of a sudden, now Pierre
is Count Bezikov, and all the other kids
are angry about this. And he's raised up
and society treats him a lot better. And
then you have Prince Andre and about
halfway through the novel they they meet
up again. And this is after Pierre has
come out of his uh childish ways and he
thinks he's found this path of
enlightenment and self-discipline
through Freemasonry and the brotherhood
of man. And he encounters Prince Andre
who's been in the war already. He's been
disabused of his illusions. He's now
just going to live for himself. He
doesn't care whatsoever about the surfs
or equality or anything like that. he's
just going to serve himself. And they
have this big debate in the middle of
the of the novel. And when they leave,
Pierre says, "I'm going to go. I'm going
to free my surfs and I'm going to
improve the lot of mankind and the
common man." And as always happens in
debates like this, they leave and they
don't agree.
But secretly, Pierre has convinced
Prince Andre. And then the irony is
Pierre goes about trying on his his
happy clappy humanitarian plans. Totally
fails. just doesn't know how to really
affect anything. Prince Andre quietly
starts to put Pierre's ideas into
practice. Uh so you you're seeing that
you're seeing the the role of ideas on
the movement of people and political
events. Uh but uh in in rather different
ways. You're seeing one walking the
walk, one just sort of talking the talk.
Just to give people a little bit of
context, we keep talking about these
families. Who are the families? We open
up the novel and they're at a a nice
sort of cocktail suaree and you have a
number of different families who kind of
show up and they're all trying to get
favors from one another and marry the
daughters off to each other. So who are
they?
&gt;&gt; So social context is is hugely helpful
here. Uh the uh Russian aristocracy at
the time that the novel is set uh own
not only vast trackcts of land but they
own people. uh that there's a big
difference between unfree labor in the
United States and unfree labor in uh
19th century Russia, namely that
everybody's white. Uh but but the surfs
are in all respects unfree. They they
don't have uh freedom. They are bound to
to the land. And uh the aristocracy uh
own very large numbers uh of of surfs as
well as large tracks of land. and they
they live this strange life which
Toltoyy's short stories uh depict very
well. They have their grand residences
uh in the country as uh Toltoy's family
did not too far from Moscow but 100
miles uh from Moscow. Um and they spend
some of their time there but they spend
more time in the two big cities that
still to this day dominate Russian life.
St. Petersburg, the fashionable westward
oriented political capital since the
time of Peter the Great and Moscow which
has reverted to being uh the capital in
uh the last 100 years since the Russian
revolution. So they have this double
life. Uh part of their time is spent in
the city. We see a lot of that the
social life of St. Petersburg, the
glamorous social life of St. Petersburg
and then there is this sort of period of
your time when you you you're in the
country miles from anywhere miles from
anybody surrounded by the unfree
laborers who work the land by the time
that that uh Tolto is writing war and
peace this great problem has been
resolved by the emancipation of the
surfs which is the great legislative
achievement of Sar Alexander II but at
the time that the novel's set that's
still a very distant prospect.
So, we're dealing here with a highly
unequal society. That that's why it's
very important that uh at a very low
point in his fortunes at the battle of
Boradino, shortly before he's taken
prisoner, Pierre has an encounter with
an ordinary Russian surf, a peasant.
&gt;&gt; That's right. Who who um who is the
person that he he's most impressed by
because of his authenticity, his
simplicity, and his sincerity. And
Toltoy increasingly romanticized the the
ordinary Russian. Uh but in his young
life he he felt so conflicted as as a
surf owner that he he tried the kind of
reforms that that Pierre and Andre are
talking about. Uh there's a funny short
story uh that Tolto also wrote
describing the kind of failure of an
idealistic land owner who who tries to
as it were preemptively emancipate his
his surfs, tries to educate them, tries
to uplift them, but doesn't work because
there's just too big a cultural gap
between the educated westernized
aristocrat and the illiterate peasant
farmers that he owns. Uh and this is a
really important moment of connection
where uh the huge social chasm that
separates a landowner from a surf is is
bridged by the the crisis of the war.
&gt;&gt; Well, one thing I love about Kayv is
I'll work on it before we get to war and
peace too. Uh is you you see different
modes of knowledge cropping up
throughout the the story. So there's
scientific knowledge, there's
philosophical knowledge, there's
hermetic, gnostic, Freemason knowledge,
there's historical knowledge, and then
my favorite is the mode of knowledge
that this surf engages in which is folk
sayings. He's always uttering these
little folk sayings, which are very
charming and which really do, especially
if you're a conservative,
really do convey a lot a lot of very
important wisdom about how societies
operate. The central question in 19th
century Russia was should we be like the
west Europeans? They were educated like
West Europeans. Hence the they speak
French and conversation in St.
Petersburg is within the elite more
likely in French than in Russian or
should we be Slavs? Should we be true uh
to our East European Orthodox
traditions? Yeah. And Toltoy is
preoccupied with this question. So is
DSvski. So is Turv. It's the big debate
of the mid-9th century uh Russian elite.
And it's there in in war and peace. Uh
it's obviously deeply problematic for
the Russian elite to be fighting the
French. Uh they have much more in common
with the French elite than they have in
common with the the Russian serves. But
part of what you see in the book is the
behavior of the French army, their
brutality, the shooting of prisoners,
which is a very important moment in the
book, the burning of Moscow. All of this
signals that there is something wrong
with this uh French culture that you've
been raised to admire. And uh when you
encounter the plain people of Russia,
the ordinary surf, uh you encounter some
authentic uh human values that are
fundamentally different from the ideas
that have animated the French Revolution
and and then animated the creation of an
empire.
&gt;&gt; There's one line on this very point that
strikes me as quite pertinent to our
politics today, which is somewhere
around the first third of the book, I
guess. Uh, Anna Pavlovna, one of these
society women characters says,
"Europe will never be our sincere ally."
&gt;&gt; That takes me right back to 2025.
Something tells me Vladimir Putin has
read this book once or twice.
&gt;&gt; I think it's uh highly likely since
reading War and Peace is like learn to
learn learning to play chess. you're not
an educated Russian if you can't do
those things. And it's that another
reason if you need another reason to
read war and peace is to be reminded of
that uh constant perennial struggle over
the bloodlands to use Timothy Snider's
term that separate Western Europe from
the Russian Empire. The war that's
raging still in Ukraine after more than
three years is a war being fought over
territory that the French army marched
through on its way uh to Moscow and then
what was left of it marched back through
it on on on the return uh the the return
to to to to France. So, it's a book that
that feels even more relevant, I hate
that word, but more uh worthy of our
interest today than it did when I first
read. I mean, I first read the book, I
guess, in the 1970s. The Cold War was
still going on. It felt like the Iron
Curtain was a permanent feature of our
lives. Uh but with war raging in these
same areas uh with with air raids
happening on some of the cities that
feature uh in the novel, war and peace
really resonates and you keep seeing
alliances change as this tension works
its way out. So one of the great moments
of the novel is when you've got Napoleon
as a as a criminal. He's he really has
no legitimacy. It would be it was
considered totally ridiculous for the
zar to actually to meet with Napoleon.
He sends a a deputy to go meet with
Napoleon. And but then after this common
criminal has won some battles, all of a
sudden there's this moment when Napoleon
and Thesar meet and they exchange honors
with each other. They give honors to
each other's officers. Now they're all
sort of friends.
&gt;&gt; And then that doesn't last very long.
Obviously Napoleon goes on to invade
Moscow. And then Napoleon is not only a
common criminal, he becomes the
Antichrist. And previously you've got
alliances between Russia and Austria and
Germany, but the Russians don't like
those people either. And there are all
sorts of tensions. And then at one point
they're waiting for the Russian army,
one half of it, to kill the the other
half of the Russian army. So you you've
got this constant shifting which is
paralleled in the social lives of these
aristocrats where these cute little
girls who they come out at their
debutant balls and they instantly fall
in love with these young men. Ah, we'll
be together forever. Once the war is
over, we're going to get married. Then
they all fall in love with different
people and then they kind of return and
there's this it just feels like this
wave that is ebbing and flowing for 1400
pages.
&gt;&gt; I think anybody uh of the generation
that went through World War II will
recognize the way in which the
disruption of war brings the disruption
of love. Uh relationships in wartime are
different from relationships in peace
time because there's some non-trivial
probability that the men won't come
back. Uh there's also the way in which
the war affects the sensibilities of of
of couples. They're they're changed by
events. So part of what's exciting about
war and peace and and and this is
important for people who feel at this
point alienated. Oh no, it's about
battles. It's about war. This is not my
thing. It's also about love. And it has
one of the great moments uh in the
history of uh of literature which is
Pierre's first encounter with Natasha.
Uh that this for me is an
extraordinarily important moment because
it's the Kudafa. They they see one
another at a ball, one of these
wonderful uh events that the book
describes. And it it it is the moment of
of connection in the Soviet movie
version, which I highly recommend
because seven or eight hours long or
something faithful to the book. If you
if you want to see a movie that is truly
faithful to the to the novel, see
Bonduk's War in Peace.
&gt;&gt; Hold on. You're telling me instead of
spending weeks reading this book, I
could have just watched the movie? No,
you have to do both. First, read the
book and then uh and it's like having
just Turkish delight for dinner. You
watch the movie and the movie's great
because it's so faithful uh to the book.
The battle scenes, incidentally, are
insanely good because they had the
entire Red Army available. Many, many
horses perished uh to the outrage of
Western animal rights activists. But the
moment when Pierre sees Natasha is
brilliantly realized by Bondichuk who
plays Pierre himself as well as
directing the movie. But that moment
when you see the person that you're
destined to marry and you you know and
they know is the most important moment
that that human life can can give you
and it's there in war and peace. Now of
course it takes a very long time for
Pierre and Natasha to be united. In
fact, some marriages in the meantime,
&gt;&gt; Star Cross doesn't even cover it. Pier
has a miserably unhappy marriage to
somebody he knows he's making a mistake
marrying. Natasha gets mixed up with a
very bad character indeed. And and so
there's there's lots and lots of love in
in War and Peace, which is why when
Woody Allen makes his parody, Love and
Death, that's the title he gives it. And
I also recommend that you watch Love and
Death after you've watched Bondichuk's
War and Peace because Love and Death is
very very funny, but it's not funny if
you have never read War and Peace. So
you you mention these Well, you know,
Pierre is a little bit older, I guess,
but you're mentioning all these young
people before the war breaks out.
They're all at balls. They're all kind
of falling in love and and one of the
characters, a secondary character is
Rostov. And uh Rostov is in love with
Sonia. Uh, so the other the other little
girl and uh they're they're going to get
married or they want to but they're
cousins so it's kind of tricky and but
Rosto he doesn't know anything. I mean
he really is a boy and then he says all
right Sonia I'll see you later because I
got to go off to the war now and I'm
going to become a man in the war. And my
favorite line, there are many, many
lines that I underlined in Dogeared, but
my favorite line in the whole book is
when he Rosstov is in battle and he's
he's off his horse now and he's looking
at these people and he says, "Who are
they? Why are they running? Can they be
coming at me? And why? To kill me, me
who everybody loves?" And then he thinks
of his mother's love for him and he
thinks of all these wonderful, beautiful
events in his life. And I thought, what
I've never been in battle. I don't maybe
I would have the same thought that
realization. Wait a second. Why would
they want to kill little old me?
Tolster had seen action in the Crimean
War and and had written some very
excellent short stories about that
experience. I think it's one of the
things that that makes war and peace
work is he knows what it's like to be in
that extraordinary situation that there
people trying to kill you and you have
no idea who they are. U so to war and
peace is good because the war stuff is
done really well by somebody who knew
where off uh he wrote but he also did
his homework.
&gt;&gt; This is a historical novel. Now, some
historical novels uh I tend to warn
people against because they're so
completely divorced from historical
reality. Toltoy did his homework. Uh
Warren Peace is a very thoroughly
researched book. Uh the historical parts
and real historical figures, not only
Napoleon, but others feature in the
book. They're done really well. And so,
you're not getting kind of bad history
here. You're you're getting very
carefully researched history. But then
you also get this human insight uh in in
the battle scenes. There's a fantastic
moment uh one of my favorites in the
book when it it looks as if Prince Andre
is dead. Yeah. uh and and he's lying on
the battlefield. Uh but uh his
apparently final act has been to to run
forward holding the standard uh and and
he he's lying there with prostrate with
the standard beside him and
&gt;&gt; and Napoleon rides up
&gt;&gt; and and utters the immortal line, Kel
Bellmore. What a beautiful death. I I
have always been haunted by that moment
that Andre's barely conscious, but he's
aware
&gt;&gt; until he starts twitching. Yeah. Oh
yeah, that one's still alive. Yeah, he's
he he he survived but is is gravely ill,
goes through this process of
convolescence and uh but he's altered by
by the experience. They all are altered
by the war. And that's I think the the
critical point. All of the
vacasillations of their private lives,
the intrigues, the affairs, the broken
engagements, the broken hearts are
resolved at the end in a way that's
that's powerfully moving. I suppose when
I read it first, I came to the the
somewhat bernal conclusion
that when all is said and done, your
grand philosophical schemes are as
nothing compared with the simple
pleasures uh of domestic happiness.
Dolster was not himself uh domestically
happy. So putting him uh I think he had
one of the unhappiest marriages of all
time.
&gt;&gt; Didn't he die fleeing his wife basically
on a train or something?
&gt;&gt; They had a tremendously troubled
relationship. Uh the the best
illustration of how this wasn't going to
work out was that on the eve of their
wedding, Toltoy gave uh his wife Sonia
his diaries which described all of his
sexual escapades, including the uh surf
woman he'd impregnated and had a child
by. This wasn't a great start to the
marriage. Then Tolto was a kind of
workaholic who expected her to be his
emanuensas to provide all the kind of
secretarial support that uh that he
required. It was not it was not a happy
relationship. But this of course is why
Toltoy is so good at unhappiness but
also sees the ideal as domestic bliss.
You're you're reminding me too of a
parallel here between Toltoy's life and
Pierre which is that Pierre marries this
awful woman and she cheats on him. She
might have cheated on him with well she
might have had a sexual relationship
with her brother Anatol and she cheats
on him with this guy Dolov who's a
complete scoundrel.
&gt;&gt; There are lots of real in the book
really great characters which is another
reason for reading war in peace that the
the loathsome people are really
worthless.
&gt;&gt; They're great. I mean they're mar and do
then later goes on and rips off Rostov
and a gambling de ruins him.
&gt;&gt; Ros is the nice guy by the way. you you
mentioned, but he's the he's the kind of
nice guy who just kind of wants to get
by, but he's broke. He's the nice broke
guy with the too many children. We've
all met Rostov,
&gt;&gt; but but even when when Pierre realizes
Dov is mocking him because he's been
sleeping with his wife. They have a
duel.
&gt;&gt; The duel is a very important moment.
&gt;&gt; It's an amazing moment because you're
waiting for Pierre who has apparently
never picked up a firearm in his life.
He he's asking, he's trying to play it
cool. He says, "And how does this
trigger work on here?" you know, and he
but he wins the duel. He he takes him
out and uh but that doesn't resolve it
for him and eventually he he ends back
up with this awful woman after some time
apart and uh but he he doesn't want to
he doesn't want to sleep with her and
his his Freemason um guide his guru
tells him he says you know you've got to
do the marital act and I'm reminded of
Poltoy who I believe one of the causes
of his marital unhappiness
he also would not sleep with his wife
&gt;&gt; the role of sexual frustration in
history is a very important and and
underststudied one. Uh
I think war and peace is is is also
about love. It it's it's about relations
between men and women and one sees them
in all the different facets. So you
you're pointing out here this uh tension
or maybe just complimentarity between
the grand philosophical schemes, the
philosophy of history and the quotidian
aspects of all the lives of these
particular people.
&gt;&gt; Reading Toltoy, not just Warren Peace,
but reading Tolto's broader u works,
&gt;&gt; one gets the impression that this guy
really just wants to be a philosopher.
And I think there was even a letter from
Turgyv saying
cut it out with all the philosophy. Just
stick to the novels. You're really
really good at novels. And and it's
almost like Toltoy is living the dream
but not his dream. He just happens to be
the greatest novelist ever. But that's
not really what what he wants to do. You
know, his true passion is philosophy. I
think what's great about the book is is
precisely the way that it interweavves
uh philosophy and the human drama, the
human comedy. As I said, the reason this
book turned me into a historian was that
I thought I ought to really be a
physicist because that was what my
mother did and that seemed like the
cleverest thing. And what Toltoy taught
me was that that really the study of
humanity was more challenging because
humanity is particles with consciousness
as opposed to just particles. So War and
Peace is about particles with
consciousness. The reason its scale is
so vast is that unlike most novelists
who who essentially paint in micro,
Toltoy gives us macro. He gives us the
vast canvas of the Napoleonic Wars and
then the human experience is where you
zoom in on Prince Andre on the the
battlefield. I love the philosophical
chapters. I know I'm in a minority. I'm
probably one of the few people you'll
ever meet who's read the second epilogue
and and I'm probably the only person you
know who thinks it's the best part of
the book. But if you just read it cold,
if you just took the philosophical
chapters and the epilog out and only
read those, then it would not be as
powerful and it it wouldn't even strike
you as particularly brilliant
philosophy. So you you actually need
both. And Troy was right. Toltoyy's
genius is that he realizes the human
condition and he makes us understand
what it is to be Prince Andre, to be
Pierre, even to be Natasha. for somebody
who ought not to be good at writing
women, he does a I think a pretty good
job. U so he's not a philosopher uh
anymore than I was going to be a
physicist, but I try and write history
with at least some sense of the
scientific context and and Tolto is
doing philosophy while while being a
brilliant novelist. I like many men, I'm
not it's not just me, I don't love
reading novels. when I get into it, then
I'm into it, whatever. But I much prefer
reading history or philosophy. And so I
actually I was told I was going to hate
the philosophical and historical
chapters. And I really liked them and I
felt more comfortable with them even.
But I agree. I wouldn't want to read a
book of them. That's not what makes this
special. There's one though that that
struck me also, which is he he starts
talking about the the continuity of
motion. He says absolute continuity of
motion is not comprehensible to the
human mind. So we like to divide things
up into is this what is this? They're
separate. We're compartmentalizing them.
But but he says
uh by adopting smaller and smaller
elements of motion we only approach a
solution to this problem. We never reach
it. Only when we have admitted the
conception of the infinitely small and
the resulting geometrical progression
with a common ratio of one/10enth. What
kind of language is this for a novel? uh
and have found the sum of this
progression to infinity. Do we reach a
solution to the problem? He says to
understand the laws of this continuous
movement is the aim of history. In other
words, you you can't really you can't
even just talk about the Napoleonic wars
because it's human history is this
continuous motion of all these various
segments that really can only be
understood together. And it's almost as
if Toltoy is envisioning
uh a movie. He's envisioning the slicing
of action into into still photographs
that are then uh shown in a seamless
continuum. That's the kind of thing that
I find exciting about the book that that
he's willing to suddenly delve into the
abstract before returning to the the
love affairs of Russian aristocrats. I
mean, why why is it that that one is
moved by these distant fictional love
affairs? I think it's because as you're
reading about them, you know that you're
being educated about something much much
larger, much much grander in its in it
in its scope.
&gt;&gt; And in fact, he's telling you that. So,
just in case you get confused, I am
teaching you something about this. And
it's funny also to think about the
importance of ideas for him as he's
telling this history because then later
on in in the epilogues he'll say listen
when we try to approach history some
people say it's the great men some
people say it's the intellectuals you
know and so if you want to trace history
you just figure out which books were
written when said by the way there's no
evidence that the uh books that were
written at a particular time ever
actually really seep down to control the
actions of the great mass of people. So
he starts to undercut that and yet he's
obviously presenting it here. I wonder
and I keep coming back to it because it
was such a jarring part of the novel to
me.
Why the Freemasonry? I mean what you
know when Pierre is going through it and
he's going to come out of his um
dereliction.
Why is it this Yseph, this Freemason uh
guru pops in unannounced and he says,
"I've got a solution to your problem."
It seems strange to you now because
Freemasonry is much less important than
it used to be. But if I were to take you
back to the American founding,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; uh the the key figures in the founding
were Masons and the Masonic lodges were
extremely important in the social
organization of the American Revolution
through the 19th century.
&gt;&gt; So much so that there was an
anti-reemason political party, a
rational party.
&gt;&gt; Correct. And and that reminds us of how
much more important uh Freemasonry used
to be. Why was it so important?
&gt;&gt; And what is it? Probably many people
don't even know what masonry is. So,
Masonic uh lodges or uh uh uh Masonic uh
fraternities were notionally ancient
traced their histories back to uh
biblical times. But in practice, they
really flourished in the 18th and 19th
and 20th centuries in in in Europe as
well as in North America. and their
significance lay partly in the fact that
they allowed men from different classes
to mix on an equal footing. Uh so they
have this important implicit
egalitarianism.
Uh they're they're quai religious but
non-denominational
uh and they have their own complex uh
set of of of social rules and and
practices. So initiation into uh the M
masonic right uh was a way into a
different social order which mattered a
lot in in a society like uh Russia's
with extremely elaborate hierarchies of
of aristocracy a rather uh disrespected
middle class and and a vast peasantry.
So that's that's a much more important
part of 18th and 19th century history
than we mostly realize today. It's
interesting the extent to which
Freemasonry has been written out of
historical narratives, but that's what
you get from being a slightly secretive
social order. If your archives aren't
that accessible, they do exist, but
they're not very accessible, then
historians uh will tend to underplay
your importance. I tried to push back
against this in a book called The Square
and the Tower, which highlights the role
of the Masonic lodges in in the American
Revolution. So if you were a 19th
century an educated man in the 19th
century, uh you have this sort of range
of possible philosophical avenues you
can go down. Uh you can embrace the
ideas of the French Revolution. You can
embrace their metamorphosis into the
imperial ideal that Napoleon uh had come
up with. Alternatively, you can embrace
conservative reaction which has a
religious dimension. This was the path
that DSTVI went down. You can you can
become convinced that even Roman
Catholicism is a dangerous deviation uh
from the orthodox conservative way
or uh you can go down the Masonic route.
These were all different paths that a
man could take. the political secular uh
the religious conservative or the the
Masonic option and there are others too
that Toltoy himself ends up being a kind
of religious fundamentalist an ultra
pacifist egalitarian who influences of
all people Mahatma Gandhi one forgets
that that Toltoy's influence reached in
all kinds of of extraordinary directions
but that's what makes war and peace
exciting you're not only learning about
the great upheavalss of the Napoleonic
period But you're also learning about
the intellectual options that were open
to a thinking person who was trying to
make sense of the human condition and
and the interplay between the
intellectual, the philosophical, the
idealistic and the social because it
it's not as though masonry just provides
the illumination for Pierre. He gets
really involved in it and he says, you
know, I realize there are three or four
kinds of masons. I think he says there
are four kinds. I'm not sure if I I
might Rick Perry myself by forgetting
all of them, but he says they're the the
mystical uh Masons. They're really
interested in the esoteric teachings of
the order that supposedly goes back to
Adam, you know, you know, the prominence
of King Solomon and all of this.
&gt;&gt; Then there are those of us who want to
do some good in the world. We want to
act, you know, we want to free the surfs
and we want political reforms and we
want all this. And then there are these
social climbers basically who just
they're they're getting into it because
they want to make connections with the
other young rich upandcomers. And and
and he he starts to think, you know,
what am I what am I spending my time and
money on this for? I'm supposed to give
all my money to these people. And and he
treats religion, Orthodox Christianity
in this case, in much the same way. you
see a there's the cynical take on it
where Prince Andre is making fun of
these uh sweet they're kind of like
religious hippies in the in the old
Russian sense of it and but then there's
also Toltoy gives a a quite sincere and
I think dignified treatment to the role
of religion in the character of Maria
this this plain girl who has a very
harsh father who's the sister of Prince
Andre and so he
&gt;&gt; he's actually pretty fair and even on
all of these aspects of of human life
the good, the good, the bad, and the
ugly.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I I think that's right. Dolto is
not telling us that there's one correct
path. Uh he recognizes that different
characters, different personalities are
bound to embrace different philosophies.
As we said earlier, the bad guys are bad
not because they follow the wrong
philosophy. They're bad because they're
morally vacuous. Uh but you know, you're
making me think a little bit about how
one might write war and peace in our
time. Uh would the Federalist Society be
the equivalent of the the Masonic orders
in in his time? I think if you uh think
about it long enough, Michael, you'll be
tempted to write your own war and peace
and it will be the
&gt;&gt; I can barely read war in peace. Write my
own, but you might find it easier to
write. That's true. the the the let's
imagine that the setting it it's it's
1971
let let's just say and uh your central
character uh your pure figure is uh uh
has flirted with the radical left he had
a sort of 1968 moment but but by 1971
he's beginning to have doubts about uh
Jane Foder and and the like and he's
beginning to flirt uh with Billy Gri
and and he he perhaps has some kind of
uh religious uh epiphany. Uh you you can
see where this might lead that that
would be the first uh move of your
central character, but that there would
be others along the way. Your your your
time span is going to probably take you
into the 1980s. Perhaps he's an
evangelical and an organite by the end.
So I think the the way in which to
Toltoy is is working here is is intended
to give us this uh this extraordinary
mixture of of the philosophical and the
and the uh and the literary but at the
heart of it is uh his own search uh for
meaning his own search for a correct way
to live. And I think what makes Tlstoy
an interesting figure is that like
Pierre he he just goes through different
phases. He has the dissolute phase. He's
a college dropper. Toltoy for those of
you who have insecurity about your
education. Toltoy flames out at the
University of Kazan. ever finish his his
studies is a complete waste and uh a
very dissolute individual uh and only
comes to literature after a period of of
of military service. And the journey
that that Toltoy is on goes far beyond
war and peace. He's still on this
journey that ultimately leads him to a
very aesthetic Christian fundamentalism.
That's what makes war and peace
exciting. the sense that although we we
get Pierre and Natasha happily married
at the end and we we see what life is
really all about
&gt;&gt; love family it's a simple outcome
&gt;&gt; but you know that the author himself has
not he's not arrived there he would love
to but he's not going it's
&gt;&gt; not going to happen
&gt;&gt; and the essay at the end offers the the
following insight we think we have free
will because things in the recent past
seem to have been determined by our
choices are the choices of others. And
yet the things that are further in the
past, the distant events seem to have
been determined and inevitable. And and
that's because we can't really imagine
different histories that might have
unfolded. So the past is deterministic,
but the recent past somehow we have
agency. And Toltoy's point is that must
be an illusion. The recent past is also
deterministic. Now I don't believe that.
And indeed, I think it was reading the
essay and disagreeing with it that set
set me on the course to study history. I
I I think there's always agency and and
there is free will. The problem is that
everybody has it from Napoleon down to
the humble Russian surf and history is
just the net outcome of all these
different decisions that that people
take as individuals. But it's it's
Toltoy's challenge to that view. It's
Toltoy's insistence that no, it's all
deterministic. that from the minute
Napoleon is born, it's inevitable that
France will invade uh Russia and that
Moscow will burn.
&gt;&gt; That's where we land. That's his attempt
to have one big idea. It's it's a
failure. It's wrong. But you have to
admire the ambition.
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. And it it does remind me a
bit of of the favorite game of all
political conservatives, which is we we
like to pinpoint where exactly
everything went wrong. You know, I was
supposed to say it was the 1960s. No,
now I say it's Obama. I don't know. Then
it was the 1960s. No, no, it was the uh
French Revolution. No, no. Some would
say it was the Jacobite, the failure of
the Jacobite rising.
&gt;&gt; So, so would the Reformation. Some would
say, "No, it was Duncotus or I don't
know,
you know, AAM or something." And when
you go all the way back, you say, "I
think it was actually when Eve ate the
apple. That was the beginning of of the
end." But the point you're making on on
the the distant past is deterministic,
but the recent past could have gone a
different way. He illustrates it in
these battles where just, you know, the
French and the Russians make peace. And
you got these Russians grumbling, ah, we
were this close. No, we had them. If we
had held out a week longer, we would
have totally we would have run Napoleon
off the edge of the earth. And you
think, well, is isn't that just the sort
of thing you say when you've lost? Or
maybe they're right. Actually, maybe is
is it possible that they actually could
have won? I think what's great about
Warren Peace is that that Toltoy is able
to give you a sense of the apparent
contingency of events to people on the
battlefield. Uh yeah, now he's writing
from a relative distance of uh five
decades. Uh his readers know that
although the French get to Moscow and
Moscow burns that ultimately the Kond
army is destroyed and Napoleon is
defeated. They have that knowledge. But
what's great is the way Toltoy gives you
the sense that to the contemporaries
each battle is uh unpredictable and the
outcomes hinge on contingencies uh and
and the the individual's fate life or
death in battle that too appears
contingent. So yeah, I think that's part
of what I find compelling about the
book. There's a great sense of
immediiacy in all that is being
described and somehow in the battle of
Boradino for example although we know
what the outcome is uh we get a sense of
the complete confusion uh that the chaos
of of of the experience of war to to the
individual including Pierre himself who
finally gets mixed up in it in his in
his sort of bumbling way. He does show
up finally get caught up in in these
historical events and and and once
you're in them then you've no idea what
the outcome will be. He ends up being a
prisoner of the French and having to
join the Grand Army in the the great
retreat. And in that sense he's just
this little piece of flatsom on the
great tide of history. The the invasion
of Russia is like a great tide. It comes
in, it gets all the way to Moscow and
then it recedes. And that's part of what
gives Toltoy's argument about
determinism a certain power.
&gt;&gt; And I see a parallel too even in in
Toltoy's description of the the
formality of the army, the way the army
is structured. It's supposed to be it's
written down here on paper and this is
these are the ranks and here's how and
then the reality the informal uh
hierarchies. I think it I think it's
Boris winds up among all of these mucky
mucks in the army and he says I realized
once you kind of gain the relationships
and uh confidences and well actually I
might nominally be underneath this
person but I kind of outrank him and
because I'm friends with this guy and
this and and so maybe I could actually
have an influence here and maybe for
goodness sakes maybe uh it's Rostov's
trying to pass a letter to the emperor
himself. I who cares about rank here?
It's all there is a a there's an ebbing
and a flowing and a little bit of a
chaos in the war.
&gt;&gt; So hierarchies are tremendously
important in in the 19th century and
especially in in Russia. Uh there are
elaborate distinctions between the
members of the the aristocracy. Uh but
as Tolar understands social networks
which are informal are more important.
And so part of what we see in in war and
peace is this interplay between formal
hierarchies uh and and the social
networks which are in many ways formed
by uh decisions of uh a romantic nature.
&gt;&gt; Uh it's obvious that Rosto needs to
marry a wealthy woman. He has no money.
He's highly indebted. But no, he's going
to make the wrong call because he is
going to be true to his heart. Romantic
love is really important and we forget
that it's not a universal phenomenon.
The 19th century is the great age of
romance. One reason that novels flourish
as a genre in the 19th century is that
there is this understanding that the
course of true love is probably going to
be at odds with the uh requirements of
the hierarchy and of of social
convention. You could say that nearly
all of 19th century literature is
basically about that. I mean the word
the word for novel is romance romanci
Roman right it's the actually the same
word
&gt;&gt; and so in some ways it's just a really
big romance uh with a lot of of love
interest going on and and and war is the
the exogenous shock that the the various
love affairs have to withstand and and I
I hope we don't make this sound an
off-putting book. I I'll I'll have
failed if I've I've done that. I I think
one enjoys war and peace the way one
enjoys Pride and Prejudice. It it it's
just on a different scale and and yet at
heart at its core, it's a love story and
a an extraordinarily moving one. I I'm
I'm still kind of Pierre and I'm I'm
still inclined to think of my wife
Ayanna's as as Natasha. It it in that
sense what makes War and Peace exciting
is the love story is embedded in the
great historical events of the time. And
we may not want to admit it, but that
will be true of most of our love stories
if we take a step back. We can't
abstract the passions of private life
from the public domain when particularly
when they take the form of war, the
great affairs of state impact the little
affairs of love. And you're making me
think this might be why I, even though I
don't like novels, why I liked it so
much is because it it is this romance,
but it's so perfectly woven in with real
historical events that it it well it
reminds me of something about my own
romantic love. And it and the the
interpersonal u ordinary trivial
seemingly trivial things that happened
to me all happen within this historical
context. I mean even the the
interweaving of real historical figures
not just as bizarre over here
&gt;&gt; which never feels forced.
&gt;&gt; It never feels forced.
&gt;&gt; It's interesting isn't it because often
if one's watching a movie and uh and a
real Winston Churchill suddenly enters
it it just normally feels off no matter
how well the actor plays the part. You
never have a sense that there's
something off even when Napoleon
appears. Part of what's brilliant about
Abd Toltoy's skill as a writer is that
the fictional and the factual are
impossible to distinguish from one
another. You do not see the join. And
his uh observation actually that you
know looking close up I mean there there
all of these descriptions of Napoleon
who you know in in the early part of the
novel they're just so in awe of this
man. They either hate him or they love
him and of the emperor of Thesar and
these grand figures that you almost like
deities. And then he gets up close. He
says, "Napoleon, he's just a guy."
&gt;&gt; You know, he's just a guy and he's got
these legion of bodyguards.
Interesting social observation. Maybe
this is why celebrities surround
themselves with a posi. It's not to not
to protect themselves so much as to
really puff themselves up. He says, "But
when you take away all the bodyguards
and you just kind of look at the guy up
close, he's just this like Corsican guy.
I don't it looks like you and me.
&gt;&gt; That's the brilliance of of War and
Peace is partly an an enormous essay
about the realities of greatness. And at
a time when the United States has a a
great man as president and there's a
great deal of reverence for him, it's
good to read war and peace and and
realize that that when you actually are
in the presence of the great man, he is
just a man and fallible and uh full of
human foibless. So Napoleon at the time
uh Toltoy is writing is a distant
memory. At the time of the events he's
describing he is the towering figure the
most famous man in the world the way
that Donald Trump is today with the
ability to shape events all over the
globe. So the interesting thing about
what Toltoy does is to start off with
the proposition that everybody's life is
an object of a sentence in which
Napoleon is the subject. And yet by the
end we realized no no that's not
actually what happened at all. Everyone
had some agency but in fact historical
processes were out of even Napoleon's
control. So it's a book for our times in
more ways than one. Yes it's a book
about war in Eastern Europe that's going
on but it's also a book about individual
greatness. It's tempting to be overroed
by the great man. But Toltoy tells us
that in truth, the great man's only
great because we we say he is up close
and personal, there's no profound
difference between Napoleon and Pierre.
It's just that one of them happens to be
emperor of France.
&gt;&gt; The the parallels with our time you're
impressing upon me are are more
marketked than maybe they have been in
recent decades. You've got this war and
in and around historical Russia and you
have this world historic figure as the
most important leader in the world which
you don't always have as the president
of the United States.
&gt;&gt; Also a great sense of moral and
ideological confusion.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh I'm struck by the fact that
many people today, I see this amongst
young people at the University of
Austin, are in search of some
philosophical path, some meaning.
They're not content with atheistical
materialism, which is I guess the kind
of legacy of the boomers. And some find
a path on uh on the way to religion.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; A lot a shocking number just within the
last few years. horrific signs of
religious revival amongst Christian and
and and Jewish students. Uh but one also
sees uh the the attractions of of
partisan politics where political
ideologies are are hardening into into
faith secular religion. So I think if
one reads war and peace uh today it it
somehow rings more uh plausibly than
when I read it first in in the ' 70s.
We're in a more war and peace world
today than when I was a a student.
&gt;&gt; And when when you try to I'm going back
even to your summary, which was
extraordinarily well done in the
beginning. Hard hard thing to do to
summarize this whole book, but Toltoy
gives a summary in the epilogue and he
says, "Let me tell you about the here's
here's the historical summary. there's
this guy named Napoleon and uh he uh
decided that he was he you know comes
out of the revolution and he gets all of
this power and he's very good at killing
people and he goes to Africa and he
kills people and he's kills a lot of
them so then he realizes wow I could
probably kill people in Europe too so he
goes around and kills a bunch of people
in Europe and he says you know I think
I'm going to go kill people in Russia
too and he kills all these know his own
people die and then all of these people
die in Russia and he just keeps on
killing them because he's really good at
it you know and he can do it and that's
going to make him great. And uh glory is
a big important theme in the novel, too.
And that's it. And then he gets to the
end of that description and he says,
"You think I'm being cute. You know, you
but I'm not I don't I don't really mean
to be cute. I'm just That's one That's a
way to read it." And and this is another
way to read it. The thing you've just
spent, 1200 pages reading, that's
another way to read it, too. And they're
both accurate.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Tolto was appalled by the violence
of war. Uh what he saw in Crimea in the
siege of Sevastapole greatly shocked
him. And you get that also in in war and
peace when when particularly when at the
battle of Boradino prisoners been killed
Pier thinks he's going to be executed.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh brushes with death are important in
in war and peace. Glimpses of one's own
mortality. they they really focus the
mind. Uh so this is part of uh what
makes the book powerful. Uh if one
hasn't contemplated one's own mortality
uh uh even in uh a car accident, one one
hasn't fully understood how precarious
life is. But life is very precarious in
in time of war. Nobody in Ukraine needs
to have this explained to them. that
maybe maybe people in California could
do with reading about this
&gt;&gt; because one of the things that's
striking about our time is that that war
is much more proximate than most people
realize. This is an odd feature of
American life. We we act as if war
happens far far away, never to us unless
we opt to go to it. But actually the
weapons of the 21st century make war
highly accessible to even people living
in the American heartland. I don't think
that has ever fully sunk in in this
country. That that you may not be
interested in war and peace, but war and
peace are interested in you and they are
more able
&gt;&gt; to impact your life than at any time in
American history. This is why Americans
need to read war and peace because you
need to be prepared for the battle of
Boradina to happen inside the borders of
the United States
&gt;&gt; because the self understanding of the
United States in the '90s. Perhaps this
has been overstated even is that history
had ended. Uh world's flat now and we're
all in a community of nations.
Liberalism is one. It's all we're good.
&gt;&gt; Plus we're exceptional.
&gt;&gt; We're exceptional. In addition, we're
exceptional and ocean here, ocean there,
Canada up, Mexico down. We're all good.
Look at the range of Chinese and Russian
missiles. Consider the implications of
hypersonic missiles and space wars. The
truth is that this country is far more
vulnerable than at any time in its
history uh to war, including war with
Russia, though I'm personally a good
deal more worried about war with China.
So war and peace is far more relevant
now than it than it was a generation ago
when the probability of of war on our
doorstep was was lower unless it was
just thermonuclear war and oblivion. So
I'm hoping that I in the course of this
conversation have aroused enough
interest in our in viewers and listeners
that they'll go and read war and peace
and ask themselves the the key question
who am I? Who am I in this book? which
character is me. The thing about the
great cast of characters and the the
range of from good to bad to ugly is
that really all different personality
types are in war and peace
&gt;&gt; and you'll encounter yourself at some
point in this book. Uh and warning it
may not be entirely flattering because
Toltoy is Toltoy is not entirely kind to
to many characters in the book. Most
maybe there are a few exceptions but
most characters get something of the
unvarnished treatment. So part of the
beauty of the scale of the book is that
you're unlikely to read it without
encountering yourself at some point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Even when when you look at
yourself and even as as you've changed
you might say when I was a boy I was
like him and I was I'm older. I'm more
like this character. This is something
that hits me on a on a broader point on
history in itself and he's he is writing
a philosophy of history or attempting
to.
There are so many moments when they say
everything changed when Pierre is
looking up at the sky or Andre is
looking up at the sky
&gt;&gt; and or when Pierre meets the Freemason
or when the girl little girls meet you
know all the various men everything
changed even even here by the end you've
gone through so many of these moments
and then 12 page 1211 in the in the
Oxford World of Classics
uh everything her face walk look and
voice was suddenly altered to her own
surprise the power of life and hope of
happiness rose rose to the surface and
demanded satisfaction. And there's so
many passages like this throughout the
the novel. And I wonder if he's
insisting upon this as we talk about how
our own conception of our country is
changing, how our own conception of our
country's history is changing. If this
is not a a comment on history and if
this is not even even in part why Toltoy
has to write a novel like this because
even even our understanding of history
is is changing even even history itself
is in flux uh throughout the story and
and throughout time. Although Toltoy
ends with this deterministic
philosophy that all history is somehow
one pre-programmed narrative, in truth
that's not what war and peace seems to
me to be telling us.
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; What War and Peace is telling us is that
the historical process is too complex to
model. That the professors in the
government department can labor night
and day. They will never produce an
equation that captures the historical
process because it's particles with
consciousness. And as they all interact
making their own decisions, actuated
perhaps by some wrong philosophy or by
some temporary passion, the net result
is this huge eb and flow that uh leads
the French to invade Russia and then and
then to retreat in in disarray. So I I
read the book in a very different way
from from Toltoyy's second epilogue. I
read it as the most successful attempt
to capture the complexity of the
historical process. And that complexity
arises from the fact that what we call
history is the sum of all the loves and
hates, the parties, the duels,
all the little things of the
individual's life, of family lives, they
sum together and knit out to history.
And in that process, we all have agency.
But because we all have agency, nobody
has absolute power. not even the the
towering figures of of our time.
&gt;&gt; Your point on particles with
consciousness and how you you can't
really predict it, you can't come I mean
all models are bad, some models are
useful, you know, you you really can't
map these things. I I even think well we
can't even do it with particles
actually. You think of the three body
problem chaos. I mean at at a very small
scale you you lose track of these things
very very quickly. And so, uh, well, the
only solution is this. So, you have to
read it. Did you get the message? Do you
think they got the message, Neil?
&gt;&gt; I hope these particles have enough
consciousness to read war in peace.
&gt;&gt; Sir Neil Ferguson, I I always say thank
you, sir, to my male guests. But for
you, I can actually say I can really
mean it. Neil, thank you for being here.
&gt;&gt; Thanks, Michael. My pleasure.
&gt;&gt; Thank you to all of you. Read it. War in
peace. I'm Michael Nolles. See you next
time on the book club.
Thank you so much for watching this
episode of the book club on Prageru.
Prageru is a 501c3 nonprofit
organization, so we rely on donations
from viewers like you to keep this
content on the air. Please consider
making a taxdeductible contribution
today to help keep this content coming.
Thank you very much.