|5tbrarg 


v.\ 


LIBRARY  RULES 

This  book^may  be  1<βρι...Ο."Π€^ weeks 

A  fine  of  tvw  cfeRts,will  be  charged  for  each  d^y  books  or 
magazines  are  kept  overtime. 

Two  books  may  be  borrowed  from  the 


Any  book  injured  or  lost  shall  be  girfd 
whom  it  is  charged. 

No  member  shall  transfer  bis  right  to  use  the  Library  to  any 
other  person. 


API2TOSENOT    ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΑ 
2ΤΟΙΧΕΙΑ 


THE    HARMONICS    OF 

A^^RISTOXENUS 

EDITED  WITH  TRANSLATION  NOTES 

INTRODUCTION  AND   INDEX   OF  WORDS 

BY 

HENRY    S.    MACRAN,    M.A., 

FELLOW   OF    TRINITY    COLLEGE,    DUBLIN 
AND   PROFESSOR  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  IN   THE   UNIVERSITY  OF   DUBLIN 


OXFORD 
AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 

IQ02 


HENRY    FROWDE,   M.A. 

PUBLISHER   TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 

LONDON,    EDINBURGH 

NEW   YORK 


PREFACE 

The  main  object  of  this  book  is  to  introduce,  to  such 
English  readers  as  may  be  curious  in  the  matter  of  music, 
the  writings  of  the  foremost  musical  theorist  of  Ancient 
Greece ;  and  with  this  object  in  view  I  have  endeavoured  to 
supply  a  sound  text  and  a  clear  translation  of  his  great  work, 
and  to  illustrate  its  more  obscure  passages  by  citations  from 
other  exponents  of  the  same  science.  But  further,  since  the 
mind  of  the  modern  reader  is  apt  to  be  beset  by  prejudices 
in  respect  of  this  subject — some  of  which  arise  from  his 
natural  but  false  assumption  that  all  music  must  follow  the 
same  laws  that  govern  the  only  music  that  he  knows,  while 
others  are  due  to  the  erroneous  theories  of  specialists  which 
have  been  accepted  as  certain  truths  by  a  public  not  in 
possession  of  the  evidence — I  have  thought  it  necessary  to 
deal  at  some  length  with  those  prejudices ;  and  this  is  the 
chief  aim  of  the  Introduction. 

The  critical  apparatus  differs  from  that  of  Marquard  in 
including  the  readings  of  Η  as  given  by  Westphal,  and  cor- 
recting from  my  own  collation  of  the  Selden  MS.  many 
incorrect  reports  of  its  readings. 

I  wish  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  Provost  of  Oriel 
College,  Oxford,  Mr.  Mahaffy,  and  Mr.  L.  C.  Purser,  for 
reading  the  proofs,  and  for  many  useful  suggestions  ;  to 
Mr.  Bury  for  advice  on  many  difficult  passages  of  the  text ; 
and  above  all  to  another  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin, 
Mr.  Goligher,  for  most  generous  and  valuable  aid  in  the 
preparation  of  the  English  Translation. 


HENRY  S.  MACRAN. 


Trinity  College,  Dublin. 
Sept.  1902. 


24S2.0 


CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION- 
PAGE 

Α.— On  the  Development  of  Greek  Music     .  i 

B— On  Aristoxenus  and  his  Extant  Works  .  86 
Text- 
book   I gc 

"       ^^ 122 

»     ^^^     •       '       • 149 

translation- 
Book!      163 

"II 187 

"111•      •      •      •      •      .      .      .      .  209 

NOTES 223 

INDEX 295 


INTRODUCTION 

Α. — On  the  Development  of  Greek  Music. 

I.  Music  is  in  no  sense  a  universal  language.  Like  its 
sister,  speech,  it  is  determined  in  every  case  to  a  special 
form  by  the  physical  and  mental  character  of  the  people 
among  whom  it  has  arisen,  and  the  circumstances  of  their 
environment.  The  particular  nature  of  music  is  no  more 
disproved  by  the  fact  that  a  melody  of  Wagner  speaks  to 
German,  French,  and  English  ears  alike,  than  is  the  particular 
nature  of  speech  by  the  fact  that  the  Latin  tongue  was  at 
one  time  the  recognized  vehicle  of  cultivated  thought 
throughout  the  civilized  world. 

Further,  this  limitation  which  is  common  to  music  and 
speech  leads  to  a  more  complete  isolation  in  the  case  of 
the  former.  The  primary  function  of  language  is  to  give 
us  representations,  whether  of  the  facts  of  the  world  and 
the  soul,  or  of  the  ideals  of  thought,  or  of  the  fancies  of 
the  imagination :  and  to  appeal  to  our  emotions  through 
the  representation  of  such  facts,  ideals,  or  fancies.  This 
service,  so  far  as  we  are  capable  of  perception  and  feeUng, 
any  strange  language  may  be  made  to  render  us  at  the  cost 
of  some  study.  But  we  are  aware  that  our  own  language 
has  another  power  for  us  ;  that  of  waking  immediately  in  us 
emotions  in  which  are  fused  beyond  all  analysis  the  effects 
of  its  very  sounds  and  the  feelings  that  are  linked  to  those 
sounds  by  indissoluble  association.  It  is  here  that  begins 
the  real  isolation  of  language,  the  incommunicable  charm 
of  poetry  that  defies  translation.  But  the  whole  meaning 
of  music  depends  upon  this  immediate  appeal  to  our 
emotions  through  the  association  of  feeling  with  sensation ; 

MACRAW  Β  I 


INTRODUCTION 

and  so  the  strangeness  of  the  foreign  music  of  to-day,  and 
of  the  dead  music  of  the  past  is  insuperable,  for  they  are  the 
expressions  of  emotions  which  their  possessors  could  not 
analyse,  and  we  can  never  experience. 

2.  The  same  contrast  appears  when  we  consider  music 
in  relation  to  painting  and  the  other  arts  of  imagery.  These 
latter  appeal  to  the  emotions  no  less  than  music,  but  they 
do  so  in  the  first  instance  mediately,  through  the  representa- 
lion  of  certain  objects.  It  is  quite  true  that  here,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  emotions  indirectly  raised  by  language,  the  culti- 
vation of  a  certain  mental  habit  is  a  necessary  condition  of 
our  receiving  the  proper  impression  from  any  work  of  art. 
But  in  painting  and  sculpture  the  mental  habit  consists 
primarily  in  our  attitude  not  to  the  manner  of  the  repre- 
sentation but  to  the  object  represented,  whereas  in  music  it 
consists  in  our  attitude  towards  the  expression  itself. 

The  incommunicable  character  of  music  finds  a  striking 
illustration  in  the  effect  which  the  remnants  of  ancient  Greek 
melody  produce  on  the  modern  hearer.  Some  years  ago, 
for  example,  Sir  Robert  Stewart  delivered  a  lecture  in 
Trinity  College,  Dublin,  on  the  Music  of  Distant  Times 
and  Places ;  and  illustrated  it  by  specimens  from  various 
nationalities  and  periods,  an  ancient  Greek  hymn  being 
included  in  the  number.  It  was  the  unanimous  verdict 
of  all  the  musicians  present  that,  while  the  music  of  the 
less  civilized  nations  was  often  crude,  barbarous,  and 
monotonous  in  the  highest  degree,  the  Greek  hymn  stood 
quite  alone  in  its  absolute  lack  of  meaning  and  its 
unredeemed  ugliness ;  and  much  surprise  was  expressed 
that  a  nation  which  had  delighted  all  succeeding  genera- 
tions by  its  achievements  in  the  other  arts  should  have 
failed  so  completely  in  the  art  which  it  prized  and  practised 
most.  Yet  all  this  criticism  is  an  absurdity  based  on  the 
fallacy  that  music  is  a  universal  language.     It  presupposes 

2 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

absurdly  that  a  melody  is  meaningless  if  it  means  nothing 
to  us,  and  it  forgets  with  equal  absurdity  that  the  beauty  of 
anything  for  us  is  conditioned  by  our  power  to  appreciate  it, 
and  our  power  to  appreciate  it  by  our  familiarity  with  it. 

3.  But  though  it  is  impossible  for  us  now  to  recover  the 
meaning  of  this  dead  music  of  ancient  Greece,  and  well-nigh 
impossible  to  accustom  our  ears  to  appreciate  its  form,  we 
can  at  least  study  as  a  matter  of  speculative  interest  the  laws 
of  its  accidence  and  syntax  as  they  have  been  handed  down 
to  us  by  its  grammarians.  To  this  end  our  first  step  must 
be  to  make  our  conceptions  clear  as  to  the  formal  nature 
of  music  in  general.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  function 
of  music  is  to  evoke  certain  moods  in  us  by  the  association 
of  feelings  with  sensations.  But  the  material  of  these 
sensations  it  does  not  find  in  nature,  but  provides  for  itself, 
by  creating  out  of  the  chaos  of  infinite  sounds  a  world  of 
sound-relations,  a  system  in  which  each  member  has  its 
relation  to  every  other  determined  through  the  common 
relation  of  all  to  a  fixed  centre.  The  idea  of  such  a  system 
implies  two  facts.  In  the  first  place,  no  sound  is  a  musical 
sound  except  as  perceived  in  its  relation  to  another  sound ; 
in  the  second  place,  there  is  a  direction  in  this  relation  in 
that  one  of  the  two  related  sounds  must  be  perceived  to  be 
the  inner,  or  nearer  to  the  centre  ^     Thus  in  the  chord 


/ίκ         ^-^ or  in  the  progression     ^ί 


the  sounds  /  and  c  become  musical  through  their  relation 
to  one  another,  and  through  the  perception  in  any  particular 
case  that  one  of  them  is  more  central  than  the  other ;  in 
the  key  of  C  for  example  that  the  c^  in  the  key  of  ^B  that 
the /is  nearer  the  musical  centre  or  tonic. 

^  Nearer,  that  is,   in  respect  of  similarity,  not  of  contiguity.     In 
this  sense,  the  nearest  note  to  any  given  note  is  its  octave, 

R  2  3 


INTRODUCTION 

But  just  as  the  arithmetical  intuition  cannot  apprehend  all 
relations  with  equal  ease,  but  finds  for  example  the  relation 
■J  more  intelligible  than  -^ ;  and  as  the  sight  apprehends 
the  relation  of  a  line  to  its  perpendicular  more  readily  than 
the  relation  between  two  lines  at  an  angle  of  87  degrees, 
so  there  stand  out  from  among  the  infinite  possible  sound- 
relations  a  limited  class,  commonly  called  concords,  which 
the  ear  grasps  and  recognizes  without  effort  and  immediately, 
and  these  form  the  elements  of  every  musical  system.  Not 
indeed  that  all  musical  systems  are  founded  on  the  same 
elementary  relations.  Universally  recognized  as  belonging 
to  this  class  are  the  relations  between  any  sound  and  its 
octave  above  or  below,  either  being  regarded  as  tonic ;  the 
relation  between  a  sound  and  its  Fourth  above,  the  latter 
being  regarded  as  tonic ;  the  relation  between  a  note  and 
its  Fifth  above,  the  former  being  regarded  as  tonic.  But 
the  relation  of  the  Major  Third  which  plays  such  a  pro- 
minent part  in  modern  music  has  no  place  as  an  elementary 
relation  in  the  system  of  Ancient  Greece. 

4.  But  evidently  these  few  relations  would  go  but  a  little 
way  in  the  constitution  of  a  system,  and  music  to  extend  its 
sphere  has  recourse  to  the  mediate  perception  of  relations. 
Thus  there  are  sound-relations,  which  the  ear,  unable  to 
grasp  them  immediately,  can  apprehend  by  resolving  them 
into  the  elementary  concords.  In  our  diatonic  scale  of  c 
for  example,  the  relation  of  ^  to  ^  is  resolved  into  the 
relation  of  d  to  g,  and  of  g  to  c.  Thus  there  enter  into 
a  musical  system,  besides  the  elementary  concords,  all  those 
sound-relations  which  result  from  their  composition  ;  and 
to  the  complexity  of  such  compound  relations  there  seems 
to  be  no  limit  either  in  theory  or  in  practice.  There  is  no 
chord,  no  progression  however  complex,  however  unpleasant 
at  first  hearing,  of  which  we  can  assert  that  it  is  musically 
impossible.  The  one  thing  needful  to  make  it  musical  is 
4 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

that  the  relation  of  its  parts  to  one  another  and  to  the 
preceding  and  succeeding  sounds  be  comprehensible. 

It  is  also  possible,  though  perhaps  a  sign  of  imperfect 
development,  that  a  note  may  enter  into  a  musical  system 
through  being  related  indeterminately  to  a  member  of  that 
system.  Thus  we  might  admit  a  passing  note  as  leading 
to  or  from  a  fixed  note,  without  the  position  of  the  former 
being  exactly  determined. 

Sound-relations  can  be  perceived  between  simultaneous 
and  successive  sounds  alike.  In  the  former  case  we  have 
harmony  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  in  the  latter 
melody ;  the  difference  between  these  phases  of  music 
being  accidental,  not  essential. 

The  development  of  a  system  such  as  we  have  been 
considering  will  proceed  upon  two  lines.  On  the  one  hand 
the  craving  for  diversity  will  lead  to  new  combinations  of 
relations,  and  so  to  the  widening  of  the  system  and  the 
multiplication  of  its  members;  while  on  the  other  hand 
the  growing  sense  of  unity  will  press  for  a  closer  determina- 
tion of  the  relations,  and  result  in  the  banishment  of  those 
notes  whose  relations  cannot  be  exactly  determined. 

5.  In  the  music  of  Ancient  Greece  we  are  able  to  trace, 
though  unfortunately  with  some  gaps,  the  first  steps  of  such 
a  development.  The  earliest  students  of  the  science,  in 
endeavouring  to  establish  a  scale  or  system  of  related  notes, 
started  as  was  natural  from  the  smallest  interval,  the  bounding 
notes  of  which  afforded  an  elementary  relation.  This  they 
found  in  the  interval  of  the  Fourth,  in  which  the  higher  note 
is  tonic ;  and  this  melodic  interval,  essentially  identical  with 
our  concord  of  the  Fifth,  may  be  regarded  as  the  funda- 
mental sound-relation  of  Greek  music.  When  they  had  thus 
secured  a  definite  interval  on  the  indefinite  line  of  pitch,  their 
next  concern  was  to  ascertain  at  what  points  the  voice  might 
legitimately  break  its  journey  between  the  boundaries  of  this 

5 


INTRODUCTION 

interval.  But  how  were  these  points  to  be  ascertained? 
Plainly,  not  by  the  exact  determination  of  their  relation  to 
the  bounding  notes ;  for  the  Fourth  was  the  smallest  interval 
the  relation  of  whose  bounding  notes  the  Greek  ear  could 
immediately  apprehend;  and  for  mediate  perception  the 
musical  idea  was  as  yet  immature.  Consequently,  the  in- 
termediate notes,  whatever  they  might  be,  could  only  be 
apprehended  as  passing  notes,  indeterminately  related  to 
the  boundaries  of  the  scale.  Evidently  then  the  number 
of  such  notes  must  be  limited.  The  sense  of  unity  which 
suffers  by  any  inadequate  determination  of  relations  would 
be  completely  lost  if  the  indeterminate  relations  were  un- 
duly multiplied.  From  these  considerations  resulted  one  of 
the  first  laws  of  Greek  melody.  The  scale  that  begins  with 
any  note,  and  ends  with  its  Fourth  above  is  at  most  a 
tetrachord  or  scale  of  four  notes— two  bounding  or  con- 
taining notes,  two  intermediate  or  contained. 

6.  Again  ;  although  for  the  theorist  a  minimum  of  musical 
interval  is  as  absurd  as  a  minimum  of  space  or  time,  yet, 
for  the  purposes  of  art,  it  was  impossible  that  any  two  of 
these  four  points  of  the  scale  should  lie  so  close  together 
that  the  voice  could  not  produce,  or  the  ear  distinguish  the 
interval  between  them.  Was  it  then  possible  to  determine 
for  practical  purposes  the  smallest  musical  interval?  To 
this  question  the  Greek  theorists  gave  the  unanimous  reply, 
supporting  it  by  a  direct  appeal  to  facts,  that  the  voice  can 
sing,  and  the  ear  perceive  a  quarter-tone^;  but  that  any 
smaller  interval  lies  beyond  the  power  of  ear  and  voice  alike. 

Disregarding  then  the  order  of  the  intervals,  and  con- 
sidering only  their  magnitudes,  we  can  see  that  one  possible 
division  of  the  tetrachord  was  into  two  quarter-tones  and 

'  The  tone  is   Γηπεΐοαίΐ}'  (not  mathematically)  determined  as  the 
difference  between   the   concord  of  the  Fourth  and  the  concord  of 
the  Fifth.     These  latter  again  are  musically  determined  by  the  direct 
evidence  of  the  ear. 
6 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

a  ditone,  or  space  of  two  tones  ;  the  employment  of  these 
intervals  characterized  a  scale  as  of  the  Enharmonic  genus. 

Or  again,  employing  larger  intervals  one  might  divide  the 
tetrachord  into,  say,  two-thirds  of  a  tone,  and  the  space  of 
a  tone  and  five-sixths  :  or  into  two  semitones,  and  the  space 
of  a  tone  and  a  half.  The  employment  of  these  divisions 
or  any  lying  between  them  marked  a  scale  as  Chromatic. 
Or  finally,  by  the  employment  of  two  tones  one  might 
proceed  to  the  familiar  Diatonic  genus,  which  divided  the 
tetrachord  into  two  tones  and  a  semitone. 

Much  wonder  and  admiration  has  been  wasted  on  the 
Enharmonic  scale  by  persons  who  have  missed  the  true 
reason  for  the  disappearance  of  the  quarter-tone  from  our 
modern  musical  system.  Its  disappearance  is  due  not  to 
the  dullness  or  coarseness  of  modern  ear  or  voice,  but  to  the 
fact  that  the  more  highly  developed  unity  of  our  system 
demands  the  accurate  determination  of  all  sound-relations 
by  direct  or  indirect  resolution  into  concords  ;  and  such 
a  determination  of  quarter-tones  is  manifestly  impossible  \ 

7.  But  the  constitution  of  our  tetrachord  scale  is  not  yet 
completed.  We  have  ascertained  the  maximum  number 
and  the  various  possible  magnitudes  of  the  intervals;  but 
their  order  has  yet  to  be  determined.  In  the  Enharmonic 
genus,  for  example,  when  we  are  passing  to  the  tonic  from 
the  Fourth  below^  shall  we  sing  quarter-tone,  quarter-tone, 
ditone;  or  ditone,  quarter-tone,  quarter-tone;  or  quarter-tone, 
ditone,  quarter-tone;  or  are  all  these  progressions  equally 
legitimate?  To  these  questions  the  Greek  theorists  give 
the  unquaHfied  and  unanimous  answer,  not  defending  it  by 
any  argument,  that  in  all  divisions  of  a  tetrachord  in  which 
the  highest  note  is  tonic,  and  the  lowest  a  Fourth  below,  the 
lowest  interval  must  be  less  than  or  equal  to  the  middle, 
and  less  than  the  highest. 

'  See  below,  note  on  p.  115,  1.  3. 

7 


INTRODUCTION 

Thus  the  schemes  of  the  tetrachord  scales  in  the  three  genera 
are  finally  determined  as  they  appear  in  the  following  table: — 

TABLE  1. 

SCHEME   OF   THE   ENHARMONIC    TETRACHORD    SCALE 
OF    THE   TONIC   A. 


i 


s 


SCHEME   OF   THE   CHROMATIC   TETRACHORD    SCALE 
OF   THE   TONIC   A. 


$ 


^ 


3 


SCHEME   OF    THE    DIATONIC   TETRACHORD    SCALE 
OF   THE   TONIC   A. 


f^^ 


In  this  table  the  following  points  are  to  be  noted  : — 
(i)  The  sign  χ  is  used  to  signify  that  the  note  before 
which  it  is  placed  is  sharpened  a  quarter-tone. 

(2)  The  distinction  between  the  definitely  determined 
bounding  notes,  and  the  indeterminate  passing  notes  is 
brought  out  by  exhibiting  the  former  as  minims,  the  latter 
as  crotchets. 

(3)  Several  divisions  are  possible  in  the  Chromatic  and 
Diatonic  genera  (see  below,  p.  116):  those  taken  in  this 
table  are  merely  typical. 

8.  The  importance  of  this  tetrachord  scale  can  hardly  be 
overrated,  for  it  is  the  original  unit  from  the  multiplication 
of  which  in  various  positions  arose  all  the  later  Greek 
scales  :  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  tonality  of  this 
scale  is  most  distinctly  conceived  and  enunciated  by  the 
theorists.  Aristoxenus  is  never  weary  of  reminding  us  that 
the  mere  perception  of  intervals  cannot  enable  us  to  under- 
8 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

stand  a  succession  of  notes ;  that  we  must  also  apprehend 
the  ^υναμις  ΟΓ  function  of  each  individual  in  the  series. 
Thus  the  highest  note  of  the  tetrachord,  which  at  a  later 
period  when  the  scale  was  enlarged,  obtained  from  its 
position  the  name  of  Mese,  or  middle  note,  holds  in  relation 
to  the  lowest  note  the  function  of  an  άρχη  or  foundation,  in 
other  words  of  a  tonic.  For  just  as  cause  and  effect,  though 
they  exist  only  in  their  relation  to  one  another,  do  not 
discharge  like  functions  in  that  relation  inasmuch  as  the 
effect  leans  upon  the  cause,  but  not  the  cause  upon  the 
effect ;  so  though  the  highest  and  lowest  notes  of  the  tetra- 
chord are  musical  notes  only  through  their  relation  to  one 
another,  yet  that  relation  is  conceived  as  implying  the 
dependence  of  the  lower  upon  the  higher,  but  not  of  the 
higher  upon  the  lower.  The  intermediate  notes  again  are 
regarded  as  mere  stopping  places  of  approximately  deter- 
mined position  in  the  passage  between  the  boundaries. 
According  to  the  Greek  terminology  they  are  κινούμενοι  or 
movable  notes  as  distinguished  from  the  eWoJTes  or  fixed 
notes,  between  which  they  stand.  For  since  the  essence 
of  a  note  is  not  its  place  in  a  group,  but  its  function  in 
a  system,  an  Enharmonic,  a  Chromatic,  and  a  Diatonic 
passing  note  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  three  notes,  but  as 
one  variable  note  in  three  positions. 

Even  if  we  disregard  the  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic 
genera,  and  confine  our  attention  to  the  Diatonic,  we  shall 
seek  in  vain  for  a  parallel  to  this  tetrachord  scale  in  the 
classical  system  of  modern  music.  We  can  descend  from 
the  tonic  a  to  the  e  below  it  by  the  progression 


•fe    rJ    J   J      i    ;  but  the  progression  ^ 


to  the  tonic  a,  though  of  frequent  occurrence  in  local  music, 
has  passed  completely  out  of  classical  use. 

9 


INTRODUCTION 

9.  When  this  meagre  group  of  four  notes  was  felt  to  be 
inadequate  to  the  expression  of  human  emotion,  a  ready 
method  for  the  production  of  a  more  ample  scale  was 
sought  in  the  addition  to  the  original  tetrachord  of  a  second 
exactly  similar  to  it.  But  immediately  the  question  arose, 
How  was  the  position  of  the  second  tetrachord  to  be  deter- 
mined in  relation  to  the  first  ?  Or,  to  put  it  more  generally. 
Supposing  a  scale  of  indefinite  length  to  be  constituted  by 
a  series  of  similar  tetrachords,  how  was  the  position  of  these 
tetrachords  to  be  relatively  defined  ? 

To  this  question  it  seems  that  there  were  three  possible 
answers  for  the  theorist,  each  of  which  no  doubt  found 
support  in  the  art  product  of  some  tribe  or  other  of  the 
Hellenic  world.  The  method  of  determination  proposed 
in  each  answer  constituted  (as  I  shall  here  assume,  post- 
poning my  arguments  for  the  present)  a  distinct  αρμονία  or 
Harmony  ^ ;  which  term  I  beheve  to  have  meant  primarily 
an  '  adjustment '  not  of  notes  (for  these  are  not  the  units  of 
music)  but  of  tetrachords. 

10.  According  to  the  first  of  these  answers,  the  tetra- 
chords might  be  so  arranged  that  the  highest  note  of  any 
one  would  coincide  with  the  lowest  note  of  the  next  above 
it.  This  method  of  conjunction^  or  the  coincidence  of 
extremities  I  believe  to  have  been  called  the  Ionic  Har- 
mony ;  and  it  resulted  in  a  scale  of  this  character  : — 

TABLE  2. 

SCALES    OF   THE   IONIC    HARMONY    IN    THE    THREE   GENERA 

INDEFINITELY    EXTENDED. 
Enharmonic  | 


\^-^A:=^ 


-I      I     |- 


I        I     J— g^iza^; 


-τ^-^γιέ- 


^  When  I  use  the  word  Harmony  as  an  equivalent  of  the  Greek 
αρμονία,  I  shall  employ  a  capital  H. 

ID 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 
Chromatic 


If  in  the  Ionic  scale  of  any  genus  we  take  any  con- 
secutive pair  of  tetrachords,  we  obtain  the  Heptachord  scale 
of  the  seven-stringed  lyre. 

TABLE  3. 

HEPTACHORD    SCALES    IN   THE   THREE   GENERA   WITH 
THE   NAMES   OF   THE   INDIVIDUAL   NOTES 


Enharmonic     χ 


i 


^MzzU: 


Chromatic 


^: 


Ύ2: 


DlATONIC 


ΙΈ 


2± 


3^ 


II.  These  names  were  derived  not  from  the  pitch  of  the 


INTRODUCTION 

respective  notes,  but  from  the  place  on  the  instrument  of 
the  strings  which  sounded  them.  Thus  a  as  the  note 
of  the  middle  string  was  called  Mese  or  '  middle ' ;  e  was 
called  Hypate  or  highest  because  sounded  by  the  top  string; 
d  which  was  sounded  by  the  bottom  string  was  in  like 
manner  called  Nete  or  lowest.  The  note  below  the  Mese 
was  called  Lichanus  or  *  forefinger,'  because  the  string 
that  sounded  it  was  played  by  that  finger.  The  names 
Parhypate,  'next  the  highest,'  Paranete,  'next  the  lowest,' 
and  Trite,  '  third,'  require  no  explanation. 

It  is  important  to  observe  exactly  what  these  names  do, 
and  do  not  denote.  They  do  not  denote  the  members 
of  a  scale  as  points  of  pitch  determined  absolutely  or  in 
relation  to  any  other  scale.     Let  us  take  the  scale 


Ρ 


!    J    .j=»; 


and  transpose  it,  say,  a  tone  higher 


D,  ^  ^  S  ϋ  rt  ϋ 

ffi        e^H       hJ        S         Η       Ph        !z; 


ί^φ^^--^Ξ^ 


the  individual  notes  of  the  resulting  scale  will  bear  the 
same  names  as  the  corresponding  members  of  the  original 
scale. 

Again,  these  names  do  denote  the  points  of  a  scale  the 
order  of  whose  intervals  is  determined.  Thus,  if  we  take 
the  enharmonic  scale 

12 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


^^^^^M 


or  the  diatonic  scale 


i 


5 


1        J      J  ^ 


consisting  not  of  two  complete  tetrachords,  but  of  one 
tetrachord  and  a  fragment  at  each  end,  the  notes  of  these 
scales  will  take  their  names  from  their  place  not  in  their  own 
scales,  but  in  the  typical  systems  given  in  Table  3. 

Once  again^  it  is  not  imphed  by  these  names  that  the 
intervals  between  the  designated  notes  are  exactly  deter- 
mined in  magnitude ;  for  they  are  applied  to  the  members 
of  Enharmonic,  Chromatic,  and  Diatonic  scales  alike. 

12.  The  second  method  of  forming  a  scale  of  tetrachords 
left  the  interval  of  a  tone,  called  the  disjunctive  tone,  be- 
tween each  pair  of  them.  This  Harmony  by  disjunction^  or 
the  separation  of  extremities,  I  shall  assume  to  have  been 
called  Doric.  It  substituted  for  the  Heptachord  the  Octa- 
chord, or  scale  of  the  eight-stringed  lyre. 

TABLE  4. 

OCTACHORD    SCALES    IN    THE    THREE   GENERA   WITH 
THE   NAMES    OF    THE    INDIVIDUAL   NOTES. 


Enharmonic  κ  ρί       j         I  £'         g        (§         ^ 

I 


i 


? ΧΦ  ^ 

13 


INTRODUCTION 


fe^fejj-^^^^^ 


Diatonic 


i 


^ 


^ 


Ύ± 


The  scale  of  this  Harmony,  when  indefinitely  prolonged, 
resulted  in  the  following  succession  : — 

TABLE  5. 

SCALES    OF   THE    DORIC    HARMONY    IN    THE    THREE 
GENERA   INDEFINITELY   EXTENDED. 


Enharmonic  i    ,.    I    ,,   I    J  _£2- 


-G>- 


Chromatic  I   il    I    JiiJ  jsL 


s, • 

The  appearance  of  the  octachord  scale  necessitated  an 
alteration  in  the  nomenclature.     The  old  names  were  em- 
ployed to  represent  the  four  lowest  and  the  three  highest 
14 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

members  of  the  new  system.,  and  the  title  Paramese,  or 
'  next  the  middle/  was  given  to  the  note  above  the  Mese. 
13.  The  third  method  of  adjustment  employing  conjunc- 
tion and  disjunction  alternately  interposed  a  tone  between 
every  second  pair  of  tetrachords,  while  every  other  pair 
were  conjimct.  This  Harmony  I  shall  assume  to  have  been 
called  Aeolian ;  it  resulted  in  the  following  scales  : — 

TABLE  6. 

SCALES    OF    THE   AEOLIAN    HARMONY    IN    THE    THREE 

GENERA    INDEFINITELY    EXTENDED. 
Enharmonic  I       |       ]     ^ 


The  alternation  of  conjunction  and  disjunction  which  is 
the  characteristic  of  this  Harmony  is  exemplified  in  the 
following  eight-note  scales  : — 

TABLE  7. 

OCTAVE    SCALES    IN    THE    THREE    GENERA    WHICH 
EXEMPLIFY    THE    AEOLIAN    HARMONY. 
Enharmonic 


y                                                                    1               i            1 

(^ 

1 

^^'v 

^w 

J     J-         '         -         -        ' 

-Φ- 

_2I_ 

-^ 

15 


INTRODUCTION 

Chromatic 


^.^=^Ξ^^ 


Diatonic 


i 


^^- 


-φΞΞ3^ 


14.  If  we  employ  modern  nomenclature  we  may  distin- 
guish the  first  two  Harmonies  from  the  last  by  saying 
that  the  former  give  rise  to  modulating  scales,  the  one 
passing  over  into  the  flat,  the  other  into  the  sharp  keys, 
while  the  latter  maintains  the  same  key  throughout.  But 
we  must  examine  more  closely  into  the  nature  of  this 
difference.  In  the  scale  of  the  first  Harmony  we  have  a 
series  of  lesser  tonics  B,  E,  A,  d,  g^ ;  that  is,  each  of  these 
notes  serves  as  tonic  to  the  notes  that  immediately  precede 
it.  What  then  is  the  relation  of  these  tonics  to  one  an- 
other ?  Each  serves  as  a  tonic  of  higher  rank  to  the  lesser 
tonic  immediately  below  it  and  mediately  through  this  to 
all  below,  so  that  we  are  necessarily  driven  upwards  in  our 
search  for  the  supreme  tonic,  and  are  unable  at  any  point 
to  reverse  the  process ;  for  no  note  can  serve  as  immediate 
tonic  to  the  Fourth  above  it.  Consequently  our  progress 
towards  the  supreme  or  absolute  tonic  becomes  a  process 
ad  infinitum. 

When  we  pass  to  the  second  Harmony  we  find  an  opposite 
condition  of  things.  Here  the  series  of  lesser  tonics  is 
Z>,  A,  e,  b.  Any  one  of  these  serves  as  tonic  of  higher 
rank  immediately  to  the  lesser  tonic  next  above  it,  and 
through  this  mediately  to  all  above,  but  cannot  discharge 
a  like  function  to  those  that  are  below  it.  Here  then  the 
necessary  order  is  the  descending  one,  but  the  progression 

^  When  any  scale  contains  the  same  note  in  two  different  octaves, 
we  shall  represent  the  higher  by  small,  the  lower  by  capital  letters. 
J6 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

is  equally  ad  irifinitum ;  and  our  search  for  an  absolute  tonic 
is  again  fruitless.  But  when  we  arrive  at  the  third  Harmony 
we  find  for  the  first  time  the  object  of  our  search.  In  the 
series  E^  A,  e,  a,  A  is  tonic  to  the  e  above  through  the 
mediation  of  a  \  and  directly  to  the  Ε  below,  and  through 
them  to  all  the  lesser  tonics  of  the  scale. 

15.  The  distinction,  then,  that  holds  between  these  three 
Harmonies  corresponds  in  no  wise  to  the  distinction  between 
our  Major  and  Minor  modes.  All  three  of  them  alike  recog- 
nize no  fundamental  relations  outside  that  of  a  note  to  its 
Fourth  above  or  Fifth  below,  and  that  of  a  note  to  its  octave  ; 
and  all  three  alike  place  their  passing  notes  in  the  same 
position.  But  our  distinction  of  Major  and  Minor  has 
arisen  through  the  recognition  of  two  fresh  elementary 
sound-relations  unknown  to  the  Greeks,  those  of  the 
Greater  and  Lesser  Third;  and  according  as  a  scale 
embodies  one  or  other  of  them,  it  is  denominated  Major 
or  Minor.  Thus  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  major 
scale  οϊ  A  is  the  immediate  relation  of  f  C  to  A,  and  oi^G 
to  Ε  -J  and  of  the  minor  scale  of  A^  in  so  far  as  we  have 
a  minor  scale  at  all,  the  immediate  relation  of  C  to  A,  and 
oi  G  io  Ε ;  and  these  relations  are  not  present  in  the  scales 
of  any  of  the  three  Harmonies.  One  might  illustrate  the 
contrast  by  representing  the  modern  minor  scale  of  A  as 
follows : — 


i 


f=r=^-^ 


^3^ 


^ 


lo: 


^  The  relation  of  a  note  to  its  octave  above  or  below  approximates 
to  identity. 

MACRAN  Q  1*1 


INTRODUCTION 


and  the  diatonic  scale  of  the  third  Harmony  as  follows  :- 


i 


^ϊ 


w 


g 


^ 


in  each  case  supplying  the  most  fundamental  relations  of 
the  scale  in  the  form  of  a  bass. 

1 6.  From  the  comparison  above  instituted  between  the 
three  early  Harmonies  of  Greek  music,  it  was  clear  that 
the  third  possessed  a  consistency  and  unity  which  were 
wanting  in  its  rivals.  Accordingly  v;e  are  not  surprised  to 
find  that  they  fell  into  disuse,  while  the  Aeolian  won  its 
way  to  predominance,  and  finally  to  exclusive  possession 
of  the  field  of  melody.  But  the  process  was  a  gradual 
one,  and  there  were  many  attempts  at  combination  and 
compromise  before  it  was  accomplished.  Of  such  attempts 
we  have  an  example  in  the  so-called  Phrygian  scale,  the 
earliest  form  of  which  is  given  us  by  Aristides  Quintilianus 
(Meibom,  21.  19). 

TABLE  8. 

(a)    ENHARMONIC    PHRYGIAN    SCALE    OF    ARISTIDES 
QUINTILIANUS. 


-G>- 


S 


S 


(δ)  OLD  DIATONIC  PHRYGIAN  SCALE  ON  THE  ANALOGY  OF  (a). 


i 


ί 


-&- 


Here  we  have  a  scale  which,  though  containing  two  dis- 
junctions (between  Σ>  and  JS,  and  between  A  and  B),  yet 
produces  an  octave  by  combining  conjunction  with  dis- 
junction at  A,  and  in  so   doing  embodies  the  distinctive 

t8 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

feature  of  the  first  Harmony,  the  relation  of  the  tonic  A  to 
d^  its  Fourth  above. 

17.  The  perverse  artificiahty  which  is  conspicuous  in  this 
scale  is  a  common  feature  in  the  musical  science  of  the 
period.  It  does  not  by  any  means  follow  that  the  music 
of  the  time  suffered  from  the  same  vice.  For  the  sake 
of  brevity,  we  have  regarded  the  theorists  as  gradually 
evolving  the  system  of  Greek  music ;  but  of  course  their 
province  as  a  matter  of  fact  extended  only  to  the  analysis 
and  explanation  of  what  the  artist  created.  As  the  theorist 
of  metrical  science  arranges  in  feet  the  rhythm  to  which 
the  instinct  of  the  poet  has  given  birth,  so  the  theorist  of 
scales  offers  an  analysis  of  the  series  of  notes  in  which  the 
passion  of  the  singer  has  found  expression.  Now,  the  art 
which  in  the  beginning  had  created  the  tetrachord  and  then 
passed  on  to  the  various  combinations  of  tetrachords  came 
to  require  for  some  song  or  chorus  the  following  diatonic 
series  of  notes  : — 


3:2: 


-Ό «^ — 

This  scale  the  theorist  applied  himself  to  read,  and  the 
scheme  of  Table  8  is  the  fruit  of  his  first  attempt.  When 
the  distracting  claims  of  the  First  and  Second  Harmonies 
had  become  silent,  and  the  Third  had  come  to  be  recog- 
nized as  the  normal  method  of  combining  tetrachords,  the 
true  reading  of  the  scale  became  apparent 


i 


S! 


-τΑ— 


1 8.  Aristides  Quintilianus  has  preserved  for  us  several 
other  examples  of  these  perverse  scale-readings.  Composers 
found  room  for  variety  within  the  Aeolian  Harmony  by 
employing  now  one,  now  another  segment  of  the  indefinite 

c  2  19 


INTRODUCTION 

Aeolian  scale,  not  of  course  with  any  change  of  tonality  or 
modality,  but  simply  as  the  melody  required  this  or  that 
number  of  notes  above  or  below  the  tonic.  Thus  there 
arose  a  series  of  scales  which  offered  material  for  the  analysis 
of  the  theorist — an  analysis  that  was  not  by  any  means  so 
easy  and  obvious  as  we  might  at  first  suppose.  We  seem 
immediately  to  recognize  that  they  are  not  essentially  in-» 
dependent  of  one  another,  but  differ  merely  as  various 
portions  of  one  scale ;  and  we  are  disposed  to  wonder  that 
the  Greeks  should  have  deemed  each  of  them  worthy  of 
a  separate  analysis  and  a  name  to  itself.  But  there  are  two 
important  considerations  which  are  apt  to  escape  us.  In 
the  first  place,  at  the  period  of  musical  science  which  we 
are  now  considering,  the  contending  claims  of  the  three 
Harmonies,  and  the  possibility  of  combining  them  produced 
an  uncertainty  in  the  analysis  of  scales,  of  which  music, 
through  the  simplifying  tendency  ever  present  in  its  develop- 
ment, has  since  cleared  itself.  In  the  second  place,  we  are 
accustomed  to  instruments  of  great  actual  or  potential 
compass,  in  which  the  relation  of  such  scales  to  one  another 
as  segments  of  a  common  whole  is  immediately  and  palpably 
evident.  But  for  any  performer  on  a  limited  instrument, 
say,  one  of  eight  notes,  it  would  be  impossible  to  pass  from 
one  of  these  scales  to  another  except  by  a  fresh  tuning,  or 
in  some  cases  by  a  change  of  instrument ;  and  from  these 
practical  necessities  the  scales  would  derive  a  character  of 
independence  which  does  not  belong  to  them  in  the  nature 
of  things.  We  should  never  think  of  differentiating  and 
distinguishing  by  name  the  octave  scales  in  which  are 
respectively  contained  the  opening  phrases  of  Handel's 
'  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth/  and  his  '  But  thou  did'st 
not  leave  his  soul  in  hell.'  But  it  would  be  natural  enough 
for  a  player  on  the  pipe  to  do  so  when  he  found  that  the 
two  themes  could  not  be  rendered  by  the  same  instrument. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

19.  Again,  these  scales  that  had  to  be  analysed  were  in 
common  vogue,  and  so  belonged  to  the  Diatonic  Genus. 
For  here  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Enharmonic  and 
Chromatic  scales  seem  to  have  been  esoteric  or  academical 
in  use,  and  the  pre-eminently  natural  character  of  the 
Diatonic  was  recognized  even  by  those  theorists  who 
defended  the  other  genera  (see  below,  p.  iii,  1.  9).  We 
append  a  table  of  the  scales  to  be  analysed. 

TABLE  9. 


VARIOUS 

SEGMENTS    OF    THE    DIATONIC    SCALE  OF 
AEOLL\N    HARMONY. 

THE 

V 

/L 

1(1) 

_   .^              rzt 

-0- 

0              ^ 

^ 

/ 

*<r 

_ <s> 

0 

-W 

___ -^ S> ^ 

V                                                                                ^ 

X 

(r\                                                    ^            rj           ^ 

\\) 

^_ 

f  J             ^-^ 

V                                                                                                             r^            ^^ 

Λ                                                                       ^^           rj           ^^ 

ffti 

.^j             <->               ^^ 

^y       i-D 

V 

/'J             <^ 

X 

i^           rr»          «"-^ 

im 

■ 

VL/         r-j 

c7 

<o 

'~\)                                                                       ^^            <r>            ^--' 

^          <rj           '^            -  ■ 

rzi 

t           •^ 

INTRODUCTION 


Z2: 


It  is  most  carefully  to  be  noted  that,  in  order  to  conceive 
of  these  scales  as  did  the  Greeks,  we  must  entirely  abstract 
from  the  pitch  relation  which  is  necessarily  introduced  into 
them  by  representing  them  according  to  modern  notation. 
Any  one  of  the  above  scales  may  lie  higher,  or  lower  than, 
or  in  the  same  compass  as  any  other  of  them. 

20.  To  guide  them  in  their  analysis  the  theorists  were 
not  without  certain  clues.  No  note,  they  knew,  could  be 
the  tonic  or  Mese  of  the  scale  unless  the  fourth  note  below 
it  stood  to  it  in  the  fundamental  relation  of  a  note  to  its 
Fourth  above.  And  the  increasing  influence  of  the  Third 
Harmony  made  it  necessary  to  find  the  tonic  in  a  note 
next  above  which  lay  the  disjunctive  tone.  But  even  with 
these  clues  the  scales  often  baffled  their  analysis.  Authori- 
ties differed,  and  in  one  case  at  least  a  historian  ^  records 
the  discovery  in  later  times  of  the  true  reading  of  a  scale 
which  had  formerly  been  misinterpreted.  Nothing,  perhaps, 
contributed  more  to  these  doubts  and  failures  than  the 
endeavour  to  find  a  distinctive  plan  of  formation  in  each 
scale.  In  accordance  with  this  principle  (d)  in  the  above 
table  was  construed  as  two  complete  tetrachords  of  the 
Dorian  Harmony,  and  was  augmented  by  a  tone  so  as  to 
represent  adequately  the  nature  of  that  adjustment  by  dis- 

^  See  Plutarch,  de  Musi'ca,  1136  d  Avais  5t  Ααμττροκλύα  rbv  Άθψαΐον 
σννιδόντα  'ότι  ουκ  (νταυθα  ΐχ€ΐ  {ή  Μιξολν5ιστΊ)  τ^ν  διάζ(νζιν,  'όπου  σχίδον 
avavjfs  φόντο,  αλλ*  Ιττι  το  ό^υ,  τοιούτον  αύτψ  άτηρ^άσασθαι  το  σχήμα  οίον 
τ6  άττό  να^αμίση$  ΙνΙ  υνάτην  υτιατων.  '  But  according  to  Lysis  Lampro- 
cles  the  Athenian  saw  that  the  Mixolydian  scale  had  its  point  of  dis- 
junction, not  where  it  was  commonly  supposed  to  be,  but  at  the  top  ; 
and  accordingly  established  its  figure  to  be  such  a  series  of  notes  as 
from  the  Paramese  to  the  Hypate-Hypaton.' 
22 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

junction  only.  According  as  this  tone  was  added  at  the 
bottom  or  at  the  top,  the  scale  would  seem  to  have  been 
called  Dorian  or  Hypodorian  (that  is,  Lower  Dorian).  The 
appropriateness  of  this  latter  name  will  appear  in  the 
sequel. 

TABLE  10. 

OLD    DORIAN    SCALE. 


m 


3Ξ3ΞΞ5 


OLD    HYPODORIAN    SCALE. 


s 


i=i=J: 


1^ 


rc± 


tf- — ^^ 


The  reading  of  {c)  resulted  in  the  Phrygian  scale,  the 
scheme  which  we  gave  in  Table  8  ;  {b)  and  {e)  were  iden- 
tified as  illustrating  alternate  conjunction  and  disjunction, 
and,  as  typical  of  the  Aeolian  Harmony,  were  called  Lydian.\ 


TABLE  IL 

OLD    LYDIAN    SCALES. 


Again,  (/)  was  read  as  in  the  following  table,  and,  as 
essentially  similar  to  the  Phrygian  scale,  was  called  Hypo- 
phrygian. 

*  For  the  relation  between  the  terms  Aeolian  and  Lydian  see 
§  41• 

23 


INTRODUCTION 
TABLE  12. 

OLD    HYPOPHRYGIAN    SCALE. 


Ξ"^ — ρ — ρΞ 


rj_ 


(^)  does  not  appear  in  the  oldest  lists  of  scales.  Perhaps 
the  extreme  position  of  the  tonic  made  such  a  segment  of 
rare  occurrence.  The  same  fact  may  have  helped  to  obscure 
the  analysis  of  {a).  Certain  it  is  at  any  rate  that  not  only 
the  true  plan,  but  even  the  position  of  the  tonic  of  this 
scale  remained  for  a  long  time  undiscovered  (see  note 
on  p.  22).  Aristides  Quintilianus  (Meibom,  21.  26)  has 
preserved  for  us  the  old  reading  which  is  curiously  in- 
teresting. 

TABLE  13. 

ENHARMONIC    MIXOLYDIAN    SCALE    OF    ARISTIDES 
QUINTILIANUS. 


Ρ 


7^ tS> ^• Γ 

'  *^ ^ 


Φ 


OLD    DIATONIC    MIXOLYDIAN    SCALE    ON  THE    ANALOGY    OF 
THE    PRECEDING. 


i 


-7^1— 


L:^]      -p-     f     γ 


if^ff^t 


In  fact  it  was  conceived  as  a  scale  constituted  by  the 
election  of  certain  parts  of  two  overlapping  scales  of  the 
Aeolian  Harmony ;  namely, 


and 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


We  have  already  seen  that  the  term  Lydian  was  apphed 
to  the  scale  that  was  typical  of  the  Aeolian  Harmony ;  and 
consistently  with  this,  {a),  as  a  mixture  of  two  such  scales, 
was  called  Mixolydian  or  Mixed  Lydian.  It  was  an  example 
of  what  Aristoxenus  calls  a  double  scale ;  that  is,  it  had 
two  Mesae  or  tonics,  d  and  e. 

21.  Each  of  these  scales  might,  at  any  rate  theoretically, 
appear  in  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic  as  well  as  in  Diatonic 
form.  The  following  is  a  complete  table  of  them  in  every 
genus. 

TABLE  14. 

SIX    ANCIENT    SCALES    IN    THE   THREE    GENERA. 

(a)  Mixolydian. 


Enharmonic 

\-M 

' 

^ 

1 

νΨ              1               1            1               ;            ^!          x^J           m 

nJ          ~^-       ,-^-      -Λ 

d-         f^ 

^w 

Chromatic 


Enharmonic 


ψ)  Lydian. 


^F^- 


rr± 


Chromatic 

r   r) 

_^ 

— 1 

-y ^^..^^ 1 ^__^ _j ^ 

im          1        1 

1 

1 

iiJ 

>— ^ 

144^ 4-HjrJ— 

* 

-4*- 

- 

INTRODUCTION 


Γ                            (c)  Phrygian. 
Enharmonic  ^  '  ^ 


i 


s 


-7J-^-id=^ 


Chromatic 


Diatonic 


4^=^ 


q r 


^     ^ 


-r^  ^y 


Γ  (^)  Dorian. 

Enharmonic  ^    ' 


^=3=i 


θ^ 


Chromatic 


Diatonic 


i 


^ 


J: 


tr~^r^ 


Γ  (ί)  Hypodorian 

Enharmonic  ^  ' 


3ΞΞ-3ΞΞΪΞΞ^ 


j-^h-rj-l^ 


Chromatic 


^^^^^ 


-4 n-l- 


J=l^ 


26 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 
Diatonic 


J    J    l°l 


I     J     -^ — ^ 


(/)  Hypophrygian. 


Enharmonic^ 


I 


T=^ 


J-J-i-^ 


-^^=^- 


Chromatic 


It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic 
scales  it  often  appears  that  more  notes  occur  than  in  the 
corresponding  Diatonic.  The  reason  is  this.  If  a  diatonic 
scale  exhibits,  say,  the  combination  of  the  conjunction  e-a 
along  with  the  disjunction  e-^f-b^  the  fixed  note  a  of  the 
conjunction  will  coincide  in  pitch  ^  with  the  second  passing 
note  a  of  the  disjunct  tetrachord  |/  g,  a,  b  ',  and  so  will 
not  be  a  different  note  from  it  according  to  our  notation. 
But  in  the  corresponding  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic  scales 
there  will  not  be  such  a  coincidence,  and  consequently  our 
notation  is  able  to  distinguish  such  notes  in  these  genera. 

2  2.  As  soon  as  the  formal  essence  of  these  scales  had 
been  established  we  find  the  Greek  theorists  exercised  with 
the  question  of  their  proper  keys,  in  other  words  of  their 
pitch.  At  first  sight  the  question  seems  an  absurd  one. 
In  the  nature  of  things  no  scale,  regarded  as  a  mere  order 

^  Not  in  function. 

27 


INTRODUCTION 


of  intervals  can  be  determined  to  any  particular  pitch  ;  and 
though  practical  necessities  reduce  the  possible  pitch  of  all 
scales  within  certain  limits,  they  do  not  define  the  relative 
position  of  different  scales  within  those  limits.  Let  us  take 
for  example  the  Lydian  and  Phrygian  scales  ;  and,  that  our 
conceptions  of  them  may  be  wholly  free  from  any  admixture 
of  pitch  relation  suggested  by  our  modern  notation,  let  us 
assume  as  scheme  of  the  Lydian  : — 

tone        tone      ^  tone       tone        tone        tone       ^  tone 

12345678 

and  of  the  Phrygian  : — 

tone       ^  tone      tone        tone        tone      ^  tone       tone 

12345678 

If  then  we  suppose  the  limit  of  practically  possible  sounds 
to  be  two  octaves,  from 


m 


to 


m 


one  might  take  as  Lydian  scale 


i 


3=|£ 


and  as  Phrygian 


ip^ppp^^^^^ 


Ϊ3 

in  which  case  the  Lydian  is  higher  than  the  Phrygian  :  or 
again,  one  might  take  as  Lydian 


i^^^p^EE^P^ 


28 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

and  as  Phrygian 


i 


:2*: 


in  which  case  the  Phrygian  is  higher  than  the  Lydian  :  or 
again,  one  might  take  as  Lydian 


I 


^φ—^ 


and  as  Phrygian 


?Ξ5 


i 


in  which  case  the  scales  coincide  in  pitch. 

23.  An  explanation  of  the  question  that  would  naturally 
suggest  itself  to  any  modern  reader  is  that  the  Greek  theorists 
desired  to  reduce  these  scales  to  segments  of  one  universal 
scale,  and  establish  thereby  a  theoretical  relation  of  pitch 
between  them ;  just  as  we,  finding  types  of  most  of  the 
scales  of  Table  14  inside  the  series  of  the  white  notes  of 
a  piano,  theoretically  regard  {c)  for  example  as  a  tone  above 
{b).  But  this  explanation  is  immediately  confronted  by  two 
objections,  each  of  which  is  fatal  to  it.  In  the  first  place, 
the  Greek  theorists  attributed  to  each  scale  in  virtue  of  its 
formal  essence  an  absolute  ethical  character,  and  they  con- 
ceived that  character  as  dependent  on  its  pitch.  Its  pitch, 
then,  must  have  been  something  more  than  a  mere  theo- 
retical relation.  And  in  the  second  place  the  answer 
actually  given  to  the  question  is  precisely  the  reverse  of 
what  it  must  have  been  if  the  above  explanation  of  the 
question  were  true.  For  the  Greek  theorists  state  that  the 
Phrygian  scale  whose  scheme  is  {c)  in  Table  14  is  one  tone 
not  above  but  below  the  Lydian,  whose  scheme  is  {b). 

We  must  conceive,  then,  this  question  of  the  pitch  of  the 
scales  as  implying  the  possibility  of  determining  each  of 

29 


INTRODUCTION 

them  to  a  particular  pitch,  not  arbitrary,  but  arising  ne- 
cessarily from  the  order  of  its  intervals ;  not  theoretical,  or 
relative,  but  serving  as  the  ground  of  an  absolute  ethical 
character ;  not  leading  to  such  an  order  of  the  scales  as 
would  arise  from  the  reduction  of  them  to  segments  of  one 
series,  but  to  precisely  the  reverse  order. 

24.  To  understand  the  possibility  of  such  a  determination 
we  must  take  into  account  an  important  distinction  between 
ancient  Greek  melody,  and  the  melody  of  modern  music. 
AVe  have  seen  that  the  essential  feature  of  music  is  the 
relation  of  all  the  notes  of  a  scale  or  system  to  its  central 
point  or  tonic.  To  maintain  the  sense  of  this  relation,  it  is 
necessary  in  every  musical  composition,  that  the  tonic  should 
be  expressed  with  due  frequency ;  and  all  the  more  neces- 
sary when  the  musical  consciousness  is  immature.  Modern 
music  indeed  can  fulfil  this  requirement  by  means  of  har- 
mony ;  and  so  it  is  not  unusual  to  have  a  melody  of  any 
length  in  which  the  tonic  seldom  or  never  occurs.  But  the 
music  of  Ancient  Greece,  lacking  the  assistance  of  harmony, 
could  not  thus  dispense  with  its  tonic;  and  accordingly 
we  find  Aristotle  ^  enunciating  the  law  that  melody  should 
constantly  recur  to  the  Mese,  as  to  the  connecting  note 
from  which  the  scale  derives  its  unity.  Now,  let  us  suppose 
a  singer,  boy  or  man,  or  a  performer  on  lyre  or  flute  to 
have  at  his  disposal  only  eight  serviceable  notes ;  and  let  us 
imagine  him  to  sing  or  play  a  melody  in  the  Lydian  scale. 
Here  the  Mese  is  third  note  from  the  top,  and  sixth  note 
from  the  bottom.  Consequently  it  lies  in  the  higher  part  of 
his  register,  or  among  the  higher  notes  of  his  instrument; 
and  the  melody  necessarily  gathering  itself  around  this  note, 
and  constantly  repeating  it,  will  assume  a  high-pitched  tone. 
But  now  let  us  imagine  him  to  pass  to  a  melody  in  the 
Hypophrygian  scale.     Here  the  Mese  is  second  note  from 

'  Problems,  xix.  20. 
30 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

the  bottom,  and  seventh  from  the  top.  Therefore  it  Hes  in 
the  under  part  of  his  register  or  among  the  lower  notes  of 
his  instrument ;  and  the  melody  gravitating  towards  this 
note  necessarily  assumes  a  low-pitched  character.  Thus 
the  pitch  of  a  Greek  scale  is  determined  not  by  the  absolute 
position  of  its  tonic,  nor  by  the  pitch  relation  between  its 
tonic  and  the  tonic  of  any  other  scale,  but  by  the  position 
of  its  tonic  in  relation  to  its  other  notes.  When  for  example, 
it  is  asserted  that  the  Lydian  scale  is  a  tone  higher  than  the 
Phrygian,  the  meaning  is  that,  while  the  Phrygian  tonic  lies 
two  and  a  half  tones  from  the  top,  and  three  and  a  half 
tones  from  the  bottom  of  the  Phrygian  scale,  the  Lydian 
tonic  lies  one  and  a  half  tones  from  the  top,  and  four  and 
a  half  tones  from  the  bottom  of  the  Lydian  scale.  Thus  it 
is  seen  that  the  relative  determination  of  the  pitch  of  these 
scales  is  only  made  possible  by  the  fact  that  each  has  an 
intrinsic  pitch  character  of  its  own,  consisting  in  a  pitch 
relation  between  its  own  members. 

25.  The  relative  pitch  of  the  six  scales  of  Table  14  may 
be  presented  to  the  eye  by  placing  them  as  in  the  following 
table  between  the  same  limiting  notes,  except  that  the  Dorian 
and  Hypodorian  will  extend  a  tone  lower  inasmuch  as  they 
exceed  the  others  by  a  tone. 

TABLE  15. 


SIX  ANCIENT  SCALES  IN  PITCH  RELATION. 


i 


Hypophrygian 

Tonic 


I         1- 


:^=J: 


ψΞΞΒΞ^ψΞ^ 


-Θ- 


Hypodorian 


t| 


Tonic 

I  I- 


31 


INTRODUCTION 


MiXOLYDIAN 


Tonic         Tonic 


u 


g 


Dorian 


Tonic 


# 


T=1: 


-j^ 


ζ^ e»- 

Phrygian 


Tonic 


:^ 


--'^ 


Lydian 


Tonic 


d=#J=t^ 


ί^Ξΐ^ 


I  have  omitted  the  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic  scales  in 
this  table,  as  the  Diatonic  are  sufficient  to  illustrate  the 
principle  before  us. 

If  we  assume  the  pitch  of  the  Mixolydian  tonic  to  be  |  G^ 
which  lies  intermediate  between  the  two  Mesae  G  and  A ; 
the  tonics  of  these  scales  taken  in  the  above  order  are  |  F^ 
Gj  I G,  A,  Β  J  f  C.  We  naturally  conclude  that  the  lowest 
scale  is  the  Hypophrygian,  and  the  Hypodorian,  Mixolydian, 
Dorian,  Phrygian  and  Lydian  follow  it  at  intervals  re- 
spectively of  a  semitone,  a  semitone,  a  semitone,  a  tone, 
a  tone,  a  tone.  When  at  a  later  time  the  true  construction 
of  the  Mixolydian  was  discovered,  and  its  Mese  was  seen  to 
be  Z>,  its  position  in  the  pitch  series  was  changed,  and  it 
became  the  highest  of  the  scales.     (See  below,  p.  128.) 

26.  Besides  these  scales,  all  of  which  are  complete  or 
continuous  in  the  sense  that  they  employ  all  the  notes 
melodically  possible  between  their  extremities,  Greek  art 
made  use  at  this  time  of  certain  deficient  scales  which 
were  called  transilient,  because  they  skipped  some  of  the 
possible  stopping  places  in  their  progression.  The  following 
32 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

transilient  scales  in  the  Enharmonic  genus  are  recorded 
by  Aristides  Quintilianus  (Meibom,  p.  21), 
(a)  Ionian 


^ 


(b)  High  Lydian 


4  J  j-^ 


I 


jr± 


Another  example  is  the  well-known  scale  of  Terpander 
[see  Aristotle  ProbL  xix.  32  and  Nicomachus  (Meibom, 
P-  7)]• 

I         1      J-^ 


^^ 


In  the  passage  in  which  Aristides  quotes  these  defective 
scales  he  promises  to  supply  on  a  later  occasion  the  reasons 
for  the  omission  of  the  wanting  notes.  Unfortunately  the 
promised  explanation  is  not  to  be  found  in  his  extant 
writings,  and  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  supply  the  loss.  But 
we  may  conjecture  that  one  cause  of  transilient  scales  was 
the  adaptation  of  an  instrument  to  a  scale  larger  than  that 
for  which  it  was  originally  intended.  Thus  the  scale  of 
Terpander  would  naturally  find  a  partial  explanation  at  any 
rate  in  the  attempt  to  get  as  much  as  possible  of  the 
octachord  scale 


g 


p^^ 


:z2: 


i^ 


:z± 


out  of  a  seven-stringed  lyre  originally  constructed  to  meet 
the  heptachord 

MACRAN  D  33 


INTRODUCTION 

The  Ionian  scale  of  Aristides  Quintilianus  would  seem  to 
have  been  obtained  from  the  scale  of  two  conjunct  tetra- 
chords  by  the  omission  of  the  two  passing  notes  of  the 
upper  tetrachord,  and  the  introduction  of  one  of  the  passing 
notes  of  the  disjunct  tetrachord 


i 


g 


It  is  thus  an  example  at  the  same  time  of  deficiency  and  of 
the  mixture  of  conjunction  and  disjunction  ;  and  the  compari- 
son of  it  with  the  Phrygian  scale  supports  us  in  our  view  that 
the  characteristic  feature  of  Phrygian  and  Ionian  music  alike 
was  the  retention  of  the  Fourth  above  the  tonic. 

27.  From  this  point  the  development  of  the  Greek  musical 
system  proceeded  upon  lines  which  are  easy  to  trace.  The 
most  prominent  moments  in  that  development  were  the 
growing  importance  of  the  Diatonic  genus  in  comparison 
with  the  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic,  and  the  disappearance 
of  the  Dorian  and  Ionian  Harmonies.  Thus  the  develop- 
ment was  a  process  of  simplification  in  which  the  artificial 
scale-readings  which  we  have  been  considering  were  gradually 
eliminated.  It  was  seen  that  the  section  of  the  diatonic 
scale  of  the  Aeolian  Harmony  from  Ό  to  d  (see  Table  9) 
contains  all  the  same  characteristic  features  as  the  so-called 
Phrygian  scale  in  the  same  genus.  Similarly  the  Hypophry- 
gian  scale  was  seen  to  be  the  segment  from  G  tog.  Similarly, 
as  we  have  already  said,  the  Mixolydian  scale  was  seen  to 
be  that  portion  in  which  the  Mese  stands  second  note  from 
the  top.  The  Dorian  and  Hypodorian  scales  were  deprived 
of  the  second  disjunctive  tone  which  was  their  distinctive 
feature,  and  were  merged  by  coincidence  in  the  one  scale 
called  Dorian  which  was  the  segment  between  Ε  and  e. 
Thus  finally  all  distinctions  of  Harmonies  perished  ;  hence- 
forth all  scales  were  but  the  τρόττυι  or  modes  of  one  note- 
34 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

series.  To  complete  the  number,  the  modes  from  Ftof 
and  from  A  to  a  were  called  respectively  Hypolydian  and 
Hypodorian  on  the  analogy  of  the  Hypophrygian.  The 
results  of  this  process  of  simplification  are  given  in  the 
following  table  : — 

TABLE  16. 

THE   SEVEN    MODES    IN    THE   THREE    GENERA. 

MiXOLYDIAN. 
Enharmonic 

Tonic 


(0        ,       .      I    ^.i—A-    J     ->^ 


Ψ 


Chromatic 


i 


Tonic 


Diatonic  ^    . 

Tonic 


i 


I         J 


¥ 


23: 


V     ^       ^ 


Lydian. 
Enharmonic 


Tonic 


^  ,  !  J        .J        J         <^ ^^—^ 


Chromatic 


-G> ΧΦ- 


i 


Tonic 


^^  .J-  4^  ^ΓΞ^ 


Diatonic 

Tonic 


■J,    s      ^^— ^ 


D  2  35 


INTRODUCTION 

Phrygian. 
Enharmonic 

^ Tonic  - 

Chromatic 

Tonic 


i 


'^r=r- 


g^^^^f^ 


Diatonic 

Tonic 


^^^^^^m 


Dorian. 
Enharmonic 


Tonic  .  I 


Chromatic 

Tonic 


3ΞίΡΞΞΕ 


Diatonic 

Tonic 


^^^^ 


φ=ύ^ 


Hypolydian. 
Enharmonic 

Tonic  ,  1 


Chromatic 


Diatonic 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 
Hypophrygian. 


Enharmonic 

Tonic 


1^ 


^E^^-J=j 


Chromatic  ^    . 

Tonic 


Diatonic 


S=^^|J-^^Jj^ 


Tonic 


Hypodorian. 


Chromatic     ^    . 
Tonic 


i 


ΞΞίΞ^ 


.^^M- 


Diatonic       _    . 

Tonic 


^  -      J-^-^-^-^ 

^ 


a 


The  pitch  relations  of  the  seven  modes  are  exhibited  in 
the  next  Table. 


TABLE  17. 

THE  SEVEN  MODES  (iN  THE  DIATONIC  GENUS)  REPRESENTED 

IN  THEIR  RELATIONS  OF  PITCH. 
MiXOLYDIAN  Tonic  ι 


^E^^^L•^^ 


37 


INTRODUCTION 


Lydian 


Tonic 


i 


-Θ- 


^F0=^: 


L  onic  ,  I 


Phrygian 


Tonic 


i 


j=t 


j=^^ 


^ΞΞ^ 


J=J: 


Dorian 


Hypolydian 


Ν  Tonic  ,  1  I 


Tonic 


i 


IS^ 


2± 


3ΞΞ^: 


J     J     ^ 


Hypophrygian 


l^^^j^^^gi^E^ 


f 


Hypodorian 


^        Tonic 


j=^-lvJ     ^- 


From  this  table  it  appears  that  the  Hypodorian  with  its 
tonic  F  is  the  lowest  of  the  modes,  and  the  Hypophrygian, 
Hypolydian,  Dorian,  Phrygian,  Lydian,  and  Mixolydian 
follow  at  intervals  respectively  of  a  tone,  a  tone,  a  semitone, 
a  tone,  a  tone,  a  semitone. 

28.  At  the  risk  of  falling  into  vain  repetition,  let  us  again 
consider  the  essence  of  the  distinction  between  these  modes. 
It  is  not  a  distinction  of  modality  such  as  exists  between 
our  major  and  minor  scales.  The  development  of  Greek 
Music  preserved,  amidst  all  its  changes,  the  original  tetra- 
chord  as  the  permanent  unit  of  composition.  And  even 
the  differences  that  came  into  being  through  the  various 
Harmonies  had  not  survived,  so  that  the  principle  of  con- 
struction remained  identical  in  the  change  of  mode. 
38 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

Again,  it  is  a  distinction  in  the  order  of  intervals,  but  only 
in  so  far  as  the  several  modes  are  different  sections  of  one 
common  whole. 

Again,  it  is  a  distinction  of  pitch,  but  not  such  as  exists 
between  our  keys,  for  it  arises  immediately  from  the  order 
of  interv^als.  The  Mixolydian  is  a  high  mode  because  any 
melody  composed  in  it,  whatever  be  the  absolute  pitch  of 
its  total  compass,  must  necessarily  lie  for  the  most  part  in 
the  upper  region  of  that  compass. 

Finally,  because  it  is  such  a  distinction  of  pitch,  it  is  also 
a  distinction  of  ethos  or  mood.  To  understand  this,  let  us 
assume  that  high  tension  of  the  voice  is  the  natural  expres- 
sion of  poignant  grief,  an  easy  relaxation  of  it  the  natural 
expression  of  sentimentalism ;  let  us  suppose,  too,  that  to 
represent  these  emotions  respectively  a  musician  desires  to 
write  two  songs,  neither  of  which  is  to  exceed  the  compass 
of  an  octave.  How,  then,  shall  he  bestow  the  required 
character  on  each  of  these  melodies?  Evidently  not  by 
choosing  a  low  key  for  one  and  a  high  key  for  the  other,  in 
the  modern  sense  of  the  terms  '  high '  and  '  low '  key ;  for 
this  would  imply  that  all  first  treble  songs  must  be  tragic, 
and  all  bass  songs  sentimental.  He  must,  instead,  leave 
the  general  pitch  of  the  songs  undetermined,  so  that  either 
of  them  may  suit  any  voice ;  but  he  must  so  compose  them 
that  the  one  will  lie  chiefly  in  the  upper,  the  other  in  the 
lower  region  of  the  undetermined  eight-note  compass.  And 
this  a  Greek  musician  could  only  effect  by  choosing,  for  his 
pathetic  song,  a  scale  in  which  the  tonic  lay  near  its  upper 
extremity,  and  for  his  sentimental,  one  in  which  its  position 
was  the  reverse  \ 

^  Cp.  Ptolemaeus,  lib.  ii,  cap.  7  ούδβ  yap  evenfv  των  βαρύτερων  ή 
δζντίρων  φωνών  ^ύροιμ^ν  αν  την  σύστασιν  t^s  κατά  τον  τόνον  μ€ταβοληϊ 
'γ('^(νημ€νην,  δπότ€  irpos  την  τοιαντην  διαφοράν  ή  των  οργάνων  'όλων 
(ir'iTaais  ή  ττάλιν  dveais  άπαρκΗ,  μηδίμιάί  ye  TtapaWayTjS  vepl  το  μέλοί 

39 


INTRODUCTION 

29.  At  this  stage  the  compass  of  the  Greek  scale,  whose 
growth  from  tetrachord  to  heptachord,  and  from  hepta- 
chord to  octachord  we  have  already  witnessed,  underwent 
a  further  extension.     To  the  typical  scale 


a.  Μ         .c 


g  J  J  J  J^J^ 


were  added  at  its  upper  extremity  a  conjunct  tetrachord 


i 


ί^ΞΕΞ£ 


and  at  its  lower  extremity  a  conjunct  tetrachord  and  an 
additional  note  below  (called  the  ττροσλαμβανόμζνοή  at  the 
interval  of  a  tone 


i 


^ 


J:      -^ 
The  resulting  scale  was  called  the  Greater  Complete  System. 

άποτ€λουμίνη5 ,  όταν  όλον  δμoίωs  υπό  των  βαρνφωνοτίρων  ή  των  δξυφωνο- 
τίρων  αγωνιστών  διαυβραίνηται'  αλλ'  eVe«a  του  κατά  rr)v  μίαν  <ρωντ)ν  το 
αυτό  μίλθ3  ττοτϊ  μ\ν  ά-ηό  των  δευτέρων  τόπων  άρχόμ^νον,  ποτ6  δε  από 
των  βαρυτίρων,  τροπήν  τίνα  του  ήθουί  άποτ€λ€Ϊν.  *  ΝοΓ  should  we  find 
that  modulation  of  key  was  introduced  for  the  sake  of  higher  or  lower 
voices  ;  for  this  difference  can  be  met  by  the  raising  or  lowering  of  the 
whole  instrument,  as  the  melody  remains  unaffected  whether  it  is 
performed  consistently  throughout  by  artists  with  high  or  by  artists 
with  low  voices.  The  object  of  modulation  is  rather  that  the  one 
unbroken  melody  sung  by  the  one  voice  may  produce  a  change  of 
feeling  by  having  its  tonic  (lit.  'having  its  beginning')  now  in  the 
higher,  now  in  the  lower,  regions  of  that  one  voice.' 
40 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 
TABLE  18. 

THE   GREATER   COMPLETE   SYSTEM   WITH    THE   NAMES    OF 

ITS    NOTES. 

Diezeug-  Hj-per- 

HjTiaton  MesSn  menon  bolaeon 


ί 


# 


As  will  be  seen  from  this  table,  all  the  notes  of  the  Greater 
Complete  System  with  the  exception  of  the  Proslambano- 
menos  were  distinguished  by  the  same  names  which  had 
been  employed  for  the  eight-note  scale  with  the  addition  of 
a  term  to  mark  the  particular  tetrachord  to  which  each 
belongs.  The  tetrachords  were  named  in  order  Hypaton  i.e. 
'of  the  lowest\'Meson  i.e.'of  the  middle,'  Diezeugmenon-  i.e. 
'  of  the  disjunct,'  Hyperbolaeon  i.e.  '  of  the  highest '  notes. 

Side  by  side  with  the  Greater  Complete  System  there 
stood  another  scale  called  the  Lesser  Complete  System,  in 
which  was  preserved  the  tradition  of  the  Ionian  Harmony 
and  the  heptachord  scale.  The  following  table  exhibits  its 
scheme  and  nomenclature  : — 

TABLE  19. 


THE  LESSER  COMPLETE  SYSTEM  WITH  THE  NAMES  OF  ITS  NOTES. 

Hj'paton  Meson  Synemmenon 


=#= 

is 
■1  = 

1  = 

V 

1 

1 

1 

X 

1 

— 1  ■ 

c 

-s 

— f- 

^ 
1 

.        ! 

c 
rt 

— 1— 

— ^— 

^ 

d: 

— U- 

i— 

-m— 

^ 

# 

—0- 

■  <^v. 

: 

- 

^  Literally  '  of  the  highest.'     The  highest  or  top  string  of  the  lyre 
gave  the  lowest  note.  ^  Also  called  Neton. 

41 


INTRODUCTION 

30.  The  following  table  exhibits  the  seven  modes  with 
the  names  of  their  notes  according  to  the  nomenclature  of 
Table  18:— 

TABLE  20. 

THE    SEVEN    MODES  WITH   THE  NAMES   OF   THEIR   NOTES. 
Hypaton  Meson 


MiXOLYDIAN 


eISS 


έ^ 


Lydian 


Hypaton 


Meson 


-*-      -P- 


(U<0 

Q  <u 
S 


i^ 


Meson 


Diezeug- 


Phrygian 


hJH 


m^-f— Ε 


Meson 


Diezeugmenon 


Dorian 


42 


THE  ΌΕΛΈΕΟΡΜΕΝΤ  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


Meson 


Diezeugmenon 


Hypolydian 


i '  J-  J 


Η  ο. 


Diezeugmenon 


Hyper- 

bolaeon 


Hypophrygian 


i 


P3 


^?:^- 


Diezeugmenon 


H3φeΓbolaeon 


Hy 


PODORIAN 


m 


©=» 


:p: 


11: 


The  nature  of  each  mode  as  merely  a  segment  of  the 
typical  scale  of  Table  i8  is  here  apparent ;  and  the  theorists 
showed  their  full  recognition  of  this  fact  by  extending,  as  is 
done  in  the  following  table,  each  of  the  modes  to  the  typical 
compass  of  two  octaves.  The  result  is  a  series  of  seven 
scales  identical  in  figure  or  order  of  intervals,  but  deter- 
minately  distinguished  from  one  another  by  the  relation  of 
their  pitch.  In  other  words,  the  modes  or  τρόττοι  have 
become  τόνοι  or  keys. 


43 


INTRODUCTION 
TABLE  21. 

THE   SEVEN   KEYS. 

The  modes  are  marked  off  by  bars. 


MlXOLYDIAN 


=i=P= 


gfet^^ 


f^ 


^ 


^ 


Lydian 


?=£=£ 


i 


^^^^^^^ 


T^ 


4=t 


Phrygian 


^=E3 


i 


±=:± 


iq: 


r±-^- 


£ 


t=t 


-1^-^- 


iH-^- 


DORIAN 


^^^=^-7ηττ^ 


-.-m 


i^s 


Si 


:M=^=z 


Hypolydian 


^^ 


τ=Χ 


^=F= 


i=t 


s 


2i 


fa=1: 


Hypophrygian 


Hypodorian 


\^m 


^ 


i 


T=i 


g^ 


-^- 


Ϊ 


This  is  a  very  striking  change  of  conception.  It  means 
that  the  sense  of  the  independent  and  distinct  character  of 
the  modes  was  almost  extinct.  But  this  was  an  inevitable 
consequence  of  musical  development ;  for  that  sense  pre- 
supposed the  limitation  of  the  scale  to  an  octave,  and  this 
44 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

limitation  necessarily  vanished  before  the  widening  demands 
of  a  growing  art,  and  the  larger  possibilities  of  more  elaborate 
instruments. 

31.  The  number  of  the  keys  was  afterwards,  apparently 
by  Aristoxenus,  raised  to  thirteen  by  the  addition  of 
(i)  a  key  at  a  semitone  below  the  Phrygian,  called  the 
Second  Phrygian  or  Ionian ;  (2)  a  key  at  a  semitone  below 
the  Lydian,  called  the  Second  Lydian  or  Aeolian ;  (3)  a  key 
at  a  semitone  below  the  Hypophrygian,  called  the  Second 
Hypophrygian  or  Hypoionian  ;  (4)  a  key  at  a  semitone  below 
the  Hypolydian,  called  the  Second  Hypolydian  or  Hypo- 
aeolian  ;  (5)  a  key  at  a  semitone  above  the  Mixolydian,  called 
the  Hyperionian  ;  (6)  a  key  at  a  semitone  above  the  Hyper- 
ionian,  called  the  Hyperphrygian.  In  this  scheme  the 
Mixolydian  key  took  the  name  of  Hyperdorian  on  the 
analogy  of  Hyperionian  and  Hyperphrygian.  At  a  still 
later  date  two  higher  keys  were  added  at  intervals  of  a  semi- 
tone and  tone  above  the  Hyperphrygian,  and  were  called 
respectively  the  Hyperaeolian  and  Hyperlydian.  Thus  we 
obtain  the  full  number  of  fifteen  keys  which  we  find  with 
their  notation  in  the  fragment  of  Alypius. 

In  the  following  table  for  the  sake  of  completeness  and 
convenience  of  reference,  we  present  these  fifteen  keys  with 
their  notation  \  and  in  the  three  Genera,  including  the 
tetrachord  Synemmenon  of  the  Lesser  Complete  System. 

^  On  the  question  of  the  Greek  notation,  the  reader  is  referred  to 
Westphal,  Harmonik  und  Melopoie  der  Griechen  (c.  viii)  ;  Gevaert, 
Mustque  de  VAntiquite  (t.  I.  pp.  244  fF)  ;  Monro,  Modes  of  Ancient 
Greek  Music  (§  27).  Each  sound  was  denoted  by  two  characters, 
one  for  the  voice,  and  one  for  instruments.  The  vocal  characters  are 
plainly  derived  from  the  ordinary  alphabet  ;  but  both  the  forms  and 
the  order  of  the  instrumental  characters  raise  great  difficulties. 


45 


INTRODUCTION 


Enharmonic 


TABLE  22. 

Hypaton 


Meson 


£& 


i 


^ 


^Ξί 


φ     C      Ρ    Π      I       Θ    Η    υ 
F      CuD<       ν>Ζ 

Chromatic  k^_ 


^Χ 


;^ 


^^3=^ 


ptcfe 


φ    c     ρ  π     I 

F     C      υ    D     < 


Diatonic 


Θ    Η    υ 
V    >    Ζ 


DIATONIC  .-.         _C2_ 


φ     C      Ρ    Μ      Ι 
F      C      U    Π     < 


Θ    Γ    υ 
V    Ν     Ζ 


Enharmonic 


^ 


m 


Chromatic 


Χ    rent 

Λ      =1     C     D     λ 


3^ 


Τ    Η     Α 
<    >     \ 


Ρ 


^^ 


Diatonic 


Χ     Τ    C    Π    Τ      Ι     Η    Α 
Λ      =!      C     3     λ       <    >     \ 

Χ     τ     C    ο     f       ι     ζ     Α 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


TABLE 

22. 

ί 

Synemmenon 

Diezeugmenon 

Hyperbolaeon 

Η 

2 

1 

Η 

c 

2 

15 

Paranete 
0    Nete 

1                                    !              ι                            ^^        ^,^          Λ           ! 

k  J 

η 

u 

Λ» 

, 

•.,  ^ 

Tid  ^ 

HcJ 

X^ 

1 

1 

1           ■■' 

A    ^     M'    β    Λ    ±      r   Θ'  Η'  U' 
Λ    Λ     Π'    ^    /^    \     <'  V'>'  Ζ' 


^       <-■     h^J      »    t^ 


-pL 


?*-^     V    \Y^—e-^r  ^ 


Λ  >p   M'  e  Λ  ±    r  Θ'  H'  u' 

Λ    Λ     Π'     Μ    /.    \     <'  V'>'  Z' 


^^J=^ 


Λ    ±    M'   β     λ    M'    r    ©'  Γ'  U' 
A     \     Π'   Μ     /.    Π'  <'  ν  Ν'   τ 


ΐ 


-r->    xf 


3«: 


υ   ^     Ο'    ^    θ    ±     Κ'    r  Η'   Α' 

ζ    χ     Κ'     ΧΜ     \     λ'  <'>'    \' 


J3g g- 


υ   ψ     Ο'    :f    θ    χ     Κ'    r  Η'   A' 

ζ    χ     Κ'     ΧΜ     κ     Κ'  <'>'    \' 


ψ-'^^^ 


7^ 


υ  e    Ο'   >ΐί  β  ο    Κ'  Ι'  Ζ'  Α' 

ζ    Μ     Κ'     ΧΜ     Κ'    λ'  <'  C    \' 

47 


INTRODUCTION 


Hypaton 


Meson 


Enharmonic  ^ 


5  ο 

Is 

ο  Q 


^^^^f^l 


:^ 


w 
a. 


Chromatic 


^ 


η    φ   Υ  τ   Μ 

Λ     F    u.    =ϊ    π 


Α    Κ    Γ 

-<    λ    Ν 


ίΞ^ 


i 


^ 


^ 


*ιί 


ΠφΤΤΜ      ΑΚΓ 
Λ      Fu.=in      -<λΝ 


Diatonic 


^ 


i 


@^ 


Κί 


3Ξ^ 


η     φ    Υ    Π    Μ      Α    Η    Γ 
Λ      Ρΐι.3Π      -<>Ν 


Enharmonic 


/Κί 


^ 


^ 


Ο      Ξ    Ν     Ζ 
Κ      ^     >     C 


Π 
Γ 


Chromatic 


5^ 


χ    φ   τ 

^     F     =1 


i 


e 


3Η^ 


Diatonic 


48 


Γ 


Γ 


χ 


Χ 


φ    Τ     Ο      Ξ    Ν     ζ 
F     =1     Κ      i^     Χ     C 


φ     C 
F     C 


i^S 


ο      Ξ    ι     ζ 
Κ      ^    <     C 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

Synemmenon  Diezeugmenon  HyperboIae3n 


^]=^—'^φ:,^-^—(-^Τ-Τ 


ΒΑ     J.     U    ^    >f     M'   Λ'  K'   Γ 
/      \      \     Ζ     λ    X    Π'  ^'λ'  Ν 


^Egn^j  nj— J^^r   ('  '  ^^  - 


Β  A  ±  U  Λ  >t:  M'  Λ'  K'   Γ' 

/  \  λ  Ζ  λ  X  Π'  ^'λ'  Ν' 

Β  ψ  J.  υ  Λ  χ  Μ'  Α' Η'   r 

/  Χ  λ  Ζ  λ  \  Π'  ^'>'  Ν' 


^Ξ1^Ξ^φ^:^-ΤΤ-^^ 


Ε  λ  β  Α  υ  :ρ  Ο'  Ξ'  Ν     Ζ' 

U  3  Μ  \  Ζ  Χ  Κ'   i^'  >'   C 

Ε  λ  β  Α  υ  >tc  Ο'  Ξ'Ν'   Ζ' 

U  D  Μ  \  Ζ  Χ  Κ'   ii'  >Ι'   C 

Ε  υ  β  Α  υ  φ  Ο'  Ξ'    Ι'   Ζ' 

U  Ζ  ^  \  Ζ  Μ  Κ'   ii'  <'  C 

Ν  Ε  49 


INTRODUCTION 


Hypaton 


Meson 


IS       a 

2g         i- 
Enharmonic  ^ 


m5 


I 


m 


-|S>- 


« 

■^  y*-     -»- 

η 

ψ  χ 

π 

0    Ν 

Η 

Λ' 

f  ^ 

D 

Κ    >Ι 

> 

Chromatic 


^Sfe? 


w, 


'^ 


^^ 


<< 


γ 

Η 


η  Ψ  Χ 


Π 


Diatonic 


sa|Eg; 


ϊ 


Ο    Ν     Η 

Κ     >     > 


Υ 

Η 


η  Ψ  Τ 


Π       Ο    Κ 
D       κ    λ 


Enharmonic 


^: 


e 


Μ 
> 


:ρ=ζχ]«: 


7 


Ί 
Γ 


R    V     C 
LLC 


Chromatic 


Ρ  π    ι 

U    D    < 


<       =^ 


:ρ= 


:^^ 


7      Ί     ρ    ν     C 
h      Γ     L    fc     C 


Ρ    Π     Ι 
U     3    < 


Diatonic 


Ξ^ 


— t 


7 


Ί      R    φ 
Γ      L     F 


Ρ    Μ      Ι 
U    Π    < 


5ο 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

S3memmenon  Diezeugmenon  Hj-perbolaeon 


T^ 


±m- 


3 


Ζ     λ     ^  Γ     ΒΑ     J.     Ο'  Ν'  Η' 

C     3     Χ  Ν     /     \     \     Κ'  >'   >' 

ΖλΨ  ΓΒΑΧΟ'Ν'  Ι-Ι' 

L     1     Α  Ν     /    \     \     Κ'  >'   >' 


τ   k    ^ 

Γ 

Β    >Ρ 

± 

0'  Κ'  Η' 

C     \    χ 

Ν 

/    Χ 

λ 

Κ'  λ'  >' 

$ 


ι 


Θ     Η     υ     ζ     Ε    λ    θ     λ    ±     I' 

ν>ζ    πυ:^Λ\<' 


?:?»^^ 


b^    ί'*      °    ^ 


ΘΗ     υ     ΖΕλ0λ±Ι' 
ν>Ζ      CUD^^\<' 


ί^ 


Ρ^^Ξ^-^^ 


ΘΓυΖΕυβλΜ'Ι' 
VNZ      EUZM/^n'< 

Ε  2  51 


INTRODUCTION 


Hypaton 


Mesfln 


Enharmonic 


Is 

I- 


/^ie 


P=F=^ 


ΎβΖ 


^ 


Η      y     Ί    V     Τ 
3      Η      Γ    t     Τ 


Chromatic 


:p=^=C 


ΐ 


:?2: 


C    Π    Κ 
C     D     λ 


ί 


ri      γ     Ί    V     Τ 
3      Η      Γ    t      =1 


C    Π    Κ 

C    D     λ 


Diatonic 


Ιϊ 


^ 


£ 


Γ— r-r-^ 


Η      γ     Ί    χ     τ 
3      Η      Γ    Λ     ^ 


C    Ο    Κ 

C    Κ     λ 


Enharmonic 


-7ΡγφΥΤΜ 


Chromatic 


-     7    F    η    φ 
Ε     μ    ±    Λ     F 


Υ    Π    Μ 
11.     D     π 


52 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

Sj-nemmenon  Diezeugmenon  Hyperbolaeon 


i 


d—    a   ^ 


l==j— j — P- 


IHA      ΗΖλ:ρβ±Κ' 


ΞΞ^^=^3=^=^^-^^^-^=^ 


I± 


ΗΑΗΖλ>1ίθ±Κ' 


Ϊ 


^:^^-^^^^ΞΞ^Ξ=^^^^^Ξ^Ξ^ 


ΙΖΑΗΖΑ^ΡβΟ'Κ:' 


AK      Γ      I      ©HU^>PM' 
<λ      Ν<ν>ΖΑΧΠ' 


!^^jhbJ    <i  ^jT^J'^'^ 


ώ: 


AK      Γ      I      0HU^>(iM' 
<λ     N<V>Z     λΧΠ' 


i 


ΡΞ3 


Ρ 


A    Η 
<    > 

Γ    Ί     Θ    Γ    υ 
Ν     <    V    Ν    Ζ 

.1.  ±    Μ' 
λ    λ    Π' 

53 

INTRODUCTION 

Hypaton  Meson 


Enharmonic 


ίβ 


^^ 


Chromatic 


W      Η     7     γ     X 
h      3     μ     Η    Λ 


^- 


^3ΞΞ3ΞΞδ 


Φ   Τ     Ο 


-^^^^ 


Diatonic 


h      3 


7     γ     χ 
h     Η    Λ 


Φ   Τ 
F     ^ 


Ο 

Κ 


^ 


Enharmonic 


Ν     ri     7     Ί     χ 
h      3     h     Γ     Λ 


Φ    C     Ο 

F    C     Κ 


ίφ 


ztzxt 


1^ 


-ί2_ 


Chromatic 


Μ     _    m   ri    η 
Η      Ε     ω     3     Λ 


y   Χ  Π 


J^ 


^mE^f-    r  ^^^g 


Diatonic 


Μ     _    fi)    ri    η 
R       Ε     uj     3      Λ 


ψ    X    π 


[^:^^-^-^;^^=p.=^=E 


π      Ε     ui 


γ 

Η 


τ  π 


54 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

Synemmenon  Diezeugmenon  Hyperbolaeon 


m 


ψ=^- 


-d- 


rJ      x# 


ΞΝΖ      KIHAUJfCO' 


i 


>IC       λ<>\ΖΧΚ' 


~^=yi-^-^-^^ 


Ξ    Ν     ζ      κ     I     Η     A    υ   ^    O' 
i^     -A      Ζ       λ<>\ΖΧΚ' 


i 


Pff^S 


-#- 


Ξ    I      Ζ      Κ      I    Ζ    A    υ  e    Ο' 
^    <     C      λ<Ε\Ζ^Κ' 

t 


-^— ^j^^^- 


ΟΝΗΜΛΚΓΒΑΧ 
Κ>Ι>Π-<λΝ/\^ 


i 


T=^ 


ONH       ΜΑΚΓΒΑΧ 
K>l>      Π-<λΝ/\λ 


m 


^^— '  α  J  j^ 


ΟΚΗΜΛΗ     Γ     B^± 

55 


INTRODUCTION 


HypatSn 


MesSn 


Enharmonic 


S 


^. 


^         X 


^ 


e 


Ϋ      U     y    ^     Ί      RVC 
Η      hxrir      LtC 


Chromatic 


g 


^^m 


--,    \ip     P- 


9NVv:T      RVC 
Η      hxdr      LtC 


Diatonic 


-^ ^ 


!^ 


^^^ 


\ 


?WV7T      ROC 
Η      h     X    \-     Γ      LF      C 


Enharmonic 


ei 


spg^i^: 


,<s> ^ 


1 — ^ 


?^ 


Oh 


UHW:^      γ      TVT 


Chromatic 


gjg^^^^^^^^ 


3      Rhri      nrtT 


Diatonic 


ete 


ΡΞ^Ξ^ΞΞΞρΞΞΞ^ΞΞ^^ 


UMWHylXT 

3    Rhanr^^ 


S6 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

S>Tiemmen6n  Diezeugmenon  HyperbolaeSn 


Ϊ 


p=^f3= 


^ 


ΡΠΙ      ΌΞΝΖΕλβ 
U3<      Kii>ICU:^ 


^ 


i 


S^j--jn>j=^^^ 


ttd- 
ΡΠΙ       OHNZEAe 


ί 


^4iJ-     -J-      *" 


PMI      ΌΞΙ      Ζ     Ευβ 
un<      Κ     ii<     C     UZM 


Ψ. 


—ίζ—±. Ό — χ^ — • 

en     Κ*ΠΟΝ      HZAJP 

CDA     dk:>i>c:x 


fer-J^-3^^ 


^|j:    -J-   ^' 

CnK      ΠΟΝ      ΗΖλίΡ 
C3A       DK>I>E3X 


ΐ 


i 


#^Ξ^Ξ^Ξ5 


CO     Κ      ΠΟΚΗ      ZA>P 
CKA       DKA>C\X 


57 


INTRODUCTION 

Hypaton  Meson 


Is 
Enharmonic 


MP 


/^^^^=^ 


-^      *       I =t: 


3     9N^H7       Ργφ 
EHdRH       XHF 

Chromatic 


ij,"      J     ^=j=^^— ^-_-=p; 


3     own     7       Ργφ 
ε      HBHf-      IHF 


Diatonic 


Ρ^^=^^=;:^ΞΞ3Ξ=^ΞΞ^^^ 


3      0^-7       ΡΠφ 
ε      ΗΗΕμ      ΙΛΡ 


Enharmonic 

/ 


Μ* ι ^=3^^ 


Ιί^=^ΞΞ=3^Ξ^^*^^ 


^Π9H'^     7γχ 

Τ3ΗΗ3        hH\ 


Chromatic 


i^i^^^^?^^^ 


Ϊ5 

Ο  λ 


^Π9^'^     7γχ 

T3HR3       Ι-Η^ 


Diatonic 


^ij 


^^^ 


ϊ 


:ζ2: 


ΗΠφ^Η       7ΊΧ 
T3Hh      3       (-Γ'Λ 

58 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


Synemmenon 


Diezeugmenon 


HyperbolaeSn 


s 


i 


^ 


^^ 


γ  τ 

u-     =1 


Μ     C     Ρ    Π      I 
Π     C     u    D     < 


Θ  Η     U 
V  >     Ζ 


^r^ 

-Ti 

I               1 

^ — 

γ  τ 

u.    =1 

Μ     C     ρ    π     1 
Π     C     u    D     < 

Θ  Η 
V  > 

,        1 

—Θ 

υ 

Ζ 

— ! — 

γ  π 

Μ     C     Ρ    Μ      1 
Π     C     u    Π     < 

Θ  Γ 
V  Ν 

-si 

υ 

ζ 

i — ^ — 

'      '      'fa 

-si-^: 

==ί= 

φ  τ 

F     Ά 


Ο 

Κ 


* 


τ   C  π 
Ά   C   :> 


ι     Η     Α 
<   >     \ 


Ρ 


ί=ί 


^ 


ζ± 


φΤΟ      TCnFl      HA 
F=l      Κ      3|CD      λ<>\ 


i^i 


ife^ 


i 


3^ 


Φ  c 

F    C 


0      Τ    C    Ο     Τ 

Κ      Τ     C    Κ      λ 


ι      ζ    Α 
<     C    \ 


59 


ο  ο 
Αι 


INTRODUCTION 


Hypaton 


Meson 


Enharmonic 


β 


eS 


w= 


Q. 


^=d=J: 


3 

ε 


ω    3      Ε 


^ 


Chromatic 


Diatonic 


Q. 


3^30^ 


g 


3 

ε 


b 

ω 


U     - 
3      Ε 


uj     3     Λ 


iili 


^ 


m  Η  η 

m     3     Λ 


CL 


3 

ε 


b 

ω 


Ρ      Ε 


ω     Η    Λ 


6ο 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

SjmemmenSn  Diezeugmenon  Hyperbolaeon 


r^r  ψ  .^  ^  r  T'T  "^ 


yxn     φΥΤΜΛΚΓ 
<^C      Fu.=l      Π-<λΝ 


^M  bb«     r^     t],-.     *  t^f 


Ε 


ΨΧΠ     φΥΤ     ΜΛΚΓ 


-¥-^Γ   'If-    g 


ί^^^ 


ΨΤΠ     φΥΠ     ΜΛΗΓ 
^=iC      FLL3n-<>N 


6ι 


INTRODUCTION 

32.  At  this  stage  then  the  musical  science  of  Greece 
found  the  material  of  all  musical  composition  in  a  cer- 
tain number  of  two-octave  scales,  uniform  in  construc- 
tion, in  the  order  of  intervals,  in  the  relation  of  the  other 
notes  to  the  tonic,  but  constituting  in  pitch  a  regular  series 
spaced  by  equal  intervals,  admitting  also  theoretically  the 
three  genera  of  Enharmonic,  Chromatic,  and  Diatonic, 
though  the  two  former  would  seem  to  have  fallen  into 
practical  disuse.  And  these  scales  may  be  resolved  into 
the  following  elementary  relations  : — 

(a)  The  relation  between  a  note  and  its  octave  above 
or  below ; 

{δ)  the  relation  of  a  note  to  its  Fourth  above ; 

(c)  the  relation  of  a  note  to  its  Fifth  below ; 

{d)  the  relation  of  two  passing  notes  to  the  extremities 
of  a  tetrachord  determined  in  so  far  that  of  the  resulting 
intervals  the  lowest  must  be  less  than  or  equal  to  the 
middle,  and  less  than  the  highest. 

The  scheme  of  these  scales,  as  has  been  already  said, 
must  not  be  identified  with  either  our  major  or  our  minor 
mode.  In  the  Greek  scale  of  the  Diatonic  genus  the  notes 
follow  one  another,  it  is  true,  at  the  same  distance  as  in 
our  descending  minor  scale,  but  the  Svm/xt?  or  function  of 
the  notes  is  different,  and  the  essence  of  a  note  is  its 
function.  The  essential  feature  of  our  minor  scale  is  the 
concord  of  the  Minor  Third  which  makes  part  of  its 
common  chord  ;  and  this  was  to  the  Greek  ear  a  discord, 
that  is,  a  sound-relation  not  to  be  immediately  recognized 
or  permanently  acquiesced  in,  but  demanding  resolution 
and  change. 

33.  We  have  seen  that  in  this  conception  of  the  keys 
the  distinction  of  modes  is  virtually  ignored.  But  it  was 
destined  to  be  revived  by  the  revolution  in  musical  science 
which  was  effected  by  Ptolemy,  the  celebrated  mathema- 
tician of  Alexandria.  This  theorist  observing  that,  by  the 
extension  of  the  modes  illustrated  in  Table  21,  their  distinc- 

62 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

live  feature  of  supplying  certain  segments  of  the  common 
scale  for  the  use  of  composers  and  performers  had  been 
sacrificed,  reduced  them  again  to  their  original  compass ; 
and,  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  their  very  nature  forbade 
their  extension,  he  introduced  (or  made  popular)  a  new 
nomenclature  by  which  the  several  notes  of  any  mode  were 
designated  in  relation  to  that  mode  only,  and  not  in  relation 
to  the  common  scale  of  which  they  were  all  segments. 
Thus  the  terms  Hypate,  Parhypate,  Lichanus,  Mese,  Para- 
mese.  Trite,  Paranete,  and  Nete  were  employed  to  signify 
the  First,  Second,  Third,  Fourth,  Fifth,  Sixth,  Seventh,  and 
Eighth  notes  of  all  the  modes  alike.  These  names  were  dis- 
tinguished from  those  of  the  old  system  by  the  addition  to 
the  former  of  the  term  κατά  θ€σιν  'in  respect  of  position,'  and 
to  the  latter  of  the  term  κατά  Βνναμιν  '  in  respect  of  function." 

TABLE    23. 

SEVEN    MODES   WITH    THEIR    OLD    NOMENCLATURE   AND 
THE   NOMENCLATURE    OF    PtOLEMY. 


κατά  θίσιν 


MlXbLYDIAN 


sss 


S5 


^ 


m 


—\- 


κατά  δνναμιν    ^ 


Hypaton 


Meson 


κατά  θίσιν 


Lydian 


fc=fe 


i 


^ 


κατά  δνναμιν 


'r.B 


Hypaton 


Meson 


INTRODUCTION 


κατά  θέσιν      H 
Phrygian        ^ 


^^^^^^Μ 


Ψ^=^=^ 


κατά  ζυναμιν 


•►3ίΰ 


Meson  • 


DiezeugmenSn 


«ατά  θίσιν       ^ 


Dorian 


m^^^^=£^=^ 


^ 


κατά  δύναμιν    >!  >; 

Κ         -5 


Meson 


DiezeugemenSn 


«ατά  θέσιν       « 
Hypolydian 


^^ 


^ 


g^ 


ί3=^= 


■a            3 
«ατά  δύναμιν    S           ^ 

Ι    '^ 

C 

Λ 

χ: 

Ι 

/           Trit 
Paranet 

ω 
^ 

^1 

Meson 

«ατά  θίσιν         ^         >; 

ο.         -ζ 

DiezeugmenOn 

V 

Η 

Hypophrygian  ^ 


i 


^ 


g 


3=^=^=^ 


^ 


«ατά  δύναμιν  ^^ 
64 


Diezeugmenon 


Hyper  bolaeon 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


κατά  θίσιν 
Hypodorian 


X 


'm^^^E 


Ϊ 


κατά  δνναμιν 


S 


Diezeugmenon  Η^φβΓΒοΙαεδη 


But  even  in  this  innovation  we  are  not  justified  in  tracing 
any  new  sense  of  the  possibility  of  different  modalities. 
For  Ptolemy  himself  asserts  that  the  object  of  passing  from 
one  mode  to  another  is  merely  to  bring  the  melody  within 
a  new  compass  of  notes. 

At  this  point  we  may  close  our  investigation,  as  the 
further  development  of  musical  science  belongs  to  the 
history  of  Modern  Europe. 

34.  For  the  sake  of  conciseness  I  have  adopted  in  the 
preceding  paragraphs  the  somewhat  misleading  method  of 
presenting,  in  the  form  of  an  historical  statement,  what  is 
in  reality  a  mere  hypothesis.  For  the  same  reason  I  have 
omitted  details,  and  restricted  myself  to  the  most  general 
features  of  the  development.  The  latter  of  these  deficiencies 
will  to  some  extent  be  made  good  in  the  notes  on  the  text 
of  Aristoxenus  ;  the  former  demands  our  immediate  atten- 
tion. Strict  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  our  hypothesis  is 
in  the  nature  of  the  case  impossible ;  but  we  must  at  least 
examine  the  rival  hypotheses  and  satisfy  ourselves  that  the 
facts  which  tell  fatally  against  them  leave  it  unassailed. 
At  the  same  time  we  must  not  be  disappointed  if  many  facts 
remain  unexplained.  In  the  development  of  any  branch  of 
human  activity  there  is  much  that  is  accidental ;  accidental, 
in  the  sense  that  the  explanation  of  it  is  not  to  be  found 
inside  the  sphere  of  that  activity.     We  shall  be  satisfied 

MACR.'^N  Ρ  65 


INTRODUCTION 

then  if  we  find  that  our  hypothesis  accounts  for  many  of  the 
recorded  facts,  and  is  not  irrefragably  refuted  by  any  of 
them;  while  the  other  intrinsically  possible  hypotheses — 
there  are  but  two — are  put  out  of  court  by  the  weight  of 
unanswerable  argument  and  evidence. 

35.  Of  one  of  these  hypotheses  the  essential  thesis  is  that 
the  seven  modes  of  Table  16  differ  from  one  another  as  do 
our  major  and  minor  scales,  that  is  in  modality,  or  in  the 
relations  which  the  other  notes  of  the  scale  bear  to  the 
tonic.  The  tonic  of  each  scale  it  finds  in  the  fourth  note 
from  its  lower  extremity,  the  μέση  κατά  θίσιν  of  Ptolemy. 

According  to  this  view  the  seven  modes  and  their  tonics 
may  be  represented  in  the  following  Table.  In  (a)  the 
scales  are  given  in  the  Greek  form,  with  the  tonic  in  the 
Fourth  place  from  the  bottom ;  in  (d)  they  are  given  in 
modern  form,  and  start  from  the  tonic. 

TABLE    24. 


THE    SEVEN    MODES    ACCORDING    TO  THE    MODALITY 
THEORY. 

MlXOLYDIAN 

(a)  Mese  (b)  Tonic  . ι 


ί 


q=t 


^i^P^ 


q=|: 


J     -J-   -m-    • 


LVDIAN 

_  («)  Mese 


ψ)  Ton 


^Ξ^3^Ξ^Ξ^ 


d=J=J: 


^^^^Ξβ 


Phrygian 

(a) 


[a]  Mese  I  (6)  Tonic 


3ΞίΕΞέΞέ 


Dorian 


Mese 


1^^ 


1  (ύ)  Tonic 


J-^ 


ij 


Ξί 


66 


mi 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

J         1  (6)  Tonic 


Hypolydian 

(a)  Mese 


^^ 


^i 


g^ 


*-*-* 


Hypophrygian 

(a)  Mese 


i 


(6)  Tonic 


3ΞΪ 


s: 


3t=^ 


*^Ξ3= 


Hypodorian 


i^ 


Mese 


_J_J_iw 


Tonic 


s 


r^=^ 


1*=^ 


36.  We  cannot  deny  that  at  first  sight  this  theory  has 
much  to  recommend  it.  It  affords  an  adequate  explanation 
of  the  striking  names  bestowed  upon  the  seven  modes ;  for 
if  these  differed  in  modahty,  they  certainly  deserved  distinc- 
tive titles.  It  enables  us  too,  on  the  analogy  of  our  major 
and  minor  scales,  to  conceive  how  the  Greeks  might  have 
found  in  each  mode  a  distinctive  Ethos  or  emotional  char- 
acter. Doubtless  the  objection  at  once  presents  itself  that 
the  ancient  nomenclature  of  the  notes  recognizes  no  such 
variety  of  modality,  that  the  note  before  the  disjunctive  tone 
is  the  Mese  in  every  scale,  no  matter  what  its  place  therein 
may  be.  But  this  objection  the  theory  finds  little  difficulty 
in  answering.  For  it  is  quite  permissible  to  suppose  that 
one  mode,  because  it  was  most  common  or  most  ancient, 
or  for  some  other  reason,  was  regarded  by  the  theorists  as 
typical,  and  that  the  nomenclature  of  the  notes,  originally 
applicable  to  that  scale  only,  came  to  be  applied  at  a  later 
date  to  scales  of  different  modality.  Besides  we  have 
seen  that,  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy,  if  not  earlier,  there  was 
a  second  system  of  nomenclature  by  which  notes  derived 
their  names  from  their  positions  in  their»respective  scales, 

F  2  67 


INTRODUCTION 

and  according  to  this  system  the  fourth  note  of  every  scale 
was  its  Mese. 

37.  Nevertheless  this  plausible  hypothesis  is  absolutely 
untenable,  as  the  following  considerations  will  show. 

In  the  first  place  we  must  note  that  the  modes  are  not 
the  invention  of  theorists,  but  scales  in  practical  use.  Now, 
it  is  hardly  conceivable,  and  in  the  absence  of  evidence  or 
parallel  wholly  incredible,  that  an  early  and  undeveloped 
artistic  impulse  should  have  produced  such  a  variety  of 
modalities,  so  many  distinct  languages,  as  one  might  say, 
of  musical  expression,  not  distributed  through  different 
regions  and  races,  but  all  intelligible  and  enjoyable  alike  to 
a  Hellene  of  Hellas  proper. 

In  the  second  place,  the  distinction  which  is  here  sup- 
posed between  the  modes  is  essential  not  accidental,  and  as 
such,  it  is  wholly  impossible  that  it  should  have  been  over- 
looked by  the  Greek  theorists,  who  have  proved  themselves 
•in  other  respects  the  most  subtle  of  analysts.  Yet  in  all  the 
extant  authorities  there  is  not  one  hint  of  such  a  distinction. 
Nay,  we  might  go  further  and  say  that  we  cannot  admit  this 
hypothesis  without  convicting  these  theorists  of  a  radically 
false  analysis.     If  the  tonic  of  the  scale 


$ 


j^31 


is  C,  the  scale  must  divide  itself  into  the  tetrachords 


and 


m^ 


t==± 


in  which  G,  c,  d,  and  g  are  the  fixed,  and  a,  b^  e,  and  / 
the  passing  notes.  But  the  theorists  recognize  no  tetra- 
chord  of  either  of  these  forms ;  but  insist  that  in  all  tetra- 
chords of  which  fhe  extreme  points  are  the  fixed  notes,  and 
68 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

the  inner  the  passing  notes,  the  lowest  interval  must  be  less 
than  the  highest,  and  equal  to  or  less  than  the  middle.  To 
take  one  from  the  countless  instances  we  read  in  the 
Isagoge  (Meibom,  3.  4) : 

Τίνη  δε  €στι  rpta,  διάτονον,  χρωμ,α^  αρμονία,  καΐ  /χελωδεΓται  το 
μίν  Βίάτονον  €7γ1  μίν  το  βαρύ  κατά  τόνον  και  τόνον  καΐ  ημίτονων, 
€7γΙ  δε  το  δζν  ίναντίως  κατά  ημίτονων  καΐ  τόνον  και  τόνον.  το 
δε  χρίομα  εττι  /χεν  το  βαρν  κατά  τριημίτόνίον  καΐ  ημιτόνίον  καΐ 
ημίτόνίον,  επΙ  Se  το  οζν  ^ναντίωζ  κατά  ημίτόνίον  καΐ  ημιτό 
καΐ  τρίημίτόνιον.  η  δε  αρμονία  εττι  μίν  το  βαρν  κατά  8ίτονον 
διεσιν  καΐ  διεσιν,  επι  δε  το  οξυ  έναντίως  κατά  δό'εσιν  και  διεσιν 
καΐ  Βίτονον. 

Here  we  find  a  certain  order  of  the  intervals  of  the  tetra- 
chord  affirmed  without  qualification.  This  affirmation 
implies  that  all  diatonic  scales  can  be  reduced  to  com- 
positions of  tetrachords  of  the  form 


ViOV 

καΙ 


Ί \-- 


But  the  scale 


if  C  be  its  tonic  could  not  be  so  reduced  except  by  an 
analysis  extending  to  the  superficial  quahties  only,  and 
leaving  the  essential  nature  untouched. 

Take  again  the  following  passage  from  the  Isagoge 
(Meibom,  19.  l)  άττό  δέ  της  μέσης  καΐ  των  λοίττων  φθόγγων  at 
δυνά/χεις  -γνωρίζονται,  το  yap  ττώς  €χ€ί  έκαστος  αυτών  ττρός  την 
μέσην  φανερως  γίγν^ταί.  '  It  is  from  the  Mese  that  we  Start 
to  discern  the  functions  of  the  other  notes ;  for  plainly  it  is 
in  relation  to  the  Mese  that  each  of  them  is  thus  or  thus ;' 

Or    this    still    more    striking    passage    from    Aristotle 

{Problems,  xix.  20) : 

69 


INTRODUCTION 

Δια  Tt,  iav  μίν  Ttg  την  μέσην  κινήσΎ]  ημών,  άρμόσας  τά,ς 
άλλα?  χορ^άς,  και  χρηται  τω  οργάνω,  ον  μόνον  όταν  κατά,  τον  της 
μέσης  γίνηται  φθόγγον,  λυττει  και  φαίνεται  άνάρμοστον,  άλλα 
και  κατά  την  αλλην  μζλω^ίαν'  εάν  δε  τ^ΐ'  λLχav6v  η  τίνα  άλλον 
φθόγγον,  τότ€  φαίνεται  διαφε/^ειν  μόνον,  όταν  κακ^ίνη  τις  χρηται ; 
— •*Η  €νλόγως  τοΐιτο  σνμβαίνα ;  ττάντα  γαρ  τα  γρηστα  μέλη 
ΤΓολλάκις  τη  μίσ-η  γρηται,  και  ττάντίς  οι  αγαθοί  ττοιηταΐ  ττνκνα 
ττρος  την  μίσην  άτταντώσι,  καν  άττέλθωσί,  ταχν  ΙττανΙργρνται, 
προς  δέ  άλλι^ν  όντως  ουδε/χι'αν.  καθάτηρ  Ικ  των  λόγων  Ινίων 
Ι^αψίθέντων  συνδέσμων  ονκ  ίστιν  ο  λόγος  'Έιλληνίκός,  οίον  το 
τ€  και  το  κα'ι.  evioc  δέ  ονθϊν  λυττονσι,  διά.  το  τοις  μεν  άναγκαΐον 
ctvai  ^ησθαί  ττολλάκις,  el  εσται  λόγος,  τοις  δε  μη.  οντω  και  των 
φθόγγων  ή  μέση  ώσττερ  σύνδεσμος  έστι,  καΧ  μάλιστα  των  κάλων, 
διά,  το  ττλαστάκις  Ιννττάργειν  τον  φθόγγον  αντης. 

[Translated  by  Mr.  Monro,  Modes  of  Ancient  Greek  Music, 
p.  43 :  *  Why  is  it  that  if  the  Mese  is  altered,  after  the 
other  chords  have  been  tuned,  the  instrument  is  felt  to  be 
out  of  tune  not  only  when  the  Mese  is  sounded,  but  through 
the  whole  of  the  music— whereas  if  the  Lichanus  or  any 
other  note  is  out  of  tune,  it  seems  to  be  perceived  only 
when  that  note  is  struck?  Is  it  to  be  explained  on  the 
ground  that  all  good  melodies  often  use  the  Mese,  and  all 
good  composers  resort  to  it  frequently,  and  if  they  leave  it 
soon  return  again,  but  do  not  make  the  same  use  of  any 
other  note?  Just  as  language  cannot  be  Greek  if  certain 
conjunctions  are  omitted,  such  as  τε  and  και,  while  others 
may  be  dispensed  with,  because  the  one  class  is  necessary 
for  language,  but  not  the  other ;  so  with  musical  sounds  the 
Mese  is  a  kind  of  "conjunction,"  especially  of  beautiful 
sounds,  since  it  is  most  often  heard  among  these.'] 

It  is  hard  to  imagine  how  the  nature  of  a  tonic  could  be 
more  clearly  and  truly  indicated  than  it  has  been  by  the 
author  of  this  passage  in  his  description  of  the  Mese.  And 
as  he  expressly  states  that  the  Mese  is  the  centre  of  unity 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

in  all  good  music,  he  must  have  recognized  only  one 
modality.  An  attempt  has,  indeed,  been  made  to  evade 
this  conclusion  by  supposing  Aristotle  to  refer  not  to  the 
μ,ίση  κατά  Βνναμιν,  but  tO  the  yaeVr/  κατά  Oeaiv.  But  this 
supposition  is  quite  untenable,  not  only  because  the  nomen- 
clature κατά  θίσίν  in  all  probability  was  the  invention  of 
Ptolemy,  but  also  for  this  much  more  convincing  reason  that 
the  terms  κατά  Swa/xtv  and  κατά  θίσιν  seem  framed  with  the 
direct  intention  of  precluding  such  a  supposition.  The 
μζση  κατά  θέσιν  is  merely  the  note  which  is  located  in  the 
centre  of  a  group ;  the  μ^ση  κατά  ^νναμνν  is  the  note  which 
discharges  the  function  of  a  centre  of  unity  to  a  system. 
The  first  is  a  mathematical,  the  second  a  dynamical  centre. 
When,  therefore,  the  whole  train  of  Aristotle's  reasoning  is 
based  on  his  conception  of  the  Mese  as  the  connecting 
bond  of  musical  sounds,  can  there  be  any  manner  of  doubt 
to  which  Mese  he  refers  ? 

38.  Again,  we  have  seen  that  one  attractive  feature  of  this 
hypothesis  is  that  it  offers  a  plausible  explanation  of  the  fact 
that  the  Greeks  attributed  a  distinct  Ethos  or  emotional 
character  to  each  of  the  modes.  It  now  remains  to  show 
that  this  plausible  explanation  is  refuted  by  the  express  state- 
ment of  the  authorities  as  to  the  conditions  of  this  Ethos. 

Consider  the  following  passages  : — 
{a)  Plato,  Republic^  iii.  398  e: 

TtVeg  ovv  Θρηνώ8€ίζ  άρμονίαί ;  .  .  .  Μ,ίξολνΒίστί,  ΐφη,  και 
'^νντονολ.ν^ιστί  καί  τοίανταί  Tives. — TtVes  ovv  μαλακαί  τ€  και 
σνμτΓΟΤίκαΙ  των  αρμονίων;  Ίαστι',  η  δ'  09,  καΐ  Λυδιστι,  αΓτινες 
χαλαραΐ  καΧοννται. 

'  What  then  are  the  scales  of  mourning  ?  '  *  Mixolydian,' 
said  he,  '  and  High  Lydian,  and  some  others  of  the 
same  character.'  '  Which  of  the  scales  then  are  soft  and 
convivial?'  'The  Ionian,'  he  rephed,  'and  Lydian,  such 
as  are  called  slack '  (i.e.  low-pitched). 

71 


INTRODUCTION 

(d)  Aristotle,  Poliiics^  vi  (iv).  3.  1290  a  20: 
*O/jtott09  δ'  c;(et  και  Trcpt  τα?  αρμονίας,  ως  φασί  rtvcs*  και  yap 
€Κ€ί  τίθενται  €Ϊ8η  Svo,  την  Αωρίστί  και  την  Φρυ-γυστί,  τα  δε  όίλλα 
συντάγματα  τα  μ\ν  Αώρια  τα  δε  Φρυγία  καλουσιν.  μάλιστα  μ\ν 
ουν  ΐΐωθασιν  ούτως  νποΧαμβάνίΐν  irepl  των  ττολιτειών  άληθίστίρον 
δε  και  βάλτων  ως  ημάς  διειλο/χ,εν  δυοΓν  η  μιας  ούσης  της  καλώς 
συνεστηκυίας  τάς  άλλας  εΤναι  τταρεκ^άσει?,  τάς  μεν  της  ευ  κε- 
κραμίνης  αρμονίας,  τάς  δε  τ^?  αρίστης  ττολίτείας,  6λίγαρ)(ίκάς  μεν 
τάς  συντονωτψας  καΐ  δεσττοτικωτερα?,  τάς  δ'  άναμίνας  καΧ 
μαλάκας  Βημοτίκάς. 

'  Some  would  have  it  that  it  is  the  same  in  the  case  of 
scales ;  there  too  they  posit  two  species,  Dorian  and 
Phrygian,  and  all  other  systems  they  class  as  either  one  or 
the  other  of  these.  Such  is  the  common  view  of  forms  of 
government.  But  our  analysis  was  truer  and  more  satis- 
factory, according  to  which  of  perfect  systems  there  are  but 
one,  or  two,  while  the  rest  are  deviations,  in  the  one  case 
from  the  scale  of  proper  composition,  in  the  other  from  the 
best  possible  government ;  those  that  incline  to  high  pitch 
and  masterfulness,  being  of  the  nature  of  oligarchy,  those 
that  are  low  in  pitch  and  slack  being  of  the  nature  of 
democracy.' 

(c)  Aristotle,  Politics^  ν  (viii).  5.  1340  a  38  : 

Εΰ^υς  γαρ  η  των  αρμονίων  διε'σττ/κε  φύσις  ώστε  άκούοντας 
άλλως  ^αατίθεσθαι  καΐ  μη  τον  αυτόν  έ'χ^ιν  τρόπον  ττρος  ίκάστην 
αυτών,  αλλά  ττρος  μ\ν  Ινίας  οΒυρτίκωτίρως  και  συνεστηκότως 
μάλλον,  οίον  ττρος  την  Μι^ολυδί,στϊ.  καλουμίνην,  ττρος  δε  τάς 
μαλακωτ€ρως  την  διάνοιαν,  οίον  ττρος  τάς  άνειμίνας. 

'  Το  begin  with  there  is  such  a  distinction  in  the  nature 
of  scales  that  each  of  them  produces  a  different  disposition 
in  the  listener.  By  some  of  them,  as  for  example  the 
Mixolydian,  we  are  disposed  to  grief  and  depression;  by 
others,  as  for  example  the  low-pitched  ones,  we  are  dis- 
posed to  tenderness  of  sentiment.' 
72 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

{d)  Aristotle,  Politics,  ν  (viii).  7.  1342  b  20  : 

Οίον  rois  άτταρηκόσι  Slo.  )(ρόνον  ov  pahiov  αδειρ'  τα?  (τνντόνον^ 
αρμονίας,  άλλα  ras  avct/xeVa?  17  φνο'ΐς  υττοβάλλα  τοΐς  τηλίκοντοίς. 

'  Thus  for  those  whose  powers  have  failed  through  years 
it  is  not  easy  to  sing  the  high  scales,  and  their  time  of  life 
naturally  suggests  the  use  of  the  low.' 

From  these  passages  it  is  clear  in  the  first  place  that  the 
Ethos  of  the  modes  was  dependent  on  their  pitch,  and  in 
the  second  place  that  the  pitch  on  which  the  Ethos  depended 
made  them  severally  suitable  for  voices  of  a  certain  class  or 
condition.  But,  if  the  distinction  between  the  modes  is 
one  of  modality  in  our  sense  of  the  word  there  is  no  reason 
in  the  nature  of  things  why  they  should  differ  in  pitch  at  all. 
And  though  we  might  assume  for  them  a  conventional  dis- 
tinction in  pitch  by  regarding  them  theoretically  as  fragments 
of  one  typical  scale  shifted  from  one  point  of  pitch  to 
another,  the  assumption  would  not  help  us  to  meet  the  facts. 
A  conventional  distinction  of  pitch  cannot  be  the  basis  of 
an  absolute  distinction  of  Ethos,  nor  can*  it  account  for 
the  practical  suitability  of  certain  scales  to  certain  voices. 

39.  The  weight  of  these  arguments  is  so  irresistible  that 
we  are  not  surprised  to  find  Mr.  Monro  substituting  a  new 
hypothesis  in  his  Modes  of  Ancient  Greek  Alusic.  Un- 
fortunately this  substitute,  though  it  embodies  one  most 
important  truth,  is  open  itself  to  objections  no  less  grave. 
The  fundamental  principle  from  which  Mr.  Monro's  theory 
starts  is  that  the  Greeks  knew  but  one  modality,  that  is  one 
set  of  relations  between  the  notes  of  a  scale  and  its  tonic  : 
and  the  establishment  of  this  principle  by  argument  and 
evidence  is  the  great  contribution  of  Mr.  Monro  to  the  study 
of  Greek  Music.  Proceeding  from  this  principle,  he  main- 
tains that  the  terms  Dorian,  Lydian,  Phrygian  originally 
designated  merely  so  many  keys,  that  is  so  many  scales 
identical  in  their  intervals  and  in  the  order  of  them,  but 

73 


INTRODUCTION 


differing  in  pitch.  The  connexion  of  these  names  with 
certain  modes  or  scales  of  different  figures  arose  in  his 
opinion  at  a  later  period  from  the  fact  that  practical  limita- 
tions restricted  composers  and  performers  to  a  certain 
compass,  and  the  name  of  the  key  was  transferred  to  the 
particular  order  of  notes  w^hich  it  afforded  within  that  com- 
pass. Thus  the  term  Mixolydian  and  Dorian  originally 
denoted  the  two  keys 

Mixolydian 


^^^^^^^ 


221 


and 
Dorian 


ΖΣ± 


Srw^ 


m 


-\ — i — 


Ά=^=^Γ^ 


ξ3^=^=* 


Now  suppose  that  a  composer  or 
performer  was  restricted  to  the  par- 
ticular compass 


ί 


is 


Within  that  compass  the  Mixolydian  key  would  give  the 
series 


i 


m--. 


*te 


i^-F 


Ύ± 


which  is  of  the  form 


i 


w^- 


Ύ± 


and  the  Dorian  the  series 


F^ll^^ 


5==t 


i 


3: 


74 


^ 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 
which  is  of  the  form 


ί 


:p= 


and  in  this  way  the  terms  might  come  to  be  apphed  to 
certain  orders  of  intervals. 

40.  The  objections  to  this  theory  are  many  and  fatal.  At 
the  very  outset,  we  are  repelled  by  the  supposition  that  such 
a  striking  nomenclature  should  have  been  adopted  to  denote 
such  a  superficial  difference.  Again,  how  are  we  to  explain 
the  distinct  ethical  character  of  the  scales  ?  If  the  pitch  of 
the  Dorian,  Phrygian,  and  other  keys  be  only  determined 
by  their  relation  to  one  another,  their  emotional  character 
must  also  be  only  relatively  determined ;  if,  for  example, 
high  pitch  is  the  natural  expression  of  pathos^  we  can  say  of 
the  higher  of  two  keys  that  it  is  more  pathetic  than  the 
lower,  not  that  it  is  absolutely  pathetic;  yet  the  Greeks 
always  attribute  an  absolute  character  to  each  of  the  scales. 
It  would  follow  that  the  pitch  of  the  keys  must  have  been 
absolutely  determined.  But  of  such  absolute  determination 
there  is  not  a  word  in  our  authorities.  Even  if  we  assume 
it,  in  spite  of  their  silence,  surely  it  cannot  have  been  exact. 
Absolute  and  exact  determination  would  presuppose  the 
universal  recognition  of  a  conventional  standard  embodied 
in  some  authorized  instrument,  or  expressed  in  a  mathe- 
matical formula ;  the  first  alternative  is  precluded  by  its 
absurdity,  and  there  is  no  evidence  for  the  second.  But 
if  the  determination,  though  absolute,  was  not  exact,  while 
we  might  admit  an  absolute  difference  of  Ethos  between 
a  scale  of  extreme  height  and  one  of  extreme  depth,  there 
could  have  been  no  such  absolute  difference  between  scales 
separated  only  by  a  tone  or  semitone  ;  for  let  there  be  but 
a  slight  variation  between  the  tuning  of  one  day  and  another, 
and   the    Phrygian    of  to-day  will   be   the    Lydian    of  to- 


INTRODUCTION 

morrow.  And  even  if  we  make  Mr.  Monro  a  present  of  all 
these  objections,  and  grant  the  existence  in  ancient  Greece 
of  an  absolute  and  exact  determination  of  pitch,  will  any 
one  venture  to  affirm  that  the  difference  of  a  tone  or 
semitone  in  the  pitch  of  two  keys  could  result  in  such  an 
antagonism  in  their  moral  effects,  that  Plato  should  have 
retained  one  of  them  as  a  valuable  aid  to  ethical  training, 
while  he  banished  the  other  relentlessly  from  his  ideal 
republic  ? 

Again,  it  is  not  uncommon^  to  find  the  names  of  musicians 
recorded  as  inventors  of  certain  scales.  Would  Mr.  Monro 
have  us  believe  that  the  only  claim  of  these  musicians  to 
the  regard  of  posterity  is  that  they  stretched  the  strings  of 
their  lyre  a  little  more  loosely  or  a  little  tighter  than  did 
their  predecessors  ? 

41 .  Returning  now  to  the  hypothesis  which  we  have  above 
proposed  we  shall  consider  a  few  passages  which  seem  to 
offer  striking  confirmation  of  its  truth. 

{a)  Heraclides  Ponticus  apud  Athenae?im,  xiv.  624  c  : 

*Η/3ακλ€ΐ'δϊ;9  δ'  b  Ποι/τικός  cv  τρίτω  Tzepi  Μουσικές  ούδ' 
αρμονίαν  φησί  δειν  καΧ^Ισθαι  την  Φρυγιον,  καθάττζρ  ουδέ  την 
AvSlov,  άρ/χονίας  yap  ctvat  τρεις'  τρία  yap  και  γενέσθαι  'Ελλήνων 
y€vη,  Δωριείς,  Αίολεΐ?,  "Ιωνα?  .  .  .  (625  d)  καταφρονητεον  ονν  των 
τας  μ\ν  κατ  ζΐ^ος  διαφοράς  ον  Βυναμενων  ^εωρειν,  έττακολονθονντων 

^  For  example  see  Plutarch,  de  Musica,  1136C-D  'Apiaro^evos  δε 
φησι  Ί,απφώ  ττρωτην  (ΰρασθαι  την  ΜιξοΚυδιστί  .  .  .  kv  dk  Tois  ΊστορικοΪ5 
TTJs  Άρμονικψ  ΐΐυθοκλείδην  φησϊ  τον  αυλητην  evpeTTjV  αυτής  yeyovevai  .  .  . 
αλλά  μην  και  ττ);/  'Έπαναμίνην  Αυδιστί,  ηπ(ρ  ΙναντΙα  ttj  Μιζολυδιστί,  ιταρα- 
ττΚησίαν  ουσαν  τη  Ίάδι  νπυ  Ααμώνοί  (υρησθαί  φασι  του  Αθηναίου. 

ή  Έπαναμύνη  Λυδίστί,  or  low-pitched  Lydian,  is  probably  the  same 
as  the  later  Hypolydian.  By  the  Ionian  is  probably  meant  the  Hypo- 
phrygian.  The  Hypolydian  in  its  schema,  that  is  in  the  position  of 
its  tonic  in  relation  to  the  other  notes,  is  very  similar  to  the  Hypo- 
phrygian  and  most  unlike  the  Mixolydian. 
76 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

δέ  Τη  των  φθόγγων  ο^ντητί  καΐ  βαρντητί  και  τιθεμένων  Ύττερ- 
μίξολνΒίον  άρμονίαν  καί  ττάλιν  υττίρ  ταντης  αλλην  .  .  .  δει  δε 
την  άρμονίαν  είδος  e;(etv  ηθονς  η  ττάθονς. 

'  Heraclides  Ponticus  in  the  third  book  of  the  de  Musica 
asserts  that  the  term  αρμονία  should  not  be  applied  to  the 
Phrygian  or  Lydian  scales  ;  that  there  are  three  Harmonies^ 
as  there  are  three  tribes  of  Hellenes — Dorians,  Aeolians, 
lonians  .  .  .  We  must  conceive  a  very  low  opinion  of  the 
theorists  who  fail  to  detect  difference  of  species^  while  they 
keep  pace  wath  every  variation  of  pitch  and  establish  a 
Hypermixolydian  Harmony  and  again  another  above  that. 
.  .  .  But  every  Harmony  should  possess  an  ethical  or 
emotional  character  peculiar  to  itself.' 

Mr.  Monro,  by  a  curious  misapprehension,  as  I  think,  of 
this  passage,  has  accused  Heraclides  of  carrying  Hellenic 
exclusiveness  to  the  extreme  of  refusing  the  title  of  άρμονίαι 
to  the  oriental  scales  of  Lydia  and  Phrygia.  But  the 
meaning  of  Heraclides'  statement  is  that  the  seven  scales 
of  Table  i6,  inasmuch  as  they  are  only  so  many  segments 
of  the  one  scale,  are  all  instances  of  the  one  αρμονία  or 
method  of  formation,  and  so  cannot  properly  be  termed  so 
many  άρμονίαι.  It  was  a  different  matter,  he  says,  with  the 
three  ancient  Harmonies,  the  Dorian,  Ionian,  and  Aeolian. 
These  were  really  distinct  adjustments  ;  they  were  scales, 
the  principles  of  whose  construction  were  essentially  dis- 
similar. Difference  of  pitch,  he  proceeds  to  say,  does  not 
constitute  a  new  αρμονία. 

(δ)  Aristides  Quintilianus  (Meibom,  21.  11)  : 

To  μεν  ovv  AvSlov  διάστημα  σννίτίθζ,σαν  e/c  διεσεως,  καί 
διτόνου,  καΧ  τόνον,  καί  διεσεως,  και  διεσεως,  και  ^τόνον^  καί  hu- 
σεως•  καΐ  τοντο  μ\ν  ην  τελειον  σύστημα,  το  δε  Αωρων  εκ  τόνον, 
καΐ  διε'σεω?,  και  διεσεω?,  και  διτόνου,  και  τόνον,  και  διεσεως,  και 
διε'σεως,  καΐ  ^ίτόνον  ην  δε  και  τοντο  τόνω  το  δια  ττασών  ντΓβρεχ^ον. 
το  δε  Φρνγίον  εκ  τόνον,  και  διε'σεω?,  και  διε'σεω?,  και  διτόι^ου,  και 

77 


INTRODUCTION 

τόνου,  /cat  διεσεω?,  και  δίεσεω?,  και.  τόνον   ■ην  0€  και  τοντο  riXeiov 
όιά  -πασών. 

'The  Lydian  scale  they' [i.e.  ancient  musicians]  'composed 
of  diesis,  ditone,  tone,  diesis,  diesis,  ditone,  diesis  ;  this 
was  a  complete  scale.  The  Dorian  was  composed  of  tone, 
diesis,  diesis,  ditone,  tone,  diesis,  diesis,  ditone ;  this  scale 
again  exceeded  the  octave  by  a  tone.  The  Phrygian  was 
composed  of  tone,  diesis,  diesis,  ditone,  tone,  diesis,  diesis, 
tone  ;  this  too  was  a  complete  octave.' 

{c)  The  Isagoge,  (Meibom,  20.  i) : 

Λύδιοι  δε  δυο,  6ζντ€ρο<ζ  και  βαρύτερος,  bg  και  Αιόλιος  καλείται• 
Φρΰγιοι  δυο,  6  μλν  βαρνς,  ος  και  Ίαστιος*  6  δ'  οζνς.  Δώριο? 
€19.  ΎτΓολυδιοι  δυο*  o^vrepos  και  βαρντΐροζ  δ?  και  Ύττοαιολιος 
καλείται,  ^ττοφρυγωι  δυο,  ων  6  βαρντζρος  και  Ύττοϊάστιος 
καλείται. 

'  Two  Lydian  keys,  a  higher,  and  a  lower,  also  called 
Aeolian  ;  two  Phrygian,  one  low  also  called  Ionian,  and 
one  high  ;  one  Dorian  ;  two  Hypolydian,  a  higher  and  a 
lower,  also  called  Hypoaeolian ;  two  Hypophrygian,  of 
which  the  lower  is  also  called  Hypoionian.' 

It  appears  from  passage  (a)  that  there  was  a  period  in 
the  development  of  the  Greek  musical  system  when  there 
existed  three  distinct  Harmonies,  i.  e.  three  scales  dis- 
tinguished by  the  different  methods  in  which  their  units 
were  put  together ;  and  that  these  three  Harmonies  were 
termed  Dorian,  Aeolian,  and  Ionian.  Now  the  units  of 
Greek  music  are  the  tetrachords ;  and  we  cannot  conceive 
how  tetrachords  could  have  been  put  together  except  by 
the  method  of  conjunction,  the  method  of  disjunction,  the 
method  of  alternate  conjunction  and  disjunction,  or  a  com- 
bination of  two  or  more  of  these  methods.  It  is  probable 
then  that  the  three  Harmonies  were  the  products  of  these 
three  methods.  But  the  characteristic  feature  of  the 
Dorian  scale  of  Aristides  Quintilianus  (see  passage  (ί^))  is 
78 


THE  DEVELOPiMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

that  it  contains  two  disjunctive  tones  in  succession  ;  from 
which  we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  the  Dorian  Harmony 
was  the  method  of  disjunction. 

Again  in  passage  {c)  we  find  that  when  the  number  of 
the  keys  was  raised  from  seven  to  thirteen,  the  terms  Ionian 
and  Aeolian  were  employed  to  denote  respectively  the 
duplicate  Phrygian  and  Lydian  keys.  This  implies  a  con- 
nexion for  purposes  of  music  between  the  terms  Ionian 
and  Phrygian,  and  between  the  terms  Aeolian  and  Lydian. 
But  the  Lydian  scale  of  Aristides  is  plainly  a  scale  of 
alternate  conjunction  and  disjunction ;  and  the  characteristic 
feature  of  the  Phrygian^  is  that  it  introduces  the  Fourth 
above  as  w^ell  as  the  Fourth  below  the  tonic ;  in  other 
words,  that  it  retains  the  essence  of  conjunction.  It  seems 
a  fair  inference  then  that  the  Ionian  and  Aeolian  Har- 
monies are  identical  respectively  with  the  method  of 
conjunction,  and  the  method  of  alternate  conjunction  and 
disjunction. 

{d)  Plutarch,  de  Musica^  1137  D  :  %Ύ]\ον  h\  και  το  irepl  των 
ί'ττατων  on  ου  Si    ayvoiav  άττίίχοντο   iv  τοις  ΔωριΌί?  τον  rerpa- 

^  The  mistake  has  commonly  been  made  of  explaining  the  upper 


tetrachord   of  the   Phrygian    scale 


■ψι 


as  a  mixture  of  enharmonic  and  diatonic  notes,  d  being  the  second 


passing   note    of  the   diatonic  tetrachord 


But  this  interpretation  ignores  the  distinction  between  fixed  and 
variable  notes,  a  distinction  which  Aristoxenus  and  other  theorists 
are  never  weary  of  repeating.  If  d  in  the  Phrygian  scale  were 
merely  a  passing  note  of  the  diatonic  tetrachord,  its  position  would 
not  be  exactly  determined  ;  and  as  the  lowest  interval  of  the  scale 
is  exactly  determined  as  a  tone,  the  compass  of  the  whole  could  not 
be  definitely  estimated  as  an  octave.  Besides,  we  should  then  have 
three  passing  notes  in  succession,  and  two  λιχανοί ;  the  impossibility 
of  which  will  be  obvious  to  any  one  who  has  grasped  the  Greek 
conception  of  a  note  as  a  δνναμίί,  not  a  point  of  pitch  (see  §  8). 

79 


INTRODUCTION 

χόρΒον  τοντον'  αντίκα  €πΙ  των  λοιπών  τόνων  Ιχρωντο,  δηλονότι 
ctSoTCS'  δια  δε  την  του  ηθονζ  φνλακην  άφ^ρονν  cttI  του  ΔωριΌυ 
τόνου,  τίμωντ€ς  το  καλόν  αντον.  '  With  regard,  too,  to  the 
tetrachord  Hypaton,  it  is  plain  that  it  was  not  through 
ignorance  that  they'  {oi  τταλαιοί,  the  ancients)  'abstained 
from  this  tetrachord  in  the  Dorian  Scale.  The  fact  that 
they  employed  it  in  the  other  keys  is  proof  that  they  were 
acquainted  with  it.  But  they  dispensed  with  it  in  the 
Dorian  because  they  respected  the  beauty  of  that  key,  and 
were  determined  to  preserve  its  character.' 

We  saw  above  (§29)  that  to  the  early  scale  of  the  form 


i 


i 


ί^ΞΞ^ 


1        J      J— -^ ^ — ^^==1 


was  added  at  a  later  period  a  conjunct   tetrachord  at  its 


ΕΞ? 


ί==  and  that  this 


lower  extremity 

addition  was  called  the  tetrachord  Hypaton.  In  the  pas- 
sage before  us  Plutarch  informs  us  that  for  some  time  an 
exception  was  made  in  the  case  of  the  Dorian  scale  because 
it  was  felt  that  such  an  alteration  would  imperil  its  Ethos. 
Mr.  Monro  endeavours  to  reconcile  this  statement  with  his 
hypothesis  of  the  keys  by  pleading  that  the  character  of 
moderation  inherent  in  a  key  of  middle  pitch  would  be 
sacrificed  by  the  addition  to  it  of  a  series  of  lower  notes. 
To  which  we  may  reply  '  Would  not  the  pathetic  character  of 
a  high  pitched  scale  suffer  equally  from  such  an  extension? ' 
But  on  our  hypothesis  Plutarch's  statement  is  quite  in- 
telligible. Obviously  the  distinctive  character  of  a  disjunct 
scale  would  perish  on  the  addition  to  it  of  a  conjunct 
tetrachord. 

(e)  See  again  the  passage  from  the  Politics  of  Aristotle ^ 
V  (viii).  7.  1342  b,  quoted  in  §  38. 
80 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

Aristotle  here  recommends  the  use  of  certain  scales  to 
voices  that  are  impaired  by  age.  What  then  must  have 
been  the  special  property  of  these  scales,  that  justified  this 
recommendation  ?  Evidently  not  a  particular  modality, 
for  one  order  of  intervals  does  not  involve  a  greater  strain 
on  the  voice  than  another.  Nor  can  it  have  been  a  mere 
difference  of  key  or  general  pitch.  How  should  the  same 
keys  suit  the  failing  tenor,  and  the  faihng  bass  ?  The  pro- 
perty of  these  *  old  men's  scales '  must  have  been  such  that 
the  melody  composed  in  them,  whatever  the  pitch  limits  of 
its  compass  might  be,  made  but  a  slight  demand  on  the 
physical  powers.  And  this  is  the  essential  property  which 
our  hypothesis  attributes  to  the  Hypolydian  mode  for 
example.     For  whether  that  mode  occur  as  the  scale 


i 


Tonic  !  I        u 

]=i ^— fg: 


P^ ^=p 


for  a  treble  voice ;  or  as  the  scale 


Tonic 

I         J 


^=s=^ 


for  a  tenor  voice ;  or  as  the  scale 

Tonic 


^=λ 


m    Ϊ    F 


»^=ig 


for  a  bass  voice ;  it  necessarily  results  from  the  position  of 
its  tonic  that  any  melody  composed  in  it  must  gravitate 
towards  its  lower  notes. 

42.  Many  persons  are  under  the  delusion  that  to  solve 
the  problem  of  ancient  Greek  music  means  to  bring  to  light 
some  hitherto  overlooked  factor,  the  recognition  of  which 


INTRODUCTION 

will  have  the  effect  of  making  the  old  Greek  hymns  as  clear 
and  convincing  to  our  ears  as  the  songs  of  Handel  and 
Mozart.  Very  curious  is  this  delusion,  though  not  astonishing 
to  any  one  who  has  reflected  on  the  extraordinary  ignorance 
of  mankind  about  the  most  spontaneous  and  universally 
beloved  of  the  arts,  and  their  no  less  extraordinary  in- 
difference to  its  potent  effects  on  the  mental  and  moral 
character.  Who  would  take  up  a  book  on  Egyptian  or 
Chinese  painting  in  the  expectation  of  learning  from  it  sonie 
new  knack  of  placing  or  viewing  an  Egyptian  or  Chinese 
picture,  by  which  it  will  come  to  please  the  eye  as  much  as 
a  Titian  or  a  Turner  ?  Who  would  demand  from  metrical 
science  that  it  should  supply  us  with  some  long-lost  spell  by 
the  magic  of  which  we  shall  discern  in 

μη  φυναι  τον  άπαντα  νίκα  XoyoV  το  δ',   Ιττίί  φαντι, 
βηναι  fctia'  όττόθ^ν  irep  ηκΗ  πολύ  devrepov  ώί  τάχιστα 

the  movement  of 

*  We  are  such  stuff 
As  dreams  are  made  on,  and  our  little  life 
Is  rounded  with  a  sleep.' 

Yet  no  less  absurd  is  the  supposition  that  any,  even  the 
most  perfect,  knowledge  of  facts  could  lead  us  to  the  love 
of  these  unfamiliar  old-world  melodies. 

To  some  cold  appreciation  of  their  form  we  may  perhaps 
attain  if  we  are  willing — sacrilege  and  destruction  as  it  may 
seem — to  strip  them  of  those  external  accidents  which  are 
peculiar  to  the  music  of  their  age,  and  invest  them  instead 
with  the  habits  of  modern  fashion.  Otherwise  the  novelty 
of  the  unfamiliar  features  will  engross  our  ear  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  essential  form.  To  render  an  ancient 
melody  note  for  note  is  to  render  it  unfaithfully  to  ears 
unaccustomed  to  its  dialect ;  just  as  to  translate  an  ancient 
poet  word  for  word  is  to  misrepresent  him,  inasmuch  as  the 
attention  is  thereby  misdirected  away  from  the  sense  to 
82 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 

the  strange  idiom.  Nay,  further,  as  a  literal  translation 
may  often  give  a  directly  false  impression  of  the  meaning, 
so  strict  adhesion  to  the  notes  of  a  foreign  melody  will 
often  lead  us  astray  as  to  its  essential  form.  As  Aristoxenus 
would  say,  in  attempting  to  preserve  the  pitch,  we  are 
sacrificing  the  all  important  Βνναμίς.  If,  for  instance,  we 
express  the  Greek  enharmonic  progression  to  the  tonic 
through  Hypate,  Lichanus,  Mese,  by 


a 


g  j  J  "■ 


not  only  are  our  ears  revolted  by  the  unwonted  progression, 
but  we  are  even  distorting  the  real  form  of  the  melody. 
For,  to  take  one  point  only,  the  Lichanus  being  the  highest 
of  the  passing  notes  to  the  tonic  from  the  Fourth  below  is 
for  the  Greek  ear  the  next  note  to  the  tonic  ;  while  we  feel 
that  in  passing  from  F  to  A  we  are  skipping  several  notes 
which  the  melody  might  have  employed. 

Let  us  apply,  then,  this  method  of  paraphrase  to  the 
familiar  Hymn  to  the  Muse,  one  of  the  compositions  of 
Mesomedes,  a  Cretan  musician  who  lived  in  the  reign  of 
the  Emperor  Hadrian.  The  words  and  ancient  notation 
(as  far  as  it  is  extant)  of  the  hymn  are  as  follows  : — 

C  Ζ  Ζ        φ  φ         φ        C  C 

"Α  -  ft  -  δ€  Μο5  -  σα  μοι  ψί  -  λη 

Ι         φΜΜ 

μολιτψ        δ'  (μψ  κα  -  τάρ-χον, 

Ζ  Ζ         Ζ         Ε         Ζ         Η  Η  Ι 

αν  -  ρη  δί  σων  απ'  άλ  -  σί  -ων 

ΜΖΗ         Ιφ€         ΡΜΦΟ 

ί   -  μ  ά  S  <ρρί  -  vas  ho  -  vi  -  ί  -  τω 

C  Ρ  Μ  Ρ  C        Φ  C 

Καλ-λί  -  6  -  π(ΐ  -α  σο  -  ψά, 

G2  «3 


INTRODUCTION 


ΦΗ€         CCC  Cn         Βφ 

μον  σ  -  ων  ττρο  •κα  -θα-ye  -  τι  Tepir  -  νών 

R  φ  C         Ρ  Μ  Ι  Μ 

καΐ  σο  -  φ€  μνσ  -  το-δό-  τα, 

ΜΙ         ΕΖ        ΓΜΡ        CM 

Λα  -  TOVS  yo  -  v(,  Αη  -  At  -  6  Ώαι  -  άν, 

Μ  Ι  Ζ  Μ         Ι  φ  C        C 

(ύ'μ(-ν€Ϊ5  nap-ea-Tt  μοι 

We  shall  (a)  substitute  for  the  Greek  modality  our  major 
scale ;  (<^)  substitute  Diatonic  notes  for  those  of  other 
genera  ;  {ή  add  simple  harmonies  ^ ;  (d)  make  slight  altera- 
tions in  the  melody  so  as  to  preserve  as  easy  a  progression 
in  our  major  scale,  as  is  the  original  progression  in  the 
Greek  scale. 

Hymn  to  the  Muse. 

Slow 


ci    -    5e       μου  -  σά     μοι       φι    -    λη      μοΚ  -  πψ    δ'Ιμ- 


i 


kM 


lJ^^^J 


te': 


^B 


μ& 


g 


l-r—J— l• 


'# Θ 


ΞΞΙΞ 


Ρ= 


A  J.  .J.    .J.  .J.  J_ 


■I — I- 

άλ  -  σί 


rJ9     κατ  '  άρ 


mm^ 


χου,   αΰ  -  ρη      Be      σων 

ΑΙ 


-1^21. 


^ψfΞr^m: 


^ 


--^ 


^  Professor  Prout  has  supplied  the  harmonies  ;  but  he  is  not  other- 
wise responsible  for  this  well-intended  mutilation. 
84 


ρ 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GREEK  MUSIC 


^ 


7^^ 


Tit= 


5 


^ 


w 


r 


1 Γ 


f 


f^ 


TV 


ων       e  -  μα%     ψρ^-ναί         δο  -  vci 


Καλ-λι  -  ό 


mBE^ 


ΐ 


^Ξρ: 


^ 


^3 


FT  ρ  Γ  Γ' ρ  tTfT 


7Γ6{  -  α    σο 


^^-.^ 


ί,      μου  •  σατμ  ττρο•καθ  -  α  -  ye  -  τι    rep  -  nvajv 


4 


fM^U 


-?-5 — * — *- 


-I — t 


f= 


v^v 


feff;.'rir'r'T^^^ 


«at    σο  -  06     fiy  -  στο-δό  -  τα,      Λα  -  του?    γό-ϊ'^»     ^V  -  At  -  € 


Ζ± 


i 


^^J. 


r->    ρ 


j-j-i  ,i 


221 


?Ξ^Ε^ 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


Πα  -  t  -  άν, 


6u  -  μ(ν  -  (15  πάρ  -  ea  -  τί      μοι. 


S 


A  A  ΙΑ  J.  J  α  J 


'^^ 


S5 


INTRODUCTION 

Β. — On  Aristoxenus  and  his  extant  works. 

I.  Our  knowledge  of  the  musical  theory  of  Ancient 
Greece  we  owe  almost  entirely  to  Aristoxenus,  or  the  Musi- 
cian (such  is  his  regular  title  in  ancient  writers).  This  philo- 
sopher was  born  ^  in  Tarentum,  and  received  his  earliest 
instruction  from  his  father  Spintharus  (also  called  Mnesias), 
a  well-known  musician  of  that  town,  who  had  travelled 
much,  and  come  into  contact  with  many  of  the  great  men 
of  the  day,  and,  among  others,  with  Socrates,  Epaminondas, 
and  Archytas.  Some  part  of  the  youth's  life  was  spent  in 
Mantinea,  the  inhabitants  of  which  city  were  remarkably 
conservative  in  their  musical  tastes  ;  and  it  was  probably 
from  this  sojourn,  as  well  as  from  the  teaching  of  Lamprus 
of  Erythrae,  that  he  derived  his  intense  love  for  the  severity 
and  dignity  of  ancient  art.  On  his  return  to  Italy  he 
became  the  pupil  and  friend  of  the  Pythagorean,  Xeno- 
philus  of  Chalcis.  Something  of  the  austerity  of  this  school 
seems  to  have  clung  to  him  to  the  last;  he  bore,  for 
example,  the  reputation  of  having  a  violent  antipathy  to 
laughter  !  We  next  find  him  in  Corinth,  where  he  was 
intimate  with  the  exiled  Dionysius.  From  the  lips  of  the 
tyrant  he  took  down  the  story  of  Damon  and  Phintias, 
which  he  incorporated  in  his  treatise  on  the  Pythagoreans. 
Lastly  we  hear  of  him  as  Peripatetic  and  pupil  of  Aristotle. 
His  position  in  this  school  must  have  been  one  of  import- 
ance ;  for  he  entertained  hopes  of  succeeding  the  master, 
and  his  disappointment  and  disgust  at  the  selection  of 
Theophrastus  betrayed  him  into  disrespectful  language 
towards  the  mighty  dead.  Indeed,  if  report  speaks  truly, 
want  of  reverence  must  have  been  his  besetting  sin ;  he 

^  For  everything  that  is  known  about  the  life  of  Aristoxenus,  and 
for  the  references  to  the  ancient  authorities,  see  the  excellent  article 
in  Westphal's  Ansioxeiius,  vol.  ii,  pp.  i-xii. 
86 


ON  ARISTOXENUS  AND  HIS  EXTANT  WORKS 

would  seem  to  have  consistently  undervalued  Plato^  and  to 
have  maliciously  propagated  scandalous  stories,  which  he 
had  gleaned  from  his  father,  about  the  domestic  life  of 
Socrates.  Besides  his  works  on  musical  theory  he  wrote 
philosophy  and  biography. 

2.  The  signal  merits  of  this  philosopher  do  not  flash  upon 
us  at  the  first  reading  of  him.  The  faults  of  his  style  are  so 
glaring — his  endless  repetitions,  his  pompous  reiterations  of 
'  Alone  I  did  it,'  his  petty  parade  of  logical  thoroughness, 
his  triumphant  vindication  of  the  obvious  by  chains  of 
syllogisms— that  we  are  apt  to  overlook  the  services  which 
such  an  irritating  writer  rendered  to  the  cause  of  musical 
science.  And  yet  these  services  were  of  great  importance  ; 
for  they  consisted  in  no  mere  improvement  of  exposition, 
in  no  mere  discovery  of  isolated  facts,  or  deeper  analysis 
of  particular  phenomena,  but,  firstly,  in  the  accurate  deter- 
mination of  the  scope  of  Musical  Science,  lest  on  the  one 
hand  it  should  degenerate  into  empiricism,  or  on  the  other 
hand  lose  itself  in  Mathematical  Physics ;  and  secondly,  in 
the  application  to  all  the  questions  and  problems  of  Music 
of  a  deeper  and  truer  conception  of  the  ultimate  nature  of 
Music  itself.  And  by  these  two  discoveries  it  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  he  accomphshed  a  revolution  in  the 
philosophy  of  the  art. 

Until  Aristoxenus  appeared  upon  the  scene  the  limits  of 
Musical  Science  had  been  wholly  misconceived.  There 
existed,  indeed,  a  flourishing  school  of  Musical  Art ;  there 
was  conscious  preference  of  this  style  of  composition  to 
that ;  of  this  method  of  performance  to  that ;  of  this  con- 
struction of  instruments  to  that ;  and  the  habits  formed  by 
these  preferences  were  transmitted  by  instruction.  To 
facilitate  this  instruction,  and  as  an  aid  to  memory,  recourse 
was  had  to  diagrams  and  superficial  generalizations  ;  but 
with  principles  for  their  own  sake  the  artist^  empiricist  as  he 

87 


INTRODUCTION 

was,  did  not  concern  himself,  and  it  is  with  principles  for 
their  own  sake  that  science  begins. 

Over  against  these  empiricists  there  stood  a  school  of 
mathematicians  and  physicists,  professing  to  be  students 
of  music,  and  claiming  Pythagoras  as  their  master,  who  were 
busied  in  reducing  sounds  to  air  vibrations,  and  ascertaining 
the  numerical  relations  which  replace  for  the  mathematical 
intellect  the  sense-distinctions  of  high  and  low  pitch.  Here 
we  have  a  genuine  school  of  science,  the  soundness  of 
whose  hypotheses  and  the  accuracy  of  whose  computations 
have  been  estabhshed  by  the  light  of  modern  discovery. 
Nevertheless,  musical  science  was  still  to  seek.  For  if  the 
artists  were  musicians  without  science,  the  physicists  and 
mathematicians  were  men  of  science  without  music.  Under 
the  microscope  of  their  analysis  all  musical  preferences  are 
levelled,  all  musical  worth  is  sacrificed  ;  noble  and  beautiful 
sounds  and  melodies  dissolve,  equally  with  the  ugly  and  base, 
into  arithmetical  relations  and  relations  of  relations,  any  one 
of  which  is  precisely  as  valuable  and  as  valueless  as  any  other. 
True  musical  science,  on  the  contrary,  accepts  as  elements 
requiring  no  further  explanation  such  conceptions  as  voice, 
interval,  high,  low,  concord,  discord  ;  and  seeks  to  reduce 
the  more  complex  phenomena  of  music  to  these  simple 
forms,  and  to  ascertain  the  general  laws  of  their  connexion. 
Yet,  while  it  will  not  be  enticed  to  transgress  the  limits  of 
the  sensible,  within  those  limits  it  will  aim  at  thoroughness 
of  analysis,  and  completeness  of  deduction.  Such  is  the 
science  which  Aristoxenus  claimed  to  have  founded. 

And  with  this  clearer  perception  of  the  scope  of  musical 
science  there  came  also  a  deeper  conception  of  music  itself. 
So  busy  were  the  Pythagoreans  in  establishing  the  mere 
physical  and  mathematical  antecedents  of  sounds  in  general, 
that  they  never  saw  that  the  essence  of  musical  sounds  lies 
in  their  dynamical  relation  to  one  another.  Thus  they 
88 


ON  ARISTOXENUS  AND  HIS  EXTANT  WORKS 

missed  the  true  formal  notion  of  music,  which  is  ever 
present  to  Aristoxenus,  that  of  a  system  or  organic  whole 
of  sounds,  each  member  of  which  is  essentially  what  it  does, 
and  in  which  a  sound  cannot  become  a  member  because 
merely  there  is  room  for  it,  but  only  if  there  is  a  function 
which  it  can  discharge. 

The  conception,  then,  of  a  science  of  music  which  will 
accept  its  materials  from  the  ear,  and  carry  its  analysis  no 
further  than  the  ear  can  follow;  and  the  conception  of 
a  system  of  sound-functions,  such  and  so  many  as  the 
musical  understanding  may  determine  them  to  be,  are  the  two 
great  contributions  of  Aristoxenus  to  the  philosophy  of  Music. 

3.  Suidas  credits  Aristoxenus  with  the  authorship  of  453 
volumes.  Of  these  nothing  considerable  has  survived  save 
an  incomplete  treatise  on  Rhythm,  and  the  so-called  'Three 
Books  of  the  Harmonic  Elements.'  That  the  last  title  is  an 
erroneous  one  has  been  established  by  Marquard  and 
Westphal,  who  appeal  to  the  following  facts  among  others. 

(a)  Porphyry  cites  the  first  of  these  books  as  ττρώτοζ  irepl 
άρχων,  and  the  second  as  ττρωτος  των  άρμονίκων  στοιχύων. 

{b)  Though  the  usual  titles  of  these  three  books  are 
supported  by  most  of  the  MSS.,  there  are  some  important 
exceptions.     The  Codex  Venetus  (M)  has  for  initial  title 

of  the  first  book  'Aptaro^evov  ττρο  των  αρμονικών  στοιχείων 
(though  a  later  hand  has  crossed  out  ττρο  των  and  added 
ττρωτον),  and  similarly  the  Codex  Barberinus  reads  ττρο  των 
αρμονικών  ττρωτον.  The  concluding  inscription  of  this  book 
in  Μ  is  ΆριστοΙενου  το  ττρωτον  στοιχ^ΐον,  but  the  third  hand 
has  written  ττρο  των  over  ττρωτον,  and  ω  over  the  latter  ο  of 
στοιχ<αον.  In  the  same  MS.  the  title  of  the  second  book  is 
^Αριστοξζνον  αρμονικών  στοιχ€ίων  (the  ω  in  the  latter  words 
is  a  correction  of  the  second  hand  for  o)  β,  but  an  a  has 
been  written  through  the  ^  by  a  later  hand  ;  the  concluding 
inscription  of  the  same  book  is  ^Αριστοξ^νον  στοιχείων  άρμονι- 

89 


INTRODUCTION 

κων  α,  but  the  α  is  crossed  out,  and  β  written  beside  it ;  the 

heading  of  the  third  book  is  'Apiaro^eVou  στοιχείων  άρμονίκων 
β,  with  the  β  crossed  out  and  γ  written  beside  it. 

(c)  The  text  of  the  '  Three  Books  '  contains  matter  of 
three  distinct  classes  ;  firstly,  introductory  matter  or  exposi- 
tion of  the  scope  and  divisions  of  the  subject ;  secondly, 
general  principles  or  expositions  of  primary  laws  and  facts ; 
thirdly,  propositions  of  details,  following  one  another  in 
logical  order  like  the  στοιχεία  or  Elements  of  Euclid. 

(^)  We  find  in  several  cases  more  than  one  treatment  of 
the  same  subject. 

(e)  We  find  certain  inconsistencies.  Thus  μζλοπούα,  or 
musical  composition,  is  sometimes  included  in,  and  some- 
times omitted  from,  the  list  of  objects  with  which  Harmonic 
science  is  concerned. 

Westphal,  not  content  with  negative  criticism,  has  en- 
deavoured to  reconstitute  from  the  extant  fragments  the 
scheme  of  three  works  of  Aristoxenus  on  the  Theory  of 
Music ;  each  containing  a  ιτροοίμιον  or  introduction,  a  state- 
ment of  αρχαί  or  principles,  and  a  system  of  στοιχάα.  or 
elementary  propositions.  His  idea  may  well  be  correct ; 
but  the  result  is  so  unsatisfactory  from  the  utterly  frag- 
mentary nature  of  the  data,  that  we  need  not  enter  into  the 
details  of  his  attempt. 

4.  The  most  important  MSS.  of  the  '  Harmonic  Elements ' 
are  the  following  : 

The  Codex  Venetus  (in  the  Library  of  St.  Mark),  written 
by  one  Zosimus  in  Constantinople  in  the  twelfth  century. 
It  has  been  corrected  by  many  hands  ;  but  two  of  especial  im- 
portance have  been  identified,  one  older  than  the  fourteenth 
•century  (denoted  in  the  Critical  Apparatus  by  Mb)  and  one 
of  that  century  or  later  (Mc).  Ma  denotes  the  first  hand ; 
Mx  a  hand  not  identified ;  (a  later  manuscript  in  the  same 
library  is  denoted  by  m) : 
90 


ON  ARISTOXENUS  AND  HIS  EXTANT  WORKS 

The  Codex  Vaticanus  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth 
centuries,  which  appears  to  have  been  directly  copied  from 
M.  In  the  Critical  Apparatus  the  first  hand  of  this  MS. 
is  denoted  by  Va,  a  corrector  by  Vb  : 

The  Codex  Seldenianus  (in  the  Bodleian  Library),  dating 
from  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century.  It  is  denoted 
by  S  in  the  Critical  Apparatus.  Mr.  H.  S.  Jones  has 
demonstrated  {Classical  Review,  VII.  lo),  that  this 
MS.  depends  closely  on  V  throughout,  though  its  exact 
relationship  is  hard  to  determine,  since  in  some  places  it 
adheres  to  the  original  reading  (\^a),  and  in  others  adopts 
the  corrections  and  additions  of  Vb.  I  have  collated  this 
MS.  afresh  : 

The  Codex  Riccardianus  (in  Florence)  of  the  sixteenth 
century  (collated  by  van  Herwerden),  which  shows  relation- 
ship with  Mc  : 

The  Codex  Barberinus  (in  the  Bibliotheca  Barberina  in 
Rome)  of  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century.  From 
page  95  to  121  of  the  text  this  MS.  shows  agreement  with 
Mc  and  R  ;  but  from  page  121  on,  it  appears  to  have  been 
copied  from  V  after  the  corrections  of  Vb.  This  MS.  has 
numerous  corrections  in  the  margin,  which,  however,  are  in 
the  same  hand  as  the  original : 

A  Codex  of  great  value  which  belonged  to  the  Library  of 
the  Protestant  Seminary  at  Strassburg,  and  perished  when 
that  building  was  burned  down  by  the  German  troops  on 
the  night  of  August  24,  1870.  It  was  collated  by  M.  Ruelle, 
who  pubHshed  the  results  with  his  translation  of  Aristo- 
xenus.  It  seems  to  have  been  independent  of  all  the  other 
MSS.  that  we  possess,  none  of  which  can  be  regarded  either 
as  its  ancestor  or  its  descendant.  M.  Ruelle  attributes  it 
to  the  fifteenth  century.  It  is  denoted  by  Η  in  the  Critical 
Apparatus. 

The  '  Harmonic  Elements '  were  first  published  at  Venice 

91 


INTRODUCTION 

in  1542,  in  a  Latin  translation  by  Antonius  Gogavinus, 
a  worthless  work  crowded  with  errors.  The  first  edition 
of  the  Greek  was  printed  in  Leyden  in  16 16  by  Elzevir, 
with  the  corrections  and  commentary  of  Johannes  Meursius, 
who  displays  gross  ignorance  of  the  general  theory  of  Greek 
music,  and  of  the  doctrine  of  Aristoxenus  in  particular. 
Meibom's  well-known  edition  with  the  Greek  text,  Latin 
translation,  and  commentary,  was  published  in  1652  at 
Amsterdam  by  Elzevir.  The  text  of  this  work  is  poor  and 
the  translation  often  obscure,  but  the  commentary  is  valuable, 
and  shows  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  system  of 
Aristoxenus.  Paul  Marquard's  edition  with  a  German  trans- 
lation (so  literal  and  servile  as  to  be  wholly  useless)  was 
issued  at  Berlin  in  1868.  The  chief  value  of  this  work  lies 
in  the  new  light  thrown  on  the  text  by  the  author's  collation 
of  the  Codex  Venetus.  Westphal's  exhaustive  but  diffuse 
and  garrulous  book  on  Aristoxenus  was  published  at  Leipzig 
in  two  volumes,  the  first  in  1883,  and  the  second  in  1893, 
after  the  author's  death.  It  is  most  valuable  as  a  storehouse 
of  facts.  M.  Ruelle's  French  translation  of  Aristoxenus, 
to  which  I  have  referred  above,  was  published  in  Paris  in 
1870. 

The  following  authors  and  works  are  referred  to  in  the 
present  volume : 

The  ΈΙσα-γωγη  αρμονική  (referred  to  in  this  volume  as 
Isagoge)  formerly  attributed  erroneously  to  Euclid  (and  so 
inscribed  in  Meibom),  but  probably  the  work  of  one  Cleon- 
ides,  of  whom  nothing  else  is  known.  It  exhibits  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  doctrine  and  arrangement  of  the  '  Har- 
monic Elements '  of  Aristoxenus  : 

Nicomachus  of  Gerasa,  who  flourished  in  the  second 
century,  a.  d.  ;  a  Pythagorean  mathematician,  and  musician  ; 
author  of  a  manual  of  Harmonic  : 

Bacchius  Senex,  a  musician  of  the  time  of  the  Emperor 
92 


ON  ARISTOXENUS  AND  HIS  EXTANT  WORKS 

Constantine.  The  so-called  '  Introduction  of  Bacchius  '  is 
a  mass  of  excerpts  of  unequal  value,  some  showing  agree- 
ment with  the  doctrine  of  Aristoxenus,  and  some  directly 
contradicting  it : 

Gaudentius  the  Philosopher,  a  musician  of  uncertain 
date,  though  he  certainly  was  not  earlier  than  the  second 
century,  a.  d.  His  '  Introduction  to  Harmonic '  is  an  eclectic 
work  combining  views  of  the  Aristoxenean,  Peripatetic,  and 
Pythagorean  schools  : 

Alypius,  of  uncertain  date,  whose  '  Introduction  '  exhibits 
the  complete  scales  of  the  three  genera  in  all  the  modes, 
with  their  notation : 

Aristides  Quintilianus,  a  musician  of  the  first  century,  a.d., 
author  of  a  treatise  in  three  books  on  Music,  in  which  the 
theory  of  the  Aristoxenean  school  is  presented  in  detail : 

Anonymi  Scriptio  de  Musica  (referred  to  in  this  volume  as 
Anonymus)  a  cento  of  the  works  of  Aristoxenus,  Aristides 
Quintilianus,  Alypius,  Ptolemy,  &c.,  probably  of  very  late 
date. 

The  works  of  Nicomachus,  Bacchius,  Gaudentius,  Aly- 
pius, and  x'^ristides  Quintilianus,  and  the  Isagoge  are 
comprised  in  the  Antiquae  musicae  auctores  septe?n  of 
Meibom.  The  same  works,  with  the  exception  of  Aristides 
Quintihanus,  have  been  edited  by  Karl  v.  Jan  in  the  Teubner 
edition  of  the  classics  under  the  title  Musici  Scriptores 
Graeci.  The  Anonymi  Scriptio  was  edited  by  Bellermann, 
and  published  at  Berlin  in  1841. 


93 


API2TOHENOT     ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ 
2ΤΟΙΧΕΙί1Ν     ΠΡίΙΤΟΝ 

Meibom. 
Tt/s  Trepi  μ^λονί  ^ττιστημ-η^  ιτολνμ€ρον9  ονση9  καΐ  δφρη-  j^  jj 
μ^νη9  €LS  TrXeiovs  Iheas  μίαν  riva  αντων  |  ντΐολαβάν  hel  την   ι- 
5  αρμονικην    καΚονμίνην    uvat    ττραγματ€ίαν,    τγ    re    rafet 
ττρώτην   ονσαν   €χονσάν  re   bvvaμLV  στoLχ€Lωhη.      τνγχαν€ί 
γαρ    ονσα    των    ττρωτων    θεωρητική•     ταυ  τα    δ     ^στίν    δσα  20 
σνντ€ίν€ΐ  TTpos  την  των  συστημάτων  re  και  τόνων  θ^ωρίαν. 
ττροσηκ^ί  γαρ  μηθ€ν  ττορρωτ^ρω  τούτων  άζωνν  τταρα  τον  την 
10  ύρημίνην  έχοντος  (τηστημην.      Τ€λο^  γαρ  τοντό  ^στι  τη$  | 
'πραγματ€ία9  ταύτης,   τα  δ'  άνώτ€\  \ρον  οσα  Θ^ωρύται  χρωμίνης  2 
■η^η  της  ττοιητικης  τοΪ9  re  σνστημασί  καΐ  τοΪ9  tovols  ovk^tl 
ταύτης   €στίν,    άλλα   της   ταύτην   re    καΐ   τας    αλλάς    irepL- 
€χούσης  |  Ιττιστημης  hC  ων  ττάντα  θ^ωρύται  τα  κατά  μονσί-  ^ 
15  κην.      αντη  δ'  €στΙν  η  του  μουσικού  e^t?. 

Ύονς  μ^ν  ονν  ίμτΐροσθ^ν  {ημμ^νους  της  αρμονικής  ττρα- 

γματ^ίας  συμβάβηκ^ν  ως  αληθώς)  αρμονικούς  eivai  βούλζσθαι 

μόνον,  αντης  γαρ  της  αρμονίας  ητττοντο  μόνον,  των  |  δ   άλλων   ίο 

20  γ€νών  ού^^μίαν  ττώττοτ   ίννοιαν  ^Χχον.     σημύον  δe•    τα  γαρ 

^αγράμματα  αντοΐς  των  ^ναρμονίων  ίκκαται  μόνον  συστη- 

De  variis  Titulorum  lectionibus  vid.  Intr.  Β  §  3  η   των  ττρώτων 

θ^ωρητικ^}  Westphal  :  πρώτη  των  θεωρητικών  codd.  8  τόνων']  τών 

Μχ  9  "ΠΌρά  του  R  :  τταρ'  αυτού  του  VB  S  :  τταρ'  αυτού  Ma.  sed  add. 

του  Μχ  14  τα  add.  Μχ  :  την  (ο  suprascr.^  Β  ιη  ημμ4νου$ 

.  .  .  αληθώε  restituit  Westphal  ex  Procli  Comm.  in  Plat.  Tiinaeum  (ed. 
Basil.  1534)  p.  192,  11.  l,  2  20  ^χων  Ma:  corr.  Mb  21  auroTs] 
auT^s  S  έναρμονίων  Marquard  :  αρμονικών  Η  :  αρμονιών  rel). 

95 


1.2  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

μάτων,  hιaτ6vωv  δ'  η  γ^ρωματικών  ovbels  ττωττοθ^  €ώρακ€ν.  | 

15  Και  TOL  τα  bL•aγpάμμaτά  y  αυτών  ίδτ^λου  την  ττάσαν  τη^ 
μ€λcύbίas  τάζιν,  iv  ots  7Γ€ρΙ  συστημάτων  οκταγόρ^ων  ivap- 
μονίων  μόνον  ^Xeyov   ητ^ρϊ  h\  των  άλλων  μ^γ^θών  re  καΐ 

2ο  σχημάτων  {των)  iv  αυτω  |  re  τω  yeyet  τούτω  καΐ  τοΐί  λοίττοΐ^  5 
ουδ*  eπeχeιpet  oib^h  καταμανθάν^ίν,  αλλ'  άττοτ^μνόμ^νοι  τηί 
όλης  jtxeλωδtαs  του  τρίτου  μ^ρουί  eV  rt  [yeVos]  μ4γζθθ9  [be], 

25  ro  δλα  ττασών,  TTept  τούτου  ττάσαν  7Γ€ΤΤοί\ηνταϋ  7Γραγματ€ίαν. 
ΟΤΙ  δ'  oi)beva  7Γ€7Γραγμάτ€υνταί  τρόττον  ουδ^  Trepl  αυτών 
τούτων  ών  ημμ^νοι  τυγγάνουσι  σχ€bbv  μβν  ημϊν  γ^γίνηται  ίο 

30  φαν€ρον  €V  rots  ^μπροσθ^ν  οτ€  €'π€σκο7Γονμ€ν  ταί  |  των 
αρμονικών  bo^as,  ου  μην  αλλ'  ert  μάλλον  νυν  ^σται  ζύσύν- 
07TT0V  bίeζιόvτωv  ημών  τα  μ^ρη  ttjs  πραγματείας  οσα  εστί 
καΐ  rjvTLva  €Καστον  αυτών  bύvaμiv  e^et*    τών  μ\ν  yap  ολω? 

3  oib^  ημ\\μξ.νους  ευρησομεν  αυτούς  τών  δ'  ουχ  ίκανώς.     ωσθ^  15 
άμα  τοϋτό  re  φανερον  εσται  κα\  τον  τύπον  κατοψόμξθα  της 
πραγματείας  ήτις  ποτ    εστίν. 
5         ΥΙρώτον  μεν   ουν   απάντων   την   της   φωνής   κίνησιν 
bLopLστεov  τώ  μελλοντί  πραγματεύεσθαι  περί  μέλους  αύτην 
την   κατά  τόπον,      ου  γαρ  εΐς  τρόπος  αύτης   ων  τυγχάνει•  2ο 

10  κινείται  μεν  γαρ  καΐ  |  bιaλεγoμεvoiV  ημών  κα\  μελωboύvτωv 
την  ειρημενην  κίνησιν,  όξυ  γαρ  καϊ  βαρύ  bηλov  ως  εν 
άμφοτεροις  τούτοις   ενεστιν — αύτη    δ'  εστίν  η   κατά   τόπον 


Ι   Siarouov  Se  ^  χρωματικών  Corr.  ex  -ων  δέ  ^  -κών  S  2  εδήλω  S 

3  (ναρμονίων  Marquard  :  αρμονικών  Η  :  αρμονιών  rell.  4   eAe'yei'  R 

μζ'γ^θών   conieci :    ycvwv  codd.  5    τών  post   σχημάτων  addidi 

re  om.  R  6  ovhus  ante  ούδ'  ponunt  Β  R  iTrexeipei  Β  V  (^ex 

€7Γίχ.)  :    (ΤΓΐβχζίρζί   A  :    εττίχείρεϊ   rell.  7    yevos   et    δβ    seclusi 

8  τΓίποΙηκε  R  ^τpayμaτίav  Β  Q  δτ6  (t  suprascr.)  Β  δ'  cm. 

Μ  Vb  S  ohVc  €va  S  πe^rpayμάτ€υvτaι  BV   {v  fortasse    postea 

additum)  :    ^r(πpayμσ.τζυτaι  rell.  ovdh]  S  δέ  Η  1 1    οτι  (« 

suprascr.)  Β  ΐσκοπονμζν  Η  :   ^-πισκοττουμ^ν  R  12  ου  μην  αλλ'  R 

14  (καστον]  στ  Mb  e  corr.  16  ^/λΓϊ/  post  (pavephv  add.  Β,  rubra 

linea  subscr.   R  έστω  R  17    4στίν]  deinde  lac.  3  litt.    Μ 

19   μίλλον  τι  Μ  αύτην  om.   Η  2θ    tV   supra   lineam   S 

23  ίν^στιν  Β  R  :  cVrtV  rell.         ί^  Β 
96 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    α  1.3 

καθ^  ην  όζύ  re   καΐ  βαρύ  yiyv^rai — αλλ'  ον  |  ταντον   elhos  15 
TTJs  Κίνησ€ω9  kKar^pas  kariv,      €7ημ€λ€9  δ'  ovbevl  ττώττοτε 
γ€γ€νηταί  ττ^ρΐ  τούτον  hLopiaaL  rts  €κατ4ρα£  αυτών  η  bLaφopά• 
καί  τοί  τοντον  μη  ^ιορισθ^ντο^  ον  τϊάνν  pahiov  ύττ^ϊν  |  Trept  20 
5  φθόγγον  τι  ττοτ    Ιστίν.      άναγκαΐον  δε  τον  βονλόμζνον  μη 
ττάσγ^ζΐν  οττβρ  Λάσο?  re  και  των  ^Κτηγονζίων  rtz^e?  €παθον, 
7Γλάros    αντον   οΙηθζντ€9    ^χ€ίν,    elirelv    irepl    αντον    μικρόν 
άκρίβζστβρον.      τοντον  \  γαρ  hLopίσθivτos  ττ^ρΐ  ττολλα  των  25 
eTretra  μάλλον  ίσται  σαφώί  {λξγξίν).     ^Αναγκαΐον  δ'  et9  την 

10  τοντων  ^νν^σιν  Trpos  τοΐί  ύρΐ'\μΙνοΐ9  7Τ€ρί  τ    άνέσβως  καΐ 
e7rtrάσeω9  καΐ  βαρντητο9   καΐ  ό^ντητοί  καΐ  rά|σeω9  3° 
eLTTelv  τι  ττοτ  αλλήλων  hιaφ4povσιv.     ovhels  γαρ  ovh'kv  irepl 
τοντων  ξΧρηκ€ν,  άλλα  τα  μ\ν  αυτών  ολω?  ovhe  ν^νόηται  τα 
δε  σνγκ€χυμ€νω5.      Mera  ταντα  δε  ττερί  της  τον  βαρ4ος 

15  re  καΐ  o^ios  δtασrά[|σeωί  λeκreoz;  7τότ€ρον  els  αττ^ιρον  4 
αν^ησ-ιν  re  καΐ  Ιλάττωσιν  Ιχει  η   ον  η  ττη  μ\ν  ττη  δ'  ον. 
Τοντων  be  ^ιωρισμ^νων   irepl  διαστήματος   καθόλον   λε- 
κτ^ον  e^τeι\τa  hιaιpeτeov  6σαγώ<5  δύναται  hiaipeladai,  eιτa  5 
Tiepl  σνστηματοί'    καθόλον  δε  l•ιeλθ6vτa  λeκτeov  els  o(ras 

20  ^τeφvκe  τeμveσθaι   biaipeaeis.      Etra  irepl  μeλovs  ντϊοδη- 
λωτ4ον  καΐ  τνπωτ^ον  οΐαν  έχει  |  φνσιν  το   κατά  μονσικην,  ίο 
εττειδ?)  7Γλeίovs  εισΐ  φvσeL•S  μeλovs,  μία  δ'  εσrt  rts  εκ  -πασών 
αντον  η  τον  ηρμοσμίνον  κα\  μeλωbovμevov.      bia  την  eira- 

I  out'  αυτό  Η  :  ταυτο  Μ,  sed  postea  una  litt.  eras.  2  ttjs]  t^s 

TTjs  S  4πίμζλ€$  conieci :  εττί^βλώϊ  codd.  3  •γβ'/ζνηταί  ex  5e. 

yeu7}Tai  Β  tis]  t^s  B  ή  om.  S  4  /χηδβ  opiaOevros  R 

post  δρισθ€ντο5  lac.  7  litt.  Μ  ;  lac.  8-9  sj'llabb.  R  de  Β  ita  scripsit 

Marquard  '  alinea  Β  quod  alibi  nusquam  fit ' ;  quod  non  intellego 
6  A^aos  ;sic')  M,  sed  acut.  ab  alia  manu  :  Aavaos  R  :  0  Aaaos  Η  :  Aaaos 
rell.  'Ewiyoviwv  Β  V  S  :  'E-myoveiwu  sed  et  e  corr.  Μ  ΐττασχον 

R  9    ffa(p€s  Meibom         Xeyeiu  addidi  13    oi/Be  νούται  Μ  S  : 

ούδ'  €ννοΐ7ται  BR  14    σχτγκ^χυμζνωί  Marquard  :    σιτγκ^χυμίνα 

codd.  15  δίατάσβωί  Β  S  R  17  Se  om.  V  S  Χ^κτίον 

conieci  :    Βίκαιον  codd.  :    post  δίκαιον  add.  clwe7v  Η  19    ante 

συσττιματοε  add.  του  Vb  Β  5teA0oWa  Marquard  :    SieAoVra  codd. 

20  μ€\ου$  ex  μ€ρου$  corr.  Μ 

MACRAN  JJ  97 


1.4  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

15  γούγην  he  την  em  τοντο  ■γι-γνομίνην  κατά  τον  γω\ρίσμον  τον 
άττο  των  άλλων  άναγκαίυν  ττω?  καΐ  των  άλλων  ^τταφασθαι 
φύσεων.  ^Αφορίσθ€ντο9  be  του  μουσικού  μίλον^  οντω<ί  ώ? 
evhi.\eTai  μηhe^τω  των  καθ^  έκαστα  τ^Θ^ωρημ^νων  αλλ'  ω^  ev 

20  τν  ττω  καΐ  'π€ρίγραφΐ},  ^ιαιρ^τίον  το  καθόλου  καΐ  μ^ριστάον  5 
eh  όσα  φαίν€ταί  γίνη  hiaιpeϊσΘaL.     Mera  τοΰτο  he  λ€κτ4ον 
TTepL   re   σί;z^eχetαy    καΐ   του   e^rjs  τί  ττοτ    €στΙν  ev  rot? 

25  συστημασι  καΐ  ττώ?  eγγι\γvόμevov. 

ΕΤτ   ά^ΐohoτeΌV  ταξ  των  yevoiiv  hίaφoρas  [αντη^]  τα^ 
ev  rot?   κινουμ^νοίξ   των   φθόγγων,  ά^τohoτeov  he   καΐ   του^  ίο 
τοτΓου?   ev   oh   κινούνται.      τούτων   δ'    ovheh   irepl   ovhevbs 

30  ττωττοτ  eσχηκev  ev\voiav  οΰδ'  ηντινοΰν,  άλλα  irepl  ττάντων  των 
eιpημevωv  avτoh  ημΐν  άναγκαϊον  e^  άρχτ]^  'πpaγμaτeύeσθaL, 
7τapeιλΎ}φaμev  γαρ  ovhev  irepl  αυτών  ά^ιόλογον.       Mera  he 

5  τούτο  rrepl  htaστημάτωv  άσυν\\θ€των  -πρώτον  λeκτeov,  15 
eira  Trepl  συνθέτων,  άναγκαϊον  he  αιττομίνοΐζ  ημΐν  συνθέ- 
των hιaστημάτωv  oh  άμα  και  συστημασιν  elvai  ττω?  συμ- 
5  fiaivei  irepl  |  συvθeσeωs  e^eiv  τι  λeγeιv  τη^  των  άσυνθίτων 
hιaστημάτωv.  Trepl  rJ9  οι  ^τλeΐστoι  των  αρμονικών  ovh^  Οτι 
7τpaγμaτeυτeov  γσθοντο•    hηλov  δ'  ημΐν   ev  rots'   eμ^:poσθev  20 

10  γeγovev.  οΐ  he  Trepl  'Epαro|κλe'α  τοσούτον  eipηκaσι  μόνον 
ότι  άττό  του  hia  τeττάpωv  e(^'  eKaTepa  διχα  σχίζeτaι  το 
μ€λθ9,  oihev  ούτ    el  άττό  τταντό^  τοϋτο  γίγveτaι  hιopίσavτes 

15  oiTe  hia  τίνα  αΐτίαν  elirovTes  ούθ"  υτ:\ρ  τών  αλ\λων  hιaστη- 
μάτων  e^nσκeψάμevoι  τίνα  TTpbs  άλληλα  συvτίθevτaι  τρόπον,  25 
καΐ   ττότepov  τταντό^   hιaστr]μaτos   πρόξ  πάν   ώρισμίνο<$  τh 

2ο  eσrt   λόγο^  ttjs  συvθeσeωs  και   ττώ?  μev  e(  αυτών  ττω?  |  δ' 

Ι   5e  om.  Va  :  add.  Vb  τούτο  Ύ^νομ^ντην  Β  R  :  τούτφ  "γι-γνομ^νην 

rell.  κατά  Thv  S  :  καΧ  Thv  rell.  6  ^^νη  Meibom  :  μ^ρτ]  codd. 

9     avTYis   seclusi  :    avTas  Westphal :     avTTjs   ante    ζιαφοραε    ponit    Η 
ΙΟ  δ6  om.  S  1 1   δ'  om.  Β  i2  tjvtiuovu  Ma  Vb  Β  R,  S  linea 

subducta :  accent,  acut.  supra  ην  et  α  supra  τιν  add.  Mc  18  τι'] 

T6    R  21    ipyaTOKXea   V  22    δίχα   σχίζίται^    5iaipe7Tai   Η 

23  ovSe  el  Η  25   ei  Tiya  S 

98 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    α  1.5 

ον  γίγν€ται  συστήματα  η  (ei)  τοντο  αόριστον  Ιστιν  ττ^ρϊ 
γαρ  τούτων  οΰτ'  άττοδεικτικο?  οντ  αΓαττοδεικτοί  νττ'  ovbevbs 
ττώττοτ  €Ϊρηταί  λόγος.  ονσης  he  θαυμαστής  της  τά^^ως 
TTepl  την  του  μέλους  σνστασιν  |  αταξία  αλ^ίστη  μουσικής  25 
5  νττ'  €Vi(x)V  κατζγνωσται  δια  τους  μ€τακ€χ€ίρίσμζνους  την 
€ΐρημ€νην  τϊραγματ^ίαν.  oibev  he  τών  αΙσθητων  τοσαύτην 
€χζΐ  τάζιν  ovb€  τοιαντην.  €σταί  δ'  ημΐν  hrjXov  τοϋθ'  j  ούτως  3° 
^χον,  όταν  iv  αυτή  γ^νώμ^θα  τή  ττραγματζία.  νυν  δε  τα 
λοίττα  των  μζρών  λζκτ^ον.      Άττοδζίχθ^ντων  γαρ  των  άσυν- 

ιο  θζτων   διαστημάτων   ον   τρόττον  ||  ττρος   άλληλα   συντίθεται  6 
τΐ^ρϊ  των  συστάντων  €^  αυτών  συστημάτων  λεκτεον  ττ€ρί 
τ€   των  άλλων  καΐ  του  τελείου,   εξ  εκείνων  ά■^^Όhεικvύvτaς 
ττόσα  εστί  καΐ  ττοΤ  Ι  άττα,  τάς  τε  κατά  μέγεθος  αυτών  αττο-  5 
bώόvτaς  διαφοράς   καΐ  των   μεγεθών  εκάστου  τάς  τε  κατά 

15  συνθεσιν  κα\  τάς  κατά  [το]  σχήμα  διαφοράς  οττως  μηδέν  τών 
μελωδουμενων   μήτε    μέγεθος    μήτε    σχήμα   μήτε  |  σύνθεσις  ίο 
[μήτε  θεσις]  άναττόδεικτος  ?].      τούτου  δε  του  μέρους  τής  ττρα- 
γματείας  άλλος  μεν  ουδείς  ττώττο^'  ήψατο-     Έρατοκλής  δ' 
εττεχείρησεν    άναττοδείκτως    εξαριθμείν    εττί   τι    μέρος'     οτι 

20  δ'  ουδέν  εϊρηκεν  |  άλλα  ττάντα  ψευδή  καΐ  τών  φαινομένων  15 
τϊ]  αίσθήσει  διημάρτηκε,  τεθεώρηται  μεν  εμττροσθεν  οτ  αυτήν 
καβ"   αυτήν   εξητάζομεν  την   ττραγματείαν  ταύτην.      τών  δ' 
άλλων    καθόλου    μεν  |  καθάττερ    εμττροσθεν    εΐττομεν    ουδείς  2ο 
ήττται,  ενός  δε  συστήματος  ^Ερατοκλής  εττεχείρησε  καθ^  εν 

25  γένος  εξαριθμήσαι  τα  σχήματα  του  δια  ττασών  άναττοδεικτώς 

Ι  €i  addidi  5  ^'"''  Meibom  Η  :  eV  rell.         μ(τακβχρισμ4νου$  Ma 

V,  Β  in  marg.  :  μζταχ^ίρισμ^νου$  R :  μ^τακ^χζΐρισμ4νου$  rell.  8  ττ) 

om.  Η  9   άττοδεχθει/των  Μ  :   αττο^^ιχθ^ντων  Mc  et  rell.  ίο  hv 

sed  post  0  et  »/  ras.  Μ  13  πόσα  ^στ\  plerique  :  ττόσατ'  4στ\  Β  R  : 

Ίτοίίά  4στι  Η  τΓοΓ'  &ττα  Meursius  :    πόσ'  αττα  V  S  :    ττόσά  άττα  Η  : 

ττόσ'  δττα  rell.  15    post  σύνθίσιν  lac.  30  fere  litt.  Μ  καΐ  tus 

κατά  rh  σχήμα  5ίαφορα5  Η  :  cm.  rell.         καί  κατά  Θ4σιν  add.  Marquard 
post  σΰνθ^σιν  ιη  μητζ  0eVis  cm.  Η  αναττόδ^ικτον  Η  τ?  Η  : 

om.  rell.  18   ipyaTOKXrjsy  25  άνατοδεικτωϊ  Monro : 

avodeiKTiKws  codd. 

Η  2  99 


1.6  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

2ζ  ΤΎ)  ττζριφορα  των  διαστημάτων  |  heiKVVs,  ον  καταμαθων  οτι 
μη  Ίτροαττο^ξίχθ^ντων  των  re  του  δια  ττβντξ  (ΓχΎ]μάτων  καΐ 
των  του  bia  τεσσάρων  irpos  he  τούτους  καΧ  τη9  (τννθ4σ€ωί 
αυτών  rt?  ττοτ    €στΙ  καθ^  ην  €μμ€λώ^  συντίθενται  ι:ολλα\- 

30  ττλάσια  των  Ιτττα  συμβαίνπν  -γίγνεσθαι  hείκvυτaι'   ετιθίμεθα  5 

δ'  ev  Tois  έμπροσθεν  οτι  οντω^  ^χει,  ^>ιό'περ  ταύτα  μεν 
7  άφείσθω,  τα  ^ε  λοιττα  λεγεσθω  των  τη9  πραγματείας  με\  \ρών. 
^Ε^ηριθ  μη  μένων  γαρ  των  συστημάτων  {των)  καθ^  εκαστον 
των  γενών  κατά  ττασαν  hia^opav  την  είρημενην  μιγννμενων 
πάλιν  των  γενών  ταντο  τούτο  ποιητεον  {περί  ου  οί  πλείστοι  ίο 
5  τών  αρμονικών  ουκ  ^σθοντο  οτι)  πραγματευτεον  ουδέ  γαρ 
αυτήν  την  μίξιν  τί  ποτ  εστί  καταμεμαθηκεσαν,  Ύούτων  δ' 
εγόμενόν  εστί  περί  φθόγγων  εΙπεΐν,  επεώηπερ  ουκ  αυτάρκη 

ΙΟ  τα  bιaστημaτa  προξ  την  τών  φθόγγων  διά\γνωσιν.      'Έ,πεΙ 
δε  τών  συστημάτων  εκαστον  εν  τόπω  τινί  της  φωνής  τεθεν  15 
μελω6εΐται  καΐ,  καθ^  αυτό  bιaφoρav  ου^εμίαν  λαμβάνοντος 
αυτού,   το    γιγνόμενον   εν   αυτώ    μέλος    ου   την   τυχοϋσαν  | 

15  λαμβάνει  ^ιαφοραν  άλλα  σ^χεb6v  την  μεγίστη  ν,  άναγκαΐον 
αν  είη  τω  την  είρημενην  μεταγειριζομενω  πραγματείαν  περί 
του  της  φωνής  τόπου  καθόλου  καΐ  κατά  μέρος  εΙπεΙν  εφ*  20 

20  όσον  εστ\  |  hiKaiov  εστί  δ'  επ\  τοσούτον  εφ^  Οσον  η  τών 
συστημάτων  αυτών  σημαίνει  φύσις.  περί  δβ  συστημάτων 
καΐ  τόπων  οίκειότητος  καΐ  τών  τόνων  λεκτεον  ου  προς  την 

2  ΊΓροατΓοΒίίχθ^ντων  Monro  :  Trphs  αττο^αχθίντων  Β  :  ττροσαττο^^ιχθ^ν- 
των  rell.  των  re  toG]  τούτων  Μ  :  τούτων  cum  τ6  suprascr.  Mc :  του 

Τ€  m :    τών  τ€  Β  Η  :   re  τών  του  Vb  e  corr.,  S  3    του  om.  Η 

καΐ    Β  R :    cm.   rell.  5    ^τιθ^μ^θα    Meibom  :    τιθίμ^θα    codd. 

6   τοιαύτα  R  8   τών  post  συστημάτων  addidi  9    '^«^  post 

Ύ^νών  addidit  Marquard  10   ττοιητίον  conieci :    ττοι^ΐται  codd. 

irepl  ου  .  .  .  'ότι  addidi  ir  ττραΎματΐυτόν  Η  12  κατζμ^μαθτ)- 

κ^ισαν  Η  15  τιθΐν  BR  ι6  καθ'  αύτ})  S,  ex  κατ   αύτ}>  Μ  : 

καθ'  avThv  rell.  17   iv  orn.  Η  ούτί^]  αυτ})  Η  ου  om.  S 

19  €Ϊρτημίνην  ex  ^ΐρηνην  Ma  20  re  post  καθόλου  add.  Η  καΐ 

om.  R  21    4στ\  8ίκαιον  .  .  .  e<^'  'όσον  om.  R  inl  om.  Η  η 

τών  συστημάτων  in  ras.  Ma  22   διασημαΐν^ι  Β  sed  in  marg.  ση- 

μαίνει        η  ante  φύσιε  add.  Η         ttjs  τών  post  δέ  add.  Η  23  όμοιο- 

τητο5  Η 

ΙΟΟ 


ΑΡΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    α!  I.y 

καταιηικνωσίν  βλίττοντα^  κα^άττερ  j  οΐ  αρμονικοί  άλλα  την  25 
irpbs  άλληλα  μ€λωbίav  των  σνςττημάτων  ols  eTTt  τίνων  τόνων 
κ€ψ€νοΐ9  μ€λω^€Ϊσθαί  σνμβαίν€ΐ  irpos  άλληλα.     ττ€ρΙ  τούτον 
he  τον  μ€ρον5  {otl)  βπΐ  βραχν  των  αρμονικών  iviois  |  σνμβζ-  30 
5  βηκβν  €ΐρηκ€ναι  κατά  τνχην,  ου  irepi  τούτον  λ^γονσιν  άλλα 
καταττνκνωσαι  βονλομ€νοΐ9  το  bιάγρaμμa,  καθόλου  he  ovhevl 
σχβδοζ^   iv  rot?   ζμττροσθ^ν  φαν^ρον  γ€γ€νηται   τονθ^  ημΐν. 
€στι  δ'  ώ?  ζΐτϊύν  καθόλου  το  μ€ρο9  [  |  τοντο  ttJs  irepl  μ€τα-  8 
βοληί    '7Γραγματ€ίαί    το    συντ^ίνον    ets    την    ττβρί    μ^λουί 

ΙΟ  θ^ωρίαν. 

Τα  μ\ν  ονν  ττ/ί  αρμονικής   καλον.μζνη^   ^ττιστιίμη^  μ^ρη  5 
ταντά   Τ€   καΐ  τοσαυτά   €στι,  tcls  δ'   ανωτέρω  τούτων   ττρα- 
γματ€[α9  '^'Trep  €ΐ7ΐομξν  άργόμ^νοι  Τ€λ€ΐοτ€ρον  tivos  ϋττολη- 
Ίττίον  eivai•  [  irepl  μ\ν  ονν  €Κ€ίνων  kv  τοΐί  καθηκονσι  καιροί^  ίο 

τ  5  λ€κτ€ον  Tives  τ    eial  καΐ  ττόσαι  καΐ  ττοία  η?  €κάστη  αυτών, 
77€ρ\  he  TTJs  τίρώτη^  νυν  ireipaTeov  hιeλθeΐv. 

ΥΙρώτον  μΛν  ονν  άττάντων  αύτης  της   κατά  τόττον  κι- 
νησ€ως   τα?   h  ιαφοράς  j  θeωpησaι  Tives  elal  ireipaTeov.   15 
'ϊτάσης  he  φωνής  hvvaμevηs   Kivelaeai  τον   eipημevov  αντον 

2ο  τρόττον  hύo  Tives  elaiv   iheai  κιvησeωs,  η  re  (Γυι^€χτ)ί  και  η 
hιaστημaτικη.       κατά  μev  ονν  την  avveyfi  τό  ττον  τινά  hie-   20 
(levai  φαίν€ται  η  φωνή  τι]  αισθησ€ΐ  οντω?  ώ?  αν  μηhaμoΰ 
Ιστάμενη    μη^*   €7γ'    αυτών    τών   7Τ€ράτων    κατά   ye   την   της 
αΙσθησ€ω$  φαντασίαν,  άλλα  φeρoμevη  συζ^βχώ?  μeχpι  σιω\- 

2  5  Τϊης,    κατά    he    την    eTepav    ην    όvoμάζoμev    hιaστημaτLκηv  25 

Ι   «ατά  νϋκνωσιν  Β  τ^ν  TTphs^  irphs  την  Η  2  τίνων  conieci  : 

om.  Η  :  τών  rell.  4  iviois  Westphal :  evlovs  codd.         'ότι  addidi 

6  τΓ€ρ\  δβ  τον  ante  καθόλου,  ώε  post  ax^Shv  add.  Marquard  ovdevl 

Marquard  :    ouSe?  Β  R  :    ouSeis  rell.  7    φav€phv  Η  Β  R  :    φαν^ρώί 

Μ  V  S,   in  marg.  Β  -γ^γίνηται  Μ  V  S,  in  marg.  Β  :    ττίποίηκξ  Η  : 

ΊΓβπί'/ητΜ  supra  lin.  Mc  :  π€ποίηται  BR  12  ανωτέρω  [as  suprascr.) 

Β  13  ρπβρ  Westphal  :  einep  codd.  :  βπβίττβρ  Marquard         τ€λ€ΐο- 

τ4ρου  Β  R  :  τ€λ€ωτ€ρου  rell.  15  τ'  om.  R  19  Thv  €Ϊρτ}μίνον 

Meibom  :    rwy  ζΐρ-ημίνων  codd.  20    ihiai  (e  supra  ι  secundum 

script.  >  Β  21  TTjv  ex  τον  Mx  :  τον  V  Β  S  25  kTepav"]  post 

ρ  ras.  Μ 


Ι•8  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

kvavTicuS  φαίνεται  κιν^Ζσθαΐ'  δίαβαίνονσα  γαρ  Χστησιν  αντην 
(ττΐ  μιας  τάσ€ω9  etra  τϊοΚιν  €φ'  erepas   καΐ  τούτο  ττοωνσα 

3ο  σΐίζ^βχώ? — λβγω  5e  [  συ^εχώ?  κατά  τοζ;  χρόνον — νττ^ρβαί- 
νονσα  μ^ν  του9  7Γ€ρί€χομ€νον^  νττο  των  τάσ€ων  τοττου?, 
Χσταμίνη  δ'   67γ'   αυτών   των  τάσεων    καΐ   φθζγγομ^νη    ταυ-  5 

9  ταί  μόνον  ανταξ  μ€λψh€ΐv  Aeyerat  καΐ  κίν€Ϊ\\(τθαί  biaστη- 
ματικην  κίνησιν,  Αητττβον  δε  €κάτ€ρον  τούτων  κατά  την 
τη9  αίσθησεωζ  φαι^τασίαν  τχότξ,ρον  μλν  γαρ  hvvaτov  η 
5  abvvaTOV  φωνην  κινξΐσθαί  καΐ  ττάλίρ  |  ΐστασθαι  αντην  iirl 
μίας  τάσεω?  €τ€ρα^  €στΙ  σκεψβω?  καΐ  irpbs  την  €ν€στώσαν  ίο 
ττραγματζίαν  ουκ  άναγκαΐον  "^το  be  κινησαι  τούτων  έκάτεροι^Τ' 

10  ότΓΟτερω?  γαρ  ίχ^ι,  το  αντο  τιοιύ  irpos  ye  το  χω\ρίσαυ  την 
€μμ€λη  κίνησιν  τη9  φωνη^  άττο  των  άλλων  κινήσεων. 
Άττλώ?  γαρ  όταν  μ\ν  οντω  κυνηταί  η  φωνή  ώστε  μηbaμoυ 
boKeiv  ιστασ^αι  rrj  άκοη,  συνεχή  λίγομζν  ταντην  την  κίνη-  1 5 

15  ΟΊν  όταν  |  δε  στηναί  τΐον  δόξασα  εΤτα  ττάλίν  bιaβaίvuv 
τίνα  τότΐον  φανη  κα\  τούτο  ττοιησαα-α  τιάλιν  εφ'  €τ€ρα^ 
τάσεω?   στηναι.  bo^j}   καΐ  τούτο  ξναλλαζ  TTOLelv  φαυνομ€νη 

2ο  (τνν€χώί  διατελτ/,  bLa\στημaτiκηv  την  τοιαύτην  κίνησίν  λε- 
γομξ,ν.      Ύην  μ\ν  ονν  σνν€χη   λογικην  etvai  φαμ€ν,  διαλε-  2ο 
γομ^νων  γαρ  ημών  οντω^  η  φωνή  κινείται  κατά  τόττον  ώστε 

25  μηbaμoυ  boKelv  Ϊστασθαι.  Κατά  δε  |  την  €τ4ραν  ην  όνομά- 
ζομ€ν  bιaστημaτLκηv  €ναντίω$  ττίφνκζ  γίγνεσθαι'  άλλα  γαρ 
ϊστασθαι  τε  δοκεΓ  κάί  'πάντ€9  τον  τοντο  φαινόμ^νον  ttoluv 

30  ονκάτι  λίγ^ίν  φασίν  αλλ'  abetv,     Διο|7Γερ  €V  τω  bιaλeγeσθaL  25 
φ€νγομ€ν  το  Ιστάναί  την  φωνΊ}ν,  αν  μη  bib,  τιάθοί  ττοτε  ει? 

Ι    αύτ^ν  Meibom  :    αυτήν  codd.  2    6</)'  eKarepas  Β  in  marg. 

5   in]  e  in  ras.  Mc  :  ύττ'  VB  R  6  κατ'  αντά$  Β  R,  Mc  (κατ   parvis 

litt.  supra  lin.  add.)  7  λοιιττίον  Η  9  /cal  Marquard  :  i^ 

codd.  τι  Th  δι^ρξυνησαι  Meibom  :  Th  διακρΊναι  Marquard  e/fa- 

Tcpov  cm.  M,  supra  lin.  add.  Mc  12  διτοτίρω$  tiv  εχτ?,  ίστι  nphs  τί> 

χωρίσαι  Η  εχτ?  Β  ττοίε?  Marquard  :  ττοκΊν  codd.  14  Μ^*' 

om.    Μ  Va  κιν^Ίται   S  δοκεΐι/  μ-ηζαμη   Η  15    «τυν^χί?   Β 

ι6  ΐΓοΟ  S         post  δ(ί|ασα  una  litt.  eras.  Μ  17  erepas]  I  in  ras.  Μ  ; 

€KaT(pas  V  S,  Β  in  marg.  18  δόξτ]']  6  in  ras.  Μ  23  ττεψυ^β] 

t/fce  in  ras.  Μ  20  'ϊστασθαι  Η  :  eV  ry  ίστάναι  V,  Β  in  marg.,  S 

102 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙίΙΝ    α'  Ι.  g 

τοιαντην  κίνησιν   άναγκασθωμ€ν   ζλθζΐν,  iv  be  τω  μeλωb€ΐv 
τουναντίον  τϊΟίοΰμ^ν,   το   μ\ν  1 1  yap   avv€\ks  φ€νγομ€ν,  το  ίο 
δ'    kaTavai    την    φωνην    ώ?   μάλιστα    bLώκoμev.      οσω    γαρ 
μάλλον  ξκάστην  των  φωνών  μίαν  re  καΐ  €στηκνΐαν  καΐ  την 
5  αντην  |  ττοίησομ^ν,  τοσοντω  φαίνβται  τ?]  αίσθησ^ι  το  /χελο?  5 
άκρίβ€στ€ρον,    "Otl    μβν    ονν    bvo    κινήσεων    ονσών    κατά 
τόττον   Tf]s   φωνη^  η   μ^ν   σνν€χη9   λογική    tls    ^στιν   η    δε 
bίaστημaτικη  μeλωbL•κη,   |   ayjibov  bηλov  ξκ  των  ύρημ^νων.     ίο 
Φαν€ρον  δ'  ovTos  otl  δει  την  φωνην  kv  τω  μζλωb€ΐv  tcls 

ΙΟ  μ€ν  €7Τίτάσ€ί9  τ€  καΐ  avia^LS   άφαν€Ϊ9   τΐοιύσθαί  tcls  be  τά- 
σεΐί  avTas  φθξγγομ^νην  |  φαν€ρα9  καθίσ-τάναί,~—€7Τ€ώη  τον  15 
μ€ν  τον  bίaστημaτos  τόττον  ον  bte^epxeTai  ore  μ^ν  άνί€μίνη 
6τ€  δ'  €τητ€ΐνομάνη  λανθάν^ιν  αντην  bel  bie^LOvaav,  tovs  be 
ορίζονται  φθόγγονί  τα  bLaστημa\τa  €ναργ€Ϊ9  re  καΐ  ^στηκότα^  2ο 
5  aTiobibovai — ώστ    eirel    τοντ    ίστι   hηλov   λ€κτξον    αν    €Ϊη 
Trepl  ετΓίτάσεω?  καΐ  αν€σ€ω9  €tl  δ'  ό^ντητοί  καΐ  /3α- 
ρντητο9  ττρο?  δε  tovtols  τάσεω?.      Ή   μ^ν  ονν  €7τίτασίί 
€στί  Ι   κίνησίί  tt]S  φωνηξ  σνν€χΊ]9   εκ   βαρύτερου   τόττον  et?  25 
6ζντ€ρον,  η  δ'  αν  eats  i(  όζντιζρον  τόττον  eis  βαρντ^ρον   όζντηί 

2θ  δε  το  γ€νόμ€νον  bib.  Trjs  εττιτάσεω?,  βαρντη^  δε  το  γ€νόμ€νον 
δια  τη9  άι^εσεωί.  |  Τάχα  ονν  Trapabo^ov  αν  φαίνουτο  rois•  ελα-  3° 
φρότ€ρον   τα   τοιαντα   ^ττισκοττονμίνοι^  το  τιθίναι   τάτταρα 
ταντα  καϊ  μη  bvo'    σχεδοζ;  γαρ  οΐ  γε  ττολλοί  Ιττίτασιν  μ€ν 
οζύτητι  ταντον  λάγονσιν  |  [  aveaiv  δε  βαρντητί.      ισω?  ονν  ον  II 

25  χ€Ϊρον   καταμαθύν  Οτι    ανγκβχνμζνω^  ττω?    δο^ά^ουσι    ττερί 

Ι   τοίαύτην  corn  ex  την  S  2  rb  δ'  karavai  .  .  .  ζιώκομ^ν  om.  Μ, 

in  marg.  Mc  Vb  3  μ^ν  post  οσφ  add.  Η  αν  post  γαρ  add.  Β  R 

5  7Γ0ίήσω^€ί/ Β  R  10  δεστάσευ  R  1 1   αύτάϊ  Bellermann, 

duce  Anonymo  (p.  49,  sect.  36)  :  αντην  codd.  φθβΎΎομίνην^]  X^yo- 

μ4νην  Β  in  marg.  14  evapye7  Β  19  ^j/effis  κίνησΙ$  4στιν  e'/c 

ToG  οξυτίρου  Η  20  Ύΐνομίνον  Β  R  post  4τΓΐτάσ€ω$  add.  άττοτβ- 

λ^σμα  Β  2ΐ   ζλαψρότξρον  Η  :  4\αφροτ6ροι$  rail.  :  ίΚα<ρροτίρω$  Mar- 

quard  22  post  τίτταρα  add.  γαρ  Μ  V  S         23  ττολλοί]  π  in  ras.  Μ 

24  Τ77  ante  οξύτητι  add.  Η         ταντί>ί']  τουτί»  (post  i»  una  litt.  eras.)  Μ 
TTj  ante  βαρύτητι  add.  Η 

I03 


I.ii  ΑΡ1ΣΤ0ΕΕΝ0Τ 

5  αντων.  Aet  5e  7Τ€ίρασθαί  κατανούν  ds  αυτό  ατ7θβλ^\τ:ονταζ 
το  γιγνυμζνον  τί  ττοτ  €στΙν  ο  7τοίονμ€ν  όταν  αρμοττόμ^νοι 
των  yophGiV  €κάστην  ανιωμ^ν  η  €7ητ€ίνωμ€ν.  Αηλον  be  rot? 
ye  μη  τταντζλώ^  aTidpois  οργάνων,  οτι  iiTLTeivovTes  μ€ν  ds  \ 

ΙΟ  οξύτητα  την  xopbi]V  {αγομξν  avUvTes  δ'  ds  βαρύτητα'    καθ^  5 
ον  be  χρόνον)  αγομίν  re  κα\  μ^τακινουμ^ν  els  οξύτητα  την 
Xopb7]V,  ονκ  evbixeTai  ττου  {βη  dvai  την  ye  μ^λλονσαν  eVe- 
σθαί  οξύτητα  δια  ti^s  e77trάσeωs.     τότ€  γαρ  ^σται  όξντηί  όταν 
τηί  e7Γtrάσeωί  άγαγονση^  eh  την  ττροσηκονσαν  τάσιν  σττ)  η  | 

15  xopbi]  καΐ  μηκάτι  κινηται.    τούτο  δ'  eWat  τη^  e7Γtrάσeω?  άττηλ-  ίο 
λαγμ^ηί  κάΙ  μηκeτL  ονσης,  ου  γαρ  evbexeTat  Kiveladai  άμα 

2ο  την  xopbrjv  καΐ  kaTavai,  ην  δ'  η  μ\ν  Ιττιτασι?  |  Κίνονμίνη^  tyjs 
XOpbrjs,  η  δ'  όξύτη9  ήρ€μούση9  ηbη  καΐ  €στηκνίαξ.  Ύαυτα  δe 
eρovμev  καΐ  irepl  Trjs  aveaecus  re  καΐ  βαρύτητθ9  ττλην  eirl  τον 

25   evavTLOv  τόττον.     Αηλον  be  bta  των  elpημevωv,  οτι  η  r'  ave-  15 
σΐ9  T?]s  βαρύτητοί  eTepov  τί  eaTiv,  ώί  το  ttolovv  του  ττοίου- 
μevov,  η  τ    e77trασι?  ttis  όξυτητο^  τον  αυτόν  τρόττον.     "Otl 

30  μev  ουν  erepa  αλλήλων  |  €στΙν  eiTLTaaLS  μ\ν  όξύτητο^  aveats 
be  βαρυτητοί  axebov  bηλov  €Κ  των  €ΐρημ^νων,  ort  δe  και  το 
τρίτον  ο  bi]  τάσιν  ovoμάζoμev  eTepov  eaTiv  εκάστου  των  elpη-  2θ 

12  μ^νων,  1 1  ireipaTeov  κατανοησαι.  *0  μ'^ν  ουν  βovλόμeθa  Ae'yetv 

την  τασιν  σχeδoF  eσrt  τοιούτον  οίον  μονή  tis  καΐ  σrάσts'  τηί 

5   φωνηί.      Μη   ταραττίτωσαν   δ'   ημα^  αΙ   των  els  \  KLvr]aeiS 

αγόντων  του^  φθόγγουί  δο^αι  καΐ  καθόλου  την  φωνην  κίνησιν 

elvai  φασκόντων,  ώ?  συμ^τeσoυμevoυ  λeγeiv  ημΐν   ότι  συμ-  25 

5  &Ύομ€ΐ/  .  .  .  χρόνον  restituit  Marquard  5)  ^  οξύτ-ητα  ti]v  χορδών 

ά-γομίν  τ€  καϊ  μ^τακινοΰμ^ν  els  om.  Ma  R  :  in  marg.  add.  Mb:  sed 
perfod.  Mc  :  praeLerea  d  5'  ets  ex  els  Mx  :  ei  δ'  els  VS,  Β  in  marg. 
7   Koi  ante  ουκ  add,  R         ye  om.  Β  g  ttjs  om.  R         ayayovaris 

Marquard  :  ayovaT)s  codd.  10  Kivelrai  Β  S  13  ante  ταύτα 

lac.  5  litt.   Μ  :    τούτα  Μ  V  Β  S  14    τον  evavrlov  τόττον  Β  :    του 

εναντίου  τόπου  R:  των  εναντίων  τόπων  rell.  17  καϊ  -η  4πίτασΐ5  Η 

19  δηλον  post  €ΐρ•ημ€νων  ponit  Η  2θ  τρίτον']  π€μπτον  Westphal 

22  καϊ  στάσίί]  ϊ  στ  Yb  e  corn  23  ταραττ4τωσαν]  4τωσαν  in  ras. 

Mb         Tcs  ante  Kivrjaeis  add.  Β  R 

104 


ΑΡΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    α'  Ι.ΐ2 

βησ€τα[  Trore  rfj  κινήσει  μη  κιν^Ισθαι  αλλ'  ηρ^μάν  re  κοΧ 
ίστάναι.  |   Δίαφ^ρ€6  ya/>   οΰδει^   17/^12;   το  Xiy^iv  ομαλότητα  ίο 
κιζ;?]σ€ω?  η  ταυτότητα  την  τάσιν  η  el  άλλο  tl  τούτων  €vpi- 
σκοιτο  γνωριμώτζρον  όνομα.      ovbev  γαρ  ήττον  ημύ^  τότ€ 
5  φησομζν  €στάναί  την  φω\νην,  Οταν  ημΐν  η  αϊσθησι^  αντην  15 
άττοφηνΐ]  μητ    Ιττί  το  ό^υ  μητ    €TtI  το  βαρύ  δρμώσαν,  ovbev 
άλλο  TTOLOvvTes  ττλην  τω  τοωντω  ττάθ^ι  τηί  φωνη9  τοντο  το 
όνομα  τιθίμ^νοι.     Φαίνεται  6e  τούτο  j  τιοιύν  kv  τω  μ€λωb€ΐv  2θ 
η  φωνψ    KiveiTai  μ\ν  yap  kv  τω  bLάστημά  tl  ttouXv,  Χσταται 

ΙΟ  δ'  kv  τω  φθόγγω.     Ει  δε  κινείται  μ\ν  την  νφ'  ημών  λ^γομίνην 
κίνησιν,  €Κ€ίνη9  τη9  Κίνησ€ω5  Trjs  ύττ'  €Κ€ίνων  λ€γομζ\νηί  25 
την  κατά  τάχο^  ^ιαφοραν  λαμβανονση^,  ηρ€μ€Ϊ  δ€  ττάλιν  αν 
την  νφ"  ημών  λ^γομύνην  ηρζμίαν,  στάντο9  τον  τάγον^  καΐ 
λαβόντο^  μίαν  τίνα  κα\  την  αντην  αγωγην,  ovbev  αν  ημΐν 

15  bιaφipoι.  ]  ayebov  yap  bηλόv  (στιν  otl  ημ€Ϊ^  λάγομ^ν  κίνησίν  3ο 
Τ6  και  ηρ^μίαν  φωνη^  [καϊ]  ο  €Κ€Ϊνοί   κίνησίν.      Ταύτα  μ\ν 
ονν  €ντανθα  ίκανώς,  iv  άλλoLs   be  ΙιτίΤΐλύόν  τ€   καϊ  σαφέ- 
στ€ρον  biapiaTai.     Ή  be  \\  τάσι?  οτι  μ\ν  οντ  ^τίίτασί<5  οντ    13 
aveaC'S   εστί   7τavτeλώs  bηλov, — την   μ\ν   γαρ    etvai  φαμ€ν 

2ο  ήρ€μίαν   φωνη^,   tcls  δ'   ev   Τ0Γ9    eμ^:ρoσθev   evρoμev    ovaas 
KL\vrjaeL's  Tivas, — οτι  be  καϊ  τών  λοίττών,  ttjs  βαρντητος  καϊ  5 
TTJs  6ξντητο9,  eTepov   eaTLV  η  τάσι?   ireLpaTeov   κατανόησαν 
"Οτι  μ\ν  ονν  ηpeμeΐv  σvμβaίveι  ττ\  φων?]  καϊ   eh  βαρύτητα 
καϊ  els  οξύτητα  \  άφίΚομ€νΊ],  bηλov  e/c  τών  eμ77poσθev'    otl  10 

25  be    καϊ   τη9  τάσeωs   ηpeμίas   tlvos   τeΘeίσηs    ovbev   μάλλον 
eKeivoiV  eKaTepa  ταντον  τάσι^   ^στίν,  6κ   τών  ρηθησομ^νων 

3   et  om.  R  βύρίσκοι  Th  BR.  5   αυτήν  S  :   avrh  R  :    αυτή 

rell.  7  TTOiovvTes  ex  voiovvTas  Mx  τούτο  rb  όνομα  τιθάμ.  ex 

τούτω  τω  (ut  vid.}  ονόματι  θ4μ.  Mb  9  -yap  om.  Η  Βιαστνματι  S 

12  T^v^  Trjs  Μ  post  ηρ^μβ?  ras.  Μ  οδ  την  ex  aurV  Mb  :  av 

om.  Η  15  δτί  conieci :   0  θ' codd.  ^/ue?s  ex /^eTs  Vb  16  καϊ 

seclusi  18  7]  ex  tV  (ut  vid.)  in  ras.  Mb  5e  Bellermann  :  re 

codd.  τάα-LS  ex  τάσιν   Mb  23    ηρ€μ€Ϊν']    etv    in    ras.    Mx 

24  αφικομ^ντ)  Vb,  αφικο  in  ras.  Mx  :   αφικνονμ4ντ}  Va  Β  S  :  αψικουμίνη  R 
26  €/caT€pot  conieci :  ίκατίρων  codd. 

105 


I.I3  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

15  €σταί  φαν^ρόν.  Act  δ?/  καταμανΘάν€ΐν  \  οτι  το  μ\ν  €στάναι 
Ψην  φωνην  το  μ€ν€ίν  eirl  μια?  TaaeduS  €στι.  συμβησ^ται 
δ'  αντη  τούτο,  eav  τ  eirl  βαρντητο9  iav  τ  k-n  όξντητος 
Ιστηταί.       Ει  δ'  η   μ\ν  τάσι?  ζν   άμφοτ^ροί^  νττάρζ^ί — και 

20  ycLp  €7Γΐ  Ι  των  βαρέων  καϊ  €πι  των  ό^4ων  το  ΐστασθαι  την  5 
φωνην  άναγκαΐον  ην — ,  η  δ'  όξντηί  μη'bi^ΐOτe  ττ\  βαρύτητι 
συνντϊάρζ^ι   μηh''  η    βαρντη9   tyj  όξντητί,    brjkov   ώ?   ζΤ€ρ6ν 

25  €στίν  €κατ€ρου  τούτων  η  τάσι?  ώ?  |  [/χι^δίΐ']  κοινον  yiyvo- 
μ€νον  iv  άμφοτ€ροί9.  'Ότι  μ^ν  ονν  τΐ&τβ  ταυτ  €στΙν 
αλλήλων  €Τ€ρα,  τάσι?  τε  και  ό^ύτη£  καϊ  ββρύτη^  ττρο?  δ€  ίο 

30  TOVTOLS  aveals  τβ  και  εττίτασι?,  σχ^δοι;  ^ηλον  €Κ  των  |  ζίρη- 
μίνων. 

Ύοντων  δ'  όντων  γνωρίμων  ζγόμ^νον  αν  €Ϊη  bL€λθ€ΐv  irepl 
T7]S  του   βαρίου   τ€   καϊ   q^eos   διαστάσβω?,    ττότ^ρον 

14  ατΓβιρο?  €(/)'  €κάτ€ρά  Ιστιν  η  'η€\\'ηζρασμίνη.      "Οτι  μ\ν  ονν  15 
eis  ye  την  φωνην  τιθ^μίνη  ουκ.  €(ttlv  aireLpos,  ον  χαλ€7τον 
σννώ€Ϊν.     άττάσϊ]?  γαρ  φωνηζ  οργανικής  Τ€  και  άνθρωτηκη^ 

5  ωρί\(Γμ€νο9  εστί  τι?  tottos  ον  διβ^ερχεται  μ€λωδοί3σα  ο  τ€ 
μέγιστοι  καϊ  6  ελάχιστο?.  οντ€  γαρ  επι  το  μ^γα  δύναται 
η  φωνή  €ΐ?  άπειροι;  av^eiv  την  του  βαρ€09  τε  και  ο^εο?  2ο 
ΙΟ  διάστασιζ;  οντ  εττι  |  το  μικρόν  συνάγω iV,  αλλ'  ϊσταταί  ττοτε 
εφ'  €κάτ€ρα.  Αιοριστ^ον  ονν  €κάτ€ρον  αντών  ττρό?  δϊ;ο 
τΐοιουμίνου^  την  άναφοράν,  ττρο?  τε  το  φθ€γγόμ€νον  καϊ  το 

15  κρίνον  ταύτα  δ'  εστιζ;  τ)'  τε  φωνή  και  7/  |  άκοτ].  δ  yap 
άδυ2'ατοί;σΐ2/   ανται   η   μ\ν    ttol€lv   η    δε    κρίνειν,    τουτ    ε^ω  25 

2  μίκχον  Β  3  ^'^'  'Π  ^^s,,  erat  άττ'  Ma  4  "(Ττ-ηται  MBS: 

ίστηταΐ  Mc  Vb  R  et  δ'  ύ)  μΐν]  η  δβ  sed  ras.  post  δβ  Μ  :  η  δ'  et  μ€ν 

Vb :  η  δ'  et  μ€ΐ/  Β  in  marg.  :  η  δ'  -η  μ^ν  S  8  ^ηδβι/  del.  Marquard, 

recte  14    δίαστάσβω?    Μ  (?)  Β  :    δίατάσβω!?  V  S  R,  Β   in   marg. 

15  ^κάτ€ρά  Meibom  :   ζκατ4ρα$  codd.  ^  ex  ή  Mb  :  ■^  Β  ι6  ye 

conieci  :    om.    Η  :    re   rell.  18    tottos   Meursius  :    T(ii/os   codd. 

20  ^  ante  ets  add.  S  21  δίάστασιν]  σ  ante  τ  eras.  Μ  :  ζιάτασιν 

rell.  'ΐστασθαι  BR  23  διαφοράν  R  irpbs  post  «ai  add.  Η 

24  δ'  om.  Β  25  TTOteti/J  e?»/  in  ras.  Mb  e|u>   Bellermann  : 

€ξωθ€ν  codd. 

106 


ΑΡΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    α  1. 14 

θζ,τίον  τηξ  T€  χρησίμου  καΐ  hvvaTTJs  iv  φωντ)  yeviaOai,  bia- 
στάσεω?.  ΈττΙ  μ€ν  ουν  το  μικρόν  αμα  ττω?  koUacTiv  ή  re 
φωνή  καΐ  |  η  αίσθΐ]σι$  i^abwareXv  ovre  γαρ  η  φωνή  5te-  20 
σβω?  τη9  €λαχίστη£  ^λαττον  ίτι  διάστημα  hyvarai  hLaσaφdv 
5  ουδ'  η  άκοη  διαισ^ά^εσ^αί  ωστ€  καΐ  ^vvUvai  τί  μζρο9  eort 
δteσeωs  etr'  άλλον  tlvos  των  γνωρίμων  6ία(ττημάτων.  \  ΈττΙ  25 
be  το  μ€γα  τάχ  αν  bo^eiev  υττ^ρτζίν^ιν  η  άκοη  την  φωνην 
ον  μάντοι  ye  ττολλω  τινί.  ΆλΛ'  ουν  €Ϊτ  e77'  αμφότερα  b^i 
τούτον  λαμβάνειν  |  nipas  τη^  δίασrάσeωs',  ets  re  77]ΐ^  φωνην  3ο 

ΙΟ  καΐ  Γ7]ΐ^  άκο?μ'  βλίι:οντα9,  etr'  e77t  ^ei'  το  ελάχιστον  ταντον 
k~\  δe  το  μ^γιστον  ^έτ^ρον    ίσται  τι  μίγιστον  καΐ  ελάχιστον 
μ€γ€θθ5  τη$  δια(Γτά||σ€α)5  ητοί  κοίνον  τον  φθζγγομίνον  καΐ  15 
του   κρίνοντος  η  Xbiov   €κατ€ρον.      'Otl  μ€ν   ονν  ets  Te  την 
φωνην   καΐ   την   άκοην  τζθ^ΐσα  η  τον  βαρ€θξ  Te   καϊ  όξίθ9 

15  δι|άστασί.9  ονκ  eiy  άτΐπρον  ίφ'  eKarepa  κίΐ'ηθήσ^ταί,  crxebov  5 
bijXov.       ei   δ'  αυτ?)    κα^'   αντην   νοηθ^ίη  η  τον  μ€λον9   (τν- 
στα(Τί9,  την  αυξησιν  ec?  άιτζφον  γίγνεσθαι  (et)  σνμβησ^ται 
τάχ  αν  άλλο?  etr;  "epl  τοτ^τωΐ'  [  λόγο9,  ονκ  αναγκαίοι  et?  το  ίο 
τταρόν,  bio-ep  ev  τοΐ^  ίτΐ^ιτα  τοντ  ^ττισκ^ψασθαί  ΐΐζίρατίον. 

2θ        Τούτου    δ'    oyTOS    γνωρίμον   λξκτ^ον   ττ^ρΐ   φθόγγου    τί 
Ίτοτ   €στί.  |  Συντόμων  μ€ν  ονν  elirelv  φωνη£  τττώσι?  e-l  μίαν   15 
τάσιν  6   φθόγγοι  €στί'    τότ€   γαρ  φαίνβται  φθόγγοι    etrat 
τοίοντοξ    οΐο^    etj   μeλos    τάττeσθαι    |   ηρμοσμ^νον,  {όταν  ή   2θ 
φωνή  φανη)  ^στάναι  ξτιΐ  μια?  τάσeω?.      Ό  /xei^  ow  φθόγγοι 

2  5  τοιούτο?    ^στίν     biάστη μα    δ'   Ιστι  το  ΰττό    δυο  φθόγ  γων  25 
ωρισμζνον  μη  την  αντην  τάσιν  εχόντων.     Φαίνεται  γάρ,  ώ? 

Ι  δίαστάσβω?  Μ  ^σ  ante  τ  eras.),  S,  Β  in  marg•.  :    ζιατάσζω$  R.  \Τ) 
fort,  e  corr.,  Β  5  '^  οπΐ•  Β  6  eire  ante  SteVews  pan-is  litt. 

supra  lin.  add.  Mc,  in  marg.  B,  R  :  cm.  rell.  9  δίοτάσβω?  Β  S  R 

12    δίαστάσεωί]   σ  ante  τ  eras.  Μ  :    ζιατάσ€ω5  BR  13    e?  («r 

suprascr. )  re  Β  15  eis]  eV  Η  i6  ΐΌηθξίη_  άχθ^Ιη  Η  17  ei 

restituit  Bellermann  22  ό  cm.  Η  opos  (pQayyov  add.  in  marg. 

Mb  Vc        €στί  τότ6  γαρ  (paiverai  (pdoyyos  add.  in  marg.  Ma  23  orav 

7]  ψωντ]  ψαν^  restituit  Meibom  25  opos  δίαστ'ηματο5  add.  in  marg. 

MbVc 

107 


1.15  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

τνττω  ζίττζΐν,  διαφορά  tls  elvai  τάσ€ων  το  διάστημα  καΐ 
τότΓΟί  beKTLKos  φθόγγων  όζντ^ρων  μ€ν  της  βαρντίρας  των  | 

3ο  όρίζονσών  το  διάστημα  τάσ€ων,  βαρυτίρων  δε  της  ό^ντ^ρας* 
διάφορα  be  ^στί  τάσεων  το  μάλλον  η  ήττον  Τ€τάσθαί.  ΐΪ€ρΙ 
μβν   ονν   διαστήματος   όντως  αν  τις  αφορίσ^ιν   το  he  σν-  5 

ΐ6  στημα  ovvOeTov  τι  ||  νοητίον  €Κ  'πλeiόv<ΛV  η  evoς  διαστη- 
μάτων, Δίί  δ'  €καστον  τούτων  ev  ττως  ^κλαμβάν€ΐν 
'π€ΐράσθαι  τον  άκονοντα  μη  τταρατηρονντα  τον  ά^ΐoδιδ6μevov 
5  λόγον  Ι  Ικάστου  αντων  eiT  €στιν  ακριβής  eiTe  και  τνπω- 
δeστepoςf  αλλ'  αντον  συμτΓροθνμονμ€νον  κατανοησαι  καΐ  ίο 
TOTe  oiόμevov    ικανώς   elρησθaL   ττρος   το   καταμαθ€Ϊν,   όταν 

ΙΟ  ^μβιβάσαι  οΙός  re  γίνηται  6  j  λόγος  elς  το  σννιίναι  το 
λeyόμevov,  ^αλ€ττον  γαρ  virep  ττάντων  μ\ν  ίσως  των  ev 
αργΫ]  λόγον   άν€7Γίλη7Ττόν  re   και  διηκριβωμίνην   epμηveιav 

15  ίγοντα  ρηθηναι,  ονχ^  ηκιστα  be  irepi  τριών  τούτων,  j  φθόγγου  15 
re  καΐ  διαστήματος  καΐ  συστήματος, 

Ύοντων   δ'  οϋτως   ωρισμίνων  ττρώτον   μ€ν    το    διάστημα 

20  TreipaTeov  διe\λeΐv  eh  Οσας  'πeφυκe  διaιpeσeις  bιaιpeLσθaι 
χρησίμους,  eireiTa  το  σύστημα,  ΐΐρώτη  μev  ονν  €στι 
διαστημάτων  διaίpeσις  καθ^  ην  μeγeθeι  αλλήλων  διaφepeι'  |  2θ 

25  δeυτepa  be  καθ'  ην  τα  σύμφωνα  των  διαφωνών  τρίτη  δε 
καθ'    ην   τα   σννθ€τα   των   άσυνθίτων     τeτάpτη    δ'    η    κατά 

3θ  γίνος'  |  ττ^μτττη  be  καθ'  ην  δLaφepeι  τα  ρητά  των  αλόγων, 
Ύας  δε  λοιπά?  των  διaιρeσeωv  ως  ου  χρησίμους  ονσας  ει? 

17  ταύτην   την   7τραγματ€ίαν   άφeτeov   τα   νυν,   j  |   Σύστημα   δε  25 

3  δρίζόντωι/  R  τό  τε  ζιάσττίμα  R  ΐι   οΐόμ^νοι  S  ^Ιρ^ισθαι 

S  12  4κβιβά(Γαι  R         yeVTjTot]  ηται  in  ras.  Mb  τ^  \€y6μ€vo^f] 

rh  :  post  h  ras.  Μ  13  ante  μ^ν  una  litt.  eras.  Μ         μ^ν]  ehai  Β  R 

τώι/]  rh  R  :  rhv  V  Β  S  των  .  .  .  τ^κιστα  Se  om.  Η  14  λΟΎων  Μ 

15  φθόγγων  R  16  συστ•ηματο5^  5ιαστ•ίιματο$  BR  18  SieAelj/  V  S 

sed  ίΐν  Vb  in  ras. :  ζΐίλθ^Ίν  Μ  Siaip^acis  cm.  Β  sed  in  marg.  add. 

19  χρησίμου    Η  eneira    in    ras.    Vb  :     καΐ    en     in     ras.     Ma 

20  Sioupeaeis  διαστή^αοτοϊ  deinde  numeri  ά.  /3.  /ere.  in  marg.  Mb 
Vc  23  5ιαφ€ρ€ΐ  om.  Η  \όγων  Β  R  :  βητά  των  άκόγων  in 
ras.  Mb 

108 


APiMOXIKilN    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕ1ί2Ν    a  1. 17 

σνσττιματο^  Tavrais  re  diotVet  rats'  {avTols)  δίαφοραΐί  ττλην 
/x,tas — ^/xeye^et  re  γαρ  brjXov  a)S  ^ίαφζρ€ί  σνστη'ματος  σν-  5 
(ττημα  καΙ  τω  [re]  συμφωνούν  η  bLaφώvov9  ea-at  tovs  ορίζονται 
φθόγγου^  το  μ4γ€θοί.  την  5e  τρίτην  των  ρηθζίσων  kin 
5  των  του  hL•aστημaτos  διαφορών  αδύνατον  νττάρ^αί  |  σνστη-  ίο 
ματί  7τρο9  σύστημα,  δηλον  γαρ  ώ?  ονκ  €νδ€χ€ταί  τα  μ€ν 
σύνθετα  τα  δ'  άσννθ^τα  ^Χναι  των  συστημάτων  τουτόν  ye 
τον  τρόττον  ovTT€p  των  διαστημάτων  τα  μ^ν  ην  σύνθετα  τα 
δ'  άσννθ^τα.     την  |   δe  τ^τάρτην — αϋτη  δ'  rjv  η  κατά  γίνοζ  1 5 

ΙΟ  — άναγκαΐον    καΐ   roti    συστημασιν   νττάρχζίν,    τα   μ\ν   γαρ 
αυτών    eσrt    δίάτονα    τα    he    χρωματικά    τα    δe    ^ναρμόνία. 
δηλον  δ'  ΟΤΙ  καΐ  {την)  ττίμτϊτην,  τα  μ€ν  |  γαρ  αυτών  άλόγω   2θ 
δίαστηματι  ωρισταυ   τα   δe  ρητω.      Προ?   δe    Tairrais  Tpus 
€Τ€ρας  ττροσθξτζον  δίαίρ^σζί^'    την  τ    els   συναφην  καΐ  δίά- 

15  ζ^υ^ίν   καΐ   το   συναμφ6τ€ρον   μ^ρίζουσαν   τα   συστήματα'  | 
{τταν  γαρ  σύστημα)  άττό  tlvos  μ^γ^θου^  άρξάμ^νον  η  συνημ-  25 
μίνον  η  δίζζ^υγμ^νον  η  μικτον  (.ζ  αμφοτέρων  γίγν^ται  (καΐ 
δζίκννται   τούτο   γιγνόμ^νον   €V   ivioLs)'    eTretra   την   τ    eh 
νπ€ρβατον  καΐ  συveχes  μepLζov\σav,  ττάν  γαρ  σύστημα  ήτοι  3° 

20  συveχes  η  υτreρβaτόv  eσri,  την  τ    els  αττλοϋν  καΐ  δίττλοϋν 
καΐ   ττολλαττλοϋν   δLaίpeσLV,   τταν    1 1    γαρ   το   λaμβavόμevov  ΐ8 
σύστημα  ήτοι  αττλουν  η  δίττλοϋν  η  ττολλαττλοϋν  ^στίν.     Ύί 
δ'  eσrί  τούτων  €καστον  ev  rot?  eTretra  δetχ^75σerαt.  | 

Ύούτων    δ'    ούτωί    άφωρισμ&ων    re    καΐ    ττpoδLr\pημevωv  5 

Ι  συστ-ηματοε  Biaipeffeis  MbVc  in  marg.  ut  supra  avraTs  restituit 

Westphal  :  ante  tols  ras.  in  qua  erat  ταΓϊ  ού  Μ  2  re  in  ras.  in 

qua  erat  re  δη  Ma :   5e  Β         yap  Η  :  om.  rell.  3  καΐ  in  ras.  Ma  : 

om.  rell.  re  seclusit  Marquard  4  5e  in  ras.  Mb:  μ^ντοι  BR 

5  Βιαστ-ηματοε  Yh  Β  S  :   συσττιματοε  MR  7  τα  δ'  άσύνθζτα  om.  R 

eJvai  .  .  .  τα  δ'  ασύνθ^τα  om.  S  g  rh  post  κατά  add.  Η  12  την 

restituit  Marquard  13  ρτητφ.     Upos  δβ  om.  B,  sed  in  marg.  add. 

14    kripas  ante  TpeTs  ponit  Η  eis  in  ras.  Mb  16    παν  yap 

σύστημα  restituit  Marquard  17  ^  Sίeζ€υyμΐvov  ante  r)  σνν-ημμάνον 

ponunt  codd. :  ordinem  restituit  Marquard  18  Te  post  els  ponit 

Η  :    r  in   marg.   Mb  20   κα\  διπλούν  om.  R  :    ^  in  marg.  Mb 

22  fj  ζιπλονν  om.  Β  23  δεχθήσετα:  S 

109 


I.i8  ΑΡΪΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

Trepi   μiλovs   αν   eir/  ημίν  Treipariov  νττοτνττώσαι   τί  ττοτ 
€στΙν  η  φυσι?  αντον.     "Otl  μ\ν  ονν  ^υαστημαηκην  kv  αυτω 

ΙΟ  δα  την  ττ/ί  φω\νη9  κίνησιν  elvai  ιτροζίρηταί,  ώστ€  τον  ye 
Xoyiabovs  κ€\ώρίσταί  ταντΎ\  το  μονσικον  jueAos*  Kiyerai 
yap  hi]  καΐ  λoγώbζS  tl  /xeXoj,  το  σνγκ^ίμ^νον  €κ  των  ττροσω-  5 

15  bLωv  των  iv  τοΐί  όνόμασίν  |  φνσικον  yap  το  ^τητ€ίν€ΐν  καΐ 
avUvai  €V  τω  bLaX^yeaOai.  Έπ€ί  δ'  ον  μόνον  €κ  διαοττ/- 
μάτων  τ€  καΐ  φθ6yyωv  σνν^στάναι  bu  το  ηρμοσμίνον  μζλοξ, 

2ο  άλλα  irpoabeiTOA  σννθίσ^ώ^  tlvos  ttoims  |  καΐ  ον  T7]s  τνχον- 
σης — brjXov  yap  cos  το  y    Ικ  bίaστΎ\μaτωv  re  και  (\>Qoyy(iiv  ίο 
σνν^σταναι  κοινόν  €(ΓΤΐν,  VTiapyjei  yap  καΐ  τω  αναρμόστω — , 
ώστ'  e7Γeiδτ/  τονθ*  οντω^  e^et,  το  pJycaTOV  jutepos  και  ιτλ^ίστην 

25  Ι  ίγον  ροττην  eis  την  όρϋώί  yίyvoμivηv  σνστασιν  τον  μ^λον^ 
{το)  Trepi  την  σύνθ^σιν  καθόλον  και  την  ταύτης  lbLότητa 
ντΐοΚητΐτίον   etvai.      X^ebbv   br]   φαν^ρόν,   δη  τον  μ€ν  eTrt  15 

30  TTjS  λζ^€ωξ  yL\yvoμevov  μελου?  τω  bίaστημaτiκr\  γ^ρησθαί  τί] 
τη^  φωνηί  κινήσει  bioiaei  το  μονσικον  μ€λθ5,  τον  δ'  άναρ- 
μόστον   καϊ  biημapτημivov  τι)  τη9  σννθέσ^ωζ   bιaφopa  ttjs 

ig  των  άσννθζτων  j  |  bιaστημάτωv,  ττ€ρΙ  η9  €V  rois  eTreira 
b€Lxe/]a€TaL  τί?  eaTLV  αντη^  6  τρόττος.  ττλην  €ττΙ  τοσοντόν  2ο 
5  y'  ειρήσθω  καθόλον  καΐ  ννν,  οτί  ττολλα?  έχοντος  δια |  φορά? 
τον  ηρμοσμίνον  κατά  την  των  bLaστημάτωv  σύνθ^σιν,  ομω^ 
€(TTL  TL  τοιούτον  ο  κατά  τταντό'ί  ηρμοσμίνον  ρηθησ^ται  ίν 
τ€  καϊ  ταυτόν,  τοιαντην  ^χον  bvvaμίv  οΐαν  αντην  αναιρον- 

ιο  μίνην  |  αναιρ^ϊν  το  ηρμοσμίνον.      αττλονν  δ'  €σταί  ττροϊονσηί  25 

Ι   Trepi  μζλου5  in  marg.  Mb  Vc  ζΐτιτυττώσαι  R  2  ^ιστ'ηματικ)]ν 

Β  3  7^]  7  ^  4  ^eyeraL  .  .  .  μίλο$  om.  Β  sed  in  marg.  add. 

5  δτ?]  τΐ  S  6  των  eV  to7s  Meursius  :  rh  eV  rois  codd.  7   irru 

δ'  Β  R  :  ζπ^ιτα  rell.  8  σννιστάναι  Β  g  τύχηϊ  R  13  ορθώ$ 

.  .  .  Trepi  την  parvis  litt.  supra  lin.  Mc,  in  marg.  Vb  14  rb  restituit 

Marquard  καθόλου  conieci  :   κάπου  Η  :  καί  που  rell.  καϊ  seclusit 

Bellermann  15    eVi   t^s   Ae'|eajs   Bellermann,   duce  Anonymo 

(P•   55)  •    eViTTjSeiws  codd.  16    διαστ-ηματικΐι  χρησθαι  Meibom  : 

διαστΎΐματι  κ^χρησθαι  codd.  18  Ζιαμαρτημίνου  Β  2θ  ό  om.  Η 

21   ΐΐρζίσθω  S  24  ταυτόνλ,  ταύτ})  (post  h  litt.  eras.)  Μ  :  Tainhv  V  : 

ταυτ^  rell.  αναιρουμ^νην  om.  Β 


ΑΡλΙ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    α'  Ι.  ig 

Trjs   ττραγματβία^.     Το   μ^ν    ονν   μονσικον   jueAo?    άττό    rGiV 
άλλων    οντω9    άφωρίσθω.      νττολητττζον    be    τον    €ΐρημ4νον 
αφορισμον  τνττίύ  d  ρησθαι  οντω^  ώ?  μφί-πω  των  καθ'  'έκαστα  15 
τ^Θζ.ωρημίνων. 
5        ''ΈΑ^όμ^νον  δ'  αν  ^ϊη  των  ^Ιρημίνων  το  καθόλου  λζγόμζνον 
μ€λθ9  ^ί€λ€Ϊν  et?  oora  φαίνεται   γένη    ^ιαιρ^ΐσθαί.      Φαί- 
νεται Ι  δ'  ds   τρία'     τταν  γαρ  το  λαμβανόμενον  μέλοί  των  2ο 
ets  ταντο  ηρμοσμένων  ήτοι  hiaTovov  έστιν  η  γ^ρωματίκον  η 
έναρμόνιον.     ΥΙρωτον  μ\ν  ονν  καΐ  ιτρεσβυτατον  αντών  θ€Τ€ον 
ΙΟ  το  hiaTOvov,  ττρώτον  γαρ  |  αντοϋ  η  του  ανθρώπου  φύσίί  ττροσ-    25 
τυγχάνει,  δεύτερον  δε  το  χρωματικόν,  τρίτον  δε  καΐ   άνώ- 
τατον  το  έναρμόνιον,  τελευταίω  γαρ  αντω   καΐ  μόλΐί  μετά 
ΤΓολλοΰ  ττόνου  συνεθίζεται  η  αϊσθησίζ.  | 

Τούτων  δ'  εΙς  τούτον  τον  αριθμόν   δΐΎ\ρημενων  των  δια-   30 
15  στηματικων  διάφορων  τη^  δευτέρας  ρηθείσης  θάτερον  μέρο^ 
ττειρατέον  διασκέψασθαι — ην  δε  τα  μέρη  ταϋτα  διαφωνία  τε 
καΐ  II  συμφωνία — λη-πτέον  τε  την  συμφωνίαν  etj  την   επί-  20 
σκεψιν.      Φαίνεται  δε  διάστημα  σνμφωνον  συμφώνου  δια- 
φέρειν  κατά  πλείου^  διαφοράς  ων  μία  j  μέν  εστίν  η   κατά  5 
20  μέγεθος,  περί  ης  άφορίστέον  ?;  φαίνεται  εγειν.      Αοκεΐ  δε 
το  μεν   ελάχιστον  των  συμφώνων  διαστημάτων  υπ'   αυτής 
της  του  μέλους   φύσεως  άφωρίσθαι,  μελωδεΐται  μεν  γαρ  | 
του  δια  τεσσάρων  έλάττω  διαστήματα  πολλά,  διάφωνα  μέν-   ίο 
τοι  πάντα.     Το  μεν  ουν  ελάχιστον  κατ  αυτήν  την  της  φωνής 

2  άφωρίσθω  ex  αφωρίζίσθω  Ma  rhv']  rh  Μ  (corr.  Mc)  3  et- 

ρησθαι  ex  ^Ιρησθω  Mc  :  elpeladai  S  βκαστον  R  6  els  cm.  S 

8  Tavrh  conieci:   r^  codd.  ηρμοσμένων  conieci  :  ηρμοσμίνον  codd. 

τΙ>  els  rh  -ηρμοσμίνοί/  Marquard  10   yap  Marquard  :   re  codd. 

ανθρώπου^     ανΰΰ    S  Trpoarvyxauei    Vb  R  S  :     TrpoTvyxdvei    rell. 

II   ί/βώτατοί'  Η  12  rh  €ναρμόνιον  ex  την  αρμονίαν  Mb  14  δί- 

Ύΐρ•ημ4νον    Β  ΐ6    CKe-^aaQai    R  καθ'    %ν    τα    σύμφωνα    των 

διαφωνών  5ιaφeρeι  in  marg.  add.  Mb  Vc  17  λητΓτ4ον  rel  re  cm.  Β  : 

Se  S  22    άφωρίσθαι  ex  άφωpιe7σθaι  Mb  :    σ  in  ras.  Vb  μ€ν 

cm.  Η  24  rh  cm.  Β  :  supra  lin.  add.  Mb         tV  o^i.  Β  :  supra 

lin.  add.  Mb 

III 


1.20  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΞΕΝΟΤ 

φνσίν  ωρισται,  το   δε  μίγιστον   οντω  μ\ν   [ουν\  ουκ  ίοικζν 

15  6ρί\ζ€σθαΐ'    φαίνεται  γαρ  els  αττ^ίρον  ανζ€.σΘαι  κατά  y  αυτήν 

την  τον  /χελου?  φνσιν  καθάττ^ρ   καΐ  το  διάφωνον.      παντού 

γαρ   προστίθβμ^νον    συμφώνου    hίaστημaτos    irpos    τω    δια 

20  ττασών  [  καΐ  μζ,ίζονο^  καΐ  ζλάττονο^  καΐ  ϊσον  το  όλον  γίγνβ-  5 
ταυ  σύμφωνον.     Οντω  μ€ν  ουν  ουκ  ίοικ^ν  €Ϊναί  τι  μίγιστον 
σνμφωνον  διάστημα'    κατά  μίντοι  την  'ημ€τ€ραν   χρησιν — 

25  λζγω  δ'  ημ^τίραν  |  την  re  δια  τη^  ανθρώπου  φωνηί  γιγνο- 
μίνην  καΐ  την  δια  των  οργάνων — φαίν€ταί  τι  μέγιστου  etvaL 
των  συμφώνων.      τούτο  δ'  €στϊ  το  δια  TreWe  και  το  δΐί  δια  ίο 

3ο  ττασών,  το  γαρ  τρίί  δια  |  ττασών  ουκ  In  δίατ€ίνομ€ν.  Δει 
δ€  την  διάστασιι;  δρίζ^ιν  kvos  τινοί  οργάνου  τόττω  καΐ  ττί- 
ρασιν,  τάχα  γαρ  6  τών  τταρΘ^νίων  αυλών  ό^ύτατο^  φθόγγος 
TTpos  τον  τών  υττ^ρτ^λ^ίων  βαρύτατον   μύζον   αν   ττοιησ^ι^ 

21  του  ύρημίνον  τ  pis  δια  ττασών  1 1  bLάστημa  καΐ  κατασττασθ^ίσης  15 
ye  της  σνριγγος  6  τον  σνρίττοντος  οξύτατος  ττρος  τον  του  αυ- 
λουντος  βαρύτατον  μύζον  αν  ττοίήσ€ί€  του  ρηθίντος  hιaστη- 

5  /χα|Γ09•    ταυτον   δe   και   τταώος   φωνή   μικρού    ττρος    avhpbs 
φωνην   ττάθοι   αν.      όθ^ν   καΐ   κατανοείται   τα   μεγάλα    τών 
σνμφώνων    €κ  ^ιαφερουσών  γαρ  ηλικιών  και  διαφερόντων  2ο 
ΙΟ  μέτρων  τεθεωρηκαμεν,  |  Οτι  και  το  τρΙς  δια  ττασών  συμφωνεί 

Ι    μ^Ύΐστον  Meibom   Η  :    μ4'/€Θο5  rell.  odv  seclusit  Marquard 

2    δρι^Ίσθαι    Μ  V  S  :    ώρίσθαι    Η  yap   supra    lin.    Mb :    Se    (70^ 

suprascr.)    Β  a  corr.  manu :    Se    R  3    ζιάψωνον   ex   ζιάψοροι/ 

Mb  :  ζίφωνον  Β  5  δλον]  όλων  S  :  oXiyov  R  6  oZv  cm.  Β 

ΙΟ  τούτο]  ToD  S  Th  Sis]  τ5  supra  lin.  Β 

5ls  δ/ά  ττασών  δίά  €\ 

-. ί-. IS       ι   in  marg.  MbVc  11  rh  yapVhBRS  : 

ίξαττλάσιον 

rod  yap  Μ  {yap  in  ras.  Ma  ut  vid.)  :  μ^χρι  yap  τον  Marquard  :  yap  cm.  Η 
'όρα  Ώορψνριον  4v  τφ  €is  αρμονικά  ύπομνηματι  add.  in  marg.  Η  ουκίτι  ex 
οϊιν  βστι  Ma         Ζιαπίνωμ^ν  Β  ΐ2  διάτασιν  R         τόττφ  Westphal : 

TOvxf  codd.  13  παρθενίων  Μ  Vb  R         τταρθ.  αύλ.  linea  subducta  S 

14  Thv  om.  R  )8α/3υτατοζ/  Marquard :  /βαρυτάτωΐ' codd.  15  του 

R  :  tout'  rell.  κατασπαθ^ίσηε  ΜΗ  ιη  ττοι^σαβ  ζιάστημα  τον 

Tpls  δια  ττασών  (Ιρ-ημίνου  διαστηματοε  Η  ^ηθβντοε]   post  ^   ras.  Μ 

ΐ8  7]  ante  TTaiShs  add.  et  φωνή  post  μικρόν  ponit  Η 
112 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    α'  1. 2ΐ 

καΧ  το  Τ€τράκί9  καΐ  το  μζΐζον.  "Ort  μ€ν  ονν  €πΙ  μ^ν  το 
μικρόν  η  του  μ^λουί  φνσίί  αντη  το  δια  τεσσάρων  Ιλάχιστον 
άποδιδωσι  των  συμφώνων,  kin  h'k  το  /xe|ya  ττ}  ημετέρα  ττω?  15 
το  μζγίστον  ορίζεται  ^υνάμβί,  σ\€^6ν  brjXov  €κ  των  (Ιρη- 
5  μίνων  otl  δ'  οκτώ  μ€γίθη  συμφώνων  hίaστ7]μάτωv  συμβαίνει 
•γίγνεσθαι  pabiov  συνώ€Ϊν.\ 

Τούτων  δ'  όντων  γνωρίμων  το  τονιαίον  hιάστημa  Tret-   20 
ρατίον  άφορίσαί.     *Έστι  δτ)  tovos  η  των  ττρώτων  συμφώνων 
κατά  μίγ^θο^  hiaφoρά.      Αίαίρζίσθω  δ'  et?  rpets  bLaLpiσ€LS' 
10  μ€λωb€Lσθω  γαρ  ]  αυτού  τό  re  ήμισυ  καΐ  το  τρίτον  μίρο^  καΐ  25 
(το)  τέταρτον    τα   δe  τούτων  ίλάττονα  hιaστ■ημaτa   ττάντα 
ίστω   άμ€λώ^ητα.       Καλ^ίσθω   δe  το  μ€ν   ελάχιστον  δteσtί 
€ναρμόνί09   ελαχίστη,   το   δ'    €χόμ€νον    Ι    bίeσLS   γJ)ωμaτLK^]  3^ 
€λαχίστη,  το  δe  μίγιστον  ημίτονων. 

15       Τουτωΐ'  δ'  ούτωξ  άφωρισμίνων  tcls  των  γ^νων  διαφο- 
ράς   οθ^ν  γίγνονται   καΐ   ον   τρόττον  ττ^ιρατίον   καταμαθ^ΐν. 
Aet  δe  1 1  νοησαι  των  συμφώνων  bιaστημάτωv  (τό)  (λάγ^ιστον  22 
το    κατ^γόμ^νον    τά    ye    7Γλetσrα   ύττο   τ€ττάρων   φθόγγων 
oOev  δή  καΐ  την  ττροσηγορίαν  ύττο  των  παλαιών  eo^e  .  •  .  j 

20  [τίνα  brj   τά^ιν  ττΚ^ιόνων  ούσών  νοητίον;    kv  rf  ^σα  τά   re  5 
κινούμενα  eισt  καΐ  τα  ηρ^μουντα  iv  ταΐς  των  γ^νών  bιaφopaίs. 
Τίγν€ται  δ'  ez^  τω  τοιουτω  οΓοι;  τό  άττό  μέσης  €φ^  ύττάτην 
€V   τούτω   γαρ   bύo   μ\ν   οι   T:e\pii)(OVTes    φθόγγοι   ακίνητοι  ίο 

3  T7J  ημ^ρα  S  5  οκτώ  Westphal  :   e'/c  των  codd.  ^eyeSei 

Μ  V  R  S  καϊ   ante    ξιαστημάτων   Β  R,  parvis  litt.  in  maig.   Mc 

7  8pos  ToVou  add.  Mb  Vc  in  marg.  8  η  om,  S  ii  τί)  restituit 

Marquard         δε  e  corr.  Μ  15  αφορισμένων  S  17  δέ]  e  in 

ras.   Β  Th  restituit  Marquard  18    κατ^χόμ^νον  conieci : 

κα\ονμ6νον  codd.         ye  conieci  :  om.  Η  :  re  rell.  20  seqq.  τ/να 

.  .  .  κινούνται  seclusit  Westphal  ut  glossema  20  τίνα  5^  τάξιν  R : 

Tiv  (a  suprascr.)  Sal  τάξιν  (δαί  τά  in  ras.)  Mc  :   τίνα  ττραξιν  V  S,  Β  in 
marg.  :  τινά  δέ  τάξιν  Β  :    τίνα  πραξιν  Η  post  ούσών  add.  χορδών 

supra  lin.  Mc,  χορδών  cum  duobus  punctis  praepositis,  punctis  in  marg. 
repett.  B,  χορών  cum  cruce  R,  συγχορδιών  Westphal 

MACRAN  I  113 


1.22  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΞΕΝΟΤ 

elaLV  €V  rats  των  γ€νων  διαφοραι?,  bvo  δ'  οί  ττξρίζγόμζνοι 
KLVovvraii]  Ύοΰτο  μ\ν  ονν  οντω  κ^ίσθω.  των  δβ  σνγχορ- 
διώζ/  'πλ€ωνων  τ    ονσων  των  την  άρημάνην  τάξιν  του  bia  | 

15  τεσσάρων  κατ^χονσων   καί  όνόμασιν   ίδιοι?   €κάστη^    αυτών 
ωρυσμ^νη^,  μία  tCs  iaTLV  η  μ^ση^  καΐ  λιχανου  καΐ  τταρυιτάτηί  5 
καΐ  νττάτης  ax^ebbv  γνωριμωτάτη  τοΐς  αιττομ^νοί^  μουσίκης 

ζο  kv  ?7  TCLS  Ι  των  γ€νών  διάφορα?  άναγκαΐον  ^ττισ κίψασθαι 
τίνα  τρόττον  γίγνονταί.  "Οτι  μ€ν  ουν  αΐ  των  κιν^ίσθαι 
ττζφνκότων   φθόγγων  βττιτάσβι?  τ€   καΐ   aveaeis  αϊτιαί  €ΐσι 

25  TTJs  των  γ€νών   διαφοράς  φαν€ρόν.      ris  δ'    |    6  τόιτο9  Trjs  ίο 
κιη/σ6ω?  €κατ€ρου  των  φθόγγων  τούτων  λ€κτ4ον.     Αιχανοϋ 
μ\ν  ουν  €στΙ  TOVtaXos  6  σύμτταί  το'ττο?  €v  ω  κινείται,  ούτ€ 

3ο  γαρ  ίλαττον  αφίσταται  μίση^  τονιαίου  bLaστη\μaτoί  ούτ€ 
μ€Ϊζον  bLτόvoυ.  Τούτων  be  το  μ\ν  ζΚαττον  τταρα  μ^ν  των 
ηbη  καταν€νοηκότων  το  biOTOvov  γίνο^  [ουχ]  ομολογείται^  15 
23  τταρα  δε  των  μηττω  συν^ωρακότων  συγχωροΐτ  αν  ]|  iira- 
γθίντων  αυτών  το  be  μύζον  οί  μεν  συγγωρουσιν  οι  δ'  ου. 
bi  ην  be  γίγνεται  τούτο  αΐτίαν,  iv  rot?  εττειτα  βηθήσεται. 
"Οτι  δ'  Ιση  η?  μελοττοιια  bιτόvoυ  λιχανον  beoμivη  και  ουχ 

5  17  φανλοτάτη  ye  άλλα  σχεδόι;  η  καλλίστη,  |  rots  μεν  ττολλοι?  20 
τών  νυν  ατΓτομενων  μουσικής  ου  ττάνυ  εύbηλόv  εστί,  γένοιτο 

Ι  y€vS}v~\  (peoyywv  Η  2  τούτο  ex  τούτων  Mc,  duobus  punctis 

subscr.  et  ων  suprascr.  Β  :  τούτων  V  S  συyχόρ5ωv  Η  3  τών 

τ^ν^   τών  Β   in  ras.  :    om,   R  4    ονόμασιν  post  Ihiois  ponit  Η 

5  \ίχανο$  (ut  constanter  fere)  Ma  :  in  \ixavhs  corn  Mc :  Va  semper 
Χΐχανο$  :  yp  Χιχάνου  Vb  in  marg.  6  κα\  ύπάτηί  om.  V  S  υπάτης 

in  marg.   Mc  (?)  to7s  ex  ttjs  Mb:    ttjs  R  απτομ^νηε  MVR 

9  T€  om.  Η  ΙΟ  tOttos  Marquard  :  τρόποε  codd.  11   εκάστου  Η 

13  αφίσταται  Marquard  Η  :  αφίστασθαι  rell.  :  άφίσ-τασθαι  φαΐνίται 
Westphal  14    Βιτόνου]    post    t    litt.    ο    eras,    τό    renovatum 

Mb  :  SiaTOvov  ex  ζιτόνου  Vb  (ut  vid.)  :  Sltovov  (a  super  t  scriptum) 
Β  :  ξιατόνου  S  τών  ^δτ;]  τώ»/  ν  in  ras.  Mb  15  δίτονον  Η 

ούχ    seclusi  :    ούχ    δμoλoye7τaι   in    ras.   Mb  16    παρά]   περί   S 

avyxopolT    Β  R  βπαχθίντων  ah  in  ras.  Mb  17    αντψ  R 

18  toCto  post  6π€ίτο  add,  Μ  (eras.),  V  S,  Β  (^suprascr.)  19  δια- 

τόνον  (duobus  punctis  sub.  a)  Β  δβομίνη']  ν  in  ras.  Mb  ονχ 

η]  ούχΙ  Μ  V  S  R  20    φαυλότητι  Β  γβ  om.  Η 

114 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙίΙΝ    α  Ι.23 

μζνταν    ^τΐαγΟύσιν    avTols'     rot?    6e    σνν^ιΘισμίνοι^    των 
αρ\γαίκ(ύν  τρόττων  toXs  re  irpcuTOLS  καί  rots-  bevripoLs  Ικανών  ίο 
hrjXov  €(TTL  το  λ€γόμ€νον.      01  μ\ν  γαρ  rfj  ννν  κατξγονσ-ρ 
μ€λθ7τοαα  σννηθβίί  μόνον  ovres  ζΐκότω^  'n]V  hirovov  λιγανον 
5  €^ορίζονσί'  Ι  σνντονωτίραι^  γαρ  γ^ρωνται  ayjihov  οι  τΐΚύστοί  15 
των   ννν.      τοντον  δ'  αΧτων  το  βονλζσθαι   γΧνκαίν^ν  ά€ΐ, 
σημ€Ϊον  δ'   οτί  τούτου  στοχάζονται,    μάλιστα  μ\ν  γαρ   καΐ 
ττλ€Ϊστον   χρόνον    €v    τω    χρώματι    ^)ΐατρίβονσιν,    Οταν    δ'  2ο 
άφίκωνταί  7τοτ€  ets  την  αρμονιαν,  €γγνί  τον  χρώματος  ττροσ- 

10  άγουσι  σνν^τΐΐστιωμίνον  τον  rjdovs.      ITept  τοντων   μ\ν  ουν 
€ττ1  τοσοντον  άρκ.€ΐτω'    6  δτ;  ττ/ί  λιχανον   τοττο?   rortato?  ι 
νττοκζίσθω,  6  δε  τη9  τταρυττάτης  διεσβω?  βλαχισττ]?.      ούτ€  25 
γαρ  €γγντ€ρω  τη9  νττάτης  7τροσ€ρχ€ται  bl€σ€ω9  οντ€  ττλύον 
αφίσταται  ημίσ€θί  τόνου,      ον  γαρ  ΙτταλΧάττονσιν  οι  τόττοι, 

1 5  αλλ'  €στιν  αντών  iripas  η  |  συναφή.  Οταν  γαρ  km  την  αντην  3ο 
τάσιν  άφίκωνταί  η   re  τταρυττάτη  καΐ  η  λιχανό^,  η  μ€ν  €771- 
τζίνομίνη  η  δ'  άνι^μίνη,  iripas  βχονσιν  οι  τόττοί'    καΐ  ^στιν 
6  μ€ν  €ττΙ  το  βαρύ  τταρυττάτη s,  6  δ'  ζττΐ  το  1 1  όζυ  λιχανον.  24 
Ylepl  μ\ν   ουν   των  όλων  τόττων  λιχανον  re  καϊ  τταρνττάτηί 

2ο  οντωξ  ωρίσθω,  ττ^ρΧ  he  των  κατά  {τα)  γένη  re  κα\  tols  xpoas 
λζκτάον.     Το  μ\ν  ουν  δια  τεσσάρων  ον  τρόττον  |  ^ζζταστάον,  δ 
etre  μ^τρ^ϊταί  rtrt  των  ^λαττόνων  διαστημάτων  etre  ττασίν 
ζστιν  άσύμμζτρον,   kv   toXs    hia    συμφωνίας   λαμβανόμενοι^ 
λe'yerαt•     ώ?    φαινομένου    δ'    [e^j    €  κείνου    hvo    τόνων    καΐ 

Ι    ^παχθησιν  Η  συνίΐθισμ4νοί$  (et  ex  77)  Mb  :    συνηθισμίνοιτ  S  : 

συν^θισμ^νοιε  Η  4  μ^νον  post  ovr^s  ponit  Η  Ζίτονον^  post  t 

litt.   eras.  Μ         χαλινών  sed.  in  marg.  Xixavhv  Β  5  δρίζουσι 

R         συντονοτζραίε  S  6  atel  Β  lo  ^0ous  Meibom:   idvovs  Η  : 

€0ous  rell.  II   δί;  Marquard  :  Se  codd.  14  έτταλλάττουσιν 

ex  ίλαττονσιν  Mc,  Vb  in  marg.  cum  signo  yp',  R  :  ελαττουσιν  Va  S  Β  in 
marg.  18  Xixavos  BR  19  Trepi  .  .  .  λιχανον  cm.  M,  et  καΐ 

■repl  τούτων  μ^ν  add.  in  marg.  Mb  :  eadem  Va  S,  Β  in  marg. :  quae  in 
textu  scripta  data  in  Β  R  et  Vb  in  marg.  cum  signo  yp'  20  ώρίσθαι 
Β  sed  ω  suprascr.,  Μ  sed  t  in  ras.  Mb  :  δρίσθω  Va  τα  restituit 

Marquard        post  re  ras.  Μ  22  ζιαστ-ημάτων  cm.  Va  S  :  add.  Vb 

in  marg.  24  e|  del.  Marquard         ΖυοΊν  Η 

I  2  115 


1.24  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

ΙΟ  ημίΐσ-ξΟί,  Κζίσθω  τοντο  αν  etrat  το  μ^γ^θος.  ΤΙνκνον  be 
λζγύσθω  το  €Κ  bvo  hιaστημάτωv  σνν€στηκ6ί  α  σνντ^θάντα 
ίλαττον  bLάστημa  Treptefet  του  λ^ιττομάνον  bLaστήμaτos   iv 

15  τω  δια  τεσσάρων.  |  Ύοντων  (δ')  οντω<ί  ωρισμ^νων  irpos  τω 
βαρντ€ρω    των   μενόντων  φθόγγων  ζίληφθω   το   (λάχίστον  5 
ττυκνόν   τοντο  δ'  eσrαt  το  ζκ  bvo  bUσ€ωv  {^ναρμονίων  kXa- 
γίστων   €π€ίτα  bevTepov  irpos  τω  αντω'   τοντο  be  ίσται  το 
ζκ  bvo  bL€σ€ωv)  γβωματικων  1\α)(ίστων.      ίσονται  be  (at) 

20  bvo  λι\γανοΙ  elλημμevaL  bvo  γ€νών  βαρνταται,  η  μ\ν  αρ- 
μονίας  η    be   χρώματος.      καθόλου   γαρ   βαρνταται    μ\ν   αΐ  ίο 

25  €ναρμόνωί  λιχανοί  ήσαν,  €χόμ€ναί  δ'  at  χρωματίκαί,  συν\τον' 
ώταται  δ'  at  biaTovou  Mera  ταύτα  τρίτον  elληφΘω  τΐνκνον 
Ίτρος  τω  αντω•  τέταρτον  (δ')  elληφθω  ττνκνον  τονιαίον 
τϊίμτΐτον  be  ττρος  τω   αντω^   το   e^  ημιτονίον   καΐ   ημιολίου 

3ο  διαστ?7|/χατο?  συveστηκbs   σύστημα   €ΐληφθω'     eKTOv   be   το  15 
€^  ημιτονίου   καΐ   τόνου.      At   μ€ν  ονν  τα   bvo   [τα]   ττρωτα 
Χ-ηφθ^ντα  ττνκνα  ορίζονσαι  λιχανοΙ  eϊρηvτaL'   η  be  το  τρίτον 

25  ττνκνον  ορίζουσα  ||  λιχανος  χρωματική  μ4ν  ^στιν,  καλ€Ϊταί 
be  το  χρώμα  ev  ω  €στΙν  ημωλίον.  Ή  be  το  τέταρτον  ττνκνον 
5  όρίζονσα  λίχανος  χρωματική  μίν  ^στίν,  KaXeiTai  |  δέ  το  2θ 
χρώμα  ev  ω  ^στι  τονιαίον,  ή  be  το  ττ€μτττον  ληφθev  σύ- 
στημα όρίζονσα  λίχανός,  ο  μ€Ϊζον  ηbη  ττνκνον  ην,  eTTeibr]TTep 
Χσα  €στι  τα  bύo  τω  evi,  βαρντάτη  biaTOvos  Ιστιν.      η  be  το 

ίο  ^κτον    ληφθev    |    σύστημα    όρίζονσα    λίχανός    σνντονωτάτη 

2  τί)  ex  τά  Mc        SvoTu  Η  4  δ'  restituit  Marquard  5  μ^νι^ντων 

om.  Β  6  duo7y  Η  ^ναρμονίων  .  .  .  SteVewv]  om.  Μ  V  S  :   ivap- 

μονίων  κα\  parvis  litt.  supra  lin.  reliquis  omissis  Mc  :  4ναρμονίων  τ€ 
καϊ  reliquis  omissis  Β  R  :  verba  in  textu  scripta  restituit  Marquard 
8  χρωματισηκων  S  al  restituit  Marquard  :   δύο  5e  Μ  Va  :  δύο  (δβ  et 

οί    omissis)    S:    δε    δύο    rell.  9    ΐΐλ-ημμίνων   {ai  suprascr.)    Β 

II  ^ναρμόνιοι]  eV  supra  lin.  add.,  spir,  in  ο  eras.  Mb:  αρμόνωι  Β  Ma 
συντονώταται  ex  συντονώτατοι  Ma(?):  συντονώτατοι^  ^  :  συντονωτατ 
δ'  ai  S  13  δ'  restituit  Marquard  14  τ)μιτόνιον  Η  i6  το 

del.  Marquard  17  rh  supra  lin.  Β  19  ημιόλιον  .  .  .  iv  φ  4στι 

cm.  Η  :  ημιόΚίον  .  .  .  χρώμα  om.  R  rh  ante  -ημιόλιον  add.  Μ  V  S 

22  δ]  ^  Η         μ^Ίζον  Vb  S  :  μείζων  Μ  Β  R  24  σύστημα^  σημαία  R 

ιι6 


ΑΡΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΏΝ    α  L25 

biarovos  €στιν.  Ή  μ^ν  ονν  βαρύτατη  χρωματίκη  λι\ανο9 
TTJs  €ναρμονίον  βαρύτατης  €κτω  μβρβυ  τόνου  οξύτερα  Ιστίν, 
€7Τ€ώη7Τ€ρ  η  χρω\ματίκη  6tWts  της  Ιναρμονίον  διεσεω?  δω-  15 
^βκατημορίω  τόνου  μείζων  €(ττ[.  ΔεΓ  γαρ  το  του  αντου 
5  τριτημόρων  του  τετάρτου  μίρους  bωheκaτημopL•ω  virepiyeLV, 
αϊ  he  hύo  γβωματικαϊ  των  hύo  |  €ναρμονίων  brjXov  ώ?  τω  2ο 
διττλασιω.  τοΰτο  he  €στΙν  €κτη μόρων,  ^λαττον  hLάστημa 
του  ελαχίστου  των  μ€λωhoυμivωv.  Τα  δβ  τοιαύτα  άμελω- 
hητά  €στιν,  άμ€λ(ύhητov  γαρ  λίγομ^ν  ο  μη  |  τάττ€ταί  καθ'  25 

ΙΟ  Ιαυτό  iv  συστηματί.      Ή  he  βαρύτατη  hiaTOVOs  της  βαρύ- 
τατης χρωματικής  ημιτονίω  καΐ  hωh€κaτημopLω  τόνου  δευτέρα 
€στίν.      €7rl  μ\ν  γαρ  την  του  ημωλίου  χρώματος  λιχανον  \ 
Ί)μιτόνίον  ην  άττ'  αυτής,  άττο  δε  της  ημωλίου  eirl  την  ivap-  3© 
μόνων   δΐ€σΐ9,   άττο  δε  της   ^ναρμονίου   km   την  βαρυτάτην 

15  χρωματίκην  €κτημόρων,  άττο   δε  της  βαρύτατης  χρωματικής 
επι  την  ημιόλιον  hωheκaτημόριov  τόνου.      το  [|   δε  τέταρτη-  26 
μόρων  εκ  τριών  hωheκaτημoρίωv  σύγκειται,  ωστ  eXvai  φαν€- 
ρόν,   ότι   το   άρημΑνον  hιάστημά  ecrriv  άττο  της  βαρύτατης 
hιaτόvoυ  €7tI  την  |  βαρυτάτην  χρωματικην.     *Η  δε  συντονω-  5 

2ο  τάτη  hιάτovoς  της  βαρύτατης  hιaτόvoυ  διεσει  Ιστι  συντονω- 
Tepa.     Έκ  τούτων  hrj  φανεροί  γίγνονται  οΐ  τόττοι  των  λιχανων 
ζκάστης•    η  τε  γαρ  βαρυ\τ^ρα  της  χρωματικής  ττάσά  Ιστιν  ίο 
^ναρμόνως  λιχανος  η  τε  της  hιaτόvoυ  βαρύτερα  ττάσά  €στι 

3   ζωζ^κατ-ημορίου  Μ  V  S  4   μείζων  Vb  :   μΐΊζον  Μ  S  Hoc  loco 

in  marg.  Μ  et  Va  et  Η  multa  adscripta  sunt,  quae  videas  in  Comra. 
5    ίπερβχείν]  ν  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  6   καΐ  post  χρωματικοί  add. 

Μ  R  Va  8  των  ελαχίστων  Η  αμζΚώτ-ητα  S  ίο  Ιαυτί» 

ex  Ιαυτώ  Mb         τφ  ante  σνστ•{)ματι  add.  Η         ιι,  ΐ2  in  marg.  Μχ  Vc 
haec  :  τ]  αί\  η  Κ  χρώμα  4στΙ  τί)  δ  μ€τα  του  ή  Ι3  ημίτονοι/  Η  απ'] 

eV'  R  14  Sleais  ex  Sieaiv  Mc  :  δίεσίΐ/ VBS  ,    16  Β^κατη- 

μόριον  Η  in   marg.   MxVc  haec:    4ναρμόν.  Sieais  τ°  (toiou  ?)  τι) 

τέταρτον  17  τριών  supra  lin.  Mb  5ωδ€κατημορίον  Ma,  sed  ωι/ 

supra  ov  scr.  Mb  18   ttjs  om.  Ma:   ins.  Mb  21    τόποί] 

τόίΌί    Β    in    marg.  22    βαρύτερα   Meibom  :    βαρύτατη    codd. 

23    ζναρμόνιοΒΐ  spir.  in   ο  eras,    ev  supra  lin.   add.   Mb  η  re] 

καΐ  7]  Η 

117 


1.26  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

{χρωματική  μ^χρι  της  βαρύτατης  χρωματικής  η  re  τη9  δια- 
τόνον  σνντονωτάτης  βαρύτερα  ττασά  (στι)  διάτονοί  μ^χρι 
τηί  βαρύτατης  ^ιατόνον.     NoT^reor  γαρ  αττζίρονί  τον  αριθμόν 

15  τας   λιχανονς'    ου   γαρ   |   αν   στησΎ]9   την  φωνην  του  άττο- 
b€b€ιγμivoυ  λιχανω  τόττου  λιχανος  ίσται,  διάκζνον  δ'  oibiv  5 
€(Γτι  του  λιχανο€ώοϋς  τόττου  oi)b€  τοιούτον  οίον  μη  ^ίχ^σθαι 

20  λιχανόν.  "ίΐστ'  dvai  μη  irepl  μικρού  την  |  άμφισβητησιν 
οι  μ\ν  γαρ  άλλοι  ^ιαφ€ρονται  irepl  του  hιaστημaτos  μόνον, 
οίον  ττότ^ρον  δίτονός  €στιν  η  λιχανος  η  συντονωτ^ρα  ώ?  μιας 

25  ούσης   ^ναρμονίου'    ημβΐς  δ'  ου  μόνον  ττλ^ίους  kv  |  kKaaTia  10 
γίν€ΐ  φαμίν  etvai  λιχανους  μιας  άλλα  καΐ  τιροστίθ^μ^ν  Οτι 
α7Γ€ΐροί  etVt  τον  αριθμόν.      Τα  μ€ν  ουν  ττ^ρΐ  των  λιχανων 
οϋτως   άφωρίσθω'    τταρυττάτης   be   bvo   dal   τόττοι,   δ   μ^ν   | 

30  κοινός  του  re  bιaτόvoυ  καΐ  του  χρώματος,  6  δ'  €τ€ρος  ϊbιoς 
της  αρμονίας'    κοινωνύ  γαρ  rq  bύo  γίνη  των  τταρυττατων.  15 
€ναρμόνιος  μ€ν   ουν   eσri  τταρυττάτη   ττασα  η   βαρύτερα  της 

27  βαρύτατης  χρωματικής,  χρωματική  δe  και  bιάτo\^voς  η  λοιτπ; 
Ίτασα  μίχρι  της  άφωρισμίνης.  Ύων  δe  bιaστημάτωv  το  μίν 
υπάτης  και  τταρυττάτη  ς  τω  τταρυττάτης  καΐ  λιχανου  ήτοι  ίσον 
5  /^eλωδeιrαι  η  ίλατ^τον,  το  be  τταρυττάτης  καΐ  λιχανου  τω  2ο 
λιχανου  και  μέσης  καΐ  Ισον  καΐ  αν  ίσον  άμφοτέρως.  τούτου 
δ'  αΧτιον  το  κοινάς  eivai  τας  τταρυττάτας  των  γ^νων,  γίγνβται 

ΙΟ  γαρ  €μμζλ€ς  T€Tpaxopbov  eK  τταρυ\ττάτης  re  χρωματικής  {της) 
βαρύτατης  καΐ  bιaτόvoυ  λιχανου  της  συντονωτάτης.      Ό  δe 

Ι  χρωματική  .  .  .  πασά  iari  restituit  Marquard  4  'ras]  rovs  sed 

supra  0  ras.  in  qua  α  fuisse  vid.  Ma  :  rohs  V  S,  Β  (sed  ου  in  ras.  et 
α  suprascr.)  οδ  ex  ού  Mc  :  ου  VS  του  άττοδ^δβίγ^αει/ου  τόττω 

λιχάνω  Ma,  sed  ω  supra  του,  ω  supra  άποδεδείγ^^β'^ου  et  ου  supra  λιχανω 
add.  Mc  :  τόττω  Χιχάνω  VS  :  τόττου  {ω  suprascr.)  λίχοίΌυ  Β  5  δ'] 

yap  Η  8  μόνου  Η  9   ^i-Tovos  Meibom  :    hiaTovos  codd. 

ouTrjs  post  μια$  add.  R  15  τα  add.  Mx  16  εστί]  ίτι  Β  : 

cVtI  β  in  marg.  18  τί»  μ^ν  .  .  •  τταρυπάτη?  cm.  R  20  τί>] 

τψ  S         τφ  λιχανου  cm.  R  21   αμή>οτ4ρω$  Marquard  :   άμφοτ4ροΐί 

codd.  23    Trjs   βαρυτάτ7ΐ5   conieci  :    τταρυπάτηΒ   codd.    (R   et    Β 

in  marg.)  :  βαρυτ^ραε  Tivhs  ttjs  7}μιτονιαία$  ante  τταρυττάττι?  add. 
Marquard 

118 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙίΙΝ    α  1. 27 

της  τταρνττάτηί  τόιτο9  φαν€ρόί  €στι  €κ  tQ)V  ζμπροσθ^ν, 
6tai/)€^€ti  re  καΐ  avvTeO^h  oaos  kariv.  | 

riept  δβ  avv^x^ias  και  τον  k^rjs  ακριβώς  ου  ττάνν  15 
pahiov  kv  άρχγ  hiopLaai,  τντΐω  δε  Τΐζίρατ^ον  νποσημηναι. 
5  Φαίν€ταί  be  τοιαύτη  tls  φύσις  ehai  τον  σνν€χονς  iv  ttj  /xcA- 
ωδια  ota  καΐ  iv  τη  Ae|^e6  Trept  την  των  γραμμάτων  σύν-  2ο 
θζσιν  κα\  yap  iv  τω  διαλeyeσ^αt  φύ(Τ€ΐ  η  φωνή  καθ'  €κάστην 
των  συλλαβών  ττρώτόν  τι  κα\  δ^ύτ^ρον  των  γραμμάτων  τίθησι 
καΐ  τρίτον  καΐ  τέταρτον  καΐ  κατά  |  τους  λοιπούς  αριθμούς  25 

ΙΟ  ωσαύτως,  ου  τταν  μ€τα  ττάν,  αλλ'  €στι  τοιαύτη  τις  φυσική 
ανζησις  της  συνθέσεως,      τταραττλησίως  bk  κάϊ  iv  τω  μ€λ- 
(ubeiv  eoiK€v  η  φωνή  τιθ^ναι  κατά  σνν^χζίαν  |  τά  re  bιaστη-  30 
ματα  καΐ  τους  φθόγγους  φυσικην  τίνα  σύνθξσιν  bιaφvλάτ- 
τουσα,  ου  ττάν  μ€τα  ττάν  bιάστημa  μ€λωboυσa  ούτ  ίσον  ούτ 

15  άνισον.      Ζ,ητητάον  be  το  συν€γ\ς  ούχ  ως  οι  αρ]\μονικοΙ  iv  28 
ταΐς  των  bιaγpaμμάτωv  καταπυκνωσ^σιν  airobibovai  7Τ€ΐρών- 
ται,    τούτους    άττοφαινοντζς    των    φθόγγων    €^ης    αλλήλων 
Κζϊσθαι  οίς  συμ\β€βηκ€  το  iλάχ^ιστov  bιάστημa  bie^eiv  αφ'  5 
αυτών.      ου  γαρ   ότι  [μη]  bυvaτόv  bιiσ€ις  όκτω  και  €Ϊκοσιν 

20  ζξης   μ€λωbησaι   τη    φωνή    Ιστίν,   άλλα    την   τρίτην   bUσιv 
ττάντα  ττοιονσα  ούχ^  οϊα  |  re  iστι  ττροστιθζναι,  αλλ'  iirl  μ\ν  ίο 
το  οζύ  iλά\ιστov  μ€λωbeΐ  το  λοιπόν  του  bia  τεσσάρων, — • 
τα  δ'  €λάττω  πάντα  i^abvvaTeX — τοντο  δ'  iστ\v  ήτοι  όκτα- 
πλάσιον  της  iλaχίστης  bιiσ€ως  η  μικρω  τινί  |  7ΓαI'reλώy  καΐ  ΐ5 

2  συρτ€θ€\$  Μ  V  Β  S  :  συνηθ^Ιε  R  :  ivredels  Marquard  4  υιτοση- 

μΐΐναι  S  7  '^1  ^  β  (^ων^  Β  καθ^κάίττη  Η  8  τι^  τ€ 

Β  R  9  λθίπου5  om.  Η  ίο  αλλ'  εστί  .  .  .  συνθβσ^ωε  cm.  Μ, 

in  marg.  Mc  (οι  in  τοιαύτη  in  ras.) :  Vb  in  marg.  sed  τοιαύτη  et  tis  om. 
τοιαύτη  Tis]  tis  αί/ττ;  S  tis  om.  Β  i6  '/ραμμάτων  S  17   e^rjs 

ex  e|  ?is  Mc  :    €ξ  r)s  V :    ife^rjs  Η  αλλήλων  post  κ^ΐσθαι  ponit  Η 

19  ου  yap  μόνον  τλ  μη  Βύνασθαι  δ.  6.  κ.  4.  Ι.  μίλψζβΊσθαι  ttjs  φωνη5  4στίν 
Marquard  'ότι  conieci :  του  codd.  μ^  seclusi  δυνατόν  conieci : 
ίύνασθαι  codd.  Sieais  Β  2ο  /χελΰ^^δησα*  conieci :  μζλ(()5€Ϊσθαι 

codd.  24  δίεσεωϊ]  δί  in  ras.  Mb 

119 


1.28  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

άμ€λωbr|T(ύ  ^λαττον,  iirl  0€  το  βαρν  των  bvo  ^ιΐίσ^ων  τονιαίον 
€Καττον   ον   6νναταί   μ€λωb€Ϊv.      Ον    δη    ττροσξκτ^ον   et   το 

2ο  σνν€χ€9  6τ€  μίν  €ξ  'ίσων  δτ€  δ'  ef  άνισων  γίγνζται,  |  άλλα 
ττρο?  την  τηξ  μελωδία?  φνσιν  Ή^ιρατίον  βΧίΐϊ^ιν  κατανοξΐν 
re   ττροθνμονμβνον   τι   μ^τα   τί  ττζφνκ^ν    ή    φωνή    διάστημα  5 
τιθ^ναι  κατά  μίλο^.     et  γαρ  μ^τά  τταρνττάτην  καΐ  λιχανον  μη  | 

25  δυνατόν  €γγντ€ρω  μζλωδήσαι  φΘόγγον  μ4ση9,  αντη  hv  €Ϊη 
μ€τα  την  λιγανόν,  eire  διττλάσιον  eire  ττολλαττλάσιον  διά- 
στημα ορίζει  {του)  τταρυπάτη^   καΐ  λιχανοϋ.      Ύίνα  μ€ν  ονν 

3ο  τρόπον  τό  re  σD^'eχes  καΐ  |  το  k^ijs  δet  ζητ€Ϊν,  σ-χeδoι'  δηλον  ίο 
e/c  των  ζίρημίνων    ττω?  δ\  γίγν^ται  καΐ  τί  μ^τά  τί  διάστημα 

29  τίθ^ταί  re  κα\  ον  τίθεται,  kv  rots  [  |  σrotχetoi9  δetχ^7ίσerαι. 

^Ύτΐοκ^ίσθω    μ€τα    το    ττνκνον    η    το    άττυκνον   τιΘίμ^νον 

σύστημα  eπι  μ\ν  το  ο^ν  μη  τίθβσθαι  (λαττον  διάστημα  του 

5  λ€ΐ7τομ€νον   τη9  |  ττρωτης    συμφωνίας,    Μ    δe   το   βαρν   μη  1 5 

€λαττον   τονιαίον     νττοκζίσθω    δ€    καΐ   των   k^rjs    κ^ιμ^νων 

φθόγγων  κατά  ju,eλos  iv  €κάστω  yeVet  ήτοι  roi/j  τζτάρτον^ 

ΙΟ  [rots  rer/^ασt]  δια  τ^ττάρων  συμ\φων€Ϊν  η  roi/s  ττζμτττου^ 
[rots  TTeWe]  δια  ττάντ^  η  άμφοτίρω^'  ω  δ'  αν  των  φθόγγων 
μηδ\ν  fi  τούτων  συμβ^βηκό^,  €κμ€λη  τούτον  eTvai  irpos  τονί  ots  20 

15  άσύμφωνόί  €στιν.  ^Ύττοκ^ίσθω  δe  και  |  τ^ττάρων  γιγνο- 
μ^νων  διαστημάτων  Ιν  τω  δια  ττ^ντζ,  δύο  μ€ν  ίσων  cos  eTTt 
το  ττολύ,  των  το  ττυκνον  κατ€γόντων,  δύο  δ'  άνισων,  τον  re 
λζίττομξνον  τηί  τΐρώτη^  συμφωνίας  καΐ  τηί  VTrepo^rjs  17  "^ο 

2ο  δια  Ι  Tre'rre  του  δια  τεσσάρων  ^Trepexei,   €ναντίω9  τίθ^σθαι  25 

Ι   ά/Λ€λή^δήτω]  Ί)  in  ras,  Mb         ^λαττον  Meibom  :  ixarroui  Μ  V  S  R  : 
ίλάττωνι   Β  τονιαίον   Meiboin  :    rouiaiwj/   Μ  V  R  :    τονιαίον   Β  S 

2    (ίΧαττον  supra  lin.   Mx.  cm.  Va,  add.  in  marg.  Vb  ζυνατ))ν  Η 

δ);]  5e  Η  €t  conieci :  ds  codd.  7  ζυνατ'όν  cm.  Β  :  ζυνατ^  S,  Vb 

(sed  ή  in  ras.)  9  toC  restituit  Marquard  12  re  om.  Η 

13  ytiera  conieci  :  yuei/  codd.  τΙ  άττυκνον  ex  τί)»/  irvKvhv  (ut  vid.)  Mb 

14  μη  τίθζσθαι']  μ^τατίθίσθαι  Μ  15  λοητομ^νου  Η  ΐ8  τοΓι 
τίτρασι  del.  Meibom  19  toIs  TreVre  del.  Meibom  20  chat 
om.  Η  Tovs  ofs]  τουτο£5  R  24  λοιπομίνου  Η  ^  ex  ^  Mb  : 
i^  S  rb  ex  ToC  Ma  (?)  S  :  rb  Vb  cum  ras.  post  h  25  ύπ€ρ4χα 
Meibom  :  ύπίρ4χ€ΐν  codd. 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΏΝ    α  1. 29 

TTpos  rots  Γσοίί  τα  [he]  άνισα  evrt  re  το  όξν  καΐ  το  βαρύ, 
^Ύτΐοκζίσθω  be  καΐ  tovs  rot?  e$rjs  φθόγγοίς  συμφωνούνται 
δια  tt\s  avTTJs  σνμ\φωνίαί  e^ijs  avTois  elvaL.  ^Aσvvθeτov  be  25 
v■πoκeίσθω  ev  ^κάστω  yevei  elvai  bLάστημa  κατά  μ€λθ9  ο  η 
5  φωνή  μ€λωbovσa  μη  bvvaTai  biaipelv  els  bιaστΎιμaτa.  'Τττο- 
Κ€ίσΘω  be  καΐ  των  σνμφώ\νων  ίκαστον  μη  bιaιpeϊσΘaι  els  30 
aσvvθeτa  ττάντα  μeγeθη,  *  Αγωγή  δ'  eσrω  η  bia  των  e^rjs 
φθόγγων  {ων),  eσωθev  των  άκρων,  [ων]  ev  {ίκάστον)  eKa- 
Τ€ρωθ€ν  άσvvθeτov  Ketrai  bLάστημa•    evdela  δ'  η  eirl  το  αυτό. 


Ι   δβ  del.  Meibom         re  om.  R  rh  ante  βαρύ  om.  S  2  tovs 

ex  rh  Mc  :  rhVS  συμφωνούνται  ex  συμφώνου  ras  Mc  :   συμφώνου 

ras  V  S  :  καϊ  rh  συμφώνου  tcls  in  marg.  Β  3  auToTs  Marquard  : 

αύτοΊε  codd.  4  ante  δ  una  litt.  eras.  Μ         η  supra  lin.  add.  Mx  : 

om.  V  S  ^  ante  η  add.  Β  5  ψωνί;]  ί;  in  ras.  Vb  ξιάστημα 

Β  sed  in  marg.  ζιασττ\ματα  7  τνάντα  supra  lin.  add.  Mc  :  om.  V  S 

8  ων  addidi         %σωθζν  conieci  :  {^ωθ^ν  codd.         6.κρων  conieci  :  άρχων 
codd.  ων  seclusi  :  supra  lin.  Β  χών  ων  et  ace.  in  %v  Mc  Vb  ; 

antea  in  utroque  cod.  lacuna  erat :  IS:  eV  rell.         εκάστου  addidi 


API2TOSENOT     ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΏΝ 
STOIXEIilN     ΔΕΤΤΕΡΟΝ 

30?  ΙΟ  BikTLOV  ϊσωξ  €στΙ  το  7rpo6t|eX^etr  τον  τρόπον  ttjs  ττρα- 
γματ€ία9  tls  ττοτ  €στίν,  Ίνα  7τρογίγνώσκοντ€9  ωσιτ€ρ  obbv  rf 
βahίστlov  pahiov  τΐορ^νώμ^θα  etooVes  re  κατά  τί  μ€ροί  ea/xer  5 

15  avTTJs  I  καΐ  μη  λάθωμ€ν  ■ημά9  avTOvs  τταρυττολαμβάνοντζ^  το 
τΐράγμα.  KaOairep  ^Αρίστοτ^λης  ael  διτ^γβιτο  τονί  ττλίΐστου? 
των  άκονσάντων  τταρα  Πλάτωνος  την  irepl  τάγαθον  ακρόασιν 

2ο  7Γαθ€Ϊν.  Ι  TTpoaUvaL  μ^ν  γαρ   €καστον  νττολαμβάνοντα   λη- 
ψ€σΘα(  TL  των  νομιζομάνων  τούτων  ανθρωπίνων  αγαθών  οΧον  ίο 
πλοΰτον  vyUiav  Ισγνν  το  όλον  ζν^αιμονίαν  tlvcl  θανμαστην 

2  5  δτ€  he  Ι  φαν€ίησαν  οί  λόγοι  irepl  μαθημάτων  καΐ  αριθμών 
καΐ  γ€ωμ€τρία9  καΐ  αστρολογίας   καΐ  το   irepas  ότι  αγαθόν 

31  €(ττιν  €V,  τταντζλώί  οΐμαι  irapahoW^ov  τι  Ιφαίν^το  avToXs' 
et^'  οί  μ\ν  νπ  ο  καταφρονούν  τον  πράγματος  οι  δε  κατ€-  15 
μάμφοντο.  Tt  ονν  το  αίτιον;  ον  πρor|b€σav,  αλλ'  ωσπαρ 
5  οι  εριστικοί  [  προς  τοννομα  αντο  νποκζγτινότας  προση^σαν 
et  hi  ye  τις  οΐμαι  προαξατίθαι  το  όλον,  απαγίνωσκαν  αν  ό 
μέλλων  aKoveiv  η   €Ϊπ€ρ  ηρ€σκ€ν  αντω  hUμevev  αν   iv  τη 

ΙΟ  (Ιρημάντ]  νποληψαι.  |  ΥΙροάλαγα  μ€ν  ουν  καϊ  αυτός  ^Αριστο-  2ο 

3    ττροΐΚθίΤίν    (δί   suprascr.")    Β  4    "rts    Marquard :    τί   codd. 

6  παρυπολαμβανόντων  Ma,  sed  es  supra  ων  scr.  Mb  11   ττλοντον] 

post  ο  ante  ν  ras.   Μ  vyeiav  MVBS  evSamovias  τιμ^ν  R 

12  5e  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  17  οί  om.  lac.  4  syllabb.  R  18  προ- 

e|eTi0T7  Ma  praeter  θη  quod  cum  ei  superposito  ab  Mb  in  ras.  qua  plus 
una   littera   deleta  erat  fTTfyiuwaKeu  ex   άπεγ.  Μ  :    έπ^γίνωσκ^ν 

rell.  19   καΐ  infra  lin.  ante  ^  add.  Mb  20   ίΙΚημμίντ) 

Marquard 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    β'  II.  3ΐ 

Τζληξ  δι'  αντα9  ταύτας  tcls  ahCas,  ώί  €φη,  rot?  μ^Χλονσιν 
ακροασθαι  τταρ  αντον,  ττ€ρΙ  τίνων  τ  έστΙν  η  Ίτραγματ^ία  καΐ 
Tty.  Βζλτων  be  καΐ  ημΐν  |  φαίνζται,  καθάττ^ρ  ύτΐομ^ν  iv  15 
cLpxfj,  το  TTpoeibivaL.  Ftyrerat  γαρ  ivioTe  εφ'  €κάτ€ρα 
5  αμαρτία'  οί  μ^ν  γαρ  μ^γα  τι  ντίοΚαμβάνονσιν  elvai  το 
μάθημα  καΐ  ίσ^σθαι  ίνιοι  μ\ν  ον  μό\νον  μουσικοί  άκον-  2ο 
σαντ€ί  τα  αρμονικά,  άλλα  καΐ  β^λτωνς  το  rjOos, — τταρακον- 
aavT€S  των  kv  rati  hei^eai  λόγων  otl  ττζίρώμζθα  7τοί€Ϊν  των 
μζλοττοιϊων    (κάστην    καΐ   το    όλον,   της    μουσικής   |    ort  ή  25 

ΙΟ  μ€ν  τοιαύτη   βλάτΓΤ€ί  τα  ηθη  η   δε  τοιαύτη   ωφελεί,   τούτο 
αντο  7ταρακούσαντ€ς,  το  δ'  οτι   καβ*  όσον  μουσική  bύvaτaι 
ώφ€λ€Ϊν  oi)b'  άκούσαντ€ς  όλως' — οί  δε  ττάλιν  ως  oibev  |  αλλ'  3° 
η  μικρόν  τι  καΐ  βουλόμ^νοι  μη  ύναι  ε/χπειροι  μηb\  τί  ττοτ 
€στιν.     OvbeTepov  δε  τούτων  άληθ€ς  Ιστιν,  ούτ€  γαρ  €νκατα- 

15  φρόνητόν  εσrt  rtz^t  δ?  νουν  έχει  το  μάθημα — bηλov  δ'  εσrαt 
7r/)otoV||ros   του  λόγου — ,    ούτ€   τηλικοϋτον    ώστ    αυτάρκης  3^ 
ζΧναι  ττρος  ττάντα,  καθάτϊ^ρ  οϊονταί  τιν€ς.     ττολλα  γαρ  brj  καΐ 
erε/^α  υπάρχει  [η]  καθάττ^ρ  άα.  λ^γ^ται  τω  |  μουσικω'   μέρος  5 
γάρ  €στιν  η  αρμονική  ττραγματζία  της  του  μουσικού  ε^εω?, 

20  καθάπ€ρ  η  rε  ρυθμική  και  η  μετρική  καΐ  η  οργανική.     Α^κτίον 
ουν  TT€pi  αυτής  rε  και  των  μ€ρών.\ 

Καθόλου  μ€ν  υυν  νοητίον  ούσαν  ημΐν  την  θζωρίαν  ττερί  ίο 
μέλους  τταντος  ττώς  7Γorε  τΐέφυκ^ν  η  φωνή  ^ττιΤΕΐνομένη  καΐ 
άνΐ€μένη   τιθέναι   τα    bιaστημaτa.      φυ\σικην   γαρ   δ?}   rtm  15 

Ι  €φη  conieci  :  ςφ-ην  codd.  3  ««^  Vf^^^']  ««'  ο^η.  R  6  μ^ν 

in   ras.  Μ  :    δε  pro  μ^ν  Β  R  ίσ^σθαι  post  μ^ν  ponit  Marquard 

OLKoiovT^s   {σαν  suprascr.)    Β  7    '^°^   om.   Β  τταρακούον- 

T€S  Β  9  μ^λωποιων  S  ΐκάστην  καΐ  cm.  R  1 1   καί  ante 

κα0'  'όσον  add.   Marquard  12    άλλ'  ί)   Marquard  :    άλλα  codd. 

13    €μτΓ€ΐροί   conieci  :    aireipOL    codd.  M^/Se   τί  ττοτ'   iστίv]   μηδίτι 

ναρίστιν  R  14  ayvoe7v  ιτρόσ^ισι  post  ττοτ'  εστί»'  add.  Marquard       5e] 

70Ρ  R  οληθεϊ  εστί»/]  €στιν  om.  R  lac.  15  εστί  τιιί  &s  νουν  e^et 

conieci  :  ξστιν  ws  νυν  εχβί  codd.  16  \oyou  om.  R  lac.         αϋταρκ65 

om.  R  lac.  18  ^  seclusi  τούτο  post  ί}  add.  Westphal  ael 

om.  R  20  καΐ  7]  μξτρικτ]  om.  R  22  οϋσηε  ημΊν  Trjs  dewpias  Η 

24  δή  om.  Β 


11.32  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

φαμ€ν  ■ημ€Ϊί  την  φωνην  κίνησιν  κιν^ισθαι  καΐ  ουχ  ώ?  €τν\€ 
Ιίάστημα  τιθίναι.     ΚαΙ  τούτων  aTrooet^etj  ττ^ιρώμζθα  Xiyeiv 

20  6μολογονμ€να9  tols  φαινομίνοΐ'ί,  ον  κα^θάττ^ρ  οί  ^μττροσθίν, 
οΐ  μ€ν  άλλοτρωλογουντ€9  καΐ  την  μ^ν  αίσθησιν  €Κκλίνοντ€9 
ώί  ονσαν  ουκ.  ακριβή,  νοητα^  h\  κατασκ€νάζοντ€ς  atrtay  καΐ  5 

2  5  φάσκοντ€ς  λόγους  re  TLvas  αριθμών  eivai  |  καΐ  τάχη  ττρο? 
άλληλα  iv  oXs  τό  τ€  όζν  καΐ  το  βαρύ  γίγν€ται,  ττάντων 
άλλοτριωτάτονί  λόγονί  λ€γοντ€9  καΐ  €ναντιωτάτον5  rots 
φαινομίνοι^'    οι  δ'  άττο^εσττι^οζ^τβ?  έκαστα  avev  αιτίας  καΧ  | 

3ο  anohei^eods  ουδ'  αντα  τα  φαινόμενα   καλώξ  €^ηριθμηκότ€ί.  ίο 

'H/xet?  δ'  άργά^  re  7Τ€φωμ€θα  λαβαν  φαινομίνα^  άττάσας 
33  ''"οΐί    6/χ7Γ€ΐροι?   μουσικής   καΐ   τα   eK   τούτων   σνμ^^βαίνοντα 
aTTobeiKVvvai. 

"Εστί  δ?)  το  /χ€Ζ^  ολοζ^  τ7Μΐζ;  {η)  θεωρία  irepl  μίλονί  iravTos 

μονσικον  του  γιγνομ^νον  kv  φωνγ  re  καΧ  opyavoLS.    'Arayerat  15 

5  δ'  η  ττραγματ€ία  [  et?  διίο,  etj  re  r^y  άκοην  καΐ  ets  r^i'  διά- 

νοιαν.      TTJ    μ€ν   γαρ   άκοτ]    κρίνομ^ν   τα   των   bιaστημάτωv 

μ€γ4Θη,  TTJ  b€  biavoia  Θ^ωρονμ^ν  raj  των  {φθόγγων)  bvvάμ€^s^ 

ΙΟ  Ael  ονν  €'π€θισθηναι  έκαστα  |  άκριβώ5  κρίν^ιν.     ον  γαρ  €στιν 
ωστΐζρ  €7ΐΙ  των  bιaγpaμμάτωv  €Ϊθισται  λίγ^σθαΐ'    Ιστω  τοντο  20 
ζνθύα   γραμμή, — οντω    καΐ   iirl   των   bιaστημάτωv   eiirovTa 

15  άττηλλάχθαι  [δβι].  Ό  μ€ν  γαρ  γ^ωμίτρη^  \  ovbev  χρηται  rr) 
TTJs  αΙσθησ€ω9  bvvάμ€l,  ον  γαρ  e^tfet  την  όψιν  οντ€  το  €υθν 
οντ€  το  TTtpi^epes  οντ  άλλο  ovbev  των  τοιούτων  οντ€  φαύλω9 

2ο  οντ€  €v  κρίν€ΐν,  άλλα  μάλλον  δ  τίκτων  καΐ  |  6  τορν^ντη^  καΐ  25 
€T€pai  Tiv€S  των  τεχνών  irepl  ταύτα  ττραγ ματ  λύονται•   τω  be 
μονσικω  a^jebov  €στιν  άρχηί  ζχονσα  τάζιν  η  τη9  αΙσθησ€ω$ 

Ι  ουχ  ex  ουκ  et  ωε  supra  lin.  Μ  2  XeX^yeiv  S  5  ούσαν 

post  ακριβή  ponit  Η  ουκ  om.  S  καΐ  post  Se  add.  R  η  rh 

βαρύ  Η  :  rh  om,  rell.  8  εναντιότατους  Β  g  α-ποτ^ρίΓίζοντ^ί  Η 

II   airaaas  om.  R  lac.  :  αττασι  Η  I4  η  restituit  Marquard  16  re 

ora.  Β  l8  των  ψθόΎΎων  conieci :  τούτων  codd.  19  επβθισθηναι^ 

iveOi  in  ras.  Mb  :  4θισθηναι  R,  in  marg.  Β  ai   οΰτω]  post  ω  litt. 

<r  eras.  Μ  22  οπηλλαχθηί/at  Η  δβ?  seclusi  τί)  add.  Mb(?) 

23  oi/re  T^  ίΰθυ  om.  R  27  ^  supra  lin.  add.  Ma  (vel  Mb) 

124 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΏΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΏΝ    β'  ΙΙ.33 

ακρίβεια,  ον  γαρ  €ν^€χ€ταί  φανλωζ  αΙσθανόμζ\νον  €υ  kiyeiv  25 
Trepl  τούτων  ων  μφίνα  τρόττον  αισθάνεται.     ''Έ,σ-ταί  6e  τούτο 
φανερον  €π'  airrrjs  ttJs  τΐραγματζία^.     Ον  δ€?  δ'  ayvo^Zv,  οτι 
η  της  μουσικής  ξννεσις  αμα  μένοντος  τίνος  |  καΐ  κινουμένου  3° 
5  εστί  κα\  τ'οΰτο  σχ^ζ^ον  δια  ττάσης  καΐ  κατά  τΐάν  μέρος  αντης, 
ως  ζίπεϊν  άττλώ?,  hιaτζίveιv.      Έ,νθίως  γαρ  τας  των  γενών 
b^aφoρaς  αίσθανόμεθα  του  μεν  ττεριεχοντος  μένοντος,  των  δε 
μέσων  κινουμένων    καΐ  ττάλιν  \  j  όταν  μένοντος  του  μεγέθους  34 
τόδε  μεν  καλώμεν  νττάτην  καΐ  μεσην,  τόδε  δβ  τταραμεσην  καΐ 

ΙΟ  νητην,  μένοντος  [γαρ]  του  μεγέθους  συμβαίνει  κινεΐσθαι  τας 
των  Ι  φθόγγων  δυνάμεις'   καΐ  ττάλιν  όταν  του  αντοϋ  μεγέθους  5 
ττλβιω  σχίσματα  γίγνηται,  καθάπερ  του  τε  bia  τεσσάρων  καΐ 
δια   ττεντε   καΐ   έτερων     ωσαύτως    δε    καΐ    όταν   τον   αντου 
διαστήματος  ττον  |  μεν  τιθεμ4νον  μεταβολή  γίγνηται,  ττοϋ  δε  ίο 

15  μψ     Πάλιν  εν  τοις  ττερί  τους  ρνθμονς  ττολλα  τοιαΰθ^  όρώμεν 
γιγνόμενα'    κα\  γαρ  μένοντος  τον  λόγου  καθ*  ον  διώρισται  τα 
γένη  τα  μεγέθη   κινεΐ\ταί  των  ττοδών  δια  την  της  αγωγής  ΐ5 
δνναμιν,  καϊ  των  μεγεθών  μενόντων  ανόμοιοι  γίγνονται  οΐ 
ττόδες'   καϊ  το  αντο  μέγεθος  ττόδα  τε  δύναται  καϊ  σνζνγίαν 

20  δηλον  δ'   ότι  καϊ  (αϊ  διαφοραΐ)  αί  τών  διαιρεσε\ών  τε  καϊ  2ο 
σχτιμάτων   ττερΙ   μενον  τι  μέγεθος  γίγνονται.      καθόλον  δ' 
ειττεΐν  η  μεν  ρνθμοττοιια  ττολλας   και  τταντοδαττας  κινήσεις 
κινείται,  οι   δε  ττόδες  οίς  σημαινόμεθα  τονς  ρνθμονς  άπλα? 
re  j  και  τας   αντας  αεί.      Ύοιαντην   δ'  εχονσης  φνσιν  της  25 

25  μουσικής  άναγκαΐον  καϊ  εν  τοΐς  ττερΙ  το  ηρμοσμενον  σννε- 

I   ού  Marquard  :  οί/τε  codd.  αΐσθανόμ^νος  Β  2  tuu  Β  :  wu 

in  marg.  3  f'""']  °^'  ^  4  H-^vovtos  ex  μίν  ovtos  Mc  :  yuei/ 

ovros  Va  Β  5  outtjs  om.  Η  lo  yap  seclusi  συμβαίνει 

.    .   .  μ^Ύ^θουε   cm.   S  12    ylveTai  Ma   (sed  -η  suprascr.    Mo 

VBS  13    δίά    πέντε]    dia    supra    lin.    add.    Mc :    om.    VS,  Β 

(sed   add.  in   marg.)  14    που  μ€ΐ/^}  ττοωνμ^ν  Η  yiverai 

SR  16    καθ'  t>u   ex    καθ})    Mc :     καθ},  VSB  19    το 

avrh   conieci  :    αυτί)  rh  codd.  20    αί  διαφοραΐ  addidi  {ζιαφοραΐ 

post  σχημάτων  addidit  Marquard)         at  των]  ul  om.  R  Η  2i  irepi- 

μίνοντί  Β 

125 


11.34  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΕΕΝΟΤ 

θίσθηναί  την  re  biavoLav  καΙ  την  αίσθησιν  καλω9  κρίν€ίν  το 
3ο  τ€  μάνον  καΧ  το  κί^νούμ€νον,     Άττλώί  μ€ν  ουν  etTretr  τοιαύτη 
tCs  €στίν  η  αρμονική  κληθύσα  ^ττκττήμη  οϊαν  bl€ληλύθaμ€V^ 
σνμβ€βηκ€  δ'  αυτήν  Ζιαιρύσθαι  els  kiTTa  μ^ρη.  1 1 
35        ^^1^  €στΙν  (V  μ€ν  καΐ  ττρώτον  το  hiopiaai  τα  γ^νη  καΐ  5 
ΤΓΟιησαι  φανζρόν,  τίνων  ττοτ€  μενόντων  κα\  τίνων  κινουμένων 
5  at  hia^>opal   αύται  γίγνονται,      Ύου\το  γαρ   oibels  ττώττοτΕ 
6ιωρισ€  τρόπον  τίνα  ^Ικότωί'    ου  γαρ  ^ττραγματζύοντο  irepl 
των  δύο  γ€νών,  άλλα  Trept  αύτη^  ttjs  αρμονία^'   ου  μην  αλλ* 
ΙΟ  οϊ  ye  διατρίβοντ€9  irepl  τα  όργανα  διτ]σθάνοντο  |  μ^ν  εκάστου  ίο 
των  γ€νών,  αύτο  be  το  Trore  ap^eTai  ef  αρμονίας  χρωμά  τι 
γίγveσθaly  oibeXs  ovb^  e7τeβλeψe  ττώττοτ    αυτών.      oύτe  γαρ 
κατά  ττασαν  χρόαν  εκάστου  των  γevώv  birjaOavovTo  bia  το 
15  μητe  |   ττά(της  μeλoπoαα?   eμ'πeιρoι   eivai  μητe   συν€ΐθίσθαι 
Trept    TCLS    τοιαύτας    bιaφopas    άκpιβoλoγeΐσθaι'     ούτ     αυτό  15 
'πωs  τούτο  κaτeμaθov  Οτι  τόττοι  Tives  ήσαν  των  κινουμένων 
2ο  φθόγγων  ev  ταΪ9  |  των  γ€νών  bιaφopaΐs.      Δι'  α?  μev   ουν 
αιτίας  ουκ  ην  bιωpισμeva  τα  γ^νη  irpOTepov,  σ)(eδor  elaiv  αί 
elρημevaι'   Οτι   be  biopiaTeov  el   μeλλoμev   άκoλoυθeΐv  rat? 
25  γιγνομ^ναι^  ev  toIs  μeλeσι  bιa\φoρaΐs,  φαν€ρόν.  2o 

Πρώτον  μev  ουν  τών  μ€ρών  eσrt  το  elρημevov'   beύτeρov 
be    το    Trept    bιaστημάτωv    elirelv,    μηbeμίav    τών    ύπαρ- 
χο γρυσών    αύτοΐί    bιaφopώv    els    bύvaμιv    7τapaλιμ\'πάvovτas. 
Σχebbv  be,  ώ?  άττλωί  etTreti^,  at  irXeiovs  αυτών  elalv  ά^eώ- 
ρητοι.      ου   bei   δ'  άγvoeΐv,   Οτι    καθ'  ην  αν  γevώμeθa  τών  25 

τ   €ί  ante  κα\ώ5  et  βουλοίμ€θα  ante  Kplveiv  add.  Η  3  κΧ^ιθ^σα  Β 

5  διορίσοι  ex  $ιωρίσαι  Ma  6  Trore  om.  R  καϊ  Marquard  :  ij 

codd.  8  ζιωρισαι  (e  suprascr.)  S  10  γβ]  μ€ΐ/  Η  ii   δβ 

in  ras.  Mb,  fuisse  vid.  μ€u:  μίντοι  R  12  ovje  Marquard  :  ou5e 

codd.  15  ουδ'  R  16  κατ4μαΘον  Marquard  :  κατ^μ-ηνυον  Η  : 

καταμ4νονθ'  rell.  :   καταμαθ6ντζ$  Meibom  (ire  Η  17  tois  (ο 

suprascr.)    Β  so    μ^λ^σι    conieci  :    yeVe^t    codd.  :     post    to7s 

dat  μ€λ  S  sed  deletum  21  μ^ν  om.  Η  22  ύπαρχυυσων 

c•^  υπαρχόντων  Ma  23  τταραΧιμττάνονται    (ut  vid.)    B:    τταραλιμ- 

TrauovTfs  Η 

126 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    β'  IL 35 

ζκλίμττανονσών  re   καΐ   αθεώρητων  διαφορών,   κατά  ταντην 
άγνοήσομ€ν  1 1  ras  iv  tols  μ€λω^ονμ€νθί9  διαφορά?.  3^ 

'ETret  δ'  ξστίν  ουκ  αυτάρκη  τα  διαστήματα  ττρο^  την  των 
φθόγγων  διάγνωσιν — τταν  γάρ,  ώ?  άττλώ?  ^lirelv,  δια' στ?;-  5 
5  ματο9  μ^γίθος  ττλβωνων  τινών  δννάμ€ων  κοινόν  €στίν — , 
τρίτον  αν  τι  μ^ρος  €Ϊη  τη9  δληί  ττραγματΕίαε  το  7i€pl  των 
φθόγγων  elirelv  οσοί  τ  elal  καΙ  τίνι  γνωρίζονται  καΐ  ττό- 
T€\pov  τάσ€ΐ9  Tives  elaiv,  ωσΐΐζρ  οΐ  ττολλοί  υττολαμβάνονσιν,  ίο 
η  hυvάμeLS  καΐ  αυτο  τούτο  τί  ποτ'  €στ\ν  η  ^ύναμι^.      Oibev 

10  γαρ   των  τοιούτων   hiopaTai   καθαρών   υττο   των  τα   τοιαύτα 
ττραγματζνομ^νων.  | 

Τέταρτον   δ'   αν    €Ϊη    μ€ρο5  τα    συστήματα    θ^ωρησαι  15 
τΐόσα  τ    ^στι  κα\  TTof  αττα  καΐ  ττώ?  €κ  re  των  hιaστημάτωv 
καΐ    φθόγγων    συν€στηκότα.      Oih^Tepov   γαρ   των   τρόττων 

15  τβθξώρηται  το  μ4ρος  τοϋτο  υπο  ]  των  ξμττροσθζν    ούτζ  γαρ  et  20 
ττάντα  τρόττον  €Κ  των  hιaστημάτωv  συντίθεται  τα  συστήματα 
κα\  μηδεμία  των  συνθέσεων  τταρα  φύσιν  εστίν  εττισκεψεωί 
τ€τύχηκ€ν,  ούβ*  αϊ  hιaφopa\  ττασαι  των  συστημά\των  υΈ  ου-  25 
hevbs   εζηρίθμηνται,      ITepi  μεν  γαρ   εμμελούς   η    εκμελοϋξ 

20  άττλώ?  oxjhiva  λόγον  ττεττοίηνται  ot  ττρό  ημών,  τών  δβ  συστη- 
μάτων TCLS  bιaφoρas  οι  μεν  όλως  ουκ  εττεχείρονν  εζαριθμειν  [ 
— αλΛά  ττερΧ  αυτών  μόνον  τών  ετττα  οκτάχορδων  α  εκάλουν  3° 
αρμονίας  την  εττίσκεψιν  εττοιοΰντο — ,   ot  δ'  εττιχειρήσαντες 
αυχένα   τρόττον   ε^ηριθμουντο,   καθάττερ   οι   ττερί   Ώυθαγόραν 

2-,  τον    Ζακύνθιον    καΐ    Άγή\\νορα    τον    Μιτυληναΐον.     *Έστι  37 

Ι    ίκλιμπανόντων  Ma  (sed  ουσων  suprascr.  Mc)  VBS:    ζκλιμπανο• 
μίμων  Η  2  ατγνο^ισωμ^ν  Μ    ut  vid.)  VB  6  6.ν  η  post  μίροε 

ponit   Η  7    ''■''"  ^^  τίνων  corn    S  ίο    καθαρώ5   om.   Η 

12  θ€ωρ€7σθαι  Η  14  των  ante  φθό'/'/ων  et  σ'υσττ]ματα  ante  συνβστη- 

κότα  add.  Η  ούδετβροι/]  ου  et  €  in  ras.  Mb  16  συστή/χατα] 

συστΎΐ  in  ras.  Mb,  fuerat  fortasse  διαστ-η  ig  μ€ν  om.  Η  f  Ή. 

21   awex^ipovv  Η  22  μόνων  Η  ετττά  οκτάχορδων  Westphal  : 

€ΐΓταχόρζων  codd.,  sed  in  Μ  a  poster,  manu  ex  επτά  χορδών  factum 
23  T^v  om.  Η  24  re  ante  Trept  Uvdayopav  et  ol  vepl  ante  'Ayf]vopa 

add.  Η 

127 


11.37  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

δβ   τοιαύτη   rts   17    "^^Ρ^   '^^   e/x/xeXej   re   /cat   c/c^eAes  ra^ty 
Ota    /cat    17    Trept    (r^i;)    τώζ;    γραμμάτων    συνθ^σιν    iv    τω 
5  hiakiyeaOai'     ov  γαρ  ττάνίτα  τρόττον  €κ  των  αυτών  γραμ- 
μάτων  συντιθέμενη  ζυλλαβη  γιγνεται,  άλλα  ττώ?  μ€ν,  ττώί 

δ»       ν 
ου.  5 

Ώ€ μτττον  δ'  6στί  τώζ;  μερών  το  ττερϊ  του$  τόνουί  εφ* 

ΙΟ  ων  τιθέμενα  τα  συ\στήματα  μελω^εΐται.  ΐίερί  ών  oυbεls 
oi)bkv  εϊρηκεν,  ούτε  τίνα  τρόπον  λητττεον  ούτε  irpos  τι  βλε- 
ττοντα^  τον  αριθμόν  αυτών  άττο^οτεον  εστίν,     άλλα  παντελών 

15  εοικε  τΐ]  τών  ημερών  άγωγη  τών  |  αρμονικών  η  ττερί  τών  τόνων  ίο 
άποδοσι?,  οίον  όταν  Κορίνθιοι  μεν  bεκάτηv  άγωσιν  ^Αθηναίοι 
δ€  ττεμτττην  έτεροι  bi  τινε^  όγ^όην,      οϋτω  γαρ  οι  μεν  τών 

20  αρμονικών  λεγουσι  βαρύτατον  μεν  τον  |  ΰττο^ώριον  τών 
τόνων,  ημιτονίω  hε  όζύτερον  τούτου  τον  μιζολύ^ιον,  τούτου 
δ'  ημιτονίω  τον  Χωρίον,  του  δβ  bωpίoυ  τόνω  τον  φρύγιον,  ι. 5 

25  ωσαύτως  bε  καϊ  του  φρυγίου  τον  λύbιov  ετερω  τόνω•  ετε\ροι 
δβ  irpos  rot?  είρημενοις  τον  ύποφρύγιον  αύλον  ττροστιθεασιν 
€πΙ  το  βαρύ,  οΐ  bε  αυ  Trpos  την  τών  αυλών  τρύττησιν  βλε- 
ττοντεί    rpets    μεν    toijs    βαρύτατους    τρισΐ    bιεσεσιv    άττ* 

3©  άλλτ^ΐλωΐ'  γωρίζουσιν,  τόν  τε  υττοφρύγιον  κα\  τον  ΰποδώριοί'  2ο 
Kat  τον  bapiov,  τον  bε  φρύγιον  άττο  του  bωpίoυ  τόνω,  τον 
δ€  λύbιov  άττο  του  φρυγίου  ττάλιν  τρεΐς  bιεσειs  άφιστασιν 
ωσαύτως  bε  καΐ  τον  μι^oλύbιov  του  λυbίoυ.     Τι  δ'  εστί  ττρος 

$8  δ  βλεττοντες  1 1  ούτω  ττοιείσθαι  την  bιάστaσιv  τών  τόνων 
ττροτεθύμηνται,    oib'kv   είρηκασιν.      "Οτι    bε   εστίν   η    κατά-  25 

Ι  τ€  cm.  Η  rh  ante  ew/xeAes  add.  Η  η  supra  lin.  add.  Ma  : 

cm.  Η  2  τ^ν  restituit  Marquard         σννθ^σιν  Meibora  :  συνθ^σΐΒ 

codd.         6  τόνουί]  prior,  litt.  in  ras.  Vb  (Va  fort,  rpoirovs)         9  ^στίν 
om.  Η  lo  TTJ  .  .  .  άγωγί)  linea  subducta  S         ημ€ρών'\  η  in  ras. 

Mb,  erat  τών  μ^ρών  -η^ρϊ]  τών  Β  :  om.  S  11    Κορίνθιοι  .  .  . 

6yS07)v  linea  subducta  S  13  ilvai  post  μ^ν  add.,  Thv  ύπο5ώριον 

om.,  Th  ύτΓοδώριον  post  τόνων  add.  Η  14  prius  τούτου]  τούτου  Mc  R  : 

τούτων  Ma  rell.        alterum  τούτου^  τούτου  Mc  :  τούτων  rell.  17  π/jbi 

om.  Η  i8  τρίπ-ησιν  Η  19  Se  post  τρισΐ  add.  VS  Β  2i  καΐ 

Thv  Ζώριον  om.  R  25    προτζθύμηνται  ouSkv  elp-ήκασιν  supra  lin. 

add.  Mb 

'  128 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    β'  II.  38 

ττνκνωσίξ  ^κ/χβλτ)?  καΐ  ττάντα  τρόττον  άχρηστο9,  φα'νζρον  €π'  5 
avrrjs  Ισται  τη^  ττραγματζίαε. 

'ETTet  δε  των  μ€λωbovμ€vωv  €στΙ  τα  μίν  αττλά  τα  δε  μ€- 
τάβολα,  7Τ€ρΙ  μζταβολη$  αν  €Ϊη  λ€ΚΤ€ον,  ττρωτον  \  μ\ν  αντο  ίο 
5  τί  ΤΓΟτ'  €στΙν  η  μεταβολή  καΐ  ττώ?  γιγνόμ^νον — λ^γω  δ'  οΐον 
7τάθον9  TLVOS  συμβαίνοντος  ev  τη  ttjs  μελωδία?  τά^€ί — , 
^ττ€ΐτα  ΤΓοσαι  ύσΐν  αΐ  ττασαι  μ€ταβολαΙ  καΐ  κατά  ττόσα  | 
διαστήματα.  Ylepl  γαρ  τούτων  ovbels  ovhevos  €Ϊρηταί  λόγος  15 
οντ^  άτΓοδεικηκό?  ουτ   avaTTobeiKTos. 

10       Ύξλ^νταΐον  δε  των  (μ€ρών  εση)  το  περί  αντης  της  με- 
λοττοίίας.     ΈττεΙ  γαρ  ev  τοΪ9  αντοϊς  φθόγ\γοί9  αδιάφοροι?  3ο 
ουσι  το  καθ'  αυτούς  ττολλαι  τε  και  τταιτοδατται  μορφαΐ  μ€λών 
γίγνονται,    bijXov   Οτι   τιάρα   την   \ρησιν   τοΰτο   γίνοιτ    αν. 
καλούμων  δε  τοΰτο  μζλοττοάαν.      Ή  μ\ν  ουν  ττερι  το  ηρμο- 

15  σμ^νον  |  ττραγματ^ία  δια  τώΐ'  €ΐρημ4νων  μ^ρών  ττορευ^εισα  25 
τοιούτοι  ληψξται  τ^Κος. 

'Ότι  δ'  ε(στι)  το  ^υνιΐναι  των  μ^λωδουμίνων  τ?)  τε  άκοτ) 
και  ttJ  biavoia  κατα  ττασαν  bLaφoρav  τοις  γιγνομ€\νοίς  τταρα-   3ο 
κολουθ€Ϊν  {brjXov) — €v  γεΓε'σει  γαρ  δτ/  το   μελό?,    καθάττ^ρ 

2ο  και  τα  λοιπά  μ^ρη  της  μουσικής  — 

εκ  δι;ο  γαρ  τούτων  η  της  μουσικής  ζύν^σίς  €στιν, 

αίσθτισζώς   τε    και   μνήμης'    αισ^άζ^ε]  |σ0αι   μει^   yap 'δει   το  39 
γιγνόμ€νον,  μνημον^ύβιν  δε  το  γ€γον6ς.     κατ  άλλον  δε  τρόττον 
ουκ  εστί  τοΓ?  ev  Tjj  μουσικτ]  τιαρακολουθύν. 

3  μ^τάβολα  Meibom  :  άμίτάβολα  codd.         5  λργω]  \4  S         6  nVos 
conieci  :    nvhs    codd.  7    ττασ-α:    post   μβταβολαϊ   ponunt    R  Η 

8  ouSels  post  ούδί!/?)?  ponit  Η  9  άττοδεικτοί  Β  ίο  μζρων 

iari  restituit  Meibom  :    των  μ^ρων  4στι   om.    R  :    μςρων  can   rh   om. 
rell.  μζλοποΰας  Meibom   Η  :    μζλφζίαε  rail.  12    τό  om.   Η 

μορφαΐ  cm.   Β,  sed  a  com  supra  lin.  add.  μ^λών  post  ylyvovTai 

ponit  Η  13  παρά]  Trphs  Η  14  μ^λωποάαν  S  οδ;/]  αδ  Β 

ι6    τοιούτον   ex    τοιούτο    Mc  :    τοιούτο   VBS  17    βστί   addidi 

€καστον   post   μζΚφΖουμίνων   add.    Meibom  18    παρακολουθίΊν 

conieci :    παρακολουθώ?  codd.  (post  e?  ras.  Μ)  ig    ζηλον  addidi 

rh  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  21    e/c  δύο  .  .  .   μουσικτιε  in  marg.  Mb 

22  αίσθάνξσθαι  μξν]  ai  μ\ν  e  corn  Β         δεΓ  ex  δή  Mc  :  δτ?  V  Β  S 

MACRAN  κ  129 


11.39  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΞΕΝΟΤ 

5  *^Α  δ€  TLV€S  TTOLovvraL  τ^λη  τη9  |  αρμονικής  καλου- 
μ€νη9  Τϊραγματζίας  οι  μ\ν  το  'παρασημαίν€σθαί  τα  μ^λη 
φάσκοντ€9  Tripas  eivai  του  ^vviivai  των  μ€Kωboυμ€vωv 
€καστον,    οί    be    την    irepl    tovs    avXovs    θ^ωρίαν    καΐ    το 

10  ^x^LV    Ι    eiiTelv    τίνα   τρόττον    €  κάστα   των    ανλονμ^νων    καΐ  5 
τϊόθ^ν  γίγν€ταί'   το  δτ)   ταντα  Xiyeiv  ττα^τβλώ?  ^στιν  όλον 
TLVOS    bLημapτηκότos.       Ον    γαρ    otl   7T€pas    της    αρμονικής 

15  €7ηστ7]μης    €στΙν   η    7ταραση\μαντίκή,   αλλ'   ovbe   μ^ρος    ου- 
biv,    el    μη    καΐ    της   μετρικής    το   γράψασθαί    των    μέτρων 
ζκαστον     d    δ'    ωσττ^ρ    em    τούτων    ονκ    άναγκαΐόν    eaTi  ίο 
τον  bvvάμevov  γράψασθαί  το   Ιαμβίκον  (jxeTpov  καΐ  elbevai 

2ο  τι  €στί  το  Ιαμβίκόν),  |  όντως  e\eL  καΐ  eirl  των  μeλωbov- 
μίνων, — ον  yap  άναγκαΐόν  eaTL  τον  γρaψάμevov  το  φρνγων 
μ^λος   καΐ   elbevai   τί   eaTi   το    φρνγων    μeλoς — brjXov   otl 

25  ονκ    αν    eϊη    της    elpημevης  |   €.τ:ιστημης    τϊίρας   η    τταραση-  15 
μαντική.      "Otl  δ'  άληθη  τα  λeγόμeva  καΐ  eaTLV  άναγκαΐόν 
τω    τταρασημαινομίνω   μόνον   τα    μeγeθη    των    bLaστημάτωv 

30  bLaLaOaveaOaL,  φaveρbv  γίνοιτ  αν  |  e'πίσκo^τovμevoις.  Ό 
γαρ  TLθeμevoς  σημeΐa  των  bLaστημάτωv  ον  καβ*  €κάστην  των 
^νντταρχονσών  αντοΐς  bLaφopώv  tbiov  TiOeTai  σημeΐov,  οίον  2ο 
40  el  του  δια  τeσσάpωv  τνγγάνουσιν  αΐ  δι|  jaipeVetj  ονσαι 
irXeLovs!  ας  ττοιουσιν  αΐ  των  γevωv  bLaφopaί,  η  οτχηματα 
TrXeiova  7Γ0ΐ€Ϊ  η    της   των    άσννθίτων   bLaστημάτωv  τάξ€ως 

6  άλλοίωσις'  τον  αντον  be  λόγον  |  καΐ  irepl  των  bυvάμeωv 
eρovμev   ας   αί   των   τeτpaχ^όpbωv   φvσeLς    τϊοιονσι,    το    γαρ  25 

3  του  ex  το  Mb  4  '''V  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  7  ζιαμαρτη- 

kOtos  B  αλ-ηθβί  post  yap  add.    Η  ον    post  on   add.   Mar- 

quard  9    ypa^aadai]  yap  α\ρασθαι   R  li    rhu^   τί)    Μ  V  S 

μ4τρον    .    .    .    iaμβικόu  restituit  Marquard  14    καΐ   άριστα  ye 

elScuai  in  marg.   Mc  (^?)  R  καΐ  post  ia-Ti  add.   Η  τη    τφ  ex 

τ^   Mb  μόνφ  Β  2θ    ίηταρχουσώρ    Η  :     4νυτταρχουσών   ex 

4νυ•παρχόντων  Ma  ahro^s  supra  lin.  add.  Mc  21   €t  in  ras.  Mb 

fito  supra  lin.  add.   Mc  :    om.  V  Β  in  marg.  δια  τζσσάρωνΛ  l•'  S 

23  &  post  -rrXeiot/a  add.   Marquard  η]  i)  R  συνθίτων  Ε 

24  κ6yωv  S 

130 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    β'  IL40 

νττ€ρβολαίων  καΐ  νητων  και  μίσων  καί  νττατων  τω  αντω  γρά- 
φεται σημείω,  ras  δε  των  δυνάμεων  διαφοράς  ον  διορίζει  τα  | 
σημεία  {ώστε)  μέχρι  των  μεγεθών  αυτών  κεΐσθαι,  ττορρωτερω  ίο 
δε  μηδέν.  "Ort  δ'  ουδέν  εστί  μερο^  τη^  συμττάση^  ζυνεσεω^  το 
5  διαισθάνεσθαι  τών  μεγεθών  αυτών,  ελέχθη  μεν  ττω?  και  εν 
αρχΎ},  ράδιον  Ι  δε  κα\  εκ  τών  ρηθησομενων  συνιδεΐν  άντε  γαρ  15 
τα^  τών  τετραχόρδων  ούτε  τα^  τών  φθόγγων  δυνάμεις  οντε  τας 
τών  γενών  διαφοράς  ούτε,  άττλώ?  είττεΐν,  την  του  συνθέτου 
καΐ  την  του  άσυν\θετου  διαφοραν  ούτε  το  αττλοϋν  καΐ  μετά-   20 

ΙΟ  βολην  έχον  ούτε  τούί  τών  μελοττοιϊών  τρόπους  ούτ    άλλο 
ουδέν,    ωσαύτως   εΙττεΐν,    δι    αυτών   τών    μεγεθών    γίγνεται 
γνώριμον.      ΕΙ  μεν  ούν   δι*  άγνοιαν  την  ύττό^ληψιν  ταύτην  25 
εσχηκασιν  οι  καλούμενοι  αρμονικοί,  το  μεν  ήθθ9  ουκ  αν  εΐεν 
άτοττοι,  την  δε  άγνοιαν  Ισχυράν  τίνα  καΐ  μεγάλην  eti^at  τταρ' 

15  αυτοΐί  άναγκαΐον    ει  δε  συνορώντες,  οτι  ουκ  [  εστί  το  τταρα-  30 
σημαίνεσθαι  ττερα?  Trjs  είρημενη^  ε'πιστημηs,  χαριζόμενοι  δε 
ToXs   Ιδιώται^   καΐ   ττειρώμενοι    άττοδιδόναι   όφθαλμοειδε^    τι 
έργον  ταύτην    εκτεθείκασι   την  νπόληψιν,    μεγάλην   1 1   {αν)  4' 
αυθίί   αυτών  άτοττίαν  του  τρόττου  καταγνοίην   ττρώτον  μεν, 

20  ότι   κριτην  οϊονται  δεϊν   κατασκευάζειν  τών  εττιστημών  τον 
Ιδίώτην — άτοττοί   γαρ   αν   |   εΐη   το   αυτό   μανθάνων   τε    καΐ  5 
κρίνων  δ  αυτοί — ,  εττειθ'  Οτι  (ττερα?)  του  ζυνιεναι  τιθεντε^ 

Ι   νπβρβολαίων  καϊ  ρητών  καϊ  μ^σων  καΐ  ύπατων  conieci  vnep- 

βολαίων  καϊ  νητών'\  τηί  ύπ€ρβολαία$   Η  :    ύπ^ρβολαίαε  νητηί  Β  :    ύπ^ρ- 
βολαία5    καϊ    νητηί    R  :    ύπ€ρβολαία5   rell.    (in    marg.    Β)  μ4σων 

καϊ  ύπατων^  μίστηε  καϊ  ύττάτηί  codd.  2    ξιορίζ^ι  τα  Marquard  : 

δίορίζίται   codd.  3    σημ^ίφ   R  ώστ€   restituit    Marquard 

6    του    ρηθησομ^νου    Η  τα    κατά    post    yap    add.    Westphal 

8    ώ$   ante   άπλώί  add.    Η  ttjv  R  :    τα$  rell.  τον  συνθέτου 

Meibom  :    τών  συνθέτων  codd.  9    '<^'*'  "^^^  ασυνθ4των  ζιαφορα5 

Η  ΙΟ    ovTe  a  corr.  suprascr.  Β  μ^λοποιϊών  V :    μ^λοττοιών 

rell.  12  Ύνωρίμων  Β  δι'  ayvoiavl  Siavoiav  Η  14   Se] 

δι'  Η  ιη   Ιδιόταΐί  S  αποδοΰναι  Η  οφθαλμο^ιδ^στι  Ma  : 

accent,  acut.  supra  e  alterum,  et  τ  supra  σ  add.  Mc  18  4κτζθ7]κασι 

S  ύπό\€ΐ\\/ιν  Η  &j/  restituit  Marquard  19  KaTayvoirjv]  ν 

add.  Mb  21  Ιδιότην  S  22  πίραε  restituit  Marquard        τον] 

TO  Μ  V  S  Β  :  om.  R 

Κ  2  131 


II.4I  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

φαν€ρόν  TL  ipyov  ώ?  οΐονται  ανάτιαλιν  τιθίασιν    iravrbs  γαρ 

ΙΟ  οφθαλμοφανούς  ^ργου  iripas  €στΙν  η  ^vv€aL9.  |  το  γαρ  €ttl- 
στατονν  ττασι  καΐ  κρίνον  τοΰτ  eWr  [η]  ras  (5e)  χαρά?  η 
την  φωνην  η  το  στόμα  η  το  τΐν^υμα  [η\  όστις  οΧ^ται  ττολν  tl 

15  hίaφipζLV  των  άψυχων  οργάνων  ουκ  ορθώς  hiavoUTai'  |  et  δβ  5 
την  ψνχην  ττον  KaTabebvKos  €στιν  η  ζνν€σίς  καΐ  μη  Trpoyeipov 
μηδζ  τοις  ττολλοΐς  φαν€ρόν,  καθάτΐ€ρ  αϊ  re  χ^ίρουργίαυ  καΐ 

20  τα  λοίττά  των  τοιούτων,  ου  δια  τοντο  άλλως  υττο\λη7ττ€ον 
^χ€ΐν  τα  ζίρημ^να.  ^ιημαρτηκξναι  γαρ  συμβησ^ται  τάλη- 
θους,  kav  το  μ\ν  κρίνον  μητ€  ττίρας  μητ€  κύριον  ττοιώμ^ν,  το  ίο 

25  δε  κρινόμ€νον  κύρων  re  καΐ  ττάρας.  Ουχ  ήττον  δε  |  €στι 
ταύτης  η  7Τ€ρΙ  τους  αυλούς  νττόληψις  άτοττος'  μίγιστον 
μ€ν  ούν  καΐ  καθόλου  μάλιστα  {άτοπον)  των  αμαρτημάτων 
€στΙ  το  €ΐς  όργανον  άνάγβιν  την  του  ηρμοσμ^νου  φύσιν    bi 

30  oibev  γαρ  των  |  rot?  όργάνοις  υπαρχόντων  τοιούτον  €στι  το  is 
ηρμοσμξνον  oibe  τοιαύτην  τάζιν  €χον.  ου  γάρ,  Οτι  6  αυλός 
τρυπήματα  re  καΐ  κοιλίας  e'xet  καΐ  τα  λοιπά  των  τοιούτων, 
42  ότι  be  χ€ΐρουργίαν  την  1 1  μ^ν  από  των  χειρών  την  δ'  από 
των  λοιπών  μζρών  οίς  €πίΤ€ίν€ΐν  re  καΐ  avUvai  π€φυκ€,  bia 
5  τούτο  συμφωνβΐ  bia  τεσσάρων  η  δια  π^ντ^  ήτοι  δια  πα\σών,  2θ 
η  τών  άλλων  bιaστημάτωv  €καστον  λαμβάνει  το  προσήκον 
μίγ^θος.  Πάντων  γαρ  τούτων  υπαρχόντων  oibev  ήττον  τα 
μ\ν   πλ^ίω  bιaμaρτάvoυσιv  οι   αύληταΐ  της  του  ηρμοσμίνου 

ΙΟ  rάfeωs',  6λί\γα  δ'  ΙστΙν  α  τυγχάνουσι  ποιοΰντ€ς  πάντα  ταύτα, 
και  γάρ   άφαιρούντ^ς  και  παραβάλλοντβς  και  τώ  πν^ύματι  25 

3  ττασι  post  €ΤΓΐστατονν  ponit  Η  κρίναν  Η  ί)  seclusi  :  in  ras. 

Mb  6e  addidi  4  ^  seclusi  'oaris  S  Β  :  'oris  ex  ei  tls  (ut 

vid.)  Mb  :   '0  tis  cum  macula  post  g  VR  5  Siacpepau  Marquard 

Η  :    8ιαφ(ρ(ΐ  rell.  6   KaTaS^dvKOs  Meibom  :   Karad^dvKws  codd. 

12  avXovs  Meibom  :  &X\ovs  codd.  13  άτοπον  restituit  Marquard 

14    5t'  cm.  Η  15    Twu  To7s  bpyauois  in  ras.  Mb  rh  om.  Η 

i6  TOiavTTjj/]  ravTf]v  Η  ιη  ras  ante  KOi\ias  add.  Η  i8  ό 

avXrir^s   ante    xfipovpylav  add.    Marquard  τ^ΐ'  /iev]   rhv  μ^ν   Β 

20  T^  ante  δια  τεσσάρων  add,  Η  S  rh  Sia  TreVre  ^  rh  Sia  πασών  Η 

21  λαμβάνρ  R  23  αύληταΐ]  ανλοί  S  24  &  supra  lin,  add. 
Mb          (πιτν/χάνουσι  Β  (ου  e  corr.)  R              25  τφ  πνΊ  S 

132 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    β'  ΙΙ.42 

€7TiT€LiOVT€s  KOL  CLvUvTe's  κοΧ  Tois  άλλαί9  aiTiais  h'€pyOVVT€S. 
ωστ  etrai  1  φαΐ'ζρόν,  otl  ovhev  5ia</)epet  \iy€Lv  το  καλώ?  iv  15 
Tols  avXoXs  τον  KaKcuS'    ουκ  edei  5e  τοντο  συμβαίν^ιν,  etirep 
TL  οφ€λθ5  ην  rrjs  et?    όργανον  τον  ηρμοσ-μ^νον  ανάγωγης, 
5  αλλ'  αμα  τ    ety  |  τους  avKovs  ανηγθαί  το  μίλος   καΐ   ξνθνς  20 
αστραβϊς  ^Ιναι  καΐ  άναμάρτητον  καΐ  ορθόν,      άλλα  γαρ  οντ 
ανλοί  οντ€  των  άλλων  ονθβν  οργάνων  ττοτζ  βζβαιώσ^ι  την 
τον  ηρμοσμίνον  φυσίν  τάζίν  1  γάρ  τίνα  καθόλον  της  φνσ€ως  25 
τον    ηρμοσμζνον    θανμαστην    μεταλαμβάνει    των    οργάνων 

ΙΟ  εκαστον   εφ'  Οσον  δύναται,   της   αίσθησεως  αντοΐς   εττιστα- 
τονσης  irpos  ην  ανάγεται  καΐ  ταντα  καΐ  τα  λοιττα  \  των  κατά  3° 
μονσικην.       Ει  (δ^)  τις  οϊεται,  ότι  τα  τρνττηματα  δρα  ταντα 
εκάστης  ημέρας  η   τας  χορδας  εντεταμενας  τας  αντάς,   δια 
τονθ'  ενρήσειν  το  ηρμοσμενον  εν  αντοΐς  διαμενον  τε  καΐ  την 

1=)  αντην  τάξιν  διασωζον,   7ταν\τελώς  ενήθης•    ώσττερ  γαρ   εν  43 
rati  χορδαΐς  ονκ  εστί  το  ηρμοσμενον,  εαν  μη  τις  αντό  δια 
της  γειρονργίας  ττροσαγαγων  αρμόσηται,  οντο^ς  ονδε  εν  τοις  Ι 
τρνπημασιν,  εαν  μη  τις  αντο  χείρον ργία  ττροσαγαγων  αρμό-  5 
σηται.      Οτι  δ'  ονδεν  των  οργάνων  αντο  αρμόττεται  άλλα  η 

2 ο  αΐσθησίς  εστίν  η  τούτον  κνρια,  δηλον  Οτι  ονδε  λόγον  Κείται, 
φανερον  γάρ,  |  θανμαστόν  δ'  εΐ  μηδ^  εΙς  τα  τοιαύτα  βλε-  ίο 
Ίΐοντες   αφίστανται   της   τοιαύτης    υττοληψεως    όρώντες    οτι 

Ι   και  aviivres]  ^  avUvns  Η  κα\  rais]  iv  ra7s  R  3  κακώίΐ 

/coAeDs  Β  :   om.  R  τουτο~\  το  Μ  R  :   του  S  4  ^'S  opyavou  του 

■ηρμοσμ€νου  Meibom  :   ets  το  ηρμοσμενον  opyavov  codd.  5  μάλθ5  Η 

6  σ.στραβ€5   ex   άστραβ4ε,    deinde    2    litt.    eras.    Mb :    αστραβί?   re    Β 

7  άλλων  in  ras.  Mb  ουθεν  post  6ρyάvωv  ponit  Η  8  ηρμοσμίνου 
φύσιν.  τάξιν  yap  τίνα  καθόλου  ttjs  φύσ^ωί  του  (ante  του  ras  )  in  marg. 
Mb  :  φύσιν  '  om.  καΐ  sed  supra  lin.  add.~i  yap  ttjs  καθόλου  φύσεως  yTrjs 
in  ras.  in  qua  τίνα  vel  fis  erat,  ante  φύσεωε  3  litt.  eras.}  Vb  :  item  Β 
sed  in  marg.  τάξιν  ut  scripturae  discrepantia  pro  φύσιν  :  τάξιν.  κα). 
yap  Trjs  καθόλου  φύσεως  S  10  ante  εφ'  4  litt.  eras.  Μ  αυτοΓ?] 
αυτής  Β  εττιταττούσης  R  12  ει]  εϊ$  Β  δε  restituit  Marquard 
(leg.  Η  ταΟτα  Μ  V  Β  S  13  ί?  om.  Μ  V  S  Β  14  Τ6  om.  R 
15  αύτην  om.  Η  ζιασώζων  Ma  :  ζιασώζον  Mb  rell.  16  ζια  της 
om.  R,  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  17  χειpoυpyίa  R  άρμόσειται  η 
suprascr.)  Β  οΰτως  .  .  .  αρμόσηται  om.  Η  19  των  om.  Η 
2θ  μυρία  [κυ  supra  μυ  scr.)  Η          οϋτε  Η          λόyov  Β  Η 

133 


11.43  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

κινούνται  οΐ  ανλοί  και  ουδ^ττο^'  ωσαύτως  ίγονσιν  αλλ'  'έκαστα 

15  των  ανλονμ^νων  μ€ταβάλλ€ΐ  |  {κατά)  τα9  αΙτίας  αφ'  ων 
ανλξΐταί.  Σ\€bbv  δ?/  φαν^ρόν,  οτι  hi  ον^ξμίαν  αΐτίαν  ets 
του9  ανλονς  ανακτίον  το  μ^λο?,  οντ€  γαρ  β^βαιώσ^ι  την 
του  ηρμοσμίνου  τάξιν  [το  ^Ιρημ&ον]   όργανον  οντ,  et  ris  |  5 

2ο  ώηθη  bdv  ets  όργανον  τι  7τοί€Ϊσθαι  την  άναγωγην,  €ΐ?  τους 
avkov9  ην  ττοιητίον,  €7Γ6ΐδτ|  μάλιστα  ττλαναται  καΐ  κατά  την 
ανλοΊτοιίαν  καΐ  κατά  την  \€ΐρονργίαν  καΐ  κατά  την  ihiav 
φνσιν.  Ι 

25        ^Α  μ'kv  ουν  ττρο^ΐζλθοι  η?  αν  ττ^ρΐ  της  αρμονικής  καλόν-  ίο 
μ€νης  ττραγματ^ίας   σχ€bόv   €στι  ταντα'   μέλλοντας  δ'  eiri- 
yjEipeiv  τη  irepl  τα  στοιχεία  ττραγματβία  δβι  ^τpohιavoηθηvaι 

3θ  τα  τοι|άδ€•  οτι  ονκ  €ν^€χ€ται  καλώς  αντην  bιeξ€λθ€ΐv  μη 
Τΐροντταρ^άντων  τριών  τών  ρηθησομάνων  ττρώτον  μ\ν  αυτών 
τών  φαινομένων  καλώς  ληφθέντων,  eTretra  hιopισθίvτωv  ev  15 
44  ο-^τοϊς  τών  1 1  re  ττροτέρων  καΐ  τών  υστέρων  ορθώς,  τρίτον  be 
του  συμβαίνοντος  re  καΐ  όμολογονμένου  κατά  τρόττον  συν- 
5  οφθέντος'  'ETret  δe  ττάσης  έττιστημης,  η  τις  €Κ  ττροβλη\μάτων 
τΐλζΐόνων  συνέστηκ€ν,  άρχας  ττροσηκόν  eσrt  λαβζΐν  e^  ων 
b€ιχθησeτaι  τα  μ€τα  τας  αρχάς,  άναγκαΐον  αν  ζϊη  λαμβάνειν  2ο 
ττροσέχοντας  bijo  roΓσδe•    ττρώτον  μ€ν  οττως  αληθές  re  και  | 

ΙΟ  φαινόμ^νον  'έκαστον  'έσται  τών  άρχο€ώών  ττροβλημάτων, 
eTret^'  οττως  τοιούτον  οίον  ev  ττρώτοις  νπο  της  αισθησ^ως 
συνοράσθαι  τών  της  αρμονικής  ττραγματβίας  μζρών    το  γαρ 

15  "ττω?   άτταιτοϋν   aTTobei^iv  |  ουκ   έστιν   άρχο€ώές.      Καθόλου  25 
δ'    iv    τω     άρχ^σθαι    τταρατηρητέον,     οττως    μητ      eti     την 
υττξρορίαν  έμττίτττωμ^ν  άττό  τίνος  φωνής  τ/   κινησ€ως  αέρος 

Ι  post  αυλοί  unum  verbum  eras.  Μ  a  «ατά  restituit  Meibom 

3  δή]  δ€  Η  4  μά\05  Η  5  "^^  dp-ημ^νον  seclusi  et  cm. 

Μ  V  Β  S  6  άγωγήν  Μ  V  S  R  Η  η  ΐ^ν']  %ν  e^  ΐιν  W:>  :  %u 

V  S  Β,  Η  (ante  ds  revs)  8  κα\  κατά  rrjv  x^ipovpy'iav  in  marg.  Mb 

10    προίχθοι   Β   in    marg.  17    rhu  ante   τρόττον  add.    MVSB 

συι/αφθίντοί  Η  1 8    eVet  ex  eVi   Mb  19    ττροσίχοντα  Η 

24  μίτρων  Η  25   ttojs  S  άπίτοΰν  Η  20  τί?»/  om.  V  S 

27   ΐμπίπτωμ^ν]  lac.  πτωμΐν  R  :  ^μπίπτομ^ν  Η  ^  conieci  :  ^  codd. 

134 


APi\I0NIKi2N    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    β'  ΙΙ.44 

αργόμ^νοί,  μητ    αν  κάμ7ΐτοντ€9   ivros  7Γθλ|λα    των    οίκζίων  2ο 
άττολίμττάνωμζν 


Τρία    -γίνη    των   μβλω^ονμ^ων   ζστίν     hiarovov   χρώμα 
5  αρμονία.      αί  μ€ν  ονν  διαφοραΐ  τούτων  νστ^ρον  ρηθησονταΐ' 
τοΰτο  δ'  αντο  €κκζίσθω,  οτι  ττάν  |  μ^λο?  eWat  ητοί  hiaTOvov  25 
?/    γ^ρωματικον  η   ^ναρμόνιον  η   μικτον   €κ   τούτων  η   κοινον 
τούτων. 

Α€ντζρα  δ'  eart  διαΓρ6σ6ί  των  ^ιασ-τημάτων  €LvaL  τα  μ€ν 
ΙΟ  (τύμφωνα  τα  |  δε  δίάφωνα.    γνωριμώταταί  μζν  boKovaiv  ζΧναι  3° 
ανται  hύo  των  ^ιαστηματικών  διαφορών,  if  τ€  μζγίθζί  δια- 
φίρονσιν  αλλήλων  καΐ  fj  τα  σύμφωνα  τών  διαφωνών    irepU- 
χξται  δ'  η  ύστερα  ρηθείσα  1 1  διάφορα  ττ)  ττροτίρα,  ττάν  γαρ  45 
σύμφωνον  τταντος  διαφώνον  διαφ^ρβι  /xeye^et.     ΈπεΙ  δε  τών 
15  συμφώνων  ττλείουί  βίσΐ  ττρόί  άλληλα  διαφοραί,  μία  rts  ?/  | 
γνωριμωτάτη  αυτών  €ΚΚ€ίσθω  {ττρώτη)'    αύτη  δ'  €στΙν  η  κατά  5 
jneye^os.  ^Έστω  δτ)  τώι/  συμφώνων  όκτω  μξγξθη'    ζλάχ^ιστον 
μζν  το  δια  τεσσάρων — συμβαίνει  δε  τούτο   {αύττ})  τη   του 
(/χελου?)  φύσ€ΐ   ζλά\ιστον  eivai'     σημύον  δβ  |  το  μζλωδ^ϊν  ίο 
2ο  μεζ^  ημά'ζ  ττολλα  του  δια  τεσσάρων  €λάττω,   ττάντα  μίντοι 
διάφωνα — .      δ^ύτ^ρον  δε  το  δια  -πε^τε,  ο  τι  δ'  αϊ»  τούτων 
άνα  μ^σον  ?]  μ^γ^θο^  ττάν  €σται  διάφωνον.      τρίτον  (δ')  εκ 
τών  €ΐρημ€  νων  συμφώνων   σύνθ^τον  το  δια  ττασών,  τα  δε  15 

4  Mb  in  marg.  αρχή       Vb  in  marg.  πόσα  yei/η  μζλψδία$        ίστίν  ins. 
Mb  :   om.  R  5  αρμονία]  vid.  fuisse  αρμονίαν  Μ  6  μάλοί  Η 

fj  τυΐ  ex  δ  re  Ma  (b  ?)  7   e'/c  om.  Μ  V  Β  R  S  9  eVrii/  post 

διαστημάτων  ponit  Η  post  εστί  una  litt.  eras.,  vid.  fuisse  ^στίν  Μ 

12  διαφωνών  ex  διαφορών  Ma  13   ev  ante  τί)  add.  Η  14  τταΐ'τόϊ 

om.   et  μ^Ύ^θ^ι  ante  διαφώνου   ponit  Η  Spa  Τίορφνρων  iv  τφ  els 

'Αρμονικά   τον   Πτολεμαίου   ύπομνί]ματι   in   marg.   Η  i6    ττρώτη 

restituit  Marquard,  sed  ante  ΐκκείσθω  ponit  18  συμβββηκ^  δτ]  Η 

auTTJ  restituit  Westphal  ττ)  om.  Β  του  Β  :  αύτοΰ  Μ  V  S  R  : 

αυτόν  Η  19  μέλους  restituit  Westphal  20  ττολλα  om.  R 

22  άνά  μέσων  Β  εσται  Η  :  είναι  rell.  post  elj/ai  add.  λε'/ομεν 

Marquard         δ'  restituit  Marquard  23  συντεθεν  Η 

135 


11.45  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

τούτων  άνα  μίσον  διάφωζ^α  ίσται.     Ύαντα  μ\ν  συν  Κίγομ^ν 
α  τΐαρα  των  ^μτίροσθ^ν  τταρ€ίλήφαμ€ν,  7Γ€ρΙ  6e  των  λοιττων 

20  ημιν  avTOLS  hiopiaTiov.  |  Πρώτοι;  μ\ν  ονν  keKTeov,  otl  irpos 
τω  δια  ττασών  ττάν  σύμψωνον  ττροστιθζμζνον  διάστημα  το 
γιγνόμξνον  e^  αυτών  /ixeye^os  σνμφωνον  ττοίζΐ.      καΐ  €στιν  5 

25  tbiov  τοντο  το  ττάθοί  του  συμφώνου  |  τούτου,  καΐ  γαρ  €λάτ- 
TOVOS  7τροστ€θ4ντο^  καΐ  Ισου  καΐ  μ^ίζονο^  το  γίγνόμζνον  €κ 
TTJs  συνθ^σ€ω9  σύμφωνον  γίγν€ταί'  τοΓί  5e  πρώτοις  σύμ- 
φωνο ls    ον    συμβαίνει    τούτο,    ούτ€    γαρ    το    Ισον    €κατ€ρω 

3©  αυ'^τών  συντ^Θ\ν  το  όλον  σύμφωνον  ττοί€Ϊ  ούτ€  το  e£  €κα-  ίο 
τίρου    αυτών    καΐ   του    δια    ττασών    συγκ€ίμ€νον,    αλλ'    act 
bLaφωvήσ€i  το  €Κ  των  €ίρημ€νων  συμφώνων  συγκ€ίμ€νον. 
46        Tovos  δ'  ζστίν  ω  το  δια  irevTe  1 1  του  δια  τεσσάρων  μύζον 
το  δβ  δια  τεσσάρων  hύo  τόνων  κα\  ημίσ^ος.      Ύών  he  του 
τόνου  μ€ρών  μβλωδαται  το  ήμισυ,  ο  καλύται  ημίτονων,  και  15 
5  το   τρίτον  μξρο^,  |  ο   καλείται   δΐ€σΐ9  χρωματική   ελαχίστη, 
καΐ   το   τίταρτον,    ο    καλύται   hUσL<ί   (ναρμόνω^   ελαχίστη' 
τούτου    δ'    ^λαττον    oihev    /χβλωδβίται    διάστημα.      ΔβΓ    δβ 

ΙΟ  πρώτον  μ€ν  τούτο  αύτο  μη   άγνο€Ϊν,  Οτι  |   πολλοί  ηδη  hn]- 
μαρτον  ύττολαβόντ€9  ημά^  λίγζΐν  Οτι  6  tovos  eis  (rpta  η)  20 
τέσσαρα   'ίσα   διαιρούμενο'^   μελωδζϊται,      συνέβη   δ'   αυτοΐ^ 
τοϋτο  πάρα  το  μη   κατανοείν  ότι   'έτερον  εστί  τό  re  λαβείν 

15  τρίτον  με\ροί  τόνου  και  τό  διελόντα  eis  τρία  τόνον  μελωδεΐν. 
έπειτα  απλώ^  μεν  ούθεν  ύπολαμβάνομεν  είναι  διάστημα 
ελάχιστον.  25 

Ι    ανά  μ^σων   Η  ζιάφωνα   ΐϊναι   Χ^^γόμ^ν.     Ταύτα  μ€ν   ονν   τταρα 

Marquard  (δ.  e.  Χ^Ύόμ^να  τ.  μ.  ο.  π.  Porphyrius)  ^σται  Η  :    ^luai 

rell.  3  Μ^ν  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  4  τφ]  τ5  S  Η  Β  in  marg. 

5  ποιεΓταί  Η  η  μζ'γξθουε  post  μ^ίζονοί  add.  Η  'γΐ'/ρόμβνον 

Marquard  :  Χζ^^όμ^νον  codd.  :  -γΐνόμ^νον  Porphyrius  9  ου  supra 

lin.  add.  Mb  iraQos  post  τούτο  add.  Η  ii   Sis  τζθ4ντο$  post 

αυτών   add.    Meibom  aei   δίαφωνήσεί]    τ)   διαφώρησίί    Μ  V  Β  S  :    ί) 

διαψώνησΐ5  R  13  του']  και  R  14  ημίσ^ωε  Β  Η  ΐη  καΐ 

.  .  .  ελαχίστη  om.  Η  <>  R  :  om.  rell.  20  νηολαβόντ€5  ex 

υττολαβόνταε  Mb  τρία  ij  restituit  Marquard  21   αύτοΐε  post 

toCto  ponit  Η  24  eTreifl*  απλώε  S 

136 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙίΙΝ    β'  IL46 

At  δε  των  γβνων  διαφοραί  λαμβά\νονταί  kv  rerpaxopbiu  20 
τοωντω  οΧόν  εστί  το  άττο  joteVr/?  εφ'  υττάτην,  των  μ\ν  άκρων 
μενόντων,    των   δε   μέσων    κινουμένων    6τ\   μ^ν    αμφοτέρων 
ore  δε  θατέρον.      Έπει  δ'  άναγκαΐον  τον  κινον\μ^νον  φθόγ-   25 
γον  €V  τόττω  tlvI  κινύσθαί,  λητττέο^  αν  €Ϊη  τόπος  ωρισμένος 
€κατέρον  των  ύρημένων  φθόγγων.      φαίνζται  δ?;   σνντονω- 
τάτη    μ\ν    α.ναι   Xiyavos   ή    τόνον    άττό   μέσης    ατιέγονσα,   \ 
ποί€Ϊ  δ'  αντη  biOTOvov  γένος,  βαρύτατη  δ'  η  hiTOVOv,  γίγν^ται  30 
δ'    αντη    έναρμόνιος'     ωστ     eivai    φαν^ρον    εκ    τούτων,    ότι 

ΙΟ  τονιαίός  έστιν  6  της  λιγανοΰ  τόττος.     το  δε  τταρυττάτης  \κα\ 
υπάτης)  hιάστημa  έλαττον  μ\ν  Οτι  ουκ  αν  γένοιτο  διε'σεω?  || 
έναρμονίου    φαν^ρόν,    εττειδτ)     πάντων    των    μ€λωhovμέvωv  47 
ελάχιστον  έστι  διεσι?  έναρμόνιος•    Οτι  δε   καΐ   τοντο  εΐ9  το 
bLπλάσιov  αυξ^ται,  κατανοητέον.      όταν  |  γαρ  έπΙ  την  αυτήν  5 

15  τάσιν  άφίκωνται  η  τε  λιχανός  άνι^μένη  καΐ  η  παρυπάτη 
έπιτ^ινομένη,  όρίζ^σθαι  hoKU  €κατέρας  δ  τόπος,  ωστ  etvai 
φανβρόν,  {ότι  ου  μείζων  διεσεω?  ελαχίστης  έστΙν  δ  της 
παρνπάτης  τόπος.  "Ηθη  bέ  τιν^ς  θαυμάζουσι)  πως  έστι 
λιχανος  κινηθέντος  ει^όί  Οτου  |  δϊ/ττοτε  των  μέσης  καΙ  λιχανον  ίο 

2θ  bιaστημάτωv'    δια  τί  γαρ  μέσης  μ^ν  καΐ  παραμέσης  €V  έστι 
bιάστημa  και  πάλιν  αν  μέσης  τε  καΐ  υπάτης  καΐ  των  άλλων 
όσοι  (μη)  κι\νοννται  των  φθόγγων,  τα  δε  μέσης  καΐ  λιχανον  15 
bιaστήμaτa  πολλά,  θ^τέον  elvai'    κρύττον  γαρ  των  φθόγγων 

2   των  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  3    Se  supra  lin.  add.  Mb :  om.  Β 

δ€  μ4σων  Η  :  μ^σων  5e  rell.  αμφοτέρων  ex  αμφοτ4ρον  (ut  vid.)  Mb 

4    eVet    δ'   &;/    Μ  :    βττειδάι/  V  Β  S  5    λτιπτ(05']    reos   corr.    Mb 

6  Ικατβρου  Marquard  :  ^κατβρων  codd.  Srj]  μτ)  Β  8  αντη  Η  : 

αυτή  Μ  V  Β  S  :  αυτί?  R  βαρυτάττη  Sh  η  Βί  in  ras.  Mb  η  om.  S 

10    καΐ  ύπάτ-η$  restituit  Marquard  11    ίΚαττον  Mc  in  marg.  Β  : 

ελάττοίΊ  Ma  VS  Β  'ότι  om.  R  12  τούτων  post  ττάντων  add.  Η 

15  ■τάσιν']  τάξιν  Η  ή  τταρυπάτη]  ύτταρυπάτη  Β  1 6  δρίζ^σθαι 

Marquard  :   ώρίσθαι  R  :  όρίσθαι  in  marg.  Β  :   όρίβΤσθαί  rell.  ό  om.  Η 

17    ΟΤΙ  .  .  .   θαυμάζουσι  restituit  Studemund  19    κινιθίντο$  Β  : 

TcOevTos  Marquard  20  -παραμέσ-ηί  ex  παραμ^σου  Mc  :  τταραμίσου 

VS  :  τταρά  μέσου  Β  2ΐ   αδ  ex  αύλοί  ί'λοί  eras.)  Mb  και  ύπατη? 

om.  in  marg.  Β  22  ^ατ?  restituit  Meibom         κινούνται  R  :  κινονσι 

ex  κζίνονσι  (ut  vid.)  Mb  :  κινοΰσί  rell. 

137 


11.47  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

τα  ονόματα  κιν^ίν  μηκάτι  καλούνται  λιχ^ανουξ  tcls  λοιττά?, 
€7Τ^ώαν  η  hiTovos  {λιχανο^}  κληθΫ]   η  των  άλλων  μία  ητι^ 

2ο  Ήοτ  ονν.  θ€Ϊν  γαρ  |  kTepovs  elvai  φθόγγου^  tovs  to  €Τ€ρον 
μ€γ€θθ9  ορίζονται'  ωσαντω'ί  he  heiv  ^χ^ιν  καΐ  τα  αντι- 
στρίφοντα.      τα   yap  Ισα  των  μζγζθων  τοΓ?  avTols  ονόμασι  5 

25  7Τ€ρίλη\7ΤΤ€ον  eivat.  Vlpbs  δτ)  ταντα  τοιούτοι  Tives  ^λίγθησαν 
λόγοι'  ττρωτον  μ\ν  Οτι  το  αζιονν  tovs  hιaφίρovτas  αλλήλων 
φθόγγους  "ώιον  /xeye^o?  e^eti»  bιaστημaτos  μΙγα  τι  κιν€Ϊν 

3ο  Ιστιν    ορωμξ,ν  γαρ  |  Οτι  νητη  μ\ν  καΧ  μίση  τταρανητη^  καΐ 
λιχανον  διαφέρει  κατά  την  ^νναμιν  και  ττάλιν  αν  τταρανητη  ίο 
Τ€   κα\  λιγανοί  τρίτης  re  κα\  τταρυτΐάτη'ί,  ωσavτωs  δβ   καΧ 

48  οντοι  τταραμίσης  re  καΐ  νττάτη^ — καΐ  δια  ταντην  ||  την  αιτίαν 
Ihia  κύται  ονόματα  ίκάστοις  αυτών — ,  διάστημα  δ'  αντοΐ^ 
ττασιν  νττόκξίται  er,  το  δια  τϊίντζ,  ωσθ^  Οτι  μϊν  ον\  οΧόν  τ 
5  aet  ττ\  των  φθόγγων  hιa\φoρq  την  των  Ιιαστηματικών  /xeye-  15 
θών  ^ιαφοραν  άκολονθβΐν  φαν€ρόν.  "Οτι  δ'  ovbe  τουναντίον 
άκολονθ€Ϊν  Θ€Τ€ον,  κατανο7]σ€ΐ€ν  αν  η?  €κ  των  ρηθησομίνων. 

ΙΟ  ΥΙρώτον  μίν  ονν  d  καΐ  καθ'  €κά\στην  αύζησίν  re  καΐ  ίλάτ- 
τωσιν  των  Trept  το  ττνκνον  γιγνομίνων  Ihia  ζητησομ^ν  ονό- 
ματα, bηλov  ΟΤΙ  απείρων  ονομάτων  b€ησόμeθa,  €7Τ€ώή7[€ρ   6  2ο 
49•  7  '"^^  λιχανον  tOttos  et?  aireipovs  τίμνβται  τομάξ.  |  f  β?  αληθών 
γαρ  τίνι  άν  η?  ττροσθεΐτο  των  αμφισβητούντων  Trepl  tcls  των 

ΙΟ  γ^νών  j  xpoas;    ον  γαρ  hi)  irpos  την  αντην  ^ιαίρ^σιν  βλ4- 

1  τά  add.  Mb  2  ^]  ^  codd,  :  ^  η  Marquard  SIttovos  R 

XiXavhs  addidi  :  οΰτω  Marquard  ^ns  renovat  Mb  accent,  add.  Mc  : 

TjTis  cum  ras.  supra  lin.  V         3  S^Ty  Marquard  :  SeT  codd.  rh  om.  S 

4  Set  Η  5  yap  Ίσα  Studemund  :  ττάρισα  codd.  :  δ'  ίσα  Marquard 

6  τοιοντοί]  ovToi  Η  4λ4χθ•ησαν]  e  in  ras.  Mc  (?)  9    ■παρανί)τ•η$ 

ex  τταραν^ιτ-ην  Mb  10  8'  post  ττάλιν  add.  Η  ii   τταρυιτάτηί^ 

ύπάτ7ΐ5  R  12  ύπάτη$^  ptjttjs  H  13  αντων  supra  lin.  add. 

corr.  Β  14   eV,  rh  conieci  :  eV  τφ  codd.  15  ζιαστ-ημάτων  Η 

17  ακολουθών  θζΤ€ον  conieci  :   ακολουθητίον  codd.  18  el  καΥ]  καϊ 

om.  Η  (Κάττοσιν  S  19   ζ-ητ-ησωμ^ν  Μ  V  S  Β  2θ  ζ^ησόμ^θα'] 

-ησά    in    ras.    Vb  21     τ4μν€ται    post   τομά$   ponit    Η  as 

άληθώε  .  .    .  hiaipiaiwv  legg.  in  codd.   post  Ζιαμίν^ιν  in  p.  140,  1.  i  : 
ordinem  mutavi  22  ττροσθξΊτο  ex  ττροσθοΊτο  Mc  :  ττροσθοΐτο  V  Β  S 

άμψισβ-ητούτων  {u  suprascr.)  Β 

138 


ΑΡχΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    β'  IL48 

TTOVT€S  7ravT€9  ovT€  TO  χρώμα  ούτ€  την  αρμονίαν  αρμοττόνται, 
ωστζ  τι  μάλλον  την  δίτονον  λίχανον  λ^κτίον  η  την  μικρω 
(Γνντονωτ€ ραν ;  αρ\μονία  μ^ν  yap  elvaL  τι]  αίσθησ^ι  κατ  ι  ς 
άμφοτ€ρα9  τας  διαιρεσβι?  φαίνεται,  τα  δε  μ€γξθη  των  διαστη- 
5  μάτων  δήλον  otl  ον  ταντα  kv  €κατ€ρα  των  l•LaLpiσ€ωv.  j 
€TT€LTa  7Γ€ίρώμ€νοί  τταρατηρ^ίν  τό  τ  ΐσον  καΐ  το  ανισον  άτΐο-  48.  15 
βαλονμ€ν  την  του  ομοίου  τ€  καΐ  ανόμοιου  δίάγνωσιν,  ωστ€ 
μηδ€  ττυκνον  καλ^ΐν  €^ω  evos  μ^γ^θου^,  hr|λov  δ'  δτί  μηb^ 
αρμονίαν  μηh€  χρώμα,  τόττω  |  γάρ  τινι  και  ταύτα  ^ιώρισται.   2θ 

ΙΟ  Αηλον  δ'  ΟΤΙ   ovbev  τούτων  ^στϊ    TTpos  την  τη?  αίσθησβω? 
φαντασίαν    €Κ€ίνη  μ^ν  γαρ  ets  ομοιότητα  kvos  Tivos  βίδου? 
βλζττουσα    τό    re    χρώμα   |   Aeyet    καΐ    την    αρμονίαν    αλλ'   25 
ουκ   €19   h'os  Tivos   hιaστημaτos  μ^γ€θθ9,   λίγω    he  ττυκνου 
μζν    6ΐδθί    τιθύσα    €ω?    αν   τα    biio    διαστήματα    του    kvos 

15  €λάττω  τότΓον  κατξχΐ] — Εμφαίνεται  γαρ  kv  ττάσι  rot?  |  ττυκ-   3° 
vois   ττυκνου    tivos    φωνή    καίττερ    άνίσων    αυτών    όντων — 
χρώματος  be  etbos  εω?  αν  το  χρωματικον  ήθος  εμφαίνηται. 
ibiav  γαρ  δή  κίνησιν  εκαστον  τών  γενών  κινείται  irpos  την 
αΧσθησιν  ον  1 1   μια  χρώμενον   τετpaχόpboυ   bιaιpεσει   άλλα  49 

20  τΓολλαι?.  ωστ  είναι  φανερόν,  ότι  κινουμένων  τών  μεγεθών 
συμβαίνει  (μενειν)  το  γενο9,  ον  γαρ  ομοίως  κινείται  τών 
μείγεθών  κινουμένων  μέχρι  τινός,  άλλα  bιaμεvει'   τούτου  bε  5 

2  post  ώ(ΤΤ6  add.  ον  πάνυ  ράΒιον  συνώ^Ίν  Marquard       δίτονοι/  conieci  : 
Siarovou  codd.  ■^^^  ^  Η  3    apuovias  sed  as  postea  corr.  Β 

4  μ^Ύ^Θ-η  post  διαστημάτων  ponit  Η  5   ταντα  Μ  V  Β  S  8  δηλον 

δ'  ΟΤΙ  om.  et  μηθ'  pro  μηδ'  scrib.  Marquard         δ'  S  :  om.  rell.  ii  yap 

om.  VS  12  βλζπονσα  in  ras.  Ma  13  ουκ  eis  ^uhs  renov. 

Mb  els  om.  Β  eialv  ws  R  ττυκνονμζν  Β  14  ύδο$  in 

marg.  Mb  :   ζΧδου$  Μ  V  S  post  elBos  add.  όταν  η  φων^  φανγ  τα  δια- 

στήματα ούτω  Marquard         τεθεΓσο  Μ  V  S  Β  eojs  conieci  :  ass  codd. 

{δια)στ7}ματα  τον  erat  in  ras.  deinde  renov.  Mb  15   κατ^χβιν 

Η  eV  ττασι  To7s  renov.  Mb  16    (και  -rrep  άνισων  renov.   Mb 

17  δ€  €ίδθ5  εωϊ  conieci  :  δε  τ)  δίεσ"€ωί  R  :  δε?  δΐ(σ€ω5  rell.  δΐ€σ€ω5  in 
ras.  Mb)  hv  τι)  χρω  in  ras.  Mb  ΐμψαίν-ηται  Marquard  :  ζμψαίνβται 
codd.  18  ιδία  S  δτ?  κίντησιν']  δ^ίκνυσιν  R  {κιν)ζ7ται  nphs  την 

in  ras.  Mb  19  μια]  a  in  ras.  Mb  διαιρ^σβι  ex  διαίρ€σιν  Mb 

21  μ4ν€ΐν  addidi  :  ταυτον  elvai  Marquard         ου  in  ras.  Mb  22  δια- 

μ4νζΐ  renov.  Mb 

139 


11.49  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

μένοντος  (Ikos  καΐ  τα^  των  φθόγγων  bvvάμ€L9  ^ιαμίν^ιν,     το 

2ο  γαρ  ethos  τον  τ^τραχόρ^ον  ταν\τό,  hi  oirep  και  tovs  των 
hίaστημάτωv  opovs  άναγκαΐον  eiirelv  tovs  avTovs.  ΚαθόΚον 
δ'  elireXv,   ί'ω?   αν   μ^νΐ]   τα   των   τΐ^ρίζγόντων   ονόματα   κα\ 

25  λ^γηταί  αντων  η  μ\ν  ο^υτίρα  μίση  νττάτη  δ'  η  |  βαρύτερα,  5 
^αμ€νύ  καΐ  τα  των  'π€ρί€χομ4νων  ονόματα  καΐ  ρηθήσ€ται 
αυτών  ή  μ€ν  όζυτίρα  Χιγανο^  η  he  βαρντίρα  τταρνττάτη,  ael 
γαρ  TOVS  μ€ταζυ  μ^σης  re  καΐ  νττάτη^  λιγανόν  Τ6  και  τταρ- 

3θ  νττάτην  {η)  αϊσθη\σίί  τίθησιν.     Το  δ'  α^ιουν  η  τα  ϊσα  δια- 
στηματα  rots  avTols  όνόμασιν  ορίζ^σθαι  η  τα  άνισα  Irepotj  ίο 
μάγ^σθαι  rot?  φαινομ^νοΐξ   €στί'     το   [re]    γαρ  νττάτην   καΐ 
τταρυττάτη^   τω   τταρνττάτη^   [ττλβονάκίί    Ισον    ju,eλωδetrαt    ?)] 

go  (και)  λιχαι^ου  j  |  μeλωhζiτaL  Trore  ισοζ;  Trore  άνισον  ότι  δ' 
ονκ  kvhiyjeTai  hvo  hLaστημάτωv  k^rjs  Κ€ίμ€νων  rot?  avToXs 
5  ονόμασιν  €κάτ€ρον  αντων  τΐ^ριίγζσθαι  φαν€ρόν,  |  direp  μη  15 
μζλλοί  6  μ^σο9  hvo  €^€lv  ονόματα.  Αηλον  he  και  iirl  των 
ανίσων  το  ατοττον  ον  γαρ  hvvaTov  hιaμevovτos  του  €τ4ρου 
των  ονομάτων  το   €Τ€ρον  κίν€Ϊσθαι,  ττροί  άλληλα  γαρ  λελβ- 

ιο  Krat•  Ι  [ώσττβ/)  γαρ  δ  τξταρτο^   άττο   ttjs  μίση<$  νττάτη  irpos 
μίσην  λ^γ^ται,  όντως  6  ^γόμ^νος  της  μίσης  λιγανος  ττρος  20 
μάσην   λάγ^ται.]      Προ?    μ^ν   {ρυν    ταύτην)   την    hLairopiav 
τοσαντα  άρησθω.  | 

2.  jap  conieci  :  δ'  codd.  elZos  ex  cd^os  Ma  4  /xeVet  S  Η 

5  X(:yqTai\  Ύ^νηται  Η  υττάττ)  δ'  τ]  βαρύτερα]  υπάτη  in  ras.  Mb  δέ 

supra  lin.  add.  Mc  η  om.  Μ  d'  η  om.  VS  Β  η  Se  βαρύτερα 

(omissis  υπάτη  δβ)  R,  in  marg.  Β  6  διαμ^ν^ΐ  Marquard  :  διαμ&^ι 

codd.  7  Xixavhs  Marquard  :  μ4ση  codd.  παρυπάτη~\  υπάτη 

sed  Trap  ante  υ  eras.  Μ  :  υπάτη  rell.  9  η  restituit  Marquard  αίσθη- 
σιν  S  10  TOts  ante  eTipois  add.  Η  ii  μάχ^σθαι]  συνίχ^σθαι  R 

iffTi  ante  to7s  ψαινομίνοΐί  ponit  Η  re  seclusi  12  πλΐονάκί5 

.  .  .  ^  del.  Meibom  13  καΐ  restituit  Meibom  Trore  μΐλωδ^Ίται 

(β  supra  TTore,  et  α  supra  μβΚωδίΊται  scr.)  Ma  ττοτβ  yuev  ϊσον  ποτέ  δέ 
άι/ισον  Η  14  αύτο7$  supra  lin.  add.  com  Β  ιη  Th  postea 

add.  Ma  (ut  vid.)  18  Ae^erat  Η  ig  ώσπ^ρ  .  .  .  λιχανϊ>5  Tr/jbs 

μίσην  λ€7€ταί  seclusit  Marquard  ϋπάτη$  Η  :  υπάτη  sed  ν  post  η  eras. 
Μ  :  ύπάτην  V  Β  sed  υπάτη  in  marg.  Β  so  AeyeTai  in  ras.  Mb  :  deinde 
4  litt.  eras,  quarum  extremae  ται  fuisse  videntur  ante  πphs  μίσην  add. 
Kol  Mc         21   oZv  ταύτην  restituit  Marquard  22  τοσαυτα]  ταΰτα  Η 

140 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΏΝ    β'  II. 50 

Υίνκνον  be  λ€γ€σθω  μ^χρί  τούτον  €ωί  αν  ev  TeTpax^opbcu  15 
δια  τεσσάρων  συμφωνούντων  των  άκρων  τα  bύo  bιaστ■ημaτa 
σνντζΘάντά  τον  kvos  ξλάττω  τόττον  κατ^χτ}.      Τίτραχορδου 
δ€  66σι  bL\aLpea€Ls  k^aipeTot  re  και  γνώριμοι  ανται  αϊ  άσιν  2ο 
5  ets  γνώριμα  bιaιpoύμevaι  μβγ^θη  bιaστημάτωv.     Μια  μ^ν  ονν 
{τούτων)  των  biaipiaeoiv  ζστιν  €ναρμόνΐ09  kv  77  το  μ\ν  ττνκνον 
ημιτόνιόν  €στι  το  \  be  λοιττον  biTovov.     rpets  δε  χρωματικαί,   25 
η  re  τον  μαλακοί)  χρώματο9   καΐ  η  τον  ημιολίον   καΐ  η  τον 
τονιαίον    μαλακον  μ€ν  ονν  χρώματος  Ιστι  biaipeais  ev  fj  το 

ΙΟ  μίν   ττνκνον   e/c   bύo  χρω\ματικών  bιeσeωv  €λαχίστων  σύγ-   3° 
KeiTai,   το   be  λοιπόν   bύo   μeτpoιs  μeτρeΐτaι,   ημιτονίω   μ^ν 
Tpisi   χρωματική    be    bie(rei   ατταζ,    coaTe   μeτpeΐ(τθaι   τρισίν 
ημιτονίοις  καΐ  τόνον  τρίτω  μeρeι  άτταξ'    eσrt  δe  των  χρωμα- 
τικών ττνκνων  ελάχιστον  καΐ  λιχανο^  αντη   βαρντάτη  τον  1 1 

15  yevovs  τούτον.      ημιολίον  be   χpώμaτos  biaipeais  €στιν    ev  ζΐ 
if  τό  re  ττνκνον  ^/xioAtoi^  eσrι  τον  [τ]  €ναρμονίον  καΐ  των 
hιeσeωv  (eKarepa)  eKaTepas  των  ^ναρμονίων   οτι  δ'   eσr6  | 
μeΐζov  το   ημιόλιον   ττνκνον  τον  μαλακον,  pabiov   avvibelv,  5 
το   μ\ν   yap   evappoviov   bιeσeωs  λeίττeι   tovos   etvai  το  be 

20  χρωματικής.      τονιαίον  be  χρώματος  biaipeais   eaTiv    ev   r) 
TO    μ\ν  ττνκνον  e^  ημι\τονίων  bύo   ovyKeiTai  το  be  λοιττον  ίο 
τριημιτόνιόν  eaTiv.      Μ^χρι  μ\ν  ονν  ταύτης  της  bιaιρeσeως 

Ι   αν  om.  R  3  κατοχή  ex  κατίχ^ι  Mb  :   κατέχει  S  Ύ^τραχόρ^ου 

κ.τ.λ.]  in  marg.  "Ορα  ΥΙτοΧ^μαΐον  iv' Αρμονικοί  Η  4  ^^^^  i^aiperoi 

una  litt.  eras.  Μ  αϊ    καΐ  R  5  e'  "γνώριμα  €στι  τα  διαιρούμενα 

μ^Ύ^θη  των  διαστημάτων  Η  διαιρούμενα  Μ  V  S  6  τούτων  addidi 

τώνΟτη.Ή.       διαιρέσεων  post  iaTiponitH       πυκvhv  in  ras.Mh:  μικphv  Κ 
7  δίτονονί  post  ι  litt.  α  eras.  Μ  8  η  του  τονιαίον^  η  του  supra  lin. 

add.  Mb  :  ημιτονίου  R  9  ουν  om.  R  10  καϊ  ante  διέσεων 

add.  R  12  τρεΐί  Η  δε  add.  Mc  :  om.  VB  S  διεσει]  ει  in 

ras.  Mb  :  διεσΐ5  Va  ατταξ  ώστε  μετρεΤσθαι  om.  Μ  V  Β  S  Η  ώ(ΓΤ6 

.  .  .  ατταξ  om.  R  τρισϊν  ημιτονίοΐ3  καϊ  τόνου  τρίτω  μέρει  in  marg.  Mb 

14    ττυκνών  R  :    τΐυκν^ν  rell.  Xixavhs^  os  in  ras.   Mb  16    τ' 

del.  Marquard  εναρμονίου']  εν  add.  Mb  17  εκατερα  restituit 

Marquard  (lac.  2  syllab.  R)  19  tovos  post  elvai  ponit  Η  2o  διαί- 

iTTuKva 
εναρμον.     μαλακ.      ημιολ. 
^  V  θ' 

141 


II.5I  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

αμφότεροι  κινούνται  οΐ  φθόγγοι,  μ€τα  ταύτα  δ'  ι)  μ€ν  τταρ- 

15  νττάτη  μ^ν€ΐ,  διελϊ/λυ^ί  γαρ  τον  αντη^  τόπον,  η  be  |  λιχανοί 
κινύται  hUaiv  ξναρμόνιον  καΐ  γίγν^ται  το  λιχανον  καΐ 
νιτάτη^  hιάστημa  ίσον  τω  λΐ)(^ανον  καΐ  μςση^,  ώστ€  μηκ^τι 
γίγνεσθαι  ττνκνον  iv  ταύττ]  ττ)  biaipia€i.      συμβαίνει  δ'  αμα  5 

2θ  τταν^σθαι  το  itv\kv6v  συνιστάμενου  iv  Trj  των  τετρaγόphωv 
bιaιp€σ€l  καΐ  αργεσθαι  γιγνόμενον  το  ^ιάτονον  γ4νος.  Έ,ΙσΙ 
be   bvo   biaTOvov   bιaιpiσξ.l's,   η   re   τον   μαλακού   καΐ   η   του 

25  συντόνου.      μαλακού  μ\ν  ονν  εστί  bιaτόvoυ  bιaC[p€σιs  kv  f] 
το  μ€ν  νττάτης  καΐ  τταρυττάτη^  ημιτονιαϊόν  εστί,  το  δε  τ:αρ-  ίο 
υττάτηί  καΐ  λιχανοϋ  τριών  b ιάσεων  εναρμονίων,  το  δε  λιχ^ανοϋ 
καΐ  μάση^  irivTe  bιiσ€ωv'    συντόνου  δε  iv  f\  το  μεν  υττάτη^ 

3©  καΐ  7τα\ρυ7τάτ7]9  ημιτονιαϊόν,  των  δε  λοιπών  τονιαίον  εκάτερόν 
εστίν.      ΑιχανοΙ   μεν   ονν    είσΐν   εζ,    μία   εναρμόνΐ09,   τρεΐί 

52  χρωματικαΙ  καΐ  bvo  biOTOVoi,  οσαι  ττερ  αι  1 1  τών  TeTpayopboiv  15 
bιaιpεσειs,  τταρυττάται  δε  bύo  ελάττονξ,  Tjj  γαρ  ημιτονιαία 
χρώμεθα  πρό^  τε  tcls  biaTOvovs  καΐ  TTpbs  την  του  τονιαίου 
5  χρώματος  bιaίpε\σιv•  τεττάρων  δ'  ουσών  τταρυττατών  η  μεν 
ivapμόvιos  IbCa  εστί  της  αρμονίας,  αι  δε  τρεις  κοιναί  του 
τε  bιaτόvoυ  καΐ  του  χρώματος.      Ύών  δ'  iv  τώ  τετρaχόρb(ύ  2ο 

10  bιaστημάτωv  το  μεν  νττάτης  |  καΐ  τταρυττάτης  τώ  παρυττάτης 
καΐ  λιχανοϋ  η  Ισον  μελωbεΐτaι  η  ελαττον,  μείζον  δ'  ovb4- 
ττοτε.  ότι  μεν  ονν  ϊσον  {φανερον  εκ  της  ivaρμovίov  biai- 
ρεσεως  καΐ  τών  χρωματικών,  ότι  δ'  ελαττον  εκ  μεν  τών 
biaTOvodv^    φανερόν,    εκ   δε   τών   χρωματικών   όντως   αν   τις  25 

15  κατανοησειεν,   ει  τταρυττάτην  [  μεν   λάβοι  την  του  μαλακού 

2     αύτηί     Marquard  :     avTrjs     codd.  8     Sialpeais    διατόνου 

Η  9   ούν  om.   R  10   ante  ημιτονιαΊον  5  fere  litt.  eras, 

(vid.  χρώμα  fuisse)  Μ  eVri  om.  R  12  καΐ  in  marg.  Mc :  om. 

rell.  13  τονιαίον  ex  ■ημιτονιαίων  Ma  τονιαΊόν  post  eKarepov 

ponit  Η  14  e'l  .  .  .  rirrap^s  in  marg.  Mb:   om.  R  15  οσαι 

ex  οσα  Ma  16  τταρυπάται  5e  τ4τταρζ$  seclusit  Marquard  παρυ- 

irOTijs  Β  :  τταρυπα  {τ  suprascr.)  S  δυίΊν  Μ  :   5υο7ν  V  S  19  ISla 

Η  :  ϊδίοϊ  rell.  21    τφ  παρυπάτηί  cm.  R  23  φανερον  .  .  . 

5ιατόνων  restituit  Westphal 

142 


ΑΡχΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    β'  IL52 

χρώματος,  λιχανον  be  την  {τον)  τονίαίον    καΙ  γαρ  αϊ  τοιανταί 
bLaLpiaeLS  των  ττνκνων  e/x^eXei?  φαίνονται.      το  δ'  CK/xeAe? 
yivoLT   αν  €Κ  της  εναντίας  λήψεως,  et  |  tls  τταρνττάτην  μ\ν  2ο 
λάβοί  την  ημίτονιαίαν,  λίχανον  be  ΤΊ]ν  τον  ημωλίον  χρω- 
5  ματο9,  η  τταρνττάτην  μ^ν  την  τον  ημωλίον,  λίχανον  0€  την 
τον    μαλακον    χρώματος'     ανάρμοστοι    γαρ    |    φαίνονται    αΐ  25 
τοιανταί    otaipeVet?.      Το    be   τταρνττάτην    καΐ   λίχανον    (τω 
λίχανον)  καΐ  μΙσης  καΐ  ίσον  μeλωbeΐτaL  καΐ  άνισον   αμφο- 
τέρων'   ϊσον  μ\ν  kv  τω  σνντονωτάρω  biaTovio,   ίλατ\τον  δ'  3° 
ΙΟ  ev  ττασί   rots  XoittoIs,  μeϊζov   δ'   όταν  {tls)  λίχανω   μev  ttj 
σνντονωτάτΎΐ   των   biaTOVMV,  τταρνττάττ]   be   των   βαρντάρων 
TLvl  της  ημίτονιαίας  χρησηται. 

Mera   be   ταντα   beiKTeov  Trepl  τον  e^ijs   vττoτvττώσavτeς 
ττρωτον  αντον  τον  ||  τρόττον  καθ^  ον  ά^ιωτέον  το  e^rjs   αφ-  53 

15  oρίζeLV.     Άττλώ?  μev  ονν  eiTTelv  κατά  την  τον  μ^λονς  φνσιν 
ζητητ^ον  το  e^s  καΐ  ουχ  ώί  οί  eh  την  καταττυκνω^σω  /3Ae-  5 
TTovTes  (Ιώθασίν   aTTobibovai  το  σvveχes.      eKelvoi  μ\ν   γαρ 
όλίγωρ€Ϊν  φαίνονται  της  τον  μeλovs  αγωγής'    φαν€ρ6ν  δ'  6Κ 
τον    ττληθονς    των    €^ης    TLθeμevωv    bιeσeωv,    [ον    γαρ    δια 

20  τοσούτων  \  bvvηθeίη  τις  αν]  μ€χρί  γαρ  τριών  η  φωνή  bvvaTai  10 
σvveίpeLV'    ωστ     elvai  φavepov    οτι   το    eζης    οντ    ev   τοις 
€λαχίστοίς    οντ    ev    τοις   άνίσοις   οϊιτ     ev   {τοϊς)   ϊσοις    ael 
ζητητίον  biaστημaσLV,  άλλ^  άκοΧον\θητ^ον  τη  φvσeL.     Τον  15 

Ι  του  restituit  Marquard  2  ^μμ^λ^ΐςΐ   4κμ€λ€ΐ5  Η  e/c^eAes] 

4κμ€λ€75   Β:    4μμ€λ€5   (κ  supra  prius  μ  scr.)   Η  •4    νμ^ολίου] 

-ημιολίου  Μ  sed  post  ή/χι  una  litt.  eras.,  At  in  ras.  in  qua  τονιαί  fuisse 
vid.  Mc  :  ■ημιτονιαίου  V  S  Β  Η  5  ^  ■  •  •  χρώματο5  om.  Η  δβ 

add.  Mc  Vb  7  τφ  λιχανοΰ  restituit  Meibom  8  μ€λψ5€7ται 

post  άμφοτ^ρωε  ponit  Η  lo  ris  addidi  11  βαρυτίρων  ηνϊ] 

βαρυτόνων  τταρνπάτη  Se  των  βαρυτόνων  tlv\  Β  :  βαρύτερων  in  marg.  Β 
12  χρ-ησηται  ex  χρήσβτοι  Ma  14  αφορίζ^σθαι  Η  ι6  και  ουχ 

is  οί  els  το  in  ras.  Mb  17  diSovai  Η  ig  ού  .  .  .  hu  seclusi 

ut  glossema  :  ού  yap  supra  lin.  add,  Mb  20  &v  om.  codd.  praeter 

R  τρίώι/]  τινών  Β  21   συνβίρζΐν  ex  cvvripeiv  Ma  (?)  οϋτ'  ev 

ex  οΰτ€  Mb  22  To7s  restituit  Marquard  23  ακολουθίον  Η 

143 


11.53  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

μίν  ονν  ακριβή  λόγον  του  ef^y  ονττω  pabtov  airobovvaL,  έ'ω? 
αν  αΐ  σννθίσ^ί^  των  διαστημάτων  άττοδο^ώσι^•    οτι  δ'  ^στι 

2ο  τι   €^η^   κα\  τω  7ταντ€λώ9  άτΐζίρω  φαν€ρον  γίνοιτ    αν  Ι  δια 
τοιασΜ    TIVOS    ^τταγωγη^.      Γίιθανον    γαρ    το    μη^€ν    eivai 
hιάστημa   ο    μ€λωhovvτ€S   et?    aireipa   τίμνομ^ν,    αλλ'    elvai  5 
TLva  μζγιστον    αριθμόν   eh  ον  hiaipeiTai  των   διαστημάτων 

25  (καστον  νττο  |  tt]s  μβλωδια?.  Ει  δβ  τοϋτό  φαμ€ν  ήτοι 
ΤΓίθανον  η  καΐ  άναγκαΐον  etvai,  hijkov  οτι  οΐ  (τον)  ττροζψη- 
μίνου  αριθμού  μ4ρη  7Γ€ρΐ€χοντ€9  φθόγγοι  k^rjs  αλλήλων 
άγονται,      δοκονσι  δ'   etvai  {τοιούτων)  των   φθόγγων   καΐ  Ι  ίο 

3ο  ούτοι  ols  τυγχάνομ^ν  €κ  τταλαιου  χρώμ€νοι  οΐον  η  νητη 
{καϊ)  η  τταρανητη  καϊ  οι  tovtois  σνν€χ€Ϊξ. 

^Κχόμζνον  δ'  αν  €Ϊη  το  άφορίσαι  το  ττρωτον  καϊ  άναγκαι- 

54  ότατον  των  σνντ€ΐνόν\\των  ττρο?  τα^  €μμ€λ€Ϊ9  σννθίσ^ι^  των 
διαστημάτων.  Έι;  τταντί  he  γίν^ι  αττο  τταντοξ  φθόγγου  bia  15 
5  των  k^rjs  το  μ^λοξ  άγόμβνον  καϊ  eirl  το  βαρύ  καϊ  €ττΙ  το  |  ό^υ 
η  τον  τίταρτον  των  k^i]9  δια  τεσσάρων  η  τον  ττίμΈτον  δια 
TtivTe  σύμφωνον  λαμβανίτω,  ω  δ'  αν  μηδίτΕρα  τούτων  συμ- 
βαίντ},  €κμ€λη9  €στω  oijtos  irpos  άτταντα^  ols  συμβξβηκβν  Ι 

ΙΟ  άσυμφώνω  etvai   κατά   Tohs  (ίρημ^νουί  αριθμούν.      Ον   δβι  20 
δ'   άγνούν,   ότι   ουκ   ίστιν    ανταρκ€9  το   €ΐρημ€νον  ττρο?  το 
ζμμζλώί    συγκύσθαι    τα    συστήματα    €κ    των    διαστημάτων 

15  ovbev  γαρ  κωλύζΐ  συμφω\νούντων  των  φθόγγων  κατα  tovs 
ζίρημ^νουί  αριθμούν  €κμ€λώ9  τα  συστήματα  συν€στάναι, 

3   τψ  add.  Mb  :  cm.  R  (pavephv^  avepov  S  5  τ€μνωμ€ν  Η 

6  &ί/]  S  S  -  8  πυθαν})ν  Η  του  restituit  Marquard  Trpo€ipr],uevov 
αριθμού  Marquard  :  ■προ(ΐρτ]μ4νοι  [προαρη  in  ras.  Mb)  αριθμοί  Μ  VS  Β  : 
{o'l)ye  (ΐρημίι/οι  αριθμοί  R  10  τοιούτων  restituit  Marquard  11  ή 

ί/ήτη  Westphal  :  ^1/  re  Η  :  ^j/  rell.  12  καϊ  add.  Marquard  η 

τταραι/ήττ?  Η  (coni.  Marquard)  :  τγ  τταρανηττ)  reW.  οί toUtois  συν(χ€7$ 

R  :   η  TovTOis  συν^χί]$  rell.  16  των]  Thv  Η  ιη  Thv  .  .  .  τί>ν] 

τί>  .  .   .  τ6  a    «       των  Marquard :    τψ  codd,  18    σύμφονον  S 

ΚαμΒανίτω  conieci :  λαμβάνεται  codd.  μ•ηΖ(Τ(ρον  Meibom  συμ- 

βαίνει Η  19  4κμ(λ^ε  (e/c  in  ras.)  Mb  :  e/u/xeA7?s  in  marg.  Β         οΰτω5 

Η  ofs  Η  :  eV  oh  rell.  20  ασυμ<ρώνοΐ3  Η  δβ?  Η  :  cm.  rell. 

22  σνγκζΐσθαι]  κινίΊσθαι  R  23  κωλύοι  S  συμφώνων  όντων  Η 

24  4κμ€\ώ5  (e/c  in  ras.)  Mb :  e/x/ieXois  R        συνεστάναι  Η  :  συνιστάναι  rell. 
144 


ΑΡλΙΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    β'  IL54 

άλλα  τοντον  μη  νττάρχοντοί  ovbev  €tl  γίγν€ταί  των  λοίττων 
όφελος.      θ€Τ€ον    οΐιν   τοντο    ιτρώτον    els  |  άρχης   τά^ίν   ον  2ο 
μη  ντΐάργοντοξ  άναιρύται  το  ηρμοσμίνον.     "Ομοων  δ'  €στΙ 
τοντω  τρόττον  τίνα  κα\  {το)  irepl  τα9  των  τ€τpaχόρbωv  ττροί 
5  ά?ύ^ηλα  θ€(Τ€ίς'    5et  γαρ  rot?  του  αντον  συστήματος  \  τ^τρα-  25 
yophoLS  ζσομίνοις  ^υοΐν  θάτβρον  υττάργ^ιν,  η  yap  συμφων€Ϊν 
Trpbs  άλληλα,    ωσθ^   €καστον   €κάστω   σνμφωνον   eti^at   καθ^ 
ην  b-qiTOTe  των  συμφωνιών,  {η)  irpos  το  αυτό  συμφων€Ϊν  μη 
67γΙ  τον  Ι  αυτόν   τόττον   συν€\η    οντά   ω  συμφωνεί  €κάτ€ρον  3° 
ΙΟ  αυτών.      "Εστί   δ'  οΰδε   τούτο   αυτάρκης   Trpos  το  etrat  του 
αυτού  συστήματος  τα  τ€τράχορ^α,  τ:ροσ^ύται  yap  τίνων  καΐ 
€τ€ρων   7T€pl  ων  kv   rot?  eTreira  ρη  \  \  θτ]σ^ται,   αλλ'  άν^υ  ye  55 
τούτου  ττάντα  yCyveTai  τα  λοίττα  άχρηστα. 

ΈτΓβΙ  he  τών  l•ίaστημaτίκώv  μ^γζθών  τα  μ\ν  τών  συμφω- 
15  I'div   ητοί   όλως   ουκ   |   eyjELV  hoKU  τόττον   αλλ'   kvl   //eyelet  5 
ώρίσθαι,  η  τταντ^λώς  άκαριαΐόν  τίνα,  τα  δβ  τών  διαφωνών 
ττολλώ  ήττον  τοϋτο  ττζττονθζ  καΐ  δια  ταύτας  τάς  αίτιας  ττολύ 
μάλλον  τοις  τών  συμφωνών   μeyeθ6σt  7Γΐ]στ€τ;6ΐ  η  αϊσθησις  ίο 
η   τοις   τών   διαφωνών    ακριβέστατη    δ'    αν    ζΧη    διαφώνου 
20  διαστήματος  ληψις  η  δια  συμφωνίας.     Έαι»  μ^ν  ουν  ττροσ- 
ταχθγ]   ττρος  τω   δοθ^ντι  φθόγγω   λαβείν  €ίτΙ  το  βαρύ  το  | 
δίάφωνον    οίον   δίτονον  η    άλλο    τι  τών    δυνατών   ληφθήναι  1 5 
δια  συμφωνίας,  em  το  όζυ  άττο  του   δοθέντος  φθόγγου  λη- 

I    ovBev  cm.   R  2    iacp^Xos  S  4   τί)  restituit  Meibora 

Trepl   ras]    rhs   irepl  Μ  V  Β  S  6    ζυσΐ    Μ  V  Β  S  ^]   ^τοι  Η 

7  ίίσθ'  ex  'όθ'  Μχ :  ό'θ'  V  Β  8  ^  restituit  Meibom  μί]  om.  et 

τφ  αυτω  τόττφ  scrib.  Marquard  9  ^]  τ^  Η  13  άχριστα  Η 

14  δίοστη,αάτων  Β       συ ^ψώι/ων  Meibom  :  συμίρωνιών  coda,  15  ολα>5•] 

δλ  in  ras.   Vb :    αλλω?  Μ  :    α-πΧώ$  Marquard  hoKetv  in  marg.   Β 

kvl  conieci  :  eV  codd.  :  ■^  d  Marquard  16  ώρίσθαι  conieci  :  ωρισται 

codd.         διαφόνων  S  17-19  ττόλλφ  .  .  .  διαφωνών  cm.  R  19  to7s 

ex  ras  vel  rats  in  ras.  Mb  δ'  del.  Marquard  20  η  in  ras.  Mb 

22  δίτονοι/]  δί  in  ras.  Mb.  fuisse  vid.  tl  vel  re  :  ofoi/  re  toioj/  in  marg. 
Β  23  eVi  δβ  τί)  punctis  post  eVt  V:    δβ  scripsisse  vid.  Mb,  eras. 

Mc  J)  :  eVt  δ€  rh  S,  Β  .^sed  punctis  in  marg.  additis) 

MACRAN  L  145 


11.55  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

ΐϊτίον  το  hia  τεσσάρων,  ζΐτ   €ττΙ  το  βαρύ  το  δια  Ί:ίντ€,  ϋτα 

2ο  ττάλίν  €7Γ6  το  |  o^v  ΤΟ  bio,  τ€σσάρων,  €tr'  tTTt  το  βαρύ  το 
biCL  7TivT€.  καΐ  οϋτως  €σταί  το  hiTOVOv  άττο  τον  ληφθ^ντοί 
φθόγγου  ύλημμ^νον  το  em  το  βαρύ.     kav  δ'  kin  τουναντίον 

25  ττροσταχθή  λαβζΐν  το  δίάφω\νον,  Ιναντίω^  υοίητ^ον  την  των  5 
συμφωνών   ληψίν.      Τίγν^ται    he    καΐ    eav    άττο   συμφώνου 
διαστήματος  το  διάφωνον  αφαίρζθ?\    hia    συμφωνίας  καΐ  το 

3ο  λοίττον  δια  συμφωνίας  ύλημμίνον  άφαιρ^ίσθω  |  γαρ  το 
hiTOVov  άττο  τον  δια  τ€σσάρων  (δια)  συμφωνίας'  δηλον  brj 
ότι  οι  την  νττζροχην  τΐ^ριίγοντ^ς  if  το  bta  τεσσάρων  virepi^jEi  ίο 
του  διτόνου  δια  συμφωνίας  ίσονταί  ττρός  άλληλονς  βίλημ- 
56  μ^νοί'  ν'ηάρ\\-)(ονσι  μ\ν  γαρ  οΐ  τον  hia  τεσσάρων  Οροι  σύμ- 
φωνου' άττο  he  τον  όζυτίρου  αυτών  λαμβάνεται  φθόγγος 
σύμφωνος  im  το  όζυ  δια  τεσσάρων,  άττο  be  τον  λη\φθεντος 

5  έτερος   εττΐ  το  βαρύ  δια  ττεντε,  {είτα  ττάλιν  εττΐ  το  ό^υ  bia  15 
τεσσάρων,)  είτ    άττο  τούτου  έτερος  εττΐ  το  βαρύ  bia  ττεντε. 
κα\  ττετττωκε  το  τελευταΐον  σύμφωνον  εττΐ  τον  δεύτερον  των 

ΙΟ  {την)  υττεροχην  οριζόντων,  ωστ  eivai  φα\νερόν,  Οτι,  εάν  άττο 
σνμφώνον  bιάφωvov  άφαιρεθι]  δια  σνμφωνίας,  εσται  και 
το  λοιττόν  δια  σνμφωνίας  είλημμενον.  2θ 

ΥΙότερον   δ'  ορθώς  υπόκειται  το  δια  τεσσάρων   εν   άρχτ} 

ΐδ  bύo  τόνων  καΐ  ημί\σεος,  κατά  τόvbε  τον  τρόττον  εζετάσειεν 

αν  τις  ακριβέστατα'    είληφθω  γαρ  το  δια  τεσσάρων  καΐ  ττρός 

εκατερω  των  Ορων  άφορίσθω  biTovov  δια  συμφωνίας.     br\Xov 

20  br\  ότι  άναγκαΐον  τάς  |  ύττεροχας  ΐσας  είναι,  εττεώηττερ  και  25 

Ι   (Ιτα]  eire  Η  2  er'  eVt  Β  :   6?τ'  βττΐ  in  marg.  Β  :   eif  τ'  eVi  S  rh 

diaircurA  rh  supra  lin.  add.  Mb         4  (peoyyos  Μ  V  S         rh  del.  Meibom 

7  ante   άψαιρ^θτ)  una    litt.    eras.   Μ  :    ai   in   ras.    Mc  :    e   in   ras.    Mb 

8  αφηρ^ίσθω  Μ  V  S  :  άφηρησθω  BR  9  τον]  ttjs  H  δια  restituit 
Marquard  11  διτόνου]  post  t  litt.  α  eras.  Μ  :  διατόνου  Β  is  yap 
cm.  Β  'όροί]  οι  in  ras.  Mb :  ορθοί  R,  Β  in  marg.  15  elra  .  .  . 
τβίΤίΓάρων  restituit  Meibom  17  τύι/ Meibom:  τί)  codd.  18  τ^ν 
restituit  Meibom  19  συμφώνου!  Η  διάφωνον]  δια  in  ras.  Mb 
24  δίτονον  Meibom  :  σύμφωνον  codd. 

146 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΏΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    /3'  IL56 

ϊσα  άττ'  ίσων  άφτβρηταί,  μζτα  bk  τοντο  τω  το  οζντ^ρον  δι- 
τονον  €m  το  βαρν  ορίζοντι  δια  τεσσάρων  ύληφθω  kirX  το 
ό^ν,  τω  6e  το  βαρντ^ρον  hίτΌVov  kw,  το  [  οζν  ορίζοντι  25 
^ΙΚήφθω  €τ€ρον  δια  τεσσάρων  kia  το  βαρν.  φαν^ρον  hr] 
5  οτι  TTpbs  €κατ€ρω  των  οριζόντων  το  γ^γονοί  (τν(ττημα  bvo 
σνν€χ^€Ϊ£  έσονται  κ^ίμ^ναι  ντΐ^ρογαί  as  άναγκαΐον  Ι  ίσα?  3° 
€ivai  δια  τα  ίμΊτροσθ^ν  ύρημίνα.  Ύοντων  δ'  οντω  ττροκατζ- 
σκζνασμζνων  τovs  aKpovs  των  ωρισμίνων  φθόγγων  €7τΙ  την 
αΧσθησιν    Ιττανακτίον     el    μ\ν    ονν    φανησονται    ^ιάφωνοι, 

ΙΟ  hrjXov  οτι  ουκ  ίσται  το  hia  τεσσάρων  bvo  τό\  \νων  καΐ  ημίσ^ος,  57 
€1    be    σνμφωνησονσι   δια   TreWe   [τέσσαρα,]   brjkov    οτι    bvo 
τόνων    καΐ    ημίσ^ο^    ^σται   το    δια    τεσσάρων.     6   μ\ν    γαρ 
βαρύτατοι  των  ξίλημμ^νων  |  φθόγγων  bia  τεσσάρων  ηρμόσθη  5 
σνμφωνον   τω   το   βαρντζρον   bίτovov  kiri   το   ό^ν   ορίζοντι, 

15  τον   δ'  όξντατον  των  άλημμίνων  φθόγγων    bia  ττίντ^   σνμ- 
β€βηκ€    σνμφωνύν    τω    βαρντάτω,    ώστβ    |    τη^    ν7Γ€ροχϊ]9  ic 
ονσηί  τονιαίαί  re  καΐ  els  'ίσα  bιr\pημevηs  ων  €κάτ€ρον  ημιτό- 
νιόν  Τ€  και  VTiepoyj]  [μ\ν'\  του  δια  τeσσάρωv  €στΙν  virep  το 
bίτovov,  brjXov  οτι  ^:evτe  ημιτονίων  σvμβaίveι  το  δια  τeσ- 

20  σάρων  j  eirat.     "On  δ'  οι  τον  ληφθevτos  σvστ■ημaτos  άκροι  15 
ον  σνμφωνησονσιν  άλλην  σνμφωνίαν  η  την  δια  ^Γevτe,  pabiov 
σννώ€Ϊν'    ττρωτον  μ\ν  ονν  οτι  την  δια  τeσσάρωv  ον  σνμ- 
φωνονσι    κατανοητίον,    |    eireibriTTep    irpos   τω    ληφθίντι    ef  20 
ap^rjs  δια  τeσσάpωv  ΰττίροχ?)  ^τρόσκeιτaι  βφ'  €κάτ€ρα'    eireiU* 

25  ότι  την  δια  ττασών  ονκ  evbeγeτaι  σνμφωνίαν  beικτeov.     το 

3  rh  βαρντ^ρον']  rh  cm.  R  βαρύτζρον  Va  R  :   βαρύτονον  Μ  Vb  S  Β 

ζιάτονον  R  4    '<^repov  Η  :   er^pos  rell.  6  κΐίμ^ναι  conieci  :   και  μ^ 

€v  at  codd.  :  καϊ  μη  μία  at  Marquard  7  προκατασκ^υασ μίνων  Β  : 

ττροσκατζσκβυασμίνων  Η  8  οριζόντων  Μ  (sed  ζόντ  in  ras.  Mc)  R  Η  : 

ορισμών  y a.:  ώρισμίνων  Vh  rell.  10  δηδηλονότι  Β  τι   συμφω- 

ν-ησωσι  Μ  τέσσαρα  del.  Marquard  15  δ']  τέσσαρα  Μ  V  S  Β  : 

τέταρτον  R  ι6  συφων^Ίν  S  τη  διηρημ€ν7}5  ex  διηρημενην 

Mc  :   διηρ-ημξνηννΒΒ  ι8  ^ev  seclusit  Marquard  19  ημι- 

τονιαίων  Η  τβσσάρων  Meibom  :    ireVre  Codd.  20    οί]  ^  S 

25  δίίκτέον  Marquard  :  Κζκτίον  codd. 

L  2  147 


11.57  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ  ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ  ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΏΝ  β' 

γαρ    €Κ    των    υ7Τ€ροχών    γιγνόμ^νον   μ^γ^θος   eXarrov   kari 
25  hirovov,  ζλάττονι  |  yap  νττ€ρ€χ€ί  το  δια  τ€(Τ(τάρων  η  τόνω 
του  biTOvov    σνγγωρζίται  {γαρ)  τταρα   ττάντων  το  δια  τεσ- 
σάρων μζΐζον  μεν  etvai  bvo  τόνων  ελαττον  δε  τριών,  ώστε  | 
3ο  ττάν  το  7τροσκ€ίμ€νον  τω  hta  τεσσάρων  ελαττόν  εστί  του  δία  5 
ττεντε'    φανερον  {brj)  οτι  το  σνγκείμενον  ε^  αυτών  ονκ  αν 
εϊη  δια  ττασών.     εΐ  hε  συμφωνουσιν  οΐ  άκροι  τών  ληφθέντων 
58  φθόγγων  μείζω  μεν  1 1  συμφωνίαν  τη9  δια  τεσσάρων  ελάττω 
δ€  τηί  δια  ττασών,  άναγκαΐον  αυτούς  δια  ττεντε  συμφωνεΐν 
τοϋτο  γάρ  εστί  μόνον  μέγεθος  σύμφωνον  μεταξύ  του  bia  |  ίο 
5  τεσσάρων  καΐ  του  δια  ττασών, 

2  Βιτόνου]  post  t  una  litt.  eras.  Μ        4λάττονι]  %\αττον  R        υττάρχ^ι  Η 
3  Sltovov  ex  διττόνου  Mc  :   Sittovov  S  άλλα  ante  συ-γχωρ^Ίται  ins. 

Marquard         yap  addidi  5  t^S]  τί)  Μ  V  Β  S  6  ^  restituit 

Marquard  :  δβ  Η  :  om.  rell.  10  τούτου  Η  σΰμφωνον~\  inter  ν 

et  ο  una  litt.  et  in  ω  ace.  eras.  Μ         re  post  /χβταξυ  του  add.  Η 


148 


API2TOSENOT     ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ 
2ΤΟΙΧΕ1ί1Ν     Γ' 


Τα  1^7/?  τ€τράχορ^α  η  σνν\η7ϊταί  η  δι^^βυκται*    καλ€ΐσθω  15 
be   σνναφη   μ^ν  όταν  δυο   τeτρaχόpbωv  k^rji  μ€λ^ύbovμevωv 
ομοίων  κατά  (τχημα  φθόγγοι  "ρ  ανα  μίσον  kolvos,  hiaCevQiS  \ 
δ'  όταν   bvo  τ€τpaχόpbωv  k^rjs  μeλωboυμ€vωv   ομοίων   κατά  20 
5  όχημα,  τόνο^  γ  ανα  μάσον.    "Ort  δ'  άναγκαΐον  €τ€ρον  ττότ^ρον 
σνμβαίν€ΐν  rots  kiijs  τ€τpaχόρboL9,  φαν^ρον  Ικ  των  ντοκ^ι- 
μ^νων  Ι  οί  μ\ν  γαρ  τέταρτοι  των  k(r]S  bia  τεσσάρων  σνμφω-  25 
νοΰντ€ί   σνναφην   Ίϊοιτισονα-ιν,   οι   be   [  |   τΐίμτττοι   bia   Trcire  59 
bLάζev^LV.      bet    δ'    eTepov    ττότ^ρον    τούτων    νττάρχ^ίν    rots' 

τ  φΘόγγοί9,  ωστ€  και  rots  k^ijs  rer/^αχo'pδots  άναγκαϊον  €τ€ρον 
των  ξίρημ^νων  νιτάρ'\€ίν,  5 

"Ηδτ/  be  rts  τ'/τΓο'ρησβ  των  άκονόντων  Trept  του  e^rjs'  ττρώτον 
μ€ν  καθόλου  τί  ττοτ  eσrt  το  e^rjs,  e^retra  7:6τepov  κατά  era 
μόνον  yίγveτaL  τρότϊον  η  κατά  TrAetous,  τρίτον  δ'  el   tσωs  10 

15  άμφότ€ρα  ταυτ  eσrty  e^rjs  τά  τe  συνημμένα  καΐ  τα  δΐ6- 
ζeυyμeva.  Ylpos  bi]  ταύτα  τοιούτοι  τLves  Ιλάγοντο  λόγοι' 
καθόλου  ταντα  elvai  συστήματα  συν€χη  ων  οι  όροι  ήτοι  e^rji 

2-4  'όταν  .  .  .  όταν  5νο]  erat  ο  Τ6,  τ'  &ί/  supra  lin.  add.,  τ€  corr.  in  δνο, 
et  Τ6  inscr.,  reliqua  in  marg.  Mc  :  om.  V  B,  R  (sed  'postea  alieno  loco 
interponuntur'  v.  Herwerden)  2-5  ore  pro  'όταν  δύο  leg.,  e|7Js 

.  .  .  σχήμα  om.  S  5  τότΐρον  om.  Η  η  τέταρτοι  Β  :   δ  rell. 

συμφώνων  ovTes  Η  9  Se?  Meibom  :  τί  codd.  12  τάδε  post 

e|77s  add.  Η  14  μόνον  Mc    supra  lin.;,  R  Η  :   opov  MBS         τρόττον] 

τρόπ    e    corr.  V  κατά    om.  Η  δ'   et   Marquard  :    δε    codd. 

16  δτ?  Η  :  δε  rell.  τοιούτον  Β  Ι7  συστ-ηματα  ex  συσττιμα 

Mb 

149 


III.59  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

15  €l(rlv  η  I  €7Γαλλάττονσίν.  τον  δ'  k^ijs  δυο  τρόττοι  άσί,  καΐ 
6  μ^ν  {καθ'  ον  τω  τον  οζυτίρον  συστήματος  βαρντ^ρω  ορω 
KOLvos  €στίν  δ  τον  βαρντζρον  σνστηματο9  opos)  όζντ€ρος,  6 
δ*  €τ€ρος  καθ'  ον  6  τον  οξντίρον  σνστΊ]ματο<$  βαρύτερος  opos 
k^T]S  €στΙ  τω  τον  βαρντίρον  συστήματος  όξντίρω  ορω.     κατά  5 

20  μζν  ονν  τον  |  7τρ6τ€ρον  των  τρόττων  τόττον  re  τίνος  κοινωνεί 
τα  των  k^rjs  τ^τραγόρίων  συστήματα  κα\  ομοιά  ^στιν  e£ 
ανάγκης,  κατά  δβ  τον  €τ€ρον  κ^γωρισται  άτι    αλλήλων  καΐ 

25  δμοια  δύναται  γί\γν€σθαί  τα  €Ϊbη  των  τ^τραγόρ^ων   τούτο  δ€ 
γίγν€ταί  τόνου  ανα  μίσον  τς.Θίντος,  άλλως  δ'  ου.     ώστε  δυο  ίο 
τβτράχορ^α  όμοια  τοιαύτα  συμβαίν€ίν  ^ξης  αλλήλων  ^Ίναι 

3°  ων  -ήτοι  τόνος  ανα  Ι  μ4σον  €στ\ν  η  οί  όροι  ^τταλλάττουσιν. 
ώστ€  τα  ^ζης  τ€τράχορ^α  Ομοια  οντά  η  συνημμένα  άναγκαΐον 
ζΧναι  η  ^ΐζζ^υ-γμίνα.  Φαμ\ν  δ€  huv  των  €ζης  τeτρaχόρhωv 
6θ  7/rot  αττλως  μη^€ν  €Τ\\ναί  ανα  μέσον  τζτράχoρbov  η  μη  15 
άνόμοιον.  των  μ€ν  ονν  όμοιων  κατ  ethos  τ€τρα)(όρ^ων  ου 
τίθζται  ανόμοιον  ανα  μέσον  τβτράχορ^ον,  των  δ'  ανόμοιων 
5  μ€ν  Ι  (ζής  δ'  ο•ι;δ€^  τι^εσ^αι  bυvaτbv  ανα  μέσον  τ^τράχορ^ον. 
Έκ  δε  των  αφημένων  φαν€ρον  Οτι  τα  Ομοια  κατ'  ethos 
τeτράχoρha  κατά  δυο  τρόττους  τους  άρημένους  ^ζης  αλλήλων  2ο 
τζθησ^ται.  | 

ΙΟ  Άσύνθ^τον  δ'  έστΧ  δί,άσΓ?7/χα  το  νττο  των  ^ζης  φθόγγων 
7Τ€ρΐ€χόμ€νον.  €1  γαρ  k^ijs  οΐ  7:€ριέχοντ€ς,  oibels  €κλιμ'πάν€ΐ, 
μη  έκλιμττάνων  δ'  ουκ  €μ7Τ€σ€Ϊται,  μη  έμπίτττων  δ'  ου  hiai- 

15  ρηο-€ΐ,  ο  be  μη  bιaίρeσιv  exei  oibe  σύνθ€σιν  [  e^er   τταν  γαρ  25 

Ι   €Ϊσ\ν  in  ras.  Ma  :  om.  V  Β  S         ^τταλΧάττουσιν  ex  ^τΐ^Χαττονσιν  Mb 
(ut  vid.)  2  καθ'  .  .  .  'opos  restituit  Meibom  3  o^vrepou  Β 

4    6ξυτ€ρου  om.   Β  6   τρό-ιτων  Marquard  :    δρών  Β  :    ορών  rell. 

κοίνωνουσιν  Η  η  'όμοια  Meibom  :   ανόμοια  codd.  ^στιν  cm.  Η 

II    ante  'όμοια   2   litt.  eras.  Μ  τοιαύτα  Marquard:    ταύτα  codd. 

συμβαίνει  Β  13  %]  ¥ιτοι  Η  15  ^  Μ^  Meibom  :  et  μ)]  et  μτ]  Β  : 

€t  μ^  rell.  16  ανόμοιον  Meibom  :  'όμοιον  codd.  17  τίθ^σθαι  Η 

ανόμοιον  Meibom  :    'όμοιον  codd.  17    των  δ'  .   .  .   τ€τράχορδον 

om.  R  18  τίθΐσθαι  ex  τίθεται  Mc  :  τίθεται  rell.  19  δέ]  δή  Η 

22   ξιαστ-ηματα  R  25   Siaipeatv  ex  διαίρησιν  vel  vice  versa  Μ 

e'ie.]  έ'ΐ  Β 

ISO 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    /  III.  6ο 

το  σννθζτον  Ικ  tlvo)v  μ€ρων  βστί  σνί'θ^τον  €t?  απ€ρ  καΐ 
biaLperov.  Τίγνβται  he  καΐ  irepl  τοντο  το  -πρόβλημα  ττλάνη 
δια  την  των  μξγ^θων  κοινότητα  τοιάδβ  rtj•  θανμάζονσί  γαρ  [ 
ττώ?  TTore  το  δίτονον  ασννθ^τον  δ  y'  βστί  '6ννατον  hieXeiv  etj  20 
5  roVoi;?  r)  ττώί  ττάΚιν  ττοτ  €στΙν  6  τόνο$  ά(Γννθ€το9  όν  y  ΙστΧ 
δυνατόν  els  bvo  ημιτόνια-^ι^Κύν  τον  αντον  δε  λόγον  λ^γονσί 
καϊ  Ι  TT€pl  του  ημιτονίον.  Τίγν^ται  δ'  αντοΐ^  η  άγνοια  τταρα  25 
το  μη  σννοραν  Οτι  των  hLaστημaτLκωv  μ€γ€θών  evLa  kolvcl 
τυγγάν^ι  οντά  συνθέτου  re  καΧ  ασννθίτον  bLaστημaτos'   δια 

ΙΟ  γαρ  ταντην  την  |  αΐτίαν  ον  //eyelet  διαστήματος  το  άσννθζτον  3^ 
άλλα  τοις  TrepUyov^i  φθόγγοι^  άφωρισταί.     το  γαρ  ^ίτονον 
όταν  μ€ν  όρίζωσι  μίση  καϊ  λιχανός,  άσννθζτόν  ζστιν,  Οταν 
δε  μ^ση  καΐ  τταρνττάτη,  σνν\\θ€τον'    hi    oirep  φαμ^ν  ουκ  ev  61 
rot?  μeye^€σt  των  6ίαστημάτων  elvai  το  ασννθ^τον  αλλ'  kv 

15  Tols  Ίτ^ρύγονσί  φθόγγοι^.  [ 

Έι^  δε  rats  των  γ^νων  ^ιαφοραΐς  τα  τον  δια  τεσσάρων  μ^ρη  5 
μόνα  κινύται,  [το  δ'  Xhiov  της  hLaζevζeωs  ακίνητόν  Ιστιν.] 
ττάν  μ\ν   γαρ  hlΎ\pητo   το   ηρμοσμίνον  els  σνναφην  τe   κα\ 
hLάζevζίv,  δ  γe  σvveστηκev  \  εκ  'nλeίόvωv  η  evos  τeτρaχόρbov.   10 

20  Άλλ'  17  Μ^^  συναφή  εκ  (των  τον  δια)  τeσσάpωv  μepώv 
μόνων  [άσυνθ4των]  σvγκeLτaι,  ωστ  e^  ανάγκη s  ev  γe  ταυττ] 
τα  του  δια  τeσσάpωv  μόνα  μ^ρη  κLvηθησeτaι*  η  δε  hLάζeυ^ιs  \ 
Xhiov  έχει  τταρα  ταύτα  τον  τόνον.      eav  ουν  δειχ^τ)  το  Xhiov  15 

Ι  post  καί  ras.  Μ  2  aSialperov  VS         δε  Marquard  :  Βη  codd. 

4  ττώποτε  Η  άσΰνθ^τ  ον  Ma,  sed  ον  supra  0er  et  ace.  et  spir.  add. 

Mc  δ  γ'  conieci  :    om.  VSB:    ov  rell.  5    πώε  post  ττάλι;/ 

ponit  Η  ■πάλιν']  iv  ras.  in  Mc  :  -πάλαι  VS  6  4στ\ν  post  δυνατόν 

ponit  Η  δε  Marquard  :    δή  S  :    δε  δτ/  rell.  12  δρΊζουσι  Β 

13  post  σννθίτον  in  unc.  quad,  αλλ'  ev  toTs  ττζριίχουσι  ^Boyyois  S 
17  T^  δ'  .   .  .  eVrij/  seclusi  19  dicit  Marquard  'post  %  una  lilt, 

eras,  quae  ν  fuisse  vid.  Μ '  :  sed  ego  quidem  -ye  fuisse  suspicor. 
Quod  si  legitur,  turn  certe  verborum  translatione  nulla  opus  est  : 
neque,  si  omittitur.  ordinem  librorum  mutare  velim  verba  h  .  .  . 
τ(τραχόρζου  post  ηρμοσμ^νον  ponit  Meibom  20  των  του  δια  addidit 

Westphal  21    μόνον  Η  άσννθίτων  seclusi  23    εχεί 

Meibom  :    εχοι  codd.  τταρα  ταυτο]  παρά  post  ταντα  eras,  et  supra 

lin.  add.  Mc         ταντα  τταρα  V  Β  S         τί>  supra  lin.  add.  Mb  (?) 


III.6I  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

rrys  ^ίαζ^νζ^ω^  /χ?)  κινουμένου  ev  ταΐί  των  γ€νών  ^ιαφοραΐ^, 
bijkov  ΟΤΙ  AetVerat  kv  avrols  rot?  τον  δια  τεσσάρων  μ^ρ^σι 

20  την   κίνησιν  etvau      "Εστί  δ'  ό  |  μίν  βαρντ€ρο9  των  {τον) 
τόνον  τΐίρι^γόντων  6^vT€pos  των  το  Τ€τράχορ^ον  τι^ρι^γόντων 
το  βαρύτ€ρον  των  iv  ri)  btaC^v^eL  κ^ιμίνων   [ομοίως  δ']  ην  5 
(δ')  \_καϊ\  ovTos  ακίνητοι  €v  tols  των^γ^νών  ^ίαφοραΪ9'   ό  δ'  | 

2.5  ό^ύτ€ροί  των  {τον)  τόνον  ττ^ρι^γόντων  βαρύτ€ρο9  των  το 
τ€τράχορ^ον  7Τ€ρί€χ6ντων  το  όξύτ€ρον  των  €V  τη  δια^βυ^βι 
κ^ίμίνων    ομοίως  δ'  ην  καΐ  ovtos  ακίνητος  kv  ταϊς  των  Ύ^νων 

3ο  hLac^yopai^.     "Ω,στ    (ττξώη  |  φαν^ρον  οτι  οι  τον  τόνον  irepii-  ίο 
χοντ€ς  άκίνητοί  daiv  iv  tois  των  γ^νων  ^αφοραΖς,  brjXov  ότι 
AeiTTOir'  αν  αντα  τα  του  δί-α  τεσσάρων  μ^ρη  μόνα  κινα,σθαι 
€V  ratj  ξ,Ιρημίναις  hιaφoρaϊs.  1 1 

62        Έζ;  €κάστω  δβ  yiv^i  τοσαυτά  €στιν  άσύνθζτα  {τα)  ττλξΐστα 

όσα  iv  τω  δια  7Τ€ντ€.      ΙΙάν  μ€ν  γαρ  yivos  ήτοι  iv  συναφΐ]  1 5 

5  μ^λωδξΐται    η    iv   hιaζ€ύ^€l,    καθάττ^ρ   |    ξμττροσθ^ν   ^'ίρηται. 

bibeiKTai  δ'  η  μ^ν  συναφή  iK  των  του  bia  τεσσάρων  μ^ρων 

μόνων  συγκειμένη,  η  δε  bιάζeυ^ις  'iv  ττροστιθζΐσα  το  Ibiov 

ΙΟ  bιάστημa,   τούτο   δ'   iστϊv   6  τόνος'    ττροστεθέντος   be  |  του 
τόνου   ττρός  τα  του  δια  τεσσάρων  μέρη  το  bia  ττίντε  συμ-  2θ 
ττληροΰται.      "Ω,στ    είναι  φανερον  Οτι,  i^τειbηπεp  oibkv  των 
γενών  ivbεχετaι  κατά  μίαν  χρόαν  λαμβανόμενον  iK  ττλειόνων 

J 5  άσυνθετων  συντε\θηναι  των  iv  τω  bia  ττεντε  όντων,  [brjXov 

2  ro7s  om.  V  Β  S  3  t^J^  restituit  Marquard  4  τόνων 

BR  5  περιεχόντων  post  βαρύτερον  ponit  Η  δμοΊω$  δ'  et  καϊ 

seclusit,    et   δ'    addidit  Westphal  7    Thv   restituit   Marquard 

fiapvTepos  .  .  .  ττίριβχόντων  in  marg.  Mc  :   om.  V  Β  :  τόνον  ττεριεχόντων 
rh    τί)    βαρύτερον    οξύτερον    των    ev    τ?)     δ.    S  8     ττζριίχοντων 

post  τί)  οξντζρον  ponit  Η  όξύτβρον  ex  βαρύτίρον  Mb  :  βαρύτ^ρον  Β 

ΙΟ- 13  ωστ'  .  .  .  6ΐρΎ]μ(ναί5  διαψοραΐί  om.  R  ίο  'ότι  supra  lin.  add. 

Mc:   om.  VBS  12  λείττοίτ']  βίποιτ'  R  κινβΊται  Β  14  το 

addidi  16    ίμττροσθ^ν  om.,   et    irpOTCpov   post    (ϊρ-ηται    add.    Η 

i8  yuoVoii' Meibom  :  /i(i;/77  codd.  €v  ττροστιθίΊσα  corned  :   ίμπροσθ^ν 

τβθίΊσα    codd.  :     ττροστίθίΐσα  Marquard  22    λαμβάνομ^ν    Β    in 

marg.  23  eV  τω  ex  €/c  των  Μ  :  e'/c  τών  V  S  Β         δ^λοΓ  'ότι  seclusit 

Marquard 

152 


APMONlkilN    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    y  III.62 

on]  kv  ξκάστω  yeVet  τοσαντα  ίσται  τα  ττλζΐστα  άσννθζτα  οσα 
€V  τω  δια  7Γ€νΤ€. 

Ύαράττ€ίν  δ'  €Ϊωθ€ν  h'Covs  καϊ  kv  τούτω  τω  ττροβληματί 
77(09  τα  ττλ^ΐστα  |  προστίθεται  καΐ  δια  τίον\  άττλώ?  δείκννται,  2ο 
5  oTt  e/c  τοσοι/τωζ;  ασννθέτων  έκαστου  των  γενών  συνεστηκεν 
οσα  ΙστΙν  iv  τω  δια  ττεντε.  Προ?  ου?  ταντα  λέγεται,  ότι 
€^  ελαττόνων  άσννθετων  εσται  ττοθ^  εκα  στον  των  γενών  25 
σνγκείμενον  εκ.  ττλειόνων  δ'  ονίετϊοτε.  Δια  ταντην  δβ  τΊ]ν 
αΐτιαν  τούτο  αντο  ττρώτον  άττο^είκννται,  οτι  ονκ  εvbε)(^ετaι  εκ. 

ΙΟ  ττλειόνων  άσννθετων  σνντεθηναι  των  γενών  εκαστον  ή  οσα  εν  3° 
τω  δια  ττεντε  τυγχάνει  οντά.     οτι  δβ  καΐ  εξ  ελαττόνων  ττοτε 
σνντεθϊ]σεται  εκαστον  αντών,  εν  τοΐί  εττειτα  bείκvvτaι. 

Γίνκνον  bε  TTpbs  ττνκνώ   ον  μελωbεΐ\  ται  ονθ^  Ολον  οντε  63 
μερο9  αντον.      Σνμβησεται  γαρ  μήτε  τοίΐί  τετάρτου^  τω  bia 

15  τεσσάρων  σνμφωνεΐν  μήτε  τον^  ττεμ-τον^  τω  δια  ττεντε'    οι 
bε  οντω  κείμενοι  |  των  φθόγγων  εκμελεΪ9  ήσαν,     των  δε  το  5 
hirovov  ττεριεχόντων  6  μεν  βαρύτεροι  οξύτατοι  εστί  ττνκνοϋ 
6  δ'  οξύτεροι  βαρντατο£'   άναγκαΐον  γαρ  εν  ττ]  συναφγ}  των 
ττνκνών    δια    τεσσάρων    σνμ  φωνονντων    ανά    μέσον    αυτών  ίο 

20  κεΐσθαι    το    biTovov,    ωσαύτως    δε     και    των    bιτόvωv    δια 
τεσσάρων    συμφωνούντων    άναγκαΐον    εν    μέσω    κεΐσθαι    το 

Ι   συνθζτά  R  οσα  eV  τφ  om.  R  3  βίω^βι/]  ν  postea  add,  Μ 

4    ττώί  in  marg.  Mb  5    σιτγκ^ίμζνόν  4στιν  ante  εκαστον  add.,  et 

συνίστ-ηκζν  cm.  Η  η   ίσται  ποθ'  om.  R  :   ίσται  ποθ'  '4καστον  cm.  V 

εστί  post  yivuiv  add.  R,  Mc  (supra  lin.)  post  y^vuiv  add.  cvvearriKos 

οσα  4στ\ν  ev  τψ  δια  wevre.  irpos  ovs  Xeyerai  on  ίξ  ελαττόνων  άσυνθίτων 
των  Ύ^νών  S  Β  Vb  in  marg.,  nisi  quod  συν€στηκ05  om.  Vb,  των  -γ^νών 
om.  Vb,  των  om.  S  10  ^  eras.  Μ  :  om.  VS  Β  Η  14  τετάρτουί 

Marquard  :  δ'  in  marg.  Mc,  S  :  om.  Va  :   τ€σσαρα$  rell.  t^j]  to  H  : 

post  τω  litt.  V  eras.  Μ  :  των  VB  15  ττξμτττουε  Marquard  :  TreWe 

codd.  T^  add.  Mc  :  om.  VS  ol  Se    ούδ'  Η  i6  post 

οΰτω  litt.  σ  eras.   Μ  έκμξλξΊε  ex  e/i/ieAels  Mc  :    €μμβλ€Ίί  V  Β  S 

17  βαρΰτ(:ρο$  Marquard  :  βαρντατο$  codd.  o^xnaTOS  .  .  .  βαρύτατοε 

om.  R  18  βαρντ€ρο5  Β,  sed  in  marg.  βαρντατο$  so  κίΊσθαι 

om.,  et  eJvai  post  δίτοι/ον  add.  Η  τί)]  τί)!/ VS  δβ  om.  S  post 
καΐ  add.  ei'  τη  σύναψη  in  marg.  Mc,  ttj  συναφτι  R  το  ante  δια  τεσσάρων 
add.  Η          '   21  post  τδ  litt.  y  eras.  Μ  :  τον  VSB 

153 


III.63  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

15  ττνκνόν  τούτων  δ'  οντω^  εχόντων  άναγκαιον  |  €ναλλα^  τό  re 
ττνκνον  καΐ  το  ^ίτονον  κ^ίσθαι,  ώστβ  brjkov  ort  6  μ\ν  βαρύ- 
τ€ρο9  των  7Τ€ρί€\6ντων  το  hίτovov  ό^ντατο9  ^σται  τον  βπΐ  το 

2ο  βαρν  κ€ΐμίνον  ττνκνον,  6  δ'  όζντ^ροί  τον  em  το  όζυ  |  κ€ίμ4νον 
ττνκνον  βαρύτατος•    οί  δe  τον  τόνον  ττ€ρί€χοντ€5  αμφότεροι  5 
άσι  ττνκνον  βαρύτατοι,  ri^erat  yap  6  τόνος  Ιν  ττ]  δiαfeι;fet 
μ^ταζν  τοιούτων  τ^τραγόρ^ων  α  οί  ττ€ρΐζχοντ€5  βαρύτατοι 

25  etσt  Ι  ττνκνον'  νττο  τούτων  δe  καϊ  6  τόνος  ττ€ρΐ€χ€ται.  6  μ\ν 
yap  βαρύτερος  των  {τον)  τόνον  ττ^ρι^χόντων  ό^ύτ€ρός  eσrt  των 
το  βαρύτ^ρον  των  τeτpaχόρhωv  ττ€ρΐ€χόντων,  6  δe  6ζύτ€ρος  ίο 

3©  των  (τον)  τόνον  ττ€ρΐ€χόντων  βα\ρύτ€ρός  €στι  των  το  ό^ύτβρον 
των  τ€τρaχόpbωv  ττ^ρι^χόντων,  ωστ  ύναι  brjkov  ότι  οί  τον 
τόνον  ττ€ρΐζχοντ€9  βαρύτατοι  ίσονται  ττνκνον. 
64  Διίο  δe  buova  k^rJ9  ον  τ€θη(Τ€ται.  Ύιθζ\\σθω  yap'  άκο- 
λονθησ^ι  δτ)  τω  μίν  όζντίρω  bιτόvω  ττνκνον  €ττ1  το  βαρύ,  15 
οξύτατος  yap  ην  ττνκνον  6  em  το  βαρν  ορίζων  το  birovov 
5  τω  δe  βαρντίρω  bι\τόvω  em  το  όζν  άκολονθησ€ΐ  ττνκνον, 
βαρύτατος  yap  ην  ττνκνον  6  €ττΙ  το  ό^ν  ορίζων  το  bίτovov. 
Ύούτον  δe  σνμβαίνοντος  bύo  ττνκνα  ζξης  τ€θησ€ταΐ'   τούτον 

ΙΟ  δe  €κμ€λονς  οντος  €κμ€λ€ς  eσrαt  |  καϊ  τα  bύo  bίτova  €^ης  2ο 
τίθξσθαι, 

Έι^  αρμονία  δe  καΐ  χρωματι  bύo  τονιαΐα  €^ης  ον  τ^θησ^ται. 
Ύιθ^σθω  yap  €ττ\  το  όζν  ττρωτον   άναγκαιον  δτ)  eiTrep  €στΙν 

Ι  εί/αλλάξ]  ace.  add.  et  postea  2  litt.  eras.  Mc  :  ^ναλλάξαι  V  Β  S  (sed 
ej/αλλάΙ  in  marg.  B)  2    βαρντ€ρο$  Marquard  :    βαρύτατοε  codd. 

4  του  iirl  rh  ό|υ  καμένου  πυκνού  in  marg.  Mc  :  om.  V  S  Β  5  ττυκνου 

oin.    R  βαρύτατο5    Marquard:     fiapurepos    codd.  01]     δ     Β 

7    τοιούτον  Β  &  Ma,  sed  ων  suprascr.   Mc  :    ων  R         τΓ(ρι4χοντ€$ 

ex  ^τζpισχ6vτ^s   Mc  9    βαρύτ€ρο5  Marquard:    βαρύτατοί  codd. 

τ6ί/  restituit  Marquard         τόνων  R         ττίρι^χόντων  om.  R  10  το 

supra  lin.  add.  Β  :  om.  S  βαρύτ^ρον  Marquard  :  βαρύτατον  codd. 

των  τ€τραχόρ5ων]  των  Supra  lin.   add.   Mx  :    om.   VS  11    τον 

restituit  Marquard  (legit  H)  12  των  rex.]  των  supra  lin.  add. 

Mx  :  om.  Va  S  14  δίτονα]  post  1  litt.  a  eras.  Μ  :  ζιάτονα  V  Β  S 

18  5ίορίζων  R  20  ίκμ^λίσθαι  supra  €  ace.  eras.,  τ  suprascr.  et 

in    marg.  4κμ€λ€$  ίσται  add.   Mc  :    e/f^eAes  ίσται  (es  eo-r  e  corn)   Vb 
καΧ  cm.  Η  ζιάτονα  Μ  V  S  22  έναρμόνια  S  23  δί?]  5e  V  S  Β 

154 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚΩΝ    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ    y  ΠΙ. 64 

6/χ/χ€λ?/?  Ο  τον  Ήροστξ.βΙντα  τόνον  [  ορίζων  φθόγγοι  em  το  ι=, 
όζυ  σνμφων€Ϊν  ήτοι  τω  τβτάρτω  των  1^9  δια  τβσσάρων  η 
τω    ΐϊίμτΐτω    bib,  τϊίντζ'   μφζτ^ρον  (5e)  τούτων  αντω    συμ- 
βαίνοντος άναγκαΐον  €κμ€λη  etvai.      otl  δ'  ον  σνμ\βτισ€ταί  2θ 
5  φαν^ρόν     ^ναρμόνυοί   μ^ν   yap   ούσα   η    λίχανος  τεσσάρας 
τόνους  άττό  του  ττροσληφθζντοξ  αφάζ^ι  φθόγγος  τέταρτος  ων, 
χρωματική  δ'  etre  μαλακού  χρώματος  et^'  ημωλίον  μ€Ϊ\ζον  25 
άφ4ξ€ί  διάστημα  του  δια  TreVre,    τονιαίου  he  γ^νομίνη  δια 
TTevTe  συμφωνήσει  τω  ττροσληφθεντι  φθόyγω.       ουκ  ebei  he 

10  ye,  άλλα  ήτοι  τον  τέταρτον  δια  τεσσάρων  συμφωνεΐν  η  τον 
ττεμτττον  hia  77eV|re.      Ύ όντων  δ'  ovheTepov  yiyveTai,  ώστε  3° 
φανερόν,  ότι  εκμελης  ίσται  ο  τον  -προσληφθέντα  τόνον  ορίζων 
φθόγγος  eirl  το  ό^.     Έττι  he  το  βαρύ  τιθεμενον  το  hevTepov 
τονιαΐον  hiOTovov  ττοιησει  το  ||  γένος,  ώστε   δηλον   ότι  εν  6$ 

15  αρμονία   καΐ  χρω  ματ  ι  ου  τεθησεται  hvo  τονιαΐα  έξης.      Έν 
hiaTOviu  δβ  τρία  τονιαΐα  έξης  τεθησεται,  ττλείω  δ'  ov'    6  γαρ 
το  τέταρτον  |  τονιαΐον  ορίζων  φθόγγος  οντε  τω  τετάρτω  hia  5 
τεσσάρων  οντε  τω  ττεμιττω  δια  ττεντε  συμφωνήσει. 

Έν  τω  αντω  δε  γένει  τοντω  hvo  ημιτονιαΐα  έξης  ον  τε- 

2ο  ^7^(Γ€ται.     Ύιθεσθω  γαρ  |  ττρώτον  εττΐ  το  βαρν  του  νττάρχον-  ίο 
τος   ημιτονίον   το   ττροστεθεν   ημιτόνιον    συμβαίνει   hr)   τον 
ορίζοντα  φθόγγον  το  ττροστεθεν  ημιτόνιον  μητε  τω  τετάρτω 
δια  τεσσάρων  συμφωνεϊν  μήτε  τω  7:εμ\7ττω  δια  ττεντε.     οντω  15 

Ι  €μμ€λ^5  ex  €κμ€λ^5  Mc :    4κμ€λ^5  V  S,  Β  (sed  in  marg.  e>^€Ai/s) 
3  των  ante  δίά  TreVre  add.  R  μτ}8'  ercpw  τοντο  ex  μη5'  erepw  τούτω 

Μ  :  μηΒ"  erep^  τούτψ  V  S  Β  Se  restituit  Marquard  αυτών  ex 

αυτφ  Mc  avTcf  post  συμβαΙνοντο5  ponit  Η  6  e^e|€i  Β  (sed 

αψίξίί  in  marg.)  lo  αλλ'  ήτοι  ex  άλλα  τοι  deinde  2  litt.  eras.  Mc  : 

άλλα  τοιοΰτο  V  Β  S  :  άλλα  rbv  in  marg.  Β         τέταρτον]  δ'  S  11  Se 

in  marg.  Mc  :  om.  VB  S  13  iirl  Th  οξν  iirl  τί)  οξν  (cum  punctis 

sub  i-rrl  TO  οξυ  altero    Β  SevTcpov  τονιαΐον  Ma,  sed  β  supra  SevT^pov 

et  ο  supra  τονιαΐον  add.  Mc  17  rii  om.  Η  ig  ημιτονιαΐα^ 

τονιαΐα  V  S  Β  et  Ma,  sed  ημι  supra  lin.  add.  Mc  τίθίται  in  marg. 

B,  R  21     ημιτονιαίου    Β  δτ?    Η  :     5e    rell.  22     τ5 

supra  lin.  add.  Mc  :    om.  V  Β  S  23    συμφωνζίν  post  δίο  TreVre 

ponit  Η 


III.65  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

μ€ν  ονν  €κμ€λη9  €<τταί  τον  ημιτονίαίον  η  Beais.  (αν  δ'  em 
το  ό^υ  τ€θΊ}  τον  νττάρχοντο^,  χρώμα  eVrac,  ωστ€  bijkov  οτι 
€V  διατοι;ω  δυο  ημίτονιαΐα  ου  τ€θη(Γ€ταί  €^s. — Ποια  μ^ν  | 

2θ  ονν  των  άσυνθ^των  bvvaTai  ΐσα  k^rjs  τίθ^σθαι  καΐ  ττόσα  τον 
αριθμόν  καΐ  ττοϊα  τουναντίον  τΐζττονθζν  άττλώ?  ου  ^υνάμ€να  5 
τίθβσθαι  ίσα  όντα  (^ijs,  δέδίίκται*   7Τ€ρΙ  he  των  άνισων  ννν 
λζκτίον.  Ι 

25  ΪΙνκνον  μ\ν  ονν  irpos  bcTovia  καΐ  (ττΐ  το  βαρν  καΐ  iirl  το 
όξν  τίθεται.  Aib€iKTaL  γαρ  kv  Trj  σνναφΐ]  εναλλάξ  τιθίμ^να 
ταντα  τα   διαστ^/χατα,   ώστε   bijXov  οτι   €κάτ€ρον   €κατ€ρον  ίο 

30  καΐ  eTTt  το  βαρν  και  |  €ττΙ  το  όζν  τ€Θησ€ται. 

Tovos  δ€  Trpos  biTOv<u  (7τΙ  ΤΟ  o^v  μόνον  τίθεται.  Ύι- 
Θίσθω  γαρ  €ττ1  το  βαρύ'  σνμβησ€ται  br]  ττίτττ€ΐν  βπΐ  την 
'66  αυτήν  τάσιν  όξύτα\\τόν  Τ€  ττυκνοϋ  καΐ  βαρντατον,  6  μ\ν  γαρ 
το  biTovov  iirl  το  βαρν  ορίζων  ό^ντατοί  ην  ττυκνον,  6  δε  τον  15 
5  roVoz;  €7γΙ  το  όζν  βαρύτατοι,  τούτων  be  ττηττόντων  |  Μ 
την  αυτήν  τάσιν  άναγκαΐον  bύo  ττνκνά  τίθ^σθαι.  τούτον  δ' 
€κμ€λοΰς  ovtos  άναγκαΐον  καΐ  τόνον  iirl  το  βαρν  biToviaiov 
€κμ€λη  eivai. 

10        T0V0S  be  ττροί  Ίτνκνω  em  το  βαρν  |  μόνον  τίθ(ται.      Ύι-  2ο 
Θίσθω  γαρ  em  τουναντίον   συμβησ€ται  brj  το  αυτό  ττάλιν 
άbύvaτov,   €ΤΐΙ   γαρ    την    αυτήν   τάσιν   οξύτατος   re   ττνκνοΰ 
ττ(σ(ΐται  καΐ   βαρύτατος^    ώστe   bύo    ττνκνα    τίθeσθaι    e^ijs, 

15  τού\τον  δ'  ovtos  eκμeλovs  άναγκαΐον  καΐ  την  τόνον  Θίσιν 
την  ein  το  όξν  τον  ττυκνοϋ  (κμ(λη  elvai.  25 

r    ίμμ€λη$  Μ  V  Β  του  Ύ]μιτονιαίου  post  η  ponit  Η  5   ^ννάμ^να 

Μ  Η  :  ζυνάμ^θα  rell,  6  Se  om.  R  8  rh  βαρν]  rh  supra  lin. 

add   Mc  (?    :  om.  S  καΐ   inl  rh  βαρν  post  καϊ   erri  rh  όξυ  ponit  Η 

ΙΟ  ό'τι  Η  :   om.  rell.  12  τφ  ante  ζιτό^φ  add.  R  13  rh  om.  Β 

συμ/3ήίΓ6ταί]  β^σ^ται  in  ras.  Ma  15  ορίζω  S  17   αύτην  supra 

lin.   add.   Β  ττίκνα   Β  i8    tOvou  Meibom  :    τούτον  codd. 

SiToi/ιαίου  (κμίλη  ex  ζιτονιαΐον  4κμ€\Ύ]$  Mc  :  Sitovluiov  4κμeλ^s  VSB 
21   4τγΙ  supra  lin.  add.  Β  rb  aiiTh  post  ττάλιν  ponit  Η  22  αύτην 

in  marg.  add.  Β  ττίσβΊται  post  βαρύτατοε  ponit  Η  24  τόνον 

Meibom  :  τούτον  codd. 

156 


ΑΡΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤΟΙΧΕΪίΙΧ    γ  111.66 

'Er  biarovcu  be  τόνον  Ιφ'  €κάτ€ρα  ημίτόπον  ον  μ€λωh€ΐτaL. 
Σνμβη(Γ€ταί  γαρ  |  μητξ  tovs  reraprovs  των  ef^s  δια  τ€σ<τάρων  2θ 
σνμφων^ϊν  μητ€  tovs  ττ^μτττοι;?  δια  Trivre.       Ανο  δε  τόνων 
η   τριών  ημιτόνιον   εφ'  €κάτ€ρα  μελωδειταΐ"    (τυμφωνησονσι 

5  γαρ  ί  οΐ  τέταρτοι  δία  Τ6σσά|ρωζ/  ^  ot  ττξμτΓτοί  bih  tt€VT€.        25 
[Άττό  ημίτονων  μ€ν  €τ:1  το  όζυ  bvo  obol  καΐ  €πΙ  το  βαρν 
bvo,]  άτΐο  be  τον  biTovov  bvo  μ\ν  €ττΙ  το  όζυ,  μία  δ    €7TL  το 
βαρύ.      AibeLKTaL  γαρ   eirl  μ^ν  το  |  όζυ  ττνκνον  τ^θ^ιμίνον  3° 
κα\   tOvos,   irXeLovs   be   τούτων   ονκ   eaovTai    obol   άττο   τον 

ΙΟ  eipημevov  bιaστημaτos  εττΐ  το  όζύ'    [βττΐ  δε  το  βαρν  ττνκνον 
μόνον,]  XeCireTaL  μεν  γαρ  των  ασννθέτων  το  Μτονον  μόνον  1 1 
bvo  be  biTova  e^rjs  ονκίτι  TiOeTaL,     ώστε  br\\ov  Οτι  bvo  μόναι  Sj 
obol  €σονταί  άττο  τον  biTOvov  e-nl  το  όξν'  επΙ  δε  το  βαρν  μία- 
bebetKTaL  γαρ.  Οτι  ovTe  biTovov  |  irpos  biTOvia  τ€θησ-€ταί  ούτε  5 

15  τόνο9  εττΐ  το  βαρν  biTOvov,  ώστε  λειττεται  το  ττνκνόν.  φαν€ρον 
δ?/  ότι  άττο  biTOvov  eirl  μ\ν  το  όζν  bvo  oboC,  η  μ\ν  εττΐ  τον  τόνον 
η  δ*  εττΐ  το  ττνκνόν,  €ΤγΙ  δε  το  βαρν  μία,  η  €ττΙ  |  το  ττνκνόν.    ίο 

Άττό  ττνκνον  δ'  ^ναντίωξ  εττι  μεζ;  το  βαρν  bvo  oboL,  €ττ1 
δε  το  όζν  μία.      Δεδεικται  γαρ  άττο  ττνκνον  εττΐ  το  βαρν  bi- 

20  τονον   Τ€Θ€ίμ4νον    καΐ   tOvos'     τρίτη    δ'    ονκ    |    εσται    οδό?,  ΐ5 
λειττεται  μev  γαρ  των  άσννθίτων  το  ττνκνόν,  bvo  be  ττνκνα 
e^rfs  ον  τίθεται,  ώστε  bijXov  ότι  μόναι  bvo  obol  ίσονται  άττο 

Ι   δίατί^νου  Μ  V  Β  S         ToVou  Meibom  :  roVt^  codd.  3  συμβ-ησ^ται 

Marquard  :  συ^πβσβΓται  codd.  3  συμφων^Ίν  in  marg.  add.  Β       των 

€|ηϊ  post  ττςμπτουΒ  add.  Η  5  prius  ^]  Tjrot  Η  δίά  τεσσάρων  ex 

δίά  τετάρτου  Mc  :    δίά  τετάρτου  VSB  6    Άπί)  .  .  .   δνο  seclusi 

ftej/]  ου  μ^ν  S  δι^ο  όδοί  ex  δυο  δ'  οί  Mc  :   δνο  δ'  οί  V  S  Β  /cai  in 

marg.  Mc  κα\  e-κϊ  rh  βαρν  .  .  .  μία  δ'  om.  VSB  7  •^'"'ΰ  δβ  toC 

δίτόί/ου  .  .  .  irrl  rh  βαρύ  in  marg.  Mc  8  dih  ante  SeScLKrai  add. 

Vb  S  Β  γαρ  add.   Mc  :    om.  VSB  τ^θ^ιμ^νον]  τίθ-ηται  R  : 

τίθ€μ€νον  Η  ΙΟ    67γΙ   .  .   .   μονον  supra  lin.  in   marg.  superior! 

add.  Mc:   om.  VBS  11    δίτονον  (post  ι  litt.  ο  eras.)  Μ  :    Slu- 

rovov  VBS  13    al  ante  όδοϊ  add.    Η  I4    on  oijre]  on 

ovdeu  Η  :    'ότι  ουδέ  Μ  V  Β  S  15    φαι/ζρ})ν  5-η  Marquard  :    evpov 

δβ  codd.  17  μίαν  Μ  V  Β  S  ιρ  ττυκνου  ex  ο|υ  Mc  :  ό|ι/  λ^  Β  S 

2θ  τίθξμζνον  Η  22   ού  τίθεται  .  .  .  βαρύ.      4τγΙ  om.  R  δύο  post 

όδοι  ponit  S  οδοϊ  post  εσοντο:  ponit  Η 

157 


m.67  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΕΕΝΟΤ 

ττνκνου  Im  το  βαρν,     €7τΙ  be  το  όζν  μία  {η)  €πΙ  το  hCTOVov 

20  οΰτ€  γαρ   |   ττνκνον  irpos  ττνκνω  τίθεται  ούτ€  tovos  €TtI   to 

όξυ  TTVKVoVy  ωστ€  λ^ίττ^ται  το  hiTovov.      Φαν^ρον  δ?)  δη  άττό 

τϊνκνον  €τά  μ^ν  το  βαρύ  hvo  ohoi,  ι]  re  Ιτή  {τον)  τόνον  καΐ 

25  η  €ττΙ  το  hiTOvoVy  em  h\  το  οζυ  μία,  |  η  €ττ1  το  hiTovov. 

ΆτΓΟ  6e  τόνου  μία  e^'  €κάτ€ρα  obos,  Μ  μϊν  το  βαρν 
eTTt  το  hiTOVov  em  5e  το  ό^ν  €7τϊ  το  ττνκνόν.  *Em  μ€ν 
3ο  το  βαρν  6e6etKrat  οτι  οντ€  tovos  τίθεται  |  οντ€  ττνκνόν, 
wcrre  KeiiT€TaL  το  hiTovov  em  6e  το  οζν  heheiKTai  οτι  ουτ€ 
Tovos  τίθεται  οντζ  ^ίτονον,  ωστ€  AetVerat  το  ττνκνόν,  Φαν€-  ίο 
ρον  δτ/  OTL  άττο  τόνον  μία  e<^'  €κάτ€ρα  ohos,  €7tI  μ\ν  το  βαρν 
68  em  το  ^ίτονον,  ||  em  δe  το  όζν  iirl  το  ττνκνόν. 

Όμοίωί  δ'  e^et  καΐ  em  των  χρωμάτων  ττλην  τό  ye  μ^σης 

5  καΐ  λιχανον  διάστημα  μ^ταλαμβάν^ται  άντΙ  hiTOvov  το  [  yi- 

γνόμ€νΌν  καθ^  ^κάστην  χρόαν  κατά  το  τον  ττνκνον  μ€γ€θοξ.  15 

Ό/Λοιωί  δ'  efet  καΐ  €ττΙ  των  διατόνων   άττο  γαρ  τον  kolvov 

τόνον  των  γ€νων  μία  ^σται   e^'  €κάτ€ρα  όδο?,  €ττΙ   μ\ν   το 

ΙΟ  βαρν   em  το   μίση^  και  λιχανον  |  διάστημα  6  τι  αν  ττοτ€ 

τνγχάντ]  6ν  καθ^  ^κάστην  χρόαν  των  διατόνων,  em  δe  το  ό^ν 

em  το  τταραμ^ση^  καΐ  τρίτης,  2 ο 

"Ηδη  δe  τισι  και  τοντο  το  ττρόβλημα  τταρίσχ^  ττλάνην 

ΐζ)  θανμάζουσι  γαρ  |   ττώ?  ονχΐ  τονναντίον  σνμβαίν€ΐ'   άπβιροι 

γάρ  Tives  avTols  φαίνονται  elvai  6ho\  eφ'  €κάτ€ρα  τον  τόνον, 

€ΤΤ€ώηττ€ρ   του   re  μ^σηί    και   λιχανον    διαστήματος   άττβιρα 

Ι  rh  ο|υ]  τον  οξυ  S  ύ)  restituit  Westphal  δέ  ante  τί)  Utovov 

add.  R  2  on  TOVOS  in  marg.  Β  3  δτ?  Marquard  :  δέ  codd. 

4-6  irvKvov  .  .  .  anh  δέ  om.  Η  4  τον  restituit  Marquard  5  ^ 

cm.  Β         iia  δέ  Ζίτονον  R  cttI  δ€  .  .  .  SItovov  in  marg.  add.  Mc  Vb 

(nisi  quod  η  om.  Mc)  η  om.  R  6  από  δέ  toVou  μία  add. 

in  marg.  McVb:    om.   VS  7-12    inl  μ\ν  .  .   .   -πυκνόν  om.   Η 

8  Ίτυκνόν]  δίτονον  R  ΙΟ  τίθεται  om.  R        post  τίθεται  ίο  litt.  eras. 

Μ  λ6λ6ί7Γταί  R  II   δ^Ι  δ€  Μ  VS  Β  14  δίΤ(ίι/ου]  δ6 

τόνου  R  15  κατά  R  :  κα\  rell.  18  το  supra  lin.  add.  Mc: 

om.  VSB  μίσ-ηΒ  καΧ  om.   R  κα\  supra  lin.   add.   Mc:    om. 

VBS  19   Ti/yxctj/et  BS  Ζιτόνων  ^  20  δίάστί^^αα  post 

TpiT-qs  add.  Η  24  τε  om.  S 

158 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤΟίΧΕΙίΙΝ    y  111.68 

μ€γ€θη  φαίνονται  elvai  του  re  ττνκνου  j  ωσαύτως.      Προ?  δ?/  2ο 
ταϋτα  ττρώτον  μ^ν  τουτ    €λ€χθη,  οτι  ovh^v  μαλΧον  evrt  τού- 
τον του  ττροβληματοί  ^ττίβλζψβί^ν   αν  rtj  τούτο  η  ζττΐ  των 
τΐροτίρων.     hrjkov    yap   otl   καΐ   των   άττο    του   ττυκνου   την 
5  €τ4\ραν  των  οδών  άττ€ίρα  μ€yiθη  συμβησζται  λαμβάνειν  καΐ  25 
των  άττο  του  ^ίτόνου  [δ']  ωσαύτως  [ώ?1•    το  re  γαρ  τοιούτον 
bLάστημa  οίον  το  μίση^  καΐ  λίχανοϋ  aireipa  λαμβανβί  μζγξθη 
τό   Τ€   τοίουτον   οίον   |   το   ττυκνον   ταυτο   ττάσχ^^ι  τταθοί  τω  3° 
ζμττροσθζν  ^ΙρημΙνω  '^ίαστηματί,  αλλ'  ομω?  οΰδ€ΐ^  ήττον  αττο 

ΙΟ  re  του  ττυκνου  διίο  yiyvovTai  6ho\  €ττ1  το  βαρύ  καΐ  άττο  του 
Οίτόνου    €ττΙ    το    ό^ύ,    ωσαύτως   δe    καΐ   άττο   του  τόνου   μια 
yiyveTai  ζφ'  ^κάτ€ρα   obos.  ||  Καθ'  €κάστην  yap  χρόαν   βφ'  69 
€κάστου  γένους  λητττίον  Ιστ\  tcls  όδου?•    δeΓ  yap  €καστον 
των   €V  τη  μουσικΐ]   καθ''  ο   ττ^ττ^ρασται   κατά  τούτο  τιθίναί 

15  re  κα\  τάττ^ιν  eh  j  τας  ζττιστημας,  fi  δ'  άττ€ίρόν  Ιστιν  eav.  5 
κατά   μ\ν    ουν    τα    μ^γ^θη    των    bLaστημάτωv    καΐ   tols    των 
φθόγγων  rάσet9  αττ€ίρά  ττωί  φαίν€ταί  etvat  τα  ττ€ρΙ  /xeλos, 
κατά  he  tcls  ^νάμζί^  καΐ  κατά  τα  dhη  |  καΐ  κατά  Tas  ^eVets  10 
ττ€ττ€ρασμ€να    re    καΐ    τζταγμ^να.      E^^ews    οΐιν    άττο    του 

2ο  ττυκνου  αΐ  ohol  €ττΙ  το  βαρν  τη  re  ^υνάμ^ί  καΐ  rots  etδeσtz^ 
ωρισμίναι  τ    etσt  κα\   hύo  μόνον  τον   αριθμόν,  η  μ\ν  \  γαρ  ΐ5 
κατά  τόνον  eh  ^ιάζ€υξιν   ayet   το  του   συστήματος  elhos,  η 
he    κατά    eaTepov    Ιιάστημα,   ο   τι    Ιηιτοτ    eyei   μeγeθo9,  eh 
συναφην.     brjXov   δ'  eK  τούτων  Οτι  καΐ  άττο  του  τόνου  μια 

ί25  τ     Ι    €σται   €φ'   eKarepa   όδο?    καΐ   evos   elbovs   συστήματος  2θ 
atriat  at   συvaμφότepaι  oboi,   της  hιaζeύ^eως.     Ότι  δ    αν 

2    βλβχθη]  ante  χ  litt.  7  eras.   Μ  :    ίλ^γχθ-η  V  Β  6    δ'  del. 

Marquard         ws  del.  Meibom  7  λαμβάνειν  ^eyeflei  Η  8  ταυτο 

in  marg.  Β,  R  :  ουτ^  rell.  10  re  Marquard  :  δε  codd.  11  του 

om.   Η  12   y'lViTai  (ive  in  ras.)  Μ  13    δεΓ  γαρ  βκαστον 

Meibom  :  δίά  yap  εκάστου  codd.  14  ante  καθ'  ras.  Μ        ττεπβρασταί 

(ire  in  ras.,  fuisse  vid.  καθάπ^ρ  ττέρασται)  Μ  :  π^π^ραται  R  :  ττζπςρασθαι  Η 
15  τ€  Marquard  :  7^  codd.         y  conieci  :  et  codd.  20  αί  όδοι  Mar- 

quard :  όδοί  al  codd.  21  μόνον  Meibom  :  τόνοι  codd.        70^  om.  S 

25  t']  Tts  R         20  συναμ(ρότ€ραι  (ot  suprascr. )  Η  :  συναμψότΐροι  Μ  V  Β  S 

159 


III.69  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΞΕΝΟΤ 

TLS  μη   κατά  μίαν   χρόαν  hbs   yivovs  €τ:ιχ€ΐργ  ras  άττό  των 
25  l•ίaστημάτωv  ohovs  €τησκο\7τ€Ϊν  αλλ'  άμα  κατά  ττάσα?  αττάν- 
των  των   γ€νων  ds  άττβφίαν  €μτ:€σάταί,  φαν^ρον  €κ  re  των 
^ρημίνων  καΐ  ef  αντοΰ  τον  ιτράγματο^. 
30         Έν  χρωματι  he  καϊ  αρμονία  ττάς  \  φθόγγοι  ττνκνοϋ  μβτ-  5 
e'xet.      Uas   μ€ν  γαρ   φθόγγοι   iv   rot?    dpΎ]μivoιs  ylv€^LV 
ήτοι   Ίτνκνου  μ^ροί   ορίζει   η   τόνον   η    τυ   τοιούτον   οίον   το 
ηο  μίση^  κα\  λιχανον  διάστημα,      οΐ  μ€ν  ονν  \\  τα  τον  ττνκνοϋ 
μ€ρη    6ρίζοντ€9    ovbev    ^ίονται    λόγον,    φανεροί    yap    etVt 
ττνκνον  μ^τ€χοντ€9'    οΐ  δβ  τον  τόνον  7Τ€ρι^χοντ€9  €^€ίχθησαν  ίο 

5  ίμιτροσθ^ν  ττνκνον  \  βαρύτατοι  οντ€^  αμφότεροι'  των  δε 
το  λοιττον  Ιιάστημα  ττ^ριβχόντων  6  μ\ν  βαρντ€ροξ  όξντατοζ 
^h€ίχθη    ττνκνον    6    δ'    όξντξρος    βαρύτατοι.     "Ω,στ    €ττ€ώη 

ΙΟ  τοσαντα   μίν   ^στι  μόνα   τα   ασνν\θ€τα,    ζκαστον   δ'    αντων 
νττο  τοιούτων  φθόγγων  ττ€ρΐ€χ€ταί  ων  kKor^pos  ττνκνον  /xer-  15 
e'xet,  hrjXov  ότι  ttcls  φθόγγοι  Ιν  αρμονία  και  χρωματι  ττνκνον 
μ^τίχ€ί.  Ι  ,  „       , 

15  "Οτι  δε  των  ev  ττνκνω  κ€ΐμίνων  φθόγγων  rpet?  βισι 
χωραι,  pahiov  σννώύν,  ^ττ^ώηττ^ρ  ττρος  ττνκνω  οντ€  ττνκνον 
τίθεται  οντ^  ττνκνον  μ^ρο^.     bijXov  γαρ  Οτι  δια  ταύτην  την  2ο 

2ο  αιτίαν  ονκ  έσονται  \  ττλειοι;?  των  άρημίνων  χωραι  φθόγγων. 

"Ort  δβ   άττό   μόνον   τον   βαρντάτον   bvo   oboi  elaiv   €φ' 

€κάτ€ρα,  αττο  δε  των  λοιττών  μία  όδο?  βφ'  €κάτ€ρα,  ^€ΐκτ4ον. 

25  ην  he  ^)ώ€ΐγμίνον  €V  rots  €μττροσθ€ν,  ότι  \  {άττο  ττνκνον  Μ 
το  βαρν  δυο  οδοί   ίίσιν,  η  μ\ν  €ττΙ  τον  τόνον  η  δ'  em  το  25 

Ι    βπιχεφ^  ex  βττίχβφεΓ  Mc  (?)  :   ^τηχ^ιρϋ  rell.  7  ττνκνον  μΐρο$] 

-rrvKvoi^fvosV  S  in  marg.  Β  ¥ι  τι]  ¥,τοι  R  9  όρίζοντί5  Mar- 

quard  :  hiopiCovr^s  codd.  ζίονται  post  xoyov  ponit  Η  lo  τόνον] 

τόπον  R  II   ToC  ante  ττυκνοΰ  add.  R  12  το  supra  lin.  add. 

Mc:  cm.  V  Β  S        λοιττών  S        βαρντ€ρο$  Marquard  :  βαρύτατο$  codd. 
o^UTaTos  in  marg.  add.  Β  I3  ό  δ'  add.  Mc  :  om.  V  Β  S         o^vTcpos 

Marquard  :  ό|υτατο$  codd.  14  άσννθίτα  R  :  σύνθετα  rell.  15  ων] 

των  Β  μ(Τ€χ(ΐ$  S,  Β  (^sed  μ^τ^χ^ί  in  marg.)  16  5ηλον  .  .  . 

μ€Τ€χ€ΐ  in  marg.  Mc  Vb  20  yap  om.  Η  2l   χωραι  post 

«ρ^όγγων  ponit  Η  24  5e  supra  lin.  add.  Mc  :  om.  V  Β  S  άττ^ 

.  .  .  δέ  τλ  restituit  Marquard 
160 


ΑΡΜ0ΝΙΚί2Ν    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    /  IIL70 

biTovov.  ίστί  δ€  το)  άττό  ττνκνον  hvo  obovs  elvai  το  αντο 
τω  άτΓΟ  του  βαρύτατου  των  iv  τω  ττυκνω  κζΐμξ,νων  bvo  όδοι/ί 
67Γί  το  βαρν  €LvaL,  ουτοξ  yap  βστίν  δ  7Τ€ραίνων  το  ττυκνόν 
ebibeLKTO  ονν  otl  άττο  bLτόvoυ  ζττΐ  το  ό^ν  |  bvo  oboi  elaiv,  30 
5  17  Μ^^  ^'^i  τον  τόνον  η  δ'  67Γί  το  ττυκνόν  Ιση  δβ  το  άττο 
δίτόνου  bvo  obovs  etrat  το  αντο  τω  άττο  τον  οζυτψου  των 
το  biTovov  οριζόντων  bvo  obovs  eirt  το  ό^ν  etrat,  ovtos  yap 
€στίν  6  ορίζων  το  j|  biTovov  (εττΐ  το  οζν.  brjkov  δ'  otl  Jl 
ό  avTos  το  biTovov   kvl  το  οξν  ορίζων   καΐ  6  το  ττυκνον  iirl 

10  το  βαρν)  βαρύτατοι  ων  ττυκνον,  eδeδetκτo  yap  καΐ  τοΰτο. 
ωστ  ζΊναι  brjXov,  otl  άττο  τοϋ  ζίρημάνου  φθόγγου  bvo  obol 
ίφ'  €κάτ€ρα  έσονται.  Ι 

"Ort  δ'  άττο  τον  οξυτάτου  μία  obbs  €φ'  €κάτ€ρα,  beLKTiov.  5 
^¥ibib€LKT0  δ'  ότι  άττό  ττυκνου  €ττΙ  το  όξν   μία   obos   €στιν, 

15  ovbev  be  bia^ipei   λ4γ€ΐν  άττό  ττυκνου  μίαν  obov  ζΐναι  €ττΙ 
το  όξν  η  άττό  Ι  τον  TrepaivovTos  αντό  φθόγγον  δια  την  €ΐρη-   ίο 
μ€νην  αΐτίαν  €ττΙ  των  ίμττροσθ^ν.      bibeiKTai  δ'  Οτι  καΐ  άττό 
δίτόνον    μία   όδο?    €στιν    €ττΙ    τό    βαρν,    ovbev    be   bιaφipeL 
λ4γ€ΐν  άττό  biTovov  μίαν  obov  €Ϊναι  €ττΙ  j  τό  βαρν  η  άττό  τον  ΐ5 

2ο  όρίζοντοί  αντό  φθόγγον  bia  την  ττρο^ιρημ^νην  αΐτίαν    br]\ov 
be   ότι   και  ό  avTOs  €στι  φθόγγοι  ό  re  τό  όίτονον   €ττΙ   τό 
βαρν    ορίζων    καΐ    6    τό    ττνκνόν    €ττ1    τό    όξν    οξυτάτου    ων 
ττυ\κνοϋ.     "Ω.στ    elvai  φαν^ρόν  €Κ  τούτων,  Οτι  μία  όδόί  eφ'  20 
ζκάτ€ρα  eσrαt  [βττΐ]  του  €ΐρημ€νον  φθόγγον. 

25       'Ότι  δe  καΐ  άττό  τον  μ^σον  μία  6δ09  eφ'  €κάτ€ρα  €σται, 

Ι    ετγΙ  τό  βαρν  post  65ohs  add.   Η  2    βαρύτατου  των  ex  βαρν 

τούτων  Mc  :  βαρν  τούτων  V  S  Β  3  ό  ττ^ραίνων    αϊ  in  ras.,  fuisse 

vid.   6  et  supra  lin.  ras.)  Μ  :    oVep  hciv  V  S,  Β    sed  αίνων  in  marg.) 

4  e5eSei/ii/6iT0  B,  sed  in  marg.  iSiSeiKTo  Uo  post  δδοί  ponit  Β 

5  TO  άττό  R  :  τα  από  rell.  6  διτόνου  Meibom  :  τόνου  codd.  του 
om,  R  7  oiJTos'\  υτ  in  ras.  Ma  8  iirl  .  .  .  βαρύ  restituit 
Marquard  lo  κα\  supra  lin.  add.  corn  Β  15  του  ante  πυκνού 
add.  Η  19  του  ante  διτόνου  add.  R  21  ό  αυτό?]  δ  om.  Μ  V 
S  Β  Te]  Tt  R  22  ό  om.  Μ  V  Β  R  24  4π\  seclusi :  Set/cTeW 
eTTi  eras.  S :  από  Marquard         iirl  .  .  .  ecTTai  om.  R 

MACRAN  I^  J  61 


111.71  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ 

25  b€LKT€OV.  ΈτΓβΙ  TOLVVV  |  cLvayKolov  μ€ν  των  τριών  ασνν- 
Θίτων  €V  TL  (προ?)  τω  άρημίνω  φθόγγω  τίθ^σθαί,  νττάρχ€ί 
be  αντον  κ€ίμ€νη  διβσυ  εφ'  €κάτ€ρα,  brikov  otl  ούτ€  biTOvov 

30  Τ€θήσ€ταί    ττρο?    αντω    κατ     ovbiTepov    των    τόττων    |    ούτ€ 
Tovos.     biTovov  γαρ  οντω  τιθεμένου  ήτοι  βαρντατο9  ττνκνον  5 
η    οξύτατοι    ττεσβιται    im    την    αυτήν    τάσιν    τω    άρημίνω 
φθόγγω  μίσω  δντι  ττνκνον,  ω(ττ€  γίγν^σθαί  Tpei'S  biiaeis  k^r\s 

72  ότΓοτερω?  αν  Tedy  το  biTovov  των  τόττων  τόνου  {be) 
τeθeLμevoυ  το  αυτό  σνμβ7]σ€ταί,  βαρύτατος  γαρ  ττνκνον 
ΤΓβσβΓται  67rt  την  αυτήν  τάσιν  μίσω  ττνκνον,  ώστε  τρει?  ίο 
5  bi\eaeis  e(i]9  TLeeaOaL.  τούτων  δ'  eκμeλώv  όντων  brjkov 
OTL  μία  obos  εφ'  eKaTepa  ίσται  άττο  τον  €ΐρημ€νον  φθόγγον. 
"Ότι   μ€ν    ουν   άττο   {του   βαρντάτον)   των  φθόγγων   των    ev 

10  ττνκνω  κeιμevωv  bύo  εφ'  εκά|τε/)α  ίσονται  6bo\  άττο  be  των 
λοίττών  eKaTepov  μία  εφ'  eKaTepa  eaTai  obos,  φavepόv.  15 

^Otl   δ'  ου   TeerjaovTai   bύo  φθόγγοι   ανόμοιοι   κατά  την 

15  τον  ττνκνον  μ€Τογ7]ν  |  εττι  την  αυτήν  τάσιν  eμμeλώs,  bei- 
KTeov.  Ύιθ^σθω  γαρ  ττρώτον  6  τ'  οξύτατος  καΐ  6  βαρύτατος 
εττΐ    την    αύτην   τάσιν     σvμβησeτaι    δ?)    τούτον    γιγνομίνον 

2ο  bύo  ττνκνά  e^rjs  τίθ€σθαι.    τούτον  δ'  εκ/χελου?  |  οντος  eκμeλes  2ο 
το  TTiTTTeiv  (εττι   την   αύτην  τάσιν   tovs   κατά   ταύτην 
την  bιaφopάv  ανόμοιους)  ev  ττνκνω  φθόγγονς.     Αηλον 
δ'  ότι  οΰδ'  οι  κατά  την  λeιττoμevηv  bιaφopάv  ανόμοιοι  φθόγγοι 

2  eV]  ev  S         TrpAs  restituit  Meibom  4  αντφ  Meibom  Η  :  αντο 

rell.  τόπων  conieci  :  τρόττων  codd.  ^ϊρ-ημ^νων  ante  τρόττων  add. 

Η  5  rovos  hiTovov.      ούτω  yap  Μ  V  S  B,  nisi  quod  ζιατόνου  (cum 

duobus  punclis  sub  a)  Β  6  τ^  ^Ιρ-ημ^νφ  (pOoyycf  Meibom,  et  μ^σφ 

Marquard  :    τών  βίρημ^νων  (pθ6yyωv  μ4σον  codd.  8    των  τόττων 

conieci  :  τφ  τόπφ  codd.  5e  coniecit  Meibom  eVl  Se  ante  τφ,  et 

αύτψ    ante    τόπψ    add.    Marquard  10    αύτην  .  .   .  &στζ   om.    R 

/xeVcD  Meibom  :  μ€ σον  codd.         ώστ6  Marquard  :  as  codd.  11   e^rjs 

τίθζσθαι]  yiveaOaL  e^rjs  Η  δ'  Marquard  :  δί?  codd.  12  μία  supra 

lin.  add.  corr.  Β  13  του  βαρύτατου  restituit  Meibom  15  ^σται 

ante  4φ'  ^κάτ^ρα  ponit  Η  i8  τιθ4σθω  .   .  .  τί]ν  αυτ^ν  τάσιν  in 

marg.  S  δ  ^ante  βαρύτατο5)  Η  :  om.  rell.  20  €κμ€λ€5^  €μμΐλ€5 

Μ  V  Β  2  1    eVi  την  .  .  .  άνομοίουε  addidi  23  δ'  om.  Β  ανό- 

μοιοι Marquard  :  'όμοιοι  codd. 

163 


ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ    ΣΤ0ΙΧΕΙί2Ν    /  III.  72 

TTJs  avTTJs  τάσβω?  ^/Λμβλώ?  κοινωνησονσΐ'  rpetj  yap  αναγκαίον 
τί\θ€σθαι  5teVets   ^$ή^,   kav  re   βαρύτατοι   iav  τ    o^vTaros  25 
τω  μ^σω  rrjs  avrrjs  μ^τάσγτι  τάσβω?. 

'Ότι  δε  το  ^ιάτονον   σν-γκ^ιται  ήτοι  €κ  bvolv  η  τριών  η 

5  τεσσάρων  άσνν\θ4των,  detKreoz^.     'Ort  μ^ν  ονν  6Κ  τοσούτων  30 
ττλζ ιστών  ασννθίτων  ζκαστον  των  γ^νών  σνν€στηκόί  Ιστιν 
(δσα)  kv  τω  hia  7Τ€ντ€,  b^beiKTai  ιτρότ^ρον    Ιση  δε  ταυ\\τα  73 
τέσσαρα  τον  αριθμόν.     €αν  ονν  των  τεσσάρων  τα  μ\ν  τρία 
Ισα  γ^νηται  το  be  {τέταρτον)  άνισον — {τοντο  δε)  γίγνβται 

ΙΟ  εζ^  τω  σνντονωτάτω  διατοι/ω — ,  bvo   εσται  μεγέθη  μόνα  ε^ 
ων  το  Ι  biaTovov  σνν€στηκ69  εσται•    iav  δε  τα  μ\ν  bvo  Ισα  5 
τα    δε  δυο  άνισα  τη^  τταρνπάτηζ    εττι   το    ^θαρυ   κινηθ€ίση£, 
τρία    εσται    μ^γ^θη    ε£   ώζ^    το    διάτοΐΌΐ^    yivos    σνν€στηκο5 
εσται,    το    τ'    ^λαττον   ημιτο\^νίον    καΐ   tovos    καΐ   το    μείζον  ίο 

1 5  ToVou•    εάί'  δε  πάντα  τα  του  δια  ττει^τε  μζγ^θη  άνισα  γ^νηται, 
τέσσαρα   εσται   μ€γ€θη    (ε^  ώι^)    το    €ΐρημ4νον   yevos   εσται 
σνν€στηκ09.     "Ω,στ     eivai   φαν€ρ6ν   οτι  το   biaTovov  |  ^τοι  15 
εκ  δυοΓζ^  η  τριών  η  τεσσάρων  άσννθζτων  σύγκειται. 

'Ότι   δε  {το)  χρώμα   και  η   αρμονία  ήτοι   εκ   τριών  η   εκ 

20  τεσσάρων   σvyκ€ιτaι,    δεικτε'οΐ'.     *Όΐ'τωζ^   δε   τώι;   μ^ν   {τον) 
δια  ττει^τε  άσυι/ 1  ^ε'τωζ;  τ€σσάρων   τον   αριθμόν   kav   μ\ν   τα  2ο 
του  7TVKV0V  μέρη  Ισα  f],  τρία  εσται  μ€yiθη  ε^  ώζ;   τα  ειρτ]- 
με'ι^α   yξvη    σνν^στηκότα   εσται,    το'   τε   του  ττνκνοΰ  μ€ροί  6 
τι  αν  -ρ  και  τόνο^  καΐ  το  τοιοντον  οίον  μίση^  και  |  Kuyavov  25 

25  bιάστημa.      kav  δε   τα  τον   ττνκνοΰ  μέρη   άνισα  fj,  τέσσαρα 

Ι  κοιν-ησουσι  Β  3  τάσ^ωί  in  marg.  Β  :   στάσ€ω5  rell.  4  ^Tot] 

■^  rb  Η         δυοΓρ'  ^  τριών  Meibom  :  τριών  ^  hvoiiv  codd,  5  α,σύνθίτον 

Μ  V  Β  S  6  άσυί/θετον  Η  7  ί^"""  restituit  Meibom  9  το 

δε  reraprov  ανισον — τοΰτο  δέ  y'lyverai  Marquard  :    rh  Se  Ίσον  y€vr]Tai 
codd.  (nisi  quod  yevT]Tai  om.  H)  10  ζιατόνφ  om.  R  14  ημίτονων 

MVBS  16  μ€y4θ€ι  Η         6|  ωι/ restituit  Meursius  18  Svo7v 

Marquard  :  δύο  codd.         19  Th  restituit  Marquard         e/c  ante  τβσσάρων 
om.  VBS  20  δε]  |U6v  oSj/ Η        τοί  restituit  Marquard  21  τον 

corr.  ex  τω  S  22,  23  yuepi?  •  .  •  πνκνοΰ  om.  R  22  77I  fj  Β 

23  συν^στ-ηκότα   Meibom:    συνίστ-ηκόε   codd.  μ4ρου$   MVBS 

24  Th  ante  toi/os  add.  VS 

Μ  2  i63 


III. 73  ΑΡΙΣΤΟΗΕΝΟΤ  ΑΡΜΟΝΙΚίΙΝ  ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ  / 

€σταί  μζγίθη  ^ζ  ων  τα  (Ιρημ^να  γβνη   συν^στηκότα  ζσται, 
ζλάχίστον  μ\ν  το  τοιούτον  οίον  το  νιτάτη^  καί  τταρυττάτη^, 

30  b€VT€pov  δ'  οίον  το  τταρυττάτη^  καΐ  λιχανον,  τρίτον  be  tO\vos, 
τέταρτον  be  το  tolovtov  oXov  to  μ^ση^  καΐ  λιχανον. 

'Ήbη   be   tls  η7ΓΟρησ€  bia  τί  ουκ  αν  καΐ  ταντα  τα  γ4νη  5 

74  ^f^  bvo  ασννθίτων  j|  elη  σvveστηκότa  ώσττβρ  καί  το  biaTOvov. 
Φaveρbv  brj  τ  is  eaTi  iravTeXcaS  καΐ  eTTLTroXrjs  η  αΙτία  τον 
5  μη  yiyveadai  τοντο'  τρία  γαρ  άσννθ€τα  'ίσα  e^rjs  ev  αρμοΐνία 
μ\ν  καΐ  \ρώματι  ον  rt^erat,  ev  biaTOviu  be  rt^erat.  δια 
ταντην  bij  την  αΐτίαν  το  biaTovov  μόνον  eK  bvo  άσννθ^των  ίο 
(rvvTiOeTai  ττοτβ. 

ΙΟ  Mera  be  ταντα  keKTeov  τί  Ιση  καΐ  \  ττοία  tls  η  κατ 
eibos  biaφoρά — biac^epei  δ'  ημίν  ovbev  eTbo9  Xeyeiv  η  σχήμα, 
φepoμev    γαρ    άμφότepa    τα   ονόματα   ταντα    eirl   το    αντό. 

15  TίγveτaL•  δ'  όταν  τον  αντον  μ€γ^θον^  eK  των  αντών  ά\σνν-  15 
Θίτων     σvγκeιμevov    μeγeθeL    καΐ    αριθμώ    η    τά^ΐί    αντών 
άλλοίωσίν   λάβ-ρ.     Τούτον   δ'  οντω9   άφωρισμ^νον  τον  bta 
τeσσάpωv  Οτι  τρία  e'ίbη,  beiKTeov.     ττρώτον  μ\ν  ονν  ον  το 

2ο  ττνκνον   €7τΙ   το  |    βαρύ,   beύτepov   δ'  ον  bίeσLS  εφ'   eKaTepa 
τον  biTovov  κ€Ϊταί,  τρίτον   δ'  ον  το  ττνκνον  eirl  το  ό(ν  τον  2ο 
biTovov.      ότι  δ'  ονκ  evbe^eTai   πλ^οζ^αχώ?  TeOrjvai  τα  τον 

25  bia  τeσσάpωv  μ^ρη  irpos  άλληλα  η  |  τοσανταχώί,  pabiov 
σvvώeΐv.        ........ 

Ι   βσται  om.  Η  συνζστ7]κί)ί  MR  7  δί?]  δ'  et  S  4πϊ  πολληί 

V  Β  S  R  8  verba  eV  αρμονία  et  quae  sequuntur  omnia  in  marg. 

add.    Mc  :    in  V  scripta  sunt  a  Vb  vel  manu   diversa  a  Va,   paullo 
iuniore  Ιναρμόνια  S  9  ou  ante  τίθεται  prius  om.,  et  ου  ante 

τίθΐται  alteram  add.  Η  9-1 1  Sia  .  .  .  ττοτε  om.  Η  lo  το 

διάτονον  om.    R  μόνον  e/c    δυο   Marquard  :    e/c  δυο   μόνων  codd. 

12  τί  Μ  Β  R  :  Ti's  V  S  iari  om,  V  13  ημΐν  post  ovShv  ponit  Η 

15  ασυνθίτων  ex  άσυνθζτου  corr.  V  :   άσυνθίτου  S  16  συ^κ^ιμ^νου 

Η  S  :  σνγκζΐμ^νων  Μ  R,  V  (ex  ανγκ^μίνου  corr.)  καΐ  ante  /ieye^et 

add.  Μ  V  Β  S  Η  17  αλνωσιν  Β         άλλοίωσίν  post  λάβ-τ)  ponit  Η 

του  δ'  οΰτω5,  sed  του  et  ου  in  ras.  corr.  V       άψορισμίνον  Η  :  αψορισμίνου 
Β  ι8  €Ϊδη]•^δ77  Β  ου\  ου  S  19  ου]  ου  S  2θ  ου\  ου  S 

22  τεσσάρα;;/]  τετάρτου  V  Β 

164 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  HARMONY 
BY  ARISTOXENUS 

BOOK  I* 

The  branch  of  study  which  bears  the  name  of  Harmonic  i.  1 1 
is  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  several  divisions  or  special 
sciences  embraced  by  the  general  science  that  concerns 
itself  with  Melody.  Among  these  special  sciences  Harmonic 
occupies  a  primary  and  fundamental  position ;  its  subject 
matter  consists  of  the  fundamental  principles  —  all  that 
relates  to  the  theory  of  scales  and  keys ;  and  this  once 
mastered,  our  knowledge  of  the  science  fulfils  every  just 
requirement,  because  it  is  in  such  a  mastery  that  its  aim 
consists.  In  advancing  to  the  profounder  speculations  2 
which  confront  us  when  scales  and  keys  are  enlisted  in  the 
service  of  poetry,  we  pass  from  the  study  under  consideration 
to  the  all-embracing  science  of  music,  of  which  Harmonic 
is  but  one  part  among  many.  The  possession  of  this  greater 
science  constitutes  the  musician. 

The  early  students  of  Harmonic  contented  themselves,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  with  being  students  of  Harmonic  in  the 
literal  sense  of  the  term;  for  they  investigated  the  enhar- 
monic scale  alone,  without  devoting  any  consideration  to  the 
other  genera.  This  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the 
tables  of  scales  presented  by  them  are  always  of  enharmonic 
scales,  never  in  one  sohtary  instance  of  diatonic  or  chromatic ; 
and  that  too,  although  these  very  tables  in  which  they  con- 
^  The  references  throughout  the  translation  are  to  Meibom's  edition. 

165 


ARISTOXENUS 

fined  themselves  to  the  enumeration  of  enharmonic  octave 
scales  nevertheless  exhibited  the  complete  system  of 
musical  intervals.  Nor  is  this  the  sole  mark  of  their  im- 
perfect treatment.  In  addition  to  ignoring  diatonic  and 
chromatic  scales  they  did  not  even  attempt  to  observe  the 
various  magnitudes  and  figures  in  the  enharmonic  as  well  as 
in  the  other  genera.  Confining  themselves  to  what  is  but 
the  third  part  of  that  complete  system,  they  selected  for 
exclusive  treatment  a  single  magnitude  in  that  third  part, 
namely,  the  Octave.  Again,  their  mode  of  treating  even 
branches  of  the  study  to  which  they  did  apply  themselves 
was  imperfect.  This  has  been  clearly  illustrated  in  a  former 
work  in  which  we  examined  the  views  put  forward  by  the 
students  of  Harmonic ;  but  it  will  be  brought  into  a  still 
clearer  light  by  an  enumeration  of  the  various  subdivisions 
of  this  science,  and  a  description  of  the  sphere  of  each.  We 
3  shall  find  that  they  have  been  in  part  ignored,  in  part  in- 
adequately treated  ;  and  while  substantiating  our  accusations 
we  shall  at  the  same  time  acquire  a  general  conception  of 
the  nature  of  our  subject. 

The  preliminary  step  towards  a  scientific  investigation  of 
music  is  to  adjust  our  different  notions  of  change  of  voice, 
meaning  thereby  change  in  the  position  of  the  voice.  Of 
this  change  there  are  more  forms  than  one,  as  it  is  found 
both  in  speaking  and  in  singing ;  for  in  each  of  these  there 
is  a  high  and  low^  and  a  change  that  results  in  the  contrast 
of  high  and  low  is  a  change  of  position.  Yet  although  this 
movement  between  high  and  low  of  the  voice  in  speaking 
differs  specifically  from  the  same  movement  in  singing,  no 
authority  has  hitherto  supplied  a  careful  determination  of 
the  difference,  and  that  despite  the  fact  that  without  such 
a  determination  the  definition  of  a  note  becomes  a  task  very 
difficult  of  accomplishment.  Yet  we  are  bound  to  accomplish 
it  with  some  degree  of  accuracy,  if  we  wish  to  avoid  the 
i66 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

blunder  of  Lasus  and  some  of  the  school  of  Epigonus,  who 
attribute  breadth  to  notes.  A  careful  definition  will  ensure 
us  increased  correctness  in  discussing  many  of  the  problems 
which  will  afterwards  encounter  us.  Furthermore,  it  is 
essential  to  a  clear  comprehension  of  these  points  that  we 
differentiate  distinctly  between  tension  and  relaxation,  height 
and  depth,  and  pitch — conceptions  not  as  yet  adequately 
discussed,  but  either  ignored  or  confused.  This  done,  we 
shall  then  be  confronted  by  the  question  whether  distance  on  4 
the  line  of  pitch  can  be  indefinitely  extended  or  diminished, 
and  if  so,  from  what  point  of  view.  Our  next  task  will  be 
a  discussion  of  intervals  in  general,  followed  by  a  classifica- 
tion of  them  according  to  every  principle  of  division  of  which 
they  admit ;  after  which  our  attention  will  be  engaged  by 
a  consideration  of  the  scale  in  general,  and  a  presentation 
of  the  various  natural  classes  of  scales.  We  must  then 
indicate  in  outline  the  nature  of  7?iusical  melody — musical^ 
because  of  melody  there  are  several  kinds,  and  tuneful 
melody — that  which  is  employed  in  musical  expression — is 
only  one  class  among  many.  And  as  the  method  by  which 
one  is  led  to  a  true  conception  of  this  latter  involves  the 
differentiation  of  it  from  the  other  kinds  of  melody,  it  will 
scarcely  be  possible  to  avoid  touching  on  these  other  kinds, 
to  some  extent  at  least.  When  we  have  thus  defined  musical 
melody  as  far  as  it  can  be  done  by  a  general  outline  before 
the  consideration  of  details,  we  must  divide  the  general  class, 
breaking  it  up  into  as  many  species  as  it  may  appear  to 
contain.  After  this  division  we  must  consider  the  nature 
and  origin  of  continuity  or  consecution  in  scales.  Our 
next  point  will  be  to  set  forth  the  differences  of  the  musical 
genera  which  manifest  themselves  in  the  variable  notes, 
as  well  as  to  give  an  account  of  the  loci  of  variation  of 
these  variable  notes.  Hitherto  these  questions  have  been 
absolutely  ignored,  and  in  dealing  with  them  we  shall  be 

167 


ARISTOXENUS 

compelled  to  break  new  ground,  as  there  is  in  existence  no 
previous  treatment  of  them  worth  mentioning. 

5  Intervals,  first  simple  and  then  compound,  will  next 
occupy  our  attention.  In  dealing  with  compound  intervals, 
which  as  a  matter  of  fact  are  in  a  sense  scales  as  well,  we 
shall  find  it  necessary  to  make  some  remarks  on  the  synthesis 
of  simple  intervals.  Most  students  of  Harmonic,  as  we 
perceived  in  a  previous  work,  have  failed  even  to  notice 
that  a  treatment  of  this  subject  was  required.  Eratocles 
and  his  school  have  contented  themselves  with  remarking 
that  there  are  two  possible  melodic  progressions  starting 
from  the  interval  of  the  Fourth,  both  upwards  and  down- 
wards. They  do  not  definitely  state  whether  the  law  holds 
good  from  whatever  interval  of  the  Fourth  the  melody 
starts ;  they  assign  no  reason  for  their  law ;  they  do  not 
inquire  how  other  intervals  are  synthesized — whether  there 
is  a  fixed  principle  that  determines  the  synthesis  of  any 
given  interval  with  any  other,  and  under  what  circumstances 
scales  do  and  do  not  arise  from  the  syntheses,  or  whether 
this  matter  is  incapable  of  determination.  On  these  points 
we  find  no  statements  made  by  any  writer,  with  or  without 
demonstration ;  the  result  being  that  although  as  a  matter 
of  fact  there  is  a  marvellous  orderliness  in  the  constitution  of 
melody,  music  has  yet  been  condemned,  through  the  fault 
of  those  who  have  meddled  with  the  subject,  as  falling  into 
the  opposite  defect.  The  truth  is  that  of  all  the  objects  to 
which  the  five  senses  apply  not  one  other  is  characterized 
by  an  orderliness  so  extensive  and  so  perfect.  Abundant 
evidence  for  this  statement  will  be  forthcoming  throughout 
our  investigation  of  our  subject,  to  the  enumeration  of  the 
parts  of  which  we  must  now  return. 

6  Our  presentation  of  the  various  methods  in  which  simple 
intervals  may  be  collocated  will  be  followed  by  a  discussion 
of  the  resulting  scales  (including  the  Perfect  Scale)  in  which 

i68 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

we  will  deduce  the  number  and  character  of  the  scales  from 
the  intervals,  and  will  exhibit  the  several  magnitudes  of  scales 
as  well  as  the  different  figures,  collocations,  and  positions  pos- 
sible in  each  magnitude  ;  our  aim  being  that  no  principle  of 
concrete  melody,  whether  magnitude,  or  figure,  or  colloca- 
tion, or  position  shall  lack  demonstration.  This  part  of  our 
study  has  been  left  untouched  by  all  our  predecessors  with  the 
exception  of  Eratocles,  who  attempted  a  partial  enumeration 
without  demonstration.  How  worthless  his  statements  are, 
and  how  completely  he  failed  even  in  perception  of  the  facts, 
we  have  already  dwelt  upon,  when  this  very  subject  was  the 
matter  of  our  inquiry.  As  we  then  observed  all  the  scales 
with  the  exception  of  one  have  been  completely  passed  over ; 
and  of  that  one  scale  Eratocles  merely  endeavoured  to 
enumerate  the  figures  of  one  magnitude,  namely  the  octave, 
empirically  determining  their  number,  without  any  attempt 
at  demonstration,  by  the  recurrence  of  the  intervals.  He 
failed  to  observe  that  unless  there  be  previous  demonstration 
of  the  figures  of  the  Fifth  and  Fourth,  as  well  as  of  the  laws 
of  their  melodious  collocation,  such  an  empirical  process 
will  give  us  not  seven  figures,  but  many  multiples  of  seven. 
Further  discussion  here  is  rendered  unnecessary  by  our 
previous  demonstration  of  these  facts ;  and  we  may  now  7 
resume  our  sketch  of  the  divisions  of  our  subject. 

When  the  scales  in  each  genus  have  been  enumerated  in 
accordance  with  the  several  variations  just  mentioned,  we 
must  blend  the  scales  and  repeat  the  process  of  enumera- 
tion. The  necessity  for  this  investigation  has  escaped  most 
students  ;  nay,  they  have  not  so  much  as  mastered  the  true 
conception  of  '  blending.' 

Notes  form  the  next  subject  for  inquiry,  inasmuch  as 
intervals  do  not  suffice  for  their  determination. 

Again,  every  scale  when  sung  or  played  is  located  in 
a  certain  region  of  the  voice;  and  although  this  location 

169 


ARISTOXENUS 

induces  no  difference  in  the  scale  regarded  in  itself,  it  im- 
parts to  the  melody  employing  that  scale  no  common — nay 
rather  perhaps  its  most  striking  characteristic.  Hence  he 
who  would  deal  with  the  science  before  us  must  treat  of  the 
'  region  of  the  voice '  in  general  and  in  detail  so  far  as  is 
reasonable ;  in  other  words  so  far  as  the  nature  of  the  scales 
themselves  prescribes.  And  in  dealing  with  the  affinity 
between  scales  and  regions  of  the  voice,  and  with  keys,  we 
must  not  follow  the  Harmonists  in  their  endeavour  at  com- 
pression, but  aim  rather  at  the  intermodulation  of  scales,  by 
considering  in  what  keys  the  various  scales  must  be  set  so 
as  to  admit  of  intermodulation.  We  have  shown  in  a  previous 
work  that,  though  as  a  matter  of  fact  some  of  the  Harmonists 
have  touched  on  this  branch  of  our  subject  in  a  purely 
accidental  way,  in  connexion  with  their  endeavour  to  exhibit 
a  close-packed  scheme  of  scales,  yet  there  has  been  no 
general  treatment  of  it  by  a  single  writer  belonging  to  this 
8  school.  This  position  of  our  subject  may  broadly  be 
described  as  the  part  of  the  science  of  modulation  con- 
cerned with  melody. 

We  have  now  set  forth  the  nature  and  number  of  the 
parts  of  Harmonic.  Any  investigations  that  would  carry  us 
further  must,  as  we  remarked  at  the  outset,  be  regarded 
as  belonging  to  a  more  advanced  science.  Postponing 
accordingly  to  the  proper  occasion  the  consideration  of 
these,  their  number,  and  their  several  natures,  it  now 
devolves  upon  us  to  give  an  account  of  the  primary  science 
itself. 

Our  first  problem  consists  in  ascertaining  the  various 
species  of  motion.  Every  voice  is  capable  of  change  of 
position,  and  this  change  may  be  either  continuous  or  by 
intervals.  In  continuous  change  of  position  the  voice 
seems  to  the  senses  to  traverse  a  certain  space  in  such  a 
manner  that  it  does  not  become  stationary  at  any  point,  not 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

even  at  the  extremities  of  its  progress — such  at  least  is  the 
evidence  of  our  sense-perception — but  passes  on  into 
silence  with  unbroken  continuity.  In  the  other  species 
which  we  designate  motion  by  intervals,  the  process  seems 
to  be  of  exactly  the  opposite  nature :  the  voice  in  its 
progress  stations  itself  at  a  certain  pitch,  and  then  again  at 
another,  pursuing  this  process  continuously — continuously, 
that  is,  in  time.  As  it  leaps  the  distances  contained 
between  the  successive  points  of  pitch,  while  it  is  stationary 
at,  and  produces  sounds  upon,  the  points  themselves,  it 
is  said  to  sing  only  the  latter,  and  to  move  by  intervals. 
Both  these  descriptions  must  of  course  be  regarded  in  the  9 
light  of  sensuous  cognition.  Whether  voice  can  really 
move  or  not,  and  whether  it  can  become  stationary  at 
a  given  point  of  pitch,  are  questions  beyond  the  scope  of 
the  present  inquiry,  which  does  not  demand  the  raising 
of  this  problem.  For  whatever  the  answer  may  be,  it  does 
not  aifect  the  distinction  between  the  melodious  motion 
of  the  voice  and  its  other  motions.  Disregarding  all  such 
difficulties,  we  describe  the  motion  of  the  voice  as  con- 
tinuous when  it  moves  in  such  a  way  as  to  seem  to  the 
ear  not  to  become  stationary  at  any  point  of  pitch ;  but 
when  the  reverse  is  the  case — when  the  voice  seems  to  the 
ear  first  to  come  to  a  standstill  on  a  point  of  pitch,  then  to 
leap  over  a  certain  space,  and,  having  done  so,  to  come  to  a 
standstill  on  a  second  point,  and  to  repeat  this  alternating 
process  continuously — the  motion  of  the  voice  under  these 
circumstances  we  describe  as  motion  by  intervals.  Con- 
tinuous motion  we  call  the  motion  of  speech,  as  in  speaking 
the  voice  moves  without  ever  seeming  to  come  to  a  stand- 
still. The  reverse  is  the  case  with  the  other  motion,  which 
we  designate  motion  by  intervals :  in  that  the  voice  does 
seem  to  become  stationary,  and  when  employing  this 
motion  one  is  always  said  not  to  speak  but  to  sing.     Hence 

171 


ARISTOXENUS 

in  ordinary  conversation  we  avoid  bringing  the  voice  to  a 
standstill,  unless  occasionally  forced  by  strong  feeling  to 
resort  to  such  a  motion ;    whereas    in    singing  we  act  in 

10  precisely  the  opposite  way,  avoiding  continuous  motion  and 
making  the  voice  become,  as  far  as  possible,  absolutely 
stationary.  The  more  we  succeed  in  rendering  each  of  our 
voice-utterances  one,  stationary,  and  identical,  the  more 
correct  does  the  singing  appear  to  the  ear.  To  conclude, 
enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  there  are  two  species  of 
the  voice's  motion,  and  that  one  is  continuous  and  employed 
in  speaking,  while  one  proceeds  by  intervals  and  is 
employed  in  singing. 

It  is  evident  that  the  voice  must  in  singing  produce  the 
tensions  and  relaxations  inaudibly,  and  that  the  points  of 
pitch  alone  must  be  audibly  enunciated.  This  is  clear  from 
the  fact  that  the  voice  must  pass  imperceptibly  through  the 
compass  of  the  interval  which  it  traverses  in  ascending  or 
descending,  while  the  notes  that  bound  the  intervals  must 
be  audible  and  stationary.  Hence  it  is  needful  to  discuss 
tension  and  relaxation,  and  in  addition  height  and  depth  of 
pitch,  and  finally  pitch  in  general. 

Tension  is  the  continuous  transition  of  the  voice  from  a 
lower  position  to  a  higher,  relaxation  that  from  a  higher  to 
a  lower.  Height  of  pitch  is  the  result  of  tension,  depth 
the  result  of  relaxation.  On  a  superficial  consideration  of 
these  questions  it  might  appear  surprising  that  we  distinguish 
four  phenomena  here  instead  of  two,  and  in  fact  it  is  usual 
to  identify  height  of  pitch  with  tension,  and  depth  of  pitch 

11  with  relaxation.  Hence  we  may  perhaps  with  advantage 
observe  that  the  usual  view  implies  a  confusion  of  thought. 
In  doing  so  we  must  endeavour  to  understand,  by  observing 
the  phenomenon  itself,  what  precisely  takes  place  when  in 
tuning  we  tighten  a  string  or  relax  it.  All  who  possess  even 
a  slight  acquaintance  with  instruments  are  aware  that  in 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARM0N7 

producing  tension  we  raise  the  string  to  a  higher  pitch,  and 
that  in  relaxing  it  we  lower  its  pitch.  Now,  while  we  are 
thus  raising  the  pitch  of  the  string,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
height  of  pitch  which  is  to  result  from  the  process  cannot 
yet  be  in  existence.  Height  of  pitch  will  only  result  when 
the  string  becomes  stationary  and  ceases  to  change,  after 
having  been  brought  by  the  process  of  tension  to  the  point 
of  pitch  required;  in  other  words,  when  the  tension  has 
ceased  and  no  longer  exists.  For  it  is  impossible  that  a 
string  should  be  at  the  same  moment  in  motion  and  at  rest ; 
and  as  we  have  seen,  tension  takes  place  when  the  string 
is  in  motion,  height  of  pitch  when  it  is  quiescent  and 
stationary.  The  same  remarks  will  apply  to  relaxation  and 
depth  of  pitch,  except  that  these  are  concerned  with  change 
in  the  opposite  direction  and  its  result.  It  is  evident,  then, 
that  relaxation  and  depth  of  pitch,  tension  and  height  of 
pitch,  must  not  be  identified^  but  stand  to  one  another  in 
the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  It  remains  to  show  that 
the  term  pitch  also  connotes  a  quite  distinct  conception. 

By  the  term  pitch  we  mean  to  indicate  a  certain  per- 12 
sistence,  as  it  Avere,  or  stationary  position  of  the  voice. 
And  let  us  not  be  alarmed  by  the  theory  which  reduces 
notes  to  motions  and  asserts  sound  in  general  to  be  a 
motion,  as  though  our  definition  involved  the  proposition 
'that  under  certain  circumstances  motion  will,  instead  of 
moving,  be  stationary  and  at  rest.  The  definition  of  pitch 
as  a  certain  condition  of  motion — call  it  '  equability '  or 
'  identity,'  or  by  any  more  enlightening  term  you  can  find — 
will  not  affect  our  position.  We  shall  none  the  less  describe 
the  voice  as  stationary  when  our  senses  assure  us  that  it  is 
neither  ascending  nor  descending,  simply  fixing  on  this 
term  as  descriptive  of  such  a  state  of  the  voice  without  any 
further  implications.  To  proceed,  then,  the  voice  appears 
to  act  thus  in  singing ;  it  moves  in  making  an  interval,  it  is 

173 


ARISTOXENUS 

stationary  on  the  note.  Now  if  we  use  the  term  '  motion  ' 
and  say  ^  the  voice  moves  '  in  cases  where,  according  to  the 
physical  theory,  it  undergoes  a  change  in  the  rate  of  motion  ; 
and  if,  again,  we  use  the  term  '  rest '  and  say '  the  voice  rests  ' 
in  cases  where  this  change  in  the  rate  of  motion  has  ceased, 
and  the  motion  has  become  uniform,  our  musical  theory  is 
not  thereby  affected.  For  it  is  plain  enough  that  the  term 
*  motion '  in  the  physical  sense  covers  both  '  motion '  and 
'rest'  in  the  sense  in  which  we  employ  them.  Sufficient 
has  been  said  on  this  point  here;  elsewhere  it  has  been 
treated  more  fully  and  clearly. 
13  To  resume ;  it  now  being  clear  that  pitch  is  distinct  from 
tension  or  relaxation,  the  former  being,  as  we  say,  a  rest  of 
the  voice,  the  latter,  as  we  have  seen,  motions,  our  next 
task  is  to  understand  that  it  is  distinct  from  the  remaining 
phenomena  of  height  and  depth  of  pitch.  Now,  our  pre- 
vious observations  have  shown  that  the  voice  is,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  in  a  state  of  rest  after  a  transition  to  height  or  depth ; 
yet  the'  following  considerations  will  make  it  clear  that 
pitch,  though  a  rest  of  the  voice,  is  a  phenomenon  distinct 
from  both.  We  must  understand  that  for  the  voice  to  be 
stationary  means  its  remaining  at  one  pitch ;  and  this  will 
happen  equally  whether  it  becomes  stationary  at  a  high 
pitch  or  a  low.  If  pitch,  then,  be  met  in  high  notes  as  well 
as  low  notes — and  the  voice,  as  we  have  shown,  must  of 
necessity  be  capable  of  becoming  stationary  on  both  alike — 
it  follows  that,  inasmuch  as  height  and  depth  are  absolutely 
incompatible,  pitch,  which  is  a  phenomenon  common  to 
both,  must  be  distinct  from  one  and  the  other  alike.  Enough 
has  now  been  said  to  show  that  pitch,  height  and  depth  of 
pitch,  and  tension  and  relaxation  of  pitch  are  five  con- 
ceptions which  do  not  admit  of  any  identification  tn^er  se. 

The  next  point  for  our  consideration  is  whether  distance 
on  the  line  of  pitch  admits  of  infinite  extension  or  diminu- 
174 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

tion.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  seeing  that  if  we  refer  solely  14 
to  musical  sounds,  such  infinite  extension  and  diminution 
are  impossible.  For  every  musical  instrument  and  for  every 
human  voice  there  is  a  maximum  compass  which  they 
cannot  exceed,  and  a  minimum  interval,  less  than  which 
they  cannot  produce.  No  organ  of  sound  can  indefinitely 
enlarge  its  range  or  indefinitely  reduce  its  intervals  :  in  both 
cases  it  reaches  a  limit.  Each  of  these  hmits  must  be 
determined  by  a  reference  to  that  which  produces  the  sound 
and  to  that  which  discriminates  it — the  voice,  namely,  and 
the  ear.  What  the  voice  cannot  produce  and  the  ear 
cannot  discriminate  must  be  excluded  from  the  available 
and  practically  possible  range  of  musical  sound.  In  the 
progress  in  parvitatem  the  voice  and  the  ear  seem  to  fail  at 
the  same  point.  The  voice  cannot  differentiate,  nor  can 
the  ear  discriminate,  any  interval  smaller  than  the  smallest 
diesis,  so  as  to  determine  what  fraction  it  is  of  a  diesis  or  of 
any  other  of  the  known  intervals.  In  the  progress  in 
magnitudinem  the  power  of  the  ear  may  perhaps  be  con- 
sidered to  stretch  beyond  that  of  the  voice,  though  to  no 
very  great  distance.  In  any  case,  whether  we  are  to  assume 
the  same  limit  for  voice  and  ear  in  both  directions,  or 
whether  we  are  to  suppose  it  to  be  the  same  in  the  progress 
in  parvitatem  but  different  in  the  progress  ift  magnitudinem, 
the  fact  remains  that  there  is  a  maximum  and  minimum 
limit  of  distance  on  the  line  of  pitch,  either  common  to  15 
voice  and  ear,  or  peculiar  to  each.  It  is  clear,  then,  that 
distance  of  high  and  low  on  the  line  of  pitch,  regarded  in 
relation  to  voice  and  ear,  is  incapable  of  infinite  extension  or 
infinitesimal  diminution.  Whether,  regarding  the  constitution 
of  melody  in  the  abstract,  we  are  bound  to  admit  such  an 
infinite  progress,  is  a  question  demanding  a  different  method 
of  reasoning  not  required  for  our  present  purpose,  and  we 
shall  accordingly  reserve  its  discussion  for  a  later  occasion. 

175 


ARISTOXENUS 

The  question  of  distance  on  the  Hne  of  pitch  being 
•  disposed  of,  we  shall  proceed  to  define  a  note.  Briefly, 
it  is  the  incidence  of  the  voice  upon  one  point  of  pitch. 
Whenever  the  voice  is  heard  to  remain  stationary  on  one 
pitch,  we  have  a  note  qualified  to  take  a  place  in  a 
melody. 

An  interval,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  distance  bounded 
by  two  notes  which  have  not  the  same  pitch.  For,  roughly 
speaking,  an  interval  is  a  difference  between  points  of  pitch, 
a  space  potentially  admitting  notes  higher  than  the  lower  of 
the  two  points  of  pitch  which  bound  the  interval,  and  lower 
than  the  higher  of  them.  A  difference  between  points  of 
pitch  depends  on  degrees  of  tension. 
i6  A  scale,  again,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  compound  of  two 
or  more  intervals.  Here  we  would  ask  our  hearers  to 
receive  these  definitions  in  the  right  spirit,  not  with  jealous 
scrutiny  of  the  degree  of  their  exactness.  We  would  ask 
him  to  aid  us  with  his  intelligent  sympathy,  and  to  consider 
our  definition  sufficiently  instructive  when  it  puts  him  in 
the  way  of  understanding  the  thing  defined.  To  supply  a 
definition  which  affords  an  unexceptionable  and  exhaustive 
analysis  is  a  difficult  task  in  the  case  of  all  fundamental 
motions,  and  by  no  means  least  difficult  in  the  case  of  the 
note,  the  interval,  and  the  scale. 

We  must  now  endeavour  to  classify  first  intervals  and 
then  scales  according  to  all  those  principles  of  division  that 
are  of  practical  use.  The  first  classification  of  intervals 
distinguishes  them  by  their  compass,  the  second  regards 
them  as  concordant  or  discordant,  the  third  as  simple  or 
compound,  the  fourth  divides  them  according  to  the 
musical  genus,  the  fifth  as  rational  or  irrational.  As  all 
other  classifications  are  of  no  practical  use,  let  us  disregard 
them  for  the  present. 
17  In  scales  will  be  found,  with  one  exception,  all  the  dis- 
ir6 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

tinetions  which  we  have  met  in  intervals.  It  is  obvious 
that  scales  may  differ  both  in  compass  and  owing  to  the 
fact  that  the  notes  bounding  that  compass  may  be  either 
concordant  or  discordant.  The  third,  however,  of  the  dis- 
tinctions mentioned  in  the  case  of  intervals  cannot  exist 
in  the  case  of  scales.  Evidently  we  cannot  have  simple 
and  compound  scales,  at  least  not  in  the  same  way  as  we 
had  simple  and  compound  intervals.  The  fourth  dis- 
tinction— that  according  to  genera — must  also  exist  in  the 
case  of  scales,  some  of  them  being  diatonic,  some  chromatic, 
and  some  enharmonic.  It  is  obvious  that  they  also  admit 
the  fifth  principle  of  division :  some  are  bounded  by  a 
rational,  and  some  by  an  irrational,  interval.  To  these  four 
there  must  be  added  three  other  classifications.  First, 
there  is  that  into  the  conjunct  scales,  the  disjunct  scales, 
and  the  scales  that  are  a  combination  of  both  ;  every  scale, 
provided  it  is  of  a  certain  compass,  becomes  either  conjunct 
or  disjunct,  or  else  combines  both  these  qualities — for  cases 
are  to  be  seen  where  the  latter  process  takes  place.  There 
is,  secondly,  the  division  into  transilient  and  continuous, 
every  scale  belonging  to  one  category  or  the  other;  and 
finally,  that  into  single,  double,  and  multiple,  as  all  without  i8 
exception  admit  of  classification  under  these  heads.  An 
explanation  of  each  of  these  terms  will  be  given  in  the 
sequel. 

Starting  from  these  definitions  and  classifications  we 
must  seek  to  indicate  in  outline  the  nature  of  melody.  We 
have  already  observed  that  here  the  motion  of  the  voice 
must  be  by  intervals ;  herein^  then,  hes  the  ,  distinction 
between  the  melody  of  music  and  of  speech — for  there  is 
also  a  kind  of  melody  in  speech  w^hich  depends  upon  the 
accents  of  words,  as  the  voice  in  speaking  rises  and  sinks 
by  a  natural  law.  Again,  melody  which  accords  with 
the  laws  of  harmony  is  not  constituted  by  intervals   and 

MACRAN  Ij•  177 


ARISTOXENUS 

notes  alone.  Collocation  upon  a  definite  principle  is  also 
indispensable,  it  being  obvious  that  intervals  and  notes  are 
equally  constituents  of  melody  which  violates  the  laws  of 
harmony.  It  follows  that  the  most  important  and  signi- 
ficant factor  in  the  right  constitution  of  melody  is  the 
principle  of  collocation  in  general  as  well  as  its  special 
laws.  We  see,  then,  that  musical  melody  differs  from  the 
melody  of  speech,  on  the  one  hand,  in  employing  motion 
by  intervals,  and  from  faulty  melody,  on  the  other  hand, 
melody  which  violates  the  laws  of  harmony,  by  the  different 
19  manner  in  which  it  collocates  the  simple  intervals.  What 
this  manner  is  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel ;  for  the  present 
it  will  suffice  to  insist  on  the  fact  that,  though  melody  which 
accords  with  the  laws  of  harmony  admits  of  many  variations 
in  collocating  the  intervals,  there  is  yet  one  invariable 
attribute  that  can  be  predicated  of  every  such  melody,  of 
so  great  importance  that  with  its  removal  the  harmony 
disappears.  A  full  explanation  will  be  given  in  the  course 
of  the  treatise.  For  the  present  we  content  ourselves  with 
this  definition  of  musical  melody  in  contradistinction  to 
the  other  species,  but  it  must  be  understood  that  we  have 
supplied  a  mere  outline  without  as  yet  reviewing  the  details. 

Our  next  step  will  be  to  enumerate  the  genera  into  which 
melody  in  general  may  be  divided.  These  are  apparently 
three  in  number.  Any  melody  we  take  that  is  harmonized 
on  one  principle  is  diatonic  or  chromatic  or  enharmonic. 
Of  these  genera  the  diatonic  must  be  granted  to  be 
the  first  and  oldest,  inasmuch  as  mankind  lights  upon 
it  before  the  others ;  the  chromatic  comes  next.  The 
enharmonic  is  the  third  and  most  recondite;  and  it  is  only 
at  a  late  stage,  and  with  great  labour  and  difficulty,  that 
the  ear  becomes  accustomed  to  it. 

We  shall  now  return  to  the  second  of  the  distinctions 
in  intervals  previously  enumerated,  and  shall  proceed  to 
178 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

examine  one  of  the  two  classes  there  contrasted.  These 
classes  consist,  as  was  remarked,  of  concords  and  discords,  20 
and  it  is  the  former  that  we  shall  now  take  for  consideration. 
We  shall  endeavour  to  establish  the  facts  with  regard  to  one 
of  the  many  points  in  which  concords  differ,  namely  respect 
of  compass.  The  nature  of  melody  in  the  abstract  deter- 
mines which  concord  has  the  least  compass.  Though  many 
smaller  intervals  than  the-Fourth  occur  in  melody,  they  are 
without  exception  discords.  But  while  the  least  concordant 
interval  is  thus  determined,  we  find  no  similar  determination 
for  the  greatest;  for  as  far  at  any  rate  as  the  nature  of 
melody  in  the  abstract  is  concerned,  concords  seem  capable 
of  infinite  extension  just  as  much  as  discords.  If  w^e  add 
to  an  octave  any  concord,  whether  greater  than,  equal  to, 
or  less  than,  an  octave,  the  sum  is  a  concord.  From  this 
point  of  view,  then,  there  is  no  maximum  concord.  If, 
however,  we  regard  our  practical  capacities — in  other  words, 
the  capacities  of  the  human  voice  and  of  instruments — there 
is  apparently  such  a  maximum,  the  interval,  namely,  com- 
posed of  two  octaves  and  a  Fifth.  The  compass  of  three 
octaves  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  beyond  our  reach.  We  must 
of  course  determine  the  compass  of  the  maximum  concord 
by  the  pitch  and  limits  of  some  07ie  instrument.  For 
doubtless  we  should  find  an  interval  greater  than  the  above- 
mentioned  three  octaves  between  the  highest  note  of  the 
soprano  clarinet,  and  the  lowest  note  of  the  bass  clarinet ; 
and  again  between  the  highest  note  of  a  clarinet  player  21 
performing  with  the  speaker  open,  and  the  lowest  note  of 
a  clarinet  player  performing  with  the  speaker  closed.  A 
similar  relation,  too,  would  be  found  to  exist  between  the 
voices  of  a  child  and  a  man.  It  is,  indeed,  from  cases 
such  as  these  that  we  come  to  know  the  large  concords. 
For  it  is  from  voices  of  different  ages,  and  instruments  of 
different  measurements  that  we  have  learned  that  the  interval 

Ν  2  179 


ARISTOXENUS 

of  three  octaves,  of  four  octaves,  and  even  greater  intervals 
than  these  are  concordant.  Our  conclusion  then  is  that, 
while  the  smallest  concord  is  given  by  the  nature  of  abstract 
melody,  the  greatest  is  only  determined  by  our  capabilities. 

That  the  concordant  intervals  are  eight  in  number  will 
be  readily  admitted.  .  .  . 

The  determination  of  the  interval  of  a  tone  is  our  next 
task.  A  tone  is  the  difference  in  compass  between  the 
first  two  concords,  and  may  be  divided  by  three  lowest 
denominators,  as  melody  admits  of  half  tones,  thirds  of 
tones,  and  quarter-tones,  while  undeniably  rejecting  any 
interval  less  than  these.  Let  us  designate  the  smallest  of 
these  intervals  the  smallest  enharmonic  diesis,  the  next  the 
smallest  chromatic  diesis,  and  the  greatest  a  semitone. 

Let  us  now  set  ourselves  to  consider  the  origin  and 
22  nature  of  the  differences  of  the  genera.  Our  attention 
must  be  directed  to  the  smallest  of  the  concords,  that  of 
which  the  compass  is  usually  occupied  by  four  notes — 
whence  its  ancient  name.  [Now  since  in  such  an  interval 
the  notes  may  be  arranged  in  many  different  orders,  what 
order  are  we  to  choose  for  consideration?  One  in  which 
the  fixed  notes  and  the  notes  that  change  with  the  variation 
in  genus  are  equal  in  number.  An  example  of  the  order 
required  will  be  found  in  the  interval  between  the  Mese 
and  the  Hypate :  here,  while  the  two  intermediate  notes 
vary,  the  two  extremes  are  left  unchanged  by  genus-variation.] 
Let  this  then  be  granted.  Further,  while  there  are  several 
groups  of  notes  which  fill  this  scheme  of  the  Fourth,  each 
distinguished  by  its  own  special  nomenclature,  there  is  one 
which,  as  being  more  familiar  than  any  other  to  the  student 
of  music,  may  be  selected  as  that  wherein  we  shall  consider 
how  variation  of  genus  makes  its  appearance.  It  consists 
of  the  Mese,  Lichanus,  Parhypate,  and  Hypate. 
180 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

That  variation  of  genus  arises  through  the  raising  and 
lowering  of  the  movable  notes  is  obvious ;  but  the  locus 
of  the  variation  of  these  notes  requires  discussion.  The 
locus  of  the  variation  of  the  Lichanus  is  a  tone,  for  this 
note  is  never  nearer  the  Mese  than  the  interval  of  a  tone, 
and  never  further  from  it  than  the  interval  of  two  tones. 
The  lesser  of  these  extreme  intervals  is  recognized  as 
legitimate  by  those  who  have  grasped  the  principle  of  the 
Diatonic  Genus,  and  those  who  have  not  yet  mastered  it  23 
can  be  led  by  particular  instances  to  the  same  admission. 
The  greater  of  these  extreme  intervals,  on  the  other  hand, 
finds  no  such  universal  acceptance ;  but  the  reason  for 
this  must  be  postponed  to  the  sequel.  That  there  is  a  style 
of  composition  which  demands  a  Lichanus  at  a  distance  of 
two  tones  from  the  Mese,  and  that  far  from  being  con- 
temptible it  is  perhaps  the  noblest  of  all  styles — this  is 
a  truth  which  is  indeed  far  from  patent  to  most  musical 
students  of  to-day,  though  it  would  become  so  if  they  were 
led  to  the  apprehension  of  it  by  the  aid  of  concrete 
examples.  But  to  any  one  who  possesses  an  adequate 
acquaintance  with  the  first  and  second  styles  of  ancient 
music,  it  is  an  indisputable  truth.  Theorists  who  are 
only  familiar  with  the  style  of  composition  now  in  vogue 
naturally  exclude  the  two-tone  Lichanus,  the  prevailing 
tendency  being  to  the  use  of  the  higher  Lichani.  The 
ground  of  this  fashion  lies  in  the  perpetual  striving  after 
sweetness,  attested  by  the  fact  that  time  and  attention 
are  mostly  devoted  to  chromatic  music,  and  that  when 
the  enharmonic  is  introduced,  it  is  approximated  to  the 
chromatic,  while  the  ethical  character  of  the  music  suffers 
a  corresponding  deflection.  Without  carrying  this  line  of 
thought  any  further,  we  shall  assume  the  locus  of  the 
Lichanus  to  be  a  tone,  and  that  of  the  Parhypate  to  be 
the  smallest  diesis,  as  the  latter  note  is  never  nearer  to  the 

181 


ARISTOXENUS 

Hypate  than  a  diesis,  and  never  further  from  it  than  a 
semitone.  For  the  loci  do  not  overlap;  their  point  of 
contact  serves  as  a  limit  to  both  of  them.  The  point 
of  pitch  upon  which  the  Parhypate  in  its  ascent  meets  the 
Lichanus  in  its  descent  supplies  a  boundary  to  the  loci, 

24  the  lower  locus  being  that  of  the  Parhypate,  the  higher  that 
of  the  Lichanus. 

Having  thus  determined  the  total  loci  of  the  Lichanus 
and  Parhypate,  we  shall  now  proceed  to  ascertain  their  loci 
as  qualified  by  genus  and  shade.  The  proper  method  of 
investigating  whether  the  Fourth  can  be  expressed  in  terms 
of  any  lower  intervals,  or  whether  it  is  incommensurable 
with  them  all,  is  given  in  my  chapter  on  'Intervals  ascer- 
tained by  the  principle  of  Concord.'  Here  we  shall  assume 
that  its  apparent  value  is  correct,  and  that  it  consists  of  two 
and  a  half  tones.  Again,  we  shall  apply  the  term  Pycnum  ^ 
to  the  combination  of  two  intervals,  the  sum  of  which  is 
less  than  the  complement  that  makes  up  the  Fourth.  Let 
us  now,  starting  from  the  lower  of  the  two  fixed  notes, 
take  the  least  Pycnum  :  it  will  consist  of  the  two  least 
enharmonic  dieses ;  while  a  second  Pycnum,  taken  from 
the  same  note,  will  consist  of  two  of  the  least  chromatic 
dieses.  This  gives  the  two  lowest  Lichani  of  two  genera — 
the  enharmonic  and  the  chromatic ;  the  enharmonic  Lichani 
being  in  general,  as  we  saw,  the  lowest,  the  chromatic 
coming  next,  and  the  diatonic  being  the  highest.  Again, 
let  a  third  Pycnum  be  taken,  still  from  the  same  note ;  then 
a  fourth,  which  is  equal  to  a  tone ;  then  fifthly,  from  the 
same  note,  let  there  be  taken  a  scale  consisting  of  a  tone 
and  a  quarter ;  then  a  sixth  scale  consisting  of  a  tone  and 
a  half.     We  have  already  mentioned  the  Lichani  bounding 

25  the  first  and  the  second  Pycna  ;  that  bounding  the  third  is 
chromatic,  and  the  special  chroma  to  which  it  belongs  is 

*  i.  e.  'close,'  'compressed.* 
182 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

called  the  Hemiolic.  The  Lichanus  bounding  the  fourth 
Pycnum  is  also  chromatic,  and  the  special  class  to  which  it 
belongs  is  called  the  To7iic  Chromatic.  The  fifth  scale  is 
too  great  for  a  Pycnum,  for  here  the  sum  of  the  intervals 
between  the  Hypate  and  Parhypate  and  betw^een  the  Par- 
hypate  and  the  Lichanus  is  equal  to  the  interval  between 
the  Lichanus  and  the  Mese.  The  Lichanus  bounding  this 
scale  is  the  lowest  diatonic.  The  sixth  scale  we  assumed  is 
bounded  by  the  highest  diatonic  Lichanus.  Thus  the 
lowest  chromatic  Lichanus  is  one-sixth  of  a  tone  higher 
than  the  lowest  enharmonic ;  since  the  chromatic  diesis 
is  greater  than  the  enharmonic  by  one-tw^elfth  of  a  tone — 
the  third  of  a  quantity  being  one-twelfth  greater  than  the 
fourth — and  similarly  the  two  chromatic  dieses  exceed  the 
two  enharmonic  by  double  that  quantity,  namely  one-sixth 
— an  interval  smaller  than  the  smallest  admitted  in  melody. 
Such  intervals  are  not  melodic  elements,  or  in  other  w^rds 
cannot  take  an  independent  place  in  a  scale.  Again,  the 
lowest  diatonic  Lichanus  is  seven-twelfths  of  a  tone  higher 
than  the  lowest  chromatic ;  for  from  the  former  to  the 
Lichanus  of  the  hemiolic  chroma  is  half  a  tone ;  from  this 
Lichanus  to  the  enharmonic  is  a  diesis ;  from  the  enhar- 
monic Lichanus  to  the  lowest  chromatic  is  one-sixth  of 
a  tone;  while  from  the  lowest  chromatic  to  that  of  the 
hemiolic  chroma  is  one-twelfth  of  a  tone.  But  as  a  quarter  26 
consists  of  three-twelfths,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  the  interval 
just  mentioned  between  the  lowest  diatonic  and  the  lowest 
chromatic  Lichanus.  The  highest  diatonic  Lichanus  is 
higher  than  the  lowest  diatonic  by  a  diesis.  These  con- 
siderations show  the  locus  of  each  of  the  Lichani.  Every 
Lichanus  below  the  chromatic  is  enharmonic,  every  Lichanus 
below  the  diatonic  is  chromatic  down  to  the  lowest  chroma- 
tic, and  every  Lichanus  lower  than  the  highest  diatonic  is 
diatonic  down  to  the  lowest  diatonic.     For  -we  must  regard 


ARISTOXENUS 

the  Lichani  as  infinite  in  number.  Let  the  voice  become 
stationary  at  any  point  in  the  locus  of  the  Lichanus  here 
demonstrated,  and  the  result  is  a  Lichanus.  In  the  locus 
of  the  Lichanus  there  is  no  empty  space — no  space  incapable 
of  admitting  a  Lichanus.  The  point  we  are  discussing  is 
one  of  no  little  importance.  Other  musicians  only  dispute 
as  to  the  position  of  the  Lichanus — whether,  for  instance, 
the  Lichanus  in  the  enharmonic  species  is  two  tones  re- 
moved from  the  Mese  or  holds  a  higher  position,  thus 
assuming  but  one  enharmonic  Lichanus ;  we,  on  the  other 
hand,  not  only  assert  that  there  is  a  plurality  of  Lichani 
in  each  class,  but  even  declare  that  their  number  is  infinite. 
Passing  from  the  Lichani  we  find  but  two  loci  for  the 
Parhypate,  one  common  to  the  diatonic  and  chromatic 
genus  and  one  peculiar  to  the  enharmonic.  For  two  of  the 
genera  have  the  Parhypate  in  common.  Every  Parhy- 
27  pate  lower  than  the  lowest  chromatic  is  enharmonic ;  every 
other  down  to  this  point  of  limitation  is  chromatic  and 
diatonic.  As  regards  the  intervals,  while  that  between  the 
Hypate  and  Parhypate  is  either  equal  to  or  less  than  that 
between  the  Parhypate  and  the  Lichanus,  the  latter  may 
be  less  than,  equal  to,  or  greater  than  that  between  the 
Lichanus  and  the  Mese,  the  reason  being  that  the  two 
genera  have  their  Parhypate  in  common.  We  can  have 
a  melodious  tetrachord  with  the  lowest  chromatic  Parhypate 
and  the  highest  diatonic  Lichanus.  Enough  has  now  been 
said  to  show  how  great  is  the  locus  of  the  Parhypate  both 
in  respect  of  its  subdivisions  and  when  regarded  as  a 
whole. 

Of  continuity  and  consecution  it  would  be  no  easy  task 

to  give  accurate  definitions  at  the  outset,  but  a  few  rough 

indications  must  be  offered.     Continuity  in  melody  seems 

in  its  nature  to  correspond  to  that  continuity  in  speech  which 

184 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

is  observable  in  the  collocation  of  the  letters.  In  speaking, 
the  voice  by  a  natural  law  places  one  letter  first  in  each 
syllable,  another  second,  another  third,  another  fourth,  and 
so  on.  This  is  done  in  no  random  order  :  rather,  the  growth 
of  the  whole  from  the  parts  follows  a  natural  law.  Similarly 
in  singing,  the  voice  seems  to  arrange  its  intervals  and  notes 
on  a  principle  of  continuity,  observing  a  natural  law  of 
collocation,  and  not  placing  any  interval  at  random  after 
any  other,  whether  equal  or  unequal.  In  inquiring  into  28 
continuity  we  must  avoid  the  example  set  by  the  Harmonists 
in  their  condensed  diagrams,  where  they  mark  as  consecutive 
notes  those  that  are  separated  from  one  another  by  the 
smallest  interval.  For  so  far  is  the  voice  from  being  able 
to  produce  twenty-eight  consecutive  dieses,  that  it  can  by 
no  effort  produce  three  dieses  in  succession.  If  ascending 
after  two  dieses,  it  can  produce  nothing  less  than  the  com- 
plement of  the  Fourth,  and  that  is  either  eight  times  the 
smallest  diesis,  or  falls  short  of  it  only  by  a  minute  and 
unmelodic  interval.  If  descending,  it  cannot  after  the  two 
dieses  introduce  any  interval  less  than  a  tone.  It  is  not, 
then,  in  the  mere  equality  or  inequality  of  successive 
intervals  that  we  must  seek  the  clue  to  the  principle  of 
continuity.  We  must  direct  our  eyes  to  the  natural  laws  of 
melody  and  endeavour  to  discover  what  intervals  the  voice 
is  by  nature  capable  of  placing  in  succession  in  a  melodic 
series.  For  if  after  the  Parhypate  and  the  Lichanus  the 
voice  can  produce  no  note  nearer  than  the  Mese,  then  the 
Mese  is  the  next  note  to  the  Lichanus,  whether  the  interval 
between  them  be  twice  or  several  times  that  between  the 
Lichanus  and  the  Parhypate.  The  proper  method  of  in- 
vestigating continuity  is  now  clear;  but  how  it  arises,  and 
what  intervals  do  and  do  not  form  a  succession,  are  questions  29 
which  will  be  treated  in  the  Elements. 

We  shall  here  assume  that,  having  posited  a  Pycnum  or 

185 


ARISTOXENUS 

a  scale  that  is  not  a  Pycnum,  the  smallest  interval  that  can 
succeed  in  the  ascending  scale  is  the  complement  of  the 
interval  of  the  Fourth,  and  that  the  smallest  similarly  in  the 
descending  scale  is  a  tone.  We  shall  assume  that  if  a  series 
of  notes  be  arranged  in  proper  melodic  continuity  in  any 
genus,  any  note  in  that  series  will  either  form  with  the  fourth 
from  it  in  order  the  concord  of  the  Fourth,  or  with  the  fifth 
from  it  in  order  the  concord  of  the  Fifth,  while  possibly 
forming  both.  A  note  that  answers  to  none  of  these  tests 
cannot  belong  to  the  same  melodic  series  as  those  with 
which  it  makes  no  concord.  Further,  we  shall  assume  that 
whereas  there  are  four  intervals  contained  in  the  interval  of 
the  Fifth,  two  of  which  are  usually  equal,  viz.  those  con- 
stituting the  Pycnum,  and  two  unequal — one  the  complement 
of  the  first  concord,  the  other  the  excess  of  the  interval  of 
the  Fifth  over  that  of  the  Fourth,  the  unequal  intervals 
which  succeed  the  equal  intervals  do  so  in  different  order 
according  as  we  ascend  or  descend  the  scale.  We  shall 
assume  too  that  notes  which  form  respectively  the  same 
concord  with  consecutive  notes  are  themselves  consecutive  ; 
that  in  each  genus  a  simple  melodic  interval  is  one  which 
the  voice  cannot  divide  in  a  melodic  progression  ;  that  not 
all  the  magnitudes  into  which  a  concord  can  be  divided 
are  simple ;  that  a  sequence  is  a  progression  by  consecutive 
notes,  each  of  which,  between  the  first  and  last,  is  pre- 
ceded and  succeeded  by  a  simple  interval ;  and  that  a 
direct  sequence  is  one  that  maintains  the  same  direction 
throughout. 


1 86 


BOOK  II 

It  will  be  well  perhaps  to  review  in  anticipation  the  course  30.  10 
of  our  study;  thus  a  foreknowledge  of  the  road  that  we  must 
travel  will  enable  us  to  recognize  each  stage  as  we  reach  it, 
and  so  lighten  the  toil  of  the  journey ;  nor  shall  we  be 
harbouring  unknown  to  ourselves  a  false  conception  of  our 
subject.  Such  was  the  condition,  as  Aristotle  used  often  to 
relate,  of  most  of  the  audience  that  attended  Plato's  lectures 
on  the  Good.  They  came,  he  used  to  say,  every  one  of 
them,  in  the  conviction  that  they  would  get  from  the 
lectures  some  one  or  other  of  the  things  that  the  world  calls 
good  ;  riches  or  health,  or  strength,  in  fine,  some  extra- 
ordinary gift  of  fortune.  But  when  they  found  that  Plato's 
reasonings  were  of  sciences  and  numbers,  and  geometry, 
and  astronomy,  and  of  good  and  unity  as  predicates  of  the 
finite,  methinks  their  disenchantment  was  complete.  The  31 
result  was  that  some  of  them  sneered  at  the  thing,  while 
others  vihfied  it.  Now  to  Avhat  was  all  this  trouble  due  ? 
To  the  fact  that  they  had  not  waited  to  inform  themselves 
of  the  nature  of  the  subject,  but  after  the  manner  of  the  sect 
of  word-catchers  had  flocked  round  open-mouthed,  attracted 
by  the  mere  title  '  good '  in  itself. 

But  if  a  general  exposition  of  the  subject  had  been  given 
in  advance,  the  intending  pupil  would  either  have  abandoned 
his  intention  or  if  he  was  pleased  with  the  exposition,  would 
have  remained  in  the  said  conviction  to  the  end.  It  was 
for  these  very  reasons,  as  he  told  us,  that  Aristotle  himself 
used  to  give  his  intending  pupils  a  preparatory  statement  of 

187 


ARISTOXENUS 

the  subject  and  method  of  his  course  of  study.  And  we 
agree  with  him  in  thinking,  as  we  said  at  the  beginning,  that 
such  prior  information  is  desirable.  For  mistakes  are  often 
made  in  both  directions.  Some  consider  Harmonic  a 
subHme  science,  and  expect  a  course  of  it  to  make  them 
musicians ;  nay  some  even  conceive  it  will  exalt  their  moral 
nature.  This  mistake  is  due  to  their  having  run  away  with 
such  phrases  in  our  preamble  as  '  we  aim  at  the  construction 
of  every  style  of  melody,'  and  with  our  general  statement 
'  one  class  of  musical  art  is  hurtful  to  the  moral  character, 
another  improves  it ' ;  while  they  missed  completely  our 
qualification  of  this  statement,  '  in  so  far  as  musical  art  can 
improve  the  moral  character.'  Then  on  the  other  hand 
there  are  persons  who  regard  Harmonic  as  quite  a  thing  of 
no  importance,  and  actually  prefer  to  remain  totally  un- 
acquainted even  with  its  nature  and  aim.  Neither  of  these 
views  is  correct.  On  the  one  hand  the  science  is  no  proper 
object  of  contempt  to  the  man  of  intelligence — this  we  shall 
32  see  as  the  discussion  progresses ;  nor  on  the  other  hand 
has  it  the  quality  of  all-sufficiency,  as  some  imagine.  To 
be  a  musician,  as  we  are  always  insisting,  implies  much 
more  than  a  knowledge  of  Harmonic,  which  is  only  one 
part  of  the  musician's  equipment,  on  the  same  level  as  the 
sciences  of  Rhythm,  of  Metre,  of  Instruments. 

We  shall  now  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  Harmonic 
and  its  parts.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  general  the 
subject  of  our  study  is  the  question.  In  melody  of  every 
kind  what  are  the  natural  laws  according  to  which  the  voice 
in  ascending  or  descending  places  the  intervals  ?  For  we 
hold  that  the  voice  follows  a  natural  law  in  its  motion,  and 
does  not  place  the  intervals  at  random.  And  of  our  answers 
we  endeavour  to  supply  proofs  that  will  be  in  agreement  with 
the  phenomena — in  this  unlike  our  predecessors.  For  some 
of  these  introduced  extraneous  reasoning,  and  rejecting  the 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

senses  as  inaccurate  fabricated  rational  principles,  asserting 
that  height  and  depth  of  pitch  consist  in  certain  numerical 
ratios  and  relative  rates  of  vibration — a  theory  utterly 
extraneous  to  the  subject  and  quite  at  variance  with  the 
phenomena;  while  others,  dispensing  with  reason  and 
demonstration,  confined  themselves  to  isolated  dogmatic 
statements,  not  being  successful  either  in  their  enumera- 
tion of  the  mere  phenomena.  It  is  our  endeavour  that 
the  principles  which  we  assume  shall  without  exception 
be  evident  to  those  who  understand  music,  and  that  we  33 
shall  advance  to  our  conclusions  by  strict  demonstration. 

Our  subject-matter  then  being  all  melody,  whether  vocal 
or  instrumental,  our  method  rests  in  the  last  resort  on  an 
appeal  to  the  two  faculties  of  hearing  and  intellect.  By  the 
former  we  judge  the  magnitudes  of  the  intervals,  by  the 
latter  we  contemplate  the  functions  of  the  notes.  We  must 
therefore  accustom  ourselves  to  an  accurate  discrimination 
of  particulars.  It  is  usual  in  geometrical  constructions  to 
use  such  a  phrase  as  '  Let  this  be  a  straight  line ' ;  but  one 
must  not  be  content  with  such  language  of  assumption  in 
the  case  of  intervals.  The  geometrician  makes  no  use  of 
his  faculty  of  sense-perception.  He  does  not  in  any  degree 
train  his  sight  to  discriminate  the  straight  line,  the  circle, 
or  any  other  figure,  such  training  belonging  rather  to  the 
practice  of  the  carpenter,  the  turner,  or  some  other  such 
handicraftsman.  But  for  the  student  of  musical  science 
accuracy  of  sense-perception  is  a  fundamental  requirement. 
For  if  his  sense-perception  is  deficient,  it  is  impossible  for 
him  to  deal  successfully  with  those  questions  that  lie  outside 
the  sphere  of  sense-perception  altogether.  This  will  become 
clear  in  the  course  of  our  investigation.  And  we  must  bear 
in  mind  that  musical  cognition  impHes  the  simultaneous 
cognition  of  a  permanent  and  of  a  changeable  element,  and 
that  this  applies  without  limitation  or  quahfication  to  every 

189 


ARISTOXENUS 

branch  of  music.  To  begin  with,  our  perception  of  the 
differences  of  the  genera  is  dependent  on  the  permanence 
of  the  containing,  and  the  variation  of  the  intermediate, 

34  notes.  Again,  while  the  magnitude  remains  constant,  we 
distinguish  the  interval  between  Hypate  and  Mese  from  that 
between  Paramese  and  Nete ;  here,  then,  the  magnitude 
is  permanent,  while  the  functions  of  the  notes  change ; 
similarly,  when  there  are  several  figures  of  the  same  magni- 
tude, as  of  the  Fourth,  or  Fifth,  or  any  other;  similarly, 
when  the  same  interval  leads  or  does  not  lead  to  modulation, 
according  to  its  position.  Again,  in  matters  of  rhythm  we 
find  many  similar  examples.  Without  any  change  in  the 
characteristic  proportion  constituting  any  one  genus  of 
rhythm,  the  lengths  of  the  feet  vary  in  obedience  to  the 
general  rate  of  movement ;  and  while  the  magnitudes  are 
constant,  the  quality  of  the  feet  undergoes  a  change;  and 
the  same  magnitude  serves  as  a  foot,  and  as  a  combination 
of  feet.  Plainly,  too,  unless  there  was  a  permanent  quantum 
to  deal  with  there  could  be  no  distinctions  as  to  the  methods 
of  dividing  it  and  arranging  its  parts.  And  in  general, 
while  rhythmical  composition  employs  a  rich  variety  of 
movements,  the  movements  of  the  feet  by  which  we  note 
the  rhythms  are  always  simple  and  the  same.  Such,  then, 
being  the  nature  of  music,  we  must  in  matters  of  harmony 
also  accustom  both  ear  and  intellect  to  a  correct  judgement 
of  the  permanent  and  changeable  element  ahke. 

These  remarks  have  exhibited  the  general  character  of 
the  science  called  Harmonic ;  and  of  this  science  there  are, 

35  as  a  fact,  seven  parts.  Of  these  one  and  the  first  is  to 
define  the  genera,  and  to  show  what  are  the  permanent  and 
what  are  the  changeable  elements  presupposed  by  this 
distinction.  None  of  our  predecessors  have  drawn  this  dis- 
tinction at  all;  nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at.  For  they 
confined  their  attention  to  the  Enharmonic  genus,  to  the 

190 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

neglect  of  the  other  t\yo.  Students  of  instruments^  it  is 
true,  could  not  fail  to  distinguish  each  genus  by  ear^  but 
none  of  them  reflected  even  on  the  question,  At  what  point 
does  the  Enharmonic  begin  to  pass  into  the  Chromatic  ? 
For  their  ability  to  discriminate  each  genus  extended  not  to 
all  the  shades^  inasmuch  as  they  were  not  acquainted  with 
all  styles  of  musical  composition  or  trained  to  exercise  a 
nice  discrimination  in  such  distinctions  ;  nor  did  they  even 
observe  that  there  were  certain  loci  of  the  notes  that  alter 
their  position  with  the  change  of  genus.  These  reasons 
sufficiently  explain  why  the  genera  have  not  as  yet  been 
definitely  distinguished ;  but  it  is  evident  that  we  must 
supply  this  deficiency  if  we  are  to  follow  the  differences 
that  present  themselves  in  works  of  musical  composition. 

Such  is  the  first  branch  of  Harmonic,  In  the  second  we 
shall  deal  with  intervals,  omitting,  to  the  best  of  our  ability, 
none  of  the  distinctions  to  be  found  in  them.  The  majority 
of  these,  one  might  say,  have  as  yet  escaped  observation. 
But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  wherever  we  come  upon  a 
distinction  which  has  been  overlooked,  and  not  scientifically 
considered,  we  shall  there  fail  to  recognize  the  distinctions  36 
in  works  of  melodic  composition. 

Again,  since  intervals  are  not  in  themselves  sufficient  to 
distinguish  notes — for  every  magnitude,  without  qualifica- 
tion, that  an  interval  can  possess  is  common  to  several 
musical  functions — the  third  part  of  our  science  will  deal 
with  notes,  their  number,  and  the  means  of  recognizing 
them;  and  will  consider  the  question  whether  they  are 
certain  points  of  pitch,  as  is  vulgarly  supposed,  or  whether 
they  are  musical  functions,  and  also  what  is  the  meaning  of 
a  musical  'function.'  Not  one  of  these  questions  is  clearly 
conceived  by  students  of  the  subject. 

The  fourth  part  will  consider  scales,  firstly  as  to  their 
number  and  nature,  secondly  as  to  the  manner  of  their 

191 


ARISTOXENUS 

construction  from  intervals  and  notes.  Our  predecessors 
have  not  regarded  this  part  of  the  subject  in  either  of  these 
respects.  On  the  one  hand,  no  attention  has  been  devoted 
to  the  questions  whether  intervals  are  collocated  in  any 
order  to  produce  scales,  or  whether  some  collocations  may 
not  transgress  a  natural  law.  On  the  other  hand,  the  dis- 
tinctions in  scales  have  not  been  completely  enumerated  by 
any  of  them.  As  to  the  first  point,  our  forerunners  simply 
ignored  the  distinction  between  '  melodious '  and  '  un- 
melodious ' ;  as  to  the  second,  they  either  made  no  attempt 
at  all  at  enumeration  of  scale-distinctions,  confining  their 
attention  to  the  seven  octave  scales  which  they  called 
Harmonies ;  or  if  they  made  the  attempt,  they  fell  very 
short  of  completeness,  like  the  school  of  Pythagoras  of 
37  Zacynthus,  and  Agenor  of  Mitylene.  The  order  that  dis- 
tinguishes the  melodious  from  the  unmelodious  resembles 
that  which  we  find  in  the  collocation  of  letters  in  language. 
For  it  is  not  every  collocation  but  only  certain  collocations 
of  any  given  letters  that  will  produce  a  syllable. 

The  fifth  part  of  our  science  deals  with  the  keys  in  which 
the  scales  are  placed  for  the  purposes  of  melody.  No  explana- 
tion has  yet  been  offered  of  the  manner  in  which  those  keys 
are  to  be  found,  or  of  the  principle  by  which  one  must  be 
guided  in  enunciating  their  number.  The  account  of  the 
keys  given  by  the  Harmonists  closely  resembles  the  obser- 
vance of  the  days  according  to  which,  for  example,  the  tenth 
day  of  the  month  at  Corinth  is  the  fifth  at  Athens,  and  the 
eighth  somewhere  else.  Just  in  the  same  way,  some  of 
the  Harmonists  hold  that  the  Hypodorian  is  the  lowest 
of  the  keys ;  that  half  a  tone  above  lies  the  Mixolydian  ; 
half  a  tone  higher  again  the  Dorian ;  a  tone  above  the 
Dorian  the  Phrygian ;  likewise  a  tone  above  the  Phrygian  the 
Lydian.  The  number  is  sometimes  increased  by  the  addi- 
tion of  the  Hypophrygian  clarinet  at  the  bottom  of  the  list. 
192 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

Others,  again,  having  regard  to  the  boring  of  finger-holes 
on  the  flutes,  assume  intervals  of  three  quarter-tones  between 
the  three  lowest  keys,  the  Hypophrygian,  the  Hypodorian, 
and  the  Dorian ;  a  tone  between  the  Dorian  and  Phrygian ; 
three  quarter-tones  again  between  the  Phrygian  and  Lydian, 
and  the  same  distance  between  the  Lydian  and  Mixolydian. 
But  they  have  not  informed  us  on  what  principle  they  have  38 
persuaded  themselves  to  this  location  of  the  keys.  And 
that  the  close  packing  of  small  intervals  is  unmelodious  and 
of  no  practical  value  whatsoever  will  be  clear  in  the  course 
of  our  discussion. 

Again,  since  some  melodies  are  simple^  and  others  contain 
a  modulation,  we  must  treat  of  modulation,  considering 
first  the  nature  of  modulation  in  the  abstract,  and  how  it 
arises,  or  in  other  words,  to  what  modification  in  the  melodic 
order  it  owes  its  existence ;  secondly,  how  many  modulations 
there  are  in  all,  and  at  what  intervals  they  occur.  On  these 
questions  we  find  no  statements  by  our  predecessors  with 
or  without  proof. 

The  last  section  of  our  science  is  concerned  with  the 
actual  construction  of  melody.  For  since  in  the  same 
notes,  indifferent  in  themselves,  we  have  the  choice  of 
numerous  melodic  forms  of  every  character,  it  is  evident 
that  here  we  have  the  practical  question  of  the  employment 
of  the  notes ;  and  this  is  what  we  mean  by  the  construction 
of  melody.  The  science  of  harmony  having  traversed  the 
said  sections  will  find  its  consummation  here. 

It  is  plain  that  the  apprehension  of  a  melody  consists  in 
noting  with  both  ear  and  intellect  every  distinction  as  it 
arises  in  the  successive  sounds — successive,  for  melody, 
like  all  branches  of  music,  consists  in  a  successive  pro- 
duction. For  the  apprehension  of  music  depends  on  these 
two  faculties,  sense-perception  and  memory ;  for  we  must  39 
perceive  the  sound  that  is  present,  and  remember  that  which 


ARISTOXENUS 

is  past.  In  no  other  way  can  we  follow  the  phenomena  of 
music. 

Now  some  find  the  goal  of  the  science  called  Harmonic 
in  the  notation  of  melodies,  declaring  this  to  be  the  ultimate 
limit  of  the  apprehension  of  any  given  melody.  Others 
again  find  it  in  the  knowledge  of  clarinets^  and  in  the  ability 
to  tell  the  manner  of  production  of,  and  the  agencies 
employed  in,  any  piece  rendered  on  the  clarinet. 

Such  views  are  conclusive  evidence  of  an  utter  miscon- 
ception. So  far  is  notation  from  being  the  perfection  of 
Harmonic  science  that  it  is  not  even  a  part  of  it,  any  more 
than  the  marking  of  any  particular  metre  is  a  part  of 
metrical  science.  As  in  the  latter  case  one  might  very  well 
mark  the  scheme  of  the  iambic  metre  without  understanding 
its  essence,  so  it  is  with  melody  also ;  if  a  man  notes  down 
the  Phrygian  scale  it  does  not  follow  that  he  must  know  the 
essence  of  the  Phrygian  scale.  Plainly  then  notation  is  not 
the  ultimate  limit  of  our  science. 

That  the  premises  of  our  argument  are  true,  and  that  the 
faculty  of  musical  notation  argues  nothing  beyond  a  dis- 
cernment of  the  size  of  intervals,  will  be  clear  on  considera- 
tion. In  the  use  of  signs  for  the  intervals  no  peculiar 
mark  is  employed  to  denote  all  their  individual  distinctions, 
40  such  as  the  several  methods  of  dividing  the  Fourth,  which 
depend  on  the  differences  of  genera,  or  the  several  figures 
of  the  same  interval  which  result  from  a  variation  in  the 
disposition  of  the  simple  intervals.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  musical  functions  proper  to  the  natures  of  the  different 
tetrachords ;  the  same  notation  is  employed  for  the  tetra- 
chords  Hyperbolaeon,  Neton,  Meson,  and  Hypaton.  Thus 
the  signs  fail  to  distinguish  the  functional  differences,  and 
consequently  indicate  the  magnitudes  of  the  intervals,  and 
nothing  more.  But  that  the  mere  sense-discrimination  of 
magnitudes  is  no  part  of  the  general  comprehension  of 
194 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

music  was  stated  in  the  introduction,  and  the  following 
considerations  will  make  it  patent.  Mere  knowledge  of 
magnitudes  does  not  enlighten  one  as  to  the  functions  of  the 
tetrachords,  or  of  the  notes,  or  the  differences  of  the  genera 
or,  briefly,  the  difference  of  simple  and  compound  intervals, 
or  the  distinction  between  modulating  and  non-modulating 
scales,  or  the  modes  of  melodic  construction,  or  indeed 
anything  else  of  the  kind. 

Now  if  the  Harmonists,  as  they  are  called,  have  in  their 
ignorance  seriously  entertained  this  view,  while  there  is 
nothing  preposterous  in  their  motives,  their  ignorance  must 
be  profound  and  invincible.  But  if,  being  aware  that 
notation  is  not  the  final  goal  of  Harmonic,  they  have  pro- 
pounded this  view  merely  through  the  desire  to  please 
amateurs,  and  to  represent  as  the  perfection  of  the  science 
a  certain  visible  activity,  their  motives  deserve  condemnation  41 
as  very  preposterous  indeed.  In  the  first  place  they  would 
constitute  the  amateur  judge  of  the  sciences — and  it  is 
preposterous  that  the  same  person  should  be  learner  and 
judge  of  the  same  thing  ;  in  the  second  place,  they  reverse 
the  proper  order  in  their  fancy  of  representing  a  visible 
activity  as  the  consummation  of  intellectual  apprehension ; 
for,  as  a  fact,  the  ultimate  factor  in  every  visible  activity  is 
the  intellectual  process.  For  this  latter  is  the  presiding  and 
determining  principle ;  and  as  for  the  hands,  voice,  mouth, 
or  breath — it  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  they  are  very  much 
more  than  inanimate  instruments.  And  if  this  intellectual 
activity  is  something  hidden  deep  down  in  the  soul,  and  is 
not  palpable  or  apparent  to  the  ordinary  man,  as  the 
operations  of  the  hand  and  the  like  are  apparent,  we  must 
not  on  that  account  alter  our  views.  We  shall  be  sure  to 
miss  the  truth  unless  we  place  the  supreme  and  ultimate,  not 
in  the  thing  determined,  but  in  the  activity  that  determines. 

No   less   preposterous   is    the   above-mentioned    theory 
ο  2  ^95 


ARISTOXENUS 

concerning  clarinets.  Nay,  rather  there  is  no  error  so 
fatal  and  so  preposterous  as  to  base  the  natural  laws  of 
harmony  on  any  instrument.  The  essence  and  order  of 
harmony  depend  not  upon  any  of  the  properties  of  instru- 
ments. It  is  not  because  the  clarinet  has  finger-holes  and 
42  bores,  and  the  like,  nor  is  it  because  it  submits  to  certain 
operations  of  the  hands  and  of  the  other  parts  naturally 
adapted  to  raise  and  lower  the  pitch,  that  the  Fourth,  and 
the  Fifth,  and  the  Octave  are  concords,  or  that  each  of  the 
other  intervals  possesses  its  proper  magnitude.  For  even 
with  all  these  conditions  present,  players  on  the  clarinet 
fail  for  the  most  part  to  attain  the  exact  order  of  melody ; 
and  whatever  small  success  attends  them  is  due  to  the 
employment  of  agencies  external  to  the  instrument,  as  in 
the  well-known  expedients  of  drawing  the  two  clarinets 
apart,  and  bringing  them  alongside,  and  of  raising  and 
lowering  the  pitch  by  changing  the  pressure  of  the  breath. 
Plainly,  then,  one  is  as  much  justified  in  attributing  their 
failures  as  their  success  to  the  essential  nature  of  the 
clarinet.  But  this  would  not  have  been  so  if  there  was 
anything  gained  by  basing  harmony  on  the  nature  of  an 
instrument.  In  that  case,  as  an  immediate  consequence  of 
tracing  melody  up  to  its  original  in  the  nature  of  the 
clarinet,  we  should  have  found  it  there  fixed,  unerring,  and 
correct.  But  as  a  fact  neither  clarinets  nor  any  other 
instrument  will  supply  a  foundation  for  the  principles  of 
harmony.  There  is  a  certain  marvellous  order  which 
belongs  to  the  nature  of  harmony  in  general ;  in  this  order 
every  instrument,  to  the  best  of  its  ability,  participates 
under  the  direction  of  that  faculty  of  sense-perception  on 
which  they,  as  well  as  everything  else  in  music,  finally 
depend.  To  suppose,  because  one  sees  day  by  day  the 
finger-holes  the  same  and  the  strings  at  the  same  tension, 
that  one  will  find  in  these  harmony  with  its  permanence 
196 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

and  eternally  immutable  order — this  is  sheer  folly.  For  43 
as  there  is  no  harmony  in  the  strings  save  that  which  the 
cunning  of  the  hand  confers  upon  them,  so  is  there  none  in 
the  finger-holes  save  what  has  been  introduced  by  the  same 
agency.  That  no  instrument  is  self-tuned,  and  that  the 
harmonizing  of  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  sense-perception 
is  obvious,  and  requires  no  proof.  It  is  strange  that  the 
supporters  of  this  absurd  theory  can  cling  to  it  in  face  of  the 
fact  that  clarinets  are  perpetually  in  a  state  of  change ;  and 
of  course  what  is  played  on  the  instrument  varies  with  the 
variation  in  the  agencies  employed  in  its  production.  It  is 
surely  clear  then  that  on  no  consideration  can  melody  be 
based  on  clarinets  ;  for,  firstly,  an  instrument  will  not  supply 
a  foundation  for  the  order  of  harmony,  and  secondly,  even 
if  it  were  supposed  that  harmony  should  be  based  on  some 
instrument,  the  choice  should  not  have  fallen  on  the  clarinet, 
an  instrument  especially  liable  to  aberrations,  resulting  from 
the  manufacture  and  manipulation  of  it,  and  from  its  own 
peculiar  nature. 

This  will  suffice  as  an  introductory  account  of  Harmonic 
science;  but  as  we  prepare  ourselves  to  enter  upon  the 
study  of  the  Elemetits  we  must  at  the  outset  attend  to  the 
following  considerations.  Our  exposition  cannot  be  a  suc- 
cessful one  unless  three  conditions  be  fulfilled.  Firstly, 
the  phenomena  themselves  must  be  correctly  observed ; 
secondly,  what  is  prior  and  what  is  derivative  in  them  must  44 
be  properly  discriminated;  thirdly,  our  conclusions  and 
inferences  must  follow  legitimately  from  the  premises.  And 
as  in  every  science  that  consists  of  several  propositions  the 
proper  course  is  to  find  certain  principles  from  which  to 
deduce  the  dependent  truths,  we  must  be  guided  in  our 
selection  of  principles  by  two  considerations.  Firstly,  every 
proposition  that  is  to  serve  as  a  principle  must  be  true  and 
evident ;  secondly,  it  must  be  such  as  to  be  accepted  by  the 

197 


ARISTOXENUS 

sense-perception  as  one  of  the  primary  truths  of  Harmonic 
science.  For  what  requires  demonstration  cannot  stand  as 
a  fundamental  principle  ;  and  in  general  we  must  be  watch- 
ful in  determining  our  highest  principles,  lest  on  the  one 
hand  we  let  ourselves  be  dragged  outside  the  proper  track 
of  our  science  by  beginning  with  sound  in  general  regarded 
as  air-vibration,  or  on  the  other  hand  turn  short  of  the  flag 
and  abandon  much  of  what  truly  belongs  to  Harmonic, 

There  are  three  genera  of  melodies  ;  Diatonic,  Chromatic, 
and  Enharmonic.  The  differences  between  them  will  be 
stated  hereafter  •  this  we  may  lay  down,  that  every  melody 
must  be  Diatonic,  or  Chromatic,  or  Enharmonic,  or  blended 
of  these  kinds,  or  composed  of  what  they  have  in  common. 

The  second  classification  of  intervals  is  into  concords 
and  discords.  The  two  most  familiar  distinctions  in 
intervals  are  difference  of  magnitude,  and  difference  between 
concords  and  discords  •  and  the  latter  of  these  is  embraced 
by  the  former,  since  every  concord  differs  from  every  discord 
in  magnitude.  Now  there  being  many  distinctions  among 
45  concords,  let  us  first  treat  of  the  most  familiar  of  them, 
namely,  difference  of  magnitude.  We  assume  then  eight 
magnitudes  of  concords  ;  the  smallest,  the  Fourth — deter- 
mined as  smallest  by  the  abstract  nature  of  melody ;  for 
while  we  can  produce  several  smaller  intervals,  they  are  all 
discords  ;  the  next  smallest,  the  Fifth,  all  intervals  between 
the  Fourth  and  Fifth  being  discords;  the  third  smallest, 
the  sum  of  the  first  two,  that  is  the  Octave,  all  intervals 
between  the  Fifth  and  the  Octave  being  discords.  So  far  we 
have  been  stating  what  we  have  learned  from  our  predeces- 
sors ;  henceforth  we  must  arrive  at  our  conclusions  unaided. 

In  the  first  place  then  we  shall  assert  that  if  any  concord 

be  added  to  the  octave  the  sum  is  a  concord.    This  property 

is  peculiar  to  the  octave.     For  if  to  an  octave  be  added  any 

concord,  whether  less  than,  equal  to,  or  greater  than  itself, 

198 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

the  sum  is  a  concord.  But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the 
two  smallest  concords.  For  the  doubling  of  a  Fourth  or 
Fifth  does  not  produce  a  concord;  nor  does  the  addition 
to  either  one  of  them  of  the  concord  compounded  of  the 
octave  and  that  one;  but  the  sum  of  such  concords  will 
always  be  a  discord. 

A  tone  is  the  excess  of  the  Fifth  over  the  Fourth ;  the  46 
Fourth  consists  of  two  tones  and  a  half.  The  following 
fractions  of  a  tone  occur  in  melody :  the  half,  called  a  semi- 
tone ;  the  third,  called  the  smallest  Chromatic  diesis ;  the 
quarter,  called  the  smallest  Enharmonic  diesis.  No  smaller 
interval  than  the  last  exists  in  melody.  Here  we  have  two 
cautions  for  our  hearers ;  firstly,  many  have  misunderstood 
us  to  say  that  melody  admits  the  division  of  the  tone  into 
three  or  four  equal  parts.  This  misunderstanding  is  due  to 
their  not  observing  that  to  employ  the  third  part  of  a  tone 
is  a  very  different  thing  from  dividing  a  tone  into  three 
parts  and  singing  all  three.  Secondly,  from  an  abstract 
point  of  view,  no  doubt,  we  regard  no  interval  as  the  small- 
est possible. 

The  differences  of  the  genera  are  found  in  such  a  tetra- 
chord  as  that  from  Mese  to  Hypate,  where  the  extremes  are 
fixed,  while  one  or  both  of  the  means  vary.  As  the  variable 
note  must  move  in  a  certain  locus,  we  must  ascertain  the 
limits  of  the  locus  of  each  of  these  intermediate  notes.  The 
highest  Lichanus  is  that  which  is  a  tone  removed  from  the 
Mese.  It  constitutes  the  genus  Diatonic.  The  lowest  is 
that  which  is  two  tones  below  the  Mese  ;  this  is  Enharmonic. 
The  locus  of  the  Lichanus  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  tone. 
The  interval  between  the  Parhypate  and  Hypate  cannot, 
plainly,  be  less  than  an  enharmonic  diesis,  for  this  latter  is  47 
the  minimum  m.elodic  distance.  It  is  to  be  observed  also 
that  it  can  only  be  extended  to  twice  that  distance ;  for 
when  the  Lichanus  in  its  descent,  and  the  Parhypate  in  its 

199 


ARISTOXENUS 

ascent  reach  the  same  pitch,  the  locus  of  each  note  finds  its 
hmit.  Thus  it  is  seen  that  the  locus  of  the  Parhypate  is  not 
greater  than  the  smallest  diesis. 

This  proposition  has  afforded  some  students  great  per- 
plexity. '  If,'  they  ask  in  surprise,  '  the  interval  between 
the  Mese  and  the  Lichanus  (assuming  it  to  be  any  one  of 
the  above-mentioned  intervals)  be  increased  or  diminished, 
how  can  the  note  bounding  the  new  interval  be  a  Lichanus  ? 
There  is  admittedly  but  one  interval  between  the  Mese  and 
Paramese,  and  again  between  the  Mese  and  Hypate,  and  in 
fact  between  any  pair  of  the  permanent  notes.  Why  then 
should  we  admit  a  plurality  of  intervals  between  the  Mese 
and  the  Lichanus  ?  Surely  it  would  be  better  to  change  the 
names  of  the  notes ;  and  restricting  the  term  Lichanus  to 
any  one  of  them,  the  two-tone  or  any  other,  to  employ  other 
designations  for  the  rest.  For  notes  that  bound  unequal 
magnitudes  must  be  different  notes.  And  one  might  add 
that  the  converse  is  equally  valid,  namely,  that  the  bound- 
aries of  equal  magnitudes  must  have  the  same  designations.' 
To  these  objections  the  following  reply  was  given.  In  the 
first  place,  to  postulate  that  a  difference  in  notes  necessarily 
implies  a  difference  in  the  magnitudes  bounded  by  them  is 
a  startling  innovation.  We  see  that  the  Nete  and  Mese 
differ  in  function  from  the  Paranete  and  Lichanus,  and  the 
Paranete  and  Lichanus  again  from  the  Trite  and  Parhypate, 
and  these  latter  again  from  the  Paramese  and  Hypate ;  and 
48  for  this  reason  each  pair  has  names  of  its  own,  though  the 
contained  interval  is  in  every  case  a  Fifth.  Thus  it  is  seen 
that  a  difference  in  the  contained  intervals  is  not  necessarily 
implied  by  a  difference  of  notes. 

That  the  converse  implication  is  equally  inadmissible  will 
appear  from  the  following  remarks.  In  the  first  place,  if 
we  seek  particular  designations  to  suit  every  increase  and 
decrease  in  the  intervals  of  the  Pycnum,  we  shall  evidently 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

need  an  infinite  vocabulary,  since  the  locus  of  the  Lichanus 
is  infinitely  divisible.  For  as  a  matter  of  fact,  to  which  of  49• 
the  disputants  as  to  the  shades  of  the  genera  should  we  give 
our  adherence  ?  Every  one  is  not  guided  by  the  same  divi- 
sions in  harmonizing  the  chromatic  or  enharmonic  scale. 
Why  then  should  the  term  Lichanus  be  applied  to  the  two- 
tone  Lichanus  rather  than  to  one  slightly  higher  ?  Which- 
ever division  be  employed,  the  ear  equally  recognizes  an 
enharmonic  genus;  yet  it  is  plain  that  the  magnitudes  of 
the  intervals  are  different  in  the  two  divisions.  In  the  48• 
second  place,  if  we  have  eyes  exclusively  for  equality  and 
inequality  we  shall  miss  the  distinction  between  the  like 
and  unlike.  Thus  we  shall  have  to  restrict  the  term  Pycnum 
to  one  particular  magnitude;  as  likewise  evidently  the 
terms  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic ;  for  they  too  are  deter- 
mined not  to  a  point  but  to  a  locus.  But  it  is  evident  that 
such  a  restriction  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  mode  in 
which  sense  forms  its  representations.  It  is  by  considering 
the  common  qualities  found  in  some  one  class,  not  the 
magnitude  of  some  one  interval,  that  sense  employs  such 
terms  as  Pycnum,  Chromatic,  Enharmonic.  That  is  to  say, 
it  constitutes  a  class  Pycnum  to  embrace  every  case  in 
which  the  two  intervals  occupy  2^  smaller  space  than  the 
one  ;  for  in  all  Pycna,  though  they  are  unequal  in  size,  there 
is  evident  to  the  ear  the  sound  of  a  certain  compression. 
Likewise  it  constitutes  a  class  Chromatic  to  embrace  all 
cases  in  which  the  Chromatic  character  is  apparent.  For 
the  ear  detects  a  motion  peculiar  to  each  of  the  genera, 
though  each  genus  employs  not  one  but  many  divisions  of  49 
the  tetrachord.  Thus  it  is  clear  that,  while  the  magnitudes 
change,  the  genus  may  remain  unaltered,  for  up  to  a  certain 
point  changes  in  the  magnitudes  do  not  involve  a  change  of 
genus.  And  if  the  genus  remains  the  same,  it  is  reasonable 
to  suppose  that  the  functions  of  the  notes  may  be  permanent 


ARISTOXENUS 

also.  For  the  species  of  the  tetrachord  is  the  same,  and  for 
this  reason  we  must  hold  that  the  boundaries  of  the  intervals 
are  the  same  notes.  In  general,  as  long  as  the  names  of 
the  extreme  notes  remain  the  same,  the  higher  being  called 
Mese,  and  the  lower  Hypate,  so  long  will  the  names  of  the 
intermediate  notes  also  remain  the  same,  the  higher  being 
called  Lichanus,  and  the  lower  Parhypate.  For  the  notes 
between  the  Mese  and  Hypate  are  always  stamped  by  the 
ear  as  Lichanus  and  Parhypate.  To  demand  that  all  notes 
bounding  equal  intervals  should  have  the  same  names,  or 
that  all  notes  bounding  unequal  intervals  should  have 
different  names,  is  to  join  battle  with  the  evidence  of  the 
senses.  For  in  melody  we  make  the  interval  between  the 
Hypate  and  Parhypate  sometimes  equal  and  sometimes 
50  unequal  to  that  between  the  Parhypate  and  Lichanus. 
Now  in  the  case  of  two  equal  consecutive  intervals  it  is 
impossible  that  the  notes  bounding  each  of  them  should  be 
designated  by  the  same  terms,  unless  the  middle  note  is  to 
have  two  names.  The  absurdity  is  also  evident  when  the 
above-mentioned  intervals  are  unequal.  For  it  is  impossible 
that  one  of  any  pair  of  such  names  should  change  while  the 
other  remains  the  same;  since  the  names  have  meaning 
only  in  their  relation  to  one  another.  So  much  for  this 
objection. 

The  term  Pycnum  we  shall  employ  in  all  cases  when,  in 
a  tetrachord  whose  extremes  form  a  Fourth,  the  sum  of 
two  of  the  intervals  occupies  a  lesser  space  than  the  third. 
There  are  certain  divisions  of  the  tetrachord  which  stand 
out  from  the  rest  as  familiar,  because  the  magnitudes  of  the 
intervals  in  them  are  familiar.  Of  these  divisions,  one  is 
Enharmonic,  in  which  the  Pycnum  is  a  semitone,  and  its 
complement  two  tones ;  three  are  Chromatic,  namely,  the 
Soft^  the  He^niolic,  and  the  Tonic  Chromatic.  The  division 
of  the  Soft  Chromatic  is  that  in  which  the  Pycnum  consists 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

of  two  of  the  smallest  Chromatic  dieses^  while  its  com- 
plement is  expressed  in  terms  of  two  quanta,  namely,  a 
semitone  taken  thrice,  and  a  Chromatic  diesis  taken  once, 
so  that  the  sum  of  it  amounts  to  three  semitones  and  the 
third  of  a  tone.  This  is  the  smallest  of  the  Chromatic 
Pycna  and  its  Lichanus  is  the  lowest  in  this  genus.  The 
division  of  the  Hemiolic  Chromatic  is  that  in  which  the  51 
Pycnum  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  Enharmonic  Pycnum, 
and  each  Diesis  one  and  a  half  times  an  Enharmonic 
diesis.  It  is  manifest  that  the  Hemiolic  Pycnum  is  greater 
than  the  Soft,  since  the  former  is  less  than  a  tone  by  an 
Enharmonic  diesis,  the  latter  by  a  Chromatic  diesis.  The 
division  of  the  Tonic  Chromatic  is  that  in  which  the  Pyc- 
num consists  of  two  semitones,  and  its  complement  of  a  tone 
and  a  half.  Up  to  this  point  both  the  inner  notes  vary ; 
but  now  the  Parhypate,  having  traversed  the  whole  of  its 
locus,  remains  at  rest,  while  the  Lichanus  moves  an  enhar- 
monic diesis.  Thus  the  interval  between  the  Lichanus 
and  Hypate  becomes  equal  to  that  between  the  Lichanus 
and  Mese,  so  that  the  Pycnum  does  not  occur  in  this 
division  as  in  the  preceding.  The  disappearance  of  the 
Pycnum  in  the  division  of  the  tetrachord  is  coincident  with 
the  first  appearance  of  the  Diatonic  genus.  There  are  two 
divisions  of  the  Diatonic  genus,  the  Soft  and  the  Sharp 
Diatonic.  The  division  of  the  Soft  Diatonic  is  that  in 
which  the  interval  between  the  Hypate  and  Parhypate  is 
a  semitone,  that  between  the  Parhypate  and  Lichanus  three 
Enharmonic  dieses,  that  between  the  Lichanus  and  Mese 
five  dieses.  The  division  of  the  Sharp  Diatonic  is  that  in 
which  the  interval  between  the  Hypate  and  Parhypate  is 
a  semitone,  while  each  of  the  remaining  intervals  is  a  tone. 
Thus,  while  we  have  six  Lichani,  as  there  are  six  divisions  52 
of  the  tetrachord,  one  enharmonic,  three  chromatic,  and 
two  diatonic,  we  have  but  four  Parhypatae,  that  is,  two 

203 


ARISTOXENUS 

less  than  the  divisions  of  the  tetrachord.  For  the  semitone 
Parhypate  is  employed  for  both  diatonic  divisions,  and  for 
the  Tonic  Chromatic.  Thus,  of  the  four  Parhypatae,  one 
is  peculiar  to  the  Enharmonic  genus^  while  the  Diatonic 
and  Chromatic  between  them  employ  three.  Of  the  in- 
tervals in  the  tetrachord,  that  between  the  Hypate  and 
Parhypate  may  be  equal  to  that  between  the  Parhypate 
and  Lichanus,  or  less  than  it,  but  never  greater.  That  it 
may  be  equal  is  evident  from  the  Enharmonic  and  Chro- 
matic division  of  the  tetrachord ;  that  it  may  be  less  is 
evident  from  the  Diatonic  scales,  and  also  may  be  ascer- 
tained in  the  Chromatic  by  taking  a  Parhypate  of  the  Soft, 
and  a  Lichanus  of  the  Tonic  Chromatic  ;  for  such  divisions 
of  the  Pycnum  sound  melodious.  But  to  adopt  the  opposite 
order  produces  an  unmelodious  result;  for  instance,  to  take 
the  semitone  Parhypate,  and  the  Lichanus  of  the  Hemiolic 
Chromatic,  or  the  Parhypate  of  the  Hemiolic,  and  the 
Lichanus  of  the  Soft  Chromatic.  Such  divisions  produce 
an  inharmonious  effect.  On  the  other  hand,  the  interval 
between  the  Parhypate  and  Lichanus  may  be  equal  to, 
greater  than,  or  less  than  that  between  the  Lichanus  and 
Mese.  It  is  equal  in  the  Sharp  Diatonic,  less  in  all  the 
other  shades^  and  greater  when  we  employ  as  Lichanus 
the  highest  of  the  Diatonic  Lichani,  and  as  Parhypate  any 
one  lower  than  that  of  the  semitone. 

We  shall  next  proceed  to  explain,  beginning  with  a  general 
53  indication,  the  method  by  which  we  should  expect  to  deter- 
mine the  nature  of  continuity.  To  put  it  generally,  in 
investigating  continuity  the  laws  of  melody  must  be  our 
guide,  nor  must  we  imitate  those  who  shape  their  account 
of  continuity  with  a  view  to  the  massing  of  small  inter- 
vals. Such  theorists  plainly  disregard  the  natural  sequence 
of  melody,  as  appears  from  the  number  of  dieses  that 
they  place  in  succession ;  for  the  voice's  power  of  con- 
204 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

necting  dieses  stops  short  of  three.  Thus  it  appears  that 
continuity  must  not  be  sought  in  the  smallest  intervals,  nor 
in  equal  nor  in  unequal  intervals;  we  must  rather  follow 
the  guidance  of  natural  laws.  Now,  though  it  were  no 
easy  matter  at  present  to  offer  an  accurate  exposition  of 
continuity  before  we  have  explained  the  collocation  of  inter- 
vals, yet  the  veriest  novice  can  see  from  the  following 
reasoning  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  continuity.  It  will 
be  admitted  that  there  is  no  interval  which  can  be  divided 
ad  infinitum  in  melody,  and  that  the  natural  laws  of  melody 
assign  a  maximum  number  of  fractions  to  every  interval. 
Assuming  that  this  will  be,  or  rather  must  be,  admitted,  we 
necessarily  infer  that  the  notes  containing  fractions  of  the 
said  number  are  consecutive.  To  this  class  belong  the 
notes  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  have  been  in  use  from 
the  earliest  times,  as  for  instance  the  Nete,  the  Paranete, 
and  those  that  follow  them. 

Our  next  duty  will  be  to  determine  the  first  and  most 
indispensable  condition  of  the  melodious  collocation  of 
intervals.  Whatever  be  the  genus,  from  whatever  note  one  54 
starts,  if  the  melody  moves  in  continuous  progression  either 
upwards  or  downwards,  the  fourth  note  in  order  from  any 
note  must  form  with  it  the  concord  of  the  Fourth,  or  the 
fifth  note  in  order  from  it  the  concord  of  the  Fifth.  Any 
note  that  answers  neither  of  these  tests  must  be  regarded 
as  out  of  tune  in  relation  to  those  notes  with  which  it 
fails  to  form  the  above-mentioned  concords.  It  must  be 
observed^  however,  that  the  above  rule  is  not  all-sufficient 
for  the  melodious  construction  of  scales  from  intervals. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  the  notes  of  a  scale  might  form 
the  above-mentioned  concords  with  one  another,  and  yet 
that  the  scale  might  be  unmelodiously  constructed.  But 
if  this  condition  be  not  fulfilled,  all  else  is  useless.  Let 
us  assume  this  then  as  a  fundamental  principle,  the  vio- 

205 


ARISTOXENUS 

lation  of  which  is  destructive  of  harmony.  A  law,  in  some 
respects  similar,  holds  with  regard  to  the  relative  position 
of  tetrachords.  If  any  two  tetrachords  are  to  belong  to 
the  same  scale,  one  or  other  of  the  following  conditions 
must  be  fulfilled ;  either  they  must  be  in  concord  with 
each  other,  the  notes  of  one  forming  some  concord  or 
other  with  the  corresponding  notes  of  the  other,  or  they 
must  both  be  in  concord  with  a  third  tetrachord,  with 
which  they  are  alike  continuous  but  in  opposite  directions. 
This,  in  itself,  is  not  sufficient  to  constitute  tetrachords  of 
the  same  scale :  certain  other  conditions  must  be  satisfied, 
55  of  which  we  shall  speak  hereafter.  But  the  absence  of  the 
condition  renders  the  rest  useless. 

When  we  consider  the  magnitudes  of  intervals,  we  find 
that  while  the  concords  either  have  no  locus  of  variation, 
and  are  definitely  determined  to  one  magnitude,  or  have 
an  inappreciable  locus,  this  definiteness  is  to  be  found  in 
a  much  lesser  degree  in  discords.  For  this  reason,  the 
ear  is  much  more  assured  of  the  magnitudes  of  the  con- 
cords than  of  the  discords.  It  follows  that  the  most 
accurate  method  of  ascertaining  a  discord  is  by  the  principle 
of  concordance.  If  then  a  certain  note  be  given,  and  it 
be  required  to  find  a  certain  discord  below  it,  such  as  the 
ditone  (or  any  other  that  can  be  ascertained  by  the  method 
of  concordance),  one  should  take  the  Fourth  above  the 
given  note,  then  descend  a  Fifth,  then  ascend  a  Fourth 
again,  and  finally  descend  another  Fifth.  Thus,  the  interval 
of  two  tones  below  the  given  note  will  have  been  ascer- 
tained. If  it  be  required  to  ascertain  the  discord  in  the 
other  direction,  the  concords  must  be  taken  in  the  other 
direction.  Also,  if  a  discord  be  subtracted  from  a  concord 
by  the  method  of  concordance,  the  remaining  discord  is 
thereby  ascertained  on  the  same  principle.  For,  subtract 
the  ditone  from  the  Fourth  on  the  principle  of  concordance, 
206 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

and  it  is  evident  that  the  notes  bounding  the  excess  of  the 
latter  over  the  former  will  have  been  found  on  the  same 
principle.  For  the  bounding  notes  of  the  Fourth  are  con-  56 
cords  to  begin  with ;  and  from  the  higher  of  these  a  concord 
is  taken,  namely,  the  Fourth  above;  from  the  note  thus 
found  another,  namely,  the  Fifth  below;  from  this  again 
a  Fourth  above,  and  finally  from  this  a  Fifth  below ;  and 
the  last  concord  alights  on  the  higher  of  the  notes  bound- 
ing the  excess  of  the  Fourth  over  the  Ditone.  Thus  it 
appears  that  if  a  discord  be  subtracted  from  a  concord  by 
the  method  of  concordance  the  complement  also  will  have 
been  thereby  ascertained  on  the  same  principle. 

The  surest  method  of  verifying  our  original  assumption 
that  the  Fourth  consists  of  two  and  a  half  tones  is  the 
following.  Let  us  take  such  an  interval,  and  let  us  find 
the  discord  of  two  tones  above  its  lower  note,  and  the  same 
discord  below  its  higher  note.  Evidently  the  complements 
will  be  equal,  since  they  are  remainders  obtained  by  sub- 
tracting equals  from  equals.  Next  let  us  take  the  Fourth 
above  the  lower  note  of  the  higher  ditone,  and  the  Fourth 
below  the  higher  note  of  the  lower  ditone.  It  will  be  seen 
that  adjacent  to  each  of  the  extreme  notes  of  the  scale 
thus  obtained  there  will  be  two  complements  in  juxta- 
position, which  must  be  equal  for  the  reasons  already  given. 
This  construction  completed,  w^e  must  refer  the  extreme 
notes  thus  determined  to  the  judgement  of  the  ear.  If  they 
prove  discordant,  plainly  the  Fourth  will  not  be  composed  57 
of  two  and  a  half  tones ;  ^and  just  as  plainly  it  will  be  so 
composed,  if  they  form  a  Fifth.  For  the  lowest  of  the 
assumed  notes  is,  by  construction,  a  Fourth  of  the  higher 
boundary  of  the  lower  ditone ;  and  it  has  now  turned  out 
that  the  highest  of  the  assumed  notes  forms  with  the  lowest 
of  them  the  concord  of  the  Fifth.  Now  as  the  excess  of 
the  latter  interval  over  the  former  Is  a  tone,  and  as  it  is 

207 


ARISTOXENUS 

here  divided  into  two  equal  parts  ;  and  as  each  of  these 
equal  parts  which  is  thus  proved  to  be  a  semitone  is  at 
the  same  time  the  excess  of  the  Fourth  over  a  ditone, 
it  follows  that  the  Fourth  is  composed  of  five  semitones. 
It  will  be  readily  seen  that  the  extremes  of  our  scale 
cannot  form  any  concord  except  a  Fifth.  They  cannot 
form  a  Fourth  ;  for  there  is  here,  besides  the  original  Fourth, 
an  additional  complement  at  each  extremity.  They  cannot 
form  an  octave;  for  the  sum  of  the  complements  is  less 
than  two  tones,  since  the  excess  of  the  Fourth  over  the 
ditone  is  less  than  a  tone  (for  it  is  universally  admitted 
that  the  Fourth  is  greater  than  two  tones  and  less  than 
three) ;  consequently,  the  whole  of  what  is  here  added  to 
the  Fourth  is  less  than  a  Fifth;  plainly  then  their  sum 
cannot  be  an  octave.  But  if  the  concord  formed  by  the 
58  extreme  notes  of  our  construction  is  greater  than  a  Fourth, 
and  less  than  an  octave,  it  must  be  a  Fifth;  for  this  is 
the  only  concordant  magnitude  between  the  Fourth  and 
Octave. 


208 


BOOK  III 

Successive  Tetrachords  are  either  Conjunct  or  Disju7ict. 

We  shall  employ  the  term  conjunction  when  two  succes-  58. 
sive  tetrachords,  similar  in  figure,  have  a  common  note  ;  the 
term  disjunction,  when  two  successive  tetrachords  similar  in 
figure  are  separated  by  the  interval  of  a  tone.  That  successive 
tetrachords  must  be  related  in  either  of  these  ways,  is  evident 
from  our  axioms.  For  a  series,  in  which  each  note  forms 
a  Fourth  with  the  fourth  note  in  order  from  it,  will  constitute 
conjunct  tetrachords;  while  disjunct  tetrachords  result,  when  59 
each  note  forms  a  Fifth  with  the  fifth  from  it.  Now  as  all 
successions  of  notes  must  fulfil  one  or  other  of  these  con- 
ditions, so  all  successive  similar  tetrachords  must  be  either 
conjunct  or  disjunct. 

Difiiculties  have  been  raised  by  some  of  my  hearers  on 
the  question  of  succession.  It  has  been  asked.  Firstly, 
what  is  succession  in  general  ?  Secondly,  does  it  appear  in 
one  form  only,  or  in  several?  Thirdly,  are  conjunct  and 
disjunct  tetrachords  equally  successive  ?  To  these  questions 
the  following  answers  have  been  given.  In  general,  scales 
are  continuous,  whose  boundaries  either  are  successive  or 
coincide.  There  are  two  forms  of  succession  in  scales ;  in 
the  one,  the  upper  boundary  of  the  lower  scale  coincides 
with  the  lower  boundary  of  the  upper  scale ;  in  the  other, 
the  lowTr  boundary  of  the  higher  scale  is  in  the  line  of 
succession  with  the  higher  boundary  of  the  low^r  scale.  In 
the  first  of  these  forms,  the  scales  of  the  successive  tetra- 
chords have  a  certain  space  in  common,  and  are  necessarily 

MACRAN  ρ  209 


ARISTOXENUS 

similar  in  figure.  In  the  other  form,  they  are  separated 
from  one  another,  and  the  species  of  the  tetrachords  may 
be  similar,  only  on  condition,  however,  that  the  separating 
interval  is  one  tone.  Thus  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  two 
similar  tetrachords  are  successive,  if  they  are  either  separated 
by  a  tone,  or  if  their  boundaries  coincide.  Consequently 
similar  successive  tetrachords  are  either  conjunct  or  dis- 
junct. 

We  also  assert  that  two  successive  tetrachords  either 
60  must  be  separated  by  no  tetrachord  whatsoever,  or  must  not 
be  separated  by  a  tetrachord  dissimilar  to  themselves. 
Tetrachords  similar  in  species  cannot  be  separated  by  a 
dissimilar  tetrachord,  and  dissimilar  but  successive  tetra- 
chords cannot  be  separated  by  any  tetrachord  whatsoever. 
Hence  we  see  that  tetrachords  similar  in  species  can  be 
arranged  in  succession  in  the  two  forms  above  mentioned. 

The  interval  contained  by  successive  notes  is  simple. 

For  if  the  containing  notes  are  successive,  no  note  is 
wanting ;  if  none  is  wanting,  none  will  intrude ;  if  none 
intrudes,  none  will  divide  the  interval.  But  that  which 
excludes  division  excludes  composition.  For  every  com- 
posite is  composed  of  certain  parts  into  which  it  is  divisible. 

The  above  proposition  is  often  the  object  of  perplexity 
on  account  of  the  ambiguous  character  of  the  intervallic 
magnitudes.  '  How,'  it  is  asked  in  surprise, '  can  the  ditone 
possibly  be  simple,  seeing  that  it  can  be  divided  into  tones  ? 
Or,  how  again  is  it  possible  for  the  tone  to  be  simple  seeing 
that  it  can  be  divided  into  two  semitones  ? '  And  the  same 
point  is  raised  about  the  semitone. 

This  perplexity  arises  from  the  failure  to  observe  that 
some  intervallic  magnitudes  are  common  to  simple  and 
compound  intervals.  For  this  reason  the  simplicity  of  an 
interval  is  determined  not  by  its  magnitude,  but  the  relations 
of  the  notes  that  bound  it.     The  ditone  is  simple  when 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

bounded  by  the  Mese  and  Lichanus  ;  when  bounded  by  the 
Mese  and  Parhypate,   it  is  compound.     This  is  why  we  6i 
assert  that  simpKcity  does  not  depend  on  the  sizes  of  the 
intervals,  but  on  the  containing  notes. 

I7i  variations  of  genus,  it  is  only  the  parts  of  the  Fourth  that 
undergo  change. 

All  harmonious  scales  consisting  of  more  than  one  tetra- 
chord  were  divided  into  conjunct  and  disjunct.  But  conjunct 
scales  are  composed  of  the  simple  parts  of  the  Fourth  alone, 
so  that  here  at  least  it  will  be  the  parts  of  the  Fourth  alone 
that  will  undergo  change.  Again,  disjunct  scales  comprise 
besides  these  parts  of  the  Fourth  a  tone  peculiar  to  disjunc- 
tion. If  then  it  be  proved  that  this  particular  tone  does 
not  alter  with  variation  of  genus,  evidently  the  change  can 
affect  only  the  parts  of  the  Fourth.  Now  the  lower  of  the 
notes  containing  the  tone  is  the  higher  of  the  notes  con- 
taining the  lower  of  the  disjunct  tetrachords ;  as  such  we 
have  seen  that  it  is  immovable  in  the  changes  of  the  genera. 
Again,  the  higher  of  the  notes  bounding  the  tone  is  the 
lower  of  the  notes  bounding  the  higher  of  the  disjunct 
tetrachords ;  it  likewise,  as  we  have  seen,  remains  constant 
through  change  of  genus.  Since  therefore,  it  appears  that 
the  notes  containing  the  tone  do  not  vary  with  a  change  of 
genus,  the  necessary  conclusion  is  that  it  is  only  the  parts 
of  the  Fourth  that  participate  in  that  change. 

Every  Genus  comprises  at  most  as  many  simple  intervals  62 
as  are  contained  in  the  Fifth. 

The  scale  of  every  genus,  as  we  have  already  stated,  takes 
the  form  of  conjunction  or  disjunction.  Now  it  has  been 
shown  that  the  conjunct  scale  consists  merely  of  the  parts 
of  the  Fourth,  w^hile  the  disjunct  scale  adds  a  single  interval 
peculiar  to  itself,  namely  the  tone.  But  the  addition  of 
this  tone  to  the  parts  of  the  Fourth  completes  the  interval 
of  the  Fifth.     Since  therefore  it  appears  that  no  scale  of  any 

ρ   2  211 


ARISTOXENUS 

genus  taken  in  the  one  shading  is  composed  of  more  simple 
intervals  than  those  in  the  Fifth,  it  follows  that  every  genus 
comprises  at  most  as  many  simple  intervals  as  are  contained 
in  the  Fifth. 

In  this  proposition  the  addition  of  the  words  'at  the  most' 
sometimes  proves  a  stumbling-block.  '  Why  not,'  it  is  asked, 
'  show  without  quahfication  that  each  genus  is  composed  of 
as  many  simple  intervals  as  are  contained  in  the  Fifth?' 
The  answer  to  this  is  that  in  certain  circumstances  each  of 
the  genera  will  comprise  fewer  intervals  than  exist  in  the 
Fifth,  but  never  will  comprise  more.  This  is  the  reason 
that  we  prove  first  that  no  genus  can  be  constituted  of  more 
simple  intervals  than  there  are  in  the  Fifth ;  that  every 
genus  will  sometimes  be  composed  of  fewer,  is  shown  in 
the  sequel. 
63  Λ  Pymuni  cannot  be  followed  by  a  Pycniim  or  by  part  of 
a  Pycnum. 

For  the  result  of  such  a  succession  will  be  that  neither 
the  fourth  notes  in  order  from  one  another  will  form  Fourths, 
nor  the  fifth  notes  in  order  from  one  another  Fifths.  But 
we  have  already  seen  that  such  an  order  of  notes  is  un- 
melodious. 

The  lower  of  the  notes  contaitting  the  ditone  is  the  highest 
note  of  a  Pycnum^  and  the  higher  of  the  notes  containing  the 
ditone  is  the  lowest  note  of  a  Pycnum. 

For  as  the  Pycna  in  conjunct  tetrachords  form  Fourths 
with  one  another,  the  ditone  must  lie  between  them ; 
similarly  since  the  ditones  form  Fourths  with  one  another, 
the  Pycnum  must  lie  between  them.  It  follows  that  the 
Pycnum  and  the  ditone  must  succeed  one  another  altern- 
ately. Therefore  it  is  evident  that  of  the  notes  containing 
the  ditone,  the  lower  will  be  the  highest  note  of  the  Pycnum 
below,  and  the  higher  will  be  the  lowest  note  of  the 
Pycnum  above. 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

The  notes  C07itaining  the  tone  are  both  the  lowest  notes  of 
a  Pycniim. 

For  in  disjunction  the  tone  is  placed  between  tetrachords 
the  boundaries  of  which  are  the  lowest  notes  of  a  Pycnum  ; 
and  it  is  by  these  notes  that  the  tone  is  contained.  For  the 
lower  of  the  notes  containing  the  tone  is  the  higher  of  those 
containing  the  lower  tetrachord;  and  the  higher  of  those 
containing  the  tone  is  the  lower  of  those  containing  the 
higher  tetrachord.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that  the  notes 
containing  the  tone  will  be  the  lowest  notes  of  a  Pycnum. 

A  succession  of  two  Ditones  is  forbidden.  64 

Suppose  such  a  succession ;  then  the  higher  ditone  will 
be  followed  by  a  Pycnum  below,  and  the  lower  ditone  will 
be  followed  by  a  Pycnum  above,  for  we  saw  that  the  note 
that  forms  the  upper  boundary  of  the  ditone  is  the  lowest 
note  of  a  Pycnum.  The  result  will  be  a  succession  of  two 
Pycna ;  and  as  this  has  been  proved  unmelodious,  the  suc- 
cession of  two  ditones  must  be  equally  so. 

In  E?i harmonic  and  Chro7natic  scales  a  succession  of  two 
to7ies  is  not  allowed.  Suppose  such  a  succession,  first  in 
the  ascending  scale ;  now  if  the  note  that  forms  the  upper 
boundary  of  the  added  tone  is  musically  correct,  it  must 
form  either  a  Fourth  with  the  fourth  note  in  order  from  it, 
or  a  Fifth  with  the  fifth  in  order ;  if  neither  of  these  con- 
ditions is  satisfied,  it  must  be  unmelodious.  But  that 
neither  of  them  will  be  satisfied,  is  clear.  For  if  it  be 
Enharmonic,  the  Lichanus,  which  is  the  fourth  note  in 
order  from  the  added  note,  will  be  four  tones  removed 
from  it.  If  it  be  Chromatic,  whether  of  the  Soft  or  Hemi- 
olic  colour,  the  Lichanus  will  be  further  removed  than 
a  Fifth ;  and  if  it  be  of  the  Tonic  Chromatic,  the  Lichanus 
will  form  a  Fifth  with  the  added  note.  But  this  does  not 
satisfy  our  law  w^hich  demands  that  either  the  fourth  note 
should  form  a  Fourth,  or  the  fifth  a  Fifth.    Neither  condition 

213 


ARISTOXENUS 

is  here  fulfilled.     It  follows  that  the  note  constituting  the 
upper  boundary  of  the  added  tone  will  be  unmelodious. 
Again,  if  the  second  tone  be  added  below  it  will  render 

65  the  genus  Diatonic.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that  in  the 
Enharmonic  and  Chromatic  genera  a  succession  of  two 
tones  is  impossible. 

Iti  the  Diatonic  genus  three  consecutive  tones  are  perinitted; 
but  no  more.  For  let  the  contrary  be  supposed ;  then  the 
note  bounding  the  fourth  tone  will  not  form  a  Fourth  with 
the  fourth  note  from  it,  nor  a  Fifth  with  the  fifth. 

lii  the  same  genus  a  succession  of  two  semitones  is  not 
allowed.  For  first  suppose  the  second  semitone  to  be 
added  below  the  semitone  already  present.  The  result  is 
that  the  note  bounding  the  added  semitone  neither  makes 
a  Fourth  with  the  fourth  note  from  it,  nor  a  Fifth  with  the 
fifth.  The  introduction,  then,  of  the  semitone  here  will  be 
unmelodious.  But  if  it  be  added  above  the  semitone 
already  present,  the  genus  will  be  Chromatic.  Thus  it 
is  clear  that  in  a  Diatonic  scale  the  succession  of  two 
semitones  is  impossible. 

It  has  now  been  shown  which  of  the  simple  intervals  can 
be  repeated  in  immediate  succession,  and  how  often  they 
can  be  repeated ;  and  which  of  them  on  the  contrary  it  is 
absolutely  impossible  to  repeat  at  all.  We  shall  now  speak 
of  the  collocation  of  unequal  intervals. 

Λ  ditone  7nay  be  succeeded  either  above  or  below  by  a 
Pycnum.  For  it  has  been  proved  that  in  conjunct  tetra- 
chords  these  intervals  follow  alternately.  Therefore  each 
can  succeed  the  other  either  in  an  ascending  or  descending 
order. 

A  ditone  can  be  followed  by  a  tone  in  the  ascending  scale 
only.     For  suppose  such  a  succession  in   the  descending 

66  order.  The  result  will  be  that  the  highest  and  the  lowest 
note  of  a  Pycnum  will  fall  on  the  same  pitch.     For  we  saw 

214 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

that  the  note  that  forms  the  lower  boundary  of  the  ditone 
was  the  highest  note  of  a  Pycnum,  and  that  the  note  that 
forms  the  upper  boundary  of  the  tone  was  the  lowest  note 
of  a  Pycnum.  But  if  these  notes  fall  on  the  one  pitch, 
it  follows  that  there  is  a  succession  of  two  Pycna.  As  this 
latter  succession  is  unmelodious,  a  tone  immediately  below 
a  ditone  must  be  equally  so. 

A  tone  can  be  followed  by  a  Pycmcm  in  the  descendmg  order 
only.  For  suppose  such  a  succession  in  the  opposite  order ; 
the  same  impossibility  will  be  found  to  result  again.  The 
highest  and  lowest  note  of  a  Pycnum  will  fall  on  the  same 
pitch,  and  consequently  there  will  be  a  succession  of  two 
Pycna.  This  latter  being  unmelodious,  the  position  of  the 
tone  above  the  Pycnum  must  be  equally  so. 

In  the  Diato7iic  genus,  a  to7ie  catuiot  be  both  preceded  and 
succeeded  by  a  semitone.  For  the  consequence  would  be 
that  neither  the  fourth  notes  in  order  from  one  another 
would  form  a  Fourth,  nor  the  fifth  a  Fifth. 

A  pair  of  to?ies,  or  a  group  of  three  to?tes  7?iay  be  both 
preceded  and  succeeded  by  a  se7?iitone ;  for  either  the  fourth 
notes  from  one  another  will  form  a  Fourth,  or  the  fifth 
a  Fifth. 

From  the  ditone  tL•re  are  two  possible  progressions  upwards, 
one  only  dow7iwards.  For  it  has  been  proved  that  the 
ditone  can  be  followed  in  the  ascending  scale  by  either 
a  Pycnum  or  a  tone.  But  more  progressions  upwards  from 
the  said  interval  there  cannot  be.  For  the  only  other 
simple  interval  left  is  the  ditone,  and  two  consecutive 
ditones  are  forbidden.  In  the  descending  order  there  is  67 
but  one  progression  from  the  ditone.  For  it  has  been 
proved  that  a  ditone  cannot  lie  next  a  ditone,  and  that 
a  tone  cannot  succeed  a  ditone  in  the  descending  order. 
Consequently  the  progression  to  the  Pycnum  alone  remains. 
It  is  clear  then  that  from  the  ditone  there  are  two  possible 

215 


ARISTOXENUS 

progressions  upwards,  one  to  the  tone,  and  one  to  the 
Pycnum ;  and  one  possible  progression  downwards,  to  the 
Pycnum. 

From  the  Pycnum,  o?i  the  contrary,  there  are  two  possible 
progressions  downwards,  and  one  upwards.  For  it  has  been 
proved  that  in  the  descending  scale  a  Pycnum  can  be 
followed  by  a  ditone,  or  a  tone.  A  third  progression  there 
cannot  be.  For  the  only  remaining  simple  interval  is  the 
Pycnum,  and  a  succession  of  two  Pycna  is  forbidden.  It 
follows  that  there  are  only  two  possible  progressions  from 
a  Pycnum  downwards.  Upwards  there  is  but  one,  to  the 
ditone.  For  a  Pycnum  cannot  adjoin  a  Pycnum,  nor  can 
a  tone  succeed  the  Pycnum  in  the  ascending  scale ;  there- 
fore the  ditone  alone  remains.  It  is  evident  then  that 
from  the  Pycnum  there  are  two  possible  progressions  down- 
wards, one  to  the  tone,  and  one  to  the  ditone;  and  one 
possible  progression  upwards,  to  the  ditone. 

From  the  tone  there  is  but  07ie  pr ogres sio7i  in  either  directio?i  : 
downwards  to  the  ditone,  upwards  to  the  Pycnum.  It  has 
been  shown  that  in  the  descending  scale  the  tone  cannot 
be  followed  by  a  tone  or  by  a  Pycnum.  Therefore  the 
ditone  alone  remains.  And  it  has  been  shown  that  in 
the  ascending  scale  the  tone  cannot  be  followed  by  a  tone 
or  a  ditone.  Therefore  the  Pycnum  alone  remains.  It 
follows  that  from  the  tone  there  is  but  one  possible  pro- 
68  gression  in  either  direction,  downwards  to  the  ditone,  and 
upwards  to  the  Pycnum. 

The  same  law  can  be  applied  to  the  Chromatic  scales, 
except  of  course  that  one  must  substitute  for  the  ditone  the 
interval  between  the  Mese  and  Lichanus,  which  varies, 
according  to  the  particular  shade,  with  the  size  of  the 
Pycnum. 

The  same  law  will  also  hold  good  of  the  Diatonic  scales. 
From  the  tone  common  to  the  genera  there  is  one  possible 
216 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

progression  in  either  direction  ;  downwards  to  the  interval 
between  the  Mese  and  Lichanus,  whatever  it  may  happen 
to  be  in  any  particular  shade  of  the  Diatonic  scales ; 
upwards  to  the  interval  between  the  Paramese  and  Trite. 

Some  persons  have  been  much  perplexed  by  this  pro- 
position. They  are  surprised  that  we  do  not  arrive  at 
quite  a  contrary  conclusion  ;  for  they  think  that  the  pro- 
gressions in  either  direction  from  the  tone  are  innumerable, 
since  there  are  innumerable  possible  magnitudes  of  the 
interval  between  the  Mese  and  Lichanus^  and  of  the 
Pycnum  as  well.  To  this  objection  we  offered  the  following 
answer.  To  begin  with,  the  same  observation  might  be 
made  equally  well  in  the  other  cases  we  have  considered. 
Evidently  one  of  the  two  descending  progressions  from  the 
Pycnum  admits  of  innumerable  possible  magnitudes ;  like- 
wise one  of  the  two  ascending  progressions  from  the  ditone. 
For  such  an  interval  as  that  between  the  Mese  and  Lichanus 
admits  of  innumerable  magnitudes,  and  the  same  may  be 
said  of  such  an  interval  as  the  Pycnum.  Nevertheless  there 
are  but  two  progressions  from  the  Pycnum  downwards,  and 
two  from  the  ditone  upwards ;  and  similarly  one  from  the 
tone  in  either  direction.  For  the  progressions  must  be  69 
ascertained  in  accordance  with  one  individual  shade  in  one 
particular  genus.  In  making  any  musical  phenomenon  the 
object  of  scientific  knowledge,  its  definite  side  should  be 
insisted  on,  its  indefinite  features  left  in  the  background. 
Now  in  respect  of  the  sizes  of  intervals  and  the  pitch  of 
notes,  the  phenomena  of  melody  are  indefinite,  while  in 
respect  of  functions,  common  qualities,  and  orders  of 
arrangement,  they  are  definite  and  determined.  To  take 
the  first  example  that  occurs,  the  progressions  downwards 
from  the  Pycnum  are  in  function  and  character  determined 
as  two  in  number.  The  first  proceeds  by  the  tone  and 
brings  the  scale  into  the  disjunct  class ;    the  second  pro- 

217 


ARISTOXENUS 

ceeding  by  the  other  interval  (whatever  its  size  may  be) 
brings  the  scale  into  the  conjunct  class.  Hence  we  see  also 
that  there  is  but  one  possible  progression  in  either  direction 
from  the  tone,  and  that  both  these  progressions  alike 
produce  but  one  class  of  scale — the  disjunct.  But  it  is 
quite  plain  from  these  observations,  and  from  the  nature 
of  the  facts,  that  if  one  seek  to  discover  the  possible  pro- 
gressions by  considering  not  one  shade  of  one  genus  at 
a  time,  but  all  shades  and  all  genera  together,  one  will 
come  upon  an  infinity  of  them. 

In  the  Chromatic  and  Enharmonic  scales  every  note  partici- 
pates in  the  Pycnum.  For  every  note  in  the  said  genera  is 
the  boundary  either  of  a  part  of  the  Pycnum,  or  of  the  tone, 
or  of  an  interval  such  as  that  between  the  Mese  and  Licha- 
70  nus.  The  case  of  notes  that  bound  the  parts  of  the  Pycnum 
requires  no  proof;  it  is  immediately  evident  that  they  partici- 
pate in  the  Pycnum.  And  we  proved  already  that  the  notes 
containing  the  tone  are  both  the  lowest  notes  of  a  Pycnum ; 
we  showed  also  that  the  lower  of  the  notes  containing  the 
remaining  interval  was  the  highest  of  a  Pycnum,  and  the 
higher  of  them  the  lowest  of  a  Pycnum.  Now  as  these  are 
the  only  simple  intervals,  and  each  of  them  is  contained  by 
notes  both  of  which  participate  in  the  Pycnum,  it  follows 
that  every  note  in  the  Chromatic  and  Enharmonic  genus 
participates  in  the  Pycnum. 

One  will  readily  see  that  the  positions  of  the  notes  situated 
in  the  Pycnum  are  three  in  number^  since,  as  we  know,  a 
Pycnum  cannot  be  followed  by  another  Pycnum  or  part  of 
one.  For  it  is  evident  in  consequence  of  this  latter  law, 
that  the  number  of  the  said  notes  is  so  limited. 

//  is  required  to  prove  that  from  the  lowest  only  of  the  notes 

in  a  Pycnum  there  are  two  possible  progressions  in  either 

direction,  while  from  the  others  there  is  but  o?te.     It    has 

already  been  proved  that  from  the  Pycnum  there  are  two 

218 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

progressions  downwards,  one  to  the  tone,  and  one  to  the 
ditone.  But  to  prove  that  there  are  two  progressions 
downwards  from  the  Pycnum  is  the  same  as  proving  that 
there  are  two  progressions  downwards  from  the  lowest  of 
the  notes  situated  in  the  Pycnum ;  for  this  note  marks  the 
hmit  of  the  Pycnum.  Again,  it  was  proved  that  from  the 
ditone  there  are  two  progressions  upwards.  But  to  say 
that  there  are  two  progressions  upwards  from  the  ditone  is 
the  same  as  saying  that  there  are  two  progressions  upwards 
from  the  higher  of  the  notes  bounding  the  ditone.  For 
this  note  marks  the  upper  boundary  of  the  ditone.  But  it  71 
is  clear  that  the  same  note  which  forms  the  upper  boundary 
of  the  ditone  also  forms  the  lower  boundary  of  the  Pycnum  ; 
being  the  lov*'est  note  of  a  Pycnum  (for  this  too  was  proved). 
Hence  it  is  evident  that  from  this  note  there  are  two 
possible  progressions  in  either  direction. 

//  is  required  to  prove  that  fro)n  the  highest  ?tote  of  a 
Pycnum  there  is  but  one  progression  in  either  directio?i.  It 
was  proved  that  from  a  Pycnum  there  is  but  one  pro- 
gression upwards.  But  to  say  that  there  is  one  progression 
upwards  from  the  Pycnum  is  (for  the  reason  given  in  the 
former  proposition)  the  same  as  saying  that  there  is  but 
one  from  the  note  limiting  it. 

Again,  it  was  proved  that  from  the  ditone  there  is  but 
one  progression  downwards  :  but  to  say  that  there  is  but  one 
progression  downwards  from  the  ditone  is  (for  the  reason 
given)  the  same  as  saying  that  there  is  but  one  from  the 
note  bounding  it.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  note  which 
bounds  the  ditone  below  is  at  the  same  time  the  upper 
boundary  of  the  Pycnum;  being  the  highest  note  of  a 
Pycnum.  It  is  plain,  then,  that  from  the  given  note  there 
is  but  one  possible  progression  in  either  direction. 

//  is  required  to  prove,  that  fro??i  the  middle  note  of  a 
Pycnum  there  is  but  one  progression  in  either  direction.    Now 

219 


ARISTOXENUS 

since  the  given  note  must  be  adjoined  by  some  one  or 
other  of  the  three  simple  intervals,  and  there  lies  already 
a  diesis  on  each  side  of  it,  plainly  it  cannot  be  adjoined  on 
either  side  by  either  a  ditone  or  a  tone.  For  suppose 
a  ditone  to  adjoin  it ;  then  either  the  lowest  or  the  highest 
note  of  a  Pycnum  will  fall  on  the  same  pitch  as  the  given 
note,  which  is  the  middle  note  of  a  Pycnum ;  consequently 
there  will  be  a  succession  of  three  dieses,  no  matter  on 
72  which  side  the  ditone  be  located.  Again,  suppose  a  tone 
to  adjoin  the  given  note ;  we  shall  have  the  same  result. 
The  lowest  note  of  a  Pycnum  will  fall  on  the  same  pitch  as 
the  middle  note  of  a  Pycnum,  so  that  we  shall  again  have 
three  dieses  in  succession.  But  this  succession  is  unmelo- 
dious;  therefore  it  follows  that  there  is  but  one  possible 
progression  from  the  given  note  in  either  direction. 

It  has  now  been  shown  that  from  the  lowest  of  the  notes 
of  a  Pycnum  there  are  two  possible  progressions  in  either 
direction  ;  while  from  the  others  in  either  direction  there  is 
but  one. 

It  is  required  to  prove  that  two  notes  that  occupy  dissimilar 
positions  in  the  Pycnum  cannot  fall  on  the  same  pitch  without 
violating  the  nature  of  melody.  Suppose,  firstly,  that  the 
highest  and  lowest  note  of  a  Pycnum  fall  on  the  same  pitch. 
The  result  will  be  two  consecutive  Pycna,  and  as  this  is 
unmelodious^  it  must  be  equally  unmelodious  that  notes  dis- 
similar in  the  Pycnum  in  the  manner  of  the  assumed  notes 
should  fall  upon  the  same  pitch. 

Again,  it  is  evident  that  the  notes  also  that  are  dissimilar 
in  the  other  possible  manner  cannot  have  a  common  pitch. 
For  if  the  highest  or  lowest  note  of  a  Pycnum  coincide  in 
pitch  with  a  middle  note,  there  necessarily  results  a  succes- 
sion of  three  dieses. 

It  is  required  to  prove  that  the  Diatonic  genus  is  composed 
of  two  or  of  three  or  of  four  simple  quanta.     It  has  been 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  HARMONY 

already  shown  that  each  genus  comprises  at  most  as  many 
simple  intervals  as  there  are  in  the  Fifth.  These  are  four  73 
in  number.  If  then  three  of  those  four  become  equal, 
leaving  but  one  odd, — as  happens  in  the  Sharp  Diatonic — 
there  will  be  only  two  different  quanta  in  the  Diatonic 
scale.  Again,  if  two  become  equal  and  two  remain  unequal, 
which  will  result  from  the  lowering  of  the  Parhypate,  there 
will  be  three  quanta  constituting  the  Diatonic  scale,  namely, 
an  interval  less  than  a  semitone,  a  tone,  and  an  interval 
greater  than  a  tone.  Again,  if  all  the  parts  of  the  Fifth 
become  unequal,  there  will  be  four  quanta  comprised  in  the 
genus  in  question. 

It  is  clear  then  that  the  Diatonic  genus  is  composed  of 
two  or  of  three  or  of  four  simple  quanta. 

//  is  required  to  prove  thai  the  Chromatic  and  E7iharmonic 
genera  are  coinposed  of  three  or  four  simple  qua7ita.  The 
simple  intervals  of  the  Fifth  being  four  in  number,  if  the 
parts  of  the  Pycnum  are  equal,  the  genera  in  question  will  . 
comprise  those  quanta,  namely,  the  half  of  the  Pycnum, 
whatever  its  size  may  be,  the  tone,  and  an  interval  such  as 
that  between  the  Mese  and  Lichanus.  If  on  the  other 
hand  the  parts  of  the  Pycnum  are  unequal,  the  said 
genera  will  be  composed  of  four  quanta,  the  least,  an 
interval  such  as  that  between  the  Hypate  and  Parhypate, 
the  next  smallest  one  such  as  that  between  the  Parhy- 
pate and  Lichanus,  the  third  smallest  a  tone,  and  the 
largest  an  interval  such  as  that  between  the  Mese  and 
Lichanus. 

On  this  point  the  difficulty  has  been  raised.  How  is  it 
that  all  the  genera  cannot  be  composed  of  two  simple  74 
quanta,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Diatonic?  We  can  now 
see  the  complete  and  obvious  explanation  of  the  difference. 
Three  equal  simple  intervals  cannot  occur  in  succession 
in  the  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic  genera ;  in  the  Diatonic 


ARISTOXENUS 

they  can.     That  is  the  reason  that  the  last-named  genus  is 
sometimes  composed  of  only  two  simple  quanta. 

Passing  from  this  subject  we  shall  proceed  to  consider 
the  meaning  and  nature  of  difference  of  species.  We  shall 
use  the  terms  '  species  '  and  '  figure '  indifferently,  applying 
both  to  the  same  phenomenon.  Such  a  difference  arises 
when  the  order  of  the  simple  parts  of  a  certain  whole  is 
altered,  while  both  the  number  and  magnitude  of  those 
parts  remain  the  same.  Proceeding  from  this  definition  we 
have  to  show  that  there  are  three  species  of  the  Fourth. 
Firstly,  there  is  that  in  which  the  Pycnum  lies  at  the 
bottom ;  secondly,  that  in  which  a  diesis  lies  on  each  side 
of  the  ditone ;  thirdly,  that  in  which  the  Pycnum  is  above 
the  ditone.  It  will  be  readily  seen  that  there  are  no  other 
possible  relative  positions  of  the  parts  of  the  Fourth. 


NOTES 

[The  references  in  these  notes  are  to  the  pages  and  hnes  of 
the  present  edition.] 

Page  95,  line  3.  The  term  μ^λος  signifies  a  song,  and  as  such 
includes  the  words,  the  melody  proper,  i.  e.  the  alternation  of 
higher  and  lower  pitch,  and  the  rhythm.  But  as  the  second 
of  these  factors  is  evidently  that  which  is  characteristic  of  song, 
it  came  to  appropriate  to  itself  the  term  μΐλος.  Then  reXeiov 
μίλοί  was  used  in  the  wider  sense.  Cp.  Anonymus,  §  29,  TeXetoi; 
de  μ^Χος  eVri  το  σνγκξίμζνον  ΐκ  re  λβ^ίω?  κα\  μίΚους  και  ρυθμοί). 
See  also  Aristides  Quintilianus  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  6,  line  18).  μ^Χος 
then  in  the  narrower  sense  signifies  in  Aristoxenus  that  moment 
of  music  which  consists  in  the  employment  of  higher  and  lower 
notes,  always  with  the  implication  that  the  complete  series  of 
compossible  higher  and  lower  notes  is  determined  by  a  natural 
law.  This  quality  of  μίΧος  by  which  it  is  obedient  to  a  law,  or 
rather  the  embodiment  of  a  law,  is  called  το  ηρμοσμ^νον  :  and 
consequently  all  true  melody  is  an  ηρμοσμίνον  μίΧος.  Thus  for 
the  Greeks  Harmony  is  the  law  of  Melody.  17  μουσική  on  the 
other  hand  is  a  term  of  very  wide  signification.  Aristides  Quin- 
tilianus (ed.  Meibom,  pp.  7,  8)  gives  the  following  analysis  of  it — 
μουσική 


I 

μ^ρη  τεχνικά 

I 


j     μζτρικόν 
ρνθμικόν 


I 

μζρη  χρηστικά 

I 


J 

ΤΓοίησίί 
ρνθμοποιΐα 


μίρη  €ξα'γΎ€Χτικά 


ωδικον 
opyaviKov 


νποκριτικον 


αρμονικοί/  μβΧοποιια 

Now  in  which  sense  is  the  term  μ^Χους  used  in  the  passage 

223 


ARISTOXENUS 

before  us?  Marquard  supposes  in  the  general  sense  of  the 
object-matter  of  μουσική.  (In  support  of  this  view  he  might 
have  quoted  Anonymus,  §  29,  Μουσική  βστιν  επιστήμη  θίωρητικη 
και  πρακτική  μβλους  reXetou  re  και  οργανικού.)  But  this  is  not  in 
accordance  with  Aristoxenus'  use,  and  probably  Westphal  is 
right  in  interpreting  it  in  its  close  and  strict  meaning.  If  so, 
what  are  the  other  sciences  of  it  besides  αρμονική  ?  Westphal 
replies,  μ^λοποιία,  οργανική,  ωδική  (i.e.  the  sciences  of  composition, 
of  instrumental  music,  of  singing). 

1.  4.  μίαν  τίνα  αυτών  νπολαββίν  Set  κ.τ.\.  —  The  Construction  of 
this  sentence  is  Sel  υπολαβ€Ϊν  την  άρμονικην  καλουμ^νην  npaypaTciav 
eivai  μίαν  τίνα  αυτών  (i.  e.  των  Ideayv),  ttj  t€  ra^et  πρωτην  ουσαν,  κ.τ.λ. 

Marquard  and  Westphal  construe  Set  υττόλαβύν  μίαν  τίνα 
αυτών,  την  άρμονικην  κάΚουμβνην,  eivai  πραγματβίαντί}  re  τάξζΐ  πρωτην 
ονσαν,  κ.τ.λ.,  and  translate  'we  must  regard  one  of  them,  namely 
Harmonic,  as  primary.'     But  the  Greek  for  '  to  be  a  good  man  ' 

is  not  etVai  άνηρ  αγαθός  ων. 

την  άρμονικην.  The  English  word  '  Harmony '  in  no  wise 
corresponds  to  the  Greek  αρμονία.  This  latter  properly  signi- 
fies an  adjustment  or  fitting  together  of  parts.  Hence,  by 
being  transferred  from  the  method  to  the  concrete  object  which 
embodies  it,  it  is  used  to  connote  (a)  a  scale  or  system  as 
a  whole  whose  parts  have  been  adjusted  in  their  proper  rela- 
tions, (d)  the  enharmonic  scale,  because  in  that  genus  three  notes 
of  the  Tetrachord  are  fitted  most  closely  to  one  another,  that  is, 
placed  at  the  smallest  possible  intervals.  The  term  αρμονική 
signifies  then  the  science  of  scales,  that  is  the  science  by  which 
we  constitute  a  system  of  related  and  compossible  notes. 
Harmony  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word  was  in  its  infancy 
among  the  ancient  Greeks. 

1.  6.  τυ•γχάν(ΐ  yap  ούσα  των  πρώτων  θεωρητική'  τηΰτα  δ  €στ\ν 
οσα.     The  MSS  reading  is  here  plainly  ungrammatical.     If  we 

retain  πρώτη  τών  θίωρητικών,  we  must  change  ταύτα  to  ταύτης,  '  tO 
this  science  belong,'  &c.  [cp.  1.  12,  oIkcti  ταύτης  eVrtV],  But 
I  prefer  to  read  as  above  with  Westphal,  in  which  case  of  course 
ταΰτα   refers   to   τα  πρώτα.     Cp.  Anonymus   (a   mere   echo   of 

Aristoxenus),  §  31,  πρωτεύον  de  μίρος  της  μουσικής  ή  αρμονική  eVrt* 
τα.   yap   iv   μουσική   πρώτα    αυτή    θίωρ€Ϊ.      Also    §    19»   τ^^    ^^    τ^? 
224 


NOTES 

μουσικής  μιρωρ  κνριώτατόν  eVri  και  πρωτορ  το  άρμονίκόν'  των  yap 
πρώτων  μουσικής  πίφυκζ  θ^ωρητίκη.  Cp.  also  1.  Ι4  of  this  page,  δΓ 
hv  πάντα  θεωρείται  τα  κατά  μουσικην. 

For  the  relation  between  Harmonic  and  Music,  cp.  Plutarch 
de  Musica,  11 42  F,  φαν€ρον  δ'  αν  yevoiro,  ei  ris  ίκάστην  ξξίτάζοι,το 
των  €πιστημών,  τίνος  eVrt  θεωρητική'  δηλον  yap  οτι  η  pkv  αρμονική 
yevcuv  τ€  των  του  ηρμοσμ^νου  κα\  διαστημάτων  και  συστημάτων  και 
φθόyyωv  κα\  τόνων  κα\  μ€ταβο\ων  συστηματικών  (στι  yvωστικη'  πορ- 
ρωτίρω  δ'  ουκίτι  ταύττ]  προίΚθΰν  οιόν  re.  ωστ  ούδε  ζητύν  πάρα 
ταίτης  το  diayvcovai  δύνασθαι,  πότ€ρον  οίκ^ίως  (ΤΚηφίν  6  ποιητής  .  .  . 
τον  Ύποδώριον  τόνον  €π\  την  αρχήν  η  τον  Μιξολυδιόν  Τ6  κα\  Αώρίον 
eVi  την  €κβασιν  η  τον  Ύποφρίτ/ΐόν  re  κα\  Φpvyιov  eVi  την  μ^σην. 

1.  ι6.  The  point  of  the  passage  lies  in  the  possible  ambiguity 
of  the  term  αρμονικός,  which  properly  signifying  'concerned 
with  scales '  [cp.  αρμονική  =  science  of  scales]  might  also  mean 
'  concerned  with  the  enharmonic  scale.'     Cp.  note  on  1.  4. 

P.  96,  1.  2.      και  rot  τα  διαγράμματα  y   αυτών.      See  end  of  note 

on  p.  ΙΟΙ,  1.  I. 

1.  4.  Trepi  δε  των  αΧΚων  μ^γ^θών  re  κα\  σχημάτων.  Ι  have 
changed  the  MSS  reading  yevatv  to  μ^γ^θων  for  three  reasons : 
(i)  quite  sufficient  stress  has  been  laid  on  the  early  theorists' 
omission  of  the  Chromatic  and  Diatonic  genera,  and  further  refer- 
ence to  it  is  not  required ;  (2)  a  reference  to  their  omission  of 
'  other  magnitudes  '  is  required  in  view  of  what  follows  (cp.  1.  7)  ; 
(3)  the  close  connexion  of  yevdv  and  σχημάτων  by  re  καί  would 
make  it  necessary  to  supply  the  qualification  iv  αυτω  re  τω  yevu 
τούτω  κα\  τοις  λοιποις  with  both,  which  is  obviously  impossible. 

σχήμα,  which  we  shall  translate  by  'Figure,'  signifies  the 
arrangement  or  order  of  the  parts  of  a  whole,  and  two  things 
differ  in  σχήμα  if  they  have  the  same  parts,  but  these  parts  are 
arranged  in  a  different  order.  Thus  the  scale  from  C  to  c  and 
the  scale  from  ^  to  <^  on  the  white  notes  of  the  piano  are 
composed  of  the  same  intervals,  five  tones  and  two  semitones, 
but  they  differ  in  σχήμα  or  the  arrangement  of  those  intervals. 

1.  6.  άποτΐμνόμ^νοι  .  .  .  το  δια  πασών.  By  the  phrase  το  τρίτον 
μΑρος  της  ολη:  μ€λωδίας  is  meant  the  Enharmonic  genus,  just  as 
a  few  lines  above  την  πασαν  της  μζλωδίας  τάξιν  means  the  Enhar- 
monic, Chromatic,  and  Diatonic  Genera. 

MACRAN  Q  225 


ARISTOXENUS 

Hence  the  MSS  reading  ev  η  yevos  /xeye^o?  Si  is  untenable. 
What  is  the  τρίτον  μίροζ  of  μ€\ωδία  from  which  the  Harmonists 
can  be  said  to  have  selected  one  genus  ?  According  to  Mar- 
quard  αρμονία  (in  the  sense  of  'melodic  element  in  music'). 
But  even  granting  that  μΐλωδία  here  means  music  in  general, 
and  that  music  in  general  may  be  divided  into  αρμονία,  ρυθμός, 
and  λύγος,  could  this  division  have  been  so  universally  familiar 
that  Aristoxenus  would  presuppose  it,  and  employ  the  phrase 
τρίτον  μίρος  without  explanation  ? 

I  omit  yevos  and  de.  The  former  might  easily  be  inserted  by 
an  ignorant  scribe,  who  not  understanding  του  τρίτον  μέρους 
missed  the  necessary  reference  to  the  enharmonic  genus.  The 
intrusion  of  yeVos  naturally  entailed  the  addition  of  bL 

1.  II.     An  unknown  polemic. 

1.  l8.  φωνής.  The  term  φωνή  in  Aristoxenus  comprehends 
the  human  voice,  and  the  sounds  of  instruments.  See  Ari- 
stotle, i/e  A?tt?na,  420  ^,  η  be  φωνή  ψόφος  τις  iaTLV  €μ•ψϋχον'  των 
yap  άψυχων  ονθ^ν  φωνΐΐ,  αλλά  καθ^  ομοιότητα  XeyeraL  φων€'ΐν,  οίον 
avXos  κηΐ  λύρα  κα\  οσα  ιίλλα  των  αψύχων  άττότασιν  ζχ€ΐ  καΐ  μίλος  καΐ 
δίάλζκτον. 

Ρ.  97,  1.  2.  Ι  read  €πιμξλ(ς  for  ίπιμ^λως  of  the  MSS  which 
(ι)  gives  a  weak  construction  to  yeyeV/^rai,  and  (2)  requires,  as 
Marquard  saw,  the  διορισθέντος  of  1.  4  to  be  supplemented  by 
an  adverb. 

1.  6.  AaVos•.  Lasus  of  Hermione,  the  well-known  dithy- 
rambic  poet,  and  teacher  of  Pindar.  Suidas  credits  him  with 
the  authorship  of  the  earliest  work  on  the  theory  of  Music. 
See  Suidas  s.  v. ;  Athenaeus  x,  455  c  and  xiv,  624  c  ;  Herodotus 
vii.  6  ;  Plutarch,  de  Musica,  1 141  B-C. 

Έπιγοι^βιων.  Disciples  of  Epigonus  of  Ambracia,  a  famous 
musical  performer.     See  Athenaeus  iv,  183  d  and  xiv,  637  f. 

1.  7.     πλάτος.     The  spatial  image,  under  which  Aristoxenus 

represents  the  pitch  relations  of  notes,  is  that  of  an  indefinite 

line  x-y  ,  , 

a  b  c  a 

X ^ ^ ^ ^ y 

on  which  the  several  notes  appear  as  points  abed  [cp.  Nico- 
machus  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  24,  1.  21),  φθόγγος  eVrt  φωνή  άτομου,  οίον 
2a6 


NOTES 


μονάς  κατ  άκοην],  and  the  intervals  as  the  one-dimension  spaces 
between  them.  The  obvious  objection  to  this  conception  is 
that  it  attributes  quantity  and  so  reality  to  the  spaces  between 
the  notes,  while  it  denies  it  to  the  notes  themselves,  whereas 
our  senses  tell  us  that  the  notes  are  the  realities,  and  the 
intervals  only  their  relations.  This  objection  lies  at  the  basis 
of  the  contending  theory,  here  quoted  by  Aristoxenus,  which 
assigns  to  notes  a  certain  quantity  or  '  breadth.' 

1.  1 6.  η  πβ  μ€ν  πη  δ'  0V.  For  Aristoxenus'  answer  to  the 
question  see  p.  107, 11.  13-19. 

1.  17.  I  conjecture  λίκτίον  for  dUaiov  of  the  MSS.  Cf.  note 
on  p.  143, 1.  13. 

1. 19.  Probably  Marquard's  δΐΐλθόιη-α  is  correct.  SieXovra  is 
not  objectionable  in  itself  (cp.  p.  98,  1.  5,  p.  108,  1.  18,  &c.)  ;  but 
if  we  retain  it,  the  passage  lacks  any  reference  to  the  general 
treatment  of  the  scale. 

1.  22,  πλίΐουί  ela\  φύσ€ΐς  μίλονς.      See  p.  I  ID. 

P.  98,  1.  9.  The  meaningless  αυτής  of  the  MSS  may  have 
been  interpolated  to  produce  a  show  of  connexion  between  this 
paragraph  and  the  preceding. 

1.  17.     oiff  αμα  .  .  .  σνμβαίνβι. 


m 


:^: 


The  distance  between  e  and  a,  regarded  as  a  whole,  is  an 
interval ;  regarded  as  a  series  of  smaller  distances,  between  e  and 
f,/ajid  g,  g  and  «,  it  is  a  scale. 

1.  21.  Of  Eratocles  nothing  is  known  beyond  what  we  learn 
from  Aristoxenus  himself. 

1.  22.  on  από  .  .  .  μίλος.  That  is,  one  has  a  choice  between 
conjunction  and  disjunction. 


Conjunction. 


Conjunction 


Disjunction 

At   the  point 


$ 


Disjunction. 


the  ascending  melodic  progression 

Q  2  227 


diverges  into 
Similarly  at  1=^=^ 


ARISTOXENUS 


and 


branches   into 


the  descending  melodic  progression 
and 


t^^^^ 


1.  23.     et  άπο  παντός    .   .   .   y'lyverai.      Evidently  the    law  only 
holds  of  those  Fourths  of  which  the  boundaries  are  fixed  notes. 


If  we  take  the  Fourth 


}zzi^     ^^nzi  there  is  but  one 


method  of  completing  the  melodic  progression  in  each  direction  ; 
thus— 


P.  99,  1.  12.  For  the  Perfect  System  or  Scale  see  Introduction 
A§  29. 

1.  14.  κατά  avvOeaiv,  *  in  respect  of  the  method  of  their  com- 
position,' according  as  that  may  be  by  conjunction,  disjunction, 
or  a  combination  of  both  these  methods.  See  Introduction  A 
passt'm. 

1.  15.   κατά  σχήμα.      Cp.  note  on  p.  96,  1.  4. 

Η  probably  supplies  the  true  reading  here.  Marquard  inserts 
και  κατά  θ^σιν  on  account  of  μητ€  Oeais  in  1.  1 7.  But  the  latter 
words  (which  do  not  appear  in  H)  are  probably  a  dittograph  to 
μητί  σΰνθίσις.  Though  θ^σις  does  not  occur  as  a  technical  term 
in  Aristoxenus,  it  might  conceivably  mean  '  key '  on  the  analogy 
of  τίθβσθαι  (see  e.g.  p.  128,  1.  7) ;  but  key-distinctions  belong  to 
a  later  part  of  the  subject  (p.  100,  11.  14-20)  and  are  out  of 
place  here,  Aristoxenus  being  well  aware  that  such  distinctions 
are  not  essentially  scale-distinctions  (see  p.  100,  1.  16). 

1.  25.  άναπο8€ίκτω9  .  .  .  yiyveaOai  SeiVi/urai.  Eratocles,  accord- 
ing to  the  criticism  of  Aristoxenus,  would  seem  to  have  presup- 
posed the  constitution  of  the  octave  scale 


and  to  have  arrived  at  the  enumeration  of  its  Figures  by  showing 
228 


NOTES 

that  after  proceeding  through  the  various  arrangements  to  be 
obtained  by  beginning  successively  with  e,  /,  g^  a,  b,  c,  d,  one  is 
brought  back  again  to  the  first  Figure  with  which  one  started. 
Against  this  superficial  empiricism  Aristoxenus  very  justly 
urges  that  the  Figures  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  and  the  laws  of 
their  collocation  must  be  demonstrated  prior  to  the  enumeration 
of  the  Figures  of  the  Octave.  Otherwise  we  are  not  justified  in 
limiting  these  Figures  to  seven.  Why,  for  example,  should  we 
not  admit  the  Figure 


Efa^=j^j^^^^^ 


ψ 


Here  we  have  a  scale  that  is  illegitimate  though  it  consists  of 
five  tones  and  two  semitones,  because  it  violates  the  law  of  the 
Figures  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  and  their  collocation. 

P.  100,  1.  lo.  Several  words  must  have  been  lost  here 
the  substance  of  which  I  have  supplied.  Aristoxenus  is  evi- 
dently insisting  that  the  enumeration  of  the  scales  cannot  be 
complete  unless  account  be  taken  of  the  scales  of  mixed 
genus:  therefore  after  the  nymber  of  possible  scales  in  each 
genus  has  been  ascertained,  we  must,  he  tells  us,  mix  genera 
and  repeat  the  process  of  enumeration.  But  what  is  the  sense 
of  giving  as  a  reason  for  the  necessity  of  this  process  the  fact 
that  '  they,'  whoever  '  they '  may  be,  '  had  not  even  perceived 
what  mixture  is '  ? 

1.  17.  Marquard  inserts  τον  τόπον  before  αντον  and  translates 
*  though  the  space  is  in  itself  homogeneous.'  Westph^l  rightly 
reads  with  the  MSS  and  understands  αντον  as  equal  to  τον 
συστήματος. 

1.  22.  The  question  here  raised  is  one  of  great  importance. 
Are  there  any  affinities  between  scales  and  keys  ?  By  scales  we 
mean  so  many  series  of  notes  in  which  abstraction  is  made  of 
pitch  and  regard  is  had  solely  to  the  order  of  intervals.  By 
keys  we  mean  so  many  series  of  notes,  in  which  the  intervals 
and  their  order  are  identical,  while  each  series  is  situated  at 
a  different  pitch  from  every  other. 

See  Introduction  A,  §  22. 

P.  101, 1.  I.     Aristoxenus  here  contrasts  two  principles  by 

229 


ARISTOXENUS 


which  one  might  be  guided  in  determining  the  relative  positions 
of  the  keys  proper  to  the  several  scales.  One  is  the  false 
principle  of  καταπνκνωσις,  or  '  close-packing '  of  intervals  ;  the 
other  the  true  principle  of  the  possibility  of  intermodulation. 
To  understand  the  difference  between  these  principles  let  us 
take  the  seven  modes  or  scales  of  Table  20  in  Introduction  A, 
in  the  Enharmonic  forms  as  follows  : 

Tonic        I 


MlXOLYDIAN 


Lydian 


Phrygian 


Dorian 


Hypolydian 


HVPOPHRYGIAN 


|ξ= 


Tonic 


3^ 


3Ξ3^ 


-w>—y^ 


i^ 


Tonic 


jL    x^i 


Hypodorian      ρ 


Tonic 


m 


^ 


and  let  us  place  all  the  notes  supplied  by  these  scales  between 
"   in  one  series  as  follows: 


p=^^^=^ — ^-^^ 


:iit 


Now  we  see  that  in  this  series  there  is  no 
Ξι    no    Ε 


,    no 


,    that   is, 


230 


NOTES 


there  are  several  intervals  of  a  semitone  which  are  not 
divided  into  their  apparently  possible  quarter-tones.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  evident  that  the  tonics  of  these  keys  are  so 
related  to  one  another  that  it  will  be  possible  to  pass  directly  or 
indirectly  from  any  one  to  any  other.  (See  note  on  p.  129,  1.  4.) 
Once  more  let  us  again  take  the  same  seven  enharmonic 
modes,  but  changing  the  keys  let  us  arrange  them  as  follows  : 

Tonic 


MlXOLYDIAN         r 


Lydian 


Phrygian 


Dorian 


Hypo  LYDIAN 


Hypophrygian 


Hypodorian      P 


Writing  in  one  series   all   the  notes   of  these  keys   between 

we  obtain  the  following  result : 


Here  we  have  an  unbroken  series  of  the  absolutely  smallest 
intervals  (i.e.  quarter-tones) ;  but  the  keys  are  so  related  to  one 
another,  their   tonics  being  spaced  by  the   interval   of  three 

231 


ARISTOXENUS 

quarter-tones,  that  a  modulation  from  one  to  another  of  them  is 
impossible.     (See  note  on  p.  129,  1.  4.) 

The  first  of  the  above  sets  of  scales  is  arranged  on  the 
principle  of  possible  intermodulation  ;  the  second  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  κηταττύκνωσις,  or  arrangement  at  the  closest  possible 
intervals.  It  is  obvious  that  the  former  is  the  true  principle  of 
music.  The  unbroken  series  of  small  intervals  may  satisfy 
the  eye,  but  to  use  the  words  of  Aristoxenus  [p.  129,  1.  i]  it  is 
€κμeλήs  KOL  πάντα  τρόπον  άχρηστος,  that  is,  at  variance  with  the 
nature  of  melody  which  forbids  a  succession  of  more  than  two 
quarter-tones ;  and  of  no  practical  value,  because  the  only 
object  in  a  relative  determination  of  keys  is  to  render  inter- 
modulation possible. 

We  can  now  understand  the  statement  of  Aristoxenus  [p.  96, 
1.  2]  that  the  tables  of  the  early  harmonists,  though  only  con- 
structed with  a  view  to  the  Enharmonic  Genus,  exhibited  the 
whole  melodic  system.  In  such  a  series  as  that  last  given  all 
the  chromatic  and  diatonic  scales  are  implicitly  presented.  [It 
is  however  possible  that  edrjXov  in  this  passage  may  signify 
'professed  to  exhibit.'] 

1.  2.     I  read  τίνων  for  MSS  τών. 

1.  3.  π€ρ\  τούτου  .  .  .  τουθ'  ημϊν.  Ι  have  corrected  the  read- 
ings of  the  MSS  by  inserting  on  before  cVi  βραχύ.  Then  on 
fviois  συμβίβηκ^ν  πβρι  τούτου  του  μίμους  €ΐρηκ€ναί,  ούδβϊΊ  8e  συμ- 
βίβηκ€ν  καθόΧου  ζίρηκίναι  is  the  subject  of  φαν^ρον  γίγβνηται. 

1.  7•  π^πίγηται  of  Mc.  for  π^ποίηται  is  an  interesting  example 
of  a  mistake  arising  from  dictation.  Such  mistakes  are  frequent 
in  the  MSS  of  Aristoxenus.  Compare  p.  144,  1.  12  η  τούτοις 
συν€χης  for  οί  τούτοις  συν€χάς,  ρ.  I^g,  1.  1 8  δΐίκνυσιν  (in  R)  for 
δη  κίνησιν,  ρ.  139)  1•  ^3  ^^^''»'  <^ί  (in  R)  for  fk  ίνός,  p.  137)  1•  1 5 

ντταρυπάτη  (in  Β)  for  η  παρυπάτη  ;  also  SUch  spellings  as  απατούν, 
άΚύωσιν,  πικνά,  αχριστα,  (Ιρζ'ισθω,  for  άπαιτονν,  άΧΚοίωσιν,  πυκνά, 
άχρηστα,  (Ιρησθω,  and  the  constant  confusion  of  subjunctive  and 
indicative  forms. 

P.  102,  1.  8.  πότ€ρον. .  .€ση  σκεψ-βωί.  See  Introduction  Β  §  2. 
Aristoxenus  is  not  concerned  with  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the 
physical  theory  of  sound. 

1.  II.  TO  δε  κινησαι  τούτων  ίκάτ^ρον.  The  true  reading  here 
232 


NOTES 

is  hard  to  conjecture.  Marquard's  first  idea  was  to  omit 
δε  and  understand  κινησαι  in  the  sense  of  '  to  raise  or  moot  a 
question ' ;  but  he  afterwards  abandoned  this  view  on  the  ground 
that  κιν€Ϊν  occurring  so  often  in  the  same  passage  in  the  technical 
sense  of  'motion'  could  not  in  this  one  case  bear  a  different 
meaning.  [On  this  point  Mr.  Goligher  aptly  cites  Berkeley's 
Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,  %']']'.  *  If  what  you  mean  by 
the  word  matter  be  only  the  unknown  support  of  unknown 
qualities,  it  is  no  matter  whether  there  is  such  a  thing  or  no, 
since  it  in  no  way  concerns  us.']  His  final  conjecture  is  δια- 
κριναι  for  5e  κιι^^σαι,  and  he  gives  as  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
*for  the  purposes  of  the  present  argument  it  is  not  necessary 
to  decide  this  question.'  But  this  is,  I  think,  quite  untenable. 
Even  if  we  grant  that  '  it  is  not  necessary  to  discriminate  each 
of  these  things '  is  a  possible  expression  of  the  meaning  '  it  is 
not  necessar}  to  decide  for  either  of  these  alternatives,'  yet  it 
is  clear  from  1.  7  that  eKUrepov  τούτων  must  here  mean  '  each  of 
these  phenomena,'  namely,  the  two  kinds  of  voice-motion.  Once 
we  admit  this,  we  must  reject  to  διακρίναι ;  for  it  is  obviously 
false  to  say  that  *  the  discrimination  of  these  phenomena  from 
one  another  is  unnecessary  for  our  argument.' 

I  believe  the  true  reading  to  be  του  διβυκρινησαι  (or  some  such 
word)  τούτων  €κάτ€ρον,  where  τοΰ  δΐίνκρινησαι  is  the  genitive  of 
the  material  after  την  (νβστώσαν  πραγματ^ίαν :  and  the  meaning 
to  be  '  the  question  of  the  objective  possibility  of  rest  and  motion 
of  the  voice  belongs  to  a  different  sphere  of  speculation,  and 
is  irrelevant  to  our  present  purpose,  which  is  to  discriminate 
each  of  these  two  phenomena  from  the  other.' 

1.  26.  dia  πάθοί.  As  in  the  case  of  impassioned  recitation. 
Cp.  Aristides  Quintilianus  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  7, 1.  23),  η  pev  ovv  σνν- 
€χής  (κίνησις)  eariu,  f]  διαΧ^γόμ^θα'  μί(τη  δε,  τ]  τάί  των  ποιημάτων 
άναγνωσας  ποιούμεθα'  διαστηματίκη  δε  η  κατά  μύσον  των  άπΚων 
φωνών  ποσά  ποιονμίνη  διαστήματα  κα\  μονάς,  η  tls  κα\  μελωδική 
κα\€Ϊται. 

Ρ.  103,  11.  1-6.  As  the  monotone  of  declamation  is  a  license 
of  speech,  so  is  the  tremolo  a  license  of  music ;  and  the  use  of 
either,  if  not  justified  by  the  presence  of  an  exceptional  emotion, 
is  a  sin  against  nature. 

233 


ARISTOXENUS 

1.  3.  Probably  δσω  yap  αν  .  .  .  ποιησωμ^ν,  the  reading  of  Β  and 
R,  is  right. 

1.  16.  ίττΊτασις  and  (ίν^σις  signify  the  processes,  not  the  states, 
of  tension  and  relaxation.  Though  properly  applying  only  to 
strings,  they  are  used  metaphorically  of  the  human  voice  and 
the  sounds  of  wind-instruments. 

P.  104,  1.  14.  eVi  τον  ivavriov  τόπον,  the  reading  of  B,  is  un- 
doubtedly right,  Cp.  p.  145,  1.  9  ;  also  the  phrases  eVi  το  6ξυ, 
€πι  το  βαρύ. 

1.  20.  τρίτον.  Westphal's  conjecture  of  -πέμπτον  is,  I  think, 
unnecessary,  in  spite  of  p.  106,  1.  9.  For  the  purposes  of  the 
argument  (ττίτασις  and  avta-is  may  be  regarded  as  subdivisions 
of  one  conception,  and  similarly  οξίτης  and  βαρύτης. 

1.  23.  μη  ταραττ€τωσαν  κ.τ.λ.  Aristoxenus  very  rightly  in- 
sists that  the  validity  of  his  distinction  is  not  injured  by  the 
fact  that  it  is  verbally  incompatible  with  the  theory  of  the 
Physicists.  When  he  speaks  of  motion  and  rest  of  the  voice, 
he  refers  to  certain  phenomena  which  t/ie  ear  distinguishes  as 
motion  and  rest,  though  this  distinction  may  directly  contradict 
the  ultimate  nature  of  these  phenomena  as  apprehended  by  the 
intellect.  Thus,  when  the  Physicist  presses  upon  him  the 
theory  that  all  sound  is  vibration  or  motion,  and  urges  that 
motion  at  rest  is  a  contradiction,  he  repHes :  '  According  to  the 
evidence  of  the  ear  (which,  for  my  purposes,  is  the  final  test 
of  truth)  the  voice  is  at  rest  in  cases  where,  according  to  your 
theory  of  objective  facts,  the  rate  of  its  vibration  is  constant ; 
consequently,  to  distinguish  the  phenomena  before  us,  we  may 
employ  the  language  of  the  ear  just  as  well  as  the  language  of 
physics.' 

P.  105,  1.  15,    The  MSS  read  here  δ  &  ημ€ΐ9  λίγομίν  κίνησίν  τ€ 

κα\  rjpepiav  φωνής  κα\  ο  (κύνοι   κίνησιν  which  is  translated  '  it  is 

fairly  evident  what  we  mean  by  rest  and  motion  of  the  voice, 
and  what  they  mean  by  motion.'  But  this  is  unsatisfactory,  not 
only  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  the  conclusion  thus  drawn, 
but  also  because  off...  κίνησιν  being  a  relative  sentence  and 
not  an  indirect  question,  the  correct  translation  would  be  '  the 
thing  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  rest  and  motion  of  the 
voice  is  a  fairly  patent  thing,  as  is  also  the  thing  to  which 
234 


NOTES 

they  give  the  name  of  motion,'  which  does  not  give  the  required 
meaning. 

P.  107,  1.  3.  SieVfwf  της  €λαχίστης.  That  is  a  quarter-tone. 
Aristoxenus  uses  Sieais  for  any  interval  less  than  a  semitone. 

1.  5.  ώστε  ιςαί  ^vvUvai  κ.τ.λ.  Aristoxenus  does  not  mean  that 
we  cannot  hear  any  interval  smaller  than  a  quarter-tone,  but 
that  though  we  may  be  conscious  of  such  a  smaller  interval, 
we  can  have  no  perception  of  it  as  a  musical  entity,  since  we 
cannot  estimate  its  magnitude  in  reference  to  other  musical 
intervals. 

P.  108,  1.  21.   καθ'  ην  τα  σύμφωνα  των  διαφωνών.     The  only  COn- 

cords  recognized  by  Greek  theorists  are  the  Fourth ;  the  Fifth  ; 
the  Octave ;  the  sum  of  two  or  more  Octaves :  the  sum  of  one 
or  more  Octaves  and  a  Fourth  ;  the  sum  of  one  or  more  Octaves 
and  a  Fifth. 

In  his  note  on  this  passage  Marquard  has  collected  several 
definitions  of  concords  and  discords. 

According  to  Gaudentius  [ed.  Meibom,  p.  11,  1.  17]  σύμφωνοι 
de  hv  άμα  κρουομΑνων  η  ανΚονμ^νων  aei  το  μίΚοί  του  βαρυτίρον  προς 
το  όζύ  καΐ  του  οξύτερου  προς  το  βαρν  το  αντο  j]  . . .  διάφωνοι  δβ  ων  αμα 
κρουομίνων  ή  ανΚονμίνων  ovdev  tl  φαίνίται  τοΐι  /xeXony  (ίναι  του 
βαρντίρου  προς  το  οζύ  ή  του  ο^υτίρου  προς  το  βαρύ  το  αυτό. 

'  The  nature  of  concordant  sounds  is  that  when  they  are  struck 
or  blown  simultaneously,  the  melodic  relation  of  the  lower  note 
to  the  higher  is  identity,  as  likewise  the  relation  of  the  higher 
to  the  lower ;  but  when  discordant  sounds  are  struck  or  blown 
together,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  of  identity  in  the  relation 
of  the  lower  note  to  the  higher,  or  of  the  higher  to  the  lower.' 
[Practically  the  same  definition  is  given  byAristides  QuintiHanus 
(ed.  Meibom,  p.  12, 1.  21),  and  Bacchius  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  2, 1.  28).] 

Marquard  professes  himself  unable  to  find  any  meaning  in 
this  definition.  The  language  is  certainly  not  happy;  but  I 
think  the  sense  is  clear  enough.  If  two  sounds  are  discordant, 
when  they  are  sounded  together,  the  particular  character  of 
each  will  stand  out  unreconciled  against  the  other;  that  is, 
the  relation  of  the  higher  to  the  lower  or  of  the  lower  to  the 
higher  will  not  be  one  of  identity  in  which  differences  are  sunk. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  concordant  sounds  are  heard  together, 

235 


ARISTOXENUS 

the  resulting  impression  is  that  of  the  reconciliation  of  differences, 
the  merging  of  particular  natures  in  an  identical  whole.  This 
is  well  illustrated  by  the  concord  called  the  Octave,  where  the 
relation  of  identity  is  so  predominant  that  we  regard  the  notes 
of  it  as  the  one  note  repeated  at  different  heights  of  pitch. 

According  to  the  Isagoge  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  8,  1.  24)  eVrt  he.  συμ- 
φωνία μίν  Kpaais  δύο  φθόγγων  o^vrepov  και  βαρύτερου'  διαφωνία  de 
τουναντίον  δύο  φθόγγύ)ν  άμιξία  ώστε  μή  κραθηναι,  αλλά  τραχυνθηναι 
την  άκοην.  '  Concord  is  the  blending  of  two  notes,  a  higher  and 
a  lower  ;  discord,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  refusal  of  two  notes  to 
combine,  with  the  result  that  they  do  not  blend  but  grate  on 
the  ear.'  The  same  conception  is  more  clearly  expressed  in  the 
definition  quoted  by  Porphyrius : — συμφωνία  δ'  eVri  δυοΐν  φθόγ- 
γων οζύτητί  και  βαρύτητι  διαφερόντων  κατά  το  αυτό  πτωσις  και 
κρασΐ9'  δει  yap  τους  φθόγγους  συγκρουσθεντας  ev  τι  έτερον  είδος 
φθόγγου  άποτελείν  παρ"  εκείνους  εζ  ων  φθόγγων  η  συμφωνία  γεγονεν. 
*  Concord  is  the  coincidence  and  blending  of  two  notes  of  differ- 
ent pitch,  for  the  notes  when  struck  together  must  result  in 
a  single  species  of  sound  distinct  from  the  notes  which  have 
given  birth  to  the  concord.' 

The  following  definition  of  Adrastus  is  quoted  by  Theo. 
Smyrn.,  p.  So,  and  Porphyrius,  p.  270,  συμφωνουσι  δε  φθόγγοι 
προς  αλλήλους  ων  θατερου  κρουσθεντος  επί  τίνος  οργάνου  των  εντατών 
κα\  6  λοιπός  κατά  τίνα  οικειότητα  κα\  συμπάθειαν  (τυιτηχη'  κατά  το 
αυτό  δε  άμα  αμφοτέρων  κρουσθεντων  λεία  κα\  προσηνής  εκ  της  κρά- 

σεως  εξακονεται  φωνή.  '  Notes  are  in  concord  with  one  another 
when  upon  the  one  being  struck  upon  a  stringed  instrument, 
the  other  sounds  along  with  it  by  affinity  and  sympathy  ;  and 
when  the  two  being  struck  simultaneously  one  hears,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  blending,  a  smooth  and  sweet  sound.' 

Most  philosophic  of  all  is  Aristotle's  definition  in  Frod/ef^is 
xix,  38,  συμφωνία  δε  χαίρομεν  οτι  κρασίς  εστί  λόγον  εχόντων 
εναντίων  προς  άλληλα.  6  μεν  οΰν  λόγος  τά^ις,  δ  ην  φύσει  ηδύ.  '  The 
reason  that  we  take  pleasure  in  concord  is  that  it  is  a  blending 
of  opposites  that  have  a  relation  to  one  another.  Now  rela- 
tion is  order  and  we  saw  that  order  naturally  gave  pleasure.' 
Cp.  also  Aristotle  περί  αίσθήσεως  καΐ  αΙσθητων  C.  3>  Ρ•  439 ^> 
τα  μεν  γαρ  εν  άριθμοίς  ευλογίστοις  χρώματα^  καθάπερ  εκεί  τάς 
236 


NOTES 


συ 


μφωνίας,  τα  η^ιστα  των  χρωμάτων  elvai  8οκονντα.  '  The  most 
agreeable  colours,  like  concords,  depend  upon  the  easily  calcu- 
lable relations  of  their  ingredients.' 

Later  theorists  introduced  παράφωνος  as  an  intermediate  term 
between  σύμφωνος  and  8ιάφωνος.  According  to  Gaudentius 
[ed.  Meibom,  p.  II,  1.  30],  παράφωνοι  de  oi  μίσοι  μ^ν  συμφώνου  καχ 
διαφώνου'  iv  be  ttj  κρούσει  φαινόμενοι  σύμφωνοι,  ωσπερ  eVi  τριών 
τόνων  φαίνεται,  άπο  παρυπάτης  μέσων  επ\  παραμεσην,  κα\  επΙ  δύο 
τόνων,  άπο  μέσων  8ιατόνου  επΙ  παραμεσην.  '  Paraphone  sounds  stand 
midway  between  concords  and  discords  ;  when  struck '  [this 
probably  means  '  when  not  prolonged  by  voice  or  wind  instru- 
ment, but  sounded  momentarily  on  strings']  'they  give  the 
impression  of  concord ;  such  an  impression  we  receive  in  the 
case  of  the  interval  of  three  tones  between  the  Parhypate  Meson 
and  the  Paramese  ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  interval  of  two  tones 
between  the  Lichanus  '  [the  term  '  Diatonus '  is  sometimes  used 
for  Lichanus]  '  Meson  and  the  Paramese.' 

The  term  ομόφωνοι  is  applied  to  notes  which  differ  in  function, 
but  coincide  in  pitch.  Thus  the  Dominant  of  the  key  of  Z>  and 
the  Subdominant  of  the  key  of  £  fall  alike  on  A.  See  Aristides 
Quintilianus,  ed.  jNIeibom,  p.  12,  1.  25. 

1.  22.  TO.  σννθίτα  τών  άσυνθετων.  Aristoxenus  means  by  a 
simple  interval  one  that  is  contained  by  two  notes  between  which 
none  can  be  inserted  m  the  particular  scale  to  which  they  belong. 


Thus    in    the    enharmonic    scale, 


.* 


s-iJ— *- 


^ 


the 


interval  between/and  a  is  simple,  because  in  this  scale  no  note  can 


:i=22: 


occur  between  them  ;  but  in  the  diatonic 

scale  the  interval  between  /  and  a  is  compound,  because  in  this 
scale  g  occurs  between  them.  Thus  the  same  με^εβος  or  inag- 
niiiide  f-a,v7Yach.  as  a  μί-^εθος  is  of  course  composite  [the  simple 
magnitude  of  music  being  a  quarter-tone],  may  sometimes  be 
occupied  by  a  simple,  sometimes  by  a  composite  interval. 

1.  23.  κα&  ήν  διαφέρει  τα  ρητά.  τών  άΧό-γων.  This  διαφορά  is  not 
without  difficulty.  The  terms  ρητά  and  άλογα  naturally  apply  to 
quanta  in  relation  to  one  another.  4  is  oKoyov  in  relation  to  7, 
the  area  of  a  square  in  relation  to  that  of  a  circle.    But  where 

237 


ARISTOXENUS 

in  the  case  of  an  interval  are  the  two  quanta  the  relation  between 
which  constitutes  it  rational  or  irrational?  Not  inside  the 
interval,  for  Aristoxenus,  as  we  have  already  seen,  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  Pythagorean  view  of  intervals  as  numerical 
relations.  An  interval  then  must  be  rational  or  irrational  in 
virtue  of  the  relation  it  bears  to  some  quantum  outside  itself. 
Marquard  supposes  this  quantum  to  be  the  twelfth  of  a  tone 
because  that  is  the  smallest  measure  used  by  Aristoxenus  in 
calculating  the  comparative  sizes  of  intervals.  (See  p.  117, 
II.  1-19.)  But  this  supposition,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  is 
directly  forbidden  by  Aristoxenus  himself.  The  true  explanation 
is  supplied  by  the  following  interesting  passage  from  the 
Eleme?tts  of  Rhyth?n  (Aristoxenus,  ed.  Marquard,  p.  413,  29) : — 

"Ωρισται  5e  των  πο8ών  ίκαστος  ήτοι  λόγω  τινί  η  άλο-γία  τοιαύττ], 
iJti?  δύο  λόγων  γνωρίμωρ  ttj  αίσθησα.  άνα  μίσον  %σται,  Γίνοίτο 
δ'  &.V  το  ζίρημίνον  ώδβ  κηταφαν€ί'  et  Χηφθ^ίησαν  δύο  πόδίς,  6  μ^ν  Ισον 
το  ανω  τω  κάτω  €χων  κα\  δίσημον  €κάτερον,  ό  de  νο  μ€ν  κάτω  δίσημον, 
το  de  ανω  ημισν,  τρίτος  δβ  τις  Χηφθ^ίη  πους  παρά  τούτους,  την  μεν 
βάσιν  ϊσην  αν  τοΐς  άμφοτεροις  έχων,  την  be  αρσιν  μέσον  μέγεθος 
εχουσαν  των  άρσεων.  Ό  yap  τοιούτος  πους  akoyov  μεν  εζει  το  ανω 
προς  το  κάτω'  εσται  δ'  η  άλογία  μεταξύ  δύο  λόγωΐ'  γνωρίμων  ttj 
αίσθησει,  του  τ€  'ίσου  και  του  διπλασίου.  .  .  . 

ΑεΙ  δε  μηδ*  ενταύθα  διαμαρτείν,  άγνοηθεντος  του  τε  ρητού  και  του 
αλόγου,  τίνα  τρόπον  εν  τοΐς  περί  τους  ρυθμούς  λαμβάνεται.  "Ωσπερ 
ουν  εν  τοΙς  διαστηματικοίς  στοιχείοις  το  μεν  κατά  μέλος  ρητον  ελήφθη, 
ο  πρώτον  μεν  εστί  μελωδούμενον,  έπειτα  γνώριμον  κατά  μέγεθος,  ήτοι 
ως  τά  τε  σύμφωνα  καΐ  ό  τόνος,  η  ως  τα  τούτοις  σύμμετρα,  το  δε  κατά 
τους  των  αριθμών  μόνον  λόγους  ρητόν,  ω  συνεβαινεν  άμελωδητω  εϊναι' 
ούτω  κα\  εν  τοΙς  ρυθμοίς  ύποληπτεον  εχειν  τό  τε  ρητον  κα\  το  αλογον» 
Το  μεν  γαρ  κατά  την  του  ρυθμού  φύσιν  λαμβάνεται  ρητόν,  το  δε 
κατά  τους  των  αριθμών  μόνον  λόγους.  Τό  μεν  ουν  εν  ρυθμω  λαμβανό' 
μενον  ρητον  χρόνου  μέγεθος  πρώτον  μεν  δεΙ  τών  πιπτόντων  εις  την 
ρυθμοπούαν  είναι,  έπειτα  τού  ποδός  εν  ω  τετακται  μέρος  είναι  ρητόν' 
το  δε  κατά  τους  τών  αριθμών  λόγους  λαμβανόμενον  ρητον  τοιούτον  τι 
δεΙ  νοείν  οίον  εν  τοΐς  διαστηματικοΐς  το  δωδέκατη μόριον  τού  τόνου  κα\ 
ει  τι  τοιούτον  άλλο  εν  ταΐς  τών  διαστημάτων  παραλλαγαΐς  λαμβάνεται. 
Φανερον  δε  διά  τών  είρημενων,  υτι  η  μέση  ληφθείσα  τών  άρσεων  ουκ 
εσται  σύμμετρος  ttj  βάσει'  ούδεν  γάρ  αυτών  μετρον  εστί  κοινον 
238 


NOTES 

ΐνρνθμον.  '  Every  foot  is  determined  either  by  a  ratio  (between 
its  accented  and  unaccented  parts)  or  by  an  irrational  relation 
such  as  lies  midway  between  two  ratios  familiar  to  sense. 
This  statement  may  be  illustrated  as  follows :  take  two 
feet,  one  of  which  has  the  accented  and  unaccented  parts 
equal,  each  of  them  consisting  of  two  minims  of  time,  while 
the  other  has  its  accented  part  equal  to  two  minims,  but  its 
unaccented  only  half  that  length.'  [Assuming  the  minim 
to  be,  what  it  once  was,  the  sign  of  the  shortest  possible 
musical  time,  the  first  of  these  feet  would  be  of  the  form 
I  Q  Q  |,  the  second  of  the  form  I  q  cJ  [•]  'Now  take 
a  third  foot  besides,  having  its  accented  part  equal  to  the  ac- 
cented part  of  either  of  the  first  two,  but  its  unaccented,  a  mean 
in  size  between  their  unaccented  parts.'  [Its  form  will  be 
I  Q  α  •  I •]  'In  such  a  foot  the  relation  between  the  ac- 
cented and  unaccented  parts  will  be  irrational,  and  will  lie 
between  tAvo  ratios  familiar  to  sense,  the  equal,'  [  q  :  q  ]  '  and 
the  double'  [  q  :  c^  ]  •  •  .  '  Nor  must  we  be  led  astray  here  by 
ignorance  of  the  principle  on  which  the  conceptions  "  rational " 
and  "irrational"  are  determined  in  matters  of  rhythm.  In  the 
Elements  of  Intervals  we  assumed  on  the  one  hand  a  "  rational 
in  respect  of  melody  "  which  is  firstly  something  that  can  be 
sung,  and  secondly,  something  whose  size  is  well  known,  either 
[directly]  as  the  concords  and  the  tone,  or  else  [indirectly]  as 
the  intervals  commensurate  with  these ;  and  on  the  other  hand, 
a  "  rational  in  respect  of  numerical  ratios,"  which,  as  a  fact, 
was  something  that  could  not  be  sung.  A  similar  view  must 
be  taken  in  the  case  of  rhythm,  and  we  must  distinguish  the 
rational  in  respect  of  the  natural  laws  of  rhythm  from  the 
rational  in  respect  of  numerical  ratios  only.  According  to 
the  first  reference,  a  rational  time-length  is  one  which,  firstly, 
can  be  introduced  into  rhythmical  composition,  and  secondly, 
is  a  rational  fraction  of  the  foot  in  which  it  is  placed.  Accord- 
ing to  the  second  reference,  it  must  be  conceived  as  something 
in  the  sphere  of  rhythm  corresponding  to  the  twelfth  of  a  tone 
in  the  sphere  of  melody,  or  to  any  other  similar  quantum 
assumed  in  the  comparative  measurement  of  intervals.     It  is 

239 


ARISTOXENUS 

clear  from  these  remarks  that  the  mean  between  the  two  un- 
accented parts  will  not  be  commensurate  with  the  accented 
part ;  for  they  have  no  common  measure  with  a  rhythmical 
existence.' 

We  see  here  that  the  reason  why  the  foot  |  q  cJ  •  |  is 
irrational  is,  that  though  cj  .  is  a  possible  rhythmical  element, 
and  though  the  relation  of  ^  .  to  Q  is  known  as  that  of  3  to  4, 
yet  the  length  ^'.  ,  while  mathematically  commensurate  with 
Q,  is  rhythmically  incommensurate.  For  their  co7nmon  measure^ 
being  half  the  minimum  time  lengthy  has  no  existence  i7i  the 
practice  of  rhythm. 

The  case  is  similar  with  regard  to  Melody.  If  any  interval 
can  be  sung ;  if  its  length  be  readily  cognisable,  either  imme- 
diately as  a  concord  or  tone,  or  because  it  is  commensurate 
with  one  of  these,  the  comition  measure  being  an  actual  melodic 
ifiterval,  then  it  is  ρητόν.  If  these  conditions  be  not  fulfilled,  it 
is  akoyov.  Thus  a  twelfth  of  a  tone  is  not  a  rational  interval 
in  respect  of  melody,  because  it  cannot  be  sung  ;  neither  is  the 
interval  of  three  sevenths  of  a  tone  rational ;  because  though  it 
can  be  sung,  and  though  its  length  can  be  mathematically 
expressed  in  relation  to  a  tone,  yet  the  common  measure  of 
it  and  of  a  tone  is  one  seventh  of  the  latter ;  which  is  not  an 
actual  melodic  interval. 

1.  24.  τά?  δβ  λοιπας  κ.τ.λ.  Cp.  Aristides  Quintilianus  [Mei- 
bom,  p.  14,  1.  10],  €Ti  δ'  αυτών  α  μίν  iariv  άρτια,  a  be  περιττά, 
άρτια  μ€ν  τα  els  'ίσα  διαιρούμενα,  ώς  ημιτόνιον  κα\  tovos'  περιττά 
δε  τα  els  άνισα'  ως  αι  y  δύσεΐί  κα\  Trevre  κα\  ζ,  and  [Meibom,  p.  14? 
1.  20],  en  των  διαστημάτων  α  μεν  εστίν  άραια  α  8e  πυκνά'  πυκνά  μεν 
τα  ελάχιστα  ώ$•  at  δύσεις,  αραιά,  δε  τα  μέγιστα  ως  το  δια  τεσσάρων. 

Ρ.  109,  1.  7•  τουτόν  ye  τον  τρόπον  κ.τ.λ.  Aristoxenus  implies 
by  this  reservation  the  possibility  of  dividing  scales  into  those 
which  are  composed  of  other  scales  (as  for  instance  an  octave, 
which  is  a  compound  of  a  Fourth  and  a  Fifth),  and  those  which 

are  not  so  composed,  as  for  instance  I  (φ     j~^     ^      •     ^"^ 
even  this  last  scale,  though  it  cannot  be  analysed  into  other 
scales,  is  composed  of  certain  parts,  namely  intervals,  and  so  can 
hardly  be  called  simple. 
240 


NOTES 

1.  1 6.  από  Tivos  μζ-^ίθους.  The  meaning  is,  '  Every  scale  from 
a  certain  magnitude  upward.'  Evidently  a  scale  of  a  Fourth 
or  any  smaller  scale  need  not  exhibit  either  conjunction  or 
disjunction. 

1.  1 8.  TovTo.  'This  phenomenon  of  the  blending  of  conjunc- 
tion and  disjunction.' 

iv  ivioiSf  i.  e.  σνστημασιν.     See  Introduction  A,  §  20. 

1.  19.  The  term  νπ€ρβατόν  signifies  that  the  scale  skips  certain 
notes  which  would  naturally  belong  to  it  by  the  laws  of  continuity 
or  sequence.     See  Introduction  A,  §  26. 

1.  20.  άπλονι;  και  διπλούν  κ.τ.λ.  Cp.  Aristides  Quintilianus 
[ed.  Meibom,  p.  16, 1.  2],  και  τά  μ^ν  άπλα  a  καθ*  eva  τρόπον  eKKetrai, 
τα  δε  ονχ  άπλα  α  κατά  πλαόνων  τρόπων  πλοκην  γίνΐται,  '  Single 
scales  are  those  that  are  composed  in  one  mode;  manifold 
scales  those  that  are  based  on  a  complex  of  several  modes.' 

Cp.  also  Isa^o^e  [ed.  Meibom,  p.  18, 1.  20],  r^  Se  τού  άμ€ταβόλον 
καΐ  €μμ€ταβόλον  διοισβι  καθ^  ην  διαφίρ^ι  τά  άπλα  συστήματα  των  μη 
απλών'  άπλα  pev  ούν  eari  τά  προς  μίαν  μ€σην  ηρμοσμ^να,  διπλά  δί  τά 
προί  δυο,  τριπλά  δε  τά  προς  Tpe'is,  πολλαπλάσια  δε  τά  προς  πλείονας. 
*The  difference  between  the  modulating  and  non-modulating 
scale  will  be  the  difference  between  single  scales  and  those  that 
are  not  single.  Single  scales  are  those  that  are  tuned  to  one 
Mese,  double  those  that  are  tuned  to  two,  triple  those  that  are 
tuned  to  three,  multiple  those  that  are  tuned  to  several.' 

The  distinctions  here  referred  to  we  have  already  considered 
in  our  comparison  of  the  three  ancient  Harmonies  [Introduction 
A,  §  14].  The  Mixolydian  scale  on  the  old  reading  of  it  [Intro- 
duction A,  §  20]  was  a  σύστημα  διπλούν. 

Cp.  p.  131,  11.  9-10  where  Aristoxenus  contrasts  άπλοΰν  and 

μζταβολην  '^χον. 

P.  110, 1.  5.  λο-γώδίς  τι  μ^λος.  For  the  relation  between  Greek 
speech  and  Greek  song,  see  Mr.  Monro's  Modes  of  Ancient 
Greek  MusiCy  \  yj- 

I.  14.  I  read  καθόλον  for  και  που.  Some  such  word  is  called 
for  by  the  following  Ιδιότητα. 

1.  21.  δη  πολλάς  .  . .  ev  Te  κα\  ταυτον  κ.τ.λ.  Aristoxenus  means 
that  in  spite  of  the  great  variety  of  forms  that  consecution 
adopts,  there  underlies  this  variety  one  immutable  law,  which 

MACRAN  R  241 


ARISTOXENUS 

decides  in  any  case  whether  any  given  sounds  may  or  may  not 
succeed  one  another. 

P.  Ill,  1.  7.  των  els  ταντο  ηρμοσμ^νων  is  my  suggestion  for  the 
impossible  τών  ets•  το  ηρμοσμίνον  of  the  MSS.  Aristoxenus  is 
obliged  to  add  this  qualifying  phrase  to  show  that  his  division 
of  the  μίΚος  is  not  inconsistent  with  mixture  of  genus.  Thus 
the  meaning  is  '  every  melody  that  observes  one  genus  through- 
out falls  into  one  of  the  three  classes  of  diatonic,  chromatic,  and 
enharmonic' 

1.  8.  ήτοι  ^ίάτονόν  iaTiv  η  χρωματικον  κ.τ.λ.  Aristides  Quin- 
tilianus  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  i8,  1.  19),  gives  the  following  deri- 
vations of  these  names:  Enharmonic,  άπο  του  συνηρμόσθαι^  i.e. 
from  the  close  fitting  of  intervals  exhibited  in  its  Pycnum  ;  Dia- 
tonic, iireibrj  σφο8ρότ€ρον  η  φωνή  κατ  αυτό  StareiVeTat  (διάτονοί  is 
to  δίατύνω  as  σύντονος  to  συντείνω)  ;  Chromatic,  ω?  yap  το  μ€τα^ν 
Χζυκου  κα\  μίλανος  χρώμα  καλύται'  ούτω  καΐ  το  δια  μβσων  άμφοίρ 
θεωροΰμενον  χρώμα  προσ^ίρηται. 

Cp.  Nicomachus  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  25,  1.  32),  και  e/c  τούτου  ye 
διατονικον  KaKenai,  eK  του  προχωρβίν  δια  τών  τόνων  αυτό  μονώτατον 
τών  αλΧων.  (ρ.  20,  1.  27),  ώστ'  άντικύσθαι  το  ζναρμόνιον  τω  διατόνω' 
μ€σον  δ'  αυτών  υττάρχζΐν  το  χρωματικόν.  μικρόν  yap  τταρετρ^ψεν,  ev 
μόνον  ημιτόνιον  άπο  του  διατονικοΰ'  evdev  Se  και  χρώμα  εχζΐν  Xeyoμev 
τούί  (ύτρεπτους  ανθρώπους. 

Cp.  also  the  interpolated  passage  in  Aristides  Quintilianus 
(Meibom,  p.  III,  1.  8),  χρωματικόν  δβ  KaXeiToi  παρά  το  χρώζ€ΐν  αντο 
τα  Χοιπά  διαστήματα,  μη  δβΊσθαι  δε  τίνος  (κείνων.  [According  tO 
Bellermann  (Anonymz  Scriptio,  p.  59)  χρώζειν  τα  Χοιπά  διαστήματα 
=  attingere  cetera  genera  ;  the  μη  δεΐσθαι  δε  τίνος  εκείνων  is  unin- 
telligible] .  ,  .  το  S*  εναρμόνιον  διά  το  εν  TJj  του  διηρμοσμενου  τεΧεία 
διαστάσει  Χαμβάνεσθαι'  ου  yap  διτόνου  πΧεον,  ούτε  διεσεως  εΧαττον 
ενδέχεται  (MSS  εδεχετο)  κατά  α'ίσθησιν  Χαβείν  τά  διαστήματα  1.6. 
the  Enharmonic  genus  derives  its  name  from  the  fact  that  it 
uses  to  the  full  the  liberty  of  variation  permitted  by  the  laws  of 
Harmony.  It  uses  quarter-tones,  than  which  there  is  no  smaller, 
and  ditones,  than  which  there  is  no  greater  (simple)  interval. 

1.  II.    If  άνώτατον  be  Correct,  it  means  '  highest '  in  the  process 
of  development  and  so  furthest  from  the  state  of  nature.     But 
νεώτατον^  the  reading  of  H,  is  very  tempting.• 
242 


NOTES 

1.  24.  το  μ€ρ  ελάχιστον.  The  Greeks  did  not  recognize  the 
Greater  or  Lesser  Thirds  as  concords. 

P.  112,  1.  II.  TO  yap  τρις  κ.τ.λ.  Marquard  reads  μ^χρι  yap  τον. 
I  prefer  to  read  to  yap  with  VbBRS,  and  am  quite  willing  to  con- 
strue it  either  as  a  direct  accusative  after  biaTeivopev  (just  as  we 
can  say  '  to  stretch  an  interval '  as  well  as  '  to  stretch  the  voice  ')> 
or  as  an  accusative  of  length  with  διατ€ίνομ€ν  used  in  a  neuter 
sense. 

1.  13.  αυλών.  For  a  full  description  of  the  αυλός  the  reader 
is  referred  to  the  exhaustive  article  of  Mr.  A.  A.  Howard, 
in  Vol.  IV  of  the  Harvard  Studies  in  Classical  Philology. 
A  few  general  remarks  will  suffice  here. 

The  term  αυλός  commonly  denotes  a  reed  instrument  of 
cylindrical  bore ;  whether  the  reed  was  double-tongued  as  in 
the  oboe,  or  single  as  in  the  clarinet,  or  whether  both  these 
forms  of  mouthpiece  were  employed,  there  is  no  conclusive 
evidence  to  prove.  The  musician  generally  performed  on  a  pair 
of  these  instruments  simultaneously,  playing  the  melody  on  one, 
and  an  accompaniment  (which  in  Greek  music  was  higher 
than  the  melody),  on  the  other.  These  double  pipes  were 
divided  according  to  their  pitch  into  five  classes,  Trap^eViot, 
παιδικοί,  κιθαριστηριοι,  reXetot,  and  νπ€ρτ€λ€ΐοι,  corresponding 
closely  to  the  soprano,  alto,  tenor,  baritone,  and  bass  ranges 
of  the  voice. 

1.  15.  κατασπασθίίσης  ye  της  σί>pιyyoς.  According  to  the  in- 
genious theory  of  Mr.  Howard  (see  last  note),  the  term  σ€ρίγ|, 
which  commonly  signifies  a  pan's-pipe,  was  used  to  denote 
a  hole  near  the  mouthpiece  of  the  αυλό?,  Hke  the  '  speaker '  of 
the  clarinet,  the  opening  of  which  facilitated  the  production  of 
the  harmonies  by  the  performer.  The  passages  which  he  quotes 
on  the  matter  are  the  following  : — 

(l)  Aristotle  {de  audib.  p.  804  a),  διό  fiat  τών  ανδρών  etVi  παχν- 
repai  κα\  τών  Τίλείων  αυλών,  κα\  μαΧλον  όταν  πληρώστ)  tis  αυτούς  του 
πνεύματος'  φαν^ρον  δ'  €στίν'    καϊ  yap  αν  πιίση  τις  τα  ζeύyη  (ί.  e.  *  if 

one  squeezes  the  reed  between  the  lips  or  teeth ')  μάλλον  οξύτερα 
η  φωνή  yiyvfTai  και  λεπτότερα,  καν  κατασπάση  τις  τάς  σvpιyyaς,  καν 
δε  επίλάβτ],  παμπλείων  ό  oyκoς  yίyvετaι  της  φωνής  δια  το  πλήθος  τον 
πνεύματος  καθάπερ  κα\  άπο  τών  παχύτερων  χορδών. 

R  2  243 


ARISTOXENUS 

From  this  passage,  as  from  the  passage  of  Aristoxenus  before 
us,  it  is  evident  that  the  effect  of  the  operation  κατασπάν  την 
σύριγγα  was  to  raise  the  pitch  of  the  instrument. 

(2)  Plutarch  {non  posse  suaviter,  p.  1096  a),  dia  ri  των  'ίσων  ανλων 
ό  στ€νώτ€ροζ  ζ6ξύτ€ρον,ό  δ'  cvpvreposy  βαρντ€ρον  φθ^γγίται'  και  δια. 
τι  της  avpiyyos  άνασπωμ^νψ  πασιν  υξύνίται  τοΙς  φθόγγοις,  κΚινομίνψ 
be  πάλιν  βάρυνα  (read  βαρύνεται)  και  συναχθάζ  προς  τον  erepov 
{βαρντ€ρον),  διαχθείς  δε  υξύτ€ρον  ηχύ ;  From  this  passage  we 
learn  that  the  effect  of  the  operation  άνασπάν  την  σύριγγα  was 
to  raise  all  the  tones  of  the  instrument. 

(3)  Anecdota  Graeca  Oxoniensia,  Vol.  II,  p.  409,  {συρι-γξ) 
σημαίνα  την  οπην  των  μουσικών  αυΧων. 

(4)  Plutarch  (de  Musica,  p.  1 138  a),  Αντίκα  Ύηλ^φάνης  6 
MeyapiKos  ούτως  ^πολΐμησβ  ταΐς  σύριγξιν,  ώστε  τους  ανΚοποιονς  ούδ' 
ζπιθίΐναι  πώποτ€  ('ίασ^ν  eVl  τους  αυλούς,  άλλα  καΐ  του  Τΐυθικου  αγώνος 
μάλιστα  δια  ταΐιτ  άπίστη. 

[Mr.  Howard  gathers  from  this  passage  that  Telephanes  as 
a  virtuoso  objected  to  mechanical  shifts  such  as  the  σύριγξ 
which  brought  elaborate  execution  within  the  reach  of  poor 
performers.  I  am  rather  disposed  to  think  from  the  context 
that  this  musician  was  a  lover  of  the  simplicity  and  reserve  of 
ancient  art,  and  resisted  innovations  in  the  direction  of  com- 
plexity.] 

The  only  difficulty  offered  by  these  passages  is  in  the  appar- 
ently indifferent  use  of  άνασπάν  and  κατασπάν  to  signify  the  same 
operation  (or  operations  with  the  same  effect).  Mr.  Howard 
thinks  that  the  σΰριγ^  might  have  been  covered  when  not  in  use 
by  a  sliding  band,  which  in  some  instruments  was  pushed  up  to 
open  the  hole,  and  in  other  cases  pulled  down  for  the  same 
purpose.  I  might  suggest  that  possibly  άνασπάν  and  κατασπάν 
in  these  passages  are  not  direct  opposites ;  that  κατασπάν  may 
be  used  in  its  primary  sense  of  '  to  draw  down,'  and  άνασπάν  in 
its  secondary  sense  of  *to  open'  (being  answered  in  (2)  by 
κλ'ινΐΐν,  '  to  shut '). 

Von  Jan  supposes  {Phil.  XXXVIII,  p.  382),  that  the  σΰριγξ 

was  a  joint  at  the  lower  end  of  the   αυλός  which  could   be 

detached  from  it.     But  this  view,  as  Mr.  Howard  points  out, 

does  violence  to  the  passage  of  Aristoxenus  before  us,  as  may 

244 


NOTES 

be  seen  from  his  own  explanation  of  it.  '  Der  Theil  also,  auf 
welchem  man  nach  Abnahme  der  Syrinx  weiter  blasen  kann, 
heisst  selbst  Syrinx,  und  das  Blasen  darauf  σνρίττίΐν.' 

P.  113,  1.  5.  οκτώ  is  the  excellent  emendation  of  Westphal 
for  €K  των  of  the  MSB.  The  eight  concordant  intervals  are,  The 
Fourth  :  The  Fifth  :  The  Octave  :  The  Fourth  and  an  Octave  : 
The  Fifth  and  an  Octave  :  The  interval  of  Two  Octaves  :  The 
Fourth  and  Two  Octaves  :  The  Fifth  and  Two  Octaves. 

11.  7-12.  For  Aristoxenus  the  Concords  are  the  elements  of 
intervals,  and  from  them  are  derived  directly  or  indirectly, 
by  processes  of  addition  and  subtraction,  all  the  discordant 
intervals.  Even  the  quarter-tone  must  be  thus  ascertained: 
From  a  Fifth  subtract  a  Fourth,  and  divide  the  result  into 
four  equal  parts.  The  latter  part  of  this  construction  is  un- 
satisfactory, for  how  is  the  ear  to  assure  itself  of  the  equality 
of  those  parts  ?  It  could  apparently  do  so  only  by  such  an 
immediate  recognition  of  the  interval  in  question  as  would 
render  any  method  of  ascertaining  it  nugatory. 

1.  8.  The  contrast  between  the  Pythagorean  and  Aristo- 
xenian  views  of  musical  science  comes  out  strongly  in  the 
definitions  of  a  tone.  For  the  Pythagoreans  a  tone  is  the 
difference  between  two  sounds  whose  rates  of  vibration  stand  in 
the  relation  8:9;  for  the  school  of  Aristoxenus,  the  difference 
between  a  Fourth  and  a  Fifth.  The  latter  explain  the  pheno- 
mena of  music  by  reducing  these  to  more  immediately  known 
musical  phenomena,  the  former  by  reducing  them  to  their 
mathematical  antecedents. 

των  πρώτων  συμφώνων.     That  is,  the  Fourth  and  Fifth. 

1.  18.  For  καλονμίνον  τά  re  πλαστά  of  the  MSS  I  read  κατ^χό- 
μ€νον  τά  ye  πλύστα.  If  καΚουμ^νον  be  retained  it  necessitates  the 
insertion  of  the  phrase  δια  τεσσάρων,  to  give  it  a  meaning  ; 
similarly,  virb  τ€σσάρων  φθόγγων^  being  left  without  any  con- 
struction, calls  for  some  such  word  as  κατ€χόμβνον. 

τά  ye  πλ€Ίστα.     Usually,  not  always  ;  see  note  on  p.  115,  1.  I. 

1.  20.  τίνα  df)  τάξιν  .  .  .  κινούνται.  This  is  undoubtedly,  as 
Westphal  has  pointed  out,  a  marginal  scholium  that  has  crept 
into  the  text  and  displaced  the  conclusion  of  the  preceding 
sentence.     Observe  the  use  of  etVi  instead  of  eVn. 

245 


ARISTOXENUS 

1.  21.  For  the  meaning  of  the  terms  'variable'  and  'fixed' 
notes,  see  Introduction  A,  §  8. 

P.  114,  1.  14.  τούτων  8e  το  μβν  ΤΚαττον  κ.τ.λ.  According  to 
Marquard's  explanation  (accepted  by  Westphal)  of  this  difficult 
sentence,  τ6  '4λαττον  and  το  μάζον  are  used  by  brachylogy  for  το 
'  ουκ  ΤΚαττον  αφίσταται,^  and  το  *  ου  μύζον  αφίσταται,'  and  thus 
repeat  the  '4\αττον  and  μάζον  of  the  preceding  sentence.  Against 
this  it  may  be  urged  that  the  brachylogy  is  a  very  violent  one ; 
and  also  that  on  this  interpretation  the  latter  clause  of  the  sen- 
tence implies  that  the  existence  of  a  Lichanus  further  than  two 
tones  from  the  Mese  was  a  matter  of  dispute.  But  of  such  a 
Lichanus  we  have  no  evidence.  Mr.  Monro  would  avoid  the 
latter  difficulty  by  supposing  το  μείζον  to  be  used  illogically  in 
the  sense  of  '  the  question  of  the  greater  limit.' 

I  consider  that  the  misinterpretation  of  this  passage  is  due  to 
the  natural  but  false  assumption  that  το  'ίλαττον  refers  to  the  'έλατ- 
τον  of  the  preceding  sentence.  On  my  view  τούτων  =  τούτων  των 
διαστημάτων  =  του  τονιαίου  διασττ/ματο?  καΐ  του  8ιτόνου :  the  geni- 
tive is  a  partitive  one  ;  το  %\αττον  τούτων  {των  διαστημάτων)  and 
το  μύζον  τούτων  mean  respectively  the  tone  interval  and  the 
ditone  interval.  The  general  object  of  the  sentence  beginning 
at  τούτων  is  to  justify  not  the  smallness  but  the  largeness  of  the 
localization  of  the  Lichanus.  In  fact  Aristoxenus  would  say, 
'  The  interval  between  the  Lichanus  and  Mese  cannot  be  less 
than  one  tone  or  greater  than  two  tones.  The  lesser  of  these 
distances  (which  I  have  assigned  as  the  minimum  limit  of  the 
space  between  the  Lichanus  and  Mese),  is  found  in  the  Diatonic 
genus,  and  is  consequently  of  unquestionable  legitimacy ;  the 
greater  of  these  distances  (which  I  have  assigned  as  the  maxi- 
mum limit  of  the  space  between  the  Lichanus  and  Mese)  is 
admissible,  though  often  disputed  in  the  present  day,  and  was 
the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  Ancient  Enharmonic  music' 

1.  15.  ούχ  is  plainly  wrong,  as  is  seen  from  the  following 
σνγχωροΐτ   αν. 

1.  1 6.  ίτταχθίντων.  enaydv  means  to  lead  one  on  to  the 
recognition  of  a  general  principle  through  the  consideration  of 
particular  cases.     Hence  (τταγω-γη  =  induction. 

P.  115, 1. 1.  των  αρχαϊκών  τρόπων  Tols  τ€  πρώτοις  καΐ  tols  devTepoiS. 
246 


NOTES 

i 


w 


Besides  the  enharmonic  scale  of  the  form 

there  was  another  enharmonic  scale  (commonly  called  after  its 

inventor  Olympus),  of  the  form  F(^  J-  'J  ^  —  which  in- 
troduced but  one  note  of  division  into  the  tetrachord.  It  is 
possible,  as  Marquard  thinks,  that  these  two  scales  are  here 
referred  to  as  the  earlier  and  later  of  the  ancient  modes  ;  but 
the  phrase  is  a  strange  one. 

1.  3.  ol  μζν  yap  κ.τ.λ.  Aristoxenus  here  records  the  fact, 
familiar  to  us  from  other  sources,  of  the  gradual  extinction  of 
the  old  enharmonic  music.  The  interv^als  it  employed  were  so 
fine  and  required  such  delicacy  of  ear  and  voice,  that  it  can 
never  have  been  popular.  But,  as  we  saw  in  the  Introduction  A, 
§  6,  the  cause  which  not  only  accounts  for  but  justifies  its 
abandonment  is  the  necessarily  imperfect  determination  of  its 
intervals.  Aristoxenus  himself  was  quite  aware  of  this  deficiency, 
though  not  alive  to  the  seriousness  of  it.  In  a  passage  quoted 
by  Plutarch  {de  Miisica,  cap.  38,  1145  B),  after  assigning  as  one 
cause  of  the  disuse  of  the  enharmonic  music  the  difficulty  of 
hearing  such  a  small  interval  as  a  quarter-tone,  he  proceeds  to 
suggest  another  explanation,  eira  και  το  μη  dvvaaOai  ληφθηναι  δια 
συμφωνία^  το  μίγβθος  καθάττίρ  τό  re  ημιτόνιον  και  τον  τόνον  κα\  τα 
λοιττά  Se  των  τοιούτων  διαστημάτων.  '  Besides,  there  is  the  fact  that 
the  magnitude  of  this  interval  (i.e.  the  quarter-tone)  cannot  be 
determined  by  concord,  as  can  the  semitone,  the  tone,  and  the 
like.'  For  this  important  principle  of  the  determination  of 
discordant  intervals  by  concord,  see  pp.  145,  146. 

1.  6.  ykvKa'iveiv.  Anonymus  (§  26)  contrasts  the  Diatonic 
genus  as  '  άνδρικά>τ€ρον  .  .  .  κα\  ανστηρότ€ρον '  with  the  Chromatic 
as  '  fjdiOTOv  re  και  γορρώτπτοι/.' 

1.  20.  The  subdivisions  of  the  genus  are  called  χρόαι  or 
*  shades.'     See  note  on  p.  116,  1.  4. 

P.  116,  1.  I.  For  convenience,  the  word  Pycnum  will  be 
retained  in  the  translation  to  denote  the  sum  of  the  two  small 
intervals  of  the  tetrachord,  when  that  sum  is  less  than  the 
remainder  of  the  Fourth.  For  the  meaning  of  the  term  see 
p.  139,  11.  29-30. 

247 


ARISTOXENUS 

Pycnum 


In  the  Enharmonic  tetrachord  p^     J~")J    ^     ^"^—^  the 


sum  of  the  intervals  between  e  and  xe,  and  between  e  and 
/  is  a  Pycnum,  because  it  is  less  than  the  interval  between  / 
and  a. 

Pycnum 

For  the  same  reasons  in  the  Chromatic 


^^^^ 


tetrachord  the  sum  of  the   intervals  between  e  and  f,  and  / 
and  jf/is  a  Pycnum. 


But  in  the  Diatonic  tetrachord   ro=g==^  J    J     ^  =   there 


is  no  Pycnum,  for  the  sum  of  the  intervals  between  e  and/,  and 
/and  ^  is  greater  than  that  between  g  and  a. 

I.  4.  τούτων  δ'  όντως  κ.τ.λ.  We  have  already  seen  that  the 
Greeks  recognize  three  genera,  differentiated  by  the  magnitudes 
of  the  intervals  into  which  they  divide  the  tetrachord ;  and  we 
have  given  as  the  plan  of  the  Enharmonic,  quarter-tone,  quarter- 
tone,  ditone  ;  of  the  Chromatic,  semitone,  semitone,  tone  and 
a-half ;  of  the  Diatonic,  semitone,  tone,  tone.  But  it  will 
immediately  be  asked,  'Are  not  other  divisions  intermediate 
between  these  equally  permissible?  Why  not  for  instance 
divide  your  tetrachord  into  third  of  a  tone,  third  of  a  tone, 
eleven-sixths  of  a  tone  ?  Or  into  five-twelfths  of  a  tone,  semitone, 
nineteen-twelfths  of  a  tone?'  Certainly,  Aristoxenus  replies, 
the  possible  divisions  of  the  tetrachord,  the  possible  locations 
of  the  Parhypate  and  Lichanus,  are  as  infinite  as  the  points  of 
space.  But  the  ear  ignoring  the  mathematical  differences 
attends  to  the  common  features  in  the  impressions  which  these 
divisions  make  upon  it,  and  constitutes  accordingly  three  genera, 
the  Enharmonic,  Chromatic,  and  Diatonic,  subdividing  the 
latter  two  again  into  χρόαι,  that  is  colours  or  shades  of  distinc- 
tion ;  the  Chromatic  into  the  Soft,  the  Hemiolic  and  the  Tonic  ; 
the  Diatonic  into  the  lower  or  Flat,  and  the  Sharp  or  higher. 
It  is  evident  then  that  each  of  these  subclasses  covers  many 
differences  of  numerical  division ;  but  one  division  is  taken  by 
Aristoxenus  as  typical  of  each. 

The  exact  proportions  of  these  typical  divisions  are  exhibited 
248 


NOTES 

in  the  following  table  in  which  the  tetrachord  is  in  each  case 
represented  by  a  line  divided  into  thirty  equal  parts,  each  part 
consequently  being  the  twelfth  of  a  tone.  The  places  of  the 
Parhypate  are  definitely  marked  as  they  are  given  in  pp.  141, 142 ; 
in  tMs  present  passage  their  positions  are  less  accurately  stated. 

Table  of  the  Genera  and  Shades. 

,JL,  =  one-twelfth  of  a  tone. 

,^  .  ^  ,  ^  ,  =  a  quarter-tone,  or  the  least  Enharmonic  diesis. 

,^,^34    _  a  third  of  a  tone,  or  the  least  Chromatic  diesis. 


12      3      4      5      6 


=  a  semitone. 


1     2     3    4    5     6     τ     8     9    10  11  12  —  ^  tone. 
Enharmonic 
Parhypate    Lichanus 

1   2   3  I  4   5   β  I  7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30 

'  '  I  ■      I  '  '  ■  ' '  ' 

Chromatic  (soft) 
Parhj'pate        Lichanus 

1234|5β78|9     10    11    12    13    14    15    16   17    18    19    20    21    22    23    24   25    26    27    28    29    30 

Chromatic  (Hemiolic) 
Parhypate        Lichanus 

123415   6789  I  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30 

Chromatic  (Tonic) 

Parhypate  Lichanus 

1   2   3   4   5   6  I  7   8   9  10  11  12 1 13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30 

I I ' 

Diatonic  (flat) 

Parhypate  Lichanus 

1   2   3   4   5   6  I  7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  I  16  17  18  1 9  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30 

Diatonic  (sharp) 

Parhypate  Lichanus 

1   2   3   4   5   6  I  7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  I  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30 

1.  19.    TO  χρώμα,  '  the  particular  species  of  chromatic'     ήμι- 
όλίον,  '  in  the  ratio  of  three  to  two ' ;    because  this  was  the 

249 


ARISTOXENUS 

relation  between  the  Pycnum  of  the  Hemiolic  Chromatic  and 
the  Pycnum  of  the  Enharmonic  scale  (9  and  6  respectively  in 
the  above  table). 

P.  117,  1.  4.  δα  γαρ  κ.τ.λ.  These  words  are  followed  in  some 
of  the  MSS  by  a  detailed  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  third  of 
any  quantity  exceeds  the  fourth  of  the  same  quantity  by  a 
twelfth.  It  runs  as  follows  :  eVei5;^7rep  6  tOuos  ev  μ^ν  χρώματι  els 
τρία  diaipelrai,  το  δβ  τριτημόριον  καΚ^Ίται  χρωματική  dieais'  iv  αρ- 
μονία de  els  δ  {τίσσαρα  Μ)  diaipelTai,  το  de  τεταρτημόριον  (δ  μόρων  Μ) 
καλίΐται  αρμονική  δίεσίί,  το  ουν  τριτημόριον  {y  μόρων  Μ)  τον  αντου 
καΐ  evos  του  τ€ταρτημορίου  (δ  μορίου  ?  Μ)  του  αντου  δωδβκάτω  vnep- 
exei).  οίον  ώ?  en\  τον  φ.  αν  διελω  τον  φ  els  y.  δ.  κα\  τταΚιν 
τον  αντον  φ  els  δ.δ  (δ.  y.  restituit  Marquard),  ev  μεν  τγι  els  y.  δ. 
diaipeaei  γίνονται  reaaapes  Tpiades,  ev  de  τβ  els  δ.  δ.  (δ.  y.  restituit 
Marquard)  rpels  TeTpades.  vnepexei  ουν  η  δ  τη5  y.  δ.  [y  restituit 
Marquard)  το  τριτημόριον  τοΰ  τεταρτημορίου  μονάδι,  onep  εστί  του 
όλον  δωδίκατον.  Marquard  very  properly  relegated  this  gloss 
to  the  Critical  Commentary. 

P.  118,  1.  3.  άπeίpoυs  τον  αριθμόν.  Aristoxenus  means  of 
course  not  that  there  can  be  more  than  one  Lichanus  in  any 
one  scale,  but  that,  given  any  note  and  its  Fourth  above  as 
boundaries,  one  can  constitute  an  infinite  number  of  scales 
differentiated  by  the  positions  of  their  variable  notes,  that  is 
of  their  Lichani  and  Parhypatae. 

1.  15.  Marquard,  followed  by  Westphal,  changes  the  order 
of  the  sentences  here  and  reads  κοινωνεί  yap  τα  δύο  γένη  των 
παρνπατων — ό  δ'  eTepos  ϊδιos  τψ  άpμovίas,  Οη  the  ground  that  the 
former  sentence  gives  the  explanation  of  ό  μεν  koivos  του  τε  διατόνου 
κα\  τον  χρωματοε  and  SO  must  immediately  follow  it.  But  the  MSS. 
order  is  correct,  κοινωνεί  yap  κ.τ.λ.  explains  not  the  phrase  ό  μεν 
KOIVOS  κ.τ.λ.,  but  the  principal  sentence  πapvπάτηs  δε  δύο  είσΐ  τόποι, 
and  ό  μεν  KOIVOS  .  .  .  r^f  appovlas  is  a  parenthesis.  The  sense 
is,  'The  loci  of  the  Parhypate  are  not  three,  like  those  of  the 
Lichanus,  but  two  (one  common  to  two  genera,  and  one  par- 
ticular) ;  for  the  Chromatic  and  Diatonic  have  their  Parhypatae 
in  common.' 

For  τα  δύο  γένη  Compare  p.  126,  1.  8,  ού  yap  επραγματεύοντο  περ\ 
των  δύο  γενών,  αλλά  περ\  avTrjs  r^y  άpμovίas. 
250 


NOTES 

I.  17.  χρωματική  5e  κ.τ.λ.  There  are  two  loci  of  the  Parhy- 
pate ;  the  line  4  in  the  above  table,  which  is  peculiar  to  the 
Enharmonic  genus,  and  the  line  consisting  of  5  and  6  which 
is  common  to  the  Chromatic  and  Diatonic.  The  meaning  of 
this  last  assertion  is  that  the  Diatonic  and  Chromatic  genera 
borrow  one  another's  Parhypatae,  so  that  you  may  melodiously 
combine  in  a  tetrachord  any  Parhypate  in  5  and  6  with  any 
Lichanus  in  the  lines  from  8  to  18  inclusive  wi'/k  this  important 
exception  however  that  the  lowest  ifiterval  of  the  tetrachord  must 
never  be  greater  than  the  one  above  it.    See  Introduction  A,  §  7. 

II.  18-21.  Of  this  most  important  law  Aristoxenus  offers  no 
proof  beyond  an  appeal  to  the  ear — y'vyv^rai  yap  €μμξ\ζς  rerpa- 
χορδον  κ.τ.λ. 

I.  21.  ανισον  άμφητερως,  '  unequal  in  both  ways  '  that  is  '  greater 
and  less.' 

II.  23,  24.  The  substitution  of  παρνπάτης  re  χρωμαηκηί  της  βαρύ- 
τατης for  the  παρυπάτης  τ€  χρωματικής  παρυπάτης  of  the  MSS 
completely  restores  the  sense.  Aristoxenus  proves  his  state- 
ments that  the  Chromatic  and  Diatonic  genera  borrow  each 
other's  Parhypatae  by  appealing  to  the  extreme  case.  A  melo- 
dious tetrachord  is  obtained  from  the  combination  of  the  lowest 
Chromatic  Parhypate,  and  the  highest  Diatonic  Lichanus. 

P.  119,  1.  2.  I  retain  σνντ^β^ίς  the  reading  of  Μ  VERS. 
Aristoxenus  means  that  he  has  exhibited  the  extent  of  the  locus 
of  the  Parhypate,  both  as  divided  into  the  loci  peculiar  to 
certain  genera  and  colours,  and  as  a  whole  embracing  all  those 
divisions.  In  p.  1 15, 1. 19,  he  says  that  having  determined  the  loci 
as  wholes  {των  δλων  τόπων)  he  must  proceed  to  determine  their 
divisions  according  to  genus  and  colour.  Here  he  sums  up  his 
account  of  the  locus  of  the  Parhypate  by  stating  that  he  has 
dealt  with  it  from  both  these  points  of  view. 

Marquard,  followed  by  Westphal,  reads  eWe^et's•,  and  trans- 
lates, 'The  locus  of  the  Parhypate  is  clear  (from  the  above 
remarks)  as  to  its  division  and  its  place  of  insertion.'  But  this 
translation  conveniently  ignores  the  words  δσος  εστίν,  which 
show  that  the  size  of  the  locus  is  what  is  here  considered  ;  and 
the  space  of  a  locus  is  not  affected  by  its  place. 

1.  15.  Aristoxenus  here  returns  to  his  criticism  of  the  method 

251 


ARISTOXENUS 

of  καταπύκνωσίζ  (cp.  note  on  p.  loi,  1.  i),  and  shows  that  it 
supplies  a  false  conception  of  musical  continuity  or  sequence ; 
in  other  words,  that  it  gives  a  false  answer  to  the  question, 
'  Starting  from  a  given  note,  how  are  we  to  determine  what 
is  the  next  note  to  it  above  or  below?'  For  it  ignores  the 
8ύναμις  of  the  given  note,  that  is,  its  function  in  the  system 
of  which  it  is  a  member ;  and  regarding  it  merely  as  a  point 
of  pitch,  it  declares  that  the  next  note  to  it  is  that  point  of 
pitch  which  is  separated  from  it  by  the  smallest  possible  interval. 
But  Aristoxenus  sees  that  though  there  may  be  a  certain  truth 
in  this  answer  from  the  point  of  view  of  Physics,  it  is  musically 
absurd.  Let  us  take  the  note/,  and  ask  what  is  the  next  note 
above  it.  But  for  the  purposes  of  music  /  is  nothing  except 
as  a  member  of  a  system  or  scale,  and  the  question  of  the  next 
note  to  it  is  meaningless  until  its  function  in  a  scale  is  deter- 
mined. Let  us  then  restate  our  question  thus  :  '  what  is  the  next 
note  above  an  /  which  is  the  second  passing  note  in  an  enhar- 
monic scale  ascending  from  e  ? '  Now  the  answer  to  this  cannot 
be  x/",  as  the  theory  of  καταπυκνωσις  would  lead  us  to  believe ; 
for  that  would  imply  the  possibility  of  singing  three  quarter- 
tones  one  after  the  other ;  whereas  it  is  a  law  of  the  voice,  and 
consequently  a  law  of  music,  that  only  two  dieses  can  occur  in 
succession.  In  fact,  the  theory  of  κατοπύκρωσιε  in  its  complete 
application  would  imply  the  possibility  of  singing  in  succession 
as  many  quarter-tones  as  are  contained  in  the  whole  compass 
of  the  scale. 

1.  19.  ουχ  ΟΤΙ  like  ούχ  δττως  is  an  elliptical  phrase  signifying 
'not  to  speak  of,'  and  is  used  for  ου  μόνον  ου.  Cp.  p.  130, 1.  7, 
ού  γαρ  οτι  πίρας  της  αρμονικής.  The  corruption  of  the  MSS 
reading  here  might  be  traced  through  the  following  stages ;  the 
insertion  of  ov  after  ort  by  a  scribe  who,  ignorant  of  the  ellipse, 
felt  the  want  of  a  negative ;  the  misreading  of  on  ov  as  τοΰ ; 
the  consequent  change  of  δυνατόν  to  δυνασθαι  to  supply  an 
infinitive  for  the  article,  the  addition  of  μη  to  supply  the  place 
of  the  lost  ol ;  the  change  of  μίΚωδήσαι  to  μ^Κωδύσθαι  to  explain 
TTj  φωντ},  the  true  construction  of  which  had  been  hidden  by 
the  corruption  of  δυνατόν, 

δύσίΐς  οκτώ  και  άκοσιν.    Why  twenty-eight  quarter-tones 
252 


NOTES 

and  not  rather  twenty-four,  seeing  that  there  are  six  tones 
in  an  octave  ?  Because  some  scales,  such  as  the  Dorian,  con- 
sisted of  seven  tones.     See  Introduction  A,  §  20. 

1.  24.  η  μικρω  κ.τ.λ.  This  seems  to  be  a  somewhat  contemptuous 
reference  of  Aristoxenus  to  the  fact  that  in  strict  mathematical 
accuracy  a  Fourth  is  not  quite  two  tones  and  a  half.  As  we 
have  often  seen  already,  Aristoxenus  is  concerned  with  musical 
phenomena  with  a  view  to  their  artistic  use,  not  their  physical 
investigation. 

P.  120, 1.  2.  ov  8η  προσ€κτ€ον  et.  Marquard  retains  the  reading 
of  the  MSS  and  translates  'Nicht  also  ist  fur  die  Aufeinanderfolge 
darauf  zu  sehen,  wann  sie  aus  gleichen,  wann  aber  aus  unglei- 
chen  entsteht.'  But  ore  is  relative  usually,  demonstrative  some- 
times ;  but  never  interrogative. 

The  general  meaning  of  the  passage  is  clear.  The  nature 
of  melodic  consecution,  Aristoxenus  would  say,  cannot  be  ex- 
pressed by  any  law  enjoining  a  succession  of  so  many  equal 
or  so  many  unequal  intervals.  Thus,  we  cannot  say,  'Two 
equal  intervals  must  be  followed  by  two  unequal,'  for  while  this 
rule  is  fulfilled  by  the  Enharmonic  scale,  it  is  violated  by  the 
Diatonic,  which  has  three  tones  in  succession.  Nor  can  we 
say  'three  equal  intervals  may  follow  one  another';  for  while 
this  is  possible  in  the  Diatonic  genus,  it  is  impossible  in  the 
Enharmonic.  [Cp.  p.  143, 11.  21-23.]  Translate, '  We  must  not 
fix  our  attention  on  the  fact  that  in  certain  cases,'  &c. 

1.  13.  I  read  μ€τά  for  μ€ν  of  the  MSS.  μ€ν  is  out  of  place, 
as  there  is  no  antithesis  between  this  assumption  and  the 
following  ;  and  some  preposition  is  required  to  give  a  con- 
struction to  TO  πνκνον  .  .  .  σύστημα. 

1.  i6.  νποκ€ίσθω  de  κα.\  των  έξης  κ.τ.λ.  Here  Aristoxenus  states 
for  the  first  time  his  fundamental  law  of  continuity ;  that  if  a 
series  of  notes  be  continuous,  any  note  in  that  series  will  form 
either  a  Fourth  with  the  fourth  note  in  order  from  it  above  or 
below,  or  a  Fifth  with  the  fifth  note  in  order  from  it  above 
or  below,  or  will  fulfil  both  these  conditions. 

Thus  1 


ARISTOXENUS 

is  a  legitimately  continuous  scale.  A,  though  it  does  not  form 
a  Fourth  with  c,  forms  a  Fifth  with  e ;  B^  though  it  does  not 
form  a  Fifth  with  x*?,  forms  a  Fourth  with  e ;  xB  does  not  form 
a  Fifth  with  f,  but  forms  a  Fourth  with  x^ ;  ίτ  does  not  form  a 
Fifth  with  a,  but  forms  a  Fourth  with/";  ^  forms  a  Fourth  with 
a  and  a  Fifth  with  b ;  and  so  on. 
On  the  other  hand, 


^=31^^: 


i*^*z=.' 


is  not  a  legitimate  scale ;  for  b  forms  neither  a  Fourth  with  ^e 
nor  a  Fifth  with/ 

1.  22.  Cuff  eVi  TO  πο\υ  i.  e.  in  the  Enharmonic  and  Chromatic 
scales,  but  not  in  the  Diatonic. 

1.  25.  €ναντίωζ  τίθ€σθαι  κ.τ.Χ.,  τα  δύο  Ίσα  are  the  two  equal 
intervals  of  the  Pycnum  :  τα  δύο  άνισα  are  (ι)  the  complement 
of  the  Fourth  and  (2)  the  disjunctive  tone.  Now  in  the  scale 
descending  from  the  Pycnum 


the  disjunctive  tone  lies  next  the  Pycnum,  and  the  complement 
of  the  Fourth  second  from  it ;  while  in  the  scale  ascending  from 
the  Pycnum 


3Ξ 


0*0        Q 

we  find  the  complement  of  the  Fourth  next  the  Pycnum,  and 
the  disjunctive  tone  second  from  it. 

P.  121,  1.  5.     Every  compound  interval  can  be  analysed  into 
simple  intervals  but  not  into  simple  magnitudes.    Thus,  a  Fourth 
254 


NOTES 

in  the  Enharmonic  scale  is  analysed  into  quarter-tone,  quarter- 
tone,  ditone.  Now  quarter-tones  are  simple  intervals  and  simple 
magnitudes  at  the  same  time  ;  for  quite  apart  from  any  con- 
sideration of  systems  or  scales,  no  smaller  musical  magnitude 
than  a  quarter-tone  exists  for  ear  or  voice.  But  the  ditone 
though  a  simple  interval  in  this  scale,  since  the  voice  in  this 
scale  cannot  divide.it,  is  not  by  any  means  a  simple  magnitude. 
For  if  we  abstract  rom  consideration  of  systems  and  scales,  a 
ditone  as  a  space  is  obviously  reducible  to  two  tones,  and 
even  farther. 

1.  7.  This  passage  is  quite  corrupt  in  the  MSS.  I  read 
άκρων  for  άρχων,  e'v  for  ev,  and  ζσωθ^ν  for  ζξωθ^ν  ;  insert  ων  after 
φθόγγων,  and  omit  it  after  Άκρων,  and  insert  €κάστον  before 
€κατ€ρωθ€ν. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  oi  έξης  φθόγγοί  are  not  neces- 
sarily consecuti\'e  or  immediately  successive  notes ;  the  phrase 
applies  equally  to  notes  that  are  in  the  safne  li?te  of  succession 
even  if  at  a  distance  from  one  another.  Thus,  in  our  major 
scale  of  C,  the  notes  D,  A,  B,  are  e|^?,  because  members  of 
the  same  legitimate  scale.  Now  an  άγωγί]  is  a  sequence  of 
consecutive  or  immediately  successive  notes,  and  this  could 
not  be  expressed  by  saying  merely  that  it  proceeds  διά  των 
ΐ^ψ  φθόγγων.  The  further  necessary  qualification  is  given  by 
the  following  words :  the  successive  notes  must  be  separated 
from  one  another  by  simple  intervals ;  must,  in  other  words, 
be  the  nearest  possible  notes  to  one  another  in  their  scale. 

Direct  sequence  is  a  species  of  sequence  in  general.     Thus 


is  a  sequence,  but  not  direct ; 


m 


is  a  direct  sequence. 

ίσωθ€ν  των  άκρων  means  'within  the  extremes,'  that  is  'between 
the  first  and  last  notes.'  The  first  note  of  a  sequence  is  not 
preceded,  the  last  note  not  succeeded,  by  a  simple  interval. 
[Mr.  Monro  would  retain  €ξωθ€ν  in  the  sense  of  *  except.'] 

255 


ARISTOXENUS 

P.  122,  1.  ΙΟ.  τούτων.  For  ovtos  in  the  sense  of  iste,  cp. 
p.  132, 1.  24. 

1.  13.  There  may  be  an  allusion  here  to  such  a  doctrine 
as  we  find  in  the  Phzlebus,  or  possibly  το  nepas  may  be  an  ac- 
cusative in  apposition  to  the  following  sentence,  and  mean  '  as 
the  sum  or  final  conclusion  of  the  matter.'  In  the  latter  case 
I  should  prefer  to  read  τάγαθόν. 

1.  2o.  Marquard  quite  unnecessarily  reads  (Ιλημμίντ}  for 
ίίρημζντ],  and  gives  the  following  reason  for  the  change  ;  *  Kann 
man  denn  eine  prior  opinio  griechisch  einfach  eine  €ΐρημ€νη 
νπόληψις  nennen,  wenn  vorher  von  einem  Aussprechen  gar 
keine  Rede  gewesen  ist?'    ή  βίρημ^νη  νπόλη-^ις  refers  back  to 

νπόλαμβάροντα  of  1.  9• 

P.  123, 1.  I.  ως  €φη.  The  MSS  read  ως  ίφην  which  Marquard 
retains,  translating  '  aus  den  genannten  Griinden.'  But  ώ?  ΐφψ 
is  not  the  same  as  as  dirov,  and  must  refer,  not  to  avTas  ταύτας 
τας  αίτιας,  but  to  δι'  αυτας  ταύτας  τας  αίτιας  npoeXeye  ^ΑριστοτίΚης, 
and  Aristoxenus  has  not  said  //lat 

1. 1 1.  Marquard  ruins  the  sense  of  this  passage  by  his  insertion 
of  και  between  otl  and  καθ"  όσον,  and  his  mistranslation  of  ούδ' 
άκούσαντ^ς  όλως — '  das  aber,  dass  die  Musik  und  in  wie  wait  sie 
nutzen  kann,  verstehn  sie  gar  nicht.'  The  sentence  to  δ'  δη  .  .  . 
ώφίλί'ίν  is  elliptical.  The  complete  statement  which  Aristoxenus 
had  made  was  on  η  μ^ν  τοιαύτη  μουσική  βλάπτ€ΐ  η  de  τοιαύτη 
ωφελεί,  καθ^  όσον  μουσική  8ύναται  ώφελειν.  The  careleSS  listeners 
just  caught  the  first  part  of  the  statement  δτι  ή  μεν  .  .  .  τοι- 
αύτη ώφελβί  :  the  concluding  qualification  οτι  [η  μβν  .  .  .  τοιαύτη 
ωφελεί]  καθ'  όσον  μουσική  δύναται  ώφελεΓι»  escaped  their  ears 
altogether.  In  such  a  sentence  as  this  δτι  serves  the  same 
purpose  as  inverted  commas  in  English. 

Westphal  rewrites  the  whole  sentence  and  destroys  its 
meaning. 

1.  13.  I  read  ^μπ^φοι  for  aueipoi.  If  aneipoi  be  retained  we 
must  suppose  a  deficiency  in  the  MSS.  Marquard  supplies  it 
by  inserting  ayvoeiv  πρόσ€ΐσιν  after  βστίν.  As  he  translates 
'  kommen  aber  herzu,'  it  would  seem  that  he  has  confused  the 
forms  of  είμ'ι  and  e'/ut. 

1.  15.  ως  νϋν  έχει  of  the  MSS  is  meaningless.  The  present 
256 


NOTES 

condition  of  the  science  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  argu- 
ment. 

1.  1 8.  νπάρχίΐ  καθάπ^ρ  ael  Xeyerai.  Marquard  retaining  the 
^of  the  MSS  translates  'many  other  things  are  indispensable 
to  the  musician  than  those  that  are  constantly  said  to  be  so' ; 
but  both  the  grammar  and  sense  of  this  sentence  are  doubtful. 
Is  there  any  evidence  or  any  likelihood  that  there  was  2i perpetual 
misunderstanding  of  the  qualification  of  a  musician  ?  Would 
not  τΓολλο  Ιτζρα  ^mean  *  many  things  different  from'  rather  than 
'  many  things  in  addition  to '  ?  And  why  not  Inpa  η  a  rather 
than  erepa  η  καθάπ(ρ.  καθάπ^ρ  aei  λίγ^ται,  if  we  omit  the  ή,  means 
'as  we  consistently  assert'  [see,  for  example,  p.  95,  11.  13-15]• 
For  a  similar  use  of  the  present  passive  of  λέγω,  cp,  p.  130,  1.  16, 
oTi  δ'  αληθή  τα  Xeyo/xei/a,  '  that  our  assertion  is  true ' ;  also  p.  153, 
1.  6.  Westphal  secures  the  right  sense  by  the  clumsy  insertion 
of  TovTo  after  fj. 

P.  124,  1.  2.  In  this  paragraph  Aristoxenus  defines  his 
position  in  relation  to  the  question  What  is  the  foundation  of 
musical  science  ?  On  the  one  hand,  he  rejects  the  intellectual 
or  mathematical  theory  of  the  Pythagoreans  on  the  ground  that 
the  principles,  from  which  they  seek  to  deduce  the  facts  of 
music,  lie  outside  the  sphere  of  music  altogether,  and  fail  to 
account  for  those  facts.  On  the  other  hand,  he  rejects  equally 
the  blind  empiricism  which  takes  the  single  facts  and  registers 
them  without  any  attempt  to  ensure  completeness,  or  ascertain 
the  general  law.     See  Introduction  B,  §  2. 

1.  17.  Let  us  suppose  that  as  we  are  Hstening  to  a  passage 
of  music  in  the  diatonic  scale 


m 


^ 


the  voice  passes  from  |-^-   J    =  to  fm — ^ — ;  to  apprehend 

this  musical  phenomenon,  what  faculties  must  we  employ  ? 
In  the  first  place  we  obviously  require  our  sense  of  hearing 
to  tell  us  that  a  semitone  has  been  sung;  but  that  is  not 
enough.  We  require  our  intellect  also  to  form  a  conception 
of  the  system  in  which  the  e  and /occur,  and  to  identify  their 

MACRAN  S  257 


ARISTOXENUS 

functions  in  it ;  so  that  the  phenomenon  before  us  may  be  for  us 


something   quite   distinct   from   the  passage  from  P^ — ~^^^~ 


to  F^^  j         in  the  enharmonic  scale 


i 


3ΞΞ3Ξ 


1.  1 8.  των  φθόγγων,  τούτων  of  the  MSS  is  wrong.  The 
διαστήματα  Aristoxenus  always  regards  as  mere  distances  ; 
functions  he  attributes  only  to  the  notes.  Cp.  p.  127,  1.  3,  ουκ 
αυτάρκη  τα  διαστήματα  κ.τ.Χ. 

δννάμίΐς.  δνναμις  signifies  the  function  which  a  note  dis- 
charges in  relation  to  the  other  notes  of  a  scale.  Thus  in 
modern  music  the  δύναμις  of  δ  is  that  of  a  leading  note  in 
the  key  of  c,  that  of  a  dominant  in  the  key  of  e,  that  of  a  tonic 
in  the  key  of  d. 

P.  124, 1.  22-P.  125, 1.  2.  Marquard  and  Westphal  have  com- 
pletely missed  the  meaning  of  this  passage,  τω  μονσικώ  is  not 
the  musician  in  the  sense  of  the  musical  artist ;  nor  is  Aristo- 
xenus labouring  at  the  obvious  fact  that  keenness  of  sense 
is  a  sine  qua  non  of  artists  in  general  as  distinguished  from 
students  of  science,  τω  μουσικω  is  the  student  of  musical 
science ;  and  the  point  to  which  Aristoxenus  would  draw  our 
attention  is  that  Music  presents  us  with  a  science  for  which 
accuracy  of  sense  is  indispensable.  In  this  respect  musical  and 
geometrical  science  differ  from  one  another.  The  propositions 
of  Geometry  are  deduced  from  principles  which,  though  possibly 
in  the  last  resort  principles  of  sight  in  the  sense  that  without 
sight  we  never  could  have  conceived  them,  are  yet  so  abstract 
and  fundamental  that  their  acceptance  accompanies  the  lowest 
use  of  that  faculty.  But  the  principles  of  musical  science  rest, 
not  on  the  presuppositions  of  hearing  in  general,  but  on  the 
evidence  of  the  developed  and  cultivated  ear.  That  a  straight 
line  is  the  shortest  distance  between  two  points  may  be  a  prin- 
ciple of  sight  in  the  sense  that  'straight,'  'distance,'  'two,'  &c. 
are  phenomena  of  sight ;  but  it  does  not  require  sharp  eyes  to 
apprehend  it.  On  the  other  hand  Aristoxenus'  proof  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  Fourth  [pp.  146-147]  depends  on  an  appeal 
258 


NOTES 


to  the  ear,  by  no  means  universal,  that  can  distinguish  a  concord 
from  a  discord. 

P.  125,  1.  6.  From  consideration  of  the  faculties  Aristoxenus 
turns  to  the  object  matter  which  those  faculties  are  to  appre- 
hend. Of  this  object  matter  he  finds  the  all-pervading 
characteristic  to  be  identity  under  difference,  the  co-existence 
of  a  permanent  and  a  changeable  element ;  and  cites  in  support 
of  his  statement  several  cases  which  may  be  made  clearer  by 
the  following  illustrations : 

(l)  1.  7.      [(ύθίως  γαρ  κ.τ.λ.]. 


Diatonic  c 


$ 


3^ 


g 


Enharmonic 


Here  we  have  as  permanent  element  the  relation  between  the 
fixed  notes  ;  as  changeable  the  position  of  the  intermediate  notes. 
(2)   1.  8.      [ττάλιι/  όταν  μένοντος  κ.τ.λ.]. 


^^^^^^^^ 


Compare  the  interval  between  Ε  and  A^  and  the  interval 
between  b  and  e.  Here  we  have  as  permanent  the  magnitude 
of  the  intervals  (a  Fourth) ;  as  variable  the  ^ϋναμις  of  the  notes 
containing  the  interval. 

(3)  1.  II.      [και  ttoKlv  όταν  του  airov  μίγίθονς  κ,τΧ.^. 


^ 


^^St 


zzt. 


i 


j_^— <gj- 


11 


u 


Q  Ω 

Here  we  have  the  same  magnitude,  a  Fifth,  appearing  in  two 
different  figures,  that  is  with  its  intervals  arranged  in  different 
orders. 

(4)  1.  13.      [ωσαύτως  de  και  όταν  k.t.X.], 


In  the  two  scales 


and 


ψ^    J  -^ 


±=A 


:3 — Ji 


^ 


S  2 


259 


ARISTOXENUS 

compare  the  tetrachord  between  b  and  £  in  the  former,  with 
that  between  a  and  d  in  the  latter.  Here  we  have  as 
permanent  the  size  and  figure  of  the  interval ;  as  variable  the 
function  of  the  tetrachord  which  in  one  case  is  modulating,  in 
the  other,  not  modulating. 

(5)  1.  16.      [και  yap  μίνοντος  του  λόγου  κ.τ.λ.]. 

Compare  the  three  following  feet  or  bars  : 

I  (22       es       (2   I    f'"  οκτασημω  /xf-ye^ei 

TO    δακτνΚικον  ^  (taking  the  crotchet  as  the  unit). 

yevoi,  TO  eV    '^    I      |         Γ~Γ"  I  I     ,     ,>.      ,  ,^ 

„„       .,  \  (Σι  •    Μ    d    βί  \    fv  ΐξασημω  uf-yci/ct. 

τω  ισω  λόγω 

!  '      "^      I 

\\\  <A       βέ    d         \    ^v  Τ€τρασημ(ύ  μίγίθξΐ. 

In  these  three  we  have  as  permanent  the  Dactylic  character 
Avith  its  ratio  of  equality  between  the  arsis  and  thesis  ;  while  the 
lengths  of  the  feet  differ,  their  difference  being  due  to  the  different 
rate  of  movement. 

(6)  1.  18.      [και  των  μζγίθων  μενόντων  κ.τ.λ.]. 

Compare  the  two  following  bars  or  feet : 

TO  haKTvKiKov  yfvos  το  ev  τω    I      1         Γ    [~^  |  |  ^ 
'ίσω  λόγω  *    '  ^  '    •*    ■*   -ί  I 

TO    Ιαμβικον    γίνοζ    το    iv  τω    ι 

διττλασίω  λόγω  \  cs.       Mm 

Here  we  have  the  μ€γ€θος  permanent,  six  crotchets  ;  but  the 
genus  varies,  the  first  being  *  dactylic  *  with  the  arsis  equal 
to  the  thesis,  the  second  being  'iambic'  with  the  arsis  double 
the  thesis. 

(7)  1.  19•      ['^<^'-  TO  aiiTO  μίγίθοζ  noba  κ.τ.λ.]. 
Compare  (a)  and  (d). 

Here  the  same  quantity,  eight  crotchets,  appears  in  (a)  as  a  single 
foot,  in  {δ)  as  a  pair  of  feet. 

(8)  1.  20.      [αί  διαφοραΐ  .   .   .  διαιρεσβωι/]. 

The  same  magnitude,  say  |  INI  |  may  be  divided  into  two 
260 


cV  ίξασημω  μ^γίΘίΐ. 


NOTES 

semibreves,  or  four  minims,  or  one  semibreve  and  two  minims, 
or  eight  crotchets,  or  one  semibreve,  one  minim,  and  two 
crotchets,  &c. 

(9)  1•  20.      [at  8ίαφοράι  ,  .  .   σχημάτων]. 

Let  us  suppose  a  certain  magnitude,  say  of  three  crotchets 
divided  into  a  minim  and  a  crotchet,  these  parts  may  be  arranged 

*■       '  '     ^, 

in  the  order    «     ezi     or  in  the  order    (J     ^  . 

(10)  1.  21.      [καθόλου  δ'  elnelv  κ.τ.λ.]. 

In  general,  rhythmical  science  reduces  the  infinite  Variety  and 
multiplicity  of  verse  to  combinations  of  a  few  primary  elements, 
namely  feet. 

1.  10.  The  omission  of  yap,  suggested  to  me  by  Mr.  Bury, 
restores  the  construction  of  this  sentence. 

P.  126,  1.  20.  I  have  changed  the  MSS  yeveai  to  μΑ^σ*. 
The  corruption  might  easily  be  explained  both  e  ret  materia 
and  also  through  the  proximity  of  yiyvopivai^.  For  the  plural  of 
^ίλο?  used  of  the  concrete,  cp.  p.  130,  I.  2. 

-yci/eat  is  plainly  wrong.  '  That  we  must  distinguish  the 
genera  if  we  are  to  follow  the  distinctions  that  occur  in  the  genera ' 
is  an  absurd  tautology.  A  comparison  with  p.  126,  1.  25,  ού 
hii  δ'  αψούν  /ί.τ.λ.  makes  clear  the  meaning  of  Aristoxenus'  warn- 
ing : — *  if  we  neglect  the  scientific  determination  of  any  differ- 
ence, we  shall  fail  to  detect  the  concrete  cases  of  that  difference 
which  meet  us  in  any  musical  composition.' 

[Since  writing  this  note  I  have  discovered,  in  collating  the 
Selden  MS,  the  letters  μ^Κ  crossed  out  before  yeVtCTi.] 

P.  127,  1.  3.  eVei  δ'  eVrii/  ονκ  κ.τ.λ.  For  example,  part  of  the 
connotation  of  the  terms  Mese  and  Hypate  is  that  they  are  the 
upper  and  lower  boundaries  of  a  Fourth ;  but  more  is  required 
to  determine  the  conception  of  these  notes  ;  for  the  same  might 
be  predicated  of  the  Nete  and  Paramese. 

1.  8.  See  Introduction  B,  §  2. 

1.  14.  ovBerepov  .  .  .  των  τρόπων.  One  method  is  to  exhaust  the 
acts  by  a  faithful  enumeration  ;  the  other  is  to  deduce  the  facts 
from  the  principle  on  which  they  depend. 

1.  24.  Pythagoras  of  Zacynthus  was  the  inventor  of  a  stringed 
instrument  called  the  τρίπονς.    See  Athenaeus,  xiv,  637. 

261 


ARISTOXENUS 

1.  25.  Agenor  of  Mitylene  is  quite  unknown.  See  Porphyry, 
p.  189. 

P.  128,  1.  6.  ττίμπτον  5'  cVti  k.t.\.  On  the  whole  paragraph 
cp.  Introduction  A,  §§  22-26,  where  I  have  explained  also  the 
uncertainty  as  to  the  key  of  the  Mixolydian  mode. 

1.  19.  τρισι  dUaeaiv.  The  separation  of  keys  by  intervals  of 
three  quarter-tones  would  be  an  application  of  the  principle 
of  κατατΓνκνωσίί.     Cp.  note  on  p.  ΙΟΙ,  1.  I. 

P.  129,  1.  4.  μ€ταβοληί.  The  modulation  with  which  Aristo- 
xenus  is  here  primarily  concerned  is  the  μ^ταβο^ή  συστηματική 
which  is  thus  defined  by  Bacchius  [ed.  Meibom,  p.  14, 1.  i],  όταν  (κ 
του  νποκ€ΐμξνον  συστήματος  els  CTCpov  σύστημα  αναχώρηση  ή  μβλωδ/α 
Ιτίραν  μίσην  κατασκίυάζονσα,  'the  transition  which  a  melody 
makes  from  one  scale  into  another  by  providing  for  itself  a  dif- 
ferent Mese.'  But  a  different  Mese  can  mean  nothing  else  than 
a  tonic  of  different  pitch,  so  this  transition  means  simply  modu- 
lation into  a  different  key.  The  conditions  of  its  possibility 
are  given  in  the  following  passage  of  the  Isagoge  [ed.  Meibom, 
p.  20,  1•  33]  ••-  ^ 

γίνονται  de  ai  μ<ταβο\α\  από  τήί  ήμιτονιηίας  άρζάμίναι  μίχρι  του 
dia  πασών,  Siv  ai  μ^ν  κατά  σύμφωνα  "γίνονται  διαστήματα,  αΐ  de  κατά 
ίιάφωνα,  τούτων  δ'  ai  μίν  e/i/xeXeis•  ήττον  ή  eV/LieXfis•,  ai  8e  μαΧΚον. 
(V  δσαΐ5  μβν  ονν  αυτών  πλοίων  ή  κοινωνία,  ^μμ^Κίστΐραι'  ev  οσαις  δε 
(Χάττων,  e/f/xeXeVrcpai*  (π€ΐ8ή  avayKalov  τταστ}  μζταβοΧτ]  κοινόν  Τί 
υπάρχ€ΐν,  ή  φθό-γγον,  ή  διάστημα,  ή  σύστημα.  Χαμβάνίται  δε  ή  κοι- 
νωνία καθ'  ομοιότητα  φθόγγων,  όταν  yap  in  ά\\ή\ουί  (V  ταΊ:  μ^τα- 
βολαΓ?  ττίσωσιν  όμοιοι  φθόγγοι  κατά  την  του  πυκνού  μ€τοχήν,  (μμίλης 
γίν(ται  ή  μβταβοΧή,  όταν  δε  ανόμοιοι,  €κμ€\ήί.  *  Modulations  begin 
with  modulation  by  the  semitone,  and  proceed  to  the  octave. 
Some  of  these  are  by  concords  and  others  by  discords.  Some 
of  them  are  more  melodious  than  otherwise  ;  others  less  so. 
The  greater  or  less  the  community  of  elements,  the  more  or  less 
melodious  the  modulation.  For  every  modulation  demands 
some  common  element,  whether  note,  interval,  or  scale.  But 
this  community  is  ascertained  by  the  similarity  of  notes ;  for 
a  modulation  is  melodious  or  unmelodious,  according  as  the 
notes  that  coincide  in  pitch  are  similar  or  dissimilar  as  regards 
their  participation  in  the  Pycnum.' 
262 


NOTES 

The  last  phrase  of  this  passage  requires  some  explanation. 
The  Greeks  considered  that  every  note  of  every  scale  was 
actually  or  potentially  the  lowest,  the  middle,  or  the  highest 
note  of  a  Pycnum.     Thus  in  the  Enharmonic  scale 


S 


Ε  is  actually  the  lowest,  y-E  actually  the  middle  and  Ε  actually 
the  highest  note  of  the  Pycnum  E-xE-E.  Similarly  b,  xd  and  c 
are  respectively  the  lowest,  middle,  and  highest  notes  of  the 
Pycnum  b-xb-c.  Similarly  e  is  the  lowest  note  of  the  Pycnum 
of  the  conjunct  tetrachord  by  which  we  might  extend  the  scale 
upwards.  Finally  A^  though  not  actually  participating  in  any 
Pycnum  in  the  above  scale,  does  so  potentially  as  the  lowest 
note  of  the  Pycnum  A-xa-'yby  in  the  possible  conjunct  tetra- 


chord 


ΐΣβ: 


Representing  the  lowest,  middle,  and  highest  notes  of  a 
Pycnum  by  the  signs  LP,  MP,  and  HP,  we  find  these  notes 
thus  distributed  in  the  Enharmonic  scale  : 

LP      MP  HP    LP       LP    MP  HP    LP 


g 


The  same  terms  naturally  apply  to  the  Chromatic  Genus; 

and  may  be  applied  analogically  to  the  notes  of  the  Diatonic 

Scale  :  thus — 

LP     MP  HP    LP      LP     MP  HP    LP 


i 


JL-J     J^    -^ 


J=zi 


•J 

This  distinction  in  notes  is  a  deep  and  essential  one,  in  which 
the  8νναμίζ  of  the  note  is  conceived  in  relation  to  the  tetrachord 
in  general,  abstraction  being  made  of  the  difference  between 
the  individual  tetrachords. 

If  then  it  be  asked  whether  two  scales  admit  of  melodious 
intermodulation,  the  answer  is  'Yes,  if  they  have  a  common 
element ;  and  the  more  common  elements  they  possess,  the 
more  melodious  will  be  the  modulation.'     But  when  we  speak 

263 


ARISTOXENUS 


of  a  common  element,  we  mean  not  only  certain  points  of  pitch 
common  to  both  scales,  but  certain  coincident  points  of  pitch 
occupied  in  both  scales  alike  by  lowest,  by  middle,  or  by  highest 
notes  of  a  Pycnum.  In  other  words  there  must  be  a  coincidence 
in  pitch  of  notes  of  the  same  ^υναμις  in  relation  to  the  tetra- 
chord. 

Let  us  consider  then  in  particular  the  possibilities  of  inter- 
modulation  between  the  keys  of  the  seven  modes. 

Mese 


MiXOLYDIAN 


Lydian 


Phrygian 


LP     MP  HP   LP 

η 

MP   HP    LP      LP 

MP  HP   LP    MP 

Mese 
HP   LP      LP    MP 

i 


Mese 
HP  LP    MP  HP    LP      LP     MP  HP 

A ^-J- 


^J^: 


:m—wL• 


-J—1^ 


Mese 
LP    MP  HP  LP      LP     MP  HP  LP 


Dorian 


Hypolydian 


$ 


i^ 


3± 


Mese 
MP  HP  LP     LP     MP  HP  LP     MP 


f 


=3-W-N-^ 


J  K^"^! 


RYGIAl• 

Mese 
HP  LP 

LP 

MP 

HP 

LP 

MP 

HP 

ψ-τΗ^-*^- 



Hypouorian 


Mese 
LP      LP     MP  HP   LP    MP   HP     LP 


^^^^ 


A  semitone  separates  the  tonics  of  the  Mixolydian  and  Lydian 
264 


NOTES 

keys.  Similarly  related  are  the  Dorian  and  Hypolydian.  Taking 
the  first  pair  as  typical  we  find  that  although  there  are  several 
coincident  points  of  pitch  in  the  two  scales  such  as  Ε  and  A^ 
there  is  no  common  element,  because  these  points  are  occupied 
in  the  two  scales  by  notes  of  different  δύι/α/:^?  in  relation  to  the 
Pycnum,  A  for  instance  being  LP  in  the  Mixolydian  key,  but 
MP  in  the  Lydian.  Hence  between  scales  separated  by  a  semi- 
tone there  is  no  direct  modulation. 

A  tone  separates  the  Lydian  and  Phrygian;  the  Phrygian 
and  Dorian ;  the  Hypolydian  and  Hypophrygian,  the  Hypo- 
phrygian  and  Hypodorian.  Taking  the  first  pair  as  typical  we 
find  that  of  the  coincident  points  of  pitch  E^  %F^  A,  d,  %c,  e, 
one  alone,  jfi•,  is  occupied  in  the  two  scales  by  notes  of  the 
same  δύναμίί,  namely  the  lowest  notes  of  a  Pycnum.  Hence  a 
melodious  modulation  is  possible  between  scales  separated  by 
a  tone,  though  the  common  element  is  the  smallest  possible. 

A  tone  and  a  half  separates  the  Mixolydian  and  Phrygian; 
the  Phrygian  and  Hypolydian  ;  the  Dorian  and  Hypophrygian. 
In  such  pairs  we  find  no  common  element ;  and  hence  they  do 
not  admit  of  direct  intermodulation.  Two  tones  separate  the 
Lydian  and  Dorian ;  and  the  Hypolydian  and  Hypodorian. 
Here  again  we  find  no  common  element,  and  no  direct  modu- 
lation. 

Two  tones  and  a  half,  or  the  Coincord  of  the  Fourth,  separate 
the  Mixolydian  and  Dorian ;  the  Lydian  and  Hypolydian ;  the 
Phrygian  and  Hypophrygian ;  the  Dorian  and  Hypodorian. 
In  the  first  pair  we  find  several  common  elements  E,  E,  G,  A,  e. 
In  general,  any  two  scales  separated  by  a  Fourth  have  many 
common  elements,  and  modulation  between  them  is  highly 
melodious. 

Three  tones  separate  the  Mixolydian  and  Hypophrygian  keys. 
Here  we  find  no  common  elements. 

Three  tones  and  a  half,  or  the  Concord  of  the  Fifth,  separate 
the  Lydian  and  Hypophrygian ;  and  the  Phrygian  and  Hypo- 
dorian. In  the  first  pair  we  find  as  common  elements  %G,  A, 
b,  c.  Hence  in  general  one  may  modulate  most  melodiously 
between  scales  separated  by  a  Fifth. 

Four  tones  separate  the  Mixolydian  and  Hypophr}'gian.    Here 

255 


ARISTOXENUS 

there  are  no  common  elements.  Four  tones  and  a  half  separate 
the  Lydian  and  Hypodorian.  Here  again  there  are  no  common 
elements. 

Five  tones  separate  the  Mixolydian  and  Hypodorian.  Here 
we  have  Ε  and  e  as  common  elements,  and  direct  modulation 
is  ρ  ssible. 

The  general  result  we  arrive  at  is  that  when  two  scales  are 
separated  by  a  Fourth  or  Fifth,  modulation  between  them  is 
melodious  in  the  highest  degree ;  when  they  are  separated  by 
a  tone  or  five  tones,  modulation  between  them  is  again  melo- 
dious though  in  an  inferior  degree  ;  but  when  they  are  separated 
by  other  intervals  then  these,  melodious  modulation  cannot  be 
effected  between  them  directly,  but  only  by  the  intervention  of 
other  keys.  It  follows  that  the  limits  of  indirect  modulation  are 
strictly  defined.  Since  direct  modulation  exists  only  between 
keys  whose  tonics  are  spaced  by  a  tone,  by  a  Fourth,  by  a  Fifth, 
or  by  five  tones,  indirect  modulation  can  only  connect  keys  the 
space  between  whose  tonics  can  be  arrived  at  by  addition  and 
subtraction  of  these  four  intervals.  But  the  only  intervals  that 
can  result  from  the  addition  and  subtraction  of  a  tone,  two  tones 
and  a  half,  three  tones  and  a  half,  and  five  tones  are  the  semi- 
tone and  its  multiples.  Hence,  if  two  keys  have  their  tonics 
separated  by  any  other  intervals  than  these,  modulation  between 
them,  direct  or  indirect,  is  impossible.     See  note  on  p.  loi,  1.  i. 

Beside  the  μίταβολη  συστηματική  Bacchius  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  13, 
1.  26)  mentions  three  other  μ€ταβό\αί  affecting  melody :  γ€νικη^  '  of 
genus';  κατά  τρόπον,  *of  mode';  κατά  ήθος,  *of  emotional  char- 
acter.' 

1.  6.  I  read  tivos  for  MSS  tivos.  λ^'γω  be  introduces  an  alter- 
native statement,  and  the  alternative  statement  of  a  question  is 
a  question. 

1.  7.  κατά  πόσα  διαστήματα.  The  answer  to  this  question  as 
appears  from  the  last  note  is  *  four,'  κατά  τα  συμφωνά  διαστήματα, 
κιΐ  κατά  τον  τόνον  και  κατά  τους  ττίντΐ  τόνους. 

1.  ΙΟ.  μΐλοποιΐας.     The  Other  parts  of  Harmonic  science  have 

supplied  the  material  of  melody,  notes,  intervals,  and  scales; 

it  remains  for  the  composer  to  make  a  judicious  use  of  it.     The 

science  of  the  use  of  musical  material  is  the  science  of  μ^λο- 

266 


NOTES 

ποιια.  One  of  the  functions  of  this  science  will  be  to  determine 
which  class  of  melody  is  adapted  to  any  particular  subject ; 
whether  the  energetic  style  suits  the  chorus  of  a  drama,  or  the 
Hypodorian  tragedy,  or  the  Enharmonic  lamentation.  But 
this  function  manifestly  lies  beyond  the  Hmits  of  αρμονική.  To 
this  latter  science,  however,  belongs  the  classification  of  the 
several  melodic  figures  by  which  a  composition  takes  its  shape. 

In  the  Isagoge  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  22,  1.  3),  we  find  the  following 
account  of  this  subject:  Μ^λοττοιΓα  eVrl  χρ^σι?  των  προ€ΐρη- 
μίνων  μ€ρων  της  αρμονικής  και  νττοκ^ιμίνων  δύναμιν  εχόντων'  δι' 
ζ>ν  de  μΐΧοποιΐα  (ττιτίλίΐται  τίσσαρά  €στΐ}ΐ'  άγωγη  π\οκη  πβττεία 
τονη.  ά'^ωγη  [cp.  above,  p.  121,  1.  7]  Η•^^  °^^  iariv  η  δια  των 
ίζη!  φθόγγων  όδόί  τον  μ€\ονς,  πΧοκη  de  η  evaWa^  των  τ€  διαστη- 
μάτων θίσις  παράΧΚηΧος,  πίττίία  Se  17  εφ'  evos  τόνου  πολλάκις  yiyvo- 
μίνη  πληζις^  τον;)  δβ  η  enl  πλίίονα  χρόνον  μονή  κατά  μίαν  -γινομίνη 
ττροφοραν  της  φωνής. 

'  Melopoeia  is  the  employment  of  the  above  mentioned  parts 
of  Harmonic  science  which  serve  as  a  material  to  it.  The 
figures  through  which  Melopoeia  takes  final  shape  are  four; 
the  sequence,  the  zigzag,  the  repetition,  and  the  prolongation. 

The  Sequence  is  the  progression  of  the  melody  through 
consecutive  notes ;  the  Zigzag,  the  irregular  progression  with 
alternate  location  of  the  intervals  [i.e.  every  second  interval 
is  ascending,  every  second  descending] ;  the  Repetition,  the 
constant  iteration  of  one  note  ;  the  Prolongation,  the  dwelling 
for  a  length  of  time  on  one  utterance  of  the  voice.' 

Ά-^ωγη  again  is  divided  into  three  species  (see  Aristides  Quint- 
ilianus,  ed.  Meibom,  p.  29, 1.  11),  evOeia,  or  ή  δια  των  €ξης  φθόγγων 
την  €πίτασιν  τνοιονμίνη  (ascending  by  consecutive  notes) ;  άνακάμ- 
πτουσα  or  η  δια  των  ^πομίνων  άποτζλονσα  την  βαρύτητα  (descending 
by  consecutive  notes)  ;  π(ριφ(ρης  or  η  κατά  συνημμένων  μ^ν  eVi- 
τΐ'ινουσα,  κατά  δκζίυ-γμενων  δβ  άνκΊσα'  η  (ναντίως  (ascending  by 
conjunction  and  descending  by  disjunction,  or  vice  versa).  A 
more  general  definition  of  πλοκή  is  supplied  by  Aristides  Quint- 
ilianus  (ed.  Meibom,  p.  19, 1.  20),  πλοκή  δ€,  οτ€  διά  των  καθ'  υπίρ- 
βασιν  λαμβανομένων  [ποιώμζθα  την  μ^λωδίαν),  '  the  zigzag  OCCUrs 

when  our  melody  proceeds  by  notes  that  have  been  taken  with 
a  skip  between  them.' 

267 


ARISTOXENUS 

If  we  accept  this  more  general  definition  of  πλοκή,  and  regard 
the  more  particular  definition  given  in  the  Isagoge  as  descriptive 
of  one  special  case  of  the  class,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  every 
melody  is  capable  of  being  analysed  into  these  four  figures  as 
final  elements.     I  subjoin  a  few  examples  of  such  analysis, 

07(07^  070^77) 

(1)  tvOna  π€ττ€ία  άνακάμτττονσα 


S^^ 


^Ε^Ξ^^^^^^Ξ^^^. 


"^^•^     ^ 


0707^      070)7^ 

fvOtia  άνακάμπτουσα        πλοκή 


(a)  ά7α;7^  (vOfta      τηττΐία 


■ηΚοκή 


m 


gfesg 


-jg — ^- 


τονή  Ίτλο/ίή    άνακάμτττονσα      πλοκή 


m^- 


ms 


(3)  πλοκή    (νθ(ΐα 


ά-γω-^τ)  π(ριφ€ρής 


(4)  πλοκή 


πλοκή 


τονή 


(5) 


07*^7^  (νθίΐα 


πλοκή  ά'/ω'/ή  (υθίΐα 


^^^^^^^^^=^^ 


268 


NO  FES 

ΊτΧοκη  (νθ(ΐα     άνακάμητουσα 


i 


w 


1.  17.  In  this  sentence  I  insert  eVri  after  5e,  read  παρακολονθίιν 
for  τταρακολονθ^Ί  and  insert  br]kov. 

Either  this  paragraph  is  defective  in  the  MSS,  or  its  brevity 
amounts  to  obscurity.  Yet  it  is  not  wholly  unintelligible  as 
it  stands.  In  the  first  sentence  Aristoxenus  asserts  that  to 
understand  a  musical  composition  means  to  follow  the  process 
of  its  melody  with  ear  and  intellect.  We  have  already  learned 
from  Aristoxenus  what  parts  these  two  faculties  play.  The  ear 
detects  the  magnitudes  of  the  intervals  as  they  follow  one 
another,  and  the  intellect  contemplates  the  functions  of  the 
notes  in  the  system  to  which  they  belong.  But  the  phrase 
^process  of  the  melody'  turns  the  speculation  of  Aristoxenus 
into  another  channel.  It  reminds  him  of  the  difference  that 
exists  between  music  and  such  an  art  as  architecture,  the  pro- 
ducts of  which  present  themselves  to  our  senses  complete  at 
one  moment.  Melody,  on  the  contrary,  like  everything  in 
music,  is  a  process  of  becoming,  in  which  one  passes,  and 
another  comes  to  be  ;  and  we  require  here  memory  as  well  as 
sense,  to  retain  the  past  as  well  as  to  apprehend  the  present. 

But  although  this  is  undoubtedly  the  general  sense  of  the 
passage,  the  logical  connexion  of  the  sentences  is  by  no  means 
obvious.  Έν  yeveVei  yap  κ.τ.λ.  justifies  the  previous  use  of  rots- 
γιγνημ€νοις,  but  how  is  the  sentence  €<  δύο  yap  τούτων  κ.τ.λ. 
related  to  what  goes  before  ?  The  fact  that  the  understanding 
of  music  requires  memory  as  well  as  perception  is  a  consequence 
rather  than  an  explanation  of  the  fact  that  melody  is  a  process  ; 
and  τούτων  implies  that  α'ίσθησις  and  μνήμη,  if  not  already 
mentioned,  have  at  least  been  indicated. 

Of  course  the  contrast  between  άκοη  and  διάναα  [cp.  p.  124, 
1.  17]  must  not  be  confused  with  the  contrast  between  α'ίσθησις 

and  μνήμη. 

p.  130,  1.  I.  α  Se  Tivei  ποιούνται  τίλη  κ.τ.λ.  This  paragraph 
contains  a  polemic  against  (a)  the  absurd  theory  that  one  who 

269 


ARISTOXENUS 

can  notate  a  melody  has  reached  the  pinnacle  of  musical  know- 
ledge ;  and  (d)  the  equally  absurd  theory,  which,  basing  the  law 
of  harmony  on  the  construction  of  clarinets,  reduces  musical 
science  to  the  knowledge  of  instruments  and  their  construc- 
tion. 

1.  6.  όλου  τι//ό$•  is  governed  by  διημηρτηκότος,  'of  one  who  has 
missed  some  whole '  =  '  missed  something  completely.'  But 
perhaps  we  should  read  όλον,  the  accusative  neuter  used  as 
an  adverb  in  the  same  sense  as  the  cognate  accusative  όλον 
αμάρτημα,  and  construe  tlpos  in  agreement  with  διημαρτηκότος. 

1.  7.  Marquard,  followed  by  Westphal,  inserts  an  ού  between 
OTL  and  nepas,  being  ignorant  apparently  of  the  use  of  ουχ  6τι  = 
ου  μόνον  ου. 

1.  Ι3•  Marquard  is  wrong  in  bracketing  ov  yap  άναγκαΐόν  βστι 
.  .  .  eVri  TO  φρύγιον  μίλος  as  a  gloss.  He  does  so  on  the  sup- 
position that  its  presence  in  the  text  involves  2,  petitio  principii \ 
because,  he  would  say,  Aristoxenus  proves  his  statement  *  that 
the  capacity  to  notate  a  melody  does  not  necessarily  imply  the 
understanding  of  it '  by  an  appeal  to  a  parallel  case  in  metrical 
science ;  and  then  proceeds  to  justify  his  analogy  by  assuming 
the  truth  of  the  statement. 

But  Marquard  has  missed  the  course  of  the  reasoning,  which 
is  as  follows  :  You  admit  that  to  mark  a  metre  is  not  the 
end-all  of  metrical  science.  On  what  grounds  then  .?  Because 
it  is  a  fact  that  a  man  may  mark  a  metre,  and  yet  not  under- 
stand its  nature.  Very  well  then.  The  same  fact  holds  good 
with  regard  to  melodic  science  (as  I  shall  prove  hereafter) ;  it  is 
namely  (γάρ)  a  fact  that  a  man  may  notate  a  melody  without 
understanding  its  nature.  Therefore  you  are  logically  bound 
to  admit  that  to  notate  a  melody  is  not  the  end-all  of  melodic 
science. 

1.  17.  This  argument  is  based  on  two  premises  ;  (i)  Notation 
takes  account  of  nothing  beyond  the  bare  magnitudes  of  intervals. 
(2)  Perception  of  the  bare  magnitude  of  intervals  is  no  part  of 
musical  knowledge. 

In  support  of  the  first  premiss  he  appeals  to  the  following 
facts  : 

{a)  The  notation  makes  no  distinction  of  genus.     Thus  [see 


NOTES 

table  22  in  Introduction   A]    the  notes    _      j^    stand  for  the 


progression 


whether  in  the  diatonic  scale 


or  in  the  chromatic  scale 


though  the  interval  in  the  first  case  is  compound  and  diatonic, 
in  the  second  case  simple  and  chromatic. 

{b)  The  notation  makes  no  distinction  of  Figure.     Thus  the 

notes    p-      ρ    mark  the  interval  of  the  sixth   γ^ — Γ~~' 

both  in  the  diatonic  scale 


where  its  schema  is  tone,  semitone,  tone,  tone,  tone  ;  and  in  the 

diatonic  scale 

I 


^^i=3=l 


I       I 


.       J    -^ 


where  its  schema  is  tone,  tone,  tone,  semitone,  tone. 

{c)  The  notation  makes  no  distinction  of  the  higher  and  lower 

R    C 

tetrachords  of  the  scale.     Thus  the  notes    .       ^    apply  to  the 


interval 


^Ξ^ 


-J^= 


whether  in  the  scale 

Hypaton  Meson 


or  in  the  scale 


-^- 1 — 

..., 1         ..._J ;,__ 

-γΞΞΤ=Ρ— 

ale 

-<sJ ^ -^ 1 

Hypaton 

—1 1 : 

Meson 

I'm•' 

^r  T^f^ 

^?=p= 

1         '       ' 

271 


ARISTOXENUS 

yet  in  the  first  case  the  interval  belongs  to  the  tetrachord 
Meson,  in  the  second  to  the  tetrachord  Hypaton. 

The  second  premiss  is  evident  from  the  undeniable  fact  that 
the  perception  of  the  distance  between  two  sounds  leaves  all  the 
vital  distinctions  of  music  untouched. 

1.  25.  To  the  reading  adopted  in  the  text  Marquard  would 
object  (i)  that  Aristoxenus  never  refers  to  the  tetrachords  Hyper- 
bolaeon  and  Hypaton;  (2)  that  Λve  know  of  no  signs  that  were 
employed  to  denote  tetrachords.  But  (i)  in  p.  99, 1.  12  we  have 
a  reference  to  the  Complete  System  of  which  the  said  tetrachords 
were  parts ;  (2)  when  Aristoxenus  speaks  of  the  notation  of  a 
tetrachord,  he  means  of  course  the  notation  of  the  notes  of  the 
tetrachord.  The  singular  τω  αντώ  σημ^ίω  is  used  because  the 
sense  is  '  the  same  sign  is  used  to  represent  a  note  of  the  tetra- 
chord Hypaton  and  a  note  of  the  tetrachord  Meson,'  &c. 

Marquard's  reading  (given  in  the  corrections  at  the  beginning 
of  his  volume)  το  yap  νήτης  και  μίσης  κα\  το  παραμίσηί  και  νπάτηί 
has  the  fatal  defect  that  these  intervals  are  Fifths,  not  Fourths. 
Sense  might  be  obtained  by  reading  with  Westphal  τό  yap  νψης 
κα\  παραμίσψ  και  τό  μίσηί  και  υπάτης,  but  this  is  rather  far  from 
the  MSS. 

P.  131,  1.  6.     ovT€  yap  .  .  .  yvώρ^μov.     An  anacolouthon. 

h  10.  Tovs  των  μελοποιϊων  τρόπους.  See  Aristides  Quintilianus 
(ed.  Meibom  p.  29,  1.  34),  τρόποι  de  μ^Χοποιΐας  yeVei  pev  TpfU'  8ιΰυ- 
ραμβικόζ,  νομικός,  τραγικοί.  6  μ€ν  ουν  νομικός  τρόπος  (στι  νητθ€ΐδης 
(i.e.  its  prevailing  character  is  that  of  the  tetrachord  Neton), 
ό  δί  διθυραμβικός,  μζση(ώης  (i.  e.  its  prevailing  character  is  that 
of  the  tetrachord  Meson),  δ  δβ  τραγικός  νπατο€ΐ8ης  (with  the 
character  of  the  tetrachord  Hypaton).  ("idei  δβ  ίίρίσκονται  πλeίovSf 
ους  δυνατόν  δι  ομοιότητα  τοΊς  yeviKoh  υποβά\λ€ΐν.  ερωτικοί  τ€  yap 
καλούνται  rti'ey,  S)v  ϊδιοι  (πιθαΧάμιοί,  κα\  κωμικοί,  και  (γκωμιαστικοί. 
τρόποι  δί  XeyovTai  dia  το  συν^μφαίναν  πως  τό  ήθος  κατά  τα  μ€\η  της 
διανοίας. 

1.  21.  Marquard,  followed  by  Westphal,  has  made  sad  havoc 
of  the  following  passage  by  changing  the  order  of  the  sentences. 
In  fact,  the  reading  of  the  MSS  calls  for  very  little  emend- 
ation. π€ρας  must  be  inserted  in  1.  22  ;  and  I  have  omitted 
ή  before  τάς  in  P.  132,  1.  3,  and  inserted  δε  after  it ;  and  omitted 
272 


NOTES 

ή  in  1.  4,  after  πν€ΐιμα.  No  other  changes  are  necessary,  except 
in  punctuation.  The  course  of  the  argument  is  sufficiently  clear 
from  the  translation. 

P.  132, 1.  12.  με-γιστον  μ€ν  ουν.  μ^ν  ουν  signifies  a  correction  or 
strengthening  of  the  preceding  statement,  '  No  less  absurd,  nay 
rather  most  absurd  of  all'  I  have  followed  Marquard  in  reading 
άτοπον  though  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  the  addition  is  necessary. 
καθόλου  μάλιστα  των  αμαρτημάτων  might  mean  '  the  most  complete 
mistake  possible.'     Cp.  note  on  p.  130,  1.  6. 

1.  17.  κοιλίας.  The  plural  is  very  strange,  if  the  word  means, 
as  it  seems  to  mean,  the  main  bore  of  the  instrument. 

Mr.  Howard  {Harvard  Studies  in  Class.  Phil.  Vol.  IV,  p.  12) 
quotes  in  support  of  this  rendering  Porphyrius  ad  Ptol.  p.  217, 
ed.  Wallis  :  πάλιν  de  iav  Χάβης  δυο  avKovs,  τοις  μ^ν  μηκίσιν  ίσους, 
τα'ις  δε  ζνρύτησι  των  κοιλιών  διαφέροντας'  καθάπερ  'ίχουσιν  οί  Φρυγιοι 
προς  τους  Ελληνικούς'  (ύρησεις  παραπλησίως  το  €υρυκοίλιον  οζυτ€ρον 
προύμξνον  φθό-γγον  του  στ€ΐ•οκοιλίου'  θΐωρουμζν  ye  τοι  τους  Φρυγίους 
στίνους  ταΐς  κοιλίαις  οντάς  en\  πολΧώ  βαρύτερους  ήχους  προβάλλοντας 

τωνΈλληνικων.  Also Nicomachus (ed.Meibom,p.8, ].33)>"»'"'^°^"' 

8e  των  €μπν€υστων  αί  μ6ίζον€ς  κοιλιωσ€ΐς  κα\  τα  μβίζονα  μήκη,  νωθρον 
κα\  €κλυτον.  He  cites  too  the  parallel  use  of  the  Latin  cavernae 
by  Servius  ad  Aen.  ix,  615. 

If  it  were  not  for  the  strength  of  these  passages,  one  might 
suppose  κοιλίας  here  to  refer  to  the  sidetubes  with  which  some 
αυλοί  were  furnished,  and  which  served,  when  in  use,  to  lower 
the  pitch  of  the  instrument  (see  Mr.  Howard's  article,  p.  8). 

1. 18.  Marquard  inserts  6  αίλητης  unnecessarily.  He  assumes 
that  οϊς  in  1.  19  must  be  an  instrumental  dative,  and  that  π€φυκ€ 
must  be  used  personally,  in  which  case  the  construction  will  be 
ό  αυΧος  π€φυκ€ν  €πιτ€ίν(ΐν  καΐ  άνύναι,  and  €πιτ(ίνίΐν  and  avievai  will 
be  used  intransitively.  But  there  is  no  reason  why  01?  may  not 
be  a  dative  after  πίφυκ^ν  =  [those  other  parts]  to  which  it  is 
natural  [to  raise  and  lower  tone]. 

1.  24.  ravTiJ.      Cp.  p.  122,  1.  lO. 

1.  25.  και  yap  άφαιρουντ(ς.  For  the  violent  ellipse  by  which  yap 
is  left  without  a  finite  verb,  cp.  p.  145,  1.  6,  η  yap  συμφων^Ίν. 

Should  we  read  παραψοΰντ(ς  for  άφαφοΐντ^ς  ?  For  this 
expedient  of  bringing  the  two   pipes   together,  and   drawing 

MACRAN  f  273 


ARISTOXENUS 

them  apart,  and  for  its  effect  on  the  pitch,  see  the  last  clause  of 
the  sentence  from  Plutarch  {noti  posse  suaviter  1096  a)  quoted  in 
the  note  on  p.  112,  1.  15. 

P.  133,  1.  2.  ovhkv  διαφίρα  \iyav  κ.τ.λ.  Here  Marquard's 
translation  is  distinctly  amusing,  'daher  macht  es  offenbar 
keinen  Unterschied,  ob  man  sagt  "  gut  die  Floten "  oder 
^'schlecht.'"  Westphal  is  equally  ridiculous:  'sodass  es  meistens 
eigentlich  dasselbe  besagen  will,  wenn  das  Publikum  beim 
Aulosspiel  "  gut  "  oder  "  schlecht  "  ruft.'  The  meaning  simply 
is  that  the  goodness  or  badness  of  the  music  does  not  depend 
upon  the  instrument. 

1.  21.  θαυμαστον  δ'  et  κ.τ.λ.  One  more  argument.  Clarinets 
are  changeable  instruments,  and  their  music  must  alter  with  the 
alteration  in  themselves. 

P.  134,  1.  5.  The  MSS  ro  €φημίνον  opyavov  cannot  be  right. 
The  argument  plainly  is  (i)  instruments  in  general  will  not 
serve  as  bases  for  the  laws  of  harmony ;  and  (2)  least  of  all  will 
that  very  defective  instrument,  the  clarinet,  do  so.  For  opyavov 
used  alone  cp.  p.  133, 1.  4. 

1.  14.  πρώτον  μ^ν  αυτών  κ.τ.λ.  It  is  required  of  us  firstly  to 
ascertain  the  phenomena  correctly,  secondly,  to  distinguish 
truly  in  these  phenomena  what  is  primary  and  what  is  derived, 
thirdly  to  grasp  aright  the  result  and  conclusion.  In  other 
Avords  we  must  first  observe  accurately,  then  analyse  our  facts 
and  find  the  essentials,  then  sum  the  results  of  our  observation 
and  analysis  in  a  generalization.  The  generalizations,  which 
we  shall  thus  obtain,  will  be  the  άρχαί,  or  fundamental  principles 
of  our  science,  from  which  its  other  propositions  will  be  deduced. 
It  is  indispensable  that  such  fundamental  principles  should  be 
(a)  indisputably  true  ;  (d)  recognizable  by  our  sense  perception 
as  primary  truths  of  music. 

The  science  of  Harmonic  then  as  conceived  by  Aristoxenus 
starts  from  the  observation  of  individual  facts,  and  proceeds  by 
induction  to  general  principles,  which  serve  in  turn  as  foundations 
for  a  train  of  deductive  reasoning. 

1. 17.  ToG  συμβαίνοντα:  .  .  .  συνοφθβντος.  This  passage  is  mis- 
translated by  Marquard  'die  methodische  Beobachtung  des 
Zufalligen  und  Uebereinstimmenden,'  that  is  '  the  methodical 
274 


NOTES 

observation  of  the  contingent  and  constant ' ;  by  Westphal  '  so 
muss  der  Sache  gemass  erkannt  werden  was  sich  (erst)  als 
Schlussfolge  ergiebt,  und  was  in  die  Kategorie  des  allgemein  An- 
genommenen  gehort/that  is,  'we  must  distinguish  in  accordance 
with  the  facts  what  is  only  arrived  at  as  a  conclusion,  and  what 
belongs  to  the  category  of  the  universally  admitted.'  But  (i)  to 
συμβαίνον  and  τυ  όμόλογούμίνον  are  technical  terms  for  the  result 
and  conclusion ;  (2)  σννοράν  means  'to  see  the  connexion  of  things ' 
not  to  'see  the  difference'  between  them  ;  (3)  if  to  συμβαίνον  and 
TO  όμολογονμ€νον  are  distinct  and  contrasted  classes,  we  should 
require  τοΰ  συμβαίνοντος  κα\  τοΰ  ομολόγου μ€νου. 

1.  25•  καθόλου  δ'  ev  τω  κ.τ.λ.  We  must  neither  trace  back  our 
musical  phenomena  to  physical  and  non-musical  principles  ; 
nor  be  content  till  we  have  resolved  them  into  the  ultimate  laws 
of  music. 

1.  27.  For  η  of  the  MSS  I  read  τ]  in  the  sense  of  gt/a  '  re- 
garded as.' 

P.  135, 1. 1,  κάμτττοντξς  ivTOs.  A  metaphor  from  the  race-course. 

1.  7.  η  μικτον  .  .  .  η  κοινόν.  See  Isagoge  [ed.  Meibom,  p.  9, 
1.  34])  KOLvov  8e  TO  €Κ  των  €στώτων  συγκήμΐνον.  μικτον  δε  το  ev 
ω  δύο  η  Tpels  χαρακτηρ€ς  yeviKol  €μφαίνονται.  Α  melody  is  COmmon 
when  it  employs  only  the  fixed  notes,  which,  of  course,  are 
common  to  all  three  genera  ;  it  is  mixed,  when  it  employs  notes 
of  different  genus. 

1.  12.  ττ^ρύχζται  δ'  η  υστέρα  .  .  .  πρότερα.  That  is  the  differ- 
ence between  concords  and  discords  in  one  special  case  of  the 
difference  between  larger  and  smaller  intervals.  The  conno- 
tation of  the  διαφορά  between  concords  and  discords  contains 
the  connotation  of  the  διαφορά  of  size,  but  the  denotation  of  the 
διαφορά  of  size  contains  the  denotation  of  the  διαφορά  between 
concords  and  discords. 

1.  18.  The  MSS  are  corrupt  here.  It  is  absurd  to  say  that 
the  Fourth  is  determined  as  the  smallest  interval  by  its  own 
nature.  It  is  so  determined  by  the  nature  of  melody  or  song, 
inasmuch  as  all  the  smaller  intervals  which  the  latter  produces 
are  discords.     The  correction  is  due  to  Westphal. 

P.  136,  1.  I.  ταίτα  μ€ν  ούν  Xeyo/zez/  α  πάρα  των  ζμπροσθίν  παρίΐ- 
ληφαμξν.     Marquard  rejects  this  sentence  on  the  ground  that 

τ  2  275 


ARISTOXENUS 

the  sense  required  is  not  'we  say  what  we  have  learned,'  but 
'  what  we  say,  we  have  learned.'  But,  just  as  ταντα  λεγομ^ν 
άληθη  means  Μη  saying  this  we  are  speaking  the  truth'  (the 
predicative  force  lying  in  the  άληθη),  so  here  the  meaning  is 
'  in  the  above  statements  we  are  repeating  what  we  have  learned 
from  our  predecessors.' 

1.  6.  πάθος.  Cp.  the  use  of  πάσχω  in  p.  145,  1.  17  ;  p.  156, 
1.  5  ;  p.  159,  1.  8. 

I.  10.  ovT€  TO  (ξ  Uaripov  κ.τ.λ.  Meibom,  Marquard  and 
Westphal  alike  find  this  sentence  unintelligible.  Is  it  not 
a  fact,  they  ask,  that  the  sum  of  a  Fourth  or  Fifth  and  an 
octave  is  a  concord?  Accordingly  they  correct  the  reading 
by  inserting  δι?  τίθίντος  after  eKarepov  αυτών.  But  the  MSS  are 
perfectly  right,  and  the  commentators  construed  wrongly. 
Written  in  full  with  the  ellipse  supplied,  the  whole  sentence 
runs,  ovT€  yap  TO  Ίσον  ίκατίρω  αυτών  συντ^θίν  το  δ\ον  σύμφωνον 
TTOtei",  οϋτ€  το  (ξ  ίκατίρου  αυτών  κα\  του  δια  πασών  συγκ^ίμΐνον 
€κατ€ρω  αυτών  συντίθ^ν  το  δΧον  σύμφωνον  ποκί,  and  the  meaning 
is  '  Add  to  a  Fourth  or  a  Fifth  an  interval  equal  to  itself ;  the 
result  is  a  discord.  Add  to  a  Fourth  or  Fifth  respectively 
the  sum  of  an  Octave  and  a  Fourth  or  Fifth  ;  again  the  result 
is  a  discord.' 

According  to  the  absurd  misconstruction  of  Meibom,  Marquard 
and  Westphal,  the  second  part  of  the  sentence  in  its  complete- 
ness is  as  follows  :  o?re  to  βξ  ίκατίρου  αυτών  δΙ?  τ^θίντοζ  κάϊ  του 
δια  πασών  σνγκβίμίνον  το  δλον  σύμφωνον  ποΐ€Ϊ.  Now  it  is  quite 
correct  to  say  '4  added  to  6  causes  the  whole  to  be  10'  or 
'the  addition  of  4  to  6  causes  the  whole  to  be  10,'  but  surely 
not  to  say  '  the  sum  of  6  and  4  causes  the  whole  to  be  10.' 

1.  18.  Aristoxenus  introduces  two  warnings.  When  he  says 
that  it  is  possible  to  sing  the  third  or  fourth  part  of  a  tone,  he 
must  not  be  misunderstood  as  saying  that  one  can  in  singing 
divide  a  tone  into  three  or  four  parts.  For  that  would  imply 
the  possibility  of  singing  three  thirds  of  tones  or  four  quarter- 
tones  in  succession  which  is  against  one  of  the  fundamental 
laws  of  melody  [see  p.  119,  1.  20]. 

Again,  he  has  mentioned  no  smaller  division  of  the  tone  than 
the  quarter-tone,  because  the  voice  can  sing  and  the  ear  dis- 
276 


NOTES 

criminate  none  smaller.  But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  in 
the  abstract  there  cannot  be  a  minimum  interval  any  more  than 
a  minimum  space  or  time. 

P.  137,  1.  4.  ore  Se  θατίρον  κ.τΧ.  Between  the  Diatonic  and 
Chromatic  scales  there  is  only  variation  of  the  Lichanus,  as 
these  genera  have  their  Parhypatae  in  common. 

P.  137, 1.  18-P.  138,  1.  6.  Marquard  is  greatly  disconcerted 
by  the  abrupt  transitions  which  he  finds  in  this  passage  from  the 
indicative  to  the  accusative  and  infinitive  construction.  Besides 
correcting  rightly  Set  to  b^lv  in  p.  138,  1.  3,  he  omits  eVrt  in 
p.  137,  1.  20  to  remove  the  incongruity.  As  a  fact,  with  the 
exception  of  the  blunder  Sei  for  belv,  the  reading  of  the  MSS  is 
quite  unexceptionable,  and  the  construction  normal.  The  quoted 
qtiestions  are  in  the  indicative,  the  quoted  statements  in  the 
accusative  and  infinitive.  The  dvai  that  follows  Oereov  in  p.  137, 
1.  23  is  grammatically  dependent  on  it,  and  not  the  infinitive  of 
oratio  obliqtia,  as  Marquard  supposes. 

1.  18.  The  objection  cited  in  this  paragraph,  and  the  answer 
of  Aristoxenus  to  it,  raise  again  the  conflict  between  the  super- 
ficial view  of  notes  as  points  of  pitch,  separated  by  certain  spaces, 
and  the  deeper  view  of  Aristoxenus  according  to  which  notes 
are  essentially  members  of  a  system  with  special  functions.  The 
objection  is  stated  in  1.  i8-p.  138,  1.  5  and  here  again  Marquard 
has  quite  wantonly  perverted  the  order  of  the  sentences.  The 
argument  of  the  objection  may  be  stated  thus :  '  We  object  to 
applying  one  term,  say  the  term  Lichanus,  to  several  points  of 
pitch  at  different  distances  from  the  Mese.  The  term  Hypate 
signifies  one  certain  point  at  one  certain  distance  from  the 
Mese;  why  not  similarly  restrict  the  term  Lichanus  to  some 
one  point,  say  the  point  two  tones  below  the  Mese,  your 
Enharmonic  Lichanus ;  and  use  other  names  for  what  you 
call  the  Chromatic  and  Diatonic  Lichani  ?  For  we  hold  that 
notes  which  bound  unequal  magnitudes  must  be  different  notes; 
or,  to  put  it  more  plainly,  that  a  difference  in  the  size  of  the 
contained  interval  necessarily  implies  a  difference  in  the  con- 
taining notes.  We  hold  equally,  by  simple  conversion  of  this 
proposition,  that  different  notes  must  bound  different  intervals, 
or  that  a  difference  in  the  containing  notes  necessarily  implies 

277 


ARISTOXENUS 

a  difference  in  the  size  of  the  contained  intervals.  Consequently 
a  proper  nomenclature  will  always  employ  the  same  terms  to 
denote  the  points  bounding  the  same  magnitudes  of  intervals  ; 
and  will  always  employ  different  terms  when  the  bounded 
intervals  are  unequal.' 

1.  19.  Marquard  reads  TeOevTos  for  κινηθίντοζ  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  when  one  posits,  not  when  one  changes,  one  of  the 
possible  intervals  between  the  Lichanus  and  Mese  that  a 
Licbanus  results.  But  the  sense  is  rather  this :  The  objectors 
urge  that  between  any  two  notes  there  must  be  but  one  interval ; 
if  this  interval  be  cha?iged,  then  there  must,  say  they,  be  a  change 
of  notes  also. 

P.  138,  1.  2.  The  addition  of  \ιχαν6^  is  perhaps  unnecessary  ; 
κληβχι  might  stand  by  itself  for  *  receives  the  name.' 

1.  3.  Probably  S  is  right  in  omitting  τό. 

1.  5•  The  sentence  τα  yap  'ίσα  των  μ^Ύ^θων  τοΐς  avrols  ονόμασι 
π(ρίληπτ€ον  ehaL  is  the  simple  converse  in  sense,  though  not 
in  form,  of  delv  yap  erepovs  eivac  (pOoyyovs  rovs  το  eTepov  μey€θos 
ορίζοντας.  For  the  former  sentence  ='  equal  intervals  should  be 
bounded  by  identically-named  notes '  =  ' no  notes  should  have 
different  names  unless  they  bound  unequal  intervals' =  ' no  notes 
are  really  different  unless  they  bound  unequal  intervals '  =  ' all 
different  notes  bound  unequal  intervals,'  which  is  the  simple 
converse  of '  all  notes  that  bound  unequal  intervals  are  different 
notes.' 

1.  9.  Before  dealing  with  the  original  proposition  of  the  ob- 
jectors Aristoxenus  disposes  of  its  converse  by  insisting  that 
the  essential  feature  of  a  note  is  its  ^ύναμίζ,  and  that  nomen- 
clature cannot  overlook  the  distinction  between  the  notes  a  and 
e  in  the  scale 


i 


3i 


when  they  are  Mese  and  Nete,  and  the  notes  a  and  e  in  the 
scale 

-I- 


when  they  are  Lichanus  and  Paranete. 
278 


NOTES 

1.  14.     I  read  eV,  τ6  for  eV  τω  of  the  MSS. 

1.  16.  oTi  δ*  ovde  τουναντίον  κ.τ.λ.  Having  disposed  of  the 
converse  Aristoxenus  turns  to  the  original  proposition,  which 
requires  a  spfecial  refutation ;  for  the  two  propositions  are 
related  to  one  another  as  a  Universal  Affirmative  and  its  simple 
converse ;  and  the  falsity  of  one  does  not  prove  the  falsity  of 
the  other.  Aristoxenus  has  to  prove  not  only  that  inequality 
in  the  contained  intervals  is  not  the  sole  ground  for  distinguishing 
notes  by  name,  but  also  that  it  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  doing 
so  at  all.     His  arguments  are  two  : 

'  In  the  first  place,  if  you  insist  on  having  different  names 
wherever  there  is  a  difference  of  interval,  you  will  require  an 
infinite  vocabulary.  The  voice,  for  example,  may  make  its  second 
resting  place  in  the  passage  of  the  tetrachord  at  any  point  between 
a  semitone  above  the  Hypate  and  a  tone  below  the  Mese.  The 
number  of  such  points  is  infinite.  We  call  them  all  Lichanus, 
but  you  who  insist  that  a  difference  of  interval  demands  a  differ- 
ence of  name  Avill  require  an  infinity  of  names.  Perhaps  you 
will  think  that  this  is  the  quibble  of  a  casuist ;  that  as  a  matter 
of  fact  three  terms  would  do,  one  for  the  Enharmonic  Lichanus, 
one  for  the  Chromatic,  and  one  for  the  Diatonic.  But  it  is  no 
quibble.  For  consider  seriously  (ως  αληθώς) :  different  schools 
or  theorists  assign  different  positions  to  the  Lichani  of  the 
different  genera ;  and  there  is  no  earthly  reason  for  giving  one's 
adherence  to  one  of  these  schools  rather  than  another.  Take 
a  special  case.  Some  theorists  locate  the  Enharmonic  Lichanus 
at  two  tones  below  the  Mese ;  some  place  it  a  little  higher. 
Supposing,  then,  that  we  even  went  so  far  with  you  as  to  restrict 
the  term  Lichanus  to  the  Enharmonic  Lichanus,  we  should  have 
just  the  same  difficulty  again.  For  here  are  two  upper  passing 
notes,  one  two  tones  below  the  Mese,  and  one  a  little  higher ; 
both  of  them  to  the  ear  give  an  Enharmonic  scale,  so  that  both 
have  equal  claims  to  the  name  of  Lichanus :  yet  they  bound 
unequal  intervals  from  the  Mese,  therefore,  on  your  theory,  the 
one  name  will  not  apply  to  both.' 

'  In  the  second  place,  your  demand  ignores  the  fundamental 
character  of  sense  perception  which,  abstracting  from  the  petty 
distinctions  of  quantity,  looks  to  the  similarity  of  things  through 

279 


ARISTOXENUS 

their  possession  of  common  qualities.  Thus  the  juxtaposition 
of  two  small  intervals  produces  on  the  ear  an  impression  of 
a  certain  sort,  which  remains  the  same  whatever  the  exact  size 
of  the  intervals  may  be  ;  and  one  uses  the  general  term  Pycnum 
for  this  juxtaposition.  But  on  your  principle,  one  has  no  right 
to  employ  this  term,  since  Pycna  are  of  different  sizes.  Similarly, 
one  has  no  right  to  speak  of  Enharmonic,  or  Chromatic,  or 
Diatonic,  for  all  these  classes  imply  the  ignoring  of  mathematical 
differences.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  do  admit  a  class  Pycnum, 
a  class  Enharmonic,  why  not  also  a  class  Parhypate  and  a  class 
Lichanus  ?  Fot  just  as  in  the  case  of  Pycna  you  have  a  general 
feature,  namely,  a  certain  compression,  and  as  in  each  genus 
you  have  a  certain  character  common  to  the  particular  cases  of 
it,  so  here  you  have  as  common  features  the  species  or  figure 
of  the  tetrachord,  that  is,  a  plan  of  four  notes,  the  two  outer 
fixed  at  an  interval  of  a  Fourth  with  the  upper  as  tonic,  and  two 
passing  notes  between  them.' 

1. 17.  Υ  ox  ακοΚονβψ-ίον  of  the  MSS  I  read  ακοΚονβύν  θ^τ^ον.  The 
preceding  sentence  asserts  that  A  is  not  a  necessary  result  of  Β  ; 
nor,  continues  Aristoxenus,  must  we  allow  that  Β  is  a  necessary 
result  of  A.  But  άκόΚουθάν  cannot  mean  '  to  assert  a  necessary 
dependence.' 

τουναντίον  άκολονθ€Ϊν  = '  the  opposite  order  of  dependence.' 

1.  21.  ως  αληθώς  .  .  .  ev  ίκατίρα  των  διαιρ€σ€ων,  I  have 
transposed  this  passage  from  its  unintelligible  position  after 
8ίαμ€ν€ΐν  in  p.  140, 1.  I.  In  its  proper  place  it  is  most  serviceable 
in  answering  the  certain  objection  that  to  talk  of  an  infinity  of 
Lichani  is  mere  casuistry. 

P.  139,  1.  2.  It  is  quite  unnecessary'•  to  insert  with  Marquard 
and  Westphal  ov  πάνυ  ράδων  awibelv.  ώστ€  may  very  well 
introduce  a  conclusion  pressed  against  an  adversary  in  the  form 
of  a  question. 

1.  13.  λί'γω  Se  is  parenthetical,  and  τιθάσα  agrees  with  €Κζίνη 
and  stands  in  apposition  to  eis  ομοιότατη  .  .  .  βλίπουσα. 

1.  14.  I  read  €ως  for  ως  in  1.  14,  and  5e  (ϊδος  €ως  αν  for  δβ  η 
δΐ€σ€ως  αν  in  1.  1 7.  For  €ως  in  the  sense  of  '  to  cover  all  cases  in 
which'  cp.  p.  141,  1.  I. 

1.  16.  πυκνού  τίνος  φωνή.  If  the  reading  is  correct,  πυκνού 
28o 


NOTES 

τινός  must  be  construed  as  a  genitive  of  the  material:  *a  voice- 
utterance  consisting  in  a  compression,'  i.  e.  in  a  succession  of 
close-lying  notes. 

1.  21.  I  insert  μίναν  after  συμβαίνω. 

P.  140, 1.  9•  Finally,  Aristoxenus  shows  a  palpable  absurdity 
that  would  result  from  the  acceptance  of  this  principle— the 
absurdity  of  one  note  bearing  more  names  than  one  in  the  same 
scale.  In  the  first  place  let  us  take  two  equal  intervals  in 
succession ;    for  instance,  the  interval  between  e  and  /,  and 

X     γ 


between /and  ft/ in  the  Chromatic  scale  Μ"~Ιι     -J— jfJ— ^^^^=^- 

If  we  insist  on  using  the  terms  X  and  Υ  universally  for  the 
lower  and  higher  notes  of  an  interval  of  this  size,  the  /  of  the 
above  scale  will  be  both  X  and  Y. 

In  the  second  place,  let  us  take  two  unequal  intervals,  the 
interval  between  e  and/and  that  between / and  ^ in  the  Diatonic 

Μ      Ν 


scale   F^     J    =^     * — ^ —      On  the  principle  under  exami- 

"  X  Υ  " 
nation,  inasmuch  as  the  names  signify  no  function  or  intrin- 
sic qualities  of  notes,  but  merely  a  space  relation  between 
two  points  whose  only  quality  is  that  they  are  so  far  from  one 
another,  every  such  name  of  a  point  must  connote  its  relation  to 
another  point  at  some  certain  distance ;  and  cannot  be  employed 
outside  this  relation.  Thus  every  change  in  the  size  of  an 
interval  will  demand  a  new  pair  of  note-names.  Hence  in  the 
present  case  the  intervals  between  e  and  /  and  between  /  and 
g  will  bear  two  distinct  pairs  of  names,  say  XY  and  MN;  and 
/will  bear  two  names,  Fand  M. 

P.  141,  1.  I.  In  this  paragraph  we  have  another  exposition  of 
the  genera  and  their  'shades.'     See  pp.  116-118. 

P.  142,  1.  23.  The  missing  words  have  been  well  supplied  by 
Westphal. 

P.  143, 1. 13.  I  have  little  doubt  that  we  should  read  XcKreov  for 
heiKriov.  Cp.  p.  147, 1. 25,  where  all  the  MSS  read  λβκτίον  instead 
of  the  plainly  necessary  deiKreov. 

281 


ARISTOXENUS 

1.  ιδ.  αγωγής:  cp.  p.  121,  1.  7.  The  term  is  here  used,  not  of 
a  particular  melodic  figure,  but  of  the  general  consecution  of 
melody. 

1.  19.  I  omit  the  words  ού  yap  δια  τοσούτων  8υνηθ€ίη  ris  αν  as 
a  gloss  Avhich  has  crept  into  the  text.  They  are  meaningless 
by  themselves,  and  require  the  addition  of  μ^Κω^ύν,  or  the 
like ;  even  when  thus  emended  they  present  a  singularly  weak, 
and  at  the  same  time  wholly  unnecessary  statement.  The  gloss 
was  occasioned  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  following  μ^χρι. 

1.  20.  μέχρι-  here  ='  up  to,  but  excluding.'  It  more  often  means 
'up  to  and  including'  (see  p.  131,  1.  3).  The  same  ambiguity 
attaches  to  εω?.  Cp.  p.  144,  1.  i,  and  p.  140,  1.  4.  Perhaps, 
however,  we  should  read  abwarcl  here. 

1.  21.  TO  ίξψ  ovT  iv  κ.τ.λ.  The  nature  of  melody  brings  it  to 
pass  that  (a)  sometimes  the  next  note  to  a  given  note  is  separated 
from  it  by  the  smallest  possible  interval,  as  in  the  Enharmonic 

=^=^=j^^=^^^^^^^=    the    next    note    above    xe    is  /. 


scale 


(ύ)  Sometimes  the  next  note  to  a  given  note  is  separated  from 
it  by  an  interval  of  considerable  size,  as  for  instance  in  the  same 
scale  the  next  note  above  y  is  a.  (c)  Sometimes  a  consecutive 
progression   moves  by  equal  intervals   as   from  f  \.o  b  in  the 


Diatonic  scale 


;^^p 


3Ξ 


^      ^    -        {d)    Sometimes 


a  consecutive  progression  moves  by  unequal  intervals  as  from 
/  to   b  in   the    Chromatic    scale       \-^ — -\ — ~j~^ — "^ — '^~~ 


i  ο     2        2 
•"*'    "-5 

Consequently,  the  true  conception  of  continuity  is  not  derived 

from  the  notions  of  the  minimum,  the  equality,  or  the  inequality 

of  intervals. 

P.  144,  11.  8-9.     After  much  hesitation  I  have  accepted  Mar- 

quard's  reading,  though  I  believe  his  interpretation  of  it  to  be 

quite  erroneous.     The  difficulty  lies  in  the  genitive  τον  προ€ΐρη- 

μίνου  αριθμόν  :  the  general  argument  is  clear.     If  we  admit  that 

282 


NOTES 

the  maximum  number  by  which  the  distance  AB  can  be  divided 
is  four 


it  is  evident  that  the  points  A,  x,  y,  z,  Β  are  consecutive,  and 
admit  of  no  intermediate  points  of  section.  Aristoxenus  refers 
to  these  points  A,  x,jy,  z,  Β  as  'the  notes  that  bound  fractions 
of  the  said  number.'  Marquard  identifies  the  number  with  the 
distance  AB,  and  regards  τον  προβιρημζΐΌυ  αριθμού  as  a  partitive 
genitive.  But,  to  take  the  above  illustration,  αριθμού  evidently 
refers  not  to  the  distance  AB  but  to  the  number  four  by  which 
it  has  been  divided.  For  it  would  not  be  true  to  say  that  the 
points  which  bound  parts  of  the  said  interval  are  consecutive ; 
A,  γ,  Β  for  example  bound  parts  of  it,  and  are  not  consecutive. 

We  must  therefore  understand  the  partitive  genitive  του 
διαστήματος  with  μ€ρη,  and  interpret  του  προζίρημζνου  αριθμού  aS 

*  having  the  said  number  as  denominator.'     To  recur  again  to 

our  illustration,  the  whole  phrase  τοΰ  ττροζίρημίνου  αριθμού  μβρη 
τού  διαστήματος  would  mean  '  fractions-of-four '  (or  '  fourths  ')  'of 
the  distance  AB: 

1.  1 8.  I  read  λαμβανίτω  for  λαμβάνβται  of  the  MSS,  as  the 
middle  voice  is  out  of  place,  λαμβανίτω  is  parallel  to  €κμ€λης 
ίστω  that  immediately  follows. 

Meibom  wished  to  read  μηδίτ^ρον  for  μη^^τ^ρα.  But  Marquard 
points  out  that  each  alternative  here  referred  to  comprehends 
two  relations,  those  of  any  given  note  to  a  certain  note  above 
it  and  to  a  certain  note  below  it. 

1.  20.  ου  Set  δ*  ayvoeiv  κ.τ.λ.     For  instance,  the  scale 

I  I ! 1 ^ 

! J ^ ^— Σϋ^Ξ^^' 


^ 


obeys  the  above  law ;  yet  it  is  illegitimate,  because  it  violates 
the  law  of  the  tetrachord  that  the  interval  between  the  lower 
fixed  note  and  the  first  passing  note  must  never  be  greater  than 
that  between  the  two  passing  notes. 

P.  145,  1.  5.  δβί  yap  τοις  κ.τ.λ.  The  law  of  the  sequence  of 
tetrachords  is  as  follows  :  two  tetrachords  belong  to  the  one 
scale  either  if  the  notes  of  one  form  some  one  concord  with  the 

283 


ARISTOXENUS 

corresponding  notes  of  the  other,  or  if  the  notes  of  both  form 
a  concord  with  the  corresponding  notes  of  a  third  tetrachord 
of  which  they  are  both  alike  continuations,  but  in  opposite  direc- 
tions, one  upwards,  one  downwards. 

Thus,  in  the  Greater  Complete  System  (see  Introduction  A, 
§29) 


the  notes  of  any  one  tetrachord  form  some  one  concord  (Fourth 
or  Fifth  or  Octave)  with  the  corresponding  notes  of  any 
other. 

Again,  in  the  Lesser  Complete  System  (see  Introduction  A, 
§  29) 


Hypaton 

-&- 

MesSn            SynemmenOn 

im)•   ■ 

1    J  ^  J_  J   -J-   -^ 

^- 

'=ά 

^       ^=^ 

-JZJ. 

the  corresponding  notes  of  the  Hypaton  and  Meson  tetrachords 
form  Fourths  with  one  another ;  as  do  also  the  corresponding 
notes  of  the  Meson  and  Synemmenon  tetrachords.  But  what 
about  the  Hypaton  and  Synemmenon  tetrachords  1  They 
evidently  belong  to  the  one  scale,  and  yet  the  notes  of  one 
do  not  form  a  concord  with  the  corresponding  notes  of  the 
other.  Here  the  second  clause  of  the  law  applies.  The 
Hypaton  and  Synemmenon  tetrachords  are  both  continuous 
with  the  Meson,  but  in  different  directions  {μη  eVi  rov  αυτόν 
τό-πον),  one  lying  below  it  and  one  above,  and  the  notes  of  the 
Hypaton  and  Synemmenon  form  concords  with  the  correspond- 
ing notes  of  the  Meson. 

1.  9.  Marquard,  followed  by  Westphal,  wrongly  altered  τον 
avTov  τόπον  to  τω  αντω  τόπω,  and  supposing  it  to  refer  to  the 
coincidence  of  the  extremities  of  conjunct  tetrachords  proposed 
to  omit  the  μή  of  1.  8. 

1.  II.  It  is  uncertain  what  are  the  other  conditions  of  the 
legitimate  synthesis  of  tetrachords,  to  which  Aristoxenus  here 
284 


NOTES 


alludes.     One  may  perhaps  have  been  a  certain  order  in  the 
employment  of  conjunction  and  disjunction.     Thus  the  scale 


r>  "J 


might  be  regarded  as  illegitimate,  because  the  conjunction  and 
disjunction  do  not  occur  alternately. 

1.  15.  The  MSS  here  read  αλλ'  h  yLteye^ei  ωρισται,  which  I  have 
corrected  to  αλλ'  evl  μζ-^ίθ^ι  ωρίσθαι.  ωρίσθαι  is  the  infinitive  after 
δοκ6ί,  and  with  παντελώς  άκαριαίόν  τίνα  one  repeats  exeiv  δοκ€Ϊ  τόπον. 
Marquard  reads  ουκ  ^χαν  8οΚ€Ϊ  τόπον  αλλ'  η  el  μί-^ίθζΐ  ωρισται,  η 

παντξλως  άκαριαίόν  τίνα  and  translates  absurdly  '  seem  only  to  take 
place  when  they  are  determined  in  magnitude,  or  at  any  rate 
only  in  a  highly  limited  degree.'  Of  course  e,\eti/  τόπον  means 
*  to  have  a  locus  of  variation.'  The  same  misconception  under- 
lies Westphal's  reading  οίκ  exeiv  δοκ€Ϊ  η  τταντελώ?  άκαριαίόν  τίνα 
τόπον  αλλ'  η  el  τα  μί-^ίθη  ωριστοι. 

1.  19-  ακριβέστατη  κ.τ.λ.  Note  Aristoxenus'  recognition  of 
the  truth  that  the  determination  of  all  intervals  must  in  the 
last  resort  fall  back  upon  the  elementary  relations  of  the 
concords. 

δ',  deleted  by  Marquard,  may  be  an  example  of  the  Se  άποδο- 

TLKOV. 

1.  22.  των  δυνατών.  Intervals  smaller  than  semitones  cannot  be 
determined  by  concords.  For  the  Fourth  consists  of  two  and 
a  half  tones,  the  Fifth  of  three  and  a  half  tones,  and  the  Octave 
of  six  tones  ;  and  no  repetition,  addition,  or  subtraction  of  these 
numbers  will  lead  to  any  fraction  smaller  than  a  half. 

1.  23.  €π\  TO  6ξν  κ.τ.λ.  If  it  be  required  to  ascertain  by  concords 
the  note  that  lies  two  tones  below  G,  the  following  will  be  the 
process : 


ARISTOXENUS 

The  note  that  lies  two  tones  above  G  is  ascertained  thus 


P.  146,  1.  5.  yiV^rat  δε  και  κ.τΧ     This  is  evident.     If  in  the 


Fourth 


we  determine  the  ditone  between 


a  and /by  concords  we  have  in  so  doing  also  determined  by 
concords  the  semitone  between  e  and/  For  e  is  given  in  concord 
with  Λ,  and  /  has  now  been  determined  by  concord  with  a ; 
and  e  and /are  the  bounding  notes  of  the  semitone. 

1.  20.  TToTepov  δ'  ορθώς  κ.τ.λ.  The  following  is  Aristoxenus' 
demonstration  that  a  Fourth  consists  of  two  tones  and  a  half 
(a  tone  being  the  excess  of  the  Fifth  over  the  Fourth).     Take 

4th  4th 


a  Fourth  e-a,  and  determine  by  concords  the  note /two  tones 
below  a,  and  the  note  jj!^  two  tones  above  e.  It  follows  that  the 
remainder  ^-3/"=the  remainder  fll^-<2  because  each  of  them=the 
whole  Fourth,  e-a,  less  by  two  tones.  Now  take  the  Fourth 
above/namely  i^a,  and  the  Fourth  below  j$^  namely  j^^.  There 
will  now  he  side  by  side  at  each  extremity  of  the  scale  two 
remainders,  which  must  be  equal  for  the  reason  already  given  ; 
that  is,  ^d-e,  e-/,  ^g-a  and  «-jfa  are  all  equal,  because  each  of 
them  equals  a  Fourth  less  by  two  tones. 

Now  if  ^d  and  Jf  a,  the  lowest  and  highest  notes  of  the  scale, 
be  sounded,  our  ears  will  assure  us  that  they  form  a  concord. 
This  concord,  as  greater  than  a  Fourth  by  construction  and 
obviously  less  than  an  octave,  must  be  a  Fifth.  But  since 
^d-^a  is  thus  found  to  be  a  Fifth,  and  ^d-^g  by  construction 
is  a  Fourth,  ^g-^a  must  be  the  difference  between  a  Fourth 
286 


NOTES 

and  a  Fifth  ;  in  other  words,  a  tone.  But  we  have  ah-eady  seen 
that  ^g--a  =  a-^a  .'.  ^g-a=2L  semitone.  But  by  the  construction 
^-Ji^=two  tones  ;  therefore  e-a  being  the  sum  oie-^g  and  ^g-a 
must  be  equal  to  two  tones  and  a  semitone. 

P.  147,  I.  4.  The  MSS  read  δύο  σνν€χ€Ϊς  έσονται  και  μη  ev  αΙ 
νπίροχαί  which  Marquard  andWestphal  following  Meibom  correct 
by  changing  ev  to  μία.  But  (i)  how  did  the  grammatically 
obvious  μία  come  to  be  corrupted  to  ev  ?  (2)  what  is  the  sense  of 
insisting  that  the  remainders  are  '  not  one '  ?  (3)  the  article  before 
νπ€ροχαί  is  objectionable,  as  the  meaning  is  '  there  will  be  two 
remainders.'  I  read  κζίμ^ναι  for  κα\  μη  ev  αί.  κ^ίμ^ναι  avpex€ls  = 
'  lying  side  by  side,'  '  in  juxtaposition.' 

1.  9.  The  absurd  τίτταρα  in  this  line  and  in  1.  1 5  arose  of  course 
from  the  scribe  mistaking  the  δ  of  brjkov  and  the  δ'  before  οξΰτατον 
for  numerals. 

P.  148,  1.  I.  The  MSS  read  biTOvov'  συγχωρείται  πάρα  πάντων 
κ.τ.λ.  Marquard  followed  by  Westphal  inserts  αλλά  before 
συΎχωρζΙται ;  but  I  prefer  συγχωρίΐται  yap,  because  (i)  the  sentence 
supplies  a  reason,  (2)  yap  might  easily  have  been  lost  before  παρά. 

P.  149, 1.  12.  Before  we  consider  Aristoxenus'  exposition  of 
the  continuity  of  tetrachords,  there  are  two  points  to  be  noticed. 
Firstly,  whereas  in  his  former  sketch  of  the  matter  [p.  145,11.3-13] 
he  considered  the  relation  of  similar  tetrachords  only,  here  his 
treatment  takes  into  account  the  differences  of  Figure.  Secondly 
there  is  an  ambiguity  in  the  terms  σνν^χψ  and  e|^s•,  which  some- 
times signify  merely  *  in  the  same  line  of  succession,'  at  other 
times  '  next  in  the  line  of  succession.' 

In  general,  Aristoxenus  asserts,  tetrachords  are  in  the  same 
line  of  succession  if  their  boundaries  are  in  the  same  line  of 
succession  or  coincide.  In  this  general  definition  are  explicitly 
given  the  two  species  of  succession  of  which  tetrachords  are 
capable.  We  have  a  case  of  the  one  species  when  the  lower 
boundary  of  the  higher  of  two  tetrachords  coincides  with  the 
upper  boundary  of  the  lower ;  a  case  of  the  other  species,  when 
the  lower  boundary  of  the  higher  of  two  tetrachords  is  in  the  one 
hne  of  succession  with  the  upper  boundary  of  the  lower. 

Now  we  must  not  confuse  this  distinction  with  the  distinction 
between  conjunct  and  disjunct  tetrachords.   The  latter  distinction 

287 


ARISTOXENUS 

divides  successive  tetrachords  into  (a)  those  whose  extremities 
coincide;  and  (ό)  those  whose  extremities  are  divided  by  one 
tone.  The  former  distinction  divides  successive  tetrachords 
into  (x)  those  whose  extremities  coincide ;  and  (j)  those  whose 
extremities  are  in  the  same  hne  of  succession.  Now  the  class 
(iz)  =  the  class  (x),  but  {ί>)  is  only  one  subdivision  of  the  class  (y). 
Thus  in  the  legitimate  scale 

— d-bJ— J—     . 


EP^^3 


=q=^3=3=^= 


the  tetrachords  E-F-G-A  and  c-d-^e-f  fall  into  the  class  (j), 
since  A  and  c  are  in  the  same  line  of  succession,  but  not  into  the 
class  {b),  since  they  are  separated  not  by  one  tone  but  by  a  tone 
and  a  half. 

Now  if  two  tetrachords  belong  to  the  class  {a)  (and  con- 
sequently to  {x)  also)  they  must  be  similar  in  figure.  Otherwise 
as  in  the  pair 


we  shall  find  a  violation  of  the  fundamental  law  of  continuity 
[p.  1 20,  1.  16]. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  tetrachords  belong  to  the  class  (_y) 
they  will  sometimes  be  similar,  sometimes  dissimilar  in  figure : 
similar,  when  they  belong  to  the  class  {b)^  that  is  when  their 
extremities  are  divided  by  a  tone  (and  also,  of  course,  if  they  are 
separated  by  a  full  concord)  ;  dissimilar,  if  they  are  separated  by 
any  other  interval. 

Thus  in  the  scales 


f 


5Ξ=Ε^^Ξ^ 


^ 


and 


Ρ 


Ssfei 


^A   A 


li-- 


J.  -^ 


288 


NOTES 


E-F-G-A  and  ]?B-C-D-\}e,  E-F-G-A  and  \?e-f-g-^a  in  the 
first,  and  E-F-G-A  and  C-D-e-f,  E-F-G-A  and  f-g-a-b, 
E-F-G-A  and  B-C-D-e  in  the  second  are  all  examples  of 
class  [y) ;  but  only  the  last  pair  are  examples  of  class  {b)  and 
only  the  last  are  similar  in  figure. 

Since  then  we  have  seen  that  all  successive  tetrachords  may 
be  divided  into  {x)  and  (/),  and  since  all  (a)  are  [x)  and  are 
similar  in  figure  and  only  those  {y)  are  similar  which  are  also 
{b)^  it  follows  that  all  similar  tetrachords  in  the  same  line  of 
succession  are  either  [a)  or  {b).  As  Aristoxenus  says,  τα  (ξης 
Τ€τράχορδα  όμοια  οντά  ή  συνημμένα  άναγκαΐον  eivai  η  Sie^euy/MeVa. 

Ρ.  140,  1.  Ι4•  In  general,  tetrachords  in  the  same  line  of 
succession  cannot  be  separated  by  a  tetrachord  dissimilar  to 
themselves ;  for 

I.  Similar  tetrachords  in  the  same  line  of  succession  cannot 
be  separated  by  a  tetrachord  dissimilar  to  themselves. 

For  if  it  be  possible,  between  the  similar  tetrachords  E-F-G-A 
and  ^-t?  i"-^^  let  the  dissimilar  tetrachord  ^-^- J C-^/ be  inter- 
posed. 


^ 


3ΞΞΕ 


■9<•^ — P- 


-(^ 


The  resulting  scale  is  illegitimate,  because  /  neither  forms  a 
Fourth  with  the  fourth  note  below  it,  nor  a  Fifth  with  the  fifth. 

2.  Dissimilar  tetrachords  in  the  same  line  of  succession  cannot 
be  separated  by  a  tetrachord  of  any  figure. 

For  if  it  be  possible,  let  the  two  dissimilar  tetrachords 
E-xE-F-A  and  (1-%/--^  #/-^be  in  the  same  line  of  succession 
and  separated  by  a  tetrachord  of  any  of  the  three  figures. 

(«)  ^ 


i 


3^^ 


:«*= 


ARISTOXENUS 

Any  one  of  the  resulting  scales  is  illegitimate.  In  (a)  for  example 
xA  neither  forms  a  Fifth  with  the  fifth  note  above  it  nor  a  Fourth 
with  the  fourth ;  and  the  other  scales  suffer  from  the  same 
defect. 

P.  151, 1.  4,  For  ov  iari  I  read  δ  y  eVri  for  two  reasons.  Firstly, 
the  sentence  is  thus  made  exactly  parallel  to  the  next ;  and 
Aristoxenus  is  fond  of  such  parallelism.  Secondly,  if  we  read 
ov,  the  meaning  is  '  People  take  the  ditone  as  simple  and  then 
wonder  how  it  can  be  divided ' ;  but  we  require  rather  '  People 
know  that  the  ditone  can  be  divided,  and  then  wonder  how  it 
can  be  simple ' ;  and  this  sense  is  secured  by  reading  δ  y  eari. 
The  difficulty  which  Aristoxenus  here  resolves  arose  from  the 
common  misconception  by  which  one  decides  an  interval  to 
be  simple  or  compound  by  its  dimension,  without  taking  into 
account  the  scale  to  which  it  belongs,  and  the  functions  of  its 
containing  notes. 

1.  17.  I  omit  TO  δ'  'ίδιον  της  δια^εύ^βω?  άκίνητόν  iariv.  The  fact 
that  the  disjunctive  interval  (the  tone)  does  not  vary  is  used 
to  prove  the  theorem,  and  therefore  cannot  be  part  of  the 
statement  of  it. 

1.  22.  The  disjunctive  interval  is  constant  because  the  notes 
that  contain  it  are  fixed  notes. 

P.  152,  1.  14.  For  MSS  άσυνθ^τα  πλείστα  I  read  άσΰνθ^τα  τα 
πλίΐστα.     Cp.  p.  1 53,  1.  I. 

1.  18.  For  the  MSS  €μπροσθ€ν  τ^θβίσα  Marquard  and  West- 
phal  read  τΐροστιθάσα,  supposing  the  ζμπροσθζν  to  have  crept 
in  from  1.  16.  I  read  ei/  ττροστιθα,σα  ;  ev  helps  to  account  for  the 
corruption,  and  strengthens  the  expression  of  the  argument. 

P.  153,  1.  II.  oTi  §6  Koi  (ξ  (λαττόνων  κ.τ.λ.  Defective  or 
transilient  scales  [see  Introduction  A,  §  26]  contain  fewer 
intervals  than  the  simple  parts  of  the  Fourth.  Also  in  the 
Enharmonic  scale  of  Olympus  [see  note  on  p.  115,  1.  2]  the 
Fourth  was  only  divided  into  two  intervals. 

1.  13.  ττυκνον  be  npos  πνκνώ  κ.τ.λ.  The  next  eleven  pages 
are  occupied  by  a  series  of  special  rules  as  to  the  succession 
of  notes  and  intervals,  all  of  which  rules  derive  themselves 
immediately  from  two  fundamental  laws.  One  of  these  laws, 
that  by  which  the  order  of  intervals  of  the  original  tetrachord  is 
290 


NOTES 


determined,  is  always  presupposed  by  Aristoxenus ;  the  other 
which  demands  a  Fourth  between  fourth  notes  or  a  Fifth  between 
fifth  notes  [see  p.  1 20, 1. 1 6]  is  explicitly  quoted.  To  understand  then 
all  these  special  rules,  it  is  only  necessary  to  keep  before  one's 
mind  (a)  the  form  of  the  original  tetrachord,  and  the  functions  of 

LP     MP  HP   LP 

its  notes  as  regards   the  Pycnum   \-4^ — ^     ~J     J — =^ — ,  [see 

note  on  p.  129,  1.  4]  and  (d)  the  possibility  of  choosing  between 
conjunction  and  disjunction  both  in  the  ascending  scale 

LP  MP  HP    LP 


LP    MP  HP  LP 

! 

t 

fe=#-^^ 

»— ^— JSP-^ 

r~^    * 

^_=j — 

LP      MP 

and  in  the  descending  scale 

LP     HP  MP    LP     HP  MP 


HP 


LP 


LP  HP  MP   LP 

P.  156,  1.  5.  I  read  with  Μ  τουναντίον  πίπονθίν  άπΚως  ου  8υνά' 
μ€να.  The  Other  MSS  have  8υνάμ(θη  for  Βυνάμ^να  which  Meibom 
retains,  inserting  a  before  άπλως.  Marquard,  rightly  urging 
that  the  explanation  of  the  general  phrase  τουναντίον  ττίττονθΐν 
would  not  be  given  in  a  relative  sentence,  reads  τουναντίον 
ττίπονθζ  κα\  απλώς,  and  is  followed  by  Westphal.  But  the 
reading  of  Μ  is  quite  unexceptionable.  Marquard's  objection  to 
the  two  participles  δυνάμξνα  and  ίσα  οντά,  which  are  not  co- 
ordinated  in  sense,  is  groundless.     In  the  active  one  might 

have  ού  δυνάμεθα  ταύτα  Ti6ivai  'ίσα  οντά  (ζηζ,  which  WOuld 
become  in  the  passive  ου  δύναται  ταύτα  τίθ€σθαι  Ισα  οντά  ί^ψ, 
and  if  used  participially  oh  8ννάμ€να  τίθ^σθαι  Ισα  οντά  ί^ης. 
Another  objection  to  the  readings  of  Meibom  and  Marquard 
is  that  they  would  require  TiSevai,  not  τίθζσθαι. 

P.  157,  1.  6.  Before  άπο  Se  του  διτόνον,  the  MSS  have  από  ημι- 
τονίον  μεν  eVi  το  οξύ  δύο  όδο\  κα\  eVt  το  βαρύ  δυο.      This  sentence 

cannot  be  retained  ;    for  in  the  first  place  it  makes   a  false 

U  2  291 


ARISTOXENUS 

assertion,  there  being  but  one  progression  upwards  from  the 
semitone  or  first  interval  of  the  Diatonic  tetrachord  (that  is, 
of  course,  in  the  scale  of  any  one  shade,  see  p.  159,  1.  12); 
and  in  the  second  place,  referring  as  it  must,  along  with  the 
preceding  paragraph,  to  the  Diatonic  genus  only,  it  could 
not  stand  in  such  close  connexion  with  the  following  propo- 
sition, which  as  it  concerns  the  ditone  can  only  apply  to  the 
Enharmonic  Genus. 

1.  10.  eVt  oe  TO  βαρύ  πυκνον  μόνον  which  in  some  of  the  MSS 
follows  eVt  TO  οξύ  is  a  most  silly  interpolation.  The  sentence 
in  1.  II,  XetufTui  μ(ν  yap  κ.τ.λ.,  introduces  the  proof  of  the 
assertion  n'Keiovs  5e  τούτων  ουκ  έσονται  in  1.  9.  The  consideration 
of  the  descent  from  the  ditone  does  not  begin  till  1.  13,  eVi  oe  τό 

βαρν  μία'   dedeiKTai  yap  κ.τ.λ. 

P.  158,  1.  15.  I  read  κατά  with  R.  The  other  MSS  have 
και.  But  whichever  we  read,  τό  του  πυκνον  peyfuos  is  accusative 
(whether  governed  by  καθ'  or  κατά)  and  not  nominative,  as 
Marquard  and  Westphal  suppose.  Evidently  the  chromatic 
interval  that  corresponds  to  the  enharmonic  ditone  (which  will 
differ  in  size  as  we  pass  from  one  shade  to  another)  will  vary 
inversely  as  the  size  of  the  Pycnum.  τό  ye  μί,σψ  of  the  MSS, 
earlier  in  the  sentence,  is  quite  correct. 

P.  159, 1.  15.  I  have  corrected  d  to  ji.  Cp.  p.  loi,  1.  13,  where 
Westphal  has  corrected  βιττβρ  to  l^ep.  The  MSS  of  Aristoxenus 
exhibit  perpetual  confusion  of  i,  e,  ?/,  υ,  et,  01.  Cp.  note  on  p. 
loi,  1.  7. 

1.  18.  δννάμ€ΐς  .  .  .  εΐ'δτ;  .  .  .  θίσαί  are  used  in  a  general  not 
a  technical  sense  here. 

P.  161,  1.  24.  The  absurd  eVi  which  appears  in  the  MSS  is 
really  the  eVei  of  p.  1 62, 1.  i .  This  is  proved  by  the  Selden  Μ  S,  the 
writer  of  which  after  the  μία  o86s  e0'  ίκάτ^ρα  εσται  of  11.  23-24 
missed  a  line,  and  proceeded  to  write  the  deiKTeov  eVi  (for  eVti) 
of  p.  162,  1.  I.  Then  discovering  his  mistake  he  drew  his  pen 
through  these  latter  words. 

P.  162,  1.  4.  Whether  we  retain  κατ  ovdeTepov  των  τρόπων  of 
the  MSS  or  read  as  I  prefer  κατ  ούδ^τερον  των  τύπων  the  sense 
is  '  neither  above  nor  below.' 

1.  8.   The  MSS  read  όποτε ρως  αν  Τ(θ[ι  TO  δίτονον'  τω  τόπω  τόνου 

29a 


NOTES 

τίθαμίνον.  Marquard  followed  by  Westphal  reads  όποτ^ρως  αν 
τ€θη  TO  δίτονον'  eVi  Se  rc3  ηντω  τόπω  τόνου  re^ei/ieVou  κ.τΧ.,  taking 
ήττοτίρως  in  the  sense  of  '  whether  above  or  below '  on  the  analogy 
of  κατ  ovderepov  των  τρόττων  (1.  4)  ;  and  eVi  τω  αυτω  τόπω  in  the 
sense  of  προς  τω  (Ιρημίνω  φθό-γγω.  But  this  last  is  very  hard 
to  accept ;  the  phrase  would  much  more  naturally  mean  '  in 
the  same  direction  of  pitch'  i.e.  either  ascent  or  descent. 
I  prefer,  having  read  κατ  ovdeTepov  των  τόπων  in  1.  4  =  '  in 
neither  of  the  directions,'  to  read  here  όποτ€ρως  αν  τ€θβ  τ6 
δίτονον  των  τόπων =' in  whichever  manner  the  ditone  be  placed 
in  regard  of  the  directions.'  The  two  τόποι  are  6  eVi  τό  οξύ  and 
6  €π\  το  βαρν. 

1.  21.  The  MSS  reading  is  obviously  defective.  The  words 
I  have  introduced  restore  the  sense  simply.  Marquard's  in- 
sertion of  the  article  before  φθόγ-γους  is  quite  inadequate. 
Westphal  reads  eVl  την  αντην  τάσιν  τους  (Ιρημ^νονε  iv  πνκιω 
φθόyyovς. 

Ρ.  163,  1.  4•  o^t  δβ  τό  διάτονον  σύγκειται  ήτοι  κ.τ.Χ.  The  pro- 
position of  this  paragraph  seems  at  first  sight  inconsistent 
with  Aristoxenus'  exposition  of  the  shades  (see  p.  142,  11.  9-14)  ; 
according  to  which  exposition  there  are  only  two  shades  of  the 
Diatonic  genus,  {a)  the  soft  Diatonic,  the  tetrachord  of  which 
is  thus  divided 


s         ^      c:  93 15 % 

III  I 

(in  which  i  =  J^  of  a  tone) 
[b]  the  sharp  Diatonic  λvith  the  tetrachord 
■B  « 


II  I  I 

If  we  complete  the  Fifth  by  adding  to  each  of  these  tetra- 
chords  the  disjunctive  tone  =  12,  we  shall  have  in  the  sharp 
Diatonic  12  and  6  as  the  only  dimensions  of  intervals.  In 
the    flat    Diatonic,   on    the   other   hand,   we   shall    have  four 

293 


NOTES 

dimensions,  6,  9,  12,  15.  But  how  can  there  be  a  Diatonic  with 
three  dimensions?  In  this  way,  that  it  is  allowable  for  the 
Diatonic  scale  to  borrow  the  Chromatic  Parhypatae.  Thus,  by 
a  combination  of  the  Sharp  Diatonic  Lichanus  and  the  soft 
Chromatic  Parhypate  we  obtain  a  Fifth  of  the  form 

I        I  i  I 

^  z?  ca  fl,  Ρ 

a.  -^  Λ  ^  g 

a     4   ^ 14         i:^       12      1^ ^ 

II  I  I  12  ' 

which  may  be  called  Diatonic  from  its  prevailing  character. 
In  it  there  are  three  dimensions,  4,  12,  14. 

P.  164,  1.  13.   eldos  here  =  schema  =  the  '  figure'  or  order  of 
disposal  of  the  given  parts  of  a  whole. 


294 


INDEX 


ayaOos  122.  8,  lo,  13. 

"Ά,-γηνωρ  127.  25. 

ά-γροέω  12δ.  3 ;  126.   26 ;  127.  2  ; 

136.  19;  144.  2i. 
ά-γνοια  131.  12,  14;  151.  7• 
070;  104.  5,  6,   9,  24;    128.   ii; 

144.  16;   159.  22. 
07(07)7  =.' rate  of  movement'  105. 

14;  125.  17. 

=  ' sequence  Ί21.  7;  143.  18. 
=  *  keeping,'      '  observance  ' 

128.  10. 
άδιάφορο$  129.  II. 
άδυνατίω  106.  25. 
αδω  102.  25. 

άΐ7/)  134.  2  7- 

άθίώρητοί  126.  25;   127-  Ι. 

'A^T^iOfos  128.  II. 

αισθάνομαι  98.   20;    125.1,   2,    7> 

129.  22. 

αισθησΐ5  99.  2ΐ  ;  101.  2  2,  24  ;  102. 

8;  103.  5;  104.  5;  HI•  13; 

124.  4,   23,  27;    129.  22;    139. 

3,  10,  19;  140.  9;  145.  18. 
αισθητοί  99.  6. 
αιτία  98.  24;    114.   ι8 ;    123.    ΐ; 

124.  5,    9;    126.    ι8 ;    133.    ΐ; 

134.  2,  3;    138.    12;    145.   17; 

151.  ίο;  153.  9;   159.  26;  160. 

21  ;  161.  17,  2θ;  164.  7,  ίο. 
atrios   114.  9;    115•  6;    118.   22; 

122.  16. 
afiapicuos  145.  16. 
άκίνητοί  113.  23;   151.  17;  152. 

6,  9,  II. 
ακοή  102.  15  ;  106.  24;  107  ;  124. 

ι6,  17;  129.  17. 
άκολουθίω  126.   19;    138.  ΐ6,  17 ; 

143.  23;  154.  14,  ι6. 
ακούω  108.  8  ;   122.  8,  19  ;  123.  6, 

12;  149.  12. 


ακρίβεια  125.  Ι. 

άκριβψ  97.  8;    103.  6;    108.  9; 

124.  5;    144.  Ι  ;    145.  19;   146. 

23. 
άκριβολο-γίομαι  126.  1 5- 
άκριβωί  119.  3  ;   124.  19. 
άκροάομαι  123.  2. 
άκρόασίί  122.  8. 
άκροί  121.    8;    137.   2;    141.    2; 

147.  8,  20 ;  148.  7- 
αλλοίωσίϊ  130.  24;  164.  17. 
άλΧοτριοΚο^ζω  124.  4• 
άΧλότριοί  124.  8. 
άλ0705  108.  23  ;  109.  Ι2. 
αμάρτημα  132.  1 3. 
αμαρτία  123.  5• 

άμ(\ωδητο5 113. 1 2  ;  117. 8  ;  120.  ι. 
άμφισβητέω  138.  2  2. 
άμφισβήτησίί  118.  7• 
άΐ'ά7ω  124.  15  ;    132.  14;    133.  5, 

II. 

ανάγωγη  133.  Ι  ;  134.  2. 

άναιράω  110.  24,  25;  145.  3^ 

άναμάρτητο$  133.  6. 

άναπόδεί/ίτοί  99.  2,  1 7,  19;    129.  g. 

άνάρμοστο9  110.  II,  17  ;  143.  6. 

αναφορά  106.  23. 

ανζΐτΊλη•πτο$  108.  14• 

areats  (see  note  on  103.   16)  97. 

10;    103;   104;    105.  19;    106. 

11;  114.  9. 
άνήρ  112.  i8. 
άνθρωπικόί  106.  17. 

άνίημι  103. 12 ;  104. 3, 5 ;  110. 7 ; 

115.17;  123.  24;  132.19;  133. 

I ;  137.  15. 
άνόμοιοί  125.  ι8;  139.  7;  150.  ΐ6, 

17;  162.  ι6,  23. 
αντιστρέφω  138.  4• 
άνώτ(ρον  95.  II. 
άνωτξρω  101.  12. 

295 


ARISTOXENUS 


άνώτατοί  111.  I  Γ. 

a^ioKoyos  98.  I4. 

ήιόω  95.  9;  138.  7;  140.  9;   143. 

άόρίστοϊ  99.  I. 

άπαιτ€ω  134.  25. 

άτταλλάττω  104.  ΐο;    124.  2  2. 

άττα^  141.  12,  13- 

άπαρία  160.  3• 

α7Γ€φ05  97.  15;  104.4;  106;  107; 
112.  2;  138.  2θ,  2ΐ ;  144.  3,  5; 
158.  22,  24;  159.  5,  7,  ΐ5• 

ά-ηέχω  137.  7  ;  155.  6,  8. 

άπλοΰί  109.  2θ,  22  ;  110.  25  ;  125. 
24;  129.3;  131.  9• 

άπλώί  =  (ι)  *in  plain  speech,  not 
in  accordance  with  strict  philo- 
sophical truth'  102.  14. 

=  (2)  'roughly  speaking, 
overlooking  particular  excep- 
tions'125. 6;  126.2,25;  127.5• 
—  (3)  '  ii^  general  terms,  sum- 
ming up  particulars'  131.  8; 
143.  15. 

=  (4)  'absolutely,  without 
exception'  127.  20;  150.  15; 
153.  4;  156.  5. 

=  (5)  'in  the  abstract'  136. 
24. 

ά7Γο;3άλλο;  139.  6. 

άποβλίττω  104.  I. 

άπο-ζι-^νώσκω  122.  l8. 

ά-ηοδίίκννμι  99. 9,  II  ;  118.  4 ;  124. 

^  13  ;  1.^3.  9. 

άποδ€ίκτίκ05  99.  2  ;  129.  g. 

άπόδ€ΐζΐ5  124.  2,  lo;   134.  25. 

άποδίδωμι  98.  9,  lo;  99.  13;  103. 
15;  108.  8;  113.  3;  119.  16; 
128.  9;  131.  17;  143.  17;  144. 
I,  2. 

άπόδοσι$  128.  II. 

άποθ^σπίζω  124.  9• 

άπολιμιτάνω  135.  2. 

άπορ(ω  149.  12  ;  164.  5• 

άιτοτίμνω  96.  6. 

άποψαίνω  105.6;   119.  Ι7• 

απτω  95.  17;  96.  ίο;  98.  ΐ6  ;  99. 
24;  114.  6,  21. 

atrvKvos  120.  13. 

άρίσκω  122.  Ι9• 

Άριστοτέληε  122.  7>  20. 
296 


αρμονία  (see  note  on  95.  5)  95. 
10;  115.  9;  116.  9;  118.  15; 
126.  9,   11;    127.  23;   135.  5; 

139.  I,  3,  9,  12;  142.  19;  154. 
22;  155.  15;  160.  5,  16;  163. 
19;  164.  8. 

άρμονικ09  123.  19  ;  130.  7  ;  134.  24. 
αρμονικό^,  6  95.  ι8  ;    96.  12  ;   98. 

19;    101.  Ι  ;  119.  15;  128.  ίο, 

13;  131.13. 
αρμονική,  ι)  95.   5  ;    101.   1 1  ;    126. 

3  ;  130.  Ι ;  134.  ίο. 
αρμονικά,  τά  123.  7• 
άρμόττω  104.  2  ;  107. 23  ;    110.  8  ; 

133.  17,  ι8,  19;  139.  ι ;  147.13• 
άρχαϊκό$  115.  2. 

αρχή  98.  13;  108.  14;  119.  45 
123.  4;    124.   II,   27;•  131.  5; 

134.  19,  20 ;    145.  2;    146.  2ΐ  ; 
,  147.  21. 

άρχο€ΐδή5  134.  22,  25• 

άρχομαι   101.   13;    109.  ι6 ;    126. 

]ΐ;  134.  26;  135.  ι;  142.  7- 
άστραβψ  133.  6. 
aarpoXoy'ia  122.  13. 
άσνμμ€τροί  115.  23. 
άσνμψωνο5  120.  2 1  ;  144.  2θ. 
aaiir^cTos  (see   note    on  108.  22) 

passim, 
αταξία  99,  4. 
άτοπία  131.  19. 
oTOTTos  131.  14,  21;    132.  12,  13; 

140.  17. 

ανλίω  112.  i6;  130.  5  ;  134.  2,  3. 

αν\οποιΐα  134.  8. 

avXos  (see  note  on  112.  13)  112. 

13;   128.  17,  18;    130.4;    132. 

12,16;  133.3,5,7;  134.1,4,7. 
αυξάνω  106.  20;   112.  2  ;  137.  14. 
αύξησΐ5  97.  i6  ;  107.  17  ;  119.  ii ; 

138.  18. 
αύτάρκη$  100.  13;    123.  i6;   127. 

3  ;  144.  21  ;   145.  10. 
άφαιρίω  132.   25;    146.  7,  8,   19; 

147.1. 
άψανήί  103.  ΙΟ. 
άφίημι  100.  7 ;  108.  25- 
άφικνίομαι   105.    24;    115.  g,   16 ; 

137.  15. 
άφίστημι  114.  13;    115.14;   128. 

22;  133,  22. 


INDEX 


αφορίζω  98.  3;  108.  5;  109.  24: 
111.  2,  20,22;  113.8,15;  118. 
13,  18;  143.  14;  144.  13;  146. 
24;   151.  II  ;  164.  17. 

αφορισμοί  111.  3. 

άχρηστοι  129.  I  ;   145.  1 3. 

άψυχοί  132.  5• 

βαδίζω  122.  4. 

Papvs  (<  low '  in  pitch)  passim. 

βαρύτψ  ^T .  11  ;    103;   104;  105; 

106. 
βίβαωω  133.  7  ;    134.  4. 
β€λτίων  122.  3  ;  123.  3,  7- 
βραχύί  101.  4. 

7ei'€(rty  129.  19. 

YfjOs  (see  Intr.  A,  §  6)  passim. 

Ύ^ωμέτρηί  124.  22. 

Ύ^ωμίτρία  122.  1 3. 

•γλυκαίνω  115.  6. 

γνωρίζω  127.  7• 

γνώριμοι  105. 4  ;  106. 13  ;  107.  20  ; 

113.  7;  131.  12;  135.  ro,  16. 
γρά/i/ia  119.  6,  8  ;  128.  2,  3. 
-γραμμή  124.  21. 
7ρά^ω  130.  9,  II,  13  ;  131.  ι. 

5€Ϊξι$  123.  8. 

δ€ΚΤΙκ05  108.   2. 

δ6ν«ί  114.  19  ;  133.  20  ;  138.  20  ; 

160.  9- 
δέχομαι  118.  6. 
δτ^λόω  96.  2. 
διαβαίνω  102.  Ι,  ΐ6. 
διάγνωσί?  100.  14;  127.4;   139•  7• 
διάγραμμα  95.  21  ;   96.  2 ;    101.  6  ; 

119.  ι6;  124.  2θ. 
διαζίν-γννμι  109.  17;    149.   Ι,  15; 

150.  14- 
διάζίν^ΐί  ('  disjunction  ' ;   see  Intr. 

A,  §  12)  passim, 
δίαιρ^σΐί  and  διαιρίω  passim, 
διαισθάνομαι  107.  5  ;    126.  ίο,  13  ; 

130.  i8  ;  131.  4. 
διάκίνοί  118.  5. 
διακριβόω  108.  Ι4. 
διαλ€'γομαι  96.   21  ;    102.   20,    25  J 

110.  7;  Π9.  7;  128.  3• 
διαμαρτάνω  99.  21  ;  110.  ι8  ;  130. 

7;  132.9,23;  136.  19. 


διαμένω  122.   19;    133.   14;    139. 

22  ;  140.  Ι,  6. 
διανοέω  132.  5• 
διάνοια  ]24.  ι6,  ι8  ;  126.  ι  ;  129. 

ι8. 
Ιιαττορία  140.  21. 
διασαφέω  107.  4• 
διασκοπίω  111.  1 6. 
δίάστασί?   97.    ΐζ  ;    106.    14,    2ΐ  ; 

107.  1,9,12,15;   112.  1 2  ;  128. 

24. 

διάστημα  ('  interval')  passim. 

διαστηματικό$  passim. 

διασώζω  133.  Ι5• 

διατ€ίνω  112.  II  ;  125.  6. 

διατΐλίω  102.  19. 

δίάτονοί  (see  Intr.  A,  §  6)  passim. 

διατρίβω  115.  8  ;   126.  ΙΟ. 

διαφυλάττω  119.  13. 

διαφωνέω  136.  1 2. 

διαφωνία  111.  ΐ6. 

δίά^ωνο?    (see    note   on    108.   21) 

passim. 
δΐίξ€ΐμι  96.  141  101.  21 ;  103.  13. 
δκξίρχομαι  103.  12  ;  106.  ι8;  134. 

Ι3• 
διέρχομαι  97.  19;   101•  ι6;    106. 

13;  126.3;  142.  2. 
δίεσίϊ   (any  interval  smaller  than 

a  semitone) /aj-^i'w. 
διέχω  119.  l8. 
διη-γέομαι  122.  7. 
δίοράω  127.  ΙΟ. 
διορίζω  passim. 

διπλάσιο5ΐ17.7',  120.8;  137.14- 
διπλουί  109.  2θ,  2  2. 
δίτοι/oj/aji-m. 
δίχα  98.  22. 
δό^α  96.  12  ;  104.  24. 
δοξάζω  103.  2  5. 
δύναμίί  95.  6  ;    96.   14  ;    113.  4  ; 

124.  ι8,  23;  125.  1 1  ;    127.  ή, 

9  ;   130.   24;    131.  2,  7;   138. 

ιο;  140.  Ι  ;  159.  ι8,  2θ. 
δωδίκατημόριον  117. 
δώριθ5  128. 

ίάω  159.  15. 
Ιγ^ίγνομαι  98.  8. 

67γιίί  115.  9,  13  >  120.  7• 
ΙβιΧα;  124.  20,  23. 

297 


ARISTOXENUS 


6f5os97.  i;   139;   150.  9,  16,  19; 

159;  164. 
ίκατίρωθίν  121.  8. 
€κκ(ΐμαι  95.  12  ;  135.  6,  i6. 
ίκκλίνω  124,  4. 
(κλαμβάνω  108.  7• 
^κλιμττάνω  124.  4  J  150.  24,  25. 
€κμ€\ψ   (*  violating   the    laws   of 

melody ')  passim, 
ίκτη μόρων  117.  7• 
(λάττωσΐ5  97.  ι6  ;  138.  ι8. 
€μβιβάζω  108.  12. 
(μμζλψ  (*  musically   legitimate ') 

passim. 
l/i7rei/)ojl23. 13  ;  124. 12  ;  126.  14. 
(μπίτττω  134.  27  ;  150.  24  ;  160.  3. 
εμφαίνομαι  139.  1 5,  Ι7• 
Ινάλλα^  102.  ι8  ;  154.  ι  ;  156.  9. 
kvapyijs  103.  14. 
(ναρμόνιοί    (see    Intr.    A,     §    6) 

passim. 
€ν(ΐμι  96.  23. 
lvep-^ίω  133.  I. 
ΐνίστημι  102.  ίο. 
ΙίΊΌία  95.  2θ  ;  98.  1 2. 
εντύνω  133.  13. 
Ιί'τό?  135.  Ι. 
(ννπάρχω  130.  20. 
Ι^αδυί/ατίω  107.  3  >  H^•  23. 
f^aipfTos  141.  4• 
(ζαριθμύω  99.  1 9,  24;  100.  8  ;  124. 

ιο;  127.  ΐ9>  2ΐ,  24. 
€ξ(τάζω  99.  22  ;  115.  21 ;  146.  22. 
?£is  98.  7;  123.  19. 
e} ορίζω  115.  5. 
Ιττάγω  114.  ι6 ;  115.  ι. 
επα-γω-γή  97.  23;  144.  4• 
€παλλάττω  115,  14;   150.  Ι,  12. 
€παι/ά7ω  147.  9• 
(παφάομαι  98.  2. 
ΐΊπθίζω  124.  19• 
(πιβλέπω  126.  ΐ2;  159.  3- 
ΈτΓίγόΐ'ίίΟί  97.  6. 
(πίμ€λή5  96,  2. 
(ΐτιπλίΐον  105.  17• 
emiroKijs  164.  7. 
(maKfipLS  111.  18;  127.  Ι7>  23. 
(πισκοπέω  96,    ιι;    98,    25;    103. 

22;    107.  19;   114.  7;    130.  ι8; 

160.  2. 
(πιστατίω  132.  3  >  133.  ΙΟ. 
298 


ετηστημη  95  ;  101.  II ;  130.  8, 15  ; 

131.  ΐ6,  20  ;  134.  ι8;  159.  15. 
kiriraais  (see  note  on  103.  16)  97. 

10;  103;  104;  106.  11  ;  114.  9. 
επιτύνω  103.  13  ;    104.  3,  4;    110. 

6;  115.  i6;    123.  23;   132.  19; 

133.  ι;  137.  i6. 
Έρατοκλψ  98.  21  ;  99.  i8. 
cpyov  131.  18  ;  132.  i,  2. 
epiariKOs  122.  17. 
ερμηνεία  108.  1 4. 
ευδαιμονία  122.  II. 
€υδ77λθ5  114.  21. 
εύθεω5  125.  6  ;  159.  19. 
εύθνε  121.  9  ;  124.  2ΐ,  23. 
ευκατα<ρρ6νητο$  123.  Ι4• 
ευσύνοητο^  96.  12. 

Ζακύνθιο$  127.  25. 

^005 115.  ίο;  123.  7,  ίο;  131.13• 
ηλικία  112.  20. 
ij/zcpa  128.  ΙΟ  ;  133.  13. 
ήμιόλιοί  116.  14  ;  117  ;  141 ;  143. 

4,  5  ;  155.  7- 
ημισν3  113.  ΙΟ  ;  115.  14  ;   116.  ι  ; 

136.  14,  15  ;  146.  22  ;  147.  ίο, 

12. 
ήμιτονιαΐοί  142  ;  143.  4,  12. 
ήμιτόνιον  passim, 
ήρεμεω  104.    13  ;    105.  Ι,  12,  23; 

113.  21. 
ηρεμία  105.  13,  ΐ6,  2θ,  25. 
ήρμοσμενοί  (see  note  on  95.  3)  97. 

23;  110.8,  22,23,25;  111.8; 

125.  25  ;    129.  14;    132;    133; 

134.5;  145.  3;  151.18. 

θαυμάζω  151.  3;   158.  22. 
θαυμαστό^  99.  3  ;  122.  1 1 ;  133.  ρ, 

21. 

ekais  99.  17 ;  145.  5 ;  156.  ι,  24 ; 

159.  ι8. 
θεωρεω  95.  1 1,  14  5  98.  4 ;  101.  ι8  ; 

111.  4;  112.  21 ;  124.  ι8;  127. 

12,  15. 
θεωρητικό^  95.  7• 
θεωρία  95.  8;    101.  ίο;    123.  22  ; 

124.  14;  130.4. 

Ιαμβικό^  180.  II,  12. 


INDEX 


ISia  95.  2  ;  101.  20. 

i'Stos  107.  13;    114.  4;    118.  14; 

130.  20  ;  134.  8  ;  136.  6  ;    138. 

8,   13,   19;    139.  18  ;    142.   19; 

151.  17,  23;  152.  18. 
ϊδιότψ  110.  14. 
Ιδιώτη5  131.  17,  21. 
ί/ίαι/ώ?  96.  15  ;  105.  17  ;  108.  1 1  ; 

115.  2. 
ϊστημι  101.  23;    102;    103  ;   104  ; 

105;   106  ;  107.  24  ;  118.  4- 
Ισχυροί  131.  14. 
Ισχύ5  122.  II. 

καθαρώί  127.  ΙΟ. 
καθήκω  101.  14. 
καθιστή  μι  103.  II. 

καθόλου  97. 17,  19  5  ^8.  5  ;  99•  23 

100.  20 ;    101.  6,  8;    104.   24 

110.  21  ;  111.  5;  116.  ίο;  125 

22;  125.  21  ;  132.  13;   133.8 

134.  25  ;  140.  3  ;  149.  13,  ΐ7• 
καθοράω  96.  ΐ6. 
καιροί  101.  14. 
κάμπτω  135.  Τ. 

κατα-^ιγνώσκω  99.  5  >  131.  19. 
καταδύω  132.  6. 
καταμανθάνω  96.  6  ;    100.   Ι,    12  ; 

103.  25  ;  106.1;  108.  ιι  ;  113. 

ι6;  126.  ι6. 
καταμάμψομαι  122.  15• 
κατανοίω   104.    ι,    21  ;    105.    2  2  ; 

108.    ίο;    112.    19;    114.    15; 

120.4;  136.22;  137.14;  138. 

17;  142.  26;  147.  23. 
κατανυκνόω  101.  6. 
καταττύκνωσίί    101.    Ι  ;    119.    ΐ6  ; 

128.  25;  143.  ι6. 
κατασκευάζω  124.  5  ;  131.  2θ. 
κατασπάω  112.  15•   « 
«ατ6χα;  113.  ι8  ;   114.  4;    115.  3  5 

120.  23;  139.  15;  141.  3- 
/ίίί/€ω  and  κίνησίί passim, 
κοιλία  132.  17. 
κοινότη$  151.  3• 

κοινωνάω  118.  15  ;  150.  6;  163.  Ι. 
Κορίνθιοί  128.  II. 
«piVcu  106.  24,  25  ;  107.  13  ;   124. 

17,  19;    126.  Ι  ;  131.  22;  132. 

3,  ΙΟ,  II. 
κριτψ  131.  20. 


Kvpios  132.  10,  II  ;  133.  20. 

λανθάνω  103.  13  ;  122.  6. 

Λάσο5  97.  6. 

λύττω  116.  3;    120.  15,  24;    141. 

19;    152.  2,  12  ;    157.  ιι,   15» 

21 ;  158.  3,  ίο;  162.  23. 
λΐξι$  110.  ι6  ;  119.  6. 
ληψίί  143.  3;  145.  2ο;  146.  6. 
λιχανοΗδψ  118.  6. 
λιχανόϊ  (see  Intr.  A,  §  11)  passim. 
λοηικ6$\01.  2o;  103.  7. 
λ^γο5   98.  27;    99.  3;    107.  i8; 

108.  9,   12,  14;    122.  12;   123. 

8,  16;  124.  6,  8;  125.  16;  127. 

20;    129.  8;    133.  20;    138.  7; 

144.1;  149.16  ;  151.6;  160.  9. 
λοηώδηί  110.  4,  5. 
λϋδιοί  128. 

μάθημα  122.  12  ;  123.  6,  15. 
μαλακοί  141 ;  142 ;  143  ;  155.  7- 
μανθάνω  131.  21. 

μίλοποιία  ]14.    19  ;    ]15.  4  5    123. 
9;   126.  14;    129.  ίο,  14;   131. 

ΙΟ. 

μίλοί  95.  3  ;  96.  19  ;   97.  2θ,  22  ; 

98.    3,    23;    99.   4;    100•    ^71 

101.  9;    103.  5;    107.   ι6,  23; 

110;  111;  112.  3  ;  113.  2;  120. 

6,   17;    121.  4;  123.  23;    124. 

14;    129.  12,  19;   130.   2,   14; 

134.  4;    135.  6  ;   143.  15,  ι8 ; 

144.  ι6;  159.  17. 
μελωδέω  passii7i. 
μελωδία  96.  3,  7  Ι  101.  2  ;  119.  5 ; 

120.  4;  129.6;  144.  7- 
μελωδικοί  103.  8. 
A/eW  106.  2  ;  116.  5  ;  125  ;  126.  2, 

6;  137.  3;  139.  21;   140.  1,4; 

142.  2. 
μερίζω  98.  5;  109.  15,  Ι9• 
/icV??  (see  Intr.  A,  §  11)  passim, 
μεταβάλλω  134.  2. 
μεταβολή  101.  8  ;  125. 14  ;  129.  4, 

5,7;  131.9. 
μετάβολοί  129.  3• 
μετακινεω  104.  6. 
μεταλαμβάνω  133.  9 ;  158.  14. 
μεταχειρίζομαι  99.  5  5   100.  Ι9• 
μετέχω  160.  5-17  J  163.  3. 
299 


ARISTOXENUS 


μετοχή  162.  17. 

μετράω  115.  22  ;  141.  II,  12. 

μΐτρικη  123.  20  ;  130.  g. 

μίτρον  112.  21  ;   130.  g,  ίι;   141. 

II. 
μηθάί  95.  9• 
μί-γνυμι  100.  9• 
Ai(/fTOs  109.  17;  135.  7• 
/xt^ts  100.  12. 
Μί^ολυδίοί  128.  14,  23- 
Μίτυλτ/ΓαΓοί  127.  25. 
^V77Ai77  129.  22. 
μνημονεύω  129.  23. 
/Χ0λί5  111.  12. 
μονή  104.  2  2. 
μορφή  129.  12. 
μουσικό^  98.  3;    HO.  4'  ^7?    m* 

I  ;  124.  15. 
μουσικοί,  δ  95.  15  ;  123.6,  1 8,  19; 

124.  27. 
μουσική,  ή  95.  15;  98.  3;  99.  4; 

144.  6,  21  ;   123.  g,   Ίΐ  ;    124. 

12;    125.  4>  25;    129.  2θ,  2ΐ, 

24;  133.  12;  159.  14. 

νήτη  (see  Intr.  A,  §  11)  125.   10; 

138.  9;  144.  II. 
νητων  (see  Intr.  A,  §  29)  131.  i. 
νοίω   97.  13;    107.   i6;    108.  6; 

113.  17,  20;  118.  3;  123.  22. 
roT/Tos  124.  5. 

ζνΚλαβή  119.  8;  128.  4. 

ί^εσί?  97.  ίο;    125.  4;   131.  4; 

132.  2,  6. 
iwtVt  107.  5;  108.  12;  129.  17; 

130.  3;  131.  22. 

δδόί  122.  4  ;  157  ;  158  ;  159  ;  160 ; 

161;  162. 
oIkcios  135.  I. 
01Κ€ΐΟτψ  100.  23. 
όκταπλάσίο?  119.  23. 
δκτάχορδοί  96,  3  ;  127.  2  2. 
ολί'-ίωρίω  143.  ι8. 
oAcys   96.    14;    97.    13;    123.   12  ; 

127.  21;  145.  15. 
όμαλότψ  105.  2. 
όμοιος  139.  7  ;   145.  3  ;   149.  3,  4  ; 

150.  7-ΐ9• 
300 


6μοίω5  139.  21  ;    152.  g  ;    158.  13, 

16. 
υμολο'/ίω  114.   15 ;    124.  3 ;   134. 

17- 
όνομα   105.   8;    110.  6  ;    114.  4; 

122.  17:  138;  140;  164.  14. 
όι/ο/κά^ωΙΟΙ.  25;  102.22;  104.20. 
υξύί  ('  high '  in  pitch  j  passim, 
ο^ΰτψ  97.    II ;    103;    104;    105. 

22,  24;  106. 


hfrfaviKos  106.  17. 
ορ-^ανική,  ή  123.  20. 


opyavov  104.  4;    112.  9,  12;    124. 

15;    126.  10;    132;   133;    134. 

5.  6. 
6p9os  133.  6. 
όρθώ9  110.  13;   132.  5;   134.  i6; 

146.  21. 
ορμάω  105.  6. 
0/30S  140.  3  ;  146.  1 2,  24 ;  149. 17  ; 

150. 
όσαχώ?  97.  i8. 
ovOds  133.  7. 
o(p€\os  133.  4  ;   145.  2. 
6φθα\μο€ίδή$  131.  17. 
οφθαλμοφανής  132.  2. 
o^ts  124.  23. 

πά0ο5  102.  26;   104.    7;    129.  6; 

136.  6  ;  159.  8. 
nais  112.  18. 

Ίταλαιόί  113.  19;  144.  ii. 
iravTiXws  passim, 
•παντοδαττός  125.  2  2  ;  129.  12. 
παραβάλλω  132.  25. 
παράδοξος  103.  21  ;  122.  14. 
παρακολονθίω  129.  1 8,  24• 
παρακονω  123,  7,  ΙΙ• 
παραλαμβάνω  98.  14;  136.  2. 
παραλιμπάνω  126.  24. 
παραμίση  (see  Intr.  A,  §  it)  125. 

9;  137.  20;  138.  12;  158.  20. 
παρανήτη  (see  Intr.  A,  §  ii)  138. 

9,  10  ;  144.  12. 
παραπλησίως  119.  II. 
παρασημαίνω  130.  2,  17;   131.  I5. 
παρασημαντική  130.  8,  1 5. 
παρατηρίω  108.  8  ;  134.  26  ;  139.  6. 
παρθίνιος  112.  Ι3• 
παρυπάτη  (see Intr.  Α,  §  ιΐ) passim. 


INDEX 


ΊταρντΓολαμβάνω  122.  6. 

ναΰομαι  142.  6. 

δια  nivTc,  τό  (*  the  Fifth ')  passim. 

ττίραίνω    106.    15;    159.    14,    19; 

161.  3,  i6. 

iTf/ws  101.  23  ;  107.  9  ;  112.  12  ; 
115.  15,  17;  122.  13;  130.  3, 
7  ;  131.  16,  22;  132.  2,  10. 

■n^piypacprj  98.  5. 

■περιλαμβάνω  138.  6. 

περιψερηί  124.  24. 

περιφορά  100.  I. 

πιθανοί  144.  4,  8. 

πίπτω  146.  17;    156.    13,   ΐ6,   23; 

162.  6,  ΙΟ,  21. 
Ίτιστείω  145.  1 8. 
πλανάομαι  134.  7• 
πλάντ/  151.  2  ;  158.  21. 
πλάτο5  97.  7• 
Πλάτων  122.  8. 
πλίοναχά)?  164.  2  1. 
πλήθθ5  143.  19- 
πλούτο?  122.  ΐΐ. 
Ίτνευμα  132.  4'  25. 
ποιητική  95.  12. 
πολλαπλάσιοε  120.  8. 
πολλαπλού?  109.  2 1,  2  2. 
πολυμερή$  95.  3• 
πορεύομαι  122.  51    129.  Ι5• 
πορρωτίρω  96.  9ί   131.  3• 
που?  125.  15-23• 

πραΎματεία      and     πρα-γματενομαι 

passim, 
πρεσβύτατοί  111.  9• 
προαποδείκννμι  100.  2. 
πρόβλημα  134.    ι8,    22;    151.    2; 

153.  3;  158.  21 ;  159.  3- 
προ^ΐ'^νώσκω  122.  4• 
προδιαιρεω  109.  24. 
προδιανοεω  134.  12. 
προδιέρχομαι  122.  3  5   134.  ίο. 
πρόειμι  110.  25  ;   123.  ΐ6. 
προεκτίθημι  122.  1 8. 
προθνμεομαι  120.  5  ;   128.  25. 
προκατασκευάζω  147.  7• 
προσάγω  115.  9;   133.  17,  ΐ8. 
προσδεομαι  110.  9  5  145.  Ιΐ. 
πρόσειμι  122.  9>  Ι7• 
προσέρχομαι  115.  13• 
προσέχω  120.  2  ;  134.  21. 
προσηγορία  113.  19. 


προσήκω  95.  9»   104.  9;  132.  2ΐ; 

134.  19- 
πρόσκειμαι  147.  24;    148.  5• 
προστάττω  145.  2θ ;   141.  5• 
προστν/χάνω  111.  ίο. 
προσωδία  110.  5• 
προϋπάρχω  134.  14. 
πρόχειροι  132.  6. 
πτώσΐ5  107.  21. 
Πυ^α^όρα?  127.  24. 
πυκνόν  {see  note  on  116.  ι")  passim. 

βητ6$  108.  23;  109.  13. 
^οπΐ7  110.  13- 
ρυθμική  123.  20. 
ρυθμοποιΐα  125.  22. 
ρυθμοί  125.  15,  23• 

σαφήί  105.  17. 

σαψώί  97.  9• 

σημαίνω  100.  22;   125.  23. 

σημεΐον  95.  2θ ;    115.  7;    130.  19, 

2θ;  131.  Ι,  2;  135.  19. 
σιωπή  101.  24. 
a/feVts  102.  10. 
στάσι?  ('stopping')  104.  22. 
στοίχεΓοι/  120.  12;   134.  12. 
στοίχβιώδ?;?  95.  6. 
στοχά^ο/χα{  115.  7• 
σύ'/κειμαι  110.  5  ;   117.  Ι7• 
συ-γκεχνμένωί  97.  14;   103.  25. 
σνγχορδία  114.  2. 
συ'/χωρέω  114.  ΐ6,  17;   148.  3• 
συζυγία  125.  19. 
συμπίπτω  104.  25. 
συμπληρόω  152.  2θ, 
συμπροθυμέομαι  108.  ΙΟ. 
συμφωνέω,     συμφωνία,     and     σύ/i- 

0ωί/ο?   (see    note    on   108.    21) 

j(>assim. 
συνά'/ω  106.  21. 

συναμφότερο$  109.  15;  159.  26. 
συνάπτω  109.  ΐ6  ;  149.  ι,  15  ;  ΙόΟ. 

συναφή  ('  conjunction   ;    see   Intr. 

A,  §  10)  passim, 
συνεθίζω   111.    13;    115.1;    125. 

25  ;  126.  14. 
συνείρω  143.  2 1. 
συνεπισπάω  115.  ΙΟ. 
συνέχεια  98.  7;  119•  3»  ^2. 
301 


ARISTOXENUS 


avvexqs  101.  20,  21  ;  102.  15,  20  ; 

103.  2,  7,  18;  109.  20;  119.  5, 

15;    120.  3,  10;   143.  17;    144. 

12;   145.9;  147.  6;  149.  17. 
συμβχώ?  101.  24;   102.  3,  19. 
σννθ^σΐί,   cwOeTos,  and   σνντίθημι 

passim, 
σνν'ιστημι  99.  ii  ;  110.  8, 11 ;  144. 

24;  151.  19;  163;  164. 
σννοράω  106.  i6 ;  113.  6  ;  114.  16  ; 

131.  6,  15;   134.  17,  24;   141. 

19;  147.  22;  151.  8;  160.  19; 

164.  23. 
σνντύνω  95.  8  ;  101.  9  ;  144.  14. 
σνντόμω$  107.  21. 
σύντονοι  115. 5  ;  116.  ιι, 24  ;  117  ; 

118;   137.  6;    139.  3;    142.9, 

12;  143.  9,  ίο;  163.  ίο. 
συνυπάρχω  106.  7• 
σΡρίγί  112.  ι6. 
συρίττω  112.  ΐ6. 

συστασίϊ  99.  4)  107.  ι6;    110.  13. 
σύστημα  ('  scale  ')  passim, 
σχήμα  96.  4;  99.  15,16,25;  100. 

2;    125.  12,  21 ;    130.  22;    149. 

3,  5  ;  164.  13. 
σχίζω  98.  2  2. 


τά^ί?  95.  5 


3; 


3,7;  113. 


20 ;    114.  3;    124.  27:    128.  ι  ; 

129.  6;  130.  23;   132.  ι6,  24; 

133.  8,  15;    134.   5;    145.    2; 

164.  ι6. 
ταράττω  104.  23  ;  153.  3- 
τάσΐ5  ('  pitch ')  passim. 
τάττω  107.  23;  117.  9»*   159-  Ι5, 

19. 
ταυτότψ  105.  3• 
τάχο5  105.  12,  13;  124.  6. 
TfiVoj  108.  4• 
τίκτων  124.  25. 
τ€λ€ί05  99.  12;  101.  13- 
τ€λ€υταΐο5  111.  1 2  ;  129.  ίο;  146. 

Ι7• 
τβ'λοϊ  95.  ίο;  129.  ι6;  130.  ι. 
τίμνω  97.  2ο;  138.  2ΐ;  144.  5. 
ηταρτημόριον  117.  1 6. 
τζτράχορδον  passim, 
Sia  τ(ττάρων,  τύ  (*  the  Fourth ') 

passim, 
τομή  138.  21. 
302 


Toviaios  passim. 

rovos(=  (i)  'interval  of  a  tone/ 
(2)  'key ')  passim. 

TOTios  ('  compass,'  '  locus  of  vari- 
ation,' 'region  or  direction  of 
the  voice-series ')  passim. 

τορν(υτή5  124.  25. 

rpis  141.  12. 

τρίτη  (see  Intr.  A,  §  11)  138.  11  ; 
158.  20. 

τριτημόριον  117.  5. 

τρόποί  (  =  (i)  'manner,' (2)  'style 
of  composition,'  (3)  '  character  * 
or  '  motive  ^)  passim. 

τρύπημα  132.  1 7  ;  133.  12,  18. 

τρύπησι^  128.  1 8. 

τύπο5  96.  i6;  98.  5  ;  108.  1 ;  111. 

3;  119.4. 
τυπόω  97.  21. 
τυπώδηί  108.  9. 
τυχώΐ',  ό  100.  17;  110.  g. 

vyieia  122.  1 1. 

υπάτη  (see  Intr.  A,  §  11)  passim. 

νπατων  (see  Intr.  A,  §  29)  131.  i. 

υπερβαίνω  102.  3. 

υπ€ρβατ05  109.  1 9. 

υπίρβοΚαίων   (see   Intr.    A,    §    29) 

131.  I. 

ύπ^ρίχω  117.  5 ;    120.    25 ;    146. 

lo;  148.  2. 
νπ^ρορία  134.  2  7. 
υπεροχή  120.  24 ;  146 ;  147. 
ύπ€ρτβίνω  107.  7• 
υπ€ρτ€λ(ΐο$  112.  1 4. 
ύποδηλόω  97.  2θ. 
ύποδώριοί  128.  13,  2 ο. 
υποκαταφρονίω  122.  Ι5• 
ύπυληφι$  122.    2θ  ;    131.    12,    ΐ8  ; 

132.  12;  133.  22. 
υποσημαίνω  119.  4• 
υποτυπύω  110.  Ι  ;  143.  13. 
ύποψρν'/ιοί  128.  17,  2 ο. 
υποχαίνω  122.  17. 

φαντασία  101.  24  ;  102.  8  ;  139.  1 1. 
φαύλοι  114.  2θ. 
φαύλωί  124.  24  ;  125.  ι. 
φθί-^^ομαι  102.  5;    103.  II ;    106. 

23;  107.  12. 
φθΟΎ'^05  ('  note ')  passim. 


INDEX 


(ppvyios  128;  130.  13,  14. 
φυσικό$  110.  6;  119.  ίο,  13  ;  123. 

24. 

φύσΐ5  97.  31,  22  ;  98.  3  ;  100.  22  ; 
110.  2;  111.  10,  22;  112.  ι,  3; 
113.  2;  119.  5,  7 '>  120.  4 ;  12δ. 
24;  127.  17;  130.  25;  132.  14; 
133.  8;    134.  g-   IS.^.  τπ!   14Η. 

15»  23- 
φύω  97.   2θ ;    102 
114.9;   120.5 

(^ωντ/  (see  note  on 


13δ.  19;   143. 

23  ;    108.    ι8; 
123.  23  ;   132. 


tassim. 


χαλ€7Γ05  106.  ι6;  108.  13- 
X€ipovpyia  132.   7>   ι8  ;    133. 

ι8;  134.  8. 
χορδή  104;  133.  13,  ι6. 
χράομαι  9δ.  II  ;  110.  ι6  ;  11δ 

124.    22;    139.    19;    142. 

143.  12;  144.  ιι. 


■  ο ; 
17; 


χρήσιμοί  107.  Ι ;  108.  19,  24. 

χρήσΐ5  112.  7;  129.  13. 

χρόα     ('shade,'     'subdivision     of 

genus';    see   note   on  116.  4); 

115.    20;    126.    13;     138.    23; 

152.  22  ;  158.  15,  19  ;   159.  12  ; 

160.  I. 
xpovos  102.  3  ;  104.  6 ;  115.  8. 
χρώμα  {'  chromatic  genus')  passim, 
χρωματικοί    (see    Intr.     A,    §    6) 

passim, 
χώρα  160.  19,  2i. 
χωρίζω  102.  12  ;  110.  4  ;  128.  2o; 

150.  8. 
χωρισμ05  98.  I. 


φ(νδή$  99.  20. 
ώψίλίω  123.  ΙΟ,  12. 


303 


OXFORD 
PRINTED   AT  THE   CLARENDON    PRESS 
BY    HORACE    HART,    M.A. 
PRINTER   TO  THE    UNIVERSITY 


ML  168.A7M2 


3  9358  00024520  6 


68 


Ar is toxenus• 

The  harmonics  of  Aristonexus  /  edite 
with  translatiorif  notest  introduct  iorit 
and  index  of  words  by  Henry  S•  Macran• 
Oxford     :     At    the    Clarendon    Presst     1902• 

303    p•     :     music    ;     19    cm• 

24520 


