in this episode.
&gt;&gt; So Freud was was trying to do exactly
what we're trying to do today with one
huge uh difference uh namely that there
was no data on the neuroysiological and
neuroanatomical side. It it was
literally uh impossible to study
anything about the living brain uh and
its workings. The only method they had
uh was was dissection of you know of the
of the kadaava at autopsy uh and and
then you know microscopic study of its
elements but that's those methods don't
tell you anything about what's going on
in the brain when somebody is conscious
versus unconscious when they're in a
state of resistance um when they're in
this or that affective state and so
So Freud was obliged to abandon the
effort because it was just pure
speculation. He was just imagining what
kind of neuroysiology and neuroanatomy
might correspond to the functional
dynamics that he had inferred. So
ironically, and I really want to
emphasize this, ironically, because
Freud was a good scientist, he abandoned
neuroscience. You know, as so many
people think it's the opposite. You
know, Freud was a good neuroscientist
and then he abandoned science for
psychology. But no, it was quite the
other way around. In order to still have
access to empirical data, to be acts
observe uh um you know, the the the
things that he was studying to be to be
able to make um predictions, you know,
if I do this, then that will happen,
which is the essence of science. Uh he
could only do that on the psychological
side. Um, and so in order to advance the
science of the mind, Freud had to stick
with purely psychological observations.
And of course, the crucial thing is that
that's no longer the case. We now have
methods, many uh powerful methods. And
so that's why we've been able to pick up
again where Freud left off as he always
hoped his his um intellectual or
scientific would do.
Neuroscychoanalysis is a realization of
Sigman Freud's project for a scientific
psychology. It's an attempt to study
psychoanalytic concepts such as the id,
ego, and super ego through empirical
techniques in modern neuroscience.
Neuroscychoanalysts pay special
attention to subjective experience and
the unconscious, which is generally
ignored by the brain sciences in order
to stick to the third person view of the
current paradigm of science. Jacqu Lacon
is perhaps one of Freud's most renowned
and at least till now controversial
adherence. Lon analyzed Freudian
concepts through structuralism in
linguistics and anthropology introducing
further topological abstractions into
what Freud discovered with a special
emphasis on language signifiers and
unconscious enjoyment or Jewish songs as
Lenians call it. In this episode,
Professor Mark SS, one of the founders
of neuroscychoanalysis, discuss
prospects for a leanian neuroscycle
analysis with John Diaglio, who's done
groundbreaking work in bringing together
two historically severed worlds.
Moderating this dialogue was an utter
privilege for me, and I want to thank
Mark and Joan for their patience with
the slew of technical issues we faced,
probably the worst I've had since
starting this podcast. Thanks for that,
Riverside Studio. If any of you know
better softwares for podcast streaming,
please email me. And now, let's go to
the episode after a quick PSA. As you
may know, I've mentioned multiple times
that I'll never have advertisers or
sponsors on this podcast. Frankly, I
think we live in a society of excess and
over consumption, and I don't want to
contribute to that by selling you
another product or service that you
probably don't need. That being said,
though, and forgive me for the
tautology, we for better or worse live
in the world we live in. I run this
podcast on top of doing a full-time job
while doing research for my masters. And
if I am to sustain this project, I need
some financial backing. So, if you have
the means, please do consider supporting
me on Patreon, Substack, or even PayPal.
All the links will be in the show notes.
And if you're wondering what are the
perks, what are you going to get? The
honest answer is nothing. That's right.
There's no exclusive behind the payw
wall goodies. As far as I'm concerned,
you're simply supporting this project if
you think the already free content
that's always going to be free is of any
value to you. I sincerely do want to
thank the existing supporters and if
you're considering supporting my work,
please do so only if you have the means,
especially in a precarious times. All
right, now to the episode. Lovely. Uh
no, but I was as as I was telling to you
Joan, uh Professor S, thanks so much for
being here. It's yeah, truly a
privilege. been following your work for
a long time and I've learned a lot from
your work. Um,
on that note, uh, I'll probably start
off I'm sure you've spoken about this
and written about this um, in in other
places extensively, but just for this
kind of maybe you're bringing together
two.
&gt;&gt; I'm not sure if you realize, but you're
very pixelated. John and I are clear,
but you breaking up. Uh but to n you put
the
&gt;&gt; technical issues behind um where we
Yeah, I was going to say uh thanks
thanks both for being here and uh
regarding
&gt;&gt; it's hard to hear you roll. I'm not sure
what you're saying.
&gt;&gt; Huh? The camera
&gt;&gt; maybe switch off your camera roll and
then we'll just hear you.
&gt;&gt; Not sure why the audio isn't okay. We'll
try with the camera off. But uh I kind
of want to want to let me know if if I'm
still not audible or if there are any
more issues.
&gt;&gt; There's the sound is good now.
&gt;&gt; Oh, fantastic. Thank you. Thank you. Um
where will we Oh, yeah. I guess the
first question that I kind of want to
kind of as like an introductory question
to kick off would be to you, Professor
SS. as a person coming from more from a
neuroscience neuroscychology background
um um I'm curious um how initially you
came across uh Freud and psychoanalysis
and uh what piqu your interest in those
subjects and I you've written
beautifully about it uh in your book the
hidden spring too but just for the
audience could we start off by a bit of
an introduction there but then also uh
perhaps as a bit more specific to the
topic today before you came across
John's work uh in Lenian
neuroscychoanalysis.
What were your general views on lacon
and lenian theory?
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, uh thank you. I'll answer the
first question first. Um the I I I
became uh interested in psychoanalysis
in in in two parallel ways. Uh the first
is that I was dismayed uh upon uh
training in neurossychology which you
would think is the branch of
neuroscience where you will learn about
the mind uh that there was no mind
there. You know it was uh we treated uh
the brain as though it were exactly the
same as any other organ. In other words,
we were studying only uh it we were
studying it as an object and as far as
mental functions were concerned. We were
studying them objectively, you know,
like you would the the functions of the
heart or the functions of the lungs, you
know, these are these are the mechanisms
whereby these functions are performed.
But there was no experience. There was
no mental phenomenology. And if you
asked about that, you know, which is the
by far the most interesting thing about
the mind is that there's something it's
like to be a mind. Um, you know, if you
ask questions about that, like how come
you actually experience this visual
information processing and how come a
memory is actually, you know, relived as
a movie in your mind's eye and so on.
You were just told that that these are
not scientific questions and, you know,
you shouldn't ask questions like that.
um is bad for your career. So um that
made the frustration with
neurossychology
um made me look around for well if you
can't study the mind um in
neurosychology then where can you study
it and uh that's uh led that led me via
all sorts of um uh serendipitous
things led me to psychoanalysis where
clearly the starting point of
psychoanalytical invest investigation is
lived experience uh both psychoanalysis
as a science and as a treatment. So that
was one way I was led to psychoanalysis
and became interested in it. The other
was um my doctoral research in
neurossychology was on brain mechanisms
of sleep and dreaming. And uh so uh
Freud obviously is a major figure in the
history of the study of of scientific
study of dreaming. And so there was a
seminar being taught uh of all things by
a professor of comparative literature,
an open seminar uh in my university. And
so I attended it. Um and this chap who
happens to have been a Leanian as it
turns out. His name was Jean Pierre de
Laalt um he he said you can't understand
Freud's interpretation of dreams or at
least chapter seven of it unless you
first of all read his project for a
scientific psychology. So he inducted us
into this uh incredible uh paper that
Freud wrote in 1895
which was really his swan song as a
neuroscientist uh his attempt to grapple
with neurossychology from the point of
view of what he had learned um in the
early years of psychoanalysis and and
after reading that and learning that
Freud had been a neuroscientist and
learning about you know his work on
aphasia and so one, I was hooked and I
knew this this was the discipline for
me. This is what I had been looking for
um in the first place. So that's my
answer to your first question. Sorry,
I'm probably um being too verbose. So
I'll answer your second question much
more briefly. You asked, what did I
think of uh Leanian psychoanalysis those
days? Well, first of all, I knew nothing
about psychoanalysis other than Freud.
The um all that I knew about was Freud.
Then I decided I wanted to train in
psychoanalysis. I moved to London. Um,
and to my dismay, it was most certainly
not a Freudian psychoanalytic institute.
It was the British Psychoanalytic
Society. I mean, was was was Kleinian.
So I then had to get my head around
Klene. And in the process, I learned a
bit about, you know, all sorts of other
things in psychoanalysis, including Lac,
but really only a bit. And uh it was to
be honest basically incomprehensible to
me. Um I mean client had been hard
enough and then like oh you know was
just like oh my god this guy I don't
understand either. So that was my first
impression before I met John.
&gt;&gt; Yeah I'm grateful for lucid lanians like
John who can write on like without
without the lanianisms so to speak. Uh
wonderful. Thank you very much for that
professors. Uh yeah along the same lines
to yourself John um can you tell us
about how you got interested in
neuroscychoan analysis as a lanian or
perhaps was it the other way around
where you were you know initially
interested in neuroscycho analysis and
then came into lanian theory.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So I fortunately uh didn't have
the the challenge uh Mark had because
neurosych analysis already existed my
time I was coming into these things. Um
but I had a um a seminar in my last year
of high school. It was like an elective
seminar and it was on uh neuroscience,
psychology and theology. Very very basic
kind of um ideas in these different
fields. was the it was the first time
that I uh studied anything in
neuroscience and psychology. And
so like you know we we read we watched
these um like like nova science things
on like the brain and like you know
prefrontal cortex amydala very kind of
you know kind of barebones stuff and
then the um the psychology section of
the course was taught by the school's
the school's school psychologist and he
was um a little older so for him what
psychology was was classical Freudian
ego psychology
Um so what we read were um some papers
uh introductory uh remarks on um more
like uh structural model stuff ego and
id and so as we were reading it and this
is the first time I came across anything
broidian I was like huh this is
interesting. I I I found it to be kind
of like a compelling story about mental
conflict and everything. And very
naively, I was just like, "Huh, this
kind of sounds similar." You know, the
brain stuff was talking about like a
rational prefrontal response versus a
impulsive amydala response. And then now
we're reading this thing about, you
know, an ego versus an id kind of
response. And so I just Googled
neuroscience psychoanalysis
um and I came across this uh YouTube
video uh titled the conscious id and I
said to myself that's not right. I
learned that the id is unconscious.
What's this? So this person's clearly
wrong. So I clicked on the video and
then um I was I was blown away. uh and
so you know and so for for the audience
uh Mark has this um fantastic paper and
there there there's a video of uh the
talk on on YouTube the the conscious id
and um I was blown away uh by the
the ability and the research and the
work that had been done to map uh
psychonolytic concepts to um brain
systems and brain networks. And then not
only that, but then also like, oh, not
only can you make this kind of bridge,
but then you can revise or recommend or
suggest changes from one field to the
other based on those connections. And
so, um, I learned about that and then I
I was that that's what helped me. And
so, at that point, I just started
reading and listening to as many things
on neuroscychalysis as as I could. Um,
so it it started with that. Um and it
was after neurosychanalysis that I
started reading more directly Freud uh
and psychoanalysis in uh my undergrad.
And so uh at my undergrad I wanted to do
uh this combination and of course there
are no you know degrees in neuroscychoan
analysis. So my plan was to I majored in
cognitive neuroscience uh as sort of
studying you know higher mental
functions and and their uh relationship
to brain stuff and in all my other sort
of free spots in my schedule I just
looked for any course on psychoanalysis
that I could find. So so uh this meant I
was taking things in comparative
literature, American studies, uh gender,
sexuality studies, um modern culture
media. So every single humanities
department because it wasn't in the uh
cognitive science department and I just
happened to have to take uh classes on
lan if I wanted to take anything on
psychoanalysis. It's more or less what
was just offered. So I kind of was I
just happened to come into Lan stuff and
my but my entire um my entire experience
reading psychoanalysis at that time and
still now too um but old psychoanalysis
was how can I think about this
neurosychologically too uh because my my
kind of entrance was with both at the
same time. My entrance into this was
both psychalysis and neuroscience. So
when I whenever I was reading things in
psychoanalysis, I was thinking how could
we work this out in the brain or like
how how could I make sense of this in
brain stuff and then vice versa
everything that I was taking in uh
cognitive neuroscience I was also
thinking okay what would the like
psychoanalytic perspective on this be or
you know where where would those more
dynamic processes uh be contributing and
so that that that was the entry um and
it's kind of been that sense.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Wonderful. Um
well I would probably just start with a
bit of foundational question here. Um so
Freud as we know had this project for uh
scientific psychology. Um and I'm
wondering professor SS if you could
comment a bit on that uh and just for
the audience too who aren't experts in
psychoanalysis um what that project was
what was the intent behind it and do you
see uh neurossychoanalysis sort of the
the continuation or even the uh
actualization of that project
&gt;&gt; gladly but first role I've noticed
you're calling me professors uh and
you're calling John John so do please
call me Mark. Um,
&gt;&gt; absolutely. That's fine. Totally. Mark
Works.
&gt;&gt; Um, the Well, by the time that Freud
wrote that project in 1895,
um, he had already had quite a bit of
experience in terms of uh, studying what
was then called hysteria um, in patients
with what we now call functional
neurological disorders. He had quite a
lot of experience first of all under the
uh tutilage of Shako um and then over
the next nine odd years uh back in
Vienna. So he'd made some sort of fairly
fundamental observations about the the
the psychonamics
um of of hysteria, you know, that part
of the mind is unconscious, part of its
conscious, that there's a resistance to
gaining access to what's unconscious.
This is all governed by feelings uh and
so on. And um so as a neurologist, which
is what he was, uh he wanted to
translate what he had learned in what we
would nowadays call functionalist terms.
In other words, the inferences that he'd
made from the psychological observations
um as to what the mechanisms are that
are at work here. He tried to translate
those mechanisms into neurohysiological
and neuroanatomical terms. Um so that
was really the the beginning of what we
would now call neuroscychoanalysis.
That's what neuroscychoanalysis is all
about. Uh we are we are trying to we're
saying well you've got two sets of
observables you know the the subjective
mental states and then the the objective
bodily organs and what unites them is an
underlying functional apparatus. Um so
Freud was was trying to do exactly what
we're trying to do today with one huge
uh difference uh namely that there was
no data on the neuroysiological and
neuroanatomical side. It it was
literally uh impossible to study
anything about the living brain uh and
its workings. The only method they had
uh was was dissection of you know of the
of the kadaava at autopsy uh and and
then you know microscopic study of its
elements but that's those methods don't
tell you anything about what's going on
in the brain when somebody is conscious
versus unconscious when they're in a
state of resistance um when they're in
this or that affective state and so
So Freud was obliged to abandon the
effort because it was just pure
speculation. He was just imagining what
kind of neurohysiology and neuroanatomy
might correspond to the functional
dynamics that he had inferred. So
ironically and I really want to
emphasize this ironically because Freud
was a good scientist he abandoned
neuroscience. You know as so many people
think it's the opposite. You know, Freud
was a good neuroscientist and then he
abandoned science for psychology. But
no, it was quite the other way around.
In order to still have access to
empirical data, to be acts
uh um you know, the the the things that
he was studying to to be able to make um
predictions, you know, if I do this,
then that will happen, which is the
essence of science. Uh he could only do
that on the psychological side. Um, and
so in order to advance the science of
the mind, Freud had to stick with purely
psychological observations. And of
course, the crucial thing is that that's
no longer the case. We now have methods,
many uh powerful methods. And so that's
why we've been able to pick up again
where Freud left off as he always hoped
his his um intellectual or scientific
would do.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Uh, Jean, would you want to
comment on that? Yeah, it's um it's um I
as I've been uh working on some other
Lan stuff, it's actually and this isn't
usually uh recognized. I think it's
relatively well recognized at least that
Freud was a neurologist and then whether
people, you know, say he abandoned
neurology versus as Mark is saying, you
know, he was a good scientist and
therefore that's why he uh invented
psychoanalysis. Um, Lan actually was
trained in neurossychiatry
um, before he became a psychoanalyst.
Uh, and it's it's well known that Lan
trained as a psychiatrist before but the
like training millu in early um, what
would that be 20th century France was
very much like all the main academic
psychiatric places they were run by
neurologists. Um and they were all
actually it's it's funny because all the
if you trace like the academic lineage
it goes back to Shako um as well. So
they were all run by neurologists
and it's really interesting there are
these early case presentations that Lan
uh co-authored with other sort of
trainees and stuff and they're all
neurossychiatric patients. Uh and so
when I found these I was like oh my god
this is so cool. No one's ever talked
about this either. Um uh so no and by
neuroscychiatric I mean and they were
mainly um uh post encphilitic patients
uh so patients who had um you know uh
due to infection and sephilitis of the
central nervous system in the brain um
and so lots of kind of like quasi
parkinsonian and also very interesting
sort of confabulatory um delusional
presentations as well and so I'm I'm I
was going through these and these are
kind of before he writes these kind of
um key papers on like his own position.
So this is he's basically still like an
intern or like a a medical resident at
this point when he's doing these papers
and um it's really interesting because I
think that the the trajectory is kind of
similar to Freud where um Freud invents
psychoanalysis to stay true to the
phenomenon of you know mental experience
and to try to capture it as best he can
with that method.
And when Lan writes about uh this kind
of transition point when he's critiquing
current uh organicist theories of mental
phenomena the critique at least the way
that I read it and and also um the
critique of some people at that time in
like 1920s 1930s 1935 in France who were
trying to already at that point
integrate organic theories um Helings
Jackson's dissolution
model with psychoanalysis at that time
in France. His critique was that the
sort of um the purely deficit model that
you get from that and the sort of
explanation by um reduction to
non-mental i.e. purely automatic um
biological processes or rather an
interpretation of biological processes
as just automatic not in any way
intentional or meaningful. That's the
critique. And then his sort of manifesto
at this point he kind of writes about
and this is also in his doctoral thesis
um looking at um personality as kind of
the the proper level of analysis to be
making sense of these um mental
phenomena in in in psychosis especially.
And then he defines personality as a
quote unquote a set of specialized
functional relationships between man and
his particular environment uh the social
environment. Uh and so again when I was
reading this it's like oh look look
there's that key signifier function um
and that so it's it's this really
interesting um I think parallel between
um Lan and Freud and the just the other
thing I'll add on the project um another
I think uh important uh point uh that
unlike some analysts Lan doesn't sort of
dismiss the project as neuroscientific
baggage when you read his engagements
with the project. He it's it's very um
it's very uh nuanced uh L's remarks on
it and he's not rejecting the idea of
there being anything relevance that
comes up from from the biology. Uh and
in fact his his interpretation of of the
project I think it's um already
directing or moving toward more like
computational light versions because he
was already interested in game theory at
this point and cybernetics was becoming
a thing um as he was kind of doing this
writing. So um yeah that that's that's
sorry that's a bit rambly but that
that's what came to mind for that.
&gt;&gt; No that that's wonderful. Um so just as
a primer for the audience Joan if maybe
obviously you can't cover the whole
thing in a few minutes but can you give
uh to use a very vulgar term the
elevator pitch of what is lanian
neuroscycho analysis?
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yes. So the the elevator pitch
version would be um
neurosychoanalysis
uh in so Freudian sense it's thinking
about the you know relationship between
neuroscience and psychoanalysis and
creating that bridge using a certain set
of concepts. Uh and so if you're coming
from a Freudian background then you're
using you know Freudian concepts and
almost all of us in psychoanalysis do
because you know Freud is the kind of
bedrock here. Um for me Lanian neurosych
analysis is doing the same thing with
Lanian concepts. Uh and and Lan develops
his concepts in dense dialogue with
Freud uh in his reading and rereading
and sort of uh his own kind of updating
of Fidian theory. Uh and so uh in in my
work I I focus especially on Lan's
register theory. Uh so the real
imaginary symbolic which is really a key
kind of theme throughout his teaching
and he uses these to think uh and think
through a lot of uh uh think things that
he's uh uh sorting out. Um and for uh uh
background uh a very simplified version
uh would be that the the imaginary uh
register sort of refers to this um
domain or this experience of uh uh
organization cohesion um consistency. Uh
I I I I feel myself to be a consistent
existing thing over time. Uh you know I
my ego has that continuity. Thank
goodness. Um uh the symbolic being the
register mainly of or usually thought
through in terms of language but really
this the register of differential
organizations
um and sort of the uh it's working
within the the lens of structuralism and
sort of um how uh diff differential
elements are important for creating
structure and creating um and and
undergirling uh structure. So like the
distinction between um me and not me uh
is is a signifying distinction um that
that isn't um immediately apparent and
the real being the register of uh what
uh basically what insists in not being
represented either through uh the
imaginary or the symbolic um what
escapes symbolization. Uh and so with
with those sort of uh three key uh
concepts trying to think through okay um
how can we uh uh look at these from a
neuroscientific perspective. what lends
this uh uh ad to the brain. And uh what
I try to focus on is really centralizing
this role of the real um as what is sort
of not fully uh uh explained or made
sense of or resolved by uh various
processes that might be correlated um
with ideas like uh symbolic or imaginary
things. And from there it it comes at
this idea of Juisance which is Lakhan's
um way of uh thinking through libido
drive. Uh it's it's a kind of energetics
in his model. Uh um and and the the the
idea that um not only is fully solving
the real or fully getting rid of
Juison's impossible, but really the
impossibility of getting rid of that is
at the basis of psychic life. Uh that
it's it's the impossibility of fully um
uh getting rid of drive excitation and
the strange enjoyment that we get from
not fully getting rid of our drive
excitation. That is the wellspring of
our our symptoms, our singularity, our
um subjective experience and all of the
kind of identifications that we build
around that to try to tame it. And we do
tame it to a degree, but that's kind of
still the the insistent motor force. Um,
and so keeping that kind of lens on
their brain, that's that's how I see a
lot of the um, Leanian contribution.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Thanks for that. Um, oh,
almost called Mark professor again. That
was a bit of a slip.
Uh so uh Mark, what are your what are
your views on what John just articulated
in the sense that do you see this uh do
you see this as a continuation of what
you set out or what you've foraw
neurosycle analysis to be or do you
think it's something a bit different to
what what you wanted to do with
neuroscycle analysis?
No, I think it is fundamentally the same
and an extension in the sense of an
advance um of what I did. Um so let me
say first of all just like John um you
know he said he he he wanted to learn
about psychoanalysis and what was on
offer was like oh I wanted to learn
about psychoanalysis what was on offer
was Freud and then subsequently client
in my clinical training. So you know
um you you take what you what you given
and that that those are the concepts
that that sort of frame your own uh uh
way of thinking about these things. Uh I
think that it's fortunate that I came
before John in that Freud is more
foundational uh than Lac. Um and uh the
the so this is what I mean by what he's
doing is an advance. Now, um, if there
were, uh, equivalent minds like John's,
I mean, John is really a a particularly
creative and intelligent chap. We're
very lucky to have him. Um, I can I wish
that there were equivalents uh, in, you
know, other schools of psychoanalysis
because they all of them are
developments of Freud. Um you know the
one thing that unites all
psychoanalytical schools is that they
they start from Freud and then you know
try to try to try to progress our
understanding but they do it in you know
multiple different uh ways in multiple
different directions frequently
developing partial aspects you know
they're particularly interested in one
pathology or they're particularly
interested in one developmental phase or
one sort of aspect of clinical
uh work And so they as as much as they
all are advances, they're kind of
fragmentaryary. So um th this is this is
uh I always try to uh retransate them
back into the language of Freud so that
I can understand them. And I think that
translating Freud in turn into the
language of neuroscience which we now
can do in exactly the way that John
described um enables us to unify uh not
only via Freud which is going backwards
in time but also via neurossychoanalysis
which is going forwards uh try to unify
all these different strands. So that's
the first thing I wanted to say. The
second thing is that when John started
to translate uh in the way that he's
just described
first of all in principle and then in
content um Leanian concepts into
neuroscychoanalytical
language um I understood for the first
time what Lon was getting you know what
he was on about uh because you know and
this is exactly what I'm saying I think
is something we should aspire to in
general John's done that for Leanian
psychoanalysis he's translating it into
a language which is accessible to people
outside uh of the of the um church of LA
and the same applies to all of our other
churches you know in in psychoanalysis
it it's a big problem in psychoanalysis
not only these different schools within
it but we only talk to ourselves you
know so it's no surprise we're not going
to have any influence on the rest of
mental science if we're not in any kind
of engagement with it um and so I think
uh What people like John and I are doing
is a is a really important um service
for the future viability of
psychoanalysis. Not reducing it to
neuroscience, replacing it with
neuroscience. It's engaging with with
the the language and the findings of the
rest of mental science so that we can be
part of the game. Um then in terms of
the actual content of what John said um
I think that this idea which I had never
understood before I encountered John's
translation of it
uh what he says what John says and I'm
assuming this is a faithful rendition of
what the concepts about in its original
form. I mean it makes absolute sense
from the point of view of what we
understand about the mental instrument
uh from from the point of view of
contemporary neuroscience uh the the the
attempt to minimize uncertainty or to or
to get rid of uncertainty when he speaks
about the real he's speaking about the
uncertain the unknowable. Um and so what
we're seeking to do most fundamentally
uh what if the mind is a a a prediction
machine it's trying to reduce the the um
uncertainty in its predictions. In other
words, it's building up a model uh of
the world uh and it is trying to
minimize the difference between its
model and the actual world. it never can
be achieved uh because a model is a
model and the world is the world and all
you have access to is your model of the
world. Uh so there's this gap uh that
between uh the imaginary and the
symbolic on the one hand and the real on
the other which is the exactly the thing
that he's talking about. Now he says
something very interesting that there is
a um some sort of pleasure uh in the in
this gap you know that there's a that
there's a um
it's not it's not a frustration only uh
which it is in part because you know
otherwise why would we be trying to
reduce it. Um but the fact that we never
can actually get there. Uh the fact that
there is uh some thrill in that uh is is
is is a fascinating observation u which
I think we can make sense of uh in if I
can just put it in a thumbnail form uh
there's this wonderful uh line in the
talking heads song uh heaven uh and the
line goes like this. Heaven is a place
where nothing ever happens. So who wants
to be in heaven? You know that's Freud's
nana, you know, where nothing ever
happens. In other words, it's death. Um,
so it's of the essence of life uh that
we are constantly striving uh to get to
something uh which we can't get to in
the sense of no uncertainty is just
death. So uncertainty is fundamental to
being alive and translating that into
the language of a effect. Um you know
nana means nothingness there's no affect
um the drive demand uh is moving away
from what we call homeostasis at nana
where where there's no demand drive
demand is unpleas is unpleasurable
um and returning toward homeostasis is
pleasurable uh getting to homeostasis is
boring that's where nothing happens so
all of the consciousness And all of the
feeling positive and negative happens in
this uh in this in between space which
is actually uh because of the reality
being unknowable where we always are we
always
striving for nana for heaven uh but
never getting there and uh so then you
you have to ask but why is it why is
there a a pleasure in joy? It's not just
well it's good to have feeling as
opposed to no feeling that there it's
that there's a positive kind of uh um
loos in in in this a positive desire in
this and excitement in this and I I
think that the way we can understand
that is in terms of what we in affective
neuroscience call the seeking drive uh
it is that uh in in regard to many of
our drives uh we're trying to reduce
uncertainty In other words, we're trying
to get into homeostasis. But the seeking
drive is positively engaging with
uncertainty. In other words, it actually
it's actually what is pleasurable for
seeking is to find something new, to
find something unknown, to find
something uh that is um beyond what I'm
already uh uh master of. Uh, in other
words, it's an engagement with the real
in in in in the language that um that
John has introduced me to and that is
familiar to the two of you. It's a
positive engagement with what's not
known and it is literally um what we
know of the phenomenology of the seeking
system. It is exciting. It's
invigorating. It's a it's arousing. uh
everything about seeking um is is has
the the the phenomenal qualities that um
that seem to attach to this concept of
results.
So I think it's the fact that this is a
fundamental insight of lacors certainly
not in Freud that concept in fact Freud
was always very puzzled why don't we
just go straight to orgasm you know
what's all this what's all of this u
foreplay and dillydallying and
excitement you know until until we get
to the nothingness uh he couldn't
comprehend it uh and he had a really
halfbaked theory about well it must be
some kind of increase and decrease
increase of tension over a particular
period of time. And I I find Lon's
explanation much better to the extent
I've understood it through John. Uh it's
it's uh if I can translate it back into
into a effective neuroscientific terms.
There are consumary effects and there
are repetitive effects and seeking is a
repetitive effect. The pleasure is in
the appetite. It's in the desire not in
the consumation of the desire. So Jean
when you gave your talk um at the active
inference institute and kind of
presented lenian neurosc psychoanalysis
to this computational neuroscientist uh
Mark remarked that one of his worries
were that you both won't have any
disagreements. So, I want to put that
onus on you and I'm going to ask from
you where do you think you both probably
have differing views or at least let's
call it constructive disagreements and
perhaps if you have any questions in
that regard you could um if I if I may
say I ask them here and I also want to
mention here you did email to me that
two points you want to discuss in in
particular uh is the role of language
and then the role of fantasy uh but
regardless I'll I'll just you You you
can you can start off wherever you want
to start start with.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I think um if if heavens were
nothing happens, I'm going to be sent to
Leanian hell if I don't bring up
language at some point. Um why the
Leanians here? Um uh but I I think um
and and just just to add and I I think
this is consistent with uh you know work
within neurosych analysis too and and
and Mark's work certainly that um you
know there's not only seeking uh there
are you know these other um drive
systems as well and and perhaps we'll
talk about that and when I write about
Juisance and when I've thought through
Juisance I agree very much that the the
positive appetitive enjoyment
in the excitation very much parallel
seeking. Now the tricky part isn't with
the Lanians and this is this is a
critique that um a Darian leader for
example um has as well with with Lanians
basically all affect is kind of reduced
to Jehu songs at least for some um and I
I don't I I think it's less helpful to
do that I think keeping I think the the
pankup work is really helpful in the
sense to let let's keep our concepts
separate. Um then you know there are
different kinds qualitatively distinct
kinds of a effects and so um uh in like
leanian cases too you'll see that
there's they'll be writing like the the
jewissance of the rage um or the
jewissance of the um the anxiety in the
symptom where like clearly the person
isn't feeling jewance in the enjoyment
sense uh at least consciously and the
idea is that it's it's an unconscious
enjoyment which um that does have its
forian par uh uh roots as well. You
know, the unconscious satisfaction
afforded by the symptom. Um and I think
and maybe this is a good segue to um one
of the ideas that uh I think I tried to
formulate and then I couldn't um make
the follow-up talk. So I'll ask it here.
Um when uh you know you you talk about
um the the prioritization of uh one of
the different basic one of the different
emotions in situations of uncertainty
where you know there's the organism not
only does the organism need to minimize
free energy uncertainty but
unfortunately there or fortunately there
are many different categories uh of
uncertainty uh in seeking uh rage you
know you don't want to be uh have obstac
obstacles with your goals. Um fear, you
want to be safe from threats to your
body and and panic, you want to stay
close to caregivers. So we have all of
these different sort of categories of um
homeostasis that we need to uh minimize.
And then so when you're in an uncertain
situation, especially situations of
conflict, say on the one hand, mommy has
left and so I feel lots of anxiety and
separation. On the other hand, mommy has
left. How dare she leave? I want to tear
her to bits. Um uh so then you have a
conflict that's uncertainty. What do you
do? And so um Mark talks about uh
needing to prioritize one over the
other. And um I've wondered about um
thinking through one level of uh sort of
psychopathology or psychical
organization as an automatization of
which uh emotion or which system tends
to get prioritized. uh and in in the
sense of this the uh to give some
context this is like the idea of um the
the fantasy in in Leninian theory that
you have this real you know uncertainty
you have perhaps your own symptomatic
way of enjoying it um some particular
mode of enjoyment and this is laid down
very
&gt;&gt; uh I'm certainly
&gt;&gt; I think I think I think drone your
microphone
uh turned off. You're back. You're back.
Right.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. What is the last thing that
Oh, the the Great. I was uh misheard.
&gt;&gt; You spoke about the the the the
enjoyment of the patient uh in the in
the symptom.
&gt;&gt; Enjoyment symptom. Okay. Yeah. Uh okay.
So, um yeah, the idea being that there
is a sort of um a cord symptom that uh
gets developed and this is a particular
mode of dealing with uncertainty. a
particular mode of uh enjoyment and
around this is sort of uh constructed uh
through layers of identifications,
symbolic and imaginary uh elaborations
um a fantasy uh a fantasy organization
that includes a certain relationship
with the other. Um, and I'm I've I've
I've wondered um if another sort of
layer in terms of Mark how you've
thought about things clinically if is a
space for not just an automatization of
um non-declarative repressed predictions
which I've um correlated to this idea of
okay there's some kind of symptom that
the patient repeats and there's a kind
of enjoyment in that and this kind of um
automaticity there but in addition to
that an automatized
way of which system gets prioritized in
the relationship between me and the
other broadly or patternedly speaking
like you know this person tends to or
prioritizes say panic where another
person prioritizes you know fear um and
that that becomes a layer on top of um
the symptom I guess a relational a
relational automatization in a certain
sense
So uh let me first of all say a word
about um what you said as a preliminary
comment about results in relation to a
effect in general. Um and you said well
let's keep the concepts uh a little more
precise. Uh I actually uh have some
sympathy with the idea uh that there's
joyance in all a effect in the sense
that there is seeking in all affect. So
um seeking is a fundamental drive to
engage with what is uncertain. Um and it
it is the default drive in that um when
you are uncertain about how to find
safety which we call fear then you are
seeking safety. So you're not seeking in
and of itself. You have you have uh
deployed seeking in the service of
another drive. So now I'm seeking safety
or I'm seeking mother uh or I'm seeking
a a sexual uh uh uh uh union or uh uh
I'm seeking to pacify my fretful baby or
whatever. You know when you're doing
those things you're still seeking in
other words you're still engaging uh
with trying to reduce uncertainty but
it's trying to reduce you're engaging
with the uncertainty in a particular
task oriented category. If you're not
bothered with all of that, then you can
default to seeking in and of itself,
which is just engaging with the world
because the world is interesting. It's a
luxury uh to be able to do that. So, um
I think that that maps onto what you
just described that in a manner of
speaking seeking is is is involved in
all affectivity. It's just that as you
say um you know one gains greater
precision by calling seeking only that
default mode where you're where you're
seeking for its own sake rather than
seeking in the service of uh some other
uh need. So uh that that uh I I also
know that role wanted to speak about
psychosis. Uh there's a special place
for seeking in psychosis in relation to
what I've just said. So if we get to
psychosis, I'll build upon what I just
said. Now I turn to the the the the the
heft of what John's asking about. And I
think there might be a few um
misunderstandings here. So, so first of
all, let me say uh that um we have to
prioritize uh one need over over the
others. Uh precisely because you can't
do everything at the same time, you
know. So, uh while I'm seeking safety, I
can't also look for mother and explore
the world generally, you know. You which
one are you going to do? You got to you
got to choose. Um so while you uh are of
are prioritizing the one the others
don't disappear as needs but they are
not currently the prioritized one in
other words the one that is driving your
voluntary activity. So the other ones um
are relegated to automaticity. In other
words to your your your currently best
available predictive model about how to
deal with those things. uh that gets put
onto, you know, the back burner and you
and you run them all. In technical
terms, that means there's fixed
precisions in relation to all of those
uh uh uh uh action policies and the the
uncertain precision the the the
modulating uh fluctuating precision
where you're pulpating um are things
turning out as I expected them to. Uh
that's what voluntary behavior is all
about where you're making choices. Um so
the the that that the prioritization has
to do with what is voluntary. What is
voluntary means where am I changing my
mind uh on the fly um as things are or
are not turning out as expected. So
that's prioritization. It's nothing to
do with psychopathology. that's got to
do with action selection and and um the
bottleneck uh in terms of you know you
as I put it you can't do everything at
the same time. So um the the now when it
comes to pathology as you say we have
conflicts um well first of all each one
of our emotional drives is hard enough
to learn how to satisfy them because
uh because of the nature of the real you
know the world is a bloody unpredictable
place and so you know you're always
going to have um uncertainty about how
to meet all of your needs. Um so each
one of them uh is is is is there's
always some uncertainty in relation to
them. Um but when they conflict with
each other as they do I mean just like
uh big time um then you don't only have
to come up with the prediction as to how
do I satisfy this drive uh in itself it
is how do I satisfy this drive given
that it conflicts with that drive and
how do I satisfy that drive given that
it conflicts with this drive and then
you have to come up with predictions
which don't pertain to one drive but to
two or more simultaneous continously.
Now that is what Freud calls compromise
formation or what Freud calls drive
fusion if you want to look at it from
the point of view of the drives rather
than the point of view of the
representations. Um it's what Melanie
Klene calls integration of part object
relations into whole object relations.
Um so uh this this process in health you
are not prioritizing one drive you are
recognizing I have many uh and you're
trying to find um compromises or or or
or um integrative object relationships
which which partially in a compromised
way uh in in a balanced way are dealing
with multiple drives simultaneously.
The uh psychopathology arises from uh uh
it it efforts to do this which which go
too badly wrong. It always goes somewhat
wrong. Uh but if it goes too badly wrong
uh what the child does is it gives up uh
the attempt uh to to grapple with this
conflict and it says it works like this
even though it doesn't work like this.
Um so that's what in in in in in
neuroscychoanalytical terms that's
repression. Putting the problem out of
mind. In other words, the conscious
grappling with the problem uh is is
foregone uh in in uh favor of
automaticity. In other words, now the
child uh always deals with the problem
this way or that way. If it had
integrated the two drives, uh then the
the pro the problem would be to a
certain extent solved. If they can't
solve the conflict then you haven't
integrated the drive. So this is why the
one or the other comes to dominate
consciousness. So the prioritization of
drive in normal functioning you know
that I spoke about first of all is not
the same concept as the fact that one
suffers from a particular feeling.
That's because one has not uh managed to
um um deal with the demands of one
particular drive because it conflicts
with other drives. So the solution the
child comes up with is not a compromised
formation which adequately resolves
both. Uh one then is is um is is favored
at the expense of the other. Uh and so
the the patient suffers from a
particular feeling. there's a particular
quality to their emotional distress
which announces which drive has has the
most uh um illegitimately automatized uh
prediction uh attached to it. Um now the
the you must remember the child puts the
problem out of mind for a good reason.
It's because it's distressing. Uh it's
overwhelming and they can't find any
solution to it. So there's a relief in
saying it works like this when it
doesn't work like that. And so this is
the the essence of why Freud says uh
that um in a symptom there's an attempt
to fulfill a wish. The the the lay
person or the non- psychoanalyst says
you symptoms are how can they be
wishful? You know they're horrible
things. Uh yes it's an attempt uh to
satisfy the drive. uh and it is and this
the the the the child giving up uh on
attempting further is is in order to to
not be distressed any further by their
failure to be able to achieve more than
that. And so this is why they resist uh
bring allowing the the the problem to to
re-enter the mind. So we cling to our
symptoms because they bring us relief uh
in relation to uh something which is
which is overwhelming. So I I hope that
that makes sense and I hope that that
addresses your point, but I'd be very
happy to clarify further if I if I've
missed something at the end of what you
were asking.
Yeah, I think um so just to to give kind
of the background um what uh I'm trying
to think through is
uh the difference between a the sort of
core of the symptom and the kind of
various things that get built around it.
Uh and the reason I'm asking this is
because uh and Mark I I I wonder what
what you think about this. um is the I
guess the hope uh in in the at the the
end of uh the a quote unquote successful
analysis whatever that you know would
look like is is the hope that there
would be um as you're kind of putting it
now a new solution uh or a new kind of
uh compromise formation that does
account for the two plus seven plus um
drives uh in in a better way that gets
sort
um automatized
uh alongside the original putting out of
mind uh pathogenic uh uh solution that
that the child laid down um versus and
this is the Lanian idea of um uh
reduction of symptom to sent uh and it's
it's this idea that when uh it kind of
takes very from the the get-go, you
know, like nothing nothing works and
there's you're kind of stuck with your
symptom. But what can happen is a
changed relationship with the symptom.
Uh so that there's
um
let me try to think of an example there.
there there's there's an an automatized
um uh pattern or or an automatized
solution of I don't know let's say to um
uh to to to to take in uh uh yeah to to
take in uh and and perhaps uh this takes
a you know manifest form initially of
say an eating disorder um and that it's
not
and may and Maybe maybe this is the same
but uh the the idea being that it's not
getting rid of that original symptom. Uh
that it's changing the relationship with
it. That perhaps um the conscious
feeling associated with that pattern or
with that solution or the feeling that
comes with it is on the one hand less
distressing and overwhelming and on the
other hand is something that allows the
person to uh continue in life. Perhaps
it metaphorizes it into uh this these
are very simple examples but you know uh
a taking in of knowledge or you know a
taking in of um uh something else in
that sense where it's not that there's a
new solution. It's that the the core is
still there um but it's uh it's related
to in in a different way or in a way
that is less um only getting acted out
or played out in one particularly
fixated uh uh manifestation.
So um as always this is um why I enjoy
doing what we're doing now. You know
this is this is what we were discussing
earlier in our conversation where um I
can engage with the Leanian concept that
I didn't even know existed. Um and uh I
can translate it into um my terms. uh
and uh
you know and in this instance I find
that Lar evidently believed something
that I myself have come to believe uh in
in contradistinction to my Freudian
colleagues or at least my Freudian
colleagues were rather dismayed uh when
I came to conclusions which seem to me
to be pretty similar to what you've just
described. So let me just um explain
what I mean by that. Um so by a symptom
I mean the core what you called the core
of the symptom uh is uh what Freud
called the attempt to fulfill a a wish.
Uh in other words that's the core you
know that the the the the patient uh has
a conflict. They have to satisfy these
drive demands. They can't uh come up
with a way of doing it that satisfies
them both. And so they say well I'm
putting this problem out of mind. I'm
saying that if I do this, you know, then
then it'll all work. But it doesn't. And
so they suffer that feeling because
they've dealt with this feeling, but
they well they dealt with this need and
they haven't dealt with that one. And
this is what we call the repressed
prediction, you know. So therefore, so
the automatically automatized or
illegitimately automatized prediction.
Prediction equals wish, you know. In
other words, this is this is the
they believe this to be true even though
it's not true. If I do this then I will
satisfy my needs. Um and uh the now what
do we do in psychoanalytical treatment?
We try to bring the problem back to
consciousness. In other words, we
problematize what they are doing. What
the patient is doing is what we call
transference. They're enacting their
their their prediction. Uh and this
gives us opportunity to see because the
patient can't remember it. It's
unconscious. it's repressed. So, uh what
they are doing and this is a very old
Freudian idea. What they are doing uh
betrays as it were you know what the
what the unconscious wish or prediction
is uh and that because they're doing it
we can draw the patients attention to it
and we can say you're doing this uh in
fact you're doing this rather uh rather
a lot uh you're doing this over and over
again. Uh and then the question is why
are you doing this? Well, it seems as if
in doing this you're hoping to achieve
that and please notice you're not
achieving that. Uh so, you know, that's
why you're suffering. I mean, that's
sort of like the essence of what a
transference interpretation is. Now,
that does not do away with the original
prediction. This is the crucial point.
This is the point that my colleagues at
least initially were rather I said you
can't undo repressions. Uh they they are
permanent structures. uh the patient
will still uh they say even though they
know consciously yes I'm doing that uh
and then they'll say [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I did it again
uh and that's because of course they
have no choice in the matter because
they're not there it's unconscious it's
it's not in the realm of the of me it's
in the realm of it's not in it's it's
it's in the realm of what is automatized
in other words not in your hands it it
it just runs through you uh the the the
uh the enactment happens Regardless of
your own intentionality,
once you've done this enough, worked it
through, you know, you did it again, you
did it again, and the patient eventually
says, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I did it again. I did it
again. Then you come to this magical
moment where the patient says, I'm doing
it again. You know, while they're doing
it, uh, and then at that point, you have
choice. Now you can change your mind and
you can say even though I'm still
inclined to do this, I can decide to do
something else. Uh and the the
inclination to do it will never go away.
So you know this is why we can always go
back to our bad old ways because our bad
old ways are always still there. Uh and
a very good example is addiction but
it's by no means the only one you know.
So the bad old the prediction is still
there. uh and you can choose uh to do
something else despite your inclination.
Uh that's the best we can hope for uh in
terms of so now that begins to sound
like what you're calling changing your
relationship with your symptom and it's
not the only way that you can change it.
In other words, you don't necessarily
have to decide I choose to do something
else. It may be now that I understand
why I'm doing this, I choose to continue
to do it. It still seems to me to be the
the the best I can come up with. But
you're not in the same relationship to
the symptom. You're not the victim of
the symptom. You're not you're not um
you're not passive uh in the face of the
symptom. Uh you have ownership of your
symptom. And I've given you two examples
there, you know, of of changing your
relationship to the symptom. And I very
much doubt that exhausts the the the the
range of ways in which you can change
your relationship to your symptom. But I
think that um the the crucial thing in
what you're saying and attributing to LA
is that the the the the core of the
symptom doesn't go away. Uh it's just
your relationship to it. that that to me
is maps directly onto the conclusion I
was led to for various reasons um
including the the cognitive
neuroscientific fact that you know
non-declarative memories cannot be
reconsolidated you can add to them but
you can't change them so um I just want
to add a footnote though which is that
that's not the total you said it
correctly that's the core of the symptom
there are other things which are
important parts of of symptom uh
symptomatic pictures and a a very
important part of them is defenses. So
let me just clarify that I don't believe
repression is just one of the many
mechanisms of defense. I think that
there's repression first and then
there's defenses second. Repression is
an attempt to satisfy a drive or or to
resolve a conflict between a drive that
is um unrealistic. It doesn't work. Uh
but you automatize it anyway. that will
necessarily lead to the fact that a a
need is not being met means you're going
to suffer that need. You're going to
feel it. Um and then we institute
defenses against the feeling. Defenses
are not attempts to meet the underlying
drive. They're mopping up exercises.
Okay. Uh now I'm suffering this feeling.
I don't know why. Uh but but you know,
let me get rid of the feeling by
snorting cocaine or or or by uh or by uh
some other um uh uh like eating
disorders you mentioned for the most
part are defenses uh against um the
failure uh or in the face of the failure
of a repressed prediction. So defenses
are much more malleable things and um
and so things that can change in terms
of your relationship to your symptom can
also have a lot to do uh with with
defenses. So for example
many sleeping disorders arise from
panic grief the panic grief drive
separation distress problems uh and uh
but then you know sleeping disorders
take on a life of their own. um you the
you you you can uh analyze the
underlying cause of the sleeping
disorder, you might still be left with
the symptom. Uh or you might treat
cognitive behaviorally the symptom,
you're still going to be left with the
underlying cause. So there all sorts of
complexities there um that that uh are
very interesting. While I'm talking of
defenses, sorry, I just need to add one
more thing which is so important for
mental health. uh is that for the very
greatest part psychopharmarmacological
drugs act like defenses. They are ways
of getting rid of the feeling without
treating the underlying cause. Um and so
uh you know psychopharmarmacological
uh treatments uh I'm not I'm not saying
that they're a bad thing and not I'm not
even saying they're an inessential
thing. I think thank god for
psychopharmarmacological treatments in
terms of managing symptoms which like
suicidality you know you you or people
who so depressed that they just can't
come to treatment um you know you need
to treat the symptoms and sometimes
symptoms are just the result of you know
recent trauma you know and so on. So in
those cases symptomatic treatment is all
that's needed. Um but it's very
important for people to know that
they're not treating the cause that they
only treat the symptoms and uh so uh and
and therefore they function just like
defenses. They are getting rid of the
feeling without addressing where the
feeling comes from. I suddenly have
coming into my mind like for example in
lust one of our famous tribes in the
history of psychoanalysis
you know if a person has erectile
dysfunction because of something to do
with the way that they've dealt with
their their their lust uh drive uh and
you just treat it with Viagra you
haven't treated the problem you know and
uh and this happens a lot especially in
you know I mean of course elderly men
get erectile dysfunction for
physiological reasons. But in young
people, you know, we have erectile
dysfunction and they're treated with the
Viagra. They're not treating the
problem. And SSRIs are the same. It's
given like Smarties, you know, and and
and nobody sorts out their lives. But I
really am rambling now. Sorry. Let's
come back to the to the uh main uh
story.
&gt;&gt; I promise this will be the only
interruption. In the past few years, I
truly have cherished connecting with all
you listeners of this podcast, whether
through email, video calls, or simply
the comments. And I'd hate to lose this
fledging community we built around our
shared love for philosophy and science.
And so, I'm kindly asking you to
consider subscribing to this podcast on
Substack. Let's cut the BS. In our
technical times, no platform is perfect,
and at the end of the day, these
companies own us. However, if I may
naively be hopeful, Substack at least
allows me to export email addresses for
me to keep connected with you all if one
of these platforms decides to kick me
off for some reason, which as we're well
aware they've done in the past with no
explanation. In fact, this almost
happened to me recently. So, please
let's stay connected through Substack
and if all else fails, at least the good
old SMT protocol. That is a nerdy joke
for you programmers out there. Yeah, and
I I I totally agree and I I think that
the um the the the working uh of the the
fences uh is in the sort of the leanian
terms it's the that's the layers and
layers and layers of symbolic and
imaginary stuff that's get that's gotten
put on top of the symptom. This is how
uh you know in like the the Freudian um
child is being beaten the kind of
reverse uh reversals of who's in the
subject position, who's in the object
position and then you know here's all
the realm of uh interpretation and you
know the the slip as you know indicating
maybe one of the kind of routes that
that that the thing has taken but and
and the idea um uh is still that okay uh
in the in the clinical work you know
you've done this work of interpretation
you've you know um uh meandered through
the particular subjective history in the
moments and then you come upon this sort
of rock in the road of this thing that
just does not budge and and that being
that this the the ultimately this kind
of core of the symptom and this being um
I think uh uh I forget if if if I've put
it this way at at points but the kind of
the leanian railing against homeostasis
being uh the recognition of this that
there's something that doesn't admit of
this kind of uh uh solution uh that that
there's something in the symptom that
just stays as it is and that you
therefore need to um come to some kind
of terms with it. Um but I'm I'm also
wondering if um Rahul you you had
mentioned psychosis and perhaps um the
talk of different uh uh ego
organizations and defenses is is around
to talk about psychosis if you wanted
to. Yeah. Yes, please go ahead because I
think
&gt;&gt; Sorry, I'm not sure I'm following. Are
you asking me to say something about
psychosis?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, because I think Mark, you had a
comment to make before on psychosis and
I want to be mindful of the time. So
therefore, go ahead, please.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So, so just on in terms of time, I
have 16 minutes uh to go and then I will
have to go about psychosis and it's not
that I have any particular need to talk
about psychosis. It's just in the email
you sent before um our meeting unless
I'm confabulating which would be
hilarious. Um I think I think you said
that you would like if there's time to
speak about psychosis. So uh and does
neuroscychoanalysis have anything to say
about psychosis? So
&gt;&gt; there is one question. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it does.
&gt;&gt; You're correct. There is a question.
It builds very much on what I've just
said because in psychosis the one tool
that we have is antiscychotic drugs you
know which are dopamine blockers which
are symptomatic treatments uh and uh
which act on the seeking drive um and um
there's all sorts of very good evidence
um that the seeking drive is indeed
fundamentally implicated in psychosis.
One of them is the one I've just
mentioned that if you give psychotic
patients antiscychotic drugs in other
words you block D2 type dopamine
transmission in other words you block
the seeking system uh then you know they
at least their positive symptoms are
reduced hallucinations and delusions and
uh conversely you know if you take
enough dopamine uh as I've tested out on
myself you eventually become psychotic
you know and you can bet your bottom
dollar on it you know you snort enough
cocaine or or you know amphetamine
psychosis is a very well-known thing and
uh and with Parkinsonian patients when
we give them leodopa if we give them too
much you know they they go psychotic so
and if you image a patient uh functional
neuroiming while they're in the grips of
a hallucination or a delusion you see
the seeking system light up like a
Christmas tree so and incidentally in
dreams uh the same system uh you know
and dreams are a lucent dreams are a
psychotic state. So uh the the the the
the role of dopamine and the seeking
system uh in psychosis is assured. Now
um how do we make sense of this
neuroscychoanalytically
um I want to take you back to what I
said earlier. I said that seeking is
involved in every drive. um you know
it's just it's it's a matter of seeking
deployed in the service of uh one of the
other drives as opposed to seeking just
for its own sake. And um
people who are going to later become
psychotic uh it's got nothing to do with
seeking. It's got to do with the fact
that one or another of these um demands
upon us to to perform mental work, one
of the emotional needs that we have to
develop a predictive model as to how to
satisfy this need in relation to all the
other needs uh fails. We we can't do it.
Uh um there's no specific there's no
specific eeological
um uh or or or
um uh causal link between uh say lust
and psychosis or uh fear and psychosis
or panic, grief and psychosis. It can be
any of them. Frequently it's play. Uh
but it's just many times it's lust. Many
times it's fear in my experience and and
panic grief. Uh let alone the other ones
like postpartum psychosis and so on.
Clearly that's dealing with care. Um so
it's is there's no special relationship
between any one driver and psychosis
including seeking. Um so what is special
about psychosis is is is not what where
is the repression in relation to which
drive or which conflict between drives.
Um it it that is the same as in any
other psychopathology. the child can't
cope with this or that or uh or the
other thing in terms of meeting their
emotional needs in the world then they
suffer as we all do. Uh what
distinguishes psychosis is what defense
do you use against your suffering? There
are neurotic defenses, there are
narcissistic defenses and there are
psychotic defenses. The psychotic
defense is disavow
in the German word that Freud uses. I
think it's deni in the French. I'm not
sure about French, but the the um and I
mentioned French because of lon but
Freud's term is foyong. Stretchy
translates it as disavow. It's a
withdrawal from reality. Um and that's
the silent prodal phase of a psychotic
illness. The the kid withdraws. Why do
they withdraw? It's because if you test
your predictions in reality, they don't
work. You know, so that's when you
suffer. Prediction error arises from
engaging with reality. So I know what I
won't engage with reality. Um is the is
the uh solution. But spot the mistake.
You know, we have to engage with reality
because our our all of our drives can
only be satisfied in relation to
reality. But now here's the crucial bit.
Through disavow, through a withdrawal
from reality, uh there's no prediction
error now because I'm no longer testing
my predictions against reality. That
allows the default mode of seeking to to
be prioritized. So the the the return to
reality is through seeking uh because
the other needs are are um in a very uh
deathly way uh they are being satisfied
in the sense only that you're not even
trying to satisfy them. You've withdrawn
from the object world. Uh and so seeking
so the return to the world is through
seeking. Um and seeking is an engagement
with uncertainty. But uh if it's
unbridled
uh and this is another whole thing I
haven't gone into uh uh that that uh
each one of these drives has a
narcissistic disposition as opposed to
an objectic related disposition.
Narcissistic seeking is omnisient. Uh it
is I I have explained all uncertainty.
Uh that's delusional certainty. Uh it is
imposing my predictive model on the
world ignoring all prediction error. The
only thing you attend to is that which
confirms your prediction and uh this is
the noisy part of psychosis and that is
what's driven by dopamine. Now uh so
that's not the the illness it's the it's
the defense in in consequence of it's
the defense in consequence of a failure
developmental failure followed by the
psychotic defense followed by psychotic
symptoms. the psychotic symptoms can be
treated with dopamine blockers. But then
you back to the kid who's who's who's
withdrawn from the world. Uh and that's
when you can do therapy is that if you
can if you're so lucky as to be able to
engage again with what was the problem
that made the child withdraw from the
world or the usually it's an adolescent
uh that the then you can engage again
with with the original cause of the of
the problem. So that's in a in a very
thumbnail sketch a neuroscychoanalytic
account of of psychosis
&gt;&gt; and in so in commentary on that I I
think and from uh and for potential Aian
listeners um important to highlight uh
so Mark h how how Mark you're um
situating the uh structural differential
diagnosis is at the level of defense
&gt;&gt; uh which defenses come in to deal with
the failure of the repressed
predictions. Absolutely.
So it's if we can keep you know at least
there these two levels you know there's
repression and then there's defense. Um
note that um uh Leanians will say that
uh the difference between let's just say
neurosis and psychosis is that neurosis
is characterized by repression versus
psychosis is characterized by
foreclosure. Uh, and so when when Lanian
differential diagnosis is talking about
repression versus foreclosure, I don't
think they're saying the same thing as
what you say Mark when you talk about.
&gt;&gt; No, they're not.
&gt;&gt; Um, so the Lan repression is not the
same thing as the neuroscychano analysis
marks repression and uh we so uh I hope
the listeners grasp that that what Lan
means by repression. Oh yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh
&gt;&gt; yeah. So, so what I what I mean by
repression uh is the the
illegitimately automatized attempt to
satisfy any drive. Uh it's putting out
of mind the problem that I can't satis I
don't know how to satisfy this drive. So
I'm I'm saying it works like this.
That's what Freud calls a repressed
wish. In other words, it's an
unrealistic prediction. It's a childish
solution. Um then because by definition
it doesn't work. Otherwise, we wouldn't
call it illegitimate or premature. Uh
because it doesn't work. It doesn't
satisfy the drive or resolve the
conflict. The child will suffer
feelings. It's just that it'll no longer
be able to think about why am I
suffering this feeling? It'll it won't
know where the feelings coming from.
What do we do with those feelings? We
institute defenses against them. So,
repression and defense are not the same
thing. That's the crucial point. the the
the way that the Lanians des
conceptualize it or or or taxonomize it
as as you just described it is is
actually very similar to how most
psychoanalytical schools do. Um they say
repression is a neurotic defense, a
projective identification or projection
and introjection or splitting is a
narcissistic defense and disavow is a
psychotic defense. uh uh foreclosure or
if you call it that but it's you know
it's a the the the idea is that
repression is a neurotic defense. I
don't agree with that. I think
repression underlies all
psychopathology. It's just un it's a
child not being able to satisfy its
needs in the world uh uh and and and
doing it in a way that doesn't work and
therefore they suffer. Uh the defenses
then are instituted against the
suffering. psychotic ones you can call
it foreclosure or I don't know what that
word means but I know what disavow means
it's a withdrawal from reality
you can call the narcissistic ones are
projection and introjection in other
words projecting out the source the the
the source of the suffering is in the
object rather than in me and in rep in
in
neurotic defenses it's the aim or the
object of the prediction is changed it's
it's called substitute formation as
opposed to the source being changed. The
suffering is not coming from me, it's
coming from you. Uh it is uh changing
the aim or the object of the prediction
uh is the defense. And the defense
against the suffering caused by the
original repressed prediction. And
there's some very nifty uh neurotic
defenses uh like sublimation. You know,
we all have to use defenses. Uh we we we
because all of us institute repressions.
But for me, the the the the uh
distinguishing feature of a neurotic
defense uh is substitute formation in
terms of aim and object. It's not
repression. Repression is is is prior to
all of them. I I realized there was
something I should have said earlier. I
did mention dreams, but I want to just
say again that when I say that that uh
seeking is prioritized because you've
withdrawn from the world through
disavow, it's also prioritized when you
go to sleep because you've withdrawn
from the world. So seeking is
prioritized during sleep because you
don't have to satisfy any of your other
needs then.
hence dreaming
&gt;&gt; which is a psychotic state
&gt;&gt; and and I think um Mark what you just
said that the essence of neurotic
defenses is the the substitutive
capacity particularly for the aim and
the object of the drive for the from for
to remind the Lanians how does Lan
define repression it's the substitution
of the unknown of uh the original object
uh the maternal object with the uh
symbolic metaphor stuff of the culture
the name of the father uh the the the
the father function. It's a substitute
function uh and the the minimal capacity
to be able to use the things out there
in the world, right? You know, the
cultural resources or linguistic
resources to be able to substitute and
then to deal with the original problem,
the symptom core that you can't
perfectly resolve. But okay, my attempt
to deal with the leftovers is through. I
I buy into um the the uh idea that okay
this can be routed through linguistic
resources, cultural resources in in this
sort of paternal substitution sense
versus in in um the the foreclosure um
uh the the that Lan talks about in
psychosis. It's it's the foreclosure of
of this mechanism of of this recognition
of of that um uh confidence that the
substitution will be worth it. um uh
that that that that it'll be uh uh
enabled in that way. Um but yeah, I so I
I I I think that the the the
differential diagnosis stuff is is so
interesting and um to to to clarify the
the levels I I think and I think and I
think this this makes um good sense
clinically too. Um I mean this uh there
is something in common between you know
neurosis, psychosis, perversions and all
of these things. you know there is um
there there is something that uh they're
not as different as as perhaps some of
the immediate you know manifest
phenomena can make us uh think so I
think finding that common ground is is
helpful too for how we approach patient
work
&gt;&gt; if you read Shreber case you'll see uh
his his analysis of the repressions
lying at the heart of the of the
disorder uh and and he marvels at how oh
my gosh it's the same old stuff you know
except this guy's dealing with it
psychotically
Um, I'm afraid we're going to have to
end as far as I'm concerned. So, I just
want to say how much say again I hope
I've
indicated throughout our conversation
how much I've enjoyed it. Uh, um, so
thanks R for hosting us. Uh, and thanks
John for your mind and for and for
contributing your your intellect to at
least in part to neuroscychoanalysis. I
think we're very lucky to have you.
&gt;&gt; No. No doubt. No doubt.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Raul. Thank you, Mark. Um,
it's not only so invigorating to engage
and, you know, respond to all of your
phenomenal work, but it's just fun. So,
you know, this is play.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Don't know why anyone does anything
else.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And thanks again, Mark, for
dealing with all the technical issues.
Jean, can you stay for 10 minutes
longer? Is that okay? I've just got a
few questions on the free energy
principle.
&gt;&gt; Sure. I know that I mustn't switch off.
I will leave the meeting and I'll leave
my thing cuz I know with with Riverside
you have to let it continue downloading.
&gt;&gt; I'm glad you're here. Thank Thank you
very much. Thanks for the time. Cheers.
See you.
&gt;&gt; Byebye.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Byebye.
&gt;&gt; Bye-bye.
&gt;&gt; Uh awesome. That was that was fantastic,
John. Yeah, I was going to say uh later
on, but I think I'm going to relisten.
I'm already taking a lot of notes,
copious amounts of notes, and then
relisten and reflect on some of this. Um
but no apppropo the free energy
principle if you've got 10 more minutes
if if that's cool.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Excellent man. So I think this question
is more for the Leanians cuz in fact
you're the first serious Leanian I've
come across truly working with FAP
active inference and then broadly uh
computational neuroscience cuz u as you
did say in your presentation to the
active inference institute lenians seem
to be a bit like anti-naturalist so to
speak right um so this very pathy
statement is I propose the fringe
principle you Okay. Uh what does it mean
when the systems efforts to minimize
free energy inevitably produces more
free energy or inevitably produces free
energy? Along those lines, can you
firstly so a bipartite question for
those who aren't familiar with the FAP
just in general? Could you just briefly
give a quick primer to that and then
more importantly explicate your Lanian
twist to the FP please?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So um free energy principle it's
uh it's it's a model in theoretic or
originally developed in theoretic
biology neurobiology but it's been
extended um quite broadly um to almost a
theory of everything uh to quote uh
Friston's um uh book in progress. So
it's developed by Carl Fristen um a
computational uh uh neuroscientist and
theoretic biologist uh and physicist
and the basic idea is that um anything
that exists as a thing uh and what does
it mean to be a thing? It means that
it's distinct from what is not the
thing. Um so you know I am not anything
beyond the boundaries of my skin. Um uh
and so that's what it means to be a
thing in a very basic sense. Anything
that exists as a thing uh has to
minimize uh free energy. And free energy
uh you can think about it as entropy.
You can think about it as uncertainty.
And it's this basic recognition that uh
there is you know the second law of
thermodynamics that entropy in a system
increases. Um, in other words, things
dissipate to equilibria. And it's a
conundrum of life that biological
organisms have to find some way to
resist the second law of thermodynamics.
Uh, and this gets applied uh in the free
energy lens as um all uh biological
systems have to minimize free energy. Uh
and that therefore everything that the
system is doing is doing things in some
way to minimize free energy. all
quantities that can change will change
to minimize uncertainty.
And so um that's the sort of core of the
free energy principle. And so the the
the immediate sort of leanian criticism
that that I still hear a lot is that you
know this is this is too homeostatic.
This is like okay you're so okay you're
saying that everything we do is to get
rid of uncertainty get rid of the real.
Nevertheless, as I was saying before,
you know, we know from clinical work
that people will do things again and
again and again and again that
nevertheless keep their uncertainty
going and keep, you know, uh that are
clearly not homeostatic. Um and so and
therefore, you know, this leads to the
kind of criticism that okay, this isn't
an applicable model to uh human
psychology uh uh subjective structure
and at odds therefore with leanian
theory. And uh at this point I I think
it's um it's just useful to to remember
that on the one hand okay yes there is
the real but the the essence of the
imaginary and the symbolic is creating
ways to deal somewhat with the real um
that uh it's not just real that that's
total chaos. uh that the symbolic and
the imaginary that these are ways of
taming the real two degree not
completely. So that's on the one hand
and then on the other hand and this is I
don't think it's a uniquely Lanian view
on the free energy principle but I think
it kind of helps draw this out from the
way that the free energy principle
language is usually presented that yes
the system changes to minimize free
energy but um nevertheless the system
never reaches that zero point uh both
for reasons that the outside world is
super super super complicated but also
So that especially in at least mamalian
and at least vertebrate um biological
organisms that there is this this thing
called the seeking drive that um it
leads to a proactive engagement with
uncertainty whether that's out in the
world or within the model itself in
terms of uncertainty among okay which
predictions are um best fitted to be
dealing with this uh current situation
that itself is a kind of uncertainty and
so that there's this active engagement
with uncertainty um that keeps a
dialectical tension with within the
system uh that the system itself is uh a
dynamic evermoving process and um one of
the other things that uh uh is more
recent within the free principle and and
things that um Carl Fristen has written
on is that um one way of approaching uh
uh Fender principal minimization is this
idea of a non-equilibrium steady state
attractor in less complicated terms
there's some none equilibrium i.e not
nirvana not nothing nothingness so some
equ n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
n non-equilibrium state that is steady
for the system that it aspires to be
toward um and this is a settling point
or homeostatic settling point that I
don't want to have no uncertainty that's
just death because then there's nothing
to deal with. Um but you know there's a
certain kind of point um there and that
in one of the more recent formulations
it's not quite that the system gets to
that point or even that the system um
stri keeps striving to get to that
point. It's um and that's what which is
the the the minimization of free energy
moving toward that point being one
aspect of free energy minimization. But
many uh dynamic systems especially
biological systems um demonstrate um a
kind of like a sinosoidal circling
around that point. Uh that what happens
is the the the point toward which the
organism strives. not only unreachable
but you kind of get into a rhythm around
which uh or sort of a a pattern uh a
function that uh uh uh the system
circulates around this point and once
once the formulation takes that form and
I was glad when when um Carl pointed
this out at the active inference um uh
talk that this formulation this is now
getting closer to at least what I think
um that some of The Lanian formulations
are where um if the the famous diagram
in seminar 11 on what a drive is you
know the drive circuit is the there's
the the rim the opening the gap uh
there's some difference that has to be
dealt with and the route of the drive is
around um the the object a around the
uncertainty in the other so that around
the uncertainty out there in the world
that I have to deal with that I never
grasp, you know, you never quite get at
the thing. Uh you never quite get at the
state that would be perfect homeostasis.
Um what the drive is and what the
symptom that goes with the drive is that
this for me is that core of the symptom
that we were talking about earlier that
follows this repetitive secuitous route
around um this fantasized state. Uh, and
this is to me the the the Leanian
interpretation of the death drive in the
form of repetition compulsion. It's it's
the repetitive circling around this
thing that I'm trying to get toward. I
fantasize that this would be the
wholeness. I never actually get there.
And therefore, I find I make the best do
I can with uh uh encircling around this
point and it repeats. And yes, there
might be variations in how I repeat it.
There can be substitutions. There can be
modifications, extensions in how I
circle around it. But there will
nevertheless be this um circling dynamic
or this repetitive um patterns dynamic
to my actions or to the the uh
predictive habitual ways that I engage
uh with my uncertainty as I have it
dialectic dialectized between both
myself and also somewhere out there in
the world. Um so I think that this um
view that it's it's not just about you
know hitting ground zero point of um uh
uh entropy that there is um the the
emergent dynamics that you get from free
principle are very much dynamics that uh
it there's a constant interplay with
uncertainty that there is this practive
engagement and repetitive returning to
uncertainty that is necessary for the
system to exist because if there were no
uncertainty then you'd be would be super
active engagement uh of anything. Uh and
so and and that's death.
&gt;&gt; Uh
&gt;&gt; and you map it to this the concept in FP
the non-equilibrium homeostasis point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So um the uh the
non-equilibrium steady state attractor
that it's not only
&gt;&gt; sorry I misspoke. It's not only a point
that it's in my in my head and perhaps
I'm wrong but in my head they're more or
less the same concept that's trying to
get at of like a homeostatic settling
point that it's not only that you know
this is the point that the system wants
to be in but there's there's a patterned
um uh secuitousness um particularly when
it comes to the domain of action uh
particularly when it come and we are
acting beings um when it comes to you
have to you have to return to a familiar
state of acting uh this is repetition
Excellent. This has been an honored
treat. Thanks, mate. And it's uh it's
been uh as he was saying, a great way to
play. Thank you so much for your time.
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me, Marco.
This this was a pleasure.