Dr. Kruse, one of the things that you
have said in many different ways is in
relation to timing and uh recently
listened to I guess the only podcast
that Roland Van Wick has ever done and
he brought up uh oscillation and delayed
bioluminescence and I I got to thinking
about this timing aspect that you do and
I I see uh timing in nature that we
don't ever really think about. Um it's
just there. like the time to plant
seeds, the growing season, the harvest,
the day and night, right? And so, and I
think back right when Lander was
diagnosed with cancer, and I thought,
what was I the most afraid of? And
honestly, it was losing time, right? It
was losing time with my baby, uh, the
life that we were going to have. So, I
guess my question to you is, what what
what is time? Uh, what is timing? And if
we can correct it, we we do what?
Well, I mean, I've talked about time
quite a bit on my blogs.
Um, obviously, I think everybody to to
to understand the answer to this
question. Timing is everything. Timing
actually controls the flow of energy in
a system. But your question is a little
bit different
uh than that. You're asking me
physically what time is. First thing I'm
going to give you a definitive answer,
but remember time is relative. Okay? So
time is the rhythm of the cosmos. It's
the pulse that synchronizes light,
water, and magnetism to create life. So
in that sense, it's the Earth's dance
with the
sun that's encoded in your cells. If you
get the timing wrong, then the stool
collapses. that forms the three-legged
stool, which is light, water, magnetism.
So, you need to really understand that
that three-legged stool is what supports
cellular function and health. And in my
framework, my decentralized
framework, time is the context or
rhythm that orchestrates those three
basic elements to interact properly.
So that tells you the relativity of time
is built into the cyclical framework.
Why?
Because the time that I think physicists
talk about is driven by the earth
earth's rotation and solar cycles and
also the effect of the the moon. Uh
that's actually where circadian biology
comes from. But you also have to realize
that the environment that you live in,
the light there or the solar energy
there, the water there, the structure in
your cells there and the magnetic flux
from both geomagnetic fields and the the
magnetochemicals like ROS and RNS all
influences these biologic systems.
Therefore, they all influence time. So
time goes from macro to micro to nano.
And it turns out when you do the
addition, subtraction and
multiplication of all those things,
that's what creates time and you. And
that's why time is relative between you
and your son. Uh between me and you and
between me and all the savages that will
listen to this. Like people look at time
like they look at water. They think
water is H2O every everywhere and it's
not. time is exactly the same um factor
and it's very difficult for people
uh to
conceptualize what it is but I think I
gave you my
answer. I I I love that.
um when you talk about blockchain and
Bitcoin uh started to come across as
actually a listener that brought this to
my attention of of you and I both and he
asked about the green flash uh and to me
that almost appears like it's a time
stamp of nature and there's a
correlation between the blockchain and
actually what we see in nature.
Yeah, there's a correlation but uh
Bitcoin is a little bit different than
us. Remember in us as the the question
you asked me to start this with
um that's time relativity. Bitcoin
doesn't have time relativity. In a sense
it does, but it really doesn't. Bitcoin
is more runs on Newtonian time.
So, we've traded in seconds, minutes,
and hours for 10-minute blocks in
Bitcoin. So, time is absolute in
Bitcoin. And if you think about it, this
is one of the the very interesting uh
things at the heart of decentralized
medicine that I think PhDs don't really
understand because I think they take the
esoteric part of it, but they don't
understand really what I'm saying.
When you have time is absolute, that's
when causation like cause and effect
exists. When time is relative, there is
no cause and effect. And this is so
counterintuitive to people. And then
when you think about talking about
medicine, what's the standard uh gold
standard in medicine? It's randomized
control clinical trials that is based on
what? Uh cause and effect. Well, cause
and effect is an illusion. When you live
in a world where time is relative, and
you just asked me what my definition of
time was, and I just told you it's
relative on every level, and then even
the levels when you add them all up,
there's even relativity there. And
um I think it's a really important
distinction to make because I don't
think people understand how big a deal
is. Now, Bitcoin and your mitochondria
are time machines, but the time that
they measure is different. Okay? And
that means they work differently. And if
you understand what makes Bitcoin so
powerful as a ledger and a blockchain,
it has to run on absolute time. Satoshi
clearly knew that. That's why he set the
10-minute uh window because then you
would have cause and effect. And cause
and effect is actually how you solve u
the Byzantine general's uh problem. so
that it's an accurate time ledger. In
other words, it's immutable. It can't be
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with like uh anything else. And
that's the reason why Bitcoin is
incredibly
powerful. It also confounds people like
you hear uh even in the Bitcoin
community, some of the Bitcoin devs
think, well, Bitcoin's too simple, you
know, to really be this. I don't think
people really understand money doesn't
need technological fanciness. All it
needs to be is do its job. And you know,
it's almost like I look at when I think
about this discussion, I think about
Bill Bich and what he used to say about
the Patriots. Just do your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] job
and that's all that matters. I don't
need you I don't need Tom Brady to do
Antoine Smith's job or Mike Vel's job or
this. Just do your job and that will
happen. And and when it comes to
Bitcoin, what is the job of Bitcoin?
Very simply, it's it's to make sure that
your value travels space and time so
that like when your son is older, all
the the the things that you did to toil
in the field in Arkansas, you're able to
transfer that value to your son and your
family. But when it comes to us, meaning
mitochondrial time, that's where it gets
a little bit nuanced. That goes to the
answer of the question that you started
the podcast with. what is time. So you
need to understand that there's a macros
macroscopic part which is the circadian
biology then the micro nano which is
actually what happens at that quantum
scale and um when you add it all up
that's actually what heteroplasm is and
that's why I say fundamentally when you
really understand mitochondrial biology
and bitcoin they're both time machines
but they're designed to do their um what
they're designed to do. One is biologic
time, one is your lifespan, longevity.
The other one
um is actually your value. And values
require cause and effect. Mitochondria
rejects cause and effect. It's based on
probability. And this is the reason why,
you know, children can be born with
retinol blasto. Your son could be born
with his cancer. But you know, seemingly
that wasn't in your family before.
You're like, well, how does this happen?
It's a timing phenomena. And that timing
phenomena affected the morphology, the
organogenesis, and the heteroplasmic
rate in his tissues. And do I think your
question gets at the core of why people
struggle with decentralized medicine
because they think about time the way
they think about water. Like water is
H2O everywhere in the world. for them.
They've actually never sat down and
truly pondered what time is. You know,
who does that? Mostly it's, you know,
physicists. They they have, you know,
the real interesting discussions about
time because they understand that timing
is big. And when you really understand
the most important part of like how time
and energy interact, it's what I said to
you before that timing determines how
energy flows. That's the basis of
entropy. And like when you read the
white paper, when you read some of the
stuff from Ilia Pirigene that deals with
biology that we are a dissipative state,
you begin to see a picture of time
that's far more complex. In other words,
you have no problem as a farmer
understanding some of the things that
Pollack has said in his book. Why?
Because he's made it like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] level
so that you can understand. Okay. Yeah.
When light interacts with water, it
doesn't have the same physics. What I'm
saying to you, when light, water, and
magnetism interact together, time
doesn't also have the same physical
characteristics. In other words, it
varies. And that's usually not something
that is in people's, you know, mental
framework or in their models. It's
certainly not present in the models of
the doctors that you've taken your kids
to. And is that kind of what I teach my
tribe about? Yes. Like circadian timing
is one aspect of timing. But then
there's quantum timing that happens on
the inner mitochondrial membrane. So the
size between the cytochrome proteins
actually affects time. How does that
fundamentally work? The longer the space
is, the harder it is for electrons and
protons to tunnel. Well, if that
happens, when I say harder, that means
time has to expand. In other words,
think about it like silly putty. And
when time expands, what does that mean?
That means that you're losing some
benefit to your lifespan. That's
effectively what happened to your son
when you get cancer. Why? Because you're
closer to death than you are to that
dissipative state. And you always have
to return the entropy back to something
else so that the entropy in you stays
really, really low. And what keeps the
entropy low is maximizing or optimizing
light water magnetism. that gives you
the most time. So I tell people that
health is the slowest form of death. And
if you actually think about that concept
for a minute, it actually has time baked
into the recipe.
Absolutely. I I think back to what you
told me in the very first conversation
we had when you were laying out
heteroplasm and redux in different
tissues and and I've I've thought a lot
about that and what what I think of on
the probability versus cause and effect
is you know in my mind what I call like
a photonic zip code a photonic or timing
zip code dependent on different tissues
and and what seems to be like the
difference between Parkinson's or a
Wilms tumor It's the zip code is off in
timing. Is is that a an okay way of
thinking about it? No, it's a it's a
great way of thinking about it because
it tells you that each the way I want
people to think about is each organ in
your body has a certain thermodynamic
footprint. That thermodynamic footprint
is subject to timing issues. So just for
argument sake, say the Wilms tumor is in
bone. just for argument sake. Well, that
tells you that the uh muscle skeletal
system likely has a higher heteroplasmic
ratio, but every single system in your
son other than that system could be
perfectly fine. So, that's where it
gives you okay, so this tumor is tied
like his bones are 85 years old, but his
brain is eight months old. And the thing
is you have to realize what happened
there is the process of your sperm and
your wife's egg coming together. You
didn't know that in the muscle skeletal
sommites that that effect was there like
whatever was the
cause of the timing issue that which
that which I answered for you in the
beginning of the podcast that macro put
the heteropasy late ratio in that part
of his cell and that's why it happens
and you know it the reason why I find
this
fascinating if you think about doctoring
all the way back to 1859 to Darwin ideas
about
evolution. No one's ever been able to
figure out, you know, like how a kid can
be born with this, but you know, this is
the only problem they have. And that's
where the magic of, you know,
integrating
uh thermodynamics with Darwin's ideas,
with Doug Wallace's ideas, with some of
the the new ideas that are present in
physics, you begin to understand
uh that life is like water. It's not
H2O. You you you're taught to believe
it's H2O. Everybody assumes when a baby
is born because it's new that it's, you
know, it's the same age
everywhere. It's not. And and the funny
thing is you can actually see that
fractal when you look at a chimpanzeee
and they look at a baby. Chimpanzees
born really really thin, doesn't have
frontal loes, but a human baby who has
almost the same amount of genes as the
chimp looks so radically different when
they're born. And then you look at it
and you're like, well, that brain has
got to develop
post-natally. The chimp's brain doesn't
have to do much at all. So that actually
also tells you that there's a timing
factor present there. Why? A chimp's
brain is ready to go as soon as it
emerges. But a human brain, time has to
be dilated. And how do we do it? Our
babies are born with a lot of fat. And
that fat is spun through its
metabolism create the mileelinated
tracts. The more mileelin comes in, the
less chimplike the baby becomes, the
more human it becomes. And that's a time
related phenomenon. And the craziest
part of the story, our brains are born
so immature from a timing perspective
that we're not fully milinated till 25
to 28 years old. And that's the reason
why kids can't rent a hotel room or rent
a car until they're 25. And you know,
the funny thing is here, the macroscopic
world, every parent that'll listen to
this goes, "So that's the reason why I
my kids can't rent a car or hotel. I got
to give them my credit card." That's
actually the truth. And you don't even
realize that it's tied back to the
transgenerational epigenetics or the
evolutionary biology between us and our
our cousins.
those kind of things. I think they're
good lessons
because everybody who listens to this,
whether you're a scientist or a farmer
or anybody else, you're going to
understand those differences because
everybody's had the experience of seeing
a little baby and understand what it's
like to get to 25 years old and what the
process is of
maturation. Maturation, just that word
alone, also has time built into the
recipe. And and I don't think people
really uh think about this the way they
should. And what am I trying to say? I
want you to take these ideas and then
scale them to diseases. Scale them to
things that you know your family is
afflicted with so that you can
understand them better because you'll
begin to understand why some of the
stuff you get told from the centralized
doctors is complete and utter [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
And ultimately, if you want better
outcomes for your family, you have to be
really good with your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] detector.
Um, and then the flip side is you don't
throw the baby out with the bath water
because there's some things that the
centralized doctors do a pretty good job
explaining to you, but it means you have
to be a
savage to understand what's the nuance
in water, what's the nuance in time
because you know that the centralized
doctor doesn't understand that. Like the
reason why you fought for your son is
because not only because he was his son,
but there was something inside of you
that knew, no, this can't be what I'm
going to settle for. There's got to be
another aspect to this that you have not
turned over yet that potentially can
help this situation. And here's the
irony. Time in physics is reversible. So
when you solve a cancer problem, what
did you effectively do? You traveled
back in
time. That's what you're doing. You're
actually giving your son back time that
he didn't have. But you don't think
about it like that. That's actually what
really healing from any disease. We're
talking about cancer because your kid
had it. And cancer also has a timing
mechanism. I think about it. the cancer
that that uh Biden's got, you know, is
an indolent cancer. Takes a long time to
kill you. Prostate cancer can take a
long time to kill you. But let's think
about Frank Zappi. He died from invasive
prostate cancer as a young man. That
tells you that the timing in his tumor
was radically different than most
prostate cancers. So, if we're dealing
with men who have rapidly growing and
metastasizing prostate cancers, coming
upon us to realize there's something in
that three-legged stool that likely sped
it up. Now, in Frank Zappa
uh time, uh if he was still alive, or
they they could they could probably
still sample some of his DNA. My bet is
that you would find SV40 from the polio
job as the source of his problem. Now,
they weren't looking at things like that
back then. You know, there's a lot of
people on social media now that will try
to say that that Biden's cancer was from
the jab. I personally don't think that.
I actually did a podcast yesterday with
Mike Ferris because he asked me that
question. And I said, I don't think
that's the case because there's times if
you look at Biden when he was the vice
president with uh Obama, you could tell
that he was wearing diapers then. So
that told me that he had cancer even
back then. The problem is he was
functionally, you know, put together.
Dementia wasn't bad. I personally think
the effect of Biden with the jabs was
the dementia. I think the dementia came
on so rapid and it was tied to the jab.
I don't think it was the cancer. And I
think um the whole rigomearroll that's
going on you know on social media right
now is it kind of makes me laugh because
you know when we say turbo cancer or we
talk about it we're always thinking
about that cancer part but you don't
realize it should really be thought of
as turbo diseases because this is the
reason why you know soccer players like
uh
Christian drops dead right on the
field. Isn't that a evaporation of his
time right in front of your face? I
mean, same thing is true with Demar
Hamlin. We all saw him die, but then he
was brought back to life. So, what
happened? He had his time evaporated and
then we're able to give it back to him
and now he's, you know, cruising around.
Isn't Demar Hamlin story a little bit
like the story of your son? Technically,
it is. But people don't see time from
that frame of reference. And I guess
what I want people to
understand is that you need to see time
from that reference. Just like you need
to see water's physics change when light
hits it, that water is radically
different than water that comes out of
your tap. Just like the water that comes
out of your mitochondria is even more
different, you know, than you know the
stuff that's in Pollack's book. You
know, everybody keeps telling me that
Pollack's finally listened to me and
done, you know, the uh the water
experiments that he needed to do on
deterior depleted water and he's found
out that I'm right. Great. But I didn't
need him to tell me that. Why? Because
the physics already told me that that in
fact was the case. Why he needed to do
these studies is for a guy like you.
Why? Because then you're going to be
able to understand timing better. You're
going to understand why the things
happen not only with your son, but
you're also going to understand why the
things happen in your field. Why you can
make tomatoes and get a 40% higher yield
when you put the tier in depleted water.
So you can say to your business
partners, look, the water cost us 20%
more, but if we get 40% more yield,
let's look at the numbers, okay? And
when you think about that, a profit and
loss statement, isn't that a timing
phenomenon? Guess what? We're back to
Bitcoin, aren't we?
You see this is how health and wealth
fundamentally are linked and what links
them uh as you know the staff in the
ground. I'm going to tell you it's
actually time. Time is
actually the fabric that we live in that
links many many things. But the fact
that it's so relative and so
plastic really confuses people because
remember people are they're taught and
designed and schooled to think in linear
fashion. And I think what you find with
like guys like me or physicists like
Einstein, we don't look at it that way.
We know that there's multiple different
axises and that you can stretch time and
you can stretch physics. Like I I tried
to explain on um Alexis Jasmine's
podcast recently when they had the guy
uh Zimmerman on and you know I told
people I said this was the weirdest
podcast I ever did because this guy
clearly came in with an idea of what I
was saying and who I was. And I looked
at him and I'm like I'm not sure if you
really
understand where I'm coming from.
Like
light is extremely plastic and it's
plastic because of time. Like photons,
photons are the most amazing things
because they don't experience time. It
actually takes an interaction with
matter for them to begin to experience
time. So it time I should say light is
the only thing that I know of in the
physical world that experiences no time
when it's by itself.
That's maybe the part of the reason, you
know, something else I think is
absolutely incredible.
I was I was just saying I said maybe
that's why light is so incredibly
important, not only for your sun, but
also for your plants. Because if you
really think about it, you are capturing
a physical entity that experiences no
time.
Absolutely fascinating. I think that it
just clicked for me when you said turbo
cancer and turbo uh disease is that is a
description. It's an expression of time,
right? It speeds up time. That's
it's right there. We have all these
fancy synonyms for it, but it goes back
to your fundamental question that you
asked me. What is time? So, like if you
sit and stew in these tomatoes for a
period of time and actually think about
it, you'll begin to understand that just
about everything in your life funnels
back to this issue about
time. I was talking to the kids this
morning about having this conversation.
So, 11 and nine are are the the kids and
talking about uh we're big on
photosynthesis. Like I want them to
understand photosynthesis front and back
and how they can apply that to other
things. But I said, you know, Jack's
always talking about food is light,
right? But food is also time. If you
think about what happens from the time
the lamb is born and it eats and it
grows and it it takes this in that all
all the steps are time. That grass they
ate was time. The growth is time and
it's utilizing light. And I just think
that that's a fascinating way to look at
it that I had never thought about. Well,
I mean, remember I told you this before
that you as a farmer have spectacular
insights that you can bring to people.
Like for example, you know that the
growing season for a cabbage and a
potato are different. Well, guess what?
Isn't that tell you something about the
way photons would interact with the
chlorophyll in that? You know that
chlorophyll is the base to explain to
your children how this happens. But what
are we saying? There are changes in the
system of a potato compared to a cabbage
where the photosynthesis is also
relative. The same thing is true with an
eggplant. The same thing is true with a
pumpkin. So if you think about food that
way all of a sudden then you begin to
understand well this is the reason why
the eye, the testicles, the lung and the
liver also do things differently. So
what are we effectively saying? We're
saying that the organs in your body
mimic the foods in nature that they all
are designed to operate with light,
water, and magnetism in a different way
to to get a physiologic task. And then
what's the big metronome? The
supercosmatic nucleus gets all the
fruits and vegetables that are organs in
you to operate so that you can live a
life of a human that's 80, 85 years old.
And it turns out when those organs don't
operate in unison together like a a
symphony, that would explain your
child's
tumor. What do you think about the
analogy of timing in reference to like
the timing belt on an automotive?
I think it's the same thing. I just
think that the time there is how shall
we say more regular. The time in a
mitochondria is so variable. It's like
when I tell you how
variable it it's hard to for people to
explain or I should say understand
because it's happening at
nano and phto levels you know. So we're
talking about -9 -13
-15 like that to us seems like almost
instantaneous but the difference between
phmptoine and auto time is is actually
the difference between a potato and a
cabbage. It's the difference between
your brain and your heart. And that is
something that people don't really
understand. And you know like the
refractive index in tissues people don't
realize that this is also tied to
timing. This is a guy named Fermat
Fermat's law. So like when you change
the optical density of a tissue what are
you effectively doing? You're changing
how light can flow in that tissue. So
based on the question that you've asked
me Jack does that mean that when we
change the optical density or the
refraction that we're changing timing in
the tissue? The answer is yes, you are.
That's
precisely what's happened. Like if you
look and distill down Pollack's book,
remember what he said in his uh in his
original studies
that the refractive index of water once
infrared light hit it was 270
nanometers. No one ever really
questioned him about that. I was
probably the first person that did. And
I said, ' Don't you find it kind of
interesting that when infrared light,
which is red light, low powered, you
know, 600
to,00 technically goes up to 3100. But
when it hits water, it changes the
refractive index in the UV range. Like
you didn't need UV stimulus to do that.
You used low power light to change the
optical density of water. And you know
that when your son was born, he was 80%
water. me as an old [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm 50 55%
water. So, what do you think the effect
of that would be when you actually think
about it? And I think you're the perfect
person to kind of have this discussion
with because you're used to looking at
your field and seeing all these
different things you grow. And I think
when you think about how I think about
time and how I think about light and how
I think about refractive indexes, you're
going to realize, okay, when I put that
water in my field in
Arkansas and the red light is changing
it, well, what happens? Because that
water is outside and there's also blue,
there's also UV, there's also green,
there's also orange. Like there's a
cornucopia in there. How does that
change how does that change the the
refractive index of water? Like for
example, if you really scale it to my
criticism with pollic
uh sunlight is going to have way
different effect than full spectrum
bulbs on light. I mean, you know that
I've I've said to many people, mostly
Kevin McCarron, and not to you, because
I know you don't grow weed, but the weed
that's grown in in uh in Colorado in
those big grow places, that weed doesn't
have as much uh power in the cabonoids
that are in there because the light
they're using is not the sun. And I
would say to you that's actually now
testable in food because you've heard me
say if you cut a sweet potato and you
bring it to to Whole Foods, they can use
an optical scanner to find out how many
biofotons are emitted from that food and
then they'll pay you the extra 30 40%
because you effectively have grown that
in the sun. You've proved to them that
there's not pesticides in there. So like
when you hear Robert F. Kennedy Jr. talk about
atrizine, what are we really saying?
When you put atrisine in a system or
glyphosate in a system, you're changing
the optical refraction. So what does
that mean? It slows or speeds light up
in the tissue. That's effectively what
pollution is. So you've probably read a
lot of the papers recently that come out
if you live close to a golf course, you
can get Parkinson's disease. Well, what
is that telling you? time is being
slowed down in different places and that
breaks down the melanin in the wrong in
places in them and that manifests the
disease. Isn't that the same kind of
story that we talked about your kids
cancer? In other words, it destroys the
zip code in that area. And then when you
think about, you know, some of the
pollutants in food, well, if you get
some of those pollutants and food from
from uh chemicals, agricultural
chemicals that you use, what effectively
are you really saying to the end
consumer? Uh, yes, I grew this food. You
have calories that you can sustain
yourself, but some of the stuff you're
going to eat from me is going to change
the refractive index in you. Is that not
the same thing that happens with
supplements? Is it not the same thing
that happens with vaccines? Like when
you put people think it has to be the
chemical. The crazy thing, Logan, all it
takes to to affect us is the app. Like I
just released a blog yesterday
uh about
deination and the big question that came
up in there is about lithium the
electronic structure of lithium atomic
number three. When you look at at the
effect of that it has a very interesting
effect on on ultra weak bofotons. It
creates them in the UV range. Well
lithium is most commonly used in bipolar
disorder. Most people know that. But
what most people don't know is that
people with bipolar disorder, not only
they have a huge timing issue, remember
we have that mania and depression issue,
which is very similar to the discussion
we're having now. Lithium is used
because guess what it does? It actually
helps potentially
reminate some of their brain. What does
the milein do? It protects you from
those cycles that you asked me about
with time in the beginning. when their
sense of timing is off, lithium can
sometimes help. But the therapeutic
index of lithium is so wild, there's no
way to control for that. You know, as a
human goes through the different
environment. See the difference in
Logan's garden, all the sweet potatoes
are in the same spot. But guess what?
When you have bipolar disorder, you can
go from Little Rock to New York City to
Los Angeles in the same day on a plane.
Well, when you use an atom like lithium
that biology normally doesn't use and it
creates a massive amount of ultra weak
UV light, what do you think would be the
effect in three different environments?
In other words, they're not the same.
And we don't have this mindset when
we're dealing with patients. Again, it
comes back to the timing is relative
story. And the reason I think this is a
good topic for you because you see it
all the time. You're an expert in
photosynthesis. But remember, your
patients are grounded in the ground.
They don't move. So guess what that
means?
Photosynthesis is about
timing
that takes away an access of
movement. So guess what that means? that
the quantum timing that happens in the
reaction center always is
controlled. My people, my potatoes, my
onions, my
savages, they cruise all around. So,
it's always hypervariable. So, that
means their timing is so much more
relative than your potato and you can't
think about them the same way. And it
means the light frequencies are
important. The light frequencies that
the mitochondria make are variable. So
when somebody says, "Hey, why shouldn't
we give everybody who has a demolinating
disease
lithium?" Then you begin to understand
the nuance that I'm trying to get to you
right now. Because when you actually see
it, then you go, "Okay, this makes some
sense now. Now I can understand why
Jack's a stickler about the stuff in
supplements, the stuff in in um in jabs,
the stuff that's in processed food.
That's the reason why process food
processed food is very different than
the food that you grow for people in
Arkansas. But I hope through this
discussion, you can now understand why I
told you food in Arkansas is very
different than food in Florida. It's
also very different than food in
California. Because guess what?
That's not the same environment. The
light environment in Arkansas is not
equivalent. So what does that mean? Even
though it looks like a raspberry, are
the raspberries from those three
different places? Or say we put
Guatemala in it, cuz that's where most
raspberries come from
now. Does that light environment create
the same issue? No. I can prove that to
you because if you get an optical
scanner, cut the fruit in half and check
it that the optical scanner from
Guatemala is going to be better better
than Arkansas, better than California,
better than Florida. So then you got to
say to yourself, like you teach your
kids, hey, uh, food is light slowed down
just as Jack says, it's an electromatic
bar
barcode. Shouldn't you be paying more
for the food that's got more time in it?
The answer is yes. But that's not how
the system's set up. In fact, some of
the worst foods are the most
expensive. And it's reversed. And why is
that? Because the people that are in
power, they know this and they don't
teach you like this. That's why this
discussion of timing is really
important. And if you scale it to say
things that people fight about on social
media like say directed energy weapons
or say you know free energy like
everybody knows that there's another
aspect of energy out there that's been
hidden by the department of defense.
Why? Because it's easy to control people
through hydrocarbons. Well, I want you
to think about this. There's a a guy in
Florida, and this is again a story of
time, just so we're clear. It's a guy in
Florida that found a nuclear weapon that
fell off the coast of Florida. He rigged
up um a way to harness the energy from
the nuclear weapon and deliver it to his
house so he didn't have to pay an
electric bill for almost 27 years. Now,
the the people in Florida found this out
and they arrested him. But why am I
telling you this story? Not because the
guy was fighting the
paradigm. The amount of power that's
present that you can harness from atoms
is astounding. Remember, in a nuclear
system that's not uh linked to biology,
it's far easier to extract the
electricity. We know that. We've known
it since the atomic age. And this guy
was harvesting huge amounts like from a
bomb that's literally 50, 60 years old.
He got free energy for 27 years. When
you think about it, you're like, that is
astounding, you know, that that
physically can happen. But isn't that a
story, Logan, about time again? It is.
So, it tells you that even in energy,
timing is different. And when you get to
nuclear fusion or fision, that's where
time really is quick. And what happens
in biology is all the matter that's in
us, the atomic molecular organization in
us is designed to work a specific way.
So that's the reason why a sweet potato
is different than a carrot, why a
carrot's different than a cabbage, but
it's also the reason why your bone is
different than your liver and your liver
is different than your brain.
Absolutely love it.
This this would also explain why like
liberated vitamin A in the cascade of
what's going on there completely
disrupts timing the the oscillation the
harmonization of of everything. Well,
you have to realize that vitamin A, you
need to know what it links to. It links
to its quantum partner which is vitamin
D. And it makes sense because vitamin D
is the hormone, the neuro hormone of the
skin. Vitamin A is the neuro hormone of
the brain. The skin and the brain come
from neuroacttom come from ectoerm in
the embryo. So this is after time has
expanded you've gone through cutting the
umbilical cord. This is the quantum
entanglement of how these two organs
still maintain communication. In other
words, how they maintain timing. So the
thing that humans found the most
interesting about vitamin A is how it
worked in the rodopsin system. And
that's been very well worked out. People
want to look at it, you should. But
remember, rodopsin is also an opposite,
okay? And it's the most ancient one, but
all the other options in the body work
the same way. What they never teach you
in biochemistry is that the emission and
absorption spectra of vitamin A is very
specific. Turns out it's 328 nanometers.
Okay. Now, the irony is that should be
important because what do you know about
the skin and the brain? What's the key
chemical that links most of them? It's
cholesterol. Do you know that
cholesterol has the same type of
absorption emission spectra? So, you
begin to understand now why vitamin A
and vitamin D actually are easily able
to talk optically because the refractive
index is very tightly coupled. See,
everybody thinks it's the genes and it
turns out it's not the genes. All genes
do is set the tissue optics in the
beginning, but then the tissue optics
begin to change. And it turns out when
the opsson releases vitamin A, it
changes Fermat's law in the tissue. And
then you have all these cycles like
Zon's loop that's designed to, you know,
capture the vit vitamin A and bring it
back so that the optin can be recycled.
That's how the system's designed to
work. The question becomes, okay, what
happens if the light that the mammal is
in is no longer sunlight and it's blue
light? Well, then we know the answer
because it's a weak coveent bond that it
constantly the vitamin A is constantly
off. The question you should be as a
savage then okay, how does that scale to
my kid's cancer? Is is that the way this
process actually started? And it turns
out when you have too much of that issue
present, it does cause you to lose time
in that tissue and you start to go,
"Wow, well, what what are the the
collateral effects of this vitamin A,
vitamin D changing the tissue optics for
timing, melatonin gets destroyed and
melatonin is made where? 95% in the
local mitochondria." So see what we just
did? We went from the sun level to the
mitochondria level, right? And you saw
the timing effect in each level, macro
to nano. Now, what's the ado and phento?
The mitochondria without melatonin then
releases massive amounts of ultra weak
biophotons like a bacteria would do, not
like a ukareot would do. So this is the
ado and fento level now releasing from
its projector light that's not as
coherent. And here's the other part to
really tie your mind in a a brain
twister. As light shrinks, what does
physics teach us? The light be gets
stronger. Why? I already taught you that
in many many blogs and many podcasts. I
know you know the answer to this, but
you're probably not putting it together
yet. Uh, and this is where this guy
Scott, uh, when I talked to Alexis, he
didn't understand this, even though he's
an electrical engineer. The light from
your mitochondria at that scale is
stronger than the sun. That explains why
leptin's got a a 220 emission. In other
words, it's not the sun that actually
affects the leptin melano cord badly. It
turns out that it's the light your
mitochondria makes. Well, because we
just said that your UPEs can be changed
by the amount of vitamin A in a tissue.
What happens if you can't make that
light,
bro? That's how you get
fat as an example. And all tied to
timing and the light that you're there
because that stuff changes the ato and
fento. But the first process is the
nano. And the nano is the mitochondria
level. The ato and phento is when those
lights is coming out. It's designed to
target all those biochemicals that have
a barcode in it. That's what an
absorption and emission spectra
functionally is. It's actually the
socket that it plugs into. And if that
signal is not good, doesn't have
fidelity, meaning there's too much
noise, which is exactly what blue light
does, why would you expect that your kid
would not get a Wilms tumor? No, you
would say, okay, because of this
understanding of
time, now I'm beginning to understand a
lot of the other concepts that Jack
teaches. Why? Because, yeah, the
axumatic thing is photons don't
experience time. They experience it once
they interact with tissue because then
they get programmed because of the
emission and absorption spectrum. And
then you begin to go, so this is like a
giant puzzle that you have to put
together. And that's exactly what
decentralized clinicians are designed to
do. I mean, when you listen to the the
last two podcasts I do with Alexis, I
think it's really interesting because
here you got a guy that's focused only
on infrared A, nothing else, trying to
make light bulbs. And you heard what I
said to him in that podcast. I'm like,
"Yeah, you can make all the light bulbs
you want, but light bulbs are not going
to solve anything. You need the sun.
Nothing replaces the sun." And I knew he
didn't like that when I said it, but
it's true. It's axiomatically true. Now,
a guy like you who's a farmer, you're
like, "Yeah, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I know that. I mean,
I don't grow my plants, you know, with
light bulbs from God Zimmerman and nor
would I ever do that. You know, I'm
going to use the best light on the
planet." But the point is is Scott is
making light bulbs for people who've
made a determination that they would
like light inside their house. Well,
guess what? That affects the tissue
optics. It affects the timing. It
affects the heteroplasm. In other words,
I just took you from the macro to the
phento. And what I'm trying to get
people to understand, I have a question
on that.
The Okay. between the the chromatin and
the mitochondria. It almost seems like
you've got two projectors going on in a
cycle, right? And then delayed
illuminescence. You've got the
mitochondria as an absorber and emitter
and this cycle going on and then
mitigated through melanin and and you
got membranes. So to me that would say
like we have a massive you got one more
thing you haven't thought about. What is
the ultimate electromagnetic antenna?
DNA. Remember you asked about histones.
Histones and methylation patterns cover
that. That blocks the electric and
magnetic fields. So guess what? Right
before a cell has to divide, what do
they do? Has to unzip. That means that
the histones and chromatin have to go
bye-bye. Right? When that happens, light
emission is coming from DNA. that tells
everything else in the cell, chill out,
be quiet, because this is the most
important thing that we do as a cell
because we're getting ready to divide.
And then what's the the s uh the I
should say the fidelity of the signal
that allows us to divide? That's the
onion root experiment. It's UV light
that stimulates mitosis.
So then you have to realize the histones
and and methylation pattern go back on
the DNA to retain the light in that
staff. The same thing is true in the
mitochondria. What's the key in
mitochondria? We know that when
mitochondria is sick, they emit more
light. That light is not coherent,
meaning that the spectral frequency is
wider. So it goes say 200 to 800. What
is health? Health is when the light
becomes less intense but shrinks in its
frequency. Why? Because of the point
that I'm trying to make to you that I
tried to make to to Zimmerman but he
didn't get. Light at small scales is
more powerful when it's coherent. And
what the physicists know about the
light, they call that laser light.
So
realize that when you look at Roland
Van's Wick's book and you talk to a guy
like say Ray Peat which I did and I
tried to explain to him what the inverse
square law means. You know how people
understand the inverse square law the
way you do as a farmer. That light is 93
million miles away. Okay. It comes to my
plants and it gets dissipated. That
light is got massive spectral frequency.
It's got its own intensity, but what you
don't realize is light at the phento
level is far more powerful. It doesn't
have to have a ton of
photons because the the length of time
traveling at the speed of light, the
fidelity of the signal is off the
chain. It's so powerful because you
can't mess with it. And the problem is
what controls that
relationship the atomic molecular
organization in the cell. That is the
key to understanding why ultra weak
biophotons can have less
intensity have a narrowed frequency but
re be really big. Why is this important
for you to understand? It's exact
problem that lithium presents to people
with bipolar disorder because that atom
makes unbelievable amount of ultra weak
UV biopotons between 200 and 300
nanometers. Well, guess what? If you're
making that strong of light at that
level, what happens if the optical
density of the tissues around it are
built for like a house in 1920s, but
you're hooking it up to a nuclear power
plant? Blows it up. Do you understand?
That's the reason why lithium has a very
low therapeutic index and that's why you
have to be careful when you use it. Like
one of the things that I just wrote in
my current blog um about the different
types of lithium out there lithium
oritate and some of the other ones I
have found when I tried to use lithium
oritate in certain neurodeenerative
conditions I actually made the patients
worse. Now remember, I'm doing this to
try to help them reminonate. That the
most serious
disease to try to get remination back is
ALS. Why? Because that's a a situation
kind of like your son. You get a tumor,
you're going to die. Okay? That's the
way the doctor thinks about it. That's
the way they're taught to think about in
medical school. So obviously doctors
when a patient comes with his family and
they get the diagnosis of ALS you want
to try to do everything you possibly can
just like when you went to see the
oncologist and the doctors with your son
the same mindset existed the problem is
when you do stuff like this and you give
it to them and you see that they get
worse what did you just do not only do
you stop because you're using the
precaution principle but then it's
incumbent upon you as a decentralized
clinician why would something that I
know helps reminisent
actually harm somebody who's deinated?
That's a very very different question.
And then when you begin to realize that
you never get to the answer because the
light that comes from the sun on your
skin is different than the light that's
made at the phento level coming out. It
turns out that is the key. And if the
surrounding tissue can't handle that
ultra weak uh light because it's at such
small scale, remember we're talking
about
minus15th scales. That light is
incredible. And if the optical density
doesn't marry to it, you can French fry,
you know, the upper motor neuron or the
lower motor neuron. And when you have
that mindset, you go, okay, I I I got
it. this is not something that we need
to do. Now, is do I hold the same thing
true with other chemicals? So, I'll I'll
tell you I haven't released this blog
yet, but I probably will. It'll be
demolination number five, but I'll give
you an early preview of it. Um, lithium
is also interesting when you think about
aspirin, metaphorin, minycycling. Why?
If you open up a PDR book, you'll notice
that there's really no biochemistry that
explains how these work. So, what's the
other interesting thing about drugs that
don't have really a good biochemical
story? It tells me as the decentralized
clinician, the reason that biochemistry
or and pharma uh pharmacy and
pharmacopia doesn't understand it, it's
because the mechanism is really
biohysical. And guess what? We're not
measuring the biohysical. What did I
just tell you about lithium? Because it
have a has a 1s
2p2 electronic structure. When light
interacts with it, it creates massive
amount of ultra weak bofotons. So when
you know that you're like okay creating
UV light like in a child that system is
built for it. Why? Because it's 80%
water. But what happens when you're 55
and 60 you got ALS and you may be 30%
water.
Do you understand now why this is a big
deal? Because what I'm trying to get you
to understand is that would be like,
"Hey, Jack, I'm going to put Desert
Light on my sweet potato that has no
water." You know what that's going to do
as a farmer. What I'm asking you to do
is think about your expertise in
vegetables and realize that me and you
are in the same game. But the way in
which I think about it is radically
different because I'm understanding as
scale changes it changes timing and it
changes light. And that was the most
frustrating thing I think talking to
Zimmerman because he didn't understand
he was thinking about light at the
scales that the sun is at. Okay, that's
that's light at the biggest you know
scales. Light gets weaker at those
scales. light becomes uber strong at the
smallest scales of light light I should
say life and it turns out that's the
part of the
story that I don't think any of the
people in the quantum space have gotten
to yet they really don't understand
Uncle Jack yet they they have all
focused in on what Zimmerman's focused
in
on focused in on that as well because
that's how you grow your food what I'm
saying to do is the question that you
brought up in the beginning of this
podcast. It's a spectacular one because
what I'm asking you to do is to put
yourself in the state of a soybean, a a
sweet potato or a cabbage and understand
how it uses
light differently to get what it does.
And then when you begin to see that,
then you say, "So this is the reason why
Jack would have me take my son to a
place like El Salvador, but not my other
kids because they don't need that signal
because his optical density is off." And
Jack knows that. And now I understand
he's trying to reverse time, you know,
in where that tissue is. And he's using
it because the prescription is really at
the phento and nano, not at the macro.
Like when you're healthy, the macro runs
most of the system. But when your
hetereropplasm is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dude. Then it
becomes more what the projector, the
mitochondria is making. And then what's
proximal to the mitochondria? I said
this in the Sabine Hazen and Alexis
podcast. what's proximal to the the
projector, you know, turns out it's the
physics that's in the cell. That's
actually what determines what the uppes
are going to be. And this is the reason
why when I said to Dr. Sabine that when
you think about the the inner lining of
the the intestine, that's the screen of
the movie, the mitochondria is making
the light. What the discussion you and I
are having now is what's behind the
projector. Normally in a movie theater
in Arkansas, you're going to say, "Well,
it's a plug that goes into the AC power
grid." What am I telling you? That plug
is actually how the sun interacts with
the AMO physics to give you the light
show. And when you really scale it to
the macro, you can go out and look at
say a 5G antenna somewhere in Arkansas
and you see all those wires coming up
and then you see all those arrays on the
top of it. that's making signals so that
you can communicate. We know that the
wires are carrying electricity from the
AC power grid. But what's effectively
happening here? You're turning
electricity into light. That's exactly
what semiconductors do. So the idea that
I'm trying to get you to understand is
that the physics in a cell actually are
are the basics of how semiconduction
works in us. That gets you straight to
Becker's work. So what am I doing for
you? I'm taking you from the sun level
all the way down to like the minus 20
minus 21 level. Then you're going to
minus 15, minus3, then the nano level.
Like you guys are just beginning to get
to the nano level, but you ain't where
I'm, dude. I'm even way past minus 20
now. I'm talking about how
nutrinos change atoms. Like it's the
ultimate alchemy that something a
particle that doesn't even interact can
change, you know, argon into chlorine.
Uh that's, you know, King Lear kind of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You know, you don't think that can
happen. Do I think that that may be a
possibility in in what life is capable
of doing? Maybe. I'm not I haven't
worked out the physics yet. But this is
the interesting thing about physics when
you talk about timing.
The laws of physics don't say no. If
they don't say no, that means nature's
had a 3.8 billion year step on us.
Remember, we're just using carbon to do
semiconduction. Now, that's not
hydrated. Like, we're built with
hydrated carbon. Like, if you drop your
iPhone in the toilet today, it ain't
going to work. But guess what? When you
go in the toilet, you work perfectly
fine. And the point I'm trying to make
to people is I want you to be uber
curious about this science because when
you ask a question that you asked about
time, I want you to think about where
we've
gone in like the last hour like a such a
simple little thing and then when you
parse it out and dissect it, you go,
"Wow, I haven't really thought about
this, you know, the way that I need to
think about it." And then when you think
about like what you do in your life,
which is why I told you the last podcast
we did that I think you you talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
about yourself too much. You're a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] farmer. Dude, you should be more
of a light expert than a dermatologist
cuz I guarantee you the dermatologists
are idiots compared to you. And not only
that, you have really really good pupils
in sweet potatoes and soybeans. Like
dermatologists don't. They have people
that that move around and do all kinds
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they're not supposed to be
doing.
And then you have the dermatologist that
has a centralized framework that doesn't
even know that time is relative, doesn't
understand that photons don't experience
time, and they're supposed to be the
light experts. This is the reason why
their literature is is filled with
garbage.
Well, one thing I I want to get your
your take on because I think it's
absolutely fascinating when you take
into what you said about the
mitochondria in a a sickened state
produces more light. We talk about maybe
uh something like SP40 getting in DNA
and darken it like it it blackens out
part of it. We go to that double
projector idea or connotation and then
we throw in say dutarium in the
cytoplasm that gets electromagnetically
squeezed and produces light. So on one
hand we have too much light and on the
other hand it's not enough. Is is that a
decent way to say because that to me
sounds like a cancer uh bomb. Yeah. Well
I mean I I'm okay with you thinking
about like this. This is what I would
tell you. I want you to learn and I've
taught people this in the blogs. The the
science that's easiest to understand in
my opinion is Shannon's theorem. Shannon
is a guy who's the ba he's the basis of
information theory. And basically what
he came up with was in a a mathematical
description of entropy. It almost looks
exactly like Boltzman in thermodynamics.
The equation is the same. So why is this
important? So you start to go that means
that energy and information seem to be
equivalent. In other words, we have E=
MC². We know that mass and energy are
that way. I'm going to tell you that
there's a an equivalency between
information and energy too. And that's
going to be the domain of uh biopysics
probably in the next hundred years. When
we figure out truly what that
determination is, that's when the
needle's really going to move for people
in biology. Okay, so here's what
Shannon's theorem says, and you have to
remember he came up with this idea. How
did he get the idea? He worked for Bell
Labs and he looked at all the wires.
You've seen the old wires that the
operators used to put in. He's like,
"This is absolute chaos." He goes, "I
have to figure out how does this signal
to noise ratio work." So he worked it
out for information, came up with the
thing, and from there we got rid of all
that stuff and he figured out what makes
the signal to the noise ratio important.
Turns out that the the
electromagnetic footprint has to be
unusual for a message to be heard. So I
want you to think about this. Let's talk
about one aspect of timing that I know
you've done your homework on.
What is the color of light that
circadian rhythm works on? Blue light.
You want to know something else that's
interesting about blue? It's extremely
rare in nature. It's not used very many
places. This is the reason why evolution
or God, whoever you want to, you know,
ascribed to, picked blue light to run
the SCN and the habenial nucleus. So
remember, circadian biology is one level
of timing. Then when you think about
this and you think about mitosis because
you know as a farmer mitosis is really
important to make a sweet potato that's
big or
soybeans frequently and same thing with
children. If you don't have mitosis you
don't have a kid. But we know from the
onion root experiment that Gerwitch told
us that the miogenic radiation is UV
specifically. Then we go to Fritz Pop's
work and Fritz Pop said anything that
messes with 380 nmter light seems to
cause cancer. Then you start to go, well
380 nmter light is kind of unusual, too.
So then you start to ask yourself, well,
what has the absorption emission spectra
in cells that's linked to that? Well, I
always show that that picture of what
380 nanometer light links to. It's to
mTor. What is mTor? MTOR controls all of
the
metabolism in everything. That includes
potatoes, soybeans, and mammals. There's
not a thing on this planet that doesn't
pay attention to that. So, in other
words, what does Shannon tell us? Things
in biology that are
unusual, pay attention. So, what else is
unusual in us? cytochrome one right NAD
NAD positive what what does David
Sinclair's paper from 2013 tell us when
NAD positive can't be recycled people
age faster well that should be important
for your kids and will tumor so then you
ask the question okay what makes
cytochrome one unusual turns out it's
got a 340 nanometer absorption spectrum
so what does that mean electrons from
the food that you grow in Arkansas only
can enter the mitochondria at that level
nothing else can everything else got to
funnel through cytochrome 2. What is
cytochrome 2?
FAD H2. That's a flavin. That's blue.
It's a blue detector. So, you start
going, this kind of interesting there.
There's a story here and it's a story
that's not developed in alipathic
medicine. It's a story that's not
developed in functional medicine. It is
the story that I am developing in
decentralized medicine. Why? Because to
understand truly how biology works, you
have to understand what increases the
signal and what increases the noise. And
this goes back to your original
question. When you have a mitochondria
that makes a lot of light, that's a lot
more noise. When you have a mitochondria
that's extremely focused on specific
frequencies, even though there's not a
lot of them, the signal ratio goes
through the roof. And when you shrink it
at scale, that makes it even more
unusual.
That is the idea, the the 100,000 foot
idea that I want you to think about.
Now, when you think about signal to
noise ratio, when you think about
information entropy, remember, we're not
talking about energy. Now, we're talking
about the information that makes your
child normal. The information that makes
your sweet potatoes normal. Turns out
that the signal has to be more than the
noise. What is sickness? More noise,
less signal. What changes that? The
optical density, the refraction in a
tissue. That
determines how photons begin to
experience light. And that tells you
what time is. That explains heteroplasm.
I think this has been absolutely epic.
Um, I I am so excited to keep parsing it
out and trying to understand all the
different levels and just again I I
can't thank you enough uh for the impact
you've made on my life and uh allowed me
to, you know, help my baby and and do my
part in uh in the world. So, thank you.
No problem.