Thank you to the Scientific and Medical Network
and to the Institute of the New Ethics Sciences, which have supported me and my work.
No, I've had the sort of encouragement of both of these organizations
practically since the first publication of my book in 1981.
And I'm immensely grateful for that because as David
mentioned, there's been quite a lot of hostility, many attacks.
But it's been enormously reassuring and in fact, essential to feel that I have friends as well.
And the two organizations that have been the rocks on which I've been able to rest and build
foundations are institute genetic sciences and the Sun if I can medical network.
So it's very appropriate that this event is hosted by both of them.
Well, first of all, I want to say something about what
the idea of morphic resonance is for those of you who are not familiar with it.
So just a very brief summary.
It basically is the idea there's a memory inherent in nature.
The so-called laws of nature are more like habits.
Each species has a kind of collective memory.
Giraffes, hedgehogs, hummingbirds, each hummingbird
species, each species of plant, foxgloves,
roses.
Each species has a collective memory.
And then each variety within the species has a kind of collective memory as well.
And each individual contributes to that collective memory and draws upon it.
So the idea of the collective unconscious of young
is just the human aspect of this much more general hypothesis
of collective memory.
And perhaps the most radical aspect of this hypothesis, and certainly one of the most controversial
is the idea that our own memories don't depend, as usually assumed on
stored memory traces inside our brains, but rather depend on morphic resonance from our past.
The idea of morphic resonance is essentially based on similarity.
Similar patterns of vibratory activity in self-organizing systems,
influence subsequent similar systems across space and time
resonance works on the basis of similarity.
It's the automatic similarity selection system.
So what I'm suggesting is that morphic resonance
works from the past to the present across space and time.
I'm not saying it works independently of space and time, because that would mean work from the future as well as the past.
I think there are influences from the future, but they're much rarer than those from the past.
And morphic resonance is a hypothesis about memory, principle in nature.
So it's from the past, but it's across space and time.
And because we are most similar to ourselves in the past,
that's why we resonate
specifically with ourselves in the past more than any other human or any other organism.
And that's the basis I suggest of our memory.
Well, this very brief in a nutshell, summary of this hypothesis.
I first thought of this idea, at least in Clone, in 1973.
I was the fellow college Cambridge.
I was also a research fellow of the Royal Society, and I was working on the development of plants.
How do plants form their leaves, flowers, their stems, their roots and
I was working on the hormone auxin endo acetic acid,
and I discovered that auxin this hormone is made by dying cells.
It's a breakdown product of tryptophan, which is one of the amino acids in proteins.
And when cells die, the proteins are hydrochloric and they're broken down.
And then the amino acids released by the hydrolysis of proteins are further broken down.
And one of the byproducts of this process is auxin.
I discovered it was made by
dying cells in Kline's wood cells in particular.
I published this hypothesis, but it didn't really catch on because most people thought
something as important as a hormone must be synthesized by complex biochemical pathways.
However, 50 years later, it turns out that all these attempts to explain it in
terms of complex pathways have failed and the dying cell hypothesis has recently risen.
Before again, I published a paper on it just a month ago
in the Journal of Experimental Botany and called the production of oxygen by dying cells.
You can see it on my website and I also worked in Cambridge on the way in which oxygen is transport
heated in a polar direction from the leaf tips towards the roots, if any moves in one direction
and what's called the polar auction transport system.
And this is a foundational study.
It's now in all the botanical textbooks.
It's a key feature
of the way oxygen works and plants develop.
Well, this is what I was working on
and it became clear that this hypothesis hypotheses were really victims of their own success.
They explain oxygen production and explain auxin movement,
but they explain it in all plants, in sons, in pine trees, in palms,
in bamboos, in roses, in foxgloves, in cabbages.
And what's more, they explain it in the petals
of the same plant and the leaves of the same plant.
Hence, this can't explain why they're different,
why the petals in the daffodil and the cup and the corona are different from each other.
Why? The leaf shapes of all the different species are different.
You need some other explanation,
and I got interested in the idea of more genetic fields
from shaping fields like invisible molds or blueprints for developing systems,
an idea that had been proposed first in 1921 by Alexander Gavage in Russia.
And the idea of more genetic fields seemed to me the best way forward to understand form.
But then there was the question of how how are these fields inherited?
Because genes don't explain form that.
Explain the inheritance of proteins and the control of of protein synthesis.
There had to be some other way they could be inherited.
And I was completely stuck for about two years.
I just couldn't understand how these fields could work because they were clearly inherited.
Do historical biology is historical.
It has history built into it.
So it's not just a reflection of platonic ideal forms.
The whole point of evolution is that it's historical.
So I couldn't understand how this worked until
a great new insight came to me.
Basically the idea of morphic resonance and it came through reading
a book of Philosophy by Henry Bergson, the French philosopher.
I read his book Matter and Memory not because of science, but because I was interested
in Marcel Proust, the great novelist who'd been influenced by Bergson.
And so I was reading it for literary reasons.
But what Bergson shows there is that memory is probably not stored in the brain
and as a form of causation that works directly across time.
Now, it had never crossed my mind before that there could be a causation that worked, as it were, at a distance in time.
And as soon as I realized that could be a form of causation, working across gaps in time,
then the idea of the inheritance of morphic genetic fields by a new kind of causation
working across time suddenly made sense of huge amounts of biology.
Then I tried to think
how it might work and the idea of morphic resonance popped into my mind.
I was in a state of extreme excitement for days, weeks,
because more and more seemed to become clear.
It didn't impress my colleagues in the biochemistry department at Cambridge
who, when I explained it to them, they were completely baffled by what
I was trying to explain.
So it didn't go over terribly well in the biochemistry department tearoom.
So we went over a little bit better on the high table in Clare College, where some historians and philosophers
were quite intrigued by the idea and quite supportive and helpful.
But it soon became clear to me that
if I published this, I'd have to think it through in much more detail.
The biochemistry department in Cambridge wasn't the right place to do that.
Everybody was busy working out enzyme mechanisms and structure of nucleic acids and so on.
It just wasn't the right place for me.
I wanted to work holistically with clients and I'd been to India.
I went there first in 1968 and the idea of working
in agriculture in India suddenly became enormously appealing.
I could work holistically.
Agriculture was about holistic studies.
You have to study whole plants in real fields with real weather and real diseases
and farmers who work under really economic conditions.
And I also wanted to do something useful.
And as it happened at that time, a new international institute was being set up in India,
the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics at present.
And I was appointed principal plant physiologist.
It was a very high prestige international institute and
it gave me a whole team to work with a lab fields on an experimental farm.
I could do experiments all over India, and indeed I did some in the Middle East as well.
I was working on chickpeas and pigeon peas.
I was running experiments in the back valley in Lebanon, for example.
We had to abandon those because of machine gun damage, a problem we didn't encounter anywhere else.
But the the working in it was
wonderful.
I greatly enjoyed it and being in India was wonderful
and it gave me the space to go on thinking about morphic resonance.
And I did this for another five years or so until I felt ready to write a book about it to bring it together.
I was helped when I was living in Hyderabad, where A.S.
is by friendship with Helen Sperber, a great British biologist of a previous generation
who had gone out to India with her husband, JP, as Haldane
had died in India, but she'd inherited his library.
And so a lot of the books I needed I could get from Haldane's library,
at least those that hadn't been eaten by termites or gnawed by her jackal, she had a pet jackal.
And so I got to the point where I was ready to
write a book about this.
And at that stage I met Father Bede Griffiths, who lived in an ashram in Tamil Nadu in South India.
He invited me to go and live in his ashram, a Benedictine ashram, and write my book, which I did.
And I lived in total there for about two years.
So I just had a palm thatched hut under a palm tree
on the bank of the Sacred River Cauvery
and the ashram had quite a good library.
Of course not scientific.
I had to get books posted from the British Council library in Bombay
for from the scientific work or from friends in England.
But it was a perfect time
for me to think about this too, to write and to write this book.
I then went back to England and with the book,
which was called Towards the New Science of Life and it was
I submitted it to publishers and it was rejected by 12 different publishers, one after another.
They just they sent it to
scientific friends or colleagues to these publishers who were literary figures.
And at that time, you had any publishers who knew anything about science, and their colleagues told me
it would be controversial.
So they backed off until I was the only publisher I actually knew personally
and knew Blond, who had a publishing firm called Plant and Briggs.
And Antony said, Oh, I'd love to do the book, RUPERT.
And then here's the contract he produced on a few days later and said, Sign here.
And I said, Shouldn't I read it first?
Is there no formalities?
So after dinner and lots of wine, I signed this contract
signing over the world rights to this book for nothing to to blond.
He later went bankrupt and I got the rights back, fortunately.
But one of his inputs, apart from the fact
he published it, for which I is very grateful, was to change the titles.
He said, no one reads books called Towards.
He said, Just cross it out.
A New Science of life notable doesn't that sounds a little bit immodest doesn't matter.
So trust me old boy he said I know about titles.
He said I told Schumacher to call his book Small is Beautiful.
It worked, he said. So I know. Okay.
So anyway, Blond published the book and came out
with a wonderful launch party by a friend of mine, now deceased.
Who? That's Linda Dufresne on Midsummer's Day Out the summer solstice, June the 21st, 1981.
And to start with, things went swimmingly well.
There was a feature in New Scientist Colin Couch was immensely supportive and helpful.
The Guardian wrote editorials that were serious discussion
and many scientific journals and magazines.
But then three months later came this Hammer Blow editorial on the front page
of Nature of the leading international scientific journal called A Book for Burning.
And I was denounced by the editor of Nature, Sir John Maddox, for heresy.
And his aim was to run me out of tongue to make sure I'd never get to got a job again or a grant in the scientific world.
And he succeeded.
I couldn't I was unemployable from then on, and
I became extremely dangerous to know.
So magic succeeded. But
it did mean in terms of research on this hypothesis,
I couldn't do it in regular universities because it was just too controversial.
However, a new doors opened and when my book was published in America
in 1982 by Jeremy Torture in Los Angeles, a whole new world opened up California I'd never been before.
I was invited by Stan Graff to teach in his program at
In the Union Societies in Los Angeles
and San Francisco invited me to give talks, and I discovered a whole network of union
analysts and people influenced by Jung, who were very well disposed towards my hypothesis.
The folks at Claremont College, the Process Philosophy
Group at Claremont College in California
who studied the philosophy of Whitehead were extremely sympathetic and helpful.
I came to know David Boehm and Krishnamurti.
We did dialogs together and as David mentioned, and David Boehm became
enormous help and support because from his way
of thinking about quantum theory, morphic resonance made perfect sense.
The the idea that things could be connected through what he called the implicate order at a distance in time and space
worked very well with his interpretation of quantum theory.
I came to know other quantum theorists and in Britain and Germany
and elsewhere in in America and in Europe.
And then New Scientist helped
further in 1982, a New Scientist ran an international competition for ideas
for testing, morphic resonance with a prize, a cash prize
that led to a really creative set of ideas for tests.
And they had to be simple tests because there was no funding for this research at the time.
And there's never been very much I mean, there's been a trickle of funding,
but nothing on the scale of regular science.
And so it was the idea of countless, simple, inexpensive tests,
and it was a very productive international brainstorming.
And the winners were announced and it really helped kickstart a new phase of research.
Then in 1982, also Robert Alan Schwarz of the Tarrytown Center
in New York, upstate New York, offered
a Tarrytown prize for the testing of morphic resonance
and a $10,000 prize for the best test.
He mentioned this to me.
We were on the way to on the way to a party, a given by Michael Murphy, who founded the Aspen Institute.
And I said, Bob, that would be a tremendous idea.
And and when we arrived, I told Michael Murphy about it,
Bob Schwartz's offer of this prize.
And Michael Murphy immediately got in class and banged it with a spoon called Sunset folks.
He said, Robert Bob Schwartz has just offered this $10,000 prize
for a test of morphic resonance, and they were great cheers.
And Schwartz was the hero of the evening.
And I said to Michael afterwards, I asked him why did you announce it so quick?
And just told you, you said, I didn't want Bob to go back on the idea.
He said I thought I'd hold him to it and indeed it did hold him to it.
And there were there was a $10,000 prize.
There was some very, very good entries.
The prize was won by Gary Schwartz, who many of you will know as a consciousness researcher who was at that time
a professor of psychology at Yale who did an ingenious test involving Hebrew words. And
then in 1987,
Institute of Noetic Sciences launched a contest for student projects to test morphic resonance.
The results were announced in 1991, and again there was a great creative
outpouring of projects, and the prize first prize was won by Monika
England, who was an undergraduate in psychology at Nottingham University
in Britain, who did a test with crossword puzzles.
She got the Evening Standard crossword puzzle before it was published in the London Evening Standard
and tested people in Nottingham where you couldn't get the Evening Standard, a London paper.
And in those days nothing was unknown.
And she found, as predicted by morphic resonance, the crossword puzzle became easier to solve
when tens of thousands of people had done it in London than it was the day before.
Before all these people had done it, as compared with a controlled crossword.
So that was a very helpful intervention of the Institute of Ethics.
Science is sponsoring this contest.
It then turned out that this area could be tested in a number of other realms.
I hadn't initially thought of all these possible tests, and what I was concentrating on was trying to test the hypothesis.
Empirically, I'm an experimental scientist and I'm the
idea of testing it
experimentally was what preoccupied me and still does.
I was giving a seminar in the chemistry department at the University of Vermont
when one of the professors raised the possibility that if morphic resonance is true,
if it really happens, then the melting points of chemical compounds
should increase over time because morphic resonance should make the crystal structure more stable.
And if it's more stable, it should be harder to disrupt it.
And how you disrupted his by heating them up.
And if it's hard to disrupt, you should be able to heat them to a high temperature before they melted.
So this this idea led to the prediction that by morphic resonance, the melting points of new compounds should rise.
Those that have been run for thousands of years that crystallized naturally,
like salt crystals or asparagus seen on the leaves of plants,
wouldn't have
this effect because they've already had a backlog of millions of crystals.
You wouldn't notice any difference against that background.
But new compounds should show rise in melting points.
So this was an outrageous prediction because melting points are called physical constants.
So you look them up in handbooks of physical constants.
So so on the cover that the constants.
And so I started looking at melting points and I found actually they seem to go up for new compounds.
I later worked with a retired chemist in British Columbia class
and tasked to do much more exhaustive survey than I had done and the results in the first slide
show the melting points of a
compounds you see at the black line.
In the middle is the melting point given in the oldest reports
that he could find in chemical literature.
Then you see the changes over time, over the next few decades
of melting points and you see the great majority of them have gone up.
There's a few that went down that could have been erased.
I mean, you would expect some errors.
If they are random errors, you'd expect them to go up and down more or less equally.
And probably the ones that seem to go down might have been errors or measuring different versions
of the compound like hydrates as opposed to anhydrous crystals, something like that.
But as you say, the great majority went up and many of them went up.
As you see, five degrees, ten, 20, 30, 40, something went up 20, ten, 20, 30 or 40 degrees centigrade.
We're not talking fractions of a degree here.
I then did a series of studies of compounds
that crystallize in nature compared with similar compounds that are human made.
The next slide shows the
melting point
of the compounds sanitation which occurs in willow bark.
And between 1902 and 1996, it was virtually no change in its melting point.
If we look at the next slide, we see aspirin first synthesized in the 19th century
as a synthetic derivative of salicylic acid.
And I didn't get the records in the 1890s, but between 1914 to 1996,
the melting point had gone up by eight degrees centigrade and pressing back further.
I'm sure we'd find a bigger increase.
The next comparison shows cocaine, which occurs in coca, leaves the coke.
The plant and the natural form that crystallizes in coca leaves when they're dried
hasn't shown any change in Melting Point over the 20th century, but cocaine hydrochloride the next one,
which is produced
by extracting coca leaves with hydrochloric acid, the cocaine of commerce
shows a considerable increase
from 184 296, 12 degrees
centigrade or centigrade over the 20th century.
So here we see
a series of data from chemicals, and it should be possible to do much more rigorous experiments
with chemicals, looking at melting points
for looking for morphic resonance effects,
I've tried to persuade chemists to do this.
The closest I got was a shell industrial chemical laboratory here in Britain.
But every time I've managed to persuade some chemists that it might be worth doing,
it comes before the head of the lab or some committee or other.
And then people say it is enormously controversial.
Well, open a can of worms.
We don't want it opened in our laboratory and then I get this apologetic email has happened over and over again
from the person I've been talking to, saying, sorry, my boss has said, we just can't do this.
And people are frightened and
they should wouldn't be told because anything to do some of these experiments,
the barrier is not financial for some of these tests, but psychological and sociological.
Well, now
the the hypothesis can be tested in the realm of biology.
I mentioned in my books and tests done with fruit flies by May one hope the next slide
shows
a normal fruit fly at the top
and a four winged fruit fly at the bottom, which can come about as a result of mutation.
It's called a homoerotic mutant, where one organ is changed to another that alters the balancing organs.
They changed into an extra pair of wings
that can happen as a result of a genetic mutation that switches the development from whole test wings.
I would say the morphing genetic field of the whole is switched.
Its light goes on to an alternative like flipping a channel on the TV set.
Then the morphed genetic field of the wings takes over.
Now you can also produce this four wing fly by exposing the eggs of fruit flies to ether.
Soon after they're blade.
This doesn't cause genetic changes, but if it changes the development,
it's a bit like thalidomide causing abnormal babies to develop.
It's not a question of genetic change, but developmental disturbance. No
experiments on this were done by May one.
Who and her colleagues at the Open University in England, and the next slide shows what they found.
And in the first generation, which used to the extreme left
hand corner, about 2% of the flies developed four wings in response
to ether fumes, exposing the eggs, being exposed to ether fumes.
In the next generation it was about 6% and it went on.
After 11 generations.
It was over 30%.
If you stopped exposing them to ether,
the dotted line showed that the percentage of falling flies fell off, but it continued.
They continued to produce falling flies for quite a few generations, five generations or more.
They were still producing some fall wing flies.
This might now be called an epigenetic effect.
Something is it changed the expression of the genes.
But I think it's a mixture of morphic resonance and epigenetic effects.
And the next slide
shows what you
would expect the top box you see the untreated flies,
then they're treated with ether, and the shaded boxes are ones which have been treated with ether.
And normally in those experiments she bred from the ones treated with ether.
So you don't know whether there's been an inheritable change through the inheritance,
through acquired characters, which has now been rebranded to epigenetic inheritance,
or whether it's morphic resonance.
The lower line shares how you do the experiments and distinguish them.
In each generation you breed from flies that haven't been exposed to ether.
Then some of them are exposed to weeks and you see how many develop for wings.
And according to morphic resonance, the proportion developing for wings
should increase, even though the ancestors have never been exposed to ether.
And in the next slide
we show what
you see, what happens, who actually did an experiment like that?
And in the first generation, 2%
were changed.
And then when she came back into the second experiment,
the first generation of the second experiment of untreated flies, it was 10%.
The second generation it was 6% originally.
But when she did the experiment again, after a lot of flies had undergone this change, it was nearly 20%.
That, I think, is a morphic resonance effect as opposed to an epigenetic
effect. Now,
what are the predictions of this hypothesis is that if you train rats
to learn a new trick in one place, rats all around the world should learn it quicker.
There's already evidence to this.
I was challenged by a skeptical
British scientist, Stephen Rose, at the Open University to test
what he called my seemingly absurd hypothesis in his laboratory under his control.
Some of my friends said you'd be foolish to let Rose who such an extremely intemperate
and and also hostile critic to be in charge of this research.
But I thought, okay, well, no one else has offered me a chance to test it.
So, you know, I'll take what I offered.
And so I accepted his challenge.
We did an experiment with tailed chicks.
They were
exposed to yellow and red light, and they made six.
Soon after, they pecked at it.
And that meant thereafter they no longer pecked yellow lights.
But they there was a control stimulus that they went on pecking at.
My prediction was that relative to the control generation after generation, fresh batches of chicks
should show more hesitancy, a greater latency before cracking at the bead
and the results in the next slide
showed
there was exactly that effect.
The latency increased over these generations
as if they weren't descended from the previous chips, which are still fresh back.
This was a significant effect.
Well, Rose immediately denounced this result as being
an artifact of some kind and said it couldn't possibly be morphic resonance.
But the fact is, it showed the effect and it worked as predicted.
And that made it very clear to me if I needed further evidence that people who are opposed to
something don't just say when you present them with the evidence in this case from this.
And they don't say, okay, yes,
it really is happening.
As I say, there's something terribly wrong with this evidence and anyway, he did say that and I then refuted what he said.
And and the dispute took place in scientific journals.
And you can read about it if you're interested in the details.
I also did a series of tests on television, and the next slide shows a puzzle picture
and oh, sorry, did I mention just one further slide here?
This shows the rise in IQ average IQ over a generation
from 1918 to 1989, so-called Flynn effect.
I predicted that there would be an average average rise
in average IQ, not because people are getting smarter,
but because the tests are getting easier, because so many have done them.
And this effect is now well known.
And this shows the effect of 3% rise in the US IQ.
No evidence that people have got 30% smarter.
The tests have just come off easier to do
and the next slide shows a puzzle picture.
And I did a series of experiments on British television with pencil pictures.
This puzzle picture those are hidden, has a hidden image.
And once you've seen the answer, you just get it.
And the idea was when people have been shown the answer to a puzzle picture on British
television, do people in Germany and elsewhere in Europe
recognize it more easily compared to the control puzzle picture
and the.
Let me show the answer no. And
it's a cowboy on a horse.
If if we now go back to the initial image, you should get it straight away.
It's a very rapid form of learning.
And it turns out people did get it did get easier for people
to recognize the puzzle picture in Germany after people had been shown it in Britain.
Now the
research has been going on in a variety of ways, which sheds further light on morphic resonance.
And one of these experiments was done by a French scientist, Miroslav Hill, who wasn't looking for morphic resonance effects,
but was looking at the ability of cells grown in tissue culture and mammalian cell walls
to respond to toxins to overcome toxic stresses or heat stresses.
And the next slide shows what he did in his experiments.
And in each experiment he sub cultured cells and put some of them into the normal medium.
We toxin.
The white circles represent each generation of the cells with some cultured, but some of them were put in a toxic medium.
And after perfusion durations, the cells in the toxic medium began to thrive.
They began to survive and divide and grow.
And after that, all the cells in the toxic medium or these, many of them were able to survive,
whereas previously they hadn't.
Now his explanation, which in the next slide we see,
was that
the top diagram represents Hill's explanation that somehow the cells that have developed the resistance
infra inside the untreated cells so that when they were treated in the next generation they had this resistance.
But he had to postulate that they did this through some kind of quantum entanglement.
There was no physical contact for which there's no evidence in cellular cultures.
My interpretation, you see below is that the ones who develop resistance could pass this on by morphic resonance.
The dotted lines, the curved dotted lines at the top
would mean that subsequent cells exposed to this toxin
would be able to resist it better because the morphic resonance from previous ones exposed to the toxin.
Now this type of experiment should be relatively easy to carry out with microbes,
with yeasts, always cells in tissue culture.
And if any of you have labs where you're able to do this, do please get in touch with me.
You can contact me through my website because this would be a very productive way of testing for morphic resonance in biology.
It just requires someone who's open minded with a lab and time to do this.
The actual cost of materials is very small.
Okay, well, no.
In the new edition of A New Science of Life, it's now in its third edition.
I outlined ten further tests for morphic.
One of them is in the realm of low temperature physics, Bose-Einstein condensates
where matter behaves strangely it becomes superconductive superfluid.
There's no electrical resistance.
The whole system behaves as a single quantum particle, even though it's made of millions of atoms.
And this only happens at low temperatures.
So the background temperature of the universe is 2.7 degrees above absolute zero.
In low temperature physics times, people can get down to 4.1 degrees above absolute zero
or even less, and anything that's done at that temperature would be new in the history of the universe,
because unless they're a high temperature, very low temperature physics labs on other planets,
these could happen for the first time.
And therefore, one could do morphic resonance experiments in low temperature physics labs.
If a Bose-Einstein condensate takes a certain amount of time to appear,
if you keep making it to same compound at the same temperature, it should appear more quickly as time goes on.
And you have it built up anyway.
There are ten new tests I put forward in a new science of life in the appendix.
And if you're interested, take a look.
And if you have a lab and these are tests in physics, chemistry, biology, psychology
and analog computing, do please get in touch.
Because what I keep most keenly want is for these tests to happen.
Now, there's also been advances
in the study of vibratory systems, and the next slide
shows some results from some experiments
I did with my son Mellon, who wrote a book on fungi called Entangled Life.
We have a laboratory at home and we've been doing experiments with vibrating fluids.
These are water vibrated at different frequencies and as do you see, there are always patterns appear.
Just add vibration.
And these different frequencies produce these complex patterns and there's a whole range.
More We've published a paper on this in Water Journal and I think that these natural systems
of vibratory brain suddenly are, and I think developing tissues are.
And I think recent research on vibration feeds into an understanding
of morphic resonance through giving us a better understanding of vibratory fields.
And the next slide
shows a
model of the computer model of vibratory modes in the electromagnetic fields, and believes
that these experiments, these simulations, are due to
a researcher called Piatek.
And she, as you see, showed that you can get patterning effects of vibration.
And so a lot of modern developmental biology still based on the idea of clunkier chemical gradients.
You just don't need them.
I think leaves and other developing systems have electromagnetic fields which have resonant patterns
and I think the morphic resonance works through those electromagnetic patterns.
Moffett Resonance also plays to the organization of groups of animals,
and the next slide
shows flocks of starlings,
a murmuration of starlings over Brighton West Pier.
And the next slide
shows other pictures of starlings as they move in these flocks.
It's like a field phenomenon.
The birds not only know where their neighbors are, but where they're going to move to.
Otherwise they collide and they don't collide.
And the next slide
shows a school of fish where you have very similar phenomenon.
I think that social groups of animals have fields, morphic fields,
the fields of social groups that move the social equivalent of morphic genetic fields.
And the generic name for these fields is morphic fields with morphic resonance a kind of memory in the group field.
And I think that some of them are
similar fields effect human groups in including human families
and we can finish that slide now.
And this again is an area where morphic
resonance has taken on a whole new dimension
through the work on family constellations therapy.
Many of you will have heard of this where the therapist treats
the whole family as a field, a members of the family within an interrelated field.
And these family fields often seem to inherit
patents from past generations, which can sometimes be very destructive.
If a member of a in a past generation committed suicide, tied or was expelled from the family,
or committed some terrible crime, or for some other reason was excluded.
Then in the present generation, a member of the family follows them, as it were, and excludes themselves
or becomes suicidal in ways that individual psychotherapy can't address.
But this form of family constellation therapy is very, very effective.
I've had many opportunities to watch it in action because my wife, Jo Purse,
does wonderful family constellation sessions, which she's not doing on Zoom.
And this I've seen
through Jill's work and through the work of Bert HENNINGER, the German,
the proponent of this, who was one of the main people to popularize this system of therapy.
I've seen many examples of transformative effects that seem to me
to show field effects with non-local effects on different members of the family.
People can be miles away from someone doing this therapy, and yet it can seem it can affect them.
Well, in conclusion,
I just want to say that the problems within mainstream science have continued to pile up.
I address these in my book, The Science Delusion, called Science and Free in the United States.
And many of these problems can be resolved
if we take into account morphic resonance
in cosmology.
For example, there's a big debate about whether this universe
at the moment of the Big Bang had all the constants and laws of nature fixed.
Exactly right for life. As we know, it
was a
fine tuning of all these laws of nature.
A lot of scientists are atheists and they hate the idea of the idea of some kind of mechanical god.
Just fine tuning the world machine. It's a very crude idea of God.
Most Christians and most believers in God would not think of God as an engineer outside the universe.
Fine tuning it.
But anyway, to avoid any hint of God,
they prefer to say there must be billions, trillions of actual universes, of which ours is the only one
which is useful for us to be aware of it in the area when we can exist in which all the others actually exist.
So you don't need God.
Well, this debate, the multiverse universe
debate.
I see both sides assumed that all the laws of nature
were fixed at the moment, the big bang and all the constants to a fixed one.
As I've shown, the constants may vary.
I discussed this in the science tradition,
but also the laws don't have to be fixed if.
The laws are like habits.
They can evolve along with nature.
They don't all have to be fixed at the moment.
The Big Bang, the whole of this debate just dissolves away like the morning mist.
If we have a view of the evolution of the habits
of nature, then cosmologists have had to postulate dark matter
to explain galaxies, which they ask to be held together by gravitation and
the known amounts of matter.
Don't explain the structure of the galaxy.
So they then assume this invisible dark matter which is titrated
into their equations of galaxies in just the right amount to explain the facts.
The only problem is that no one knows what dark matter is, and there's no evidence that it actually exists at all.
And yet the space to be about five times more dark matter than real matter of kind, we already knew.
But if the galaxy is an organism,
if the stars within is like cells within an organism,
we don't have to say it's just gravity that holds it together.
In my article on is the Sun Conscious, I discussed the
hypothesis of Greg Matloff, who proposes that stars naturally move
like cells to an embryo to take up the right position.
He calls it the Volitional Star hypothesis.
And if we think of the
galaxy as an organism then we don't need all this dark matter.
We can have a much more organic view of astronomy and indeed of the cosmos.
Then morphic resonance helps understand very puzzling data about inheritance.
It turns on genes.
The results of the genome project.
We now know that genes don't explain more than about 10% of inheritance,
even of common things like height or proneness to diseases, or proneness to schizophrenia.
And the amount of inheritance they tend to explain
is something like 80 or 90% of what's inherited
this is called the missing heritability problem within biology.
I think the reason that there's a missing heritability problem is that the genes don't explain form instinct behavior.
They only
explain the inheritance of the structure of proteins, which is what we know.
Genes do.
So morphic resonance together with epigenetic inheritance, I think can enable us to reinterpret
inheritance and the entire evolutionary process, which depends on inheritance
in what is now called the extended evolutionary synthesis, which is taking over from the narrow, rather shrill, dogmatic
neo-darwinism that's been so widely popularized by Richard Dawkins and his colleagues.
And then attempts to locate memories in brains have failed over
and over again, and recent attempts to track down the so-called engram, the memory traits again
have run into problems, as they always do over and over again for more than 100 years.
And I think this is because the memories aren't in the brains in the first. So
morphic fields
also enable us to think in terms of extended minds.
I don't have time to discuss that.
I'm giving a seminar next weekend on the extended minds of animals and how they connect with
what's called the unexplained powers of animals
and a whole new range
of ways of thinking about consciousness open up
so this is very much an ongoing project, and
if you're interested in finding out more, then do take a look at my books.
The next slide shows
a new science of life in the UK edition.
This is the third edition, fully updated
and in the US it's been retitled Next Slide
Morphic Resonance.
It's the same book by both your thinking you'll get more, you won't.
You'll get the same book with a different title.
And this was my first
book as we met this evening to discuss
and is brief and somewhat technical.
My main theoretical book on Morphic Resonance, which deals with memories, psychology, cultural inheritance,
rituals, the role of morphic professions and religious rituals and many other topics is called the presence of the Past.
And this is the new edition in Britain and the US.
New edition, both of these fully updated is looks like that
it's the same book,
it's just across different editions in Britain and America.
So if you're interested in going into more detail, do please take a look at these books.
And right now I think we've got some time for questions.
If you'd like to ask more about this.
Thank you so much. Rupert.
Well, that was a sort of tour de force of the tour dailies.
All the French would say, you know, giving us an idea of the the
epigenetic development of morphic resonance over the last 40 years and what still needs to be tested.
And indeed, at the end, you were talking about the puzzles that are illuminated by the hypothesis.
And and these the the which could potentially be an angle of approach
in a number of disciplines.
And so I think that I think that's very exciting and we really need orthodox scientists
to spread their wings a bit and to be a little more adventurous and less fearful for their narrow reputations.
And I just want to I've got some very interesting questions to to put to you, but I,
I wondered if I know that Louis Wolpert died recently and he is one of you.
In the past, you actually had a debate with him, which I attended at the Royal Society of Arts.
And. But you had a bit didn't you ever have a case of fine pause?
I remember advising you on what porte to get
out of that.
How's that going in terms of can you remind us of what the debate was, what the issue was, and where you think it's got to?
Well, in
2009, Louis Wulf and I had a debate at Cambridge University
and the last event in the Cambridge University Science Festival, it was on the nature of Life.
And Wolpert,
in this debate said that it would soon be possible
to predict every detail of a new organism based on the genetic code and its fertilized egg
and modify as it will, and say that genetics could predict everything about organisms.
And I challenged him on that.
I said I didn't. That's at all true, Louis. I don't think it's going to happen.
And and and I said, I'll bet your bottle of champagne it won't happen within ten years.
You said, Well, maybe not ten years, maybe 20.
I said, okay, bottle of champagne in 20 years.
And you said, Well, no, actually, I might be a bit more complicated.
I mean, perhaps 100 years too. You said soon.
And I said both of us will be dead in 100 years time.
Promiscuity, materialism in its most extreme form.
And anyway, I followed up afterwards and I said, Louis, can
we have a debate, a bet that's feasible within our lifetimes
or potentially lifetimes?
No, 20 years is.
And so he said, all right.
He said I said, you've said humans are too difficult.
What about the mouse?
All right. 20 years predict every detail of a mouse.
Then we agreed on it.
We agreed on the steak.
The case of quinoa deficiency of 2005.
Thanks to your advice to it, we paid half each and there it is.
This case of fine porters in the vaults of the Wine Society
awaiting 2029 when the bet terminates.
And so with new scientists, we're going to publish the bet.
But he got on to me.
He said, Ruth, I just kind of tricks the mouse a bit too.
Doesn't have to be a chick.
Anyway, after several iterations we got down to a nematode worm
and so I said, okay, any multicellular organism.
And we published the bat and
last year, the 10th anniversary
to 2019, the 10th anniversary, a betting company called Fitz des Open to book.
So anyone who wants to can bet on whether one or or I will win
this battle in 2029.
Anyway, it looks extremely unlikely that he or his as well.
He obviously he won't win it.
But his and he has a son who's a fellow of Trinity College Cambridge.
He's got a scientific son who will no doubt be able to watch out for the Wolpert interests in the case
and so anyway, that's where the status of that bet.
And and I think that if you took a bet among biologists today, the vast majority would think that Wolf is going to lose
drastic variance.
I think that's a little personal, but very interesting questions.
And the first one from John Brown
president would be a vehicle of pre-determined information.
And he said the ancient myths as a bird.
So the harbingers of the knowledge of death
on three separate occasions I personally experienced this in all three separate incidents.
A bird appeared inside my house all on a Friday night, one week on the following
and and spaced a few years apart.
First my son, second my sister, my wife all died in exactly the same kind of accidents.
In addition, my wife and sister had exact first and last names
and are exactly the same age.
Gosh.
Well, I think these I mean, I've had many stories of this
kind of presaging of death, and it's very, very hard to understand these.
I mean, it would be
in part an you know, you can't exactly do experiments on it.
You know, you can't sort of have people die
at randomized times to make joke to see whether the birds appear a week before.
So it's one of those those mysteries which I think the most we can do
is document them and to explain it in terms of morphic resonance would be difficult.
Morphic resonance is about habits of nature, and perhaps it's a habit for birds to announce tests and certain families.
It seems to be
the heart of the birds. No.
And this is going way beyond the scope of this hypothesis.
I mean, there are many mysteries which this hypothesis doesn't embrace.
I mean, it might hint towards a possible answer,
but I myself focused primarily
on the regularities of things that are easier to test.
This would take us into those very intriguing realms
where we can only say We just don't know, we just don't understand.
I think to a good answer, then there's one more related to the current situation.
You think there's any relationship between morphic resonance and herd immunity?
Well, I'm
I've thought quite a bit about this.
The thing is that morphic resonance would mean or might mean that
when you have a lot of people recover from a disease, that the response to the antibody response to that disease
might become easier for others to to have the same kind of response.
In other words,
immune responses might be subject to morphic resonance.
And the more people that get better from the disease, the easier it may be for others to get better from it.
And it's interesting that about a third of the people who are infected
with COVID now, at least in Britain, have no symptoms at all.
The antibody response to so effective that you wouldn't know they had it
unless you did actual COVID tests.
So it's possible that's happening, on the other hand, but
it can't be true of all diseases otherwise all diseases would die out
and diseases in the flu and cold family, these viral respiratory diseases
do die out or tend to die out, but there are other diseases like smallpox
and so on, that if any, died as a result of eradication campaigns with vaccination.
So it if morphic resonance plays a part, then one would have to find out why does it work more for some diseases than others?
This would be a whole realm of exploration in epidemiology.
I mean, as soon as you start thinking in terms of morphic resonance, new questions come up everywhere
and potential new scientific experiments and lines of inquiry.
Yes, thank you.
And there's a couple of questions about how movement resonance relates
to the holographic universe and also connection with quantum entanglement.
I think the quantum entanglement you already addressed through what you said about David Byrne,
but you want to comment too long.
Holographic universe.
We had called pre brown mystics and scientists around the same time and I'm sure you knew him.
Yes, he did indeed.
I met my wife Jo through Carl Pre Brown.
We were at a conference in Bombay in 1982 and I was talking to Carl program, arguing about the nature of memory.
When Joe came up, he introduced us because he knew.
Joe said, I have Carl programed to think for introducing me to my wife.
Well, program at first thought memory was stored in the brain.
Then he thought because you couldn't find localized memory traces
that would be stored holographic tree over large regions of the brain.
Then he became interested in David Bowie's ideas
and then thought it might be stored holographic through in the whole universe.
You know that the
holograms have a distributed pattern of storage and
the whole is present in each part.
And so in a sense, morphic resonance is saying that.
It's saying that the whole of the infinite all information universe
is potentially present everywhere from the past.
There's a kind of entanglement, if you like, but it's not the same as quantum entanglement,
as we usually think of it, which is simultaneous in space.
This involves a connection from the past across time and that goes beyond current quantum theory.
David Byrne thought current quantum theory needed extending
or expanding, but you wouldn't get many conventional quantum theorists
who would think of morphic resonance as fitting within quantum theory as can be understood.
So the holographic universities, a kind of metaphor
of the way that the whole can be present in each part, a hologram is in itself is static.
It's a kind of a photograph, so it doesn't have the time dimension.
So all metaphors are inadequate.
But what it's trying to show is that the information is everywhere.
And in morphic resonance and in David Bowman's idea of the input control order,
that's what we're saying, that the information is potentially present everywhere.
Yes. Do you think.
I'm not sure how this question angle angles in, but do you think that morphing fields will ever be
detectable in any way?
Both experiments I propose for morphic resonance are ways of detecting the fields.
If you train rats to then a new trick in London and rats learn it
quicker in Paris and New York, that's detecting a morphic field.
When people ask this question, they usually think you get some kind of meter
that detects, Yes, I can, or a meter.
But the fact is that meters that detect things, usually people think in terms of electric meters.
When electric meters detect electric phenomena, magnetometers detect magnetic phenomena,
you don't detect a gravitational field with an electric meter or gravity or a magnetometer.
You need to detect fields of the appropriate kind.
So to detect a morphic field, you'd need a morphic measuring system,
which is the kinds of experiments I've been proposing.
You wouldn't necessarily expect to
see it or to detect it.
It might interact.
I think they do interact with electromagnetic fields, and it's possible that some kinds of carry on photography
where you see a kind of aura around leaves, may be ways of visualizing these fields, but there are many artifacts
in carry on photography caused by damp and humidity and
do research on it as being not very rigorous.
And so it's very hard to know.
I would say it's an open question as to whether you can detect them through
it, through electrical electrical means.
But all the experiments for testing, for morphic resonance are ways of testing morphic fields ultimately.
Yes, exactly.
You interesting question here.
Could the Moffett Field be the result of the mind acting in matter or in a matter data
that forms even the laws of nature, since consciousness is an intimate element
or part of the fabric of our reality, as proposed by Sir Roger Penrose.
I think what you're saying is.
Well, not exactly.
I mean, this is a this is a really tricky question because
morphic resonance is really about habits.
The subtitle of my book, The Presence of the Past, is Morphic Resonance and the Habits of Nature and Habits Are unconscious.
Our own habits are largely unconscious,
and I think that the instincts of animals are largely unconscious and the habits of plants
when they grow leaves and things are largely unconscious and probably
the habits of galaxies might be unconscious too.
So most habits are unconscious, and where consciousness comes in is where there has to be a choice among possibilities.
And it's to do with freedom and
I follow Whitehead in this way of thinking about it.
And what I haven't discussed this evening actually lives time is creativity.
Evolution has to involve more than simply habits.
Otherwise things will just repeat.
And you can sometimes.
And it's spreading like in parallel or convergent evolution, a habit that develops in one part of the world,
like being a mammal, like a mouse, for example, could spread to another part world like Australia.
We can have a marsupial mouse.
You could have parallel evolution or parallel evolution of the eye,
and that could be habit spreading.
But then you've still got the question of how you get the mouse in the first place or an eye in the first place.
And morphic resonance doesn't explain creativity.
It only explains once new things have happened through repetition, they become habitual
and consciousness plays a part in creativity.
But it's again even more when we come to that.
It's not immediately obvious.
I mean, we humans are often creative and new science, new arts, new music happening all the time.
But when you ask a creative person where it came from, they often don't know.
They just say, It came to me in a flash, or I'd suddenly realized or I dreamt of it or something like that.
So how does it come into our own minds?
We don't even understand creativity in the human realm. So
when we come to the whole cosmic realm there, it
clearly is a creative influence, working through all nature, interacting with the habits of nature.
But the way you think of it really depends on your bigger
picture metaphysical or religious or theological
or philosophical view of the larger picture of reality.
But once those things happened and been repeated, then morphic resonance can take over and
help it to be repeated more and more.
Now, one of our one of the attendees has pointed out we can hear the birds
coming from your garden, and through the zoo, which is rather nice.
And this leads into the next question is, can morphic resonance help us rescue the ecosphere?
Does increased concern of property make it easier
others to become concerned, or more likely that they will?
More likely they'll become concerned.
So could morphic resonance be triggered or amplified by mainstream media
suggesting parents and carers likely?
Well, I think morphic resonance plays a part in this space of the times, what the Germans call the zeitgeist,
that it's an influence.
It influences our thinking and our attitudes.
It's not.
However, compulsory morphic resonance doesn't have a built in moral filter, and it means that things that become habitual
when more people do them, they become easier for others to adopt the fastest spreading habits.
The world at the moment are those of consumerism which Western capitalist culture has now converted.
Billions of people all over the world into being consumers
who look at advertising and want things they might not otherwise have wanted.
So consumerism is unfortunately a very fast spreading habit
in China and India, in Africa and in many other parts of the world.
And of course, it's long been a dominant feature, our own societies.
But I think also that the awareness
of environmental problems will be amplified by and made easier
for people to get through morphic resonance and an evolutionary moral filter.
In morphic resonance itself, it does mean
we're a bit more responsible than you might otherwise be, not only for our actions and our words,
but also for our thoughts and attitudes, because those are likely to spread
by morphic resonance, making it easier for others to adopt the same attitude or way of thinking.
Yes. And I wonder whether
this also applies to coming out, which we've we've talked about coming out in this in a science
making philosophical sense, because a lot of scientists and we did this survey three years ago, remember,
have interesting paranormal psychic spiritual experiences.
They don't want to admit that to their colleagues because they're afraid that they're going
to lose their reputation, even though the very same colleagues they're afraid of are in exactly the same situation.
So I wonder if we could somehow use means
as a way of helping people pluck up
the courage to be true to themselves?
Well, I think it would happen automatically if the more people who come out of the
closet herbalists who are present in most scientific and medical
and engineering institutions, the more people do come out, the more it will empower and help others
and make it easier for them to accept that you can actually survive.
And like gay people know, they've they've come out of the closet, many of them,
and it's become much more socially acceptable.
And I think that holistic ideas and sons will become more acceptable as more people identify
with them in public and, say, yes, morphic resonance might help that process, but it's something that
all of
us who live at the Institute of Noetic Sciences and the Scientific and Medical Network
and probably the two main catalysts for coming out in the Western world, and
I remember when I first joined it, it became part of these organizations.
They were really quite small and fringe,
and now the number of members is increasingly the it's becoming much more mainstream consciousness.
Research, which new ethics sciences has promoted
for nearly 50 years, is now a major topic
in many universities, and the more holistic approach to science and medicine
that the scientific and medical networks promote, it is becoming increasingly important.
So I think that these organizations that we are part of
have a very valuable role to play in actually catalyzing this process and they have been doing that
increasingly effectively over the years.
Yes, thank you.
Thank you.
Rupert, final question that we've got time to take and I'm sorry, we obviously go through 123 questions here.
So look at them.
And so at our leisure is this the Alamo beyond cathedrals?
It's very much up your street.
And places of worship seem to have a tangible atmosphere sense of stillness and peace.
Could this be due to morphic resonance?
And he's asking whether one could do experiments with blindfolds as individuals entering
different buildings to show the effect.
But I'm not sure about that.
But any any thoughts on that?
You might you might say something your choral evensong initiative.
Well, yes. The the
thing is that there's a memory when we go to places.
So you enter a cathedral or a temple or a moscow
or some sacred cave or a sacred grove or something like that.
A holy place.
When you go there, the sensory stimuli impinge on your eyes and ears and nose and so on.
A similar to those that another people have experienced there.
And that will put us in morphic resonance with those who've been there before.
So there'll be a kind of memory of the place.
I'm not suggesting that it's etched into the stones of the temple or the cathedral.
I'm suggesting we resonate with a lot of people who've been there and had experiences.
There's often a mystical experience or revelatory experience
or a sense of connection, some kind of spiritual experience.
Now, there are places also with very bad, and those stories you hear of haunted houses
usually tell some of some awful things happened there so they can be negative memories, too.
Again, it's not all good,
but I think the
holy places, which become a focus of pilgrimage,
do this kind of memory and quality.
And I'm one of the people who helped set up the British Pilgrimage Trust,
which is reopening the ancient pilgrimage footpath, pilgrimage routes
to the old holy places of Britain and British Pilgrimage
Trust has a website which you can call British Pilgrimage dot org.
And one of the best ways of visiting
a cathedral in England is to walk on, pass through the countryside.
The routes are different on the British Pilgrimage website and time your arrival.
So you arrive in the evening and English cathedrals have a wonderful choral service
in the evening, every day in many cathedrals weekdays as well as Sundays, cork, choral Evensong,
Sung very well trained choirs and free of charge.
You can enter this enchanted world, literally enchanted as the whole cathedral echoes sacred chant.
And it's
one of the most uplifting experiences I know of in Britain
and strongly recommend as a website called Choral Evensong dot org
c h a l.
Even if you have an essay in g dot org where you can find out where these services are happening
and know because many of them are doing them streamed on Zoom or Facebook
anywhere in the world you can attend the services virtually
by going to this website and to catch recordings or livestreamed services.
So tapping into these traditions and memories is actually open to everybody and it's free.
It doesn't require you to sign up to any particular belief system.
Indeed, the British Pilgrimage Trust,
when it has organized pilgrimages, has a slogan Bring your own beliefs. So
yes, this question of memories in places I think is very important
as another aspect of life, which I think morphic resonance can help to illuminate.
Thank you.
You missed out a very important element here, which is the research on tea and which you have before you go to Evensong.
And there you will fish and order cream cheese and
say more about that.
And an exciting and for Americans who may not know what cream tea is here in England as a tradition,
you have a tea with scones and or scones and instead of butter,
clotted cream and things like strawberry jam,
I'm afraid not a low key to your diet, but as an occasional treat.
Very good.
And most cathedrals have tea rooms where you can have a cream tea before called Evensong.
So that's part of the experience, at least for some of us. Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you, Rupert.
We'll put these in the in the recording email.
They're all the references to the various initiatives.
Any closing thoughts?
Well, I'm just very, very pleased that we've reached this 40th anniversary and that
things are
opening up, you know, almost every day that passes.
I feel that at last the sciences are moving in the right direction
and does this greater sense of openness within the scientific world.
And so I suppose my closing thought some of the time actually, despite all the gloom in world,
I was quite optimistic about the transformation and science paradigm shift that all of us
on probably all the people on this Zoom call have been thinking about for years
is actually happening
and I think we need to prepare ourselves for a whole new world in which the educational system
needs to reflect this more holistic attitude to science funding needs to reflect it.
And of course, it needs to play an urgent play to our need to adapt to living more sustainably on the earth.
The mechanistic mechanical world view
is the worst possible worldview for living sustainably on the earth, a more holistic world view
of which morphic resonance and of part seems to me not only true, but essential for our survival.