ROBERT KAUFMAN: --everybody.
Thank you for coming.
Or good evening or good morning, depending
where you are coming from.
I'm Robert Kaufman from the UC Berkeley
Program in Critical Theory and the Comparative Literature
Department at UC Berkeley.
We're really delighted to have all of you,
and we're especially thrilled to have Peter Gordon with us
for a second day of discussion and talk.
I won't give a very long introduction at all of Peter,
because Marty Jay, yesterday, gave
a very elegant and justifiably more
expansive introduction of Peter.
I'll just say that Peter's most recent book is making waves
as it deserves to.
It's Migrants in the Profane, Critical Theory and the Question
of Secularization.
Many of you probably know that besides quite a number
of important books that Peter has written, edited, co-edited,
and made available, he's also been very audible and visible
in very important ways in the public sphere
writing pieces, reviews, dialogues, giving interviews
in such places as the Boston Review, the New York
Review of Books, The Nation, just to name a few.
Before going any further, I want to thank the chair
of the Program in Critical Theory, Dan Blanton,
for moving quite a number of mountains,
both a year ago when we were just trying to figure out
whether we could have Peter live in-person and physically,
and realizing we couldn't.
And then doing everything he could
to make sure that this could at least happen this year,
and that we would be having a future real-world visit
with Peter in the upcoming future.
And above all, I want to thank Patty Dunlap,
our amazing Critical Theory staff person,
who, everyone behind the scenes, knows
is the reason anything is possible.
And also, usually that everything
is made possible because of patty's unbelievable talent,
skill, imagination, and ability to put up with all of us.
The format we're going to have today
is that after I just give a couple more brief introductions
of our other speakers today, Peter
is going to speak for about 15 to 20 minutes, probably jumping
off perhaps a bit from his talk yesterday,
but mostly focusing on the text at the end
of negative dialectics.
That is the section of it, meditations on metaphysics,
that he's asked attendees to read if they can or reread,
as the case may be.
And then we're going to have brief responses from Pardis
Dabashi.
I'm going to say something probably very, very brief,
and then Marty Jay will give the final response today.
We'll turn it back to Peter for a few moments
and then open it up to the audience.
Please feel more than free, as things
go, to write questions or comments you have in the chat.
They'll be read and voiced by Dan Blanton when
we turn to the audience after the other speakers have
responded to Peter.
I just want to say at a bit more length,
because she wasn't with us yesterday,
except via an intervention that proved extremely generative,
I just want to tell you a little bit about the person who
will be our first responder today, Pardis Dabashi.
Pardis Dabashi is Assistant Professor
of English at the University of Nevada.
Her areas of research include 19th and 20th century American,
European, and Persian literature,
as well as film and novel studies and literary theory.
She's co-editor of the volume The New William Faulkner Studies
that's forthcoming from Cambridge University
Press in 2021, and her work has appeared
or is forthcoming in PMLA, modernism modernity,
modern fiction studies, textual practice, Arizona quarterly,
early popular visual culture, public books, and other journals
and venues.
Professor Dabashi's current book project, Losing the Plot, Film,
and Feeling in the Modernist Novel,
examines identification, ambivalence, and plot
in the modernist novel and popular film.
And I'll also tell you all, although I have a feeling
that, as Dan said yesterday, Marty Jay, someone who really
doesn't need much of an introduction,
we're very fortunate in the Critical Theory program
that he's one of the founders and former co-directors
of the program.
By title, he's technically the Sidney Heller Ehrman Professor
of History, Emeritus at UC Berkeley.
By more than title, when we're in our real physical digs,
he's the person down the hall from where
most of the Critical Theory events take place,
and that's enormously helpful for us.
Because even when he's not scheduled,
we usually run down the hall and pull him out
of his office to get him to respond,
whether he's on the bill or not.
We're very pleased to have him today.
I just want to add that although probably quite
a number of people in the audience know many of his many,
more than many books, the most recent ones are
the 2016 Reason After Its Eclipse On Late Critical Theory,
and the 2021 that sounds like a Bronx cheer in its title,
but it actually comes from text that many of you
will recognize from the Frankfurt School, Splinters
in Your Eye, subtitled Frankfurt School Provocations.
I'm going to turn it over to Peter now, who is the,
I just want to say to be a little official about it,
the Amabel B. James Professor of History at Harvard,
and also their faculty affiliate in the Department
of German Languages and Literatures,
as well as the Department of Philosophy at Harvard.
Just to say one more time, we're really
thrilled to be having Peter.
And in certain ways, especially virtually.
And by especially, I mean that it especially
means we can have him with us.
Again, thanks, Peter, for being with us.
Thanks to all of you in the audience for the ways
that you're all making the event possible by being here
and then being involved in the discussion afterwards.
Peter, it's all yours.
Thank you.
PETER GORDON: Thanks so much, Rob.
Am I audible?
Am I all right?
Thanks, Rob, for the introduction.
Again, thanks to Dan Blanton, to Rob, Patty Dunlap,
and of course, also to Martin Jay, and Pardis Dabashi
for their comments in advance.
Now, my talk yesterday touched upon themes
that are prominent in Adorno's 1966 Negative Dialectics.
But the talk was more comprehensive, more synthetic
than that.
What I understand we're going to do today
is engage in a collective discussion
about negative dialectics, and especially
the concluding portion of the book.
I thought I'd begin by just offering a few framing
remarks about the general themes of the book, the general task
of the book, its title and its significance,
and then take us through some of the most
prominent questions that are raised in the conclusion.
So it's fair to say that Negative Dialectics is
one of the more challenging works
of modern European philosophy and social theory.
It took Adorno about seven years to write.
He began writing it in around 1959.
So he had been back in Germany for about 10 years
when he began composing it.
And it is, in some ways, the summa,
if one can use a term like that, of his philosophical career.
He worked terribly hard on this book.
He wrote to a friend, "I'm working very hard,
and I'm so exhausted that I'm looking forward to a few
miserable days at Christmas."
This was 1965.
He called it his [GERMAN], his fat child.
And he further called it my chief philosophical work,
if I may call it that.
Henceforth, all my work will be concentrated far more
strongly than for years now on artistic matters.
And indeed, when he completed the book,
he did turn most of his attention
to working out the rudiments of his aesthetic theory, which,
as you all know, was not actually published
in his lifetime, was published posthumously in 1970, and not
even in a complete form.
Was just a draft of the introduction.
But a wonderful editorial work has
gone into assembling it into something like the text it
would have been.
So Negative Dialectics was the culmination of long germinating
thoughts that, in a way, stretch back
to the very beginning of Adorno's career.
As many scholars have noted, there is, in Adorno's career,
remarkably few brakes or shifts of direction.
There's almost nothing like, for example, Heidegger's [GERMAN],
Heidegger's turning.
Instead, one finds a remarkable consistency in argumentation,
stretching all the way back to his inaugural address
at Frankfurt in 1931.
The book announces its major theme
in a typically contrarian voice.
In the very first sentence of the preface,
which Adorno completed in the summer of 1966.
"The formulation negative dialectics," he says,
"transgresses against tradition.
Already in Plato, dialectics meant
to establish something thing positive through the thought
means of negation.
The figure of a negation of the negation names this precisely."
So this is Adorno's summary of the tradition
of dialectical thinking.
And then he continues, "This book
would like to emancipate dialectics
from these types of affirmative essence
without relinquishing anything in terms of determinacy.
The development of its paradoxical title is one of its
intentions."
So this is the statement of his task in the book.
Now, if we were to try to summarize
what exactly this means, we could
say that what Adorno wants to do is dislodge us
from the high plateau of a philosophical tradition that
culminates in Hegel's arrogant claim to absolute knowing
and move us off of that high plateau toward a practice
that Adorno calls negative dialectics.
Now, if we were to try to summarize
what is the meaning of a negative dialectic,
I think there are various ways of describing it.
We could say it's a dialectic without reconciliation,
a dialectic without [NON-ENGLISH].
Another way to say it is it's a dialectical practice
that never fully sublates the difference between concept
and its object.
But remains at the middle stage of negativity,
which constantly acknowledges the insufficiency
of the concept.
Or as Adorno puts it at one point early on in the book,
that his task is [NON-ENGLISH] the disenchantment
of the concept.
And indeed, the central chapters of the book
offer negative dialectical readings of the tradition,
fastening most of our attention on Kant, on Hegel,
and on Heidegger.
And showing how they constantly strive
to occlude the insufficiency of the concept.
And what they do is, instead, insist
on the arrogance of the concept, its sovereignty in relation
to the object, its domination of the object.
And through a very canny, sometimes very polemical,
but always insightful readings, Adorno
exposes the aporias in those various systems.
And then the book reaches its end,
what is perhaps the most famous passage, the most famous portion
of the book, the meditations on metaphysics.
Now, what is the meditations on metaphysics, this conclusion?
Well, we could say that in this chapter of the book at the end,
Adorno is prompted by a question.
And the question is this.
In a negative dialectic, which is
to say, in a mode of dialectical reasoning
that's abandoned the gesture of completion, what remains,
if anything, of the categories we once
identified with metaphysics?
In a negative dialectic, what remains of the metaphysical?
Hence the title meditations on metaphysics.
Now, you might imagine that Adorno would answer would be,
well, nothing remains.
That once you've overcome the arrogance of absolute knowing,
once you've acknowledged the insufficiency of the concept,
the status of the supersensible or purely intelligible realm,
which would be a realm immune to the world,
uncontaminated by empirical distraction,
unscathed by the suffering of human experience,
that that realm too would collapse entirely.
Because the concept, and indeed the subject
could no longer claim to grasp the all in its perfection.
Well, Adorno does begin there.
He says, "It can no longer be asserted that the immutable
would be the truth, and that what moves, the transient,
would be appearance."
So we can no longer draw that strong distinction
and then valorize the metaphysical over the transient.
Why?
Well, in part because Adorno takes very seriously
that philosophical discourse is entangled with human experience.
And especially the catastrophes of the mid 20th century
for Adorno left their mark on metaphysical speculation
and showed certain themes of the metaphysical tradition to no
longer be valid.
As he famously says, "After Auschwitz,
the capacity for metaphysics is crippled because what occurred
smashed the basis of the compatibility of speculative
metaphysical thought with experience."
Adorno's conclusion then, is that metaphysics, if it still
could mean anything, can no longer
mean that we direct our attention to something
beyond the transient realm, to some purely intelligible realm
uncontaminated by time and suffering.
On the contrary, he says, Metaphysics
must now take up a residence in materialism.
And he turns quickly to the themes of morality.
And he says, "Only in the unvarnished,
materialistic motive does morality survive.
The course of history compels metaphysics,
which was traditionally the unmediated opposite
of materialism, toward the material realm."
And that then leads him to entertain something
very curious, which is the possibility that there is still
some meaning to metaphysics, despite the collapse
of the privileged, atemporal intelligible world.
And this brings him to the very perplexing category
of metaphysical experience.
Now, for those of us who are steeped in the Kantian
tradition, the very phrase, metaphysical experience,
should strike us as a contradiction in terms,
because what is the metaphysical necessarily
is what lies beyond the bounds of all possible experience.
Metaphysical experience, therefore,
seems to bring together two terms that belong in the Kantian
system and in post-Kantian philosophy
to incompatible realms of discourse.
But Adorno entertains the possibility
that there might be something like metaphysical experience,
which is to say, there might be some way
of bending our expectations that were
once satisfied by traditional metaphysics
back toward material life, back into materialism.
And his name for that consequent kind of--
that consequent category is metaphysical experience.
And as he meditates further upon this,
he thinks that what metaphysical experience
is a kind of a promise of happiness
that lies wholly in the particular.
He offers many examples, most of them borrowed from Proust,
most of them entertaining the thought
that childhood memories are ones that
promise the kind of ultimacy, the kind of happiness
that we once ascribed to the metaphysical realm.
But those memories are now not memories
of anything like the metaphysical universal
or the absolute.
Instead, they record for us happiness
in its nonfungible particularity.
He describes passages from Proust
of being enraptured in one place.
In all of its particularity, being enraptured at one spot,
he says, without squinting at the generality.
There's something about the nonfungible particularity
of a childhood experience, particularly
an experience of place that Adorno
thinks captures what we mean by metaphysical experience.
And this relates, of course, to what I was describing yesterday
about the happiness or fragments of happiness.
Without taxing your attention too much,
I'll just move very quickly toward--
to remind you of some of the themes
that occur later in the chapter.
He touches briefly upon Heidegger
and Heidegger's concept of metaphysics,
and then he turns quickly to Kant.
And he shows a special interest in the category
of metaphysics in Kant.
And he's especially interested in the Kantian doctrine
of the postulates, which is a rather controversial moment
in Kant's system and the critique
of pure, practical reason.
And he shows special interest in Kant's postulate of immortality.
Having revoked the right of metaphysics
in theoretical reason, the postulates
permit Kant to bring metaphysical questions back in,
but only from the practical point of view.
Or as Heinrich Heine once said, old Lampe must have his god.
In other words, Kant's manservant needs religion.
And so Kant, having banished metaphysics
with all of its objective dignity,
brings back metaphysical categories
as mere postulates that orient us in our morality.
And the most provocative of these postulates
is, of course, the postulate of immortality.
And Adorno says of Kant's postulate of immortality,
"The Kantian rescue of the intelligible sphere
by the construction of immortality
as a postulate of practical reason
condemns the intolerability of what exists and reinforces
the spirit which cognizes it.
That no inner worldly betterment would
suffice to do justice to the dead,
that none would touch upon the injustice of death
is what moves Kantian reason to hope against reason.
The secret of his philosophy is the unthinkable of despair."
And this prompts Adorno to turn, at last,
toward the general question, not just of metaphysics,
but of theology and theological concepts in particular.
Now, Adorno is, by no means, atheist.
And so he says, metaphysics preserves theology
in its critique of it.
Or, more paradoxically, in a typical Adorno formulation,
"whoever believes in God can therefore not believe in him.
The possibility for which the divine name stands is held fast
by those who do not believe."
And that torsion, that paradoxical phrase
is Adorno's way of, once again, confirming that whatever
metaphysics metaphysical inquiry used to be,
it no longer survives in that form,
but must undergo what he calls a migration into the profane.
Or, as he elaborates it a bit further in the conclusion,
metaphysics migrates into mycology.
Which is to say, our critical attention no longer
is directed beyond the world into a supramundane realm.
Our critical attention is directed
toward the smallest things.
So what is most metaphysically promising,
the moments of happiness and negativity
that could overturn our world survive in transience
or, he says, in what is slightest and shabbiest.
The full phrase is interesting to hear.
"The question of metaphysics sharpens itself as to whether
this holy, thin, abstract, indeterminate thing would be its
ultimate and already lost defensive position,
or whether metaphysics survives alone in what is slightest
and shabbiest."
Let me pause here to say that in the seminar
I'm teaching this term with my colleague in music, Alex
[INAUDIBLE], we're reading Adorno's monographs on music one
by one.
His one on Beethoven, his book on Wagner,
his writings on Alban Berg, on Schoenberg, and then
also his text on Mahler.
And he finished the text on Mahler in 1962
when he was already hard at work on negative dialectics.
And I've been preparing the last week for the seminar, which
is actually tomorrow morning.
And I've been struck by the fact that many
of the very same phrases and arguments
that appear in Negative Dialectics
appear already in the Mahler book,
almost the exact same formulations, which
is which has been very, very interesting to see,
including this idea that metaphysics survives in what
is slightest and shabbiest.
That phrase recurs almost the same.
Now, in the lecture course on Negative Dialectics, which
Adorno offered in 1965 and 66, shortly
before the publication of the book,
and as a kind of preparation for composition,
he summarized this idea that metaphysics survives
in what is slightest and shabbiest
with a general materialist motif,
and one that emphasizes the idea of micro micro logical
criticism.
He said to his audience, "We must
philosophize not about concrete details, but from within them.
We must philosophize not about concrete details,
but from within them."
Now, that leads to his conclusion,
he recommends the micro-logical glance
as the final practice of negative dialectics.
And this then leads to the concluding passage of the book,
which I'll just read to you.
Because having set the stage for this,
we can understand, I think, more precisely what it
is he has in mind and why the shabbiest smallest detail known
through the micro logical grants would be a sign, a promise,
a fragment of the metaphysical ultimacy that is denied to us
in the world.
As he says, this is the conclusion,
"The smallest inner worldly markings
would be relevant to the absolute.
For the psychological glance demolishes
the shells of that which is helplessly compartmentalized,
according to the measure of its subsuming master concept,
and explodes its identity.
The deception that it would be merely an exemplar.
Such thinking," that micro logical practice,
"is solidaristic with metaphysics at the moment of its
fall."
Now, we could parse that for hours,
and I could lay out for you what I
think it is that Adorno is saying there,
but I think it's best instead that I pause because many of you
here are far more gifted in the interpretation of Adorno
than I am.
And I've just used this time, I hope,
to lay out the basic themes of the conclusion of the book.
So thanks for listening.
ROBERT KAUFMAN: Thank you so much, Peter.
And we're going to turn it over to Pardis
Dabashi for her response.
Thanks, Peter, again, and thank you, Pardis.
All yours.
PARDIS DABASHI: Wonderful.
Can everybody hear me OK?
OK.
Great.
Peter, thank you so much for that wonderful framing.
OK.
So I've organized my comments today
as primarily a response to Peter's paper
from yesterday's event, while keeping in mind
the meditations on metaphysics section of Negative Dialectics.
So firstly, I'll briefly rearticulate
what I understand to be Peter's claim,
and then I'll pose a few questions
in hopes of gaining further clarity on Peter's views
and of generating discussion among us afterwards.
OK.
So Peter's aim, as I understand it,
is to recuperate Adorno from the common charge of a thoroughgoing
negativity.
Adorno tends to be characterized as what Fabian Freienhagen has
recently called an epistemic negativist, someone who denies
that we can have any knowledge of the good
because our current world is comprehensively subsumed
by the structures of domination, organizing capitalist modernity.
Adorno would thus seem to reject the idea
that the administered world provides us any normative funds,
that is, any normative basis from which to imagine something
better than what is.
The most one could hope to have, according to this dominant view,
is a negative urging or imperative to, quote,
"live less wrongly."
Peter, as I understand him, argues
that this dominant view of Adorno
is actually incompatible with basic tenets of Adornian
thought.
First, he reminds us that if Adorno exhaustively
thought anything, it's that exhaustiveness
is a fiction of ideology.
The administered world is ideologically
interested in generating the illusion of a social totality,
with no apparent gaps or lacunae,
but it's one of the primary jobs of the critic
to expose those gaps and lacunae as constitutive
of social reality.
Second, and relatedly, to say that the world is uniformly
anything, good or bad, is to commit
an act of conceptual domination of that Adorno persistently
urges us to avoid.
Part of the work of immanent critique
is to resist, as much as is possible,
subsuming the object within the totalizing grasp of concepts.
So to perform the ostensibly critical move
of claiming the entirety of social reality
to be bereft of normative resources
would be to flout one of the basic premises
of a negative dialectics, which is the attempted
refusal of conceptual mastery of the object
in order to make room for the ever presence of nonidentity.
Here, Peter allows us to see the uncomfortably close proximity
of the position of total epistemic negativism
to that of transcendent critique.
And this is what I take to be Peter's third reason that we
should reject the view of Adorno as an epistemic negativist.
If immanent critique relentlessly
recognizes its own embeddedness within the very social,
political, and epistemic terms of unfreedom that it criticizes,
transcendent critique disavows that embeddedness,
lifting the act of criticism up and out
of its situatedness within the actuality of its conditions
of possibility.
So transcendent critique actually
does something very strange in that it posits a closed world
that the critic is somehow able to remove themselves
from and see clearly.
Adorno puts this somewhat comically in his discussion
of nihilism in Negative Dialectics when he refers
to, quote, "The palliative of a mind proudly content to see
through the whole swindle."
So Peter shows how Adorno's commitment
to immanent critique and the project of a negative dialectics
formally invalidates an epistemic negativism that
purports to have transcended and conceptually grasped
social reality.
And it's from within Adorno's commitment to an immanent
rather than a transcendent critique
that Peter makes his case for Adorno's acknowledgment
of a reservoir, let's call it, of normative stuff,
or what Peter is calling surplus, available in
and amongst what is.
That the critic relies on as the basis
of her articulation of the shortcomings
of our current world and ways to imagine how we might change it
into something better.
I take Peter to be claiming that for Adorno,
that stuff or that surplus consists
of fleeting and partial moments of sensuous, mimetic experience,
moments when the distinction between subject and object
is obscured.
And we are put back in touch momentarily, partially,
and imperfectly with the nature within us.
Before that, nature was suppressed and violated
by the rise of the rational subject.
And mimesis here, as, and I think also Walter Benjamin,
is not meant in the classical sense
that we often mean it in literary studies, which
is my background, whereby the real is made
legible and masterful by means of various representational
strategies.
Rather, here, the mimetic faculty and now I'm borrowing
from Miriam Hansen, would involve the capacity, quote,
"to relate to the external world through patterns of similitude,
affinity, reciprocity, and interplay."
Mimesis is a material and not representational
insofar as it comes into being at the moment of contact,
to borrow Peter's phrase, between subject and object.
And such moments illuminate the sensuous and fragile embodiment
of human being.
Precisely in their status as fleeting, partial, and damaged,
rather than enduring, total, and perfect,
these moments of happiness simultaneously admit
of our abiding suffering under the regime of modernity
and give us access to a morally better alternative.
So fleeting moments of partial and damaged happiness immanent
to our current world provide the normative basis, at least
this is my understanding of Peters claim, from which we
might draw a critical sense of the good.
And here's where my questions start.
Or really maybe it's just one big question,
and it's nothing Earth shattering.
But merely, I request, Peter, for you
to say a bit more about how your view interacts with or might
account for, the social and political implications
of Adorno's epistemological and aesthetic claims.
OK.
So a precarious happiness has to recede from us
in our very attempt to clutch at it in order for us
to be able to theoretically mobilize
the happiness that it's very recession allows us to glimpse.
We might then say that ideally, there
would need to be a dialectical relationship between sensuality
and thought, mimesis and critique,
in order for this happiness to remain normatively potential
and not ideological.
And sensuous experience does seem
central to Adorno's meditations on the appropriate way
to go on living after Auschwitz.
I think this comes across with a special poignance
in Negative Dialectics, when he describes children
who, when confronted with carcasses,
are moved to philosophize.
What is that, they start to ask, and where is it going?
But I wonder, Peter, and for all of us,
how we might put this set of ideas
into conversation with another powerful strain in Adorno's
thinking, which is the social and political power of thinking?
So in the example of children confronting the corpse,
it's the damaged materiality of the body
that gets them to think differently,
to hear that whisper, as Adorno puts it,
that this is what matters.
But it also strikes me that in Adorno's epistemology,
we are taught that it is thinking
that holds the potential for creating, not just imagining,
but actually making a better world.
I'll take a couple of steps back.
Moments of precarious happiness, which work primarily
on and through our mostly repressed, mimetic faculty
put us put us partially, fleetingly, and imperfectly
into contact with our repressed relationship
to nature, providing us as immanent critics
glimpses of a happiness, albeit damaged, that
allow us to make normative assessments
of the administered world.
This process of drawing normative authority
from mimetic experience, of course,
would not have to be a linear one, nor even
necessarily a conscious one, but sensuousness, and therefore
the body, does strike me as in a sense primary.
In this formulation, while the mind is secondary,
the mind uses what the body has given it.
I apologize for this somewhat plodding account
of the temporal relationship between mimesis and critique,
which sounds completely undialectical and dualistic.
But I purposefully put it this way
in order to draw out what seems to me to be an underlying
order of things in your argument,
Peter, whereby if we are different, then
we will think differently.
In order to become people able to imagine and thus create
more of good, we must first experience our bodies
differently or arguably we experience our bodies at all.
The sense this mimesis here, and therefore the body,
seems, in some nontrivial sense, to proceed thought,
and by extension, critique, offering
the immanent critique, as you put it, Peter,
normative resources.
But it's also-- isn't it also the case that Adorno
wants us to find something normatively charged
about the disembodiment of thought?
So the disembodiment of a negative
dialectics in particular.
Whereby if I can try to think something that always eludes me,
then that very act of persistently
grasping at a concept that is never positively
available to me, but that is always
in the process of negating itself, dissolving, and receding
from me, that if done enough, this always unfinished,
always partial epistemic process stands
a chance of making me, over time,
into a different kind of political subject,
one more attuned to the primacy of the object.
In other words, does not something
like a precarious happiness proceed
from a negative dialectics?
Toward the end of your paper, Peter,
you briefly mention how central--
and this is direct quote, "sensuous experience,
and more specifically, aesthetic experience,
serves as a refuge for a spirit that
sustains both its difference from nature
and also retains its mimetic bond with it.
And this is why Adorno calls art a precarious happiness."
I wonder whether you're here referring
to what Adorno calls the shudder, whereby the eye is
undermined or shaken, as he puts it in the aesthetic theory,
and thrown into uncomfortable contact
with its own limitedness and finitude.
Does not Adorno want this productively
uncomfortable and momentary destabilization
of the knowing eye to take place at the level of thought itself?
So just to wrap up.
There's a moment in the culture industry essay
where Adorno and Horkheimer admit something quite radical,
it seems to me, which is that it's not that autonomous art is
true and light art is false.
Light art, they write, has accompanied autonomous art
as its shadow.
It is the social bad conscience of serious art.
The truth that the latter could not
apprehend because of its social premises
gives the former the appearance of objective justification.
The split between them is the truth.
In other words, by virtue of unconflictedly basking
in the social, mass art exposes the structural embarrassment
of the autonomous work of art, which is that it too is bound up
within the very social terms from which it imagines
a departure, and it has to be.
Otherwise, it would be feigning transcendence.
The exposure of that embarrassment,
intrinsic to the very makeup of the autonomous work of art,
gives mass art the appearance of being justified
in its indulgence in the social on the grounds
that if we can't ever fully escape
the social terms of our current world, even when
trying to imagine a better alternative to it, then
why try instead just bask in it unconflicted?
Would not anything else be a form of hypocrisy?
And this is the cross that the autonomous work of art
has to bear.
That in order for it to be imminently critical,
it has to be born of the very substance which it critiques.
And Adorno argues as much in the aesthetic theory.
But if the true rests in the split
between mass and autonomous art, then that split
needs to be thought, activated, or set in motion
by someone thinking it.
In order for the autonomous work of art
not to become fetishized as the true amidst the false,
it needs to be thought dialectically
with and against mass art.
In other words, it seems to me that the true here
is to be located not in the art itself,
nor in the experience of it per se,
so much as in the act of thinking the astronomical
structure of the autonomous work of art,
the fact that it is both a figure of autonomous
humanity and a figure of social domination.
That it both instantiates freedom
from the social while also bearing the guilt of the social.
Might not be the act of thinking these antinomies itself
be the glimmer of a partial truth
amidst the false and the idea of the autonomous work of art
be the occasion that spurs that thinking?
So to conclude, my suggestion would be first,
that the particular form of thinking
generated by a negative dialectics offers something
on the order of a precarious happiness,
because it too affects a kind of shudder
or momentary and partial disintegration
of the knowing subject.
And if we buy this, then does this put us
in the position of locating normative resources,
potentially within thought itself?
But a very particular kind of thought.
OK.
That's it.
ROBERT KAUFMAN: Thanks so much, Pardis
I think what I have to offer very
briefly is going to be something like a very
small footnote to what Pardis just gave us
and what Peter was talking about both yesterday and today.
At a certain point, and unfortunately, we
didn't get a chance to get at it yesterday,
among others, both Karen Feldman and Anneliese
Francois in the audience asked really important questions
in the chat about what was meant by normativity in the way
that Peter was trying to get at Adorno,
and the idea of a precarious happiness
and some notion of normativity.
Peter alluded very briefly today that
was all that there was time for, for something
like one of the run thrus for the writing
of negative dialectics, which was the 1965 series of lectures
that Adorno gave on metaphysics and that
have since been published from their transcripts.
Even more than in the text of negative dialectics, and this
may just be due to the lecture form,
not only do the lectures really begin
with trying to understand time and temporality
as a problem for traditional metaphysics,
but the heightened problem of that in what Adorno,
not surprisingly to us, is underscoring as after Auschwitz.
But also, it's worth pointing out,
he immediately aligns that, this is
1965, to what he says is what is going on in Vietnam right now.
And then indicates he doesn't want to make an identity between
them, but that, to quote him, "it would also be barbaric
to not bring them up together" and to think about that
as structuring--
as permeating the moment that he is together
with the students in this lecture format,
trying to think about metaphysics.
And what I was thinking about in relation
to the questions that Karen Feldman and Alice Francois,
but I think other people were raising too,
is what does Adorno mean?
What does Peter mean to suggest that he
thinks Adorno might be getting at with a notion of normativity?
I think it's almost crystal clear,
but I would say that it's rather clear,
meaning still a little clouded by context, but also
by an aesthetic density.
And it happens to be the last two
lines of the draft introduction to aesthetic theory.
And Adorno refers, partly riffing
off Paul Valéry, the need not to adopt the view of traditional,
Adorno explicitly calls it, bourgeois history and philosophy
and aesthetic philosophy, and try
to understand the art of the present,
meaning also to understand the present itself,
by starting with the past, but selecting
the works that seem the most powerfully unsettling--
he thinks that that is inseparable
from their formal power--
of the present in order to understand the history
that got us to this present.
The key word right near the end is,
by doing this esthetics, art, and by implication,
our interaction with them and with one another become,
and the word is normative.
He's echoing, there's not time nor need
to say it now, various other moments in the text
of aesthetic theory.
They themselves, I've never been quite as clear,
and I thank both Peter and Pardis for that.
They're also echoing this same inner charge moment
from 1960 on of writing the Mahler book, of writing
the lectures a couple of years later for the metaphysics
lectures, the text of them, then Negative Dialectics.
The locutions about need and need
that would be more than self-preservation that
would also be he sometimes wants and sometimes
doesn't want to be echoing Kant for various reasons
that one could easily figure out.
And so he doesn't say anything like subjective universality.
But he's clearly getting at collective interaction,
including about decisions, that have always been wrongly taken
by those who rule us that would be more rightly taken
if made non coercively.
He's obviously not using the phrase subjective universality,
but he's using a more, more or less Marxian-inflected
or Adorno version of whatever that might be at the moment.
And he's clearer than ever, and this
is why I thought that Karen and Anneliese were
asking great questions.
And I think they were, at least to my mind,
they were in accord with what I heard Peter asking
as the question of the lecture yesterday
and what he and Pardis, I think, are trying
to get at today, which is, Adorno seems to have
a notion not that art gives us any kind of blueprint
for what normativity would look like,
but an indication that it's a desire that
has been violently constrained from coming into being.
And it's something like--
and here, I can't resist saying that two of our audience
members, our colleague in the critical theory program,
Fumi Okiji and also Jonathon Catlin,
have been organizing this series of Adorno seminars
that have been overlapping with Peter's talk here today.
The one last week was one of several
on identity and nonidentity, but specifically taking up
questions of the history of racism and race.
And we wound up getting last Friday
briefly into a discussion that might not
have been predicted from a paper that Martin Schuster gave
about Du Bois and Du Bois's idea of reconstruction of democracy
and of, obviously, the book, Black Reconstruction, from 1935.
But a certain not so much utopian as,
let's put it this way, knowing conviction
that historically, there had been a period where democracy
was being reconstructed.
And in other words, norms were being
remade as a norm that, and I'll stop here,
seems to be signified right at the end of aesthetic theory
with the notion of the history of art
giving us an idea of what it would mean for normativity to be
critique.
And for critique to be the critique of anything,
not a noncoercive shared in process
under construction normativity.
Also with the idea that norms doesn't mean prescription,
but that the very idea of normativity being-- coming
somehow inseparable from critique
implies that rather than prescription,
there's got to be an ongoing debate.
This, of course, all sounds very idealist and utopian,
and it would then have to be factored through
with what Pardis was just bringing up, Peter as well,
the last two days, with all the indications
Adorno gives of how one needs to see this as precarious, fragile,
always imperfect.
But therefore, presumably also genuinely
intersubjective in the sense of, how
do you get to agreement without slugging somebody else,
let alone worse?
And this would also be the moment
to say what Peter mentioned yesterday
in response to Marty's kind of critique of,
how do you put these together?
And Peter's answer about Adorno was, Adorno isn't, to put it
mildly, a particularly good philosopher of the political
in any practical way.
And that seems also to be why we get perhaps the most
full blooded, quick, but almost climactic
sense of where the aesthetic and the notion of normativity
as critique and critique of normativity,
they come right at the end of the introduction,
or what had been perceived as the possible draft introduction
to aesthetic theory.
I'll leave it there, and I'll also just, again,
thank Peter and Pardis and turn it over to Marty.
Marty, please.
Thanks.
MARTIN JAY: Thanks, Rob.
Can everybody hear me?
Am I on?
When I went to Frankfurt in January of 1969 to speak with
Adorno, I was following a number of Americans who had come
in the mid '60s--
Sam Weber, Shari Nicholson Weber, Angela Davis,
Donald Kuspit, and also a British scholar,
Irving Wohlfarth.
And the story was told, and I think it was true.
That when they went to see Adorno, they went to his house
on the Coutinho.
Gretel Adorno would come to the door
with a copy of Negative Dialectics.
And she would immediately say, have you read this?
And if they said no, she would say,
well, come back when you have.
So luckily, when I went to see him, I was spared this.
I made an appointment in advance.
But in fact, I had not yet read--
I had skimmed, but not really read the German version
of Negative Dialectics.
So it would have been a disaster.
In other ways, perhaps it was anyway.
But in any event, I had not yet read it.
It came out in English in 1973.
It was seabury continuum.
This is the copy I read then.
The book was miserably bound, and it's totally come apart.
It's one of these books now that's
like a loose-leaf pamphlet.
I remember though, when I read it in 1973, being scandalized--
and I think that's a legitimate word to use here--
by one argument made in that final section of Peter
has asked us to read today, an argument
about the idea of reification.
But I want to use my few minutes today to talk about--
I want to use my few minutes in this conversation
to discuss what Adorno says about reification,
and then connect it to what he says
about redemption, another issue that he raises in this book.
Let me just briefly read to you what he says about reification.
"The category of reification, which
was inspired by the wishful image
of unbroken, subjective immediacy,
no longer merits the key position accorded to it
overzealously by an apologetic thinking happy to absorb
materialist thinking.
This acts back upon whatever goes under the concept
of metaphysical experience."
And then later in the paragraph, he says,
"The total liquification of everything thing-like regressed
to the subjectivism of the pure act,
that I proselytize the indirect as direct, pure immediacy,
and fetishism are equally untrue."
Now, the scandal of this is that it
is a direct attack on the Marxist humanism associated
with Lukacs, with Gramsci, with other figures who
were seen as the antidote to scientistic, overly
dialectically materialist Marxism.
That it was a critique of the idea
that the human subject had been alienated in a world of objects
and was pitted against them, in which that subjectivity was
forgotten and, in a sense, erased
from the production of those objects.
So what Adorno was doing was setting himself apart from
the Lukacsian notion of reification and the existential
notion of alienation, which, at that time in the 1970s,
was seen as the liberating antidote to materialism
in a basically sterile Soviet way of thinking.
Now, what's fascinating about this
is that it has continued all the way through this book
as a critique of the subjective domination
produced by a hypertrophy not only of the subject,
but also of the concept.
And Adorno is very clear in giving priority,
as he says elsewhere, to the object, preponderance
of the object against the subject.
So this is a Marxism, which is deeply,
you might say, hostile to the Fichtean
and to a certain extent, Hegelian,
if you understand Hegel in a certain way,
hypersubjectivism that he thought
would lead to an obliteration of the object.
On the next page, he makes a comparable critique
of the idea of meaning as something that is essentially
constituted by the subject.
I can't find it, I think, now, but the basic idea
is that any making is inherently something
that subverts the idea of true sense, of true meaning.
That, in other words, humans don't make their values.
Humans don't make their norms.
Humans don't make sense.
Humans don't constitute the world.
There is a certain passivity, a certain even heteronomy,
which he's trying to protect.
A certain sense of the humility of the subject by passivity
awaiting a insubordination of the subject to the object.
An insubordination of the subject
is something that is prior to and greater
than subjective constitution, which of course, is connected,
he argues elsewhere, to the domination of nature.
And this leads to the somewhat oblique reference
to the idea of redemption.
And redemption, of course, is a category
that you basically borrows from Walter Benjamin.
And in this book, there is one place where
he uses it only in passing.
We know it, of course, from the final aphorism
of minima moralia, where he talks
about looking at things from a perspective of redemption.
But here also, this is on page 400 of this translation,
he says, "If the possibility, however feeble and distant,
of redemption in existence is cut off altogether,
the human spirit would become an illusion.
And the finite condition merely exists
in subject would eventually be deified
as carrier of the spirit.
So that possibility of redemption, feeble, distant,
unlikely to happen, possible, but highly, highly impossible,
nonetheless is absolutely necessary as a way
to prevent us from simply becoming what we
are and nothing more than that.
Simply finite, simply the existing reality."
So then the obvious question is, what does redemption mean?
And this is not something Adorno ever, I think, spells out.
It's a term clearly taken from religion.
And Peter's metaphor of migrating into the profane
is, I think, powerful.
What we have here is an example of a typical emigre
who is perhaps nostalgic for the home that he's left behind.
So it's as if there's a kind of return migration
that's going on, migration back from the profane
into the sacred, into the religious, into the theological.
So the category of redemption, how do we flesh it out?
Is it possible to make some sense of it?
Recently, I've been asked to review the new book
by Fred Jamison called The Benjamin Files, which
deals with Benjamin's notion, among other thing,
of apocatastasis, a term which he associates with redemption.
Now, this is a concept Adorno himself, as far as I can tell,
does not draw on it explicitly, although there
is one place obliquely in this book where it is, I think,
referenced.
Apocatastasis is a term that is derived largely
from the early church fathers origin who
argued that at the final judgment,
there would be a kind of amnesty, a kind of forgiving,
a kind of redemption of everything
that had occurred courage, every sinner
in the past, every evildoer, everybody
would ultimately be saved.
A kind of merciful, retrospective judgment
would cast back a kind of grace that
was denied to people, at least in the immediate world
of human judgment, and then perhaps in the Purgatory
before the final judgment.
Now, apocatastasis is a very, very problematic concept.
In fact, origin was condemned as a heretic,
and Augustine and others attacked
the idea of apocatastasis.
But Benjamin found it very, very seductive.
And Jamieson argues that in a way, his notion of redemption
captures this idea of apocatastasis, which
is an idea of a kind of merciful retrospective or retroactive
acceptance of absolutely everything.
Everything that had been forgotten,
everything that had been neglected, everything had been
marginalized, but also those things that had been basically
condemned by judgments that were essentially, in a way,
imperfect, kind of perfect, godlike judgment
which goes beyond human can is a judgment
which is able to redeem even the evil that we see among us, even
the oppressors, as well as the oppressed.
Now, Adorno doesn't spell this out.
But when he evokes redemption, there is a bit of this in his,
I think, let's say, rhetoric.
And what this implies in a very, I think,
troubling way is a certain acceptance of heteronomy,
a certain acceptance of passivity,
a certain acceptance that humans are themselves
at the mercy, we might say, of a judgment which
is external to themselves, a sense which they have not made.
A world, which is not simply a reflection of human creativity,
a reflection [INAUDIBLE] of a making which allows
us to know what we have made.
And Adorno, to this extent, is trafficking, we might say,
in a kind of audacious critique of the bourgeois fetish
of autonomy.
I mean, I was very struck when parties mentioned the autonomous
work of art as a model of human autonomy,
the autonomy of humankind.
There are places in Adorno when one
might read him as arguing that.
But I think to a certain extent, and a significant extent,
he is arguing against the idea of absolute human autonomy,
humans making their own laws, humans making sense,
humans being the ultimate determinant of our reality.
And although from a religious point of view,
we can see this as a kind of acceptance
of a perhaps metaphysics or theology
that we don't feel very comfortable
with, from the point of view, let's
say, of secular ecological thinking, it's part of a move
away from the idea of the hubris of human domination
of the natural world so that it gives us, we might say,
a or it leaves us with the conundrum.
Adorno's Marxism is not a philosophy of praxis.
It's not a productivist philosophy.
It's not a philosophy which stresses
the centrality of labor.
The sensuousness that he stresses that somatic pleasure
is, to a certain extent, receptive.
We wait for it.
And the mimetic relationship to nature
is not one of our initiating everything.
We imitate the natural world.
So in this mixture of religious and what
I would call ecological sensibility,
we find Adorno a challenge to the possibility of a politics,
and this is why, as Peter said yesterday,
he's not much of a political thinker,
a politics which will create the possibility
of the utopia, or at least the true world, that he hopes
will somehow appear in some distant future.
And this feeble and distant notion of redemption
is, in a way, a placeholder for something
which he has no way of telling us can be
brought about by our actions.
So Adorno leaves us with, I think,
a serious challenge, which is to figure out
how to get from here to there?
How to bring about this state of redemption
without bringing it about, because we don't have the power
to do that.
So let me finish with that conundrum, which
I think makes this book and a lot of his work
difficult to assimilate to many of our traditional notions
of Marxist philosophy or even progressive philosophy,
and certainly a philosophy that emphasizes human praxis.
Let me stop with that.
DAN BLANTON: Thanks to everyone.
And before asking Peter to pick up and tease and disentangle--
untease and re-entangle all of those suggestions,
let me just invite anyone who wants
to add in to this melting heap of questions
to deal with, to go ahead and type that into the chat
so everyone can read or directly to me, if you prefer.
And we can add all of that to those things which
were which were tabled in yesterday's discussion
and just have been.
But Peter, if you want to take up
any of these threads of normativity,
this conundrum of agency, or its disappearance,
all of these, all of these difficulties
that seem to intrude on the return of metaphysics
here at the end or the return of a attenuated glimpse
of metaphysics at the end, please do.
PETER GORDON: So let's see.
I'm not muted.
Very good.
Well, thank you, all three of you,
for extraordinarily discerning, elegantly stated remarks.
This is this is the best one can hope for when giving a paper.
And just as a seminar format today, it's lovely.
And I'm learning a great deal.
I obviously can't respond to all of this,
and I'm very interested to hear what other questions
people might have.
I'll just try to weave together a few brief thoughts
that respond to just a couple points.
I'll move backward, taking up Marty's parting question, how
do we get from here to there?
In other words, what is it that Adorno is recommending?
I do think that what he primarily
recommends for us are models that serve to exemplify
a certain, let's say, mode of comportment and experiential
instance of what the human being would be like
if the human being were not bent on domination.
And precarious happiness, it seems
to me, as good a name for those models
as we can find in Adorno's work.
And indeed, in his aesthetic theory,
he refers to the experience that Pardis mentioned,
[NON-ENGLISH] as another example of that mode of subjectivity,
that experience of oneself as a subject that isn't bent
on domination of the world, but that is fragile,
open to the world, responsive to the world,
and indeed feels the weight of the object upon one's own
subjectivity.
As Adorno famously puts it in Negative Dialectics,
suffering is the weight of the object upon the subject.
[NON-ENGLISH] is something that he brings up specifically in his
revision of the Kantian sublime.
The Kantian sublime, which is supposed to first overwhelm us,
but overwhelm us from a position where we then
can respond with a sense of our own dignity, our own magnitude,
in relation to what would otherwise
be threatening surroundings.
And what Adorno says is different about the modern
condition is that place of safety
from which we experience the sublime is
no longer available to us.
So we are indeed utterly fragilized.
The boundaries of the self are not entirely dissolved,
of course, but they are made porous,
and we experience the primacy of the object, our suffering.
Now, that model of the subject, it seems to me,
does furnish Adorno with some kind of clue
for a type of politics, or at the very least,
a type of comportment that he thinks
would point in a different direction
than the politics which he believes
to now govern our world.
A politics that, in its most extreme form, becomes
authoritarianism.
What's the characteristic of authoritarianism?
Well, in the authoritarian personality,
we know it's a certain kind of tough mindedness.
It's a certain kind of refusal by the subject
to acknowledge its fragility.
The authoritarian personality, as Adorno describes it,
is a personality that feels itself to be invulnerable.
Tough mindedness is one of the chief features of such a person.
So recommending these models would
amount to a kind of, I would want to say,
phenomenological showing for us of a different way of being,
and that would have normative import.
So I'll turn then to offer just one remark
on that category of normativity, which I know is quite loaded.
And at least two remarks yesterday
from Karen and Anneliese in the chat remarked on that term
and asked whether it was even a suitable term
for our interpretation of Adorno.
And here I just want to say that the term normativity
may have a certain kind of philosophical formality to it,
but what it simply means is oughtness.
That in our descriptions of the world
and indeed in our ethical relations
and in our politics, human life is not just given.
It's also shot through with a sense of how things should be.
And the normative structure of experience
is that we take some things to be the way they should be,
and we find other things objectionable.
And that's simply all we mean by normativity.
We could call it oughtness instead.
It does indeed have a kind of importance, particularly
in second generation and later critical theory in the Frankfurt
tradition, but it's simply a formalized term of art
that directs us toward oughtness, both in description
and in prescription.
In description, we find that when
we say that a certain description hits
the mark in another description falls flat or doesn't
describe the world the way it actually is.
And then our normativity governing the description
tries to get the description right.
Of course, in practical life, we're
thinking normatively all the time,
is a simple matter of thinking how things should be.
When we find certain policies toward treatments of migrants
objectionable, our objections necessarily
invoke certain normative expectations.
The objections would make no sense
if they didn't have a normative structure to them.
So I want to say that Adorno's thinking is deeply normative
through and through in the sense that it is always animated
by a sense of the way the world should be, and a sense
and that the world has failed to measure up
to that normative expectation.
And I'll end by saying that I think
that this is why we need to read Adorno as practicing
a mode of immanent critique.
Where the tradition of immanent critique is something
that connects him up to Marx, and indeed
to Hegel and the entire left Hegelian tradition.
Where what animates our criticism is the belief that we
can gain some kind of leverage, normative leverage,
against the way the world is, against the given.
And that can direct us toward how
we think the world should be.
And this, to conclude, is what sets Adorno and the tradition
of immanent critique apart from all,
let's call them, deflationary genealogies,
including those associated with Nietzsche and so forth.
Where the normative claims of a culture
are taken to be wholly false because those claims
were not wholly fulfilled.
And so I'll end by just quoting a little bit
from Adorno's Lectures on Metaphysics, which
he offered in the summer of 1965 when
he stated exactly this point.
And I think it's something that occasionally
some readers of Adorno neglect, and then
they assimilate him to the tradition
of disenchanting genealogy, of Nietzsche, Foucault,
and so forth.
He declared to his audience in 1965,
"It's a metaphysical fallacy to believe that because culture has
failed, because it has not kept its promise,
because it has denied human beings freedom,
individuality, true universality,
because it is not fulfilled its own concept,
it should therefore be thrown on the scrap heap
and cheerfully replaced by the cynical establishment
of immediate power relationships.
It's one of the most dangerous errors now lurking
in the collective consciousness," he concluded,
"to assume that because something is not what it
promises to be, because it does not yet match its concept,
it is therefore worse than its opposite,
the pure immediacy which destroys it."
That objection is also a way of Adorno
stating his own practice of immanent critique, which
mobilizes the normative resources of our given world,
but acknowledges the surplus of normativity within them,
the promises that have not been kept
and then strives to realize them.
There's so much more I could say,
but I think it's best I stop here.
And I know that there are already
a number of comments in the chat,
so thank you so much, once again,
for all your wonderful comments.
DAN BLANTON: I'm unmuted.
Thank you.
And as you say, we have an accumulating number
of things to think about.
I wonder, on the way to this, if I could just ask one--
a invoke a privilege to ask one--
about one small detail, which is the Proust passage that I think
appears in both Negative Dialectics and the Lectures
on Metaphysics.
I wonder if there's anything to say
about that moment of the recollection in Proust
as the kind of presentation or emanation
of that normative surplus, if that doesn't elaborate or turn
over this version of normativity in.
PETER GORDON: The section on Proust is absolutely lovely.
And it's a section in which we can hear Adorno speaking
for his own experiences of childhood,
his own special attachment to Amorbach,
for example, where his family would stay
every summer at the post hotel.
And he is projecting into Proust so many of his own feelings,
or identifying with Proust.
And that sense that there's something special
about the particularity of a place
as a child experiences it, which captures
this nonfungible, precarious happiness, which he believes
should be restored, not just not for the individual,
but for all humanity.
And he admits that there's something
that one can't wholly recuperate about those childhood memories.
I mean, one of the most lovely phrases
there is, if you really go there,
that which is promised recedes like a rainbow.
Nevertheless, you aren't disappointed.
Rather, you feel that you are too close,
and that's why you don't see it.
Now, as many of you will know, Adorno did go back to Amorbach
and wrote about it a little bit about going back there.
And obviously had some kind of longing
to reclaim the innocent child attachment to that place.
But there's that sense that the particularity of that place
receded like a rainbow.
And that there is a kind of--
there's a strange mix of satisfaction and disappointment
there.
You feel you're too close, and that's why you don't see it.
It isn't there.
It isn't wholly there.
And that's the precarity, the fragmentation,
rather than the full plenitude or full satisfaction
that Adorno says we can't find in childhood experiences,
nor can we find it in art.
I think Pardis' comments were quite apt here.
Even in the greatest works of art, Adorno wants to say,
truth doesn't reside in its completion.
The very falsehood of the world, the very partiality
of the bourgeois cult of art damages the artwork from within
and compromises its claims to autonomy.
I think that Pardis captured that thought quite well.
DAN BLANTON: Perhaps touches, too,
on the problem that Ralph Dumain raises
of metaphysical experience and its apparent apparently
paradoxical quality.
It is difficult for me to determine
what exactly the experience is supposed
to be as Adorno's presentation is,
after all, an abstract critique of other abstractions
identity thinking.
Is the metaphysical experience, only the experience
of freeing oneself from the thrall of metaphysicians
of various sorts--
Kant, Hegel, et cetera?
The micro logical glance doesn't tell us much.
It's a problem I always have with Adorno
applying his general ideas to concrete circumstances
and phenomena.
Pardis apparently anticipates my question in a response
and gives something to hang on to.
It is necessary to further concretize
this way of thinking with more specific examples of what
this experience if this is metaphysical experience entails.
PETER GORDON: This is a lovely point.
I mean, there is, you might say, a performative tension
here for Adorno to recommend the general category
of metaphysical experience.
When the defining characteristic of a metaphysical experience
is that it's not a--
it's not a category.
[LAUGHS] And that's, I think, a very interesting problem
for him.
I think it's the problem that he tries
to capture in the final passage of the book.
Where he says, the concept is wrong,
because the concept makes the particular into a mere example,
into a mere instance.
And so that will always fail when we try to--
if we were to try to recommend a metaphysical experience
as something categorical, some general feature of our world,
this will always be falsifying it
at the same time, which is it's a fascinating problem.
DAN BLANTON: Farzad Shahin picks up Marty's direction
to this problem of praxis.
Does not immanent critique require
Adorno to take note of praxis participation
more seriously or differently than he did in marginalia
to theory and praxis?
I understand that Adorno sees theory as a form of praxis,
but does not as absolute dismissal of praxis as failure
not make him an epistemic skeptic?
Took us back to yesterday's question.
Does not immanent critique require
praxis or, in Marxist Hegelian terms, action or labor?
PETER GORDON: This is an excellent question, Farzad.
I mean, so you're aware of all the complications here.
And Theory &amp; Practice, of course,
is a text that's authored in the moment of great tension
with the student movement, which is expecting, from Adorno
a greater, a greater commitment to praxis
and a greater sense of alignment,
of solidarity with the students, with Kroll and so forth.
I think the question of how Adorno reaches across
that gap between theory and practice
is always a difficult one for him, and particularly
at that late moment when he writes Theory &amp; Practice
and when he writes the essay resignation, which
I quoted from earlier.
He seems to be in a mode of, well,
constantly rescinding from commitment,
or indeed rescinding from the notion of literary commitment
as well as we know from that essay a rejoinder to Sartre.
And he therefore leaves open the question of how exactly
these normative categories, this precarious happiness,
metaphysical experience, and so forth,
could be mobilized for praxis, could
be mobilized for a politics.
And here I'd have to say that, I have no solution to this
and wouldn't want to try to fill in the picture for Adorno.
I will simply repeat what I said yesterday,
and I think Marty referred to it.
Adorno was not a terribly good institutional thinker.
In fact, he was a fairly bad one.
In terms of German public life, he was much better
as a socratic gadfly, seeing what was false
rather than recommending something better.
And that goes as well for these normatively loaded models.
He can recommend these models as modes of comportment
that could be mobilized for the sake of some other kind
of politics, but what that politics would actually
look like in institutional form, in structures
or in movements is something that Adorno seems unwilling
or perhaps unable to provide.
DAN BLANTON: This actually picks up
a question that was raised yesterday,
but I don't think we got to following up on your comment
about Adorno's lack of lack of a political theory
or shortcoming as a political philosopher.
It was asked then whether there was something
to be made of a distinction between a political philosophy
and a social philosophy.
I wonder if that works in the suggestion of praxis here,
that it's praxis seems to measure that gap.
PETER GORDON: This is a very good question.
Of course, the term social philosophy
is one that goes back to Horkheimer.
And I think it alerts us to the fact that in a certain respect,
the first generation of Frankfurt critical theory
had a very capacious understanding of politics
that spills over the boundaries of institutional life.
You know, the tradition that we know more recently,
Habermas and so forth, seems more contented with affirming
the institutions of modern democracy,
even the democratic welfare states that have really come
into their own in the first half--
the second half of the 20th century.
But the first generation critical theory
had this notion of social philosophy,
which I do think was more--
somewhat more capacious, was certainly
very willing to take on board questions of aesthetics
and psychology in a way that some
of the more recent exemplars of critical theory
have largely neglected.
But not entirely.
I mean, Axel Honneth has paid a great attention
to psychoanalysis, to object relations,
and tries to fold that into his understanding of recognition,
which is very capacious and also makes room, by the way,
for a revision of the concept of reification
that Marty noted Adorno was so critical of.
And other people like Rahel Jaeggi
in her notion of forms of life, have
tried to fill out an understanding of philosophy
as social philosophy in that same tradition.
So it's there.
But despite all of that, I still think
it's very much the case that Adorno didn't think in terms
of institutions of law, of representative government,
of economic forms, and so forth.
He had very little acumen for that.
And in fact, it wasn't something that initially moved him
into philosophy.
I mean, the recurrence of Kant and themes
from Kant's practical philosophy and from his aesthetics
goes all the way back to the very, very beginning
of Adorno's career as a young man studying philosophy
with Siegfried Kracauer.
And it recurs at the very end of his career
with these homages to Kant, somewhat surprising homages
in negative dialectics.
Enough said.
DAN BLANTON: Yeah.
Eduardo Mendieta asks about the decision
to publish the Jargon Of Authenticity separately.
Says, my understanding is that this long essay, small book,
was to be the introduction to negative dialectics.
Now, there is a way to read the Jargon Of Authenticity is also
a critique of the jargon of happiness.
Happiness itself is something that is suspect.
PETER GORDON: Happiness itself is something that's suspect.
Yeah.
Well, so bits of the Jargon Of Authenticity, of course,
survive in Negative Dialectics.
But the portions that survive are much less, let's
say, culturalist in orientation.
The quite ruthless critique of the Jargon Of [NON-ENGLISH] has
a sociological and cultural dimension to it that simply
wouldn't have had much of a place in Negative Dialectics,
which is a much more narrowly focused book directed
to straightforwardly philosophical questions.
I mean, so much in jargon of authenticity
is about post-war Germany, the kind of circulation
of a kitschified, pious, Heideggerian, quasi
existentialist discourse that, as Adorno points out,
infects even businesses and the way that the businesses promote
notions of satisfaction through advertising
or the way the managerial class speaks among themselves.
So all of that is quite different from what
appears in Negative Dialectics.
But there are moments in Negative Dialectics,
long sections of the book that are devoted
to a critique of Heidegger.
And Adorno is especially interested in the way
that Heidegger, notwithstanding his reputation as a philosopher
of the concrete, of this worldly and temporal life,
is a crypto idealist, a term that he borrows from Günther
Anders or Günther Anders Stern.
And this means that Heidegger is still
guilty of celebrating the primacy of the object.
That the understanding of being is
something that endows the subject with great strength.
That being is something that the subject
can wield, through its understanding of being,
to master the world.
You could call it a perverse reading of Heidegger,
but I think it's not entirely wrong.
I actually think that captures something
about Heidegger's notion of Dasein
as enjoying the gift of a [GERMAN].
That's what makes the human so special.
And then, of course, this brings us back
to our reading for today.
In Meditations on Metaphysics, there's
that interesting passage on [GERMAN] on dying today.
And there, Heidegger returns.
Heidegger returns as a philosopher who offers the idle,
he says, of pure [NON-ENGLISH] experience.
And you hear a little bit of the jargon of authenticity there.
He says that "The metaphysics of death degenerated either
into advertising for the heroic death or into the triviality
of the pure repetition of what is unmistakable,"
what's incorrigible, what can't be changed anyways.
"Namely that everyone has to die.
Its entire ideological bad state of affairs."
He goes on.
I won't read the whole passage.
But this is, once again, Adorno really trying to say,
don't turn Heidegger's celebration of authenticity
into the proper kind of porous subject
that is responsive to the object.
Heidegger's way of doing this is mistaken.
Heidegger, after all, still wants resolve.
He still wants a self which arrogates to itself,
a certain kind of privilege and claims
to gather up all of the meanings of life in the face of death
into a mode of comportment that he calls authenticity.
And Adorno wants none of that.
I don't know if I responded to the question, Eduardo.
I'm sorry if I didn't.
[LAUGHS] OK.
DAN BLANTON: Unmute myself.
It occurs to me we've got a couple
of threads coming out of the question,
tendrils in different directions.
One perhaps picking up on the composition
of practice of Adorno.
Jaya Sahota points to the implicit contradiction
with which we're left and asks, what do we make of the fact
that Adorno argued so emphatically
for the particularity and nonfungibility,
or nongeneralizability of experience
and a philosophy that's situated in particularity?
And yet use the same language in the Mahler writings
that he does in Negative Dialectics,
that he argues in favor of the shabby and yet broadest
critical attention primarily to figures like Mahler.
Not usually thought of as shabby, it seems fair to say.
Do these constitute substantial contradictions?
If so, what do we make of them?
And then, below, picking up that thread,
Tekla Babiak points to this fact that Adorno, and maybe this
picks up the social political problem again,
turn not to philosophy, but rather to literature, to music
in order to articulate these ideas about particularity.
It's as though he felt that the arts could
offer a particularized form of metaphysics that
philosophy hadn't yet taken up.
When Adorno invokes Proust, then what
is at stake in terms of genre?
Is he treating literature as philosophy
or is he implicitly positing a view
of literature as a possible antidote to Kantian metaphysics?
Or perhaps just picking up that other thread,
is there a different sort of hidden notion of authenticity
in some of these borrowings and referential attachments
to the music and artistic and other, other modes,
a different mode of being?
PETER GORDON: What a wonderful question.
I can't do justice to all of this.
But one very particular point, this remark
on the shabby and the discarded, that
is anticipated almost directly in the same words
in his analysis of Mahler.
He sees Mahler not as a composer of the monumental,
but as someone whose monumental forms are decayed,
are breaking down, and who incorporates into his music
a kind of potpourri of references, of debris,
of the popular, of the folk song, the landler,
for example, which are sometimes unassimilated.
So that Mahler is actually, if you
like, the modernist of Kitsch.
And Kitsch gets turned into a kind
of aesthetic, an aesthetic of the remnant
of the unassimilable, indeed of the migrant, the exile, the Jew.
And Adorno then tries to revalue the anti-Semitic charge
that Mahler's Jewish music was something
that made him a weak composer.
So that passage about the shabby actually
comes from the Mahler book.
And indeed, some of this sounds a little strange.
I mean, I think it's fair to say that there are certainly
passages in Mahler that, with their grand brass
fanfares, that sound just as grandiose, as
triumphant, as absurdly bombastic as Bruckner,
with whom he was often compared.
But Adorno doesn't read him that way.
Adorno, on the contrary, reads him
as a composer in a moment of decadence and decay,
who anticipates atonality, anticipates
particularly the free atonality of the earlier Schoenberg.
This brings us-- well, maybe that's enough said about Mahler.
[LAUGHS]
The question about the prominence
of aesthetic illustration in Adorno
is a very, very interesting one.
And yeah, this is the--
I think this is a very, very important point,
at least for me.
There is a view out there that Adorno somehow
retreated from the social world entirely,
and that particularly in response
to the traumatic experiences with the student movement,
he spent his last years in a, in a, in a kind of retreat
into aesthetic modernism.
I think this is a misunderstanding.
I mean, I think that he had shown since the very beginning
of his career a strong interest in the aesthetic
alongside his interests in philosophy
and in problems of society.
He didn't feel that the two were in conflict,
and he didn't rescind rescinded from the social
into it, the aesthetic.
On the contrary, he seemed to see the aesthetic
as a seismograph of the social, and see
that the same problems that we encounter in society
recur in the artwork as problems of aesthetic form.
That's a paraphrase from the aesthetic theory.
But, and here's the last point, it
wasn't only in formal aesthetics that he
identified moments of, let's say, precarious happiness.
The great significance of minima moralia, I think,
shouldn't be missed here.
That is one marvelous illustration
of how a Adorno performs a kind of phenomenology
of everyday experience and finds, in everyday experience,
moments of happiness, moments of compromise, moments of--
well, moments of compromise between what's
the normative promise and the damage
of our current social world.
It's a beautiful book in that respect.
It's not merely a collection of minor aphorisms
to be consumed along the way as we devote our primary attention
to the great formal tomes of Adorno's life.
I think it's actually a crucial book in which he demonstrates
that his interest in happiness and social suffering
can direct his attention to everyday life as well.
DAN BLANTON: As perhaps befits a discussion of Adorno,
we draw to a late hour.
And it's a later one for Peter still.
So we probably have time for one more question,
and I can't promise it's a small one.
But Noah Sanders asks, question about experience,
which picks up this undertone minima moralia and elsewhere.
Wondering about Adorno's role for presence or being in
regards to the thing that endures the negative dialectic.
The interest in the precarity of happiness
seems related to the instability of presence
in Hegel's definition of being as indeterminate immediacy.
What's the relationship between the fleeting and ephemeral
qualities of Adorno's precarious happiness
and the unknowingness and insecurity of Hegel's being?
And--
PETER GORDON: What a lovely question, (INAUDIBLE).
That's a fantastic question.
There's a whole book to be written about that,
and I hope you'll write it.
I mean, as regards experience, of course,
the great expert on experience and the concept
and its many adventures is right here in the session with us,
Martin Jay.
So I defer to him on that.
What I would say about Adorno's relation to Hegel in this regard
is that Adorno's understanding of Hegel
is an understanding of Hegel as the philosopher
of absolute knowing, of dialectical completion.
Where having gone through the dialectic
becomes a greater differentiated or mediated totality,
but finally gains a kind of security, a kind of truth,
the truth of absolute knowing.
And for Adorno, that's everything in Hegel he rejects.
What, of course, is very interesting
is that from another perspective,
the Anglo-American neo-Hegelianism,
say of Brandom, McDowell, Pippin, and so forth,
have, in their own very different way,
conceded that that kind of Hegel would be, at this point
in history, a metaphysical embarrassment.
And they too have therefore tried
to recuperate from Hegel an understanding of Hegel who
is much less the Hegel of absolute knowing,
the Hegel of the owl of Minerva, the Hegel
of dialectical completion, or a mediated totality.
And instead, they've recuperated a Hegel
who is a theoretician of practice, of--
as Pippin and Pinkard like to say,
a Hegel who sees that the modern structure of life
is one where we have gained an awareness
that truth is a process of the giving and taking of reasons.
Now, that that's hardly Adorno's Hegel.
I don't want to assimilate one to the other.
But I do want to say that there's a concession there
that the old vision of Hegel as the last great metaphysician
is no longer tolerable.
And I think that's an interesting that's
an interesting connection.
It perhaps brings both of them closer to the Hegel
that you were invoking in your question.
DAN BLANTON: Marvelous.
I think we've come to the end of the hour.
My apologies to anyone that we couldn't get to directly,
but please feel free to continue the conversation in any way
possible.
My thanks most of all to Peter, whom we've
exhausted for the last couple of days
after making him wait for a year and have now promised to bring
him back and exhaust him again.
But our silent gratitude and all of the little
tiles above the above the screen.
My thanks too to Pardis and to Rob and to Marty
for the texture and depth and enhancement
of all of these questions.
And I do hope we can defer the conversation yet again and take
it up in an appropriately Ardonian fashion
before too much longer.
And ideally with some promise of presence and happiness,
if we can find it.
But thank you.
PETER GORDON: Thank you.
ROBERT KAUFMAN: Thank you, again, so much
for making all this possible.
Thanks to the audience for being here and being so engaged.
Really appreciate it from everybody.
Thank you.
PETER GORDON: Thank you, everybody.
[APPLAUSE]