In the summer of 1925,
Verer Heisenberg developed the first
consistent theory of quantum mechanics.
The paper he wrote is cryptic even for
experts. But inside we find four
groundbreaking ideas that rewrote the
rules of physics. In this video, I will
walk you through these ideas, concepts,
and calculations to show you exactly how
Heisenberg created quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics was created by Verer
Heisenberg in 1925 with the publication
of this paper. The content is hard to
follow. Some sections lack continuity
and some mathematical steps look like
magic. The goal of this video is to
change that and only with the help of
not very advanced physics and plenty of
mathematical manipulation, I hope to
make Heisenberg's paper more accessible.
By the end of this video, we will
discover how the famous 0 point energy
appears in Heisenberg's theory and an
early draft of what later became the
uncertainty principle. In this
step-by-step guide, I will show you all
the details so you can also enjoy the
beauty of this groundbreaking paper.
This video is divided into three parts.
I will begin by showing you the
experimental fact that led to matrices.
Then I will introduce the four core
ideas and calculations in the paper. And
finally I will present one of the
examples that Heisenberg provided at the
end of his paper including all the gory
details that I hope can give you a
glimpse on the work of theoretical
physics. As you probably know,
Heisenberg's theory of quantum mechanics
became known as matrix mechanics because
of the use of these mathematical arrays
of numbers. I want to begin by answering
one simple question. Why are matrices
needed in quantum mechanics? The answer
is a simple experimental observation
made by the Swiss physicist Valter Ritz
in the summer of 1908.
This table shows some of the lines of
the hydrogen spectrum. Let's take these
two and add their inverse. And now let's
look at the inverse of this line.
Let's try with these lines.
Now these three. There is clearly a
pattern here. One last time. I will now
show you why this happens. This is a
formula that Reitberg found in 1888 for
the wavelength of hydrogen spectral
lines in terms of two integer numbers J
and K. R is just a constant. Multiplying
all this by the speed of light, we get
frequencies instead. Notice what happens
when we add two frequencies in which the
second index of one is identical to the
first index of the other. Using the
formula above, we find that the middle
indices cancel out and we get a new
frequency with the first index of one
and the second index of the other. This
relation is a general result for
spectral lines. And this is exactly what
I show you in the examples. If I include
the indices, you can see that in all
cases, the general formula works. This
relation is an example of the so-called
Ritz combination principle and it tells
us how the frequencies of a spectral
lines are combined to form new
frequencies. This observation is the key
to unlocking the ideas in Heisenber's
paper. And as I will show you shortly,
this experimental fact is the reason for
the need of matrices.
Since 1900, quantum physics was a
collection of arbitrary and unjustified
rules that became known as old quantum
theory. Heisenberg changed all that
after an isolation retreat in a remote
island in June 1925.
After his return, he wrote a cryptic
paper titled on the quantum theoretical
reinterpretation of kinematical and
mechanical relationships in which he
laid out four rules for calculating the
outcome of experiments.
Everything began with Einstein's quantum
theory of radiation from 1917. After
completing his monumental work on
general relativity, Einstein returned to
the study of radiation, introducing two
key innovations, a new process called
stimulated emission and transition
probabilities for describing the
absorption and emission of light.
Unfortunately, there was no way to
determine these probabilities. The
breakthrough came in early 1921 when
Rudolfph Latenburgg found a way to
connect Einstein's quantum probabilities
with classical quantities that could be
measured in dispersion experiments.
Inspired by Latenburg, this idea was
extended by Henrik Kramers who found a
quantum theory of dispersion. Kramers
and Max Bourne also discovered a
mathematical relation between classical
and quantum relations that was crucial
for Heisenberg. Let's now dive into
Heisenberg's famous paper. The key word
is reinterpretation.
Historians of science refer to this work
as the unon paper. What everyone was
searching for during the 1920s was a way
to derive quantum equations to replace
the equations of classical mechanics.
Heisenberg built on the ideas of
Einstein, Latenburg, Kmers, Bore and
Bourne to find the quantum equivalent of
physical quantities from a classical
theory. He starts by setting one of the
core ideas in which his quantum
mechanics is built. It is advisable to
completely discard unobserved quantities
such as the electrons position and
period. Instead, it seems more
reasonable to try to establish a theory
of quantum mechanics in which only
relationships among observable
quantities occur. This is one of the
most radical ideas in the history of
physics, one that leads to debates even
today. Heisenberg proposes here that
quantum mechanics is only a theory about
experimental observables. In his paper,
these are the transition amplitudes and
frequencies. Although this idea is
usually attributed to Heisenberg, one of
its main proponents was Wol and Powley.
His letters show that by the summer of
1925, he had convinced most of the key
figures of quantum theory about this
idea. This is something that Einstein
and Shinger strongly opposed. For them,
physics is about describing nature as a
whole, including all its underlying
mechanisms, even those that we cannot
measure. We could say that with this
sentence, Heisenberg began the infamous
shut up and calculate approach. Let me
know in the comments if you have an
opinion about this idea. After this,
Heisenberg begins his rumblings. I stop
following the paper here and present the
ideas in a more coherent order pointing
out to the corresponding results in the
paper. The first concept is position.
The classical view of the electron
orbiting the nucleus was enough for
atoms with a single electron but failed
with all the others. After his work with
Bourne, Heisenberg knew that a classical
periodic motion of an electron in a
stationary state n can be described as
an infinite sum of oscillations. This is
called a furier series. A more general
way to write this is by using a complex
exponential instead where the sum is
over all positive and negative values of
the index alpha. I will later drop the
estimation range to simplify notation.
The factors a alpha are called fura
modes and kramers showed in his doctoral
thesis that these factors are directly
related to the transition probabilities
between states introduced by Einstein in
his paper on quantum radiation. The
position is a real quantity. Forcing all
this sum to be equal to its own complex
conjugate implies a relation between the
negative and positive fura modes. This
relation will be very useful later. Here
heisenberg introduces his first seminal
idea. According to the correspondence
principle, the classical frequency of
the orbital motion of the electron and
its harmonics get replaced by the
transition frequencies between atomic
states. Alpha omega becomes omega and k
where n is the current state of the
electron and k is any other state that
the electron can transition via a
quantum jump. Just for clarity in this
video, I will use the subindex k as
short notation for n minus alpha. Now we
can write the position of the quantum
electron in this way where the classical
furier modes are replaced by transition
amplitudes with two indices to match the
transition frequencies that obey the
ritz combination principle. Just like in
the classical case, forcing the position
to be a real quantity implies this
relationship. Reversing the indices of
the amplitudes is equivalent to checking
its complex conjugate. This relation
corresponds to Heisenber's position
reinterpretation and the word kinematics
in the title of his paper. Note that the
positive values of alpha represent
quantum transitions between the current
state n and lower levels whereas the
negative values denote higher levels.
With this expression, Heisenberg built a
tower of so-called virtual oscillators.
The next concept is motion. I bet many
of you were not expecting to find
Newton's second law in the foundational
paper on quantum mechanics, but this is
Heisenberg's starting point. Writing the
force and acceleration as functions of
position, dividing by the mass of the
particle and collecting terms on the
left hand side. Heisenberg renamed this
ratio just f. His idea is that depending
on the physical system of interest, all
you have to do is to identify the
potential energy, calculate f and
properly write this equation of motion
in terms of the quantum position as
defined in the previous section. This
concept is the mechanics in the title of
his paper. as examples for the harmonic
oscillator f is just omega^ squar * x
whereas the so-called unharmonic
oscillator has an extra term with x
squared in general for any function we
can expand the function as a power
series of x and here realized that we
need a proper definition of how to
calculate powers of x which takes us to
the third concept
Multiplication.
This concept is probably the most
important and revolutionary in the
paper. Back to the classical
definitions. Let's see what the product
of two positions X and Y is in terms of
FIA modes. For this, we simply multiply
two FA series where A are the modes of X
and B are the modes of Y. Note that the
exponential now combines harmonics of X
and Y. However, we can introduce a new
index toao which allows writing the
product as a new fier series. Defining
the new fier modes in terms of a and b,
we explicitly find that the product of
two positions x and y gives a series
that has the same structure as x. This
is one of the great properties of a
series. We can calculate the product
between y and x instead. Following the
same steps as before, we find that the
order of the product makes no
difference. We call quantities that
satisfy this relation commutative
objects. A common example is real
numbers. The order of the factors does
not affect the product. Now we repeat
this but using the quantum
reinterpretation of position and
frequency introduced before. Taking
their product, we must be careful with
the indices. And just like in the
classical case, the two corresponding
frequencies appear added in the
exponential. But now we have a problem.
Note that the two frequencies cannot be
combined into a new frequency like in
the classical case because the indices
do not match the RIT's combination
principle. This would mark the end of
Heisenber's efforts because the product
of two series does not produce a new
series. But here comes the bold move.
Heisenberg proposed that this is not how
quantum objects are multiplied. He wants
the two frequencies in the exponential
to have the indices in such order that
the rich combination principle can be
used to convert this sum of quantum
frequencies into a single new frequency.
Remember that the ritz combination
principle is an experimental fact.
Heisenber simply took this feature of
nature and used it to invent a new way
to manipulate transition frequencies.
His multiplication rule is that the
second index of the first amplitude must
be equal to the first index of the
second amplitude. In this way, the two
frequencies in the exponential can be
easily added using the Ritz combination
principle. Now we proceed just as
before. We rename the product of
amplitudes and find that the product of
these two quantum objects is a series
like the original. We can repeat the
same steps to calculate y * x instead.
But now we find that the indices are
arranged in a way that the two products
are except in very special cases not
equal. Here Heisenberg found that a
consequence of his quantum
reinterpretation is that quantum objects
are not commutative. This is the bold
conceptual innovation that makes this
paper the foundation of modern quantum
mechanics. This weird multiplication
rule made Heisenberg very uncomfortable.
In the paper he wrote this
multiplication rule is an almost
necessary consequence of the frequency
combination rules. He accepted what his
theory was telling him but could not
make sense of the meaning of these
non-commutative objects. After his
return from Helgoland, he expressed his
concern to Max Bourne. What are these
objects that obey these rules? Let me
bring back the way the transition
amplitudes are combined. Heisenberg was
baffled by this relation. But today,
even a freshman student would recognize
it as matrix multiplication. Believe it
or not, Heisenberg didn't know about
matrices. This is how Hans Bete, one of
the great students of Somerfield and
Heisenberg, described it.
So he said we should only talk about
experimentally observable quantities
both the frequencies and these
amplitudes but should forget about the
motion of electrons in orbits.
Then he
discussed just how these quantities Q
and PKN should occur in the theory. how
would you form kinetic and potential
energy from them? And he found that
these uh quantities obeyed very strange
multiplication rules which he had never
seen before. But he wrote down these
multiplication rules. Uh P and Q just
did not uh behave like ordinary
algebraic quantities. when he came home
to Guttingan
uh Max Bon told him but Heisenberg what
you have there is simply the
multiplication of matrices.
Now you all learn about matrices
probably in your freshman year or at
most in your sophomore year but
Heisenberg had never heard about
matrices.
Thanks to Bourne, Heisenberg discovered
that quantum objects follow the rules of
matrix algebra. But this only happened
after he wrote his paper. Before we
judge Heisenberg for not knowing about
matrices, the same was true for most
physicists of the time. Matrix algebra
was so unknown that the paper that
Bourne and Jordan wrote following on
Heisenber's work began with a full
section explaining the basics of
matrices.
The fourth and final concept introduced
by Heisenberg was a new quantization
rule. I remind you that old quantum
theory was mostly based on the rule
developed by Bore and Somerfeld. This
was very successful for describing an
isolated hydrogen atom, but it failed in
light of new experiments. This rule
worked as follows. First, write the
classical equation of motion. then solve
the equation to find the classical
solution and finally force the classical
solution to satisfy the bore summerfeld
rule. In Heisenber's approach, the
classical solution is irrelevant because
the goal is to determine the transition
amplitudes and frequencies. For this
reason, a new quantization rule was
needed. Heisenberg took the rule from
old quantum theory and replaced momentum
and position by their classical FA
expansions. Using the chain rule, the
integral over position can be turned
into an integral over one orbital
period. We need to determine x dot
squared. Since we know x, we can
directly take the time derivative and
then take the product with itself. These
are classical free expansions. So this
is the conventional product. Now we can
use a trick. Since the sum over beta
includes all positive and negative
values, we can replace beta by minus
beta in this expression and the sum does
not change. In this line, I have simply
replaced every beta by minus beta. Now
we can integrate over time. The orbital
period is related to the frequency. So
we can make this change of variables.
This angular integral is not trivial but
it happens to vanish except when beta is
equal to alpha. In case you are familiar
with the name this is an integral
representation of the chronicer delta.
This means that when summing over beta
all terms are zero except when beta
equals alpha and this expression reduces
to a single sum. There is nothing new
here. This relation is just the bore
summerfell rule for fier modes. Now
Heisenberg tried to reinterpret this
relation. The obvious thing to do is
replacing the fier modes and harmonics
frequencies by transition amplitudes and
quantum frequencies respectively.
However, there is a problem. What to do
with this extra index alpha?
Heisenberg's reinterpretation of
frequency only eliminates one of the
alpha indices. meaning that a direct
reinterpretation of the bore summerfeld
rule is not possible. Here is
Heisenberg's workaround. He took the
derivative with respect to the quantum
number n on both sides. This expression
looks even more complicated. But here he
invoked what we could call the
reinterpretation discovered
independently by Bourne and Kmers. This
relation turns classical derivatives
into quantum differences.
This is one of the great outcomes
obtained in the spirit of the failed BKS
theory that I presented in a previous
video. Using this relation, Heisenberg
was able to transform the quantum rule
of the old quantum theory into his new
language of transition amplitudes and
frequencies. Heisenber understood that
this rule provides a recursive relation
between amplitudes. Once you know the
amplitude for one quantum transition,
this relation allows finding the others.
This formula and the equation of motion
with the corresponding multiplication
rule constitute the equations of
Heisenberg's quantum theory. And these
are the revolutionary ideas in the
paper. Here is a summary of the key
concepts in Heisenberg's paper. Position
is written in terms of transition
amplitudes and frequencies. These two
quantities are the central unknowns of
the theory because they are observable
in experiments. The transition
amplitudes define the intensity of the
spectral lines and the frequencies
determine their wavelength.
Motion is characterized by the quantum
position object satisfying the classical
equations. Note that Heisenberg's theory
is Newtonian. This was later improved
and turned into a more general
Hamiltonian theory by Heisenberg in
collaboration with Bourne and Jordan.
Maybe I should make a video about that
too. Quantum objects obey an unusual
multiplication rule. Non-commutativity
of quantum quantities is one of the
central discoveries in the paper. Thanks
to Bourne, Heisenberg and the rest of
the physics community learned that
transition amplitudes are described by
matrix algebra and Heisenberg's theory
became known as the matrix formulation
of quantum mechanics.
The quantum nature of transition
amplitudes and frequencies is specified
by Heisenberg's reinterpretation of the
old Bore Somerfell quantum rule. Here is
where plank's constant enters the
equations. And that's it. This is the
recipe for a self-consistent and
systematic quantum mechanics. Heisenberg
described it like this. Equations 11 and
16 contain a complete determination not
only of frequencies and energy values
but also of quantum transition
probabilities.
The paper also includes two crucial
questions probably influenced by the
recent reputation of BKS theory.
Heisenberg wondered about energy
conservation and also whether the energy
levels predicted by his theory would
satisfy the wellestablished bore
Einstein relation. But the only way to
answer these questions was by testing
the theory with examples. This is what I
will do in the next part.
Heisenberg's method was a first draft
for quantum mechanics. All the main
ingredients are there, but he knew that
a mathematical refinement was needed. He
ended his paper with an invitation to
such mathematical polishing of his
ideas. Whether the method proposed here
can be regarded as satisfactory can be
decided only by more intensive
mathematical investigation. The method
has been very superficially employed
here.
In the last section of this video, I
want to show you an explicit example of
how to use Heisenber's idea to a
particular system. Although I will
present a simplified case, I will
include all the gory details because I
find this a very instructive exercise. I
honestly think that I understood the
main ideas in Heisenberg's paper only
after going through these calculations
and I hope that they can help you too.
This would let you appreciate the amount
of work behind every result in the paper
and hopefully give you a glimpse of the
work of a theoretical physicist.
Heisenber begins section three of his
paper with as a simple example the
anharmonic oscillator will now be
treated. The interest in the unharmonic
oscillator is that just like the
hydrogen atom transitions between all
levels are possible. However, this
example requires familiarity with the
methods of perturbation theory. Since I
want this exercise to be valuable even
if this is your first encounter with
quantum mechanics, I will only cover the
particular case of lambda equals 0. This
is the simple harmonic oscillator. There
is a running joke that the simple
harmonic oscillator is the only system
that physicists know how to solve.
Sydney Collan described it better. The
career of a young theoretical physicist
consists of treating the harmonic
oscillator in everinccreasing levels of
abstraction. And if you have studied
quantum mechanics and quantum field
theory, you know that this is true. I
will first solve this using the bore
Somerfell rule of the old quantum theory
and then using Heisenber's quantum
mechanics so we can compare. If you
watch my last video, you will like the
subtle differences.
As you probably know, the differential
equation of the harmonic oscillator is
exactly satisfied by this general
solution where a and b are constants and
omega kn is the fundamental frequency of
the oscillator. Comparing this solution
with the general fier series, we
immediately find that there are only two
nonzero fier modes and the harmonics are
given by multiples of omega kn. This
means that the infinite sum only has two
terms. Following the recipe of old
quantum theory, now that we have found a
classical solution, we make it quantum
by forcing it to obey the bore
summerfield rule for fier modes found
before where n is an integer. Let's not
forget that this sum has only two terms.
One for alpha= 1 and alpha= minus1. by
properties of complex numbers. This
reduces to a single term from which we
directly find the general expression of
the only nonzero fier mode. Let's now
calculate the energy levels of this old
quantum oscillator. Note that we need to
determine x dot squared and x². And for
this we use our simple fa expansion. X
dot is given by this. And it's a square
leads to three terms. Then we do the
same for x^2. The calculation is very
similar. Plug in these two quantities in
the expression for energy, we have six
terms, but two pairs cancel each other
out while the other two are identical.
Note that all time dependence
disappears, meaning that the energy
levels are constant in time. Energy is
conserved. We have found the energy
levels in terms of the fier modes. We
can now replace our previous result to
find that the energy levels are
proportional to the quantum number n.
For this reason, the energy gap between
two adjacent levels is exactly h bar
omega kn and the bore einstein relation
is satisfied. Here is the summary of the
results.
Now we repeat this but following method.
Just like before, we begin with the
quantum position, but instead of using
the classical solution, we calculate the
second time derivative to replace it
into the equation of motion. Factorizing
common terms, we find this relation.
From now on, we will need the complete
form of the indices. So, I am replacing
K by N minus alpha. Under the assumption
that every state has its own energy for
each value of alpha in the sum, the
exponent will be different. This means
that each element of the sum must
individually vanish. For alpha equals 0,
we get this. Since the transition
frequency of a state with itself is
zero, we find that the same is true for
the amplitude. For alpha equals 1, we
get this. Inspired by the classical
result, we set the amplitude between one
level and the next to be non zero, which
gives us a constant value for the
transition frequency. Contrary to the
hydrogen atom, here the frequencies are
independent of the quantum number n,
which means that the energy levels are
equally spaced. We can now repeat for
alpha= minus1 to get this. Just like the
classical case, the only nonzero
transition amplitudes are between
adjacent states. Using that the energy
levels are equally spaced implies that
for all other values of alpha, the
amplitude is zero. Summarizing from the
equation of motion, we found the
frequencies and the nonvanishing
amplitudes. This condition that the only
allowed transitions are between states
that defer by one quantum unit is
usually known as selection rules. We
still need to find the value of these
two amplitudes. For this, we use the
older equation in Heisenberg's method,
the quantum condition. As mentioned
before, this equation provides a
recursive way to determine the
amplitudes. Since alpha can only take
two values, we can expand the sum
leading to four terms. Using the
previous result for the transition
amplitudes and being extra careful with
the order of the indices to get all the
signs right, we find that the four terms
reduce to two terms. Finally, we can
write the recursive relation for the
amplitudes. The next step is defining a
so-called ground state. This is defined
as the lowest possible state of the
system. Setting this to be represented
by n equals 0, we get the following. In
this step, heisenber reasoned that
transitions below the level n= 0 do not
exist by definition of ground state.
Therefore, this term must be zero. And
with this, we find our first transition
amplitude. Next we take n= 1 which is
given in terms of the transition that we
just found. We can repeat for n= 2 and
quickly find the pattern for any state
n. This is the transition amplitude
which I will add to the summary on the
top right. Note that the absolute value
allows reversing the state indices
without affecting the result. Also
notice that we can replace n by n minus
one to obtain this pair of relations
that will be useful in a minute. The
final calculation is the energy of the
oscillator. Just like before we need to
determine x dot squar and x^2. But this
time we must use Heisenber's
multiplication rule. For x dot we simply
take the derivative with respect to
time. Here notice that all these terms
correspond to the amplitude that we have
to use in the multiplication rule. The
product of x dot with itself gives us
this long expression. Now we use that
only transitions between adjacent states
are allowed to expand the sum over
alpha. So we get two terms for the sum
over beta. We have to be extra careful.
Let's look at this term from the
selection rules. The indices in the
amplitude can only defer by one.
Therefore, beta can only take the values
zero or two leading to these two terms.
Using the same method with the second
term, we find that beta can only take
the values 0 and minus2 producing the
next two terms. Now we have to evaluate
the frequencies. Since the two
amplitudes have the same indices in
reverse order, their product is just the
squared magnitude. Using our previous
results, the first frequency is positive
and equal to omega KN. Whereas the
second frequency has the same indices in
reverse order. So it has an extra minus.
Finally, we use that the transition
frequency of a state with itself is
zero. Just to make sure that the method
is clear, let me do the second term.
Here the product of amplitudes remains
as it is. The first frequency is again
omega kn whereas the second frequency is
also omega kn. If this is unclear, just
replace n by n minus one in the formula
above. The exponent is no longer zero.
Since we know that the energy levels are
equally spaced, the frequency between
levels two units apart is simply two
times omega KN. Using the same procedure
with the other two terms, we get this.
Taking out the common factor omega
squared, we have found the expression
needed for the kinetic energy. The same
steps are needed for x^2. We expand the
sum over alpha, then sum over beta and
evaluate the frequencies. This is much
easier than the previous one. And now
we're ready to calculate the energy of
the oscillator. Like the semi-class
case, all the time dependent terms
cancel each other out, making the energy
levels constant. This answers
Heisenberg's question about energy
conservation. Yes, the energy of the
harmonic oscillator in quantum mechanics
is conserved. Now I bring back the
amplitudes that we found before because
we can determine the final expression
for the energy. Plugging the two
relevant amplitudes, we get this.
Factorizing common terms, we finally
find the energy. Here is the summary of
all the results that we found. We can
answer Heisenberg's second question.
Yes, given that the energy levels are
equally spaced, the bore Einstein
relation is satisfied. This is the final
answer from Heisenberg's point of view.
It is not the position of the oscillator
or its speed but the observable
quantities transition amplitudes and
frequencies.
Additionally, we find that the energy of
the ground state is not zero, but 1/2 h
bar omega kn exactly as many experiments
indicated. In case you're unfamiliar
with this, make sure to check my video
about the 0 point energy. In that video,
I mentioned that there was no room for
this factor 1/2 h bar omega in quantum
theory before Heisenberg. Bringing back
the results of the semic-class theory of
the harmonic oscillator, we see that
Heisenber's theory agrees with all the
results of the bore summer theory except
for the 0 point energy. In the old
theory, the energy of the ground state n
equals 0 is exactly zero. in
contradiction with many experiments at
low temperatures that show that quantum
systems exhibit a remnant energy of 1/2
h bar omega. The hope was that a
systematic theory of quantum mechanics
could explain the origin of this
residual energy and Heisenberg's quantum
mechanics did exactly that. If you track
the origin of the constant term in the
energy, you will find it to arise from
the new quantum condition. Bourne and
Jordan transformed this new rule created
by Heisenberg into one of the
fundamental building blocks of quantum
mechanics found today in textbooks. The
so-called canonical quantum commutation
relation from which the famous
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle can
be derived. But this happens two years
later. For now, I wanted to show you
that Heisenberg's paper already contains
many of the blueprints for modern
quantum mechanics. And although he
didn't know it, this formula is the
first draft of his famous uncertainty
principle.
If you made it this far, congratulations
and thank you for joining me. This is a
remarkable paper and I hope that with
this deep dive any student even at the
undergraduate level can understand its
significance and reproduce the original
calculations. Most textbooks present
these results as coming out of a magic
hat but in reality they can be derived
using some math a good understanding of
the historical context and more
importantly building out of experimental
evidence.