This book was uploaded by Hidden
Whispers Revelations on YouTube. Please
subscribe and like the video to support
us. Some spelling may be off. We
apologize to the listener. This is a 633
page book. So I upload in parts. This is
part one. The secret teachings of all
ages. An encyclopedic outline of
Masonic, hermetic, cabalistic, and
rosacrruian. Symbolical philosophy being
an interpretation of the secret
teachings concealed within the rituals.
Allegorories and Mysteries of All Ages
by Manley P. Hall, San Francisco.
Printed for Manly P. Hall by HS Crocker
Company Incorporated. MCMXXVI,
1928. For once, a book which really
lives up to its title. Hall
self-published this massive tome in
1928, consisting of about 200
legal-sized pages in 8oint type. It is
literally his magnumopus. Each of the
nearly 50 chapters is so dense with
information that it is the equivalent of
an entire short book. If you read this
book in its entirety, you will be in a
good position to dive into subjects such
as the cabala, alchemy, tarot,
ceremonial magic, neoplatonic
philosophy, mystery religions, and the
theory of rosacrruianism and
freemasonry. Although there are some
questionable and controversial parts of
the book such as the outdated material
on Islam, the portion on the bacon
Shakespeare hypothesis and Hall's
conspiracy theory of history as driven
by an elite cabal of roving immortals.
They are far outweighed by the
comprehensive information here on other
subjects. For many years, this book was
only available in a large format
edition, which was hard to obtain and
very expensive. Preface. Numerous
volumes have been written as
commentaries upon the secret systems of
philosophy existing in the ancient
world. But the ageless truths of life,
like many of the earth's greatest
thinkers, have usually been clothed in
shabby garments. The present work is an
attempt to supply a tone worthy of those
seers and sages whose thoughts are the
substance of its pages to bring about
this coalescence of beauty and truth has
proved most costly. But I believe that
the result will produce an effect upon
the mind of the reader which will more
than justify the expenditure. Work upon
the text of this volume was begun the
first day of January 1926 and has
continued almost uninterruptedly for
over 2 years. The greater part of the
research work however was carried on
prior to the writing of the manuscript.
The collection of reference material was
begun in 1921 and 3 years. Later, the
plans for the book took definite form.
For the sake of clarity, all footnotes
were eliminated. The various quotations
and references to other authors being
embodied in the text in their logical
order. The bibliography is appended
primarily to assist those interested in
selecting for future study. the most
authoritative and important items
dealing with philosophy and symbolism to
make readily accessible. The abstuse
information contained in the book, an
elaborate topical cross index, is
included. I make no claim for either the
infallibility or the originality of any
statement here contained. I have studied
the fragmentaryary writings of the
ancients sufficiently to realize that
dogmatic utterances concerning their
tenants are worse than foolhardy.
Traditionalism is the curse of modern
philosophy, particularly that of the
European schools. While many of the
statements contained in this treatise
may appear at first wildly fantastic, I
have sincerely endeavored to refrain
from haphazard metaphysical speculation,
presenting the material as far as
possible in the spirit rather than the
letter of the original. Authors by
assuming responsibility only for the
mistakes which may appear herein. I hope
to escape the accusation of plagiarism
which has been directed against nearly
every writer on the subject of mystical
philosophy. Having no particular ism of
my own to promulgate, I have not
attempted to twist the original writings
to substantiate preconceived notions,
nor have I distorted doctrines in any
effort to reconcile the irreconcilable
differences present in the various
systems of religio philosophic thought.
The entire theory of the book is
diametrically opposed to the modern
method of thinking for it is concerned
with subjects openly ridiculed by the
sophists of the 20th century. Its true
purpose is to introduce the mind of the
reader to a hypothesis of living wholly
beyond the pale of materialistic
theology, philosophy or science. The
mass of abstruse material between its
covers is not susceptible to perfect
organization, but so far as possible
related topics have been grouped
together. Rich as the English language
is in media of expression, it is
curiously lacking in terms suitable to
the conveyance of abstract philosophical
premises. A certain intuitive grasp of
the subtler meanings concealed within
groups of inadequate words is necessary,
therefore, to an understanding of the
ancient mystery teachings. Although the
majority of the items in the
bibliography are in my own library, I
wish to acknowledge gratefully the
assistance rendered by the public
libraries of San Francisco and Los
Angeles, the libraries of the Scottish
Wright in San Francisco and Los Angeles,
the libraries of the University of
California in Berkeley and Los Angeles,
the Mechanics Library in San Francisco,
and the Crotona Theosophical Library at
Ohio, California. Special recognition
for their help is also due to the
following persons. Mrs. Max Handel, Mrs.
Alice Palmer Henderson, Mr. Ernest
Dawson, and staff Mr. John Howell, Mr.
Paul, Elder, Mr. Philip Watson Hackett,
and Mr. John R. Ruxell. Single books
were lent by other persons and
organizations to whom thanks are also
given. The matter of translation was the
greatest single task in the research
work incident to the preparation of this
volume. The necessary German
translations which required nearly three
years were generously undertaken by Mr.
Alfred Ber who declined all remuneration
for his labor. The Latin, Italian,
French and Spanish translations were
made by Professor Homer P. Earl. The
Hebrew text was edited by Rabbi Jacob M.
Alcow. Miscellaneous. Short translations
and checking also were done by various
individuals. The editorial work was
under the supervision of Dr. C. B
rolling sun through whose able efforts
literary order was often brought out of
literary chaos. Special recognition is
also due the services rendered by Mr.
Robert B. Tummens of the staff of H S
Crocker Company Incorporated to whom
were assigned the technical difficulties
of fitting the text matter into its
allotted space. For much of the literary
charm of the work I am also indebted to
Mr. M. Saxton to whom the entire
manuscript was first dictated and to
whom was also entrusted the preparation
of the index table of contents the
ancient mysteries and secret societies
which have influenced modern Masonic
symbolism ancient systems of education
celsius concerning the Christians
knowledge necessary to write living the
druidic mysteries of Britain and Gaul
the writes of Mithris the Mithraic and
Christian mysteries contrasted the
ancient mysteries and secret societies
part Two, the Gnostic mystery. Simon
Magus and Basselid Abrais. The Gnostic
concept of deity. The mysteries of
Sarapus Labyrinth symbolism. The Odinic
or Gothic Mysteries. The ancient
mysteries and secret societies. Part
three. The Elusinian mysteries. The
lesser rights. The greater rights. The
Orphic mysteries. The Bakshik mysteries.
The Dioniac mysteries. Atlantis and the
gods of antiquity. Chambers of the Great
Pyramid. The Riddle of the Sphinx. The
pyramid. Mystery. The secret of the
pyramid. Coffer. The dwelling place of
the hidden god. Isis, the virgin of the
world. The birthdays of the gods. The
murder of Osiris. The hermetic Isis. The
symbols peculiar to Isis. The trouidors.
The mummification of the dead. The sun,
a universal deity. The solar trinity,
Christianity, and the sun. The birthday
of the sun, the three sons. The
celestial inhabitants of the sun, the
midnight sun. The zodiac and its signs.
primitive astronomical instruments, the
equinoxes and solstesses, the
astrological ages of the world, the
circular zodiac of tinterin
interpretation of the zodiacal signs,
the horoscope of the world, the benbine
table of Isis, Plato's initiation in the
great pyramid, the history of the Benine
table, platonic, theory of ideas, the
interplay of the three philosophical
zodiacs, the calaldian, philosophy of
triads, the orphic egg, wonders of
antiquity, the ever burning lamps, The
Oracle of Deli, the Dodinian Oracle, the
Oracle of Trophonius, the initiated
architects, the seven wonders of the
world, the life and philosophy of
Pythagoras, Pythagoras and the school of
Croton Pythagoric fundamentals, the
symmetrical solids, the symbolic
apherisms of Pythagoras, Pythagorean
astronomy, Kepler's theory of the
universe, Pythagorean mathematics, the
theory of numbers, the numerical values
of letters, method of securing the
numerical power of words, an
introduction to The Pythagorean theory
of numbers. The civ of Eratostheines.
The meanings of the 10 numbers. The
human body in symbolism. The
philosophical mannequin. The three
universal centers. The temples of
initiation. The hand in symbolism. The
greater and lesser man. The anthropose
or oversoul. The hierramic legend. The
building of Solomon's temple. The murder
of Seahhyram. Aith the martyrdom of
Jacqu de mole. The spirit fire. And the
pineal gland. The wanderings of the
astronomical seahar Cleopatra's needle
and mason's marks. The Pythagorean
theory of music and color. Pythagoras
and the datonic scale therapeutic music.
The music of the spheres. The use of
color in symbolism. The colors of the
spectrum and the musical scale zodiacal
and planetary colors. Fishes insects
animals reptiles and birds. Jonah and
the whale. The fish the symbol of Christ
the Egyptian scarab. Jupiter's fly. The
serpent of wisdom, the sacred crocodile,
fishes, insects, animals, reptiles, and
birds. Part two, the dove, the yanic
emblem, the self-renewing phoenix, the
great seal of the United States of
America, the cat goddess of the talmy's
apis, the sacred bull, the manosceros,
and the cosmic egg. The cabalistic
system of worlds, the cabalistic
interpretation of Ezekiel's vision, the
great image of Nebuchadnezzar's dream,
the grand man of the universe, the 50
gates of life, the tree of the
Sepharoth, the 32 paths of wisdom, the
greater and the lesser face curters.
Sepharothic tree. The mystery of death.
The three pillars supporting the
sepharothic tree. The four letters of
the sacred name. Cabalistic keys to the
creation of man. Gatria Noteron and
Tamira the Elohim. The four Adams.
Zeribian traditions concerning Adam as
the archetype of mankind. The early
Christian church on the subject of
marriage. An analysis of the tarot
cards. The origin of playing cards. The
roamundi of the rosacrruian. The problem
of tarot symbolism that unnumbered card
the symbolism of the 21 major trumps.
The suit cards. The tabernacle in the
wilderness. Moses the Egyptian initiate
the building of the tabernacle. The
furnishings of the tabernacle. The ark
of the covenant. The robes of glory. The
urim and thumbim. The fraternity of the
rose cross. The life of father c. R. C.
Yan valentene. Andre. Alchemical
teachings of the rosacrruian.
Significance of the rose cross. The
rosacrruian temple. The adepts of the
rose cross. Rosacrruian doctrines and
tenets. The confessesio fraternitatus
through anatomy of melancholy. John
Hayden. Rosacrruianism. The three
mountains of the wise. The philosophical
egg. The objects of the rosacrruian
order. 15. Rosacrruian and cababalistic
diagrams. Schamayam. The ocean of
spirit. The seven days of creation. The
symbolic tomb of Christian Rosenites.
The regions of the elements, the new
Jerusalem, the grand secret of nature,
alchemy and its exponents, the
multiplication of metals, the medal of
emperor Leupold Iparels of Hoenheim,
Raymond Lully Nicholas Floral, Count
Bernard of Treviso, the theory and
practice of alchemy, the origin of
alchemical philosophy, Alexander the
Great, and the talking trees nature and
art. Alchemical symbolism, the song of
Solomon, the Philosophers&lt;unk&gt;'s gold,
the theory and practice of alchemy, part
two. The alchemical prayer, the emerald
tablet of Hermes, a letter from the
brothers of R. C. The magical mountain
of the moon and alchemical formula, the
due of the sages, the chemical marriage.
Christian Rosen is invited to the
chemical wedding, the Virgo, Lucifer,
the philosophical inquisition, the Tower
of Olympus, the Homunculi, the Knights
of the Golden Stone, Bacon, Shakespeare,
and the Rosacrruian. The Rosacrruian
mask life of William Shakespeare Sir
Francis Bacon the acrostic signatures.
The significant number 33. The
philosophic death. The cryptogram as a
factor in symbolic philosophy. Secret
alphabets. The biliteral cipher
pictorial ciphers acromatic ciphers
numerical and musical ciphers code
ciphers. Freemasonic symbolism. The
pillars raised by the sons of Sethan and
the royal arches. The dionc architects.
The Roman collegiia Solomon. The
personification of universal wisdom.
Freemasonry's priceless heritage. Mystic
Christianity. St. Iranius on the life of
Christ. The original name of Jesus the
Christen man. The Essen. The Arthurian
cycle Merlin the mage. The cross and the
crucifixion. The aa legenda. The lost
libraries of Alexandria. The cross in
pagan symbolism. The crucifixion. A
cosmic allegory. The crucifixion of
kettzel coatal. The nails of the
passion. The mystery of the apocalypse,
the sacred city of Ephesus, the
authorship of the apocalypse, the alpha
and omega, the lamb of God, the four
horsemen, the number of the beast, the
faith of Islam, the life of Muhammad,
the revelation of the Quran, the
validictory pilgrimage, the tomb of the
prophet, the Cabba at Mecca, the secret
doctrine of Islam, American Indian
symbolism, the ceremony of the peace
pipe, the historical hayawatha, the
papel of American Indian sorcery, the
mysteries of Zabalba, the mid will win
the mysteries and their emissaries. The
golden chain of Homer Hepatia, the
Alexandrian neoplatonist, the divine
Calstro, the K de St. Germaine, the
designing of the American flag, the
declaration of independence.
Introduction Philosophy is the science
of estimating values, the superiority of
any state or substance over another is
determined by philosophy by assigning a
position of primary importance to what
remains. When all that is secondary has
been removed, philosophy thus becomes
the true index of priority or emphasis
in the realm of speculative thought. The
mission of philosophy of priori is to
establish the relation of manifested
things to their invisible ultimate cause
or nature. Philosophy writes Sir William
Hamilton has been defined as the science
of things divine and human and of the
causes in which they are contained.
Cicero, the science of effects by their
causes. Hobbes, the science of
sufficient reasons. Libnets, the science
of things possible in as much as they
are possible. Wolf, the science of
things evidently deduced from first
principles. Decart, the science of
truths, sensible and abstract. Dondelac,
the application of reason to its
legitimate objects. Tinman, the science
of the relations of all knowledge to the
necessary ends of human reason. Kant,
the science of the original form of the
ego or mental self. Krug, the science of
sciences. Ficta, the science of the
absolute von shelling. The science of
the absolute indifference of the ideal
and real. Von Shelling or the identity
of identity and non-identity. Hegel see
lectures on metaphysics and logic. The
six headings under which the disciplines
of philosophy are commonly classified
are metaphysics which deals with such
abstract subjects as cosmology, theology
and the nature of being. Logic which
deals with the laws governing rational
thinking or as it has been called the
doctrine of fallacies. Ethics which is
the science of morality, individual
responsibility and character concerned
chiefly with an effort to determine the
nature of good. Psychology which is
devoted to investigation and
classification of those forms of
phenomena referable to a mental origin.
Epistemology which is the science
concerned primarily with the nature of
knowledge itself and the question of
whether it may exist in an absolute form
and aesthetics which is the science of
the nature of and the reactions awakened
by the beautiful, the harmonious, the
elegant and the noble. Plato regarded
philosophy as the greatest good ever
imparted by divinity to man. In the 20th
century, however, it has become a
ponderous and complicated structure of
arbitrary and irreconcilable notions,
yet each substantiated by almost
incontestable logic. The lofty theorems
of the old academy which I amus likened
to the nectar and ambrosia of the gods
have been so adulterated by opinion
which Heraclitus declared to be a
falling sickness of the mind that the
heavenly me would now be quite
unrecognizable to this great
neoplatonist. Convincing evidence of the
increasing superficiality of modern
scientific and philosophic thought is
its persistent drift towards
materialism. When the great astronomer
Lelas was asked by Napoleon why he had
not mentioned God in his trait the law
mechanique Celeste the mathematician
naively replied sire I had no need for
that hypothesis in his treatise on
atheism sir Francis Bacon tursly
summarizes the situation thus a little
philosophy in Clint man's mind to
atheism but depth in philosophy bringeth
men's minds about to religion the
metaphysics of Aristotle opens with
these birds. All men naturally desire to
know. To satisfy this, common urged the
unfolding human intellect has explored
the extremities of imaginable space
without and the extremities of
imaginable self within, seeking to
estimate the relationship between the
one and the all, the effect and the
cause, nature and the groundwork of
nature, the mind and the source of the
mind, the spirit and the substance of
the analysis. Not only did Dr. Babbot
create this form of the atom, but he
also contrived a method whereby these
particles could be grouped together in
an orderly manner and thus result in the
formation of molecular bodies. Enclosed
in any body is the efficient cause of
all things. Out of the infinite matter
consisting of similar parts, everything
being made according to its species by
the divine mind, who when all things
were at first confusedly mingled
together, came and reduced them to
order. Archelius declared the principle
of all things to be twofold. Mind which
was incorporeal and air which was
corporeal, the rarifaction and
condensation of the latter resulting in
fire and water respectively. The stars
were conceived by Archilus to be burning
iron places. Heracitis who lived 536 to
470 BC and is sometimes included in the
ionic school in his doctrine of change
and eternal flux asserted fire to be the
first element and also the state into
which the world would ultimately be
reabsorbed. The soul of the world he
regarded as an exhalation from its humid
parts and he declared the eb and flow of
the sea to be caused by the sun. After
Pythagoras of Samos, its founder, the
Italic or Pythagorean school numbers
among its most distinguished
representatives in Petacles, Epicmus,
Archus, Alchemian, Hypus, Filaus, and
Udoxis, Pythagoras 580 to 500 BC
conceived mathematics to be the most
sacred and exact of all the sciences,
and demanded of all who came to him for
study of familiarity with arithmetic,
music, astronomy, and geometry. He laid
special emphasis upon the philosophic
life as a prerequisite to wisdom.
Pythagoras was one of the first teachers
to establish a community wherein all the
members were of mutual assistance to one
another in the common attainment of the
higher sciences. He also introduced the
discipline of retrospection as essential
to the development of the spiritual
mind. Pythagoreanism may be summarized
as a system of metaphysical speculation
concerning the relationships between
numbers and the causal agencies of
existence. This school also first
expounded the theory of celestial
harmonics or the music of the spheres.
John Royland said of Pythagoras that he
taught nothing to his disciples before
the discipline of silence. Silence being
the first rudiment of contemplation. In
his sophist Aristotle credits Impedicles
with the discovery of rhetoric. Both
Pythagoras and Impeticles accepted the
theory of transmigration. The latter
saying a boy I was then did a maid
become a plant, bird, fish, and in the
vast sea swam. Archus is credited with
invention of the screw and the crane.
Pleasure. He declared to be a pestilence
because it was opposed to the temperance
of the mind. He considered a man without
deceit to be as rare as a fish without
bones. The Eliatic sect was founded by
Xenophanes 570 to 480 BC who was
conspicuous for his attacks upon the
cosmologic and theogonic fables of Homer
and Hessiad. Xenophanes declared that
God was one and incorporeal in substance
and figure round in no way resembling
man. That he is all sight and all
hearing but breathes not. That he is all
things the mind and wisdom not generate
but eternal impassible immutable and
rational. Xenophanes believed that all
existing things were eternal, that the
world was without beginning or end, and
that everything which was generated was
subject to corruption. He lived to great
age and is said to have buried his sons
with his own hands. Permenities studied
under Xenophanes, but never entirely
subscribed to his doctrines. Permenities
declared the senses to be uncertain and
reason the only criterion of truth. He
first asserted the earth to be round and
also divided its surface into zones of
here and cold. Melissus who is included
in the Eliatic school held many opinions
in common with perminities. He declared
the universe to be immovable because
occupying all space there was no place
to which it could be moved. He further
rejected the theory of a vacuum in
space. Zeno of Ilia also maintained that
a vacuum could not exist. Rejecting the
theory of motion, he asserted that there
was but one god who was an eternal
ungenerated being. Like Zenophanes, he
conceived deity to be spherical in
shape. Lucipus held the universe to
consist of two parts, one full and the
other a vacuum. From the infinite a host
of minute fragmentaryary bodies
descended into the vacuum where through
continual agitation they organized
themselves into spheres of substance.
The great Democrus to a certain degree
enlarged upon the atomic theory of
Lucifus. Democrus declared the
principles of all things to be two-fold
atoms and vacuum. Both he asserted are
infinite atoms in number vacuum in
magnitude. Thus all bodies must be
composed of atoms or vacuum. Atoms
possess two properties form and size
both characterized by infinite variety.
The soul democrus also conceived to be
atomic in structure and subject to
dissolution with the body. The mind he
believed to be composed of spiritual
atoms. Aristotle intimates that Democrus
obtained his atomic theory from the
Pythagorean doctrine of the monad. Among
the Eliatics are also included
Protagoras and Anexarus. Socrates 469 to
399 BC. The founder of the Socratic sect
being fundamentally a skeptic did not
force his opinions upon others but
through the medium of questionings
caused each man to give expression to
his own philosophy. According to
Plutarch, Socrates conceived every place
as appropriate for reaching and that the
whole world was a school of virtue. He
held that the soul existed before the
body and prior to immersion therein was
endowed with all knowledge. That when
the soul entered into the material form,
it became stupified, but that by
discourses upon sensible objects, it was
caused to reawaken and to recover its
original knowledge. On these premises
was based his attempt to stimulate the
soul power through irony and inductive
reasoning. It has been said of Socrates
that the sole subject of his philosophy
was man. He himself declared philosophy
to be the way of true happiness and its
purpose twofold. One to contemplate God
and two to abstract the soul from
corporeal sense. The principles of all
things he conceived to be three in
number. God matter and ideas of God. He
said what he is I know not. What he is
not I know. Matter he defined as the
subject of generation and corruption
idea as an incorruptible substance. The
intellect of God. wisdom. He considered
the sum of the virtues. Among the
prominent members of the Socratic sect
were Zenifin, Esanes, Cro, Simon,
Glalco, Simeas, and Sebie. Professor
Zeller, the great authority on ancient
philosophies, has recently declared the
writings of Zenifin relating to Socrates
to be forgeries. When the clouds of
Aristophanes, a comedy written to
ridicule the theories of Socrates, was
first presented, the great skeptic
himself attended the play. During the
performance, which caricatured him
seated in a basket high in the air,
studying the sun, Socrates rose calmly
in his seat, the better to enable the
Athenian spectators to compare his own
unprepossessing features with the
grotesque mask worn by the actor
impersonating him. The alen sect was
founded by Fido of Ellis, a youth of
noble family who was bought from slavery
at the instigation of Socrates and who
became his devoted disciple. Plato so
highly admired Fidos mentality that he
named one of the most famous of his
discourses the Fido. Fido was succeeded
in his school by plethines who in turn
was followed by Minadmus. Of the
doctrines of the alien sect, little is
known. Minadmus is presumed to have been
inclined toward the teachings of Stilpo
and the Megarian sect. When Minadmus
opinions were demanded, he answered that
he was free, thus intimating that most
men were enslaved to their opinions.
Minadmus was apparently of a somewhat
belligerent temperament and often
returned from his lectures in a badly
bruised condition. The most famous of
his propositions is stated thus, that
which is not the same is different from
that with which it is not the same. This
point being admitted, Minadmis continued
to benefit is not the same as good.
Therefore, good does not benefit. After
the time of Menademus, the alien sect
became known as the Iritrian. Its
exponents denounced all negative
propositions and all complex and abstru
theories, declaring that only
affirmative and simple doctrines could
be true. The Megarian sect was founded
by Uklid of Mega, not the celebrated
mathematician, a great admirer of
Socrates. The Athenians passed a law
decreeing death to any citizen of Megra
found in the city of Athens. Nothing
daunted Uklid dawned woman's clothing
and went at night to study with
Socrates. After the cruel death of their
teacher, the disciples of Socrates,
fearing a similar fate, fled to Mega,
where they were entertained with great
honor by Uklit. The Mgarian school
accepted the Socratic doctrine that
virtue is wisdom, adding to it the
Eliatic concept that goodness is
absolute unity and all change and
illusion of the senses. Uklid maintained
that good has no opposite and therefore
evil does not exist. Being asked about
the nature of the gods, he declared
himself ignorant of their disposition
save that they hated curious persons.
The Mcgarens are occasionally included
among the dialectic philosophers. Uklid
who died 374 BC was succeeded in his
school by Ubilites among whose disciples
were Alexinus and Appalonius. Cronis
Eupfantis who lived to great age and
wrote many tragedies was among the
foremost followers of Ubilites. Diodoris
is usually included in the Mcgaren
school having heard Ubil's lecture.
According to legend, Diodoris died of
grief because he could not answer
instantly certain questions. asked him
by Stilpo at one time master of the
Mcgarian school. Diodoris held that
nothing Plato's real name was
Aristocles. When his father brought him
to study with Socrates, the great
skeptic declared that on the previous
night he had dreamed of a white swan,
which was an omen that his new disciple
was to become one of the world's
illumin. There is a tradition that the
immortal Plato was sold as a slave by
the king of Sicily can be moved since to
be moved it must be taken out of the
place in which it is and put into the
place where it is not which is
impossible because all things must
always be in the places where they are.
The cynics were a sect founded by
Antistanes of Athens 444 to 365 BC a
disciple of Socrates. There doctrine may
be described as an extreme individualism
which considers man as existing for
himself. Alone and advocates surrounding
him by inhering
and dyest need that be may thereby be
driven to retire more completely into
his own nature. The cynics renounced all
worldly possessions living in the rudest
shelters and subsisting upon the
coarsest and simplest food. On the
assumption that the gods wanted nothing,
the cynics affirmed that those whose
needs were fewest consequently
approached closest to the divinities.
Being asked what he gained by a life of
philosophy, Antistanes replied that he
had learned how to converse with
himself. Dioynes of Cynop is remembered
chiefly for the tub in the metum which
for many years served him as a home. The
people of Athens loved the beggar
philosopher and when a youth ingested
board holes in the tub, the city
presented Dioynes with a new one and
punished the youth. Dioynes believed
that nothing in life can be rightly
accomplished without exitation. He
maintained that everything in the world
belongs to the wise. A declaration which
he proved by the following logic. All
things belong to the gods. The gods are
friends to wise persons. All things are
common amongst friends. Therefore, all
things belong to the wise. Among the
cynics are Monomus, Onicrus, Crates,
Metricals, Hipparkia, who married
Crates, Manipus, and Menadmus. The
Serinic sect founded by Aristipus of
Sirene 435 to 356 BC promulgated the
doctrine of hedenism. Learning of the
fame of Socrates, Arisipus journeyed to
Athens and applied himself to the
teachings of the great skeptic Socrates
pained by the voluuptuous and mercenary
tendencies of Arisipus vainly labored to
reform the young man. Arisipus has the
distinction of being consistent in
principle and practice for he lived in
perfect harmony with his philosophy that
the quest of pleasure was the chief
purpose of life. The doctrines of the
Serinics may be summarized thus. All
that is actually known concerning any
object or condition is the feeling which
it awakens in man's own nature. In the
sphere of ethics, that which awakens the
most pleasant feeling is consequently to
be esteemed as the greatest good.
Emotional reactions are classified as
pleasant or gentle, harsh and mean. The
end of pleasant emotion is pleasure. The
end of harsh emotion, grief, the end of
mean emotion, nothing. Through mental
perversity, some men do not desire
pleasure. In reality, however, pleasure,
especially of a physical nature, is the
true end of existence and exceeds in
every way mental and spiritual
enjoyments. Pleasure, furthermore, is
limited wholly to the moment. Now is the
only time. The past cannot be regarded
without regret, and the future cannot be
faced without misgiving. Therefore,
neither is conducive to pleasure. No man
should grieve for grief is the most
serious of all diseases. Nature permits
man to do anything he desires. He is
limited only by his own laws and
customs. A philosopher is one free from
envy, love and superstition and whose
days are one long round of pleasure.
Indulgence was thus elevated by
Aeristipus to the chief position among
the virtues. He further declared
philosophers to differ marketkedly from
other men in that they alone would not
change the order of their lives if all
the laws of men were abolished. Among
prominent philosophers influenced by the
Sinaic doctrines were hijeris,
Theodoris and Bayern. The sect of the
academic philosophers instituted by
Plato 427 to 347 BC was divided into
three major parts. the old, the middle
and the new academy. Among the old
academics were Spucupus, Zenocrates,
Pullman, Crates and Crantor. Arcelius
instituted the middle academy and
carnities founded the new. Chief among
the masters of Plato was Socrates. Plato
traveled widely and was initiated by the
Egyptians into the profoundities of
hermetic philosophy. He also derived
much from the doctrines of the
Pythagoreans. Cicero describes the
three-fold constitution of Platonic
philosophy as comprising ethics,
physics, and dialectics. Plato defined
good as three-fold in character, good in
the soul expressed through the virtues,
good in the body expressed through the
symmetry and endurance of the parts, and
good in the external world expressed
through social position and
companionship. In the book of specupus
on Platonic definitions, that great
platonist thus defines God a being that
lives immortally by means of himself
alone, sufficing for his own
blessedness, the eternal essence cause
of his own goodness. According to Plato,
the one is the term most suitable for
defining the absolute since the whole
precedes the parts in diversity is
dependent on unity but unity not on
diversity. The one moreover is before
being. For to be is an attribute or
condition of the one. Platonic
philosophy is based upon the postulation
of three orders of being. That which
moves unmoved. That which is self-moved
and that which is moved. That which is
immovable but moves is anterior to. That
which is self-moved, which likewise is
anterior to that which it moves. That in
which motion is inherent cannot be
separated from its mode of power. It is
therefore incapable of dissolution. Of
such nature are the immortals. That
which has motion imparted to it from
another can be separated from the source
of its inanimating principle. It is
therefore subject to dissolution. Of
such nature are mortal beings. Superior
to both the mortals and the immortals is
that condition which continually moves
yet itself is unmoved. To this
constitution the power of abidance is
inherent. It is therefore the divine
permanence upon which all things are
established being nobler even than
self-motion. The unmoved mover is the
first of all dignities. The Platonic
discipline was founded upon the theory
that learning is really reminiscence or
the bringing into objectivity of
knowledge formerly acquired by the soul
in a previous state of existence. At the
entrance of the Platonic school in the
academy were written that words let none
ignorant of geometry inter here. After
the death of Plato his disciples
separated into two groups. One the
academics continued to meet in the
academy where once he had presided the
other the parapotetics removed to the
lysum under the leadership of Aristotle
384 to 322 BC. Plato recognized
Aristotle as his greatest disciple and
according to Philopus referred to him as
the mind of the school. If Aristotle
were absent from the lectures, Plato
would say the intellect is not here. Of
the prodigious genius of Aristotle,
Thomas Taylor writes in his introduction
to the metaphysics. When we consider
that he was not only well acquainted
with every science as his works
abundantly events, but that he wrote on
almost every subject which is
comprehended in the circle of human
knowledge and this with matchless
accuracy and skill. We know not which to
admire most, the penetration or extent
of his mind. In the above diagram,
Kercher arranges 18 objects in two
vertical columns and then determines the
number of arrangements in which they can
be combined. By the same method, Kercher
further estimates that 50 objects may be
arranged in 1, 273, 726, 838, 8:15, 420,
339, 851, 343, 083, 767, 0005, 515, 293,
749 for 54, 795 for 0800
000000 000000000000
combinations. From this it will be
evident that infinite diversity is
possible for the countless parts of the
universe may be related to each other in
an incalculable number of ways and
through the various combinations of
these limitless subdivisions of being
infinite individuality and infinite
variety must inevitably result. Thus it
is further evident that life can never
become monotonous or exhaust the
possibilities of variety of the
philosophy of Aristotle. The same author
says the end of Aristotle's moral
philosophy is perfection through the
virtues and the end of his contemplative
philosophy and union with the one
principle of all things. Aristotle
conceived philosophy to be twofold
practical and theoretical. Practical
philosophy embraced ethics and politics,
theoretical philosophy, physics and
logic. Metaphysics he considered to be
the science concerning that substance
which has the principle of motion and
rest inherent to itself. Two, Aristotle
the soul is that by which man first
lives, feels and understands. Hence to
the soul he assigned three faculties,
nutrative, sensitive and intellective.
He further considered the soul to be
twofold, rational and irrational, and in
some particulars elevated the sense
perceptions above the mind. Aristotle
defined wisdom as the science of first
causes. The four major divisions of his
philosophy are dialectics. Physics,
ethics, and metaphysics. God is defined
as the first mover, the best of beings
and immovable substance separate from
sensible things, void of corporeal
quantity without parts and indivisible.
Platinism is based upon a priori
reasoning, aristoilianism upon apostroi
reasoning. Aristotle taught his pupil
Alexander the Great to feel that if he
had not done a good deed, he had not
reigned that day. Among his followers
were Theoprastus, Strato, Leo, Aristo,
Krytoleus and Diodoris of skepticism as
propounded by Pyro of Ellis 365 to 275
BC and by Timon Sexus Empiricus said
that those who seek must find or deny
they have found or can find or persevere
in the inquiry. Those who suppose they
have found truth are called dogmatists.
Those who think it incomprehensible are
the academics. Those who still seek are
the skeptics. The attitude of skepticism
towards the knowable is summed up by
Sexus Empiricus in the following words.
But the chief ground of skepticism is
that too. Every reason there is an
opposite reason equivalent which makes
us forbear to dogmatize. The skeptics
were strongly opposed to the dogmatists
and were agnostic in that they held the
accepted theories regarding deity to be
self-contradictory and undemonstrable.
How, asked the skeptic, can we have
indubitate knowledge of God, knowing not
his substance, form, or place? For while
philosophers disagree irreconcilably on
these points, their conclusions cannot
be considered as undoubtedly true. Since
absolute knowledge was considered
unattainable, the skeptics declared the
end of their discipline to be in
opinionatives in disturbance in
impulsives moderation and in disquives
suspension. The sect of the Stoics was
founded by Zeno 340 to 265 BC the cyian
who studied underrates the cynic from
which se the stoics had their origin.
Zeno was succeeded by Cleanths, Creipus,
Zeno of Tarsus, Dioynes, Antiper,
Penicius and Posidonius. Most famous of
the Roman Stoics are Epictetus and
Marcus Aurelius. The Stoics were
essentially pantheists since they
maintained that as there is nothing
better than the world, the world is God.
Zeno declared that the reason of the
world is diffused throughout it as seed.
Stoicism is a materialistic philosophy
enjoining voluntary resignation to
natural law. Creipus maintained that
good and evil being contrary both are
necessary since each sustains the other.
The soul was regarded as a body
distributed throughout the physical form
and subject to dissolution with it.
Though some of the stoics held that
wisdom prolonged the existence of the
soul, actual immortality is not included
in their tenets. The soul was said to be
composed of eight parts. the five
senses, the generative power, the vocal
power, and an eighth or hegemonic part.
Nature was defined as God mixed
throughout the substance of the world.
All things were looked upon as bodies,
either corporeal or incorporeal.
Meekness marked the attitude of the
stoic philosopher, while Dioynes was
delivering a discourse. Against anger,
one of his listeners spat contemptuously
in his face. Receiving the insult with
humility, the great Stoic was moved to
retort, "I am not angry, but am in doubt
whether I ought to be so or not."
Epicurus of Samos 341 to 270 BC was the
founder of the Epicuran sect, which in
many respects resembles the Serinic, but
is higher in its ethical standards. The
Epicurans also posited pleasure as the
most desirable state, but conceived it
to be a grave and dignified state
achieved through renunciation of those
mental and emotional inconstancies which
are productive of pain and sorrow.
Epicurus held that as the pains of the
mind and soul are more grievous than
those of the body, so the joys of the
mind and soul exceed those of the body.
The Serinics asserted pleasure to be
dependent upon action or motion. The
Epicurans claimed rest or lack of action
to be equally productive of pleasure.
Epicurus accepted the philosophy of
Democrus concerning the nature of atoms
and based his physics upon this theory.
The Epicuran philosophy may be summed up
in four cannons. One, sense is never
deceived and therefore every sensation
and every perception of an appearance is
true. Two, opinion follows upon sense
and is super added to sensation and
capable of truth or falsehood. Three,
all opinion attested or not contradicted
by the evidence of sense is true. Four,
an opinion contradicted or not attested
by the evidence of sense is false. Among
the Epicurans of note were Metradoris of
Lampsicus, Zeno of Siden, and Fedrris.
Eclecticism may be defined as the
practice of choosing apparently
irreconcilable doctrines from
antagonistic schools and constructing
there from a composite philosophic
system in harmony with the convictions
of the eclectic himself. Eclecticism can
scarcely be considered philosophically
or logically sound. For as individual
schools arrive at their conclusions by
different methods of reasoning, so the
philosophic product of fragments from
these schools must necessarily be built
upon the foundation of conflicting
premises. Eclecticism accordingly has
been designated the layman's cult. In
the Roman Empire, little thought was
devoted to philosophic theory.
Consequently, most of its thinkers were
of the eclectic type. Cicero is the
outstanding example of early eclecticism
for his writings are a veritable popery
of invaluable fragments from earlier
schools of thought. Eclecticism appears
to have had its inception at the moment
when men first doubted the possibility
of discovering ultimate truth. observing
all so-called knowledge to be mere
opinion at best. The less studious
furthermore concluded that the wiser
course to pursue was to accept that
which appeared to be the most reasonable
of the teachings of any school or
individual. From this practice, however,
arose a pseudo broad-mindedness devoid
of the element of preciseness found in
true logic and philosophy. The
Neopyagorean school flourished in
Alexandria during the first century of
the Christian era. Only two names stand
out in connection with it appalonius of
Tyina and moderatus of gades.
Neopathyanism is a link between the
older pagan philosophies and
neoplatinism like the former it
contained many exact elements of thought
derived from Pythagoras and Plato like
the latter emphasized metaphysical
speculation and aesthetic habits. A
striking similarity has been observed by
several authors between neopathyanism
and the doctrines of the Essenes.
special emphasis was laid upon the
mystery of numbers. And it is possible
that the Neopyagoreans had a far wider
knowledge of the true teachings of
Pythagoras than is available today. Even
in the first century, Pythagoras was
regarded more as a god than a man and
the revival of his philosophy was
resorted to. Apparently, in the hope
that his name would stimulate interest
in the deeper systems of learning, but
Greek philosophy had passed the zenith
of its splendor. The mass of humanity
was awakening to the importance of
physical life and physical phenomena.
The emphasis upon earthly affairs which
began to assert itself later reached
maturity of expression in 20th century
materialism and commercialism. Virgil
describes part of the ritual of a Greek
mystery possibly the elusinian. In his
account of the descent of Inas to the
gate of hell under the guidance of the
civil of that part of the ritual
portrayed above the immortal poet writes
full in the midst of this infernal road.
An elm displays her dusky arms abroad.
The god of sleep there hides his heavy
head and empty dreams on every leaf are
spread of various forms. Unnumbered
specters more. Centaurs and double
shapes besiege the door before the
passage. Horrid Hydra stance and
Briarius with all his hundred hands.
Gorgance Jiren with his triple frame and
Vain Chimera vomits empty flame. The
chief unshathed his shining steel prepar
though sazed with sudden fear to force
the guard offering his brandished weapon
at their face. Had not the sibil stopped
his eager pace and told him what those
empty phantoms were forms without bodies
and impassive air. Even though
neoplatinism was to intervene and many
centuries passed before this emphasis
took definite form. Although Ammonius
Sakis was long believed to be the
founder of neoplatinism, the school had
its true beginning in Plotinus AD 204 to
269. Prominent among the neoplatinists
of Alexandria, Syria, Rome and Athens
were Pfury, I amus, Celestius, the
emperor Julian, Plutarch and Proclas.
Neoplatinism was the supreme effort of
decadent paganom to publish and thus
preserve for posterity its secret or
unwritten doctrine. In its teachings,
ancient idealism found its most perfect
expression. Neoplatanism was concerned
almost exclusively with the problems of
higher metaphysics. It recognized the
existence of a secret and allimportant
doctrine which from the time of the
earliest civilizations had been
concealed within the rituals, symbols
and allegorories of religions and
philosophies to the mind unacquainted
with its fundamental tenets.
Neoplatinism may appear to be a mass of
speculations interspersed with
extravagant flights of fancy. Such a
viewpoint, however, ignores the
institutions of the mysteries those
secret schools into whose profoundities
of idealism nearly all of the first
philosophers of antiquity were initiated
when the physical body of pagan thought
collapsed. An attempt was made to
resurrect the form by instilling new
life into it by the unveiling of its
mystical truths. This effort apparently
was bare enough results. Despite the
antagonism, however, between pristine
Christianity and neoplatinism, many
basic tenets of the latter were accepted
by the former and woven into the fabric
of petristic philosophy. Briefly
described, neoplatinism is a philosophic
code which conceives every physical or
concrete body of doctrine to be merely
the shell of a spiritual varity which
may be discovered through meditation and
certain exercises of a mystic nature. In
comparison to the esoteric spiritual
truths which they contain, the corporeal
bodies of religion and philosophy were
considered relatively of little value.
Likewise, no emphasis was placed upon
the material sciences. The term
petristic is employed to designate the
philosophy of the fathers of the early
Christian church. Petristic philosophy
is divided into two general epics,
antyine and postnine. The antonyy period
in the main was devoted to attacks upon
paganism and to apologies and defenses
of Christianity. The entire structure of
pagan philosophy was assailed and the
dictates of faith elevated above those
of reason. In some instances, efforts
were made to reconcile the evident
truths of paganism with Christian
revelation. Eminent among the antyine
fathers were St. Irenaeus, Clement of
Alexandria and Justin Martyr. In the
postnine period, more emphasis was
placed upon the unfoldment of Christian
philosophy along Platonic and
neoplatonic lines, resulting in the
appearance of many strange documents of
a lengthy, rambling, and ambiguous
nature, nearly all of which were
philosophically unsound. The postnine
philosophers included Athanasius,
Gregory of Nissa, and Sirillov
Alexandria. The petristic school is
notable for its emphasis upon the
supremacy of man throughout the
universe. Man was conceived to be a
separate and divine creation, the
crowning achievement of deity, and an
exception to the susaranty of natural
law. To the petristics, it was
inconceivable that there should ever
exist another creature so noble, so
fortunate, or so able as man, for whose
sole benefit and edification all the
kingdoms of nature were primarily
created. Petristic philosophy culminated
in Augustinianism which may best be
defined as Christian Platinism. Opposing
the Pelagian doctrine that man is the
author of his own salvation.
Augustinianism elevated the church and
its dogmas to a position of absolute
infallibility. A position which it
successfully maintained until the
reformation. Gnosticism a system of
emanationism interpreting Christianity
in terms of Greek, Egyptian and Persian
metaphysics appeared in the latter part
of the first century of the Christian
era. Practically all the information
extent regarding the Gnostics and their
doctrines stigmatized as heresy by the
antyine church fathers is derived from
the accusations made against them
particularly from the writings of St.
Arnaeus. In the 3rd century appeared
manicism, a dualistic system of Persian
origin which taught that good and evil
were forever contending for universal
supremacy. In manicism, Christ is
conceived to be the principle of
redeeming good in contradistinction to
the man Jesus who was viewed as an evil
personality. The death of Botheus in the
sixth century marked the close of the
ancient Greek school of philosophy. The
9th century saw the rise of the new
school of scholasticism which sought to
reconcile philosophy with theology
representative of the main divisions of
the scholastic school were the
eclecticism of John of Salsbury the
mysticism of Bernard of Clairvo and St.
Bonaventura the rationalism of Peter
Abalard and the pantheistic mysticism of
Meister Ehart among the Arabian
aristoilians were Avisa and Avaros. The
zenith of scholasticism was reached with
the advent of Albertus Magnus and his
illustrious disciple St. Thomas Aquinus.
Tomiism the philosophy of St. Thomas
Aquinas sometimes referred to as the
Christian Aristotle sought to reconcile
the various factions of the scholastic
school. Tomiism was basically
aristoilian with the added concept that
faith is a projection of reason Scottism
or the doctrine of volunteerism
promulgated by Jonas Duncotus a
Franciscan scholastic emphasized the
power and efficacy of the individual
will as opposed to toism. The
outstanding characteristic of
scholasticism was its frantic effort to
cast all European thought in an
aristoilian mold. Eventually, the
schoolmen descended to the level of mere
word mongers who picked the words of
Aristotle so clean that nothing but the
bones remained. It was this decadent
school of meaningless verbiage against
which Sir Francis Bacon directed his
bitter shafts of irony and which he
relegated to the potter's field of
discarded notions. The Baconian or
inductive system of reasoning whereby
facts are arrived at by a process of
observation and verified by
experimentation cleared the way for the
schools of modern science. Bacon was
followed by Thomas Hobbes for some time
as secretary who held mathematics to be
the only exact science and thought to be
essentially a mathematical process.
Hobbes declared matter to be the only
reality and scientific investigation to
be limited to the study of bodies, the
phenomena relative to their probable
causes and the consequences which flow
from them under every variety of
circumstance. Hobbes laid special stress
upon the significance of words,
declaring understanding to be the
faculty of perceiving the relationship
between words and the objects for which
they stand. Having broken away from the
scholastic and theological schools,
post-reformation or modern, philosophy
experienced a most prolific growth along
many diverse lines. According to
humanism, man is the measure of all
things. Rationalism makes the reasoning
faculties the basis of all knowledge.
Political philosophy holds that man must
comprehend his natural, social, and
national privileges. Empiricism declares
that alone to be true which is
demonstrable by experiment or
experience. Moralism emphasizes the
necessity of right conduct as a
fundamental philosophic tenant. Idealism
asserts the realities of the universe to
be super physically either mental or
psychical. Realism the reverse and
phenomenalism restricts knowledge to
facts or events which can be
scientifically described or explained.
The most recent developments in the
field of philosophic thought are
behaviorism and neo-realism. The former
estimates the intrinsic characteristics
through an analysis of behavior. The
latter may be summed up as the total
extinction of idealism. Baroo Despinosa,
the imminent Dutch philosopher,
conceived God to be a substance
absolutely self-existent and needing no
other conception besides itself to
render it complete and intelligible. The
nature of this being was held by
Spininoza to be comprehensible only
through its attributes which are
extension and thought. These combine in
ridiculing the geocentric system of
astronomy expounded by Claudius Talamy.
Modm astronomers have overlooked the
philosophic key to the tomic system. The
universe of Tommy is a diagrammatic
representation of the relationships
existing between the various divine and
elemental parts of every creature and is
not concerned with astronomy as that
science is now comprehended. In the
above figure, special attention is
called to the three circles of zodiacs
surrounding the orbits of the planets.
These zodiacs represent the three-fold
spiritual constitution of the universe.
The orbits of the planets are the
governors of the world and the four
elemental spheres in the center
represent the physical constitution of
both man and the universe. Tomies scheme
of the universe is simply a
cross-section of the universal aura the
planets and elements to which he refers
having no relation to those recognized
by modern astronomers to form an endless
variety of aspects or modes. The mind of
man is one of the modes of infinite
thought. The body of man, one of the
modes of infinite extension. Through
reason, man is enabled to elevate
himself above the illusionary world of
the senses and find eternal repose in
perfect union with the divine essence.
Spinosa, it has been said, deprive God
of all personality, making deity
synonymous with the universe. German
philosophy had its inception with
Gotfrieded Wilhelm von Liebnitz whose
theories are permeated with the
qualities of optimism and idealism.
Libnit's criteria of sufficient reason
revealed to him the insufficiency of
Daycart theory of extension and he
therefore concluded that substance
itself contained an inherent power in
the form of an incalculable number of
separate and allsufficient units. Matter
reduced to its ultimate particles ceases
to exist as a substantial body being
resolved into a mass of immaterial ideas
or metaphysical units of power to which
Libnetss applied the term monad. Thus
the universe is composed of an infinite
number of separate monatic entities
unfolding spontaneously through the
objectification of innate active
qualities. All things are conceived as
consisting of single monads of varying
magnitudes or of aggregations of these
bodies which may exist as physical,
emotional, mental or spiritual
substances. God is the first and
greatest monad. The spirit of man is an
awakened monad in contradistinction to
the lower kingdoms whose governing
monatic powers are in a semi-ormant
state. Though a product of the
Labnitzian Wolfian school, Emanuel Kant
like Lach dedicated himself to
investigation of the powers and limits
of human understanding. The result was
his critical philosophy, embracing the
critique of pure reason, the critique of
practical reason, and the critique of
judgment. Dr. WJ Durant sums up Kant's
philosophy in the concise statement that
he rescued mind from matter. The mind
conceived to be the selector and
coordinator of all perceptions which in
turn are the result of sensations
grouping themselves about some external
object. In the classification of
sensations and ideas, the mind employs
certain categories of sense, time and
space of understanding, quality,
relation, modality and causation and the
unity of app perception. Being subject
to mathematical laws, time and space are
considered absolute and sufficient basis
for exact thinking. Kant's practical
reason declared that while the nature of
Numon could never be comprehended by the
reason, the fact of morality proves the
existence of three necessary postulates
free will, immortality and God. In the
critique of judgment, Kant demonstrates
the union of the numon and the
phenomenon in art and biological
evolution. German superintellectualism
is the outgrowth of an overemphasis of
Kant's theory of the autocratic
supremacy of the mind over sensation and
thought. The philosophy of Yoan got
ficta was a projection of Kant's
philosophy wherein he attempted to unite
Kant's practical reason with his pure
reason. Ficta held that the known is
merely the contents of the consciousness
of the knower and that nothing can exist
to the knower until it becomes part of
those contents. Nothing is actually
real. Therefore, accept the facts of
one's own mental experience. Recognizing
the necessity of certain objective
realities, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von
Shelling who succeeded Fika in the chair
of philosophy at Jenna first employed
the doctrine of identity as the
groundwork for a complete system of
philosophy. Whereas Fika regarded self
as the absolute, vaugh shelling
conceived infinite and eternal mind to
be the allervading cause. Realization of
the absolute is made possible by
intellectual intuition which being a
superior or spiritual sense is able to
dissociate itself from both subject and
object. Kant's categories of space and
time von shelling conceived to be
positive and negative respectively and
material existence the result of the
reciprocal action of these two
expressions. Von Shelling also held that
the absolute in its process of
self-development proceeds according to a
law or rhythm consisting of three
movements. The first a reflective
movement is the attempt of the infinite
to embody itself in the finite. The
second that of subumption is the attempt
of the absolute to return to the
infinite after involvement in the
finite. The third that of reason is the
neutral point wherein the two former
movements are blended. George Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel considered the
intellectual intuition of von shelling
to be philosophically unsound and hence
turned his attention to the
establishment of a system of philosophy
based upon pure logic of Hegel. It has
been said that he began with nothing and
showed with logical precision how
everything had proceeded from it in
logical order. Hegel elevated logic to a
position of supreme importance in fact
as a quality of the absolute itself. God
he conceived to be a process of
unfolding which never attains to the
condition of unfoldment. In like manner
thought is without either beginning or
end. Hegel further believed that all
things owe their existence to their
opposites and that all opposites are
actually identical. Thus the only
existence is the relationship of
opposites to each other through whose
combinations new elements are produced.
As the divine mind is an eternal process
of thought never accomplished. Hegel
assails the very foundation of theism
and his philosophy limits. Immortality
to the everflowing deity alone.
Evolution is consequently the
never-ending flow of divine
consciousness out of itself. All
creation though continually moving never
arrives at any state other than that of
ceaseless flow. Yan Friedrich Herbart's
philosophy was a realistic reaction from
the idealism of ficta and vaugh
shelling. To Herbart, the true basis of
philosophy was the great mass of
phenomena continually moving through the
human mind. Examination of phenomena,
however, demonstrates that a great part
of it is unreal, at least incapable of
supplying the mind with actual truth. To
correct the false impressions caused by
phenomena and discover reality, Herbart
believed it necessary to resolve
phenomena into separate elements, for
reality exists in the elements and not
in the whole. He stated that objects can
be classified by three general terms
thing, matter and mind. The first a unit
of several properties, the second an
existing object, the third a
self-conscious being. All three notions
give rise, however, to certain
contradictions with whose solution
Herbart is primarily concerned. For
example, consider matter. Though capable
of filling space, if reduced to its
ultimate state, it consists of
incomprehensibly minute units of divine
energy occupying no physical space
whatsoever. The true subject of Arthur
Schopenhau's philosophy is the will. The
object of his philosophy is the
elevation of the mind to the point where
it is capable of controlling the will.
Schopenhau likens the will to a strong
blind man who carries on his shoulders
the intellect which is a weak lame man
possessing the power of sight. The will
is the tireless cause of manifestation
and every part of nature the product of
will. The brain is the product of the
will to know the hand the product of the
will to grasp. The entire intellectual
and emotional constitutions of man are
subservient to the will and are largely
concerned with the effort to justify the
dictates of the will. Thus the mind
creates elaborate systems of thought
simply to prove the necessity of the
thing willed. Genius however represents
the state wherein the intellect has
gained supremacy over the will and the
life is ruled by reason and not by
impulse. The strength of Christianity
said Schopenhau lay in its pessimism and
conquest of individual will. His own
religious viewpoints resembled closely
the Buddhistic. To him, Nirvana
represented the subjugation of will.
Life, the manifestation of the blind
will to live. He viewed as a misfortune,
claiming that the true philosopher was
one who, recognizing the wisdom of
death, resisted the inherent urge to
reproduce his kind. Before a proper
appreciation of the deeper scientific
aspects of Greek mythology is possible,
it is necessary to organize the Greek
pantheon and arrange its gods,
goddesses, and various superhuman
hierarchies in concatenated order.
Proclas the great neoplatonist in his
commentaries on the theology of Plato
gives an invaluable key to the sequence
of the various deities in relation to
the first cause and the inferior powers
emanating from themselves. When thus
arranged, the divine hierarchies may be
likened to the branches of a great tree.
The roots of this tree are firmly
embedded in unknowable being. The trunk
and larger branches of the tree
symbolize the superior gods, the twigs
and leaves, the innumerable existences
dependent upon the first and unchanging
power of Friedrich Wilhelm Nichze. It
has been said that his peculiar
contribution to the cause of human hope
was the glad tidings that God had died
of pity. The outstanding features of
Nichzche's philosophy are his doctrine
of eternal recurrence and the extreme
emphasis placed by him upon the will to
power a projection of Schopenhau's will
to live. Nze believed the purpose of
existence to be the production of a type
of all powerful individual designated by
him the superman. This superman was the
product of careful culturing. For if not
separated forcibly from the mass and
consecrated to the production of power,
the individual would sink back to the
level of the deadly mediocre love. Nze
said, should be sacrificed to the
production of the superman and those
only should marry who are best fitted to
produce this outstanding type. Nze also
believed in the rule of the aristocracy.
Both blood and breeding being essential
to the establishment of this superior
type. Nichze's doctrine did not liberate
the masses. It rather placed over them
supermen for whom their inferior
brothers and sisters should be perfectly
reconciled to die. Ethically and
politically, the Superman was a law unto
himself. To those who understand the
true meaning of power to be virtue,
self-control, and truth. The ideality
behind Nichzche's theory is apparent. To
the superficial, however, it is a
philosophy heartless and calculating
concerned solely with the survival of
the fittest. Of the other German schools
of philosophic thought, limitations of
space preclude detailed mention. The
more recent developments of the German
school are Freudianism and relativism,
often called the Einstein theory. The
former is a system of psychoanalysis
through psychopathic and neurological
phenomena. The latter attacks the
accuracy of mechanical principles
dependent upon the present theory of
velocity. Renee Decart stands at the
head of the French school of philosophy
and shares with Sir Francis Bacon the
honor of founding the systems of modern
science and philosophy as Bacon based
his conclusions upon observation of
external things. So Daycart founded his
metaphysical philosophy upon observation
of internal things. Cartisianism. The
philosophy of Daycart first eliminates
all things and then replaces as
fundamental those premises without which
existence is impossible. Daycart defined
an idea as that which fills the mind
when we conceive a thing. The truth of
an idea must be determined by the
criteria of clarity and distinctness.
Hence Daycart held that a clear and
distinct idea must be true. Daycart has
the distinction also of evolving his own
philosophy without recourse to
authority. Consequently, his conclusions
are built up from the simplest of
premises and grow in complexity as the
structure of his philosophy takes form.
The positive philosophy of Agugust Ka is
based upon the theory that the human
intellect develops through three stages
of thought. The first and lowest stage
is theological, the second metaphysical,
and the third and highest positive. Thus
theology and metaphysics are the feeble
intellectual efforts of humanity's child
mind and positivism is the mental
expression of the adult intellect. In
his course the philosophy positive Kant
writes in the final the positive state
the mind has given over the vain search
after absolute notions the origin and
destination of the universe and the
causes of phenomena and applies itself
to the study of their laws that is their
invariable relations of succession and
resemblance reasoning and observation
duly combined are the means of this
knowledge. Kant's theory is described as
an enormous system of materialism.
According to Kant, it was formerly said
that the heavens declare the glory of
God. But now they only recount the glory
of Newton and Llas. Among the French
schools of philosophy are traditionalism
often applied to Christianity which
esteems tradition as the proper
foundation for philosophy, the
sociological school which regards
humanity as one vast social organism.
The encyclopedists whose efforts to
classify knowledge according to the
Baconian system revolutionized European
thought. Volaterism which assailed the
divine origin of the Christian faith and
adopted an attitude of extreme
skepticism toward all matters pertaining
to theology and neoccriticism. A French
revision of the doctrines of Emanuel
Kant. Henri Bergson, the intuitionalist,
undoubtedly the greatest living French
philosopher, presents a theory of mystic
anti-intellectualism founded upon the
premise of creative evolution. His rapid
rise to popularity is due to his appeal
to the finer sentiments in human nature,
which rebel against the hopelessness and
helplessness of materialistic science
and realistic philosophy. Bergson sees
God as life, continually struggling
against the limitations of matter. He
even conceives the possible victory of
life over matter and in time the
annihilation of death. Applying the
Baconian method to the mind, John
Lockach, the great English philosopher
declared that everything which passes
through the mind is a legitimate object
of mental philosophy and that these
mental phenomena are as real and valid
as the objects of any other science. In
his investigations of the origin of
phenomena lock departed from the
baconian requirement that it was first
necessary to make a natural history of
facts the mind was regarded by lock to
be blank until experience is inscribed
upon it. Thus the mind is built up of
received impressions plus reflection.
The soul lock believed to be incapable
of apprehension of deity and man's
realization or cognition of God to be
merely an inference of the reasoning
faculty. David Hume was the most
enthusiastic and also the most powerful
of the disciples of Lach. Attacking
Lock's sensationalism, Bishop George
Berkeley substituted for it a philosophy
founded on Lock's fundamental premises,
but which he developed as a system of
idealism. Berkeley held that ideas are
the real objects of knowledge. He
declared it impossible to aduce proof
that sensations are occasioned by
material objects. He also attempted to
prove that matter has no existence.
Barklayanism holds that the universe is
permeated and governed by mind. Thus,
the belief in the existence of material
objects is merely a mental condition and
the objects themselves may well be
fabrications of the mind. At the same
time, Berkeley considered it worse than
insanity to question the accuracy of the
perceptions. For if the power of the
perceptive faculties be questioned, man
is reduced to a creature incapable of
knowing, estimating, or realizing
anything whatsoever. In the
associationalism of Hartley and Hume was
advanced the theory that the association
of ideas is the fundamental principle of
psychology and the explanation for all
mental phenomena. partly held that if a
sensation be repeated several times,
there is a tendency towards its
spontaneous repetition which may be
awakened by association with some other
idea even though the object causing the
original reaction be absent. The
utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham, Arch
Deacon Paley and James and John Stewart
Mill declares that to be the greatest
good which is the most useful to the
greatest number. John Stewart Mill
believed that if it is possible through
sensation to secure knowledge of the
properties of things, it is also
possible through a higher state of the
mind that is intuition or reason to gain
a knowledge of the true substance of
things. Darwinism is the doctrine of
natural selection and physical
evolution. It has been said of Charles
Robert Darwin that he determined to
banish spirit altogether from the
universe and make the infinite and
omnipresent mind itself synonymous with
the allervading powers of an impersonal
nature. Agnosticism and neohaggalianism
are also noteworthy products of this
period of philosophic thought. The
former is the belief that the nature of
ultimates is unknowable. The latter in
English and American revival of Hegel's
idealism drive WJ Durant declares that
Herbert Spencer's great work first
principles made him almost at once the
most famous philosopher of his time.
Spencerianism is a philosophic
positivism which describes evolution as
an everinccreasing complexity with
equilibrium as its highest possible
state. According to Spencer, life is a
continuous process from homogeneity to
heterogeneity and back from
heterogeneity to homogeneity. Life also
involves the continual adjustment of
internal relations to external
relations. Most famous of all Spencer's
apherisms is his definition of deity.
God is infinite intelligence infinitely
diversified through infinite time and
infinite space manifesting through an
infinitude of ever evolving
individualities. The universality of the
law of evolution was emphasized by
Spencer who applied it not only to the
form but also to the intelligence behind
the form in every manifestation of
being. He recognized the fundamental
tendency of unfoldment from simplicity
to complexity. Observing that when the
point of equilibrium is reached, it is
in an effort to set forth in an
appropriate figure the Christian
doctrine of the trinity. It was
necessary to devise an image in which
the three persons father, son, and holy
ghost were separate and yet one. In
different parts of Europe may be seen
figures similar to the above, wherein
three faces are united in one head. This
is a legitimate method of for to those
able to realize the sacred significance
of the three-fold had a great mystery is
revealed. However, in the presence of
such applications of symbology in
Christian art, it is scarcely proper to
consider that philosophers of other
faiths as been kned if like the Hindus
they have a three-faced Brahma or like
the Romans a two-faced Janice always
followed by the process of dissolution.
According to Spencer, however,
disintegration took place only that
reintegration might follow upon a higher
level of being. The chief position in
the Italian school of philosophy should
be awarded to Geodano Bruno who after
enthusiastically accepting Copernicus
theory that the sun is the center of the
solar system declared the sun to be a
star and all the stars to be sons. In
Bruno's time, the earth was regarded as
the center of all creation.
Consequently, when he thus relegated the
world and man to an obscure corner in
space, the effect was cataclysmic. For
the heresy of affirming a multiplicity
of universes and conceiving cosmos to be
so vast that no single creed could fill
it, Bruno paid the forfeit of his life.
Vecoism is a philosophy based upon the
conclusions of Giovani Batista Viko who
held that God controls his world not
miraculously but through natural law.
the laws by which men rule themselves.
Viko declared issue from a spiritual
source within mankind which is in
rapport with the law of the deity. Hence
material law is of divine origin and
reflects the dictates of the spiritual
father. The philosophy of ontologism
developed by Vincenzo Jioie generally
considered more as a theologian than a
philosopher posits god as the only being
and the origin of all knowledge.
knowledge being identical with deity
itself. God is consequently called
being. All other manifestations are
existences. Truth is to be discovered
through reflection upon this mystery.
The most important of modern Italian
philosophers is Benadetto Crochi, a
Hegelian idealist. Crochi conceives
ideas to be the only reality. He is
anti- theological in his viewpoints,
does not believe in the immortality of
the soul and seeks to substitute ethics
and aesthetics for religion among other
branches of Italian philosophy should be
mentioned sensism, sensationalism which
posits the sense perceptions as the sole
channels for the reception of knowledge,
criticism or the philosophy of accurate
judgment and neoscolasticism which is a
revival of tomiism encouraged by the
Roman Catholic Church. The two
outstanding schools of American
philosophy are transcendentalism and
pragmatism. Transcendentalism,
exemplified in the writings of Ralph
Waldo Emerson, emphasizes the power of
the transcendental over the physical.
Many of Emerson's writings show
pronounced oriental influence.
Particularly, his essays on the oversoul
and the law of compensation. The theory
of pragmatism, while not original with
professor William James, owes its
widespread popularity as a philosophic
tenant to his efforts. Pragmatism may be
defined as the doctrine that the meaning
and nature of things are to be
discovered from consideration of their
consequences. The true, according to
James, is only an expedient in the way
of our thinking, just as the right is
only an expedient in the way of our
behaving. See his pragmatism. John Dwey
the instrumentalist who applies the
experimental attitude to all the aims of
life should be considered a commentator
of James to Dwey growth and change are
limitless and no ultimates are
postulated the long residence in America
of George Santiana warrants the listing
of this great Spaniard among the ranks
of American philosophers defending
himself with the shield of skepticism
alike from the illusions of the senses
and accumulative errors of the ages
Santiana Iana seeks to lead mankind into
a more apprehending state denominated by
him, the life of reason. In addition to
the authorities already quoted in the
preparation of the foregoing abstract of
the main branches of philosophic
thought, the present writer has had
recourse to Stanley's history of
philosophy. Morel's and historical and
critical view of the speculative
philosophy of Europe in the 19th century
singer's modern thinkers and present
problems. Ran's modern classical
philosophers, Wendelban's history of
philosophy, Perry's present
philosophical tendencies, Hamilton's
lectures on metaphysics and logic and
Durant the story of philosophy having
thus traced the more or less sequential
development of philosophic speculation
from fails to James and Bergson. It is
now in order to direct the reader's
attention to the elements leading to and
the circumstances attendant upon the
genesis of philosophic thinking.
Although the Helens proved themselves
peculiarly responsive to the disciplines
of philosophy, this science of sciences
should not be considered indigenous to
them. Although some of the Grecians,
writes Thomas Stanley, half challenged
to their nation the original of
philosophy, yet the more learned of them
have acknowledged it to be derived from
the east. The magnificent institutions
of Hindu, Calaldian, and Egyptian
learning must be recognized as the
actual source of Greek wisdom. The last
was patterned after the shadow cast by
the sanctuaries of Allora, UR and
Memphis upon the thought substance of a
primitive people. Fails, Pythagoras and
Plato in their philosophic wanderings
contacted many distant cults and brought
back the lore of Egypt and the inscrable
orient. From indisputable facts such as
these, it is evident that philosophy
emerged from the religious mysteries of
antiquity, not being separated from
religion until after the decay of the
mysteries. Hence, he who would fathom
the depths of philosophic thought, must
familiarize himself with the teachings
of those initiated priests designated as
the first custodians of divine
revelation. The mysteries claim to be
the guardians of a transcendental
knowledge so profound as to be
incomprehensible save to the most
exalted intellect and so potent as to be
revealed with safety only to those in
whom personal ambition was dead and who
had consecrated their lives to the
unselfish service of humanity. Both the
dignity of these sacred institutions and
the validity of their claim to
possession of universal wisdom are
attested by the most illustrious
philosophers of antiquity who were
themselves initiated into the
profoundities of the secret doctrine and
who bore witness to its efficacy. The
question may legitimately be propounded.
If these ancient mystical institutions
were of such great pith and moment, why
is so little information now available
concerning them and the arcana they
claim to possess? The answer is simple
enough. The mysteries were secret
societies binding their initiates to
inviable secrecy and avenging with death
the betrayal of their sacred trusts.
Although these schools were the true
inspiration of the various doctrines
promulgated by the ancient philosophers,
the fountain head of those doctrines was
never revealed to the profane.
Furthermore, in the lapse of time, the
teachings became so inextricably linked
with the names of their disseminators
that the actual but reconites source the
mysteries came to be wholly ignored.
Symbolism is the language of the
mysteries. In fact, it is the language
not only of mysticism and philosophy,
but of all nature. For every law and
power active in universal procedure is
manifested to the limited sense
perceptions of man through the medium of
symbol. Every form existing in the
diversified sphere of being is symbolic
of the divine activity by which it is
produced. By symbols, men have ever
sought to communicate to each other
those thoughts which transcend the
limitations of language. rejecting man
conceived dialects as inadequate and
unworthy to perpetuate divine ideas. The
mysteries thus chose symbolism as a far
more ingenious and ideal method of
preserving their transcendental
knowledge in a single figure. A symbol
may both reveal and conceal. For to the
wise the subject of the symbol is
obvious while to the ignorant the figure
remains inscrutable. Hence, he who seeks
to unveil the secret doctrine of
antiquity must search for that doctrine
not upon the open pages of books which
might fall into the hands of the
unworthy, but in the place where it was
originally concealed. Far-sighted were
the initiates of antiquity. They
realized that nations come and go, that
empires rise and fall, and that the
golden ages of art, science, and
idealism are succeeded by the dark ages
of superstition. With the needs of
posterity foremost in mind, the sages of
old went to inconceivable extremes to
make, certain that their knowledge
should be preserved, they engraved it
upon the face of mountains, and
concealed it within the measurements of
colossal images, each of which was a
geometric marvel. Their knowledge of
chemistry and mathematics they hid
within mythologies which the ignorant
would perpetuate, or in the spans and
arches of their temples, which time has
not entirely obliterated. They wrote in
characters that neither the vandalism of
men nor the ruthlessness of the elements
could completely a face. Today men gaze
with awe and reverence upon the mighty
mennons standing alone on the sands of
Egypt or upon the strange terrorist
pyramids of Palenke. Mute testimonies
these are of the lost arts and sciences
of antiquity and concealed this wisdom
must remain until this race has learned
to read the universal language
symbolism. The book to which this is the
introduction is dedicated to the
proposition that concealed within the
emblematic figures, allegorories, and
rituals of the ancients is a secret
doctrine concerning the inner mysteries
of life. Which doctrine has been
preserved in Toto among a small band of
initiated minds since the beginning of
the world. Departing, these illumined
philosophers left their formula that
others too might attain to
understanding. But lest these secret
processes fall into uncultured hands and
be perverted, the great Arcanum was
always concealed in symbol or allegory,
and those who can today discover its
lost keys may open with them a treasure
house of philosophic, scientific, and
religious truths. The ancient mysteries
and secret societies, which have
influenced modern Masonic symbolism.
When confronted with a problem involving
the use of the reasoning faculties,
individuals of strong intellect keep
their poise and seek to reach a solution
by obtaining facts bearing upon the
question. Those of immature mentality,
on the other hand, when similarly
confronted, are overwhelmed. While the
former may be qualified to solve the
riddle of their own destiny, the latter
must be led like a flock of sheep and
taught in simple language. They depend
almost entirely upon the ministrations
of the shepherd. The apostle Paul said
that these little ones must be fed with
milk but that meat is the food of strong
men. Thoughtlessness is almost
synonymous with childishness while
thoughtfulness is symbolic of maturity.
There are however but few mature minds
in the world and thus it was that the
philosophic religious doctrines of the
pagans were divided to meet the needs of
these two fundamental groups of human
intellect. one philosophic, the other
incapable of appreciating the deeper
mysteries of life. To the discerning few
were revealed the esoteric or spiritual
teachings, while the unqualified, many
received only the literal or exoteric
interpretations. In order to make simple
the great truths of nature and the
abstract principles of natural law, the
vital forces of the universe were
personified, becoming the gods and
goddesses of the ancient mythologies.
While the ignorant multitudes brought
their offerings to the altars of priapus
and pan deities representing the
procreative energies, the wise
recognized in these marble statues only
symbolic concretions of great abstract
truths. In all cities of the ancient
world were temples for public worship
and offering. In every community also
were philosophers and mystics deeply
versed in nature's lore. These
individuals were usually banded together
forming seclusive philosophic and
religious schools. The more important of
these groups were known as the
mysteries. Many of the great minds of
antiquity were initiated into these
secret fraternities by strange and
mysterious rights, some of which were
extremely cruel. Alexander Wilder
defines the mysteries as sacred dramas
performed at stated periods. The most
celebrated were those of Isis. Sebasius,
Sibily, and Elusus. After being
admitted, the initiates were instructed
in the secret wisdom which had been
preserved for ages. Plato, an initiate
of one of these sacred orders, was
severely criticized because in his
writings, he revealed to the public many
of the secret philosophic principles of
the mysteries. Every pagan nation had
and has not only its state religion, but
another into which the philosophical
elect alone have gained entrance. Many
of these ancient cults vanished from the
earth without revealing their secrets,
but a few have survived the test of ages
and their mysterious symbols are still
preserved. Much of the ritualism of
Freemasonry is based on the trials to
which candidates were subjected by the
ancient hieraphants before the keys of
wisdom were entrusted to them. Few
realize the extent to which the ancient
secret schools influenced contemporary
intellects and through those minds
posterity. Robert McCoy 33° in his
general history of Freemasonry pays a
magnificent tribute to the part played
by the ancient mysteries in the rearing
of the edifice of human culture. He says
in part, "It appears that all the
perfection of civilization and all the
advancement made in philosophy, science,
and art among the ancients are due to
those institutions which under the veil
of mystery sought to illustrate the
sublimeest truths of religion, morality,
and virtue, and impress them on the
hearts of their disciples." asterisk
asterisk asterisk. Their chief object
was to teach the doctrine of one God,
the resurrection of man to eternal life.
the dignity of the human soul and to
lead the people to see the shadow of the
deity in the beauty, magnificence and
splendor of the universe. With the
decline of virtue which has preceded the
destruction of every nation of history,
the mysteries became perverted. Sorcery
took the place of the divine magic.
Indescribable practices such as the
Bakanalia were introduced and perversion
ruled supreme. For no institution can be
any better than the members of which it
is composed. In despair the few who were
true sought to preserve the secret
doctrines from oblivion. In some cases
they succeeded, but more often the
arcanum was lost and only the empty
shell of the mysteries remained. Thomas
Taylor has written, "Man is naturally a
religious animal. From the earliest
dawning of his consciousness, man has
worshiped and revered things as symbolic
of the invisible on the present
indescribable thing concerning which he
could discover practically nothing. The
pagan mysteries opposed the Christians
during the early centuries of their
church declaring that the new faith
Christianity did not demand virtue and
integrity as requisites for salvation.
Celsus expressed himself on the subject
in the following costic terms. That I do
not however accuse the Christians more
bitterly than truth compels may be
conjectured from hence that the criers
who call men to other mysteries proclaim
as follows. Let him approach whose hands
are pure and whose words are wise. And
again others proclaim, "Let him approach
who is pure from all wickedness, whose
soul is not conscious of any evil, and
who leads a just and upright life." And
these things are proclaimed by those who
promise a purification from error. Let
us now hear who those are that are
called to the Christian mysteries.
Whoever is a sinner, whoever is unwise,
whoever is a fool, and whoever in short
is miserable, him the kingdom of God
will receive. Do you not therefore call
a sinner an unjust man, a thief, a
housebreaker, a wizard, one who is
sacriiggious, and a robber of sepilers?
What other persons would the crier
nominate? Who should call robbers
together? It was not the true faith of
the early Christian mystics that Celsius
attacked, but the false forms that were
creeping in even during his day. The
ideals of early Christianity were based
upon the high moral standards of the
pagan mysteries and the first Christians
who met under the city of Rome used as
their places of worship the subterranean
temples of Mithris from whose cult has
been borrowed much of the sacraodalism
of the modem church. The ancient
philosophers believe that no man could
live intelligently who did not have a
fundamental knowledge of nature and her
laws. Before man can obey, he must
understand. And the mysteries were
devoted to instructing man concerning
the operation of divine law in the
terrestrial sphere. Few of the early
cults actually worshiped anthropomorphic
deities, although their symbolism might
lead one to believe they did. They were
moralistic rather than religionistic,
philosophic rather than theologic. They
taught man to use his faculties more
intelligently, to be patient in the face
of adversity, to be courageous when
confronted by danger, to be true in the
midst of temptation, and most of all to
view a worthy life as the most
acceptable sacrifice to God and his body
as an altar sacred to the deity. Sun
worship played an important part in
nearly all the early pagan mysteries.
This indicates the probability of their
Atlantean origin. For the people of
Atlantis were sun worshippers. The solar
deity was usually personified as a
beautiful youth with long golden hair to
symbolize the rays of the sun. This
golden sun god was slain by wicked
ruffians who personified the evil
principle of the universe. By means of
certain rituals and ceremonies symbolic
of purification and regeneration, this
wonderful God of good was brought back
to life and became the savior of his
people. The secret processes whereby he
was resurrected symbolized those
cultures by means of which man is able
to overcome his lower nature, master his
appetites, and give expression to the
higher side of himself. The mysteries
were organized for the purpose of
assisting the struggling human creature
to reawaken the spiritual powers which
surrounded by the flaming. This
illustration shows civily here called
the Syrian goddess in the robes of a
hierofphant. Mont Faulen describes the
figure as follows. Upon her head is an
episcopal miter adorned on the lower
part with towers and pinnacles. Over the
gate of the city is a crescent and
beneath the circuit of the walls a crown
of rays. The goddess wears a sort of
surplus exactly like the surplus of a
priest or bishop and upon the surplus a
tunic which falls down to the legs and
overall an episcopal cope with the 12
signs of the zodiac wrought on the
borders. The figure hath a lion on each
side and holds in its left hand a
tempenum, a cyist, a distaff, a kaducius
and another instrument. In her right
hand she holds with her middle finger a
thunderbolt and upon the same animals,
insects, and as far as we may guess,
flowers, fruit, a bow, a quiver, a
torch, and a scythe. The whereabouts of
the statue is unknown. The copy
reproduced by Mont Faulen being from
drawings by Piro Lorio, ring of lust and
degeneracy, lay asleep within his soul.
In other words, man was offered away by
witch. He could regain his lost estate.
C. Wagner seed freed in the ancient
world nearly all the secret societies
were philosophic and religious. During
the medieval centuries they were chiefly
religious and political although a few
philosophic schools remained. In modern
times secret societies in the accidental
countries are largely political or
fraternal although in a few of them as
in masonry. The ancient religious and
philosophic principles still survive.
Space prohibits a detailed discussion of
the secret schools. There were literally
scores of these ancient cults with
branches in all parts of the eastern and
western worlds. Some such as those of
Pythagoras and the hermitists show a
decided oriental influence while the
Rosacruians according to their own
proclamations gained much of their
wisdom from Arabian mystics. Although
the mystery schools are usually
associated with civilization, there is
evidence that the most univilized
peoples of prehistoric times had a
knowledge of them, natives of distant
islands, many in the lowest forms of
savagery, have mystic rituals and secret
practices which, although primitive, are
of a decided Masonic tinge. The druidic
mysteries of Britain and Gaul. The
original and primitive inhabitants of
Britain at some remote period revived
and reformed their national institutes,
their priest or instructor had hitherto
been simply named GWD. But it was
considered to have become necessary to
divide this office between the national
or superior priest and another whose
influence would be more limited. From
henceforth the former became dur
druid or superior instructor and the
latter go wid or ovd ovate subordinate
instructor and both went by the general
name of beard bards or teachers of
wisdom. As the system matured and
augmented the bic order consisted of
three classes the druids beard brant or
privileged bards and ovates. See Samuel
Merik and Charles Smith, the costume of
the original inhabitants of the British
islands. The origin of the word druid is
under dispute. Max Mueller believes that
like the Irish word druid means the men
of the oak trees. He further draws
attention to the fact that the forest
gods and tree deities of the Greeks were
called dryads. Some believe the word to
be of Tutonic origin. Others ascribe it
to the Welsh. A few trace it to the
Gaelic druid which means a wise man or a
sorcerer. In Sanskrit the word Drew
means timber. At the time of the Roman
conquest, the druids were thoroughly
enscconced in Britain and Gaul. There
power over the people was unquestioned
and there were instances in which armies
about to attack each other sheathed
their swords when ordered to do so by
the white robed druids. No undertaking
of great importance was scat without the
assistance of these patriarchs who stood
as mediators between the gods and men.
The Druidic Order is deservedly credited
with having had a deep understanding of
nature and her laws. The Encyclopedia
Bratannica states that geography,
physical science, natural theology, and
astrology were their favorite studies.
The Druids had a fundamental knowledge
of medicine, especially the use of herbs
and simples. Crude surgical instruments
also have been found in England and
Ireland. An odd treatise on early
British medicine states that every
practitioner was expected to have a
garden or backyard for the growing of
certain herbs necessary to his
profession. If Levi, the celebrated
transcendentalist, makes the following
significant statement. The Druids were
priests and physicians curing by
magnetism and charging amulets with
their fluidic influence. Their universal
remedies were mistletoe and serpent's
eggs because these substances attract
the astral light in a special manner.
The somnity with which mistletoe was cut
down drew upon this plant the popular
confidence and rendered it powerfully
magnetic asterisk asterisk asterisk the
progress of magnetism well someday
reveal to us the absorbing properties of
mistletoe. We shall then understand the
secret of those spongy growths which
drew the unused virtues of plants and
become sircharged with tinctures and
savers, mushrooms, truffles, gallon
trees and the different kinds of
mistletoe will be employed with
understanding by a medical science which
will be new because it is old asterisk
asterisk asterisk but one must not move
quicker than science which recedes that
it may advance the further. See the
history of magic. Not only was the
mistletoe sacred as symbolic of the
universal medicine or panacea, but also
because of the fact that it grew upon
the oak tree. Through the symbol of the
oak, the druids worshiped the supreme
deity. Therefore, anything growing upon
that tree was sacred to him. At certain
seasons, according to the positions of
the sun, moon, and stars, the arch druid
climbed the oak tree and cut the
mistletoe with a golden sickle
consecrated for that service. The
parasitic growth was caught in white
cloths provided for the purpose lest it
touch the earth and be polluted by
terrestrial vibrations. Usually a
sacrifice of a white bull was made under
the tree. The druids were initiates of a
secret school that existed in their
midst. This school which closely
resembled the bakshik and elusinian
mysteries of Greece or the Egyptian
writes of Isis and Osiris is justly
designated the druidic mysteries. There
has been much speculation concerning the
secret wisdom that the druids claimed to
possess. Their secret teachings were
never written, but were communicated
orally to specially prepared candidates.
Robert Brown, 32°, is of the opinion
that the British priests secured their
information from Tyrion and Phoenician
navigators who thousands of years before
the Christian era established colonies
in Britain and Gaul while searching for
tin. Thomas Maurice in his Indian
antiquities discourses at length on
Phoenician, Carthaginian and Greek
expeditions to the British als for the
purpose of procuring tin. Others are of
the opinion that the mysteries as
celebrated by the druids were of
oriental origin possibly Buddhistic. The
proximity of the British Isles to the
lost Atlantis may account for the sun
worship which plays an important part in
the rituals of druidism. According to
Artemis, Siri and Praphanany were
worshiped on an island close to Britain
with rights and ceremonies similar to
those of Samothrace. There is no doubt
that the druidic pantheon includes a
large number of Greek and Roman deities.
This greatly amazed Caesar during his
conquest of Britain and Gaul and caused
him to affirm that these tribes adored
Mercury, Apollo, Mars, and Jupiter in a
manner similar to that of the Latin
countries. It is almost certain that the
druidic mysteries were not indigenous to
Britain or Gaul but migrated from one of
the more ancient civilizations. The
school of the druids was divided into
three distinct parts and the secret
teachings embodied therein are
practically the same as the mysteries
concealed under the allegorories of blue
lodge masonry. The lowest of the three
divisions was that of ovate oid. This
was an honorary degree requiring no
special purification or preparation. The
ovates dressed in green, the druidic
color of learning, and were expected to
know something about medicine,
astronomy, poetry if possible, and
sometimes music. On oate was an
individual admitted to the druidic order
because of his general excellence and
superior knowledge concerning the
problems of life. The second division
was that of bard beard. Its members were
robed in sky blue to represent harmony
and truth and to them was assigned the
labor of memorizing at least in part the
20,000 verses of druidic sacred poetry.
They were often pictured with the
primitive British or Irish harp and
instrument strung with human hair and
having as many strings as there were
ribs on one side of the human body.
These bards were often chosen as
teachers of candidates seeking entrance
into the druidic mysteries. Nephites
wore striped robes of blue, green, and
white. These being the three sacred
colors of the druidic order. The third
division was that of Druid Derwin. Its
particular labor was to minister to the
religious needs of the people. To reach
this dignity, the candidate must first
become a Bard Bryant. The Druids always
dressed in white symbolic of their
purity and the color used by them to
symbolize the sun. In order to reach the
exalted position of arch druid or
spiritual head of the organization, it
was necessary for a priest to pass
through the six successive degrees of
the druidic order. The members of the
different degrees were differentiated by
the colors of their sashes, for all of
them wore robes of white. Some writers
are of the opinion that the title of
arch druid was hereditary, descending
from father to son, but it is more
probable that the honor was conferred by
ballot election. Its recipient was
chosen for his virtues and the most
striking adornment of the arch druid was
the ayadhen moran or breastplate of
judgment which possessed the mysterious
power of strangling any who made an
untrue statement while wearing it.
Godfrey Higgins states that this
breastplate was put on the necks of
witnesses to test the veracity of their
evidence. The druidic tiara or anguum,
its front embossed with a number of
points to represent the sun's rays,
indicated that the priest was a
personification of the rising sun. On
the front of his belt, the arch druid
wore the lithis, a magic brooch or
buckle in the center of which was a
large white stone. To this was
attributed the power of drawing the fire
of the gods down from heaven at the
priest's command. This specially cut
stone was a burning glass by which the
sun's rays were concentrated to light
the altar fires. The druids also had
other symbolic implements such as the
peculiarly shaped golden sickle with
which they cut the mistletoe from the
oak and the cornin or scepter in the
form of a crescent symbolic of the sixth
day of the increasing moon and also of
the ark of Noah. An early initiate of
the druidic mysteries related that
admission to their midnight ceremony was
gained by means of a glass boat called
CWRWG Guyron. This boat symbolized the
moon which floating upon the waters of
eternity preserved the seeds of living
creatures within its boatlike crescent
integrity from the most learned members
of the higher druidic degrees. According
to James Gardner, there were usually two
arch druids in Britain. one residing on
the aisle of Anglesy and the other on
the aisle of man. Presumably there were
others in Gaul. These dignitaries
generally carried golden scepters and
were crowned with wreaths of oak leaves
symbolic of their authority. The younger
members of the druidic order were clean
shaven and modestly dressed. But the
more aged had long gray beards and wore
magnificent golden ornaments. The
educational system of the druids in
Britain was superior to that of their
colleagues on the continent and
consequently many of the GIC youths were
sent to the druidic colleges in Britain
for their philosophical instruction and
training. Alifa's Levi states that the
druids lived in strict abstinence,
studied the natural sciences, preserved
the deepest secrecy, and admitted new
members only after long probationary
periods. Many of the priests of the
order lived in buildings not unlike the
monasteries of the modern world. They
were associated in groups like
aesthetics of the far east. Although
celibacy was not demanded of them, few
married. Many of the druids retired from
the world and lived as recluses in
caves, in rough stone houses, or in
little shacks built in the depths of a
forest. Here they prayed and medicated,
emerging only to perform their religious
duties. James Freeman Clark in his 10
great religions describes the beliefs of
the druids as follows. The druids
believed in three worlds and in
transmigration from one to the other in
a world above this in which happiness
predominated a world below of misery in
this present state. This transmigration
was to punish and reward and also to
purify the soul. in the present world
said they good and evil are so exactly
balanced that man has the utmost freedom
and is able to choose or reject either.
The Welsh triads tell us there are three
objects of metamsychosis to collect into
the soul the properties of all being to
acquire a knowledge of all things and to
get power to conquer evil. There are
also they say three kinds of knowledge
knowledge of the nature of each thing of
its cause and its influence. There are
three things which continually grow
less, darkness, falsehood, and death.
There are three which constantly
increase, light, life, and truth. Like
nearly all schools of the mysteries, the
teachings of the Druids were divided
into two distinct sections. The simpler
a moral code was taught to all the
people, while the deeper esoteric
doctrine was given only to initiated
priests. To be admitted to the order, a
candidate was required to be of good
family and of high moral character. No
important secrets were entrusted to him
until he had been tempted in many ways
and his strength of character severely
tried. The Druids taught the people of
Britain and Gaul concerning the
immortality of the soul. They believed
in transmigration and apparently in
reincarnation. They borrowed in one
life, promising to pay back in the next.
They believed in a purgatorial type of
hell where they would be purged of their
sins afterward passing on to the
happiness of unity with the gods. The
druids taught that all men would be
saved but that some must return to earth
many times to learn the lessons of human
life and to overcome the inherent evil
of their own natures. Before a candidate
was entrusted with the secret doctrines
of the druids, he was bound with a vow
of secrecy. These doctrines were
imparted only in the depths of forests
and in the darkness of caves. In these
places, far from the haunts of man, the
Nephite was instructed concerning the
creation of the universe, the
personalities of the gods, the laws of
nature, the secrets of occult medicine,
the mysteries of the celestial bodies,
and the rudiments of magic and sorcery.
The druids had a great number of feast
days. The new and full moon and the
sixth day of the moon were sacred
periods. It is believed that initiations
took place only at the two solstesses
and the two equinoxes. At dawn of the
25th day of December, the birth of the
sun god was celebrated. The secret
teachings of the druids are said by some
to be tinctured with Pythagorean
philosophy. The Druids had a Madonna or
virgin mother with a child in her arms
who was sacred to their mysteries. And
their son god was resurrected at the
time of the year corresponding to that
at which modern Christians celebrate
Easter. Both the cross and the serpent
were sacred to the Druids who made the
former by cutting off all the branches
of an oak tree and fastening one of them
to the main trunk in the form of the
letter T. This oaken cross became
symbolic of their superior deity. They
also worshiped the sun, moon, and stars.
The moon received their special
veneration. Caesar stated that Mercury
was one of the chief deities of the
Gauls. The Druids are believed to have
worshiped Mercury under the similitude
of a stone cube. They also had great
veneration for the nature spirits,
fairies, gnomes, and undines, little
creatures of the forests and rivers to
whom many offerings were made.
describing the temples of the druids.
Charles Hecathornne in the secret
societies of all ages and countries says
their temples wherein the sacred fire
was preserved were generally situated on
eminences and in dents groves of oak and
assumed various forms circular because a
circle was the emblem of the universe.
Oval in illusion to the mundane egg from
which issued according to the traditions
of many nations the universe or
according to others our first parents.
Serpentine because a serpent was the
symbol of who? The druidic Osiris.
Crucifiform because a cross is an emblem
of regeneration or winged to represent
the motion of the divine spirit.
Asterisk asterisk asterisk their chief
deities were reducible to two a male and
a female. The great father and mother
who and Siridwin distinguished by the
same characteristics as belong to Osiris
and Isis, Bakis and series or any other
supreme god and goddess representing the
two principles of all being. Godfrey
Higgins states that who the mighty
regarded as the first settler of Britain
came from a place which the Welsh triads
call the summer country the present site
of Constantinople. Albert Pike says that
the lost word of masonry is concealed in
the name of the druid god who the meager
information extent concerning the secret
initiations of the druids indicates a
decided similarity between their mystery
school and the schools of Greece and
Egypt who the son god was murdered and
after a number of strange orals and
mystic rituals was restored to life.
There were three degrees of the druidic
mysteries but few successfully passed
them all. The candidate was buried in a
coffin as symbolic of the death of the
sun god. The supreme test, however, was
being sent out to sea in an open boat.
While undergoing this ordeal, many lost
their lives. Talesin, an ancient scholar
who passed through the mysteries,
describes the initiation of the open
boat in Faber's pagan idolatry. The few
who passed this third degree were said
to have been born again and were
instructed in the secret and hidden
truths which the Druid priests had
preserved from antiquity. From these
initiates were chosen many of the
dignitaries of the British religious and
political world. For further details,
see Faber's pagan idolatry, Albert
Pike's morals and dogma, and Godfrey
Higgins Celtic Druids, the rights of
Mithris. When the Persian mysteries
immigrated into southern Europe, they
were quickly assimilated by the Latin
mind. The cult grew rapidly, especially
among the Roman soldiery and during the
Roman wars of conquest, the teachings
were carried by the legionaries to
nearly all parts of Europe. So powerful
did the cult of Mithris become that at
least one Roman emperor was initiated
into the order, which met in caverns
under the city of Rome. concerning the
spread of this mystery school through
different parts of Europe. C W King in
his Gnostics and their remains says
mythraic bur leaves cut on the faces of
rocks or on stone tablets still abound
in the countries formerly the western
provinces of the Roman Empire. Many
exist in Germany, still more in France
and in this island Britain. They have
often been discovered on the line of the
pix wall and the noted one at Bath.
Alexander Wilder in his philosophy and
ethics of Azoroasters states that
Mithris is the Zen title for the sun and
he is supposed to dwell within that
shining orb. Mithris has a male and a
female aspect though not himself
androgynous. As Mithris he is the ford
of the sun powerful and radiant and most
magnificent of the Yazadas isads or geni
of the sun. As Matra, this deity
represents the feminine principle. The
mundane universe is recognized as her
symbol. She represents nature as
receptive and terrestrial and as
fruitful only when bathed in the glory
of the solar orb. The Mthraic cult is a
simplification of the more elaborate
teachings of Zerathustra Zoroaster, the
Persian fire magician. The Druid temples
of places of religious worship were not
patterned after those of other nations.
Most of their ceremonies were performed
at night, either in thick groves of oak
trees or around open air altars built of
great uncut stones. How these masses of
rock were moved ahs not been
satisfactorily explained. The most
famous of their altars, a great stone
ring of rocks is Stonehenge in
southwestern England. This structure
laid out on an astronomical basis still
stands a wonder of antiquity according
to the Persians. There coexisted in
eternity two principles. The first of
these Ahuram Mazda or Ormist was the
spirit of good. From Ormist came forth a
number of hierarchies of good and
beautiful spirits, angels and
archangels. The second of these
eternally existing principles was called
Armen. He was also a pure and beautiful
spirit. But he later rebelled against
Ormist being jealous of his power. This
did not occur, however, until after
Ormist had created light. For
previously, Armen had not been conscious
of the existence of Ormist. Because of
his jealousy and rebellion, Armen became
the spirit of evil. From himself, he
individualized a host of destructive
creatures to injure. Or when Ormist
created the earth, Orman entered into
its grosser elements. Whenever Ormis did
a good deed, Orman placed the principle
of evil within it. At last, when Ormist
created the human race, Armen became
incarnate in the lower nature of man, so
that in each personality, the spirit of
good and the spirit of evil struggle for
control. For 3,000 years, Ormist ruled
the celestial worlds with light and
goodness. Then he created man. For
another 3,000 years, he ruled man with
wisdom and integrity. Then the power of
Armen began and the struggle for the
soul of man continues through the next
period of 3,000 years. During the fourth
period of 3,000 years, the power of
Armen will be destroyed. Goodwill return
to the world again. Evil and death will
be vanquished and at last the spirit of
evil will bow humbly before the throne
of Ormist. While Ormis and Armen are
struggling for control of the human soul
and for supremacy in nature, Mithris,
god of intelligence, stands as mediator
between the two. Many authors have noted
the similarity between Mercury and
Mithris as the chemical mercury acts as
a solvent according to alchemists. So,
Mithris seeks to harmonize the two
celestial opposites. There are many
points of resemblance between
Christianity and the cult of Mithris.
One of the reasons for this probably is
that the Persian mystics invaded Italy
during the first century after Christ
and the early history of both cults was
closely interwoven. The Encyclopedia
Britannica makes the following statement
concerning the methraic and Christian
mysteries. The fraternal and democratic
spirit of the first communities and
their humble origin. The identification
of the object of adoration with light
and the sun. The legends of the
shepherds with their gifts and
adoration, the flood and the ark, the
representation in art of the fiery
chariot, the drawing of water from the
rock, the use of bell and candle, holy
water and the communion, the
sanctification of Sunday and of the 25th
of December, the insistence on moral
conduct, the emphasis placed on
abstinence and self-control, the
doctrine of heaven and hell, of
primitive revelation, of the mediation
of the logos emanating
from the divine, the atoning sacrifice,
the constant warfare between good and
evil, and the final triumph of the
former, the immortality of the soul, the
last judgment, the resurrection of the
flesh and the fiery destruction of the
universe. These are some of the
resemblances which whether real or only
apparent enabled Methruism to prolong
its resistance to Christianity. The
rights of Mithris were performed in
caves. Pfury in his cave of the nymphs
states that Zerathustra Zoroaster was
the first to consecrate a cave to the
worship of God because a cavern was
symbolic of the earth or the lower world
of darkness. John P. Lundy in his
monumental Christianity describes the
cave of Mithris as follows. But this
cave was adorned with the signs of the
zodiac, cancer, and Capricorn. The
summer and winter solstesses were
chiefly conspicuous as the gates of
souls descending into this life or
passing out of it in their ascent to the
gods. Cancer being the gate of descent
and Capricorn of ascent. These are the
two avenues of the immortals passing up
and down from earth to heaven and from
heaven to earth. The so-called chair of
St. Peter in Rome was believed to have
been used in one of the pagan mysteries
possibly that of Mithris in whose
subterranean gro the votaries of the
Christian mysteries met in the early
days of their faith. In Anacalypsis,
Godfrey Higgins writes that in 1662
while cleaning this sacred chair of
Barjonas, the 12 labors of Hercules were
discovered upon it and that later the
French discovered upon the same chair
the Mohamadan confession of faith
written in Arabic. Initiation into the
rights of Mithris, like initiation into
many other ancient schools of
philosophy, apparently consisted of
three important degrees. Preparation for
these degrees consisted of self-
purification, the building up of the
intellectual powers, and the control of
the animal nature. In the first degree,
the candidate was given a crown upon the
point of a sword and instructed in the
mysteries of Mithris hidden power.
Probably he was taught that the golden
crown represented his own spiritual
nature which must be objectified and
unfolded before he could truly glorify
Mithris. For Mithris was his own soul
standing as mediator between Ormist his
spirit and Armen his animal nature. In
the second degree he was given the armor
of intelligence and purity and sent into
the darkness of subterranean pits to
fight the beasts of lust, passion, and
degeneracy. In the third degree, he was
given a cape upon which were drawn or
woven the signs of the zodiac and other
astronomical symbols. After his
initiations were over, he was hailed as
one who had risen from the dead was
instructed in the secret teachings of
the Persian mystics and became a
full-fledged member of the order.
Candidates who successfully passed the
Mithraic initiations were called lions
and were marked upon their foreheads
with the Egyptian cross. Mithris himself
is often pictured with the head of a
lion and two pairs of wings. Throughout
the entire ritual were repeated
references to the birth of Mithris as
the son god, his sacrifice for man, his
death that men might have eternal life,
and lastly his resurrection and the
saving of all humanity by his
intercession before the throne of Ormist
Hecathornne. While the cult of Mithris
did not reach the philosophic heights
attained by Zerathustra, its effect upon
the civilization of the western world
was farreaching. For at one time nearly
all Europe was converted to its
doctrines. Rome in her intercourse with
other nations inoculated them with her
religious principles and many later
institutions have exhibited mythraic
culture. The reference to the lion and
the grip of the lion's paw in the master
mason's degree have a strong mythraic
tinge and may easily have originated
from this cult. A ladder of seven rungs
appears in the mythraic initiation.
Faber is of the opinion that this ladder
was originally a pyramid of seven steps.
It is possible that the Masonic ladder
with seven rungs had its origin in this
methraic symbol. Women were never
permitted to enter the Mthraic order,
but children of the male sex were
initiates long before they reached
maturity. The refusal to permit women to
join the Masonic order may be based on
the esoteric reason given in the secret
instructions of the Mthraics. This cult
is another excellent example of those
secret societies whose legends are
largely symbolic representations of the
sun and his journey through the houses
of the heavens. Mithris rising from a
stone is merely the sun rising over the
horizon or as the ancients supposed out
of the horizon at the vernal equinox.
John O'Neal disputes the theory that
Mithris was intended as a solar deity in
the night of the gods. He writes the
Avestan Mitra the Yazada of light has
10,000 eyes high with full knowledge.
Perth of strong, sleepless and ever
awake. Jagger Vongams, the supreme god
Ahura. Mazda also has one eye or else it
is said that with his eyes, the sun,
moon, and stars, he sees everything. The
theory that Mitra was originally a title
of the supreme heaven's god putting the
sun out of Cortis. The only one that
answers all requirements. It will be
evident that here we have origins in
abundance for the Freemason's eye and
its nunum dormio. The reader must nor
confuse the Persian mitra with the vdic
mitra. According to Alexander Wilder,
the methraic rights superseded the
mysteries of bakis and became the
foundation of the gnostic system which
for many centuries prevailed in Asia,
Egypt, and even the remote west. The
ancient mysteries and secret societies.
Part two, the entire history of
Christian and pagan gnosticism is
shrouded in the deepest mystery and
obscurity. For while the Gnostics were
undoubtedly prolific writers, little of
their literature has survived. They
brought down upon themselves the
animosity of the early Christian church.
And when this institution reached its
position of world power, it destroyed
all available records of the Gnostic
cultist. The name Gnostic means wisdom
or knowledge and is derived from the
Greek nosis. The members of the order
claimed to be familiar with the secret
doctrines of early Christianity. They
interpreted the Christian mysteries
according to pagan symbolism, their
secret information and philosophic
tenets. They concealed from the profane
and taught to a small group only of
especially initiated persons. Simon
Magus, the magician of New Testament
fame, is often supposed to have been the
founder ofnosticism.
If this be true, the sect was formed
during the century after Christ and is
probably the first of the many branches
which have sprung from the main trunk of
Christianity. everything with which the
enthusiasts of the early Christian
church might not agree. They declared to
be inspired by the devil. That Simon
Magus had mysterious and supernatural
powers as conceited even by his enemies.
But they maintain that these powers were
lent to him by the infernal spirits and
furies which they asserted were his
ever-present companions. Undoubtedly the
most interesting legend concerning Simon
is that which tells of his theosophic
contests with the apostle Peter while
the two were promulgating their
differing doctrines in Rome. According
to the story that the church fathers
have preserved, Simon was to prove his
spiritual superiority by ascending to
heaven in a chariot of fire. He was
actually picked up and carried many feet
into the air by invisible powers. When
St. Peter saw this. He cried out in a
loud voice, ordering the demons, spirits
of the air, to release their hold upon
the magician. The evil spirits, when so,
ordered by the great saint, were forced
to obey. Simon fell a great distance and
was killed, which decisively proved the
superiority of the Christian powers.
This story is undoubtedly manufactured
out of whole cloth as it is only one out
of many accounts concerning his death.
Few of which agree as more and more
evidence is being amassed to the effect
that st Peter was never in Rome. It's
last possible vestage of authenticity is
rapidly being dissipated that Simon was
a philosopher. There is no doubt for
wherever his exact words are preserved
his synthetic and transcending thoughts
are beautifully expressed. The
principles ofnosticism are well
described in the following verbatim
statement by him supposed to have been
preserved by Hippolitus to you.
Therefore, I say what I say and write
what I write. And the writing is this of
the universal
periods, planes or cycles of creative
and created life in substance and space.
Celestial creatures. There are two chuts
without beginning or end springing from
one root which is the power invisible
inapprehensible silence. Bthos of these
chuts one is manifested from above which
is the great power the universal mind
ordering all things male and the other
is manifested from below the great
thought female producing all things.
Hence pairing with each other they unite
and manifest the middle distance
incomprehensible air without beginning
or end. In this is the father who
sustains all things and nourishes those
things which have a beginning and end.
See Simon Magus by GR S me. By this we
are to understand that manifestation is
the result of a positive and a negative
principle one acting upon the other and
it takes place in the middle plane or
point of equilibrium called the plleoma.
This plura is a peculiar substance
produced out of the blending of the
spiritual and materials. Out of the
plleoma was individualized the
demiierus, the immortal mortal to whom
we are responsible for our physical
existence and the suffering we must go
through in connection with it. In the
gnostic system, three pairs of opposites
called sissies emanated from the eternal
one. These with himself make the total
of seven. The six three pairs Ian's
living divine principles were described
by Simon in the philosophina in the
following manner. The first two were
mind, noose and thought, epinoia. Then
came voice, phone, and its opposite
name, Onoma. And lastly, reason,
loismos, and reflection, and thumsus.
From these primordial six, united with
the eternal flame, came forth the Ians,
angels, who formed the lower worlds
through the direction of the demiurgis.
See the works of H Pllatski. How this
firstnosticism of Simon Magus and
Manander his disciple was amplified and
frequently distorted by later adherence
to the cult must now be considered. The
school ofnosticism was divided into two
major parts commonly called the Syrian
cult and the Alexandrian cult. These
schools agreed in essentials but the
latter division was more inclined to be
pantheistic while the former was
dualistic while the Syrian cult was
largely Simmonian. The Alexandrian
school was the outgrowth of the
philosophical deductions of a clever
Egyptian Christian Baselides by name who
claimed to have received his
instructions from the apostle Matthew
like Simon Magus. He was an emanationist
with neoplatonic inclinations. In fact,
the entire gnostic mystery is based upon
the hypothesis of emanations as being
the logical connection between the
irreconcilable opposites absolute spirit
and absolute substance which the
gnostics believe to have been coexistent
in eternity. Some assert that baselides
was the true founder of gnosticism. But
there is much evidence to the effect
that Simon Magus laid down its
fundamental principles in the preceding
century. The Alexandrian baselides
inculcated Egyptian hermeticism,
oriental occultism, calaldian astrology
and Persian philosophy in his followers
and in his doctrines sought to unite the
schools of early Christianity with the
ancient pagan mysteries. To him is
attributed the formulation of that
peculiar concept of the deity which
carries the name of Arais. In discussing
the original meaning of this word,
Godfrey Higgins in his Celtic Druids has
demonstrated that the numerological
powers of the letters forming the word
Arais when added together result in the
sum of 365. The same author also notes
that the name Mithris when treated in a
similar manner has the same numerical
value. Baselites caught that the powers
of the universe were divided into 365ans
or spiritual cycles and that the sum of
all these together was the supreme
father and to him he gave the
cabalistical appellation abraasis as
being symbolical numerologically of his
divine powers attributes and emanations.
A brais is usually symbolized as a
composite creature with the body of a
human being and the head of a rooster
and with each of his legs ending in a
serpent. C W King in his Gnostics and
their remains gives the following
concise description of the Gnostic
philosophy of baselites quoting from the
writings of the early Christian bishop
and martyr St. Irenaeus. He asserted
that God the uncreated eternal father
had first brought forth noose or mind.
This the logos word. This again Fisus
intelligence from fisus sprung Sophia
wisdom and dynamis strength. In
describing Abraasis, CW King says,
"Bellererman considers the composite
image inscribed with the actual name
abraasis to be a gnostic pantheos
representing the supreme being with the
five emanations marked out by
appropriate symbols from the human body.
The usual form assigned to the deity
spring the two supporters noose and
logos expressed in the serpents symbols
of the inner senses and the quickening
understanding on which account the
Greeks had made the serpent the
attribute of palace. His head that of a
represents fisus that bird being
the emblem of foresight and of
vigilance. His two arms hold the symbols
of Sophia and Dynamis the shield of
wisdom and the whip of power. The
Gnostics were divided in their opinions
concerning the demier or creator of the
lower worlds. He established the
terrestrial universe with the aid of six
sons or emanations possibly the
planetary angels which he formed out of
and yet within himself. As stated
before, the demiier was individualized
as the lowest creation out of the
substance called Plleoma. One group of
Gnostics was of the opinion that the
demier was the cause of all misery and
was an evil creature who by building
this lower world had separated the souls
of men from truth by encasing them in
mortal vehicles. The other sect viewed
the demier as being divinely inspired
and merely fulfilling the dictates of
the invisible lord. Some gnostics were
of the opinion that the Jewish god
Jehovah was the demier. This concept
under a slightly different name
apparently influenced medieval
Rosacrrucianism which viewed Jehovah as
the lord of the material universe rather
than as the supreme deity. Mythology
abounds with the stories of gods who
ptook of both celestial and terrestrial
natures. Odin of Scandinavia is a good
example of a deity subject to mortality
bowing before the laws of nature and yet
being in certain senses at least a
supreme deity. The Gnostic viewpoint
concerning the Christ is well worthy of
consideration. This order claimed to be
the only sect to have actual pictures of
the divine Syrian. While these were in
all probability idealistic conceptions
of the Savior based upon existing
sculpturings and paintings of the pagan
sun gods, they were all Christianity
had. To the Gnostics, the Christ was the
personification of noose, the divine
mind, and emanated from the higher
spiritual. He descended into the body of
Jesus at the baptism and left it again
before the crucifixion. The Gnostics
declared that the Christ was not
crucified as this divine noose could not
suffer death but that Simon the Sirenian
offered his life instead and that the
noose by means of its power caused Simon
to resemble Jesus. Irenaeus makes the
following statement concerning the
cosmic sacrifice of the Christ. When the
uncreated unnamed father saw the
corruption of mankind, he sent his
firstborn noose into the world in the
form of Christ for the redemption of all
who believe in him out of the power of
those that have fabricated the world,
the demier, and his six sons, the
planetary geni. He appeared amongst men
as the man Jesus, and wrought miracles,
seekings gnostics and their remains. The
Gnostics divided humanity into three
parts. Those who as savages worshiped
only the visible nature. Those who like
the Jews worshiped the demier. And
lastly themselves or others of a similar
cult including certain sects of
Christians who worshiped noose Christ
and the true spiritual light of the
hierans. After the death of Basilites,
Valentinus became the leading
inspiration of the Gnostic movement. He
still further complicated the system of
gnostic philosophy by adding infinitely
to the details. He increased the number
of emanations from the great one the
abyss to 15 pairs and also laid much
emphasis on the virgin Sophia or wisdom.
In the books of the savior parts of
which are commonly known as the pistus
Sophia may be found much material
concerning this strange doctrine of Ian
and their strange inhabitants. James
Freeman Clark in speaking of the
doctrines of the Gnostics says, "These
doctrines, strange as they seem to us,
had a wide influence in the Christian
church." Many of the theories of the
ancient Gnostics, especially those
concerning scientific subjects, have
been substantiated by modern research.
Several sects branched off from the main
stem of Gnosticism, such as the
Valentinians, the Offites, serpent
worshippers, and the Adommites. After
the 3rd century, their power waned and
the gnostics practically vanished from
the philosophic world. An effort was
made during the middle ages to resurrect
the principles of gnosticism. But owing
to the destruction of their records, the
material necessary was not available.
Even today, there are evidences of
gnostic philosophy in the modern world,
but they bear other names and their true
origin is not suspected. Many of the
Gnostic concepts have actually been
incorporated into the dogmas of the
Christian church and are newer
interpretations of Christianity are
often along the lines of Gnostic
emanationism. The mysteries of Assarapp.
The identity of the Greco Egyptian
Sarapus known to the Greeks as Sarapus
and the Egyptians asarappy is shrouded
by an impenetrable veil of mystery.
While this deity was a familiar figure
among the symbols of the secret Egyptian
initiatory rights, his arcane nature was
revealed only to those who had fulfilled
the requirements of the cereapic
cultist. Therefore, in all probability,
accepting the initiated priests, the
Egyptians themselves were ignorant of
his true character. So far as known,
there exists no authentic account of the
rights of Sarapus. But an analysis of
the deity and his accompanying symbols
reveals their salient points. In an
oracle delivered to the king of Cyprus,
Sarapus described himself thus. A god I
am such as I show to thee. The starry
heavens are my head, my trunk the sea.
Earth forms my feet, mine ears the air
supplies. The sun's far darting,
brilliant rays mine eyes. Several
unsatisfactory attempts have been made
to etmologize the word sarapis. Godfrey
Higgins notes that Soros was the name
given by the Egyptians to a stone coffin
and Apis was Osiris incarnate in the
sacred bull. These two words combined
result in Soros Apis or Sorapis the tomb
of the bull. But it is improbable that
the Egyptians would worship a coffin in
the form of a man. Several ancient
authors including Macrobius have
affirmed that Sarapus was a name for the
sun because his image so often had a
halo of light about its head. In his
erration upon the sovereign sun, Julian
speaks of the deity in these words, one
jous.
In Hebrew, Sarapus is serif, meaning to
blaze out or to blaze up. For this
reason, the Jews designated one of their
hierarchies of spiritual beings,
Saraphim. The most common theory,
however, regarding the origin of the
name Sarapus is that which traces its
derivation from the compound Osiris
Apis. At one time, the Egyptians believe
that the dead were absorbed into the
nature of Osiris, the god of the dead.
While marked similarity exists between
Oseris and Sarapus, the theory advanced
by Egyptologists that Sarapus is merely
a name given to the dead. Apis or sacred
bull of Egypt is untenable in view of
the transcendent wisdom possessed by the
Egyptian priestcraft who in all
probability used the god to symbolize
the soul of the worldma. Mundi the
material body of nature was called apis.
The soul which escaped from the body at
death but was in meshed with the form
during physical life was designated
Sarapus. C W King believes Sarapus to be
a deity of Brahmanic extraction. His
name being the Grecianized form of
Sarata or Shria. Two titles ascribed to
Yama, the Hindu god of death. This
appears reasonable especially since
there is a legend to the effect that
Sarapus in the form of a bull was driven
by Bakis from India to Egypt. The
priority of the Hindu mysteries would
further substantiate such a theory.
Among other meanings suggested for the
word Sarapus are the sacred bull, the
sun in Taurus, the soul of Osiris, the
sacred serpent, and the retiring of the
bull. The last Appalachian has reference
to the ceremony of drowning the sacred
apis in the waters of the Nile every 25
years. There is considerable evidence
that the famous statue of Sarapus in the
Serapium at Alexandria was originally
worshiped under another name at Cynopi
from which it was brought to Alexandria.
There is also a legend which tells that
Sarapus was a very early king of the
Egyptians to whom they owed the
foundation of their philosophical and
scientific power. After his death, this
king was elevated to the estate of a
god. Felarcus declared that the word
Sarapus means the power that disposed
the universe into its present beautiful
order. In his Isis and Osiris, Plutarch
gives the following account of the
origin of the magnificent statue of
Sarapus which stood in the Serapium at
Alexandria. While he was pharaoh of
Egypt, Tommy Soder had a strange dream
in which he beheld a tremendous statue
which came to life and ordered the
pharaoh to bring it to Alexandria with
all possible speed. Tommy Soder, not
knowing the whereabouts of the statue,
was sorely perplexed as to how he could
discover it. While the pharaoh was
relating his dream, a great traveler by
the name of Soibius, coming forward,
declared that he had seen such an image
at Cynopi. The pharaoh immediately
dispatched. Sotles and Dionius to
negotiate for the removal of the figure
to Alexandria. Three years elapsed
before the image was finally obtained.
the representatives of the pharaoh
finally stealing it and concealing the
theft by spreading a story that the
statue had come to life and walking down
the street leading from its temple had
boarded the ship prepared for its
transportation to Alexandria. Upon its
arrival in Egypt, the figure was brought
into the presence of two Egyptian
initiates, the Yalpit, Timoththeus and
Manitho the Sebanite, who immediately
pronounced it to be Sarapus. The priests
then declared that it was equipent to
Pluto. This was a masterly stroke for in
Sarapus the Greeks and Egyptians found a
deity in common and thus religious unity
was consummated between the two nations.
Several figures of Sarapus that stood in
his various temples in Egypt and Rome
have been described by early authors.
Nearly all these showed Grecian rather
than Egyptian influence. In some the
body of the God was encircled by the
coils of a great serpent. Others showed
him as a composite of Osiris and Apis. A
description of the god that in all
probability is reasonably accurate is
that which represents him as a tall
powerful figure conveying the two-fold
impression of manly strength and womanly
grace. His face portrayed a deeply
pensive mood, the expression inclining
towards sadness. His hair was long and
arranged in a somewhat feminine manner,
resting in curls upon his breast and
shoulders. The face, safe for its heavy
beard, was also decidedly feminine. The
figure of Sarapus was usually robed from
head to foot and heavy draperies
believed by initiates to conceal the
fact that his body was androgynous.
Various substances were used in making
the statues of Sarapus. Some undoubtedly
were carved from stone or marble by
skilled craftsmen. Others may have been
cast from base or precious metals. One
Colossus of Sarapus was composed of
plates of various metals fitted together
in a labyrinth sacred too. Sarapus stood
a 13 ft statue of him reputed to have
been made from a single emerald. Modern
writers discussing this image state that
it was made of green glass poured into a
mold. According to the Egyptians,
however, it withtood all the tests of an
actual emerald. Clement of Alexandria
describes a figure of Sarapus compounded
from the following elements. First,
filings of gold, silver, lead, and tin.
Second, all manner of Egyptian stones,
including sapphires, hematites,
emeralds, and topazes. All these being
ground down and mixed together with the
coloring matter left over from the
funeral of Osiris and Apis. The result
was a rare and curious figure, indigo,
and color. Some of the statues of
Sarapus must have been formed of
extremely hard substances. For when a
Christian soldier carrying out the edict
of Theodosius struck the Alexandrian
Sarapus with his ax, that instrument was
shattered into fragments and sparks flew
from it. It is also quite probable that
Sarapus was worshiped in the form of a
serpent in common with many of the
higher deities of the Egyptian and Greek
pantheons. Sarapus was called Theon
Heeptogrammatin or the god with the name
of seven letters. The name Sarapus like
Arais and Mithris contains seven
letters. In their hymns to Sarapus the
priests chanted the seven vowels.
Occasionally Sarapus is depicted with
horns or a coronet of seven rays. These
evidently represented the seven divine
intelligences manifesting through the
solar light. The encyclopedia Britannica
notes that the earliest authentic
mention of Sarapus is in connection with
the death of Alexander. Such was the
prestige of Sarapus that he alone of the
gods was consulted in behalf of the
dying king. The Egyptian secret school
of philosophy was divided into the
lesser and the greater mysteries. The
former being sacred to Isis and the
latter to Sarapus and Osiris. Wilkinson
is of the opinion that only the priests
were permitted to enter the greater
mysteries. Even the heir to the throne
was not eligible until he had been
crowned pharaoh when by virtue of his
kingly office he automatically became a
priest and the temporal head of the
state religion. See Wilkinson's manners
and customs of the Egyptians. A limited
number were admitted into the greater
mysteries. These preserved their secrets
in Violet. Much of the information
concerning the rituals of the higher
degrees of the Egyptian mysteries has
been gleaned from an examination of the
chambers and passageways in which the
initiations were given. Under the temple
of Sarapus, destroyed by Theodosius were
found strange mechanical contrivances.
Constructed by the priests in the
subterranean crypts and caverns where
the nocturnal initiatory rights were
celebrated. These machines indicate the
severe tests of moral and physical
courage undergone by the candidates.
After passing through these tortuous
ways, the Nephites who survived the
orals were ushered into the presence of
Sarapus, a noble and awe inspiring
figure illumined by unseen lights.
Labyrinth were also a striking feature
in connection with the rice of Sarapus
and EA Wallace budge in his gods of the
Egyptians depicts Sarapus Minotaur like
with the body of a man and the head of a
bull. Labyrinths were symbolic of the
involvements and illusions of the lower
world through which wanders the soul of
man in its search for truth. In the
labyrinth dwells the lower animal man
with the head of the bull who seeks to
destroy the soul entangled in the maze
of worldly ignorance. In this relation,
Sarapus becomes the tryer or adversary
who tests the souls of those seeking
union with the immortals. The maze was
also doubtless used to represent the
solar system. The bullman representing
the sun dwelling in the mystic maze of
its planets, moons, and asteroids. The
Gnostic mysteries were acquainted with
the arcane meaning of Sarapus and
through the medium ofnosticism. This god
became inextricably associated with
early Christianity. In fact, the emperor
Hadrien while traveling in Egypt in AD24
declared in a letter to Servianis that
the worshippers of Sarapus were
Christians and that the bishops of the
church also worshiped at his shrine. He
even declared that the patriarch himself
when in Egypt was forced to adore
Sarapus as well as Christ. See Parson's
new light on the great pyramid. The
little suspected importance of Sarapus
as a prototype of Christ can be best
appreciated after a consideration of the
following extract from CW King's
Gnostics and their remains. There can be
no doubt that the head of Sarapus marked
as the face is by a grave and pincive
majesty supplied the first idea for the
conventional portraits of the savior.
The Jewish prejudices of the first
converts were so powerful that we may be
sure no attempt was made to depict his
countenance until some generations.
After all that had beheld it on earth
had passed away. Sarapus gradually
usered the positions previously occupied
by the other Egyptian and Greek gods and
became the supreme deity of both
religions. His power continued until the
4th century of Sarapus is often shown
standing on the back of the sacred
crocodile carrying in his left hand a
rule with which to measure the
inundations of the Nile and balancing
with his right hand a curious emblem
consisting of an animal with the heads.
The first head, that of a lion,
signified the present. The second head,
that of a wolf, the past, and the third
head, that of a dog, the future. The
body with its three heads, was enveloped
by the twisted coils of a serpent.
Figures of Sarapus are occasionally
accompanied by Cberus, the three-headed
dog of Pluto, and like Jupiter carry
baskets of grain upon their heads. the
Christian era. In AD 385, Theodosius
that would be exterminator of pagan
philosophy issued his memorable edict to
Eidolo Serapidus Deruendo when the
Christian soldiers in obedience to this
order entered the Serapium at Alexandria
to destroy the image of Sarapus which
had stood there for centuries. So great
was their veneration for the god that
they dared not touch the image lest the
ground should open at their feet and
engulf them at length. Overcoming their
fear they demolished the statue sack the
building and finally as a fitting climax
to their offense burned the magnificent
library which was housed within the
lofty apartments of the cerapum. Several
writers have recorded the remarkable
fact that Christian symbols were found
in the ruined foundations of this pagan
temple. Socrates, a church historian of
the fifth century, declared that after
the pious Christians had raised the
Serapia mat Alexandria and scattered the
demons who dwelt there under the guise
of gods, beneath the foundations was
found the monogram of Christ. Two
quotations will further establish the
relationship existing between the
mysteries of Sarapus and those of other
ancient peoples. The first is from
Richard Payne Knight's symbolical
language of ancient art and mythology
hence veraro in lingual latina says that
coilum and terra that is universal mind
and productive body were the great gods
of the samothrian mysteries and the same
as the sarapis and Isis of the later
Egyptians the tados and a startard of
the phoenetians and the saturn and ops
of the latattins the second quotation is
from Albert Pike's morals and dogma the
says
Martian Capella in his hymn to the sun.
Dwellers on the Nile adore as Sarapus
and Memphis worships as Osiris in the
sacred rights of Persia. Thou art
Mithris in Friia and Libya bows down to
thee as Ammon and Phoenician Biblas as
Adonis. Thus the whole world adors thee
under different names. The Odinic
mysteries. The date of the founding of
the Odinic mysteries is uncertain. Some
writers declaring that they were
established in the first century before
Christ, others the first century after
Christ. Robert McCoy 33° gives the
following description of their origin.
It appears from the northern chronicles
that in the first century of the
Christian era, Sig, the chief of the
Azer, an Asiatic tribe, immigrated from
the Caspian Sea in the Cauasus into
northern Europe. He directed his course
northwesterly from the Black Sea to
Russia over which according to tradition
he placed one of his sons as a ruler as
he is said to have done over the Saxons
and the Franks. He then advanced through
Simria to Denmark which acknowledged his
fifth son Skiold as its sovereign and
passed over to Sweden where Gilf who did
homage to the wonderful stranger and was
initiated into his mysteries then ruled.
He soon made himself master here, built
Siktuna as the capital of his empire and
promulgated a new code of laws and
established the sacred mysteries. He
himself assumed the name of Odin,
founded the priesthood of the 12s.
Druids who conducted the secret worship
and the administration of justice and as
prophets revealed the future. The secret
rights of these mysteries celebrated the
death of Balder, the beautiful and
lovely, and represented the grief of
gods and men at his death and his
restoration to life. General history of
Freemasonry. After his death, the
historical Odin was apithesized, his
identity being merged into that of the
mythological Odin, god of wisdom, whose
cult he had promulgated. Odinism then
supplanted the worship of Thor the
Thunderer, the supreme deity of the
ancient Scandinavian pantheon, the mount
where, according to legend, King Odin
was buried, is still to be seen near the
site of his great temple at Upas. The 12
drawers who presided over the Odinic
mysteries evidently personified the 12
holy and ineffable names of Odin. The
rituals of the Odinic mysteries were
very similar to those of the Greeks,
Persians and Brahmans after which they
were patterned. The Ders who symbolized
the signs of the zodiac were the
custodians of the arts and sciences
which they revealed to those who passed
successfully. The ordeals of initiation
like many other pagan cults. The Odinic
mysteries as in institution were
destroyed by Christianity. But the
underlying cause of their fall was the
corruption of the priesthood. Mythology
is nearly always the ritual and the
symbolism of a mystery school. Briefly
stated, the sacred drama which formed
the basis of the Odinic mysteries was as
follows. The supreme invisible creator
of all things was called all father. His
regent in nature was Odin, the oneeyed
god. Like ketzel coaddal, Odin was
elevated to the dignity of the supreme
deity. According to the droters, the
universe was fashioned from the body of
Er, the horrost giant. Emer was formed
from the clouds of mist that rose from
Janungagap, the great cleft and chaos
into which the primordial frost giants
and flame giants had hurled snow and
fire. The three gods Odin, Villi, and Vi
slew Emer, and from him formed the
world. From Emer's various members, the
different parts of nature were
fashioned. After Odin had established
order, he caused a wonderful palace
called Asgard to be built on the top of
a mountain. And here the 12 Assir gods
dwelt together far above the limitations
of mortal men. On this mountain also was
Valhalla, the palace of the slain, where
those who had heroically died fought and
feasted day after day. Each night their
wounds were healed, and the boar whose
flesh they ate renewed itself as rapidly
as it was consumed. Balder the beautiful
the Scandinavian Christ was the beloved
son of Odin. Boulder was not warlike.
His kindly and beautiful spirit brought
peace and joy to the hearts of the gods
and they all loved him safe. One as
Jesus had a Judas among his 12
disciples. So one of the 12 gods was
false Loki, the personification of evil.
Loki caused Hawthor, the blind god of
fate, to shoot Balder with a mistletoe
arrow. With the death of Balder, light
and joy vanished from the lives of the
other deities. Heartbroken, the gods
gathered to find a method whereby they
could resurrect this spirit of eternal
life and youth. The result was the
establishment of the mysteries. The
Odinic mysteries were given in
underground crypts or caves. The
chambers nine in number, representing
the nine worlds of the mysteries. The
candidate seeking admission was assigned
the task of raising Balder from the
dead. Although he did not realize it, he
himself played the part of Balder. He
called himself a wanderer. The caverns
through which he passed were symbolic of
the worlds and spheres of nature. The
priests who initiated him were
emblematic of the sun, the moon, and the
stars. The three supreme initiators, the
sublime, the equal to the sublime, and
the highest were analogous to the
worshipful master and the junior and
senior wardens of a Masonic lodge. After
wandering for hours through the
intricate passageways, the candidate was
ushered into the presence of a statue of
Balder the Beautiful, the prototype of
all initiates into the mysteries. This
figure stood in the center of a great
apartment roofed with shields. In the
midst of the chamber stood a plant with
seven blossoms emblematic of the
planers. In this room, which symbolized
the house of the Assir or wisdom, the
Nephite took his oath of secrecy and
piety upon the naked blade of a sword.
He drank the sanctified me from a bowl
made of a human skull. And having passed
successfully through all the tortures
and trials designed to divert him from
the course of wisdom, he was finally
permitted to unveil the mystery of Odin,
the personification of wisdom. He was
presented in the name of Balder with the
sacred ring of the order. He was hailed
as a man reborn, and it was said of him
that he had died and had been raised
again without passing through the gates
of death. Richard Wagner's immortal
composition during deblangan is based
upon the mystery rituals of the odenic
cult. While the great composer took many
liberties with the original story, the
ring operas declared to be the grandest
tetrology of music dramas the world
possesses have caught and preserved in a
remarkable manner the majesty and power
of the original sagas. Beginning with
Doss Ryold, the action proceeds through
Die Walker and Seagreed to an all-
inspiring climax in Gutter Demer, the
Twilight of the Gods. This book was
uploaded by Hidden Whispers Revelations
on YouTube. Please subscribe and like
the video to support us. Some spelling
may be off. We apologize to the
listener. The Ancient Mysteries and
Secret Societies Part Three. The most
famous of the ancient religious
mysteries were the Elusinian whose
rights were celebrated every five years
in the city of Elusus to honor series
Deer Ria or Isis and her daughter
Pphanie. The initiates of the Elusinian
school were famous throughout Greece for
the beauty of their philosophic concepts
and the high standards of morality which
they demonstrated in their daily lives.
Because of their excellence, these
mysteries spread to Rome and Britain and
later the initiations were given in both
these countries. The Elusinian mysteries
named for the community in Adica. The
sacred dramas were first presented are
generally believed to have been founded
by Yimalpos about 1,400 years before the
birth of Christ and through the Platonic
system of philosophy. There principles
have been preserved to modern times. The
rights of Elusis, with their mystic
interpretations of nature's most
precious secrets, overshadowed the
civilizations of their time and
gradually absorbed many smaller schools,
incorporating into their own system
whatever valuable information these
lesser institutions possessed.
Hecathornne sees in the mysteries of
series and Bakis a metamorphosis of the
rights of Isis and Osiris. And there is
every reason to believe that all
so-called secret schools of the ancient
world were branches from one philosophic
tree which with its root in heaven and
its branches on the earth is like the
spirit of man and invisible but
everpresent cause of the objectified
vehicles that give it expression. The
mysteries were the channels through
which this one philosophic light was
disseminated and their initiates
respplendant with intellectual and
spiritual understanding were the perfect
fruitage of the divine tree bearing
witness before the material world of the
reconite source of all light and truth.
The rights of elusis were divided into
what were called the lesser and the
greater mysteries. According to James
Gardner, the lesser mysteries were
celebrated in the spring, probably at
the time of the vernal equinox in the
town of Agri and the greater in the
fall, the time of the autuminal equinox
at Elusis or Athens. It is supposed that
the former were given annually and the
latter every 5 years. The rituals of the
Elusinians were highly involved and to
understand them required a deep study of
Greek mythology which they interpreted
in its esoteric light with the aid of
their secret keys. The lesser mysteries
were dedicated to Pphanany in his
Elusinian and Bakshik mysteries. Thomas
Taylor sums up their purpose as follows.
The lesser mysteries were designed by
the ancient theologists, their founders,
to signify occultly the condition of the
unpurified soul invested within earthy
body and enveloped in a material and
physical nature. The legend used in the
lesser writes is that of the abduction
of the goddess Pphanie, the daughter of
Siri by Pluto, the lord of the
underworld or Hades. While Pphanany is
picking flowers in a beautiful meadow,
the earth suddenly opens and the gloomy
Lord of Death riding in a magnificent
chariot emerges from its somber depths
and grasping her in his arms carries the
screaming and struggling goddess to his
subterranean palace where he forces her
to become his queen. It is doubtful
whether many of the initiates themselves
understood the mystic meaning of this
allegory. For most of them apparently
believe that it referred solely to the
succession of the seasons. It is
difficult to obtain satisfactory
information concerning the mysteries for
the candidates were bound by inviable
oaths never to reveal their inner
secrets to the profane. At the beginning
of the ceremony of initiation, the
candidate stood upon the skins of
animals sacrificed for the purpose and
vowed that death should seal his lips
before he would divulge the sacred
truths which were about to be
communicated to him through indirect
channels. However, some of their secrets
have been preserved. The teachings given
to the Nephites were substantially as
follows. The soul of man often called
psyche and in the elusinian mysteries
symbolized by pracphanany is essentially
a spiritual thing. Its true home is in
the higher worlds where free from the
bondage of material form and material
concepts. It is said to be truly alive
and self-expressive. The human or
physical nature of man according to this
doctrine is a tomb, a quagmire, a false
and impermanent thing, the source of all
sorrow and suffering. Plato describes
the body as the seilcher of the soul.
And by this he means not only the human
form but also the human nature. The
gloom and depression of the lesser
mysteries represented the agony of the
spiritual soul unable to express itself
because it has accepted the limitations
and illusions of the human environment.
The crux of the elusinian argument was
that man is neither better nor wiser
after death than during life. If he does
not rise above ignorance during his
sojurnn here, man goes at death into
eternity to wander about forever making
the same mistakes which he made here. If
he does not outgrow the desire for
material possessions here, he will carry
it with him into the invisible world
where, because he can never gratify the
desire, he will continue in endless
agony. Dante's Inferno is symbolically
descriptive of the sufferings of those
who never freed their spiritual natures
from the cravings, habits, viewpoints,
and limitations of their plutonic
personalities. Those who made no
endeavor to improve themselves, whose
souls have slept during their physical
lives, passed at death into Hades, where
lying in rows they slept through all
eternity as they had slept through life.
To the Elusinian philosophers, birch
into the physical world was death in the
fullest sense of the word, and the only
true birth was that of the spiritual
soul of man rising out of the womb of
his own fleshly nature. The soul is dead
that slumbers, says Longfellow. And in
this he strikes the keynote of the
Elusinian mysteries. Just as Narcissus,
gazing at himself in the water, the
ancients used this mobile element to
symbolize the transitory illusionary
material universe lost his life trying
to embrace a reflection. So man gazing
into the mirror of nature and accepting
as his real self the senseless clay that
he sees reflected loses the opportunity
afforded by physical life to unfold his
immortal invisible self. An ancient
initiate once said that the living are
ruled by the dead. Only those conversant
with theeinian concept of life could
understand that statement. It means that
the majority of people are not ruled by
their living spirits but by their
senseless hence dead animal
personalities. Transmigration and
reincarnation were taught in these
mysteries but in a somewhat unusual
manner. It was believed that at midnight
the invisible worlds were closest to the
terrestrial sphere and that souls coming
into material existence slipped in
during the midnight hour. For this
reason, many of the Elusinian Pluto, the
lord of the underworld, represents the
body intelligence of man, and the rape
of Pphanany is symbolic of the divine
nature assaulted and defiled by the
animal soul and dragged downward into
the somber darkness of Hades, which is
here used as a synonym for the material
or objective sphere of consciousness. In
his disquisitions upon the painted Greek
faces, James Christi presents mercious
version of the occurrences taking place
during the nine days required for the
enactment of the greater Elusinian
rights. The first day was that of
general meeting during which those to be
initiated were questioned concerning
their several qualifications. The second
day was spent in a procession to the
sea, possibly for the submerging of an
image of the presiding goddess. The
third day was opened by the sacrifice of
a mullet. On the fourth day, the mystic
basket containing certain sacred symbols
was brought to a lucis accompanied by a
number of female devotees carrying
smaller baskets. On the evening of the
fifth day, there was a torch race. On
the sixth, a procession led by a statue
of Aakis and on the seventh an athletic
contest. The eighth day was devoted to a
repetition of the ceremonial four, the
benefit of any who might have been
prevented from coming sooner. The ninth
and last day was devoted to the deepest
philosophical issues of the Elusinia
during which an ern or jar the symbol of
Bakus was exhibited as an emblem of
supreme importance. Ceremonies were
performed at midnight. Some of those
sleeping spirits who had failed to
awaken their higher natures during the
earth life and who now floated around in
the invisible worlds surrounded by a
darkness of their own making
occasionally slipped through at this
hour and assumed the forms of various
creatures. The mystics of Elusus also
laid stress upon the evil of suicide,
explaining that there was a profound
mystery concerning this crime of which
they could not speak, but warning their
disciples that a great sorrow comes to
all who take their own lives. This in
substance constitutes the esoteric
doctrine given to the initiates of the
lesser mysteries. As the degree dealt
largely with the miseries of those who
failed to make the best use of their
philosophic opportunities, the chambers
of initiation were subterranean, and the
horrors of Hades were vividly depicted
in a complicated ritualistic drama.
After passing successfully through the
tortuous passageways with their trials
and dangers, the candidate received the
honorary title of mists. This meant one
who saw through a veil or had a clouded
vision. It also signified that the
candidate had been brought up to the
veil which would be torn away in the
higher degree. The modern word mystic as
referring to a seeker after truth
according to the dictates of the heart
along the path of faith is probably
derived from this ancient word. For
faith is belief in the reality of things
unseen or veiled. The greater mysteries
into which the candidate was admitted
only after he had successfully passed
through the ordeals of the lesser and
not always then were sacred to seriesir,
the mother of Pphanie, and represent her
as wandering through the world in quest
of her abducted daughter. Siri carried
two torches, intuition, and reason to
aid her in the search for her lost
child, the soul. At last she found
Praphanany not far from Elusus and out
of gratitude taught the people there to
cultivate corn which is sacred to her.
She also founded the mysteries. Siri
appeared before Pluto, god of the souls
of the dead, and pleaded with him to
allow Pphanie to return to her home.
This the god at first refused to do
because Pphanie had eaten of the
pomegranate, the fruit of mortality. At
last, however, he compromised and agreed
to permit Pphanany to live in the upper
world half of the year if she would stay
with him in the darkness of Hades for
the remaining half. The Greeks believed
that Pphanie was a manifestation of the
solar energy, which in the winter months
lived under the earth with Pluto, but in
the summer returned again with the
goddess of productiveness. There is a
legend that the flowers loved Pphanie
and that every year when she left for
the dark realms of Pluto, the plants and
shrubs would die of grief. While the
profane and uninitiated had their own
opinions on these subjects, the truths
of the Greek allegorories remained
safely concealed by the priests who
alone recognized the sublimity of these
great philosophic and religious
parables. Thomas Taylor epitomizes the
doctrines of the greater mysteries in
the following statement. the greater
mysteries obscurely intimated by mystic
and splendid visions, the felicity of
the soul both here and hereafter when
purified from the defilement of a
material nature and constantly elevated
to the realities of intellectual
spiritual vision. Just as the lesser
mysteries discussed the prenatal epic of
man when the consciousness in its nine
days embryologically months was
descending into the realm of illusion
and assuming the veil of unreality. So
the greater mysteries discuss the
principles of spiritual regeneration and
revealed to initiates not only the
simplest but also the most direct and
complete method of liberating their
higher natures from the bondage of
material ignorance. Like Prometheus
chained to the top of Mount Cauasus,
man's higher nature is chained to his
inadequate personality. The nine days of
initiation were also symbolic of the
nine spheres through which the human
soul descends during the process of
assuming a terrestrial form. The secret
exercises for spiritual unfoldment given
to disciples of the higher degrees are
unknown. But there is every reason to
believe that they were similar to the
bremanic mysteries since it is known
that the elusinian ceremonies were
closed with the Sanskrit words cons
that part of the allegory referring to
the two six-month periods during one of
which panony must remain with Pluto
while during the other she may revisit
the upper world offers material for deep
consideration. It is probable that the
Elusinians realized that the soul left
the body during steep or at least was
made capable of leaving by the special
training which undoubtedly they were in
a position to give. Thus, Pphanany would
remain as the queen of Pluto's realm
during the waking hours but would ascend
to the spiritual worlds during the
periods of sleep. The initiate was
taught how to intercede with Pluto to
permit Pphanany, the initiate soul, to
ascend from the darkness of his material
nature into the light of understanding.
When thus freed from the shackles of
clay and crystallized concepts, the
initiate was liberated not only for the
period of his life, but for all
eternity. For never thereafter was he
devested of those soul qualities which
after death were his vehicles for
manifestation and expression in the
so-called heaven world. In contrast to
the idea of Hades as a state of darkness
below, the gods were said to inhabit the
tops of mountains, a well-known example
being Mount Olympus, where the 12
deities of the Greek pantheon were said
to dwell together. In his initiatory
wanderings, the Neaphite therefore
entered chambers of everinccreasing
brilliancancy to portray the ascent of
the spirit from the lower worlds into
the realms of bliss. As the climax to
such wanderings, he entered a great
vaulted room in the center of which
stood a brilliantly illumined statue of
the goddess series. Here, in the
presence of the hierofphant, and
surrounded by priests in magnificent
robes, he was instructed in the highest
of the secret mysteries of the elus. At
the conclusion of this ceremony, he was
hailed as an apops, which means one who
has beheld or seen directly. For this
reason also, initiation was termed
autopsy. The apops was then given
certain sacred books probably written in
cipher together with tablets of stone on
which secret instructions were engraved
in the obelisk in freemasonry. John A.
Weiss describes the officiating
personages of the Elusinian mysteries as
consisting of a male and a female
hierofphant who directed the initiations
a male and a female torchbearer, a male
herald and a male and a female altar
attendant. There were also numerous
minor officials. He states that
according to Pfury, the hieropofant
represents Plato's demiurgus or creator
of the world, the torchbearer, the sun,
the alter man, the moon, the herald,
Hermes or Mercury, and the other
officials, minor stars. From the records
available, a number of strange and
apparently supernatural phenomena
accompanied the rituals. Many initiates
claim to have actually seen the living
gods themselves. Whether this was the
result of religious ecstasy or the
actual cooperation of invisible powers
with the visible priests must remain a
mystery in the metamorphosis or golden
ass. Apulus thus describes what in all
probability is his initiation into the
elusinian mysteries. I approached to the
confines of death and having trod on the
threshold of proarpine eye returned from
it being carried through all the
elements. At midnight, I saw the sun
shining with a splendid light, and I
manifestly drew near to the gods beneath
and the gods above, and approximately
adored them. Women and children were
admitted to the Elusinian mysteries, and
at one time there were literally
thousands of initiates. Because this
vast host was not prepared for the
highest spiritual and mystical
doctrines, a division necessarily took
place within the society itself. The
higher teachings were given to only a
limited number of initiates who because
of superior mentality showed a
comprehensive grasp of their underlying
philosophical concepts. Socrates refused
to be initiated into the Elusinian
mysteries for knowing its principles
without being a member of the order. He
realized that membership would seal his
tongue. that the mysteries of elusis
were based upon great and eternal truths
is attested by the veneration in which
they were held by the great minds of the
ancient world. M Overof asks would
Pinder Plato Cicero Epictetus have
spoken of them with such admiration if
the hierofphant had satisfied himself
with loudly proclaiming his own opinions
or those of his order. The garments in
which candidates were initiated were
preserved for many years and were
believed to possess almost sacred
properties. Just as the soul can have no
covering save wisdom and virtue, so the
candidates being as yet without true
knowledge were presented to the
mysteries unclothed being first given
the skin of an animal and later a
consecrated robe to symbolize the
philosophical teachings received by the
initiate. During the course of
initiation, the candidate series or deer
was the daughter of Kronos and Ria and
by Zeus the mother of pphanany. Some
believe her to be the goddess of the
earth, but more correctly she is the
deity protecting agriculture in general
and corn in particular. The poppy is
sacred to seriesir and she is often
shown carrying or ornamented by a
garland of these flowers. In the
mysteries, series represented riding in
a chariot drawn by winged serpents. In
the initiation of the Bakshik mysteries,
the role of Bakis is played by the
candidate who set upon by priests. In
the guise of the Titans is slain and
finally restored to life amidst great
rejoicing. The Bakshik mysteries were
given every 3 years and like the
Elusinian mysteries were divided into
two degrees. The initiates were crowned
with myrtle and ivy plants which were
sacred to Bakus. In the analypsis,
Godfrey Higgins conclusively establishes
Bakis Dianisis as one of the early pagan
forms of the Christos myth. The
birthplace of Bakis called Sebasius or
Sabayoth was claimed by several places
in Greece. But on Mount Zelmis in
Thrace, his worship seems to have been
chiefly celebrated. He was born of a
virgin on the 25th of December. He
performed great miracles for the good of
mankind, particularly one in which he
changed water into wine. He rode in a
triumphal procession on an ass. He was
put to death by the Titans and rose
again from the dead on the 25th of
March. He was always called the savior.
In his mysteries, he was shown to the
people as an infant is by the Christians
at this day on Christmas Day morning in
Rome. While Apollo most generally
represents the sun, Bakis is also a form
of solar energy for his resurrection was
accomplished with the assistance of
Apollo. The resurrection of Bakis
signifies merely the extraction or
disentanglement of the various parts of
the Bakshik constitution from the
Titanic constitution of the world. This
is symbolized by the smoke or soot
rising from the burned bodies of the
Titans. The soul is symbolized by smoke
because it is extracted by the fire of
the mysteries. Smoke signifies the
ascension of the soul. Far evolution is
the process of the soul rising like
smoke from the divinely consumed
material mass. At me time the bakshik
writes were of a high order but later
they became much degraded. The
bachanelia or orgies of bakis are famous
in literature passed through two gates.
The first led downward into the lower
worlds and symbolized his birth into
ignorance. The second led upward into a
room brilliantly lighted by unseen lamps
in which was the statue of seriesir and
which symbolized the upper world or the
abode of light and truth. Strabo states
that the great temple of elusis would
hold between 20 and 30,000 people. The
caves dedicated by Zerahustra also had
these two doors symbolizing the avenues
of birth and death. The following
paragraph from Pfury gives a fairly
adequate conception of Elusinian
symbolism. God being a luminous
principle residing in the midst of the
most subtle fire. He remains forever
invisible to the eyes of those who do
not elevate themselves above material
life. On this account, the sight of
transparent bodies such as crystal,
peran marble, and even ivory recalls the
idea of divine light. As the sight of
gold excites an idea of its purity for
gold cannot be sullied. Some have
thought by a black stone was signified
the invisibility of the divine essence
to express supreme reason. The divinity
was represented under the human form and
beautiful. For God is the source of
beauty of different ages and in various
attitudes sitting or upright of one or
the other sex as a virgin or a young
man, a husband or a bride, that all the
shades and gradations might be marked.
Everything luminous was subsequently
attributed to the gods, the sphere and
all that is spherical, to the universe,
to the sun and the moon, sometimes to
fortune and to hope, the circle and all
circular figures to eternity to the
celestial movements to the circles and
zones of the heavens. The section of
circles to the phases of the moon and
pyramids and obelisks to the ignous
principle and through that to the gods
of heaven. A cone expresses the sun, a
cylinder, the earth, the fallus and
triangle, a symbol of the matrix
designate generation from essay on the
mysteries of elusis by M. Overoth. The
Elusinian mysteries according to
Hecathornne survived all others and did
not cease to exist as an institution
until nearly 400 years after Christ when
they were finally suppressed by
Theodosius. Styled the great who cruy
destroyed all who did not accept the
Christian faith of this greatest of all
philosophical institution Cicero said
that it taught men not only how to live
but also how to die. The Orphic
mysteries. Orpheus the thrianbard, the
great initiator of the Greeks, ceased to
be known as a man and was celebrated as
a divinity several centuries before the
Christian era. As to Orpheus himself,
asterisk asterisk asterisk writes,
"Thomas Taylor, scarcely a vestage of
his life is to be found amongst the
immense ruins of time." For who has ever
been able to affirm anything with
certainty of his origin, his age, his
country, and condition? This alone may
be depended on from general ascent that
there formerly lived a person named
Orpheus who was the founder of theology
among the Greeks, the institutor of
their lives and morals, the first of
prophets and the prince of poets himself
the offspring of a muse who taught the
Greeks their sacred rights and mysteries
and from whose wisdom as from a
perennial and abundant fountain the
divine muse of Homer and the sublime
theology of Pythagoras and Plato flowed.
See the mystical hymns of Orpheus.
Orpheus was founder of the Grecian
mythological system which he used as the
medium for the promulgation of his
philosophical doctrines. The origin of
his philosophy is uncertain. He may have
got it from the Brahinss there being
legends to the effect that he got it was
a Hindu. His name possibly being derived
from Roofanu
meaning dark. Orpheus was initiated into
the Egyptian mysteries from which he
secured extensive knowledge of magic,
astrology, sorcery and medicine. The
mysteries of the cabaret at Samothrace
were also conferred upon him and these
undoubtedly contributed to his knowledge
of medicine and music. The romance of
Orpheus and Uritysy is one of the tragic
episodes of Greek mythology and
apparently constitutes the outstanding
feature of the Orphic right. Uritysy in
her attempt to escape from a villain
seeking to seduce her died from the
venom of a poisonous serpent which stung
her in the heel. Orpheus penetrating to
the very heart of the underworld so
charmed Pluto and Pphanie with the
beauty of his music that they agreed to
permit. Urity to return to life if
Orpheus could lead her back to the
sphere of the living without once
looking round to see if she were
following. So great was his fear,
however, that she would stray from him
that he turned his head, and Uritysy,
with a heartbroken cry, was swept back
into the land of death. Orpheus wandered
the earth for a while disconulate, and
there are several conflicting accounts
of the manner of his death. Some declare
that he was slain by a bolt of
lightning, others that failing to save
his beloved Uritsy, he committed
suicide. The generally accepted version
of his death, however, is that he was
torn to pieces by saconian women whose
advances he had spurned. In the 10th
book of Plato's Republic, it is declared
that because of his sad fate at the
hands of women, the soul that had once
been, Orpheus, upon being destined to
live again in the physical world, chose
rather to return in the body of a swan
than be born of woman. The head of
Orpheus, after being torn from his body,
was cast with his liar into the river
Hebrris, down which it floated to the
sea, where wedging in a cleft in a rock,
it gave oracles for many years. The
liar, after being stolen from its shrine
and working the destruction of the
thief, was picked up by the gods and
fashioned into a constellation. Orpheus
has long been sung as the patron of
music. on his seven stringed liar. He
played such perfect harmonies that the
gods themselves were moved to acclaim
his power. When he touched the strings
of his instrument, the birds and beasts
gathered about him. And as he wandered
through the forest, his enchanting
melodies caused even the ancient trees
with mighty effort to draw their gnarled
roots from out the earth and follow him.
Orpheus is one of the many immortals who
have sacrificed themselves that mankind
might have the wisdom of the gods. By
the symbolism of his music, he
communicated the divine secrets to
humanity. And several authors have
declared that the gods, though loving
him, feared that he would overthrow
their kingdom and therefore reluctantly
encompassed his destruction. As time
passed on the historical Orpheus became
hopelessly confounded with the doctrine
he represented and eventually became the
symbol of the Greek school of the
ancient wisdom. Thus, Orpheus was
declared to be the son of Apollo, the
divine and perfect truth and collap the
muse of harmony and rhythm. In other
words, Orpheus is the secret doctrine
Apollo revealed through music. Collopy
Uritsy is humanity dead from the sting
of the serpent of false knowledge and
imprisoned in the underworld of
ignorance. In this allegory, Orpheus
signifies theology which wins her from
the king of the dead but fails to
accomplish her resurrection because it
falsely estimates and mistrusts the
innate understanding within the human
soul. The saconian women who tore
Orpheus limb from limb symbolize the
various contending theological factions
which destroy the body of truth. They
cannot accomplish this, however, until
their discordant cries drown out the
harmony drawn by Orpheus from his magic
liar. The head of Orpheus signifies the
esoteric doctrines of his cult. These
doctrines continue to live and speak
even after his body, the cult, has been
destroyed. The liar is the secret
teaching of Orpheus. The seven strings
are the seven divine truths which are
the keys to universal knowledge. The
differing accounts of his death
represent the various means used to
destroy the secret teachings. Wisdom can
die in many ways at the same time. The
allegory of Orpheus incarnating in the
white swan merely signifies that the
spiritual truths he promulgated will
continue and will be taught by the
illumined initiates of all future ages.
The swan is the symbol of the initiates
of the mysteries. It is a symbol also of
the divine power which is the progenitor
of the world. The bak and dioniac writes
the bakshik right centers around the
allegory of the youthful bakis dionis or
zus being torn to pieces by the titans.
These giants accomplished the
destruction of Bakis by causing him to
become fascinated by his own image in a
mirror. After dismembering him, the
titans first boiled the pieces in water
and afterwards roasted them. Palace
rescued the heart of the murdered god
and by this precaution, Bakus Dianisis
was enabled to spring forth again in all
his former glory. Jupiter the demier
beholding the crime of the titans hurled
his thunderbolts and slew them burning
their bodies to ashes with heavenly fire
out of the ashes of the titans which
also contained a portion of the flesh of
Bakus whose body they had partly
devoured the human race was created.
Thus the mundane life of every man was
said to contain a portion of the bakshik
life. For this reason the Greek
mysteries warned against suicide. He who
attempts to destroy himself raises his
hand against the nature of Bakis within
him since man's body is indirectly the
tomb of this god and consequently must
be preserved with the greatest care.
Bakus Dianisis represents the rational
soul of the inferior world. He is the
chief of the titans the artificers of
the mundane spheres. The Pythagoreans
called him the titanic monad. Thus,
bakus is the all-inclusive idea of the
titanic sphere and the titans or gods of
the fragments the active agencies by
means of which universal substance is
fashioned into the pattern of this idea.
The backsh state signifies the unity of
the rational soul in a state of
self-nowledge and the titanic state. The
diversity of the rational soul which
being scattered throughout creation
loses the consciousness of its own
essential oneness. The mirror into which
Bakus gazes and which is the cause of
his fall is the great sea of illusion.
The lower world fashioned by the titans.
Bakus the mundane rational soul seeing
his image before him accepts the image
as a likeness of himself and insoles the
likeness that is the rational idea in
souls its reflection the irrational
universe. By insoling the irrational
image it implants in it the urge to
become like its source the rational
image. Therefore, the ancients said that
man does not know the gods by logic or
by reason, but rather by realizing the
presence of the gods within himself.
After Bakis gazed into the mirror and
followed his own reflection into matter,
the rational soul of the world was
broken up and distributed by the titans
throughout the mundane sphere of which
it is the essential nature, but the
heart or source of it they could not
scatter. The Titans took the dismembered
body of Bakus and boiled it in water
symbol of immersion in the material
universe which represents the
incorporation of the Bakshik principle
and form. The pieces were afterwards
roasted to signify the subsequent
ascension of the spiritual nature out of
form. When Jupiter, the father of Bakis
and the demiergus of the universe, saw
that the Titans were hopelessly
involving the rational or divine idea by
scattering its members through the
constituent parts of the lower world. He
slew the Titans in order that the divine
idea might not be entirely lost. From
the ashes of the titans, he formed
mankind whose purpose of existence was
to preserve and eventually to release
the bakshik idea or rational soul from
the titanic fabrication. Jupiter being
the demier and fabricator of the
material universe is the third person of
the creative triad. Consequently, the
lord of death for death exists only in
the lower sphere of being over which he
presides. Disintegration takes place so
that reintegration may follow upon a
higher level of form or intelligence.
The thunderbolts of Jupiter are
emblematic of his disintegrative power.
They reveal the purpose of death which
is to rescue the rational soul from the
devouring power of the irrational
nature. Man is a composite creature. His
lower nature consisting of the fragments
of the titans and his higher nature the
sacred immortal flesh life of Bakus.
Therefore, man is capable of either a
titanic irrational or a backsh rational
existence. The titans of Hessiad who
were 12 in number are probably analogous
to the celestial zodiac. Whereas the
titans who murdered and dismembered
Bakus represent the zodiacal powers
distorted by their involvement in the
material world. Thus, Bakus represents
the son who is dismembered by the signs
of the zodiac and from whose body the
universe is formed. When the terrestrial
forms were created from the various
parts of his body, the sense of
wholeness was lost and the sense of
separateness established. The heart of
Bakis which was saved by palace or
Manurva was lifted out of the four
elements symbolized by his dismembered
body and placed in the ether. The heart
of Bakis is the immortal center of the
rational soul. After the rational soul
had been distributed throughout creation
and the nature of man, the Bakshik
mysteries were instituted for the
purpose of disentangling it from the
irrational titanic nature. This
disentanglement was the process of
lifting the soul out of the state of
separateness into that of unity. The
various parts and members of Bakis were
collected from the different corners of
the earth. When all the rational parts
are gathered, Bakus is resurrected. The
rights of Dianisis were very similar to
those of Bakus and by many these two
gods are considered as one. Statues of
Dionis were carried in the Elusinian
mysteries especially the lesser degrees.
Bakus representing the soul of the
mundane sphere was capable of an
infinite multiplicity of form and
designations. Dionis apparently was his
solar aspect. The Dionisc architects
constituted an ancient secret society in
principles and doctrines much like the
modern Freemasonic order. They were an
organization of builders bound together
by their secret knowledge of the
relationship between the earthly and the
divine sciences of architectonics. They
were supposedly employed by King Solomon
in the building of his temple. Although
they were not Jews, nor did they worship
the god of the Jews being followers of
Bakis and Dionis. The Dionisiac
architects erected many of the great
monuments of antiquity. They possessed a
secret language and a system of marking
their stones. They had annual
convocations and sacred feasts. The
exact nature of their doctrines is
unknown. It is believed that Sehyram was
an initiate of this society. Atlantis
and the gods of antiquity. Atlantis is
the subject of a short but important
article appearing in the annual report
of the board of regents of the
Smithsonian Institution for the year
ending June 30th 1915. The author M.
Pierre Termier a member of the Academy
of Sciences and director of service of
the geological chart of France in 1912
delivered a lecture on the Atlantean
hypothesis before the institute
oceanographic. It is the translated
notes of this remarkable lecture that
are published in the Smithsonian report.
After a long period of disdainful
indifference, writes M Turier, observe
how in the last few years, science is
returning to the study of Atlantis, how
many naturalists, geologists,
zoologologists, or botanists are asking
one another today whether Plato has not
transmitted to us with slight
amplification a page from the actual
history of mankind. No affirmation is
yet permissible, but it seems more and
more evident that a vast region,
continental or made up of great islands,
has collapsed west of the pillars of
Hercules, otherwise called the straight
of Gibralar, and that its collapse
occurred in the not far distant past. In
any event, the question of Atlantis is
placed a new before men of science. And
since I do not believe that it can ever
be solved without the aid of
oceanography, I have thought it natural
to discuss it here in this temple of
maritime science and to call to such a
problem long scorned but now being
revived the attention of oceanographers
as well as the attention of those who
though immersed in the tumult of cities
lend an ear to the distant murmur of the
sea. In his lecture m, Termier presents
geologic, geographic, and zoologic data
and substantiation of the Atlantis
theory, figuratively draining the entire
bed of the Atlantic Ocean. He considers
the inequalities of its basin and cites
locations on a line from the Azors to
Iceland, where dredging has brought lava
to the surface from a depth of 3,000 m.
The volcanic nature of the islands now
existing in the Atlantic. Ocean
corroborates Plato's statement that the
Atlantean continent was destroyed by
volcanic cataclysms. M. Termier also
advances the conclusions of a young
French zoologologist. M. Lewis Germaine
who admitted the existence of an
Atlantic continent connected with the
Iberian Peninsula and with Moritania and
prolonged toward the south so as to
include some regions of desert climate.
M. Termier concludes his lecture with a
graphic picture of the engulfment of
that continent. The description of the
Atlantean civilization given by Plato in
the Critous may be summarized as
follows. In the first ages, the gods
divided the earth among themselves,
proportioning it according to their
respective dignities. Each became the
peculiar deity of his own allotment and
established therein. Temples to himself,
ordained a priest craft, and instituted
a system of sacrifice. to Poseidon was
given the sea in the island continent of
Atlantis. In the midst of the island was
a mountain which was the dwelling place
of three earthborn primitive human
beings even his wife Lucip and their
only daughter Kaido. The maiden was very
beautiful and after the sudden death of
her parents she was wooed by Poseidon
who begott by her five pairs of male
children. Poseidon aortioned his
continent among these 10 and Atlas the
eldest he made overlord of the other
nine. Poseidon further called the
country Atlantis and the surrounding sea
the Atlantic in honor of Atlas. Before
the birth of his 10 sons, Pooseidon
divided the continent and the coastwise
sea into concentric zones of land and
water which were as perfect as though
turned upon a lathe. Two zones of land
and three of water surrounded the
central island which Poseidon caused to
be irrigated with two springs of water,
one warm and the other cold. The
descendants of Atlas continued as rulers
of Atlantis and with wise government and
industry elevated the country to a
position of surpassing dignity. The
natural resources of Atlantis were
apparently limitless. Precious metals
were mined, wild animals domesticated,
and perfumes distilled from its fragrant
flowers. While enjoying the abundance
natural to their semi-otropic location,
the Atlanteanss employed themselves also
in the erection of palaces, temples, and
docks. They bridged the zones of sea and
later dug a deep canal to connect the
outer ocean with the central island
where stood the palaces and temple of
Poseidon, which excelled all other
structures in magnificence. A network of
bridges and canals was created by the
Atlanteanss to unite the various parts
of their kingdom. Plato then describes
the white, black and red stones which
they quarried from beneath their
continent and used in the construction
of public buildings and docks. They
circumscribed each of the land zones
with a wall the outer wall being covered
with brass, the middle with tin and the
inner which encompassed the citadel with
orich. The citadel on the central island
contained the palaces, temples and other
public buildings. In its center,
surrounded by a wall of gold was a
sanctuary dedicated to Kaido and
Poseidon. Here the first 10 princes of
the island were born and here each year
their descendants brought offerings.
Poseidon's own temple, its exterior
entirely covered with silver and its
pinnacles with gold also stood within
the citadel. The interior of the temple
was of ivory, gold, silver, and orchalk,
even to the pillars and floor. The
temple contained a colossal statue of
Pooseidon standing in a chariot drawn by
six-winged horses. About himundriads
riding on dolphins arranged. Outside the
building were golden statues of the
first 10 kings and their wives. In the
groves and gardens were hot and cold
springs. There were numerous temples to
various deities, places of exercise for
men and for beasts, public baths, and a
great raceourse for horses. At various
vantage points on the zones were
fortifications, and to the great harbor
came vessels from every maritime nation.
The zones were so thickly populated that
the sound of human voices was ever in
the air. That part of Atlantis facing
the sea was described as lofty and
precipitous. But about the central city
was a plane sheltered by mountains
renowned for their size, number, and
beauty. The plane yielded two crops each
year. In the winter being watered by
rains and in the summer by immense
irrigation canals, which were also used
for transportation. The plane was
divided into sections and in time of war
each section supplied its quota of
fighting men and chariots. The 10
governments differed from each other in
details concerning military
requirements. Each of the kings of
Atlantis had complete control over his
own kingdom. But their mutual
relationships were governed by a code
engraved by the first 10 kings on a
column of orichalks standing in the
temple of Poseidon at alternate
intervals of five and six years of
pilgrimage was made to this temple that
equal honor might be conferred upon both
the odd and the even numbers. Here with
appropriate sacrifice, each king renewed
his by ascending successively through
the fiery sphere of Hades, the spheres
of water, earth, and air, and the
heavens of the moon. The plane of
Mercury is reached. Above Mercury are
the plains of Venus, the sun, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn. The latter
containing the symbols of the zodiacal
constellations. Above the arch of the
heavens, Saturn, is the dwelling place
of the different powers controlling the
universe. The Supreme Council of the
Gods is composed of 12 deities, six male
and six female, which correspond to the
positive and negative signs of the
zodiac. The six gods are Jupiter,
Vulcan, Apollo, Mars, Neptune, and
Mercury. The six goddesses are Juno,
series, Vesta, Manurva, Venus, and
Diana. Jupiter rides his eagle as the
symbol of his sovereignty over the
world. And Juno is seated upon a
peacock, the proper symbol of her
hottiness and glory oath of loyalty upon
the sacred inscription. Here also the
kings dawned azure robes and sat in
judgment. At daybreak they wrote their
sentences upon a golden tablet and
deposited them with their robes as
memorials. The chief laws of the
Atlantean kings were that they should
not take up arms against each other and
that they should come to the assistance
of any of their number who was attacked
in matters of war and great moment. The
final decision was in the hands of the
direct descendants of the family of
Atlas. No king had the power of life and
death over his kinsmen without the
ascent of a majority of the 10. Plato
concludes his description by declaring
that it was this great empire which
attacked the helenic states. This did
not occur however until their power and
glory had lured the Atlantean kings from
the pathway of wisdom and virtue. Filled
with false ambition, the rulers of
Atlantis determined to conquer the
entire world. Zeus perceiving the
wickedness of the Atlanteanss gathered
the gods into his holy habitation and
address them. Here Plato's narrative
comes to an abrupt end for the Critius
was never finished. In the Tus is a
further description of Atlantis
supposedly given to Solen by an Egyptian
priest and which concludes as follows.
But afterwards there occurred violent
earthquakes and floods and in a single
day and night of rain all your warlike
men in a body sank into the earth and
the island of Atlantis in like manner
disappeared and was sunk beneath the
sea. And that is the reason why the sea
in those parts is impassible and
impenetrable because there is such a
quantity of shallow mud in the way and
this was caused by the subsidance of the
island. In the introduction to his
translation of the Tamius, Thomas Taylor
quotes from a history of Ethiopia
written by Marcelis which contains the
following reference to Atlantis. For
they relate that in their time there
were seven islands in the Atlantic Sea,
sacred to Proerine, and besides these
three others of an immense magnitude,
one of which was sacred to Pluto,
another to Ammon, and another which is
the middle of these and is of a thousand
stadia to Neptune. Pranter commenting
upon Plato asserted that the Egyptian
priest declared the story of Atlantis to
be written upon pillars which were still
preserved. circa 300 BC sea beginnings
or glimpses of vanished civilizations.
Ignatius Donnelly who gave the subject
of Atlantis profound study believed that
horses were first domesticated by the
Atlantanss for which reason they have
always been considered peculiarly sacred
to Poseidon. See Atlantis from a careful
consideration of Plato's description of
Atlantis. It is evident that the story
should not be regarded as wholly
historical but rather as both
allegorical and historical. Origin,
Pfury, Proclas, I amus, and Serianis
realized that the story concealed a
profound philosophical mystery, but they
disagreed as to the actual
interpretation. Plato's Atlantis
symbolizes the three-fold nature of both
the universe and the human body. The 10
kings of Atlantis are the tetr or
numbers, which are born as five pairs of
opposites. Consult Theen of Smyrna for
the Pythagorean doctrine of opposites.
The numbers 1 to 10 rule every creature
and the numbers in turn are under the
control of the monad or one the eldest
among them. With the trident scepter of
Poseidon, these kings held sway over the
inhabitants of the seven small and three
great islands comprising Atlantis.
Philosophically, the 10 islands
symbolized the triune powers of the
superior deity and the seven regents who
bow before his eternal throne. If
Atlantis be considered as the archetypal
sphere, then its immersion signifies the
descent of rational organized
consciousness into the illusionary
impermanent realm of irrational mortal
ignorance. Both the sinking of Atlantis
and the biblical story of the fall of
man signifies spiritual involution, a
prerequisite to conscious evolution.
Either the initiated Plato used the
Atlantis allegory to achieve two widely
different ends or else the accounts
preserved by the Egyptian priests were
tampered with to perpetuate the secret
doctrine. This does not mean to imply
that Atlantis is purely mythological but
it overcomes the most serious obstacle
to acceptance of the Atlantis theory
namely the fantastic accounts of its
origin, size, appearance, and date of
destruction 9600 BC. In the midst of the
central island of Atlantis was a lofty
mountain which cast a shadow 5,000
stadia in extent and whose summit
touched the sphere of ether. This is the
axle mountain of the world sacred among
many races and symbolic of the human
head which rises out of the four
elements of the body. This sacred
mountain upon whose summit stood the
temple of the gods gave rise to the
stories of Olympus, Meu, and Asgard. The
city of the Golden Gates, the capital of
Atlantis, is the one now preserved among
numerous religions as the city of the
gods or the holy city. Here is the
archetype of the new Jerusalem, with its
streets paved with gold and its 12 gates
shining with precious stones. The
history of Atlantis writes Ignatius
Donnelly is the key of the Greek
mythology. There can be no question that
these gods of Greece were human beings.
The tendency to attach divine attributes
to great earthly rulers is one deeply
implanted in human nature. See Atlantis.
The same author sustains his views by
noting that the deities of the Greek
pantheon were norooked upon as creators
of the universe, but rather as regents
set over it by its more ancient original
fabricators. The Garden of Eden, from
which humanity was driven by a flaming
sword, is perhaps an illusion to the
earthly paradise supposedly located west
of the pillars of Hercules and destroyed
by volcanic cataclysms. The deluge
legend may be traced also to the
Atlantean inundation during which a
world was destroyed by water was the
religious, philosophic and scientific
knowledge possessed by the priest crafts
of antiquity secured from Atlantis whose
submergence obliterated every vestage of
its part in the drama of world progress.
Atlantean sun worship has been
perpetuated in the ritualism and
ceremonialism of both Christianity and
paganom. Both the cross and the serpent
were Atlantean emblems of divine wisdom.
The divine Atlantean progenitors of the
Mayas and Kishas of Central America
coexisted within the green and azure
radiance of Guimats, the plumemed
serpent. The six skyborn sages came into
manifestation as centers of light bound
together or synthesized by the seventh
and chief of their order. They feathered
snake. See the papelvo. The title of
winged or plumemed snake was applied to
ketzel koaddle or kukulkin. The central
American initiate. The center of the
Atlantean wisdom religion was presumably
a great pyramidal temple standing on the
brow of a plateau rising in the midst of
the city of the golden gates. From here
the initiate priests of the sacred
feather went forth carrying the keys of
universal wisdom to the uttermost parts
of the earth. The mythologies of many
nations contain accounts of gods who
came out of the sea. Certain shamans
among the American Indians tell of holy
men dressed in birds feathers and wampam
who rose out of the blue waters and
instructed them in the arts and crafts.
Among the legends of the calaldanss is
that of oans a partly amphibious
creature who came out of the sea and
taught the savage peoples along the sure
to read and write till the soil
cultivate herbs for healing. study the
stars, establish rational forms of
government, and become conversant with
the sacred mysteries. Among the Mayas,
Ketzel Koaddle, the savior god, whom
some Christian scholars believe to have
been St. Thomas, issued from the waters
and after instructing the people in the
essentials of civilization, rode out to
sea on a magic raft of serpents to
escape the wrath of the fierce god of
the fiery mirror, Tescatiply Poka. May
it not have been that these demagods of
a fabulous age who estrus like came out
of the sea were Atlantan priests. All
that primitive man remembered of the
Atlantanss was the glory of their golden
ornaments, the transcendency of their
wisdom and the sanctity of their
symbols, the cross and the serpent that
they came in ships was soon forgotten.
For untuittered minds considered even
boats as supernatural. Wherever the
Atlanteanss procelite, they erected
pyramids and temples patterned after the
great sanctuary in the city of the
golden gates such as the origin of the
pyramids of Egypt, Mexico, and Central
America. The mounds in Normandy and
Britain, as well as those of the
American Indians, are remnants of a
similar culture. In the midst of the
Atlantean program of world colonization
and conversion, the cataclysms which
sank Atlantis began, the initiate
priests of the sacred feather who
promised to come back to their
missionary settlements never returned
and after the lapse of centuries.
Tradition preserved only a fantastic
account of gods who came from a place
where the sea now is. HP Blavatzky thus
sums up the causes which precipitated
the Atlantean disaster under the evil.
insinuations of their demon Thevitat.
The Atlantis race became a nation of
wicked magicians. In consequence of
this, war was declared, the story of
which would be too long to narrate. Its
substance may be found in the disfigured
allegorories of the race of Cain, the
giants, and that of Noah and his
righteous family. The conflict came to
an end by the submersion of the
Atlantis, which finds its imitation in
the stories of the Babylonian and Mosaic
flood. The giants and magicians asterisk
asterisk asterisk and all flesh died
asterisk asterisk asterisk and every man
all except Zutherus and Noah who were
substantially identical with the great
father of the flankians in the papalvu
or the sacred book of the Guatemalians
which also tells of his escaping in a
large boat like the Hindu no of ice. See
ISIS unveil from the Atlanteanss. The
world has received not only the heritage
of arts and crafts, philosophies and
sciences, ethics and religions, but also
the heritage of hate, strife, and
perversion. The Atlanteanss instigated
the first war, and it has been said that
all subsequent wars were fought in a
fruitless effort to justify the first
one and write the wrong which it caused.
Before Atlantis sank, it spiritually
illumined. initiates who realized that
their land was doomed because it had
departed from the path of light,
withdrew from the ill- fated continent,
carrying with them the sacred and secret
doctrine. These Atlantanss established
themselves in Egypt, where they became
its first divine rulers. Nearly all the
great cosmologic myths forming the
foundation of the various sacred books
of the world are based upon the
Atlantean mystery rituals. The myth of
the dying god. The myth of Tamuz and
Ishtar is one of the earliest examples
of the dying god allegory. Probably
antidating 4,000b C Babylonia and
Assyria by Lewis Spence. The imperfect
condition of the tablets upon which the
legends are inscribed makes it
impossible to secure more than a
fragmentaryary account of the Tamuz
writes. Being the esoteric god of the
sun, Tamuz did not occupy a position
among the first deities venerated by the
Babylonians who for lack of deeper
knowledge looked upon him as a god of
agriculture or a vegetation spirit.
Originally, he was described as being
one of the guardians of the gates of the
underworld. Like many other savior gods,
he is referred to as a shepherd or the
lord of the shepherd's seat. Tamuz
occupies the remarkable position of son
and husband of Ishtar, the Babylonian
and Assyrian mother goddess. Ishtar to
whom the planer Venus was sacred was the
most widely venerated deity of the
Babylonian and Assyrian pantheon. She
was probably identical with Ashtor, a
start and Aphrodite. The story of her
descent into the underworld in search
presumably for the sacred elixir which
alone could restore Tamuz to life is the
key to the ritual of her mysteries.
Tamuz whose annual festival took place
just before the summer solstice died in
midsummer in the ancient month which
bore his name and was mourned with
elaborate ceremonies. The manner of his
death is unknown, but some of the
accusations made against Ishtar by
Idabbar Nimrod would indicate that she
indirectly at least had contributed to
his demise. The resurrection of Tamuz
was the occasion of great rejoicing at
which time he was hailed as a redeemer
of his people. Without spread wings,
Ishtar, the daughter of sin, the moon,
sweeps downward to the gates of death.
The house of darkness, the dwelling of
the god or kala is described as the
place of no return. It is without light.
The nourishment of those who dwell
therein is dust and their food is mud
over the bolts. On the door of the house
of Kala is scattered dust, and the
keepers of the house are covered with
feathers like birds. Ishtar demands that
the keepers open the gates, declaring
that if they do not, she will shatter
the doorposts and strike the hinges and
raise up dead devourers of the living.
the guardians of the gates beg her to be
patient while they go to the queen of
Hades from whom they secure permission
to admit Ishtar but only in the same
manner as all others came to this dreary
house. Ishtar thereupon descends through
the seven gates which lead downward into
the depths of the underworld. At the
first gate the great crown is removed
from her head. At the second gate the
earrings from her ears. At the third
gate the necklace from her neck. At the
fourth gate the ornaments from her
breast. At the fifth gate, the girdle
from her waist. At the sixth gate, the
bracelets from her hands and feet. And
at the seventh gate, the covering cloak
of her body. Ishtar remmonstrates as
each successive article of apparel is
taken from her. Bur the guardian tells
her that this is the experience of all
who enter the somber domain of death.
Enraged upon beholding Ishtar, the
mistress of Hades inflicts upon her all
manner of disease and imprisons her in
the underworld. As Ishtar represents the
spirit of fertility, her loss prevents
the ripening of the crops and the
maturing of all life upon the earth. In
this respect, the story parallels the
legend of Pphanany. The gods realizing
that the loss of Ishtar is disorganizing
all nature, send a messenger to the
underworld and demand her release. The
mistress of Hades is forced to comply
and the water of life is poured over
Ishtar. Thus cured of the infirmities
inflicted on her, she retraces her way
upward through the seven gates, at each
of which she is reinvested with the
article of apparel which the guardians
had removed. See the Calaldian account
of Genesis. No record exists that Ishtar
secured the water of life which would
have wrought the resurrection of Thomas.
The myth of Ishtar symbolizes the
descent of the human spirit through the
seven worlds or spheres of the sacred
planets until finally deprived of its
spiritual adornments. It incarnates in
the physical body. Hades where the
mistress of that body heaps every form
of sorrow and misery upon the imprisoned
consciousness. The waters of life, the
secret doctrine cure the diseases of
ignorance. and the spirit ascending
again to its divine source regains its
god-given adornments as it passes upward
through the rings of the planets.
Another mystery ritual among the
Babylonians and Assyrians was that of
Meridac and the dragon. Meridac, the
creator of the inferior universe, slays
a horrible monster and out of her body
forms the universe. Here is the probable
source of the so-called Christian
allegory of St. George and the dragon.
The mysteries of Adonis or Adoni were
celebrated annually in many parts of
Egypt, Phoenicia and Biblis. The name
Adonis or Adoni means Lord and was a
designation applied to the son and later
borrowed by the Jews as the exoteric
name of their god. Smyrna, mother of
Adonis, was turned into a tree by the
gods and after a time the bark burst
open and the infant savior issued forth.
According to one account, he was
liberated by a wild boar which split the
wood of the maternal tree with its
tusks. Adonis was born at midnight of
the 24th of December. And through his
unhappy death, a mystery right was
established that wrought the salvation
of his people. In the Jewish month of
Tamuz, another name for this deity. He
was gored to death by a wild boar sent
by the god RS Mars. The Adoniasmos was
the ceremony of lamenting the premature
death of the murdered god. In Ezekiel
8:14, it is written that women were
weeping for Tamuz Adonis at the north
gate of the Lord&lt;unk&gt;'s house in
Jerusalem. Sir James George Fraser cites
Jerome. us. He tells us that Bethl, the
traditionary birthplace of the Lord, was
shaded by a grove of that still older
Syrian lord Adonis, and that where the
infant Jesus had wept, the lover of
Venus was bewailed. See the golden bow,
the effigy of a wild boar is said to
have been set over one of the gates of
Jerusalem in honor of Adonis and his
rights celebrated in the grotto of the
nativity at Bethlehem. Adonis as the
gourd or god man is one of the keys to
Sir Francis Bacon's use of the wild boar
in his cryptic symbolism. Adonis was
originally an androgynous deity who
represented the solar power which in the
winter was destroyed by the evil
principle of cold the boore. After 3
days months in the tomb Adonis rose
triumphant on the 25th day of March
amidst the acclamation of his priests
and followers he is risen. Adonis was
born out of a merr tree. Myrrh, the
symbol of death because of its
connection with the process of embombing
was one of the gifts brought by the
three magi to the manger of Jesus. In
the mysteries of Adonis, the Nephite
passed through the symbolic death of the
god and raised by the priests entered
into the blessed state of redemption
made possible by the sufferings of
Adonis. Nearly all authors believe
Adonis to have been originally a
vegetation god directly connected with
the growth and maturing of flowers. The
great Pan was celebrated as the author
and director of the sacred dances which
he is supposed to have instituted to
symbolize the circumambulations of the
heavenly bodies. Pan was a composite
creature the upper part with the
exception of his horns being human and
the lower part in the form of a goat.
Pan is the prototype of natural energy
and while undoubtedly a phallic deity
should nor be confused with priapus. The
pipes of Pan signify the natural harmony
of the spheres and the god himself is a
symbol of Saturn because this planet is
enthroned in Capricorn whose emblem is a
goat. The Egyptians were initiated into
the mysteries of Pan who was regarded as
a phase of Jupiter the demier. Pan
represented the impregnating power of
the sun and was the chief of a horde
rustic deities and sats. He also
signified the controlling spirit of the
lower worlds. The fabricated a story to
the effect that at the time of the birth
of Christ the oracles were silenced
after giving utterance to one last cry
pan is dead and fruits. In support of
this viewpoint, they described the
gardens of Adonis, which were small
baskets of earth in which seeds were
planted and nurtured for a period of 8
days. When those plants prematurely died
for lack of sufficient earth, they were
considered emblematic of the murdered
Adonis and were usually cast into the
sea with images of the god. In Friia,
there existed a remarkable school of
religious philosophy which centered
around the life and untimely fate of
another savior god known as 80s or Addis
by many considered synonymous with
Adonis. This deity was born at midnight
on the 24th day of December. Of his
death there are two accounts. In one he
was gored to death like Adonis. In the
other he emasculated himself under a
pine tree and there died. His body was
taken to a cave by the great mother
Sibili where it remained through the
ages without decaying to the rights of
80s. The modern world is indebted for
the symbolism of the Christmas tree.
Ades imparted his immortality to the
tree beneath which he died and cibily
took the tree with her when she removed
the body. Hades remained three days in
the tomb, rose upon a date,
corresponding with Easter mourn, and by
this resurrection overcame death for all
who were initiated into his mysteries.
In the mysteries of the friians, says
Julius Fermicus, which are called those
of the mother of the gods. Every year a
pine tree is cut down, and in the inside
of the tree, the image of a youth is
tied in. In the mysteries of Isis, the
trunk of a pine tree is cut. The middle
of the trunk is nicely hollowed out. The
idol of Osiris made from those hollowed
pieces is buried in the mysteries of
propppine. A tree cut is put together
into the effigy and form of the virgin.
And when it has been carried within the
city, it is mourned 40 nights, but the
40th night it is burned. See sad. The
mysteries of Adoni. The mysteries of
included a sacramental meal during which
the Neaphite ate out of a drum and drank
from a symbol. After being baptized by
the blood of a bull, the new initiate
was fed entirely on milk to symbolize
that he was still a philosophical
infant, having but recently been born
out of the sphere of materiality. See
Fraser's the golden bow. Is there a
possible connection between this lactial
diet prescribed by the attic right and
St. Paul's illusion to the food for
spiritual babes? Salast gives a key to
the esoteric interpretation of the attic
rituals. Sibily the great mother
signifies the vivifying powers of the
universe and 80s that aspect of the
spiritual intellect which is suspended
between the divine and animal spheres.
The mother of the gods loving 80s gave
him a starry hat signifying celestial
powers. But 80s mankind falling in love
with a nymph symbolic of the lower
animal propensities forfeited his
divinity and lost his creative powers.
It is thus evident that Hades represents
the human consciousness and that his
mysteries are concerned with the
reattainment of the starry hat. See
Salast on the gods and the world. The
rights of Sebasius were very similar to
those of Bakis and it is generally
believed that the two deities are
identical. Bakus was born at Sebasius or
Sabayoth and these names are frequently
assigned to him. The Sebasian mysteries
were performed at night and the ritual
included the drawing of a live snake
across the breast of the candidate.
Clement of Alexandria writes the token
of the Sebasian. Mysteries to the
initiated is the deity gliding over the
breast. A golden serpent was the symbol
of Sebasius because this deity
represented the annual renovation of the
world by the solar power. The Jews
borrowed the name Sabayoth from these
mysteries and adopted it as one of the
appellations of their supreme god.
During the time the Sebasian mysteries
were celebrated in Rome, the cult gained
many votaries and later influenced the
symbolism of Christianity. The Kabiric
mysteries of Samothrace were renowned
among the ancients being next to the
Elusinian. In public esteem, Herodotus
declares that the Samothraans received
their doctrines, especially those
concerning Mercury from the Palagians.
Little is known concerning the Kabiric
rituals, for they were enshrouded in the
profoundest secrecy. Some regard the
Cabaret as seven in number and refer to
them as the seven spirits of fire before
the throne of Saturn. Others believe the
Cabary to be the seven sacred wanderers,
later called the planets. While a vast
number of deities are associated with
the Samothranian mysteries, the
ritualistic drama centers around four
brothers. The first three Asceros
Achoters and Achoters attack and murder
the fourth Kashmala or Cadmillis,
Dionidoris, however, identifies Ascuros
with Deer Aoers with Pluto, Achoterso
with Pphanie, and Kashma with Hermes.
Alexander Wilder notes that in the
samoththration ritual, Cadmillis is made
to include the Theban serpent god Cadmus
the th of Egypt, the Hermes of the
Greeks and the emf or Escalapius of the
Alexandrians and Phoenicians. Here again
is a repetition of the story of Osiris,
Bakis, Adonis, Alder and Hyramab. The
worship of 80 had 80s and sibily was
also involved in the samothration
mysteries in the rituals of the cabaret
is to be traced a form of pine tree
worship for this tree sacred to 80s was
first trimmed into the form of a cross
and then cut down in honor of the
murdered god whose body was discovered
at its foot. If you wish to inspect the
orgies of the Carabs, writes Clement,
then know that having killed their third
brother, they covered the head of the
dead body with a purple cloth, crowned
it, and carrying it on the point of a
spear, buried it under the roots of
Olympus. These mysteries are, in short,
murders and funerals. This antonyy
father in his efforts to defame the
pagan rights apparently ignores the fact
that like the Kabirian martyr Jesus
Christ was fouly betrayed, tortured and
finally murdered. And the priests of
these rights who are called kings of the
sacred rights by those whose business it
is to name them give additional
strangeness to the tragic occurrence by
forbidding parsley with the roots from
being placed on the table. For they
think that parsley grew from the
carabantic blood that flowed forth. Just
as the women in celebrating the
Mmaphoria abstain from eating the seeds
of the pomegranate which have fallen on
the ground from the idea that
pomegranates sprang from the drops of
the blood of Dionis. Those carabants
also they call Kabiric and the ceremony
itself they announce as the Kabiric
mystery. The mysteries of the cabaret
were divided into three degrees. The
first of which celebrated the death of
Kashmala at the hands of his three
brothers. The second the discovery of
his mutilated body, the parts of which
had been found and gathered after much
labor. And the third accompanied by
great rejoicing and happiness is
resurrection and the consequent
salvation of the world. The temple of
the Cabarat Samothrace contained a
number of curious divinities. Many of
them misshapen creatures representing
the elemental powers of nature, possibly
the Bakshik titans. Children were
initiated into the Kabiran cult with the
same dignity as adults and criminals who
reached the sanctuary were safe from
pursuit. The Samothran rights were
particularly concerned with navigation.
The Dioscera Castor and Pollocks or the
gods of navigation being among those
propitiated by members of that cult. The
Argonautic expedition listening to the
advice of Orpheus stopped at the island
of Samothrace for the purpose of having
its members initiated into the Kabiric
writes. Herodotus relates that when
Kambises entered the temple of the
cabaret, he was unable to restrain his
mirth at seeing before him the figure of
a man standing upright and facing the
man, the figure of a woman standing on
her head. Had Kambisces been acquainted
with the principles of divine astronomy,
he would have realized that he was then
in the presence of the key to universal
equilibrium. I ask says Voltaare, who
were these hierofphants, these sacred
Freemasons who celebrated their ancient
mysteries of Samothracia and whence came
they and their god's cabarety. See
Mackey's encyclopedia of Freemasonry.
Clement speaks of the mysteries of the
cabaret as the sacred mystery of a
brother slain by his brethren and the
kabiric death was one of the secret
symbols of antiquity. Thus the allegory
of the self murdered by the notself is
perpetuated through the religious
mysticism of all peoples. The
philosophic death and the philosophic
resurrection are the lesser and the
greater mysteries respectively. A
curious aspect of the dying god myth is
that of the hanged man. The most
important example of this peculiar
conception is found in the Odinic
rituals where Odin hangs himself for
nine nights from the branches of the
world tree and upon the same occasion
also pierces his own side with the
sacred spear. As the result of this
great sacrifice, Odin while suspended
over the depths of Niflheim discovered
by meditation the runes or alphabets by
which later the records of his people
were preserved. Because of this
remarkable experience, Odin is sometimes
shown seated on a gallows tree and he
became the patron deity of all who died
by the noose. Esoterically, the hanged
man is the human spirit which is
suspended from heaven by a single
thread. Wisdom, not death, is the reward
for this voluntary sacrifice during
which the human soul suspended above the
world of illusion and meditating upon
its unreality is rewarded by the
achievement of self-realization. From a
consideration of all these ancient and
secret rituals, it becomes evident that
the mystery of the dying god was
universal among the illumined and
venerated colleges of the sacred
teaching. This mystery has been
perpetuated in Christianity in the
crucifixion and death of the god man
Jesus the Christ. The secret import of
this world tragedy and the universal
martyr must be rediscovered if
Christianity is to reach the heights
attained by the pagans in the days of
their philosophic supremacy. The myth of
the dying god is the key to both
universal and individual redemption and
regeneration. And those who do not
comprehend the true nature of this
supreme allegory are not privileged to
consider themselves either wise or truly
religious. The life and teachings of
Thoth Hermes Tismagist thunder rolled.
Lightning flashed the veil of the temple
was rent from top to bottom. The
venerable initiator in his robes of blue
and gold slowly raised his jeweled wand
and pointed with it into the darkness
revealed by the tearing of the silken
curtain. Behold the light of Egypt. The
candidate in his plain white robe gazed
into the utter blackness framed by the
two great lotus headed columns between
which the veil had hung. As he watched,
a luminous haze distributed itself
throughout the atmosphere until the air
was a mass of shining particles. The
face of the neophy was illumined by the
soft glow as he scanned the shimmering
cloud for some tangible object. The
initiator spoke again. This light which
ye behold is the secret luminance of the
mysteries. Once it comes none knoweth,
save thee, master of the light. Behold
him. Suddenly, through the gleaming
mist, a figure appeared, surrounded by a
flickering greenish sheen. The initiator
lowered his wand, and bowing his head,
placed one hand edge-wise against his
breast in humble salutation. The Nephite
stepped back in awe, partly blinded by
the glory of the revealed figure.
Gaining courage, the youth gazed again
at the divine one. The form before him
was considerably larger than that of a
mortal man. The body seemed partly
transparent so that the heart and brain
could be seen pulsating and radiant. As
the candidate watched, the heart changed
into an ibis and the brain into a
flashing emerald. In its hand this
mysterious being bore a winged rod
entwined with serpents. The aged
initiator raising his wand cried out in
a loud voice, "All hail thee, th Hermes
thrice greatest, all hail thee, prince
of men. All hail thee who standeth."
Upon the head of Typhon. At the same
instant a lurid writhing dragon
appeared, a hideous monster, part
serpent, part crocodile, and part hawk.
from its mouth and nostrils poured
sheets of flame and horrible sounds
echoed through the vaulted chambers.
Suddenly Hermes struck the advancing
reptile. With the serpent wound staff,
and with snarling cry, the dragon fell
over upon its side while the flames
about it slowly died away. Hermes placed
his foot upon the skull of the
vanquished Typhon. The next instant,
with a blaze of unbearable glory that
sent the Neaphites staggering backward
against a pillar, the immortal Hermes,
followed by streamers of greenish mist,
passed through the chamber and faded
into nothingness. Suppositions
concerning the identity of Hermes. I
amlicus aver that Hermes was the author
of 20,000 books. Manitho increased the
number to more than 36,000. C. James
Gardner. figures which make it evident
that a solitary individual, even though
he be overshadowed by divine
prerogative, could scarcely have
accomplished such a monumental labor.
Among the arts and sciences which it is
affirmed Hermes revealed to mankind were
medicine, chemistry, law, art,
astrology, music, rhetoric, magic,
philosophy, geography, mathematics,
especially geometry, anatomy, and
oratory. Orpheus was similarly acclaimed
by the Greeks in his biographia Antiqua.
Francis Barrett says of Hermes asterisk
asterisk asterisk if God ever appeared
in man he appeared in him as is evident
both from his books and his commander in
which works he has communicated the sum
of the abyss and the divine knowledge to
all posterity by which he has
demonstrated himself to have been not
only an inspired divine but also a deep
philosopher obtaining his wisdom from
God and heavenly things and not from
man. His transcendent learning caused
Hermes to be identified with many of the
early sages and prophets. In his ancient
mythology, Bryant writes, I have
mentioned that Cadmas was the same as
the Egyptian th and it is manifest from
his being Hermes and from the invention
of letters being attributed to him. In
the chapter on the theory of Pythagorean
mathematics will be found the table of
the original cadmine letters.
Investigators believe that it was Hermes
who was known to the Jews as Enoch
called by Connealy the second messenger
of God. Hermes was accepted into the
mythology of the Greeks later becoming
the Mercury of the Latins. He was
revered through the form of the planet
Mercury because this body is nearest to
the sun. Hermes of all creatures was
nearest to God and became known as the
messenger of the gods. In the Egyptian
drawings of him, Th carries a wax and
writing tablet and serves as the
recorder during the weighing of the
souls of the dead in the judgment hall
of Osiris. Ritual of great significance.
Hermes is of first importance to Masonic
scholars because he was the author of
the Masonic initiatory. Rituals which
were borrowed from the mysteries
established by Hermes. Nearly all of the
Masonic symbols are hermetic in
character. Pythagoras studied
mathematics with the Egyptians and from
them gained his knowledge of the
symbolic geometric solids. Hermes is
also revered for his reformation of the
calendar system. He increased the year
from 360 to 3605 days thus establishing
a precedent which still prevails. The
appellation thrice greatest was given to
Hermes because he was considered the
greatest of all philosophers, the
greatest of all priests and the greatest
of all kings. It is worthy of note that
the last poem of America's beloved poet
Henry Wodsworth Longfellow was a lyric
owed to Hermes. C. Chambers Encyclopedia
the mutilated hermetic fragments on the
subject of the hermetic books. James
Campbell Brown in his history of
chemistry has written leaving the
Calaldian and earliest Egyptian periods
of which we have remains but no record
and from which no names of either
chemists or philosophers have come down
to us. We now approach the historic
period when books were written not at
first upon parchment or paper but upon
papyrus. A series of early Egyptian
books is attributed to Hermes Tismagist
who may have been a real savant or maybe
a personification of a long succession
of writers. asterisk asterisk asterisk.
He is identified by some with the Greek
god Hermes and the Egyptian th or Tudi
who was the moon god and is represented
in ancient paintings as Ibis headed with
the disc and crescent of the moon. The
Egyptians regarded him as the god of
wisdom, letters and the recording of
time. It is in consequence of the great
respect entertained for Hermes by the
old alchemist that chemical writings
were called hermetic and that the phrase
hermetically sealed is still in use to
designate the closing of a glass vessel
by fusion after the manner of chemical
manipulators. We find the same root in
the hermetic medicines of paracelis and
the hermetic freemasonry of the middle
ages. Among the fragmentaryary writings
believed to have come from the stylus of
Hermes are two famous works. The first
is the emerald table and the second is
the divine commander or as it is more
commonly called the shepherd of men. A
discussion of which follows. One
outstanding point in connection with
Hermes is that he was one of the few
philosopher priests of paganom upon whom
the early Christians did not vent their
spleen. Some church fathers went so far
as to declare that Hermes exhibited many
symptoms of intelligence and that if he
had only been born in a more enlightened
age so that he might have benefited by
their instructions, he would have been a
really great man. In his stroa, Clement
of Alexandria, one of the few chronicers
of pagan lore whose writings have been
preserved to this age, gives practically
all the information that is known
concerning the original 42 books of
Hermes and the importance with which
these books were regarded by both the
temporal and spiritual powers of Egypt.
Clement describes one of their
ceremonial processions as follows.
Master of all arts and sciences, perfect
in all crafts, ruler of the three
worlds, scribe of the gods, and keeper
of the books of life. Th Hermes
Tismagist, the three times greatest, the
first intelligencer, was regarded by the
ancient Egyptians as the embodiment of
the universal mind. While in all
probability there actually existed a
great sage and educator by the name of
Hermes, it is impossible to extricate
the historical man from the mass of
legendary accounts which attempt to
identify him with the cosmic principle
of thought principally shown by their
sacred ceremonial. For first advances
the singer bearing some one of the
symbols of music. For they say that he
must learn two of the books of Hermes,
the one of which contains the hymns of
the gods, the second the regulations for
the king's life. And after the singer
advances the astrologer with a horal
loge in his hand and a palm the symbols
of astrology. He must have the
astrological books of Hermes which are
four in number always in his mouth. Of
these one is about the order of the
fixed stars that are visible and another
about the conjunctions and luminous
appearances of the sun and moon and the
rest respecting their risings. Next in
order advances the sacred scribe with
wings on his head and in his hand a book
and rule in which we're writing ink and
the read with which they write. And he
must be acquainted with what are called
hieroglyphics, and know about the
cosmography and geography, the position
of the sun and moon, and about the five
planets, also the description of Egypt,
and the chart of the Nile, and the
description of the equipment of the
priests, and of the place consecrated to
them, and about the measures, and the
things in use in the sacred rights. Then
the stolekeeper follows those previously
mentioned with the cubit of justice and
the cup for libations. He is acquainted
with all points called paid dudic
relating to training and moscapalic
sacrificial. There are also 10 books
which relate to the honor paid by them
to their gods and containing the
Egyptian worship as that relating to
sacrifices, first fruits, hymns,
prayers, processions, festivals and the
like. And behind all walks the prophet
with the water vase carried openly in
his arms who is followed by those who
carry the issue of loaves. He as being
the governor of the temple learns the 10
books called hieratradic and they
contain all about the laws and the gods
and the whole of the training of the
priests. For the prophet is among the
Egyptians also over the distribution of
the revenues. There are then 42 books of
Hermes indispensably necessary of which
the six and 30 containing the whole
philosophy of the Egyptians are learned
by the forementioned personages and the
other six which are medical by the
pastoroy imagebearers
treating of the structure of the body
and of disease and instruments and
medicines and about the eyes and the
last about women. One of the greatest
tragedies of the philosophic world was
the loss of nearly all of the 42 books
of Hermes mentioned in the foregoing.
These books disappeared during the
burning of Alexandria for the Romans and
later the Christians realized that until
these books were eliminated they could
never bring the Egyptians into
subjection. The volumes which escaped
the fire were buried in the desert and
their location is now known to only a
few initiates of the secret schools. The
Book of Th. While Hermes still walked
the earth with men, he entrusted to his
chosen successors the sacred book of Th.
This work contained the secret processes
by which the regeneration of humanity
was to be accomplished and also served
as the key to his other writings.
Nothing definite is known concerning the
contents of the book of th other than
that its pages were covered with strange
hieroglyphic figures and symbols which
gave to those acquainted with their use
unlimited power over the spirits of the
air and the subterranean divinities.
When certain areas of the brain are
stimulated by the secret processes of
the mysteries, the consciousness of man
is extended and he is permitted to
behold the immortals and enter into the
presence of the superior gods. The book
of th described the method whereby this
stimulation was accomplished. In truth,
therefore, it was the key to
immortality. According to legend, the
book of th was kept in a golden box in
the inner sanctuary of the temple. There
was but one key, and this was in the
possession of the master of the
mysteries, the highest initiate of the
hermetic arcanum. He alone knew what was
written in the secret book, the book of
th was lost to the ancient world with
the decay of the mysteries. But its
faithful initiates carried it sealed in
the sacred casket into another land. The
book is still in existence and continues
to lead the disciples of this age into
the presence of the immortals. No other
information can be given to the world
concerning it now. But the apostolic
succession from the first hierofphant
initiated by Hermes himself remains
unbroken to this day. And those who are
peculiarly fitted to serve the immortals
may discover this priceless document. if
they will search sincerely and
tirelessly for it. It has been asserted
that the book of th is in reality the
mysterious tarot of the Bohemian a
strange emblematic book of 78 leaves
which has been in possession of the
gypsies since the time when they were
driven from their ancient temple the
cereapium. According to the secret
histories, the gypsies were originally
Egyptian priests. There are now in the
world several secret schools privileged
to initiate candidates into the
mysteries. But in nearly every instance
they lighted their altar, fires from the
flaming torch of Herm. Hermes in his
book of thath revealed to all mankind
the one way. And for ages the wise of
every nation and every faith have
reached immortality by the way
established by Hermes in the midst of
the darkness for the redemption of
humankind. Poandras the vision of
Hermes. The divine commander of Hermes
mercurious tismistice is one of the
earliest of the hermetic writings. now
extent. While probably not in its
original form, having been remodeled
during the first centuries of the
Christian era and incorrectly translated
since, this work undoubtedly contains
many of the original concepts of the
hermetic cultists. The divine commander
consists of 17 fragmentaryary writings
gathered together and put forth as one
work. The second book of the divine
commander called poandras or the vision
is believed to describe the method by
which the divine wisdom was first
revealed to Hermes. It was after Hermes
had received this revelation that he
began his ministry teaching to all who
would listen the secrets of the
invisible universe as they had been
unfolded to him. The vision is the most
famous of all the hermetic fragments and
contains an exposition of hermetic
cosmogy and the secret sciences of the
Egyptians regarding the culture and
unfoldment of the human soul. For some
time it was erroneously called the
genesis of Enoch. But that mistake has
now been rectified at hand while
preparing the following interpretation
of the symbolic philosophy concealed
within the vision of Hermes. The present
author has had these reference works.
The divine commander of Hermes Mercurius
Tismagist London 1650 translated out of
the Arabic and Greek by Dr. Everard.
Hermetica Oxford 1924 edited by Walter
Scott. Hermes the mysteries of Egypt
Philadelphia 1925 by Edward Shore and
the thrice greatest Hermes London 1906
by GR S me. to the material contained in
the above volumes. He has added
commentaries based upon the esoteric
philosophy of the ancient Egyptians
together with amplifications derived
partly from other hermetic fragments and
partly from the secret arcanum of the
hermetic sciences. For the sake of
clarity, the narrative form has been
chosen in preference to the original
dialogic style and obsolete words have
given place to those in current use.
Hermes while wandering in a rocky and
desolate place gave himself over to
meditation and prayer following the
secret instructions of the temple he
gradually freed his higher consciousness
from the bondage of his bodily senses
and thus released his divine nature
revealed to him the mysteries of the
transcendental spheres. He beheld a
figure terrible and all inspiring. It
was the great dragon with wings
stretching across the sky and light
streaming in all directions from its
body. The mysteries taught that the
universal life was personified as a
dragon. The great dragon called Hermes
by name and asked him why he thus
meditated upon the world mystery.
Terrified by the spectacle, Hermes
prostrated himself before the dragon,
beseeching it to reveal its identity.
The great creature answered that it was
poandras, the mind of the universe, the
creative intelligence and the absolute
emperor of all. Sh identifies poandras
as the god Osiris. Hermes then besought
poandras to disclose the nature of the
universe and the constitution of the
gods. The dragon acquiesed bidding
tismistice hold its image in his mind.
Immediately the form of poanders
changed. Where it had stood there was a
glorious and pulsating radiance. This
light was the spiritual nature of the
great dragon itself. Hermes was raised
into the midst of this divine eulgence
and the universe of material things
faded from his consciousness. Presently
a great darkness descended and expanding
swallowed up the light. Everything was
troubled. About Hermes swirled a
mysterious watery substance which gave
forth a smoke-like vapor. The air was
filled with inarticulate moanings and
sighings which seemed to come from the
light swallowed up in the darkness. His
mind told Hermes that it is doubtful
that the deity called Th by the
Egyptians was originally Hermes, but the
two personalities were blended together
and it is now impossible to separate
them. Th was called the lord of the
divine books and scribe of the company
of the gods. He is generally depicted
with the body of a man and the head of
an ibis. The exact symbolic meaning of
this latter bird has never been
discovered. A careful analysis of the
peculiar shape of the ibis, especially
its head and beak, should prove
illuminating. The light was the form of
the spiritual universe, and that the
swirling darkness which had engulfed it,
represented material substance. Then out
of the imprisoned light, a mysterious
and holy word came forth and took its
stand upon the smoking waters. this
word, the voice of the light rose out of
the darkness as a great pillar, and the
fire and the air followed after it, but
the earth and the water remained unmoved
below. Thus the waters of light were
divided from the waters of darkness, and
from the waters of light were formed the
worlds above, and from the waters of
darkness were formed the worlds below.
The earth and the water next mingled
becoming inseparable and the spiritual
word which is called reason moved upon
their surface causing endless turmoil.
Then again was heard the voice of
poanderas but his form was not revealed.
I thy God am the light. And the mind
which were before substance was divided
from spirit and darkness from light. And
the word which appeared as a pillar of
flame out of the darkness is the son of
God born of the mystery of the mind. The
name of that word is reason. Reason is
the offspring of thought and reason
shall divide the light from the darkness
and establish truth in the midst of the
waters. Understand, O Hermes, and
meditate deeply upon the mystery. That
which in you sees and hears is not of
the earth, but is the word of God
incarnate. So it is said that divine
light dwells in the midst of mortal
darkness and ignorance cannot divide
them. The union of the word and the mind
produces that mystery which is called
life. As the darkness without you is
divided against itself. So the darkness
within you is likewise divided. The
light and the fire which rise are the
divine man ascending in the path of the
word and that which fails. To ascend is
the mortal man which may not partake of
immortality. Learn deeply of the mind
and its mystery for therein lies the
secret of immortality. The dragon again
revealed its form to Hermes. And for a
long time the two looked steadfastly one
upon the other eye to eye. So that
Hermes trembled before the gaze of
Pouandress. At the word of the dragon
the heavens opened and the innumerable
light powers were revealed soaring
through cosmos. on pinions of streaming
fire. Hermes beheld the spirits of the
stars, the celestials controlling the
universe, and all those powers which
shine with the radiance of the one fire,
the glory of the sovereign mind. Hermes
realized that the sight which he beheld
was revealed to him only because
poandras had spoken a word. The word was
reason, and by the reason of the word,
invisible things were made, manifest.
Divine mind, the dragon continued its
discourse. Before the visible universe
was formed, its mold was cast. This mold
was called the archetype. And this
archetype was in the supreme mind long
before the process of creation began.
Beholding the archetypes, the supreme
mind became enamored with its own
thought. So taking the word as a mighty
hammer, it gouged out caverns in
primordial space and cast the form of
the spheres in the archetypal mold. at
the same time sewing in the newly
fashioned bodies the seeds of living
things. The darkness below receiving the
hammer of the word was fashioned into an
orderly universe. The elements separated
into straighta and each brought forth
living creatures. The supreme being the
mind male and female brought forth the
word and the word suspended between
light and darkness was delivered of
another mind called the workman, the
master builder or the maker of things.
In this manner it was accomplished. Oh
Hermes, the word moving like a breath
through space called forth the fire by
the friction of its motion. Therefore
the fire is called the sun of striving.
The workmen passed as a whirlwind
through the universe causing the
substances to vibrate and glow with its
friction. The son of striving thus
formed seven governors. The spirits of
the planets whose orbits bounded the
world. And the seven governors
controlled the world by the mysterious
power called destiny given them by the
fiery workmen. When the second mind, the
workman had organized chaos, the word of
God rose straightway out of its prison
of substance, leaving the elements
without reason and joined itself to the
nature of the fiery workmen. Then the
second mind together with the risen word
established itself in the midst of the
universe and whirled the wheels of the
celestial powers. This shall continue
from an infinite beginning to an
infinite end. For the beginning and the
ending are in the same place and state.
Then the downward turned and unreasoning
elements brought forth creatures without
reason. Substance could not bestow
reason for reason had ascended out of
it. The air produced flying things and
the waters such as swim. The earth
conceived strange 4-footed and creeping
beasts, dragons, composite demons, and
grotesque monsters. Then the father, the
supreme mind being light and life,
fashioned a glorious universal man in
its own image, not an earthly man, but a
heavenly man dwelling in the light of
God. The supreme mind loved the man it
had fashioned and delivered to him the
control of the creations and
workmanships. The man desiring to labor,
took up his abode in the sphere of
generation, and observed the works of
his brother, the second mind, which sat
upon the ring of the fire. And having
beheld the achievements of the fiery
workmen, he willed also to make things,
and his father gave permission. The
seven governors, of whose powers he
ptook, rejoiced, and each gave the man a
share of its own nature. The man longed
to pierce the circumference of the
circles and understand the mystery of
him who sat upon the eternal fire.
Having already all power, he stooped
down and peeped through the seven
harmonies and breaking through the
strength of the circles made himself
manifest to nature stretched out below.
The man looking into the depths smiled
for he beheld a shadow upon the earth
and a likeness mirrored in the waters
which shadow and likeness were a
reflection of himself. The man fell in
love with his own shadow and desired to
descend into it. Coincident with the
desire, the intelligent thing united
itself with the unreasoning image or
shape. Nature beholding the descent,
wrapped herself about the man whom she
loved, and the two were mingled. For
this reason, earthy man is composite.
Within him is the sky man, immortal and
beautiful. Without his nature, mortal
and destructible. Thus suffering is the
result of the immortal man's falling in
love with his shadow and giving up
reality to dwell in the darkness of
illusion. For being immortal, man has
the power of the seven governors also
the life, the light and the word. But
being mortal, he is controlled by the
rings of the governor's fate or destiny.
Of the immortal man, it should be said
that he is hermaphrodite or male and
female and eternally watchful. He
neither slumbers nor sleeps and is
governed by a father also both male and
female and ever watchful such as the
mystery kept hidden to this day. For
nature being mingled in marriage with
the sky man brought forth a wonder most
wonderful seven men all bisexual male
and female and upright of stature each
one exemplifying the natures of the
seven governors. These O Hermes are the
seven races species and wheels. After
this manner were the seven men
generated. Earth was the female element
and water the male element. And from the
fire and the ether they received their
spirits and nature produced bodies after
the species and shapes of men. And man
received the life and light of the great
dragon and of the life was made his soul
and of the light his mind. And so all
these composite creatures containing
immortality but partaking of mortality
continued in this state for the duration
of a period. They reproduced themselves
out of themselves, for each was male and
female. But at the end of the period,
they not of destiny was untied by the
will of God, and the bond of all things
was loosened. Then all living creatures,
including man, which had been
hermaphroditical, were separated, the
males, being set apart by themselves,
and the females likewise, according to
the dictates of reason. Then God spoke
to the holy word within the soul of all
things, saying, "Increase and in
increasing and multiply in multitudes,
all you my creatures and workmanships.
Let him that is endued with mind know
that the cause of death is the love of
the body. And let him learn all things
that are for he who has recognized
himself enters into the state of good."
The name Hermes is derived from Herm, a
form of Seahum, the personified
universal life principle generally
represented by fire. The Scandinavians
worshiped Hermes under the name of Odin,
the Tutans as Voton, and certain of the
Oriental peoples as Buddha or Eo. There
are two theories concerning his demise.
The first declares that Hermes was
translated like Enoch and carried
without death into the presence of God.
The second states that he was buried in
the valley of Eban and a great treasure
placed in his tomb not a treasure of
gold but of books and sacred learning.
The Egyptians likened humanity to a
flock of sheep. The supreme and
inconceivable father was the shepherd
and Hermes was the shepherd dog. The
origin of the shepherd's crook in
religious symbolism may be traced to the
Egyptian rituals. The three scepters of
Egypt include the shepherd's crook,
symbolizing that by virtue of the power
reposing in that symbolic staff, the
initiated pharaohs guided the destiny of
their people. And when God had said this
providence, with the aid of the seven
governors in harmony, brought the sexes
together, making the mixtures and
establishing the generations, and all
things were multiplied according to
their kind. He who through the error of
attachment loves his body abides
wandering in darkness sensible and
suffering the things of death. But he
who realizes that the body is but the
tomb of his soul rises to immortality.
Then Hermes desired to know why men
should be deprived of immortality for
the sin of ignorance alone. The great
dragon answered to the ignorant the body
is supreme and they are incapable of
realizing the immortality that is within
them knowing only the body which is
subject to death. They believe in death
because they worship that substance
which is the cause and reality of death.
Then Hermes asked how the righteous and
wise pass to God. To which Po Mandras
replied, "That which the word of God
said, say I." Because the father of all
things consists of life and light
whereof man is made. If therefore a man
shall learn and understand the nature of
life and light, then he shall pass into
the eternity of life and light. Hermes
next inquired about the road by which
the wise attained to life eternal and
poandrous continued let the man endued
with a mind mark consider and learn of
himself and with the power of his mind
divide himself from his notself and
become a servant of reality. Hermes
asked if all men did not have minds. And
the great dragon replied, "Take heed
what you say, for I am the mind, the
eternal teacher. I am the father of the
word, the redeemer of all men. And in
the nature of the wise, the word takes
flesh. By means of the word, the world
is saved." I thought, "Fil, the father
of the word, the mind come only unto men
that are holy and good, pure and
merciful, and that live piously and
religiously. and my presence is an
inspiration and a help to them. For when
I come, they immediately know all things
and adore the universal father. Before
such wise and philosophic ones die, they
learn to renounce their senses, knowing
that these are the enemies of their
immortal souls. I will not permit the
evil senses to control the bodies of
those who love me, nor will I allow evil
emotions and evil thoughts to enter
them. I become as a porter or doorkeeper
and shut out evil, protecting the wise
from their own lower nature. But to the
wicked, the envious, and the covetous, I
come not, for such cannot understand the
mysteries of mind. Therefore, I am
unwelcome. I leave them to the avenging
demon that they are making in their own
souls. For evil each day increases
itself and torments man more sharply and
each evil deed adds to the evil deeds
that are gone before until finally evil
destroys itself. The punishment of
desire is the agony of unfulfillment.
Hermes bowed his head in thankfulness to
the great dragon who had taught him so
much and begged to hear more concerning
the ultimate of the human soul. So
poandras resumed. At death the material
body of man is returned to the elements
from which it came and the invisible
divine man ascends to the source from
whence he came namely the eighth sphere.
The evil passes to the dwelling place of
the demon. And the senses, feelings,
desires, and body passions return to
their source, namely the seven governors
whose natures in the lower man destroy.
But in the envy, envis spiritual man
give life. After the lower nature has
returned to the brutishness, the higher
struggles again to regain its spiritual
estate. It ascends the seven rings upon
which sit the seven governors and
returns to each their lower powers. In
this manner upon the first ring sits the
moon and to it is returned the ability
to increase and diminish. Upon the
second ring sits Mercury and to it are
returned minations, deceit and
craftiness. Upon the third ring sits
Venus and to it are returned the lusts
and passions. Upon the fourth ring sits
the sun and to this Lord are returned
ambitions. Upon the fifth ring sits Mars
and to it are returned rashness and
profane boldness. Upon the sixth ring
sits Jupiter and to it are returned the
sense of accumulation and riches. And
upon the seventh ring sits Saturn at the
gate of chaos and to it are returned
falsehood and evil plotting. Then being
naked of all the accumulations of the
seven rings, the soul comes to the
eighth sphere, namely the ring of the
fixed stars. Here, freed of all
illusion, it dwells in the light and
sings praises to the father in a voice
which only the pure of spirit may
understand. Behold, O Hermes, there is a
great mystery in the eighth sphere, for
the Milky Way is the seed ground of
souls, and from it they drop into the
rings, and to the Milky Way they return
again from the wheels of Saturn. But
some cannot climb the seven rungid
ladder of the rings. So they wander in
darkness below and are swept into
eternity with the illusion of sense and
earthiness. The path to immortality is
hard and only a few find it. The rest
await the great day when the wheels of
the universe shall be stopped and the
immortal sparks shall escape from the
sheets of substance woe. Unto those who
wait, for they must return again,
unconscious and unknowing, to the seed
ground of stars, and await a new
beginning. Those who are saved by the
light of the mystery which I have
revealed unto you, oh Hermes, and which
I now bid you to establish among men,
shall return again to the Father, who
dwelleth in the white light, and shall
deliver themselves up to the light, and
shall be absorbed into the light, and in
the light they shall become powers in
God. This is the way of good, and is
revealed only to them that have wisdom.
Blessed art thou, oh son of light, to
whom of all men, I, poandras, the light
of the world, hath revealed myself. I
order you to go forth to become as a
guide to those who wander in darkness,
that all men within whom dwells the
spirit of my mind, the universal mind,
may be saved by my mind in you, which
shall call forth my mind in them.
Establish my mysteries, and they shall
not fail from the earth. For I am the
mind of the mysteries, and until mind
fails, which is never, my mysteries
cannot fail. With these parting words,
poandras, radiant with celestial light,
vanished, mingling with the powers of
the heavens, raising his eyes unto the
heavens, Hermes blessed the father of
all things, and consecrated his life to
the service of the great light. Thus
preached Hermes, "Oh people of the
earth, men born and made of the
elements, but with the spirit of the
divine man within you, rise from your
sleep of ignorance. Be sober and
thoughtful. Realize that your home is
not in the earth, but in the light. Why
have you delivered yourselves over unto
death, having power to partake of
immortality? Repent and change your
minds. Depart from the dark light, and
forsake corruption forever. Prepare
yourselves to climb through the seven
rings and to blend your souls with the
eternal light. Some who heard mocked and
scoffed and went their way, delivering
themselves to the second death from
which there is no salvation. But others,
casting themselves before the feet of
Hermes, besought him to teach them the
way of life. He lifted them gently,
receiving no appribation for himself and
staff in hand went forth teaching and
guiding mankind and showing them how
they might be saved. In the worlds of
men, Hermes swed the seeds of wisdom and
nourished the seeds with the immortal
waters. And at last came the evening of
his life, and as the brightness of the
light of earth was beginning to go down,
Hermes commanded his disciples to
preserve his doctrines in violet
throughout all ages. the vision of
poandras. He committed to writing that
all men desiring immortality might
therein find the way. In concluding his
exposition of the vision, Hermes wrote,
"The sleep of the body is the sober
watchfulness of the mind and the
shutting of my eyes reveals the true
light. My silence is filled with budding
life and hope and is full of good. My
words are the blossoms of fruit of the
tree of my soul. For this is the
faithful account of what I received from
my true mind, that is poandras, the
great dragon, the lord of the word,
through whom I became inspired by God
with the truth. Since that day my mind
has been ever with me, and in my own
soul it hath given birth to the word.
The word is reason, and reason hath
redeemed me. For which cause with all my
soul and all my strength, I give praise
and blessing unto God the Father, the
life and the light and the eternal good.
Holy is God, the Father of all things,
the one who is before the first
beginning. Holy is God whose will is
performed and accomplished by his own
powers which he hath given birth to out
of himself. Holy is God who has
determined that he shall be known and
who is known by his own to whom he
reveals himself. Holy art thou who by
thy word reason hast established all
things. Holy art thou of whom all nature
is the image. Holy art thou whom the
inferior nature has not formed. Holy art
thou who art stronger than all powers.
Holy art thou who art greater than all
excellency. Holy art thou who art better
than all praise. Accept these reasonable
sacrifices from a pure soul and a heart
stretched out unto thee. Oh thou
unspeakable, unutterable, to be praised
with silence. I beseech thee to look
mercifully upon me, that I may not heir
from the knowledge of thee, and that I
may enlighten those that are in
ignorance, thy brothers and thy sons.
Therefore I believe thee, and bear
witness unto thee, and depart in peace,
and in trustfulness into thy light and
life. Blessed art thou, oh father, the
man thou hast fashioned would be
sanctified with thee as thou hast given
him power to sanctify others with thy
word and thy truth. The vision of
Hermes, like nearly all of the hermetic
writings, is an allegorical exposition
of great philosophic and mystic truths,
and its hidden meaning may be
comprehended only by those who have been
raised into the presence of the true
mind. The initiation of the pyramid
supreme among the wonders of antiquity,
unrivaled by the achievements of later
architects and builders, the great
pyramid of Giz bears mute witness to an
unknown civilization which having
completed its predestined span passed
into oblivion. Eloquent in its silence,
inspiring in its majesty, divine in its
simplicity, the great pyramid is indeed
a sermon in stone. Its magnitude
overwhelms thee. puny sensibilities of
man among the shifting sands of time. It
stands as a fitting emblem of eternity
itself. Who were the illumined
mathematicians who planned its parts and
dimensions? The master craftsmen who
supervised its construction, the skilled
artisans who tred its blocks of stone.
The earliest and best known account of
the building of the great pyramid is
that given by that highly revered but
somewhat imaginative historian,
Herodotus. The pyramid was built in
steps battlement wise as it is called or
according to others altterwise. After
laying the stones for the base, they
raised the remaining stones to their
places by means of machines formed of
short wooden planks. The first machine
raised them from the ground to the top
of the first step. On this there was
another machine which received the stone
upon its arrival and conveyed it to the
second step once a third machine
advanced it still higher. Either they
had as many machines as there were steps
in the pyramid or possibly they had but
a single machine which being easily
moved was transferred from tier to tier
as the stone rose. Both accounts are
given and therefore I mention both the
upper portion of the pyramid was
finished first then the middle and
finally the part which was lowest and
nearest the ground. There is an
inscription in Egyptian characters on
the pyramid which records the quantity
of radishes, onions, and garlic consumed
by the laborers who constructed it. And
I perfectly well remember that the
interpreter who read the writing to me
said that the money expended in this way
was 1,600 talants of silver. If this
then is a true record, what a vast sum
must have been spent on the iron tools
used in the work and on the feeding and
clothing of the laborers, considering
the length of time the work lasted,
which has already been stated, 10 years,
and the additional time no small space,
I imagine, which must have been occupied
by the quarrying of the stones, their
conveyance, and the formation of the
underground apartments. While his
account is extremely colorful, it is
apparent that the father of history for
reasons which he doubtless considered
sufficient concocted a fraudulent story
to conceal the true origin and purpose
of the great pyramid. This is but one of
several instances in his writings which
would lead the thoughtful reader to
suspect that Herodotus himself was an
initiate of the sacred schools and
consequently obligated to preserve and
violate the secrets of the ancient
orders. The theory advanced by Herodotus
and now generally accepted that the
pyramid was the tomb of the pharaohs
cannot be substantiated. In fact,
Manitho, Eratostheines and Diodoris
siculus all differ from Herododus as
well as from each other regarding the
name of the builder of this supreme
edifice. The seul vault which according
to the Lepsius law of pyramid
construction should have been finished
at the same time as the monument or
sooner was never completed. There is no
proof that the building was erected by
the Egyptians, for the elaborate
carvings with which the burial chambers
of Egyptian royalty are almost
invariably ornamented are entirely
lacking, and it embodies none of the
elements of their architecture or
decoration such as inscriptions, images,
cartes, paintings, and other distinctive
features associated with dynastic
mortuary art. The only hieroglyphics to
be found within the pyramid are a few
builders marks sealed up in the chambers
of construction first opened by Howard
Vice. These apparently were painted upon
the stones before they were set in
position. For in a number of instances
the marks were either inverted or
disfigured by the operation of fitting
the blocks together. While Egyptologists
have attempted to identify the crude
dabs of paint as cartes of kops, it is
almost inconceivable that this ambitious
ruler would have permitted his royal
name to suffer such indignities. As the
most eminent authorities on the subject
are still uncertain as to the true
meaning of these crude markings,
whatever proof they might be that the
building was erected during the fourth
dynasty is certainly offset by the sea.
Shells at the base of the pyramid, which
Mr. gab advances as evidence that it was
erected before the deluj theory
substantiated by the muchabused Arabian
traditions. One Arabian historian
declared that the pyramid was built by
the Egyptian sages as a refuge against
the flood while another proclaimed it to
have been a treasure house of the
powerful antidoluvian king Shedad binad.
a panel of hieroglyphs over the entrance
which the casual observer might consider
to afford a solution of the mystery
unfortunately dates back no further than
AD 1843 having been cut at that time by
Dr. Lepsius as a tribute to the king of
Prussia. Caiff al-Mamman, an illustrious
descendant of the prophet inspired by
stories of the immense treasures sealed
within its depths, journeyed from
Baghdad to Cairo, AD 820, with a great
force of workmen to open the mighty
pyramid. When caiff al-Man first reached
the foot of the rock of ages and gazed
up at its smooth, glistening surface, a
tumult of emotions undoubtedly racked
his soul. The casing stones must have
been in place at the time of his visit,
for the caiff could find no indication
of an entrance for perfectly smooth
surfaces confronted him. Following vague
rumors, he set his followers to work on
the north side of the pyramid with
instructions to keep on cutting and
chiseling until they discovered
something. To the Muslims with their
crude instruments and vinegar, it was a
herculean effort to tunnel a full
hundred ft through the limestone. Many
times they were on the point of
rebellion. But the word of the caiff was
law and the hope of a vast fortune boyed
them up. At last on the eve of total
discouragement, fate came to their
rescue. A great stone was heard to fall.
Somewhere in the wall near the toiling
and disgruntled Arabs, pushing on toward
the sound with renewed enthusiasm, they
finally broke into the descending
passage which leads into the
subterranean chamber. They then chiseled
their way around the great stone port
cullis which had fallen into a position
barring their progress and attacked and
removed one after another the granite
plugs which for a while continued to
slide down the passage leading from the
queen's chamber above. Finally no more
blocks descended and the way was clear
for the followers of the prophet. But
where were the treasures? From room to
room the frantic workmen rushed looking
in vain for loot. The discontent of the
Muslims reached such a height that caiff
al-Maman who had inherited much of the
wisdom of his illustrious father, the
caiff al-rascad sent to Baghdad for
funds which he caused to be secretly
buried near the entrance of the pyramid.
He then ordered his men to dig at that
spot and great was there rejoicing when
the treasure was discovered. The workmen
being deeply impressed by the wisdom of
the antidoluvian monarch who had
carefully estimated their wages and
thoughtfully caused the exact amount to
be buried for their benefit. The caiff
then returned to the city of his fathers
and the great pyramid was left to the
mercy of succeeding generations. In the
9th century, the sun's rays striking the
highly polished surfaces of the original
casing stones caused each side of the
pyramid to appear as the Egyptian sphinx
is closely related to the Greek legend
of Edypus, who first solved the famous
riddle. Propounded by the mysterious
creature with the body of a winged lion
and the head of a woman which frequented
the highway leading to thieves. To each
who passed her lair, the Sphinx
addressed the question, "What animal is
it that in the morning goes on four
feet, at noon on two feet, and in the
evening on three feet. These who failed
to answer her riddle she destroyed."
Edypus declared the answer to be man
himself, who in childhood crawled upon
his hands and knees, in manhood stood
erect, and in old age shuffled along,
supporting himself by a staff.
Discovering one who knew the answer to
her riddle, the Sphinx cast herself from
the cliff which bordered the road and
perished. There is still another answer
to the riddle of the Sphinx. An answer
best revealed by a consideration of the
Pythagorean values of numbers. The four,
the two, and the three produce the sum
of nine, which is the natural number of
man, and also of the lower worlds. The
four represents the ignorant man, the
two the intellectual man, and the three
the spiritual man. Infant humanity walks
on four legs, evolving humanity on two
legs, and to the power of his own mind,
the redeemed and illumined Magus adds
the staff of wisdom. The Sphinx is
therefore the mystery of nature, the
embodiment of the secret doctrine, and
all who cannot solve her riddle perish.
To pass the Sphinx is to attain personal
immortality, a dazzling triangle of
light. Since that time, all but two of
these casing stones have disappeared.
Investigation has resulted in their
discovery recut and resurfaced in the
walls of Mohamadan mosques and palaces
in various parts of Cairo and its
environments. Pyramid problems. C. Patsy
Smith asks, "Was the great pyramid then
erected before the invention of
hieroglyphics and previous to the birth
of the Egyptian religion? Time may yet
prove that the upper chambers of the
pyramid were a sealed mystery before the
establishment of the Egyptian Empire in
the subterranean chamber, however, are
markings which indicate that the Romans
gained admission there in the light of
the secret philosophy of the Egyptian
initiates WW Harmon by a series of
extremely complicated yet exact
mathematical calculations determines
that the first ceremonial of the pyramid
was performed. 68,890
years ago on the occasion when the star
Vega for the first time sent its ray
down the descending passage into the
pit. The actual building of the pyramid
was accomplished in the period of from
10 to 15 years immediately preceding
this date. While such figures doubtless
will evoke the ridicule of modern
Egyptologists, they are based upon an
exhaustive study of the principles of
cidurial mechanics as incorporated into
the structure of the pyramid by its
initiated builders. If the casing stones
were in position at the beginning of the
9th century, the so-called erosion marks
upon the outside were not due to water.
The theory also that the salt upon the
interior stones of the pyramid is
evidence that the building was once
submerged is weakened by the scientific
fact that this kind of stone is subject
to exudations of salt. While the
building may have been submerged, at
least in part, during the many thousands
of years since its erection, the
evidence aduced to prove this point is
not conclusive. The Great Pyramid was
built of limestone and granite
throughout, the two kinds of rock being
combined in a peculiar and significant
manner. The stones were tred with the
utmost precision, and the cement used
was of such remarkable quality that it
is now practically as hard as the stone
itself. The limestone blocks were sawed
with bronze saws, the teeth of which
were diamonds or other jewels. The chips
from the stones were piled against the
north side of the plateau on which the
structure stands where they form. An
additional buttress to aid in supporting
the weight of the structure. The entire
pyramid is an example of perfect
orientation and actually squares the
circle. This last is accomplished by
dropping a vertical line from the apex
of the pyramid to its baseline. If this
vertical line be considered as the
radius of an imaginary circle, the
length of the circumference of such a
circle will be found to equal the sum of
the baselines of the four sides of the
pyramid. If the passage leading to the
king's chamber and the queen's chamber
was sealed up thousands of years before
the Christian era, those later admitted
into the pyramid mysteries must have
received their initiations in
subterranean galleries now unknown.
Without such galleries, there could have
been no possible means of ingress or
egress. Since the single surface
entrance was completely dosed with
casing stones, if not blocked by the
mass of the sphinx or concealed in some
part of that image, the secret entrance
may be either in one of the adjacent
temples or upon the sides of the
limestone plateau. Attention is called
to the granite plugs filling the
ascending passageway to the queen's
chamber. which caiff elmman was forced
practically to pulverize before he could
clear a way into the upper chambers.
Ciazi Smith notes that the positions of
the stones demonstrate that they were
set in place from above which made it
necessary for a considerable number of
workmen to depart from the upper
chambers. How did they do it? Smith
believes they descended through the well
C diagram dropping the rampstone into
place behind them. He further contends
that robbers probably used the well as a
means of getting into the upper
chambers. The rampstone having been set
in a bed of plaster. The robbers were
forced to break through it, leaving a
jagged opening. Mr. Dup prey, an
architect who has spent years
investigating the pyramids, differs from
Smith, however, in that he believes the
well itself to be a robber's hole being
the first successful attempt made to
enter the upper chambers from the
subterranean chamber. than the only open
section of the pyramid. Mr. Dup prey
bases his conclusion upon the fact that
the well is merely a rough hole in the
grotto and irregular chamber without any
evidence of the architectural precision
with which the remainder of the
structure was erected. The diameter of
the well also precludes the possibility
of it having been dug downward. It must
have been gouged out from below and the
grotto was necessary to supply air to
the thieves. It is inconceivable that
the pyramid builders would break one of
their own rampstones and leave its
broken surface in a gaping hole in the
sidewall of their otherwise perfect
gallery. If the well is a robber's hole,
it may explain why the pyramid was empty
when caiff al-Maman entered it and what
happened to the missing coffer lit. A
careful examination of the so-called
unfinished subterranean chamber, which
must have been the base of operations
for the robbers, might disclose traces
of their presence or show where they
piled the rubble, which must have
accumulated as a result of their
operations. While it is not entirely
clear by what entranced the robbers
reached the subterranean chamber, it is
improbable that they used the descending
passageway. There is a remarkable niche
in the north wall of the queen's chamber
which the guides glibly
pronounced to be a shrine. The general
shape of this niche, however, with its
walls converging by a series of overlaps
like those of the grand gallery would
indicate that originally it had been
intended as a passageway. Efforts made
to explore this niche have been
non-productive. But Mr. Dup prey
believes in entrance to exist here
through which if the well did not exist
at the time the workmen made their exit
from the pyramid after dropping the
stone plugs into the ascending gallery.
Biblical scholars have contributed a
number of most extraordinary conceptions
regarding the great pyramid. This
ancient edifice has been identified by
them as Joseph's granary despite its
hopelessly inadequate capacity as the
tomb prepared for the unfortunate
pharaoh of the exodus who could not be
buried there because his body was never
recovered from the Red Sea and finally
as a perpetual confirmation of the
infallibility of the numerous prophecies
contained in the authorized version the
Sphinx. Although the Great Pyramid, as
Ignatius Donnelly has demonstrated, is
patterned after an antidoluvian type of
architecture, examples of which are to
be found in nearly every part of the
world, the Sphinx, who is typically
Egyptian. The steel between its paws
states, "The Sphinx is an image of the
sun god. Hermakis, which was evidently
made in the similitude of the pharaoh
during whose reign it was chiseled. The
statue was restored and completely
excavated by Tahutmies for as the result
of a vision in which the god had
appeared and declared himself oppressed
by the weight of the sand about his
body. The broken beard of the sphinx was
discovered during excavations between
the front paws. The steps leading up to
the sphinx and also the temple and altar
between the paws are much later
additions probably Roman for it is known
that the Romans reconstructed many
Egyptian antiquities. The shallow
depression in the crown of the head,
once thought to be the terminus of a
closed up passageway leading from the
Sphinx to the Great Pyramid, was merely
intended to help support a headdress now
missing. Metal rods have been driven
into the Sphinx in a vain effort to
discover chambers or passages within its
body. The major part of the Sphinx is a
single stone, but the front paws have
been built up of smaller stones. The
sphinx is about 200 ft long, 70 ft high,
and 38 ft wide across the shoulders. The
main stone from which it was carved is
believed by some to have been
transported from distant quaries by
methods unknown, while others asserted
to be native rock, possibly an
outcropping somewhat, resembling the
form into which it was later carved. The
theory once advanced that both the
pyramid and the sphinx were built from
artificial stones made on the spot, has
been abandoned. A careful analysis of
the limestone shows it to be composed of
small sea creatures called mumulites.
The popular supposition that the sphinx
was the true portal of the great pyramid
while it survives with surprising
tenacity has never been substantiated.
P. Christian presents this theory as
follows basing it in part upon the
authority of ambleus. The Sphinx of Giz
says the author of the trait demysters
served as the entrance to the sacred
subterranean chambers in which the
trials of the initiate were undergone.
This entrance obstructed in our day by
sands and rubbish may still be traced
between the four legs of the crouched
colossus. It was formerly closed by a
bronze gate whose secret spring could be
operated only by the magi. It was
guarded by public respect, and a sort of
religious fear maintained its
inviability better than armed.
Protection would have done. In the belly
of the Sphinx were cutout galleries
leading to the subterranean, part of the
great pyramid. These galleries were so
artfully crisscrossed along their course
to the pyramid that in setting forth
into the passage without a guide through
this network, one ceaselessly and
inevitably returned to the starting
point. See Histo.
Unfortunately, the bronze door referred
to cannot be found, nor is there any
evidence that it ever existed. The
passing centuries have wrought many
changes in the colossus, however, in the
original opening may have been closed.
Nearly all students of the subject
believe that subterranean chambers exist
beneath the Great Pyramid. Robert
Ballard writes, "The priests of the
pyramids of Lake Moeris had their vast
subterranean residences. It appears to
me more than probable that those of Giz
were similarly provided. And I may go
further. Out of these very caverns may
have been excavated the limestone of
which the pyramids were built in the
bowels of the limestone ridge on which
the great pyramid stands upon a
limestone plateau at the base of which
according to ancient history the Nile
once flooded. Thus supplying a method
for the huge blocks used in its
construction. Presuming that the
capstone as originally in place, the
pyramid is according to John Taylor in
round figures 486 ft high, the base of
each side is 764 ft long and the entire
structure covers a ground area of more
than 13 acres. The Great Pyramid is the
only one in the group at Giz. In fact,
as far as known, the only one in Egypt
that has chambers within the actual body
of the pyramid itself. For this reason,
it is said to refute the Lepsius law,
which asserts that each of these
structures is a monument raised over a
subterranean chamber in which a ruler is
intombed. The pyramid contains four
chambers, which in the diagram are
lettered K, H, F, and O. The king's
chamber K is an oblong apartment 39 ft
long, 17 felt wide, and 19 ft high.
disregarding fractional parts of a foot
in each case with a flat roof consisting
of nine great stones, the largest in the
pyramid. Above the king's chamber are
five low compartments, L generally
termed construction chambers. In the
lowest of these, the so-called
hieroglyphs of the pharaoh kios are
located. The roof of the fifth
construction chamber is peaked. At the
end of the king's chamber opposite the
entrance stands the famous sarcophagus
or coffer I and behind it is a shallow
opening that was dug in the hope of
discovering valuables. Two air vents MN
passing through the entire body of the
pyramid ventilate the king's chamber in
itself. This is sufficient to establish
that the building was not intended for a
tomb. Between the upper end of the grand
gallery GG and the king's chamber is a
small antichamber H. Its extreme length
9 ft, its extreme width 5 ft, and its
extreme height 12 ft with its walls
grooved far purposes. Now unknown. In
the groove nearest the Grand Gallery is
a slab of stone in two sections with a
peculiar boss or knob protruding about
an inch from the surface of the upper
part facing the Grand Gallery. This
stone does not reach to the floor of the
Anda chamber, and those entering the
king's chamber must pass under the slab.
From the King's Chamber, the Grand
Gallery, 157 ft in length, 28 feet in
height, 7 feet in width at its widest
point, and decreasing to 3 and 1/2 ft as
the result of seven converging overlaps
of the stones forming the walls descends
to a little above the level of the
queen's chamber. Here, a gallery E
branches off, passing mere than 100 ft
back towards the center of the pyramid
and opening into the queen's chamber F.
The queen's chamber is 19 ft long, 17 ft
wide, and 20 ft high. Its roof is peaked
and composed of great slabs of stone.
Air passage is not shown lead from the
queen's chamber, but these were not open
originally. In the east wall of the
queen's chamber is a peculiar niche of
gradually converging stone which in all
likelihood may prove to be a new lost
entrance way. At the point where the
grand gallery ends and the horizontal
passage towards the queen's chamber
begins is the entrance to the well and
also the opening leading down the first
descending passage D to the point where
this passage meets the descending
passage A leading from the outer wall of
the pyramid down to the subterranean
chamber. After descending 59 ft down the
well P the grotto is reached. Continuing
through the floor of the grotto, the
well leads downward 133 ft to the
descending entrance passage A, which it
meets a short distance before this
passage becomes horizontal and leads
into the subterranean chamber. The
subterranean chamber O is about 46 ft
long and 27 ft wide, but is extremely
low. the ceiling varying in height from
a little over three feet to about 13
feet from the rough and apparently
unfinished floor. From the south side of
the subterranean chamber, a low tunnel
runs about 50 ft and then meets a blank
wall. These constitute the only known
openings in the pyramid with the
exception of a few niches, exploration
holes, blind passages, and the rambling
cavernous tunnel bun out by the Muslims
under the leadership of the prophets
descendant caiff al-Maman
the pyramids are built will yet be
found. I feel convinced ample
information as to their uses. A good
diamond drill with two or 300 ft of rods
is what is wanted to test this and the
solidarity of the pyramids at the same
time. See the solution of the pyramid
problem. Mr. Ballard's theory of
extensive underground apartments and
quaries brings up an important problem
in architectonics. The pyramid builders
were too far-sighted to endanger the
permanence of the great pyramid by
placing over 5 million tons of limestone
and granite on any but a solid
foundation. It is therefore reasonably
certain that such chambers or
passageways as may exist beneath the
building are relatively insignificant
like those within the body of the
structure which occupy less than 11600th
of the cubic contents of the pyramid.
The sphinx was undoubtedly erected for
symbolical purposes at the instigation
of the priestcraft. The theory is that
the Urius upon its forehead was
originally the finger of an immense
sundial and that both the pyramid and
the sphinx were used to measure time,
the seasons, and the precession of the
equinoxes are ingenious but not wholly
convincing. If this great creature was
erected to obliterate the ancient
passageway leading into the subterranean
temple of the pyramid, its symbolism
would be most appropriate in comparison
with the overwhelming size and dignity
of the great pyramid. The sphinx is
almost insignificant. Its battered face,
upon which may still be seen vestigages
of the red paint with which the figure
was originally covered, is disfigured
beyond recognition. Its nose was broken
off by a fanatical lest the
followers of the prophet be led into
idolatry. The very nature of its
construction and the present repairs
necessary to prevent the head from
falling off indicate that it could not
have survived the great periods of time
which have elapsed since the erection of
the pyramid. To the Egyptians, the
sphinx was the symbol of strength and
intelligence. It was portrayed as
androgynous to signify that they
recognize the initiates and gods as
partaking of both the positive and
negative creative powers. Gerald Massie
writes, "This is the secret of the
Sphinx. The Orthodox Sphinx of Egypt is
masculine in front and feminine behind.
So is the image of Satyon, a type of
horn and tail, male in front and female
behind. The pharaohs who wore the tail
of the lioness or cow behind them were
male in front and female behind. Like
the gods they included the dual totality
of being in one person born of the
mother but of both sexes as the child.
See the natural genesis. Most
investigators have ridiculed the sphinx
and without even daining to investigate
the great colossus have turned their
attention to the more overwhelming
mystery of the pyramid. The pyramid
mysteries. The word pyramid is popularly
supposed to be derived from pi ao fire
thus signifying that it is the symbolic
representation of the one divine flame
the life of every creature. John Taylor
believes the word pyramid to mean a
measure of wheat while c pati smith
favors the copic meaning a division into
10. The initiates of old accepted the
pyramid form as the ideal symbol of both
the secret doctrine and those
institutions established for its
dissemination. Both pyramids and mounds
are antetypes of the holy mountain or
high place of god which was believed to
stand in the midst of the earth. John P.
Lundy relates the great pyramid to the
fabled Olympus further assuming that its
subterranean passages correspond to the
tortuous byways of hades. The square
base of the pyramid is a constant
reminder that the house of wisdom is
firmly founded upon nature and her
immutable laws. The Gnostics writes
Albert Pike claimed that the whole
edifice of their science rested on a
square whose angles were sigma oda
silence betaupsilon theta profoundity
newupsilon
intelligence and alpha lambda the
epsilon iota alpha truth see morals and
dogma the sides of the great pyramid
face the four cardinal angles the latter
signifying according to alifa's levi the
extremities of heat and cold south and
north and the extremities of light and
darkness, east and west. The base of the
pyramid further represents the four
material elements or substances from the
combinations of which the quadinary body
of man is formed. From each side of the
square, there rises a triangle typifying
the three-fold divine being enthroned
within every quadinary material nature.
If each baseline be considered a square
from which ascends a three-fold
spiritual power, then the sum of the
lines of the four faces 12 and the four
hypothetical squares 16 constituting the
base is 28, the sacred number of the
lower world. If this be added to the
three septenies composing the sun, 21,
it equals 49, the square of 7 and the
number of the universe. The 12 signs of
the zodiac like the governors of the
lower worlds are symbolized by the 12
lines of the four triangles. The faces
of the pyramid. In the midst of each
face is one of the beasts of Ezekiel and
the structure as a whole becomes the
cherubam. The three main chambers of the
pyramid are related to the heart, the
brain and the generative system. The
spiritual centers of the human
constitution. The triangular form of the
pyramid also is similar to the posture
assumed by the body during the ancient
meditative exercises. The mysteries
taught that the divine energies from the
gods descended upon the top of the
pyramid which was likened to an inverted
tree with its branches below and its
roots at the apex. From this inverted
tree, the divine wisdom is disseminated
by streaming down the diverging sides
and radiating throughout the world. The
size of the capstone of the Great
Pyramid cannot be accurately determined.
For while most investigators have
assumed that it was once in place, no
vestage of it now remains. There is a
curious tendency among the builders of
great religious edififices to leave
their creations unfinished, thereby
signifying that God alone is complete.
The capstone if it existed was itself a
miniature pyramid the apex of which
again would be capped by a smaller block
of similar shape and so on at infinitum.
The capstone therefore is the epitome of
the entire structure. Thus the pyramid
may be likened to the universe and the
capstone to man following the chain of
analogy. The mind is the capstone of
man, the spirit the capstone of the mind
and God the epitome of the whole the
capstone of the spirit. As a rough and
unfinished block, man is taken from the
quarry and by the secret culture of the
mysteries, gradually transformed into a
shrewd and perfect pyramidal capstone.
The temple is complete only when the
initiate himself becomes the living apex
through which the divine power is
focused into the diverging structure
below. W Marshamadams calls the great
pyramid the house of the hidden places.
Such indeed it was for it represented
the inner sanctuary of pre-Egyptian
wisdom by the Egyptians. The great
pyramid was associated with Hermes, the
god of wisdom and letters and the divine
illuminator worshiped through the planet
Mercury. Relating Hermes to the pyramid
emphasizes and knew the fact that it was
in reality the supreme temple of the
invisible and supreme deity. The great
pyramid was not a lighthouse, an
observatory or a tomb, but the first
temple of the mysteries, the first
structure erected as a repository for
those secret truths which are the
certain foundation of all arts and
sciences. It was the perfect emblem of
the microcosm and the macrocosm and
according to the secret teachings, the
tomb of Osiris, the black god of the
Nile. Osiris represents a certain
manifestation of solar energy and
therefore his house or tomb is
emblematic of the universe within which
he is entombmed and upon the cross of
which he is crucified through the mystic
passageways and chambers of the great
pyramid past the illumined of antiquity.
They entered its portals as men. They
came forth as gods. It was the place of
the second birth, the womb of the
mysteries and wisdom dwelt in it as God
dwells in the hearts of men. Somewhere
in the depths of its recesses, there
resided an unknown being who was called
the initiator or the illustrious one
robed in blue and gold and bearing in
his hand the seven-fold key of eternity.
This was the lion-faced hierofphant, the
holy one, the master of masters, who
never left the house of wisdom, and whom
no man ever saw save he who had passed
through the gates of preparation and
purification. It was in these chambers
that Plato he of the broadbrow came face
to face with the wisdom of the ages
personified in the master of the hidden
house. Who was the master dwelling in
the mighty pyramid, the many rooms of
which signified the worlds in space, the
master whom none might behold save those
who had been born again. He alone fully
knew the secret of the pyramid, but he
has departed the way of the wise, and
the house is empty. The hymns of praise
no longer echo in muffled tones through
the chambers. The neophite no longer
passes through the elements and wanders
among the seven stars. The candidate no
longer receives the word of life from
the lips of the eternal one. Nothing now
remains that the eye of man can see but
an empty shell. The outer symbol of an
inner truth and men call the house of
God a tomb. The technique of the
mysteries was unfolded by the sage
illuminator, the master of the secret
house. The power to know his guardian
spirit was revealed to the new initiate.
The method of disentangling his material
body from his divine vehicle was
explained and to consummate the magnum
opus there was revealed the divine name.
The secret and unutterable designation
of the supreme deity by the very
knowledge of which man and his god are
made consciously one. With the giving of
the name, the new initiate became
himself a pyramid within the chambers of
whose soul numberless other human beings
might also receive spiritual
enlightenment. In the king's chamber was
enacted the drama of the second death.
Here the candidate after being crucified
upon the cross of the solstesses and the
equinoxes was buried in the great
coffer. There is a profound mystery to
the atmosphere and temperature of the
king's chamber. It is of a peculiar
death-like cold which cuts to the marrow
of the bone. This room was a doorway
between the material world and the
transcendental spheres of nature. While
his body lay in the coffer, the soul of
the nephite soared as a human-headed
hawk through the celestial realms there
to discover firsthand the eternity of
life, light, and truth as well as the
illusion of death, darkness, and sin.
Thus, in one sense, the great pyramid
may be likened to a gate through which
the ancient priests permitted a few to
pass toward the attainment of individual
completion. It is also to be noted,
incidentally, that if the coffer in the
king's chamber be struck, the sound
emitted has no counterpart in any known
musical scale. This tonal value may have
formed part of that combination of
circumstances which rendered the king's
chamber an ideal, setting for the
confirmment of the highest degree of the
mysteries. The modern world knows little
of these ancient rights. The scientist
and the theologian alike gaze upon the
sacred structure, wondering what
fundamental urge inspired the herculean
labor. If they would but think for a
moment, they would realize that there is
only one urge in the soul of man capable
of supplying the required incentive,
namely the desire to know, to
understand, and to exchange the
narrowness of human mortality for the
greater breadth and scope of divine
enlightenment. Sman say of the great
pyramid that it is the most perfect
building in the world the source of
weights and measures the original Noah's
ark the origin of languages alphabets
and scales of temperature and humidity
few realize however that it is the
gateway to the eternal though the modern
world may know a million secrets the
ancient world knew one and that one was
greater than the million for the million
secrets breed death
sorrow selfishness lust and avarice. But
the one secret confers life, light, and
truth. The time will come when the
secret wisdom shall again be the
dominating religious and philosophical
urge of the world. The day is at hand
when the doom of dogma shall be sounded.
The great theological tower of Babel
with its confusion of tongues was built
of bricks of mud and the mortar of
slime. Out of the cold ashes of lifeless
creeds, however, shall rise phoenix-like
the ancient mysteries. No other
institution has so completely satisfied
the religious aspirations of humanity.
For since the destruction of the
mysteries, there never has been a
religious code to which Plato could have
subscribed. The unfolding of man's
spiritual nature is as much an exact.
Science as astronomy, medicine or
juristprudence. To accomplish this in
religions were primarily established and
out of religion have come science,
philosophy and logic as methods whereby
this divine purpose might be realized.
The dying god shall rise again. The
secret room in the house of the hidden
places shall be rediscovered. The
pyramid again shall stand as the ideal
emblem of solidarity, inspiration,
aspiration, resurrection, and
regeneration. As the passing sands of
time bury civilization upon civilization
beneath, there wait. The pyramid shall
remain as the visible covenant between
eternal wisdom and the world. The time
may yet come when the chance of the
illumined shall be heard once more in
its ancient passageways. And the master
of the hidden house shall await in the
silent place for the coming of that man
who casting aside the fallacies of dogma
and tenet seeks simply truth and will be
satisfied with neither substitute nor
counterfeit. Isis the virgin of the
world. It is especially fitting that a
study of hermetic symbolism should begin
with a discussion of the symbols and
attributes of the citic Isis. This is
the Isis of Seais famous for the
inscription concerning her which
appeared on the front of her temple in
that city. I Isis am all that has been
that is or shall be no mortal man hath
ever me unveiled. Plutarch affirms that
many ancient authors believe this
goddess to be the daughter of Hermes.
Others held the opinion that she was the
child of Prometheus. Both of these
demigods were noted for their divine
wisdom. It is not improbable that her
kinship to them is merely allegorical.
Plutarch translates the name Isis to
mean wisdom. Godfrey Higgins in his
anacalypsis derives the name of Isis
from the Hebrew ISO and the Greek Zomega
Omega to save. Some authorities however
for example Richard Payne knight as
stated in his symbolical language of
ancient art and mythology believe the
word to be of northern extraction
possibly Scandinavian or Gothic. In
these languages the name is pronounced
isa meaning ice or water in its most
passive crystallized negative state.
This Egyptian deity under many names
appears as the principle of natural
ficundity among nearly all the religions
of the ancient world. She was known as
the goddess with 10,000 Appalachians and
was metamorphosed by Christianity into
the Virgin Mary for Isis although she
gave birth to all living things chief
among them the son still remained a
virgin according to the legendary
accounts. Apulus in the 11th book of the
golden ass ascribes to the goddess the
following statement concerning her
powers and attributes. Behold asterisk
asterisk I moved by thy prayers am
present with thee. I who am nature, the
parent of things, the queen of all the
elements, the primordial progeny of
ages, the supreme of divinities, the
sovereign of the spirits of the dead,
the first of the celestials, and the
uniform resemblance of gods and
goddesses. I who rule by my nod the
luminous summits of the heavens, the
cubrious breezes of the sea and the
deplorable silences of the realms
beneath and whose one divinity. The
whole orb of the earth venerates under a
manifold form by different rights and a
variety of appellations. Hence the
primogenial friians call me pessanica
the mother of the gods the attic
aboriges cropian manurva the floating
cyprians pathian venus the arrowbearing
cretins diana dicta the three- tonged
Sicilians stigian proerine and the
elucinians the ancient goddess series
some also call me Juno others Balona
others he and others Ramnujia and those
who are illuminated by the incipient
rays of that divinity the son when he
rises. Viz, the Ethiopians, the REI, and
the Egyptians skilled in ancient
learning, worshiping me by ceremonies.
Perfectly appropriate. Call me by my
true name, Queen Isis. Lu Planin
believes that the Egyptian myth of Isis
had a historical basis among the Mayas
of Central America, where this goddess
was known as Queen Moo. In Prince Co.,
the same author finds a correspondence
to Osiris, the brother husband of Isis.
Luplonjin's theory is that Mayan
civilization was far more ancient than
that of Egypt. After the death of Prince
Co, his widow, Queen Mu, fleeing to
escape the wrath of his murderers sought
refuge among the Mayan colonies in Egypt
where she was accepted as their queen
and was given the name of Isis. While
Luplangen may be right, the possible
historical queen sinks into
insignificance when compared with the
allegorical symbolic world virgin. And
the fact that she appears among so many
different races and peoples discredits
the theory that she was a historical
individual. According to Sexus
Empiricus, the Trojan War was fought
over a statue of the moon goddess. For
this lunar Helena and not for a woman,
the Greeks and Trojans struggled at the
gates of Troy. Several authors have
attempted to prove that Isis, Osiris,
Typhon, Nephus, and Auris, Thor or
Mercury were grandchildren of the great
Jewish patriarch Noah by his son Ham.
But as the story of Noah and his ark is
a cosmic allegory concerning the
repopulation of planets at the beginning
of each world period, this only makes it
less likely that they were historical
personages. According to Robert Flood,
the sun has three properties, life,
light, and heat. These three vivify and
vitalize the three worlds, spiritual,
intellectual, and material. Therefore,
it is said from one light, three lights,
I, e, the first three, master masons. In
all probability, Osiris represents the
third or material aspect of solar
activity which by its beneficent
influences vitalizes and enliven the
flora and fauna of the earth. Osiris is
not the sun, but the sun is symbolic of
the vital principle of nature which the
ancients knew as Osiris. His symbol
therefore was an opened eye in honor of
the great eye of the universe, the sun,
opposed to the active radiant principle
of impregnating fire, here in motion was
the passive receptive principle of
nature. Modern science has proved that
forms ranging in magnitude from solar
systems to atoms are composed of
positive radiant nuclei surrounded by
negative bodies that exist upon the
emanations of the central life. From
this allegory, we have the story of
Solomon and his wives. For Solomon is
the sun and his wives and concubines are
the planets, moons, asteroids, and other
receptive bodies within his house. The
solar mansion Isis represented in the
Song of Solomon by the dark maid of
Jerusalem is symbolic of receptive
nature. The watery maternal principle
which creates all things out of herself
after impregnation has been achieved by
the verility of the sun. In the ancient
world, the year had 360 days. The five
extra days were gathered together by the
god of cosmic intelligence to serve as
the birthdays of the five gods and
goddesses who are called the sons and
daughters of Ham. Upon the first of
these special days, Osiris was born and
upon the fourth of the Misesus. The
number four shows the relation that this
goddess bears to the earth and its
elements. Typhon, the Egyptian demon or
spirit of the adversary, was born upon
the third day. Typhon is often
symbolized by a crocodile. Sometimes his
body is a combination of crocodile and
hog. Isis stands for knowledge and
wisdom. And according to Plutarch, the
word typhon means insolence and pride.
Egotism, self-centeredness, and pride
are the deadly enemies of understanding
and truth. This part of the allegory is
revealed after Osiris here symbolized as
the son had become king of Egypt and had
given to his people the full advantage
of his intellectual light. He continued
his path through the heavens visiting
the peoples of other nations and
converting all with whom he came in
contact. Plutarch further asserts that
the Greeks recognized in Osiris the same
person whom they revered under the names
of Dionis and Bakus. While he was away
from his country, his brother Typhon,
the evil one, like the Loki of
Scandinavia, plotted against the son god
to destroy him. Gathering 72 persons as
fellow conspirators, he attained his
nefarious end in a most subtle manner.
He had a wonderful ornamented box made
just the size of the body of Osiris.
This he brought into a banquet hall
where the gods and goddesses were
feasting together. All admired the
beautiful chest and Typhon promised to
give it to the one whose body fitted it
most perfectly. One after another laid
down in the box. But in disappointment,
Diodoris writes of a famous inscription
carved on a column at Nissa in Arabia
wherein ISIS described herself as
follows. I am Isis, queen of this
country. I was instructed by Mercury. No
one can destroy the laws which I have
established. I am the eldest daughter of
Saturn, most ancient of the gods. I am
the wife and sister of Osiris. The king
I first made known to mortals the use of
wheat. I am the mother of Orus the king.
In my honor was the city of Bubaste
built. Rejoice, O Egypt. Rejoice land
that gave me birth. See morals and dogma
by Albert Pike rose again until at last
Osiris also tried. The moment he was in
the chest, Typhon and his accompllices
nailed the cover down and sealed the
cracks with molten lead. They then cast
the box into the Nile down which it
floated to the sea. Plutarch states that
the date upon which this occurred was
the 17th day of the month after when the
sun was in the constellation of Scorpio.
This is most significant for the
scorpion is the symbol of treachery. The
time when Osiris entered the chest was
also the same season that Noah entered
the ark to escape from the deluge.
Plutarch further declares that the pans
and sats the nature spirits and
elementals first discovered that Osiris
had been murdered. These immediately
raised an alarm and from this incident
the word panic meaning fright or
amazement of the multitudes originated.
Isis upon receiving the news of her
husband's murder which she learned from
some children who had seen the murderers
making off with the box at once robed
herself in mourning and started forth in
quest of him. At length, Isis discovered
that the chest had floated to the coast
of Biblo. There it had lodged in the
branches of a tree, which in a short
time miraculously grew up around the
box. This so amazed the king of that
country that he ordered the tree to be
cut down and a pillar made from its
trunk to support the roof of his palace.
Isis visiting Biblo recovered the body
of her husband but it was again stolen
by Typhon who cut it into 14 parts which
he scattered all over the earth. Isis in
despair began gathering up the severed
remains of her husband but found only 13
pieces. The 14th part the fallus she
reproduced in gold for the original had
fallen into the river Nile and had been
swallowed by a fish. Typhon was later
slain in battle by the son of Osiris.
Some of the Egyptians believed that the
souls of the gods were taken to heaven
where they shone forth as stars. It was
supposed that the soul of Isis gleamed
from the dog star while Typhon became
the constellation of the bear. It is
doubtful, however, whether this idea was
ever generally accepted. Among the
Egyptians, Isis is often represented
with a headdress consisting of the empty
throne sheriff, her murdered husband.
And this peculiar structure was accepted
during certain dynasties as her
hieroglyphic. The headdresses of the
Egyptians have great symbolic and
emblematic importance. Four. They
represent the oric bodies of the
superhuman intelligences and are used in
the same way that the nimbus halo and
oral are used in Christian religious
art. Frank C. Higgins, a well-known
Masonic symbolist, has astutely noted
that the ornate headgearss of certain
gods and pharaohs are inclined backward
at the same angle as the earth's axis.
The robes, insignia, jewels, and
ornamentations of the ancient
hierofphants symbolize the spiritual
energies radiating from the human body.
Modern sciences rediscovering many of
the lost secrets of hermetic philosophy.
One of these is the ability to gauge the
mental development, the soul qualities,
and the physical health of an individual
from the streamers of semi-visible
electric force which pour through the
surface of the skin of every human being
at all times during his life. For
details concerning a scientific process
for making the oric emanations visible,
see the human atmosphere by Dr. Walter
J. Kilner. Isis is sometimes symbolized
by the head of a cow. Occasionally the
entire animal is her symbol. The first
gods of the Scandinavians were licked
out of blocks of ice by the mother cow
Adhumla who symbolized the principle of
natural nutrient and ficundity because
of her milk. Occasionally Isis is
represented as a bird. She often carries
in one hand the crux and sada the symbol
of eternal life and in the other the
flowered scepter symbolic of her
authority. Th Hermes Tismagist, the
founder of Egyptian learning, the wise
man of the ancient world, gave to the
priests and philosophers of antiquity
the secrets which have been preserved to
this day in myth and legend. These
allegorories and emblematic figures
conceal the secret formula for
spiritual, mental, moral, and physical
regeneration commonly known as the
mystic chemistry of the soul, alchemy.
These sublime truths were communicated
to the initiates of the mystery schools.
but were concealed from the profane. The
latter, unable to understand the
abstract philosophical tenets, worshiped
the concrete sculptured idols which were
emblematic of these secret truths. The
wisdom and secrecy of Egypt are
epitomized in the Sphinx which has
preserved its secret from the seekers of
a hundred generations. The mysteries of
hermeticism, the great spiritual truths
hidden from the world by the ignorance
of the world, and the keys of the secret
doctrines of the ancient philosophers
are all symbolized by the Virgin Isis.
Veiled from head to foot, she reveals
her wisdom only to the tried and
initiated few who have earned the right
to enter her sacred presence. Tear from
the veiled figure of nature its shroud
of obscurity, and stand face to face
with the divine reality. The
explanations in these pages of the
symbols peculiar to the virgin Isis are
based unless otherwise noted on
selections from a free translation of
the fourth book of biblotech defiliz
hermitics entitled the hermetical
signification of the symbols and
attributes of Isis with interpolations
by the compiler to amplify and clarify
the text. The statues of Isis were
decorated with the sun, moon, and stars
and many emblems pertaining to the earth
over which Isis was believed to rule as
the guardian spirit of nature
personified. Several images of the
goddess have been found upon which the
marks of her dignity and position were
still intact. According to the ancient
philosophers, she personified universal
nature, the mother of all productions.
The deity was generally represented as a
partly nude woman, often pregnant,
sometimes loosely covered with a garment
either of green or black color or of
four different shades intermingled
black, white, yellow, and red. Apulus
describes her as follows. In the first
place, then her most copious and long
hairs being gradually intorred and
promiscuously scattered on her divine
neck were softly defluous. a multifiform
crown consisting of various flowers
bound the sublime summit of her head and
in the middle of the crown just on her
forehead there was a smooth orb
resembling a mirror or rather a white
reulgent light which indicated that she
was the moon vipers rising up after the
manner of furos environment the crown on
the right hand and on the left and
serillian ears of corn were also
extended from above her garment was of
many colors and woven from the finest
flax and was at one time lucid with a
white splendor at another yellow from
the flower of crocus, and at another
flaming with a rosy redness, but that
which most excessively dazzled my sight,
was a very black robe, folded with a
dark splendor, and which spreading round
and passing under her right side, and
ascending to her left shoulder, there
rose pertuberant like the center of a
shield, the dependent part of the robe,
falling in many folds, and having small
knots of fringe, gracefully flowing in
its extremities. Glittering stars were
dispersed through the embroidered border
of the robe and through the whole of its
surface and the full moon shining in the
middle of the stars breathed forth
flaming fires. Nevertheless, a crown
wholly consisting of flowers and fruits
of every kind adhered with indivisible
connection to the border of that
conspicuous robe in all its undulating
motions. What she carried in her hands
also consisted of things of a very
different nature. For her right hand
indeed bore a brazen rattle cyrum
through the narrow lamina of which bent
like a belt. Certain rods passing
produced a sharp triple sound through
the vibrating motion of her arm. An
oblong vessel in the shape of a boat
depended from her left hand on the
handle of which in that part in which it
was conspicuous. and ASP raised its
erect head and largely swelling neck and
shoes woven from the leaves of the
victorious palm tree covered her
immortal feet. The green color alludes
to the vegetation which covers the face
of the earth and therefore represents
the robe of nature. The black represents
death and corruption as being the way to
a new life and generation. Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God. John 3 three white yellow and
red signify the three principal colors
of the alchemical hermetical universal
medicine after the blackness of its
putrifaction is over. The ancients gave
the name Isis to one of their occult
medicines. Therefore the description
here given relates somewhat to
chemistry. Her black drape also
signifies that the moon or the lunar
humidity. The sophicic universal mercury
and the operating substance of nature in
alchemical terminology has no light of
its own but receives its light, its fire
and its vitalizing force from the sun.
Isis was the cyum is designed to
represent to us that everything must be
kept in continual agitation and never
cease from motion that they ought to be
mused and well shaken whenever they
begin to grow drowsy as it were and to
droop in their motion. For say they, the
sound of these cystra averts and drives
away typho, meaning hereby that as
corruption clogs and puts a stop to the
regular course of nature, so generation
by the means of motion loosens it again
and restores it to its former vigor. Now
the outer surface of this instrument is
of a convex figure, as within its
circumference are contained those four
cords or bars, only three shown, which
make such a rattling when they are
shaken. Nor is this without its meaning.
For that part of the universe which is
subject to generation and corruption is
contained within the sphere of the moon
and whatever motions or changes may
happen therein they are all affected by
the different combinations of the four
elementary bodies fire earth water and
air moreover upon the upper part of the
convex surface of the cyrum is carved
that effiges of a cat with a human
visage as on the lower edge of it under
those moving cords is engraved on the
one side the face of Isis and on the
other that of Nephus by the faces
symbolically representing generation and
corruption which as has been already
observed is nothing but the motion and
alteration of the four elements one
amongst another the image or
representative of the great works of the
wise men the philosopher&lt;unk&gt;'s stone
the elixir of life and the universal
medicine other hieroglyphics seen in
connection with Isis are no less curious
than those already described but it is
impossible to enumerate pray at all. For
many symbols were used interchangeably
by the Egyptian hermitists. The goddess
often wore upon her head a hat made of
cypress branches to signify mourning for
her dead husband and also for the
physical death which she caused every
creature to undergo in order to receive
a new life and posterity or a periodic
resurrection. The head of Isis is
sometimes ornamented with a crown of
gold or a garland of olive leaves as
conspicuous marks of her sovereignty as
queen of the world and mistress of the
entire universe. The crown of gold
signifies also the horrific unctuity or
sulurious fatness of the solar and vital
fires which she dispenses to every
individual by a continual circulation of
the elements. This circulation being
symbolized by the musical rattle which
she carries in her hand. This cyram is
also the yanic symbol of purity. A
serpent interwoven among the olive
leaves on her head devouring its own
tail denotes that the horrific unuosity
was soiled with the venom of terrestrial
corruption which surrounded it and must
be mortified and purified by seven
planetary circulations or purifications
called flying eagles. alchemical
terminology in order to make it
medicinal for the restoration of health.
Here the emanations from the sun are
recognized as a medicine for the healing
of human ills. The seven planetary
circulations are represented by the
circumambulations of the Masonic lodge
by the marching of the Jewish priests
seven times around the walls of Jericho
and of the Mohamadan priests seven times
around the Cabarat Mecca. From the crown
of gold project, three horns of plenty
signifying the abundance of the gifts of
nature proceeding from one root having
its origin in the heavens head of Isis.
This book was uploaded by Hidden
Whispers Revelations on YouTube. Please
subscribe and like the video to support
us. Some spelling may be off. We
apologize to the listener. In this
figure, the pagan naturalists represent
all the vital powers of the three
kingdoms and families of subliminary
nature, mineral, plant, and animal. man
considered as an animal. At one of her
ears was the moon and at the other the
sun to indicate that these two were the
agent and patient or father and mother.
Principles of all natural objects and
that Isis or nature makes use of these
two luminaries too communicate her
powers to the whole empire of animals,
vegetables and minerals. On the back of
her neck were the characters of the
planets and the signs of the zodiac
which assisted the planets in their
functions. This signified that the
heavenly influences directed the
destinies of the principles and sperms
of all things because they were the
governors of all sublunary bodies which
they transformed into little worlds made
in the image of the greater universe.
Isis holds in her right hand a small
sailing ship with the spindle of a
spinning wheel for its mast. From the
top of the mass projects a water jug,
its handle shaped like a serpent swelled
with venom. This indicates that Isis
steers the bark of life full of troubles
and miseries on the stormy ocean of
time. The spindle symbolizes the fact
that she spins and cuts the thread of
life. These emblems further signify that
Isis abounds in humidity by means of
which she nourishes all natural bodies
preserving them from the heat of the sun
by humidifying them with nutritious
moisture from the atmosphere. Moisture
supports vegetation. But this subtle
humidity life ether is always more or
less infected by some venom proceeding
from corruption or decay. It must be
purified by being brought into contact
with the invisible cleansing fire of
nature. This fire digests, perfects, and
revitalizes this substance in order that
the humidity may become a universal
medicine to heal and renew all the
bodies in nature. The serpent throws off
its skin annually and is thereby renewed
symbolic of the resurrection of the
spiritual life from the material nature.
This renewal of the earth takes place
every spring when the vivifying spirit
of the sun returns to the countries of
the northern hemisphere. The symbolic
virgin carries in her left hand a cyrum
and a symbol or square frame of metal
which when struck gives the key note of
nature fa sometimes also an olive branch
to indicate the harmony. She preserves
among natural things with her
regenerating power. By the processes of
death and corruption she gives life to a
number of creatures of diverse forms
through periods of perpetual change. The
symbol is made square instead of the
usual triangular shape in order to
symbolize that all things are transmuted
and regenerated according to the harmony
of the four elements. Dr. Sigisman
Backrom believed that if a physician
could establish harmony among the
elements of earth, fire, air, and water,
and unite them into a stone, the
philosopher&lt;unk&gt;'s stone, symbolized by
the six-pointed star or two interlaced
triangles. he would possess the means of
healing all disease. Dr. Backstrom
further stated that there was no doubt
in his mind that the universal
omnipresent fire spirit of nature does
all and is all in all by attraction,
repulsion, motion, heat, sublimation,
evaporation, exeication, inspation,
coagulation, and fixation. The universal
fire, spirit manipulates matter and
manifests throughout creation. Any
individual who can understand these
principles and adapt them to the three
departments of nature becomes a true
philosopher. From the right breast of
Isis protruded a bunch of grapes and
from the left an ear of corn or a sheath
of wheat golden in color. These indicate
that nature is the source of nutrition
for plant animal and human life
nourishing all things from herself. The
golden color in the wheat corn indicates
that in the sunlight or spiritual gold
is concealed the first sperm of all
life. On the girdle surrounding the
upper part of the body of the statue
appear a number of mysterious emblems.
The girdle is joined together in front
by four golden plates. The elements
placed in the form of a square. This
signified that Isis or nature the first
matter alchemical terminology was the
essence of the four elements life,
light, heat and force which quintessence
generated all things. Numerous stars are
represented on this girdle thereby
indicating their influence in darkness
as well as the influence of the sun and
light. Isis is the virgin immortalized
in the constellation of Virgo where the
world mother is placed with the serpent
under her feet and a crown of stars on
her head in her arms. She carries a
sheath of grain and sometimes the young
sun god. The statue of Isis was placed
on a pedestal of dark stone ornamented
with ram's heads. Her feet trod upon a
number of venomous reptiles. This
indicates that nature has power to free
from acidity or saltness all corrosives
and to overcome all impurities from
terrestrial corruption adhering to
bodies. The ram's heads indicate that
the most auspicious time for the
generation of life is during the period
when the sun passes through the sign of
Aries. The serpents under her feet
indicate that nature is inclined to
preserve life and to heal disease by
expelling impurities and corruption. In
this sense, the axioms known to the
ancient philosophers are verified.
Namely, nature contains nature. Nature
rejoices in her own nature. Nature
surmounts nature. Nature cannot be
amended but in her own nature.
Therefore, in contemplating the statue
of Isis, we must not lose sight of the
occult sense of its allegorories.
Otherwise, the virgin remains an
inexplicable enigma. From a golden ring
on her left arm, a line descends to the
end of which is suspended a deep box
filled with flaming coals and incense.
Isis or nature personified carries with
her the sacred fire religiously
preserved and kept burning in a special
temple by the vestal virgins. This fire
is the genuine immortal flame of nature.
Ethereal, essential, the author of life,
the inconsumable oil, the balsom of
life. So much praised by the wise and so
often referred to in the scriptures, is
frequently symbolized as the fuel of
this immortal flame from the right arm
of the figure also descends a thread to
the end of which is fastened a pair of
scales to denote the exactitude of
nature in her weights and measures. Isis
is often represented as the symbol of
justice because nature is eternally
consistent. Auris or th one of the five
immortals protected the infant Horus
from the wrath of Typhon after the
murder of Osiris. He also revised the
ancient Egyptian calendar by increasing
the year from 360 days to 3605. Th
Hermes was called the dogheaded because
of his faithfulness and integrity. He is
shown crowned with a solar nimbus
carrying in one hand the crux and sada
the symbol of eternal life and in the
other a serpent wound staff symbolic of
his dignity as counselor of the gods.
Isis is shown with her son Horus in her
arms. She is crowned with the lunar orb
ornamented with the horns of rams or
bulls. Orus or Horus as he is more
generally known was the son of Isis and
Osiris. He was the god of time, hours,
days, and this narrow span of life
recognized as mortal existence. In all
probability, the four sons of Horus
represent the four kingdoms of nature.
It was Horus who finally avenged the
murder of his father, Osiris, by slaying
Typhon, the spirit of evil. The world
virgin is sometimes shown standing
between two great pillars, the Janin and
Boazof. Freemasonry symbolizing the fact
that nature attains productivity by
means of polarity as wisdom personified.
Isis stands between the pillars of
opposites demonstrating that
understanding is always found at the
point of equilibrium and that truth is
often crucified between the two thieves
of apparent contradiction. The sheen of
gold in her dark hair indicates that
while she is lunar, her power is due to
the sun's rays from which she secures
her ruddy complexion. As the moon is
robed in the reflected light of the sun,
so Isis, like the virgin of revelation
is clothed in the glory of solar
luminosity, Apulius states that while he
was sleeping, he beheld the venerable
goddess Isis rising out of the ocean.
The ancients realized that the primary
forms of life first came out of water
and modem science concurs in this view.
HG. Wells in his outline of history
describing primitive life on the earth
states, "But though the ocean and
intertidal water already swarmed with
life, the land above the high tide line
was still so far as we can guess. A
stony wilderness without a trace of
life." In the next chapter, he adds,
"Wherever the shoreline ran, there was
life, and that life went on in and by
and with water as its home, its medium,
and its fundamental necessity. The
ancients believe that the universal
sperm proceeded from warm vapor, humid
but fiery. The veiled Isis whose very
coverings represent vapor is symbolic of
this humidity which is the carrier or
vehicle for the sperm life of the sun
represented by a child in her arms.
Because the sun, moon and stars and
setting appear to sink into the sea and
also because the water receives there
rays into itself. The sea was believed
to be the breeding ground for the sperm
of living things. This sperm is
generated from the combination of the
influences of the celestial bodies.
Hence, Isis is sometimes represented as
pregnant. Frequently, the statue of Isis
was accompanied by the figure of a large
black and white ox. The ox represents
either Osiris as Taurus, the bull of the
zodiac, or Apis, an animal sacred to
Osiris because of its peculiar markings
and colorings. Among the Egyptians, the
bull was a beast of burden. Hence, the
presence of the animal was a reminder of
the labors patiently performed by nature
that all creatures may have life and
health. Harpocrates, the god of silence,
holding his fingers to his mouth, often
accompanies the statue of Isis. He warns
all to keep the secrets of the wise from
those unfit to know them. The druids of
Britain and Gaul had a deep knowledge
concerning the mysteries of Isis and
worshiped her under the symbol of the
moon. Godfrey Higgins considers it a
mistake to regard Isis as synonymous
with the moon. The moon was chosen for
Isis because of its dominion over water.
The Druids considered the sun to be the
father and the moon the mother of all
things. By means of these symbols, they
worshiped universal nature. The figure
of Isis is sometimes used to represent
the occult and magical arts such as
necromancy, invocation, sorcery, and
thury. In one of the myths concerning
her, Isis is said to have conjured the
invincible god of eternities ra to tell
her his secret and sacred name, which he
did. This name is equivalent to the lost
word of masonry. By means of this word,
a magician can demand obedience from the
invisible and superior deities. The
priests of Isis became adepts in the use
of the unseen forces of nature. They
understood hypnotism, mesmeriism, and
similar practices long before the modem
world dreamed of their existence.
Plutarch describes the requisites of a
follower of Isis in this manner. For as
it is not the length of the beard, or
the coarseness of the habit which makes
a philosopher, so neither will those
frequent shavings or the mere wearing of
a linen vestment constitute a voter of
Isis. But he alone is a true servant or
follower of this goddess who after he
has heard and been made acquainted in a
proper manner with the history of the
actions of these gods searches into the
hidden truths which he concealed under
them and examines the whole by the
dictates of reason and philosophy.
During the middle ages the trouidors of
central Europe preserved in song the
legends of this Egyptian goddess. They
composed sonnetss to the most beautiful
woman in all the world. Though few ever
discovered her identity, she was Sophia,
the virgin of wisdom, whom all the
philosophers of the world have wooed.
Isis represents the mystery of
motherhood, which the ancients
recognized as the most apparent proof of
nature's omnisient wisdom and God's
overshadowing power. To the modern
seeker, she is the epitome of the great
unknown and only those who unveil her
will be able to solve the mysteries of
life, death, generation, and
regeneration. Mummification of the
Egyptian dead. Servius commenting on
Virgil's Anid observes that the wise
Egyptians took care to embalm their
bodies and deposit them in catacombs in
order that the soul might be preserved
for a long time in connection with the
body and might not soon be alienated.
While the Romans with an opposite design
committed the remains of their dead to
the funeral pile, intending that the
vital spark might immediately be
restored to the general element or
return to its pristine nature. from
Pritchard's analysis of the Egyptian
mythology. No complete records are
available which give the secret doctrine
of the Egyptians concerning the
relationship existing between the spirit
or consciousness and the body which it
inhabited. It is reasonably certain
however that Pythagoras who had been
initiated in the Egyptian temples when
he promulgated the doctrine of
metamsychosis restated in part at least
the teachings of the Egyptian initiates.
The popular supposition that the
Egyptians mummified their dead in order
to preserve the form for a physical
resurrection is untenable in the light
of modern knowledge regarding their
philosophy of death. In the fourth book
of on abstinence from animal food, Pfrey
describes an Egyptian custom of
purifying the dead by removing the
contents of the abdominal cavity which
they placed in a separate chest. He then
reproduces the following erration which
had been translated out of the Egyptian
tongue by Efantis. Oh sovereign son and
all ye gods who impart life to men,
receive me and deliver me to the eternal
gods as a cohabitant. For I have always
piously worshiped those divinities which
were pointed out to me by my parents as
long as I lived in this age, and have
likewise always honored those who
procreated my body. and with respect to
other men, I have never slain anyone,
nor defrauded anyone of what he
deposited with me, nor have I committed
any other atrocious deed. If therefore
during my life I have acted erroneously
by eating or drinking things which it is
unlawful to cat or drink, I have not
aired through myself, but through these
pointing to the chest which contained
the visca, the removal of the organs
identified as the seed of the appetites
was considered equivalent to the
purification of the body from their evil
influences. So literally did the early
Christians interpret their scriptures
that they preserve the bodies of their
dead by pickling them in salt water so
that on the day of resurrection the
spirit of the dead might reenter a
complete and perfectly preserved body.
Believing that the incisions necessary
to the inbombing process and the removal
of the internal organs would prevent the
return of the spirit to its body. The
Christians buried their dead without
resorting to the more elaborate
mummification methods employed by the
Egyptian morticians. In his work on
Egyptian magic, SSD hazards the
following speculation concerning the
esoteric purposes behind the practice of
mummification. There is every reason to
suppose, he says, that only those who
had received some grade of initiation
were mummified. For it is certain that
in the eyes of the Egyptians,
mummification effectually prevented
reincarnation, reincarnation was
necessary to imperfect souls, to those
who had failed to pass the tests of
initiation. But for those who had the
will and the capacity to enter the
secret adom, there was seldom necessity
for that liberation of the soul which is
said to be affected by the destruction
of the body. The body of the initiate
was therefore preserved after death as a
species of talisman or material basis
for the manifestation of the soul upon
earth. During the period of its
inception, mummification was limited to
the pharaoh and such other persons of
royal rank as presumably ptook of the
attributes of the great Osiris, the
divine mummified king of the Egyptian
underworld. Osiris is often represented
with the lower par of his body enclosed
in a mummy case or wrapped about with
funeral bandages. Man's spirit consists
of three distinct parts, only one of
which incarnates in physical form. The
human body was considered to be a tomb
or sephiler of this incarnating spirit.
Therefore, Osiris, a symbol of the
incarnating ego, was represented with
the lower half of his body mummified to
indicate that he was the living spirit
of man enclosed within the material form
symbolized by the mummy case. There is a
romance between the active principle of
God and the passive principle of nature.
From the union of these two principles
is produced the rational creation. Man
is a composite creature. From his
father, the active principle, he
inherits his divine spirit, the fire of
aspiration, that immortal part of
himself which rises triumphant from the
broken clay of mortality, that part
which remains after the natural
organisms have disintegrated or have
been regenerated. from his mother, the
passive principle. He inherits his body,
that part over which the laws of nature
have control, his humanity, his mortal
personality, his appetites, his
feelings, and his emotions. The
Egyptians also believe that Osiris was
the river Nile and that Isis, his sister
wife, was the contiguous land, which
when inundated by the river, bore fruit
and harvest. The murky water of the Nile
were believed to account for the
blackness of Osiris who was generally
symbolized as being of ebony hue, the
sun, a universal deity. The adoration of
the sun was one of the earliest and most
natural forms of religious expression.
Complex modern theologies are merely
involvements and amplifications of this
simple aboriginal belief. The primitive
mind recognizing the beneficent power of
the solar orb adored it as the proxy of
the supreme deity concerning the origin
of sun worship. Albert Pike makes the
following concise statement in his
morals and dogma. To them Aboriginal
peoples, he the sun was the innate fire
of bodies the fire of nature, author of
life, heat and ignition. He was to them
the efficient cause of all generation.
For without him there was no movement,
no existence, no form. He was to them
immense, indivisible, imperishable, and
everywhere present. It was their need of
light and of his creative energy that
was felt by all men. And nothing was
more fearful to them than his absence.
His beneficent influences caused his
identification with the principle of
good and the Brahma of the Hindus and
Mithris of the Persians and Aam. Amun,
PhD ha and Osiris of the Egyptians, the
BL of the Calaldanss, the Adonai of the
Phoenicians, the Adonis and Apollo of
the Greeks became but personifications
of the sun, the regenerating principle
image of that ficundity which
perpetuates and rejuvenates the world's
existence. Among all the nations of
antiquity, altars, mounds, and temples
were dedicated to the worship of the orb
of day. The ruins of these sacred places
yet remain. Notable among them being the
pyramids of Yucatan and Egypt, the snake
mounds of the American Indians, the
zikarats of Babylon and Calaldia, the
round towers of Ireland, and the massive
rings of uncut stone in Britain and
Normandy, the Tower of Babel, which
according to the scriptures was built so
that man might reach up to God, was
probably an astronomical observatory.
Many early priests and prophets, both
pagan and Christian, were versed in
astronomy and astrology. Their writings
are best understood when read in the
light of these ancient sciences. With
the growth of man's knowledge of the
constitution and periodicity of the
heavenly bodies, astronomical principles
and terminology were introduced into his
religious systems. The tudelary gods
were given planetary thrones. The
celestial bodies being named after the
deities assigned to them. The fixed
stars were divided into constellations
and through these constellations
wandered the sun and its planets. The
latter with their accompanying
satellites, the solar trinity, the sun
as supreme among the celestial bodies
visible to the astronomers of antiquity
was assigned to the highest of the gods
and became symbolic of the supreme
authority of the creator himself. From a
deep philosophic consideration of the
powers and principles of the sun has
come the concept of the trinity as it is
understood in the world today. The tenet
of a triune divinity is not peculiar to
Christian or mosaic theology but forms a
conspicuous part of the dogma of the
greatest religions of both ancient and
modern times. The Persians, Hindus,
Babylonians, and Egyptians had their
trinities. In every instance, these
represented the three-fold form of one
supreme intelligence. In modern masonry,
the deity is symbolized by an
equilateral triangle. Its three sides
representing the primary manifestations
of the eternal one who is himself
represented as a tiny flame called by
the Hebrews yad. Jacob Bow the Tatonic
mystic calls the trinity the three
witnesses by means of which the
invisible is made known to the visible
tangible universe. The origin of the
trinity is obvious to anyone who will
observe the daily manifestations of the
sun. This orb being the symbol of all
light has three distinct phases rising,
midday and setting. The philosophers
therefore divided the life of all things
into three distinct parts. growth,
maturity and decay. Between the twilight
of dawn and the twilight of evening is
the high noon of respplendant glory. God
the father the creator of the world is
symbolized by the dawn. His color is
blue because the sun rising in the
morning is veiled in blue mist. God the
son he illuminating one sent to bear
witness of his father. Before all the
worlds is the celestial globe at
noonday, radiant and magnificent, the
maimed lion of Judah, the goldenhaired
savior of the world. Yellow is his color
and his power is without end. God. The
Holy Ghost is the sunset phase when the
orb of day robed in flaming red rests
for a moment upon the horizon line and
then vanishes into the darkness of the
night to wandering the lower worlds and
later rise again triumphant from the
embrace of darkness. To the Egyptians,
the sun was the symbol of immortality.
For while it died each night, it rose
again with each ensuing dawn. Not only
has the sun this dal activity, but it
also has its annual pilgrimage during
which time it passes successively
through the 12 celestial houses of the
heavens remaining in each for 30 days.
Added to these, it has a third path of
travel which is called the precession of
the equinoxes in which it retrogrades
around the zodiac through the 12 signs
at the rate of one degree every 72
years. Concerning the annual passage of
the sun through the 12 houses of the
heavens. Robert Hewitt Brown 32 degrees
makes the following statement. The sun
as he pursued his way among these living
creatures of the zodiac was said in
allegorical language either to assume
the nature of or to triumph over the
sign he entered. The sun thus became a
bull in Taurus and was worshiped as such
by the Egyptians under the name of Apis
and by the Assyrians as bell ball or
bull. In Leo, the son became a lion
slayer Hercules and an archer in
Sagittarius. In Pisces, the fishes he
was a fish or Vishnu, the fish god of
the Philistines and Hindus. A careful
analysis of the religious systems of
pagandom uncovers much evidence of the
fact that its priests serve the solar
energy and that their supreme deity was
in every case this divine light.
personified Godfrey Higgins after 30
years of inquiry into the origin of
religious beliefs is of the opinion that
all the gods of antiquity resolve
themselves into the solar fire sometimes
itself as God or sometimes an emblem or
shikina of that higher principle known
by the name of the creative being or
God. The Egyptian priests in many of
their ceremonies wore the skins of lions
which were symbols of the solar orb
owing to the fact that the sun is
exalted, dignified, and most fortunately
placed in the constellation of Leo which
he rules and which was at one time the
keystone of the celestial arch. Again,
Hercules is the solar deity. For as this
mighty hunter performed his 12 labors,
so the son, in traversing the 12 houses
of the zodiacal band, performs during
his pilgrimage 12 essential and
benevolent labors for the human race and
for nature in general. Hercules, like
the Egyptian priests, wore the skin of a
lion for a girdle. Samson, the Hebrew
hero, as his name implies, is also a
solar deity. His fight with the Nubian
lion, his battles with the Philistines,
who represent the powers of darkness,
and his memorable feat of carrying off
the gates of Gaza, all refer to aspects
of solar activity. Many of the ancient
peoples had more than one solar deity.
In fact, all of the gods and goddesses
were supposed to partake, in part at
least, of the sons of Fulg. The golden
ornaments used by the priestcraft of the
various world religions are again a
subtle reference to the solar energy as
are also the crowns of kings. In ancient
times, crowns had a number of points
extending outward like the rays of the
sun. But modern conventionalism has in
many cases either removed the points or
else bent them inward, gathered them
together and placed an orb or cross upon
the point where they meet. Many of the
ancient prophets, philosophers, and
dignitaries carried a scepter, the upper
end of which bore a representation of
the solar globe, surrounded by emanating
rays. All the kingdoms of earth were but
copies of the kingdoms of heaven, and
the kingdoms of heaven were best
symbolized by the solar kingdom in which
the sun was the supreme ruler, the
planets his privy council, and all
nature the subjects of his empire. Many
deities have been associated with the
sun. The Greeks believe that Apollo,
Bakis, Dianisis, Sebasius, Hercules,
Jason, Ulisses, Zeus, Uranus, and Vulcan
purtook of either the visible or
invisible attributes of the sun. The
Norwegians regarded Balder the beautiful
as a solar deity, and Odin is often
connected with the celestial orb,
especially because of his one eye. Among
the Egyptians, Osiris, Ra, Anubis,
Hermes, and even the mysterious Ammon
himself had points of resemblance with
the solar disc. Isis was the mother of
the sun, and even Typhon, the destroyer,
was supposed to be a form of solar
energy. The Egyptian sun myth finally
centered around the person of a
mysterious deity called Sarapus. The two
central American deities, Tescat Lipoka
and Ketzel Coat, while often associated
with the winds, were also undoubtedly
solar gods. In masonry, the sun has many
symbols. One expression of the solar
energy is Solomon, whose name Solomon is
the name for the supreme light in three
different languages. Hyram Aby, the sea
hyram. Hyram of the Caldis is also a
solar deity and the story of his attack
and murder by the ruffians with its
solar interpretation will be found in
the chapter the hieramic legend. A
striking example of the important part
which the sun plays in the symbols and
rituals of Freemasonry is given by
George Oliver. Deity in his dictionary
of symbolical masonry as follows. The
sun rises in the east and in the east is
the place for the worshipful master. As
the sun is the source of all light and
warmth, so should the worshipful master
enliven and warm the brethren to their
work. Among the ancient Egyptians, the
sun was the symbol of divine providence.
The hierofphants of the mysteries were
adorned with many insignia emblematic of
solar power. The sunbursts of guilt.
Embroidery on the back of the vestments
of the Catholic priesthood signify that
the priest is also an emissary and
representative of soul invictus.
Christianity and the son for reasons
which they doubtless considered
sufficient. Those who chronicled the
life and acts of Jesus found it
advisable to metamorphos him into a
solar deity. The historical Jesus was
forgotten. Nearly all the salient
incidents recorded in the four gospels
have their correlations in the
movements, phases, or functions of the
heavenly bodies. Among other
allegorories borrowed by Christianity
from pagan antiquity is the story of the
beautiful blue-eyed son god with his
golden hair falling upon his shoulders
robed from head to foot in spotless
white and carrying in his arms the lamb
of God symbolic of the vernal equinox.
This handsome youth is a composite of
Apollo, Osiris, Orpheus, Mithris, and
Bakis, for he has certain
characteristics in common with each of
these pagan deities. The philosophers of
Greece and Egypt divided the life of the
sun during the year into four parts.
Therefore, they symbolized the solar man
by four different figures. When he was
born in the winter, Solstice, the sun
god, was symbolized as a dependent
infant who in some mysterious manner had
managed to escape the powers of darkness
seeking to destroy him while he was
still in the cradle of winter. The sun
being weak at this season of the year
had no golden rays or locks of hair. But
the survival of the light through the
darkness of winter was symbolized by one
tiny hair which alone adorned the head
of the celestial child. As the birth of
the sun took place in Capricorn, it was
often represented as being suckled by a
goat. At the vernal equinox, the sun had
grown to be a beautiful youth. His
golden hair hung in ringlets on his
shoulders and his light, as Schiller
said, extended to all parts of infinity.
At the summer solstice, the sun became a
strong man, heavily bearded, who in the
prime of maturity symbolized the fact
that nature at this period of the year
is strongest and most fant. At the
autumnal equinox, the sun was pictured
as an aged man shuffling along with
bended back and whitened locks into the
oblivion of winter darkness. Thus, 12
months were assigned to the sun as the
length of its life. During this period,
it circled the 12 signs of the zodiac in
a magnificent triumphal march. When fall
came, it entered like Samson into the
house of Delilah, Virgo, where its rays
were cut off and it lost its strength.
In masonry, the cruel winter months are
symbolized by three murderers who sought
to destroy the god of light and truth.
The coming of the sun was hailed with
joy. The time of its departure was
viewed as a period to be set. Aside for
sorrow and unhappiness, this glorious
radiant orb of day, the true light which
lightth every man who cometh into the
world, the supreme benefactor who raised
all things from the dead, who fed, the
hungry multitudes who stilled the
tempest, who after dying rose again and
restored all things to life. This
supreme spirit of humanitarianism and
philanthropy is known to Christendom as
Christ, the redeemer of worlds, the only
begotten of the father, the word made
flesh, and the hope of glory, the
birthday of the son. The pagans set
aside the 25th of December as the
birthday of the solar man. They
rejoiced, feasted, gathered in
processions, and made offerings in the
temples. The darkness of winter was over
and the glorious son of light was
returning to the northern hemisphere.
With his last effort, the old son god
had torn down the house of the
Philistines, the spirits of darkness,
and had cleared the way for the new son,
who was born that day from the depths of
the earth amidst the symbolic beasts of
the lower world. Concerning this season
of celebration, an anonymous master of
arts of Baleo College, Oxford, in his
scholarly treatis, mankind, their origin
and destiny says the Romans also had
their solar festival and their games of
the circus in honor of the birth of the
god of day. It took place the 8th day
before the kalins of January that is on
December 25th. Servius in his commentary
on verse 720 of the 7th book of the
Aniid in which Virgil speaks of the new
son says that properly speaking the sun
is new on the 8th of the calendars of
January that is December 25th in the
time of Leo I Leo serum 21 da native dm
page 148 some of the fathers of the
church said that what rendered the
festival of Christmas venerable was less
the birth of Jesus Christ than the
return and as they expressed it the new
birth of the son. It was on the same day
that the birth of the invincible son
Natalie Solis Invicti was celebrated at
Rome as can be seen in the Roman
calendars published in the reign of
Constantine and of Julian hymn to the
sun page 155. This epithet invictus is
the same as the Persians gave to this
same god whom they worshiped by the name
of Matra and whom they caused to be born
in a grotto. Justin dial come trips page
305. Just as he is represented as being
born in a stable under the name of
Christ by the Christians concerning the
Catholic feast of the assumption and its
parallel in astronomy. The same author
adds at the end of 8 months when the sun
god having increased traverses the
eighth sign. He absorbs the celestial
virgin and his fiery course and she
disappears in the midst of the luminous
rays and the glory of her son. This
phenomenon which takes place every year
about the middle of August gave rise to
a festival which still exists and in
which it is supposed that the mother of
Christ laying aside her earthly life is
associated with the glory of her son and
is placed at his side in the heavens.
The Roman calendar of Kalamela Colonel 1
2 cap 2 page 429 marks the death or
disappearance of Virgo at this period.
The sun, he says, passes into Virgo on
the 13th day before the calendars of
September. This is where the Catholics
place the feast of the assumption or the
reunion of the virgin to her son. This
feast March 4th, 1648. On Monday the
28th of February last, there arose with
the sun two Pureli on either side one.
Their distance from him was by
estimation about 10°. They continued
still of the same distance from the
zenith or height above the horizon that
the sun did. And from the parts of verse
to the sun, there seemed to issue out
certain bright rays, not unlike those
which the sun sendeth from behind a
cloud, but brighter. The parts of these
purely which were toward the sun, were
of a mixed color, wherein green and red
were most predominant. Hey, little above
them was a thin rainbow scarcely
discernible of a bright color with the
concave towards the sun and the ends
thereof seeming to touch the Pureli.
Above that, in a clear diaphous air,
appeared another conspicuous rainbow,
beautified with diverse colors. It was
as near as I could discern to the
zenith. It seemed of something a lesser
radius than the other. They being back
to back, yet a pretty way between. At or
near the apparent time of the full moon,
they vanished, leaving abundance of
terror and amazement in those that saw
them. See William Lily was formerly
called the feast of the passage of the
virgin bober to i 350 and in the library
of the fathers. Bibl part volume 2 part
two page 212. We have an account of the
passage of the blessed virgin. The
ancient Greeks and Romans fix the
assumption of Astria who is also this
same virgin. On that day, this virgin
mother giving birth to the son god which
Christianity has so faithfully preserved
is a reminder of the inscription
concerning her Egyptian prototype Isis
which appeared on the temple of Seais.
The fruit which I have brought forth is
the sun, while the virgin was associated
with the moon. By the early pagans,
there is no doubt that they also
understood her position as a
constellation in the heavens. For nearly
all the peoples of antiquity credit her
as being the mother of the sun, and they
realized that although the moon could
not occupy that position, the sign of
Virgo could and did give birth to the
sun out of her side on the 25th day of
December. Alberta Magnus states, "We
know that the sign of the celestial
virgin rose over the horizon at the
moment at which we fix the birth of our
Lord Jesus Christ among certain of the
Arabian and Persian astronomers, the
three stars forming the sword belt of
Orion." We're called the magi who came
to pay homage to the young son god, the
author of mankind there, origin and
destiny contributes the following
additional information. in cancer which
had risen to the meridian at midnight is
the constellation of the stable and of
the ass. The ancients called it preep
jovies. In the north the stars of the
bear are seen called by the Arabians
Martha and Mary and also the coffin of
Lazarus. Thus the esotericism of paganom
was embodied in Christianity although
its keys are lost. The Christian church
blindly follows ancient customs and when
asked for a reason gives superficial and
unsatisfactory explanations either
forgetting or ignoring the indisputable
fact that each religion is based upon
the secret doctrines of its predecessor
the three sons. The solar orb like the
nature of man was divided by the ancient
sages into three separate bodies.
According to the mystics, there are
three suns in each solar system
analogous to the three centers of life
in each individual constitution. These
are called three lights. The spiritual
sun, the intellectual or solar sun and
the material sun, now symbolized in
Freemasonry by three candles. The
spiritual sun manifests the power of God
the father. The solar sun radiates the
life of God, the son, and the material.
Son is the vehicle of manifestation for
God, the Holy Spirit. Man's nature was
divided by the mystics into three
distinct parts, spirit, soul, and body.
His physical body was unfolded and
vitalized by the material sun. His
spiritual nature was illuminated by the
spiritual sun, and his intellectual
nature was redeemed by the true light of
grace, the solar sun. The alignment of
these three globes in the heavens was
one. Explanation offered for the
peculiar fact that the orbits of the
planets are not circular but elliptical.
The pagan priests always considered the
solar system as a grand man and drew
their analogy of these three centers of
activity from the three main centers of
life in the human body. The brain, the
heart, and the generative system. The
transfiguration of Jesus describes three
tabernacles. the largest being in the
center, the heart and a smaller one on
either side, the brain and the
generative system. It is possible that
the philosophical hypothesis of the
existence of the three sons is based
upon a peculiar natural phenomenon which
has occurred many times in history. In
the 50st year after Christ, three sons
were seen at once in the sky and also in
the 66th year. In the 69th year, two
sons were seen together. According to
William Lily, between the years 1156 and
1648, 20 similar occurrences were
recorded. Recognizing the sun as the
supreme benefactor of the material
world, hermitists believe that there was
a spiritual sun which ministered to the
needs of the invisible and divine part
of nature, human and universal. And in
this subject, the great Pariselus wrote,
"There is an earthly sun which is the
cause of all heat, and all who are able
to see may see the sun, and those who
are blind and cannot see him may feel
his heat. There is an eternal son, which
is the source of all wisdom, and those
whose spiritual senses have awakened to
life will see that son and be conscious
of his existence. But those who have not
attained spiritual consciousness may yet
feel his power by an inner faculty which
is called intuition. Certain Rosacruian
scholars have given special appellations
to these three phases of the sun. The
spiritual son they called Vulcan the
solar and intellectual son Christ and
Lucifer respectively and the material
sun the Jewish demiurgous Jehovah.
Lucifer here represents the intellectual
mind without the illumination of the
spiritual mind. Therefore, it is the
false light. The false light is finally
overcome and redeemed by the true light
of the soul called the second logos or
Christ. The secret processes by which
the Luciferian intellect is transmuted
into the Christly intellect constitute
one of the great secrets of alchemy and
are symbolized by the process of
transmuting base metals into gold. In
the rare treatise, the secret symbols of
the rosacrrucience, France Hartmon
defines the sun alchemically as the
symbol of wisdom, the center of power or
heart of things. The sun is a center of
energy and a storehouse of power. Each
living being contains within itself a
center of life which may grow to be a
Sunday in the heart of the regenerated.
The divine power stimulated by the light
of the logos grows into a sun which
illuminates his mind. In a note, the
same author amplifies his description by
adding, "The terrestrial sun is the
image or reflection of the invisible
celestial son. The former is in the
realm of spirit what the latter is in
the realm of matter. But the latter
receives its power from the former. In
the majority of cases, the religions of
antiquity agree that the material
visible sun was a reflector rather than
a source of power. The sun was sometimes
represented as a shield carried on the
arm of the sun god." As for example,
Fry, the Scandinavian solar deity. This
sun reflected the light of the invisible
spiritual sun which was the true source
of life, light and truth. The physical
nature of the universe is receptive. It
is a realm of effects. The invisible
causes of these effects belong to the
spiritual world. Hence, the spiritual
world is the sphere of causation. The
material world is the sphere of effects.
While the intellectual or soul world is
the sphere of mediation. Thus Christ the
personified higher intellect and soul
nature is called the mediator who by
virtue of his position and power says no
man cometh to the father but by me. Alan
Trithl King Supj
Comet Sale concept regarded the sun as a
parent and the planers as embryos still
connected to the solar body by means of
ethereal umbilical cords which served as
channels to convey life and nourishment
to the planets. Some secret orders have
taught that the sun was inhabited by a
race of creatures with bodies composed
of a radiant spiritual ether not unlike
in its constituency the actual glowing
ball of the sun itself. The solar heat
had no harmful effect upon them because
their organisms were sufficiently
refined and sensitized to harmonize with
the sun's tremendous vibratory rate.
These creatures resemble miniature suns
being a little larger than a dinner
plate in size. Although some of the more
powerful are considerably larger. Their
color is the golden white light of the
sun and from them emanate four streamers
of real. These streamers are often of
great length and are in constant motion.
A peculiar palpitation is to be noted
throughout the structure of the globe
and is communicated in the form of
ripples to the emanating streamers. The
greatest and most luminous of these
spheres is the archangel Michael and the
entire order of solar life which
resemble him and dwell upon the sun are
called by modern Christians the
archangels or the spirits of the light.
The sun in alchemical symbology gold is
the metal of the sun and has been
considered by many as crystallized
sunlight. When gold is mentioned in
alchemical tracks, it may be either the
metal itself or the celestial orb which
is the source or spirit of gold. Sulfur
because of its fiery nature was also
associated with the sun as gold was the
symbol of spirit and the base metals
represented man's lower nature. Certain
alchemists were called miners and were
pictured with picks and shovels digging
into the earth in search of the precious
metal. Those finer traits of character
buried in the earthiness of materiality
and ignorance. The diamond concealed in
the heart of the black carbon
illustrated the same principle. The
Illuminati used a pearl hidden in the
shell of an oyster at the bottom of the
sea to signify spiritual powers. Thus
the seeker after truth became a pearl
fisher. He descended into the sea of
material illusion in search of
understanding termed by the initiates
the pearl of great price. When the
alchemist stated that every animate and
inanimate thing in the universe
contained the seeds of gold, they meant
that even the grains of sand possessed a
spiritual nature for gold was the spirit
of all things. Concerning these seeds of
spiritual gold, the following roacian
axiom is significant. A seed is useless
and impotent unless it is put in its
appropriate matrix. France Hartman
comments on this axiom with these
illuminating words. A soul cannot
develop and progress without an
appropriate body because it is the
physical body that furnishes the
material for its development. See in the
pronos of the temple of wisdom, the
purpose of alchemy was not to make
something out of nothing, but rather to
fertilize and nurture the seed which was
already present. Its processes did nor
actually create gold, but rather made
the everpresent seed of gold grow and
flourish. Everything which exists has a
spirit, the seed of divinity within
itself. And regeneration is not the
process of attempting to place something
where it previously had not existed.
Regeneration actually means the
unfoldment of the omnipresent divinity
in man. That this divinity may shine
forth as a sun and illumine all with
whom it comes in contact. The midnight
sun. Apulus said when describing his
initiation vid anti at midnight I saw
the sun shining with a splendid light.
The midnight sun was also part of the
mystery of alchemy. It symbolized the
spirit in man shining through the
darkness of his human organisms. It also
referred to the spiritual sun in the
solar system which the mystic could see
as well at midnight as at high noon. The
material earthbring powerless to
obstruct the rays of this divine orb.
The mysterious lights which illuminated
the temples of the Egyptian mysteries
during the nocturnal hours were said by
some to he reflections of the spiritual
sun gathered by the magical powers of
the priests the weird light seen 10 mi
below the surface of the earth by I am
the man in that remarkable Masonic
allegory Edorpa Aphrodite spelt backward
may well refer to the mysterious
midnight sun of the ancient rights
primitive conceptions concerning the
warfare between the principles of Good
and evil were often based upon the
alternations of day and night. During
the Middle Ages, the practices of black
magic were confined to the nocturnal
hours, and those who served the spirit
of evil were called black magicians,
while those who served the spirit of
good were called white magicians. Black
and white were associated respectively
with night and day, and the endless
conflict of light and shadow is alluded
to many times in the mythologies of
various peoples. The Egyptian demon
Typhon was symbolized as part crocodile
and part hog because these animals are
gross and earthy in both appearance and
temperament. Since the world began,
living things have feared the darkness.
Those few creatures who use it as a
shield for their maneuvers were usually
connected with the spirit of evil.
Consequently, cats, bats, toads, and
owls are associated with witchcraft. In
certain parts of Europe, it is still
believed that at night, black magicians
assumed the bodies of wolves in Rome
around destroying. From this notion
originated the stories of the
werewolves, serpents because they lived
in the earth were associated with the
spirit of darkness as the battle between
good and evil centers around the use of
the generative forces of nature. Winged
serpents represent the regeneration of
the animal nature of man or those great
ones in whom this regeneration is
complete. Among the Egyptians, the sun's
rays are often shown ending in human
hands. Masons will find a connection
between these hands and the well-known
paw of the lion which raises all things
to life with its grip. Solar colors. The
theory so long held of three primary and
four secondary colors is purely
esoteric. For since the earliest
periods, it has been known that there
are seven and not three primary colors,
the human eye being capable of
estimating only three of them. Thus,
although green can be made by combining
blue and yellow, there is also a true or
primary green which is not a compound.
This can be proved by breaking up the
spectrum with a prism. Helmholds found
that the so-called secondary colors of
the spectrum could not be broken up into
their supposed primary colors. Thus the
orange of the spectrum if passed through
a second prism does not break up into
red and yellow but remains orange.
Consciousness, intelligence and force
are fittingly symbolized by the colors
blue, yellow and red. The therapeutic
effects of the colors moreover are in
harmony with this concept. For blue is a
fine soothing electrical color, yellow a
vitalizing and refining color and red an
agitating and heatgiving color. It has
also been demonstrated that minerals and
plants affect the human constitution
according to their colors. Thus, a
yellow flower generally yields a
medicine that affects the constitution
in a manner similar to yellow light or
the musical tone me. An orange flower
will influence in a manner similar to
orange light and being one of the
so-called secondary colors corresponds
either to the tone re or to the court of
due and me. The ancients conceived the
spirit of man to correspond with the
color blue, the mind with yellow, and
the body with red. Heaven is therefore
blue, earth yellow, and hell or the
underworld red. The fiery condition of
the inferno merely symbolizes the nature
of the sphere or plane of force of which
it is composed. In the Greek mysteries,
the irrational sphere was always
considered as red for it represented
that condition in which the
consciousness is enslaved by the lusts
and passions of the lower nature. In
India is certain of the gods usually
attributes of Vishnuir depicted with
blue skin to signify their divine and
super mundane constitution. According to
esoteric philosophy, blue is the true
and sacred color of the sun. The
apparent orange yellow shade of this orb
is the result of its rays being immersed
in the substances of the illusionary
world. In the original symbolism of the
Christian church, colors were of first
importance and their use was regulated
according to carefully prepared rules.
Since the middle ages, however, the
carelessness with which colors have been
employed has resulted in the loss of
their deeper emblematic meanings. In its
primary aspect, white or silver
signified life, purity, innocence, joy
and light. Red the suffering and death
of Christ and his saints and also divine
love, blood and warfare or suffering.
Blue the heavenly sphere and the states
of godliness and contemplation. Yellow
or gold, glory, fruitfulness and
goodness. Green ficundity, youthfulness
and prosperity. Violet, humility, deep
affection and sorrow, black, death,
destruction and humiliation. In early
church art, the colors of robes and
ornaments also revealed whether a saint
had been martyred, as well as the
character of the work that he had done
to deserve canonization. In addition to
the colors of the spectrum, there are a
vast number of vibratory color waves,
some too low and others too high to be
registered by the human optical
apparatus. It is appalling to
contemplate man's colossal ignorance
concerning these vistas of abstract
space as in the past man explored
unknown continents. So in the future
armed with curious implements fashioned
for the purpose he will explore these
little known fastnesses of light, color,
sound and consciousness. The zodiac and
its signs. It is difficult for this age
to estimate correctly the profound
effect produced upon the religions,
philosophies and sciences of antiquity
by the study of the planets, luminaries
and constellations. Not without adequate
reason were the magi of Persia called
the stargazers. The Egyptians were
honored with a special appellation
because of their proficiency in
computing the power and motion of the
heavenly bodies and their effect upon
the destinies of nations and
individuals. Ruins of primitive.
Astronomical observatories have been
discovered in all parts of the world.
Although in many cases, modern
archaeologists are unaware of the true
purpose for which these structures were
erected. While the telescope was unknown
to ancient astronomers, they made many
remarkable calculations with instruments
cut from blocks of granite or pounded
from sheets of brass and copur. In
India, such instruments are still in use
and they poses a high degree of
accuracy. In Jaipur, Rajpatana, India,
an observatory consisting largely of
immense stone sund dials is still in
operation. The famous Chinese
observatory on the wall of peaking
consists of immense bronze instruments,
including a telescope in the form of a
hollow tube without lenses. The pagans
looked upon the stars as living things
capable of influencing the destinies of
individuals, nations, and races. that
the early Jewish patriarchs believe that
the celestial bodies participated in the
affairs of men is evident to any student
of biblical literature. As for example
in the book of judges they fought from
heaven. Even the stars in their courses
fought against cisera. The Calaldians,
Phoenicians, Egyptians, Persians,
Hindus, and Chinese all had zodiacs that
were much alike in general character and
different authorities have credited each
of these nations with being the cradle
of astrology. In astronomy, the Central
and North American Indians also had an
understanding of the zodiac, but the
patterns and numbers of the signs
differed in many details from those of
the eastern hemisphere. The word zodiac
is derived from the Greek zetto omega
delaode alphaappa final sigma zodiacos
which means a circle of animals or as
some believe little animals. It is the
name given by the old pagan astronomers
to a band of fixed stars about 16° wide
apparently encircling the earth. Robert
Huitt Brown 32° states that the Greek
word zodiacos comes from zon meaning an
animal. He adds this latter word is
compounded directly from the primitive
Egyptian radicals zo life and on a being
the zodiac and its signs. It is
difficult for this age to estimate
correctly the profound effect produced
upon the religions philosophies and
sciences of antiquity by the study of
the planets luminaries and
constellations. Not without adequate
reason were the magi of Persia called
the stargazers. The Egyptians were
honored with a special appellation
because of their proficiency in
computing the power and motion of the
heavenly bodies and their effect upon
the destinies of nations and
individuals. Ruins of primitive
astronomical observatories have been
discovered in all parts of the world.
Although in many cases, modern
archaeologists are unaware of the true
purpose for which these structures were
erected. While the telescope was unknown
to ancient astronomers, they made many
remarkable calculations with instruments
cut from blocks of granite or pounded
from sheets of brass and copur. In
India, such instruments are still in use
and they poses a high degree of
accuracy. In Jaipur, Rajpatana, India,
an observatory consisting largely of
immense stone sund dials is still in
operation. The famous Chinese
observatory on the wall of peaking
consists of immense bronze instruments
including a telescope in the form of a
hollow tube without lenses. The pagans
looked upon the stars as living things
capable of influencing the destinies of
individuals, nations, and races. That
the early Jewish patriarchs believed
that the celestial bodies participated
in the affairs of men is evident to any
student of biblical literature. As for
example in the book of judges they
fought from heaven. Even the stars in
their courses fought against cisera. The
calaldanss, phoenetians, Egyptians,
Persians, Hindus and Chinese all had
zodiacs that were much alike in general
character and different authorities have
credited each of these nations with
being the cradle of astrology. In
astronomy, the central and north
American Indians also had an
understanding of the zodiac. But the
patterns and numbers of the signs
differed in many details from those of
the eastern hemisphere. The word zodiac
is derived from the Greek zetto omega
delaode alphaappa final sigma zodiacos
which means a circle of animals or as
some believe little animals. It is the
name given by the old pagan astronomers
to a band of fixed stars about 16° wide
apparently encircling the earth. Robert
Huitt Brown 32 degrees states that the
Greek word zodiacos comes from zon
meaning an animal. He adds this latter
word is compounded directly from the
primitive Egyptian radicals zo life and
on a being. The Greeks and later other
peoples influenced by their culture
divided the band of the zodiac into 12
sections each being 16° in width and 30°
in length. These divisions were called
the houses of the zodiac. The sun during
its annual pilgrimage passed through
each of these in turn. Imaginary
creatures were traced in the star groups
bounded by these rectangles. And because
most of them were animal or part animal
in form, they later became known as the
constellations or signs of the zodiac.
There is a popular theory concerning the
origin of the zodiacal creatures to the
effect that they were products of the
imagination of shepherds who watching
their flocks at night occupied their
minds by tracing the forms of animals
and birds in the heavens. This theory is
untenable unless the shepherds be
regarded as the shepherd priests of
antiquity. It is unlikely that the
zodiacal signs were derived from the
star groups which they now represent. It
is far more probable that the creatures
assigned to the 12 houses are symbolic
of the qualities and intensity of the
sun's power while it occupies different
parts of the zodiacal belt. On this
subject, Richard Payne Knight writes,
"The emblematical meaning which certain
animals were employed to signify was
only some particular property
generalized and therefore might easily
be invented or discovered by the natural
operation of the mind. But the
collections of stars named after certain
animals have no resemblance whatever to
those animals which are therefore merely
signs of convention adopted to
distinguish certain portions of the
heavens which were probably consecrated
to those particular personified
attributes which they respectively
represented the symbolical language of
ancient art and mythology. Some
authorities are of the opinion that the
zodiac was originally divided into 10
instead of 12 houses or solar mansions.
In early times, there were two separate
standards, one solar and the other.
Lunar used for the measurement of the
months, years, and seasons. The solar
year was composed of 10 months of 36
days each and 5 days sacred to the gods.
The lunar year consisted of 13 months of
28 days each with one day left over. The
solar zodiac at that time consisted
often houses of 36° each. The first six
signs of the zodiac of 12 signs were
regarded as benevolent because the sun
occupied them while traversing the
northern hemisphere the 6,000 years
during which according to the Persians
ahuramazda ruled his universe in harmony
and peace were symbolic of these six
signs. The second six were considered
malevolent because while the sun was
traveling the southern hemisphere, it
was winter with the Greeks, Egyptians,
and Persians. Therefore, these six
months symbolic of the 6,000 years of
misery and suffering caused by the evil
genius of the Persians, Aramman, who
sought to overthrow the power of
Ahuramazda. Those who hold the opinion
that before its revision by the Greeks,
the zodiac consisted of only 10 signs.
Aduce evidence to show that Libra the
scales was inserted into the zodiac by
dividing the constellation of Virgo
Scorpio at that time one sign into two
parts thus establishing the balance at
the point of equilibrium between the
ascending northern and the descending
southern signs. Rosacrruian their rights
and mysteries by Hargrave Jennings on
this subject Isaac Meyer states we think
that the zodiacal constellations were
first 10 and represented an immense
androgenic man or deity. Subsequently
this was changed resulting in Scorpio
and Virgo and making 11. After this from
Scorpio Libra the balance was taken
making the present 12 the cabala. Each
year the sun passes entirely around the
zodiac and returns to the point from
which it started the vernal equinox and
each year it falls just a little short
of making the complete circle of the
heavens in the allotted period of time.
As a result it crosses the equator just
a little behind the spot in the zodiacal
sign where it crossed the previous year.
Each sign of the zodiac consists of 30°.
And as the sun loses about one degree
every 72 years, it regresses through one
entire constellation or sign in
approximately 2,160 years and through
the entire zodiac in about 25,920
years. Authorities disagree concerning
these figures. This retrograde motion is
called the precession of the equinoxes.
This means that in the course of about
25,920
years, which constitute one great solar
or platonic year, each one of the 12
constellations occupies a position at
the vernal equinox for nearly 2,160
years, then gives place to the previous
sign. Among the ancients, the sun was
always symbolized by the figure and
nature of the constellation through,
which it passed at the vernal equinox.
For nearly the past 2,000 years, the sun
has crossed the equator at the vernal
equinox and the constellation of Pisces,
the two fishes. For the 2,160
years before that, it crossed through
the constellation of Aries, the ram.
Prior to that, the vernal equinox was in
the sign of Taurus, the bull. It is
probable that the form of the bull and
the bull's proclivities were assigned to
this constellation because the bull was
used by the ancients to plow the fields
and the season set aside for plowing and
furrowing corresponded to the time at
which the sun reached the segment of the
heavens named Taurus. Albert Pike
describes the reverence which the
Persians felt for this sign and the
method of astrological symbolism in
vogue among them. Thus in Zoroastaster's
cave of initiation the sun and planets
were represented overhead in gems and
gold as was also the zodiac. The sun
appeared emerging from the back of
Taurus in the constellation of the bull
are also to be found the seven sisters
the sacred piudes famous to freemasonry
as the seven stars at the upper end of
the sacred ladder in ancient Egypt. It
was during this period when the vernal
equinox was in the sign of Taurus that
the bull Apis was sacred to the sun god
who was worshiped through the animal
equivalent of the celestial sign which
he had impregnated with his presence at
the time of its crossing into the
northern hemisphere. This is the meaning
of an ancient saying that the celestial
bull broke the egg of the year with his
horns. Samson Arnold Mackey in his
mythological astronomy of the ancients
demonstrated makes note of two very
interesting points concerning the bull
in Egyptian symbolism. Mr. Mackey is of
the opinion that the motion of the earth
that we know as the alternation of the
poles has resulted in a great change of
relative position of the equator and the
zodiacal band. He believes that
originally the band of the zodiac was at
right angles to the equator with the
sign of cancer opposite the north pole
and the sign of Capricorn opposite the
south pole. It is possible that the
orphic symbol of the serpent twisted
around the egg attempts to show the
motion of the sun in relation to the
earth under such conditions. Mr. Macki
advances the labyrinth of Cree, the name
Abrais, and the magic formula,
Abracadabra, among other things to
substantiate his theory concerning
Abracadabra, he states. But the slow
progressive disappearance of the bull is
most happily commemorated in the
vanishing series of letters so
emphatically expressive of the great
astronomical fact. For abracadabra is
the bull, the only bull. The ancient
sentence split into its component parts
stands thus. Abara, a i, e, a bar, the
bull, a cad, the only and c aad is one
of the names of the sun given him in
consequence of his shining alone. He is
the only star to be seen when he is seen
the remaining of a makes the whole to be
the bull. the only bull. While the
repetition of the name omitting a letter
till all is gone, is the most simple yet
the most satisfactory method that could
have been devised to preserve the memory
of the fact. And the name of Sarapis or
Sarapus given to the bull at the above
ceremony puts it beyond all doubt.
Asterisk asterisk asterisk this word
abracadabra disappears in 11 decreasing
stages as in the figure. And what is
very remarkable, a body with three heads
is folded up by a serpent with 11 coils
and placed by sarapis. And the 11 vs of
the serpent form a triangle similar to
that formed by the 11 diminishing lines
of the abracadabra. Nearly every
religion of the world shows traces of
astrological influence. The old
testament of the Jews, its writings
overshadowed by Egyptian culture is a
mass of astrological and astronomical
allegorories. Nearly all the mythology
of Greece and Rome may be traced in star
groups. Some writers are of the opinion
that the original 22 letters of the
Hebrew alphabet were derived from groups
of stars and that the starry handwriting
on the wall of the heavens referred to
words spelled out with fixed stars for
consonants and the planets or luminaries
for vowels. These coming into ever
different combinations spelled words
which when properly read foretold future
events as the zodiacal band marks the
pathway of the sun through the
constellations. It results in the
phenomena of the seasons. The ancient
systems of measuring the year were based
upon the equinoxes and the solstesses.
The year always began with the vernal
equinox celebrated March 21st with
rejoicing too. marked the moment when
the sun crossed the equator northward up
the zodiacal ark. The summer solstice
was celebrated when the sun reached its
most northerly position and the day
appointed was June 21st. After that
time, the sun began to descend toward
the equator which it recrossed
southbound at the autumnal equinox.
September 21st, the sun reached its most
southerntherly position at the winter
solstice. December 21st. For of the
signs of the zodiac have been
permanently dedicated to the equinoxes
and the solstesses, and while the signs
no longer correspond with the ancient
constellations to which they were
assigned, and from which they secured
their names, they are accepted by modern
astronomers as a basis of calculation.
The vernal equinox is therefore said to
occur in the constellation of Aries, the
ram. It is fitting that of all beasts a
ram should be placed at the head of the
heavenly flock forming the zodiacal
band. Centuries before the Christian era
the pagans revered this constellation.
Godfrey Higgins states this
constellation was called the lamb of
God. He was also called the savior and
was said to save mankind from their
sins. He was always honored with the
appellation of dominus or lord. He was
called the lamb of god which taketh away
the sins of the world. The devotees
addressing him in their litany
constantly repeated the words, "Oh lamb
of God that taketh away the sin of the
world, have mercy upon us. Grant us thy
peace." Therefore, the lamb of God is a
title given to the son who is said to be
reborn every year in the northern
hemisphere in the sign of the ram.
Although due to the existing discrepancy
between the signs of the zodiac and the
actual star groups, it actually rises in
the sign of Pisces. The summer solstice
is regarded as occurring in cancer, the
crab, which the Egyptians called the
scarab beetle of the family lamelacorns,
the head of the insect kingdom and
sacred to the Egyptians as the symbol of
eternal life. It is evident that the
constellation of the crab is represented
by this peculiar creature because the
sun after passing through this house
proceeds to walk backwards or descend.
The zodiacal arc cancer is the symbol of
generation for it is the house of the
moon. the great mother of all things and
the patronist of the life forces of
nature. Diana the moon goddess of the
Greeks is called the mother of the world
concerning the worship of the feminine
or maternal principle. Richard Pay
knight writes by attracting or heaving
the waters of the ocean. She naturally
appeared to be the sovereign of humidity
and by seeming to operate so powerfully
upon the constitutions of women, she
equally appeared to be the patronist and
regulator of nutrition and passive
generation when she is said to have
received her nymphs or subordinate
personifications from the ocean and is
often represented by the symbol of the
sea crab. An animal that has the
property of spontaneously detaching from
its own body. any limb that has been
hurt or mutilated and reproducing
another in its place. The symbolical
language of ancient art and mythology.
This water sign being symbolic of the
maternal principle of nature and
recognized by the pagans as the origin
of all life was a natural and consistent
doicile of the moon. The autumnal
equinox apparently occurs in the
constellation of Libra. the balances.
The scales tipped and the solar globe
began its pilgrimage toward the house of
winter. The constellation of the scales
was placed in the zodiac to symbolize
the power of choice by means of which
man may weigh one problem against
another. Millions of years ago when the
human race was in the making, man was
like the angels who knew neither good
nor evil. He fell into the state of the
knowledge of good and evil. When the
gods gave him the seed for the mental
nature from man's mental reactions to
his environments, he distills the
product of experience which then aids
him to regain his lost position plus an
individualized intelligence. Pariselus
said the body comes from the elements,
the soul from the stars and the spirit
from God. All that the intellect can
conceive of comes from the stars, the
spirits of the stars rather than the
material constellations. The
constellation of Capricorn in which the
winter solstice theoretically takes
place was called the house of death for
in winter all life in the northern
hemisphere is at its lowest eb.
Capricorn is a composite creature with
the head and upper body of a goat and
the tail of a fish. In this
constellation the sun is least powerful.
The pagans believe that the zodiac
formed the body of the grand man of the
universe. This body which they called
the macrocosm, the great world was
divided into 12 major parts. One of
which was under the control of the
celestial powers were opposing in each
of the zodiacal constellations.
Believing that the entire universal
system was epitomized in man's body,
which they called the microcosm, the
little world, they evolved that now
familiar figure of the cutup man in the
almanac by allotting a sign of the
zodiac to each of 12 major parts of the
human body. in the northern hemisphere
and after passing through this
constellation it immediately begins to
increase. Hence the Greeks said that
Jupiter a name of the sun god was
suckled by a goat. A new and different
sidlight on zodiacal symbolism is
supplied by John Cole in a treatise on
the circular zodiac of Tentra in Egypt.
The symbol therefore of the goat rising
from the body of a fish Capricorn
represents with the greatest propriety
the mountainous buildings of Babylon
rising out of its low and marshy
situation. The two horns of the goat
being emblematical of the two towns
Nineveh and Babylon. The former built on
the Tigris, the latter on the Euphrates,
but both subjected to one sovereignty.
The period of 2,160
years required for the regression of the
sun through one of the zodiacal
constellations is often termed an age.
According to this system, the age
secured its name from the sign through
which the sun passes year after year as
it crosses the equator at the vernal
equinox. From this arrangement are
derived the terms the toan age, the
Aryan age, the Piscian age and the
Aquarian age. During these periods or
ages, religious worship takes the form
of the appropriate celestial sign that
which the son is said to assume as a
personality in the same manner that a
spirit assumes a body. These 12 signs
are the jewels of his breastplate and
his light shines forth from them one
after the other. From a consideration of
this system, it is readily understood
why certain religious symbols were
adopted during different ages of the
earth's history. For during the 2,160
years, the sun was in the constellation
of Taurus. It is said that the solar
deity assumed the body of Apis and the
bull became sacred to Osiris. For
details concerning the astrological ages
as related to biblical symbolism, see
the message of the stars by Max and
Augusta Foshel. During the Aryan age,
the lamb was held sacred and the priests
were called shepherds. Sheep and goats
were sacrificed upon the altars. and a
scapegoat was appointed to bear the sins
of Israel. During the age of Pisces, the
fish was the symbol of divinity and the
son god fed the multitude with two small
fishes. The frontest piece of Inman's
ancient faiths shows the goddess Isis
with a fish on her head and the Indian
savior god Krishna in one of his
incarnations was cast from the mouth of
a fish. Not only is Jesus often referred
to as the fisher of men, but as John P.
Lundy writes the word fish is an
abbreviation of this whole title Jesus
Christ son of God savior and cross or as
St. Augustine expresses it. If you join
together the initial letters of the five
Greek words a sigma micron final sigma
cyro iota sigma tomicron theta epsilon
iota sigma sigma mega row which mean
Jesus Christ son of god savior they will
make iota k thetailon sigma fish in
which word Christ is mystically
understood because he was able to live
in the abyss of this mortality as in the
depth of waters that is without sin
monumental Christianity. Many Christians
observe Friday, which is sacred to the
virgin Venus, upon which day they shall
eat fish and not meat. The sign of the
fish was one of the earliest symbols of
Christianity, and when drawn upon the
sand, it informed one Christian that
another of the same faith was near.
Aquarius is called the sign of the water
bearer or the man with a jug of water on
his shoulder. Mentioned in the New
Testament, this is sometimes shown as an
angelic figure supposedly. androgynous
either pouring water from an urn or
carrying the vessel upon its shoulder.
Among oriental peoples a water vessel
alone is often used. Edward Uppam in his
history and doctrine of Buddhism
describes Aquarius as being in the shape
of a pot and of a color between blue and
yellow. This sign is the single house of
Saturn. When Hershel discovered the
planet Uranus, sometimes called by the
name of its discoverer, the second half
of the sign of Aquarius was allotted to
this added member of the planetary
family. The water pouring from the urn
of Aquarius under the name of the waters
of eternal life appears many times in
symbolism. So it is with all the signs.
Thus the sun in its path controls
whatever form of worship man offers to
the supreme deity. There are two
distinct systems of astrological
philosophy. One of them, the talmic, is
geocentric. The earth is considered the
center of the solar system around which
the sun, moon, and planets revolve.
Astronomically, the geocentric system is
incorrect. But for thousands of years,
it has proved its accuracy. when applied
to the material nature of earthly
things. A careful consideration of the
writings of the great occultists in a
study of their diagrams reveal the fact
that many of them were acquainted with
another method of arranging the heavenly
bodies. The other system of astrological
philosophy is called the heliocentric.
This posits the sun in the center of the
solar system where it naturally belongs
with the planets and their moons
revolving about it. The great difficulty
however with the heliocentric system is
that being comparatively new there has
not been sufficient time to experiment
successfully and catalog the effects of
its various aspects and relationships.
Geocentric astrology as its name implies
is confined to the earthy side of nature
while heliocentric astrology may be used
to analyze the higher intellectual and
spiritual faculties of man. The
important point to be remembered is that
when the sun was said to be in a certain
sign of the zodiac, the ancients really
meant that the sun occupied the opposite
sign and cast its long ray into the
house in which they enthroned it.
Therefore, when it is said that the sun
is in Taurus, it means astronomically
that the sun is in the sign opposite to
Taurus which is Scorpio. This resulted
in two distinct schools of philosophy,
one geocentric and exoteric, the other
heliocentric and esoteric. While the
ignorant multitudes worshiped the house
of the sun's reflection, which in the
case described would be the bull. The
wise revered the house of the sun's
actual dwelling, which would be the
scorpion or the serpent, the symbol of
the concealed spiritual mystery. This
sign has three different symbols. The
most common is that of a scorpion who
was called by the ancients the backbiter
being the symbol of deceit and
perversion. The second and less common
form of the sign is a serpent often used
by the ancients to symbolize wisdom.
Probably the rarest form of Scorpio is
that of an eagle. The arrangement of the
stars of the constellation bears as much
resemblance to a flying bird as to a
scorpion. Scorpio being the sign of a
cult initiation. The flying eagle, the
king of birds, represents the highest
and most spiritual type of Scorpio in
which it transcends the venomous insect
of the earth. As Scorpio and Taurus are
opposite each other in the zodiac, their
symbolism is often closely intermingled.
The honorable E M plucket in ancient
calendars and constellations says the
scorpion the constellation Scorpio of
the zodiac opposed to Taurus joins with
Mithris in his attack upon the bull and
always the geni of the spring and autumn
equinoxes are present in joyous and
mournful attitudes. The Egyptians, the
Assyrians, and the Babylonians, who knew
the sun as a bull called the Zodiac, a
series of furrows through which the
great celestial ox dragged the plow of
the sun. Hence, the populace offered up
sacrifice and led through the streets
magnificent steers bedcked with flowers
and surrounded with priests, dancing
girls of the temple, and musicians. The
philosophic elect did not participate in
these idolatrous ceremonials, but
advocated them as most suitable for the
types of mind. Composing the mass of the
population, these few possessed a far
deeper understanding as the serpent of
Scorpio upon their foreheads, the Urius
bore witness. The sun is often
symbolized with its rays in the form of
a shaggy mane. Concerning the Masonic
significance of Leo, Robert Hwitt Brown,
32° has written on the 21st of June when
the sun arrives at the summer solstice.
The constellation Leo being but 30° in
advance of the sun appears to be leading
the way and to aid by his powerful paw
in lifting the sun up to the summit of
the zodiacal arch asterisk asterisk
asterisk. This visible connection
between the constellation Leo and the
return of the sun to his place of power
and glory at the summit of the royal
arch of heaven was the principal reason
why that constellation was held in such
high esteem and reverence by the
ancients. The astrologers distinguished
Leo as the soul house of the sun and
taught that the world was created when
the sun was in that sign. The lion was
adored in the east and the west by the
Egyptians and the Mexicans. The chief
druid of Britain was style the lion.
Stellar theology in Masonic astronomy
when the Aquarian age is thoroughly
established. The sun will be in Leo as
will be noted from the explanation
previously given in this chapter.
Regarding the distinction between
geocentric and heliocentric astrology
then indeed will the secret religions of
the world include once more the raising
to initiation by the grip of the lion's
paw. Lazarus will come forth. The oldest
circular zodiac known is the one found
at Tentara in Egypt and now in the
possession of the French government. Mr.
John Cole describes this remarkable
zodiac as follows. The diameter of the
medallion in which the constellations
are sculptured is 4'9 in French measure.
It is surrounded by another circle of
much larger circumference containing
hieroglyphic characters. This second
circle is enclosed in a square whose
sides are 7 ft 9 in long. asterisk
asterisk asterisk the asterisms
constituting the zodiacal constellations
mixed with others are represented in a
spiral. The extremities of this spiral
after one revolution are Leo and Cancer.
Leo is no doubt at the head. It appears
to be trampling on a serpent and its
tail to be held by a woman. Immediately
after the lion comes the virgin holding
an ear of corn. Further on we perceive
two scales of a balance above which in a
metal lion is the figure of harpocrates.
Then follows the scorpion and
Sagittarius to whom the Egyptians gave
wings and two faces. After Sagittarius
are successively placed Capricornous,
Aquarius, Pisces, the ram, the bull and
the twins. This zodiacal procession is,
as we have already observed, terminated
by cancer, the crab. The antiquity of
the zodiac is much in dispute. To
contend that it originated, but a mere
few thousand years before the Christian
era is a colossal mistake on the part of
those who have sought to compile data
concerning its origin. The zodiac
necessarily must be ancient enough to go
backward to that period when its signs
and symbols coincided exactly with the
positions of the constellations whose
various creatures in their natural
functions exemplified the outstanding
features of the sun's activity during
each of the 12 months. One author after
many years of deep study on the subject
believed man's concept of the zodiac to
be at least 5 million years old. In all
probability, it is one of the many
things for which the modem world is
indebted to the Atlantean or the Lemuran
civilizations. About 10,000 years before
the Christian era, there was a period of
many ages when knowledge of every kind
was suppressed, tablets destroyed,
monuments torn down, and every vestage
of available material concerning
previous civilizations completely
obliterated. Only a few copper knives,
some arrowheads, and crude carvings on
the walls of caves bear mute witness of
those civilizations which preceded this
age of destruction. Here and there a few
gigantic structures have remained which
like the strange monoliths on Easter
Island are evidence of lost arts and
sciences and lost races. The human race
is exceedingly old. Modern science
counts its age in tens of thousands of
years, occultism in tens of millions.
There is an old saying that mother earth
has shaken many civilizations from her
back and it is not beyond reason that
the principles of astrology and
astronomy were evolved millions of years
before the first white man appeared. The
occultists of the ancient world had a
most remarkable understanding of the
principle of evolution. They recognized
all life as being in various stages of
becoming. They believed that grains of
sand were in the process of becoming
human in consciousness but not
necessarily in form. That human
creatures were in the process of
becoming planets, that planets were in
the process of becoming solar systems.
And that solar systems were in the
process of becoming cosmic chains and so
on. At infinitum, one of the stages
between the solar system and the cosmic
chain was called the zodiac. Therefore,
they taught that at a certain time a
solar system breaks up into a zodiac.
The house of the zodiac become the
thrones for 12 celestial hierarchies or
as certain of the ancient state 10
divine orders. Pythagoras taught that 10
or the unit of the decimal system was
the most perfect of all numbers and he
symbolized the number 10 by the lesser
tetris an arrangement of 10 dots in the
form of an upright triangle. The early
stargazers after dividing the zodiac
into its houses appointed the three
brightest scars in each constellation to
be the joint rulers of that house. Then
they divided the house into three
sections of 10 degrees each which they
called deans. These in turn were divided
in half resulting in the breaking up of
the zodiac into 72 duade of 5° each.
Over each of these duins, the Hebrews
placed a celestial intelligence or
angel. And from this system has resulted
the cabalistic arrangement of the 72
sacred names which correspond to the 72
flowers, knaps and almonds upon the
seven branched candlestick of the
tabernacle and the 72 men who were
chosen from the 12 tribes to represent
Israel. The only two signs not already
mentioned are Gemini and Sagittarius.
The constellation of Gemini is generally
represented as two small children who
according to the ancients were born out
of eggs, possibly the ones that the bull
broke with his horns. The stories
concerning Castor and Pollock and
Romulus and Remis may be the result of
amplifying the myths of these celestial
twins. The symbols of Gemini have passed
through many modifications. The one used
by the Arabians was the peacock. Two of
the important stars in the constellation
of Gemini still bear the names of Castor
and Pollock. The sign of Gemini is
supposed to have been the patron of
phallic worship and the two obelisks or
pillars in front of temples and churches
convey the same symbolism as the twins.
The sign of Sagittarius consists of what
the ancient Greeks called a centur
composite creature. The lower half of
whose body was in the form of a horse
while the upper half was human. The
centaur is generally shown with a bow
and arrow in his hands aiming a shaft
far off into the stars. Hence,
Sagittarius stands for two distinct
principles. First, it represents the
spiritual evolution of man for the human
form is rising from the body of the
beast. Secondly, it is the symbol of
aspiration and ambition. For as the
centaur aims his arrow at the stars, so
every human creature aims at a higher
mark than he can reach. Albert Church in
the signs and symbols of primordial man
sums up the influence of the zodiac upon
religious symbolism in the following
words. The division here is in 12 parts.
the 12 signs of the zodiac, 12 tribes of
Israel, 12 gates of heaven mentioned in
Revelation, and 12 entrances or portals
to be passed through in the great
pyramid before finally reaching the
highest degree and 12 apostles in the
Christian doctrines and the 12 original
and perfect points in masonry. The
ancients believe that the theory of
man's being made in the image of God was
to be understood literally. They
maintained that the universe was a great
organism not unlike the human body and
that every phase and function of the
universal body had a correspondence in
man. The most precious key to wisdom
that the priests communicated to the new
initiates was what they termed the law
of analogy. Therefore to the ancients
the study of the stars was a sacred
science. For they saw in the movements
of the celestial bodies the everpresent
activity of the infinite father. The
Pythagoreans were often undeservedly
criticized for promulgating the
so-called doctrine of metamsychosis or
the transmigration of souls. This
concept is circulated among the
uninitiated was merely a blind, however,
to conceal a sacred truth. Greek mystics
believe that the spiritual nature of man
descended into material existence from
the Milky Way, the seed ground of souls
through one of the 12 gates of the great
zodiacal band. The spiritual nature was
therefore said to incarnate in the form
of the symbolic creature created by
Maggie and stargazers to represent the
various zodiacal constellations. If the
spirit incarnated through the sign of
Aries, it was said to be born in the
body of a ram. If in Taurus in the body
of the celestial bull, all human beings
were thus symbolized by 12 mysterious
creatures through the natures of which
they were able to incarnate into the
material world. The theory of
transmigration was not applicable to the
visible material body of man, but rather
to the invisible immaterial spirit
wandering along the pathway of the stars
and sequentially assuming in the course
of evolution the forms of the sacred
zodiacal animals. In the third book of
the mythsis of Julius Fermicus maternus
appears the following extract concerning
the positions of the heavenly bodies at
the time of the establishment of the
inferior universe. According to
Esculapius therefore and Anubius to whom
especially the divinity Mercury
committed the secrets of the
astrological science the genature of the
world is as follows. They constituted
the sun in the 15th part of Leo. The
moon in the 15th part of Cancer Saturn
in the 15th part of Capricorn Jupiter in
the 15th part of Sagittary. Mars in the
15th part of Scorpio Venus in the 15th
part of Libra. Mercury in the 15th part
of Virgo and the horoscope in the 15th
part of Cancer conformably to this gener
of the stars and the testimonies which
they aduce in confirmation of this
genature. They are of opinion that the
destinies of men also are disposed in
accordance with the above arrangement as
may be learned from that book of
Escalapius which is called Muupsilon
Odoms new epsilon sigma i.e 10,
thousand, or an innumerable multitude of
genres in order that nothing in the
several genes of men may be found to be
discordant with the abovementioned
gener. The seven ages of men are under
the control of the planets in the
following order. Infancy, the moon,
childhood, Mercury, adolescence, Venus,
maturity, the sun, middle age, Mars,
advanced age, Jupiter, and decrepitude
and dissolution, Saturn, the Benbine
table of Isis. Concerning the theoric or
magic sense in which the Egyptian
priests exhibited in the Benbine table
of Isis, the philosophy of sacrifice,
rights, and ceremonies by a system of
occult symbols. Athanasius Kercher
writes, "The early priests believe that
a great spiritual power was invoked by
correct and unabbridged sacrificial
ceremonies. If one feature were lacking,
the whole was visiated," says I amus.
Hence, they were most careful in all
details, for they considered it
absolutely essential for the entire
chain of logical connections to be
exactly according to ritual. Certainly
for no other reason did they prepare and
prescribe for future use the manuals as
it were for conducting the rights. They
learned too what the first hyromancers
possessed as it were by a divine fury
devised as a system of symbolism for
exhibiting their mysteries. These they
placed in this tablet of Isis before the
eyes of those admitted to the sanctum
sancttorum in order to teach the nature
of the gods and the prescribed forms of
sacrifice. Since each of the orders of
gods had its own peculiar symbols,
gestures, costumes, and ornaments, they
thought it necessary to observe these in
the whole apparatus of worship, as
nothing was more efficacious in drawing
the benign attention of the deities and
geni. asterisk asterisk asterisk. Thus,
their temples, remote from the usual
haunts of men, contain representations
of nearly every form in nature. First in
the pavement they symbolized the
physical economy of the world using
minerals, stones and other things
suitable for ornaments including little
streams of water. The walls showed the
starry world and the done the world of
Geni. In the center was the altar to
suggest the emanations of the supreme
mind from its center. Thus the entire
interior constituted a picture of the
universe of worlds. The priests in
making sacrifices wore raignment adorned
with figures similar to those attributed
to the gods. Their bodies were partially
bare like those of the deities and they
themselves were devested of all material
cares and practices the strictest
chastity. asterisk asterisk asterisk
their heads were veiled to indicate
their charge of earthly things. Their
heads and bodies were shaved for they
regarded hair as a useless excressence.
Upon the head they bore the same
insignia as those attributed to the
gods. Thus arrayed they regarded
themselves to be transformed into that
intelligence with which they constantly
desired to be identified. For example,
in order to call down to the world the
soul and spirit of the universe, they
stood before the image shown in the
center of our tablet wearing the same
symbols as that figure and its
attendance and offered sacrifices. By
these and the accompanying singing of
hymns, they believe that they infallibly
drew the gods attention to their prayer.
And so they did in regard to other
regions of the tablet, believing of
necessity the proper ritual properly
carried out would evoke the deity
desired that this was the origin of the
science of oracles is apparent as a
touched cord produces a harmony of
sound. Likewise, the adjoining chords
respond though not touched. Similarly,
the idea they expressed by their
concurrent acts while adoring the god
came into accord with basic idea and by
an intellectual union it was returned to
them dayformed and they thus obtained
the idea of ideas. Hence there sprang up
in their souls. They thought the gift of
prophecy and divination and they
believed they could foretell future
events, impending evils etc. For as in
the supreme mind, everything is
simultaneous and spaceless, the future
is therefore present in that mind. And
they thought that while the human mind
was absorbed in the supreme by
contemplation, by that union, they were
enabled to know all the future. Nearly
all that is represented in our tablet
consists of amulets which by analogy
above described would inspire them under
the described conditions with the
virtues of the supreme power and enable
them to receive good and avert evil.
They also believe they could in this
magical manner affect cures of diseases
that geni could be induced to appear to
them during sleep and cure or teach them
to cure the sick. In this belief they
consulted the gods about all sort of
doubts and difficulties while adorned
with the similacra of the mystic right
and intently contemplating the divine
ideas and while so enraptured they
believed the god by some sign nod or
gesture communicated with them whether
asleep or awake concerning the truth or
falsity of the matter in point. See
Edypus, Egypt, the Benine table of Isis.
A manuscript by Thomas Taylor contains
the following remarkable paragraph.
Plato was initiated into the greater
mysteries at the age of 49. The
initiation took place in one of the
subterranean halls of the great pyramid
in Egypt. The isak table formed the
altar before which the divine Plato
stood and received that which was always
his but which the ceremony of the
mysteries enkindled and brought from its
dormant state. With this ascent after
three days in the great hall, he was
received by the hierofphant of the
pyramid. The hierofphant was seen only
by those who had passed the three days,
the three degrees, the three dimensions,
and given verbally the highest esoteric
teachings, each accompanied with its
appropriate symbol. After a further 3
months, sojurnn in the halls of the
pyramid, the initiate Plato was sent out
into the world to do the work of the
great order as Pythagoras and Orpheus
had been before him. Before the sacking
of Rome in 1527, there is no historical
mention of the Msa Isaka tablet of Isis.
At that time, the tablet came into the
possession of a certain locksmith or
iron worker who sold it at an exorbitant
price to Cardinal Bimbo, a celebrated
antiquaryy, historioggrapher of the
Republic of Venice, and afterwards
librarian of St. Marks. After his death
in 1547, the isak tablet was acquired by
the house of Manua in whose museum it
remained until 1630 when troops of
Ferdinand 2 captured the city of Manua.
Several early writers on the subject
have assumed that the tablet was
demolished by the ignorant soldiery for
the silver it contained. The assumption,
however, was erroneous. The tablet fell
into the hands of Cardinal Pava who
presented it to the Duke of Seavoi who
in turn presented it to the king of
Sardinia when the French conquered Italy
in 1797. The tablet was carried to Paris
in 1809. Alexander Lenor writing of the
Mensa Isiaka said it was on exhibition
at the Bibliotech National. Upon the
establishment of peace between the two
countries, it was returned to Italy. In
his guide to northern Italy, Carl Beder
describes the Msa Ayaka as being in the
center of gallery 2 in the Museum of
Antiquities at Torrent. A faithful
reproduction of the original tablet was
made in 1559 by the celebrated Inius
Vicus of Parma and a copy of the
engraving was given by the Chancellor of
the Duke of Bavaria to the Museum of
Hieroglyphics. Athanasius Kercher
describes the tablet as five palms long
and four wide. Winn Westcot says it
measures 50 by 30 in. It was made of
bronze and decorated with enostic or
smalt enamel and silver inlay. Fosbroke
adds the figures are cut very shallow
and the contour of most of them is
encircled by threads of silver. The
bases upon which the figures were seated
or reclined and left blank in the prince
were of silver and are torn away. See
encyclopedia of antiquities. Those
familiar with the fundamental principles
of hermetic philosophy will recognize in
the msa the key to calaldian Egyptian
and Greek theology in his antiquities
the learned benedicting father Mont
Faulen admits his inability to cope with
the intricacies of its symbolism. He
therefore doubts that the emblems upon
the tablet possess any significance
worthy of consideration and ridicules.
Kercher declaring him to be more obscure
than the tablet itself. Lorentu's
Piggorius reproduced the tablet in
connection with a descriptive essay
in6005, but his timidly advanced
explanations demonstrated his ignorance
concerning the actual interpretation of
the figures. In his Edypus Egypt
published in 1654, Kercher attacked the
problem with characteristic aidity.
Being peculiarly qualified for such a
task by years of research in matters
pertaining to the secret doctrines of
antiquity and with the assistance of a
group of eminent scholars, Kercher
accomplished much towards an exposition
of the mysteries of the tablet. The
master's secret however eluded even him
as alpha as Levi has shrewdly noted in
his history of magic. The learned Jesuit
writes Levi divine that it contained the
hieroglyphic key to sacred alphabets.
Though he was unable to develop the
explanation, it is divided into three
equal compartments. Above are the 12
houses of heaven and below are the
corresponding distributions of labor
work periods throughout the year. While
in the middle place are 21 sacred signs
answering to the letters of the
alphabet. In the midst of all is a
seated figure of the panamorphic INX
emblem of universal being and
corresponding as such to the Hebrew yod
or to that unique letter from which all
the other letters were formed. The INX
is encircled by the offite triad
answering to the three mother letters of
the Egyptian and Hebrew alphabets. On
the right are the ibomorphic and
serapian triads. On the left are those
of nepes and heced representing active
and passive fixed and volatile
fructifying fire ant generating water.
Each pair of triads in conjunction with
the center produces a septener and a
septenery is contained in the center.
The three septineries furnish the
absolute number of the three worlds as
well as the complete number of primitive
letters to which a complimentary sign is
added like zero to the nine numerals.
Levi's hint may be construed to mean
that the 21 figures in the center
section of the table represent the 21
major trumps of the tarot cards. If this
be so is not the zero card of so much
controversy the nameless crown of the
supreme mind. The crown being symbolized
by the hidden triad in the upper part of
the throne in the center of the table.
Might not the first emanation of this
supreme mind be well symbolized by a
juggler or magician with the symbols of
the four lower worlds spread out on a
table before him. The rod, the sword,
the cup, and the coin. Thus considered
the zero card belongs nowhere among the
others but is in fact the
fourthdimensional point from which they
all emanated and consequently is broken
up into the 21 cards letters which when
gathered together produce the zero. The
cipher appearing upon this card would
substantiate this interpretation for the
cipher or circle is emblematic of the
superior sphere from which issue the
lower worlds powers and letters. Wescott
carefully collected the all too meager
theories advanced by various authorities
and in 1887 published his now extremely
rare volume which contains the only
detailed description of the isak tablet
published in English since Humphre
translated Mont Faulen's worthless
description in 1721. After explaining
his reticence to reveal that which Levi
evidently felt was better left
concealed, Westcot sums up his
interpretation of the tablet as follows.
The diagram of Levi by which he explains
the mystery of the tablet shows the
upper region divided into the four
seasons of the year each with three
signs of the zodiac and he has added the
four-lettered sacred name the
tetragrammatin assigning j to Aquarius
that is canopus heed to taurus that is
apis va to leo that is mda and he final
to typhon. Note the cherubic parallel
man bull lion and eagle. The fourth form
is found either as scorpion or eagle
depending upon the occult good or evil.
Intention in the demonic zodiac. The
snake replaces the scorpion. The lower
region he ascribes to the 12 simple
Hebrew letters associating them with the
four quarters of the horizon. The Isak
tablet writes Levi is a key to the
ancient book of th which has survived to
some extent the lapse of centuries and
is pictured to us in the still
comparatively ancient set of Taraki
cards. To him the book of th was a
resume of the esoteric learning of the
Egyptians after the decadence of their
civilization. This lore became
crystallized in a hieroglyphic form as
the tarot. This tarot having become
partially or entirely forgotten or
misunderstood. Its pictured symbols fell
into the hands of the sham divers and of
the providers of the public amusement by
games of cards. The modem tarot or
taraki pack of cards consists of 78
cards of which 22 form a special group
of trumps of pictorial design. The
remaining 56 are composed of four suits
of 10 numerals and four court cards
king, queen, knight and nave or valet.
The suits are swords, militarism, cups,
sassidosi, clubs or wands, agriculture,
and shekels or coins, commerce,
answering respectively to our spades,
hearts, clubs, and diamonds. Our purpose
is with the 22 trumps. These form the
special characteristic of the pack and
are the lineal descendants of the
hieroglyphics of the tarot. These 22
respond to the letters of the Hebrew and
other sacred alphabets which fall
naturally into three classes of a trio
of mothers. A heptad of doubles and a
doode of simple letters. They are also
considered as a triad of heptads and one
apart a system of initiation and an
uninitiate planetary. In the middle we
see above the sun marked ops and below
it is a Solomon's seal above a cross a
double triangle hexapla one light and
one dark triangle superpost the whole
forming a sort of complex symbol of
Venus to the ibomorphos he gives the
three dark planets Venus Mercury and
Mars placed around a dark triangle erect
denoting fire to the Nephian triad he
gives three light planets Saturn Luna
and Jupiter around a light inverted
triangle which denotes water. There is a
necessary connection between water,
female power, passive principle, bina,
and sepharotic mother and bride. See the
cabala by matters. Note the ancient
signs for the planets. We're all
composed of a cross, solar disc, and
crescent. Venus is a cross below a sun
disc. Mercury, a disc with a crescent
above and cross below. Saturn is a cross
whose lowest point touches the apex of
the crescent. Jupiter is a crescent
whose lowest point touches the left hand
end of a cross. All these are deep
mysteries. Note that Levi in his
original plate transposed Sarapus and
Hecati but not the Apis noir and Apis
Blanc perhaps because of the head of
Bess being associated by him with
Hecade. Note that having referred the 12
simple letters to the lower, the seven
double must correspond to the central
region of the planets and then the great
triad am the mother letters representing
air, water and fire remain to be
pictured around s the central or yod by
the afionian triad. the two serpents and
the leonine sphinx Levi's word ops in
the center is the Latin ops terra genius
of the earth and the Greek ops ria or
cubil sibily often drawn as a god is
seated in a chariot drawn by lions she
is crowned with turrets and holds a key
see the tablet the essay published in
French by Alexander Lenor in 1809 while
curious and original contains little
real information on on the tablet which
the author seeks to prove was an
Egyptian calendar or astrological chart
as both Mont Faulen and Lenor in fact
all writers on the subject since 1651
either have based their work upon that
of Kercher or have been influenced
considerably by him a careful
translation has been made of the
latter's original article 80 pages of
17th century Latin the double page
played at the beginning of this chapter
is a faithful reproduction made by
Kercher from the engraving the Museum of
Hieroglyphics. The small letters and
numbers used to designate the figures
were added by him to clarify his
commentary and will be used for the same
purpose in this work. Like nearly all
religious and philosophical antiquities,
the Benbine table of Isis has been the
subject of much controversy. In a
footnote, a ew wait unable to
differentiate between the true and the
purported nature or origin of the tablet
echoes the sentiments of JG Wilkinson,
another eminent exotericus. The original
table is exceedingly late and is roughly
termed a forgery. On the other hand,
Edward Wkelman, a man of profound
learning, defends the genuiness and
antiquity of the tablet. A sincere
consideration of the Mensa Aizyaka
discloses one fact of paramount
importance that although whoever
fashioned the table was not necessarily
an Egyptian, he was an initiate of the
highest order conversant with the most
arcane tenants of hermetic esotericism.
Symbolism of the Benbine table. The
following necessarily brief elucidation
of the Benbine table is based upon a
digest of the writings of curture
supplemented by other information
gleaned by the present author from the
mystical writings of the calaldanss,
Hebrews, Egyptians and Greeks. The
temples of the Egyptians were so
designed that the arrangement of
chambers, decorations, and utensils was
all of symbolic significance as shown by
the hieroglyphics that covered them.
Beside the altar, which usually was in
the center of each room, was the Sistn
of Nile water, which flowed in and out
through unseen pipes. Here also were
images of the gods in concatenated
series accompanied by magical
inscriptions. In these temples by use of
symbols and hieroglyphics, Nephites were
instructed in the secrets of the
sacraodal cast. The tablet of Isis was
originally a table or altar, and its
emblems were part of the mysteries
explained by priests. Tables were
dedicated to the various gods and
goddesses. In this case, Isis was so
honored. The substances from which the
tables were made differed according to
the relative dignities of the deities.
The tables consecrated to Jupiter and
Apollo were of gold, those to Diana,
Venus, and Juno were of silver, those to
the other superior gods, of marble,
those to the lesser divinities, of wood.
tables were also made of metals
corresponding to the planets governed by
the various celestials as food for the
body is spread on a banquet table. So on
these sacred altars were spread the
symbols which when understood feed the
invisible nature of man. In his
introduction to the table, Kercher
summarizes its symbolism thus it teaches
in the first place. The whole
constitution of the three-fold world,
archetypal, intellectual, and sensible.
The supreme divinity is shown moving
from the center to the circumference of
a universe made up of both sensible and
inanimate things, all of which are
animated and agitated by the one supreme
power which they call the father mind
and represented by a three-fold symbol.
Here also are shown three triads from
the supreme one, each manifesting one
attribute of the first trrimorti. These
triads are called the foundation or the
base of all things. In the table is also
set forth the arrangement and
distribution of those divine creatures
that aid the father mind in the control
of the universe. Here in the upper panel
are to be seen the governors of the
worlds each with its fiery ethereal and
material insignia. Here also in the
lower panel are the fathers of fountains
whose duty it is to care for and
preserve the principles of all things
and sustain the inviable laws of nature.
Here are the gods of the spheres and
also those who wander from place to
place laboring with all substances and
forms Zia and Aonia grouped together as
figures of both sexes with their faces
turned to their superior deity wonders
of antiquity. It was a common practice
among the early Egyptians, Greeks and
Romans to seal lighted lamps in the
sephilers of their dead as offerings to
the god of death. Possibly it was also
believed that the deceased could use
these lights in finding his way through
the valley of the shadow. Later, as the
custom became generally established, not
only actual lamps, but miniatures of
them in terracotta were buried with the
dead. Some of the lamps were enclosed in
circular vessels for protection, and
instances have been recorded in which
the original oil was found in them in a
perfect state of preservation after more
than 2,000 years. There is ample proof
that many of these lamps were burning
when the sephilers were sealed, and it
has been declared that they were still
burning when the vaults were opened
hundreds of years later. The possibility
of preparing a fuel which would renew
itself as rapidly as it was consumed has
been a source of considerable
controversy among medieval authors.
After due consideration of the evidence
at hand, it seems well within the range
of possibility that the ancient priest
chemists did manufacture lamps that
burned, if not indefinitely, at least
for considerable periods of time.
Numerous authorities have written on the
subject of ever burning lamps. Winn
Wescott estimates the number of writers
who have given the subject consideration
as more than 150 and H P Levatsky as
173. While conclusions reached by
different authors are at variance, a
majority admit the existence of these
phenomenal lamps. Only a few maintained
that the lamps would burn forever, but
many were willing to concede that they
might remain a light for several
centuries without replenishment of the
fuel. Some considered the so-called
perpetual lights as mere artififices of
the crafty pagan priests, while a great
many admitting that the lamps actually
burned, made the sweeping assertion that
the devil was using. This apparent
miracle to ensnare the credulous and
thereby lead their souls to predition.
On this subject, the learned Jesuit
Athanasius Kercher, usually dependable,
exhibits a striking inconsistency. In
his Edypus Egypt, he writes, "Not a few
of these ever burning lamps have been
found to be the devices of devils. And I
take it that all the lamps found in the
tombs of the Gentiles dedicated to the
worship of certain gods were of this
kind, not because they burned, or have
been reported to burn with a perpetual
flame, but because probably the devil
set them there maliciously, intending
thereby to obtain fresh credence for a
false worship. Having admitted that
dependable authorities defend the
existence of the ever burning lamps and
that even the devil lends himself to
their manufacturer, Kercher next
declared the entire theory to be
desperate and impossible and to be
classed with perpetual motion and the
philosopher&lt;unk&gt;'s stone. Having already
solved the problem to his satisfaction
once, Kercher solves it again, but
differently in the following words. In
Egypt there are rich deposits of asphalt
and petroleum. What did these clever
fellows the priests do then but connect
an oil deposit by a secret duct with one
or more lamps provided with wicks of
asbestous? How could such lamps help
burning perpetually? asterisk asterisk
asterisk in my opinion this is the
solution of the riddle of the
supernatural everlastingness of these
ancient lamps. Mont Faulen in his
antiquities agrees in the main with the
later deductions of Kercher believing
that fabled perpetual lamps of the
temples to be cunning mechanical
contrivances. He further adds that the
belief that lamps burned indefinitely in
tombs was the result of the noteworthy
fact that in some cases fumes resembling
smoke poured forth from the entrances of
newly opened vaults. Parties going in
later and discovering lamps scattered
about the floor assumed that they were
the source of the fumes. There are
several interesting stories concerning
the discoveries of ever burning lamps in
various parts of the world. In a tomb on
the Aion way, which was opened during
the papacy of Paul III, was found a
burning lamp which had remained a light
in a hermetically sealed vault for
nearly 1,600 years. According to an
account written by a contemporary, a
body that of a young and beautiful girl
with long golden hair was found floating
in an unknown transparent liquid and is
well preserved as though death had
occurred but a few hours before. About
the interior of the vault were a number
of significant objects which included
several lamps, one of them a light.
Those entering the sephilic declared
that the draft caused by the opening of
the door blew out the light and the lamp
could not be relight. Kercher reproduces
an epitap talleoli phillyme
supposedly found in the tomb but which
Mont Faulen declares never existed. The
latter adding that although conclusive
evidence was not found the body was
generally believed to be that of Talola
the daughter of Cicero. Ever burning
lamps have been discovered in all parts
of the world. Not only the Mediterranean
countries but also India, Tibet, China
and South America have contributed
records of lights which burned
continuously without fuel. The examples
which follow were selected at random
from the imposing list of perpetual
lamps found in different ages. Plutarch
wrote of a lamp that burned over the
door of a temple to Jupiter Ammon. The
priests declared that it had remained a
light for centuries without fuel. St.
Augustine described a perpetual lamp
guarded in a temple in Egypt sacred to
Venus which neither wind nor water could
extinguish. He believed it to be the
work of the devil. An ever burning lamp
was found at Adessa or Antioch during
the reign of the emperor Justinian. It
was in a niche over the city gate
elaborately enclosed to protect it from
the elements. The date upon it proved
that the lamp had been burning for more
than 500 years. It was destroyed by
soldiers. During the early middle ages,
a lamp was found in England which had
burned since the 3rd century after
Christ. The monument containing it was
believed to be the tomb of the father of
Constantine the great. The lantern of
palace was discovered near Rome in
AD401.
It was found in the sephiler of palace,
son of aander, immortalized by Virgil in
his anid. The lamp was placed at the
head of the body and had burned with a
steady glow for more than 2,000 years.
In AD 1550 on the island of Nes in the
Bay of Naples, a magnificent marble
vault was opened in which was found a
lamp still a light which had been placed
there before the beginning of the
Christian era. Posanius described a
beautiful golden lamp in the temple of
Manurva which burned steadily for a year
without refueling or having the wick
trimmed. The ceremony of filling the
lamp took place annually and time was
measured by the ceremony. According to
the FMA fraternitatus, the crypt of
Christian Rosenites when opened 120
years after his death was found to be
brilliantly illuminated by a perpetual
lamp suspended from the ceiling. Numa
Pompilius, king of Rome and magician of
considerable power, caused a perpetual
light to burn in the dome of a temple he
had created in honor of an elemental
being. In England, a curious tomb was
found containing the windings of these
serpents formed the base, and the three
heads sustained the three feet of the
tripod. It is impossible to secure
satisfactory information concerning the
shape and size of the celebrated
Delelfian tripod. Theories concerning it
are based in most part upon small
ornamental tripods discovered in various
temples. According to Bumont, the above
is the most authentic form of the
Delphian tripod extent. But as the
tripod must have changed considerably
during the life of the oracle, hasty
conclusions are unwise. In his
description of the tripod, Bulmont
divides it into four parts. One, a frame
with three. Two, a reverberating basin
or bull set in the frame. E, a flat
plate or table upon which the Pythus
sat. and four, a cone-shaped cover over
the table, which completely concealed
the priestess, and from beneath which
her voice sounded forth in weird and
hollow tones. Attempts have been made to
relate the Delelfian tripod with the
Jewish ark of the covenant, the frame of
three legs was likened to the ark of the
covenant, the flat plate or table to the
mercy seat, and the cone- shaped
covering to the tent of the tabernacle
itself. This entire conception differs
widely from that popularly accepted but
discloses a valuable analogy between
Jewish and Greek symbolism. An automaton
which moved when certain stones in the
floor of the vault were stepped upon by
an intruder. At that time the Rosacruian
controversy was at its height. So it was
decided that the tomb was that of a
Rosacruian initiate. A countryman
discovering the tomb and entering found
the interior brilliantly lighted by a
lamp hanging from the ceiling. As he
walked, his weight depressed some of the
floor stones. At once, a seated figure
in heavy armor began to move.
Mechanically, it rose to its feet and
struck the lamp with an iron batten,
completely destroying it, and thus
effectually preventing the discovery of
the secret substance which maintained
the flame. How long the lamp had burned
is unknown, but certainly it had been
for a considerable number of years. It
is related that among the tombs near
Memphis and in the Brahman temples of
India, lights have been found in sealed
chambers and vessels. But sudden
exposure to the air has extinguished
them and caused their fuel to evaporate.
It is now believed that the wicks of
these perpetual lamps were made of
braided or woven asbestous called by the
alchemist salamander's wool and that the
fuel was one of the products of
alchemical research. Kercher attempted
to extract oil from asbestous, being
convinced that as the substance itself
was indestructible by fire and oil
extracted from it would supply the lamp
with a fuel likewise indestructible.
After spending 2 years in fruitless
experimental work, he concluded that the
task was impossible of accomplishment.
Several formula for the making of the
fuel for the lamps have been preserved.
In Isis Unveiled HP, Bllovatzky reprints
two of these formula from early authors
Triton and Bartome Cornf one will
suffice to give a general understanding
of the process. Sulfur alum A4 sublime
them into flowers to J of which add of
crystalline Venetian borax powdered J
upon these FU's high rectified spirit of
wine and digest it. Then abstract it and
pour on fresh. Repeat this so often till
the sulfur melts like wax without any
smoke upon a hot plate of brass. This is
for the pabulum. But the wick is to be
prepared after this manner. Gather the
threads or thrums of the lapis asbestous
to the thickness of your middle and the
length of your little finger. Then put
them into a Venetian glass and covering
them over with the aforated sulfur or
alamment. Set the glass in. sand for the
space of 24 hours, so hot that the
sulfur may bubble all the while. The
wick being thus besmeared and anointed,
is to be put into a glass like a scolop
shell, in such manner that some part of
it may lie above the mass of prepared
sulfur. Then setting this glass upon hot
sand, you must melt the sulfur so that
it may lay hold of the wick, and when it
is lighted, it will burn with a
perpetual flame. And you may set this
lamp in any place where you please. the
Greek oracles. The worship of Apollo
included the establishment and
maintenance of places of prophecy by
means of which the gods could
communicate with mankind and reveal
futurity to such as deserved the bone.
The early history of Greece abounds with
accounts of talking trees, rivers,
statues, and caves in which nymphs,
dryads, or demons had taken up their
abodess and from which they delivered
oracles. While Christian authors have
tried to prove that oracular revelations
were delivered by the devil for the
purpose of misleading humanity, they
have not dared to attack the theory of
oracles because of the repeated
reference to it in their own sacred
writings. If the onyx stones on the
shoulders of Israel's high priest made
known by their flashings the will of
Jehovah, then a black dove temporarily
endowed with the faculty of speech could
indeed pronounce oracles in the temple
of Jupiter Ammon. If the witch of Ender
could invoke the shade of Samuel, who in
turn gave prophecies to Saul, could not
a priestess of Apollo called up the
spectre of her lege to foretell the
destiny of Greece. The most famous
oracles of antiquity were those of Deli,
Dona, Trafonius, and Leona, of which the
talking oak trees of Dona were the
oldest. Though it is impossible to trace
back to the genesis of the theory of
oracular prophecy, it is known that many
of the caves and fissurers set aside by
the Greeks as oracles were sacred long
before the rise of Greek culture. The
oracle of Apollo at Deli remains one of
the unsolved mysteries of the ancients.
Alexander Wilder derives the name Deli
from Delos, the womb. This name was
chosen by the Greeks because of the
shape of the cavern and the vent leading
into the depths of the earth. The
original name of the oracle was Pytho,
so-called because its chambers had been
the abode of the great serpent Python, a
fearsome creature that had crept out of
the slime left by the receding flood
that had destroyed all human beings
except Dukeen and Pira. Apollo climbing
the side of Mount Pernaces, slew the
serpent after a prolonged combat and
threw the body down the fisher of the
oracle. From that time, the sun god
surnamed the Pytheian Apollo gave
oracles from the vent. With Dianisis, he
shared the honor of being the patron god
of Deli. After being vanquished by
Apollo, the spirit of Python remained at
Deli as the representative of his
conqueror. And it was with the aid of
his affluvium that the priestess was
able to become in rapport with the god.
The fumes rising from the fisher of the
oracle were supposed to come from the
decaying body of Python. The name
Pythonus or Pytheia given to the female
hierofphant of the oracle means
literally one who has been thrown into a
religious frenzy by inhaling fumes
rising from decomposing matter. It is of
further interest to note that the Greeks
believe the oracle of deli to be the
umbilicus of the earth. Thus proving
that they considered the planet an
immense human being. The connection
between the principle of aacular
revelation and the occult significance
of the naval is an important secret
belonging to the ancient mysteries. The
oracle, however, is much older than the
foregoing account indicates. A story of
this kind was probably invented by the
priests to explain the phenomena to
those inquisitive persons whom they did
not consider worthy of enlightenment
regarding the true esoteric nature of
the oracle. Some believe that the
Delphic Fisher was discovered by a
Hypoborean priest. But as far back as
recorded history goes, the cave was
sacred and persons came from all parts
of Greece and the surrounding countries
to question the demon who dwelt in its
chimney-like vent. Priests and
priestesses guarded it closely and
served the spirit who dwelt therein and
who enlightened humanity through the
gift of prophecy. The story of the
original discovery of the oracle is
somewhat as follows. shepherds tending
their flocks on the side of Mount
Pernaces were amazed at the peculiar
antics of goats that wandered close to a
great chasm on its southwestern spur.
The animals jumped about as though
trying to dance and admitted strange
cries unlike anything before heard. At
last one of the shepherds, curious to
learn the cause of the phenomenon,
approached the vent from which were
rising noxious fumes. Immediately he was
seized with a prophetic ecstasy. He
danced with wild abandon, sang, jabbered
inarticulate sounds, and foretold future
events. Others went close to the fiser
with the same result. The fame of the
place spread, and many came to learn of
the future by inhaling the methidic
fumes, which exhilarated to the verge of
delirium. Some of those who came, being
unable to control themselves, and having
temporarily the strength of madmen, tore
themselves from those seeking to
restrain them, and jumping into the
vent, perished. In order to prevent
others from doing likewise, a wall was
erected around the fisher, and a
prophetus was appointed to act as
mediator between the oracle and those
who came to question it. According to
later authorities, a tripod of gold
ornamented with carvings of Apollo in
the form of Python the great serpent was
placed over the clft and on this was
arranged a specially prepared seat. So
constructed that a person would have
difficulty in falling off while under
the influence of the oracular fumes.
Just before this time a story had been
circulated that the fumes of the oracle
arose from the decaying body of Python.
It is possible that the oracle revealed
its own origin. For many centuries
during its early history, virgin maidens
were consecrated to the service of the
oracle. They were called the feebades or
pythe and constituted that famous order
now known as the pytheian priesthood. It
is probable that women were chosen to
receive the oracles because their
sensitive and emotional nature
responded. Apollo, the twin brother of
Diana, was the son of Jupiter and
Latona. Apollo was fully adult at the
time of his birth. He was considered to
be the first physician and the inventor
of music and song. The Greeks also
acclaimed him to be father of the bow
and arrow. The famous temple of Apollo
at deli was rebuilt five times. The
first temple was formed only of laurel
branches. The second was somewhat
similar. The third was brass and the
fourth and fifth were probably of marble
of considerable size and great beauty.
No other oracle in Greece equal in
magnificence that of Deli in the zenith
of its power. Writers declare that it
contained many statues of solid gold and
silver, marvelous ornaments and
implements of the most valuable
materials and beautiful workmanship
donated by princes and kings who came
from all parts of the civilized world to
consult the spirit of Apollo dwelling in
this sanctuary more quickly and
completely to the fumes of enthusiasm.
Three days before the time set to
receive the communications from Apollo,
the virgin priestess began the ceremony
of purification, she bathed in the
Castellian well, abstained from all
food, drank only from the fountain of
Cassodus, which was brought into the
temple through concealed pipes, and just
before mounting the tripod, she chewed a
few leaves of the sacred bay tree. It
has been said that the water was drugged
to bring on distorted visions or the
priests of Deli were able to manufacture
an exhilarating and intoxicating gas
which they conducted by subterranean
ducts and released into the shaft of the
oracles several feet below the surface.
Neither of these theories has been
proved however nor does either in any
way explain the accuracy of the
predictions. When a young prophetus had
completed the process of purification,
she was clothed in sanctified raignment
and led to the tripod upon which she
seated herself, surrounded by the
noxious vapors rising from the yawning
fissure. Gradually, as she inhaled the
fumes, a change came over her. It was as
if a different spirit had entered her
body. She struggled, tore her clothing,
and uttered inarticulate cries. After a
time, her struggles ceased. Upon
becoming calm, a great majesty seemed to
poss her, and with eyes fixed on space
and body rigid, she uttered the
prophetic words. The predictions were
usually in the form of hexameter verse,
but the words were often ambiguous and
sometimes unintelligible. Every sound
that she made, every motion of her body
was carefully recorded by the five Hoji
or holy men who were appointed as
scribes to preserve the minutest details
of each divination. The Hoji were
appointed for life and were chosen from
the direct descendants of Ducalon. After
the oracle was delivered, the Pythia
began to struggle again and the spirit
released her. She was then carried or
supported to a chamber of rest where she
remained till the nervous ecstasy had
passed away. I amus in his dissertation
on the mysteries describes how the
spirit of the oracle a fiery demon. Even
Apollo himself took control of the
Pythonus and manifested through her. But
the prophetus in Deli, whether she gives
oracles to mankind through an attenuated
and fiery spirit bursting from the mouth
of the cavern, or whether being seated
in the addum on a brazen tripod or on a
stool with four feet, she becomes sacred
to the god. Whosoever of these is the
case, she entirely gives herself up to a
divine spirit and is illuminated with a
ray of divine fire. And when indeed fire
is sending from the mouth of the cavern
circularly invests her in collected
abundance, she becomes filled from it
with a divine splendor. But when she
places herself on the seat of the god,
she becomes co-addapted to his stable
prophetic power. And from both of these
preparatory operations she becomes
wholly possessed by the god. And then
indeed he is present with and
illuminates her in a separate manner and
is different from the fire, the spirit,
the proper seat and in short from all
the visible apparatus of the place
whether physical or sacred. Among the
celebrities who visited the oracle of
deli were the immortal Appalonius of
Tina and his disciple Damis. He made his
offerings and after being crowned with a
laurel wreath and given a branch of the
same plant to carry in his hand, he
passed behind the statue of Apollo which
stood before the entrance to the cave
and descended into the sacred place of
the oracle. The priestess was also
crowned with laurel and her head bound
with a band of white wool. Appalonius
asked the oracle if his name would be
remembered by future generations. The
Pythonus answered in the affirmative,
but declared that it would always be
Coloniated. Appalonius left the cavern
in anger, but time has proved the
accuracy of the prediction, for the
early church fathers perpetuated the
name of Appalonius as the Antichrist.
For details of the story, see Histo.
The messages given by the virgin
prophetus were turned over to the
philosophers of the oracle whose duty it
was to interpret and apply them. The
communications were then delivered to
the poets who immediately translated
them into ods and lyrics setting forth
in exquisite form the statements
supposedly made by Apollo and making
them available for the populace.
Serpents were much evidence at the
oracle of deli. The base of the tripod
upon which the Pytheus sat was formed of
the twisted bodies of three gigantic
snakes. According to some authorities,
one of the processes used to produce the
prophetic ecstasy was to force the young
priestess to gaze into the eyes of a
serpent. Fascinated and hypnotized, she
then spoke with the voice of the god.
Although the early Python priestesses
were always maidens, some still in their
teens, was later enacted that only women
pasted 50 years of age should be the
mouthpiece of the oracle. These older
women dressed as young girls and went
through the same ceremonial as the first
Pyth. The change was probably the
indirect result of a series of assaults
made upon the persons of the priestesses
by the profane. During the early history
of the Delelfian oracle, the god spoke
only at each 7th birthday of Apollo. As
time went on, however, the demand became
so great that the Pythia was forced to
seat herself upon the tripod every
month. The time selected for the
consultation and the questions to be
asked were determined by lot or by vote
of the inhabitants of deli. It is
generally admitted that the effect of
the delelfian oracle upon Greek culture
was profoundly constructive. James
Gardner sums up its influence in the
following words. It responses revealed
many a tyrant and foretold his fate
through its means. Many an unhappy being
was saved from destruction and many a
perplexed mortal guided in the right
way. It encouraged useful institutions
and promoted the progress of useful
discoveries. Its moral influence was on
the side of virtue and its political
influence in favor of the advancement of
civil liberty. See the faiths of the
world. The oracle of Dona was presided
over by Jupiter who uttered prophecies
through oak trees, birds, and vases of
brass. Many writers have noted the
similarities between the rituals of Dona
and those of the Druid priests of
Britain and Gaul. The famous oracular
dove of Dona, a lighting upon the
branches of the sacred oaks, not only
discoursed at length in the Greek tongue
upon philosophy and religion, but also
answered the queries of those who came
from distant places to consult it. The
talking trees stood together forming a
sacred grove. When the priests desired
answers to important questions, after
careful and solemn purifications, they
retired to the grove. They then accosted
the trees, beseeching a reply from the
god who dwelt therein. When they had
stated their questions, the trees spoke
with the voices of human beings,
revealing to the priests the desired
information. Some assert that there was
but one tree which spoke an oak or a
beach standing in the very heart of the
ancient grove. Because Jupiter was
believed to inhabit this tree, he was
sometimes called Fanius or one who lives
in a beach tree. Most curious of the
oracles of Dona were the talking vases
or kettles. These were made of brass and
so carefully fashioned that when struck
they gave off sound for hours. Some
writers have described a row of these
vases and have declared that if one of
them was struck its vibrations would be
communicated to all the others and a
terrifying den and sue. Other authors
describe a large single vase. Standing
upon a pillar near which stood another
column supporting the statue of a child
holding a whip. At the end of the whip
were a number of swinging cords tipped
with small metal balls and the wind
which blew incessantly through the open
building caused the balls to strike
against the vase. The number and
intensity of the impacts and the
reverberations of the vase were all
carefully noted and the priests
delivered their oracles accordingly.
When the original priests of Dodona the
cellw mysteriously vanished, the oracle
was served for many centuries by three
priestesses who interpreted the vases
and at midnight interrogated the sacred
trees. The patrons of the oracles were
expected to bring offerings and to make
contributions. Another remarkable oracle
was the cave of Trophonius, which stood
upon the side of a hill with an entrance
so small that it seemed impossible for a
human being to enter. After the
consultant had made his offering at the
statue of Trophonius and had dawned the
sanctified garments, he climbed the hill
to the cave. Carrying in one hand a cake
of honey. Sitting down at the edge of
the opening, he lowered his feet into
the cavern. Thereupon his entire body
was precipitately. Jupiter was called
Dodinian after the city of Dona in
Epyrus. Near this city was a hill
thickly covered with oak trees which
from the most ancient times had been
sacred to Jupiter. The grove was further
venerated because drys, fawns, sats and
nymphs were believed to dwell in its
depths from the ancient oaks and beaches
were hung. Many chains of tiny bronze
bells which tinkled day and night as the
wind swayed the branches. Some assert
that the celebrated talking dove of Dona
was in reality a woman because in
Thessal prophetices and thus were called
pelatis. It is supposed that the first
temple of Dona was erected by Dukeon and
those who survived the great flood with
him. For this reason, the oracle at Dona
was considered the oldest in Greece.
Drawn into the cave, which was described
by those who had entered it as having
only the dimensions of a fair-sized
oven. When the oracle had completed its
revelation, the consultant, usually
delirious, was forcibly ejected from the
cave, feet foremost. Near the cave of
the oracle, two fountains bubbled out of
the earth within a few feet of each
other. Those about to enter the cave
drank first from these fountains, the
waters of which seemed to possess
peculiar occult properties. The first
contained the water of forgetfulness,
and all who drank thereof forgot their
earthly sorrows. From the second
fountain flowed the sacred water of
namosin, or remembrance. For later, it
enabled those who ptook of it to recall
their experiences while in the cave.
Though its entrance was marked by two
brass obelisks, the cave, surrounded by
a wall of white stones, and concealed in
the heart of a grove of sacred trees,
did not present an imposing appearance.
There is no doubt that those entering it
passed through strange experiences, for
they were obliged to leave at the
adjacent temple a complete account of
what they saw and heard while in the
oracle. The prophecies were given in the
form of dreams and visions, and were
accompanied by severe pains in the head.
some never completely recovered from the
after effects of their delirium. The
confused recital of their experiences
was interpreted by the priests according
to the question to be answered. While
the priests probably used some unknown
herb to produce the dreams or visions of
the cavern, their skill in interpreting
them bordered on the supernatural.
Before consulting the oracle, it was
necessary to offer a ram to the demon of
the cave. And the priest decided by
hyromancy whether the time chosen was
propitious and the sacrifice was
satisfactory. The seven wonders of the
world. Many of the sculptors and
architects of the ancient world were
initiates of the mysteries particularly
the elusinian writes. Since the dawn of
time the truers of stone and the huers
of wood have constituted a divinely
overshadowed cast as civilization spread
slowly over the earth. Cities were built
and deserted. Monuments were erected to
heroes at present unknown. Temples were
built to gods who lie broken in the dust
of the nations they inspired. Research
has proved not only that the builders of
these cities and monuments and the
sculptor who chiseled out the inscrable
faces of the gods were masters of their
crafts, but that in the world today
there are none to equal them. The
profound knowledge of mathematics and
astronomy embodied in ancient
architecture and the equally profound
knowledge of anatomy revealed in Greek
statuary proved that the fashioners of
both were masterminds deeply cultured in
the wisdom which constituted the arcana
of the mysteries. Thus was established
the guild of the builders, progenitors
of modern Freemasons. When employed to
build palaces, temples, or combs, or to
carve statues for the wealthy, those
initiated architects and artists
concealed in their works the secret
doctrine, so that now, long after their
bones have returned to dust, the world
realizes that those first artisans were
indeed duly initiated and worthy to
receive the wages of master masons. The
seven wonders of the world while
apparently designed for diverse reasons
were really monuments erected to
perpetuate the arcana of the mysteries.
They were symbolic structures placed in
peculiar spots and the real purpose of
their erection can be sensed only by the
initiated. Alifas Levi has noted the
marked correspondence between these
seven wonders and the seven planets. The
seven wonders of the world were built by
widow's sons in honor of the seven
planetary geni. Their secret symbolism
is identical with that of the seven
seals of revelation and the seven
churches of Asia. One, the Colossus of
Roads, a gigantic brass statue about 109
ft in height and requiring over 12 years
to build was the work of an initiated
artist chairs of Lindis. The popular
theory accepted for several hundred
years that the figure stood with one
foot on each side of the entrance to the
harbor of roads and that fullrigged
ships passed between its feet has never
been substantiated. Unfortunately, the
figure remains standing but 56 years
being thrown down by an earthquake in
224 BC. The shattered parts of the
colossus lay scattered about the ground
for more than 900 years when they were
finally sold to a Jewish merchant who
carried the metal away on the backs of
700 camels. Some believe that the brass
was converted into munitions and others
that it was made into drainage pipes.
This gigantic gilded figure with its
crown of solar rays and its upraised
torch signified occultly the glorious
sunman of the mysteries, the universal
savior. Two, the architect Tessafon in
the fifth century B.C. submitted to the
Ionian cities a plan for erecting a
joint monument to their patron goddess
Diana. The place chosen was Ephesus, a
city south of Smyrna. The building was
constructed of marble. The roof was
supported by 127 columns, each 60 ft
high and weighing over 150 tons. The
temple was destroyed by black magic
about 356 BC, but the world fixes. the
odious crime upon the tool by means of
which the destruction was accomplished a
mentally deranged man named Herostratus.
It was later rebuilt but the symbolism
was lost. The original temple designed
as a miniature of the universe was
dedicated to the moon, the occult symbol
of generation. Three. Upon his exile
from Athens, Fidius, the greatest of all
the Greek sculptors, went to Olympia in
the province of Ellis and there designed
his colossal statue of Zeus, chief of
the gods of Greece. There is not even an
accurate description of this masterpiece
now in existence. Only a few old coins
given, inadequate idea of its general
appearance. The body of the god was
overlaid with ivory and the robes were
of beaten gold. In one hand, he is
supposed to have held a globe supporting
a figure of the goddess of victory. In
the other, a scepter surmounted by an
eagle. The head of Zeus was archaic,
heavily bearded, and crowned with an
olive wreath. The statue was seated upon
an elaborately decorated throne. As its
name implies, the monument was dedicated
to the spirit of the planet Jupiter, one
of the seven. Loi, who bow before the
lord of the sun. Four. Alifa's Levi
includes the temple of Solomon among the
seven wonders of the world, giving it
the place occupied by the Ferros or
lighthouse of Alexandria. The Ferros
named for the island upon which it stood
was designed and constructed by
Sastradus of Nidus during the reign of
Tammy 283 247 BC. It is described as
being of white marble and over 600 ft
high. Even in that ancient day, it cost
nearly a million dollars. Fires were
lighted in the top of it and could be
seen for miles out at sea. It was
destroyed by an earthquake in the 13th
century, but remains of it were visible
until AD 1350, being the tallest of all
the wonders. It was naturally assigned
to Saturn, the father of the gods and
the true illuminator of all humanity.
Five. The mosselium at Hakarnasses was a
magnificent monument erected by Queen
Arnameia in memory of her dead husband
King Moselus from whose name the word
moselum is derived. The designers of the
building were Satyus and Pithus and four
great sculptors were employed to
ornament the edifice. The building which
was 114 ft long and 92 ft wide was
divided into five major sections. the
senses and surmounted by a pyramid, the
spiritual nature of man. The pyramid
rose in 24 steps, a sacred number, and
upon the apex was a statue of King
Mosulus in a chariot. His figure was 9
ft 9 and 1/2 in tall. Many attempts have
been made to reconstruct the monument,
which was destroyed by an earthquake,
but none has been altogether successful.
This monument was sacred to the planet
Mars and was built by an initiate for
the enlightenment of the world. Six. The
gardens of Samiramis at Babylon, more
commonly known as the hanging garden
stood within the palace grounds of
Nebuchadnezzar near the Euphrates River.
They rose in a terrace-like pyramid and
on the top was a reservoir for the
watering of the gardens. They were built
about 600 BC, but the name of the
landscape artist has not been preserved.
They symbolized the plains of the
invisible world and were consecrated to
Venus as the goddess of love and beauty.
Seven. The Great Pyramid was supreme
among the temples of the mysteries. In
order to be true to its astronomical
symbolism, it must have been constructed
about 70,000 years ago. It was the tomb
of Osiris and was believed to have been
built by the gods themselves. And the
architect may have been the immortal
Hermes. It is the monument of Mercury,
the messenger of the gods and the
universal symbol of wisdom and letters.
Trafonius and his brother Aanda were
famous architects. While building a
certain treasure vault, they contrived
to leave one stone movable so that they
might secretly enter and steal the
valuables stored there. A trap was set
by the owner who had discovered the plot
and a game was caught. To prevent
discovery, Trafonius decapitated his
brother and fled hotly pursued. He hid
in the grove of Lebedia where the earth
opened and swallowed him up. The spirit
of trfonius thereafter delivered oracles
in the grove and its caverns. The name
Trafonius means to be agitated, excited
or royd. It was declared that the
terrible experiences through which
consultants passed in the oracular
cavern so affected them that they never
smiled again. The bees which accompany
the figure of Trophonius were sacred
because they led the first envoys from
Boisha to the sight of the oracle. The
figure above is said to be a production
of a statue of Trophonius which was
placed on the brow of the hill above the
oracle and surrounded with sharply
pointed stakes that it could not be
touched. The life and philosophy of
Pythagoras. While Nisarcus, the father
of Pythagoras, was in the city of Deli
on matters pertaining to his business as
a merchant. He and his wife Parththenis
decided to consult the Oracle of Deli as
to whether the fates were favorable for
their return voyage to Syria. When the
Pythonus, Prophetus of Apollo, seated
herself on the golden tripod over the
yawning vent of the oracle, she did not
answer the question they had asked, but
told Nasarcus that his wife was then
with child and would give birth to a son
who was destined to surpass all men in
beauty and wisdom, and who throughout
the course of his life would contribute
much to the benefit of mankind. Narcis
was so deeply impressed by the prophecy
that he changed his wife's name to
Pythesis in honor of the Python
priestess. When the child was born at
Siden in Funisha, it was as the oracle
had set a son. Narcis and Pythesis named
the child Pythagoras for they believe
that he had been predestined by the
oracle. Many strange legends have been
preserved concerning the birth of
Pythagoras. Some maintain that he was no
mortal man, that he was one of the gods
who had taken a human body to enable him
to come into the world and instruct the
human race. Pythagoras was one of the
many sages and saviors of antiquity for
whom an immaculate conception is
asserted. In his anacalypsis, Godfrey
Higgins writes, "The first striking
circumstance in which the history of
Pythagoras agrees with the history of
Jesus is that they were natives of
nearly the same country, the former
being born at Siden, the latter at
Bethlehem, both in Syria, the father of
Pythagoras, as well as the father of
Jesus, was prophetically informed that
his wife should bring forth a son who
should be a benefactor to mankind. They
were both born when their mothers were
from home on journeys. Joseph and his
wife having gone up to Bethlehem to be
taxed and the father of Pythagoras
having traveled from Samos his residence
to Siden about his mercantile concerns.
Pythesis
the mother of Pythagoras had a
connection with an appaloniacal spectre
or ghost of the god Apollo or god soul.
Of course, this must have been a holy
ghost. And here we have the Holy Ghost,
which afterward appeared to her husband
and told him that he must have no
connection with his wife during her
pregnancy, a story evidently the same as
that relating to Joseph and Mary. From
these peculiar circumstances, Pythagoras
was known by the same title as Jesus,
namely the son of God, and was supposed
by the multitude to be under the
influence of divine inspiration. This
most famous philosopher was born
sometime between 600 and 590 BC. And the
length of his life has been estimated at
nearly 100 years. The teachings of
Pythagoras indicate that he was
thoroughly conversant with the precepts
of oriental and accidental esotericism.
He traveled among the Jews and was
instructed by the rabbins concerning the
secret traditions of Moses the logiver
of Israel. Later the school of the
Essins was conducted chiefly for the
purpose of interpreting the Pythagorean
symbols. Pythagoras was initiated into
the Egyptian, Babylonian, and Calaldian
mysteries. Although it is believed by
some that he was a disciple of
Zoroaster, it is doubtful whether his
instructor of that name was the god man
now revered by the parses. While
accounts of his travels differ,
historians agree that he visited many
countries and studied at the feet of
many masters. After having acquired all
which it was possible for him to learn
of the Greek philosophers and presumably
become an initiate in the Elusinian
mysteries, he went to Egypt and after
many rebuffs and refusals finally
succeeded in securing initiation in the
mysteries of Isis at the hands of the
priests of thieves. Then this intrepid
joiner winded his way into Phoenicia and
Syria where the mysteries of Adonis were
conferred upon him and crossing to the
valley of the Euphrates he terried long
enough to become versed in the secret
lore of the Calaldanss who still dwelt
in the vicinity of Babylon. Finally he
made his greatest and most historic
venture through media and Persia into
Hindustan where he remained several
years as a pupil and initiate of the
learned brahinss of elephant andora c
ancient Freemasonry by Frank C Higgins
32° the same author adds that the name
of Pythagoras is still preserved in the
records of the brahinss as yavankeria
the Ionian teacher Pythagoras was said
to have been the first man to call
himself a philosopher In fact, the world
is indebted to him for the word
philosopher. Before that time, the wise
men had called themselves sages, which
was interpreted to mean those who know.
Pythagoras was more modest. He coined
the word philosopher, which he defined
as one who is attempting to find out.
After returning from his wanderings,
Pythagoras established a school, or as
it has been sometimes, called a
university at Crotona, a Dorian colony
in southern Italy. Upon his arrival at
Crotona, he was regarded a scance. But
after a short time, those holding
important positions in the surrounding
colonies sought his counsel in matters
of great moment. He gathered around him
a small group of sincere disciples whom
he instructed in the secret wisdom which
had been revealed to him and also in the
fundamentals of occult mathematics,
music, and astronomy which he considered
to be the triangular foundation of all
the arts and sciences. When he was about
60 years old, Pythagoras married one of
his disciples and seven children
resulted from the union. His wife was a
remarkably able woman who not only
inspired him during the years of his
life but after his assassination
continued to promulgate his doctrines as
is so often the case with genius.
Pythagoras by his outspokenenness
incurred both political and personal
imity. Among those who came for
initiation was one who, because
Pythagoras refused to admit him,
determined to destroy both the man and
his philosophy by means of false
propaganda. This disgruntled one turned
the minds of the common people against
the philosopher. Without warning, a band
of murderers descended upon the little
group of buildings where the great
teacher and his disciples dwelt, burned
the structures, and killed Pythagoras.
Accounts of the philosopher&lt;unk&gt;'s death
do not agree. Some say that he was
murdered with his disciples. Others that
on escaping from Crotona with a small
band of followers, he was trapped and
burned alive by his enemies in a little
house where the band had decided to rest
for the night. Another account states
that finding themselves trapped in the
burning structure, the disciples threw
themselves into the flames, making of
their own bodies a bridge over which
Pythagoras escaped, only to die of a
broken heartache. Short time afterwards,
as the result of grieving over the
apparent fruitlessness of his efforts to
serve and illuminate mankind, his
surviving disciples attempted to
perpetuate his doctrines, but they were
persecuted on every hand, and very
little remains today as a testimonial to
the greatness of this philosopher. It is
said that the disciples of Pythagoras
never addressed him or referred to him
by his own name, but always as the
master or that man. This may have been
because of the fact that the name
Pythagoras was believed to consist of a
certain number of specially arranged
letters with great sacred significance.
The word magazine has printed an article
by T R Prader showing that Pythagoras
initiated his candidates by means of a
certain formula concealed within the
letters of his own name. This may
explain why the word Pythagoras was so
highly revered after the death of
Pythagoras his school gradually
disintegrated. but those who had
benefited by its teachings revered the
memory of the great philosopher as
during his life they had reverenced the
man himself. As time went on, Pythagoras
came to be regarded as a god rather than
a man and his scattered disciples were
bound together by their common
admiration for the transcendent genius
of their teacher. Edward Shure in his
Pythagoras in the Delphic mysteries
relates the following incident as
illustrative of the bond of fellowship
uniting the members of the Pythagorean
school. One of them who had fallen upon
sickness and poverty was kindly taken in
by an inkeeper before dying. He traced a
few mysterious signs, the pentagram, no
doubt, on the door of the inn and said
to the host, "Do not be uneasy. One of
my brothers will pay my debts." A year
afterwards, as a stranger was passing by
this and he saw the signs and said to
the host, "I am a Pythagorean, one of my
brothers died." Here, tell me what I owe
you on his account. Frank C. Higgins,
32° gives an excellent compendium of the
Pythagorean tenants in the following
outline. Pythagoras teachings are of the
most transcendental importance to Masons
in as much as they are the necessary
fruit of his contact with the leading
philosophers of the whole civilized
world of his own day and must represent
that in which all were agreed shorn of
all weeds of controversy. Thus, the
determined stand made by Pythagoras in
defense of pure monotheism is sufficient
evidence that the tradition to the
effect that the unity of God was the
supreme secret of all the ancient
initiations is substantially correct.
The philosophical school of Pythagoras
was in a measure also a series of
initiations for he caused his pupils to
pass through a series of degrees and
never permitted them personal contact
with himself until they had reached the
higher grades. According to his
biographers, his degrees were three in
number. The first that of mathematicus,
assuring his pupils proficiency in
mathematics and geometry, which was
then, as it would be now, if masonry
were properly inculcated, the basis upon
which all other knowledge was erected.
Secondly, the degree of theoreticus
which dealt with superficial
applications of the exact sciences and
lastly the degree of electus which
entitled the candidate to pass forward
into the light of the fullest
illumination which he was capable of
absorbing. The pupils of the Pythagorean
school were divided into exoterasai or
pupils in the outer grades and
esoterasai after they had passed the
third degree of initiation and were
entitled to the secret wisdom. Silence,
secrecy, and unconditional obedience
were cardinal principles of this great
order. See ancient Freemasonry
Pythagoric fundamentals. The study of
geometry, music, and astronomy was
considered essential to a rational
understanding of God, man, or nature.
And no one could accompany Pythagoras as
a disciple who was not thoroughly
familiar with these sciences. Many came
seeking admission to his school. Each
applicant was tested on these three
subjects, and if found ignorant was
summarily dismissed. Pythagoras was not
an extremist. He taught moderation in
all things rather than excess in
anything. For he believed that an excess
of virtue was in itself a vice. One of
his favorite statements was we must
avoid with our utmost endeavor and
amputate with fire and sword and by all
other means from the body sickness from
the soul ignorance. From the belly
luxury from a city sedition from a
family discord and from all things
excess. Pythagoras also believed that
there was no crime equal to that of
anarchy. All men know what they want,
but few know what they need. Pythagoras
warned his disciples that when they
prayed, they should not pray for
themselves, that when they asked things
of the gods, they should not ask things
for themselves, because no man knows
what is good for him. And it is for this
reason undesirable to ask for things
which if obtained would only prove to be
injurious. The god of Pythagoras was the
monad or the one that is everything. He
described God as the supreme mind
distributed throughout all parts of the
universe the cause of all things, the
intelligence of all things and the power
within all things. He further declared
the motion of God to be circular, the
body of God to be composed of the
substance of light and the nature of God
to be composed of the substance of
truth. Pythagoras declared that the
eating of meat clouded the reasoning
faculties. While he did not condemn its
use or totally abstain there from
himself, he declared that judges should
refrain from eating meat before a trial
in order that those who appeared before
them might receive the most honest and
astute decisions. When Pythagoras
decided, as he often did, to retire into
the temple of God for an extended period
of time to meditate and pray, he took
with his supply of specially prepared
food and drink. The food consisted of
equal parts of the seeds of poppy and
sesame, the skin of the sea onion from
which the juice had been thoroughly
extracted, the flour of daffodil, the
leaves of malows, and a paste of barley
and peas. These he compounded together
with the addition of wild honey. For a
beverage, he took the seeds of
cucumbers, dried raisins with seeds
removed, the flowers of coriander, the
seeds of mows, and pcelain, scraped
cheese, meal, and cream mixed together
and sweetened with wild honey.
Pythagoras claimed that this was the
diet of Hercules while wandering in the
Libyan desert and was according to the
formula given to that hero by the
goddess series herself. The favorite
method of healing among the Pythagoreans
was by the aid of puses. These people
also knew the magic properties of vast
numbers of plants. Pythagoras highly
esteemed the medicinal properties of the
sea onion and he is said to have written
an entire volume on the subject. Such a
work however is not known at the present
time. Pythagoras discovered that music
had great therapeutic power and he
prepared special harmonies for various
diseases. He apparently experimented
also with color attaining considerable
success. One of his unique curative
processes resulted from his discovery of
the healing value of certain verses from
the Odyssey and the Iliad of Homer.
These he caused to be read to persons
suffering from certain ailments. He was
opposed to surgery in all its forms and
also objected to cauterizing. He would
not permit the disfigurement of the
human body for such in his estimation
was a sacrilege against the dwelling
place of the gods. Pythagoras taught
that friendship was the truest and
nearest perfect of all relationships. He
declared that in nature there was a
friendship of all for all, of gods for
man, of doctrines one for another, of
the soul for the body, of the rational
part for the irrational part, of
philosophy for its theory, of men for
one another, of countrymen for one
another, that friendship also existed
between strangers, between a man and his
wife, his children, and his servants.
All bonds without friendship were
shackles and there was no virtue in
their maintenance. Pythagoras believed
that relationships were essentially
mental rather than physical and that a
stranger of sympathetic intellect was
closer to him than a blood relation
whose viewpoint was at variance with his
own. Pythagoras defined knowledge as the
fruitage of mental accumulation. He
believed that it would be obtained in
many ways but principally through
observation. Wisdom was the
understanding of the source or cause of
all things. And this could be secured
only by raising the intellect to a point
where it intuitively cognized the
invisible manifesting outwardly through
the visible and thus became capable of
bringing itself in rapport with the
spirit of things rather than with their
forms. The ultimate source that wisdom
could cognize was the monad, the
mysterious permanent atom of the
Pythagoreans. Pythagoras taught that
both man and the universe were made in
the image of God, that both being made
in the same image, the understanding of
one predicated the knowledge of the
other. He further taught that there was
a constant interplay between the grand
man, the universe, and man, the little
universe. Pythagoras believed that all
the cidurial bodies were alive and that
the forms of the planets and stars were
merely bodies encasing souls, minds, and
spirits in the same manner that the
visible human form is, but the encasing
vehicle for an invisible spiritual
organism, which is in reality the
conscious individual. Pythagoras
regarded the planets as magnificent
deities worthy of the adoration and
respect of man. All these deities,
however, he considered subservient to
the one first cause within whom they all
existed temporarily as mortality exists
in the midst of immortality. The famous
Pythagorean
signified the power of choice and was
used in the mysteries as emblematic of
the forking of the ways. The central
stems separated into two parts. One
branching to five Pythagorean solids are
the tetrahedrin two with four
equilateral triangles as faces. The cube
three with six squares as faces. The
octahedron four with eight equilateral
triangles as faces. The iicosahedron
five with 20 equilateral triangles as
faces. And the dodica six with 12
regular pentagons as faces. the right
and the other to the left. The branch to
the right was called divine wisdom and
the one to the left earthly wisdom.
Youth personified by the candidate
walking the path of life symbolized by
the central stem of the uppelon reaches
the point where the path divides. The
Nephite must then choose whether he will
take the left-hand path and following
the dictates of his lower nature enter
upon a span of folly and thoughtlessness
which will inevitably result in his
undoing or whether he will take the
right hand road and through integrity
industry and sincerity ultimately regain
union with the immortals in the superior
spheres. It is probable that Pythagoras
obtained his concept of the upupsilon
from the Egyptians who included in
certain of their initiatory rituals a
scene in which the candidate was
confronted by two female figures. One of
them veiled with the white robes of the
temple urged the Nephite to enter into
the halls of learning. The other bedcked
with jewels symbolizing earthly
treasures and bearing in her hands a
tray loaded with grapes emblematic of
false light sought to lure him into the
chambers of dissipation. This symbol is
still preserved among the tarot cards
where it is called the forking of the
ways. The fork stick has been the symbol
of life among many nations and it was
placed in the desert to indicate the
presence of water. Concerning the theory
of transmigration as disseminated by
Pythagoras, there are differences of
opinion. According to one view, he
taught that mortals who during their
earthly existence had by their actions
become like certain animals returned to
earth again in the form of the beasts
which they had grown to resemble. Thus,
a timid person would return in the form
of a rabbit or a deer, a cruel person in
the form of a wolf or other ferocious
animal, and a cunning person in the
guise of a fox. This concept, however,
does not fit into the general
Pythagorean scheme, and it is far more
likely that it was given in an
allegorical rather than a literal sense.
It was intended to convey the idea that
human beings become best when they allow
themselves to be dominated by their own
lower desires and destructive
tendencies. It is probable that the term
transmigration is to be understood as
what is more commonly called
reincarnation. A doctrine which
Pythagoras must have contacted directly
or indirectly in India and Egypt. The
fact that Pythagoras accepted the theory
of successive reappearances of the
spiritual nature in human form is found
in a footnote to Levi's history of
magic. He was an important champion of
what used to be called the doctrine of
metamsychosis. understood as the soul's
transmigration into successive bodies.
He himself had been A. Ethalades a son
of Mercury, B. Euphorbus, son of
Pandthas, who perished at the hands of
Menaus in the Trojan War, C Hermotamus,
a prophet of Klesman, a city of Ionia,
D, a humble fisherman, and finally E,
the philosopher of Seamos. Pythagoras
also taught that each species of
creatures had what he termed a seal
given to it by God and that the physical
form of each was the impression of this
seal upon the wax of physical substance.
Thus, each body was stamped with the
dignity of its divinely given pattern.
Pythagoras believed that ultimately man
would reach a state where he would cast
off his gross nature and function in a
body of spiritualized ether which would
be in juxtaposition to his physical form
at all times and which might be the
eighth sphere or antithon. From this he
would ascend into the realm of the
immortals whereby divine birthright he
belonged. Pythagoras taught that
everything in nature was divisible into
three parts and that no one could become
truly wise who did not view every
problem as being diagrammatically
triangular. He said establish the
triangle and the problem is 2/3 solved.
Further all things consist of three. In
conformity with this viewpoint,
Pythagoras divided the universe into
three parts which he called the supreme
world, the superior world and the
inferior world. The highest or supreme
world was a subtle interpenetrative
spiritual essence pervading all things
and therefore the true plane of the
supreme deity itself. The deity being in
every sense omnipresent, omniactive,
omnipotent and omnisient. Both of the
lower worlds existed within the nature
of this supreme sphere. The superior
world was the home of the immortals. It
was also the dwelling place of the
archetypes or the seals. Their natures
in no manner ptook of the material of
earthiness, but they casting their
shadows upon the deep, the inferior
world, were cognisible only through
their shadows. The third or inferior
world was the home of those creatures
who ptook of material substance or were
engaged in labor with or upon material
substance. Hence this sphere was the
home of the mortal gods, the demiurgei,
the angels who labor with men. Also the
demons who partake of the nature of the
earth and finally mankind and the lower
kingdoms, those temporarily of the earth
but capable of rising above that sphere
by reason and philosophy. The digits 1
and two are not considered numbers by
the Pythagoreans because they typify the
two super mundane spheres. The
Pythagorean numbers therefore begin with
three the triangle and four the square.
These added to the one and the two
produced the 10, the great number of all
things, the archetype of the universe.
The three worlds were called
receptacles. The first was the
receptacle of principles. The second was
the receptacle of intelligences and the
third or lowest was the receptacle of
quantities. The symmetrical solids were
regarded by Pythagoras and by the Greek
thinkers after him as of the greatest
importance. To be perfectly symmetrical
or regular, a solid must have an equal
number of faces meeting at each of its
angles. And these faces must be equal
regular polygons, i.e. figures whose
sides and angles are all equal.
Pythagoras perhaps may be credited with
the great discovery that there are only
five such solids. Asterisk asterisk
asterisk. Now the Greeks believed the
world material universe to be composed
of four elements earth, air, fire,
water. And to the Greek mind, the
conclusion was inevitable that the
shapes of the particles of the elements
were those of the regular solids. Earth
particles were cubicle, the cube being
the regular solid possessed of greatest
stability. Fire particles were
tetrahedral, the tetrahedrin being the
simplest and hence lightest solid. Water
particles were icosahhedral for exactly
the reverse reason. Whilst air particles
as intermediate between the two latter
were ocahedral. The dodicahedron was to
these ancient mathematicians the most
mysterious of the solids. It was by far
the most difficult to construct the
accurate drawing of the regular pentagon
necessitating a rather elaborate
application of Pythagoras great theorem.
Hence the conclusion as Plato put it
that this the regular docahedron the
deity employed in tracing the plan of
the universe. H Stanley Redgrove in
bygone beliefs. Mr. Redgrove has not
mentioned the fifth element of the
ancient mysteries that which would make
the analogy between the symmetrical
solids and the elements complete. This
fifth element or ether was called by the
Hindu zakasa. It was closely correlated
with the hypothetical ether of modern
science and was the interpenetrative
substance permeating all of the other
elements and acting as a common solvent
and common denominator of them. The
12-face solid also sly referred to the
12 immortals who surfaced the universe
and also to the 12 convolutions of the
human brain, the vehicles of those
immortals in the nature of man. While
Pythagoras in accordance with others of
his day practiced divination, possibly
arithmety, there is no accurate
information concerning the methods which
he used, he is believed to have had a
remarkable wheel by means of which he
could predict future events and to have
learned hydromancy from the Egyptians.
He believed that brass had oracular
powers because even when everything was
perfectly still, there was always a
rumbling sound in brass bowls. He once
addressed a prayer to the spirit of a
river, and out of the water arose a
voice, Pythagoras, I greet thee. It is
claimed for him that he was able to
cause demons to enter into water and
disturb its surface, and by means of the
agitation certain things were predicted
after having drunk from a certain
spring. One day, one of the masters of
Pythagoras announced that the spirit of
the water had just predicted that a
great earthquake would occur. The next
day, a prophecy which was fulfilled. It
is highly probable that Pythagoras
possessed hypnotic power not only over
man but also over animals. He caused a
bird to change the course of its flight,
a bear to cease its ravages upon a
community and a bull to change its diet
by the exercise of mental influence. He
was also gifted with second sight being
able to see things at a distance and
accurately describe incidents that had
not yet come to pass the symbolic
apherisms of Pythagoras. I amlicus
gathered 39 of the symbolic sayings of
Pythagoras and interpreted them. These
have been translated from the Greek by
Thomas Taylor. Apherismic statement was
one of the favorite methods of
instruction used in the Pythagorean
University of Crotona. 10 of the most
representative of these apherisms are
reproduced below with a brief
elucidation of their concealed meanings.
I declining from the public ways walk in
unfrequented paths. By this it is to be
understood that those who desire wisdom
must seek it in solitude. Two, govern
your tongue before all other things
following the gods. This apherism warns
man that his words instead of
representing him misrepresent him and
that when in doubt as to what he should
say he should always be silent. Three,
the wind blowing adore the sound.
Pythagoras here reminds his disciples
that the fiat of God is heard in the
voice of the elements and that all
things in nature manifest through
harmony, rhythm, order, or procedure the
attributes of the deity. For assist a
man in raising a burden, but do not
assist him in laying it down. The
student is instructed to aid the
diligent, but never to assist those who
seek to evade their responsibilities,
for it is a great sin to encourage
indolence. V. Speak not about pithagoric
concerns without light. The world is
herein warned that it should not attempt
to interpret the mysteries of God and
the secrets of the sciences without
spiritual and intellectual illumination.
Six. Having departed from your house,
turn not back, for the furies will be
your attendance. Pythagoras here warns
his followers that any who begin the
search for truth and after having
learned part of the mystery become
discouraged and attempt to return again
to their former ways of vice and
ignorance will suffer exceedingly for it
is better to know nothing about divinity
than to learn a little and then stop
without learning all. Seven, nourish a
but sacrifice it not for it is
sacred to the sun and moon. Two great
lessons are concealed in this apherism.
The first is a warning against the
sacrifice of living things to the gods
because life is sacred and man should
not destroy it even as an offering to
the deity. The second warns man that the
human body here referred to as a is
sacred to the sun, God, and the moon,
nature, and should be guarded and
preserved as man's most precious medium
of expression. Pythagoras also warned
his disciples against suicide. Eight,
receive not a swallow into your house.
This warns the seeker after truth not to
allow drifting thoughts to come into his
mind nor shiftless persons to enter into
his life. He must ever surround himself
with rationally inspired thinkers and
with conscientious workers. Nine, offer
not your right hand easily to anyone.
This warns the disciple to keep his own
counsel and not offer wisdom and
knowledge his right hand to such as are
incapable of appreciating them. The hand
here represents truth which raises those
who have fallen because of ignorance.
But as many of the unregenerate do not
desire wisdom, they will cut off the
hand that is extended in kindness to
them. Time alone can affect the
redemption of the ignorant masses. X
when rising from the bedclo them
together and obliterate the impression
of the body. Pythagoras directed his
disciples who had awakened from the
sleep of ignorance into the waking state
of intelligence to eliminate from their
recollection all memory of their former
spiritual darkness. For a wise man in
passing leaves no form behind him which
others less intelligent seeing shall use
as a mold for the casting of idols. The
most famous of the Pythagorean fragments
are the golden verses ascribed to
Pythagoras himself. But concerning whose
authorship there is an element of doubt.
The golden verses contain a brief
summary of the entire system of
philosophy forming the basis of the
educational doctrines of Crettona or as
it is more commonly known the italic
school. These verses open by counseling
the reader to love God, venerate the
great heroes and respect the demons and
elemental inhabitants. They then urge
man to think carefully and industriously
concerning his daily life and to prefer
the treasures of the mind and soul to
accumulations of earthly goods. The
verses also promise man that if he will
rise above his lower material nature and
cultivate self-control, he will
ultimately be acceptable in the sight of
the gods be reunited with them and
partake of their immortality. It is
rather significant to note that Plato
paid a great price for some of the
manuscripts of Pythagoras which had been
saved from the destruction of Crettona.
See Histori deorum fatiticorum Geneva
1675. Pythagorean astronomy. According
to Pythagoras, the position of each body
in the universe was determined by the
essential dignity of that body. The
popular concept of his day was that the
earth occupied the center of the solar
system. that the planets including the
sun and moon moved about the earth and
that the earth itself was flat and
square. Contrary to this concept and
regardless of criticism, Pythagoras
declared that fire was the most
important of all the elements that the
center was the most important part of
every body and that just as Vesta's fire
was in the midst of every home so in the
midst of the universe was a flaming
sphere of celestial radiance. This
central globe he called the tower of
Jupiter the globe of unity, the grand
monad and the altar of Vesta. As the
sacred number 10 symbolized the sum of
all parts and the completeness of all
things, it was only natural for
Pythagoras to divide the universe into
10 spheres symbolized by 10 concentric
circles. These circles began at the
center with the globe of divine fire.
Then came the seven planers, the earth,
and another mysterious planet called
Antihon, which was never visible
opinions differ as to the nature of
Antihon. Clement of Alexandria believed
that it represented the mass of the
heavens. Others held the opinion that it
was the moon. More probably, it was the
mysterious eighth sphere of the
ancients. The dark planet which moved in
the same orbit as the Earth, but which
was always concealed from the Earth by
the body of the sun, being in exact
opposition to the Earth at all times. Is
this the mysterious Lilith concerning
which astrologers have speculated so
long? Isaac Meyer has stated the
Pythagoreans held that each star was a
world having its own atmosphere with an
immense extent surrounding it of ether.
See the Cabala. The disciples of
Pythagoras also highly revered the
planet Venus because it was the only
planet bright enough to cast a shadow.
As the morning star, Venus is visible
before sunrise and as the evening star,
it shines forth immediately after
sunset. Because of these qualities, a
number of names have been given to it by
the ancients. Being visible in the sky
at sunset, it was called Vesper. And as
it arose before the sun, it was called
the false light. the star of the morning
or Lucifer which means the lightbearer.
Because of this relation to the sun, the
planet was also referred to as Venus, a
start, Aphrodite, Isis, and the mother
of the gods. It is possible that at some
seasons of the year in certain
latitudes, the fact that Venus was a
crescent could be detected without the
aid of a telescope. This would account
for the crescent which is often seen in
connection with the goddesses of
antiquity, the stories of which do not
agree with the phases of the moon. The
accurate knowledge which Pythagoras
possessed concerning astronomy he
undoubtedly secured in the Egyptian
temples for their priests understood the
true relationship of the heavenly bodies
many thousands of years before that
knowledge was revealed to the
uninitiated world. The fact that the
knowledge he acquired in the temples
enabled him to make assertions requiring
2,000 years to check proves why Plato
and Aristotle so highly esteemed the
profoundity of the ancient mysteries. In
the midst of comparative scientific
ignorance and without the aid of any
modern instruments, the priest
philosophers had discovered the true
fundamentals of universal dynamics. An
interesting application of the
Pythagorean doctrine of geometric solids
as expounded by Plato is found in the
canon. Nearly all the old philosophers
says its anonymous author devised and
harmonic theory with respect to the
universe and the practice continued till
the old mode of philosophizing died out.
Kepler 1596 in order to demonstrate the
Platonic doctrine that the universe was
formed of the five regular solids
proposed the following rule. The earth
is a circle, the measure of all. Round
it. Describe a dodcahedron. The circle
enclosing this will be Mars. Round Mars.
Describe a tetrahedrin. A sphere
enclosing this will be Jupiter. Describe
a cube round Jupiter. The sphere
containing this will be Saturn. Now
inscribe in the Earth an icosahedron.
The circle inscribed in it will be
Venus. Inscribing ocahedron and Venus.
The circle inscribed in it will be
Mercury. Mysterium cosmographicum 1596.
This rule cannot be taken seriously as a
real statement of the proportions of the
cosmos. Foxit bears no real resemblance
to the ratios published by Copernicus in
the beginning of the 16th century. Yet
Kepler was very proud of his formula and
said he valued it more than the
electorate of Saxony. It was also
approved by those two eminent
authorities, Taiko and Galileo, who
evidently understood it. Kepler himself
never gives the least hint of how his
precious rule is to be interpreted.
Platonic astronomy was not concerned
with the material constitution or
arrangement of the heavenly bodies, but
considered the stars and planers
primarily as focal points of divine
intelligence. Physical astronomy was
regarded as the science of shadows.
Philosophical astronomy, the science of
realities, Pythagorean mathematics.
Concerning the secret significance of
numbers, there has been much
speculation. Though many interesting
discoveries have been made, it may be
safely said that with the death of
Pythagoras the Great, key to this
science was lost. For nearly 2,500
years, philosophers of all nations have
attempted to unravel the Pythagorean
SCE, but apparently none has been
successful, not withstanding attempts
made to Obliterate all records of the
teachings of Pythagoras. Fragments have
survived which give clues to some of the
simpler parts of his philosophy. The
major secrets were never committed to
writing but were communicated orally to
a few chosen disciples. These apparently
dated not divulge their secrets to the
profane. The result being that when
death sealed their lips, the Arcana died
with DM. Certain of the secret schools
in the world today are perpetuations of
the ancient mysteries. And although it
is quite possible that they may possess
some of the original numerical formula,
there is no evidence of it in the
voluminous writings which have issued
from these groups during the last 500
years. These writings, while frequently
discussing Pythagoras, show no
indication of a more complete knowledge
of his intricate doctrines than the
post-Pythagorean Greek speculators had,
who talked much, wrote little, knew
less, and concealed their ignorance
under a series of mysterious hints and
promises. Here and there among the
literary products of early writers are
found enigmatic statements which they
made no effort to interpret. The
following example is quoted from
Plutarch. The Pythagoreans indeed go
farther than this and honor even numbers
and geometrical diagrams with the names
and titles of the gods. Thus they call
the equilateral triangle headborn
manurva and tritenia because it may be
equally divided by three perpendiculars
drawn from each of the angles. So the
unit they term Apollo as to the number
two they have affixed the name of strife
and audaciousness and to that of three
justice four as doing an injury is an
extreme on the one side and suffering
one is an extreme on the on the one side
and suffering in the middle between them
in like manner the number 36. Their
tetrctis or sacred quitterian being
composed of the first four odd numbers
added to the first four even ones as is
commonly reported is looked upon by them
as the most solemn oath they can take
and called cosmos Isis and Osiris.
Earlier in the same work, Plutarch also
notes, "For as the power of the triangle
is expressive of the nature of Pluto,
Bakus and Mars and the properties of the
square of Ria, Venus, series, Vesta and
Juno of the dodicahedron of Jupiter. So
as we are informed by Udoxis is the
figure of 56 angles expressive of the
nature of Typhon. Plutarch did not
pretend to explain the inner
significance of the symbols, but
believed that the relationship which
Pythagoras established between the
geometrical solids and the gods was the
result of images the great sage had seen
in the Egyptian temples. Albert Pike,
the great Masonic symbolist, admitted
that there were many points concerning
which he could secure no reliable
information in his symbolism for the 32°
and 33°. He wrote, "I do not understand
why the seven should be called Manurva
or the cube Neptune." Further on, he
added, "Undoubtedly, the names given by
the Pythagoreans to the different
numbers were themselves enigmatical and
symbolic, and there is little doubt that
in the time of Plutarch, the meanings
these names concealed were lost.
Pythagoras had succeeded too well in
concealing his symbols with a veil that
was from the first impenetrable without
his oral explanation asterisk asterisk
asterisk. This uncertainty shared by all
true students of the subject proves
conclusively that it is unwise to make
definite statements founded on the
indefinite and fragmentaryary
information available concerning the
Pythagorean system of mathematical
philosophy. The material which follows
represents an effort to collect a few
salient points from the scattered
records preserved by disciples of
Pythagoras and others who have since
contacted his philosophy. Method of
securing the numerical power of words.
The first step in obtaining the
numerical value of a word is to resolve
it back into its original tongue. Only
words of Greek or Hebrew derivation can
be successfully analyzed by this method
and all words must be spelled in their
most ancient and complete forms. Old
Testament words and names therefore must
be translated back into the early Hebrew
characters and New Testament words into
the Greek. Two examples will help to
clarify this principle. The demiierous
of the Jews is called in English
Jehovah. But when seeking the numerical
value of the name Jehovah, it is
necessary to resolve the name into its
Hebrew letters. It becomes and is read
from right to left. The Hebrew letters
are he, vav, he, yad, and when reversed
into the English order from left to
right read yadhi vavi. By consulting the
foregoing table of letter values, it is
found that the four characters of this
sacred name have the following numerical
significance. Yad equals 10, he equals
5, vav equals 6, and the second he
equals 5. Therefore 10 + 5 + 6 + 5 is
equal to 26 a synonym of Jehovah. If the
English letters were used the answer
obviously would not be correct.
Testament of the Jews and in their
cabalistic system. This same method is
used in finding the numerical value of
the names of the gods and goddesses of
the Greeks and Jews. All higher numbers
can be reduced to one of the original 10
numerals and the 10 itself to one.
Therefore, all groups of numbers
resulting from the translation of names
of deities into their numerical
equivalents have a basis in one of the
first 10 numbers. By this system, in
which the digits are added together, 666
becomes 6 + 6 + 6 or 18. And this in
turn becomes 1 + 8 or 9. According to
Revelation, 144,000 are to be saved.
This number becomes 1 + 4 + 4 + 0 + 0 +
0 which equals 9. Thus proving that both
the beast of Babylon and the number of
the saved refer to man himself whose
symbol is the number nine. This system
can be used successfully with both Greek
and Hebrew letter values. The original
Pythagorean system of numerical
philosophy contains nothing to justify
the practice now in vogue of changing
the given name or surname in the hope of
improving the temperament or financial
condition by altering the name
vibrations. There is also a system of
calculation in vogue for the English
language but its accuracy is a matter of
legitimate dispute. It is comparatively
modern and has no relationship either to
the Hebrew cabalistic system or to the
Greek procedure. The claim made by some
that it is Pythagorean is not supported
by any tangible evidence and there are
many reasons why such a contention is
untenable. The fact that Pythagoras used
10 as the basis of calculation while
this system uses nine an imperfect
number is in itself almost conclusive.
Furthermore, the arrangement of the
Greek and Hebrew letters does not agree
closely enough with the English to
permit the application of the number
sequences of one language too. the
number sequences of the others. Further
experimentation with the system may
prove profitable, but it is without
basis in antiquity. The arrangement of
the letters and numbers is as follows. 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F G H I J K L
M N O P QR S T U V W XY Z. The letters
under each of the numbers have the value
of the figure at the top of the column.
Thus in the word man m= 4, a= 1, n= 5, a
total of 10. The values of the numbers
are practically the same as those given
by the Pythagorean system. An
introduction to the Pythagorean theory
of numbers. The following outline of
Pythagorean mathematics is a paraphrase
of the opening chapters of Thomas
Taylor's theoretic arithmetic, the
rarest and most important compilation of
Pythagorean mathematical fragments.
extent the Pythagoreans declared
arithmetic to be the mother of the
mathematical sciences. This is proved by
the fact that geometry, music and
astronomy are dependent upon it but it
is not dependent upon them. Thus,
geometry may be removed but arithmetic
will remain. But if arithmetic be
removed, geometry is eliminated. In the
same manner, music depends upon
arithmetic. But the elimination of music
affects arithmetic only by limiting one
of its expressions. The Pythagoreans
also demonstrated arithmetic to be prior
to astronomy. For the latter is
dependent upon both geometry and music.
The size, form, and motion of the
celestial bodies is determined by the
use of geometry. Their harmony and
rhythm by the use of music. If astronomy
be removed, neither geometry nor music
is injured. But if geometry and music be
eliminated, astronomy is destroyed. The
priority of both geometry and music to
astronomy is therefore established.
Arithmetic however is prior to all. It
is primary and fundamental. Pythagoras
instructed his disciples that the
science of mathematics is divided into
two major parts. The first is concerned
with the multitude or the constituent
parts of a thing and the second with the
magnitude or the relative size or
density of a thing. Magnitude is divided
into two parts. magnitude which is
stationary and magnitude which is
movable. The stationary pair having
priority. Multitude is also divided into
two parts for it is related both to
itself and to other things. The first
relationship having priority. Pythagoras
assigned the science of arithmetic to
multitude related to itself and the art
of music to multitude related to other
things. Geometry likewise was assigned
to stationary magnitude and spherics
used partly in the sense of astronomy to
movable magnitude. Both multitude and
magnitude were circumscribed by the
circumference of mind. The atomic theory
has proved size to be the result of
number for a mass is made up of minute
units though mistaken by the uninformed
for a single simple substance. Owing to
the fragmentaryary condition of existing
Pythagorean records, it is difficult to
arrive at exact definitions of terms.
Before it is possible, however, to
unfold the subject further some light
must he cast upon the meanings of the
words number, monad, and one. The monad
signifies a the all-including one. The
Pythagoreans called the monad the noble
number, sire of gods and men. The monad
also signifies b the sum of any
combination of numbers considered as a
whole. Thus the universe is considered
as a monad. But the individual parts of
the universe such as the planets and
elements are monads in relation to the
parts of which they themselves are
composed. Though they in turn are parts
of the greater monad formed of their
sum. The monad may also be likened see
to the seed of a tree which when it has
grown has many branches the numbers in
other words the numbers are to the monad
what the branches of the tree are to the
seed of the tree from the study of the
mysterious Pythagorean monad lienit
evolved his magnificent theory of the
world atoms theory in perfect accord
with the ancient teachings of the
mysteries for lienets himself was an
initiate of a secret school by some
Pythagorean means the monad is also
considered d synonymous with the one
number is the term applied to all
numerals and their combinations. A
strict interpretation of the term number
by certain of the Pythagoreans excludes
one and two. Pythagoras defines number
to be the extension an energy of the
spermatic reasons contained in the
monad. The followers of hypocus declared
number to be the first pattern used by
the demier in the formation of the
universe. The one was defined by the
Plleonists as the summit of the many.
The one differs from the monad in that
the term monad is used to designate the
sum of the parts considered as a unit
whereas the one is the term applied to
each of its integral parts. There are
two orders of number odd and even
because unity or one always remains
indivisible. The odd number cannot be
divided equally. Thus 9 is 4 + 1 + 4.
The unity in the center being
indivisible. Furthermore, if any odd
number be divided into two parts, one
part will always be odd and the other
even. Thus, may 9th be 5 + 4, 3 + 6, 7 +
2 or 8 + 1. The Pythagoreans considered
the odd number of which the monad was
the prototype to be definite and
masculine. They were not all agreed,
however, as to the nature of unity or
one. Some declared it to be positive
because if added to an even negative
number produces an odd positive number.
Others demonstrated that if unity be
added to an odd number, the latter
becomes even thereby making the
masculine to be feminine. Unity or one
therefore was considered an androgynous
number partaking of both the masculine
and the feminine attributes.
Consequently, both odd and even. For
this reason, the Pythagoreans called it
evenly odd. It was customary for the
Pythagoreans to offer sacrifices of an
uneven number of objects to the superior
gods, while to the goddesses and
subterranean spirits, an even number was
offered. Any even number may be divided
into two equal parts, which are always
either both odd or both even. Thus, 10
by equal division gives 5 + 5, both odd
numbers. The same principle holds true
if the 10 be unequally divided. For
example, in 6 + 4, both parts are even.
In 7 + 3, both parts are odd. In 8 + 2,
both parts are again even. And in 9 + 1,
both parts are again odd. Thus, in the
even number, however it may be. Divided,
the parts will always be both odd or
both even. The Pythagoreans considered
the even number of off which the duad
was the prototype, to be indefinite and
feminine. The odd numbers are divided by
a mathematical contrivance called the
civ of irratostheines into three general
classes incomposite composite and
incomposite composite. The incomposite
numbers are those which have no divisor
other than themselves in unity such as 3
5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43 47 and
so forth. For example, 7 is divisible
only by 7 which goes into itself once
and unity which goes into seven seven
times. The composite numbers are those
which are divisible not only by
themselves in unity but also by some
other number such as 9 15 21
27 33 39 45 51 57 and so forth. For
example, 21 is divisible not only by
itself and by unity, but also by three
and by 7. The incomposite composite
numbers are those which have no common
divisor, although each of itself is
capable of division, such as 9 and 25.
For example, 9 is divisible by 3 and 25
by 5, but neither is divisible by the
divisor of the other. Thus, they have no
common divisor. Because they have
individual divisors they are called
composite and because they have no
common divisor they are called in
composite. Accordingly the term in
composite composite was created to
describe their properties. Even numbers
are divided into three classes evenly
evenly odd and oddly odd. The evenly
even numbers are all in dupal ratio from
unity. Thus 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512
and 1,024. The proof of the perfect
evenly even number is that it can be
hald and the halves again halded. Back
to unity as 1/2 of 64 is equal to 32.
1/2 of 32 is equal to 16. 1/2 of 16 is
equal to 8. 1/2 of 8 is equal to 4. 1/2
of 4 is equal to 2. 1/2 of 2 is equal to
1. Beyond unity, it is impossible to go.
The evenly even numbers possess certain
unique properties. The sum of any number
of terms, but the last term is always
equal to the last term minus one. For
example, the sum of the first and second
terms 1 + 2 equals the third term 4
minus one. or the sum of the first,
second, third, and fourth terms 1 + 2 +
4 + 8 equals the fifth term 16 - 1. In a
series of evenly even numbers, the first
multiplied by the last equals the last,
the second multiplied by the second from
the last equals the last and so on until
in an odd series, one number remains,
which multiplied by itself equals the
last number of the series. Or in an even
series, two numbers remain which
multiplied by each other give the last
number of the series. For example, 1 2 4
8 16 is an odd series. The first number
1 multiplied by the last number 16
equals the last number 16. The second
number 2 multiplied by the second from
the last number 8 equals the last number
16. Being an odd series, the four is
left in the center and this multiplied
by itself also equals the last number
16. The evenly odd numbers are those
which when haved are incapable of
further division by having. They are
formed by taking the odd numbers in
sequential order and multiplying them by
two. By this process the odd numbers 1 3
5 7 9 11 produce the evenly odd numbers
2 6 10 14 18 22. Thus every fourth
number is evenly odd. Each of the even
odd numbers may be divided once as two
which becomes two 1's and cannot be
divided further or six which becomes two
threes and cannot be divided further.
Another peculiarity of the evenly odd
numbers is that if the divisor be odd,
the quotient is always even. And if the
divisor be even, the quotient is always
odd. For example, if 18 be divided by
two, an even divisor, the quotient is 9,
an odd number. If 18 be divided by 3, an
odd divisor, the quotient is six, an
even number. The evenly odd numbers are
also remarkable in that each term is 1/2
of the sum of the terms on either side
of it. This civ is a mathematical device
originated by Aratostheines about 230 BC
for the purpose of segregating the
composite and incomposite odd numbers.
Its use is extremely simple after the
theory has once been mastered. All the
odd numbers are first arranged in their
natural order as shown in the second
panel from the bottom designated odd
numbers. It will then be seen that every
third number beginning with three is
divisible by three. Every fifth number
beginning with five, winky face is
divisible by 5. Every seventh number
beginning with seven is divisible by
seven. Every ninth number beginning with
9 is divisible by 9. Every 11th number
beginning with 11 is divisible by 11 and
so on to infinity. This system finally
sifts out what the Pythagoreans called
the incomposite numbers or those having
no divisor other than themselves and
unity. These will be found in the lowest
panel designated primary and incomposite
numbers. In his history of mathematics,
David Eugene Smith states that
Eratostheines was one of the greatest
scholars of Alexandria and was called by
his admirers the second Plato. Eras the
was educated at Athens and is renowned
not only for his civ but for having
computed by a very ingenious method the
circumference and diameter of the earth.
His estimate of the earth's diameter was
only 50 mi less than the polar diameter
accepted by modern scientists. This and
other mathematical achievements of
aeritosines are indisputable evidence
that in the 3rd century before Christ,
the Greeks not only knew the earth to be
spherical in form, but could also
approximate with amazing accuracy its
actual size and distance from both the
sun and the moon. Aristoarkus of Samos,
another great Greek astronomer and
mathematician who lived about 250 BC,
established by philosophical deduction
and a few simple scientific instruments
that the earth revolved around the sun.
While Copernicus actually believed
himself to be the discoverer of this
fact, he but restated the findings
advanced by Arisarchus 1700 years
earlier. The oddly odd or unevenly even
numbers are a compromise between the
evenly even and the evenly odd numbers.
Unlike the evenly even, they cannot be
haved back to unity. And unlike the
evenly odd, they are capable of more
than one division by having. The oddly
odd numbers are formed by multiplying
the evenly even numbers above two by the
odd numbers above one. 1 or 3, 5, 7, 9,
11, and so forth. The evenly even
numbers above 2 are 4 8 16 32 64 and
soon the first odd number of the series
3 multiplied by 4. The first evenly even
number of the series gives 12. The first
oddly odd number by multiplying 5 7 9 11
and so forth by four oddly odd numbers
are found. The other oddly odd numbers
are produced by multiplying three, 5, 7,
9, 11 and so forth in turn by the other
evenly even numbers 8 16 32 64 and so
forth. An example of the having of the
oddly odd number is as follows. 1/2 of
12 is equal to 6. 1/2 of 6 is equal to 3
which cannot be have further because the
Pythagoreans did not divide unity. Even
numbers are also divided into three
other classes. Super perfect, deficient
and perfect. Super perfect or super
abundant numbers are such as have the
sum of their fractional parts greater
than themselves. For example, 1/2 of 24
is equal to 12. 1 / 4 is equal to 6. 1 /
3 is equal to 8. 1 / 6 is equal to 4. 1
/ 12 is equal to 2. and 1 / 24 is equal
to 1. The sum of these parts 12 + 6 + 8
+ 4 + 2 + 1 is 33 which is in excess of
24 the original number. Deficient
numbers are such as have the sum of
their fractional parts less than
themselves. For example, 1/2 of 14 is
equal to 7. 1 / 7 is equal to 2 and 1 /
14 is equal to 1. The sum of these parts
7 + 2 + 1 is 10 which is less than 14
the original number. Perfect numbers are
such as have the sum of their fractional
parts equal to themselves. For example,
1/2 of 28 is equal to 14. 1 / 4 is equal
to 7. 1 / 7 is equal to 4. 1 / 14 is
equal to 2. And 1 / 28 is equal to 1.
The sum of these parts 14 + 7 + 4 + 2 +
1 is equal to 28. The perfect numbers
are extremely rare. There is only one
between 1 and 10, namely 6. One between
10 and 100, namely 28, one between 100
and 1,000, namely 496, and one between
1,000 and 10,000, namely 8,128.
The perfect numbers are found by the
following rule. The first number of the
evenly even series of numbers 1 2 4 8 16
32 and so forth is added to the second
number of the series and if an
incomposite number results it is
multiplied by the last number of the
series of evenly even numbers whose sum
produced it. The product is the first
perfect number. For example, the first
and second evenly even numbers are 1 and
two. Their sum is three an incomposite
number. If three be multiplied by two,
the last number of the series of evenly
even numbers used to produce it, the
product is six, the first perfect
number. If the addition of the evenly
even numbers does not result in an
incomposite number, the next evenly even
number of the series must be added until
an incomposite number results. The
second perfect number is found in the
following manner. The sum of the evenly
even numbers 1, 2, and four is seven. In
composite number, if 7 be multiplied by
4, the last of the series of evenly even
numbers used to produce it, the product
is 28, the second perfect number. This
method of calculation may be continued
to infinity. Perfect numbers when
multiplied by two produce super abundant
numbers and when divided by two produce
deficient numbers. The Pythagoreans
evolve their philosophy from the science
of numbers. The following quotation from
theoretic arithmetic is an excellent
example of this practice. Perfect
numbers therefore are beautiful images
of the virtues which are certain media
between excess and defect and are not
summits as by some of the ancients they
were supposed to be. And evil indeed is
opposed to evil, but both are opposed to
one good. Good, however, is never
opposed to good, but to two evils at one
and the same time. Thus timidity is
opposed to audacity to both of which the
one of true. Courage is common but both
timidity and audacity are opposed to
fortitude. Craft also is opposed to
fetuity to both of which the one of
intellect is common and both these are
opposed to prudence. Thus too profusion
is opposed to avarice to both of which
illiberality is common and both these
are opposed to liberality. and in a
similar manner in the other virtues by
all of which it is evident that perfect
numbers have a great similitude to the
virtues. But they also resemble the
virtues on another account, for they are
rarely found as being few, and they are
generated in a very constant order. On
the contrary, an infinite multitude of
super abundant and diminished numbers
may be found, nor are they disposed in
any orderly series, nor generated from
any certain end. and hence they have a
great similitude to the vices which are
numerous inordinate and indefinite. The
table of the 10 numbers the following
outline of the Pythagorean numbers is a
paraphrase of the writings of Nikcomicus
Fen of Smyrna Profery
Plutarch Clement of Alexandria Aristotle
and other early authorities. Monad one
is so-called because it remains always
in the same condition that is separate
from multitude. Its attributes are as
follows. It is called mind because the
mind is stable and has preeminence.
Hermaphrodism because it is both male
and female. Odd and even. For being
added to the even it makes odd and to
the odd even. God because it is the
beginning and end of all but itself has
neither beginning nor end. Good. For
such is the nature of God. the
receptacle of matter because it produces
the duad which is essentially material.
By the Pythagoreans, monad was called
chaos, obscurity, chasm, tartarus,
sticks, abyss, leafy, atlas, axis,
morpho, a name for Venus and tower or
throne of Jupiter because of the great
power which abides in the center of the
universe and controls the circular
motion of the planers about itself.
Monad is also called Germanal reason
because it is the origin of all the
thoughts in the universe. Other names
given to it were Apollo because of its
relation to the sun, Prometheus because
he brought man light. Pireios one who
exists in fire, ginature because without
it known number can exist, substance
because substance is primary cause of
truth and constitution of symphony. All
these because it is the primordial one.
Between greater and lesser, the monad is
equal. Between intention and remission
it is middle, in multitude it is main
and in time it is now because eternity
knows neither past nor future. It is
called Jupiter because he is father and
head of the gods. Vesta, the fire of the
home, because it is located in the midst
of the universe and remains there,
inclining to no side as a dot in a
circle form because it circumscribes,
comprehends, and terminates, love,
concord, and piety because it is
indivisible. Other symbolic names for
the monad are ship, chariot, protuse, a
god capable of changing his form,
Namosin, and Polyonmus, having many
names. The following symbolic names were
given to the duad. Two, because it has
been divided and is two rather than one.
And when there are two, each is opposed
to the other. Genius, evil, darkness,
inequality, instability, movability,
boldness, fortitude, contention, matter,
dissimilarity, partition between
multitude and monad, defect,
shapelessness, indefinitess,
indeterminatess, harmony, tolerance,
root, feet of fountain, abounding idea.
Top fans, opinion, fallacy, alterity,
diffidence, impulse, death, motion,
generation, mutation, division,
longitude, augmentation, composition,
communion, misfortune, sustation,
imposition, marriage, soul, and science.
In his book numbers winncott
says of the duad it was called audacity
from its being the earliest number to
separate itself from the divine one from
the addom of godn nourished silence as
the calaldian oracles say as the monad
is the father so the duad is the mother
therefore the duad has certain points in
common with the goddesses Isis Ria Joe's
mother Friia Lydia dindamine sibily and
theories. Erto, one of the muses. Diana
because the moon is forked. Dictina,
Venus, Dion, Cytheria, Juno because she
is both wife and sister of Jupiter and
Maya the mother of Mercury. While the
Manad is the symbol of wisdom. The Duad
is the symbol of ignorance for in it
exists the sense of separateness which
sense is the beginning of ignorance. The
Duad however is also the mother of
wisdom. Four ignorance out of the nature
of itself invariably gives birth to
wisdom. The Pythagoreans revered the
monad but despised the duad because it
was the symbol of polarity by the power
of the duad. The deep was created in
contra distinction to the heavens. The
deep mirrored the heavens and became the
symbol of illusion. For the below was
merely a reflection of the above. The
below was called Maya illusion, the sea,
the great void. And to symbolize it, the
magi of Persia carried mirrors. From the
duad arose, disputes and contentions
until by bringing the monad between the
duad, equilibrium was reestablished by
the savior God who took upon himself the
form of a number and was crucified
between two thieves for the sins of men.
The triad three is the first number
actually odd monad not always being
considered a number. It is the first
equilibrium of unities. Therefore,
Pythagoras said that Apollo gave oracles
from a tripod and advised offer of
libation three times. The key words to
the qualities of the triad are
friendship, peace, justice, prudence,
piety, temperance, and virtue. The
following deities partake of the
principles of the triad. Saturn, ruler
of time, Latona. Cornicopi, Oion, the
great serpent. Thetus, Heced, Polyamia,
Amuse. Pluto, Triton, president of the
C. Tritenia, Achilles, and the faces,
furies, and graces. This number is
called wisdom because men organize the
present, foresee the future, and benefit
by the experiences of the fast. It is
cause of wisdom and understanding. The
triad is the number of knowledge, music,
geometry, and astronomy, and the science
of the celestials and terrestrials.
Pythagoras taught that the cube of this
number had the power of the lunar
circle. The sacredness of the triad and
its symbol the triangle is derived from
the fact that it is made up of the monad
and the duad. The monad is the symbol of
the divine father and the duad of the
great mother. The triad being made of
these two is therefore androgynous and
is symbolic of the fact that God gave
birth to his worlds out of himself who
in his creative aspect is always
symbolized by the triangle. The monad
passing into the duad was thus capable
of becoming the parent of progeny for
the duad was the womb of Meu within
which the world was incubated and within
which it still exists in embryo. The
tetrd four was esteemed by the
Pythagoreans as the primogenial number,
the root of all things, the fountain of
nature and the most perfect number. All
tetrads are intellectual. They have an
emergent order and encircle the world as
the empirium passes through it. Why the
Pythagoreans expressed God as a tetrad
is explained in a sacred discourse
ascribed to Pythagoras wherein God is
called the number of numbers. This is
because the decad or 10 is composed of 1
2 3 and four. The number four is
symbolic of God because it is symbolic
of the first for numbers. Moreover, the
tetrd is the center of the weak being
halfway between 1 and 7. The tetrd is
also the first geometric solid.
Pythagoras maintained that the soul of
man consists of a tetrd. The four powers
of the soul being mind, science,
opinion, and sense. The tetrd connects
all beings, elements, numbers, and
seasons. Nor can anything be named,
which does not depend upon the tetrus.
It is the cause and maker of all things,
the intelligible God, author of
celestial and sensible good. Plutarch
interprets this tetrase which he said
was also called the world to be 36
consisting of the first four odd numbers
added to the first four even numbers.
Thus 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 is equal to 16. 2 + 4
+ 6 + 8 is equal to 20. 36. Key words
given to the tetrd are impetuosity,
strength, verility, tothered and the
keykeeper of nature because the
universal constitution cannot be without
it. It is also called harmony and the
first profoundity. The following deities
ptook of the nature of the tetrd.
Hercules, mercury, vulcan, bakus and
urania, one of the muses. The triad
represents the primary colors and the
major planets. While the tetrad
represents the secondary colors and the
minor planets. From the first triangle
come forth the seven spirits symbolized
by a triangle and a square. These
together form the Masonic apron. The
pintad five is the union of an odd and
an even number three and two. Among the
Greeks, the pentagram was a sacred
symbol of light, health and vitality. It
also symbolized the fifth element ether
because it is free from the disturbances
of the four lower elements. It is called
equilibrium because it divides the
perfect number 10 into two equal parts.
The pintad is symbolic of nature. For
when multiplied by itself, it returns
into itself just as grains of wheat
starting in the form of seed pass
through nature's processes and reproduce
the seed of the wheat as the ultimate
form of their own growth. Other numbers
multiplied by themselves produce other
numbers but only five and six multiplied
by themselves represent and retain their
original number as the last figure in
their products. The pintad represents
all the superior and inferior beings. It
is sometimes referred to as the
hierofphant or the priest of the
mysteries because of its connection with
the spiritual ethers by means of which
mystic development is attained. Key
words of the pentad are reconciliation,
alternation, marriage, immortality,
cordiality, providence, and sound. Among
the deities who ptook of the nature of
the pentad were palace, nemesis,
bubastia, bast, venus, androgenia,
cytheria, and the messengers of Jupiter.
The tetrd, the elements plus the monad
equals the pentad. The Pythagoreans
taught that the elements of earth, fire,
air, and water were permeated by a
substance called ether, the basis of
vitality and life. Therefore, they chose
the five-pointed star or pentagram as
the symbol of vitality, health, and
interpenetration. It was customary for
the philosophers to conceal the element
of earth under the symbol of a dragon
and many of the heroes of antiquity were
told to go forth and slay the dragon.
Hence they drove their sword the monad
into the body of the dragon the tetrat.
This resulted in the formation of the
pintad a symbol of the victory of the
spiritual nature over the material
nature. The four elements are symbolized
in the early biblical writings as the
for rivers that poured out of garden of
Eden. The elements themselves are under
the control of the composite cherubim of
Ezekiel. The Pythagoreans held the hexad
six to represent as Clement of
Alexandria conceived the creation of the
world according to both the prophets and
the ancient mysteries. It was called by
the Pythagoreans the perfection of all
the parts. This number was particularly
sacred to Orpheus and also to the fate
Lacasis and the muse Tia. It was called
the form of forms, the articulation of
the universe and the maker of the soul.
Among the Greeks, harmony and the soul
were considered to be similar in nature
because all souls are harmonic. The
hexad is also the symbol of marriage
because it is formed by the union of two
triangles, one masculine and the other
feminine. Among the key words given to
the hexad are time for it is the measure
of duration panacea because health is
equilibrium and the hexad is a balanced
number. The world because the world like
the hexad is often seen to consist of
contraries by harmony. Omnisufficient
because its parts are sufficient for
totality. 3 + 2 plus 1 is equal to six
unwaried because it contains the
elements of immortality by the
Pythagoreans. The heptad 7 was called
worthy of veneration. It was held to be
the number of religion because man is
controlled by seven celestial spirits to
whom it is proper for him to make
offerings. It was called the number of
life because it was believed that human
creatures born in the seventh month of
embriionic life usually lived but those
born in the eighth month often died. One
author called it the motherless virgin
manurva because it was nor of a mother
but out of the crown or the head of the
father the monad. Keywords of the heptad
are fortune, occasion, custody, control,
government, judgment, dreams, voices,
sounds, and that which leads all things
to their end. Deities whose attributes
were expressed by the heptad were Eegis,
Osiris, Mars, and Cleo, one of the
muses. Among many ancient nations, the
Heptad is a sacred number. The Elohim of
the Jews were supposedly seven in
number. They were the spirits of the
dawn, more commonly known as the
archangels controlling the planets. The
seven archangels with the three spirits
controlling the sun in its three-fold
aspect constitute the 10, the sacred
Pythagorean decad, the mysterious
Pythagorean tetr or four rows of dots
increasing from 1 to four was symbolic
of the stages of creation. The great
Pythagorean truth that all things in
nature are regenerated through the decad
or 10 is subtly preserved in Freemasonry
through these grips being affected by
the uniting of 10 fingers five on the
hand of each person. The three spirit
mind and soul descend into the four the
world. The sum being the seven or the
mystic nature of man consisting of a
three-fold spiritual body and a
four-fold material form. These are
symbolized by the cube which has six
surfaces and a mysterious seventh point
within. The six surfaces are the
directions north, east, south, west, up
and down or front, back, right, left,
above and below or again earth, fire,
air, water, spirit and matter. In the
midst of these stands the one which is
the upright figure of man from whose
center in the cube radiates six
pyramids. From this comes the great
occult axiom. The center is the father
of the directions, the dimensions and
the distances. The heptad is the number
of the law because it is the number of
the makers of cosmic law. The seven
spirits before the throne. The ogdoad 8
was sacred because it was the number of
the first cube which form had eight
corners and was the only evenly even
number under 10 1 to 484 to 1. Thus the
8 is divided into two fours. Each four
is divided into two twos and each two is
divided into two ones thereby
reestablishing the monad. Among the key
words of the agdoad are love, counsel,
prudence, law and convenience. Among the
divinities partaking of its nature were
panmonia, Ria, Sibily, Cadmia,
Dindimine, Orsia, Neptune, Femis, and
Utury Amuse. The Agdawad was a
mysterious number associated with the
Elusinian mysteries of Greece and the
Cabaret. It was called the little holy
number. It derived its form partly from
the twisted snakes on the kaducius of
Hermes and partly from the serpentine
motion of the celestial bodies, possibly
also from the moon's nodes. The Niad 9
was the first square of an odd number
3x3. It was associated with failure and
shortcoming because it fell short of the
perfect number 10 by 1. It was called
the called the number of man because of
the 9 months of his embriionic life.
Among its keywords are ocean and horizon
because to the ancients these were
boundless. The iniad is the limitless
number because there is nothing beyond
it but the infinite 10. It was called
boundary and limitation because it
gathered all numbers within itself. It
was called the sphere of the air because
it surrounded the numbers as air
surrounds the earth. Among the gods and
goddesses who ptook in greater or less
degree of its nature were Prometheus,
Vulcan, Juno, the sister and wife of
Jupiter, Pin, and Agia, Tritenia,
Hurides, Proerpine, Hyperion, and
Tpicery, Amuse. The nine was looked upon
as evil because it was an inverted six.
According to the Elusinian mysteries, it
was the number of the spheres through
which the consciousness passed on its
way to birth. Because of its close
resemblance to the spermatzoan, the nine
has been associated with Germanal life.
The decad 10 according to the
Pythagoreans is the greatest of numbers,
not only because it is the tetractis,
the tin dots, but because it comprehends
all arithmetic and harmonic proportions.
Pythagoras said that 10 is the nature of
number because all nations reckon to it
and when they arrive at it they return
to the monad. The decad was called both
heaven and the world because the former
includes the latter being a perfect
number. The decad was applied by the
Pythagoreans to those things relating to
age, power, faith, necessity, and the
power of memory. It was also called
unweied because like God it was
tireless. The Pythagoreans divided the
heavenly bodies into 10 orders. They
also stated that the decad perfected all
numbers and comprehended within itself
the nature of odd and even, moved and
unmoved, good and ill. They associated
its power with the following deities.
Atlas, for it carried the numbers on its
shoulders, Urania, Namosin, the sun,
fans, and the one God. The decimal
system can probably be traced back to
the time when it was customary to reckon
on the fingers. These being among the
most primitive of calculating devices
and still in use among many Aboriginal
peoples. The human body and symbolism.
The oldest, the most profound, the most
universal of all symbols is the human
body. The Greeks, Persians, Egyptians,
and Hindus considered a philosophical
analysis of man's triune nature to be an
indispensable part of ethical and
religious training. The mysteries of
every nation taught that the laws,
elements, and powers of the universe
were epitomized in the human
constitution, that everything which
existed outside of man had its analog
within man. The universe being
immeasurable in its immensity and
inconceivable in its profoundity was
beyond mortal estimation. Even the gods
themselves could comprehend but a part
of the inaccessible glory which was
their source. When temporarily permeated
with divine enthusiasm, man may
transcend for a brief moment the
limitations of his own personality. And
behold, in part that celestial eulgence
in which all creation is bathed, but
even in his periods of greatest
illumination, man is incapable of
imprinting upon the substance of his
rational soul a perfect image of the
multifiform expression of celestial
activity. Recognizing the futility of
attempting to cope intellectually with
that which transcends the comprehension
of the rational faculties, the early
philosophers turned their attention from
the inconceivable divinity to man
himself within the narrow confines of
whose nature they found manifested all
the mysteries of the external spheres.
As the natural outgrowth of this
practice, there was fabricated a secret
theological system in which God was
considered as the grand man and
conversely man as the little god.
Continuing this analogy, the universe
was regarded as a man and conversely man
as a miniature universe. The greater
universe was termed the macrocosm, the
great world or body. And the divine life
or spiritual entity controlling its
functions was called the macroprophice.
Man's body or the individual human
universe was termed the microcosm and
the divine life or spiritual entity.
Controlling its functions was called the
microprocapus. The pagan mysteries were
primarily concerned with instructing
Neaphites in the true relationship
existing between the macrocosm and the
microcosm. In other words, between God
and man. Accordingly, the key to these
analogies between the organs and
functions of the microcosmic man and
those of the macrocosmic man constituted
the most prized possession of the early
initiates. In Isis Unveiled, H Pllatski
summarizes the pagan concept of man as
follows. Man is a little world, a
microcosm inside the great universe.
Like a fetus, he is suspended by all his
three spirits in the matrix of the
macrocossmos. And while his terrestrial
body is in constant sympathy with its
parent earth, his astral soul lives in
unison with the cidurial animma mundi.
He is in it as it is in him. For the
worldvading element fills all space, and
his space itself only shoreless and
infinite. As to his third spirit, the
divine, what is it but an infinite
decimal ray, one of the countless
radiations proceeding directly from the
highest cause the spiritual light of the
world. This is the trinity of organic
and inorganic. nature, the spiritual and
the physical which are three in one and
of which process says that the first
monad is the eternal God, the second
eternity, the third the paradigm or
pattern of the universe, the three
constituting the intelligible triad.
Long before the introduction of idolatry
into religion, the early priests caused
the statue of a man to be placed in the
sanctuary of the temple. This human
figure symbolized the divine power in
all its intricate manifestations. Thus
the priests of antiquity accepted man as
their textbook and through the study of
him learned to understand the greater
and more abstuse mysteries of the
celestial scheme of which they were a
part. It is not improbable that this
mysterious figure standing over the
primitive altars was made in the nature
of a mannequin and like certain
emblematic hands in the mystery schools
was covered with either carved or
painted hieroglyphs. The statue may have
opened thus showing the relative
positions of the organs, bones, muscles,
nerves and other parts. After ages of
research, the mannequin became a mass of
intricate hieroglyphs and symbolic
figures. Every part had its secret
meaning. The measurements formed a basic
standard by means of which it was
possible to measure all parts of cosmos.
It was a glorious composite emblem of
all the knowledge possessed by the sages
and hierofphants. Then came the age of
idolatry. The mysteries decayed from
within. The secrets were lost and none
knew. The identity of the mysterious man
who stood over the altar. It was
remembered only that the figure was a
sacred and glorious symbol of the
universal power and it finally came to
be looked upon as a god, the one in
whose image man was made. Having lost
the knowledge of the purpose for which
the mannequin was originally
constructed, the priests worshiped this
effigy until at last their lack of
spiritual understanding brought the
temple down in ruins about their heads
and the statue crumbled with it.
Civilization that had forgotten its
meaning. Proceeding from this assumption
of the first theologians that man is
actually fashioned in the image of God,
the initiated minds of past ages erected
the stupendous structure of theology
upon the foundation of the human body.
The religious world of today is almost
totally ignorant of the fact that the
science of biology is the fountain head
of its doctrines and tenets. Many of the
codes and laws believed by modern
divines to have been direct revelations
from divinity are in reality the
fruitage of ages of patient delving into
the intricacies of the human
constitution and the infinite wonders
revealed by such a study in nearly all
the sacred books of the world can be
traced in anatomical analogy. This is
most evident in their creation myths.
Anyone familiar with embryology and
obstetrics will have no difficulty in
recognizing the basis of the allegory
concerning Adam and Eve in the Garden of
Eden, the nine degrees of the Elusinian
mysteries, and the bremanic legend of
Vishnu's incarnations, the story of the
universal egg, the Scandinavian myth of
Janungagap, the dark cleft in space in
which the seed of the world is sown, and
the use of the fish as the emblem of the
paternal generative power. all show the
true origin of theological speculation.
The philosophers of antiquity realized
that man himself was the key to the
riddle of life. For he was the living
image of the divine plan and in future
ages, humanity also will come to realize
more fully the solemn import of those
ancient words. The proper study of
mankind is man. Both God and man have a
two-fold constitution of which the
superior part is invisible and the
inferior visible. In both there is also
an intermediary sphere marking the point
where these visible and invisible
natures meet. As the spiritual nature of
God controls his objective universal
form which is actually a crystallized
idea. So the spiritual nature of man is
the invisible cause and controlling
power of his visible material
personality. Thus it is evident that the
spirit of man bears the same
relationship to his material body that
God bears to the objective universe. The
mysteries taught that spirit or life was
anterior to form and that what is
anterior includes all that is posterior
to itself. Spirit being anterior to
form. Form is therefore included within
the realm of spirit. It is also a
popular statement or belief that man's
spirit is within his body. According to
the conclusions of philosophy and
theology, however, this belief is
erroneous. For spirit first
circumscribes an area and then manifests
within it. Philosophically speaking,
form being a part of spirit is within
spirit. But spirit is more than the sum
of form as the material nature of man is
therefore within the sum of spirit. So
the universal nature including the
entire cidurial system is within the
allervading essence of God the universal
spirit. According to another concept of
the ancient wisdom, all bodies, whether
spiritual or material, have three
centers called by the Greeks the upper
center, the middle center, and the lower
center. An apparent ambiguity will here
be noted. To diagram or symbolize
adequately abstract mental varities is
impossible, for the diagrammatic
representation of one aspect of
metaphysical relationships may be an
actual contradiction of some other
aspect. While that which the
tetragrammatin or four-letter name of
God is here arranged as a tetractis
within the inverted human heart beneath
the name Jehovah is shown transformed
into Jehoshua by the interpolation of
the radiant Hebrew letter Shin. The
drawing as a whole represents the throne
of God and his hierarchies within the
heart of man. In the first book of his
libri apologetic, Jacob Bow thus
describes the meaning of the symbol. For
we men have one book in common which
points to God. Each has it within
himself which is the priceless name of
God. Its letters are the flames of his
love which he out of his heart in the
priceless name of Jesus has revealed in
us. Read these letters in your hearts
and spirits and you have books enough.
All the writings of the children of God
direct you unto that one book for
therein lie all the treasures of wisdom.
Asterisk asterisk asterisk this book is
Christ in you. is above is generally
considered superior in dignity and
power. In reality, that which is in the
center is superior and anterior to both
that which is said to be above and that
which is said to be below. Therefore, it
must be said that the first which is
considered as being above is actually in
the center while both of the others
which are said to be either above or
below are actually beneath. This point
can be further simplified if the reader
will consider above as indicating degree
of proximity to source and below as
indicating degree of distance from
source. Source being posited in the
actual center and relative distance
being the various points along the radi
from the center toward the
circumference. In matters pertaining to
philosophy and theology, up may be
considered as toward the center and down
is toward the circumference. Center is
spirit, circumference is matter.
Therefore, up is towards spirit along an
ascending scale of spirituality. Down is
toward matter along an ascending scale
of materiality. The latter concept is
partly expressed by the apex of a cone
which when viewed from above is seen as
a point in the exact center of the
circumference formed by the base of the
cone. These three universal centers, the
one above, the one below and the link
uniting them represent three suns or
three aspects of one sun's centers of
aulgence. These also have their analoges
in the three grand centers of the human
body which like the physical universe is
a demi-urgic fabrication. The first of
these suns says Thomas Taylor is
analogous to light when viewed
subsisting in its fountain. the sun, the
second to the light immediately
proceeding from the sun and the third to
the splendor communicated to other
natures by this light. Since the
superior or spiritual center is in the
midst of the other two, its analog in
the physical body is the heart the most
spiritual and mysterious organ in the
human body. The second center or the
link between the superior and inferior
worlds is elevated to the position of
greatest physical dignity, the brain.
The third or lower center is relegated
to the position of least physical
dignity but greatest physical importance
the generative system. Thus the heart is
symbolically the source of life. The
brain the link by which through rational
intelligence life and form are united
and the generative system or infernal
creator the source of that power by
which physical organisms are produced.
The ideals and aspirations of the
individual depend largely upon which of
these three centers of power
predominates in scope and activity of
expression. In the materialist, the
lower center is the strongest. In the
intellectualist, the higher center, but
in the initiate, the middle center by
bathing the two extremes in a flood of
spiritual. Eulgence controls wholesomely
both the mind and the body. As light
bears witness of life which is its
source, so the mind bears witness of the
spirit and activity in a still lower
plane bears witness of intelligence.
Thus the mind bears witness of the heart
while the generative system in turn
bears witness of the mind. Accordingly,
the spiritual nature is most commonly
symbolized by a heart, the intellectual
power by an opened eye symbolizing the
pineal gland or cyclopian eye, which is
the two-faced Janice of the pagan
mysteries and the generative system by a
flower, a staff, a cup, or a hand. While
all the mysteries recognized the heart
as the center of spiritual
consciousness, they often purposely
ignored this concept and used the heart
in its exoteric sense as the symbol of
the emotional nature. In this
arrangement, the generative center
represented the physical body, the heart
the emotional body and the brain the
mental body. The brain represented the
superior sphere. But after the initiates
had passed through the lower degrees,
they were instructed that the brain was
the proxy of the spiritual flame.
Dwelling in the innermost recesses of
the heart, the student of esotericism
discovers heir long that the ancients
often resorted to various blinds to
conceal the true interpretations of
their mysteries. The substitution of the
brain for the heart was one of these
blinds. The three degrees of the ancient
mysteries were with few exceptions given
in chambers which represented the three
great centers of the human and universal
bodies. If possible, the temple itself
was constructed in the form of the human
body. The candidate entered between the
feet and received the highest degree in
the point corresponding to the brain.
Thus, the first degree was the material
mystery and its symbol was the
generative system. It raised the
candidate through the various degrees of
concrete thought. The second degree was
given in the chamber corresponding to
the heart but represented the middle
power which was the mental link. Here
the candidate was initiated into the
mysteries of abstract thought and lifted
as high as the mind was capable of
penetrating. He then passed into the
third chamber which analogous to the
brain occupied the highest position in
the temple but analogous to the heart
was of the greatest dignity. In the
brain chamber the heart mystery was
given. Here the initiate for the first
time truly comprehended the meaning of
those immortal words. As a man thinkketh
in his heart so is he. As there are
seven hearts in the brain so there are
seven brains in the heart. But this is a
matter of super physics of which little
can be said at the present time. Proclas
writes on this subject in the first book
of on the theology of Plato. Indeed,
Socrates in that first Alabiades rightly
observes that the soul entering into
herself will behold all other things and
deity itself for verging to her own
union and to the center of all life,
laying aside multitude and the variety
of the all manifold powers which she
contains. She ascends to the highest
watchtower offerings. And as in the most
holy of the mysteries, they say that the
mystics at first meet with the
multiiform and many shaped genera which
are hurled forth before the gods. But on
entering the temple, unmoved and guarded
by the mystic rights, they genuinely
receive in their bosom, heart divine
illumination, and devested of their
garments, as they would say, participate
of a divine nature. The same mode as it
appears to me takes place in the
speculation of holes. For the soul when
looking at things posterior to herself
beholds the shadows and images of
beings. But when she converts herself to
herself, she evolves her own essence and
the reasons which she contains. And at
first indeed she only as it were beholds
herself. But when she penetrates more
profoundly into the knowledge of
herself, she finds in herself both
intellect and the orders of beings. When
however she proceeds into her interior
recesses and into the adamass, it were
of the soul, she perceives with her eye
closed without the aid of the lower
mind, the genus of the gods and the
unities of beings. For all things are in
us psychically, and through this we are
naturally capable of knowing all things
by exciting the powers and the images of
holes which we contain. The initiates of
old warned their disciples that an image
is not a reality but merely the
objectification of a subjective idea.
The image of the gods were nor designed
to be objects of worship but were to be
regarded merely as emblems or reminders
of invisible powers and principles.
Similarly, the body of man must not be
considered as the individual but only as
the house of the individual. In the same
manner that the temple was the house of
God. In a state of grossness and
perversion, man's body is the tomb or
prison of a divine upon the 12 felanges
of the fingers appear the likenesses of
the apostles, each bearing its own
appropriate symbol. In the case of those
who suffered martyrdom, the symbol
signifies the instrument of death. Thus,
the symbol of St. Andrew is a cross. Of
St. Thomas, a javelin or a builder's
square of St. James the less a club of
street philip a cross of St. Bartholomew
a large knife or simar of St. Matthew a
sword or spear sometimes a purse of St.
Simon a club or saw of St. Matias an axe
and of St. Judas a halbert the apostles
whose symbols do not relate to their
martyrdom are St. Peter, who carries two
crossed keys, one gold and one silver.
St. James the Great, who bears a pilgrim
staff and an escalop shell, and St. John
who holds a cup from which the poison
miraculously departed in the form of a
serpent. See handbook of Christian
symbolism. The figure of Christ upon the
second fang of the thumb does not follow
the pagan system of assigning the first
person of the creative triad to this
position. God the father should occupy
the second falanche, God the son the
first falanche while to God the holy
spirit is assigned the base of the thumb
also according to the philosophic
arrangement the virgin should occupy the
base of the thumb which is sacred to the
moon principle in a state of unfoldment
and regeneration it is the house or
sanctuary of the deity by whose creative
powers it was fashioned personality is
suspended upon a thread from the nature
of being declares the secret work. Man
is essentially a permanent and immortal
principle. Only his bodies pass through
the cycle of birth and death. The
immortal is the reality. The mortal is
the unreality. During each period of
earth life, reality thus dwells in
unreality to be liberated from it
temporarily by death and permanently by
illumination. While generally regarded
as polytheists, the pagans gained this
reputation not because they worshiped
more than one god, but rather because
they personified the attributes of this
god, thereby creating a pantheon of
posterior deities, each manifesting a
part of what the one god manifested as a
whole. The various pantheons of ancient
religions therefore actually represent
the cataloged and personified attributes
of deity. In this respect, they
correspond to the hierarchies of the
Hebrew cabalists. All the gods and
goddesses of antiquity consequently have
their analogies in the human body as
have also the elements, planets, and
constellations which were assigned as
proper vehicles for these celestials.
Four body centers are assigned to the
elements, the seven vital organs to the
planets, the 12 principal parts and
members to the zodiac, the invisible
parts of man's divine nature to various
super mundane deities. While the hidden
god was declared to manifest through the
marrow in the bones, it is difficult for
many to realize that they are actual
universes, that their physical bodies
are avisible nature, through the
structure of which countless ways of
evolving life are unfolding their latent
potentialities. Yet through man's
physical body, not only are a mineral, a
plant, and an animal kingdom evolving,
but also unknown classifications and
divisions of invisible spiritual life,
just as cells are infinite decimal units
in the structure of man. So man is an
infinite decimal unit in the structure
of the universe. A theology based upon
the knowledge and appreciation of these
relationships is as profoundly just as
it is profoundly true. As man's physical
body has five distinct and important
extremities, two legs, two arms, and a
head of which the last governs the first
four, the number five has been accepted
as the symbol of man. By its four
corners, the pyramid symbolizes the arms
and legs, and by its apex, the head,
thus indicating that one rational power
controls four irrational corners. The
hands and feet are used to represent the
four elements of which the two feet are
earth and water and the two hands fire
and air. The brain then symbolizes the
sacred fifth element ether which
controls and unites the other four. If
the feet are placed together and the
arms outspread, man then symbolizes the
cross with the rational intellect as the
head or upper limb. The fingers and toes
also have special significance. The toes
represent the ten commandments of the
physical law and the fingers the ten
commandments of the spiritual law. The
four fingers of each hand represent the
four elements and the three fanges of
each finger represent the divisions of
the element. So that in each hand there
are 12 parts to the fingers which are
analogous to the signs of the zodiac.
Whereas the two fanges and base of each
thumb signify the three-fold deity. The
first fange corresponds to the creative
aspect. the second to the preservative
aspect and the base to the generative
and destructive aspect. When the hands
are brought together, the result is the
24 elders and the six days of creation.
In symbolism, the body is divided
vertically into halves. The right half
being considered as light and the left
half as darkness by those unacquainted
with the true meanings of light and
darkness. The light half was denominated
spiritual and the left half material.
Light is the symbol of objectivity.
Darkness of subjectivity. Light is a
manifestation of life and is therefore
posterior to life. That which is
anterior to light is darkness in which
light exists temporarily but darkness
permanently. As life precedes light, its
only symbol is darkness and darkness is
considered as the veil which must
eternally conceal the true nature of
abstract and undifferiated being. In
ancient times, men fought with their
right arms and defended the vital
centers with their left arms on which
was carried the protecting shield. The
right half of the body was regarded
therefore as offensive and the left half
defensive. For this reason also the
right side of the body was considered
masculine and the left side feminine.
Several authorities are of the opinion
that the present prevalent
right-handedness of the race is the
outgrowth of the custom of holding the
left hand in restraint for defensive
purposes. Furthermore, as the source of
being is in the primal darkness which
preceded light, so the spiritual nature
of man is in the dark part of his being,
for the heart is on the left side. Among
the curious misconceptions arising from
the false practice of associating
darkness with evil is one by which
several early nations use the right hand
for all constructive labors and the left
hand for only those purposes termed
unclean and unfit for the sight of the
gods. For the same reason, black magic
was often referred to as the left-hand
path, and heaven was said to be upon the
right and hell upon the left. Some
philosophers further declared that there
were two methods of writing, one from
left to right, which was considered the
exoteric method, the other from right to
left, which was considered esoteric. The
exoteric writing was that which was done
out or away from the heart, while the
esoteric writing was that which, like
the ancient Hebrew, was written toward
the heart. The secret doctrine declares
that every part and member of the body
is epitomized in the brain and in turn
that all that is in the brain is
epitomized in the heart. In symbolism,
the human head is frequently used to
represent intelligence and
self-nowledge. As the human body in its
entirety is the most perfect known
product of the earth's evolution, it was
employed to represent divinity, the
highest appreciable state or condition.
Artists attempting to portray divinity
often show only a hand emerging from it.
Impenetrable cloud. The cloud signifies
the unknowable divinity concealed from
man by human limitation. The hand
signifies the divine activity. The only
part of God which is cognisible to the
lower senses. The face consists of a
natural trinity. The eyes representing
the spiritual power which comprehends.
the nostrils representing the
preservative and vivifying power and the
mouth and ears representing the material
demiurgic power of the lower world. The
first sphere is eternally existent and
is creative. The second sphere pertains
to the mystery of the creative breach
and the third sphere above represent the
anatomy of the divine or inner man and
graphically set forth its condition
during its human infernal and divine
states. The plates in the William Law
edition of Bow's works are based
apparently upon GTL's diagrams which
they follow in all essentials. Gal gives
no detailed description of his figures
and the lettering on the original
diagrams here translated out of the
German is the only clue to the
interpretation of the charts. The two
end figures represent the obverse and
reverse of the same diagram and are term
table three. They are designed to show
the condition of the whole man as to all
his three essential parts spirit, soul
and body in his regenerated state. The
third figure from the left is called the
second table and sets forth the
condition of man in his old lapsed and
corrupted state without any respect to
or consideration of his renewing by
regeneration. The third figure however
does not correspond with the first table
of William Law. The first table
presumably represents the condition of
humanity before the fall. But the geekal
plate pertains to the third or
regenerated state of mankind. William
Law thus describes the purpose of the
diagrams and the symbols upon them.
These three tables are designed to
represent man in his different
three-fold state. The first before his
fall in purity, dominion, and glory. The
second after his fall in pollution and
predition. and the third in his rising
from the fall or on the way of
regeneration in sanctification and
tendency to his last perfection. The
student of orientalism will immediately
recognize in the symbols upon the
figures the Hindu chakras or centers of
spiritual force the various motions and
aspects of which reveal the condition of
the disciples internal divine nature to
the creative word by the word of God the
material universe was fabricated and the
seven creative powers or vowel sounds
which have been brought into existence
by the speaking of the word became the
seven Elohim or deities by whose power
and ministration. The lower world was
organized. Occasionally the deity is
symbolized by an eye, an ear, a nose or
a mouth. By the first divine awareness
is signified, by the second divine
interest, by the third divine vitality,
and by the fourth divine command. The
ancients did not believe that
spirituality made men either righteous
or rational, but rather that
righteousness and rationality made men
spiritual. The mysteries taught that
spiritual illumination was attained only
by bringing the lower nature up to a
certain standard of efficiency and
purity. The mysteries were therefore
established for the purpose of unfolding
the nature of man according to certain
fixed rules which when faithfully
followed elevated the human
consciousness to a point where it was
capable of cognizing its own
constitution and the true purpose of
existence. This knowledge of how man's
manifold constitution could be most
quickly and most completely regenerated
to the point of spiritual illumination
constituted the secret or esoteric
doctrine of antiquity. Certain
apparently physical organs and centers
are in reality the veils or sheets of
spiritual centers. What these were and
how they could be unfolded was never
revealed to the unregenerate. For the
philosophers realized that once he
understands the complete working of any
system, a man may accomplish a
prescribed and without being qualified
to manipulate and control the effects
which he has produced. For this reason,
long periods of probation were imposed
so that the knowledge of how to become
as the gods might remain the soul
possession of the worthy, lest that
knowledge be lost. However, it was
concealed in allegorories and myths
which were meaningless to the profane
but self-evident to those acquainted
with that theory of personal redemption
which was the foundation of
philosophical theology. Christianity
itself may be cited as an example. The
entire New Testament is in fact an
ingeniously concealed exposition of the
secret processes of human regeneration.
The characters so long considered as
historical men and women are really the
personification of certain processes
which take place in the human body when
man begins the task of consciously
liberating himself from the bondage of
ignorance and death. The garments and
ornamentations supposedly worn by the
gods are also keys for in the mysteries
clothing was considered as synonymous
with form. The degree of spirituality or
materiality of the organisms was
signified by the quality, beauty and
value of the garments worn. Man's
physical body was looked upon as the
robe of his spiritual nature.
Consequently, the more developed were
his super substantial powers, the more
glorious his apparel. Of course,
clothing was originally worn for
ornamentation rather than protection,
and such practice still prevails among
many primitive peoples. The mysteries
caught that man's only lasting
adornments were his virtues and worthy
characteristics that he was clothed in
his own accomplishments and adorned by
his attainments. Thus, the white robe
was symbolic of purity, the red robe of
sacrifice and love, and the blue robe of
altruism and integrity. Since the body
was said to be the robe of the spirit,
mental or moral deformities were
depicted as deformities of the body.
Considering man's body as the measuring
rule of the universe, the philosophers
declared that all things resemble in
constitution if not in form the human
body. The Greeks, for example, declared
deli to be the navl of the earth. For
the physical planet was looked upon as a
gigantic human being twisted into the
form of a ball. In contra distinction to
the belief of Christrysendom that the
earth is an inanimate thing, the pagans
considered not only the earth but also
all the cidurial bodies as individual
creatures possessing individual
intelligences. They even went so far as
to view the various kingdoms of nature
as individual entities. The animal
kingdom, for example, was looked upon as
one being a composite of all the
creatures composing that kingdom. This
prototypic beast was a mosaic embodiment
of all animal propensities and within
its nature the entire animal world
existed as the human species exists
within the constitution of the
prototypic atom in the same manner.
Races, nations, tribes, religions,
states, communities and cities were
viewed as composite entities each made
up of varying numbers of individual
units. Every community has an
individuality which is the sum of the
individual attitudes of its inhabitants.
Every religion is an individual whose
body is made up of a hierarchy and vast
host of individual worshippers. The
organization of any religion represents
its physical body and its individual
members the cell life making up this
organism. Accordingly, religions, races,
and communities like individuals pass
through. Shakespeare's seven ages for
the life of man is a standard by which
the perpetuity of all things is
estimated according to the secret
doctrine man through the gradual
refinement of his vehicles and the
everinccreasing sensitiveness resulting
from that refinement is gradually
overcoming the limitations of matter and
is disentangling himself from his mortal
coil. When humanity has completed its
physical evolution, the empty shell of
materiality left behind will be used by
other life waves as stepping stones to
their own liberation. The trend of man's
evolutionary growth is ever toward his
own essential selfhood. At the point of
deepest materialism, therefore, man is
at the greatest distance from himself.
According to the mystery teachings, not
all the spiritual nature of man
incarnates in matter. The spirit of man
is diagrammatically shown as an
equilateral triangle with one point
downward. This lower point which is
one-third of the spiritual nature but in
comparison to the dignity of the other
two is much less than a third descends
into the illusion of material existence
for a brief space of time. That which
never clothes itself in the sheath of
matter is the hermetic anthropose the
overmanagus to the cyclops or guardian
demon of the Greeks the angel of Jacob
Bow and the oversoul of Emerson that
unity that oversoul within which every
man's particular being is contained and
made one with all other at birth only a
third part of the divine nature of man
temporarily dissociates itself from its
own immortality and takes upon itself
the Dream of physical birth and
existence animating with its own
celestial enthusiasm. A vehicle composed
of material elements part of and bound
to the material sphere. At death, this
incarnated part awakens from the dream
of physical existence and reunites
itself once more with its eternal
condition. This periodical descent of
spirit into matter is termed the wheel
of life and death. And the principles
involved are treated at length by the
philosophers under the subject of
metamsychosis by initiation into the
mysteries and a certain process known as
operative theology. This law of birth
and death is transcended and during the
course of physical existence that part
of the spirit which is asleep in form is
awakened without the intervention of
death the inevitable initiator and is
consciously reunited with the anthropose
or the overshadowing substance of
itself. This is at once the primary
purpose and the consumate achievement of
the mysteries that man shall become
aware of and consciously be reunited
with the divine source of himself
without tasting of physical dissolution.
The hierramic legend. When Solomon, the
beloved of God, builder of the
everlasting house and grandmaster of the
lodge of Jerusalem, ascended the throne
of his father David, he consecrated his
life to the erection of a temple to God
in a palace for the kings of Israel.
David's faithful friend, Hyram, king of
Ty, hearing that a son of David sat upon
the throne of Israel, sent messages of
congratulation and offers of assistance
to the new ruler. In his history of the
Jews, Josephus mentions that copies of
the letters passing between the two
kings were then to be seen both at
Jerusalem and at Ty. Despite Hyram&lt;unk&gt;s
lack of appreciation for the 20 cities
of Galilee, which Solomon presented to
him upon the completion of the temple,
the two monarchs remained the best of
friends. Both were famous for their wit
and wisdom, and when they exchanged
letters, each devised puzzling questions
to test the mental ingenuity of the
other. Solomon made an agreement with
Hyram of Ty promising vast amounts of
barley, wheat, corn, wine, and oil as
wages for the masons and carpenters from
Ty who were to assist the Jews in the
erection of the temple. Hyram also
supplied cedars and other fine trees
which were made into rafts and floated
down the sea to Japa once they were
taken inland by Solomon's workmen to the
temple site. Because of his great love
for Solomon, Hyram of Ty sent also the
Grandmaster of the Dionc architects.
Sihum Abif, a widow's son, who had no
equal among the craftsmen of the earth.
Sihum is described as being a Tyrion by
Burch, but of Israelitish descent and a
second Bezale, honored by his king with
the title of father. The Freemason's
Pocket Companion, published in 1771,
describes, "See Hyram as the most
cunning, skillful, and curious workmen
that ever lived, whose abilities were
not confined to building alone, but
extended to all kinds of work, whether
in gold, silver, brass, or iron. Whether
in linen, tapestry or embroidery,
whether considered as an architect,
statuery, sick, founder or designer,
separately or together, he equally
excelled from his designs and under his
direction all the rich and splendid
furniture of the temple and its several
appendages were begun, carried on, and
finished. Solomon appointed him in his
absence to fill the chair as deputy
grandmaster and in his presence senior
grand warden, master of work and general
overseer of all artists as well those
whom David had formerly procured from
Tyer and Siden as those Hyram should now
send. Modasonic writers differ as to the
accuracy of the last sentence. Although
an immense amount of labor was involved
in its construction, Solomon's temple,
in the words of George Oliver, was only
a small building and very inferior in
point of size to some of our churches.
The number of buildings contiguous to
it, and the vast treasure of gold and
precious stones used in its construction
concentrated a great amount of wealth
within the temple area. In the midst of
the temple stood the Holy of Holies,
sometimes called the oracle. It was an
exact cube, each dimension being 20
cubits and exemplified the influence of
Egyptian symbolism. The buildings of the
temple group were ornamented with 1,453
columns of Pan marble magnificently
sculptured and 2,96
plasters decorated with capitals. There
was a broad porch facing the east and
the sanctum sancttorum was upon the
west. According to tradition, the
various buildings and courtyards could
hold in all 300,000 persons. Both the
sanctuary and the holy of holies were
entirely lined with solid gold plates
encrusted with jewels. King Solomon
began the building of the temple in the
fourth year of his reign on what would
be according to modern calculation the
21st day of April and finished it in the
11th year of his reign. On the 23rd day
of October, the temple was begun in the
480th year after the children of Israel
had passed the Red Sea. Part of the
labor of construction included the
building of an artificial foundation on
the brow of Mount Mariah. The stones for
the temple were hoisted from quaries
directly beneath Mount Mariah and were
tred before being brought to the
surface. The brass and golden ornaments
for the temple were cast in molds in the
clay ground between Sukus and Zereditha,
and the wooden parts were all finished
before they reached the temple site. The
building was put together, consequently
without sound and without instruments,
all its parts fitting exactly without
the hammer of contention, the acts of
division or any tool of mischief.
Anderson's much discussed constitutions
of the Freemasons published in London in
1723 and reprinted by Benjamin Franklin
in Philadelphia in 1734 thus describes
the division of the laborers engaged in
the building of the everlasting house.
But Deeon's temple and the finest
structures of Ty and Siden could not be
compared with the eternal God's temple
at Jerusalem.
Isk asterisk there were employed about
it no less than 3,600 princes or master
masons to conduct the work according to
Solomon's directions with 80,000 hewers
of stone in the mountain or fellow
craftsmen and 70,000 laborers in all
153,600
besides the levy under adinum to work in
the mountains of Lebanon by turns with
the Sidonians viz 30,000 being in all
183,600
Daniel Sickls gives 3,300 overseers
instead of 3,600
and lists the three grand masters.
Separately, the same author estimates
the cost of the temple at nearly 4,000
millions of dollars. The Masonic legend
of the building of Solomon's temple does
not in every particular parallel the
scriptural version, especially in those
portions relating to Syram. According to
the biblical account, this master
workman returned to his own country. In
the Masonic allegory, he is fouly
murdered. On this point, a ew wait in
his new encyclopedia of freemasonry
makes the following explanatory comment.
The legend of the master builder is the
great allegory of masonry. It happens
that his figurative story is grounded on
the fact of a personality mentioned in
holy scripture. But this historical
background is of the accidents and not
the essence. The significance is in the
allegory and not in any point of history
which may lie behind it. See Hyram as
master of the builders divided his
workmen into three groups which were
termed entered apprentices, fellow
craftsmen and master masons. While the
mystic symbolism of Freemasonry decrees
that the apron shall be a simple square
of white lambskin with appropriate flap.
Masonic aprons are frequently decorated
with curious and impressive figures.
When silk, cotton, or linen is worn,
writes Albert Pike, the symbolism is
lost, nor is one clothed who blotss,
defaces, and desecrates the white
surface with ornamentation, figuring, or
colors of any kind. C. Symbolism to
Mars, the ancient plane of cosmic
energy, the Atlantean and Calaldian
stargazers assigned Aries as a dial
throne, and Scorpio as a nocturnal
throne. Those not raised to spiritual
life by initiation are described as dead
from the sting of a scorpion. For they
wander in the night side of divine
power. Through the mystery of the Pascal
lamb or the attainment of the golden
fleece, the soul are raised into the
constructive day power of Mars and
Aries, the symbol of the creator. When
worn over the area related to the animal
passions, the pure lambskin signifies
the regeneration of the procreative
forces and their consecration to the
service of the deity. The size of the
apron exclusive of the flap makes it the
symbol of salvation. For the mysteries
declare that it must consist of 144
square in. The apron shown above
contains a wealth of symbolism. The
beehive emblematic of the Masonic lodge
itself, the trowel, the mallet and the
trestle boat, the rough and true
dashlers, the pyramids and hills of
Lebanon, the pillars, the temple and
checkerboard floor and the blazing star
and tools of the craft. The center of
the apron is occupied by the compass and
square representative of the macrocosm
and the microcosm and the alternately
black and white serpent of astral light.
Below is an acacia branch with seven
sprigs signifying the life centers of
the superior and the inferior man. The
skull and crossbones are a continual
reminder that the spiritual nature
attains liberation only after the
philosophical death of man's sensuous
personality passwords and signs by which
their respective excellence could be
quickly determined. While all were
classified according to their merits,
some were dissatisfied, for they desired
a more exalted position than they were
capable of filling. At last, three
fellow craftsmen, more daring than their
companions, determined to force Sahum to
reveal to them the password of the
master's degree. Knowing that, Sihum
always went into the unfinished sanctum
sancttorum at high noon to pray. These
ruffians whose names were Jabila,
Jubilo, and Jubelam lay in wait for him,
one at each of the main gates of the
temple. See, Hyram, about to leave the
temple by the south gate, was suddenly
confronted by Jabila, armed with a 24-in
gauge. Upon Kyram's refusal to reveal
the master's word, the ruffian struck
him on the throat with the rule, and the
wounded master then hastened to the west
gate, where Jubelo, armed with a square,
awaited him and made a similar demand.
Again, Seahhyram was silent, and the
second assassin struck him on the breast
with the square. Seahhyram thereupon
staggered to the east gate, only to be
met there by Jubel, armed with them all.
When Seahhyram refused him the master's
word, Jubilum struck the master between
the eyes with the mallet and Seahhyram
fell dead. The body of Seahhyram was
buried by the murderers over the brow of
Mount Mariah and a sprig of Acacia
placed upon the grave. The murderers
then sought to escape punishment for
their crime by embarking for Ethiopia,
but the port was closed. All three were
finally captured and after admitting
their guilt were duly executed. Parties
of three were then sent out by King
Solomon and one of these groups
discovered the newly made grave marked
by the evergreen sprig. After the
entered apprentices and the fellow
craftsmen had failed to resurrect their
master from the dead, he was finally
raised by the master mason with the
strong grip of a lion's paw. To the
initiated builder, the name Siharam Aby
signifies my father, the universal
spirit, one in essence three in aspect.
Thus, the murdered master is a type of
the cosmic martyr, the crucified spirit
of good, the dying god whose mystery is
celebrated throughout the world. Among
the manuscripts of Dr. Sigisman Bastram,
the initiated Rosacrruian appears the
following extract from von Welling.
Concerning the true philosophic nature
of the Masonic Seahhyram. The original
word hyram is a radical word consisting
of three consonants and I. Each chef
rash and mem one chef signifies comma
the sun's light i.e. the universal
invisible cold fire of nature attracted
by the sun manifested into light and
sent down to us and to every planetary
body belonging to the solar system. Two
rash signifies ruach I, e, spirit, air,
wind as being the vehicle which conveys
and collects the light into numberless
fosi wherein the solar rays of light are
agitated by a circular motion and
manifested in heat and burning fire.
Three or mem signifies magum water
humidity but rather the mother of water
i.e radical humidity or a particular
kind of condensed air. These three
constitute the universal agent or fire
of nature in one word
not hyum. Albert Pike mentions several
forms of the name cihum kerm kerm and
kuroam the latter ending in the sacred
Hindu monosyllable Om which may also be
extracted from the names of the three
murderers. Pike further relates the
three ruffians to a triad of stars in
the constellation of Libra and also
calls attention to the fact that the
calaldian god ball metamorphosed into a
demon by the Jews appears in the name of
each of the murderers jabila jubilo and
jubilum to interpret the hierramic
legend requires familiarity with both
the pythagorean and cababalistic systems
of numbers and letters and also the
philosophic and astronomic cycles of the
Egyptians calaldanss and brahinss.
For example, consider the number 33. The
first temple of Solomon stood for 33
years in its pristine splendor. At the
end of that time, it was pillaged by the
Egyptian king Shishak. And finally, 588
BC, it was completely destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar and the people of
Jerusalem were led into captivity to
Babylon. See general history of
Freemasonry by Robert McCoy. Also, King
David ruled for 33 years in Jerusalem.
The Masonic order is divided into 33
symbolic degrees. There are 33 segments
in the human spinal column and Jesus was
crucified in the 33rd year of his life.
The efforts made to discover the origin
of the hierramic legend show that while
the legend in its present form is
comparatively modem. Its underlying
principles run back to remotest
antiquity, it is generally admitted by
modem Masonic scholars that the story of
the martyrdum is based upon the Egyptian
writes of Osiris whose death and
resurrection figuratively portrayed the
spiritual death of man and his
regeneration through initiation into the
mysteries. Seahhyram is also identified
with Hermes through the inscription on
the emerald table. From these
associations, it is evident that
Seahhyram is to be considered as a
prototype of humanity. In fact, he is
Plato's idea archetype of man as Adam
after the fall symbolizes the idea of
human degeneration. So, see Hyram
through his resurrection symbolizes the
idea of human regeneration. On the 19th
day of March 1314, Jacqu demo mole the
last Grandmaster of the Knights Templars
was burned on a py erected upon that
point of the island of the sain at Paris
where afterwards was erected. The statue
of King Henry IV see the Indian
religions by Hargrave Jennings. It is
mentioned as a tradition in some of the
accounts of the burning writes Jennings
that mole heir he expired summoned
Clement the pope who had pronounced the
bull of abolition against the order and
had condemned the grandmaster to the
flames to appear within 40 days before
the supreme eternal judge and Philip the
king to the same awful tribunal within
the space of a year. Both predictions
were fulfilled. The close relationship
between Freemasonry and the original
Knights Templars has caused the story of
Seihyram to be linked with the martyrdom
of Jacqu de Mole. According to this
interpretation, the three ruffians who
cruy slew their master at the gates of
the temple because he refused to reveal
the secrets of his order represent the
pope, the king, and the executioners.
Demole died maintaining his innocence
and refusing to disclose the
philosophical and magical arcana of the
Templars. Those who have sought to
identify Seahhyram with the murdered
king Charles I conceived the Hyramic
legend to have been invented for that
purpose by Elias Ashol, a mystical
philosopher who was probably a member of
the Rosacrruian fraternity. Charles was
dethroned in 1647 and died on the block
in 1649, leaving the royalist party
leaderless. An attempt has been made to
relate the term the sons of the widow,
an appellation frequently applied to
members of the Masonic order to this
incident in English history. For by the
murder of her king England became a
widow and all Englishmen widow's sons to
the mystic Christian mason
represents the Christ who in three days
degrees raised the temple of his body
from its earthly sephiler. His three
murderers were Caesar's agent, the
state, the Sanhedrin, the church, and
the incited populace, the mob. Thus
considered, Sehyum becomes the higher
nature of man. And the murderers are
ignorance, superstition, and fear. The
indwelling Christ can give expression to
himself in this world only through man's
thoughts, feelings, and actions. Right
thinking, right feeling, and right
action. These are three gates through
which the Christ power passes into the
material world. There to labor in the
erection of the temple of universal
brotherhood. Ignorance, superstition,
and fear are three ruffians through
whose agencies the spirit of good is
murdered and a false kingdom controlled
by wrong thinking, wrong feeling and
wrong action established in itsstead. In
the material universe, evil appears ever
victorious. In this sense, writes Daniel
Sickls, the myth of the Tyrion is
perpetually repeated in the history of
human affairs. Orpheus was murdered and
his body thrown into the Hebris.
Socrates was made to drink the hemlock.
And in all ages, we have seen evil
temporarily triumphant and virtue and
truth. Columniated, persecuted,
crucified, and slain. But eternal
justice marches surely and swiftly
through the world. The typhons, the
children of darkness, the plotters of
crime, all the infinitely varied forms
of evil are swept into oblivion and
truth and virtue for a time laid low
come forth clothed with diver majesty
and crowned with everlasting glory. See
general aimman reason if as there is
ample reason to suspect the modern
freemasonic order was profoundly
influenced by if it is not an actual
outgrowth of Francis Bacon's secret
society. Its symbolism is undoubtedly
permeated. With Bacon's two great
ideals, universal education and
universal democracy, the deadly enemies
of universal education are ignorance,
superstition, and fear by which the
human soul is held in bondage to the
lowest part of its own constitution. The
errant enemies of universal democracy
have ever been the crown, the tiara, and
the torch. Thus, sahhyram symbolizes
that ideal state of spiritual,
intellectual and physical emancipation
which has ever been sacrificed upon the
altar of human selfishness. Sihum is the
beautifier of the eternal house. Modern
utilitarianism, however, sacrifices the
beautiful for the practical in the same
breath, declaring the obvious lie that
selfishness, hatred, and discord are
practical. Dr. Orville Ward Owen found a
considerable part of the first 32
degrees of freemasonic ritualism hidden
in the text of the first Shakespeare
folio. Masonic emblems are to be
observed also upon the title pages of
nearly every book published by Bacon.
Sir Francis Bacon considered himself as
a living sacrifice upon the altar of
human need. He was obviously cut down in
the midst of his labors and no student
of his new Atlantis can fail to
recognize the Masonic symbolism
contained therein. According to the
observations of Joseph Fort Newton, the
temple of Solomon described by Bacon in
that utopian romance was not a house at
all but the name of an ideal state. Is
it not true that the temple of
Freemasonry is also emblematic of a
condition of society? While as before
stated, the principles of the hierramic
legend are of the greatest antiquity, it
is not impossible that its present form
may be based upon incidents in the life
of Lord Bacon, who passed through the
philosophic death and was raised in
Germany. In an old manuscript appears
the statement that the freemasonic order
was formed by alchemists and hermetic
philosophers who had banded themselves
together to protect their secrets
against the infamous methods used by
avaricious persons to ring from them the
secret of gold making. The fact that the
hyramic legend contains an alchemical
formula gives credence to this story.
Thus the building of Solomon's temple
represents the consummation of the
magnum opus which cannot be realized
without the assistance of Seahhyram the
universal agent. The Masonic mysteries
teach the initiate how to prepare within
his own soul a miraculous powder of
projection by which it is possible for
him to transmute the base lump of human
ignorance, perversion, and discord into
an ingot of spiritual and philosophic
gold. Sufficient similarity exists
between the Masonic Seahum and the
condalini of Hindu mysticism too warrant
the assumption that seahum may be
considered a symbol also of the spirit
fire moving through the sixth ventricle
of the spinal column. The exact science
of human regeneration is the lost key of
masonry for when the spirit fire is
lifted up through the 33° or segments of
the spinal column and enters into the do
chamber of the human skull. It finally
passes into the pituitary body isis
where it invokes ra the pineal gland and
demands the sacred name operative
masonry in the fullest meaning of that
term signifies the process by which the
eye of Horus is opened. Ea Wallace Budge
has noted that in some of the papyri
illustrating the entrance of the souls
of the dead into the judgment hall of
Osiris the deceased person has a pine
cone attached to the crown of his head.
The Greek mystics also carried a
symbolic staff, the upper end being in
the form of a pine cone which was called
the thus of Bakus. In the human brain,
there is a tiny gland called the pineal
body which is the sacred eye of the
ancients and corresponds to the third
eye of the cyclops. Little is known
concerning the function of the pineal
body which Daycart suggested more wisely
than he knew might be the abode of the
spirit of man. As its name signifies,
the pineal gland is the sacred pine cone
in manly eye single which cannot be
opened until sea hyram the spirit fire
is raised through the sacred seals which
are called the seven churches in Asia.
There is an oriental painting which
shows three sunbursts. One sunburst
covers the head in the midst of which
sits Brahma with four heads, his body a
mysterious dark color. The second
sunburst which covers the heart, solar
plexus and upper abdominal region shows
Vishnu sitting in the blossom of the
lotus on a couch formed of the coils of
the serpent of cosmic motion. Its seven
hooded head forming a canopy over the
god. The third sunburst is over the
generative system in the midst of which
sits Shiva his body a grayish white and
the Ganges river flowing out of the
crown of his head. This painting was the
work of a Hindu mystic who spent many
years subtly concealing great
philosophical principles within these
figures. The Christian legends could be
related also to the human body by the
same method as the oriental for the
arcane meanings hidden in the teachings
of both schools are identical as applied
to masonry. The three sunbursts
represent the gates of the temple at
which Seahhyram was struck. There being
no gate in the north because the sun
never shines from the northern angle of
the heavens. The north is the symbol of
the physical because of its relation to
ice crystallized water and two the body
crystallized spirit. In man, the light
shines toward the north, but never from
it, because the body has no light of its
own, but shines with the reflected glory
of the divine life particles concealed
within physical substance. For this
reason, the moon is accepted as the
symbol of man's physical nature. Seahum
is the mysterious fiery airy water which
must be raised through the three grand
centers symbolized by the latter with
three rungs and the sunburst flowers
mentioned in the description of the
Hindu painting. It must also pass upward
by means of the latter of seven rungs.
The seven plexuses proximate to the
spine. The nine segments of the sacrum
and coxix are pierced by 10 framina
through which pass the roots of the tree
of life. Nine is the sacred number of
man and in the symbolism of the sacrum
and coxix a great mystery is concealed.
That part of the body from the kidneys
downward was termed by the early
cabalists the land of Egypt into which
the children of Israel were taken during
the captivity. Out of Egypt, Moses, the
illuminated mind, as his name implies,
led the tribes of Israel, the 12
faculties, by raising the brazen serpent
in the wilderness upon the symbol of the
Tao cross. not only see Hyram but the
god men of nearly every pagan mystery
ritual are personifications of the
spirit fire in the human spinal cord.
The astronomical aspect of the hierramic
legend must not be overlooked. The
tragedy of sea hyramis enacted annually
by the sun during its passage through
the signs of the zodiac. From the
journey of the sun through the 12 signs,
writes Albert Pike come the legend of
the 12 labors of Hercules and the
incarnations of Vishnu and Buddha. Hence
came the legend of the murder of Kurum
representative of the sun by the three
fellow crafts symbols of the winter
signs Capricornis, Aquarius and Pisces
who assailed him at the three gates of
heaven and slew him at the winter
solstice. Hence the search for him by
the nine fellow crafts. the other nine
signs, his finding, burial, and
resurrection. See morals and dogma.
Other authors consider Libra, Scorpio,
and Sagittarius as the three murderers
of the sun in as much as Osiris was
murdered by Typhon to whom were assigned
the 30° of the constellation of Scorpio.
In the Christian mysteries also, Judas
signifies the scorpion and the 30 pieces
of silver for which he betrayed his lord
represent the number of degrees in that
sign. Having been struck by Libra, the
state, Scorpio, the church, and
Sagittarius, the mob, the sun, Seahum,
is secretly home through the darkness by
the signs of Capricorn, Aquarius, and
Pisces, and buried over the brow of a
hill, the vernal equinox. Capricorn has
for its symbol an old man with a scythe
in his hand. This is father time, a
wayfairer who is symbolized in masonry
as straightening out the ringlets of a
young girl's hair. If the weeping virgin
be considered a symbol of Virgo and
father time with his scythe a symbol of
Capricorn then the interval of 90°
between these two signs will be found to
correspond to that occupied by the three
murderers. Eoterically the earn
containing the ashes of sea hyram
represents the human heart. Saturn the
old man who lives at the north pole and
brings with him to the children of men a
sprig of evergreen. The Christmas tree
is familiar to the little folks under
the name of Santa Claus. Four. He brings
each winter the gift of a new year. The
martyred son is discovered by Aries, a
fellow craftsman, and at the vernal
equinox, the process of raising him
begins. This is finally accomplished by
the lion of Judah, who in ancient times
occupied the position of the keystone of
the royal arch of heaven. The precession
of the equinoxes causes various signs to
play the role of the murderers of the
sun during the different ages of the
world. But the principal involved
remains unchanged such as the cosmic
story of Sehyum, the universal
benefactor, the fiery architect of the
divine house who carries with him to the
grave that lost word which when spoken
raises all life to power and glory.
According to Christian mysticism, when
the lost word is found, it is discovered
in a stable surrounded by beasts and
marked by a star after the sun leaves
Leo. Writes Robert Huitt Brown, "The
days begin to grow unequivocally shorter
as the sun declines toward the autuminal
equinox to be again slain by the three
autuminal months, lie dead through the
three winter ones, and be raised again
by the three vernal ones. Each year the
great tragedy is repeated and the
glorious resurrection takes place. See
stellar theology and masonic astronomy.
Sea hyum is termed dead because in the
average individual the cosmic creative
forces are limited in their
manifestation to purely physical and
correspondingly materialistic expression
obsessed by his belief in the reality
and permanence of physical existence.
Man does not correlate the material
universe with the blank north wall of
the temple as the solar light
symbolically is said to die as it
approaches the winter solstice. So the
physical world may be termed crowned
with a triple tower-like tiara and her
form adorned with symbolic creatures
representative of her spiritual powers.
Diana stood for the source of that
imperishable doctrine which flowing from
the bosom of the great Multimeia is the
spiritual food of those aspiring men and
women who have consecrated their lives
to the contemplation of reality as the
physical body of man receives its
nutrient from the great earth mother. So
the spiritual nature of man is fed from
the never failing fountains of truth
pouring outward from the invisible
worlds. The winter solstice of the
spirit. Reaching the winter solstice,
the sun apparently stands still for
three days and then rolling away the
stone of winter begins its triumphal
march north towards the summer solstice.
The condition of ignorance may be
likened to the winter solstice of
philosophy, spiritual understanding to
the summer solstice. From this point of
view, initiation into the mysteries
becomes the vernal equinox of the spirit
at which time the sea hyum in man
crosses from the realm of mortality into
that of eternal life. The autumnal
equinox is analogous to the mythological
fall of man at which time the human
spirit descended into the realms of
hades by being immersed in the illusion
of terrestrial existence. In an essay on
the beautiful, Plutinus describes the
refining effect of beauty upon the
unfolding consciousness of man
commissioned to decorate the everlasting
house. Sihumab is the embodiment of the
beautifying principle. Beauty is
essential to the natural unfoldment of
the human soul. The mysteries held that
man in part at least was the product of
his environment. Therefore, they
considered it imperative that every
person be surrounded by objects which
would evoke the highest and noblest
sentiments. They proved that it was
possible to produce beauty in life by
surrounding life with beauty. They
discovered that symmetrical bodies were
built by souls continuously in the
presence of symmetrical bodies that
noble thoughts were produced by minds
surrounded by examples of mental
nobility. Conversely, if a man were
forced to look upon an ignoble or
asymmetrical structure, it would arouse
within him a sense of ignobility which
would provoke him to commit ignoble
deeds. If an ill-proportioned building
were erected in the midst of a city,
there would be ill-proportioned children
born in that community, and men and
women gazing upon the asymmetrical
structure would live in harmonious
lives. Thoughtful men of antiquity
realized that their great philosophers
were the natural products of the
aesthetic ideals of architecture, music,
and art established as the standards of
the cultural systems of the time. The
substitution of the discord of the
fantastic for the harmony of the
beautiful constitutes one of the great
tragedies of every civilization. Not
only were the savior gods of the ancient
world beautiful, but each performed a
ministry of beauty, seeking to affect
man's regeneration by arousing within
him that love of the beautiful. A
renaissance of the golden age of fable
can be made possible only by the
elevation of beauty to its rightful
dignity as the all-pervading idealizing
quality in the religious, ethical,
sociological, scientific, and political
departments of life. The Dionisc
architects were consecrated to the
raising of their master spirit cosmic
beauty from the sephiler of material
ignorance and selfishness by erecting
buildings which were such perfect
exemplars of symmetry and majesty that
they were actually magical formula by
which was evoked the spirit of the
martyrd beautifier inmbed within a
materialistic world. In the Masonic
mysteries, the triune spirit of man, the
light delta, is symbolized by the three
grand masters of the lodge of Jerusalem.
As God is the pervading principle of
three worlds, in each of which he
manifests as an active principle, so the
spirit of man, partaking of the nature
of divinity, dwells upon three plains of
being, the supreme, the superior, and
the inferior spheres of the
Pythagoreans. At the gate of the
inferior sphere, the underworld or
dwelling place of mortal creatures,
stands the guardian of Hades, the
three-headed dog Cberus, who is
analogous to the three murderers of the
Hyramic legend. According to this
symbolic interpretation of the triune
spirit, seyram is the third or
incarnating part, the master builder who
through all ages erects living temples
of flesh and blood as shrines of the
most. Hi. See Hyram comes forth as a
flower and is cut down. He dies at the
gates of matter. He is buried in the
elements of creation. But like Thor, he
swings his mighty hammer in the fields
of space sets the primordial atoms in
motion and establishes order out of
chaos. as the potentiality of cosmic
power within each human soul. Seihyram
lies waiting for man by the elaborate
ritualism of life to transmute
potentiality into divine potency as the
sense perceptions of the individual
increase. However, man gains ever
greater control over his various parts
and the spirit of life within gradually
attains freedom. The three murderers
represent the laws of the inferior world
birth, growth, and decay which ever
frustrate the plan of the builder. To
the average individual, physical birch
actually signifies the death of Sea
Hyram. In physical death, the
resurrection of Sea Hyram. To the
initiate, however, the resurrection of
the spiritual. Nature is accomplished
without the intervention of physical
death. The curious symbols found in the
base of Cleopatra's needle, now standing
in Central Park, New York, were
interpreted as being of first Masonic
significance by S. Azola, 33° past
Grandmaster of the Grand Lodge of Egypt.
Mason's marks and symbols are to be
found on the stones of numerous public
buildings not only in England and on the
continent, but also in Asia. In his
Indian masons marks of the Mogul
dynasty, A Gorum describes scores of
markings appearing on the walls of
buildings such as the Taj Mahal, the
Jama Masid and that famous Masonic
structure, the Katab Manar. According to
those who regard masonry as an outgrowth
of the secret society of architects and
builders which for thousands of years
formed a cast of master craftsmen,
Sihyramif was the Tyrion Grandmaster of
a worldwide organization of artisans
with headquarters entire. Their
philosophy consisted of incorporating
into the measurements and ornamentation
of temples, palaces, moseliums,
fortresses, and other public buildings
their knowledge of the laws controlling
the universe. Every initiated workman
was given a hieroglyphic with which he
marked the stones he tred to show to all
posterity that he thus dedicated to the
supreme architect of the universe each
perfected product of his labor.
Concerning Mason's marks, Robert Freak
Gould writes, "It is very remarkable
that these marks are to be found in all
countries in the chambers of the great
pyramid at Giz on the underground walls
of Jerusalem in Herculanium and Pompei
on Roman walls and Grecian temples in
Hindustan, Mexico, Peru, Asia Minor, as
well as on the great ruins of England,
France, Germany, Scotland, Italy,
Portugal, and Spain. see a concise
history of Freemasonry. From this
viewpoint, the story of Seahhyram may
well represent the incorporation of the
divine secrets of architecture into the
actual parts and dimensions of earthly
buildings, the three degrees of the
Craftberry, the Grandmaster, the great
Arcanum in the actual structure they
erect after first having killed him with
the builder's tools by reducing the
dimensionless spirit of cosmic beauty to
the limitations of concrete form. These
abstract ideals of architecture can be
resurrected however by the master mason
who by meditating upon the structure
releases there from the divine
principles of architectonic philosophy
incorporated or buried within it. Thus
the physical building is actually the
tomb or embodiment of the creative ideal
of which its material dimensions are but
the shadow. Moreover, the hieramic
legend may be considered to embody the
vicissitudes of philosophy itself. As
institutions for the dissemination of
ethical culture, the pagan mysteries
were the architects of civilization.
Their power and dignity were personified
in Seahharam aby the master builder. But
they eventually fell a victim to the
onslaught of that recurrent trio of
state, church, and mob. They were
desecrated by the state, jealous of
their wealth and power, by the early
church, fearful of their wisdom, and by
the rabble or soldiery incited by both
state and church. As Seihyram when
raised from his grave whispers the
master mason's word which was lost
through his untimely death. So according
to the tenets a philosophy the
reestablishment or resurrection of the
ancient mysteries will result in the
rediscovery of that secret teaching
without which civilization must continue
in a state of spiritual confusion and
uncertainty. When the mob governs, man
is ruled by ignorance. When the church
governs, he is ruled by superstition.
And when the state governs, he is ruled
by fear. Before men can live together in
harmony and understanding, ignorance
must be transmuted into wisdom,
superstition into an illumined faith,
and fear into love. Despite statements
to the contrary, masonry is a religion
seeking to unite God and man by
elevating its initiates to that level of
consciousness whereon they can behold
with clarified vision the workings of
the great architect of the universe.
From age to age the vision of a perfect
civilization is preserved as the ideal
for mankind. In the midst of that
civilization shall stand a mighty
university wherein both the sacred and
secular sciences concerning the
mysteries of life will be freely taught
to all who will assume the philosophic
life. Here creed and dogma will have no
place. The superficial will be removed
and only the essential be preserved. The
world will be ruled by its most
illumined minds and each will occupy the
position for which he is most admirably
fitted. The great university will be
divided into grades admission to which
will be through PS dominary tests or
initiations. Here mankind will be
instructed in the most sacred, the most
secret and the most enduring of all
mystery symbolism. Here the initiate
will be taught that every visible
object, every abstract thought, every
emotional reaction is but the symbol of
an eternal principle. Here mankind will
learn that see hyum truth lies buried in
every atom of cosmos that every form is
a symbol and every symbol the tomb of an
eternal varity through education.
Spiritual, mental, moral and physical
man will learn to release living truths
from their lifeless coverings. The
perfect government of the earth must be
patterned. Eventually, after that divine
government by which the universe is
ordered in that day, when perfect order
is reestablished with peace universal
and good triumphant, men will no longer
seek for happiness, for they shall find
it welling up within themselves. Dead
hopes, dead aspirations, dead virtues
shall rise from their graves, and the
spirit of beauty and goodness repeatedly
slain by ignorant men shall again be.
the master of work. Then shall sages sit
upon the seats of the mighty and the
gods walk with men. The Pythagorean
theory of music and color. Harmony is a
state recognized by great philosophers
as the immediate prerequisite of beauty.
A compound is termed beautiful only when
its parts are in harmonious combination.
The world is called beautiful and its
creator is designated the good because
good perforce must act in conformity
with its own nature and good acting
according to its own nature is harmony
because the good which it accomplishes
is harmonious with the good which it is.
Beauty therefore is harmony manifesting
its own intrinsic nature in the world of
form. The universe is made up of
successive gradations of good. these
gradations ascending from matter which
is the least degree of good to spirit
which is the greatest degree of good in
man his superior nature is the sum
bonum. It therefore follows that his
highest nature most readily cognizes
good because the good external to him in
the world is in harmonic ratio with the
good present in his soul. What man terms
evil is therefore in common with matter
merely the least degree of its own
opposite. The least degree of good
presupposes likewise the least degree of
harmony and beauty. Thus, deformity,
evil, is really the least harmonious
combination of elements naturally
harmonic as individual units. Deformity
is unnatural for the sum of all things
being the good. It is natural that all
things should partake of the good and be
arranged in combinations that are
harmonious. Harmony is the manifesting
expression of the will of the eternal
good. the philosophy of music. It is
highly probable that the Greek initiates
gained their knowledge of the
philosophic and therapeutic aspects of
music from the Egyptians who in turn
considered Hermes the founder of the
art. According to one legend, this god
constructed the first liar by stretching
strings across the concavity of a turtle
shell. Both Isis and Osiris were patrons
of music and poetry. Plato in describing
the antiquity of these arts among the
Egyptians declared that songs and poetry
had existed in Egypt for at least 10,000
years and that these were of such an
exalted and inspiring nature that only
gods or godlike men could have composed
them. In the mysteries, the liar was
regarded as the secret symbol of the
human constitution. The body of the
instrument representing the physical
form, the strings the nerves and the
musician the spirit playing upon the
nerves. The spirit thus created the
harmonies of normal functioning which
however became discords if the nature of
man were defiled. While the early
Chinese, Hindus, Persians, Egyptians,
Israelites and Greeks employed both
vocal and instrumental music in their
religious ceremonials also to complement
their poetry and drama. It remained for
Pythagoras to raise the art to its true
dignity by demonstrating its
mathematical foundation. Although it is
said that he himself was not a musician,
Pythagoras is now generally credited
with the discovery of the datonic scale.
Having first learned the divine theory
of music from the priests of the various
mysteries into which he had been
accepted, Pythagoras pondered for
several years upon the laws governing
consonants and dissonance. How he
actually solved the problem is unknown,
but the following explanation has been
invented. One day, while meditating upon
the problem of harmony, Pythagoras
chanced to pass a brazier shop where
workmen were pounding out a piece of
metal upon an anvil by noting the
variances in pitch between the sounds
made by large hammers and those made by
smaller implements and carefully
estimating the harmonies and discords
resulting from combinations of these
sounds. He gained his first clue to the
musical intervals of the dietonic scale.
He entered the shop and after carefully
examining the tools and making mental
note of their weights, returned to his
own house and constructed an arm of wood
so that it extended out from the wall of
his room at regular intervals. Along
this arm, he attached four cords all of
like composition, size, and weight. To
the first of these, he attached a 12lb
weight to the second a 9 lb weight. to
the third an eight pound weight and to
the fourth a sixlb weight. These
different weights corresponded to the
sizes of the braier's hammers.
Pythagoras thereupon discovered that the
first and fourth strings when sounded
together produced the harmonic interval
of the octave four doubling the weight
had the same effect as having the
string. The tension of the first string
being twice that of the fourth string.
Their ratio was said to be 2:1 or dupal.
By similar experimentation he
ascertained that the first and third
string produced the harmony of the
diapeny or the interval of the fifth.
The tension of the first string being
half again as much as that of the third
string. Their ratio was said to be 3:2
or sesquial altar. Likewise the second
and fourth strings having the same ratio
as the first and third strings yielded a
dipeny harmony. Continuing his
investigation, Pythagoras discovered
that the first and second strings
produced the harmony of the dietess or
the interval of the third and the
tension of the first string being a
third greater than that of the second
string. Their ratio was said to be 4:3
or susquitian. The third and fourth
strings having the same ratio as the
first and second strings produced
another harmony of the dietess.
According to amamblicus, the second and
third strings had the ratio of 8:9 or
epodan. The key to harmonic ratios is
hidden in the famous Pythagorean tetrus
or pyramid of dots. The tetractis is
made up of the first four numbers 1 2 3
and four which in their proportions
reveal the intervals of the octave, the
dipiny and the dietess. While the law of
harmonic intervals as set forth above is
true, it has been subsequently proved
that hammers striking metal in the
manner described will not produce the
various tones ascribed to them. In all
probability, therefore, Pythagoras
actually worked out his theory of
harmony from the monocord contrivance
consisting of a single string stretched
between two pegs and supplied with
movable frets. To Pythagoras, music was
one of the dependencies of the divine
science of mathematics and its harmonies
were inflexibly controlled by
mathematical proportions. The
Pythagoreans averted that mathematics
demonstrated the exact method by which
the good established and maintained its
universe. Number therefore preceded
harmony since it was the immutable law
that governs all harmonic proportions.
After discovering these harmonic ratios,
Pythagoras gradually initiated his
disciples into this the supreme arcanum
of his mysteries. He divided the
multitudinous parts of creation into a
vast number of planes or spheres to each
of which he assigned a tone, a harmonic
interval, a number, a name, a color, and
a form. He then proceeded to prove the
accuracy of his deductions by
demonstrating them upon the different
planes of intelligence and substance
ranging from the most abstract logical
premise to the most concrete geometrical
solid. From the common agreement of
these diversified methods of proof, he
established the indisputable existence
of certain natural laws. Having once
established music as an exact science,
Pythagoras applied his newly found law
of harmonic intervals to all the
phenomena of nature, even going so far
as to demonstrate the harmonic
relationship of the planets,
constellations, and elements to each
other. A notable example of modern
corroboration of ancient philosophical
reaching is that of the progression of
the elements according to harmonic
ratios. While making a list of the
elements in the ascending order of their
atomic weights, John A. Nuland's
discovered at every eighth element a
distinct repetition of properties. This
discovery is known as the law of octaves
in modern chemistry since they held that
harmony must be determined not by the
sense perceptions but by reason and
mathematics. The Pythagoreans called
themselves canonics as distinguished
from musicians of the harmonic school
who asserted taste and instinct to be
the true normative principles of
harmony. Recognizing, however, the
profound effect of music upon the senses
and emotions, Pythagoras did not
hesitate to influence the mind and body
with what he termed musical medicine.
Pythagoras avinced such a marked
preference for stringed instruments that
he even went so far as to warn his
disciples against allowing their ears to
be defiled by the sounds of flutes or
symbols. He further declared that the
soul could be purified from its
irrational influences by solemn songs
sung to the accompaniment of the liar.
In his investigation of the therapeutic
value of harmonics, Pythagoras
discovered that the seven modes or keys
of the Greek system of music had the
power to incite or allay the various
emotions. It is related that while
observing the stars one night he
encountered a young man befuddled with
strong drink and mad with jealousy who
was piling about his mistress
door with the intention of burning the
house. The frenzy of the youth was
accentuated by a flutist a short
distance away who was playing a tune in
the stirring friian mode. Pythagoras
induced the musician to change his air
to the slow and rhythmic spondic mode
whereupon the intoxicated youth
immediately became composed and
gathering up his bundles of wood
returned quietly to his own home. There
is also an account of how impeticles a
disciple of Pythagoras by quickly
changing the mode of a musical
composition he was playing saved the
life of his host and Kitus when the
latter was threatened with death by the
sword of one whose father he had
condemned to public execution. It is
also known that Esculapius the Greek
physician cured sciatica and other
diseases of the nerves by blowing aloud
trumpet in the presence of the patient.
Pythagoras cured many ailments of the
spirit, soul, and body by having certain
specially prepared musical compositions
played in the presence of the sufferer
or by personally reciting short
selections from such early poets as
Hessi and Homer. In his university at
Crotona, it was customary for the
Pythagoreans to open and to close each
day with songs those in the morning
calculated to clear the mind from sleep
and inspire it to the activities of the
coming day. Those in the evening of a
mode soothing, relaxing, and conducive
to rest. At the vernal equinox,
Pythagoras caused his disciples to
gather in a circle around one of their
number who led them in song and played
their accompaniment upon a liar. The
therapeutic music of Pythagoras is
described by Aamblicas thus. And there
are certain melodies devised as remedies
against the passions of the soul and
also against despondency and lamentation
which Pythagoras invented as things that
afford the greatest assistance in these
maladies. And again he employed other
melodies against rage and anger and
against every aberration of the soul.
There is also another kind of modulation
invented as a remedy against desires.
See the life of Pythagoras. It is
probable that the Pythagoreans recognize
the connection between the seven Greek
modes and the planets. As an example,
Plenny declares that Saturn moves in the
Dorian mode and Jupiter in the friian
mode. It is also apparent that the
temperaments are keyed to the various
modes and the passions likewise. Thus,
anger which is a fiery passion may be
accentuated by a fiery mode or its power
neutralized by a watery mode. The
far-reaching effect exercised by music
upon the culture of the Greeks is thus
summed up by Emil Nman. Plato
depreciated the notion that music was
intended solely to create cheerful and
agreeable emotions, maintaining rather
that it should inculcate a love of all,
that is noble, and hatred of all that is
mean, and that nothing could more
strongly influence man's innermost
feelings than melody and rhythm. Firmly
convinced of this, he agreed with Damon
of Athens, the musical instructor of
Socrates, that the introduction of a new
and presumably innovating scale would
endanger the future of a whole nation,
and that it was not possible to alter a
key without shaking the very foundations
of the state. Plato affirmed that music
which enobbled the mind was of a far
higher kind than that which merely
appealed to the senses. And he strongly
insisted that it was the paramount duty
of the legislature to suppress all music
of an effeminate and lascivious
character and to encourage only s that
which was pure and dignified that bold
and stirring melodies were for men
gentle and soothing once for women. From
this it is evident that music played a
considerable part in the education of
the Greek youth. The greatest care was
also to be taken in the selection of
instrumental music because the absence
of words rendered its signification
doubtful and it was difficult to foresee
whether it would exercise upon the
people a benign or baneful influence.
Popular taste being always tickled by
sensuous and meritricious effects was to
be treated with deserved contempt. See
the history of music. Even today,
martial music is used with telling
effect in times of war and religious
music. While no longer developed in
accordance with the ancient theory still
profoundly influences the emotions of
the ley, the music of the spheres. The
most sublime but least known of all the
Pythagorean speculations was that of
cidurial harmonics. It was said that of
all men only. Pythagoras heard the music
of the spheres. Apparently, the
Calaldanss were the first people to
conceive of the heavenly bodies joining
in a cosmic chant as they moved in
stately manner across the sky. Job
describes a time when the stars of the
morning sang together and in the
merchant of Venice, the author of the
Shakespearean plays writes, "There's not
the smallest orb which thou beholds, but
in his motion like an angel sings." So
little remains, however, of the
Pythagorean system of celestial music
that it is only possible to approximate
his actual theory. Pythagoras conceived
the universe to be an immense monocord
with its single string connected at its
upper end to absolute spirit and at its
lower end to absolute matter. In other
words, a chord stretched between heaven
and earth. counting inward from the
circumference of the heavens. Pythagoras
according to some authorities divided
the universe into nine parts according
to others into 12 parts. The 12-fold
system was as follows. The first
division was called the empiran or the
sphere of the fixed stars and was the
dwelling place of the immortals. The
second to 12th divisions were in order
the spheres of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
the sun, Venus, Mercury, and the moon
and fire, air, water, and earth. This
arrangement of the seven planets, the
sun and moon being regarded as planets
in the old astronomy is identical with
the candlestick symbolism of the Jews,
the sun in the center as the main stem
with three planets on either side of it.
The names given by the Pythagoreans to
the various notes of the datonic scale
were according to Macrobius derived from
an estimation of the velocity and
magnitude of the planetary bodies. Each
of these gigantic spheres as it rushed
endlessly through space was believed to
sound a certain tone caused by its
continuous displacement of the ethereal
diffusion. As these tones were a
manifestation of divine order and
motion, it must necessarily follow that
they ptook of the harmony of their own
source. The assertion that the planets
in there revolutions round the earth
uttered certain sounds differing
according to their respective magnitude,
solarity and local distance was commonly
made by the Greeks. Thus Saturn, the
farthest planet was said to give the
gravest note while the moon which is the
nearest gave the sharpest. These sounds
of the seven planets and the sphere of
the fixed stars together with that above
us and tickthon are the nine muses and
their joint symphony is called namosin.
See the canon. This quotation contains
an obscure reference to the nine-fold
division of the universe previously
mentioned. The Greek initiates also
recognized a fundamental relationship
between the individual heavens or
spheres of the seven planets and the
seven sacred vowels. The first heaven
uttered the sound of the sacred vowel
alpha alpha. The second heaven the
sacred vowel epsilon epsilon. The third
ada ada. The fourth iota iota. The fifth
omocron omocrron. The sixth upsilon.
And the seventh heaven, the sacred vowel
omega omega. When these seven heavens
sing together, they produce a perfect
harmony which ascends as an everlasting
praise to the throne of the creator. See
Arnaeus against heresies. Although not
so stated, it is probable that the
planetary heavens are to be considered
ascending in the Pythagorean order
beginning with the sphere of the moon
which would be the first heaven. Many
early instruments had seven strings and
it is generally conceded that Pythagoras
was the one who added the eighth string
to the liar of Turpander. The seven
strings were always related both to
their correspondences in the human body
and to the planets. The names of God
were also conceived to be formed from
combinations of the seven planetary
harmonies. The Egyptians confined their
sacred songs to the seven primary sounds
forbidding any others to be uttered in
their temples. One of their hymns
contained the following invocation. The
seven sounding tones praise thee, the
great God, the ceaseless working father
of the whole universe. In another, the
deity describes himself. Thus, I am the
great indestructible liar of the whole
world, attuning the songs of the
heavens. See Nman's history of music.
The Pythagoreans believe that everything
which existed had a voice and that all
creatures were eternally singing the
praise of the creator. Man fails to hear
these divine melodies because his soul
is inshed in the illusion of material
existence. When he liberates himself
from the bondage of the lower world with
its sense limitations, the music of the
spheres will again be audible as it was
in the golden age. Harmony recognizes
harmony. And when the human soul regains
its true estate, it will not only hear
the celestial choir, but also join with
it in an everlasting anthem of praise to
that eternal good, controlling the
infinite number of parts and conditions
of being. The Greek mysteries included
in their doctrines a magnificent concept
of the relationship existing between
music and form. The elements of
architecture, for example, were
considered as comparable to musical
modes and notes or as having a musical
counterpart. Consequently, when a
building was erected in which a number
of these elements were combined, the
structure was then likened to a musical
chord, which was harmonic only when it
fully satisfied the mathematical
requirements of harmonic intervals. The
realization of this analogy between
sound and form led Gerta to declare that
architecture is crystallized music. In
constructing their temples of
initiation, the early priests frequently
demonstrated their superior knowledge of
the principles underlying the phenomena
known as vibration. A considerable part
of the mystery rituals consisted of
invocations and atonements for which
purpose special sound chambers were
constructed. A word whispered in one of
these apartments was so intensified that
the reverberations made the entire
building sway and be filled with a
deafening roar. The very wood and stone
used in the erection of these sacred
buildings eventually became so
thoroughly permeated with the sound
vibrations of the religious ceremonies
that when struck they would reproduce
the same tones thus repeatedly impressed
into their substances by the rituals.
Every element in nature has its
individual keynote. If these elements
are combined in a composite structure,
the result is a chord that if sounded
will disintegrate the compound into its
integral parts. Likewise, each
individual has a key note that if
sounded will destroy him. The allegory
of the walls of Jericho falling when the
trumpets of Israel were sounded
undoubtedly intended to set forth the
arcane significance of individual
keynote or vibration. The philosophy of
color light writes Edwin D. Babbit
reveals the glories of the external
world and yet is the most glorious of
them all. It gives beauty reveals beauty
and is itself most beautiful. It is the
analyzer, the truth teller and the
exposer of shams for it shows things as
they are. It's infinite. Streams measure
off the universe and flow into our
telescopes from stars which are
quintilions of miles distant. On the
other hand, it descends to objects
inconceivably small and reveals through
the microscope objects 50 millions of
times less than can be seen by the naked
eye. Like all other fine forces, its
movement is wonderfully soft yet
penetrating and powerful. Without its
vivifying influence, vegetable, animal,
and human life must immediately perish
from the earth and general ruin take
place. We shall do well then to consider
this potential and beautiful principle
of light and its component colors. For
the more deeply we penetrate into its
inner laws, the more will it present
itself as a marvelous storehouse of
power to vitalize, heal, refine, and
delight mankind. See the principles of
light and color. Since light is the
basic physical manifestation of life,
bathing all creation in its radiance, it
is highly important to realize in part
at least the subtle nature of this
divine substance. That which is called
light is actually a rate of vibration
causing certain reactions upon the optic
nerve. Few realize how they are walled
in by the limitations of the sense
perceptions. Not only is there a great
deal more to light than anyone has ever
seen, but there are also unknown forms
of light, which no optical equipment
will ever register. There are unnumbered
colors which cannot be seen, as well as
sounds which cannot be heard, odors
which cannot be smelt, flavors which
cannot be tasted, and substances which
cannot be felt. Man is thus surrounded
by a super sensible universe of which he
knows nothing because the centers of
sense perception within himself have not
been developed sufficiently to respond
to the subtler rates of vibration of
which that universe is composed. Among
both civilized and savage peoples, color
has been accepted as a natural language
in which to couch their religious and
philosophical doctrines. The ancient
city of Abbatna as described by
Heroditus. Its seven walls colored
according to the seven planets revealed
the knowledge of this subject possessed
by the Persian magi. The famous Sicarat
or astronomical tower of the god Nebo at
Boripa ascended in seven great steps or
stages. Each step being painted in the
key color of one of the planetary
bodies. See Lenorman's Calaldian magic.
It is thus evident that the Babylonians
were familiar with the concept of the
spectrum in its relation to the seven
creative gods or powers in India. One of
the mogul emperors caused a fountain to
be made with seven levels. The water
pouring down the sides through specially
arranged channels changed color as it
descended passing sequentially through
all shades of the spectrum. In Tibet,
color is employed by the native artists
to express various moods. L. Austin
Wedell, writing of Northern Buddhist
art, notes that in Tibetan mythology,
white and yellow complexions usually
typify mild moods, while the red, blue,
and black belong to fierce forms, though
sometimes light blue as indicating the
sky means merely celestial. Generally,
the gods are pictured white, goblins
red, and devils black like their
European relative. See the Buddhism of
Tibet. In Mino Plato speaking through
Socrates describes color as an effluence
of form commenurate with sight and
sensible. In Theotitus he discourses
more at length on the subject. Thus let
us carry out the principle which has
just been affirmed that nothing is
self-existent. And then we shall see
that every color, white, black, and
every other color, arises out of the I'm
meeting the appropriate motion, and that
what we term the substance of each color
is neither the active nor the passive
element, but something which passes
between them, and is peculiar to each
precipient. Are you certain that the
several colors appear to every animal,
say a dog, as they appear to you? In the
Pythagorean tetris, the supreme symbol
of universal forces and processes are
set forth the theories of the Greeks
concerning color in music. The first
three dots represent the three-fold
white light, which is the godhead
containing potentially all sound and
color. The remaining seven dots are the
colors of the spectrum and the notes of
the musical scale. The colors and tones
are the active creative powers which
emanating from the first cause establish
the universe. The seven are divided into
two groups, one containing three powers
and the other for a relationship also
shown in the tetractis. The higher group
that of three becomes the spiritual
nature of the created universe. The
lower group that of four manifests as
the irrational sphere or inferior world.
In the mysteries, the seven loi or
creative lords are shown as streams of
force issuing from the mouth of the
eternal one. This signifies the spectrum
being extracted from the white light of
the supreme deity. The seven creators or
fabricators of the inferior spheres were
called by the Jews the Elohim. By the
Egyptians they were referred to as the
builders, sometimes as the governors and
are depicted with great knives in their
hands with which they carve the universe
from its primordial substance. Worship
of the planets is based upon their
acceptation as the cosmic embodiment of
the seven creative attributes of God.
The lords of the planets were described
as dwelling within the body of the sun
for the true nature of the sun being
analogous to the white light contains
the seeds of all the tone and color
potencies which it manifests. There are
numerous arbitrary arrangements setting
forth the mutual relationships of the
planets, the colors and the musical
notes. The most satisfactory system is
that based upon the law of the octave,
the sense of hearing has a much wider
scope than that of sight. For whereas
the ear can register from 9 to 11
octaves of sound, the eye is restricted
to the cognition of but seven
fundamental color tones or one tone
short of the octave. Red when posited as
the lowest color tone in the scale of
chromatics, thus corresponds to do the
first note of the musical scale.
Continuing the analogy, orange
corresponds to re, yellow to me, green
to fa, blue to soul, indigo to law, and
violet to si ti. The eighth color tone
necessary to complete the scale should
be the higher octave of red, the first
color tone. The accuracy of the above
arrangement is attested by two striking
facts. One, the three fundamental notes
of the musical scale, the first, the
third, and the fifth, correspond with
the three primary colors, red, yellow,
and blue. Two, the seventh, and least
perfect note of the musical scale
corresponds with purple. The least
perfect tone of the color scale. In the
principles of light and color, Edwin D.
Babbot confirms the correspondence of
the color and musical scales. S C is at
the bottom of the musical scale and made
with the coarsest waves of air. So is
read at the bottom of the chromatic
scale and made with the coarsest waves
of luminous ether. As the musical note
B, the seventh note of the scale
requires 45 vibrations of air every time
the note C. At the lower end of the
scale requires 24 or but little over
half as many. So does extreme violet
require about 300 trillions of
vibrations of ether in a second while
extreme red requires only about 450
trillions which also are but little more
than half as many. When one musical
octave is finished another one commences
and progresses with just twice as many
vibrations as were used in the first
octave and so the same notes are
repeated on a finer scale. In the same
way when the scale of colors visible to
the ordinary I is completed in the
violet. Another octave of finer
invisible colors with just twice as many
vibrations will commence and progress on
precisely the same law. When the colors
are related to the 12 signs of the
zodiac, they are arranged as the spokes
of a wheel. To Aries is assigned pure
red to Taurus red orange to Gemini pure
orange to Cancer orange yellow. to Leo,
pure yellow. To Virgo, yellow green. To
Libra, pure green. To Scorpio, green
blue. To Sagittarius, pure blue. To
Capricorn, blue violet. To Aquarius,
pure violet. And to Pisces, violet red.
In expounding the eastern system of
esoteric philosophy, H P. Blovatsky
relates the colors to the septenary
constitution of man and the seven states
of matter as follows. Color principles
of man states of matter. Violet chia or
etheric double ether. Indigo higher
manis or spiritual intelligence critical
state called air. Blue oric envelope
steam or vapor. Green lower manus or
animal soul critical state. Yellow booty
or spiritual soul water. Orange prana or
life principal critical state. Red
kamarupa or seed of animal life. device.