Extrasensory Perception: 
Research Findings 

John Palmer 



1 . Does This Stuff Really Exist? 

1.1. The Early Years 

Although claims of psychic phenomena have been with us since antiquity, 
the beginning of organized research into the nature of these phenomena is 
usually associated with the founding in 1882 of the Society for Psychical 
Research in London. The S.P.R. was the brainchild of a group of distin¬ 
guished scholars who were concerned primarily with the question of sur¬ 
vival after death, and who believed that scientific research might provide 
a more satisfactory resolution of this problem than had the current reli¬ 
gious dogma (Gauld, 1968). The S.P.R., as well as its sister society estab¬ 
lished a few years later in America, devoted its energies to two principal 
lines of ESP research. The first was a thorough investigation of reports of 
“real-life” psychic experiences (e.g., telepathy, apparitional experiences, 
hauntings) with the purpose of demonstrating that they could not be 
adequately explained by “normal” causes (e.g., Gurney, Myers, and 
Podmore, 1886/1970; Myers, 1903/1975). The second approach involved 
the investigation of spiritualist mediums who claimed the ability to com¬ 
municate with the dead. Although some of these mediums proved to be 
fraudulent, others consistently were able to provide investigators with 
remarkably detailed information about deceased persons, information that 


John Palmer • John F. Kennedy University, Orinda, California. 

59 

S. Krippner et al. (eds.), Advances in Parapsychological Research 
© Plenum Press, New York 1978 



60 


John Palmer 


it is difficult to conceive of their having acquired by normal means. 
Perhaps the most outstanding of these mediums were Leonore Piper 
(Hodgson, 1897-1898) and Gladys Leonard (Smith, 1964). Whether the 
information received by these mediums originated from the “other side” 
or simply reflected their own ESP is still an unresolved issue in parapsy¬ 
chology, although most parapsychologists today recoil from the 
spiritualistic interpretation. 

The observational approach only gradually gave way to laboratory 
experimentation. Although a handful of quantitatively analyzed labora¬ 
tory experiments were reported in the first quarter of the 20th century in 
both Europe (e.g., Brugmans, 1922) and the United States (e.g., Coover, 
1917; Estabrooks, 1927/1961), the dominant status that the experimental 
method enjoys today is largely attributable to J. B. Rhine. Although 
Rhine did not originate the card-guessing paradigm in parapsychology, he 
employed it more extensively and successfully than had previous inves¬ 
tigators. In 1934 he published a monograph describing an extensive series 
of card-guessing tests with eight college students, each of whom achieved 
highly extrachance scores with a great degree of consistency (Rhine, 
1934/1973). Unfortunately, most of this research was conducted under 
informal conditions that were not always well controlled, and the mono¬ 
graph itself reads more like a popular book than a detailed scientific 
report. Combined with the dominance of both methodological and 
metaphysical behaviorism in American psychology at this time, these 
facts caused the monograph to become the object of severe attacks from 
more orthodox segments of the scientific community. Although these 
attacks were not always rational, they did push Rhine to tighten experi¬ 
mental controls, and by 1940 he and his colleagues were able to publish a 
more scholarly volume, which purported to demonstrate that later card¬ 
guessing experiments effectively overcame the legitimate criticisms of 
other scientists (Rhine, Pratt, Stuart, Smith, and Greenwood, 1940/1966). 

1.2. Evidence from Selected Subjects: The Psychic Superstars 

Probably the most important and evidential of the early Rhine exper¬ 
iments was the so-called Pearce-Pratt distance series (Rhine et al ., 1940/ 
1966; Rhine and Pratt, 1954). Hubert Pearce was a divinity student at Duke 
and one of the eight star subjects referred to in Rhine’s 1934 monograph. 
For this experiment the BT clairvoyance procedure was selected, with the 
subject (Pearce) and the experimenter (Pratt) located in different build¬ 
ings.* Duplicate records were made of both the call and target sequences, 

*The meanings of abbreviations used to define forced-choice testing procedures such as BT, 
DT, and STM are discussed in Chapter 1, pp. 24-25. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


61 


and the scoring was checked independently by Rhine and Pratt. There 
were 37 sessions conducted, generally consisting of 2 runs each. Pearce’s 
average score was 7.5 hits per run, where the expected number of hits was 
5. The probability of such a scoring rate occurring by chance over this 
number of runs is less than 10~ 22 . 

Of course, no single experiment, regardless of how significant the 
results or tight the controls, can be accepted without reservation as con¬ 
clusive verification of any scientific hypothesis, especially one as con¬ 
troversial as the existence of ESP. The case for ESP rests not on any one 
study but on the cumulative results of literally hundreds of controlled 
experiments. The bulk of these experiments have used groups of un¬ 
selected subjects (mostly high school and college students) who claim no 
outstanding psychic ability. While the pooled scores from such samples 
frequently provide statistically significant evidence of ESP, the results are 
rarely dramatic. Although equating the magnitude of an effect with its 
evidential value is a questionable tactic, it is the smaller number of exper¬ 
iments with “gifted” subjects—who produce highly significant individual 
scores under controlled laboratory conditions—that usually are consid¬ 
ered as providing the strongest evidence in support of the ESP hypothe¬ 
sis. Generally speaking, these are the only studies that have captured 
what little interest scientists outside the field of parapsychology have 
shown in ESP research. For a historical perspective on research with 
outstanding ESP subjects, see Pratt (1975). 

Not counting subjects tested at Rhine’s laboratory prior to 1940, six 
subjects stand out as having demonstrated the ability to achieve high 
scores in forced-choice ESP tests over a protracted period of time. It is 
the reliability of their performance as much as, if not more than, the 
magnitude of their scores that causes these subjects to assume prominent 
positions in the annals of parapsychological research. Two of these sub¬ 
jects, a photographer named Basil Shackleton and a housewife named 
Gloria Stewart, were tested by the British parapsychologist S. G. Soal, 
whom we will discuss shortly. The other four I will briefly discuss now, 
in chronological order. 

The first was a college student identified only as C. J., who was 
tested at the University of Colorado (Martin and Stribic, 1938a, b, 1940). 
This subject excelled at card-guessing tests of the conventional DT (or 
UT) type, in which he averaged better than 7 hits per run over 2,000 runs; 
but he also performed well on other card-guessing tests. 

The second outstanding subject is a library information clerk in 
Czechoslovakia by the name of Pavel Stepanek (Pratt, 1973). Stepanek, 
who was discovered by the Czech parapsychologist Milan Ryzl, has been 
tested over a period of more than 10 years. He probably has retained his 
card-guessing abilities longer than any other subject in the history of 



62 


John Palmer 


parapsychology, although his ability has seemed to decline since 1968. 
Stepanek has been able to succeed on only one type of test, one which 
involves guessing which side of a green-and-white card is facing upward 
inside a cardboard envelope. Although he was able to succeed at guessing 
the correct color early in his career, his success has always been com¬ 
bined with a strong tendency to base his calls on visual cues from the 
envelopes. The significance of his later results derived in large part from 
the continuation of these secondary scoring patterns when the envelopes 
were concealed in progressively larger containers that shielded the inner 
containers from Stepanek’s view. We will discuss this “focusing effect” in 
greater detail toward the end of the chapter. Stepanek has succeeded with 
tests conducted by a number of investigators, including a neutral scientist 
not previously associated with parapsychology (Blom and Pratt, 1968). 

The third subject is a professional psychic from Trinidad named Lal- 
singh Harribance (Altrocchi, 1971; Child and Kelly, 1973; Damgaard, 
1972; Dukhan, 1971; Kanthamani, 1974; Kelly and Lenz, 1976b; Klein, 
1972; Morris, 1972, 1973; Morris, Roll, Klein, and Wheeler, 1972; 
Roll, 1972; Roll and Klein, 1972; Stump, Roll, and Roll, 1970). Harribance 
has succeeded in a number of different forced-choice tests under well- 
controlled conditions, but his unique specialty is guessing the sex of per¬ 
sons in concealed photographs. He also succeeded in a free-response 
experiment where he was asked to give “blind readings” of 20 volunteer 
subjects. He was particularly accurate in identifying the physical aspects 
of these persons (Roll, Morris, Damgaard, Klein, and Roll, 1973). 

The fourth subject is a former law student named Bill Delmore (Kanth¬ 
amani and Kelly, 1974a, b; Kelly and Kanthamani, 1972; Kelly, Kanth¬ 
amani, Child, and Young, 1975). Although he has been tested less exten¬ 
sively than the other subjects described in this section, Delmore also has 
succeeded on a variety of forced-choice tests. His most outstanding 
results have involved correctly and completely identifying concealed 
playing cards. 

Although free-response testing methods have been employed at times 
throughout the history of parapsychology (e.g., Sidgwick, 1924) and are 
enjoying increasingly widespread use, the published literature fails to re¬ 
veal any subjects who have achieved outstanding scoring levels with such 
methods under controlled conditions over a large number of trials. 
Perhaps the individual most closely approaching this ideal was the wife of 
novelist Upton Sinclair, who evidenced striking success over several 
years at duplicating hundreds of line drawings made by her husband or 
others in a different room (Sinclair, 1962). Unfortunately, the results could 
not be adequately analyzed statistically and the sender was allowed to 
arbitrarily select the target picture, a fatal flaw in the design of any ESP 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


63 


experiment. Nevertheless, many of the correspondences were extremely 
striking. 

A number of subjects have produced striking free-response results 
under better controlled conditions in short series, however. Many of these 
occurred during dreaming, a topic to be discussed later. Several subjects 
have achieved impressive results with a technique called “remote view¬ 
ing,” where an experimenter travels to a randomly selected location sev¬ 
eral miles from the laboratory and the subject is asked to both describe 
and draw his impressions of the location (Bisaha and Dunne, 1977; Puthoff 
and Targ, 1976; Targ and Puthoff, 1977). In a very sophisticated experi¬ 
ment, an Argentine psychiatrist obtained highly significant results in 
duplicating 90 freehand drawings under both GESP and clairvoyance 
conditions (Musso and Granero, 1973). 

The above listing is by no means intended as a complete catalogue of 
all persons who have demonstrated exceptional ESP talents in either the 
forced-choice or free-response modes. I have simply selected those who 
have provided the most striking and consistent evidence of ESP in well- 
controlled experiments reported in detail in the scientific literature. 

No discussion of star ESP subjects would be complete without men¬ 
tioning the Israeli psychic Uri Geller. In a controversial experiment pub¬ 
lished in Nature , Geller was seated in a visually, acoustically, and electri¬ 
cally shielded room and asked to reproduce freehand drawings that were 
located in another room. The results were highly significant statistically, 
and many of the correspondences were quite impressive (Targ and 
Puthoff, 1974). 

The greater-than-average controversy surrounding these results 
stems from the fact that there is at least a great deal of circumstantial 
evidence that many of Geller’s ostensibly psychic stage and “cocktail 
party” feats are nothing more than magician’s tricks (Randi, 1975). 
Nonetheless, critics so far have been unable to convincingly explain away 
Targ’s drawing experiment. The editorial reviewers for Nature were split 
concerning whether the paper should be published (Investigating the 
Paranormal, 1974). There were general criticisms concerning the lack of 
methodological detail in the report but no indications as to what informa¬ 
tion the reviewers felt was lacking. The only specific criticism stated in 
the editorial concerned the less-than-ideal method of assuring unbiased 
selection of target pictures, a technically valid but trivial argument given 
the magnitude of the effects. Suggestions by others as to how Geller might 
have cheated either misrepresented the experimental conditions as out¬ 
lined in Targ’s report (Randi, 1975; noted by Tart, 1976b) and/or delved 
into such exotic speculations as that Geller had a radio receiver implanted 
in his tooth (Hanlon, 1974). 



64 


John Palmer 


The controversy over whether or not Geller has genuine psychic 
ability has become such a media event that serious scientists interested in 
coming to terms with the paranormal would be best advised to look 
elsewhere. However, fraud in ESP experiments (on the part of subject, 
experimenter, or both) is an important issue that must be confronted, 
however unpleasant and distracting such a task may be. 


1.3. Is It All a Hoax? 


1.3.1. The Hume Game 

In the first presidential address delivered to the Society for Psychical 
Research, Henry Sidgwick made the following prophetic statement: “We 
have done all that we can when the critic has nothing left to allege except 
that the investigator is in the trick” (Sidgwick, 1882, p. 12). By 1940, it 
appeared that the skeptics were in just such a position. It took them 15 
years after that to fulfill Sidgwick’s prophecy. 

The logic of their attack can be traced back to David Hume, a 
member of the British empiricist school of philosophy, which helped to 
provide the philosophical foundation of American behavioristic psychol¬ 
ogy. In Hume’s book, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding , 
originally published in 1748 (Hume 1748/1952), one finds the following 
quote: “No testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle, unless the tes¬ 
timony be of such a kind that its falsehood would be more miraculous than 
the fact which it endeavors to establish . . . the knavery and folly of men 
are such common phenomena, that I should rather believe the most ex¬ 
traordinary events to arise from their concurrence, than admit to so signal 
a violation of the laws of nature.” (p. 491). In other words, it is more 
reasonable to believe that those who participate in ESP experiments are 
cheaters than to believe in the “miracle” of ESP. 

One could question the relevance of Hume’s quotation to parapsy¬ 
chology because if ESP does exist, it is not a miracle (i.e., a temporary 
suspension of natural law). On the contrary, it itself represents a natural 
law, albeit one currently not well understood by science. Such 
technicalities were insufficient, however, to deter a young research scien¬ 
tist named George Price from publishing in Science an article proposing 
that ESP research that could not be explained away on more conventional 
grounds could be accounted for as deliberate fraud or “mildly abnormal 
mental conditions” (Price, 1955, p. 360). He thus became the first highly 
visible player of what I will hereafter call the Hume Game. 

Although no one has ever set down an official set of rules for the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


65 


Hume Game, my own observations suggest the following salient features. 
The object is to take any ESP experiment, preferably one that seems on 
the surface to provide conclusive proof of ESP, and to figure out a way 
the experiment could have been faked. Considerable stress seems to be 
laid on the elegance of the solution. The best solutions would seem to be 
the ones where it is necessary to assume that only the subject is a cheat, 
while the less ideal solutions are apparently the ones where the principal 
investigator must be implicated as a culprit. Solutions also seem to 
be more elegant the fewer persons are assumed to be involved in the 
conspiracy. 

Price (1972) eventually decided that his earlier promotion of the 
Hume Game had been unfair, but by that time other players had come 
along to take his place. Probably the best known of these newcomers is 
the British psychologist C. E. M. Hansel. In 1966, he published a book 
entitled ESP: A Scientific Evaluation , in which he played the Hume 
Game with several of what were considered to be the most “conclusive” 
ESP experiments published up to that time. At the beginning of the book 
he defines his own rules for the game: “An experiment that has any defect 
such that its result may be due to a cause other than ESP cannot provide 
conclusive proof of ESP. In parapsychological research, the process 
being investigated is both hypothetical and a priori extremely unlikely. 
Any possible known cause [italics mine] of the result is far more likely to 
be responsible for it than the hypothetical process under consideration” 
(p. 17). In an earlier paper, we find an even more sweeping quote: “Any 
experiment that has any defect such that the result may be due to any 
cause [italics mine] other than the hypothetical cause being investigated 
must be rejected” (Hansel, 1960, p. 8). In other words, all a critic has to do 
to destroy the evidence for ESP (or any other hypothesis he or she doesn’t 
like) is to demonstrate that for each relevant experiment there is some 
alternate hypothesis that does not invoke ESP or whatever other con¬ 
struct happens not to be fashionable in the current scientific orthodoxy. 
Since there are no limits to the lengths one can go in applying such 
“orthodox” hypotheses, the failure to do so would seem to be more a 
reflection on the dullness of the critic than on the rigor of the experimental 
design. Perhaps this is why the Hume Game is so popular with certain 
critics: It is almost impossible to lose l 

One experiment that Hansel subjected to the Hume Game was the 
Pearce-Pratt series. It will be recalled that this was the clairvoyance 
experiment in which subject and experimenter were located in different 
buildings. Although the results seemed to provide strong support for the 
ESP hypotheses, Hansel proposed an alternate explanation, which as¬ 
sumed fraud on the part of the subject. In a nutshell, Hansel claimed that 



66 


John Palmer 


Pearce could have left his building during the session and stationed him¬ 
self in a room across the hall from Pratt’s room. From there he could have 
stood on a chair, peeked through the transom above the door in Pratt’s 
room, copied the target order as Pratt was recording it after the run, 
returned to his own room, and recorded his guesses so as to obtain the 
desired number of hits. 

Unfortunately for Hansel, the building in which Pratt was located 
had since been renovated, and Hansel was unable to obtain the original 
blueprints. He therefore could not document his assumption that Pearce 
could have had a direct line of sight onto Pratt’s desk. Pratt, however, was 
more successful in obtaining the blueprints and they discredited Han¬ 
sel’s theory (Stevenson, 1967). 

A second experiment that received Hansel’s attention was by Pratt 
and Woodruff (1939). In the more tightly controlled second series of this 
experiment, 32 unselected subjects were tested using an STM procedure. 
The overall results, although not dramatic, were highly significant. In this 
case, Hansel’s villain was the experimenter (Woodruff) who controlled 
the deck of target cards. One of the control features supposedly intro¬ 
duced into this series was that this experimenter should not know the 
order of the key cards hung in a row by the subject on the opposite side of 
the screen, so that he could not cheat by occasionally matching a target 
card to the corresponding key card contrary to the subject’s call. How¬ 
ever, Hansel discovered that one could determine the location of at least 
some key cards by noting their order on the preceding run (which was 
revealed during the scoring of that run). This assumes that the subject did 
a poor job of rearranging the key cards between runs, thus allowing the 
experimenter to keep track of them. Hansel also found that for himself it 
was easiest to keep track of the cards that occupied the end positions on 
the previous run (E-cards), and he concluded that the misplacement of 
target cards should be concentrated on these key cards. 

Hansel then went a step further and actually demonstrated that in the 
case of the highest scoring subject in the series, the significance indeed 
was attributable to an excess of hits on the E-cards. This effect also was 
found to a lesser but still significant degree in the combined results of the 
four other subjects whose overall scores were independently significant 
(Medhurst and Scott, 1974). 

Pratt argued that parapsychological interpretations could account for 
this finding (Pratt and Woodruff, 1961; Pratt, 1974a), and he succeeded in 
providing evidence for such an explanation in a later paper (Pratt, 1977). 
He suggested that subjects might score best on the E-cards simply be¬ 
cause these cards were most salient to them, as a result of their positions 
on the previous run. As we will see later (see section 4.1.1.) such salience 
effects have been found in other ESP data. He reasoned that if the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


67 


E-cards were salient to the subject, he would be more likely to re¬ 
member to change their locations on the next run than he would if these 
E-cards were not salient. Pratt in fact found, at least with the highest 
scoring subject, that there were significantly more hits on the E-cards 
when their locations had been shifted than when they had not been 
shifted. 

Although parapsychologists so far have had the last word in the 
controversies surrounding the Pearce-Pratt and Pratt-Woodruff experi¬ 
ments, it would be hazardous to assume that either controversy is over. 
But it really doesn’t matter. As a last resort, all Hansel (or any other 
player of the Hume Game) has to do is argue that Rhine, Pratt, Pearce, 
and a few of the subjects in the Pratt-Woodruff experiment fabricated the 
data. While this argument lacks the elegance of Hansel’s earlier solutions, 
it is preferable to the ESP solution, according to the logic of the Hume 
Game. 

13.2. Toward a More Balanced Approach 

The excesses of the Hume Game should not blind us to the fact that 
fraud can occur in any science, and that there are legitimate means of both 
detecting and demonstrating it. A case where the accusations or insinu¬ 
ations of fraud possess more credibility than in those cases discussed 
above is the research of the late British mathematician and para¬ 
psychologist S. G. Soal. He obtained highly significant evidence of psi 
over a number of years from two selected subjects, a photographer named 
Basil Shackleton and a housewife named Gloria Stewart, using adapta¬ 
tions of Rhine’s forced-choice GESP techniques (Soal and Bateman, 

1954) . Soal’s research, which seemed to be among the most tightly con¬ 
trolled in parapsychology up to that time, became the object of specula¬ 
tive attacks in the tradition of the Hume Game (Hansel, 1960, 1966; Price, 

1955) , attacks to which Soal vigorously replied (Soal, 1955, 1960). 

However, a new element was added to the controversy when one of 

Soal’s assistants reported that she saw Soal altering figures in the target 
sequences (Soal and Goldney, 1960), a fact that Hansel, curiously 
enough, mentioned only briefly in his lengthy attack on Soal’s work. More 
recently Scott and Haskell (1974) found internal evidence in the data 
which was consistent with the assistant’s allegation, while another inves¬ 
tigator was unable to find the recorded target sequences in question in any 
of the sources Soal claims to have used (Medhurst, 1971). Several promi¬ 
nent parapsychologists were invited to defend Soal (who was at the time 
senile and unable to defend himself and has since died) in a debate pub¬ 
lished in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research (Scott et 
al ., 1974), but none of them was able to refute the heart of the critics’ 



68 


John Palmer 


argument, at least in the reviewer’s opinion. Nonetheless, the case against 
Soal cannot, at this point, be considered conclusive. 

What sets the criticism of Soal’s research apart from, say, that of the 
Pratt-Woodruff experiment was that fraud was not just assumed to have 
occurred on an ad hoc basis but was actually alleged by a participant. A 
similar allegation of fraud by an experimental assistant recently led to the 
expose of W. J. Levy and the discrediting of his extensive research on psi 
in animals (Rhine, 1974). 

It is thus undeniable that at least one professional parapsychologist 
whose work was considered of high scientific quality did not live up to the 
standards of integrity maintained by the vast majority of other scientists in 
the field, a human frailty not unknown in the more orthodox sciences. 
Because of this fact, any suspicion of experimenter fraud based upon 
empirical evidence of fraud should be vigorously pursued. Moreover, ex¬ 
perimenters should take all reasonable precautions to eliminate the possi¬ 
bility of cheating by subjects (precautions, incidentally, that I have found 
most good psychics insist upon). On the other hand, it is both unrealistic 
and unfair to assume cheating just because the results of a particular 
experiment are distasteful or do not readily fit into the current 
paradigm—not because such an assumption will not on occasion be cor¬ 
rect but because science cannot function in the climate of paranoia and 
“witch hunting” (of the secular variety) that such an attitude inevitably 
produces. No branch of scientific inquiry can reach its full potential if 
those who engage in it know that their honesty or competence will be 
questioned simply for advancing and defending bold ideas or “disparate” 
findings. Such persecution has been with us throughout the history of 
science, but never in modern times has it been so blatantly defended as by 
those critics of parapsychology who have played the Hume Game. The 
implications of their attacks are by no means limited to parapsychology. 

A more reasonable guideline for evaluating the likelihood of fraud in 
parapsychology experiments has been presented by Ransom (1971): 

If you have a situation where fraud or ESP are the only explanations for an 
experimental result, the result is evidence for (not proof of) ESP to the degree 
that the evidence for an honestly conducted experiment outweighs the evi¬ 
dence for fraud; and it is evidence for (not proof of) fraud to the degree that the 
evidence for fraud outweighs the evidence for an honestly conducted experi¬ 
ment. (p. 294) 


1.4. The “Crucial Experiment”—and Other Myths 

A great deal of energy has been wasted over the years by both para¬ 
psychologists and their critics in efforts to either proclaim or debunk the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


69 


“crucial experiment” that once and for all will provide conclusive proof of 
ESP. By this time we all should know better. There is no such thing as a 
conclusive experiment in parapsychology or any other science. Beyond 
the lowest levels of abstraction, the results of any experiment can poten¬ 
tially be interpreted in more than one way, even if one assumes the com¬ 
petence and integrity of the experimenters. 

It is likely that many scientists who do not feel that ESP has been 
convincingly demonstrated would change their minds if a well-controlled 
(although not “conclusive”) ESP experiment could be replicated by any 
competent investigator in his or her own laboratory. However, para¬ 
psychologists must concede that no such “repeatable experiment” exists, a 
concession, incidentally, that must be echoed by investigators in many 
areas of orthodox psychology. While lack of replicability is often cited as 
a reason for outright rejection of the ESP hypothesis (see Ransom, 1971), 
it is not at all clear that such absolute repeatability should be expected, 
even assuming the validity of the hypothesis. It is important to recognize 
that the behavioral sciences, including parapsychology, are probabilistic 
rather than absolute sciences. This is why statistical methods must be 
used to evaluate most results in these disciplines. One often overlooked 
implication of this fact is that valid relationships that are not exceptionally 
strong are likely not to reach conventional levels of statistical significance 
in a replication attempt simply as a result of sampling variability. 

A second cause of the failure of ESP experiments to replicate by 
conventional criteria is the fact that it is difficult, if not impossible, to 
precisely replicate the original methodology in all potentially crucial re¬ 
spects. For example, any independent replication attempt by definition 
involves a different experimenter, and, as we shall see later, there is 
evidence that different experimenters conducting the same ESP experi¬ 
ment frequently obtain significantly different results. The ways in which 
different experimenters interact with their subjects is difficult to control 
but likely has a profound effect on experimental outcomes in this area. We 
are only beginning to understand the situational variables that determine 
the success or failure of ESP experiments. 

Even if one concedes all of the above, the fact still remains that the 
repeatable ESP experiment does not exist. Any scientist who chooses to 
cite this fact as a reason for concluding that the existence of ESP has not 
been proven is on firm ground, at least in terms of scientific tradition. But 
why all the fuss over whether ESP has been “proven”? Proof is a term that 
is appropriate in mathematics and logic but not in empirical science. Sci¬ 
ences that are based on probabilistic models and use probabilistic 
methods of analysis should restrict themselves to probabilistic conclu¬ 
sions. The proper question is not whether ESP has been proven but what 



70 


John Palmer 


is the subjective probability one can reasonably attach to the validity of 
the ESP hypothesis? 

Unfortunately, such a judgment must be largely subjective, although 
there are certain objective factors that should enter into it. One factor that 
in my opinion should not enter into it is the so-called a priori improbability 
of ESP. One often hears the argument that if ESP exists, it would violate 
other well-established laws of nature. This simply is not true. The ESP 
hypothesis deals with a set of observations totally outside of those that 
serve as the data base for evaluating other physical laws or theories. ESP 
in no way threatens the validity of currently accepted scientific laws with 
respect to the observations to which those laws were intended to apply. 
The only threat posed by parapsychology is to the universality of those 
laws, a universality that should never be assumed in the first place. When 
and if the “existence” of ESP is finally accepted by the majority of or¬ 
thodox scientists, the preferred explanation of how you are assimilating 
the information on this page will have to do with patterns of light pro¬ 
cessed by your physical sense organs and brain, not with ESP. 

A factor that should enter into the judgment is the massive evidence 
in support of the ESP hypothesis accumulated over the years by para¬ 
psychologists and others. First of all, while “anecdotal” reports of ESP 
experiences by laymen do not and should not carry the conviction of 
well-designed experiments, a substantial proportion of the population 
have reported ESP experiences that they found convincing, both in the 
United States (Greely, 1975; Palmer and Dennis, 1975) and elsewhere 
(Haraldsson, Gudmundsdottir, Ragnarsson, Loftsson, and Jonsson, 
1977). Furthermore, many such cases have been carefully documented 
(Gurney et al ., 1886/1970; Stevenson, 1970). The detail of correspondence 
between these experiences and the target events is often greater, and the 
likelihood that the experiences would have occurred without the target 
events is often less, than is often supposed by critics. 

However, the bulk of the case for ESP rests on the numerous con¬ 
trolled laboratory experiments carried out by trained investigators that 
have provided statistically significant evidence of ESP in the data. While 
the quality of these experiments varies, few have flaws I would consider 
fatal as far as the demonstration of ESP is concerned, and the best ones 
compare favorably with the best I have seen in the psychological litera¬ 
ture from the standpoint of methodological rigor. Secondly, although 
there is far from perfect repeatability in ESP research, it would be equally 
erroneous to say that there is no repeatability at all, especially when one 
considers the results of attempts by experimenters to repeat their own 
results. Generally speaking, I would say that the level of repeatability is 
about what one would expect given a genuine but weak phenomenon 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


71 


subject to the vagaries of sampling error and changes of conditions de¬ 
scribed above. Finally, and perhaps most important of all, the results of 
many experiments fall into consistent patterns that make psychological 
sense. 

After reading the evidence presented in this chapter, the reader, one 
hopes, will be in a position to attach his or her own subjective probability 
to the validity of the ESP hypothesis. (The reader will be in an even better 
position, of course, if he or she consults the original reports.) In all likeli¬ 
hood, if the reader is open-minded, this probability will be greater than 
zero but less than one. 

Once one has decided upon one’s own subjective probability, the 
important question then becomes whether that probability is high enough 
to justify assuming the existence of ESP as a working hypothesis on 
which to base further research. I have little sympathy for the kind of logic 
that says that since parapsychologists have failed to “prove” the existence 
of ESP after close to a hundred years of research, further research is a 
waste of time. Progress is being made in this most difficult field of re¬ 
search, even though the progress is slow. Progress would be much faster 
if the educational and financial resources available to the other sciences 
were equally available to parapsychology. Just because parapsychologists 
lack the “repeatable experiment” now does not mean that such will always 
be the case. Further research well may bring to light the variables that 
must be exploited or controlled to produce this ultimate breakthrough. 
When one considers the revolutionary theoretical and practical implica¬ 
tions of ESP if it does exist, it is clear that a sufficiently strong prima 
facie case has been made for its existence to justify a major research effort 
to achieve this objective. 

Such a program, unfortunately, will need to be a long-term affair. 
Parapsychology is in a very primitive stage of development compared to 
most of the other sciences. Although there is some testing of theory-based 
hypotheses (e.g., Stanford, 1973; Schmidt, 1975), much of the “hypothesis 
testing” in parapsychology involves the cross-validation of post hoc ef¬ 
fects found in preliminary experiments. The parapsychological literature 
consists primarily of one huge and rather unwieldy data base. What I will 
attempt to do in the remainder of this chapter is to integrate that data base 
and to reveal some consistent trends that emerge from it. These trends 
may not be strong or reliable enough to deserve the title of “scientific 
laws,” but they may point the way toward the further development of 
methods for improving the reliability of ESP data and the construction 
and elaboration of testable theories. 

More specifically, I will attempt to review in the remainder of this 
chapter the great majority of valid, published experiments that, more than 



72 


John Palmer 


simply demonstrating ESP, have contributed, or attempted to contribute, 
some understanding of its properties and its relationship to other vari¬ 
ables. The logic of this admittedly ambitious undertaking is predicated on 
the assumption that a great deal of weight should not be placed on the 
results of any one experiment or experimental series in this field, regard¬ 
less of the apparent elegance of the methodology or the apparent im¬ 
pressiveness of the results. To state the point positively, reliable knowl¬ 
edge is most likely to derive from the convergence of the results of several 
experiments on a common conclusion. While I could have lightened my 
burden by reviewing only those experiments I consider “important,” such 
a strategy would merely add my own prejudice to whatever biases already 
exist in the literature itself. Although space limitations will prevent me 
from reviewing the literature as critically as I would like, I can take some 
comfort in knowing that the fair-minded and critical reader will want to 
consult the original reports before drawing final conclusions, regardless of 
how thoroughly critical is my own treatment. 

The sources I have drawn from consist primarily of the major profes¬ 
sional journals in the field {Journal and Proceedings of the American 
Society for Psychical Research .Journal of Parapsychology , Journal and 
Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research , International Journal 
of Parapsychology , European Journal of Parapsychology , and Para- 
psychological Monographs). The second major source will be abstracts of 
papers referred and approved for presentation at the Parapsychological 
Association conventions since 1967 but not yet published at length in the 
journals. The published abstracts of these papers, while not the equiva¬ 
lent of journal articles, are rather substantive, especially since 1971 when 
the series Research in Parapsychology was initiated. Other abstracts, 
most of which were published in the Journal of Parapsychology and re¬ 
viewed by their staff if not published elsewhere, will only be cited if they 
involve replication attempts or reflect on the generality of findings from 
more fully reported experiments. In cases where my information about a 
paper is derived exclusively from the abstract but a more detailed report is 
presumably available, both will be listed in the references.* 

Any published scientific literature tends to provide a somewhat 
biased representation of all experiments actually conducted, especially 
with regard to the proportion of significant findings. In the following 
pages, I will be interested primarily in exploring consistency with respect 


*The chapter includes journal articles published before the fall of 1976. I have also cited 
about half the papers presented at the 1976 Parapsychological Association convention. 
These are now published in Research in Parapsychology 1976 , and some have already 
appeared in journal form. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


73 


to the direction of experimental relationships across studies rather than 
their significance per se. In this former respect it is my opinion, based on 
some knowledge of the publication policies of my sources, that the litera¬ 
ture is not seriously biased. 

I have tried to describe the experiments reviewed in the rest of this 
chapter such that the reader may assume that a difference between groups 
or experimental conditions is nonsignificant unless it is stated as being 
significant or its significance is obvious from the context (e.g., significant 
hitting in one group and significant missing in the other). The same princi¬ 
ple applies to the significance with respect to MCE of overall ESP means 
in an experiment and the means of particular groups or conditions. While 
I have tried to apply these criteria consistently, readers who require de¬ 
tailed information on particular topics are urged to consult the original 
reports. 


2. ESP and the Experimental Situation 

Whenever a parapsychologist wants to test subjects in an ESP exper¬ 
iment, he must make numerous decisions about how the experiment 
should be conducted. Does it matter how far away the targets are from the 
subject? What kind of targets should he use? Should he offer incentives 
for high scores? Should he employ an agent to “send” the targets? Might it 
help to hypnotize the subject or attempt to put him in a state of conscious¬ 
ness maximally conducive to receiving psi impressions? The purpose of 
this section is to examine what parapsychologists have learned about the 
effects of various experimental manipulations on ESP scores. 


2.7. Transcending Space and Time: Beyond the Fourth Dimension 

2.1.1. ESP and Distance: From Rock Concerts to Moon Rocks 

If one accepts the possibility that a person can obtain information 
about distant events without use of the known senses, it is tempting to 
speculate that some transmission of physical energy is involved, even 
though that energy may have yet to be discovered by scientists. One 
probable implication of most theories of ESP that assume such transmis¬ 
sion is that receptivity should decrease as physical distance between the 
subject and the target stimulus increases. 

2.1.1a. Long-Distance Experiments . A large number of experiments 
have shown that significant ESP scores can occur when subjects and 



74 


John Palmer 


targets are separated by long distances. Perhaps the first substantial 
long-distance experiment was by Carington (1940a, b), who had subjects in 
other countries, including the United States, attempt to duplicate 
freehand drawings located in his home in England. The results were 
highly significant, but his statistical methods were of questionable valid¬ 
ity. A subsequent “replication” attempt gave results of comparable sig¬ 
nificance (Schmeidler and Allison, 1948), but the significance was based 
on one subseries where the subjects and target drawings were located in 
the same building. 

J. B. Rhine considered the distance question in the early Duke exper¬ 
iments (Rhine, 1934/1973). The Pearce-Pratt experiment, described ear¬ 
lier, provides strong evidence that ESP can occur over moderate dis¬ 
tances of 100 to 250 yards with the targets and percipient in separate 
buildings. Other experiments from the early Duke period provided sig¬ 
nificant evidence of ESP over distances ranging from hundreds to 
thousands of miles (Gibson, 1937; J. B. Rhine, 1937). In the latter article, 
Rhine reported that over 4,000 runs from published and unpublished ex¬ 
periments involving distances from 70 to 3,000 miles resulted in a mean 
ESP score that was significantly above chance. 

Subsequent demonstrations of ESP occurring over long distances 
have primarily involved subjects who had achieved high scores in pre¬ 
liminary testing or reported frequent spontaneous psi experiences. Un¬ 
doubtedly the most extensively tested of these was a physician named 
Carlo Marchesi, who recorded his responses in Yugoslavia and mailed 
them to Duke, where the targets had been located (McMahan and Bates, 
1954; McMahan and Rhine, 1947; Rhine and Humphrey, 1942). The re¬ 
sults for all three experiments combined were significantly positive, but 
the magnitude of the effect was not impressive given the large number of 
runs (1,352) completed. A number of shorter card-guessing experiments 
with selected subjects also produced significant results involving psi- 
hitting (Anderson, 1959a; Mangan, 1957; Nielsen, 1956a), psi-missing 
(Osis, 1955), psi-hitting and psi-missing (Osis and Pienaar, 1956), and 
replicated displacement effects (Mangan, 1955, 1957). A South African 
subject was repeatedly able to wake himself up at times randomly selected 
by a friend 900 miles away (Bleksley, 1963). 

A transcontinental card-guessing experiment with a selected subject 
that produced chance results was reported by Osis (1956), and we do not 
know how many other nonsignificant results simply were never pub¬ 
lished. Distance experiments with groups of subjects have produced 
mixed results (e.g., Fisk and West, 1957; Green, 1965; Kahn, 1952; 
Michie and West, 1957; J. B. Rhine, 1962; Skibinsky, 1950). Nonetheless, 
the success of long-distance card-guessing experiments in the published 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


75 


literature compares quite favorably in terms of significant outcomes to the 
success of short-distance experiments from the same literature. 

The number of long-distance free-response experiments is relatively 
small. The only long-distance drawing experiments, outside of 
Carington’s and Schmeidler’s work discussed above, were successful en¬ 
deavors by Rush and Jensen (1949) and the recent experiments in “remote 
viewing” (e.g., Puthoff and Targ, 1976). Probably the most exotic of the 
significant distance series was a dream study where the agents were the 
audience at a rock concert being held several miles from the percipients 
(Krippner, Honorton, and Ullman, 1973; see also Krippner, Honorton, 
Ullman, Masters, and Houston, 1971). However, a transcontinental 
dream experiment with a single sender submitted to “sensory bombard¬ 
ment” was less successful (Foulkes, Belvedere, Masters, Houston, 
Krippner, Honorton, and Ullman, 1972). 

The most ambitious attempt to transcend the distance barrier through 
ESP was by astronaut Edgar Mitchell on the Apollo 14 moon flight 
(Mitchell, 1971). During six rest periods, Mitchell was to send random 
sequences of 25 ESP symbols to four persons on earth, all of whom had 
been preselected for psychic ability. Unfortunately, Mitchell was not al¬ 
ways able to send at the proper time, and two of the transmissions were 
missed entirely. This threw off the time correspondences between sending 
and receiving, and it required some arbitrary decisions to be made about 
which guess sequences to match with which target sequences for analysis. 
The precise analyses decided upon are too complex to describe here. 
Suffice it to say that matching in terms of sequence, e.g., first guess 
sequence with first target sequence, produced marginally significant psi- 
hitting, while analyses based more upon the temporal proximity of the 
sequences produced significant psi-missing. These results, being of a 
highly post hoc nature, must be interpreted with even greater than usual 
caution. 

2.1.1b. Comparison of Distances. Although ESP may or may not be a 
possible means of future communication for space voyagers, the evidence 
does indicate that ESP can function over long distances. However, this 
does not mean that ESP functions equally well at all distances. The more 
interesting question of whether ESP effects are attenuated with distance 
has yet to be addressed in this chapter. 

Generally speaking, the early Duke work revealed little evidence of 
decline with distance (J. B. Rhine, 1937). In the Pearce-Pratt series, 
however, the mean ESP score was significantly lower at 250 yards than at 
100 yards, but outstanding single run scores were obtained at both dis¬ 
tances (Rhine and Pratt, 1954). Also, Gibson (1937), who gave GESP 
tests to three unselected subjects in the same building and at distances up 



76 


John Palmer 


to 2,000 miles, reported substantial declines with distance in all three 
cases. 

In the nonsignificant transoceanic experiment reported by Osis 
(1956), the subject, who was located in Germany, achieved very high 
scores on control runs he conduct by himself at home. While having 
subjects test themselves without supervision is not accepted procedure in 
parapsychological research, Osis defended the validity of these results by 
citing a significant negative correlation between the daily scores on the 
short-distance and long-distance runs. Since the subject did not know his 
long-distance scores when he completed the corresponding short-distance 
runs, the attenuation-with-distance interpretation retains some plausibil¬ 
ity, although this reasoning implies that some psi was operating at the long 
distance. 

In a more sophisticated experiment, Osis and Fahler (1965) manipu¬ 
lated distance and time (precognition vs. clairvoyance) in a 2 x 2 factorial 
design. Subjects were members of a Finnish psychical research society. 
Multivariate analysis of variance was used to evaluate not only direct hits 
but also +1 and -1 displacements. The result was a complicated interac¬ 
tion affecting primarily the -1 scores. None of the simple effects 
suggested a straightforward decline of scoring level with distance. Some 
kind of decline with distance was also reported by Turner (1965), but I was 
only able to find an abstract of the report. 

Of the experiments discussed above, those of Gibson (1937), Osis 
(1956), Rhine and Pratt (1954), and Turner (1965) reveal a significant de¬ 
cline with distance. All involved research with selected subjects. No 
studies reveal comparable incline effects. However, in each experiment 
where a significant decline effect was found, other uncontrolled variables 
could have been responsible for the effect. Perhaps the most important of 
these factors was that subjects were aware of the target locations. This 
procedure allows psychological effects to be confounded with distance 
effects, e.g., the subject may lose confidence if he thinks the target is far 
away from him, and the decline effect may be attributable to this loss of 
confidence. Karlis Osis attempted to circumvent this problem in an elabo¬ 
rate series of card-guessing experiments with subjects restricted to per¬ 
sons who had shown evidence of ESP ability in previous testing (Osis and 
Turner, 1968; Osis, Turner, and Carlson, 1971). In the first experiment, 
senders were located in New York, Los Angeles, and Sydney, Australia, 
with the percipients scattered throughout the United States, but mostly in 
the East. Subjects did not know which target location they were aiming 
for on any particular run. Complex multivariate techniques again were 
used to evaluate the results. The only evidence of significant decline 
effects were on two measures of +1 displacement (see p. 198). 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


77 


Recognizing that this post hoc finding required replication, Osis 
undertook two confirmatory experiments. In each of these, a sender 
traveled from New York to Sydney and back, with intermediate stops in 
Paris and New Delhi. Again, subjects were kept “blind” as to the location 
of the sender on any particular run. In the first replication experiment, the 
decline effect was replicated on one of the two +1 measures, while in the 
second experiment it was replicated in neither. Given the large number 
of potential relationships from which this one finding was selected, sup¬ 
port for the decline-with-distance hypothesis was marginal at best in the 
Osis-Turner experiments. 

2.1.1c. Conclusion. Generally speaking, the experimental evidence 
indicates that ESP can occur at great distances and does not decline with 
distance. These findings do not fit well with most hypotheses that physical 
energies mediate the transmission of extrasensory information. Indeed, 
the information transmission model itself may be erroneous, a point I will 
return to at the end of the chapter. 

On the other hand, it would be unwise to form any final conclusions 
at this point. Despite their methodological shortcomings, some studies 
have shown a significant decline with distance and none have shown a 
significant incline. A possible reason for the failure of the Osis-Turner 
experiments was that all the distances were so long that there was not 
enough variability to allow significant distance effects to consistently 
occur above the noise abundant in all ESP data. Another possibility is 
that ESP information triggers neural receptors in an “all-or-none” fashion 
provided that a critical threshold level of physical energy is received, in 
which case we might not expect a decline of scores with distance, even 
though there is a continuous decline in the strength of the carrier energy. 
There are a number of conceptual problems not discussed in this section 
that any physical theory of extrasensory transmission would have to solve 
before we could take it seriously, but the best attitude at present is still an 
open mind. 


2.1.2. Precognition: ESP of the Future 

It seemed natural to Rhine that since ESP could overcome distance it 
could overcome time as well. Instances of such “precognition” frequently 
were recorded in the spontaneous case literature, and informal testing 
with some of his star subjects further convinced Rhine that ESP could 
transcend the time barrier. 

2.1.2a. Evidence for Precognition. The first formal experiment to 
provide evidence for precognition was again the drawing experiment of 
Carington (1940a,b), who found that his subjects often would draw pictures 



78 


John Palmer 


closely corresponding to targets for later sessions, targets that had not yet 
been chosen. Tyrrell (1936) tested a highly talented subject who had 
shown success in previous clairvoyance experiments with a mechanical 
box device. In the precognition experiment, the subject opened one of 
five lids immediately before Tyrrell activated a circuit that randomly 
selected a target and caused a light to appear in the corresponding box. 
After 2,255 trials, she accumulated a rate of success giving odds of several 
hundred thousand to one against chance. 

In 1938, Rhine reported results of a series of experiments with 49 
subjects, 32 of whom were grade school children (Rhine, 1938b). Vari¬ 
ations of the basic DT and matching tests were used. In the DT tests, for 
example, subjects recorded their guesses on record sheets. Immediately 
thereafter, the experimenter shuffled a deck of ESP cards to determine 
the target order. Although the mean score per run was only 5.14, this 
result was highly significant for the total of 4,523 runs completed by the 
subjects. 

A concern that has continued to plague precognition researchers to 
the present day is that the experimenter might be using some other form of 
psi (either ESP in the present time or psychokinesis [PK]) to determine 
the target order in such a way that it will significantly match the percip¬ 
ient’s guesses. When target orders were generated by shuffling decks of 
cards, this became known as the “psychic shuffle.” One likely mechanism 
of the “psychic shuffle” in precognition tests is that the experimenter uses 
unconscious ESP to stop shuffling at the time when the order of cards 
most closely corresponds to the subject’s pattern of calling the symbols. 
The plausibility of the “psychic shuffle” as a counterexplanation of precog¬ 
nition results was demonstrated in an experiment where subject and ex¬ 
perimenter both shuffled decks of cards and found the resulting sequences 
to be significantly related (Rhine, Smith, and Woodruff, 1938). In a later 
precognition experiment, Rhine (1941a) attempted to circumvent this 
problem by having target orders determined by mechanical shuffling of 
the cards. Although today this procedure would not be considered a very 
good way of ruling out PK, it did have the advantage of assuring a more 
random target sequence than likely was obtained by hand shuffling. A 
matching test was chosen for this experiment, so only the order of the 5 
key cards had to be rigorously randomized. The subjects were 19 adults 
and 5 children, who completed a total of 2,108 runs. Prior testing had 
indicated that the children tended to score above chance and the adults 
below chance on precognition tests. This pattern was significantly con¬ 
firmed for each group. 

Unfortunately, not all precognition experiments had been this suc¬ 
cessful. Nevertheless, in the appendix to his 1941 report, Rhine sum- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


79 


marized the results of all known precognition experiments conducted at 
his laboratory and elsewhere up to June 1939. Despite the psi-missing in 
some experiments, he found the overall results were significantly above 
chance. Using a statistical test that treats the results of individual experi¬ 
mental groups in terms of their mean deviation from chance regardless of 
sign, the probability was 10 -12 . For a discussion of the early precognition 
work, see Rhine (1945a). 

Since 1940, parapsychologists have continued to use the precognition 
technique for ESP testing, albeit rarely in experiments as massive as 
those described above. Impressive results have continued to appear in 
these shorter experiments when testing was restricted to preselected sub¬ 
jects. A number of such experiments began to appear in the literature in 
the 1950s, specifically those referred to in the last section on distance 
effects. By this time, a more advanced method, which made use of random 
number tables, had been developed at Rhine’s laboratory for generating 
target sequences (see Chapter 1). Significant results were obtained with 
this technique by several selected subjects (Anderson, 1959a; Mangan, 
1955, 1957; Nielsen, 1956a; Osis, 1955). 

Highly significant results with selected subjects have been obtained 
more recently by Helmut Schmidt using a machine that generates random 
target sequences through the principle of decay of a radioactive source 
(Schmidt, 1969b; Schmidt and Pantas, 1972; see Chapter 1 for a discussion 
of this apparatus). A possible alternate interpretation for some of these 
results is that the subjects might have been using PK to influence the 
target generation of the machine to coincide with their guesses, and 
Schmidt (1969b) presents supplementary data suggesting that this may 
have happened with at least one subject. Significant precognitive psi- 
hitting by selected subjects with one of Schmidt’s machines also has been 
reported by Haraldsson (1970), Honorton (1971a) and by Kelly and 
Kanthamani (1972). 

The use of the precognition technique in free-response testing has 
been less frequent but equally successful. In two eight-night dream exper¬ 
iments, the British psychic Malcolm Bessent was asked to dream about 
events or slides he would experience the next day. He was awakened 
during the night to give dream reports, but the target was never selected 
until the following morning. In each experiment, outside judges were able 
to match target and dream reports for the eight nights to a degree signifi¬ 
cantly better than chance (Krippner, Ullman, and Honorton, 1971; Kripp- 
ner, Honorton, and Ullman, 1972). 

Puthoff and Targ (1976) asked a professional photographer named 
Hella Hammid, who previously had been successful in clairvoyance tests 
with the “remote-viewing” technique, to try it precognitively. Only four 



80 


John Palmer 


trials were completed, but an outside judge was able to correctly match all 
targets and descriptions. The correspondences were qualitatively quite 
impressive, somewhat more so than those obtained with the clairvoyance 
procedure. Successful precognitive remote viewing also was found with 
two female college students (Bisaha and Dunne, 1977). 

As might be expected, precognition experiments with unselected sub¬ 
jects have been less consistent in providing significant overall deviations 
from chance, although many of the studies I will cite later in which sig¬ 
nificant relationships were found between ESP scores and predictor vari¬ 
ables employed precognition procedures. In perhaps the largest precog¬ 
nition experiment with unselected subjects, close to 30,000 readers of 
Maclean’s magazine completed a ten-trial precognition test by filling out 
and mailing back postcards placed in the magazine (J. B. Rhine, 1962). 
Separate random target orders were generated for each subject by com¬ 
puter. The overall mean score was significantly below chance. 

2.12b. Precognition versus Clairvoyance. Of the several studies 
where precognition and clairvoyance tests have been systematically com¬ 
pared within subjects, only three provided significant differences, two of 
which favored precognition. Freeman (1962) gave seven college students 
alternate DT and precognition runs over several sessions. They scored 
significantly above chance on precognition and close to chance on DT. 
The difference was significant, although it is unclear how consistent the 
effect was across subjects. Furthermore, demand characteristics favoring 
precognition were introduced for other purposes, and these may have 
been responsible for the effect. The British psychologist Robert Thouless 
(1949) tested himself with DT and precognition methods in counterbal¬ 
anced order over several sessions. Contrary to his initial expectation, he 
scored significantly above chance on one of two precognition tests and 
significantly below chance on a DT test. He attributed this result to the 
greater novelty of the precognition tests which sustained his interest 
longer than the DT method; he had practiced DT extensively in the past. 
Buzby (1963) reported significant positive scoring on clairvoyance but not 
precognition among a group of 33 college students, the difference being 
significant. Overall results for a second group, reported in more detail 
later (Buzby, 1967b), showed no significant difference. 

A number of other experiments have shown no significant within- 
subject differences between the two methods nor any consistent direc¬ 
tional trends (Beloff and Bate, 1970; Dean, 1972; Fahler, 1957; Freeman, 
1969a; McMahan and Rhine, 1947; Nash and Nash, 1968; Osis and 
Fahler, 1965; Zenhausern, Stanford, and Esposito, 1977). However, only 
the Beloff, Osis, and Zenhausern experiments controlled the order of 
clairvoyance and precognition trials within sessions. Zenhausern et al. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


81 


(1977) did find a significant interaction between type of test and sex, with 
females scoring significantly higher on clairvoyance than on precognition. 
Comparisons using between-subjects designs simply have not been re¬ 
ported in the literature. 

2.1.2c. Comparison of Time Intervals. Just as it was meaningful to 
ask whether ESP scores decline with distance, it is meaningful to ask if 
scores on precognition tests decline as the time interval between the 
actual test and target selection increases. Hutchinson (1940) reported sig¬ 
nificantly lower scores on runs checked 10 days after the test than on runs 
checked 1 day after the test. Scoring on the 1-day runs was significantly 
positive. However, the 10-day runs were usually the last runs subjects 
completed in the session, so the results might reflect nothing more than a 
within-session decline effect. Also, subjects knew in advance which runs 
would be checked at which time, introducing possible demand charac¬ 
teristics. In an earlier series where 1-day and 10-day intervals were com¬ 
pared and some effort was made at counterbalancing the design, no sig¬ 
nificant difference was found, and the means in both conditions were 
close to chance. Turner (1965) found no significant differences among 
precognition scores checked 1, 2, or 3 weeks after the test. 

The only other studies where time intervals have been compared in 
any systematic way were correspondence experiments with individual 
subjects. Osis (1955) found no significant difference between scores on 
runs checked within 1 week of testing and those checked 1 month after 
testing. How many days he waited was decided arbitrarily for each run. 
Overall scores in this experiment were significantly below chance. A 
subject tested by Anderson (1959a) actually scored better on runs checked 
1 year later than on those checked only 5 days later. The difference was 
not quite significant, but significant psi-hitting was restricted to the 1-year 
runs. In neither of these studies were subjects informed at the time of 
testing which runs would be scored when. 

2.7.2 d. Conclusion. Research with selected subjects provides a strong 
case in support of the conclusion that ESP under certain circumstances 
can provide information about events that do not yet exist at the time of 
the response. The philosophical implications of precognition are obvi¬ 
ously rather mind-boggling, but a discussion of these is beyond the al¬ 
ready ubiquitous scope of this chapter. The evidence for precognition is 
particularly impressive methodologically, because by definition there is 
no way that the subject can be guided by sensory cues, since the target 
sequence does not exist at the time he makes his responses. The possibil¬ 
ity that all precognition data can be explained by other forms of psi such 
as PK has not been completely ruled out, but it is rather strained in those 
experiments where target orders were derived from random number ta- 



82 


John Palmer 


bles and entry points were determined in a complex manner. Precognition 
procedures have been no less successful than clairvoyance procedures in 
group experiments with nongifted subjects. There is no evidence that 
precognition scores decline as the time interval between testing and target 
generation increases, but more research on this topic with high-scoring 
subjects is needed. Other data relevant to the precognition issue are dis¬ 
cussed in section 6.1.1. 


2.2. Forced-Choice Target Material: Variety Is the Spice of Psi 

2.2.1. Type of Target: It's All a Matter of Preference 

Parapsychologists have revealed no lack of creativity in selecting 
types of target material for forced-choice ESP experiments. Not surpris¬ 
ingly, a number of experimenters have systematically compared scores on 
two types of targets using within-subject designs. Although subjects fre¬ 
quently score quite differently on these target types, the nature of these 
trends by no means has been clear or consistent, at least on the surface. 

22.1a. Physical Dimensions. Size of the target stimulus is a case in 
point. Pratt and Woodruff (1939) found that subjects scored significantly 
above chance on an STM test when the ESP symbols were made very 
small, but close to chance when the symbols were of normal size. How¬ 
ever, this effect could not be replicated significantly in a second experi¬ 
ment. In both experiments, subjects knew which type of symbol was 
being used on some runs but not others, and this variable had no signifi¬ 
cant effect on the results. In another matching experiment L. E. Rhine (1937) 
found that grade school children scored equally well on various sizes of 
symbols. To complete the cycle, the French biologist Chauvin (1961) 
found that in a clairvoyance guessing game where targets were the num¬ 
bers 1 and 2, he and four children from his family scored significantly 
below chance when the numbers were very small and near chance when 
they were of normal size. Subjects did not know the size of symbol on 
particular trials, although they knew symbol size was a variable in the 
design. 

Pratt and Woodruff were able to explain the findings from their first 
experiment as a tendency for subjects to score significantly only on 
targets they had not responded to in previous testing. Many of Pratt’s 
subjects in his first series had prior experience with normal-sized ESP 
symbols, while Rhine’s subjects apparently had not. Chauvin and his 
children had been tested before with numerical stimuli, but the micro¬ 
scopic stimuli were probably new to them. This pattern of results suggests 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


83 


that, at least as far as stimulus size is concerned, novelty has the effect of 
increasing the magnitude of ESP scoring, but the direction of the effect 
depends upon other factors. However, in an experiment designed to sys¬ 
tematically manipulate subjects’ familiarity with type of target (symbol or 
position of symbol in a row of five spaces), novelty was found to have no 
effect (Hallett, 1952). 

Other variations of target type where the emphasis has been on the 
physical attributes of the targets as opposed to their meaning or impact for 
the subjects have produced mixed results which so far have contributed 
little to our understanding of the ESP process. MacFarland and George 
(1937) found that significant psi-hitting among 13 college students was not 
adversely affected when the ESP symbols were distorted in shape. In a 
series of classroom GESP experiments in which grade school children 
also achieved significant positive scoring overall, Van Busschbach (1956) 
initially found higher scoring when the targets were colors or symbols as 
opposed to words, but this effect vanished when the order of run types 
was counterbalanced. Differences in target type (generally words vs. 
symbols) entered into complex interactions in classroom ESP tests of 
grade school and high school students conducted by Freeman (1963, 1965, 
1966b, 1967, 1968, 1969b, 1970a, b, 1972b), but no significant main effects 
were reported. 

In an experiment involving numerical stimuli, Nash and Nash (1959) 
reported nonsignificant scoring when the targets were addition problems 
that subjects had to solve (e.g., the target is “1 + 2” and the correct 
response is “3”), while significant psi-missing occurred when the targets 
were the numbers themselves (e.g., “3”). The difference is significant by a 
C.R. analysis computed by the reviewer. Subjects were unaware that 
addition problems were included in the target sequence. A possible ex¬ 
planation of the less significant scoring on the addition problems is that 
subjects were picking up on the actual numbers rather than their sum, but 
no direct evidence of this is reported. Translation also may have been a 
factor in an experiment reported by Krippner (1966). Children who were 
asked to respond by circling the appropriate word on a clairvoyance test 
scored significantly above chance when the targets were words but non- 
significantly when the targets were pictures representing the words. 

2.2.1b. Psychological Dimensions. There are some indications from 
the literature that subjects may be more sensitive to the personal meaning 
of target stimuli than to their physical form. Perhaps the most compelling 
single illustration of this point is an experiment with a single subject in 
which targets consisting of descriptions or pictures of people were com¬ 
pared with blank cards onto which images of these people had been hal¬ 
lucinated by a hypnotized person. Untreated blank cards served as con- 



84 


John Palmer 


trol targets. Significant positive scoring occurred on the treated blank 
cards and on the three experimental types of stimuli combined. Unfortu¬ 
nately, no comparisons with the control stimuli were possible (Lucas and 
Roll, 1973). 

Meaningful stimuli do not always produce psi-hitting, however. 
Skibinsky (1950) found in three GESP distance series that overall signifi¬ 
cant psi-missing occurred on runs where the targets were names of the 
subjects’ family members as compared to slightly above-chance scoring 
with normal ESP symbols. The difference was significant in the three 
series pooled. Unfortunately, subjects probably filled out the name run 
first in all sessions, introducing a confounding order effect. Van de Castle 
(1953) found that a single subject scored very significantly above chance 
on conventional types of targets (e.g., ESP symbols and numbers) but 
slightly below chance on drawings that she made herself and that were 
meaningful to her. Nash and Nash (1968) found that male college students 
scored significantly above chance on word targets that they selected by 
group vote as representing “favorite things” and significantly below 
chance on number targets selected by the experimeter. Freeman (1961), 
however, found no mean difference among college students between 
scores on ESP symbols and target objects they selected themselves as 
having emotional significance for them. (We will return to this study 
later.) Other experiments in which target material of an emotional nature 
was used without the subject’s knowledge have revealed appropriate ef¬ 
fects on ESP scoring. These experiments will be discussed in section 
5.1.2. 

Rao conducted a series of experiments in which subjects were asked 
to select five symbols to which they had a “favorable emotional attach¬ 
ment.” Scoring on these symbols was then compared to scoring on con¬ 
ventional ESP symbols in the same session. In the first experiment, six 
female subjects selected on the basis of high scores in preliminary testing 
scored above chance on “choice” symbols and below chance on ESP 
symbols, the difference being significant (Rao, 1962). However, in a sec¬ 
ond experiment using the STM technique, five unselected subjects pro¬ 
duced a significant reversal of this effect (Rao, 1963a).* Unlike the earlier 
experiment, subjects did not know which type of target they were guess¬ 
ing on any given trial. Two further STM experiments failed to produce 
any overall difference, but post hoc analyses revealed a reversal of the 
trend between the first and second runs of the session in each case (Rao, 
1963c). The reversal was significant in the second experiment and ap¬ 
proached significance in the first. 


*Here and elsewhere in the chapter, “significant reversal” means that the second effect was 
independently significant, not necessarily that it differed significantly from the first effect. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


85 


Another series of experiments that has continued this pattern of in¬ 
consistent within-subject differences involved comparisons of targets 
composed of English words and words in a foreign language (Hindi or 
Telugu) unknown to the subjects. Kanthamani (1965b) found that subjects 
scored above chance on English words and below chance on Hindi words. 
The difference was significant in two of three experiments and ap¬ 
proached two-tailed significance in the third. However, subjects scored 
significantly higher on Hindi than on English words when she attempted 
to adopt a different method of presenting targets to the subjects (Kantha¬ 
mani, 1965a). 

Rao (1964b), on the other hand, found in an STM test that his male 
subjects scored significantly higher on Telugu than on English words in 
each of two experiments, while females reversed the trend. The effect 
was strongest when the target and key cards were in the same language. 
An earlier experiment produced mixed results (Rao, 1963b). Seventy-five 
high-school students completed two standard clairvoyance runs, one with 
each type of target. The initial analysis produced results generally in line 
with those of his later experiments described above. However, Rao noted 
that while his subjects had always completed the Telugu run first (a pro¬ 
cedure that he recognized had confounded target type and order), he had 
always selected targets for the English run first. When he went back and 
compared the Telugu responses with the English targets, and vice versa, 
the results confirmed Kanthamani’s finding (i.e., overall higher scores on 
English words) to a significant degree. Another experiment, however, 
produced a nonsignificant trend in the opposite direction from the pre¬ 
viously found pattern (Rao, 1965a). Finally, Sailaja (1965) reported in 
abstract form an experiment with five subjects of unspecified sex who 
scored significantly higher on Telugu than on English targets, but an 
additional subject later failed to confirm the effect. 

Two other experiments involving major procedural variations pro¬ 
duced no differences in scoring on English and Telugu words. In one of 
these, the subjects were Indian students who knew both languages 
(Sailaja and Rao, 1973). In the other, ordinary ESP symbols were com¬ 
pared to ESP symbols incorporated into artistic drawings of African 
masks. Subjects scored significantly higher on the mask targets, suggest¬ 
ing that targets which are aesthetically pleasing to subjects may facilitate 
psi-hitting (Rao, 1964a). Ten of the subjects in this experiment were given 
a language ESP test in addition to the symbol test. Scores on the two tests 
were negatively correlated to a very high degree across subjects. It is 
unclear whether the order of the tests was counterbalanced. Freeman 
(1961), in a study mentioned earlier, found a similar significant negative 
correlation, in this case between scores on ESP symbols and on emotion¬ 
ally toned objects. 



86 


John Palmer 


22.1c. The “Preferential Effect.” These last two findings illustrate, 
perhaps more clearly than any we have discussed so far, the tendency for 
subjects to score differentially on two types of target material when they 
are combined in a single experiment. In these two experiments, subjects 
were not consistent with respect to which target type was associated with 
psi-hitting, in contrast to those experiments where one target type pro¬ 
duced a significantly higher mean score than the other. In both cases, the 
customary finding is for psi-hitting to occur on one target type and a 
comparable degree of psi-missing on the other, a phenomenon that Rao 
(1965a) called the “differential effect.” He earlier had labeled this the 
“preferential effect,” assuming that the psi-hitting occurred on whichever 
target type the subject preferred. However, the fact that subjects some¬ 
times scored higher on ESP symbols than their “choice” symbols (e.g., 
Rao, 1963a) caused him to introduce the more neutral term. It should be 
mentioned that only in Rao’s first experiment (Rao, 1962) was the subject 
aware what type of card he was aiming for on a particular trial, so only in 
this experiment would we expect the psychological consequences of pref¬ 
erence to vary as a function of target type. In this experiment, subjects 
scored significantly higher on the supposedly preferred target type. Also, 
in most of the studies where emotional and “choice” targets were com¬ 
pared, there was no check to see if subjects actually preferred the 
“choice” targets. 

Sanders (1962) tested the preferential hypothesis directly by alternat¬ 
ing runs in which subjects responded by calling out their guesses with runs 
in which they wrote down their guesses. There was no main effect for 
type of response, but in each of two series the subjects scored signifi¬ 
cantly higher with the method they preferred. Schmeidler (1946b) had sub¬ 
jects alternately guess symbol and color of ESP cards in a clairvoyance 
test. She found that subjects scored significantly better on calls represent¬ 
ing the particular symbols or colors they claimed to prefer. In a later 
experiment, the target pool consisted of pictures that varied on four at¬ 
tributes, and subjects were asked to guess on each trial which attributes 
were present in the target (Schmeidler and Lewis, 1969). On the first four 
trials, subjects had to guess all four attributes, while on the second four 
they were told two of them and were asked to guess the other two. 
Afterward, they were asked which procedure they preferred. Subjects 
scored significantly higher on the preferred procedure than on the non¬ 
preferred procedure, the scores on the latter actually falling significantly 
below chance. An interesting secondary finding was that subjects scored 
significantly higher on the nonpreferred targets when the results were 
analyzed for +1 displacements. Schmeidler suggested that “impatient” 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


87 


subjects may have been looking ahead while engaged in the nonpreferred 
task, causing them to direct their psi-hitting tendencies toward the next 
trial in the sequence. Finally, Hebda, Velissaris, and Velissaris (1974) 
reported that subjects scored significantly higher with a deck composed of 
cards of a type (e.g., ESP cards, animal cards) they preferred than with a 
type they did not prefer. 

2.2.1d. Conclusion. Evidence is beginning to accumulate which sup¬ 
ports the perfectly reasonable proposition that when subjects are allowed 
to choose which of two methods of response they prefer in an ESP exper¬ 
iment, they will score better on the one they prefer. Although this “prefer¬ 
ential hypothesis” has been validated primarily with respect to response 
type rather than target type, it offers our best hope to date of integrating a 
very messy and inconsistent body of data concerning the effect of target 
type on ESP scoring in forced-choice experiments. So far, the applicabil¬ 
ity of the preferential hypothesis has only been demonstrated in situations 
where subjects each completed two types of tasks. The hypothesis that 
sensitivity to subject preferences can help guarantee overall psi-hitting in 
single-task experiments, although plausible, remains a question for 
further research. 


2.2.2. Multiple Aspect Targets: Getting the Whole Picture 

Several experiments in the parapsychological literature have in¬ 
volved targets that differ simultaneously on two or more attributes. An 
example of such target material is a deck of ordinary playing cards, which 
differ in terms of suit and number. The most interesting question raised by 
the use of multiple-aspect targets is whether subjects tend to score more 
total or exact hits than would be predicted from their scoring rates on the 
component elements. In other words, do subjects respond to such targets 
as wholes or as a series of independent parts? 

Foster (1952) reviewed five early ESP experiments that achieved 
overall significantly positive scoring. In four of these series, subjects 
scored significantly higher on exact hits than would be expected on the 
basis of their scores on the separate attributes. (This number of expected 
exact hits, based on scores for separate attributes, hereafter will be called 
the “adjusted expectancy.”) Unfortunately, these experiments were con¬ 
ducted in the early 20th century when controls against sensory cues were 
not as adequate as they are today, and one of the four experiments show¬ 
ing the effect was by S. G. Soal (see Sec. 1.3.2). 

In a more recent series of experiments, the gifted subject Bill Del- 
more consistently scored a highly significant excess of exact hits com- 



88 


John Palmer 


pared to the adjusted expectancy on playing cards using both standard 
clairvoyance and psychic shuffle methods (Kanthamani and Kelly, 1974a, 
b, 1975). Another subject tested with double-aspect targets (form and 
color, each with p = 1/5) also scored significantly above chance on exact 
hits but, unlike Delmore, her exact hit total was not quite significant when 
I compared it to the adjusted expectancy (Mangan, 1957). There was 
possibly evidence of excess exact hits in dual-aspect group experiments 
by Lancaster (1959) and Warcollier (1962), but the reports I have seen are 
only brief abstracts. In an experiment with unselected subjects involving 
triple-aspect targets, Schmeidler and Lewis (1968) found a significantly 
high number of exact hits, while scoring on the separate attributes was 
close to chance. This effect was not found in a later experiment with 
four-aspect targets, however (Schmeidler and Lewis, 1969). 

Although the above results provide indirect evidence for holistic 
“perception” of ESP targets, other explanations cannot be ruled out. 
When Delmore guessed the cards using ordinary clairvoyance methods, 
he did not make unitary responses. On the contrary, he tended to guess 
the number first and then the suit (Kanthamani and Kelly, 1974a). His 
pattern was to guess the number correctly to a highly significant degree 
but only to get the suit right if the number had been right. Schmeidler"s 
subjects were required by the nature of the task to guess the attributes 
successively rather than holistically. Her subjects were given immediate 
feedback after guessing each attribute, leading her to suggest that the 
excess of direct hits may have resulted from heightened motivation or 
positive affect at the time of later guesses if guesses on previous attributes 
had been successful. 

One negative study with respect to exact hits as compared to attri¬ 
bute hits was reported by Hallett (1952), who used double-aspect targets 
consisting of the identity of ESP symbols and their locations on rows of 
five spaces. Scoring was positive on position and negative on symbol, the 
difference reaching significance in each of two experiments. The number 
of exact hits was close to chance. 

2.2.2a. Conclusion. The general pattern among those few studies 
where multiple-aspect targets were used and appropriate analyses re¬ 
ported is for subjects to score at least as high or higher on the total target 
than on any of its primary attributes. Such results suggest either that such 
targets are perceived holistically (even if the overt responses are fragmen¬ 
tary) or that a correct guess on one attribute somehow facilitates correct 
guesses on other attributes. It may be that both processes occur in 
different cases, and other factors such as psychological set may also play 
a role. These issues, of course, must be resolved by future research. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


89 


2.3. Test-taking Strategies: In Search of the Magic Formula 

Subjects are usually left to their own devices when it comes to the 
best strategy for successful card guessing. There have been a few experi¬ 
ments, but only a few, where experimenters have attempted to manipulate 
the manner in which the subject guesses the targets on a particular type of 
test. Most of these have involved the subject’s rate of guessing. 

23.1. Rate of Responding: The Tortoise and the Hare 

Stuart attempted to establish subjects’ preferred tempos by having 
them tap a pencil in three-quarter time. Then a series of trials were ad¬ 
ministered in which each subject had to make his calls correspond to the 
beat of a metronome. The metronome was set at different tempos, some¬ 
times at the subjects’ preferred tempo and other times either above or 
below it. In each of three exploratory series involving both BT and STM 
procedures, subjects scored significantly above chance at the preferred 
tempo and near chance at the other tempos. In each series, the difference 
was significant (Stuart, 1938). However, results of a more systematic 
confirmatory experiment, although in the predicted direction, were not 
significant (Stuart and Smith, 1942). Hebda et al. (1974) and Nash and 
Nash (1958) also found no significant correlation between ESP scores and 
rate of responding with unselected subjects. 

Other experiments suggest that slower calling rates may facilitate 
psi-hitting. Van de Castle (1953) had a subject call each five-trial segment 
of the run at a different tempo, the order being varied across runs. The 
intertrial intervals ranged from 30 seconds to 90 seconds or more. Overall 
scoring was significantly positive, but there was a significant linear de¬ 
cline in scores as response rate increased. Osis and Pienaar (1956) re¬ 
ported the results of GESP tests with two subjects, each tested with two 
response rates in counterbalanced order. The trials (including intertrial 
intervals) lasted either 5 seconds or 20 seconds. There was significant 
psi-hitting at the slow rate and significant psi-missing at the fast rate. 
Among a group of ten subjects preselected for high ESP ability by screen¬ 
ing tests, Tart (1976a) found that those who apparently worked most 
slowly on a confirmatory GESP test with trial-by-trial feedback obtained 
the highest scores. The particular agent-experimenter used with the high- 
scoring subjects in this experiment may be a confounding factor, however. 
Finally, Stuart (1947) found that students who felt “rushed and inhibited” 
in a classroom free-response drawing experiment scored significantly 
above chance on the target for the next trial, and significantly higher on 
this target than did the other subjects in the class. The overall results for 



90 


John Palmer 


the class as a whole were below chance on direct targets, but it is not 
reported how much this was contributed by the subjects who felt rushed. 
However, Heyman and Schmeidler (1967) found that subjects described 
as “dynamic-hasty” on a test of one’s orientation to time (see Sec. 3.2.3d) 
scored significantly above chance on +1 displacement when asked to 
respond slowly (one call every ten seconds). 

2.3.1a. Conclusion. There is suggestive evidence that slower re¬ 
sponse rates facilitate psi-hitting in forced-choice ESP tests. But since 
this evidence comes exclusively from a handful of selected subjects, its 
generality is quite questionable. Stuart’s drawing experiment suggests the 
hypothesis that lower scores resulting from rushed responses may be a 
by-product of +1 displacement, although Heyman’s results suggest that 
individual differences must be considered as well. 


23.2. Being Spontaneous: Impulsivity Pays Off 

A strong impression shared by many experienced parapsychologists 
is that an attitude of spontaneity during an ESP test is conducive to good 
scoring. Subjects often are instructed to adopt such an orientation toward 
the ESP test. Is the value of such spontaneity merely a myth energized by 
the disdain many parapsychologists feel toward the excesses of 
rationalism, or is there some evidence for it? Fortunately, we have some 
data that we can turn to for at least a tentative answer. 

2.3.2a. Affectability. Stuart (1941) reanalyzed several thousand runs 
from previous clairvoyance and precognition experiments in which sub¬ 
jects had been asked to predict their scores on a run-by-run basis. He 
found that when subjects’ predictions for the first ten runs of the session 
were influenced by their scores on the immediately previous run, their 
scores in the remainder of the session tended to be lower than if their 
predictions had been more independent. Although such “affectability” in 
predicting ESP scores does not necessarily reflect a lack of spontaneity in 
actually making ESP responses, it is symptomatic of a rationalistic cogni¬ 
tive style that ordinarily would not favor spontaneity. 

23.2b. Spontaneous Card Calling. Ross, Murphy, and Schmeidler 
(1952) found that children rated as “spontaneous” on the basis of free-play 
behavior scored suggestively higher on an ESP card test than did less 
spontaneous subjects. However, the first experiment designed specifi¬ 
cally to test the spontaneity hypothesis was by Scherer (1948). In two 
experiments using two different homemade ESP testing machines, 
Scherer asked subjects to make one guess at a time and to make such 
responses only when they had a strong “hunch” that the response would 
be accurate. Various control conditions were introduced, the most com- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


91 


parable of which had the same subjects make one trial at a time in a 
“deliberate” manner. On one machine, there was a highly significant dif¬ 
ference between results in the experimental condition and the various 
control conditions, with significant psi-hitting in the former. Results with 
the second machine were in the predicted direction but not significant. 

In exploratory self-testing, Cadoret (1952) consistently found that the 
first trial with a new technique tended to yield a higher scoring rate than 
other trials. This kind of result fits in nicely with the spontaneity hypothe¬ 
sis not only because of the novelty element (e.g., Pratt and Woodruff, 
1939) but also because the first responses in a calling sequence are the 
ones least influenced by the development of sequential calling patterns. 

The effect of such calling patterns was examined more systematically 
by Stanford (1966a), who had a group of college students complete two 
precognition runs. In one run “closed decks” (always five of each symbol) 
were used, and subjects were urged to call each symbol an equal number 
of times. In the second run, “open decks” were used, and subjects were 
urged to make their calls more spontaneously. Mean deviation scores for 
the two runs did not differ significantly, but run-score variance was sig¬ 
nificantly higher for the open deck run. Similar results were subsequently 
found in three other experiments (Stanford, 1966a, 1968), two of which 
were conducted by experimenters other than Stanford. In one of these 
experiments, no calling set was given. Another experiment by Stanford 
providing indirect support for the spontaneity hypothesis is discussed in 
Sec. 3.3.1b. For an overall review, see Stanford (1975). 

Morris and Cohen (1971) gave subjects four DT runs with an “open 
set.” They found that those subjects whose responses showed the most 
“randomness,” as defined by a relatively large number of doubles in 
the call sequence, scored significantly below chance while the low- 
doubles group scored significantly above chance. 

Schouten (1975) attempted to eliminate calling patterns more directly 
by training subjects to produce more random sequences. The specific 
objective of the training was to help subjects avoid response strategies 
altogether and to make their responses more “free.” However, the training 
was not successful in boosting ESP scores. Among those subjects who 
met Schouten’s criterion for unbiased responding, there was no significant 
difference between their scores in the first (nonrandom) session and their 
scores in the session where their calls had been most random, although 
the latter scores approached significant psi-missing. Unfortunately, no 
analyses comparable to Stanford’s analysis of run-score variance were 
reported in either the Morris or Schouten experiments. 

23.2c. Imagery versus Impulse. In two DT clairvoyance experi¬ 
ments, subjects were instructed on some runs to imagine the targets 



92 


John Palmer 


visually and on other runs to “guess the first thing that comes to mind.” In 
neither case did one method or the other prove superior, nor was there 
any significant interaction with imagery ability as measured by the Betts 
QMI, despite independent evidence of psi in the data. (Honorton, Tier¬ 
ney, and Torres, 1974; Schechter, Solfvin, and McCallum, 1975). 

232d. Conclusion. The highly consistent results reported by Stan¬ 
ford suggest that a set for spontaneous calling, whether it is imposed by 
the experimenter or occurs naturally, facilitates both psi-hitting and psi- 
missing (i.e., high variance) as opposed to chance scoring. The single-trial 
results of Cadoret and Scherer, although involving psi-hitting only, can 
readily be interpreted within this framework, while the results of Morris 
and Cohen are more equivocal. If one assumes that absence of measur¬ 
able calling biases reflects such spontaneity, it should be a relatively simple 
matter to verify the generality of Stanford’s results by reanalyzing pre¬ 
viously collected data. Although there apparently was no analysis for 
run-score variance, Schouten’s experiment suggests that attempts to en¬ 
force spontaneity by extensively training subjects to call randomly is 
unlikely to be a fruitful solution. A possible reason for the failure of this 
approach is that subjects become so concerned about not responding in a 
biased manner that genuine spontaneity is sacrificed, despite the experi¬ 
menters intention. 

Generally speaking, attempting to visualize the targets does not seem 
to be more effective than more intuitive guessing strategies, even for 
“good” imagers. 


2.4. External Conditions: Manipulating Motivation 

2.4.1. Environmental Conditions: Pollution in the Laboratory 

It is natural to expect better performance on any mental task if the 
surroundings are pleasant and free from distraction. Although most 
parapsychologists consider the test environment to be important, only 
rarely has it been the object of systematic experimental manipulation. 

The first such manipulation I was able to find in the literature was by 
Bevan (1947a), who had college students complete card-guessing runs 
with the room either normally light or darkened. Subjects scored above 
chance in the light and below chance in the dark, the difference being 
significant. In GESP experiments with cats, positive ESP scores were 
significantly reduced by introducing unpleasant conditions such as excess 
light or darkness, increasing the speed of an electric fan aimed at the cats, 
rubbing the cats’ fur the wrong way, or holding them back from food 
(Osis, 1952; Osis and Foster, 1953). 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


93 


Less noxious environmental changes seem to have little effect, how¬ 
ever. Gibson and Stuart (1942) reviewed seven card-guessing series and 
found no consistent relationship between ESP scores and average 
barometric pressure for the day of the test in a nearby city. Barometric 
pressure also had no discernible effect on ESP scores of the Yugoslav 
subject Marchesi (McMahan and Rhine, 1947). Eilbert and Schmeidler 
(1950) and Reed (1959) found that playing different kinds of background 
music had no significant effect on ESP scores, in experiments where there 
was other evidence of ESP in the data. Palmer, Bogart, Jones, and 
Tart (1977) discovered that redecorating a barren-looking laboratory 
room failed to reverse a psi-missing trend in a free-response ganzfeld 
experiment. 

Pratt (1961) noted that the great majority of high-scoring ESP subjects 
reported upon in the Journal of Parapsychology up to that time did ex¬ 
ceptionally well when tested in their own homes, often better than when 
tested in the laboratory. This observation was significantly confirmed in a 
more systematic fashion in an experiment with unselected children as 
subjects (Drucker, Drewes, and Rubin, 1977). However, Eilbert and 
Schmeidler (1950) found that college students scored significantly higher 
when tested at the college than when asked to come to the experimenter's 
home to be tested. 

Finally, Woodruff (1943) introduced ESP tests into an experiment 
designed primarily to test the effect of low temperatures and oxygen 
deprivation on a motor task. College students completed five DT runs 
before and five after each of eight sessions involving various combina¬ 
tions of stress factors. Stress was not present during the tests themselves, 
however. A significant decrease in scoring following the session, as com¬ 
pared to before the session, was obtained; but it was entirely attributable 
to the control condition where the only effective variable apparently was 
boredom. 

2.4.1a. Conclusion. There are a few studies that suggest that adverse 
environmental conditions lead to decrements in ESP scoring, provided 
that they are sufficiently extreme. The possibility that ESP scores may be 
improved by testing subjects in their own homes should be explored 
further, when the requirements of the experimental design permit. 

2.4.2. Incentix 'es: Here Comes the Bribe* 

It is almost a religion among many parapsychologists that high ESP 
scores depend upon the subject being strongly motivated to achieve such 
scores (e.g., Smith and Gibson, 1941). Incredibly, there are only a few 

*This subheading was stolen from Dr. Lawrence Casler. 



94 


John Palmer 


experiments in the literature where motivational variables have been di¬ 
rectly manipulated. They can be broken down into those involving tangi¬ 
ble incentives, such as money, and intangible incentives, such as knowl¬ 
edge of results. 

2.4.2a. Tangible Incentives. In a precognition experiment with adult 
and child subjects, Rhine (1941a) offered rewards ranging from candy bars 
to $100 for high scores on some runs. There was no significant difference 
between overall scores on these runs and other runs in the experiment, 
although rewards seemed to lead to somewhat improved scores among the 
child subjects. Woodruff and Murphy (1943) assigned one group of sub¬ 
jects to a condition where they received 50 for each hit obtained in a 
second set of clairvoyance runs above what they achieved in the first set. 
Control subjects were offered no rewards. There was an increase in scor¬ 
ing rate from the first to second set of runs in the experimental group, but 
it was not significant, nor apparently was it significantly different from the 
change in the control group. Woodruff and George (1937) introduced a 
manipulation of financial incentive (this time, theater tickets) with two 
high-scoring subjects, but the results were highly ambiguous. Sprinthall 
and Lubetkin (1965) offered half of the subjects they tested $100 if they 
could get a score of 20 or higher on one BT run. Both the experimental 
and the control groups scored close to chance. Palmer and Miller (1972) 
found that a significant relationship between ESP scores and an attitude 
scale was significantly reduced when a $10 reward was offered for the 
highest score. 

2.4.2b. Feedback as Incentive. Participating in an ESP test can have 
its own intrinsic rewards, provided the subject can learn how well he or 
she scored. However, as any college student who has to wait weeks and 
weeks for an exam grade will tell you, a long delay in receiving such 
feedback can be more frustrating than receiving no feedback at all. 

Rhine (1938a) reported the results of close to 5,000 clairvoyance runs 
completed by 175 subjects in eight experiments by various investigators. 
Results were positive to a highly significant degree when subjects re¬ 
ceived immediate feedback of their scores after each run. Less extreme 
but still significant psi-missing occurred when feedback was delayed sev¬ 
eral days. The latter were experiments where decks of cards were mailed 
to subjects who made their guesses and then mailed the cards and record 
sheets back to Duke for scoring. Sometimes these latter subjects never 
received their actual scores. Cases where the scores were checked at the 
end of a session but not after each run produced chance results. Compar¬ 
able effects were found when an even larger number of precognition runs 
were broken down in this way (Rhine, 1941a). Although these results 
could be attributable to any one of a number of procedural differences, 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


95 


Rhine felt that negativism (possibly unconscious) resulting from the delay 
in feedback was the most likely interpretation. 

A somewhat better test of this hypothesis is provided by the experi¬ 
ment of Woodruff and Murphy (1943). Experimental subjects, who re¬ 
ceived feedback of their scores after each of four runs and knew before¬ 
hand that this would be the case, scored significantly higher than the 
control subjects, who received no feedback. Although feedback was 
somewhat confounded with monetary incentive in this experiment, the 
internal analyses suggest that the feedback was the most powerful factor. 

2.4.2c. Feedback as Direct Cause. Schmidt (1975) has theorized that 
feedback actually may exert a direct causal influence, backward in time, 
on ESP scores. If he is right, feedback should be psi-facilatory, but not 
because of its incentive value. 

An experiment relevant to this issue was conducted by Schmeidler 
(1964a, b), who gave her subjects feedback on only one of three runs. She 
found no significant differences between the mean scores on feedback and 
nonfeedback runs in each of two series. This finding is not directly rele¬ 
vant to the incentive hypothesis, because subjects did not know in ad¬ 
vance on which runs they would receive feedback. However, a mean 
difference would seem to be a logical prediction from Schmidt’s theory. 
Although Schmidt (1975) argued that feedback to the experimenter may 
have washed out any effect of differential feedback to subjects, Schmeid¬ 
ler’s study still stands as evidence against the applicability of Schmidt’s 
theory to the results of Rhine and of Woodruff discussed above. 

A more recent study by Broughton (1977b), however, provided at 
least a modicum of support for Schmidt’s theory. Subjects each completed 
two runs on an electronic device similar to Schmidt’s machine. After 
these runs were completed, the computer generated a random “hypothe¬ 
sis” as to which run score should be higher. Half of the subjects received 
feedback of their correct scores, while the other half received pseudo¬ 
scores generated randomly by the computer. The main finding of the study 
was a significant confirmation of the computer’s “hypotheses,” but only 
with respect to those scores actually reported to the subject, whether they 
were his own scores or not. (All subjects thought the scores they received 
were their own.) However, no significant results were obtained in a strict 
replication attempt of this experiment. Obviously, more research will be 
needed before a pattern emerges that will allow us to assess the validity of 
Schmidt’s theory as it applies to ESP. 

2.4.2d. Conclusion. Tangible incentives such as monetary rewards 
for high scores do not seem to facilitate ESP, but there is some evidence 
that providing subjects with immediate feedback of their scores may be 
more successful. This latter effect can be explained most readily in terms 



96 


John Palmer 


of the incentive value of such feedback, although a physical theory of 
psi has been proposed which assumes that feedback can have a direct 
causal influence on ESP scores. Other types of non tangible incentives 
(e.g., approval of the experimenter) simply have not been investigated 
experimentally. 


2.5. Social Psychological Factors: The Interpersonal Side of ESP 


2.5.1. The Telepathic Agent: Vital Cog or Excess Baggage? 

To the early psychical researchers, the most prominent form of ESP 
was telepathy, or direct communication between two minds (Myers, 
1903/1975). This imbalance evaporated when Rhine (1934/1973) stressed 
that his subjects could obtain impressive ESP scores when no one was 
trying to “send” them the targets, or even when no one knew what the 
target order was at the time. Although a few successful experiments had 
been reported in which agents concentrated on target symbols that had 
not yet been recorded (Rhine, 1934/1973; Soal and Bateman, 1954), there 
was always the possibility that information about the target orders written 
down after the session could be acquired by precognitive clairvoyance. 
These factors caused Rhine (1945b, 1946) to conclude that telepathy as 
such had not been adequately demonstrated. 

2.5.1a. The Status of “Pure” Telepathy. An associate of Rhine de¬ 
vised an ingenious procedure to get around the clairvoyance interpreta¬ 
tion (McMahan, 1946). She prepared decks of cards containing numerical 
stimuli and then memorized an unwritten code translating the numbers to 
ESP symbols. She communicated the code orally to another staff member 
who was responsible for verifying the scoring of results. During the exper¬ 
iment, McMahan picked up the cards one by one and “sent” the appro¬ 
priate symbol. There was no way the subject could demonstrate ESP 
unless he could “break” the code telepathically. The code itself was never 
recorded. 

McMahan conducted five separate series with this procedure, all of 
which used unselected subjects and none of which gave significant posi¬ 
tive results. Nevertheless, some indirect evidence of telepathy was ob¬ 
tained in the final series, for which subjects were divided into two groups 
based upon personality measures and scores on a previous clairvoyance 
test. The two groups differed significantly on the telepathy test in a direc¬ 
tion that confirmed previous findings with the more conventional GESP 
procedure. Birge (1948) also failed to obtain significant psi-hitting on real- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


97 


time targets with McMahan’s procedure in three separate series, but a 
post hoc analysis revealed significant psi-hitting on +1 targets. 

A similar mental coding technique was adapted by Soal to his 
standard testing paradigm, the percipient being Gloria Stewart. Three 
sessions with this procedure yielded highly significant positive scoring. 
Unfortunately, the controversial status of Soal’s research makes it unwise 
to put much weight on these findings. 

2.5.1b. GESP versus Clairvoyance: Subjects Not “Blind.” Whatever 
the status of “pure telepathy,” the widespread use of GESP procedures in 
psi experiments is ample evidence that many experimenters believe the 
presence of an agent may improve the chances of a successful outcome. 
Although many significant results have been obtained using the GESP 
method, the effect of having an agent can only be assessed adequately in 
those experiments where GESP and clairvoyance (or precognition) pro¬ 
cedures are directly compared. Experiments in which the percipients 
were not informed or were misinformed about whether an agent was 
sending the targets on a particular run are most valuable as tests of the 
agent’s actual effect on the results. In experiments where percipients were 
not “blind” in this respect, it is unclear whether significant differences 
should be attributed to a telepathic component in the psi interaction or to 
psychological factors associated with the percipient. For example, the 
percipient might be more relaxed, more confident, or more highly 
motivated if he thinks someone is sending to him, even if no agent actually 
exists. 

Let us first consider experiments where the percipient was not 
“blind.” Among “gifted” subjects, both Shackleton and Stewart (Soal and 
Bateman, 1954) and the distinguished trance medium Eileen Garrett 
(Birge and Rhine, 1942) scored significantly better in card tests when a 
GESP procedure as opposed to a clairvoyance procedure was used. 

Group experiments in which GESP and clairvoyance runs were 
given to the same subjects in the same session have failed to produce 
significant differences, although in some cases significant relationships 
were found between pooled ESP scores and other variables (Adcock and 
Quartermain, 1959; Beloff, 1969; Bevan, 1947a,b; Casper, 1951, 1952; 
Rivers, 1950; West, 1950). Two experiments using between-groups de¬ 
signs also failed to reveal any significant differences between the two 
types of test (Altom and Braud, 1976; Casler, 1962). Palmer, Tart, and 
Redington (1976), however, found that in a screening experiment involv¬ 
ing over 1,800 college students tested in a classroom setting, scoring was 
significantly higher on a GESP run than on a BT run within subjects, the 
GESP mean being significantly above chance. Agents were partly visible 



98 


John Palmer 


to subjects in this experiment; thus sensory cues were not completely 
ruled out. Barring such an interpretation, these results suggest that an 
agent may contribute to higher scoring but that large samples are needed 
to demonstrate the effect. 

2.5.1c. GESP versus Clairvoyance: Subjects “Blind.” In smaller 
studies, however, significant results actually have occurred more fre¬ 
quently when the subject was “blind” regarding the agent. The “gifted” 
subject Lalsingh Harribance scored significantly above chance on GESP 
but close to chance on clairvoyance when the two types of run were 
alternated (Klein, 1972). Harribance was under the impression that all 
runs were GESP (Morris, personal communication), the procedure which 
he preferred (Klein, 1972). However, it should be noted that on other 
occasions Harribance achieved comparably high scores on clairvoyance 
tests when this procedure was used exclusively (e.g., Roll and Klein, 
1972). MacFarland (1938) found significantly higher scoring among five 
male college students on GESP than on DT runs, the subjects apparently 
believing that DT was used throughout. Unfortunately, the GESP runs 
always were given first, introducing the possibility that the difference 
reflects nothing more than a decline effect (see Sec. 4.2.1.). This exper¬ 
iment also became the object of a methodological controversy (Kennedy, 
1939; Stuart, 1940). Bierman and Camstra (1973) found higher scoring on 
GESP than on clairvoyance trials in each of two classroom experiments 
involving 88 and 1,402 high school students, respectively. However, the 
significance levels of the differences were unclear from the report, as was 
the method of ordering the two types of trials. Subjects apparently 
thought all trials were GESP. 

Kreitler and Kreitler (1972, 1973) reported a series of four GESP 
experiments in which, unbeknownst to the percipient, an agent attempted 
to influence his or her performance on a relatively unstructured 
psychological test. In the first of these experiments the percipient’s task 
was to identify letters of the alphabet projected subliminally. The Kreit- 
lers found that the subjects were significantly more successful on those 
trials where an agent in another room was attempting to transmit the 
correct letter than on control trials. A successful replication of this finding 
was reported by Lubke and Rohr (1975). 

In the last of these experiments, which also involved subliminal per¬ 
ception, the Kreitlers varied whether the ESP stimulus supported or con¬ 
tradicted the subliminal stimulus and also whether the agent was actually 
attempting to transmit the ESP stimulus or simply thinking about it. Both 
the subliminal and ESP stimuli were components of classical illusions 
(e.g., the Muller-Lyer illusion), and the percipient’s task was to report 
which of two identical supraliminal lines or circles (the basic stimuli of the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


99 


illusions) seemed longer or larger. A significant post hoc effect was found, 
indicating that the ESP stimulus was most effective when it contradicted 
the subliminal stimulus and was being “transmitted” by the agent. Al¬ 
though the order of the latter variable was not counterbalanced (cf. Child, 
1977), the Kreitlers’ finding would not seem to correspond to a traditional 
decline effect. 

In the two other experiments, no significant main effect was found 
using autokinetic perception as the psychological test, but at least a partial 
confirmation of the effect was found using the Thematic Apperception 
Test (Kreitler and Kreitler, 1972; Child, 1977). 

In a free-response ganzfeld experiment, Raburn and Manning (1977) 
manipulated both the actual presence of an agent and the subject’s infor¬ 
mation about same in a 2 x 2 factorial design. Both main effects were 
significant, indicating that the highest scores occurred when an agent was 
present and the subject was aware that his ESP was being tested. These 
results seem to suggest that both the presence of an agent and the sub¬ 
jects’ awareness of this fact contribute to positive scoring. However, the 
latter conclusion would be more compelling were control subjects given a 
clairvoyance set rather than a set that ESP was not involved in the exper¬ 
iment at all. 

Not all experiments with “blind” subjects have provided results 
favoring GESP, however. In an experiment with college students that 
may not have been adequately controlled against sensory cues, Coover 
(1917) obtained significant positive scoring when GESP and clairvoyance 
scores were pooled, but no significant difference between them (Rhine, 
1934/1973). Better controlled runs with psychics as subjects produced 
chance results. Whether or not the agent was to look at the card during the 
trial was determined randomly on a trial-by-trial basis, and the agent 
looked at the card immediately after the trial even on clairvoyance trials. 
In two of her “pure telepathy” experiments, McMahan (1946) conducted a 
BT clairvoyance test simultaneously with the telepathy test by picking up 
cards from the two decks at the same time. The same subjects partici¬ 
pated in both experiments. In the first experiment, they were told that 
only telepathy was being tested while in the second they were told it was 
only clairvoyance. The overall results revealed significant positive scor¬ 
ing on clairvoyance and slightly below chance scoring on telepathy, but 
the difference was not significant. Note, however, that this design differs 
appreciably from that of other experiments we have reviewed so far in this 
section. In three experiments with college students, Schmeidler (1961) 
divided her subjects into agent-percipient pairs and gave each pair two 
GESP and two clairvoyance runs. Percipients apparently thought all runs 
were GESP. There were no overall significant differences as a function of 



100 


John Palmer 


run type, but there were significant internal effects that we will examine 
shortly. An Argentine psychiatrist scored significantly above chance to 
about equal degrees with both methods in a free-response experiment. He 
was led to believe that only a GESP procedure was used. Randall (1974) 
found no significant GESP-clairvoyance differences in six classroom 
ESP tests with high school students. 

Finally, several ESP experiments with animals have provided data 
relevant to the topic of GESP in “blind” subjects. In an experiment de¬ 
scribed in more detail later, Schouten (1972) trained mice to press one of 
two levers for water reward. Which lever was to be rewarded in each trial 
was determined by a random number generator. On some trials, another 
mouse (the “agent”) was present in a cage where a discriminable cue 
stimulus appeared. The “agent” also received water rewards, but only on 
those trials in which the “percipient” pressed the correct lever. Schouten 
found no significant difference in mean scores on the GESP and 
clairvoyance trials, but he did find a significant negative correlation be¬ 
tween the individual percipients’ scores on the two types of trials, a result 
reminiscent of Rao’s (1965a) “differential effect” (see Sec. 2.2.1c). 
Follow-up experiments failed to provide significant results, however 
(Schouten, 1976b). Using a shock-avoidance paradigm, Extra (1972) found 
in each of two experiments a marginally significant tendency for rats to 
receive fewer shocks when the experimenter heard a warning stimulus 
(inaudible to the rat) than when he did not. 

2.5.Id. Effect of Different Agents. One possible explanation of the 
inconsistent results from experiments comparing clairvoyance and GESP 
is that they depend upon who happens to be selected as the agent. In the 
large-sample classroom experiment of Palmer et al. (1976), for example, 
there was a significant interaction between type of test and which agent/ 
experimenter team did the testing. The significantly higher scoring on the 
GESP run was found to be almost entirely attributable to subjects tested 
by one of the five teams. These subjects scored significantly above 
chance on GESP and significantly below chance on clairvoyance. Tart 
(1976a) found that one of the agent/experimenters in his ESP training 
experiment obtained highly significant scores with most of his subjects, a 
performance generally not matched by the other agents. 

Schmeidler (1961) attempted to predict the GESP scoring trends of 
her agent-percipient pairs on the basis of their responses on a group 
Rorschach test. In two of the three experiments, predicted low scorers 
obtained significant below-chance scores on GESP, in contrast to sig¬ 
nificantly higher but chance scores obtained on the clairvoyance runs. No 
significant results were obtained with the predicted high scorers. 

Several classroom ESP experiments have examined the question of 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


101 


whether students would score higher when the agent was their teacher or 
someone they both knew well and liked. Anderson and White (1958a) had 
two teachers “send” conflicting target sequences simultaneously to a class 
of high school students. Students got the highest scores on target se¬ 
quences sent by teachers they had independently ranked as “preferred.” 
White and Angstadt (1963b) obtained comparable results in an experiment 
where the competing agents were a student nominated by his classmates 
and his counterpart from another class, but this result could not be sig¬ 
nificantly replicated (White and Angstadt, 1963a). Louwerens (1960) 
found that Dutch nursery school children obtained very high scores when 
their teachers served as agents, but nonsignificant results when the exper¬ 
imenter assumed this role. Unfortunately, the design was such that the 
session with the experimenter always followed the session with the 
teacher, so the decline may simply have been due to repeated testing. Van 
Busschbach (1955) also found significant psi-hitting among grade school 
children with their teacher as agent, but results were almost as good when 
the agent was a stranger. Wiesinger (1973) found the teacher’s attitude 
toward parapsychology and the “test atmosphere” to be predictive of ESP 
scoring, but not the attitudes of teachers and pupils toward each other. 
Better results overall were obtained when children were the agents rather 
than the teacher. 

Another common procedure is to compose agent-percipient pairs of 
persons who are closely acquainted with each other or who are fond of 
each other. Several such studies have employed control groups. In two of 
these, closely acquainted pairs scored significantly above chance while 
unacquainted pairs scored significantly below chance (Stuart, 1946a; Rice 
and Townsend, 1962). Unfortunately, Stuart’s study, a free-response 
drawing experiment, can be criticized because conclusions were based on 
the results of “non-blind” judging procedures, and the Rice study allowed 
agents easy opportunities to cheat, were they so inclined. In the third 
study, agent-percipient pairs were composed of college students who 
either liked or disliked each other as determined by a peer rating proce¬ 
dure (Casper, 1952). On GESP runs, the incompatible pairs scored 
significantly higher than the compatible pairs. This effect reversed 
slightly on clairvoyance control runs. In a fourth study, spouses scored 
significantly above chance and (it would appear) significantly higher than 
strangers (Beer, 1971). Subjects were aware of the agent’s identity in all 
these experiments. Moss, on the other hand, reports that agent- 
percipient rapport has consistently failed to be a factor in a series of 
free-response experiments (e.g., Moss, 1969). In experiments that lacked 
control groups, null results have been found in GESP experiments where 
the agent-percipient pairs consisted of “sweethearts” (Beloff, 1969), 



102 


John Palmer 


spouses (Brinkman and Van Hilten, 1972), and persons defined as having 
“sympathetic relationships” (Van’t Hoff, 1972). Finally, Casler (1971) 
failed in an attempt to improve GESP scoring by creating rapport be¬ 
tween agent and percipient through appropriate hypnotic suggestions 
given to one or the other. 

2.5.le. Conclusion. There is as yet no convincing experimental evi¬ 
dence of direct “mind-to-mind” communication, i.e., telepathy, that 
adequately controls for clairvoyance or precognition. Nonetheless, indi¬ 
rect support for the telepathy hypothesis comes from several experiments 
in which significant differences betweeen GESP and clairvoyance scores 
were found when percipients were “blind” to the type of test. However, 
these results have not been entirely consistent and some of the positive 
experiments have weaknesses in design or reporting of results. Other 
evidence indicates that some of this inconsistency may be attributable to 
the fact that different agents often affect percipients’ scores in different 
ways. Attempts to demonstrate that persons well known or well liked by 
percipients make the most successful agents have produced conflicting 
results, although the general trend is confirmatory. 

Finally, the question of whether telepathy, assuming its existence, is 
primarily attributable to the agent, the percipient, or some interaction 
between them has yet to be directly addressed experimentally. 

2.5.2. The Experimenter Effect: Psychology or Psi? 

In the last section we saw that the agent can have an effect on scoring 
in ESP tests. In this section we will examine evidence that demonstrates 
that a person need not be involved in actually “sending” the targets to 
have such an effect. The person we will be focusing upon predominantly, 
but not exclusively, is the experimenter. We will consider not only 
whether or not he or she can influence experimental outcomes but also 
whether the vehicle of such influence is the method of interacting with 
subjects, or whether the experimenter’s own psi (or potential for activat¬ 
ing the subject’s psi in the absence of sensory contact) may somehow be a 
contributing factor. 

A number of experiments have been reported in which two ex¬ 
perimenters conducting the same experiment with the same or similar 
subjects have obtained significantly different results. Although not an 
experimenter effect in the strict sense of the term, a finding of Sharp and 
Clark (1937) indicated that testing sessions conducted with a skeptical 
observer present produced significantly below-chance scoring, whereas 
subjects scored above chance when the observer was sympathetic to 
ESP. Subjects apparently did not know of the observers’ beliefs, but one 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


103 


subject complained that the skeptical observer distracted her. In an exper¬ 
iment where five subjects responded to two competing target sequences 
handled by two different experimenters, they scored very significantly 
above chance on one set of sequences and close to chance on the other. 
The effect occurred with both GESP and DT clairvoyance procedures 
(MacFarland, 1938). Osis and Dean (1964) reported the results of clair¬ 
voyance tests given to eight audiences following 40-minute lectures on 
ESP. Partway through the experiment, Osis became ill and Dean had to 
take over the role of lecturer-experimenter. Despite the fact that Dean 
gave essentially the same lecture and conducted the experiment in the 
same way as Osis, the groups tested by Osis scored significantly higher 
than those tested by Dean, the difference being most pronounced among 
those subjects who indicated the strongest belief in ESP. Although we 
have no assurance that the groups tested by the two experimenters were 
truly comparable, the experimenter effect remains the most likely in¬ 
terpretation. Still another experimenter difference was found in classroom 
testing of British schoolboys by Beloff and Bate (1970). 

2.5.2a. Experimenter Psychology. The most obvious interpretation of 
such experimenter differences is that different experimenters sometimes 
create different moods, sets, motivational levels, or psychological “at¬ 
mospheres,” which in turn determine whether ESP will occur and, if so, 
whether it will manifest as psi-hitting or psi-missing. The first experiment 
to test this hypothesis directly was by Pratt and Price (1938). Margaret 
Price, who had a history of being a highly successful experimenter (e.g., 
Price, 1938; Bates and Newton, 1951), treated some subjects in a friendly, 
encouraging manner and others in an abrupt, discouraging manner. She 
found that in both instances her subjects scored around chance. However, 
scores markedly increased to their usual high level when she returned to 
her more natural way of relating to subjects. Her natural approach en¬ 
couraged spontaneity during the test, a factor that seems to facilitate psi 
(see Sec. 2.3.2b). 

A more systematic attempt to test the above hypothesis was reported 
by Honorton, Ramsey, and Cabibbo (1975). Subjects were randomly as¬ 
signed to one of two groups. One group was tested by an experimenter 
instructed to be friendly and supportive, while the other group was tested 
by an experimenter given the opposite set. Each subject completed 200 
trials on a Schmidt machine. Each of two experimenters tested subjects in 
each group. As predicted, there was significant psi-hitting in the group 
tested by a “friendly” experimenter and significant psi-missing in the 
group tested by an “unfriendly” experimenter. 

Parker (1975a) found that agent-percipient pairs scored significantly 
higher in a GESP card-guessing experiment when tested by one of three 



104 


John Palmer 


experimenters who believed in ESP than when tested by one of three 
experimenters who did not. Both sets of experimenters had been given 
lectures prior to the experiment that supported their biases. Taddonio 
(1976) chose to manipulate experimenters’ expectancies regarding whether 
the type of ESP test to be employed should produce psi-hitting or psi- 
missing. Each experimenter tested a separate group of subjects. The re¬ 
sults significantly confirmed the experimenters’ expectations in both a 
preliminary experiment and a replication attempt. Other data pertinent to 
the effect of the beliefs projected by experimenters are discussed in Sec. 
3.6.1c. 

2.5.2b. Teacher-Pupil Attitudes. In the above experiments, the be¬ 
havior of the experimenters was systematically manipulated. However, it 
is obvious that different experimenters can create different psychological 
effects on subjects simply by “being themselves,” and such effects can 
still influence ESP scoring. 

Margaret Anderson and Rhea White reasoned that such an effect 
should be especially pronounced when pupils are tested by their own 
teachers, with whom they have had close contact for prolonged periods. 
In the previous section, evidence was cited that some teachers make 
particularly good agents in GESP tests, but Anderson and White thought 
they might also make good experimenters in clairvoyance tests, provided 
teacher-pupil rapport was high. More specifically, they predicted that 
ESP scores should be most positive when teachers and pupils felt most 
positive toward each other and most negative when the mutual feeling was 
negative. In a series of well-designed experiments, they prepared a sepa¬ 
rate target sequence of ESP symbols for each pupil in the class and sealed 
them in opaque envelopes. Blank record sheets were pasted on top of the 
envelopes for the pupils to record their responses. In addition, the pupils 
were asked to fill out anonymous rating scales evaluating their teachers. 
The teacher, in turn, was asked to respond yes or no for each student to 
the question “If you could form your ideal group for this class, would you 
include this student?” The teacher then administered the ESP test to his 
or her class and returned all the materials to Anderson for scoring. 

In the first experimental series, the pooled results from seven high 
school classes confirmed the hypothesis to a highly significant degree 
(Anderson and White, 1956). A strict replication attempt with a sample 
consisting of seven new classes was equally successful (Anderson and 
White, 1957), as was a replication attempt by Deguisne (1959). In each 
case, student attitudes contributed more strongly to the effect than did 
teacher attitudes. In an extension of the paradigm, pupils were tested 
twice, once at the beginning of the school term and once at the end. It was 
found that scores on the two occasions changed in the same direction as 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


105 


student attitudes toward their teachers (Anderson and White, 1958b). In 
general, the pattern has been for overall scores to be near chance in the 
Anderson-White experiments: psi-missing when attitudes are negative 
canceling out psi-hitting when attitudes are positive. 

Unfortunately, a number of experiments with high school students 
failed to confirm these earlier results (Anderson and White, 1958c; White 
and Angstadt, 1961, 1965). Rilling, Pettijohn, and Adams (1961) confirmed 
the hypothesis with respect to pupil attitudes but found a significant re¬ 
versal with respect to teacher attitudes. Nonetheless, a pooling of the 
successful and unsuccessful experiments revealed a highly significant 
confirmation of the original Anderson-White hypothesis, i.e., significant 
psi-hitting when attitudes were mutually positive and significant psi- 
missing when they were mutually negative. The relationship was even 
stronger when student evaluations alone were considered (White and 
Angstadt, 1965). 

Despite one early success (Anderson, 1957), the Anderson-White 
hypothesis has not been supported with grade school students (Anderson 
and White, 1958c; Eisenbud, Hassel, Keely, and Sawrey, 1960; 
Goldstone, 1959; Hall, 1958; Rilling, Adams, and Pettijohn, 1962). Two 
experiments in which college students were tested by their professors also 
failed to produce positive results (Anderson and White, 1958c; Rilling et 
al ., 1962), although Rilling reported a perfect positive relationship be¬ 
tween his four class means and the estimated attitude of the professors 
toward the reality of psychic phenomena. Nash (1960b) obtained a sig¬ 
nificant confirmation of the hypothesis among college students by having 
classmates take turns testing each other. The attitudes of college students 
toward the experimenter were associated in more complex ways with ESP 
scores in other research by this author (Nash, 1964). 

In summary, the first Anderson-White experiment has probably 
spawned more replication attempts than any other experiment in parapsy¬ 
chology. With high school students, the rate of replicability has been high 
by parapsychological standards, especially with respect to pupil attitudes 
toward their teachers. It is not clear why the effect does not hold up for 
grade school and college students. Perhaps passing through the stage of 
“adolescent rebellion” causes interpersonal relationships between stu¬ 
dents and teachers to be more dynamic for high school students than for 
the other groups. If so, the import of these findings might be that rela¬ 
tively powerful feelings may be necessary if attitudes toward the experi¬ 
menter are to influence ESP scoring. 

2.5.2 c. Sex of Experimenter. One set of powerful feelings that most of 
us share concerns sex. Stanford and Associates (1976) attempted to 
capitalize on this drive in an experiment where the scores obtained by 



106 


John Palmer 


male subjects on a disguised ESP test determined whether they later 
would get to examine erotic photographs. The authors hypothesized that 
the female experimenters would be sexually arousing to their male sub¬ 
jects, thereby giving the erotic pictures more incentive value than they 
possessed for subjects tested by male experimenters, thus leading to 
higher ESP scores. Subjects tested by female experimenters in fact scored 
significantly above chance and significantly higher than those tested by 
male experimenters. 

In a more conventional experiment, Woodruff and Dale (1950) took 
turns testing each of 50 female subjects in different sessions, 20 DT runs 
per session. Following each session, subject and experimenter both filled 
out rating scales describing how they felt about each other, the experi¬ 
ment, and their general mood and sense of well-being. In the case of the 
male experimenter, the surprising result was a significant tendency for 
higher scores to occur when the two participants felt neutral about each 
other than when rapport was exceptionally good. No such trend appeared 
with the female experimenter. A possible interpretation of this post hoc 
and admittedly tenuous finding is that when subject and experimenter are 
of the opposite sex, rapport that is too good diverts attention from the 
ESP test and leads to poorer performance. This interpretation would not 
be relevant to Stanford’s experiment, because the ESP aspect of the test 
did not require conscious attention (see Sec. 5.1. for a discussion of Stan¬ 
ford’s methodology). 

2.5.2d. Experimenter Psi. Up to this point, we have been dealing with 
cases where the subject and experimenter interacted with each other di¬ 
rectly. Under such circumstances, it is most reasonable to assume that 
experimenter effects are mediated by the psychological ramifications of 
the overt subject-experimenter interaction. However, other data suggest 
that persons involved with the experiment but not interacting with the 
subject can also influence scoring in some way. 

In a classic but sketchily reported experiment by West and Fisk 
(1953), 20 subjects were asked to guess the orders of 32 packs of “clock 
cards” with 12 cards per pack. Half of the packs were prepared by Fisk, 
who had generally obtained positive results as an experimenter (e.g., 
Fisk, 1951a, b; Fisk and Mitchell, 1953; Michie and West, 1957). The 
other half were prepared by West, who obtained chance results with equal 
consistency (e.g., West, 1950, 1952; Michie and West, 1957). The order in 
which subjects guessed the packs was systematically varied in a Latin 
Square design, and the subjects were unaware of the manipulation of 
experimenters. Despite the fact that the experiment was conducted by 
correspondence and the experimenter had no direct contact with the sub- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


107 


jects, there was highly significant positive scoring on the packs prepared 
by Fisk and only chance scoring on those prepared by West. 

A similar type of effect serendipitously intruded into an experiment 
by Price (1973b), who discovered that his subjects selectively achieved 
high scores on certain targets prepared by an experimental assistant who 
happened to be in a very negative mood at the time. Although post hoc, 
this finding suggests that experimenters may need to pay attention to such 
subtle mood factors in the execution of their experiments. Complex ex¬ 
perimenter mood effects also have been reported in the work of Osis (Osis 
and Carlson, 1972; Osis et al., 1971), but capitalization on chance seems a 
likely explanation for most of these findings. 

In a series of experiments intentionally aimed at detecting experi¬ 
menter psi effects, Feather and Brier (1968) obtained evidence that sub¬ 
jects may be sensitive to who will score the record sheets of an experi¬ 
ment even before that person is designated. In each of three experiments, 
subjects completed four precognition runs. They were told that the exper¬ 
imenter would score only two of the four runs himself, and that they were 
to predict which two. Afterwards, the runs to be scored by the experi¬ 
menter were determined randomly. With respect to these latter runs only, 
subjects scored significantly higher on those they accurately predicted the 
experimenter would score than on the other runs. Such an effect did not 
occur on the runs scored by the other checker. The effect was indepen¬ 
dently significant in the first two experiments pooled and in the third 
experiment. Sensitivity to the scorer also might explain the results of the 
West and Fisk experiment, since each experimenter also checked the 
results of the packs he prepared. 

Only one experiment so far has attempted to discriminate between 
the psychological and psi interpretations of the experimenter effect 
(Parker, 1977). Several parapsychologists were cornered at a recent con¬ 
vention and asked to fill out two personality scales, one of which was a 
disguised ESP test. Independent judges then divided the subjects into two 
approximately equal groups on the basis of how frequently they reported 
significant evidence of psi in their experiments. The two groups did not 
differ significantly on any of the personality traits thought to distinguish 
successful and unsuccessful experimenters, but the successful experimen¬ 
ters were the only ones to provide significant evidence of psi on the covert 
ESP test. Thus Parker’s results favor the psi interpretation of the experi¬ 
menter effect. 

2.5.2e. Conclusion. To keep things in perspective, it should be 
pointed out that having more than one experimenter test one’s subjects 
does not automatically guarantee a significant experimenter effect (e.g., 



108 


John Palmer 


Broughton and Millar, 1975; Craig, 1975; Musso, 1965; Parker, Millar, and 
Beloff, 1977; Price and Pegram, 1937; Sailaja and Rao, 1973), although 
there was some evidence of experimenter effects in the Broughton, the 
Craig, and the Sailaja experiments. On the other hand, it seems clear that 
under certain circumstances experimenters can unwittingly make or break 
their own experiments. There is evidence that how experimenters treat 
their subjects, their beliefs about ESP and about the outcome of their 
experiments, how much they are liked by their subjects, and even their 
sex can influence the results of ESP experiments. Such factors also may 
explain why some telepathic agents are more successful than others in 
GESP experiments; in reality, the distinction between agent and experi¬ 
menter may not be a very important one. 

Somewhat harder to swallow is the growing evidence that persons 
outside the immediate experimental context and whose functions are un¬ 
known to the subjects at the time of the test can influence the results. One 
thing that makes such results so unpalatable is the difficulty in specifying 
the mechanism involved in producing such effects. One possibility is ESP 
and/or PK on the part of the experimenter. For example, Fisk might have 
unwittingly used ESP to decipher the calling biases of his subjects and 
then used ESP or PK to generate technically random target orders to 
match these biases. Psi has been known to be capable of such complex 
feats (e.g., Morris, 1968). A second possibility involves unconscious ESP 
on the part of the subject. For example, Alan Price’s subjects might have 
unconsciously “picked up” on the distress of the experimental assistant, 
thus making the targets prepared by her more salient to them. As pointed 
out by Eisenbud (1963), it is naive to think subjects can use ESP to 
identify targets and not also use it to identify other aspects of the experi¬ 
mental situation. Note that this interpretation does not assume active psi 
on the part of the experimenter. At this point, however, both interpreta¬ 
tions remain speculative. 

A second unpalatable feature of psi-based experimenter effects is 
that they create monumental complexities for the experimenter who 
wishes to design a tightly controlled ESP experiment or to replicate such 
an experiment. Indeed, experimenter effects may be responsible for much 
of the lack of independent replicability in ESP research. The Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle has invaded parapsychology, as it has all the be¬ 
havioral sciences. The observer can no longer be considered apart from 
the observed. 

For the reader who wants to delve further into this topic, a number of 
recent review articles are available (Kennedy and Taddonio, 1976; Thou- 
less, 1976; White, 1976a, b). 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


109 


2.6. Altered States of Consciousness: Tuning In by Turning On 

The idea that ESP abilities can be enhanced by entering a so-called 
altered state of consciousness (ASC) dates back at least to the Indian sage 
Patanjali (2nd century B.C.), and it was a dominant concept of 19th- 
century parapsychology. Although the era of the great trance mediums 
has largely passed, contemporary parapsychologists have shown a re¬ 
newed interest in techniques that help one to withdraw attention from the 
external world. The most extensively studied of such techniques has been 
hypnosis. 


2.6.1. Hypnosis: The Power of Suggestion 

The association between hypnotism and psychic phenomena has 
been proclaimed since the early days of Mesmerism. A number of dra¬ 
matic examples are reported in the literature of the 18th and 19th cen¬ 
turies, but none of these demonstrations meet modern standards of ex¬ 
perimental control (see Dingwall, 1967). The most impressive of these 
early experiments were those of Gilbert and Janet, who repeatedly suc¬ 
ceeded in causing a peasant woman named Leonie to enter hypnosis from 
a distance of half a mile. More recently, hypnosis at a distance has been 
demonstrated by a series of experiments in the Soviet Union (Vasiliev, 
1962). While these experiments seem to be better controlled than the early 
French work, fully detailed reports are not available. 

2.6.1a. Forced-Choice Experiments. Rhine attempted to use hyp¬ 
nosis in some of the early Duke research but eventually abandoned the 
technique as unfruitful (Rhine et al., 1940/1966). However, in the 1950s 
and 1960s a number of experimental reports appeared in the literature 
which painted a much more optimistic picture. The bulk of these findings 
were contributed by three experimenters: Jarl Fahler, Lawrence Casler, 
and Charles Honorton. 

Fahlefs results were by far the most impressive statistically (Fahler, 
1957; Fahler and Cadoret, 1958; Fahler and Osis, 1966). He used standard 
card-guessing techniques, generally testing the same subjects under both 
hypnosis and “waking” control conditions, a procedure that unfortunately 
increases the likelihood of demand characteristics confounding the in¬ 
terpretation of results. It is unclear from the reports whether suggestions 
of success on the ESP test accompanied the hypnotic inductions. Fahler 
generally obtained highly significant psi-hitting in the hypnosis conditions 
and mostly chance results in the control conditions, although in one ex¬ 
periment (Fahler and Osis, 1966) the hitting was restricted to those trials 



110 


John Palmer 


on which the subject expressed confidence that his or her guess was 
correct (see Sec. 4.1.3). 

Casler (1962, 1964, 1967, 1971) also used standard card-guessing 
methodology, but his experimental designs were somewhat cleaner than 
those of Fahler. He used college students exclusively as subjects, and 
each subject was tested under both hypnosis and “waking” conditions. 
Moderately significant differences favoring hypnosis were reported in 
four of the five published experiments, although a sixth unpublished ex¬ 
periment briefly mentioned by Casler (1964) failed to achieve significance. 
In the other nonsignificant experiment, the hypnotic suggestions were 
oriented toward enhancing agent-percipient rapport rather than ESP 
scoring per se (Casler, 1971). No suggestions at all regarding the ESP test 
were given in two other experiments, one of which was successful 
(Casler, 1964). The fact that subjects predicted higher scores for the hyp¬ 
nosis runs than for the control runs in this experiment indicates that 
suggestions of success may have been present implicitly. One of the in¬ 
teresting and so far unresolved issues in the hypnosis-ESP area is 
whether hypnosis facilitates ESP because it induces an ASC, because it 
creates an expectation or attitude change, or both. 

Honorton used hypnosis in an effort to enhance both psi-hitting and 
psi-missing in subjects preselected for these directional scoring tenden¬ 
cies on the basis of responses on the Stuart Interest Inventory (see Sec. 
3.2.4). Standard DT card-guessing techniques were employed through¬ 
out, and scores on hypnosis and control runs again were compared within 
subjects. In the experiments where hypnosis was accompanied by sugges¬ 
tions of success (Honorton, 1964, 1966), hypnosis produced significant 
psi-missing in the predicted missers but was unsuccessful for the pre¬ 
dicted hitters. Matters were further complicated by the failure of the 
attitude scale to properly predict scoring direction in the control runs. In 
the third study (Honorton, 1969a), where “waking” suggestions were used 
without hypnosis, the results were of marginal significance, suggestions 
having the most pronounced effect this time on the predicted hitters. In 
the fourth study (Honorton, 1969a), where the suggestions of success 
were indirect and impersonal, they had no discernible effect on ESP 
scores. 

In summary, hypnotic suggestions of success seemed more effective 
(at least in producing the predicted effect) in Honorton’s experiments than 
personal “waking” suggestions, which in turn seemed more effective than 
impersonal “waking” suggestions or no suggestions at all. Likewise, sub¬ 
jects’ confidence of success, as inferred from their predictions of scores 
before each run, declined monotonically across these experimental condi¬ 
tions. This pattern indirectly suggests that hypnosis influenced ESP scor- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


111 


ing primarily because of its effect on subjects’ expectancies. On the other 
hand, Van de Castle and Davis (1962) reported somewhat better results 
with hypnosis when suggestions of success were not included (see also 
Honorton and Krippner, 1969). 

Forced-choice ESP-hypnosis experiments by other experimenters 
have produced mixed results. The first formal experiment of this type was 
reported by Grela (1945). He found significant psi-hitting among college 
students when hypnosis was combined with suggestions of success, but 
the scores were not significantly higher than those in various control 
conditions. Rao (1964a) reported a significant difference between the hyp¬ 
nosis and “waking” runs of a single subject, but the difference was con¬ 
tributed largely by psi-missing on the waking runs. In an earlier experi¬ 
ment, the same informal hypnotic induction failed to produce overall 
significant scoring, but there was no control group (Rao, 1963c). McBain, 
Fox, Kimura, Nakanishi, and Tirado (1970) incorporated hypnosis in a 
very carefully conceived GESP experiment in which overall significant 
psi-hitting was obtained, but again there was no control group. Essentially 
chance results have been report by Nash and Durkin (1959), Edmunds 
and Jolliffe, (1965), and Stephenson, (1965). 

2.6.1b. Ft * ee-Response Experiments—the Hypnotic “Dream.’ ’ Hyp¬ 
nosis most frequently has been applied to free-response ESP experiments 
in the guise of the hypnotic “dream.” Following a standard hypnotic in¬ 
duction, the subject is given the suggestion to have a dream that will 
include the content of a randomly selected picture being concentrated 
upon by an agent. Honorton has reported significant psi-hitting with this 
procedure among female subjects selected for high susceptibility to hyp¬ 
nosis (Honorton and Stump, 1969; Honorton, 1972b). The latter study 
incorporated various control conditions involving no hypnosis and/or 
low-susceptible subjects, all of which produced chance results. Further¬ 
more, ESP scores in the hypnosis groups were significantly and posi¬ 
tively related to two measures of subjects’ reported change in their states 
of consciousness during the session. Parker and Beloff (1970) reported 
two attempted replications of Honorton’s work, one of which was suc¬ 
cessful. Significant psi-hitting was achieved in only the first of two ses¬ 
sions completed by each subject in this experiment, but since Honorton’s 
subjects completed just one session these results are comparable to his. 

Glick and Kogen (1972) reported significant psi-hitting among one of 
two apparently nongifted subjects in another hypnotic dream study simi¬ 
lar in design to Honorton’s, but Krippner (1968) achieved marginally sig¬ 
nificant results only in a “waking” control group. Keeling (1972) added the 
dimension of hypnotizing both members of agent-percipient pairs before 
each group of trials. The pooled results of ratings submitted by three 



112 


John Palmer 


groups of judges (undergraduate psychology students, clinical psychology 
graduate students, and students in an adult education course on the occult) 
yielded significant overall psi-hitting. Only the ratings of the graduate 
students were independently significant. 

Hypnosis of the percipient entered into one final free-response exper¬ 
iment (Moss, Paulson, Chang, and Levitt, 1970). Agents were asked to 
“send” the contents of emotionally arousing pictorial slides to percipients 
located in another room. Hypnotized subjects scored significantly above 
chance while control subjects scored at chance. However, the interpreta¬ 
tion of this effect is obscured because subjects were allowed to assign 
themselves to conditions, and the method of statistical analysis was not 
specified in the report. 

2.6.1c. Hypnotic Training of ESP. A technique for training ESP 
through hypnosis has been developed by Ryzl (1962). He claims that 
about 500 persons have been trained using this method, representing a 
success rate of approximately 10%. However, only one of his trainees, 
Pavel Stepanek, has gone on to show consistent success as an ESP sub¬ 
ject (cf. Pratt, 1973), although it is conceivable that others may have had 
the ability to do so. It is unclear how much the hypnotic training contrib¬ 
uted to the ability of even this subject. Independent attempts to apply 
Ryzl’s technique have not been successful (Beloff and Mandleberg, 1966; 
Stephenson, 1965), although Honorton and Krippner (1969) question 
whether the technique was properly applied in these projects. 

2.6.1d. Conclusion. Attempts to improve ESP scoring levels on a 
short-term basis through hypnosis have produced generally consistent 
results from a number of different laboratories. To illustrate this point, 
Van de Castle (1969) pooled the results of all forced-choice experiments 
reported up to that time in which scoring under hypnosis and control 
conditions were directly compared. He found that the mean score over 
1,776 hypnosis runs was 5.51 (p < 10 -20 ), while the mean of 1,381 control 
runs was only 5.03. The record for free-response experiments is equally 
impressive, although most of the successful studies with this procedure 
lacked “waking” controls. Clearly, the hypnosis-ESP relationship is one 
of the more consistent in the parapsychological literature. See Honorton 
and Krippner (1969) and Van de Castle (1969) for excellent reviews of 
experimental studies. 

It is likely that hypnosis is psi-conducive both because hypnotic 
suggestions increase one’s confidence in one’s ESP ability and because 
the induction procedure produces an altered state of consciousness that 
either encourages relaxation and withdrawal of attention from the exter¬ 
nal world or reduces the operation of rational, “left-hemisphere” mental 
processes that are thought to be inhibiting to psi. Evidence for the “confi- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


113 


dence” interpretation comes from those studies in which mean ESP scor¬ 
ing levels were evaluated in relation to subjects’ predictions of their run 
scores following various combinations of hypnosis and suggestions of 
success. Evidence for the “ ASC” interpretation comes primarily from the 
free-response experiment of Honorton (1972b), who found a positive 
relationship between ESP scores and verbal state reports among hyp¬ 
notized subjects. Considerable indirect evidence comes from a growing 
number of experiments where other consciousness-altering techniques 
besides hypnosis have been used to boost ESP. We turn to these studies 
next. 


2.6.2. Hypnagogiclike States: ESP in the Twilight Zone 

Hypnagogic is a term used by sleep psychologists to refer to the 
intermediate period between sleep and wakefulness.* From a 
phenomenological perspective, it can be broadly characterized as consist¬ 
ing of deep physical relaxation, heightened imagery (especially visual 
imagery), withdrawal of attention from the external world, and a tendency 
toward “primary process” mental organization. Many parapsychologists 
suspect that the hypnagogic state, or at least one or more of its associated 
characteristics, may be particularly well suited for psychic functioning. 
Much of the recent work on ESP in altered states was inspired by an 
article by Rhea White (1964) in which she analyzed the techniques used by 
various sensitives to enhance psychic receptivity. White found that these 
techniques contained many common elements, among which were relaxa¬ 
tion and stilling of the mind preparatory to the emergence of psi-related 
visual imagery. In the early 1970s, many parapsychologists began to apply 
such techniques to their experimental subjects and note their effect on 
ESP scores, especially in free-response tests. Several specific techniques 
have been tried, and we will examine each separately. 

2.6.2a. Progressive Relaxation. An exercise that has been known for 
a number of years to induce deep muscular relaxation is the progressive 
relaxation technique of Jacobson (1938/1974). The technique essentially 
consists of having the subject alternatively tense and relax specific muscle 
groups and note the contrast between the tension and relaxation. William 
Braud combined the Jacobson technique with suggestions for mental 
quietude as a means of inducing a so-called “psi-conducive syndrome” 
(Braud, 1975b). 


*The term hypnopompic is sometimes used to refer to the transition state upon awakening, 
but for the sake of simplicity, the term hypnagogic will be used to refer to the transitions 
both into and from sleep. 



114 


John Palmer 


Braud and his colleagues have consistently obtained significant over¬ 
all psi-hitting in experiments where this induction technique immediately 
precedes a standard free-response GESP test (Altom and Braud, 1976; 
L. W. Braud, 1977; Braud and Braud, 1974; Braud and Braud, 1973; 
Braud and Thorsrud, 1976). A control group was employed in only one of 
these experiments, in which a group receiving straight relaxation sugges¬ 
tions was compared to a group receiving straight tension suggestions 
(Braud and Braud, 1974). As predicted, there was significant psi-hitting in 
the relaxation group and chance scoring in the tension group. The differ¬ 
ence was significant. Differences in relaxation between the two groups 
were verified by both verbal reports and EMG measures, and the groups 
reported very similar expectancies of success prior to the induction pro- 

_ 9 

cedure. (Both techniques had been presented as psi-conducive.) In a pre¬ 
liminary experiment where all subjects received the standard progressive 
relaxation procedure, the psi-hitters were shown to be significantly more 
relaxed than the psi-missers. 

A successful independent confirmation of Braud’s results was re¬ 
ported by Stanford and Mayer (1974) using a clairvoyance procedure. 
However, the experiment did not include a control group, and there was 
no significant relationship between ESP scores and verbal reports of relax¬ 
ation during the session. Nonetheless, subjects as a group manifested 
significant psi-hitting. In contrast, significant results were not obtained in 
a progressive relaxation experiment by Miller and York (1976). 

There is only one experiment in which progressive relaxation was 
used in conjunction with forced-choice testing (Sandford and Keil, 1975). 
In this experiment, a single subject scored significantly above chance on 
control runs but right at chance in runs preceded by progressive relax¬ 
ation. The only other chance outcome I am aware of in a free-response 
experiment using progressive relaxation exclusively to induce an ASC 
was in the control condition of an experiment by Charlesworth (1975), to 
be discussed later (Sec. 2.6.2e), where an abbreviated progressive relax¬ 
ation induction was utilized. 

2.6.2b. Perceptual Deprivation. Honorton has recently become the 
leading advocate of perceptual deprivation techniques to facilitate psychic 
receptivity (Honorton, 1974b). He argues that in normal waking con¬ 
sciousness the organism is bombarded by external and internally gener¬ 
ated sensory stimuli of a patterned or meaningful nature that compete 
with and drown out low-level ESP stimuli and hinder their detection. 
Perceptual deprivation techniques have the effect of reducing this 
“noise,” while at the same time causing the mind to compensate for this 
dearth of patterned stimulation by creating hypnagogic-like imagery (see 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


115 


West, 1962). This imagery may serve as a vehicle for the transmission of 
ESP impressions from the unconscious. 

Inspired by a non-psi experiment of Bertini, Lewis, and Witkin 
(1969), Honorton chose the “ganzfeld” technique to create the appropriate 
state of consciousness. The purpose of this technique, described more 
fully in Chapter 1, is to eliminate patterned external stimulation. The 
subject remains in the ganzfeld anywhere from 15 to 45 minutes (Honor- 
ton recommends the longer intervals), during or after which he or she 
gives mentation reports that are later matched to target pictures using 
standard free-response judging procedures. 

The first published ganzfeld experiment was by Honorton and 
Harper (1974), who found significant psi-hitting among 30 unselected 
subjects. Because of the simplicity of the technique and the qualitative 
impressiveness of some of the hits, a plethora of ganzfeld experiments 
soon began to flood the literature. Some were successful in producing 
overall significant psi-hitting under comparable conditions to those of 
Honorton (L. W. Braud, 1977; Braud, Wood, and Braud, 1975; Dunne, 
Warnock, and Bisaha, 1977; Raburn and Manning, 1977; Smith, Tremmel, 
and Honorton, 1976; Terry and Honorton, 1976; Terry, Tremmel, Kelly, 
Harper, and Barker, 1976; York, 1977), while others were not (Braud, 
1976; Braud and Wood, 1977; Habel, 1976; Palmer and Aued, 1975; 
Palmers al., 1977; Palmer and Lieberman, 1975; Parker, 1975b; Parker et 
al ., 1977; Rogo, Smith, and Terry, 1976; Stanford and Neylon, 1975; 
Terry, 1976a). Of the successful ganzfeld experiments, only two employed 
nonganzfeld control groups (Braud et al., 1975; Terry et al., 1976). Results 
in the control conditions were nonsignificant in both of these experiments, 
but only in the Braud experiment were scores in the ganzfeld and control 
conditions significantly different. 

Some of the “unsuccessful” experiments nonetheless yielded signifi¬ 
cant internal effects that provide some support for the underlying theoreti¬ 
cal rationale of the ganzfeld. Parker (1975b), in an experiment where the 
overall results were below chance, found a significant negative relation¬ 
ship between ESP scores and a self-report scale measuring alterations of 
consciousness during the session. In other words, a relatively pronounced 
alteration in consciousness was associated with significant ESP scoring, 
but in the negative direction, i.e., persons reporting pronounced ASCs 
manifested psi-missing. Likewise, Palmer et al ., (1977) found significant 
psi-missing among subjects who reported relatively pronounced ASCs in 
the ganzfeld, based upon their responses to rating scale items answered 
immediately after the session. The correlation between ESP scores and 
the ASC scale was significant. In still another experiment with below- 



116 


John Palmer 


chance scoring overall, Stanford and Neylon (1975) reported a significant 
negative correlation between ESP scores and changes in body awareness, 
an item very similar to one that contributed considerable variance to 
Palmer’s ASC scale. 

Most other ganzfeld experiments simply did not include state report 
measures, so their contribution to this trend cannot be assessed. I can 
report, however, that such trends were not found in two of my own 
experiments (Palmer and Aued, 1975; Palmer and Lieberman, 1975). 
However, when results from the latter study (a clairvoyance experiment 
that included a psychological set for 44 out-of-body experiences” in one 
condition) were combined with results from other comparable conditions 
from other phases of the project, I found a significant positive correlation 
between ESP scores and an ASC scale similar to the one reported in my 
most recent experiment (Palmer et al., 1977). In this case, however, the 
overall results were positive , indicating that high positive scores were 
obtained by subjects who experienced the most pronounced ASCs. A 
report of these findings is in preparation. 

The above results strongly suggest that even in “unsuccessful” exper¬ 
iments, significant levels of ESP scoring frequently occur among subjects 
for whom the ganzfeld succeeds in evoking a relatively pronounced altera¬ 
tion of consciousness, but that the direction of the scoring trend varies 
from study to study. The reasons for this variability are currently un¬ 
known. 

A further significant finding in the two ganzfeld experiments where 
this variable has been examined is a tendency for subjects who, contrary 
to the norm, either overestimate or do not underestimate the duration of 
the ganzfeld session to score below chance and significantly lower than 
other subjects (Palmer et al ., 1977; Stanford and Neylon, 1975). 

Finally, Honorton, Drucker, and Hermon (1973) used a sensory iso¬ 
lation technique called the witch’s cradle to induce an ASC for a free- 
response experiment. The overall ESP mean was nonsignificantly above 
chance. Significant positive scoring, however, was evidenced by those 
subjects who reported above-average alterations in consciousness during 
the session (in line with the pattern of results from ganzfeld and hypnotic 
dream studies), but a significant overall relationship between state reports 
and ESP scores apparently was obtained from only one of several statisti¬ 
cal tests. 

2.6.2c. Meditation. Four experiments in the literature attempted to 
use standard meditation techniques to facilitate ESP. Two of these studies 
were conducted in the context of meditation groups meeting on a weekly 
basis, so the subjects either had or were in the process of acquiring ex¬ 
perience with meditation (Osis and Bokert, 1971; Roll and Solfvin, 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


117 


1976). Both experiments were extremely complex, and complicated mul¬ 
tivariate statistical techniques were used to analyze the results. Roll used 
a free-response test and Osis both a free-response and a forced-choice 
test. The report of Roll and Solfvin was simply too short to allow an 
adequate assessment of their conclusions, but one hopes a more detailed 
report will follow. The Osis and Bokert report was sufficiently detailed, 
but this reviewer found it incomprehensible. Both sets of authors inter¬ 
preted their results as indicating that subjects who had the most pleasant 
and self-transcending meditation experiences scored most negatively on 
the ESP test. Provided that the overall scoring level was below chance, 
this conclusion would fit nicely with the ganzfeld results, since it would 
imply the strong possibility of significant psi-missing on the part of those 
with the deepest meditation experiences. Mean ESP scores were not 
reported in Osis’s experiment, while in Roll’s it would appear that the 
mean on the most relevant GESP trials was right at chance. 

The other two experiments were simpler and yielded more clearly 
positive results. Dukhan and Rao (1973) tested Western and Indian stu¬ 
dents of Yoga in an Indian ashram. Over three separate experiments, 
there was a generally consistent tendency for subjects to score signifi¬ 
cantly higher on a BM card-guessing test following a meditation session 
than before the session. The results represented a shift from psi-missing 
to psi-hitting. It is unclear from the report how consistent was the effect 
across subjects. Schmeidler (1970) gave six graduate students one clair¬ 
voyance run before and one after listening to a lecture on meditation and 
practicing a breathing exercise suggested by an Indian Swami. Subjects 
scored significantly above chance on the run following the exercise, com¬ 
pared to slightly below chance scoring beforehand. The difference, how¬ 
ever, was not significant. 

2.6.2d. Out-of-Body Experiences . Psychic experiences have often 
been reported anecdotally in conjunction with a specific ASC in which a 
person feels that his center of consciousness is located in space outside of 
his body (e.g., Crookall, 1961). A common characteristic of such out-of- 
body experiences (OBEs) is that the person “sees” his physical body as if 
from another point in space. 

One of the more dramatic single episodes in the experimental para- 
psychological literature concerned a woman who correctly identified a 
five-digit number during an apparent OBE, which took place while her 
physiology was being monitored in a sleep laboratory (Tart, 1968). Unfor¬ 
tunately, sensory cues were not completely ruled out in this experiment, 
as the author points out. Another subject, who has written a popular book 
about his own OBEs (Monroe, 1971), produced more equivocal results in 
a similar experiment (Tart, 1967). Still another subject claimed to be able 



118 


John Palmer 


to visit his pet cat during OBEs. In one experiment it was found that the 
cat was significantly less active during these OBEs than during control 
periods (Morris, 1974). 

Another series of experiments was undertaken to induce OBEs in 
unselected subjects and to assess the effect on free-response ESP per¬ 
formance (Palmer and Lieberman, 1975, 1976; Palmer and Vassar, 1974). 
Progressive relaxation exercises followed by one of several techniques 
designed to induce a hypnagogic state were combined with suggestions to 
imagine leaving the body and traveling to an adjacent room to identify a 
target picture. Although a significant difference was obtained in only one 
of four individual experiments (one of which is yet to be published), the 
pooled results indicated that subjects who reported feeling that they were 
literally “outside their bodies” during the session were significantly more 
successful at identifying the target picture than were subjects who did not, 
but only when the induction procedure was limited to pure sensory isola¬ 
tion techniques such as the ganzfeld. However, OBE reports had a high 
positive loading on the ASC scale described earlier, suggesting that OBEs 
in this experiment (and perhaps in other situations as well) may have 
paranormal elements simply because they tend to occur in psi-conducive 
hypnagogic states—not because the person has somehow literally left his 
body as suggested by some occult theories. 

2.6.2e. Miscellaneous Techniques . Charlesworth (1975) obtained sig¬ 
nificant psi-hitting with a guided-imagery technique, in which the subject 
was guided through a fantasy journey and asked to identify objects along 
the way. The agent was simultaneously guided through the same fantasy, 
except that she was told what the objects (i.e., ESP targets) were. Results 
in two control groups were nonsignificant, and there was no significant 
difference between experimental and control groups. No significant over¬ 
all results were obtained in a second experiment where the subject and 
agent pairs were twins, but there was an interesting interaction that we 
will discuss later (Sec. 3.5.4). 

Finally, there have been two studies in which naturally occurring 
hypnagogic states were compared to other ASCs. Krippner (1968) com¬ 
pared the success of eight subjects following three different induction 
techniques in a free-response GESP experiment. Subjects first went 
through a standard “hypnotic dream” procedure. Later, they were in¬ 
structed to take a nap and given the posthypnotic suggestion to dream 
about another picture. This procedure was the most likely of the three to 
involve a hypnagogic state. Last, it was suggested that subjects’ nocturnal 
dreams during the week would correspond to yet another picture, and 
they were instructed to keep dream diaries. Eight other subjects went 
through the same regimen without hypnosis. Based on judges’ but not 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


119 


subjects’ ratings, hypnotized subjects scored significantly above chance in 
the hypnagogic condition and control subjects in the dream condition. 
There apparently were no significant differences between conditions. Al¬ 
though these findings are quite marginal, the trend seems to indicate that 
alterations of consciousness associated with sleep or presleep states may 
be more effective than simple hypnosis in facilitating ESP in free- 
response tasks. 

William Braud (1977) evaluated free-response GESP scoring in two 
conditions methodologically similar to Krippnef s nocturnal dream condi¬ 
tion. Each subject responded to two targets, one “sent” right before he 
went to sleep (hypnagogic) and the other “sent” late at night (dream). 
Significant scoring occurred for the hypnagogic targets but not the dream 
targets. The difference approached but did not reach significance. 

2.6.2/. Conclusion . An impressive number of experiments have pro¬ 
duced significant psi-hitting when small samples of unselected subjects 
were submitted to induction techniques designed to produce hypna- 
gogiclike states. Most of these were free-response studies in which each 
subject completed only one trial. Although most of these experiments 
lacked control groups, the ratio of studies reporting significant overall 
psi-hitting seems much higher than in studies where such induction tech¬ 
niques have not been used. Furthermore, most studies that did use con¬ 
trol groups found only chance scoring in these conditions. 

Among the small proportion of experiments in which subjects filled 
out state report scales, the evidence is rather consistent in revealing that 
the most extreme mean deviation scores occurred among those subjects 
who experienced the most pronounced ASCs. This evidence comes 
primarily from the ganzfeld literature, but not exclusively so (e.g., Braud 
and Braud, 1974; Honorton, 1972b). It would appear from this evidence 
that ASCs effect the magnitude of the deviation from chance, whereas the 
direction (i.e., psi-hitting or psi-missing) is determined by other factors 
that vary across experiments but that seem to be consistent within a given 
experiment. 

Finally, it is conceivable that the induction techniques described in 
this section are effective not because they produce ASCs but because 
they introduce demand characteristics that might influence subjects’ con¬ 
fidence or orientation toward the task (Rogo, 1976). Although questions 
concerning subject expectancies have not correlated significantly with 
ESP scores in those experiments where they have been employed (see 
Sec. 3.6.2b), such questions themselves are likely to be contaminated by 
demand characteristics and may reflect response biases more than actual 
attitudes. Thus the issue raised earlier in the discussion of the ESP- 
hypnosis research (Sec. 2.6.Id) is also relevant to the research on hypna- 



120 


John Palmer 


gogiclike states, although the simplest and most straightforward interpre¬ 
tation of these latter findings, at least, remains the ASC hypothesis. A 
review critical of the ASC interpretation of the studies reviewed in the 
section has been published by Rogo (1976). 

2.6.3. Dreams: Losing Sleep for Science 

The most common ASC to be associated with ESP in everyday life is 
clearly the nocturnal dream. Ever since biblical times, tales have been 
recorded of dreams that later came true. In an analysis of more recent 
reports of psychic experiences mailed to Rhine’s laboratory at Duke, 
Louisa Rhine (1962) found that 65% of them occurred in the dream state 
and that the dream experiences tended to provide a more complete de¬ 
scription of the target event than did waking experiences. Furthermore, 
psychotherapists began reporting cases in which their patients had dreams 
about the therapist’s life that were related to therapy in dynamically mean¬ 
ingful ways (Eisenbud, 1970; Ullman, Krippner, and Vaughan, 1973). 

With the advent of the rapid-eye-movement (REM) monitoring tech¬ 
nique, research was initiated at Maimonides Medical Center in New York 
City to demonstrate under well-controlled laboratory conditions that ESP 
could occur in dreams. The basic procedure, described more fully in 
Chapter 1, was to waken subjects from REM periods, record their dream 
reports, and then assess the correspondence between these reports and 
randomly selected art prints “sent” by an agent in another room. 

In the first Maimonides experiment, each of 12 subjects spent one 
night in the laboratory. The results of this study were marginally signifi¬ 
cant, in that subjects but not outside judges were able to “blindly” match 
the targets and dream reports better than expected by chance. Two 
agents, one male and one female, were used in the experiment, and the 
significance was found to be attributable to those nights when the male 
served as agent (Ullman, Krippner, and Feldstein, 1969). 

However, most of the significant results from Maimonides have in¬ 
volved repeated testing of particular individuals selected either through a 
screening process, such as the experiment described above, or because 
the experimenters had reason to believe they would be successful in this 
type of test. Some pilot data possibly notwithstanding (Ullman, Krippner, 
and Honorton, 1970), the bulk of the significant findings have involved 
only three individuals: Dr. William Erwin, a psychologist (Ullman and 
Krippner, 1969; Ullman et al., 1969); Dr. Robert Van de Castle, another 
psychologist (Hall, 1967; Krippner and Ullman, 1970); and Malcolm Bes- 
sent, a professional psychic (Krippner et al ., 1971, 1972). Nevertheless, 9 
of 12 formal nocturnal dream studies conducted at Maimonides using the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


121 


REM monitoring technique have produced significantly positive results 
(Honorton, 1974a), and a number of individual correspondences have 
been quite impressive. 

On the other hand, two attempted replications of successful 
Maimonides experiments conducted at the laboratory of a noted dream 
researcher were unsuccessful (Belvedere and Foulkes, 1971; Foulkes et 
al ., 1972). Another replication attempt with a single subject produced 
significant results only on those trials where the judges were confident of 
their ratings (Globus, Knapp, Skinner, and Healey, 1968). Several direct 
ESP-dream correspondences also were found in the experiment of Hall 
(1967). 

The two experiments referred to at the end of the last section in 
which unselected subjects recorded their dreams at home produced 
equivocal results (W. G. Braud, 1977; Krippner, 1968). 

2.6.3a. Conclusion. The results of the well-controlled Maimonides 
experiments have demonstrated that ESP can occur in dreams. An over¬ 
view of these studies is contained in a semipopular book by Ullman et al. 
(1973). However, the generality of the Maimonides results beyond a select 
group of individuals is questionable, and the incidence of replication in 
other laboratories has not been particularly impressive. What little evi¬ 
dence we have comparing ESP in dreams and hypnagogic or related states 
indicates that the latter is the best place to look, in terms of both economy 
of effort and yield of ESP. 

2.6.4. Drugs: Uppers , Downers , and Outers 

Only a handful of experiments have been conducted to assess the 
effect of psychopharmacological agents on ESP test performance, all 
using human subjects. 

2.6.4a. Stimulants versus Depressants . In the early Duke research, 
Rhine (1934/1973) noticed that sodium amytal markedly reduced scoring 
rates in three of his high-scoring subjects, while caffeine caused these 
subjects’ normally high levels of scoring to resume after they had been 
low. He observed that fatigue and illness likewise depressed scoring rates 
in these subjects. 

Two experiments have incorporated double-blind techniques to com¬ 
pare the effects of stimulants and depressants on ESP scoring. Cadoret 
(1953) had 11 young adults complete four testing sessions in which they 
ingested either sodium amytal, dexadrine, lactose placebo, or nothing. 
They completed five BT runs and four free-response drawing trials before 
drug administration and again one hour thereafter. Significant treatment 
main effects were found on the pre- to postdrug change scores on both 



122 


John Palmer 


tests. Amytal produced a decrease in scoring in each case. Dexadrine 
produced a decrease on the card tests and an increase on the drawing 
tests. The latter of these dexadrine effects seemed to be attributable 
primarily to the subjects’ associations to their drawings, in contrast to the 
drawings themselves. 

Huby and Wilson (1961) conducted two experiments similar to 
Cadoret’s. In their first experiment, 100 subjects produced marginally 
significant psi-missing on a two-run symbol guessing test following 
quinalbarbitone (a depressant). Scores following ingestion of this drug 
also differed significantly from scores following administration of a lac¬ 
tose placebo. Amphetamines produced nonsignificant psi-missing. These 
trends were not confirmed in a second experiment with 54 subjects (26 of 
whom had participated in the first experiment) and twice the number of 
runs per subject. A possible reason for the difference is that the ESP test 
was given two hours following drug administration as compared to 45 
minutes in the first experiment. Another complicating factor is that sub¬ 
jects in both experiments were restricted to those who scored an average 
of plus or minus one hit from chance on a preliminary two-run card test. 

2.6.4b. Anesthesia. In a clock-card experiment with 36 maternity pa¬ 
tients, Gerber and Schmeidler (1957) inadvertently tested 6 while they 
were still under the influence of an unspecified anesthetic. These 6 sub¬ 
jects scored significantly below chance. However, the difference between 
the drug-influenced and non-drug-influenced subjects was significant only 
among a subgroup of the sample who had been rated by the experimenter 
as relaxed and acceptant during the test. The principal analysis of the 
experiment had confirmed a prediction for nondrugged subjects that those 
who were relaxed and accepting would score significantly higher than the 
others, so there is at least some justification in treating this subgroup 
separately. 

2.6.4c. Psychedelic Drugs. Users of psychedelic drugs frequently re¬ 
port psychic experiences while under the influence of these substances 
(Tart, 1971). However, experimental research on this topic is virtually 
nonexistent, due in large part to the tight government restriction on the 
use of psychedelic drugs even for research purposes. The most substan¬ 
tial study was conducted in Holland by van Asperen de Boer, Barkema, 
and Kappers (1966), who compared the results of 37 subjects on a variety 
of ESP tests given when they either were or were not under the influence 
of psilocybin. Unfortunately, the order of sessions was not counterbal¬ 
anced. Although there was overall significant psi-hitting on standard DT 
tests, scoring was slightly better in the control conditions. Whittlesey 
(1960) gave 27 psychiatric outpatients one card-guessing run before and 
one after ingesting an unspecified dose of LSD. There was significantly 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


123 


below-chance run-score variance overall, but apparently no significant 
mean differences between the two runs. In a longer series of experiments, 
Cavanna and Servadio (1964) succeeded primarily in demonstrating that it 
is difficult to get subjects to attend to an ESP test while having an LSD 
experience. 

2.6.4d. Conclusion. The evidence is fairly consistent in showing that 
central nervous system depressants tend to reduce the level of scoring in 
ESP card tests. The evidence that stimulants have the opposite effect is 
much less consistent. Too little research with psychedelic drugs has been 
reported to allow any conclusions whatsoever. 


3. The Subject in ESP Experiments 

In section 2, I paid little attention to the characteristics of the subject 
who happened to be on the receiving end of the experimenter’s attempts to 
elicit ESP. This obviously is not a matter we can afford to ignore for long. 
First of all, subjects vary in the amount of potential ESP ability they bring 
with them to an ESP experiment, and a given subject’s ESP talent may in 
turn be related to such things as his (or her) personality, cognitive skills, 
sex, age, and even species. Secondly, the attitudes and moods a subject 
brings to the experiment may be expected to influence scoring, and these 
in turn may be modified by the kinds of experimental manipulations dis¬ 
cussed in section 2. This is especially true of manipulations such as hyp¬ 
nosis, which I discussed in the last subsection. The first topic of the 
upcoming section, physiological predictors, provides a convenient bridge 
between our studies of induced ASCs and individual differences as they 
relate to ESP test performance. 


3.1. Physiological Predictors: In Search of the Mind-Brain Interface 

Physiological variables have been studied both as predictors of ESP 
scores and as ESP measures themselves. In this section we will be con¬ 
cerned exclusively with the first of these functions. 


3.1.1. EEG Studies: The Hard-Headed Approach to Altered States 

The only physiological variable that has been studied to any appreci¬ 
able extent as a predictor of ESP scores is the electroencephalograph 
(EEG), and this research has dealt almost exclusively with brain waves in 
the “alpha” band, i.e., 8-13 Hz. The reason why parapsychologists be¬ 
came so interested in alpha is that it is often associated with a relaxed, 



124 


John Palmer 


passive state of mind, which has long been considered psi-conducive 
(e.g., White, 1964). Although a few alpha-ESP studies were reported in 
the early experimental literature (e.g., Wallwork, 1952), interest in the 
possible relationship between these variables was slight until about 1970, 
when evidence began to appear in the psychological journals suggesting 
that alpha could be increased in human subjects through biofeedback 
training (e.g., Nowlis and Kamiya, 1970). Such findings suggested to 
some parapsychologists that “alpha training” might be useful in training 
ESP; if a person were taught to increase his or her alpha, ESP perfor¬ 
mance might improve as well. Training people to increase their alpha pro¬ 
duction substantially above optimal baseline levels proved to be easier 
said than done, as parapsychologists themselves soon discovered (Honor- 
ton and Carbone, 1971; Lewis and Schmeidler, 1971). Nevertheless, an 
extensive body of data has surfaced that, while not always consistent, 
does suggest some kind of relationship between ESP scores and whatever 
it is that EEG recording techniques measure. 

3.1.1a. Alpha Density—Between Subjects. Percent-time alpha (or 
alpha density) has been studied as a predictor both between subjects and 
within subjects. In some studies, between-subjects and within-subjects 
effects have been confounded. Let us look first at the between-subjects 
effects. 

The first sign of a positive relationship between alpha and ESP came 
from a single-session card-guessing experiment by Honorton (1969b), who 
found a significant correlation of +.72 between these two measures. The 
subjects were ten high school students selected on the basis of high ESP 
scores in a pretest. In a follow-up experiment with a new sample of ten 
older subjects, the correlation was -.63, also significant (Honorton and 
Carbone, 1971). However, the ESP scores that entered into this correla¬ 
tion were pooled over ten sessions, nine of which occurred after subjects 
had been exposed to alpha feedback training. When only the results of the 
first session are considered, the correlation is positive ( + .17), although 
nonsignificant. 

Stanford and Lovin (1970) reported a significant negative correlation 
between alpha density and ESP in a single-session card-guessing experi¬ 
ment not involving feedback. The authors noted that both they and Hon¬ 
orton (1969b) used a scoring method of the EEG records that gave rela¬ 
tively little weight to alpha bursts of short duration. Alpha density failed 
to significantly predict ESP scores between subjects in three other ESP 
experiments (Morris and Cohen, 1971; Stanford, 1971; Stanford and 
Palmer, 1975). The latter experiment used a free-response procedure. 

3.1.1b. Alpha Density—Within Subjects. Honorton and Carbone 
(1971) computed alpha-ESP correlations for each of their subjects across 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


125 


ten sessions and found no more of them to be significant than expected by 
chance, although they were predominantly negative in direction. Cadoret 
(1964), on the other hand, found significantly higher ESP scores on “trials 
accompanied by slow EEG” than on “relatively fast” EEG trials. Al¬ 
though between-subjects and within-subject effects apparently were con¬ 
founded in this experiment (a brief abstract is all we have to go on), the 
trend was relatively consistent across his seven subjects. No straightfor¬ 
ward differences between mean ESP scores on trials made simultaneously 
with attempts to respectively generate or suppress alpha were found in 
either of two biofeedback experiments with unselected subjects (Honor- 
ton, Davidson, and Bindler, 1971; Pleshette, 1975). 

In another experiment where between-subjects and within-subject 
effects were confounded, Stanford and Stanford (1969) examined changes 
of alpha density within the run in relation to card-guessing performance. 
They failed to confirm their prediction that the half run showing the most 
alpha would yield the greater number of ESP hits. However, a post hoc 
analysis revealed significantly higher run-score variance in runs with an 
above average increase in alpha density from the first to the second half of 
the run. These high-change runs also were significantly associated with a 
tendency for subjects to avoid calling an equal number of each symbol on 
each run. This result gave the initial post hoc finding a measure of con¬ 
struct validity, because previous research had shown a relationship be¬ 
tween unbalanced calling sequences and high run-score variance (Stan¬ 
ford, 1966a,b). Apparently, increases in alpha within the run reflect a 
tendency not to try to balance calling probabilities at the end of the run. 

A number of experimenters have tested single subjects selected for 
outstanding ESP talent or for proficiency in controlling their alpha. Three 
forced-choice experiments with the psychic Harribance included EEG 
monitoring. In the first two, Harribance’s overall scoring rate was sig¬ 
nificantly and substantially above chance (Morris et al ., 1972). The high¬ 
est scoring runs were selected for comparison with chance runs, and in 
each experiment significantly more alpha was present in the high-scoring 
runs. Analyses using alpha to predict ESP scores were not reported. In 
the third experiment, Harribance’s overall score was slightly below 
chance (Kelly and Lenz, 1976b). Spectral analysis was used to compare 
individual hit and miss trials. The only significant effect was an excess of 
power in the 12- to 13-Hz range on the missing trials, a finding not pre¬ 
dicted in advance. The only other forced-choice experiment with a 
selected subject was by Wallwork (1952), who simply classified GESP 
trials as concurrent with strong, average, or no alpha. Overall ESP scores 
were near chance, and there were no significant alpha-ESP relationships. 

Turning to free-response experiments, Rao and Feola (1973) tested an 



126 


John Palmer 


experienced meditator who also had gained proficiency in controlling his 
alpha through feedback training. Alternate trials with instructions to gen¬ 
erate or suppress alpha during the image-reception period revealed sig¬ 
nificantly higher ESP scoring on the generation trials. In a correlational 
study with another experienced meditator, no significant relationship was 
found between ESP scores and alpha density either during the reception 
periods or during pretest mind-clearing periods (Stanford and Stevenson, 
1972). 

Finally, Tart (1968) found an unusual slow alpha pattern during the 
apparent time a subject reporting an out-of-body experience correctly 
identified a five-digit number (see Sec. 2.6.2d). 

3.1.1c. Alpha Density and ASCs. Studies examining the relationship 
between alpha density and ESP clearly have yielded inconsistent results. 
An experiment that may shed some light on the matter is a complex study 
by Honorton et al. (1971). This experiment, the main purpose of which 
was to examine card-guessing performance in relation to alpha feedback 
training, differed from the EEG experiments described so far in that 
subjects were asked to give periodic verbal reports of their “states of 
consciousness” during the ESP test. Although several significant relation¬ 
ships were uncovered, the analyses reported are not the most appropriate 
for documenting the point the authors wish to make. Nevertheless, it is 
clear from the overall pattern of results that positive ESP scores occurred 
most often when generation of alpha was combined with verbal reports of 
an alteration of consciousness. Although demand characteristics might 
have been a contributing factor to the results, it nonetheless would appear 
that alpha was a necessary but not sufficient condition for high scores. 
Indirect support for this latter proposition comes from a free-response 
experiment (Stanford and Palmer, 1975). Although subjects in this exper¬ 
iment who produced high percentages of alpha did not necessarily get high 
ESP scores, above-chance scoring subjects produced significantly more 
alpha during the reception period than did below-chance scoring subjects. 
Unfortunately, no state report measures were included in this experiment. 

The hypothesis that both alpha and a concomitant ASC are needed to 
boost ESP scoring levels blends well with the ASC-ESP results from 
nonphysiological experiments discussed earlier in the chapter, and it may 
help to explain the inconsistent results from EEG experiments where the 
ASC factor was not taken into account. Evidence from the non¬ 
physiological ASC literature that pronounced ASCs produce psi-miss- 
ing in some experiments might help to explain the significant negative 
correlations between alpha density and ESP found in some of the EEG 
experiments. 

If alpha is only psi-conducive to the degree it reflects an alteration of 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


127 


consciousness, one would not expect it to be a consistently successful 
predictor of ESP scoring rates. Conversely, requiring that state reports be 
accompanied by physiological indices may weed out invalid reports 
(e.g., those influenced by demand characteristics) and thereby lead to a 
strengthening for the evidence for an ASC-ESP relationship. A cogent 
argument for the “convergent operations” approach in ASC research has 
been made by Stoy va and Kamiya (1968). 

3.l.ld. Alpha Frequency . While most parapsychologists have re¬ 
stricted the EEG analyses to the study of alpha density, Rex Stanford has 
examined the frequency of the EEG (i.e., cycles per second) within the 
alpha band. In each of three experiments, he found ESP scores to be 
positively and significantly correlated with the net increase in alpha fre¬ 
quency from a pretest mind-clearing period to the test period itself (Stan¬ 
ford, 1971; Stanford and Lovin, 1970; Stanford and Stevenson, 1972). In 
two of these experiments, there was also a significant negative correlation 
between ESP scores and pretest alpha frequency (Stanford and Lovin, 
1970; Stanford and Stevenson, 1972). 

Neither of these relationships was found in a free-response experi¬ 
ment where subjects listened to Indian flute music along with a mental set 
designed to stimulate visual imagery during the pretest period (Stanford 
and Palmer, 1975). Moreover, no correlation between ESP scores and 
alpha frequency in a pretest meditation period was found in an experiment 
where the psychic Malcolm Bessent was asked to give “readings” about 
subjects’ personal lives (Stanford and Palmer, 1973). No EEG recordings 
could be taken during the readings themselves in this experiment. 

Neither of these latter experiments undermines the consistency of 
the relationship between ESP scores and pretest to test increase in alpha 
frequency, provided the pretest involves a simple mind-clearing exercise. 
Stanford interprets this finding to mean that successful subjects achieve 
an initial state of relaxation and mental quietude but then become more 
aroused during the ESP test. Unfortunately, this interpretation depends 
solely on inferences from physiological data, although its plausibility is 
reinforced by data from research bearing on the relationship between ESP 
and alpha density. 

3.l.le. Conclusion. There is no simple relationship between EEG 
alpha density and ESP scoring levels. There is some evidence that alpha 
is a facilitater of psi only if other factors are present, and the results of 
Honorton et al. (1971) suggest that one such factor may be some kind of 
ASC. Stanford has consistently found a significant relationship between 
changes in mean alpha frequency and ESP scores under certain condi¬ 
tions. Surprisingly, no other experimenters have attempted to replicate 
this work. 



128 


John Palmer 


if, as suggested in an earlier section, hypnagogiclike states may be 
psi-conducive, one might expect theta rather than alpha to be the brain 
wave pattern most closely associated with high ESP scores, especially in 
those experiments where visual mediation of ESP responses is encour¬ 
aged. This, of course, remains to be seen. Alpha, on the other hand, may 
be most desirable prior to the test, when a preparatory period of mind 
clearing may be useful. 


3.1.2. Hemispheric Specialization: Which Hand Has the ESP? 

A series of behavioral experiments not involving physiological 
measurements are included in this section because of their relevance to 
recent data disclosing different primary cognitive functions of the two 
hemispheres of the brain. This research suggests that spatial, holistic 
functions are characteristic of the right hemisphere, while verbal, analytic 
functions are more characteristic of the left hemisphere (Dimond and 
Beaumont, 1974). Given this dichotomy, ESP would appear to be primar¬ 
ily a “right-hemisphere” process (Braud, 1975b). 

Braud and Braud (1975) compared the activation of these so-called 
right- and left-hemisphere processes on immediately subsequent perfor¬ 
mance in a free-response ESP test. One group of subjects was asked to 
solve logic and math problems while the other group listened to sounds 
suggesting depth and imagery. The former, “left-hemisphere” group 
scored significantly below chance on the ESP test while the “right- 
hemisphere” group’s scores were at chance. The difference was signifi¬ 
cant. Stanford and Castello (1977) gave their subjects an ESP test disguised 
as a word association test (see Sec. 5.1.1). Half of the subjects were given 
a mental set to produce abstract associations characteristic of left- 
hemisphere functioning, and the other half were given a set to produce 
concrete associations characteristic of right-hemisphere functioning. The 
ESP scores were near chance for both groups. 

Richard Broughton hypothesized that ESP should function best 
when the ESP response is mediated as much as possible by the right 
hemisphere while the left hemisphere is occupied with a competing task. 
In the first three experiments, subjects were asked to make their ESP 
responses by lifting one of five wooden objects (each representing one of 
the five ESP symbols) with either their right or left hands. For half the 
trials the left hemisphere was occupied with a mental task (Broughton, 
1976). In two of the three experiments, significant results were obtained 
suggesting that the most ESP occurred when the response was made with 
the left hand (right hemisphere) and the left hemisphere was engaged in 
the distracting task. However, the specific effects in the two experiments 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


129 


were not the same, and the support provided for the hypothesis by the 
first experiment was rather indirect. 

In the second series of experiments, a reaction time task was used 
(Broughton, 1977a). The idea was to determine whether having an agent 
listen to a tone would influence subjects’ reaction time to that tone when 
they made their responses with their left hand (right hemisphere) but not 
their right hand. A significant interaction consistent with this hypothesis 
was found only when the subjects were engaged simultaneously in a 
“left-hemisphere” reading task. 

On the other hand, Maher and Schmeidler (1977) found significant 
ESP performance only in a condition where a “verbal” type of discrimina¬ 
tion response was made with the right hand while the left hand was en¬ 
gaged in a pattern-tracing task. This result suggested that successful ESP 
performance was being mediated by the left hemisphere, although the 
failure to find any significant differences between conditions renders the 
finding marginal. The authors suggest that either hemisphere is capable of 
showing ESP on a task related to its inherent skills but that results are 
enhanced if the other hemisphere is agreeably occupied with an irrelevant 
task. 

3.1.2a. Conclusion. More research will be needed before a distinctive 
pattern of results emerges from this paradigm. The findings so far do 
suggest, however, that dissociative states (in a more literal sense of that 
term than one usually finds in the altered states area) might be particularly 
psi-conducive. If so, it follows that persons with a natural aptitude for 
performing two competing tasks simultaneously may prove to be good 
ESP subjects. For theoretically oriented discussions of hemispheric 
specialization in relation to psi, see Broughton (1975) and Stanford and 
Castello (1977). 


3.1.3. Other Physiological Predictors: Slim Pickings 

A few experiments have explored autonomic variables as predictors 
of ESP scoring. Woodruff and Dale (1952) found no relationship between 
GSR and ESP scores in two experiments where a shock paradigm was 
used in an unsuccessful effort to reinforce correct responses. In another 
experiment, a single subject completed four BT runs in each of 37 ses¬ 
sions, alternating between a relaxed and concentrating mental set either 
within sessions or between sessions (Otani, 1955). A significant interac¬ 
tion between set and within-run change in GSR was reported, the princi¬ 
pal deviation consisting of significant psi-missing in the relaxed runs when 
GSR did not increase during the run. According to Tart (1963), an unpub¬ 
lished replication of this experiment was unsuccessful (cf. Otani, 1958). 



130 


John Palmer 


Finally, Price (1973a) reported a negative correlation (N = 5) between the 
heart rate variability of five female “psychics” while giving free-response 
“readings” of anonymous target persons and a measure of the accuracy of 
their statements. 

A review of the relationship between ESP and physiological vari¬ 
ables has been written by Beloff (1974). 

3.2. The “Psychic Personality”: Profiling the High Scorer 

Although performances on ESP tests can fluctuate widely in any 
given individual, the existence of exceptional subjects such as those de¬ 
scribed at the beginning of this chapter document the fact of individual 
differences in psychic ability. Although clinical approaches sometimes 
have been used to study psychic ability (e.g., Pratt, 1973; Tenhaeff, 1962), 
by far the most common approach has been to correlate ESP scores with 
various paper-and-pencil tests of personality. In fact, this literature has 
become quite extensive. 

In this section, I will restrict myself to an examination of the relation¬ 
ship between ESP scores and behavioral dispositions or tendencies that 
are relatively stable over time. Most personality-ESP experiments can be 
classified according to the two broad trait clusters of neuroticism and 
extraversion that frequently emerge in factor-analytic studies of personal¬ 
ity (e.g., Cattell, 1965; Eysenck, 1960), so I will begin with these two 
categories. 


3.2.1. Neuroticism: ESP Test Anxiety 

I will use the term neuroticism to refer broadly to tendencies toward 
maladaptive behavior caused either by anxiety or by defense mechanisms 
against anxiety. “Objective” personality inventories meeting this criterion 
that have been used in ESP experiments include the Taylor Manifest 
Anxiety Scale (Carpenter, 1971; Freeman and Nielsen, 1964; Honorton, 
1965; Nielsen and Freeman, 1965; Rao, 1965b; Roll and Solfvin, 1976; 
Sailaja and Rao, 1973; Schmeidler and Lindemann, 1966), the Maudsley 
or Eysenck Personality Inventory (Brodbeck, 1969; Freeman, 1972a; 
Green, 1966b; Nielsen, 1972b, c; Osis et al., 1971; Randall, 1974), Cattell’s 
16PF or HSPQ (Kanthamani and Rao, 1973a; Kramer and Terry, 1973; 
Nicol and Humphrey, 1953, 1955), the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory (Nash, 1966), Guilford’s personality scales (Crumbaugh, 1958; 
Nash and Nash, 1967; Nicol and Humphrey, 1953, 1955), Maslow’s 
Security-Insecurity Questionnaire (Smith and Humphrey, 1946; Stuart, 
Humphrey, Smith, and McMahan, 1947), Spielberger’s State-Trait Anx- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


131 


iety Inventory (Ballard, 1977), the Bernreuter Personality Inventory 
(Humphrey, 1945b; McElroy and Brown, 1950), the Heston Personal Ad¬ 
justment Inventory (Kahn, 1952), the Mental Health Analysis (Rivers, 
1950), the Mosher Sex Guilt Scale (Carpenter, 1971), and a composite 
measure of openness versus defensiveness (L. W. Braud, 1976, 1977). 
Only the experiments by Braud and by Roll and Solfvin used free- 
response methods. 

Projective measures that have been correlated with ESP scores in¬ 
clude the Rorschach (Schmeidler, 1958, 1960, 1961; Schmeidler and 
LeShan, 1970), the Blacky Test (Schmeidler, 1962a), and Kragh’s Defense 
Mechanisms Test (Carpenter, 1965; Johnson, 1974; Johnson and Kantha- 
mani, 1967; Miller and York, 1976). Only Miller and York used free- 
response methodology. 

Discounting experiments where significance was based on post hoc 
classification of subjects or analysis of extreme scorers only, just a hand¬ 
ful of experiments have yielded significant simple relationships between 
ESP and neuroticism (L. W. Braud, 1977; Carpenter, 1965; Kahn, 1952; 
Johnson and Kanthamani, 1967; Kanthamani and Rao, 1973a; Nicol and 
Humphrey, 1953; Rao, 1965b). All of these significant relationships, how¬ 
ever, have been in the direction of the least anxious or defensive subjects 
getting the highest ESP scores. The most successful predictors have been 
Cattelfs scales and the Defense Mechanisms Test, especially the latter. 

The pattern between neuroticism and ESP becomes more consistent 
when one eliminates from consideration those experiments where sub¬ 
jects were tested in a group or classroom setting. Of the remaining ex¬ 
perimental series where the direction of the effect could be determined from 
the report, the less neurotic subjects scored higher in 20 series (Carpenter, 
1965; Humphrey, 1945b; Johnson and Kanthamani, 1967; Kanthamani and 
Rao, 1973a; Miller and York, 1976; Nash, 1966; Nash and Nash, 1967; 
Nicol and Humphrey, 1953, 1955; Sailaja and Rao, 1973; Stuart et al ., 
1947), while the more neurotic subjects scored higher in only six series 
(Carpenter, 1971; Green, 1966b; Nash and Nash, 1967; Nielsen and 
Freeman, 1965; Rivers, 1950). A more detailed discussion of a similar 
breakdown is published elsewhere (Palmer, 1977). 

Interactions between neuroticism and other variables, discussed 
elsewhere in the chapter, have been reported by Carpenter (1971) and 
Schmeidler (1960). Randall (1974) found significantly high between- 
subjects variance in three of six classroom experiments among high 
school students who scored above average on the Junior Eysenck Per¬ 
sonality Inventory. 

3.2.1a. Conclusion. There is a clear trend in the data indicating that 
persons whose responses on personality tests indicate relatively good 



132 


John Palmer 


emotional adjustment score more positively on standard ESP tests than 
do more “neurotic” subjects. The results of Randall notwithstanding, the 
effect seems to be on the direction of the deviation (hitting versus miss¬ 
ing), rather than on its magnitude per se. The fact that the relationship is 
more consistent when subjects are tested individually may be because 
neurotic tendencies do not become engaged in relatively nonthreatening 
group testing situations, where a subject can “lose himself in the crowd.” 
Differences in predispositions to anxiety (which is what these personality 
inventories measure) would be expected to have their greatest influence 
when subjects must face a strange experimenter alone and have their 
performances singled out for evaluation. A possible boundary condition 
of the neuroticism-ESP relationship is discussed in Sec. 3.7.2a. 

3.2.2. Extroversion: Neuroticism's Siamese Twin? 

The second major personality variable to be correlated with ESP 
scores is extraversion. Relationships have been reported involving Cat- 
tell’s scales (Kanthamani and Rao, 1972; Nicol and Humphrey, 1953, 
1955), Eysenck’s scales (Astrom, 1965; Brodbeck, 1969; Green, 1966a,b; 
Haraldsson, 1972; Nielsen, 1972a; Osis <?/ <r//., 1971; Randall, 1974), Guil¬ 
ford’s scales (Nash and Nash, 1967; Nicol and Humphrey, 1953, 1955), the 
Bernreuter scale (Humphrey, 1945b, 1951a; Casper, 1952; McElroy and 
Brown, 1950; Nielsen, 1970), the MMPI (Nash, 1966; Szyczygielski and 
Schmeidler, 1975), a ten-item scale of unspecified origin (L. W. Braud, 
1976, 1977), experimenter ratings (Kanthamani, 1966), and clinical ratings 
of “withdrawal” in emotionally disturbed children (Shields, 1962). Only a 
handful of these authors reported significant simple relationships between 
ESP and extraversion, but all were in the direction of more positive ESP 
scores among extraverts (Astrom, 1965; L. W. Braud, 1976; Casper, 
1952; Humphrey, 1951a; Kanthamani and Rao, 1972; Nash, 1966; Shields, 
1962). A significant relationship in the same direction was also reported 
by Marsh (1962) in a free-response experiment, but I lack access to the full 
report, which presumably described the measure of extraversion used. 
Charlesworth (1975) suggested that a significant difference favoring fra¬ 
ternal as opposed to identical twins in a free-response experiment may 
have been attributable to the fact that the fraternal twins were signifi¬ 
cantly more extraverted, but no measure of extraversion was described in 
the published report. Again, the great majority of all experiments where 
the direction of the effect could be determined from the report revealed 
higher scores for extraverts, but there have been exceptions (Nash, 1966; 
Nash and Nash, 1967; Randall, 1974; Szyczygielski and Schmeidler, 
1975). Whether subjects were tested individually or in groups had less 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


133 


effect on the extraversion-ESP relationship than on the neuroticism-ESP 
relationship, so the trends reported in this paragraph are based on studies 
of both types. For a more detailed analysis, the reader again is referred to 
Palmer (1977). 

3.2.2a. Conclusion. There is a clear trend in the data indicating a 
positive relationship between social extraversion and scores on standard 
ESP tests. The trend is similar to that between neuroticism and ESP; in 
fact, the evidence for the two relationships often comes from the same 
experiments. There is a high degree of correlation between the extraver¬ 
sion and neuroticism scales that have been used in ESP research, espe¬ 
cially in those “objective” scales that have been most successful as predic¬ 
tors of ESP scores. This obviously introduces interpretational problems. 
The only attempt to partial out these effects was by Kanthamani (1968), 
who found that her significant neuroticism-ESP relationship with Cat¬ 
ted’s HSPQ survived the partialing out of extraversion but not vice versa. 

In my judgment, the most reasonable and parsimonious conclusion 
that can be drawn from the data is that there is a weak but generally 
consistent tendency for the highest ESP scores (at least on initial testing) 
to be obtained by subjects with superior social adjustment, especially as 
this affects their ability to adapt to and be comfortable in social situations 
such as psychology experiments. A stronger interpretation of the ESP- 
extraversion relationship is presented by Eysenck (1967). 


3.2.3. Other Personality Measures: Place Your Bets and . . . 

Several other personality variables have been used as predictors in 
ESP experiments, but their use has been too infrequent to allow clear 
trends to emerge. 

3.2.3a. Aggression. Some significant negative relationships between 
ESP scores and externally directed aggressiveness have been reported 
using the Rosenzweig Picture Frustration Study (Eilbert and Schmeidler, 
1950; Schmeidler, 1950, 1954) and Cason’s Test of Annoyance (Nicol and 
Humphrey, 1953, 1955). Osis found complex and inconsistent effects with 
the Rosenzweig that do not support the generality of these earlier findings 
(Osis and Fahler, 1965; Osis and Turner, 1968; Osis et al., 1971). Schmeid¬ 
ler’s results suggested that the relationship only holds for subjects who 
are “moderately annoyed” at the test, and this factor may be responsible 
for the inconsistent results. 

3.2.3b. Hypnotic Susceptibility. Using a within-subject design, Stan¬ 
ford (1972b) found that susceptibility to hypnosis as measured by the 
Barber Suggestibility Scale was positively related to ESP scores in a 
conventional card test but negatively related to scores in an “augury” test 



134 


John Palmer 


more relevant to PK. Both trends were significant, based on the pooled 
results of two series. Honorton (1969a) also found a positive (but nonsig¬ 
nificant) correlation between the BSS and card-guessing scores. In a 
GESP experiment involving a restricted range of scores on the Stanford 
Hypnotic Susceptibility Scale, McBain et al. (1970) found a significant 
positive correlation between ESP scores and the agents’ scores on the 
SHSS, but not the percipients’. Hypnotic susceptibility has not proven to 
be significantly related to ESP scores in free-response experiments 
(Palmer and Lieberman, 1976; Roll and Solfvin, 1976). For other data 
relevant to hypnotic susceptibility, see Sec. 2.6.1. 

3.2.3c. Self-Concept. In each of two experiments, Stanford (1964a, 
1965) found that subjects who believed in ESP and who scored above 
chance on an ESP card test with multiple calls (see Chapter 1,) had a 
significantly greater difference between their self- and ideal-self-concepts, 
as measured by a Semantic Differential technique, than did believers who 
scored below chance. Unfortunately, it could not be determined whether 
the mean self-ideal discrepancy of the high scorers indicated realistic 
self-perception or feelings of inferiority. 

3.2.3d. Perception of Time. Several experiments have employed a 
projective technique called the Time Metaphor Test. Designed to directly 
assess subjects’ preferred ways of viewing time, it has been shown to 
correlate with measures of need for achievement. The test does not seem 
to relate to ESP card-guessing scores in any simple way, but some com¬ 
plex effects have been reported (Goldberg, Sondow, and Schmeidler, 
1976; Heyman and Schmeidler, 1967; Mihalsky, 1972; Osis et al ., 1971; 
Schmeidler, 1964c; Taetzsch, 1965). 

32.3e. Values. Nash (1958) reported a significant positive correlation 
between ESP card-guessing scores and the religion subscale of the 
Allport-Vernon Scale of Values, but a nonsignificant relationship was 
reported by Buzby (1963). The subscale measuring a theoretical value 
orientation was not found to relate significantly to ESP scores (Schmeid¬ 
ler and McConnell, 1958). 

3.2.3f. Other Scales. Roll and Solfvin (1976) found a significant posi¬ 
tive correlation between clairvoyance but not GESP scores and the Time 
Competence Scale of the Personal Orientation Inventory in a free- 
response experiment. In another free-response experiment, Palmer and 
Lieberman (1975) reported a significant negative correlation between ESP 
scores and a projective measure of articulation of body concept. Car¬ 
penter (1973) found a significant interaction between belief in ESP and the 
California F Scale of authoritarianism as predictors of card-guessing per¬ 
formance. McGuire, Percy, and Carpenter (1974) found that scales from 
the California Psychological Inventory contributed to a multiple regres- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


135 


sion equation predicting ESP scores. Stanford (1965) found among sub¬ 
jects who believed in ESP a significant negative correlation between ESP 
scores and an item concerning the pleasure derived from touching and 
fingering physical objects. Other scales used in only one experiment that 
have failed to correlate significantly with ESP scores include Allport’s 
Ascendance-Submission Scale (Kanthamani, 1966), Rotter’s Internal- 
External Control of Reinforcement Scale (Stanford, 1972a), Rokeach’s 
Dogmatism Scale (Schmeidler and Lindemann, 1966), and the need- 
achievement subscale of the Edwards Personal Preference Schedule 
(Schmeidler and Lindemann, 1966). 

3.2.3g. Conclusion. Among these other personality variables, aggres¬ 
siveness and self-concept appear to be the most promising. More research 
with these variables will be needed, however, before any conclusions can 
be drawn. 

3.2.4. The Stuart Interest Inventory: A Case of Raw Empiricism 

Another approach to the prediction of ESP scores is represented by 
the Stuart Interest Inventory, a scale designed exclusively for ESP re¬ 
search on which subjects express their degree of liking for 60 objects and 
events on five-point scales (Stuart, 1946b). Because of earlier research 
suggesting a relationship between ESP and “affectability” (Stuart, 1941), 
scores on the scale were based upon extremity of attitude rather than 
direction. Although the specific scoring scheme Stuart used did not prove 
to be a very valid measure of affectability, a significant difference in favor 
of midrange scorers on the SI I was found in the pooled results of 32 
card-guessing series including 900 subjects (Humphrey, 1949, 1951b). 
Casper (1951), however, was unable to significantly replicate the effect 
with a sample of 146 subjects. 

Using a more empiricist approach, Humphrey (1950) submitted the 
SI I to item analysis, selecting the 14 items that best discriminated high 
and low ESP scores in three previous experiments in terms of the per¬ 
centages of subjects choosing each response alternative. The new scale 
was successfully cross-validated in 13 subsequent series but not in still 
later series (Humphrey, 1951b). However, its predictive utility was sig¬ 
nificantly confirmed in a more recent experiment (Carpenter, 1969). Hon- 
orton (1964, 1966) found that the scale successfully predicted direction of 
scoring following hypnotic induction, but not in control runs. 

3.2.4a. Conclusion. The new version of the Stuart scale shows some 
promise as a predictor of ESP scoring direction, but I wouldn’t bet my 
money on it. The old version is longer, certainly no better, and may be 
outdated. No research has been reported attempting to provide either 



136 


John Palmer 


version with any construct validity, and neither has much face validity as 
a measure of underlying dispositions that might be conceptually related to 
psi. In other words, even if the SII-ESP relationship is genuine, we have 
no idea what it means. 


33. Cognitive Variables: From Substance to Style 

In this section, we will take a look at how individual differences in 
cognitive abilities and styles are related to ESP test performance. All the 
experiments in this section used forced-choice testing procedures unless 
otherwise indicated. 


33.1. Intelligence and Scholastic Ability: IQ and Psi Q 

A number of experimenters have correlated ESP scores with scores 
on standard intelligence tests. However, sample sizes have usually been 
small and representative of a limited range of intellectual ability, e.g., 
college students. Most of these correlations have been nonsignificant, 
although predominantly in the positive direction (Bond, 1937; Drucker et 
al ., 1977; Eason and Wysocki, 1965; Humphrey, 1945a, 1948; Kanthamani 
and Rao, 1971; Nash and Nash, 1964; Nicol and Humphrey, 1953, 1955; 
Rivers, 1950; Shields, 1965; Vasse and Vasse, 1958). The few significant 
relationships have been exclusively positive (Humphrey, 1945a; Nash and 
Nash, 1958; Schmeidler, 1962a). Although this pattern suggests a positive 
relationship between ESP and intelligence in the population sampled, the 
fact that highly significant psi-hitting has been found among mentally 
retarded children (Bond, 1937; Drake, 1938) suggests caution in making 
any broad generalizations. 

A related variable that has been studied as a predictor of ESP scores 
is school grades. Anderson (1959b) reported a significant relationship be¬ 
tween ESP scores and class grades among 1,228 high school and junior 
college students. Schmeidler (1960) likewise found a significant positive 
relationship between these variables in a large sample of college students, 
but only among those who believed ESP was possible under the condi¬ 
tions of the experiment. Other experiments, however, produced nonsig¬ 
nificant relationships (Anderson and Gregory, 1959; Nash and Nash, 
1964; White and Angstadt, 1961). 

As far as interactions are concerned, Freeman (1967, 1968, 1970a) 
conducted a series of complex experiments suggesting a relationship be¬ 
tween type of target and relative spatial and verbal aptitude. These com¬ 
plex effects were not entirely consistent. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


137 


33.1a. Conclusion. Correlational studies have shown a weak but 
fairly consistent positive relationship between ESP and intelligence test 
scores within restricted samples. However, the crucial predictor variable 
may not be intelligence. For example, Anderson’s finding of a positive 
relationship between ESP scores and grades was highly confounded with 
the relationship described previously between ESP scores and teachers’ 
attitudes toward their pupils (see Sec. 2.5.2b). One interpretation of this 
pattern of results is that the brighter students feel more comfortable in the 
classroom situation than do their less intelligent counterparts, and this is 
why they score better on ESP tests. In Schmeidler’s (1960) research, a 
measure of personal adjustment produced the same pattern of results as 
described above for class grades. Although no correlation between per¬ 
sonal adjustment and class grades was reported in Schmeidler’s article, 
measures of intelligence and personal adjustment are often positively cor¬ 
related. In the context of other research findings described in the last 
section, it seems most reasonable to conclude that the positive relation¬ 
ship between ESP and intelligence, assuming its validity, is the by¬ 
product of a more fundamental relationship between ESP and personal 
adjustment. 

3.3.2. Short-Term Memory: Not Much to Remember 

Only a handful of experiments have considered individual differences 
in short-term memory in relation to ESP scoring. In a series of four 
preliminary experiments, Feather (1965) gave subjects 15 or 20 seconds to 
memorize a list of 25 ESP symbols or digits. In between memorization 
and recall the subjects completed a conventional ESP card test. Results 
for the four series pooled indicated a significant positive relationship be¬ 
tween the ESP and memory scores, and a significantly high proportion of 
subjects with “low” memory scores scored below chance on the ESP test. 
A significant confirmation of the memory-ESP correlation was obtained 
in the pooled results of three confirmatory experiments of similar design 
(Feather, 1967). However, subjects in all these experiments were given so 
little time to memorize the lists that the “memory” test may have 
functioned merely as a second ESP test, a point made by K. R. Rao 
(personal communication). 

Kanthamani and Rao (1975c) found a significant positive correlation 
between ESP scores and recall of paired associates with low association 
strength. In this case, subjects with above-median memory scores scored 
significantly above chance on the ESP test. On the other hand, Parker 
(1976) found a significant negative relationship between ESP and a mea- 



138 


John Palmer 


sure of digit-memory span, but only in one of two experiments. The overall 
mean in this experiment was very close to chance. In both sets of experi¬ 
ments, the memory test was incorporated in the ESP test. 

Other research pertinent to the memory-ESP relationship is dis¬ 
cussed in section 4.1.2d. 

33.2a. Conclusion. The few studies relating ESP to short-term 
memory have yielded inconsistent results. 


33.3 Creativity: A Creative Interpretation Needed 

An important aspect of intelligence that psychologists have found 
very difficult to quantify is creativity. In each of two experiments with 
college students, Schmeidler (1962b, 1964d) found negative correlations 
between ESP scores and two measures of creativity: a “classes-of-use” 
test and Barron’s Independence of Judgment Scale. Only one of the four 
correlations was significant. The overall negative scoring in both experi¬ 
ments suggests that the results should be interpreted as psi-missing on the 
part of the more creative subjects. 

Honorton (1967) tested high school students and found significant 
positive correlations between ESP scores and scores on a classes-of-use 
test and Torrance’s Social-Motivation Inventory. This time the more 
creative subjects averaged close to chance while the less creative subjects 
manifested significant psi-missing. McGuire et al. (1974) reported a posi¬ 
tive correlation between ESP and scores on the Welsh Figure Preference 
Test in an unspecified population, but the relationship apparently was not 
significant. 

Anderson (1966) reported the results of a classroom experiment with 
591 grade school children in which the ESP test was presented as a 
rocket-launching game. Teachers rated each pupil’s creativity on a three- 
point scale. The most creative students scored significantly above chance 
and the middle group significantly below chance. The mean of the least 
creative group was nonsignificant. Group means and the method of statis¬ 
tical analysis were not reported. Levine and Stowell (1963) reported non¬ 
significant correlations between clairvoyance scores and classes-of-use 
tests in each of two experiments. 

Finally, Moss found that pairs of subjects at least one of whom was 
engaged in an artistic profession had significantly more hits than other 
pairs in two free-response GESP experiments (Moss, 1969; Moss and 
Gengerelli, 1968). In a later study, the relationship was in the predicted 
direction but nonsignificant, perhaps due to the smaller sample size (Moss 
et al., 1970). In the first two experiments, the artistic pairs scored signifi¬ 
cantly above chance. A chi-square analysis, which I computed of results 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


139 


reported by Gelade and Harvie (1975) in an attempted replication of Moss’ 
experimental procedure, again revealed significantly more hits in pairs 
composed of two artists than in other pairs. However, in a card-guessing 
experiment, music majors were found to score no higher than other sub¬ 
jects (Jackson, Franzoi, and Schmeidler, 1977). 

3.3.3a. Conclusion . Integrating this disparate set of findings is left as 
an exercise for readers more creative than this reviewer. It is likely that 
the relationship between creativity and ESP depends on the particular 
measure of creativity used, the type of ESP test, and the nature of the 
experimental situation. Until such factors are systematically studied, 
conclusions in this area will continue to be hard to come by. 

The one consistent finding discussed in this section is a tendency for 
agent-percipient teams to be most successful in Moss’s free-response 
GESP paradigm if both members of the team are artists. Although profes¬ 
sion is only an indirect measure of creativity, it may be at least as valid as 
the direct measures currently available. Again, however, social 
psychological variables cannot be ruled out as possible mediators of this 
relationship. 


33.4. Mental Imagery: Still More Confusion 

Because of indications that ESP responses are frequently mediated 
by visual imagery (e.g., Honorton and Harper, 1974; McCallam and Hon- 
orton, 1973), a number of experimenters have recently examined ESP 
scores in relation to one of the few objectively scored measures of imag¬ 
ery, Sheehan’s (1967) version of the Betts QMI. The test requires the 
subject to generate images of various objects and events and to rate the 
vividness of each image on a seven-point scale. 

Honorton et al. (1974) found that above-average imagers on the Betts 
scored significantly above chance and below-average imagers signifi¬ 
cantly below chance on a six-run DT test. In a strict replication attempt, 
Schechter et al. (1975) obtained a significant reversal of Honorton’s find¬ 
ing, with the below-average imagers scoring significantly above chance. A 
significant negative correlation between ESP and Betts scores also was 
found by Pleshette (1975) in an ESP test completed simultaneously with 
efforts at brain wave control, but the mean ESP score was not reported. 
No significant nonartifactual relationships between ESP and Betts scores 
have been found in free-response experiments (Palmer and Lieberman, 
1975; Roll and Solfvin, 1976; Smith et al ., 1976). 

A companion scale to the Betts is the Gordon Test of Visual Imagery 
Control, in which subjects are asked how well they can manipulate im¬ 
ages. When he combined the results of two experiments using this scale, 



140 


John Palmer 


Price (1973b) found in a post hoc analysis that the scores of “autonomous” 
imagers were significantly more variable (i.e., between-subjects) than 
those of “controlled” imagers. The effect was independently significant in 
the first experiment and approached significance in the second. The two 
types of imagers also manifested significantly different run-score position 
effects (see Sec. 4.1.1) in each experiment, but the two interactions were 
not the same. 

33.4a. Conclusion. The Betts has been shown to be heavily influ¬ 
enced by subtle variations in testing conditions (Marks, 1972; Palmer and 
Lieberman, 1975; Sheehan and Neisser, 1969), and such factors conceiv¬ 
ably could be responsible for the inconsistent results with this measure. 
For a review, see Honorton (1975). More research will be needed to see if 
the Gordon scale is a more consistent predictor. 


3.3.5. Dream Recall: A Dream Yet to Come True 

A variable of possible relevance to the ability to evoke vivid visual 
imagery is the frequency with which persons recall their dreams. Honor- 
ton (1972a) found that adult education students who reported recalling 
their dreams at least once a week scored significantly above chance on a 
card-guessing test and significantly higher than the other members of the 
class. According to Honorton, a significant relationship between ESP 
scores and dream recall briefly reported by Johnson (1968) also was posi¬ 
tive. However, Haraldsson (1975, 1976) twice failed to find significant 
relationships between these variables among large samples of Icelandic 
high school, vocational school, and college students. The trend in the first 
study, at least, would seem to be inconsistent with that found by Honor- 
ton. Two classroom card-guessing experiments with British high school 
children likewise yielded no significant relation between ESP and dream 
recall (Randall, 1972). 

3.3.5a. Conclusion. A significant positive relationship between ESP 
and dream recall has been reported in two of six experiments. More data 
will be needed to determine if this indicates a genuine trend. 


3.3.6. Field Dependence: A Merging of Present and Future? 

Several tests have been devised to assess a person’s ability to differ¬ 
entiate a figure in space from its surrounding environment or “ground.” 
Persons who are relatively unsuccessful at making this discrimination are 
called “field-dependent” (Witkin, Dyk, Faterson, Goodenough, and 
Karp, 1962). A prominent measure of field dependence, the Embedded 
Figure Test (EFT), has related significantly to precognition scores in two 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


141 


experiments (Buzby, 1967a; Nash and Nash, 1968). In each case, the 
precognition scores of field-dependent subjects deviated from chance in 
either direction to a significantly greater degree than those of field- 
independent subjects. A measure of articulation of the body concept de¬ 
rived from the Draw-a-Person (DAP) test, which is positively correlated 
with the EFT, significantly differentiated subjects in the same direction as 
the EFT in the Nashes’ experiment; but it would appear that a reversal 
occurred in the research of Buzby (1968a), inasmuch as significantly high 
variance was restricted to subjects who were both field-dependent on the 
EFT and field-independent on the DAP. 

Relationships between clairvoyance scores and both the EFT and 
DAP test have consistently produced only chance results overall (Buzby, 
1967a, 1968a, b; Nash and Nash, 1968, 1971). In an experiment with grade 
school children, however, Schmeidler (1962a) found a significant positive 
correlation between clairvoyance scores and scores on a test similar to 
the EFT, a trend indicating more psi-hitting among field-independent 
subjects. 

33.6a. Conclusion. There is some preliminary evidence of a positive 
relationship between field dependence, as measured by the EFT, and the 
magnitude of precognition deviation scores, regardless of sign. Why this 
apparent relationship only holds for precognition is unclear; an admittedly 
metaphorical interpretation might be that field-dependent persons, who 
perceive more “globally,” have a less rigid psychological boundary be¬ 
tween the present and future that makes them more open to precognitive 
stimuli that more field-independent subjects tend to block out. Tart 
(1977a) proposes a somewhat similar interpretation to account for some 
precognitive displacement effects (see Sec. 6.1.1c). 


3.4. Disabilities: ESP among the Less Fortunate 

3.4.1. Mental Illness: Psi in the Psychically Disturbed 

In medieval times and even in colonial America, psychic powers 
were considered to be a form of mental illness. The infamous Salem witch 
trials bear witness to the brutality sometimes suffered by those who were 
considered to be psychic. In our now more enlightened era, ESP no 
longer is considered a mark of insanity, but the question remains whether 
those diagnosed as mentally ill on what we hope are more rational grounds 
have more or less ESP ability than the population at large. 

3.4.1a. Noninstitutionalized Patients. Hudesman and Schmeidler 
(1971) gave ESP clock-card tests to three outpatients following 



142 


John Palmer 


psychotherapy sessions. ESP scores were significantly above chance in 
sessions independently rated “good,” and they were significantly better 
than scores following sessions rated “mediocre” or “poor.” A follow-up 
experiment with two new patients failed to confirm these results, but a 
third patient showed a significant tendency to avoid both the target and its 
diametric opposite on the clock face (Hudesman and Schmeidler, 1976). 
The authors concluded that individualized hypotheses must be formulated 
for particular patients. 

Jampolsky and Haight (1975) gave various forced-choice ESP tests to 
ten hyperkinetic children and a control group. The groups did not differ 
significantly in their performance, although nine of the ten hyperkinetic 
children had scores above chance. 

3.4.1b. Institutionalized Patients. Shulman (1938) gave ten or more 
STM runs to each of 141 psychotic patients with various diagnoses. Over¬ 
all results were at chance, but he did find significant and consistent psi- 
hitting among 12 manic-depressives in the depressed state and signifi¬ 
cant psi-missing (by t test) among 9 patients afflicted with involutional 
melancholia. If valid, these findings may reflect in part the generally 
superior performance of extraverted as compared to introverted subjects. 
Shulman states that melancholia patients are considered to be more with¬ 
drawn than depression patients, and he noted this difference manifested in 
the test situation. Randall (1974) found that high school males who re¬ 
ported depression on a questionnaire had card-guessing scores that de¬ 
viated significantly from chance in either direction, i.e., significant 
“between-subjects variance.” Combined with the findings of Shulman, 
these results suggest that depression may contribute to the magnitude 
of ESP effects, while direction is influenced by other factors such as 
extraversion. 

Bates and Newton (1951) reported an experiment conducted 13 years 
earlier in which 95 patients were given a variety of forced-choice ESP 
tests. The overall results were highly significant, but there were no clear 
differences as a function of diagnostic category. Since the experimenter, 
Margaret Price, consistently obtained highly significant results with a 
variety of populations (see Pratt and Price, 1938), these results tell us 
nothing about the psychic ability of psychotics relative to other groups. 
West (1952), who has the reputation of being an unsuccessful experimenter, 
did nothing to damage his reputation in three DT series with psychotic 
patients, nor did 15 patients tested by Zorab (1957) show any evidence of 
ESP. 

Finally, Humphrey (1954) tested 28 patients before and after elec¬ 
troshock therapy and 11 others before shock only. No pre-to-post-shock 
differences were found, but post hoc analyses revealed significant pre- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


143 


shock psi-hitting among those patients diagnosed as schizophrenic. Hum¬ 
phrey found the schizophrenics to be unusually cooperative for patients 
with this diagnosis. 

3.4.1c. Conclusion. There is little evidence that mentally ill patients 
have any more or less psychic ability than anyone else. However, only 
Jampolsky’s experiment systematically compared such patients to a con¬ 
trol group. The possibility that depression may enhance the bidirectional 
magnitude of ESP effects should be explored further. The discussion of 
ESP and mood (section 3.7) will be relevant to this issue. For a more 
extensive review of the literature on psi and psychosis, see Rogo (1975). 


3.4.2. Physical Disabilities: Could the Thyroid Be the Key? 

3.4.2a. Brain Injury. Since ESP must be at least mediated by the 
brain, one might expect its manifestation to be affected by brain injury. 
Unable to find subjects with localized brain lesions, Schmeidler gave a 
ten-trial card-guessing test to 18 concussion patients and 11 controls who 
either had recently recovered from concussion or who were hospitalized 
for fractures of regions other than the head (Schmeidler and McConnell, 
1958). The concussion patients scored significantly above chance and 
significantly higher than the controls. Schmeidler noted that in compari¬ 
son to the controls, the concussion patients were extremely passive, and 
the ones who got the highest scores, in addition, were cooperative during 
the test. Smythies and Beloff (1965) found no significant card-guessing 
performance in patients suffering from Parkinson’s disease tested either 
before or after stereotactic surgery. 

3.4.2b. Blindness. Price achieved her usual highly positive scores 
with a group of blind subjects, mostly adolescents, and a partially 
matched group of orphanage children, but no significant differences be¬ 
tween them (Price, 1938; Price and Pegram, 1937). 

3.4.2c. Thyroid Conditions. A number of persons with hyperthyroid 
conditions have seemed to possess unusual psi abilities (Taves, 1944). A 
young hyperthyroid woman tested by Reiss (1937, 1939) achieved the 
incredibly high average score of 18.24 hits per run over 1,850 trials in a 
GESP distance experiment. Following an unspecified treatment, the 
mean plummetted to 5.30. Almost as impressive a scoring rate was ob¬ 
tained by an 11-year-old mentally retarded boy in GESP runs with his 
mother as agent (Drake, 1938). This child apparently had hypothyroidism, 
and his scores declined following injections of thyroxin. Unfortunately, as 
the author was aware, some of the most successful runs with this subject 
were completed with less than adequate controls for auditory cues. 

In neither of these two cases can the decline in scoring be clearly 



144 


John Palmer 


attributed to the thyroid condition (e.g., Reiss’s subject suffered an emo¬ 
tional breakdown in between the two testing periods) and things obviously 
would be clearer if both subjects had the same type of thyroid imbalance. 
Nevertheless, the fact that two of the highest scoring card-guessing sub¬ 
jects in the history of parapsychology both had thyroid conditions points 
to an area of research that has been neglected far too long. 

3.4.2d. Conclusion. All we have from the limited research on physi¬ 
cal disabilities in relation to ESP are leads. However, the lead involving 
thyroid disturbances, in particular, could prove to be a very important 
one. Brain damage also may be worth a second look. 


3.5. Biological Variables: ESP in the Life Cycle 

Although our personalities and intellectual skills are conditioned to a 
large degree by the environment, certain other characteristics are for the 
most part fixed at birth. Whether an organism comes into the world as a 
human or an infrahuman species, male or female, firstborn or later born, 
has a profound and irreversible impact on his or her life experience. All 
organisms pass through the life cycle from birth, through childhood and 
adolescence, and into adulthood and old age. How is ESP ability affected 
by these biologically determined individual differences and life processes? 

3.5.1. Sex Differences: Females Are More Intuitive , Sometimes 

It is a common belief in our society that women are more intuitive 
than men. If intuition is any way connected to ESP, one also might expect 
women to be more psychic than men and thus to obtain higher scores on 
ESP tests. 

3.5.1a. GESP Classroom Experiments. For some reason, analyses of 
sex differences have been reported most faithfully when the experiments 
involved the testing of primary or secondary school students in a 
classroom setting. Van Busschbach (1959) found that girls in the first and 
second grades of Dutch schools scored significantly higher than boys. 
However, other samples of Dutch and American school children did not 
reveal significant sex differences (Van Busschbach, 1955, 1956, 1961), and 
in some cases the boys scored better. Overall scoring generally was above 
chance in these experiments. 

Louwerens (1960) found that when the teachers served as agents in a 
GESP experiment with 684 Dutch nursery school children, the girls 
scored significantly above chance and significantly higher than the boys. 
When some of these students were retested later, however, with the ex¬ 
perimenter serving as agent, exactly the opposite result occurred. This 
time, however, the sex difference was not significant. Such reversals are 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


145 


common in ESP experiments when the same subjects are tested under 
two different conditions (Rao, 1965a), so the identity of the agent may not 
be a crucial variable. However, it is worth mentioning that the teachers 
served as agents in most of Van Busschbach’s experiments. 

In a more recent GESP experiment with 1,402 Dutch school children 
and the teacher serving as agent, girls again scored significantly higher 
than boys (Bierman and Camstra, 1973). An earlier pilot study failed to 
yield a significant difference, however. White and Angstadt (1963a, b) 
failed to find any significant sex differences in two experiments where the 
agents were classmates of the subjects, but the sample sizes were much 
smaller than those of the Dutch investigators, and the latter of White’s 
experiments produced no significant evidence of psi whatsoever. 

Finally, Van de Castle (1971) gave GESP card tests with the experi¬ 
menter as agent to two groups of adolescent Cuna Indians, a tribe inhabit¬ 
ing islands off the coast of Panama. Pooled results for the 285 subjects 
revealed that girls again scored significantly higher than boys, but the 
result was primarily attributable to a significantly high proportion of the 
boys (62%) scoring below chance. 

3.5.1b. Other GESP Experiments. In GESP experiments where sub¬ 
jects are tested individually, a common approach is to create a number of 
agent-percipient pairs. Sometimes the scores of these pairs are analyzed 
in terms of their sexual composition. McBain et al. (1970) found that 
same-sex pairs scored significantly higher than mixed-sex pairs in an ex¬ 
periment with significant overall positive scoring. However, in four 
GESP experiments in which senders attempted to bias the responses of 
naive subjects on various unstructured psychological tests (e.g., percep¬ 
tion of the autokinetic effect, awareness of subliminal stimuli), sexual 
composition of the agent-percipient pairs had no significant effect (Kreit- 
ler and Kreitler, 1972, 1973). 

In a review of the Maimonides dream experiments, Krippner (1970) 
reported that only the pooled results of male subjects were significant, 
and the results were not affected by the sex of the agent. However, it must 
be remembered that much of these data were contributed by a handful of 
highly selected subjects. In a modified ganzfeld experiment, Habel (1976) 
found significant psi-missing among all-male pairs and nonsignificant psi- 
hitting among all-female pairs, with mixed pairs scoring close to chance. 
No overall analysis comparing these groups was reported. 

3.5.1c. Clairvoyance and Precognition Experiments. Experiments 
without an agent, including those conducted in a classroom setting, have 
consistently failed to yield any significant main effects for sex. I was able 
to find 34 experiments of this type in the literature where sex breakdowns 
were mentioned, and in only two of these was there a significant main 
effect for sex (Freeman, 1963; Rao, 1963b). The boys scored highest in 



146 


John Palmer 


each of these experiments, although Freeman’s conclusion was based on 
analyses that used the trial rather than the subject as the unit of analysis. 

However, sex has occasionally been shown to interact with other 
variables as predictors of ESP scores. These variables, discussed 
elsewhere in the chapter, include type of target symbol and arrangement 
(Freeman, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1966b, 1967, 1968, 1970a,b, 1972b), language 
of ESP target words (Rao, 1963b, 1964b), belief in ESP (Layton and 
Turnbull, 1975; Schmeidler, 1960), and precognition versus clairvoyance 
(Zenhausern et aL, 1977). 

3.5.Id. Sexual Dominance . Two experimenters examined the sexual 
composition of intact groups, each predicting that scoring would be influ¬ 
enced by whether the group was dominated by males or by females. 
Mihalasky (1972) reported that some kind of complex interaction involv¬ 
ing sex of subject, whether the leadership of the group was male or 
female, and a homemade personality scale measuring “dynamism” was 
found to be in the predicted direction in 12 of 15 groups tested. In a 
simpler experiment, Friedman, Schmeidler, and Dean (1976) defined sex¬ 
ual dominance in terms of the relative numbers of each sex in the group. 
Results of a card-guessing test given to 1,100 subjects in 11 intact groups 
revealed that in groups where sexual dominance was evident, subjects of 
the dominant sex scored significantly higher than subjects of the nondom¬ 
inant sex, when the groups were pooled for analysis. Finally, Wiklund 
(1977) found on the basis of a post hoc analysis that 15 of 16 subject triads 
scored highest when the experimenter was of the opposite sex from the 
majority of the triad members. 

3.5.1e. Conclusion. There is evidence that among Dutch school chil¬ 
dren, females tend to score more positively than males in GESP card tests 
conducted in a classroom setting, at least when the agent is their teacher. 
Outside of this limited context (and with the exception of the psi-missing 
of Van de Castle’s male Cuna Indians), sex of subject seems to have no 
direct effect on ESP scoring, although it occasionally has been shown to 
interact with other predictor variables. The sexual composition of 
agent-percipient pairs in more individualized GESP experiments has 
been shown to affect scoring in some experiments, but the patterns have 
been inconsistent and probably interact with other aspects of the test 
situation. Sexual dominance may be a useful variable to examine further 
in experiments with certain intact groups. 


3.5.2. Age Differences: The Power of Youth 

It is especially difficult to study age differences in ESP test perfor¬ 
mance, particularly over a large age range, because of the problems in 
finding a test procedure suitable for all ages. Until very recently, the only 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


147 


attempt to systematically compare the performance of children and adults 
were Rhine’s early precognition experiments. In the first of three series, 
involving 19 adults, 5 children, and over 2,000 runs, the children scored 
significantly above chance and the adults significantly below chance 
(Rhine, 1941a). Two subsequent series of similar extent yielded results 
that were in the same direction but not significant (Rhine, 1942). In these 
latter experiments, the children were always tested in groups with a 
“party” atmosphere, while the adults were tested individually. Thus test¬ 
ing conditions were not very comparable for the two age groups. 

In his classroom GESP experiments, Van Busschbach (1953, 1955, 
1956) found that primary school children (ages 10 to 12) scored signifi¬ 
cantly above chance, while secondary school students (ages 12 to 20) 
scored at chance. Several thousand students were tested, and the differ¬ 
ences were significant. Bierman and Camstra (1973), on the other hand, 
failed to find such a difference in their classroom GESP experiments. 

Both Rhine and Van Busschbach relied exclusively on statistical 
techniques that indiscriminately pooled hits across subjects. Therefore, 
we have no firm basis of knowing how uniformly the effects were distrib¬ 
uted among the subjects in their samples. Practically speaking, this does 
not introduce a serious bias in Van Busschbach’s case, but it may well be 
a factor in Rhine’s, where the number of runs per subject was quite large. 

The most ambitious attempt to compare ESP test results in different 
age groups was a recent GESP experiment by Spinelli (1977). He tested 
150 children of ages 3 to 8 and 50 adults of ages 19 to 21. Subjects were 
tested in pairs, each member alternating as sender and receiver. The 
children scored above chance to a highly significant degree, while the 
adults scored close to chance. An earlier experiment with a wider range of 
ages produced comparable results, but the agents in this experiment were 
allowed to choose which target to send on each trial, a methodological 
no-no that conceivably could have biased the results. In this experiment, 
subjects from 3 to 8 scored significantly above chance while those 14 or 
older scored at chance. Van Busschbach (1959) also found significant 
scoring among children aged 6 to 8 in classroom GESP experiments con¬ 
ducted in Holland, but comparable series conducted in the United States 
yielded only chance results, a fact he attributed to poor testing conditions 
(Van Busschbach, 1961). 

The significant age differences that have been found all involved 
comparing subjects before and after puberty. Experiments comparing age 
ranges within these broader categories have failed to yield significant 
main effects (Anderson and Gregory, 1959; Anderson and McConnell, 
1961; Green, 1965; Musso, 1965; Shields, 1962; Spinelli, 1977; Van 
Busschbach, 1961; White and Angstadt, 1963a, b), with one exception 
(Van Busschbach, 1959). However, White and Angstadt (1963b) found an 



148 


John Palmer 


interaction suggesting that younger subjects were most successful in dis¬ 
criminating between two competing target sequences in the predicted 
direction. 

3.5.2ci. Conclusion. There is some evidence that children score more 
significantly and positively on forced-choice ESP tests than do adoles¬ 
cents or adults. Puberty seems to be the crucial cutoff point. However, 
the failure of fifth and sixth grade students to score any better than high 
school students in the large-scale Anderson-White clairvoyance experi¬ 
ments (see Sec. 2.5.2b) and the weakness of design of some of the confir¬ 
matory experiments suggest caution in drawing conclusions. Conceivably 
age, like sex, has a straightforward effect on scoring only in GESP exper¬ 
iments. More and better research on the relationship between age and 
ESP is needed. 


3.5.3 Birth Order: Shall the First Be First? 

In a correspondence experiment involving over 6,000 readers of a 
magazine or newspaper, Green (1965) reported a post hoc effect indicating 
that magazine readers who had been only children scored below chance 
on -1 displacement, eldest children above chance, and younger children 
at chance. The groups differed by one-way analysis of variance to a highly 
significant degree. No such effect was found with the newspaper readers, 
whom Green considered to be of generally lower economic status than the 
magazine readers. Eastman (1967) reported significant psi-hitting among 
firstborn college students, who apparently scored significantly higher than 
later born or only children. No significant birth order effects were found 
in two other experiments (Brodbeck, 1969; Schmeidler and Lindemann, 
1966). 

3.5.3a. Conclusion. Despite some suggestive evidence that psi- 
hitting may be more prevalent among eldest children, a clear trend has yet 
to be established between birth order and ESP. 


3.5.4. Twins: Togetherness Outside the Womb 

Twins often have been considered potentially ideal subjects for 
GESP experiments in which one twin would try to “send” a target to the 
other. It is tempting to speculate that twins might be particularly able to 
“tune in” to each other telepathically because of their common biological 
origin. Although such twin studies are frequently talked about, very few 
have been published in the serious literature. 

Kubis and Rouke (1937) tested six pairs of twins by having them 
respond simultaneously to cards looked at by the experimenter. Informal 
testing with two of these pairs involved having the twins take turns send- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


149 


ing to each other. Results were essentially of a chance nature, as were the 
results of a GESP experiment by Rogers (1960). Duane and Behrendt 
(1965) reported remote driving of the EEG in 2 of 15 pairs of identical 
twins. The report was very sketchy, but it would appear that alpha waves 
evoked in one twin by photic driving spontaneously and simultaneously 
appeared in the EEG of the other twin located in another room. In a 
similar experiment where an effort was made to induce plethysmographic 
reactions in a percipient by showing emotional verbal stimuli to the agent, 
friends or spouses achieved somewhat better results than did twins 
(Esser, Etter, and Chamberlain, 1967). Barron and Mordkoff (1967) found 
suggestive evidence of autonomic responses in one twin coincident with 
arousal in his counterpart, but three other pairs of identical twins produced 
null results. Nash and Buzby (1965) tested 25 pairs of twins ranging in age 
from 5 to 13. Each twin completed six DT clairvoyance runs. Overall 
results were nonsignificant, but a post hoc analysis revealed that 10 of the 
11 pairs of identical twins had overall scores of the same algebraic sign 
(i.e., either above or below chance) as compared to only 5 of 12 pairs of 
fraternal twins suitable for this analysis. The difference was significant. In 
another clairvoyance experiment, however, France and Hogan (1973) 
found no evidence of similar hit patterns between members of pairs of 
identical twins, pairs of fraternal twins, or pairs of ordinary siblings. 

The best of the twin studies was a recent experiment by Charles- 
worth (1975). Pairs of identical and fraternal twins were tested in a free- 
response GESP experiment presented in the context of an imaginary 
dream (see Sec. 2.6.2e). Each twin was sender once and receiver once. 
The fraternal twins had significantly more hits than expected by chance 
and significantly more than obtained by the identical twins, although the 
twin types apparently differed also on extraversion, a possible confound¬ 
ing variable. 

3.5.4a. Conclusion. There is no evidence that twins have any special 
aptitude for “telepathic” exchange. However, more research on the topic 
is needed, especially studies comparing twins and ordinary siblings. 


3.5.5. ESP in Animals: The Carrot and the Stick 

The suggestive evidence that children may have greater psychic abil¬ 
ity than adults seems to indicate that advanced brain activity may be 
inhibitory to psi. If this is the case, infrahuman species might be expected 
to manifest considerable ESP. There have been numerous anecdotal re¬ 
ports of ESP in animals, the best documented being so-called psi-trailing 
cases, in which pets left behind by a family when they move eventually 
turn up at the family’s new residence, often after traversing considerable 
distances (Rhine and Feather, 1962). 



150 


John Palmer 


ESP experiments involving animals have been and will be discussed 
in other sections of the chapter where appropriate. The purpose of this 
section is to briefly review these “anpsi” experiments from the standpoint 
of the evidence they provide that animals do in fact have ESP abilities. 

3.5.5a. Experiments with Cats. The first systematic attempt to dem¬ 
onstrate ESP in animals under experimental conditions was by Osis. In 
the first set of experiments, the experimenter attempted to exert a tele¬ 
pathic influence over which of two food cups kittens would approach first 
(Osis, 1952). In the second set, a clairvoyance procedure was adopted, 
the cats being required to choose which of two doorways at the end of an 
alley would lead to a food reward. Significant evidence of psi was ob¬ 
tained in both sets of experiments (Osis and Foster, 1953). Although 
controls against sensory cues were probably adequate, I would not go so 
far as to say they were ruled out. Furthermore, results of the first set of 
experiments could just as easily be attributable to the agent’s PK as to 
ESP on the part of the kittens, a possibility that exists in any GESP 
experiment with human or animal percipients. I also am not convinced 
that experimenter knowledge of the target was ruled out in the second set, 
rendering telepathy or “agent” PK as possibilities there as well. ESP and 
PK are also alternate interpretations of an experiment by Morris (1974), 
who demonstrated that the activity level of a kitten was altered when his 
master “visited” him during out-of-body experiences. Unfortunately, re¬ 
sults of later experiments when the cat was older were less consistent 
(Roll, Morris, Harary, Wells, and Hartwell, 1975). 

3.5.5b. The Shock-Avoidance Paradigm. One of the more elegant ap¬ 
proaches to testing psi in animals was the shock-avoidance paradigm of 
Duval and Montredon (1968a, b). A random number generator controlled 
the delivery of brief shocks to one or the other side of an electrified grid 
floor divided by a low barrier. The animal could avoid shock by precog¬ 
nizing on which side the shock would be delivered next and positioning 
himself on the opposite side. The procedure was completely automated 
and could be run in the experimenter’s absence, thereby reducing, if not 
entirely eliminating, the possibility of experimenter PK confounding the 
interpretation of results. 

Duval made the a priori decision to evaluate only what he called 
“random behavior trials” (RBTs), which he defined as trials during which 
the animal crossed the barrier once without the stimulus of a previous 
shock.* Cases where the animal simply stayed on the same side or 
crossed in response to shock were considered instances of stereotyped 


* Duval's criterion for RBTs did not account for double jumps within a single trial, which 
some might consider to be instances of “random behavior.” 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


151 


behavior not likely to be psi-mediated. In each of two experiments involv¬ 
ing four and ten mice, respectively, Duval demonstrated that the mice 
crossed the barrier to avoid shock significantly more often than they 
crossed into shock. Morris (1970) examined the target sequences used in 
these experiments and found them to be satisfactorily random. Such a 
test had not been reported by Duval. 

An impressive series of apparent replications and extensions of Du¬ 
val’s work was invalidated when the experimenter, Walter J. Levy, was 
caught manipulating data by his associates (Rhine, 1974). A subsequent 
series of replication attempts at Rhine’s laboratory only yielded spotty 
evidence of significance in nine experiments (Levin, 1975; Terry, 1976b), 
the average number of trials per experiment being roughly comparable to 
that reported by Duval. 

Eysenck (1975) reported the results of two shock-avoidance series 
with rats, the series differing only in the intensity of the shock adminis¬ 
tered. In the low-shock (0.1 mA) series, the animals approached the 
shock to a degree significantly greater than chance; in the higher-shock 
(0.2 mA) series, only chance results were obtained. Eysenck tentatively 
interpreted his results as supporting the applicability of optimal level 
theories of arousal to psi research. Duval, unfortunately, did not report 
the level of shock he used, so Eysenck’s results cannot be integrated with 
this previous work. 

Finally, Extra (1972) reported no overall significant scoring in two 
shock-avoidance experiments with rats, but in each case he found 
significantly greater avoidance under GESP than under clairvoyance 
conditions. 

3.5.5c. Positive-Reinforcement Paradigms. Duval’s research also led 
to attempts to see whether ESP could be demonstrated in positive- 
reinforcement paradigms. Schouten (1972) trained ten mice in a 
brightness-discrimination task. The mice were to press a black or a white 
lever for water reward when a buzzer and light came on in a correspond¬ 
ing black or white portion of the chamber. For test trials, the light 
stimulus was removed to a corresponding cage in another room and only 
the buzzer remained as a (nondiscriminable) cue stimulus. Thus the ani¬ 
mal had to use psi to determine which lever would yield reward. 

The overall results revealed a marginally significant tendency for 
animals to receive reward more frequently than expected by chance. 
However, an extensive series of follow-up experiments yielded virtually 
no evidence of psi (Schouten, 1976b). 

Nevertheless, other experimenters have reported significant results 
with positive reinforcement. In a precognition experiment otherwise simi¬ 
lar to Schouten’s, Terry and Harris (1975) trained five rats to make a 



152 


John Palmer 


brightness discrimination in a Skinner box for water reward. The rats 
scored significantly above chance in the subsequent ESP test, but only on 
RBTs. (Schouten’s significant results in 1972 also were attributable to 
such trials.) In another precognition experiment, this time with gerbils, 
Parker (1974) reported a significant excess of correct choices on all trials 
combined, but nonsignificant results were obtained in each of two inde¬ 
pendent replication attempts (Broughton and Millar, 1975). 

3.5.5d. The “Russian Roulette” Paradigm. In a third approach to 
testing ESP in animals, which I call the Russian Roulette paradigm, the 
behavior of the animals at a particular time is noted. Subsequently, some 
of the animals are randomly selected to receive a noxious stimulus (usu¬ 
ally resulting in death) while the other animals are spared. Differences in 
the preselection behavior of the two groups are interpreted as evidence 
for precognition. 

The first exploratory experiments of this type were undertaken by 
Morris (1970), who found encouraging results with both rats and goldfish, 
the behavioral measures being the amount of free-field activity. As ex¬ 
pected, the targeted rats were less active than controls (i.e., “freezing”) 
and the targeted goldfish were more active than controls. 

A series of systematic attempts to provide further evidence of ESP 
with this paradigm have been reported by James Craig. Craig and Treur- 
niet (1974) found that rats scheduled to be killed immediately after the 
experiment were more active than rats to be killed at least three weeks 
later. However, the effect was significant on only one of three activity 
measures, and no significant effects were found in a later experiment 
(Treurniet and Craig, 1975). In a related series of experiments, the be¬ 
havioral measure was which direction rats would turn at the end of a 
T-maze (Craig, 1973, 1975). For some of the rats, the decision as to 
whether death would be imminent or delayed was partly contingent on 
their choices, while for other rats it was not. In each of three experiments, 
there was no significant tendency for rats in the contingent condition to 
make choices that would postpone their deaths. There were significant 
post hoc effects in most of Craig’s experiments, but these tended to be 
inconsistent across experiments. 

3.5.5e. “Clever” Animals. Numerous accounts have appeared in the 
popular literature describing animals who seem to be able to perform 
mental feats beyond their presumed intellectual capacities, the most fa¬ 
mous perhaps being the horse Clever Hans (Pfungst, 1911/1965). It some¬ 
times is suggested that such abilities may have a psi component, although 
responses to intentional or unintentional cues by the trainer seems to be 
the preferred explanation in most cases (Rhine, 1951). 

The only experiment where ESP in such an animal has been tested 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


153 


under reasonably well-controlled conditions involved a dog named Chris, 
whose forte was answering mathematical questions by pawing an appro¬ 
priate number of times on his masters arm. Chris was trained to make 
ESP responses in this way by means of a numerical code and then tested 
on several occasions with standard card-guessing procedures (Wood and 
Cadoret, 1958). Results were significantly positive and quite impressive 
when only the trainer and/or his friends or family were present during the 
test. Less impressive but still significant psi-missing occurred when 
Cadoret, a parapsychologist, was present as an observer. 

3.5.5f. Conclusion . Although some significant evidence of ESP has 
been found in experiments with animals, the results are not noticeably 
superior to those obtained with humans. The possibility of experimenter 
or agent psi clouds the interpretation of several animal experiments. The 
positive-reinforcement paradigm seems to be slightly more promising than 
the shock-avoidance paradigm and substantially more promising than the 
Russian Roulette paradigm, trends that certainly should be greeted with 
joy by the world’s rodent population. Research with “clever” animals is 
only likely to pay off if the animal can perform in the absence of its trainer 
and other persons who might give sensory cues. An excellent review of 
most of the “anpsi” research has been written by Robert Morris (1970). 


3.6. Attitudes toward ESP: Faith Conquers All 


3.6.1. Belief in ESP: Speaking of Animals . . . 

Parapsychological jargon contains its share of colorful terms, but 
none are better known than Gertrude Schmeidler’s labels of “sheep” and 
“goats,” which she applied to believers and nonbelievers in ESP. This 
“sheep-goat effect” has become perhaps the most thoroughly studied 
relationship in the field of parapsychology. Interpretation of this deluge of 
data is not as simple and straightforward as one might expect, and to make 
sense of it we will need to introduce certain distinctions that are often 
overlooked by the experimenters themselves. 

3.6.1a. Belief in ESP—in the Test Situation . In a detailed summary of 
her early research on the sheep-goat effect, Schmeidler reported the 
results of 18 separate card-guessing series (excluding 3 that were arbitrar¬ 
ily stopped when the results reached significance), 14 of which were con¬ 
ducted in a classroom setting (Schmeidler and McConnell, 1958). A total 
of 1,248 subjects were tested in these series. Subjects were asked whether 
they believed ESP to be possible under the conditions of the experiment. 
Those who totally rejected this possibility were labeled goats and all 



154 


John Palmer 


others were labeled sheep, even those who were doubtful about it. When 
the results for both the individual and classroom series were separately 
pooled, a highly significant difference was found in each case, the sheep 
scoring significantly above chance and the goats scoring significantly 
below chance. However, the effect was an extremely weak one in terms of 
the magnitude of the deviations; the high significance levels were the 
result of the large sample sizes. 

Because the sheep-goat hypothesis is so easy to test, belief questions 
have been included in a large number of forced-choice ESP experiments 
(although not, surprisingly, in free-response experiments). However, 
many experimenters have claimed to be testing this hypothesis using 
questions and/or classification criteria that differed substantially from 
Schmeidler’s. In particular, investigators often Overlook the fact that 
Schmeidler did not ask her subjects whether ESP exists but only whether 
it can occur in the test situation. Any experienced investigator knows that 
there are many people with strong beliefs in ESP who don’t believe that it 
can be manufactured on demand in a laboratory, especially by means of 
“sterile” card tests. 

Considering only those experiments where Schmeidler’s procedure 
was replicated essentially, if not precisely, we find several significant 
confirmations of the sheep-goat hypothesis (Bevan, 1947b; Carpenter, 
1971; Eisenbud, 1965; Palmer, 1973; Schmeidler, 1971; Wilson, 1964). Car¬ 
penter’s and Eisenbud’s effects reached significance only by a one-tailed 
test, and Eisenbud’s belief question could be interpreted as referring to 
the subject’s confidence in his own scoring ability rather than his belief in 
the utility of the procedure. Another significant confirmation was re¬ 
ported by Schmeidler (1962b), but only on the basis of a secondary post 
hoc analysis. Finally, the effect was confirmed in two experiments where 
classification was based on a multiple-item scale heavily loaded with 
items reflecting Schmeidlef s criterion (Bhadra, 1966; Ryzl, 1968b). 

On the other hand, a large number of studies have produced nonsig¬ 
nificant results with this type of breakdown (Adcock and Quartermain, 
1959; Beloff and Bate, 1970; Friedman et al ., 1976; Honorton, 1972a; 
Kahn, 1952; Nash, 1965; Nash and Nash, 1967; Schmeidler, 1964e, 1968; 
Schmeidler and Craig, 1972; Schmeidler and Lewis, 1968, 1969; White and 
Angstadt, 1961; Wilson, 1964). Thus we see that only about a third of 
these replication attempts have been successful, and even this figure is 
probably too high if one takes into account publication biases. However, 
the important point is that all the significant sheep-goat differences have 
been in the predicted direction; none of the reversals has even approached 
significance. In fact, the overall pattern of results is strikingly similar to 
that of Schmeidler’s original research, where significant effects (all in the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


155 


proper direction) were found in only 4 of the 18 separate series (Schmeid- 
ler and McConnell, 1958). 

3.6.1b. Belief in ESP—in the Abstract. Questions asking subjects 
simply whether or not they believe in ESP have produced a pattern of 
results not too different from the pattern based on Schmeidler’s question. 
In these experiments, the usual procedure is either to divide subjects into 
approximately equal groups or to use correlational methods of analysis; 
classification criteria are not as precisely defined as those suggested by 
Schmeidler. Believers scored significantly higher than nonbelievers in 
four of these experiments (Barrington, 1973; Eilbert and Schmeidler, 1950; 
Haraldsson, 1976; Moss and Gengerelli, 1968). In three other experi¬ 
ments, a question of this type contributed to a multiple-item scale that 
significantly discriminated these two groups in the expected direction 
(Bhadra, 1966; Palmer and Miller, 1972; Ryzl, 1968b). One significant 
reversal has been reported (Moss et al ., 1970), but this finding is not 
particularly meaningful because the goats were preselected on the basis of 
high ESP scores in previous testing. All other experiments have yielded 
essentially chance differences (Casper, 1951; Haraldsson, 1975; Harary, 
1976; Kahn, 1952; Nash, 1958; Nash and Nash, 1967; Osis and Dean, 
1964; Palmer, 1973; Palmer et al ., 1976; Rhine, 1968; Roll and Solfvin, 
1976; Schmeidler and Lindemann, 1966; Smith and Canon, 1954; Wood¬ 
ruff and Dale, 1950). An indirect projective measure of belief in ESP has 
also yielded generally nonsignificant results so far as ESP deviation 
scores are concerned (Osis and Dean, 1964; Van de Castle, 1957; Van de 
Castle and White, 1955). 

This pattern is not quite as strong as the previous one, but it does 
seem to be nonrandom. The question then becomes whether belief in ESP 
is an independent correlate of ESP scores, or whether its discriminating 
power depends upon its confounding with Schmeidler’s criterion. Ques¬ 
tions regarding belief in ESP in the abstract and belief in ESP in the test 
situation have been directly compared in only three experiments (Kahn, 
1952; Nash and Nash, 1967; Palmer, 1973). Only Palmer’s experiment 
yielded a significant attitude effect. In this case, the sheep-goat hypothe¬ 
sis was significantly confirmed using a slightly modified version of 
Schmeidler’ s classification, while the abstract belief question resulted in a 
nonsignificant reversal. 

There also have been a number of experiments that I have seen only 
in abstract form where sheep-goat questions were included in the design 
and the results of the relevant analyses were either reported as nonsig¬ 
nificant (Banham, 1968; Crumbaugh, 1958; Gerstein and Merker, 1964; 
Jackson et al ., 1977; McGuire et al ., 1974; Peterson, 1972; Taetzsch, 
1964, 1965) or not reported at all (Carpenter, 1973; Dean and Taetzsch, 



156 


John Palmer 


1963; Nash, 1964; Rogers, 1967c). It would appear likely from the 
abstracts that most if not all of these authors defined the sheep-goat 
variable in terms of belief in ESP in the abstract. 

At this point, the most reasonable conclusion would seem to be that 
abstract belief in ESP is not an independently valid predictor of ESP 
scores. 

3.6.1c. Manipulating Belief. Some experimenters have sought not 
only to measure already existing belief in ESP but to manipulate such 
beliefs experimentally. Layton and Turnbull (1975) instructed an experi¬ 
menter to tell one group of subjects that the existence of ESP had been 
scientifically verified and that he expected it to be demonstrated in this 
test, but to give a second group the opposite information. Although the 
manipulation was apparently effective in creating the appropriate beliefs, 
a straightforward confirmation of the sheep-goat hypothesis was not ob¬ 
tained in either of two experiments. 

Taddonio (1975), on the other hand, obtained significant confirma¬ 
tions of the hypothesis in each of two experiments of similar design to 
Layton’s, the effect in each case being strongest among subjects who were 
undecided about their own ability to score well on ESP tests before the 
session began. Perhaps Taddonio’s experiments were more successful than 
Layton’s because her belief manipulation stressed the adequacy of the 
test for measuring ESP, whereas Layton stressed the existence of ESP 
per se. 

Two other experimenters also attempted to manipulate subjects’ be¬ 
liefs by identifying themselves with attitudes either favorable or unfavor¬ 
able to the ESP hypothesis (Alkokar, 1968; Waldron, 1959). Both experi¬ 
ments yielded significant results, but they were more complex than those 
of Taddonio. 

3.6.1d. Variance Effects. Several experimenters have examined be¬ 
lief in ESP in relation to ESP variance measures. Although Schmeidler 
and McConnell found no significant difference between the scores of 
sheep and goats with respect to run-score variance (Schmeidler and 
McConnell, 1958), three other investigators reported results that gener¬ 
ally indicated higher run-score variance among goats and conflicted sub¬ 
jects than among sheep (Nash and Nash, 1958; Osis and Dean, 1964; Van 
de Castle, 1957). 

Van de Castle and Osis in their experiments also examined the vari¬ 
ance of subjects’ total scores, where the finding was that such variance 
was greater among extreme sheep and conflicted subjects than among 
goats and less enthusiastic sheep. Buzby (1967b) found significantly 
higher between-subjects variance among sheep who were “vitally” in¬ 
terested in ESP than among sheep whose interest was only “casual.” The 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


157 


effect was significant in two independent series, but it only appeared in 
precognition (in contrast to clairvoyance) runs, and the effect could not be 
replicated by Nash and Nash (1968). Finally, Jones and Feather (1969) 
found consistently higher between-subjects variance among persons who 
reported a variety of psychic experiences than among less “psychic” indi¬ 
viduals. It is usually safe to assume that persons who have had a variety 
of psychic experiences believe strongly in ESP, although Jones reported 
no data on this point. 

In a tentative attempt to integrate the results of the variance studies, 
Palmer (1972) suggested that extreme sheep, and perhaps others who are 
strongly involved emotionally with the issue of ESP, produce the 
strongest and most reliable scores on ESP tests, but that some of these 
subjects score above chance and others below. This inference was based 
primarily on trends that indicate high between-subjects variance and low 
run-score variance among extreme sheep. 

This factor conceivably could explain a tendency noted in some 
sheep-goat data for the highest scoring subjects to be those who think a 
positive outcome in the experiment to be possible but not likely (Fried¬ 
man et al ., 1976; Palmer and Miller, 1972; Schmeidler, 1968; Schmeidler 
and McConnell, 1958). In other words, there is a tendency for the mean of 
the more extreme sheep to regress back to chance, a tendency that might 
be attributable to a cancellation of high- and low-scoring subjects. An 
alternative interpretation of this regression is suggested by an experiment 
of Stanford (1964b), who found that scores of extreme sheep declined 
within the run, while scores of other subjects inclined. Stanford only gave 
his subjects one run, but if the decline of his extreme sheep is the kind of 
thing that can continue beyond one run, it could lead to mean differences 
between extreme and moderate sheep in multirun experiments. However, 
it should be emphasized that evidence for lower mean scores among ex¬ 
treme than moderate sheep is only suggestive, and there is at least one 
significant exception (McBain et al ., 1970). 

3.6.1e. Interaction Effects. Because of the fragility of the sheep-goat 
effect, it is fortunate that several investigators have looked for interac¬ 
tions between belief in ESP and other variables as predictors of ESP 
scores. The other predictor that has recieved the most attention so far is 
sex differences. In secondary analyses of her original series of sheep-goat 
experiments, Schmeidler (1960) found a significant interaction indicating 
that the sheep-goat effect was strongest for females. Layton and Turnbull 
(1975) found a similar interaction favoring females in the first of two 
experiments in which belief was experimentally manipulated, but the ef¬ 
fect did not reappear in the replication attempt. These results prompted 
me to look for this interaction in data I had recently reported (Palmer et 



158 


John Palmer 


a/., 1976). I also found a significant interaction (F = 4.77, df= 1/1708,/? < 
.05), but this time the predicted effect occurred only for males. 

Another set of secondary analyses caused Schmeidler to conclude 
that the sheep-goat effect in her original studies did not appear for sub¬ 
jects who showed signs of maladjustment on the Rorschach (Schmeidler, 
1960). Carpenter (1971) found a complex interaction between belief in 
ESP, a measure of sex guilt, and whether ESP targets were accompanied 
by erotic photographs (see Sec. 5.1.2). In an experiment devoid of goats, 
Nielsen (1970) reported that sheep scored significantly above chance and 
significantly higher than “open-minded” subjects, but only in sessions 
where they rated their moods as either extremely positive or extremely 
negative. Finally, Palmer and Miller (1972) found a significant interaction 
indicating that the sheep-goat effect was eliminated when a monetary 
reward was offered for the highest score. 

3.6.1f Conclusion. Research described by Schmeidler and McCon¬ 
nell (1958) provides strong evidence that subjects who believe ESP to be 
possible under the conditions of the experiment score more positively on 
card-guessing tests than subjects who do not. Although most smaller- 
scale replication attempts have failed to produce significant confirmations 
of this finding, the fact that all the significant effects have been in the 
predicted direction reinforces Schmeidler’s conclusion. Still further sup¬ 
port comes from experiments in which the sheep-goat question was 
phrased in terms of belief in ESP in the abstract, although the results 
suggest that Schmeidlef s classification scheme is the most effective. At¬ 
tempts to influence ESP scoring by manipulating belief in ESP have pro¬ 
duced mixed results. 

The results of variance studies suggest, among other things, that 
strong or emotionally involved believers in ESP have a tendency to score 
reliably above or below chance on ESP tests, possibly contributing to a 
suggestive tendency for extreme sheep to average closer to chance on 
ESP card tests than moderate sheep. Evidence of within-run decline ef¬ 
fects among extreme sheep suggests an alternate explanation of this ap¬ 
parent regression. 

Belief in ESP has shown a tendency to interact with other variables 
such as sex, mood, and emotional adjustment as predictors of ESP scor¬ 
ing. However, the direction of such interactions may depend on situa¬ 
tional factors not now understood. 


3.6.2. Questions Related to Belief: Wolves in Sheep’s Clothing 

Sheep-goat experiments frequently include questions that are re¬ 
lated to belief in ESP, but deal with other aspects of subjects’ cognitions 
about this topic. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


159 


3.6.2a. Psychic Experiences. One such question concerns whether 
the subject has ever had a psychic experience or belives that he is 
“psychic.” In only two cases have subjects admitting such experiences or 
talent scored significantly higher than other subjects (Alkokar and Desh- 
pande, 1966; Moss and Gengerelli, 1968), the latter being a free- 
response experiment. Such a question was included in the successful 
composite scales of Bhadra (1966) and Palmer and Miller (1972), but in the 
latter, at least, its contribution to the scale’s success was considerably less 
than the contribution of the abstract belief question. Beloff and Bate 
(1970) found that subjects who believed they had psychic ability scored 
differently from other subjects to a significant degree across seven sam¬ 
ples, but the direction of the effect differed from sample to sample. Also, 
Jones and Feather (1969) found significantly higher between-subject vari¬ 
ance among subjects who reported a relatively wide range of psychic 
experiences. Otherwise, this question has failed to yield significant dis¬ 
criminations (Casper, 1951; Gelade and Harvie, 1975; Harary, 1976; 
Moss, 1969; Osis and Dean, 1964; Palmer, 1973; Roll and Solfvin, 1976; 
Schmeidler, 1964e, 1968, 1971; Schmeidler and Lindemann, 1966; Wood¬ 
ruff and Dale, 1950). 

3.6.2b. Confidence of Success. Sheep-goat experiments often in¬ 
clude a question asking how well the subjects themselves think they will 
score or have just scored on the ESP test. The only experiment I can find 
in the literature where such predictions proved to be accurate involved 
Argentine grade school children (Musso, 1965), although Eisenbud’s 
(1965) experiment may also qualify if the belief question is interpreted as a 
confidence question. Nash (1958) found a significant negative relationship 
between predictions of success and actual ESP scores. A confidence item 
was included in two of the successful composite scales (Bhadra, 1966; 
Palmer and Miller, 1972), but its contribution to the success of the latter 
experiment, at least, was negligible. Schmeidler (1971) found that subjects 
who predicted above-chance scores revealed a significantly different rela¬ 
tionship between a composite mood scale and ESP run-score variance 
than did subjects who did not predict above-chance scores. 

Confidence items have failed to yield significant discriminations in 
numerous other forced-choice experiments (Eilbert and Schmeidler, 1950; 
Friedman et al ., 1976; Kahn, 1952; Michie and West, 1957; Osis and 
Dean, 1964; Palmer, 1973; Ryzl, 1968a; Schmeidler, 1964e, 1971; Schmeid¬ 
ler and Craig, 1972; Woodruff and Dale, 1950). Schmeidler (1964e) found 
that her subjects could make significantly accurate predictions on a run- 
by-run basis, but subjects tested by Nash (1960a) were not so successful. 
Expectancy of success has also been a poor predictor in free-response 
experiments (Braud and Braud, 1974; Braud et al ., 1975; Parker et al ., 
1977; Stanford and Mayer, 1974), although complex curvilinear effects 



160 


John Palmer 


were found in two experiments where subjects were given the mental set 
to have out-of-body experiences during the session (Palmer and Lieber- 
man, 1975; Palmer and Vassar, 1974). 

To keep things in perspective, it should be pointed out that simple 
questions asking a person how well he expects to perform on a test, 
because they get into the area of personal competence, are very suscepti¬ 
ble to response biases. Genuine confidence, a rather rare commodity in 
ESP tests, may yet prove to be helpful. In fact, the creation of such 

confidence is one explanation of why hypnosis seems to facilitate ESP 
(see Sec. 2.6.1a). 

3.6.2c. Attitude toward ESP. Finally, several experiments have in¬ 
cluded questions addressing subjects’ “attitudes” toward ESP as distinct 
from their “beliefs” about its existence (see Fishbein and Raven, 1967). In 
other words, these questions refer to whether the subject would like for 
ESP to exist. The results can be succinctly summarized by saying that no 
significant or consistent relationship between attitudes toward ESP and 
ESP scores has been uncovered (Kahn, 1952; Layton and Turnbull, 1975; 
Ryzl, 1968a; Schmeidler and Lindemann, 1966). 

3.6.2d. Conclusion. Neither previous psychic experiences nor pre¬ 
dictions of ESP scores nor attitude toward ESP have been shown 
to correlate with ESP test performance in a straightforward manner, 

although any or all of them may interact with other variables in this 
capacity. 

For a detailed review of the sheep-goat literature and studies on 
related questions, see Palmer (1971, 1972). 


3.7. Spontaneous Transient States: Good Days and Bad Days 

3.7.1. Mood and Emotional Variables: The Effect of Affect 

Personality traits and attitudes are less likely to influence ESP per¬ 
formance directly than through the mediation of dispositions that are 
present at the time of the test itself. Spielberger (1966) has operationalized 
this notion with his “state-trait” theory of anxiety. If this reasoning is 
valid, one might expect measures of a subject’s mood, anxiety, or other 
emotional states to be associated with ESP scores, perhaps to an even 
greater degree than underlying trait measures. 

Two classes of ESP experiments are relevant to this issue. The first 
group of studies deal with what might be called the subject’s mood, i.e., 
how good or bad he or she feels, or how much he or she feels like taking 
the test. The second group of studies have sought to define these affective 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


161 


states more precisely, dealing with predictor variables such as state anx¬ 
iety, surgency, and social affection. 

3.7.1a. General Mood. One of the first mood studies was a corre¬ 
spondence experiment conducted in England by Fisk and West (1956). 
Fisk displayed three clock-card targets in his home each day, which sub¬ 
jects were asked to identify from their homes. There were 162 subjects 
who completed at least the minimum of 96 trials, and most of these filled 
out a simple scale rating their moods at each session on a continuum from 
“elation” to “depression.” Sessions where subjects’ moods were classified 
as “pleasureable” were associated with significantly positive scoring, 
while the outcomes with other moods depended upon how the results 
were analyzed. 

The bulk of subsequent mood studies have been conducted by 
three investigators: Winnifred Nielsen, David Rogers, and James Car¬ 
penter. The most elaborate approach has been that of Nielsen, who has 
attempted to explore the interaction between mood and personality vari¬ 
ables. In her first experiment (Nielsen, 1956b), eight subjects completed 
20 sessions, each of which included five precognition runs and a three- 
part mood scale measuring physical, mental, and emotional vitality. Be¬ 
cause a precognition procedure was used, subjects could complete the 
sessions at home anytime they wished. The results indicated that signifi¬ 
cant above-chance scoring was restricted to subjects who rated their 
moods consistently across all three subscales within the session, regard¬ 
less of whether the mood was pleasant or unpleasant. Nielsen interpreted 
this as a relationship between ESP scores and extremeness of mood. In a 
follow-up experiment (Nielsen, 1970), the same effect was found using the 
same mood scale scored in a way that more directly measured extreme¬ 
ness rather than consistency of mood. However, the effect reversed for a 
small subsample who were not believers in ESP. 

Secondary analyses of these two experiments, plus a third experi¬ 
ment briefly discussed by Nielsen (1970), revealed another interaction. 
This one indicated the relationship between ESP scores and extremity of 
mood consistently appeared only for subjects classified as introverted on 
the Bernreuter Personality Inventory. Nielsen explored this interaction 
further in a series of 12 experiments with high school and college students 
tested in a classroom setting (Nielsen, 1972a, 1972b). The Eysenck Per¬ 
sonality Inventory was substituted for the Bernreuter, and subjects’ re¬ 
sponses were scored against both their own individual target orders and a 
single target order for the whole group. Unfortunately, the reports of this 
research are quite sketchy. In general, though, the results seem to confirm 
the previously reported interaction between introversion and extremity of 
mood for individual targets. In one experiment, however, it was the rela- 



162 


John Palmer 


tively neurotic (rather than introverted) subjects on the EPI who showed 
the mood effect (Nielsen, 1972b), and a complex interaction generally 
consistent with this latter finding also was reported by Freeman (1972a). 

Since the Bernreuter “introversion” scale is as much a measure of 
neuroticism as of introversion, perhaps the best way to summarize 
Nielsen’s overall results is to say that anxious, introverted subjects 
tended to obtain positive ESP scores when they were in extremely pleas¬ 
ant or extremely unpleasant moods, in marked contrast to their usual 
tendency to obtain negative scores (see Sec. 3.2.2). 

Both Rogers and Carpenter found that mood was related to the vari¬ 
ability of ESP run scores (regardless of direction) around MCE. Effects 
involving the more common ESP deviation scores were either not sig- 
nificant or not reported. 

The simpler of these two paradigms was that of Rogers (1967b), 
whose subjects were asked to complete standard precognition runs at 
times when they were either in a good mood (and really wanted to take the 
test) or in a bad mood. This stipulation probably led to more variability on 
the mood dimension than occurred in Nielsen’s experiments. Both in this 
experiment and in an earlier experiment where Rogers tested himself 
(Rogers, 1966), there was significantly below-chance variance (i.e., run 
scores consistently close to five) in the negative mood state, and nonsig¬ 
nificant above-chance variance in the positive mood state. In each exper¬ 
iment, the variances in the two conditions differed significantly. 

Carpenter had his subjects complete precognition runs (four or five 
per session) at their leisure. His subjects also filled out at each session a 
mood scale consisting of items selected from Nowlis’s mood adjective 
checklist. In each of three experiments, an interaction was found between 
pleasantness and extremity of mood in relation to ESP run-score variance 
(Carpenter, 1968, 1969). Variance was consistently higher in moderately 
pleasant than in moderately unpleasant moods (this subeffect was inde¬ 
pendently significant in two of the three experiments), but in sessions 
where moods were rated as extreme, unpleasant moods were associated 
with the higher variance. 

Carpenter (1973) briefly reported on five subsequent experiments of 
similar design, using a truncated mood scale that consisted only of items 
that were significant predictors of ESP scores in his previous experi¬ 
ments. In two of the five experiments, this new scale significantly rep¬ 
licated the effect found previously, and there were clear trends in the 
predicted direction in two others. Two experiments revealed interactions 
between this effect and attitude or personality variables, suggesting that a 
systematic multivariate approach might result in greater predictability. 

Carpenter’s results are similar to those obtained by Rogers, but only 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


163 


if one assumes that Rogers’ subjects were in “moderate” moods when 
they completed their ESP runs. As mentioned before, the instructions 
Rogers gave his subjects would seem to encourage them to do their runs 
when they were in “extreme” moods. Also, the effect with Rogers’s sub¬ 
jects was contributed primarily by low variance in negative moods. On 
the other hand, the effect in Carpenter’s moderate-mood sessions con¬ 
sisted predominantly of high variance in positive moods (at least in the 
earlier experiments, where mean scores were reported). 

Mood questions have occasionally been included as secondary vari¬ 
ables in other experiments. In forced-choice experiments, simple mood 
questions have failed to correlate significantly with ESP deviation scores 
(Banham, 1974; Mussig and Dean, 1967; Nash, 1958; Palmer^/ al ., 1976; 
Pleshette, 1975; Woodruff and Dale, 1950), but the more substantive re¬ 
search discussed above suggests that such simple effects should not be 
expected. 

Simple relationships between mood and ESP scores also have not 
been found in free-response experiments (Braud and Braud, 1974; Braud 
et al ., 1975; Palmer and Vassar, 1974; Parker et al ., 1977; Stanford and 
Mayer, 1974). Stanford and Mayer found the best scoring among subjects 
who were not in the mood to take the test but in a good mood generally. 
However, such an effect has not been reported (or looked for) in other 
free-response experiments. 

3.7.1b. Discrete Affective States. Schmeidlefs approach to the 
mood-ESP question has been to examine ESP scores in relation to sub¬ 
jects’ self-ratings of more precisely defined affective states, based on 
Nowlis’s adjective checklist. In her first series of three experiments 
(Schmeidler, 1971), a complex but consistent relationship was found be¬ 
tween ESP run-score variance and a composite mood index including the 
sum of “concentration,” “surgency,” and social affection in one of the 
two groups tested. Generally speaking, this index correlated negatively 
with the variance scores for subjects who predicted high scores for them¬ 
selves on the ESP test; among the remaining subjects, the correlation was 
positive. The correlations from the two subgroups differed significantly in 
each of the two experiments where the scoring predictions were re¬ 
quested, the results of the first experiment providing the hypothesis for 
the second. These latter two experiments involved group testing of the 
same high school students. 

This pattern of results did not appear to a significant degree in any of 
three subsequent group experiments representing highly divergent subject 
populations (Schmeidler and Craig, 1972). A somewhat similar pattern 
appeared for the only group that was composed of students, but only in 
the first of two sessions. Having anticipated that the affect-ESP relation- 



164 


John Palmer 


ship would differ for different groups, Schmeidler s strategy again was to 
use each group’s results in a first session to predict that group’s results in a 
second session. This strategy was successful for only one of the three 
groups. In this group, which consisted of young businessmen, a positive 
correlation between ESP deviation scores and a mood index of egotism 
minus the sum of aggression and anxiety was independently significant in 
both sessions. 

In a more recent experiment, Hudesman and Schmeidler (1976) gave 
a clock-card ESP test and the Nowlis checklist to a psychotherapy patient 
at the beginning and end of a series of therapy sessions. The results 
indicated that high ESP scores were associated with hostility and low 
scores with depression. Given the obsessive-compulsive nature of the 
patient’s neurosis, these findings suggest that ESP scores were highest 
when the patient’s defenses were being successfully mobilized. The au¬ 
thors speculate that ESP tests may have value as a projective technique in 
psychotherapy. 

Whereas Schmeidler depended upon “eyeball” detection of patterns 
within a matrix of bivariate correlations, other investigators have em¬ 
ployed multivariate statistical techniques to study the relationship be¬ 
tween ESP scores and discrete affective states (Friedman et al ., 1976; 
McGuire et al., 1974; Osis and Bokert, 1971; Osis and Turner, 1968; Osis 
et al., 1971). While all of these reports claimed to have demonstrated some 
kind of significant relationship between ESP and affect, the effects were 
predominantly post hoc and directional trends were consistently inconsis¬ 
tent (to coin a phrase) across samples. 

A handful of experiments have focused more exclusively on what 
might be called “state anxiety.” In two of three experiments with Indian 
college students, Sailaja and Rao (1973) found that subjects rated as “ner¬ 
vous” during a job interview scored significantly higher than subjects 
rated as “confident.” In both cases, I computed t tests that indicated that 
the nervous subjects scored significantly above chance. The ESP test had 
been presented to subjects as one criterion for employment. This finding 
is puzzling in the context of studies with trait measures that suggest that 
low-anxious subjects score best on ESP tests. In fact, results with the 
Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale indicated slightly better performance 
among Sailaja’s less anxious subjects, contrary to the “nervousness” 
ratings. The authors suggest that nervousness may reflect strong motiva¬ 
tion to get the job, rather than anxiety. Finally, Ballard (1977) reported a 
post hoc effect indicating that subjects who showed the greatest decrease 
in “state anxiety” (as measured by Spielberger’s scale) following a pretest 
relaxation exercise scored significantly higher on ESP targets clandes¬ 
tinely matched with erotic photographs than did other subjects. Other 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


165 


findings discussed in section 2.6 on altered states are also relevant, espe¬ 
cially those that demonstrated a relationship between ESP scores and 
subjective reactions to induction techniques. 

3.7.1c. Conclusion. No simple statement that has any generality can 
be made regarding the relationship between ESP and affective states, 
except for the highly nonspecific comment that the magnitude of the affect 
seems to be at least as important as its hedonic tone. The pattern among 
simple “mood” studies seems to be for one experimenter to consistently 
obtain a certain complex effect that differs from the consistent complex 
effect obtained by another experimenter using superficially similar proce¬ 
dures. There is some similarity, however, in the patterns of results ob¬ 
tained by Rogers and Carpenter. Results from studies attempting to look 
at more discrete affective states can only be described as chaotic. Never¬ 
theless, it is evident that mood variables can influence ESP scoring, but 
they do so by interacting with other variables in complex ways that we are 
only beginning to understand. Such interactions may well provide the key 
for unlocking the mystery of how to make ESP more reliable. From a 
more cynical point of view, these complex results suggest that experimen¬ 
ters make an effort to either control affective states (if this is possible) or 
at least measure them, if for no other reason than to partial out their 
confounding effects on more tractable relationships. 


3.7.2. Graphic Expansiveness: State or Trait? 

A projective personality test that I did not include in the section on 
personality traits involves ratings of the graphic expansiveness of 
freehand drawings. Because of evidence that such drawing tendencies 
often change from session to session and can be influenced by the test 
situation (see Humphrey, 1946b; West, 1950), I have included this discus¬ 
sion in the section on transient states. Although the transient state re¬ 
flected by these drawings has never been specified, one might speculate 
that “expansive” drawings (i.e., those made in a free-and-easy style using 
a large amount of the sheet) reflect a more positive and uninhibited mood 
or response set than do “compressive” drawings. 

Graphic expansiveness has been incorporated in a number of ESP 
drawing experiments by having the ESP responses themselves rated on 
this dimension. Generally speaking, results have revealed a tendency for 
expansive drawings to yield higher ESP scores than compressive draw¬ 
ings in clairvoyance tests, but a reversal of this trend in GESP tests 
(Bevan, 1947a, b; Humphrey, 1946a, b; Stuart et al., 1947). A minority of 
studies have shown nonsignificant reversals of this pattern, however 
(Nash and Richards, 1947; West, 1950). Graphic expansiveness has also 



166 


John Palmer 


been used as a predictor of performance in card-guessing tests conducted 
at the same session. These experiments have yielded the same pattern as 
the drawing experiments, although not quite as strongly (Bevan, 1947a; 
Casper 1951; Kahn, 1952; Kanthamani and Rao, 1973b; McMahan, 1946; 
Smith and Humphrey, 1946; Stuart et al ., 1947; West, 1950). For both 
types of ESP tests, the results suggest that graphic expansiveness affects 
the direction of scoring rather than the absolute magnitude of the devia¬ 
tion from chance. A more detailed analysis of the above trends is pre¬ 
sented elsewhere (Palmer, 1977). 

Further evidence that a “compressive” attitude may facilitate hitting 
in GESP tests comes from a classroom experiment that provided data for 
some of Humphrey’s analyses referred to in the previous paragraph 
(Stuart, 1945). Stuart manipulated mental set directly by having subjects 
make half of their drawings in an “unrestricted” manner (either “automati¬ 
cally” or by means of “free association”) and the other half in a “limited” 
manner (by concentrating on either the agent or an object). Significant 
psi-missing occurred with the “unrestricted” set, while the “limited” set 
produced nonsignificant psi-hitting. The difference was significant. How¬ 
ever, this effect could not be repeated in a follow-up experiment also 
considered by Humphrey, possibly because subjects were given less time 
to make their drawings (Stuart, 1947). There is indirect evidence that 
psi-hitting was transformed into +1 displacement among subjects who 
felt “rushed” in this latter experiment (see Sec. 2.3.1). Unfortunately, in 
neither experiment is it reported whether the induced sets influenced the 
actual expansiveness of the drawings. 

3.7.2a. Conclusion. Although systematic within-experiment or 
within-session comparisons are generally lacking, there is a quite consis¬ 
tent tendency for expansiveness of freehand drawings to be associated 
with relatively positive ESP scoring in clairvoyance experiments and rela¬ 
tively negative scoring in GESP experiments. The reason for the interac¬ 
tion is unclear, although Humphrey (1946b) has speculated that “compres¬ 
siveness” in the GESP situation may indicate social responsiveness to the 
agent that might be helpful in this type of test. 

Despite the deficiencies of expansiveness ratings as a trait measure, 
they do possess some construct validity as a measure of emotional ad¬ 
justment (Elkisch, 1945; Humphrey, 1946a). Interpreted as such, they 
support my previously stated conclusion of a positive relationship be¬ 
tween ESP scores and trait measures of emotional adjustment only with 
respect to clairvoyance tests. Since most of the experiments supporting 
this relationship that I discussed in the section on personality traits (Sec. 
3.2) also used clairvoyance (precognition) procedures, the findings on 
graphic expansiveness raise the possibility that the relationship should 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


167 


not be generalized to GESP tests. More research will be needed to shed 
light on this matter. 


4. Toward More Reliable ESP 

A major concern of most thoughtful parapsychologists is how to 
make ESP more reliable. I have really been addressing this question 
indirectly all along. Experimenters customarily choose the procedures 
they will adopt and the kinds of subjects they will test with precisely this 
goal in mind. Any knowledge they gain about the effects of manipulations 
and individual differences on ESP scores contributes to our understand¬ 
ing of how to make ESP more reliable. 

I have set aside for special consideration in this section two topics 
whose relevance to this issue is somewhat more direct than that of topics 
discussed so far. The first has to do with attempts to segregate particular 
responses or sets of responses that are likely to be ESP hits. The second 
has to do with attempts to actually increase the incidence of these “psi- 
prone” trials by means of training. 


4.1. Psi-Prone Trials: Separating the Wheat from the Chaff 

When a subject makes a series of responses on a forced-choice ESP 
test, it is quite possible that some responses will be more likely to be 
influenced by ESP than other responses. If these psi-prone trials could be 
identified independently of the actual scores, the information yield of ESP 
data could be increased, perhaps substantially. In this section, I will 
examine three approaches parapsychologists have utilized in their efforts 
to define psi-prone trials. 


4.1.1. Position Effects: The Salience oflJ 

This first approach attempts to designate psi-prone trials in terms of 
their position in the run. Its use has been restricted almost exclusively to 
standard card tests using the five ESP symbols. In his first monograph, 
Rhine (1934/1973) reported that when DT procedures were used, most of 
his star subjects produced U curves, defined as the highest scoring on the 
first and last five-trial segments of the run. However, one subject pro¬ 
duced an inverted U function, indicative of better scoring in the middle of 
the run. When procedures such as BT were used that required the subject 
to make his calls more slowly and deliberately, a decline effect (i.e., 



168 


John Palmer 


above-chance scoring declining to chance as the run proceeded) was the 
most common tendency. 

4.1.1a. The “DT Curve .” Rhine attributed this U curve (or DT 
curve, as it was often called) to a kind of “salience” of the end points of the 
run, which was only apparent when the structure of the run as a unit of 25 
trials was clear to the subject. He argued that such structure was more 
evident with the DT procedure than with other procedures, hence the 
preponderance of U curves with this method. He suggested that ESP was 
concentrated at the beginning and end of DT runs because it is at these 
stages that spontaneity would be at a maximum and mechanical guessing 
patterns least operative (Rhine, 1969a). 

A large-scale experiment in which 30 adult and child subjects com¬ 
pleted a total of 1,114 DT runs reinforced Rhine’s earlier observation 
(Rhine, 1941b). Overall scoring was significantly below chance, and a plot 
of the deviation scores on the five segments of the run, pooled over 
subjects, revealed an inverted U function, i.e., the most extreme psi- 
missing in the first and last segments. Furthermore, a similar curve was 
apparent within the segments, i.e., the most extreme scoring on the first 
and fifth trials of the segments. These two functions (i.e., within the run 
and within the segments) were shown to be significantly similar by a 
special correlation technique called the “covariation of the salience 
ratios.” 

Some internal effects in these data fit in nicely with Rhine’s reason¬ 
ing. Among the adult subjects, U curves were most prevalent in those 
conditions where subjects wrote their responses on paper instead of call¬ 
ing them out, and also when brief interruptions were introduced following 
each segment of the run. In other words, salience was most prevalent 
under those conditions in which the structure of the run was most evident 
and among those subjects who would most likely be sensitive to such 
structuring. 

In three additional series of approximately 1,000 runs each using 
precognitive DT (PDT) procedures, the U curve for the segments of the 
run and the significant covariation of salience ratios were confirmed 
(Humphrey and Rhine, 1942; Rhine, 1942). However, in these experi¬ 
ments the overall results were close to chance, so the deviation scores did 
not differ more from chance in the middle segments than in the outer 
segments. The U curve was much clearer within the run than within the 
segments. 

Searching for position effects within segments has not been in vogue 
since the 1940s. Rhine himself argued that segment salience is not likely to 
be observed unless the run segments are clearly demarcated (Rhine, 
1941b), which often is not the case even in DT experiments. The covaria- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


169 


tion ratio thus fell into disuse as well. Before it died, however, significant 
ratios were reported in a group experiment (Humphrey and Rhine, 1944) 
and the first of several experiments with the “gifted” subject Marchesi 
(Rhine and Humphrey, 1942). The ratio was not significant in subsequent 
research with this subject (McMahan and Rhine, 1947; McMahan and 
Bates, 1954). 

However, simple U curves within the run have frequently been re¬ 
ported in experiments using DT or similar procedures with both selected 
subjects (Gibson, 1937; Osis, 1955; Pegram, 1937; Rhine and Humphrey, 
1942; Rogers, 1967a) and unselected groups of subjects (Anderson and 
Gregory, 1959; Dean, 1972; Joesting and Joesting, 1970; Martin and 
Stribic, 1940; Pratt, 1961; Schmeidler, 1944; Sharp and Clark, 1937; 
Taetzsch, 1964). In a somewhat related experiment where the targets 
were numbers of various lengths, Nash and Durkin (1959) found that the 
most hits occurred on the first and last digits. The salience was reported 
as statistically significant only in the experiments of Dean, Nash, Osis, 
Pratt, and Schmeidler (as reported by Humphrey and Rhine, 1944). 

This level of repeatability is not as impressive as it might appear on 
the surface. While most of the curves were ^/-shaped (more or less), some 
investigators reported inverted Us (Anderson and Gregory, 1959; Rogers, 
1967a). Of more concern is the fact that the most significant scoring some¬ 
times occurred in the middle segments (Anderson and Gregory, 1959; 
Martin and Stribic, 1940; Osis, 1956). 

Finally, U curves of any type are far from universal in DT-type 
experiments. The star subject of Martin and Stribic (1938a,b) showed 
significant decline effects within the run when tested with DT or UT 
procedures, as did a subject tested by Anderson (1959a) using a precogni¬ 
tion procedure. Another high-scoring subject, Harribance, revealed both 
highly significant decline (Stumper al ., 1970) and incline (Roll and Klein, 
1972) effects in runs consisting of 10 or 12 trials, but no clear pattern in a 
series of 25-trial runs (Child and Kelly, 1973). One parapsychologist who 
tested himself with a DT procedure found a significant decline effect 
(Cadoret, 1952), while another found a decline in variance, i.e., regression 
to chance from either above- or below-chance scoring early in the run 
(Carpenter, 1966; Carpenter and Carpenter, 1967). U curves also have 
failed to show up in other experiments with selected subjects (McMahan 
and Rhine, 1947; McMahan and Bates, 1954; Osis, 1956; Steilberg, 1971). 

Disconfirming instances are harder to document in experiments with 
groups of subjects, although many undoubtedly exist that have not been 
reported or were reported inadequately. One disconfirming experiment 
yielded a rather clear-cut decline effect (Humphrey and Pratt, 1941), while 
the results from two others could best be summarized as incline effects 



170 


John Palmer 


(MacFarland, 1938; Schmeidler, 1964b), the latter a regression to chance 
from psi-missing. None of these effects were reported as significant. 

Although one might argue that U curves are more likely than some 
other kind of function to occur in group DT experiments, the precise 
nature of this effect is far from clear. As usual, the problem is the pen¬ 
chant of parapsychologists to pool results over subjects. While the overall 
U curves reported in these experiments might be composed of U curves 
contributed by the individual subjects, they just as easily could be com¬ 
posed of individual incline and decline effects. Indeed, this latter interpre¬ 
tation seems somewhat easier to reconcile with the curves of individual 
subjects described above. 

Both Martin and Stribic (1940) and Rhine (1941b) noted tendencies in 
their data for U curves to be most prevalent among those subjects and 
conditions that yielded the least significant overall scoring. This also may 
help explain the relative lack of U curves among selected individuals, 
many of whom are “selected” because they generally achieve very high 
scores. 

Testing procedures such as GESP and BT that involve longer trial 
durations have provided U curves (Humphrey, 1943; Mitchell, 1971; 
Rose, 1955; Rose and Rose, 1951), decline effects (Estabrooks, 1927/1961; 
Humphrey, 1943; Humphrey and Pratt, 1941), and incline effects (Keil, 
1965; Steilberg, 1971). Only the effects of Rose (1955) and Estabrooks 
were reported as significant. There is not much of a pattern here, except 
that, contrary to what was found with DT procedures, all of the experi¬ 
ments that yielded U curves, with the exception of Humphrey (1943), 
involved testing of “gifted” subjects. The only one of the other experi¬ 
ments falling into this category was that of Steilberg. 

4.1.1b. Individual Differences. Given the inconsistency of position 
effects, surprisingly little research has been done examining individual 
differences in this area. Stanford (1964b) found evidence of a decline 
effect among above-chance-scoring subjects who had a strong belief in 
ESP and an incline effect among disbelievers and subjects whose belief 
was more equivocal. In another sheep-goat experiment where both hit¬ 
ters and missers were included in the analysis, Schmeidler (1944) reported 
that her overall U curve (which may have involved a combination of 
inclines and declines) was attributable to the extreme goats. Carpenter 
found that his decline of variance effect did not hold up when he adopted 
special expansive or compressive response sets (Carpenter and Car¬ 
penter, 1967). 

4.1.1c. The Cancellation Effect. Position effects have been used to 
explain another unusual effect in parapsychology: cases where run-score 
variance around mean chance expectation is significantly below chance. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


171 


(An extreme example of this would be a series of consecutive scores of 
five.) It was suggested that such low variance would result if positive 
scoring in one part of the run were to be “cancelled” by negative scoring in 
the other part. Stanford (1966b), in fact, found in each of two experiments 
significant position effects (i.e., differences between the first 10 and last 15 
trials) in runs from a condition with significantly low run-score variance 
which he failed to find in runs from a condition completed by the same 
subjects at the same session where variance was significantly high. 
Suggestive position effects in low-variance runs also were found by 
Rogers (1967a). Variance analyses were not introduced into the para¬ 
psychologist’s repertoire until the mid-1960s, so unless some raw data can 
be reanalyzed we will not know whether low run-score variance charac¬ 
terized earlier experiments where significant position effects were found. 

4.1.1 d. Conclusion. There is some evidence, predominantly from the 
early Duke period, indicating that ESP hitting and missing tends to be 
concentrated in the first and last segments of the run, provided that DT or 
other techniques with short trial durations are used which encourage the 
subject to perceive the run as a unit. However, it is clear that many 
individual subjects do not conform to this pattern, and the U curves often 
reported in group studies may in fact represent the pooling of individual 
incline and decline effects. Slower procedures such as BT and GESP 
have produced no consistent position effects in group experiments, al¬ 
though some relatively recent experiments with selected subjects have 
revealed U curves. Although position effects seem to be influenced by 
individual and situational differences, very little systematic research has 
been undertaken to elucidate such differences. A theory that position 
effects may be the cause of significantly low run-score variance around 
mean chance expectation has received some support from preliminary 
research. 

Although position effects may be real, they are too inconsistent to 
have much value as a basis for defining psi-prone responses, even in the 
limited contexts where they are applicable. If the card-guessing paradigm 
continues to wane in parapsychology, interest in position effects as such 
will probably continue to decline. For a review of the literature on posi¬ 
tion effects see Rhine (1969a). 


4.1.2. Response Bias: Turning a Liability into an Asset 

Although the promise held out by early research on position effects 
has not been realized in later work, a second approach to detecting what 
might be called psi-prone trials has been more successful. Earlier in the 
chapter, evidence was presented which suggested that elimination of sys- 



172 


John Palmer 


tematic calling biases in forced-choice tests might improve scoring levels, 
provided that responding indeed became more spontaneous. However, 
eliminating such biases is easier said than done. Some relatively recent 
research suggests that response biases may actually have some positive 
value by providing a frame of reference against which more spontaneous 
responses can be more readily detected. This section will be devoted to an 
examination of such research. 

4.1.2a. Response Bias in High-Scoring Subjects. In reanalyzing five 
extensive card-guessing series completed by Gloria Stewart (one of the 
two “outstanding” subjects of S. G. Soal), Pratt (1967b) found highly non- 
random patterns with respect to pairs of calls. In the first four series, this 
nonrandomness was reflected primarily in Stewart’s tendency to undercall 
“doubles” (i.e., pairs of the same symbol), and Pratt found a significant 
excess of hits on the second trials of these undercalled doubles. In other 
words, when Stewart violated her normal bias against calling doubles, her 
rate of hitting was significantly higher on the doubled responses than on 
other trials. Perhaps when the ESP “message” was strong enough to 
cause her to break her normal calling pattern, it also was strong enough to 
cause her to choose the correct target. 

Because of the questions raised about Soal’s integrity, the above 
results must be evaluated cautiously, even though Soal had never to my 
knowledge predicted this effect and it was not discovered until about 20 
years after the data had been collected. 

Regardless of its validity, Pratt’s finding has had considerable heuris¬ 
tic value. Stanford (1967) noted that in two card-guessing series completed 
by a high-scoring subject (Martin and Stribic, 1938a,b), there was a 
significant tendency for the subject to obtain the largest percentage of hits 
on the symbols he called least frequently. Ryzl and Pratt (1963) found that 
their star subject, Pavel Stepanek, revealed a comparable scoring ten¬ 
dency in a two-choice task, as did Harribance using standard ESP cards 
(Morris, 1972). In neither case, however, is it clear whether this was a 
general characteristic of the subject’s performance over his career. 

Neither Martin nor Ryzl reported the data in a way that would allow 
the response bias hypothesis to be tested for pairs of calls, as was the case 
with Stewart. Morris reported that Harribance had a bias in favor of 
calling doubles, but it is unlikely one could argue that avoiding doubles 
constituted a genuine response bias in this case. In any event, scoring 
rates on doubles and nondoubles were not significantly different in this 
research. 

Finally, no response bias effect is evident in data from Rhine’s sub¬ 
ject Hubert Pearce (Greenwood and Stuart, 1937), but neither was there 
any clear evidence of response bias in Pearce’s calls. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


173 


4.1.2b. Response Bias in Unselected Subjects. All the results dis¬ 
cussed so far were obtained with subjects who revealed highly significant 
overall psi-hitting and (with the exception of Pearce and, possibly, Harri- 
bance) highly significant response biases on the unit of analysis where the 
scoring differences were found. The first study to report a response bias 
effect in subjects not preselected for ESP ability was a number-guessing 
GESP experiment with retarded children (Bond, 1937). Bond found that 
the children often would fall into very routinized calling patterns (e.g., 
calling the numbers in order), and on runs where they did so, their other¬ 
wise significant level of positive scoring was reduced to chance. 

While Bond’s finding is not especially profound, more subtle re¬ 
sponse biases also have been shown to interact with scoring rates in 
unselected subjects. Stanford found support for the response bias hypoth¬ 
esis in two modified forced-choice experiments in which response biases 
were built into the tests themselves. In the first of these experiments, 
subjects were asked to answer a series of multiple-choice questions based 
on a dream transcript they had just read (Stanford, 1970). Unbeknownst 
to the subjects, one of the answers to each question had been randomly 
selected as an ESP target. As predicted, when subjects gave answers that 
were wrong in terms of the transcript, they obtained significantly more 
ESP hits than when they gave “correct” answers. Furthermore, this effect 
was strongest for those subjects who obtained the highest scores on an 
independent test of incidental memory. Thus, when subjects with rela¬ 
tively good memory ability went against their natural tendency (or “re¬ 
sponse bias”) to accurately recall the content of the dream, they scored 
significantly above chance on the covert ESP test. This study will be 
discussed from a point of view relevant to its covert aspects later on. 

In the second experiment, subjects’ ESP scores were determined by 
whether they gave primary or secondary responses to items on a word- 
association test (Stanford, 1973). The list was limited to words with high- 
commonality primary associates, and either the primary or the secondary 
associate was randomly selected as the ESP target for each trial. Two 
measures of response bias, the number of primary responses given on the 
tests and the shortness of the response latencies, both correlated signifi¬ 
cantly with the difference between the percentages of ESP hits on primary 
and secondary responses. In other words, subjects who had the strongest 
bias to give primary responses were the ones who scored relatively high 
when they violated that bias and gave secondary responses. However, 
there apparently was no tendency for these subjects to score significantly 
above chance on their secondary responses, or even to score higher in the 
absolute sense than they did on their primary responses. This outcome 
was attributable in part to a significant tendency among all subjects for 



174 


John Palmer 


significantly higher scores on primary than on secondary responses. Stan¬ 
ford had predicted this latter result on the basis of Roll’s (1966) theory that 
responses that depend upon “well established associative connections” 
(Stanford, 1973, p. 150) are most likely to be psi-mediated. 

The results so far suggest that response bias effects only occur among 
subjects who have strong response biases to begin with, as we would 
expect, given the underlying rationale of response bias theory (which is 
closely related to signal detection theory in psychology). In a somewhat 
different experiment, Stanford (1967) found that subjects who designated 
a smaller-than-average number of segments on a mock “radar screen” as 
containing ESP targets obtained significantly more hits on segments actu¬ 
ally containing targets than did subjects who designated a larger number 
of segments. 

Two experiments have dealt with response bias effects in the context 
of a paper-maze test (Glidden, 1974; Child and Singer, 1977). The mazes 
consist of concentric circles, and the subject’s task is to move from the 
center to the periphery of the maze while avoiding barriers, some of which 
are knowable only by ESP. (See Chapter 1 for a more complete descrip¬ 
tion.) In both experiments, attempts were made to define violations of 
response biases as moves other than those leading most directly out of the 
maze. In neither case were such counterbias responses found to be sig¬ 
nificantly associated with more psi-hitting than other responses. How¬ 
ever, the proper way to define counterbias responses in this paradigm is 
unclear, and such responses may simply represent naturally based 
strategies no more spontaneous than the “biased” responses. 

Finally, in a test where subjects had to choose either a word or a 
nonsense syllable as the ESP response, Kanthamani and Rao (1975d) 
found that subjects who had a bias toward choosing words scored sig¬ 
nificantly higher overall than subjects with the opposite bias in each of 
three experiments. There was no evidence that any of the subjects had 
significant response biases, or that there was any relationship between 
the degree of bias and scoring on counterbias responses. Thus Kanth¬ 
amani’ s experiment is irrelevant to the response bias hypothesis as sub¬ 
sequently stated by Stanford, although the main effect they uncovered 
may be indirectly relevant to this hypothesis in ways that are at present 
unclear. 

4.1.2c. Response Bias in Animals. A number of the animal experi¬ 
ments discussed earlier (Sec. 3.5.5.) provided data relevant to the re¬ 
sponse bias issue. In an experiment in which cats had to choose one or the 
other side of a T-maze for food reward, scoring rates were significantly 
lower when the cat had chosen the same side on three or more previous 
trials than when such severe side biases were not present (Osis and Fos- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


175 


ter, 1953). In a conceptually similar experiment with rodents using a 
Skinner-box format, Schouten (1972) found significant psi-hitting only on 
trials where the animals violated their normal habit of pressing the same 
bar that had given reward on the previous trial. (I computed a chi-square 
test on Schouten’s data which demonstrated that scoring rate was signifi¬ 
cantly higher on nonbiased than on biased responses.) Although follow-up 
research failed to yield significant evidence of ESP on either kind of 
response (Schouten, 1976b), a similar experiment by Terry and Harris 
(1975) revealed significant psi-hitting restricted to trials where their rats 
changed response bars for no apparent reason. Parker (1974) found sig¬ 
nificant positive scoring on both kinds of trials, although scoring rates 
were somewhat higher on counterbias responses for two of his three 
gerbils. (In the other experiments described in this section, it is unclear 
how uniformly the effect was distributed among the animals.) In two 
nonsignificant replication attempts of Parker’s experiment, there was no 
appreciable difference between scoring on biased and counterbiased re¬ 
sponses ( Broughton and Millar, 1975). 

In the research of Duval and Montredon (1968a,b), avoidance of 
shocks would appear to be restricted to “random behavior trials,” but 
some parapsychologists question the relevance of this particular concept 
to response bias theory (e.g., Schouten, 1972). 

4.L2d. Related Paradigms. Two other research paradigms, both in¬ 
volving human subjects, are indirectly related to the response bias ques¬ 
tion. The relationship can only be considered indirect because, in contrast 
to Stanford’s research, the responses evaluted for bias are not the ESP 
responses. Thus the relevance of these studies to the response bias issue 
must be considered limited. 

The first of these is more directly concerned with the relationship 
between ESP and memory on a trial-by-trial basis. Kanthamani and Rao 
(1974) gave three groups of high school students a word-association test, 
the ESP score being determined by the manner in which the subject 
recorded his or her response (e.g., in capital or lower-case letters). In 
each case, subjects scored significantly above chance on those trials 
where the associate was correctly recalled, but below chance on the other 
trials. The difference was only significant in one of the three series, but it 
was significant for the three series pooled. Two additional studies where 
subjects were tested in groups produced more equivocal results (Kanth¬ 
amani and Rao, 1975a), and significant psi-missing was found for correctly 
recalled pairs in a third study (Gambale, Margolis, and Crucci, 1976). 
Kreiman (1975) found psi-missing on incorrectly recalled trials and chance 
scoring on correctly recalled trials in each of two experiments. Gener¬ 
ally nonsignificant results were found in a study by O’Brien (1976). 



176 


John Palmer 


Parker (1976) attempted to obtain a comparable effect using a digit-span 
test instead of a word-association test and succeeded in one of two 
experiments. 

In the second stage of their research with the word-association tech¬ 
nique, Kanthamani and Rao (1975b) manipulated the association strength 
of paired associates. In each of two series they found a significant differ¬ 
ence in ESP scoring between correctly and incorrectly recalled words, 
but only for low-association pairs. Scoring was above chance on correctly 
recalled words and below chance on incorrectly recalled words, and both 
of these effects differed significantly from chance for the two series 
pooled. These results are consistent with the authors’ earlier studies in 
which low-association pairs were used. However, this effect was not 
confirmed in three other experiments (Gambale, 1976; Harary, 1976; 
Lieberman, 1976). 

As pointed out by Lieberman (1976), the research described in the 
preceding paragraph is relevant to the response bias hypothesis in the 
sense that correct responses should be more consonant with built-in re¬ 
sponse biases for high-association pairs than for low-association pairs. 
Thus Kanthamani’s results are consistent with the notion that ESP should 
be most prevalent when the subject is forced to give a low-commonality 
(i.e., counterbias) response. However, her results are not consistent with 
the memory theory of Roll (1966), who I expect would predict high- 
association pairs to be the most psi-facilitory. Still another possibility is 
that low-association words create a more challenging memory test, and 
this kind of mental attitude is relatively psi-conducive.* 

The second paradigm involves having subjects indicate whether they 
like or dislike a particular word by placing an L or a D on one of five lines, 
the choice of line constituting the ESP response. Using the simple version 
of this test called the Word Reaction Test, Freeman (1964, 1969b) found in 
each of two group experiments that subjects scored significantly higher on 
trials where the response (L or D) was consistent with the subject’s gen¬ 
eral response tendency than they did on other trials. For example, sub¬ 
jects who made more D responses than the group average scored higher 
on D responses than on L responses. 

Although it is questionable whether the LID responses provide a 
valid measure of response bias in Stanford’s sense, these results seem to 
suggest that subjects obtained the most ESP hits on responses that were 
consistent with their biases. However, Feather (1967a) reported a sig¬ 
nificant reversal of this effect using Freeman’s test. Furthermore, 
Freeman’s effect generally has not occurred in experiments with a later 


*This possibility was suggested by Dr. K. R. Rao. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


177 


version of the Word Reaction Test (called the Word Feeling Test) in 
which subjects were asked to express degree of like and dislike for the 
words on an expanded scale (Freeman and Nielsen, 1964; Nielsen and 
Freeman, 1965). 

Finally, Freeman (1973) developed a related testing technique in 
which subjects answered questions similar to those on intelligence tests 
by indicating the answer in one of five ways. He found that subjects who 
scored above the class average got more ESP hits on the questions they 
missed, whereas the other subjects reversed this trend. The overall pat¬ 
tern was statistically significant, this time in a direction consistent with 
response bias theory. 

4.1.2e. Conclusion . Experiments with both humans and animals sup¬ 
port the hypothesis that responses on forced-choice ESP tests that violate 
strong nonrandom response tendencies of the subject are more likely to be 
correct than are responses consistent with such biases. Although such 
effects are by no means universal, all significant trends have been in the 
predicted direction. 

Response bias research may provide a valuable means for detecting 
psi-prone responses, but only among subjects who have such biases and 
whose overall scores may suffer because of them. For subjects who either 
respond more spontaneously or whose biased patterns are not identifi¬ 
able, other methods will need to be found. 

4.13. Confidence Calls: Letting the Subject Do It 

Earlier in the chapter, I pointed out that subjects were not very good 
at predicting their total scores on ESP tests (see Sec. 3.6.2b). However, 
this does not preclude the possibility that they might be more successful at 
picking out particular trials where something told them that their response 
was more than a mere guess. This possibility provides yet another poten¬ 
tial source for designating psi-prone trials in ESP experiments. 

The most striking evidence of successful confidence calling was pro¬ 
vided by the high-scoring subject Bill Delmore (Kanthamani and Kelly, 
1974a). Pooling the results of three series using psychic shuffle and BT- 
like techniques, the authors found that Delmore completely identified 
playing cards on 91% of his confidence calls as compared to only 4% of his 
other calls. (Even the 4% was significantly above chance.) Delmore made 
confidence calls on only 8% of his trials. Another “high-scoring” subject, 
Carlo Marchesi, failed to reveal significant ESP scoring on confidence 
calls distributed over 180 DT runs, but his overall scoring at this stage of 
his career was nonsignificant (McMahan and Bates, 1954). 

Fahler instructed two subjects under hypnosis to indicate trials they 



178 


John Palmer 


thought were likely to be correct or that felt “different” in some way 
(Fahler and Osis, 1966). The results revealed not only significant psi- 
hitting on the “marked” trials but also significant psi-missing on the un¬ 
marked trials. 

Humphrey and Nicol (1955) reported the results of two card-guessing 
experiments in which subjects were asked to make five to ten confidence 
calls per run. In each experiment, those subjects who followed the in¬ 
struction scored significantly higher on checked than on unchecked trials, 
but only on those runs where they did not receive trial-by-trial feedback of 
the correctness of their guesses. Combining the two series revealed that 
significant psi-hitting on the checked calls was balanced by significant 
psi-missing on the unchecked calls, the same pattern reported by Fahler. 

Two experiments by Nash reveal that significant scoring on confi¬ 
dence calls can occur under conditions where scoring on other trials re¬ 
mains close to chance. In the first experiment the checked calls yielded 
significant psi-hitting (Nash and Nash, 1958) while in the other it was 
psi-missing (Nash, 1960a). In both cases, the difference between the 
checked and unchecked trials was significant. Kreiman and Ivnisky 
(1973b) reported significant psi-missing on runs where confidence calls 
were requested in a GESP experiment, the effect being mostly attribut¬ 
able to trials where emotional targets were used. No significant difference 
between checked and unchecked trials was reported in the abstract (my 
only source for this experiment), but results on unchecked trials would 
appear to have been close to chance. 

In his second experiment, Nash asked his subjects to predict on a 
run-by-run basis how they expected to score. He found that the psi- 
missing on confidence calls was primarily attributable to those runs on 
which subjects in fact predicted below-chance scoring. Schmeidler (1964e) 
obtained the same effect in a precognition experiment, except that 
checked and unchecked trials did not differ significantly for all runs com¬ 
bined. Perhaps those subjects who predicted below-chance scores desired 
at some level to confirm their predictions, in which case the confidence 
calls reflected a correct “awareness” of the target which somehow got 
manifested by an incorrect response. 

Nash and Nash (1963) found a significant excess of confidence call 
hits in the first of two sessions, but this was followed by a significant 
decline to chance scoring on confidence calls in the second session. Such 
declines were not reported in Nash’s earlier experiments, which also in¬ 
volved more than one session. In an experiment where subjects were not 
given the usual set to give about five confidence calls per run, Schmeidler 
(1964e) found that confidence calls produced significantly more positive 
scores than other trials only for subjects who averaged fewer than one 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


179 


confidence call per run. Schmeidler (1961), in an earlier set of experi¬ 
ments, found significant psi-hitting on such infrequent confidence calls, 
but no difference test was reported. 

A number of other forced-choice experiments have failed to yield any 
significant differences between the proportion of hits on checked and 
unchecked calls (Honorton, 1970, 1971b, 1972a; Honorton et al ., 1974; 
Jackson, Franzoi, and Schmeidler, 1977; Kreiman and Ivnisky, 1973; 
McCallam and Honorton, 1973; Schechter et al ., 1975) although several 
obtained significant relationships involving confidence calls (Sec. 4.2.2a). 
These experiments generally involved fewer total trials than those dis¬ 
cussed previously, and this may have something to do with the nonsig¬ 
nificant differences. 

In the only free-response experiment to incorporate confidence calls, 
agents attempted to “send” the content of pictorial slides to percipients in 
another room (Gelade and Harvie, 1975). Following each of five trials, the 
percipient was asked to pick out the correct slide from a pair of slides and 
to rate his or her confidence on a four-point scale. Subjects scored sig¬ 
nificantly above chance on trials where they rated themselves as either 
“fairly confident” or “very confident,” while they scored below chance to 
an almost significant degree on the remaining trials. Unlike the confidence 
calls in the forced-choice experiments, however, these confidence calls 
could have been (and likely were) influenced by subjects’ sensory knowl¬ 
edge of the degree of correspondence between calls and targets. 

4.1.3a. Conclusion. The literature on confidence calls provides its 
share of significant effects, but their directions have not been consistent 
and significance sometimes has depended upon selecting out portions of 
the data post hoc. There is some evidence that the direction of scoring on 
confidence calls may depend upon subjects’ expectations regarding their 
total run scores, at least when low scores are expected. The puzzling 
tendency found in three experiments for psi-hitting on confidence calls to 
be balanced by psi-missing on other trials may be an example of Rao’s 
(1965a) “differential effect.” 

It has been customary in analyzing confidence call effects to pool 
trials over subjects. This procedure led one observer to suggest that such 
effects could occur artifactually if the subjects who had the highest total 
ESP scores also made the most confidence calls (Thouless, 1956). While 
the “guilty” experimenters have generally countered this criticism by 
demonstrating that this precondition was not met by their data (e.g., 
Humphrey and Nicol, 1956), it is not always clear in these reports how 
uniformly confidence call effects are distributed among subjects. This 
makes it difficult to judge the generality of the effects. 

Confidence calls nevertheless show some promise as a vehicle for 



180 


John Palmer 


identifying psi-prone responses, but more research will be needed to tease 
out the conditions under which they will be most effective and whether 
they will expose psi-hitting or psi-missing. Individual differences in ability 
to make accurate confidence calls, in particular, need some study. A first 
step in this direction was provided by McCallam and Honorton (1973), 
who found that subjects who showed the greatest increase in percentage 
of correct confidence calls following feedback training were those who 
based their confidence calls on a multiplicity of internal cues. 


4.2. Effects of Repeated Testing: Monotony and Monotonicity 


4.2.1. Decline Effects: Too Much of a Good Thing 

Ask any parapsychologist what is the most consistent finding in 
parapsychology, and he or she is likely to tell you that it is the decline 
effect, which means that subjects’ scores are likely to get lower the more 
they are tested. Although decline effects indeed are common in parapsy¬ 
chology, some species are more common than others. As usual, we are 
going to have to make a few distinctions if we are to avoid overly simplistic 
conclusions. 

4.2.1a. Long-Term Declines —“ Gifted” Subjects. When a subject 
comes along with outstanding ESP ability, it is natural for the enterprising 
parapsychologist to want to collect large amounts of data. It is not un¬ 
common for such benevolent souls to complete hundreds and even 
thousands of card-guessing runs over periods ranging from several weeks 
to several years. It is not surprising that many of these subjects eventually 
“burn out.” 

The list of cases where high-scoring subjects sooner or later lost their 
ability is a long one (Banham, 1966; Brugmans, 1922; Drake, 1938; 
Freeman, 1966a; Mangan, 1957; McMahan and Bates, 1954; Mitchell, 
1953; Pratt, 1937, 1974b; Rhine, 1934/1973, 1938b; Riess, 1937; Rose, 1955; 
Soal and Bateman, 1954). Even this survey is probably not exhaustive. 
Although one might expect scores of preselected high-scoring subjects to 
decline simply as a result of regression artifact, the initial scoring levels of 
these subjects were too high and/or maintained for too long for this to be a 
viable explanation. 

The length of time subjects maintain their talents is quite variable. 
Some declined after only a few runs (e.g., Banham, 1966; Mitchell, 1953), 
while others endured for much longer periods (e.g., Pratt, 1973; Rhine, 
1934/1973). The star subject of Martin and Stribic (1940) maintained a 
scoring rate of 6.85 hits per run through 3,659 card-guessing runs adminis- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


181 


tered over a three-year period. I have seen no reports that this subject’s 
ability ever declined, although he has not been formally tested in many 
years. However, the endurance record goes to the Czech subject Pavel 
Stepanek, who maintained his card-guessing ability for ten years before 
finally dropping off (Pratt, 1973). However, the nature of his scoring 
tendencies changed over the years, and his ability still may exist in some 
as yet undetected form. In fact, this may be true of other subjects who 
seemingly have lost their abilities. Furthermore, subjects who have lost 
the ability to achieve high scores may later regain this talent. An Austra¬ 
lian Aborigine whose initial scoring level was quite high saw her scores 
decline markedly over a course of 68 runs (Rose and Rose, 1951). When 
retested several years later, she temporarily regained her initial scoring 
rate but again declined sharply (Rose, 1955). 

Although a number of contemporary “gifted” subjects, such as Har- 
ribance and Delmore, have as yet to evidence decline (perhaps because 
they haven’t been tested long enough), I am aware of only one experiment 
in which a subject’s scores increased significantly during a period of re¬ 
peated testing, outside of a “training” context (Anderson, 1959a). This 
subject completed 90 precognition runs over a nine-month period. 

4.2.1b. Between-Sessions Declines—Unselected Subjects. Subjects 
who lack outstanding psychic ability are not tested as extensively as those 
who have such abilities, for obvious reasons. Nevertheless, it is not too 
uncommon for such subjects to participate in more than one session. The 
first investigators to report significant decline effects under these circum¬ 
stances were Taves and Dale (1943), but others have reported them from 
time to time (Honorton and Carbone, 1971; Humphrey, 1945c; Osis, 1952; 
Osis and Turner, 1968; Parker and Beloff, 1970). In most cases, the de¬ 
cline was from psi-hitting to chance scoring. However, the effect reported 
by Honorton and Carbone was a shift from psi-hitting to psi-missing, and 
Osis and Turner did not report their means. The only (apparently) sig¬ 
nificant incline effect I could find was in a free-response experiment, 
where significant psi-hitting was restricted to the second of two sessions 
(Keeling, 1972). 

4.2.1c. Within-Session Declines. Significant declines or inclines of 
scoring rate within one experimental session are a potential effect in al¬ 
most all ESP experiments, but they have been reported in only a handful. 
While there is obviously no way to tell how many effects of this type have 
gone undetected, it is safe to assume that they are quite rare. Among the 
significant findings however, decline effects are somewhat more prevalent 
than incline effects. Significant declines have been reported with both 
selected subjects (Osis, 1956; Roll and Klein, 1972) and unselected sub¬ 
jects (Dean and Taetzsch, 1963; Freeman, 1962; Humphrey, 1945c; Kahn, 



182 


John Palmer 


1952; McMahan and Lauer, 1948; Parker and Beloff, 1970; Schmeidler, 
1968; Schmeidler, Friedenberg, and Males, 1966; Van Busschbach, 1959). 
All except Dean and Taetzsch’s results involved a decline from psi-hitting 
to chance scoring. Schmeidler (1964b) reported a significant incline effect, 
but it was from significant psi-missing to chance scoring. I could find only 
one experiment that produced an overall significant increase from chance 
scoring to psi-hitting (Palmer et al ., 1976). In a third experiment where 
subjects completed both card and drawing tests in the same session, a 
significant incline was reported for the drawing trials only. Overall scores 
were slightly above chance (Stuart et al ., 1947). I could find no consistent 
directional trend among the nonsignificant studies, nor could I find any 
relationship between scoring trends and the number of runs per session. 

A potentially more reliable finding comes from a series of experi¬ 
ments in which declines of run-score variance were found within sessions 
(Carpenter, 1966, 1968, 1969; Carpenter and Carpenter, 1967; Rogers and 
Carpenter, 1966). In other words, run scores started out either high or low 
at the beginning of the session but approached chance as the session 
progressed. The decline was significant in three of five experiments, and in 
one other experiment the run-score variance was significantly high in the 
first half of the experiment. Length of session in the significant series 
varied from 4 to 36 runs. In the one experiment with a single subject, a 
significant decline was found in sessions consisting of 16 to 36 runs but not 
in longer sessions (Carpenter and Carpenter, 1967). 

When factors are operating in an experiment that tend to produce 
psi-hitting in one condition or group of subjects and psi-missing in 
another, Carpenters findings indirectly suggest that difference scores 
might be more prevalent early in a session that later in a session, i.e., the 
difference scores will decline automatically as the psi-hitting and psi- 
missing both regress to MCE as the session proceeds. Such a trend was 
found very consistently in a series of experiments by Sailaja and Rao 
(1973), and it conceivably could have influenced the results of countless 
other experiments in which overall decline effects were not found. 

4.2.Id. Experimenter Declines. A few post hoc analyses have been 
reported which suggest that scoring levels in experiments with multiple 
subjects declined during the course of the experiment (Casper, 1951; Tad- 
donio and O’Brien, 1977; Taves and Dale, 1943). Such results have been 
attributed to waning interest or enthusiasm on the part of the experi¬ 
menter. It is much too early to draw even tentative conclusions on this 
topic, but experimenter decline effects clearly deserve more systematic 
investigation. 

4.2.1 e. Conclusion. It is clear that most high-scoring ESP subjects 
sooner or later lose their ability to achieve high scores, some considerably 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


183 


sooner than others. However, spontaneous recovery has been noted in at 
least one case, and it is possible that “loss of ability” may really reflect a 
diversion of scoring to other modes, such as those I will discuss later in 
the chapter. 

Decline effects are considerably less prevalent among less talented 
subjects. Of course, one would not expect decline effects unless the scor¬ 
ing level were initially high, and significant declines are somewhat more 
frequent than significant inclines, both within and between sessions. De¬ 
cline of run-score variance is a potentially more reliable within-session 
effect, but it needs to be validated by other investigators. 

4.2.2. Immediate Feedback: Can ESP Be Learned? 

There are several possible explanations for decline effects in ESP 
testing, a discussion of which is beyond the scope of this chapter. How¬ 
ever, most parapsychologists would attribute them to declining motiva¬ 
tion on the part of the subject (Rhine, 1964). Another interpretation has 
been stated by Tart (1966), who compared decline effects to extinction 
effects in learning. When an animal in a learning experiment is no longer 
given a reward for a correct response, the rate of emission of the response 
declines. Likewise, if high-scoring ESP subjects are not rewarded after 
each trial by knowledge of the outcome, their rate of emitting psi- 
mediated ESP responses also will go down, until their percentage of hits is 
no greater than that expected by chance. In the ESP case, the decline of 
scoring is seen by Tart as not being entirely due to a decline in motivation. 
Testing makes subjects self-conscious about their manner of using psi, 
and unless guided by immediate feedback, this self-consciousness merely 
upsets the delicate balance of mental processes that control psi, thus 
creating confusion (Tart, personal communication). Although ESP sub¬ 
jects receive such feedback at the end of the session, and sometimes after 
each run, Tart considers this delay too long to prevent extinction. 

The other side of this coin is that subjects cannot learn to improve 
their ESP performance without the information provided by immediate 
feedback. Such feedback is necessary if subjects are to learn to identify 
subtle internal cues that might differentiate a psi-mediated response from 
a wild guess. However, Tart was careful to point out that learning could 
only be accomplished by subjects who had a fairly high level of ESP talent 
to begin with. Subjects lacking such talent would not make enough psi- 
mediated responses spontaneously to allow them to discriminate cues 
associated with psi-mediated hits (which are inevitably mixed with some 
“chance” hits) from irrelevant cues. On the other hand, immediate feed¬ 
back would have some information value for subjects with moderate 



184 


John Palmer 


levels of talent, so moderately high levels of scoring would not be likely to 
decline during the course of testing. Thus, at a minimum, immediate 
feedback should eliminate most decline effects. 

A relatively large number of ESP experiments providing subjects 
with immediate feedback have been reported, especially since the intro¬ 
duction of automated testing devices such as the Schmidt machine. Let us 
now take a look at these studies. 

4.2.2a. Unselected Subjects. Among experiments using subjects not 
selected for initial ESP talent, the results have been mixed. Among 
studies with humans where temporal trends could be deduced from the 
reports, quite a few have reported negative results as far as learning is 
concerned (Beloff, 1969; Beloff and Bate, 1971; Dale, Taves, and Murphy, 
1944; Haraldsson 1970; Jampolsky and Haight, 1975; McElroy and 
Brown, 1950; Taves, Dale, and Murphy, 1943; Thouless, 1971) McElroy 
supplemented informational feedback with electric shock for incorrect 
guesses in some runs, and he found not only that there was no learning but 
also that there was a significant decline effect across the shock runs. 
None of the reports of the animal experiments discussed in section 3.5.5 
mentioned temporal trends, so one may assume that significant learning 
effects most likely were absent here as well. 

The picture is not all negative, however. A young girl tested by Targ 
and Hurt (1972) improved dramatically on clairvoyance and then on pre¬ 
cognition tests using a machine similar to Schmidt’s. In a later experi¬ 
ment, 6 out of 147 subjects showed significant increases in performances 
as compared to none who showed significant decreases (Targ and Cole, 
1975). Although none of these subjects had been preselected for ESP 
talent, it cannot be ruled out that they had such talent. 

This latter possibility is more remote in experiments where conclu¬ 
sions are based on the results of all members of a group of unselected 
subjects. In an experiment with young children, Drucker et al. (1977) 
found a significant increase in performance from the first to the second 
run. Subjects were asked to guess on each trial the color of an M & M 
candy the experimenter would “blindly” pick from the bag. Subjects re¬ 
ceived an M & M of that color from another source for each correct 
response. The incline effect was primarily attributable to those subjects 
who scored above the group mean on an intelligence test, despite a rather 
restricted range of intelligence in the sample. However, no incline effect 
was reported in an earlier experiment of similar design reported in the 
same article. 

Dagel and Puryear (1971) gave subjects 200 trials on an ESP testing 
machine, half of which were with feedback and half without. The order 
was counterbalanced across subjects. Neither the methodology nor the 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


185 


results were reported in adequate detail, but it would appear that subjects 
scored significantly higher on feedback than nonfeedback trials only when 
the nonfeedback trials were given first. If the significant difference in¬ 
volved a shift from chance scoring to psi-hitting, these results are con¬ 
sistent with a learning interpretation. 

The most extensive series of learning studies with unselected sub¬ 
jects used a card-guessing procedure (Honorton, 1970, 1971b; Jackson et 
al ., 1977; Kreiman and Ivnisky, 1973a; McCallam and Honorton, 1973). 
The typical procedure in these studies was for subjects to complete three 
practice runs with trial-by-trial feedback sandwiched between two sets of 
three standard DT runs without feedback. Subjects in control conditions 
received either false feedback during the practice runs or no feedback 
during the “practice” runs, or the practice runs were omitted entirely. 
(This varied from experiment to experiment.) During the test runs, sub¬ 
jects were asked to make confidence calls on about five trials per run. 

In three of the five experiments, there was a significant increase in 
overall scoring from the prefeedback to the postfeedback runs when the 
practice period consisted of no more than three runs (Honorton, 1970; 
Kreiman and Ivnisky, 1973a; McCallam and Honorton, 1973). Three 
experiments also yielded a significant increase in the proportion of correct 
confidence calls (Honorton, 1970, 1971b; McCallam and Honorton, 1973). 
Significant increases were never obtained in control conditions. How¬ 
ever, there is a respect in which these results do not fit a learning interpre¬ 
tation. In one of the successful experiments, the significant increase in 
overall scores was from significant psi-missing on the pretest to a mean 
just slightly above chance on the posttest (Honorton, 1970). This looks 
more like regression to the mean than learning. Jackson et al. (1977) found 
significant psi-missing on pretest confidence calls in their feedback group 
as compared to only chance scoring on the posttest. Confidence call 
means exhibited this same pattern in two of Honorton’s three experiments 
(Jackson et al ., 1977). Kreiman and Ivnisky (1973a) do not report their 
means in the abstract of their full report (to which I do not have access), 
but they shy away from interpreting their own results as evidence of 
learning. 

Braud and Wood (1977) attempted to adapt Honorton’s paradigm to a 
free-response situation using the ganzfeld to facilitate a psi-conducive 
state. The four practice sessions consisted of tonal feedback indicating 
the accuracy of individual mentation reports during the session. Accord¬ 
ing to one of the two measures of ESP the authors used, ESP scores for 
the feedback group were significantly above chance in the posttraining 
ganzfeld sessions and significantly higher than their scores in the pretrain¬ 
ing sessions. No such difference was found in the control group. The only 



186 


John Palmer 


significant effect by the second measure was the regression effect found in 
the feedback group in two of the card-guessing studies described above: 
significant psi-missing in the pretest followed by chance scoring in the 
posttest, but in this case the effect appeared in the control group only. 

The only significant decline effect I could find in an experiment with 
immediate feedback was by Banham (1973), and this involved a contrast 
between the first and last 10 trials of a 100-trial test. It is doubtful that this 
effect would have been significant had the author used the more conven¬ 
tional procedure of analyzing data from all the trials. 

4.2.2b. Selected Subjects. The crucial test of Tart’s theory is whether 
subjects who have demonstrated ESP talent before training show in¬ 
creases in scoring rate as a result of training. Several studies using 
Schmidt machines with talented subjects were not reported in such a way 
that the learning hypothesis could be evaluated (Haraldsson, 1970; 
Schmidt, 1969a, b; Schmidt and Pantas, 1972), although we may assume 
that any obvious scoring increments would have been reported. There 
was no evidence that any of these subjects declined in performance, how¬ 
ever. Delmore, on the other hand, increased his scoring dramatically 
between the first and second series of a card-guessing experiment with 
immediate feedback on most trials, an effect that might conceivably reflect 
learning (Kanthamani and Kelly, 1974b). 

The most direct attempt so far to test Tart’s theory has been by Tart 
himself (Tart, 1976a). He screened over 1,500 college students for ESP 
ability with simple card tests and invited those who scored significantly 
above chance to complete six additional runs on two electronic ESP 
testing machines. The machines provided immediate feedback and were 
adapted for testing in the GESP mode. Subjects who continued to score 
significantly were assumed to have genuine talent, and they were 
graduated to the training phase of the experiment, which consisted of 20 
runs on the machine of their choice. 

Ten of the 25 subjects who completed the training phase scored sig¬ 
nificantly above chance, most to an extreme degree. Only one of these 
subjects evidenced a significant increase in scoring across the 20 runs, but 
there were no significant decline effects. The most encouraging finding 
from the standpoint of Tart’s theory, however, was a significant positive 
correlation for one of the machines between the individual performance 
curves in the training study (the measure of “learning”) and the total 
number of hits on that machine in the second phase of the screening (the 
measure of initial talent). In other words, the most talented subjects were 
the ones who showed the most stable ESP performance over the 20 runs. 
The correlation for the other machine was in the opposite direction but 
not significant. Finally, the one subject who increased her scoring rate 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


187 


significantly during training had the highest score of any subject on her 
machine during the screening phase. The validity of Tart’s conclusions 
has been the subject of an extensive debate in the literature (Stanford, 
1977a, c; Tart, 1977b). 

4.22c. Conclusions. Although trial-by-trial feedback does not pro¬ 
duce changes in ESP scoring rate over time with a high degree of consis¬ 
tency, the changes it does produce are much more likely to be incline 
effects than decline effects. As we saw in the last section, just the oppo¬ 
site is the case in experiments where immediate feedback is not em¬ 
ployed. This pattern suggests that such feedback does indeed have a 
tendency to stabilize ESP scoring and perhaps to enhance it in some 
cases. 

Whether the incline effects that have been found really represent 
learning is an open question. Such increases by themselves are not suffi¬ 
cient to verify learning; for example, they might reflect nothing more than 
heightened motivation as scoring continues to be positive. More second¬ 
ary effects such as the suggestive interaction between scoring increases 
and intelligence reported by Drucker will be needed before the validity of 
the learning hypothesis can be clearly established, although a learning 
interpretation of their experiment is questionable due to the small number 
of runs. Tart’s finding that his most talented subjects were the ones whose 
performance slopes during training were most positive holds promise that 
more clear-cut scoring increases might be found with more extensive 
training than Tart was able to provide, particularly if subjects are given 
aids for detecting internal cues. Biofeedback could prove to be a useful 
tool in this connection. 


5. Short-Circuiting the Ego 

Tart’s training procedure involves the activation of what might be 
called ego processes toward the goal of enhancing ESP. That is, the 
subject uses conscious, intellectually guided effort to make correct re¬ 
sponses. While recognizing the potential value of this approach, many 
parapsychologists also believe that ego processes may at the same time 
inhibit ESP by reducing spontaneity or mobilizing psychological de¬ 
fenses. Furthermore, an ESP message simply may not reach a level of 
consciousness where it can be dealt with by ego processes. Such consid¬ 
erations have led to the development of testing techniques that do not 
require the subject to make any conscious, intentional ESP responses at 
all, thereby effectively bypassing these ego functions. The findings gener¬ 
ated by the use of such techniques are the topic of this section. 



188 


John Palmer 


5.7. Covert ESP Tests: Keeping Subjects in the Dark 

5.1.1. PMIR:. . . But I Thought You Were Testing My Memory! 

ESP is clearly an unconscious process that functions primarily out¬ 
side the voluntary control of the organism. Generally speaking, subjects 
are unaware on which particular trial an ESP message is getting through, 
or even if it is getting through at all. It is tempting to carry this logic one 
step further and speculate that ESP may sometimes function at times 
when we are not trying to use it or may not even want to use it, and in 
such a way that we are completely unaware of its operation. Rex Stanford 
(1974) has proposed an elaborate scientific model that assumes that ESP 
functions in just this way in order to fulfill the organism’s needs. He refers 
to goal-directed behavior governed by the operation of psi as “psi- 
mediated instrumental response” or PMIR. 

5.1.1a. The Word-Association Paradigm. The unintentional operation 
of psi can be demonstrated most clearly in a laboratory setting by experi¬ 
ments where the subject is not consciously aware that the experiment 
involves ESP at all. A number of such experiments have recently been 
conducted by Stanford himself in the guise of word-association tests 
(Stanford and Associates, 1976; Stanford and Castello, 1977; Stanford and 
Rust, 1977; Stanford and Stio, 1976; Stanford and Thompson, 1974). All 
these experiments were intended to test an assumption of the model that 
states that PMIR can function through an “unconscious timing 
mechanism,” and their designs were basically similar. Subjects were each 
given a ten-item word-association test in a context supposedly unrelated 
to ESP. One of the ten trials was randomly designated as the crucial trial. 
If the subject’s response latency on that trial met a certain criterion (e.g., 
the fastest of the ten trials), he subsequently experienced a pleasant task, 
such as rating Playboy photographs. (Stanford has exclusively tested male 
subjects in this paradigm.) If the subject did not meet the criterion, he 
experienced a tedious and boring task, such as crossing out letters in a 
manuscript. Thus the subject’s performance on a covert ESP test was 
instrumental in determining whether he experienced a pleasant or un¬ 
pleasant task later. 

None of the above experiments produced overall significant positive 
scoring on the main dependent variable, which was a function of the mean 
difference in reaction time between the crucial trial and the average of all 
ten trials. However, in one experiment, significantly more persons en¬ 
tered the favorable condition than expected by chance (Stanford and 
Rust, 1977). This experiment differed from the others in that the person 
who experienced the consequences of the subject’s ESP performance was 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


189 


someone other than himself. Whether or not a significantly large number 
of subjects entered the favorable condition in Stanford’s earlier experi¬ 
ments could not be precisely evaluated because timing of the response 
latencies was too insensitive to eliminate ties within subjects for the 
words with the shortest latencies. Stanford and Rust (1977) eliminated this 
problem by timing within 1/100" instead of 1/10". 

Two of the experiments obtained results that supported specific pre¬ 
dictions from the PMIR model. Stanford and Associates (1976) found that 
female experimenters obtained significantly higher ESP scores from their 
subjects than did male experimenters, the subsequent “pleasant” task 
having a sexual theme. Presumably the sexual arousal engendered by 
males interacting with female experimenters increased the need-relevance 
of the pleasant task such that it provoked more ESP than it would other¬ 
wise. The “need strength” hypothesis was not confirmed in another exper¬ 
iment (Stanford and Stio, 1976), but there is some independent evidence 
that the arousal manipulation was not effective in this experiment. 

A second prediction derived from the model is that “PMIR occurs in 
part through psi-mediated facilitation or triggering of otherwise ready or 
available responses” (Stanford, 1974, pp. 45-46). This hypothesis had 
received support from an earlier word-association experiment not specifi¬ 
cally designed to test the PMIR model (Stanford, 1973). Through a com¬ 
plicated logic, Stanford deduced from this hypothesis that PMIR should 
be more effective when the criterion for the crucial trial is a short re¬ 
sponse latency than when it is a long one. This prediction was confirmed 
by Stanford and Stio (1976). However, in two other experiments designed 
to test other hypotheses, both criteria nonetheless were incorporated. In 
one of these experiments there was a nonsignificant reversal of the effect 
found by Stanford and Stio (Stanford and Thompson, 1974), while data 
from the other are not at present available for reanalysis (Stanford and 
Associates, 1976).* 

A third hypothesis involving the subject’s self-concept was not con¬ 
firmed (Stanford and Associates, 1976), but only a weak manipulation of 
self-concept was used for ethical reasons. 

5.1.1b. The Academic-Exam Paradigm. The PMIR model has re¬ 
ceived additional support from a procedure developed by Martin Johnson 
(1973). On short-answer essay exams given to three college classes, he 
provided answers to half the questions in sealed envelopes to which the 
exams were attached. The targeted questions were randomly selected for 
each student individually. For two classes the answers were correct, 


*Dr. Stanford kindly supplied me with this information in the course of reviewing the first 
draft of the chapter. 



190 


John Palmer 


while for the third they were incorrect. In each case where the answers 
were correct, the students scored significantly higher on the targeted 
questions than on the control questions. However, when the enclosed 
answers were incorrect, they scored significantly higher on the control 
questions. It would appear that students who were unaware that ESP was 
involved with the exams used the concealed information to improve their 
scores in the first two experiments. However, in the third experiment 
their ESP presumably did not tell them that the answers were wrong and 
the “strategy” backfired. Although the scale used to score the answers 
was different in this experiment from that in the first two, it would appear 
that the overall scores in the first two experiments were higher, even 
when the scaling is taken into account. 

The results of Johnson’s first two experiments were successfully rep¬ 
licated twice by Braud (1975a), who also found that the subjects who used 
psi most effectively got the lowest scores on the part of the exam where 
answers were not supplied. However two attempted “replications” based 
on multiple-choice rather than essay questions failed to yield any signifi¬ 
cant results (Willis, Duncan, and Udofia, 1974). 

An earlier experiment by Stanford (1970) is conceptually related to 
Johnson’s paradigm and will be discussed in this section. In this case, 
subjects were asked to listen to the transcript of a bogus dream report and 
then to answer questions about its content. Unbeknownst to them, one of 
the four possible answers to each question was randomly selected as an 
ESP target. Thus, in contrast to Johnson’s procedure, the correctness of 
the ESP responses bore no systematic relationship to the correctness of 
responses on the cognitive test. Among other things, Stanford found that 
when subjects gave answers that contradicted the transcript, they made 
significantly more hits than expected by chance. It would appear that 
designating an incorrect answer on the memory test as an ESP hit actually 
distorted subjects’ recall of the transcripts without their awareness. 

5.1.1c. PM1R and Overt ESP. Although the PMIR model stresses the 
role of unintentional psi as a mediator of instrumental responses, it as¬ 
sumes that intentional psi can serve this function as well. The 
hypothesized relationship between intentional and unintentional psi was 
supported by Stanford and Thompson (1974), who found a significant 
positive correlation between ESP scores derived from their word associa¬ 
tion test and scores from an orthodox card-guessing test administered 
immediately before. 

Perhaps the best example of a case where intentional psi could be 
used to fulfill strong needs is a series of experiments in which subjects 
were led to believe that their scores on an ESP test would help to deter¬ 
mine whether or not they would be allowed to enroll in a university course 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


191 


or receive employment in the university library (Sailaja and Rao, 1973). 
An interview was sandwiched between the two ESP tests. Overall scores 
were nonsignificant, but in each experiment scoring was higher after the 
interview than before. The difference was significant in two experiments 
and approached significance in the other. Subsequent research suggested 
that the difference was primarily due to the fact that the first ESP test 
caught subjects by surprise, while by the second test they were able to 
develop a more appropriate mental set. 

5.Lie. Conclusion. There is evidence from a number of experiments 
that subjects can use ESP unconsciously and unintentionally to fulfill 
their own needs or the needs of others. The academic exam paradigm has 
so far been the most successful in producing significant overall ESP ef¬ 
fects, at least with essay-type questions. Since multiple-choice items are 
scored in an all-or-none fashion, it is conceivable that procedures based 
on such scores are simply too insensitive to demonstrate the effect. Al¬ 
though support for the specific predictions of Stanford’s PMIR model has 
been inconsistent, all significant relationships have been in the predicted 
direction. 


5.1.2. Covert Target Impregnation: X-Rated Parapsychology 

A number of more traditional ESP experiments in which subjects 
made intentional ESP responses that were not instrumental in achieving 
some other end nevertheless had covert elements. These experiments 
were designed to demonstrate that subjects can respond to emotionally 
relevant target stimuli, of whose nature they are consciously unaware, in 
ways that are relevant to their own needs. 

5.1.2a. Anxiety and Emotional Stimuli. In a variation of the standard 
BM card test, Carpenter (1971) included erotic photographs (e.g., couples 
engaging in sexual acts) inside half of the envelopes containing ESP cards 
that subjects were supposed to match to the key cards. The subjects, who 
were high school students, were unaware that erotic photographs were 
involved in the experiment. Carpenter found a significant interaction be¬ 
tween target type and trait anxiety as measured by the Taylor Manifest 
Anxiety Scale. As expected, high-anxious subjects scored higher on the 
neutral targets and low-anxious subjects scored higher on the targets as¬ 
sociated with the erotic pictures. 

In an experiment quite similar to Carpenter's except that college 
students were tested with a BT procedure and the pictures were some¬ 
what less risque, Ballard (1975) found a significant negative relationship 
between scores on Spielberger’s Trait Anxiety Scale and ESP scores on 
erotic targets, but only for females. This relationship was not confirmed in 



192 


John Palmer 


a follow-up experiment (Ballard, 1977), but his female subjects had an 
unusually high mean score on the anxiety scale, suggesting a possible 
restriction of range problem. He did find, however, that scoring on erotic 
targets was highest among subjects who reported the greatest decrease in 
state anxiety following a pretest relaxation exercise. These results fit in 
with the general pattern of better scoring on erotic targets among the least 
anxious subjects. 

Carpenter (1971), in a second experiment with college males, used the 
Mosher Sex Guilt Scale and belief in ESP as predictors in an ESP exper¬ 
iment otherwise identical to his first endeavor described above. Among 
believers in ESP (who scored significantly lower on sex guilt than did 
nonbelievers) he found significantly higher ESP scores on erotic than on 
neutral targets. Among the more guilt-prone goats, he found generally 
chance scoring on the erotic targets, but there was a significant tendency 
for these goats to score lower on the neutral targets than the less guilt- 
prone goats. These findings are complex, but they show that psi-hitting on 
erotic targets was restricted to subjects who both believe in ESP and have 
relatively little sex guilt as measured by the Mosher scale. To the extent 
that “sex guilt” represents a kind of anxiety, these findings are consistent 
with those described above. 

Finally, Johnson and Nordbeck (1972) tested a woman with frequent 
psychic experiences who also revealed signs of neuroticism on the De¬ 
fense Mechanisms Test. A BM procedure was used, and the target cards 
(unknown to the subject) consisted of words having positive or negative 
emotional import for her, as deduced from personality tests and a clinical 
interview. She scored above chance on the positive words and below 
chance on the negative words, the difference being significant. A second 
experiment was unsuccessful, but in between experiments the subject had 
learned the nature of the target cards and expressed displeasure at the 
previous deception. Thus the psychological conditions were drastically 
altered in this second experiment. 

5.1.2b. Other Experiments With Covert Emotional Stimuli. Rogers 
(1967c) found in each of two experiments that subjects who believed in 
ESP and reported sexual arousal after reading an erotic passage scored 
significantly higher on targets that consisted of provocative words from 
the passage than on ESP symbol targets. The difference was only signifi¬ 
cant when the word runs were given after subjects had read the passage 
and the symbol runs before, not vice versa. 

Wiklund (1975) used pictures of beautiful or gruesome scenes as 
targets in two blind matching experiments. Subjects were unaware of the 
identity or nature of the pictures. In the first experiment, the overall mean 
was significantly below chance, and there was a signficiant interaction 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


193 


between target type and perceptual response on a spiral aftereffect test. 
“Intraceptive” (subjectively oriented) subjects concentrated their psi- 
missing on the gruesome targets, while “extraceptive” (objectively 
oriented) subjects concentrated their psi-missing on the beautiful targets. 
Results in the replication attempt were nonsignificant, despite a larger 
sample size. Price (1973b) generally found that supplementing ESP sym¬ 
bols with erotic symbols had no significant effect on ESP scores, but the 
erotic symbols he used (the first letters of erotic words) would not be 
expected to have much emotional impact. 

5.1.2c. Conclusion. The overall pattern of results from studies using 
covert emotional stimuli suggests that subjects who are relatively anxious 
tend to avoid responding correctly to targets associated with emotionally 
arousing or potentially threatening stimuli when they are not informed of 
the presence of such stimuli. Carpenters experiment with the Mosher 
scale and Johnson’s experiment are the most convincing in this respect, 
because the target material was related in relatively specific ways to the 
psychodynamics of the subjects. 

5.2. Physiological Response Indices: ESP's Body Language 

In the designs we examined in the last section, the ESP message was 
always mediated by a verbal or quasi-verbal response; i.e., the message 
still required some representation in consciousness. But what if a psychic 
impression is either too weak or too heavily censored to achieve even this 
secondary representation in consciousness? Such an impression could 
still influence the organism at an even more primitive level that might be 
detected by examining unconscious and/or unintentional physiological re¬ 
sponses to the remote ESP stimulus. As was the case in the PMIR exper¬ 
iments described in the previous section, the subject need not be trying to 
make an ESP response or even know that he or she is in an ESP experi¬ 
ment. In this section I will discuss those experiments where physiological 
responses were used not as predictors of ESP responses but as ESP 
responses themselves. 

5.2.1. Autonomic Responses: Let Your Finger Do the Talking 

5.2.1a. Plethysmograph. The majority of studies have examined au¬ 
tonomic reactions, and the most common of these has been blood volume 
of the finger as measured by the plethysmograph. The first systematic 
attempt to use the plethysmograph as an ESP index was by Figar (1959), 
who simultaneously recorded subjects in the same room separated by a 
heavy curtain. At various times, one subject would silently perform men- 



194 


John Palmer 


tal arithmetic while the physiological responses of the other subject were 
noted. Responses coincident with the agent’s mental arithmetic were de¬ 
tected on a large number of trials, accompanied by a large number of 
spontaneous deflections occurring simultaneously in the two subjects. 
Statistical analyses of these results proved to be highly significant (West, 
1959). However, Dalton (1960) pointed out that the spontaneous syn- 
chronicities of response could be due to common reactions to environ¬ 
mental stimuli, while Nash and Nash (1962) found errors in the statistical 
analysis of Figar’s results which reduced the other effect to nonsignifi¬ 
cance. The Nashes also replicated Figar’s experiment with the partici¬ 
pants seven miles apart and failed to obtain significant results. Sanjar 
(1969) likewise failed to achieve significance with a similar design, al¬ 
though he included a third subject who was not to receive an ESP mes¬ 
sage as a control for environmental effects. The design of this study has 
been criticized by Dean (1970). 

A better experimental design than Figar’s would be to compare au¬ 
tonomic reactions on experimental trials to reactions on control trials 
where the stimulus presented to the agent is not expected to evoke a 
response. Such an approach was pioneered by Dean and his co-workers 
(Dean, 1962, 1966a, b, 1971a, b; Dean and Nash, 1967; Dean and Otani, 
1972). Dean used as target material cards with names that were emotion¬ 
ally meaningful to the percipient or to the agent, names selected at ran¬ 
dom from the phone book, and blank cards. The cards were looked at by 
the agent, in random order and with random intertrial intervals, while the 
reactions of the remote percipient were recorded. The principal method of 
analysis was to compare the magnitude of the pen deflection during trials 
where a name was presented to that of trials where a blank card was 
presented. 

Dean reported generally significant results using this method with 
three percipients, including himself, although in only one case was a 
detailed experimental report published (Dean and Nash, 1967). Although 
the effect was generally strongest with names known to the percipient, 
trends approaching significance also appeared for other names, especially 
in the Dean and Nash experiment. In one case, a reversal (more response 
to blank cards) occurred when the student was tested around exam time 
(Dean, 1966b). However, a successful replication of the primary finding 
with a single subject was reported by Barry (1968). 

In an experiment of a design similar to Dean’s, Esser et al. (1967) 
found that 7 of 12 percipients made more responses to emotional stimuli 
presented to the agent than to neutral stimuli, while only one subject 
reversed this trend. However, a larger replication attempt by Haraldsson 
(1972) produced only chance results on the relationship of interest. 

Two experiments employing methodology somewhat different from 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


195 


Dean’s have yielded significant results with plethysmographic measures. 
Tart (1963) examined percipients’ responses on occasions when a re¬ 
motely located agent received painful electric shocks randomly in¬ 
terspersed with other occasions when the shock was “sent” but, instead 
of being received by the agent, was diverted to a resistor. Compared 
to matched control periods, percipients evidenced significantly more 
plethysmographic responses on each type of experimental trial, the effect 
actually being somewhat stronger on those trials where the agent did not 
receive the shock. Percipients were asked to press a telegraph key when 
they felt that a “subliminal stimulus” had been presented to them during 
the session, but these conscious ESP responses were unrelated to any of 
the experimental manipulations. 

In a more complex experiment, Schouten (1976a) used both name 
cards (of the various types employed by Dean) and loud tones to stimulate 
the agent at random intervals. Using numbers of responses as the depen¬ 
dent variable, significant results with the plethysmograph were obtained 
only with names. Although only names known to the percipient produced 
independently significant results, effects of comparable magnitude were 
found with names supplied by the agents and with neutral names. 

5.2.1b. Skin Resistance. Skin resistance has been used almost as fre¬ 
quently as plethysmograph with this paradigm, but the results have been 
less encouraging. Woodruff and Dale ( 1952) used electric shock to condi¬ 
tion a GSR to one of three ESP symbols. When the symbols were later 
presented in random sequence under conditions of sensory shielding, 
there was no evidence of discriminating GSR responses, despite periodic 
reinforcement to prevent extinction. Beloff, Cowles, and Bate (1970) 
obtained chance results using names or photos of the percipients as the 
crucial stimuli supplied to the agent. 

A better comparison of skin resistance and plethysmograph is pro¬ 
vided by those experiments in which both recording techniques were 
used. Tart’s (1963) results with GSR were in the same direction as with 
plethysmograph but nonsignificant. Schouten (1976a) found that name 
stimuli had no effect on his skin resistance measure, but he did find that 
when sound stimuli were used, there were significantly fewer GSRs when 
the agent was being stimulated than during control periods. Schouten 
interprets this result as an increase of basal skin resistance (BSR) during 
the sending periods, indicative of lower sensitivity to sensory stimulation 
during periods of extrasensory stimulation. Why such an effect did not 
appear with name stimuli remains obscure. Sanjar (1969) used both mea¬ 
sures only in a preliminary experiment. Although GSR seemed somewhat 
more effective than plethysmograph, the results were not impressive and 
controls were lax. 

5.2.1c. Conclusion. Autonomic responses to remote stimuli of emo- 



196 


John Palmer 


tional salience to agent and/or percipient have been demonstrated with a 
fair degree of consistency in properly designed experiments when the 
measure is the plethysmograph, but not when it is the GSR. Although I 
am by no means an expert in autonomic physiology, I know of no 
physiological reason to expect different results with these two measures. 
Experimenter effects may be responsible for some of the difference, but 
this explanation cannot readily account for the relatively superior results 
with plethysmographs in Tart’s and Schouten’s experiments. 

The failure of Schouten to find significant plethysmograph results 
with tone stimuli suggests that stimuli must have either emotional valence 
or cognitive meaning to be effectively transmitted. On the other hand, the 
tendency of neutral names to be almost as effective as emotional names in 
the work of Schouten and of Dean and Nash, and the apparent transmis¬ 
sion of information on pseudoshock trials in Tart’s experiment, suggests 
that a stimulus need not have emotional impact to get through. Perhaps 
there is a generalization effect involved; i.e., if some of the stimuli in an 
experimental condition are of an emotional nature, neutral stimuli in¬ 
terspersed among them take on at least some of this emotional quality 
themselves and are also transmitted. Schouten’s sound stimuli would not 
be predicted to be effective by this hypothesis because they were 
not interspersed with the name stimuli and (apparently, at least) 
did not arouse a specific emotion themselves. 


5.2.2. EEG: Show Me Your Sine 

A smaller number of experiments have attempted to influence central 
as opposed to autonomic nervous system responses by means of remote 
stimulation. The first substantial effort to determine whether the EEG 
could be influenced in this way was Tart’s (1963) experiment discussed 
above. Using period analysis, he found a general desynchronization of the 
EEG during experimental (shock and pseudoshock) trials as compared to 
control trials, but the difference was significant only on the variable that 
measured EEG activity superimposed on the basic waveform. This is the 
most sensitive of the measures provided by period analysis. 

5.2.2a. Stroboscopic Stimulation. The most common procedure for 
testing remote EEG effects has been to drive the agent’s EEG with a 
strobe device and to determine whether comparable changes simultane¬ 
ously appear in the brain waves of a sensorially isolated percipient. The 
first report I could find of such an experiment was by Duane and 
Behrendt (1965), who claimed remote driving of EEG alpha with 2 of 15 
pairs of identical twins. 

In a more sophisticated experiment, Targ and Puthoff (1974) ran- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


197 


domly interspersed 12 trials of 6Hz and 16-Hz stimulation, respectively, 
with 12 control trials. Although no photic driving was demonstrated in any 
of the six percipients, alpha blocking was observed in one of them during 
the experimental trials. Confirmatory research with this subject revealed 
continued significant alpha blocking with 16-Hz stimulation of the agent, 
and the same trend approached significance with 6-Hz stimulation. An 
attempted independent replication with one subject and omission of the 
6-Hz condition yielded some significant effects based on post hoc 
analyses of EEG spectra, but the pattern of results differed from session 
to session and thus cannot be considered a clear confirmation of Targ’s 
findings (Kelly and Lenz, 1976a). 

5.2.2b. Evoked Potentials. Lloyd (1973) reported a pilot study in 
which an average evoked response (AER) occasionally was elicited in re¬ 
sponse to a single flash of light presented to a remote agent. However, the 
design of this experiment was criticized by Millar (1976), who proceeded 
to conduct his own experiment under better controlled conditions. He 
found no evidence of remote AER when the agent was repeatedly submit¬ 
ted to .5-Hz photic stimulation during a 75-second period. 

5.2.2c. Conclusion. Attempts to influence EEG by remote stimula¬ 
tion so far have been less successful than attempts to influence blood 
volume, but the presence of some positive findings should encourage 
further research. Some of the EEG experiments discussed in section 3.1.1 
that were primarily designed to find correlates of ESP behavioral re¬ 
sponses could also be construed as involving EEG responses to ESP 
stimuli. Studies where EEG-ESP relationships are examined on a trial- 
by-trial basis are particularly relevant (Kelly and Lenz, 1976b; Wallwork, 
1952). 

6. The Ubiquity of It All 

In the preceding sections we have seen a wide range of ESP effects: 
psi-hitting, psi-missing, variance effects, position effects, precognition, 
etc. However, all of these effects involve the relationship between each 
ESP call and the target designated for that trial. In this section, we will 
examine instances where ESP calls seem to be related in systematic ways 
to stimuli other than the target, or to patterns in the target sequences. 

Results of this type present perhaps the clearest illustration yet of the 
ubiquity of psi. Almost every conceivable form of psi manifestation has 
been demonstrated at one time or another. This ubiquity must be taken 
into account when we finally confront the question of how we can 
best make sense of the experimental results we have considered in this 
chapter. 



198 


John Palmer 


6.1. Displacement Effects: ESP Off Target 

In most ESP tests, the subject is trying to use ESP to acquire infor¬ 
mation about a particular target as distinct from other potential targets. 
However, it is not uncommon for ESP to miss the target and pick up one 
or more of these other stimuli, the subject being completely unaware that 
this is happening. Such “displacement” represents one of the major bar¬ 
riers to the reliable application of psi. 


6.1.1. Between-Trials Displacement: Expanding the Space-Time Frame 

Between-trials displacement refers to scoring a hit on a target occur¬ 
ring either before or after the real-time target in a sequence of targets. 
Interest traditionally has been focused on the targets occurring im¬ 
mediately before or after the real-time target, and hitting on such targets is 
referred to as -1 and +1 displacement, respectively. The +1 displace¬ 
ment may provide evidence of precognition in cases where targets are 
selected randomly on a trial-by-trial basis, but this perspective will not be 
our primary concern in this section. 

6.1.1a. Evidence for Between-T rials Displacement. If we can accept 
its credibility, the strongest evidence for between-trials displacement ef¬ 
fects in the parapsychological literature comes from the extensive testing 
of Basil Shackleton (Soal and Bateman, 1954). In a screening experiment, 
Shackleton scored significantly above chance on both +1 and -1. He 
continued to score significantly above chance on +1 throughout most of 
his career while scoring nonsignificantly on the actual target and -1. With 
one sender, however, he reverted to his original habit of scoring signifi¬ 
cantly on both +1 and -1. Most of this latter effect subsequently was 
found to be attributable to cases where the +1 and -1 targets were the 
same symbol, thus giving him both a +1 and -1 hit on the same response. 
This was called the “reinforcement effect” (Pratt, 1951). 

Significant displacement effects have occasionally been found with 
other subjects, but not nearly as frequently as direct hitting. Russell (1943) 
found no clear evidence of between-trials displacement in the results of 
eight major experiments conducted at Rhine’s laboratory up to that time. 
Six of these involved single subjects. However, Mangan (1955, 1957) 
found a woman who consistently scored significantly above chance on 
+ 1, while her scoring on real-time targets was inconsistent. 

The strongest evidence of displacement in research with unselected 
subjects comes from “home-testing” experiments organized by G. W. 
Fisk (Fisk, 1951a, b; West, 1953). Fisk mailed packs of standard ESP 
cards to 235 correspondents, who tested each other on varying numbers 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


199 


of runs using a GESP format. The experiment was intended as a screen¬ 
ing device to select talented subjects for additional testing under better 
controlled conditions. A significantly positive overall mean score in the 
actual targets in this experiment could not have been taken seriously, but 
scoring on these targets was not significant, although positive. The main 
finding of interest, which it would be somewhat harder to attribute to 
experimental error, was highly significant psi-missing on both +1 and -1. 
Evidence of “reinforcement” was also found in these data. Significant 
between-trials displacements have occasionally been reported in other 
forced-choice and free-response experiments, some of which have been 
described elsewhere in the chapter. However, they form no consistent 
pattern. 

6.1.1b. Between-Trials Displacement in High-Scoring Direct Hitters. 
Tart (1977a) recently reported that all five of the high-scoring subjects on 
the ten-choice machine in his GESP learning experiment (Tart, 1976a) 
showed significant psi-missing on +1 and -1. Although the -1 effect was 
at least partly an artifact due to the immediate feedback, Tart cited inter¬ 
nal evidence possibly suggesting a genuine bilateral psi-missing effect on 
the + 1 and —1 targets. Very similar bilateral psi-missing on 4-1 and — 1 
was found in GESP tests with a high-scoring Aborigine woman (Rose and 
Rose, 1951). Pratt and Foster (1950) found significant evidence of psi- 
missing on +1 in the DT results of one of Martin and Stribic’s high- 
scoring subjects. This analysis was based only on pairs of trials that 
included no direct hits. Pairs containing a direct hit revealed a significant 
excess of +1 hits, but Pratt later concluded that analysis of such pairs for 
displacement effects was inappropriate (Pratt, Martin, and Stribic, 1974). 
A comparable anlaysis of pairs of misses contributed by Martin and 
Stribic’s best subject, C. J., revealed different displacement effects for 
different types of DT or UT tests (Pratt et al ., 1974). Two of the three 
effects involved significant psi-missing on either +1 or -1, while the other 
involved significant psi-hitting on -1. Analysis of pairs of misses from 
Gloria Stewart, one of Soal’s high-scoring subjects, revealed a significant 
excess of +1 and -1 hits (Pratt, 1967a). Other high-scoring subjects such 
as Pearce have failed to show significant displacement (Russell, 1943). 

6.1.1c. Conclusion. In the literature as a whole, significant scoring on 
displacement targets is reported much less frequently than on real-time 
targets. How much of this is attributable to the fact that displacement 
effects are analyzed less often than real-time effects is unclear. No consis¬ 
tent relationships have been found between displacmement scores and 
psychological variables. 

A number of subjects who have evidenced strong hitting on real-time 
targets have shown secondary displacement effects. The nature of such 



200 


John Palmer 


effects have been inconsistent, but most seem to involve psi-missing on 
either +1, -1, or both. If one ignores the controversial Stewart data, this 
type of pattern is most evident in GESP experiments, including, perhaps, 
Fisk’s experiment with unselected subjects. 

Tart (1977a) labeled the effect he found as “transtemporal inhibition,” 
likening it to the secondary inhibition of stimuli immediately adjacent to 
the focal stimulus in all known sensory systems. Since +1 effects in his 
experiment were most likely precognitive because targets were generated 
on a trial-by-trial basis, he argued that his results suggested an expanded 
primary perception forward in time. In other experiments, the expansion 
of perception could be interpreted either spatially or temporally. 

6.1.2. Within-Trial Displacement: Confusing Kings with Queens 

A second kind of displacement occurs within a particular trial. In 
forced-choice experiments, it involves the tendency to consistently call a 
particular incorrect symbol when missing a particular target, e.g., consis¬ 
tently calling “circle” every time the target is “star.” Parapsychologists 
refer to this effect as “consistent missing.” In certain free-response exper¬ 
iments, within-trial displacement involves the evocation of imagery re¬ 
lated to control pictures to be used in the judging process. 

6.1.2a. Consistent Missing. Significant evidence of consistent missing 
in card-guessing experiments has been reported by Cadoret and Pratt 
(1950) and by Timm (1969). However, the most impressive evidence of 
consistent missing comes from a recent experiment with Bill Delmore, 
who reports strong visual imagery associated with his ESP responses 
(Kelly et al ., 1975). This “gifted” subject made 10,350 calls of ordinary 
playing cards concealed by heavy black paper. In addition, he made 1,875 
guesses of playing cards projected tachistoscopically at a rate likely to 
induce mistakes of identification. The subject’s overall positive score on 
the ESP runs was highly significant, and there was significant evidence 
of consistent missing concentrated in the runs with the highest scores. 
The most interesting aspect of the data was the fact that the particular 
errors the subject made were the same on the high-scoring ESP runs as on 
the visual task, for example, confusion among picture cards (e.g., calling a 
king a queen) and confusion among colors (e.g., calling a heart a 
diamond). As expected, such consistent missing effects were not found in 
high-scoring runs using a “psychic shuffle” procedure where visual media¬ 
tion was not relevant (Kanthamani and Kelly, 1975). The results of these 
two experiments together strongly suggest that, at least for this one sub¬ 
ject, ESP information is encoded in the same way as visual information in 
relevant types of ESP tests. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


201 


Consistent missing effects have also been found with a between- 
subjects design. In a correspondence experiment, Fisk and West (1957) 
invited subjects who were situated in their own homes to guess a common 
sequence of 12 clock cards displayed at Fisk’s home, the order being 
rerandomized for each test. There was a significant tendency for particu¬ 
lar cards to receive the same call regardless of their locations in the 
sequence. Although no formal statistical test of consistent missing was 
applied, for none of the 12 targets was the most frequent call the correct 
one. This kind of consistent missing effect seems to suggest that particular 
targets “pull” particular responses that may not be accurate. 

6.1.2 b. Free-Response Experiments . Within-trial displacement to 
control pictures in free-response experiments can occur, especially when 
the subject is asked to pick out a target picture from a group of pictures 
soon after the reception period. Such displacements are frequently re¬ 
ported anecdotally (e.g., Stanford and Neylon, 1975), and some statistical 
evidence of their occurrence has recently been found in a ganzfeld exper¬ 
iment (Palmer et al., 1977). 

6.1.2c. Conclusion . Within-trial displacement effects have never 
evoked much interest among parapsychologists, but they have been 
shown to occur in both forced-choice and (more equivocally) free- 
response experiments. In forced-choice experiments, at least, consistent 
missing has as much potential information value as direct hitting, and 
subjects who manifest this aberration possibly could be trained to com¬ 
pensate for it and become outstanding psi-hitters. 

6.1.3. Focusing and Holistic Effects: Microscope and Macroscope 

The kinds of displacement analyses we have looked at so far assumed 
that all targets in the sequence are equivalent as sources of ESP informa¬ 
tion. In this section, I will consider two opposite kinds of situation where 
this assumption does not hold. 

6.1.3a. The Focusing Effect. The “focusing effect” refers generally to 
the tendency for psi-mediated responses to be focused on particular phys¬ 
ical targets in a sequence. The term was coined as a label for a unique 
scoring tendency found in the data of the “gifted” subject Stepanek (Pratt, 
1973). This subject, you may recall (Sec. 1.2.), specialized in guessing 
which side of a card concealed in an opaque envelope was facing upward. 
It later was discovered that Stepanek had developed a tendency to make 
the same call each time certain sides of some of the envelopes were 
presented to him, regardless of the status of the enclosed cards. This 
finding became of parapsychological interest when the envelopes were 
enclosed in cardboard covers and focusing on the same envelopes con- 



202 


John Palmer 


tinued. Then sensory focusing began to appear on some of the covers, and 
this new effect continued when the covers were concealed. The focusing 
effect began soon after the containers were first introduced in the research 
and were consistent across different experimental series. Stepanek does 
not “focus” intentionally, and he claims his attention is always concen¬ 
trated on the cards. 

Pratt (1973) suggests that Stepanek unconsciously utilizes subtle sen¬ 
sory cues to classify exposed containers into two categories, which are 
responded to extrasensorially when the containers are concealed. How¬ 
ever, ESP might be involved even when the containers are visible. 

No evidence of focusing effects has yet been discovered with other 
high-scoring subjects. It was not found with Harribance when the targets 
were ten male or female photographs (Roll and Klein, 1972). Lucas and 
Roll (1973) asked a subject to repeatedly guess four decks of cards of 
different types, each card being concealed in an opaque envelope. The 
subject apparently did not know which deck she was guessing on a par¬ 
ticular run. Results indicated a significant tendency not to repeatedly call 
the same symbol on a given card. This looks like the diametric opposite of 
the focusing effect demonstrated by Stepanek. However, the relevance of 
this finding to the focusing effect is limited by the fact that there was no 
evidence of the effect being concentrated on particular cards. 

The closest thing I could find to a replication of the focusing effect 
was the experiment of Fisk described in the last section. West (1953) 
noted that the consistent missing effect found in Fisk’s data was concen¬ 
trated on 3 of the 12 target envelopes, although no statistical test was 
reported to back up this assessment. 

6.1.3b. Holistic Effects. In an ingenious experiment with Harribance 
as subject, Child and Kelly (1973) created “unbalanced decks,” which 
consisted of nine, seven, five, three, and one replications of the standard 
ESP symbols in random permutation. For example, a deck might consist 
of nine circles but only one star. Harribance was aware of this manipu¬ 
lation in general terms only. His scoring was significantly above chance, 
but the result was attributable at least partly to a significant tendency to 
unbalance his calls in the direction of the deck’s composition. In other 
words, if a deck contained large numbers of stars and crosses he would 
tend to call large numbers of stars and crosses on that run. This effect was 
not simply an artifact of direct hitting, because it was independently sig¬ 
nificant when only misses were analyzed. These results suggest that Har¬ 
ribance responded holistically to the deck more than he did to the particu¬ 
lar sequence of targets. 

6.1.3c. Conclusion. The focusing effect clearly applies to Stepanek, 
but its generality to other subjects is questionable. Fisk’s results with 
unselected subjects offer some hope in this regard, however, and they 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


203 


suggest further that particular targets may engender identical calling 
biases in different individuals. The generality of Child’s holistic effect is 
completely indeterminate because only one unbalanced deck experiment 
has been reported. This procedure certainly should be tried with other 
subjects. 

6.2. Summary and Conclusion: What Does It All Mean? 

It is now time to bring the chapter to a close and take stock of where 
we have been. How can we further integrate the over 700 references 
reviewed so far in the chapter and what guidelines can be suggested for 
the next stages of inquiry? 

6.2.1. The Unreliability of ESP Scores: A Nemesis Revisited 

Early in the chapter I made the point that ESP scores are quite 
unreliable, even by the standards of reliability customary in the social and 
behavioral sciences. The signal-to-noise ratio is very low, and one must 
endure a great deal of static to hear any message that may be present. 

The implications of this fact can hardly be understated. Many psy¬ 
chologists, for example, are simply unwilling to study unreliable variables 
because of the problems they present. The willingness of para¬ 
psychologists to accept the challenge such variables offer is one of the 
major characteristics that distinguishes them from most other scientists. 

In practice, the unreliability of ESP scores means that a large amount 
of data must be collected to obtain a small amount of information. Much 
dirt must be panned before any gold is discovered. At the level of rela¬ 
tionships between ESP and other v.ariables, we saw that almost never 
have such relationships appeared consistently in different experiments. 
As Rao (1977) has recently pointed out, it is unclear whether the null 
results in some cases is evidence against the validity of the relationship or 
whether the “ESP scores” in these experiments simply did not reflect any 
ESP. In the beginning of the chapter, subtle differences in methodology 
and sampling variability were cited as other plausible reasons for the 
inconsistency. However, the ability to explain this unreliability does not 
make it go away or make it any less frustrating to the theoretically minded 
researcher. 

Nevertheless, our cloud has an important silver lining. Low or incon¬ 
sistent reliability is not the same as no reliability. We saw numerous 
instances throughout the chapter where researchers were successful in 
replicating the results of their own previous experiments. Independent 
replications have also been reported from time to time, although not as 
frequently as “in-house” replications. (This ratio is not surprising, given 



204 


John Palmer 


the greater opportunity for subtle methodological differences to intrude 
into independent replication attempts). In short, what this reliability 
means is that trends frequently emerge in the data. For example, we saw 
that some variables are better predictors of ESP scores than are other 
variables. We saw several instances where relationships which were usu¬ 
ally not significant almost always occurred in the same direction when 
they were significant. These patterns are the elusive gold nuggets we have 
been seeking amidst the debris. They are what justify the tedium of our 
expedition into the kingdom of the unreliable. 

On the other hand, I would be remiss not to point out the dangers of 
such a strategy. The human mind has a natural and irresistible urge to 
abstract order out of chaos, even when there is no order to be abstracted. 
Occasionally, relationships are significant simply by chance, the infamous 
“type 1 erroi^’ that statisticians talk about. Might not we find “meaningful” 
patterns of relationship between psychological variables and “scores” 
taken from a random number table? On a couple of occasions I have 
generated such relationships myself as a kind of control condition for an 
ESP experiment, and I have always found that the ESP scores provided 
more, and more meaningful, relationships (meaningful, at least, to me). 

There really is no definitive way at present to resolve the issue raised 
in the previous paragraph, but that does not mean we should not be keenly 
aware of it. Like many things in life, the proof of the pudding will be in the 
eating. Some of the patterns I have pointed out in this chapter will col¬ 
lapse as more data are collected. Others, I am confident, will survive, 
although I would not wish to speculate which ones they will be. Thus, as 
the process of research continues, it will become clearer and clearer 
where the gold is. Such knowledge, in turn, will teach us how to make 
ESP scores more reliable so we can find still more gold. 

Parapsychology has traditionally found itself in a vicious circle: We 
can’t get reliable ESP scores until we discover and then “understand” the 
functional relationships between ESP and other variables; but we can’t 
discover these functional relationships without reliable ESP scores. By 
capitalizing on the admittedly low reliability we already have, the cycle 
can be reversed. What we are seeing in contemporary parapsychology is 
the beginning of this shift in equilibrium: The vicious circle is gradually 
turning into a snowball. 


6.2.2. ESP and Predictor Variables: The Pattern of the Patterns 

Throughout the chapter, but especially in sections 2 and 3, I com¬ 
mented upon certain patterns of relationships (or “gestalts,” if you will) 
that seemed to emerge from an examination of several experiments that 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


205 


addressed similar research questions. I even went so far as to suggest 
possible interpretations of some of these relationships, although I never 
meant to imply that they were the only interpretations possible. What I 
plan to do in this section is carry the process to one higher level of 
abstraction. Do the patterns themselves fall into patterns that may further 
our understanding of the factors that influence scoring in ESP tests and 
thus guide future research? Again, I wish to stress that the interpretations 
I will propose are not the only ones possible, although they are the most 
reasonable ones to me. 

In a methodological paper (Palmer, 1975), I stressed the importance 
of distinguishing between factors that influence the magnitude of psi (rep¬ 
resented by the absolute deviation of the score from MCE) and the direc¬ 
tion of psi (hitting versus missing). I will apply this distinction in the 
following discussion. 

6.2.2a. Factors Affecting Magnitude: Cognitive Processing. In 
studying the patterns described in the chapter, I got the impression that 
the variables that most clearly seemed to affect the magnitude as opposed 
to the direction of psi had something to do with the manner in which 
subjects’ cognitive processes were functioning during the test. The two 
most successful predictors of magnitude seemed to be spontaneity in the 
test (Sec. 2.3.2.) and the presence of a hypnagogiclike state of con¬ 
sciousness (2.6.2.). Spontaneity seems to be the primary variable here. 
Hypnagogiclike states may be expected to encourage spontaneity insofar 
as they are associated with a breakdown of rationalistic or “linear^ (to 
adopt the current cliche) patterns of mentation. 

Spontaneity appeared to facilitate ESP primarily through the vehicle 
of run-score variance. Most ASC experiments involved free-response 
procedures with only one or a very small number of trials per subject, so 
run-score variance could not be computed. What seemed to be happening 
in these experiments was that the subjects who reported relatively pro¬ 
nounced ASCs were responsible for most of the significant scores, but 
these scores tended to be all in the same direction in a given experiment. 
Thus it would seem that situational factors overrode individual differ¬ 
ences as determinants of directional trends in these experiments. This is 
not surprising, because situational factors are more powerful in ASC 
experiments than in most experiments where subjects’ minds are not 
being “tampered with.” 

The finding that significant psi-hitting is most likely to occur when 
subjects violate response biases (4.1.2.) also would seem to support the 
spontaneity hypothesis, since counterbias responses would appear to be 
more spontaneous than probias responses. Although there is no experi¬ 
mental evidence of psi-missing on counterbias responses (thus rendering 



206 


John Palmer 


the assumption that this is a magnitude rather than a deviation effect 
somewhat equivocal), this is due to the fact that the response-bias hy¬ 
pothesis has simply not been evaluated in experiments where the overall 
scoring deviation was negative. Rhine’s salience effect (4.1.1.) is more 
clearly a magnitude effect, although it has appeared less consistently than 
the response bias effect. Rhine speculatively interpreted the greater evi¬ 
dence of psi at the beginning and end of the test unit as attributable to 
greater spontaneity of response on these trials. 

There is also some evidence that the magnitude of ESP scoring is 
greatest on confidence calls, when they are allowed (4.1.3.). It is reason¬ 
able to assume that such calls reflect to a large degree the subject’s as¬ 
sessment of his or her cognitive processes during the trial, but the relation 
of this assessment to spontaneity remains a question for future research. 
There also is some evidence that “extreme sheep,” or persons emotionally 
involved with the issue of psi, tend to score significantly on ESP tests, 
some as hitters and some as missers (3.6.Id.). The relevance of this find¬ 
ing to spontaneity is not nearly so obvious as those cited above, but 
neither is it contradictory. 

Finally, one piece of evidence that might be cited against the above 
interpretation is the fact that graphic expansiveness (a test with face valid¬ 
ity as a measure of spontaneity, at least in free-response tests) does not 
seem to predict the magnitude of ESP scoring (3.7.2.). 

6.2.2b. Factors Affecting Direction: Social Psychological Variables. 
The variables that seemed to most consistently discriminate hitting and 
missing tendencies were almost exclusively social psychological in na¬ 
ture. The most obvious of these are the effect of the experimenter (2.5.2.) 
and the identity of the agent (2.5.1.). The effect of providing or depriving 
subjects of knowledge of their results (2.4.2.), strongly adverse environ¬ 
mental conditions (2.4.1.), and attractiveness of the targets and/or ex¬ 
perimental procedure (2.2.1.) also fit into this category. A number of 
individual difference variables were also interpreted as reflecting the 
capacity of the subject to be comfortable in the test situation. These 
included neuroticism (3.2.1.), extraversion (3.2.2.), intelligence (3.3.1.), 
and the belief that ESP can occur in the test (3.6.1). The idea that psi- 
missing can be encouraged by adverse psychological conditions is by no 
means a new one (e.g., Rhine, 1969b), but it draws support from the data 
presented in this chapter. 

A variable that reflects both social psychological factors (induction of 
a confident attitude) and cognitive state factors (induction of an ASC) is 
hypnosis (2.6.1.). Generally speaking, hypnosis seems to affect direction 
more than magnitude, but some studies also suggest an effect on mag¬ 
nitude per se (e.g., Honorton, 1964, 1966; Honorton and Krippner, 1969). 

Another variable that seems clearly related to ESP scoring but that is 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


207 


somewhat difficult to classify in one category or the other is age (3.5.2). 
Rhine’s (1941a, 1942) precognition research, where he generally found 
psi-hitting in children and psi-missing in adults, could well reflect social 
psychological factors, especially since in at least some of this research 
special efforts were made to create a positive social environment for the 
children but not the adults. In most other research, younger subjects 
scored significantly above chance and older subjects near chance. Thus 
magnitude and direction effects cannot be distinguished in these studies. 
Since people tend to become less spontaneous as they grow older, I would 
expect this to prove to be a magnitude effect rather than a direction effect, 
but that remains to be seen. 

6.2.2c. Some Equivocal Patterns. A third set of predictor variables 
have yielded significant results with relatively great frequency, but the 
results have either been contradictory or have made little psychological 
sense. These include mood or affective state variables (3.7.), EEG alpha 
density (3.1.1.), and “cognitive style” variables such as creativity (3.3.3.), 
imagery ability (3.3.4.), and field dependence (3.3.6.). In some cases, 
especially creativity, imagery ability, and EEG alpha, part of the problem 
may be inadequate measuring techniques or the inability to adequately 
define the underlying variables being measured. It is also likely that these 
variables interact with other, uncontrolled variables in determining ESP 
performance. The plausibility of this latter point is reinforced by the fact 
that some interactions have been demonstrated in ESP experiments be¬ 
tween these variables and other predictors that have been treated sys¬ 
tematically. Mood has been shown to interact with personality variables 
in the research of Nielsen (3.7.1a), and field dependence and graphic 
expansiveness were shown to interact with types of ESP test in the re¬ 
search of Buzby (3.3.6) and Humphrey (3.7.2), respectively. 

6.2.2d. Physical Variables: Nothing Cooking. Among those variables 
that seem to show little or no relationship of any kind to ESP scores, the 
most apparent cluster consists of physical variables. ESP scores do not 
seem to be affected by the distance of the target from the percipient either 
in space (2.1.) or in time (2.2.), the physical characteristics of forced- 
choice targets (2.3.1.). Physical variables only seem to influence psi in¬ 
sofar as they have secondary psychological effects. 


6.2.3. The Ubiquity of It All: Is ESP Really ESP? 

Throughout the chapter I have been making certain implicit as¬ 
sumptions about the nature of the psi process. These assumptions are in 
part an outgrowth of the term extrasensory perception , which implies a 
kind of analogy between ESP and known sensory processes. More speci¬ 
fically, we have been conceptualizing ESP as the ability to acquire infer- 



208 


John Palmer 


mation from sources not available to our known senses. This, in turn, 
implies transmission of information through some kind of channel from a 
source to a receiver. 

At first glance, it seems perfectly reasonable to postulate such a 
model. After all, what a significant score on an ESP test seems to tell us is 
that information has been acquired, in much the same way that a student 
getting a certain proportion of the questions correct on a history exam tells 
us that he or she has acquired information about history. The problem is 
that in the case of the history course, or in any other case where sensory 
modes of information acquisition are operative, we have highly predictive 
theories that clearly specify how the information gets from the source to 
the receiver—physical theories of light, sensory physiology, etc. We have 
theories of this type in parapsychology, but they are very poorly de¬ 
veloped and have little or no empirical support. We simply do not know 
how psi information is transmitted from source to receiver, and until we 
do, it is hazardous to take it for granted that such transmission occurs at 
all. 

Another factor that should give us pause in prematurely embracing 
transmission models of ESP is the failure to detect any real limits to the 
manner of its manifestation. Subjects can score above chance, below 
chance, both, or neither. Their responses can relate to the intended target 
or to some other target in the sequence. It matters little whether the target 
exists in the past, present, or future, or how far away it is from the 
percipient. ESP can occur without the percipient’s intent (as in Stanford’s 
PMIR) or even without the subject making any voluntary response (as in 
studies of physiological ESP responses). 

Given all this ubiquity, is it really that much of an inferential leap to 
add to our list synchronistic correspondences in nature (i.e., so-called 
meaningful coincidences) that do not involve the participation of a living 
mind or brain at all? In fact, wouldn’t it really be more parsimonious to do 
so? While it is true that such synchronistic phenomena have not been as 
well verified as ESP, might this be simply because we have been so brain¬ 
washed by our transmission models that we have not sought to study 
them? There certainly is enough anecdotal evidence to justify such an 
examination. 

Other anomalies in ESP data, although potentially explainable in 
terms of a transmission model, nonetheless strain that model. Rao’s 
(1965a) differential effect looks more like some homeostatic principle in 
nature than the reflection of some psychological process affecting the 
processing of extrasensory information. In a similar vein, Nash and Nash 
(1963) have pointed out that the magnitude of psi-missing tends to match 
the magnitude of psi-hitting in so-called high aim-low aim ESP tests 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


209 


with more than two response alternatives, despite the fact that more psi 
(so to speak) would seem to be necessary to produce a given negative 
deviation than the same positive deviation in such a test. Significantly low 
run-score variance (e.g., Rogers and Carpenter, 1966) does not follow 
readily from a transmission model, despite some evidence for a “cancella¬ 
tion effect” (see Sec. 4.4.1c). Finally, the provocative findings subsumed 
under the heading of “experimenter psi” (2.5.2d) burden the transmission 
model with some assumptions that can at best be called unwieldly. 

My intent here is not to suggest that we perfunctorily abandon the 
transmission model, but only that we keep our options open and our 
construct systems flexible. Indeed, synchronistic theories of psi are show¬ 
ing signs that they may be coming of age. The most visible proponent of 
this viewpoint has been Koestler (1972). The skeleton of a synchronistic 
theory of psi has recently been proposed by Lila Gatlin (1977), and Rex 
Stanford (1977b) seems to be moving in this direction with his new “con¬ 
formance theory.” 

I could elaborate further on these points, but this is a chapter on 
research findings, not theory. I will leave it to Dr. Rao to carry the ball 
from here! 


7. Acknowledgments 

This chapter was written while I was employed as assistant research 
psychologist in the Department of Psychology, University of California, 
Davis. I wish to acknowledge with appreciation the est Foundation and 
the Parapsychology Foundation, Inc., who funded my position. I am also 
grateful to my senior colleague, Dr. Charles Tart, who provided me with 
the freedom and encouragement to pursue this project. 

A number of individuals have read the first draft of the chapter and 
provided me with comments and suggestions. They include Dr. T. X. 
Barber, Dr. Irvin Child, Mr. Charles Honorton, Mr. James Kennedy, Dr. 
Robert Morris, Dr. Rex Stanford, and Ms. Debra Weiner. The chapter is 
much improved because of their efforts, but any deficiencies that remain 
are, of course, the responsibility of the author. 


8. References 

Adcock, C. J., and Quartermain, D. Some problems in group testing of ESP. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1959, 23, 251-256. 

Alkokar, V. V. Experimentally induced shifts in attitude to ESP and their effects on scoring. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1968, 32, 63. (Abstract) 



210 


John Palmer 


Alkokar, V. V., and Deshpande, V. D. Paranormal perceptivity and ESP test performance. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 131. (Abstract) 

Altom, K., and Braud, W. G. Clairvoyant and telepathic impressions of musical targets. In 
J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 171-174. 

Altrocchi, J. Experiments with Lalsingh Harribance: Psychological studies. In W. G. Roll, 
R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1971. Pp. 
68-70. 

Anderson, M. Clairvoyance and teacher-pupil attitudes in fifth and sixth grades. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1957,27, 1-12. 

Anderson, M. A precognition experiment comparing time intervals of a few days and one 
year .Journal of Parapsychology, 1959,25, 81-89. (a) 

Anderson, M. The relationship between level of ESP scoring and class grade. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1959,25, 1-18. (b) 

Anderson, M. The use of fantasy in testing for extrasensory perception. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 60, 150-163. 

Anderson, M., and Gregory, E. A two year program of tests for clairvoyance and precogni¬ 
tion with a class of public school pupils. Journal of Parapsychology, 1959,25, 149-177. 

Anderson, M., and McConnell, R. A. Fantasy testing for ESP in a fourth and fifth grade 
class. Journal of Psychology, 1961, 52, 491-503. 

Anderson, M., and White, R. Teacher-pupil attitudes and clairvoyance test results. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1956 ,20, 141-157. 

Anderson, M., and White, R. A further investigation of teacher-pupil attitudes and clair¬ 
voyance test results. Journal of Parapsychology, 1957, 21, 81-97. 

Anderson, M., and White, R. ESP score level in relation to students’ attitude toward 
teacher-agents acting simultaneously. Journal of Parapsychology, 1958,22, 20-28. (a) 

Anderson, M., and White, R. The relationship between changes in student attitude and ESP 
scoring. Journal of Parapsychology, 1958, 22, 167-174. (b) 

Anderson, M., and White, R. A survey of work on ESP and teacher-pupil attitudes. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1958,22, 246-268. (c) 

Astrom, J. GESP and MPI measures. Paper presented at the Eighth Annual Convention of 
the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1965. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1965, 29, 292-293.) 

Ballard, J. A. A psi task with hidden erotic and neutral stimuli. Paper presented at the 
meeting of the Southeastern Regional Parapsychological Association, Durham, North 
Carolina, 1975. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1975,59, 34.) 

Ballard, J. A. Unconscious perception of erotic, non-erotic and neutral stimuli on a psi task. 
In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 
1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 159-162. 

Banham, K. M. Temporary high scoring by a child subject. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1966, 30, 106-113. 

Banham, K. M. The imaginary quiz as a technique. Journal of Parapsychology, 1968,52, 64. 
(Abstract) 

Banham, K. M. Feedback, learning, and guessing. Journal of Parapsychology, 1973, 57, 
72-73. (Abstract) 

Banham, K. M. Mood and guessing. Journal of Parapsychology, 1974,55, 344. (Abstract) 

Barrington, M. R. A free response sheep/goat experiment using an irrelevant task. Journal 
of the Society for Psychical Research, 1973,47, 222-245. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


211 


Barron, F., and Mordkoff, A. M. An attempt to relate creativity to possible extrasensory 
empathy as measured by physiological arousal in identical twins. Journal of the Ameri¬ 
can Society for Psychical Research, 1967, 62 , 73-79. 

Barry, J. [Telepathy and plethysmography.] Revue Metapsychique (No. 4, Nouvelle Serie), 
1967, 56-74. (Abstract mJournal of Parapsychology , 1968, 32, 144.) 

Bates, K. E., and Newton, M. An experimental study of ESP capacity in mental patients. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1951, 15, 271-277. 

Beer, D. A correlational study to determine the effects of marital status on “telepathy” 
(GESP) between individuals. Journal of Parapsychology, 1971,55, 157. (Abstract) 

Beloff, J. The “sweethearts” experiment. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 
1969, 45, 1-7. 

Beloff, J. ESP: The search for a physiological index. Journal of the Society for Psychical 
Research, 1974,47,403-420. 

Beloff, J., and Bate, D. Research report for the year 1968-69. Journal of the Society for 
Psychical Research, 1970,45, 297-301. 

Beloff, J., and Bate, D. An attempt to replicate the Schmidt findings. Journal of the Society 
for Psychical Research, 1971, 46, 21-31. 

Beloff, J., and Mandleberg, I. An attempted validation of the “Ryzl technique” for training 
ESP subjects. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 43, 229-249. 

Beloff, J., Cowles, M., and Bate, D. Autonomic reactions to emotive stimuli using sensory 
and extrasensory conditions of presentation. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1970, 64, 313-319. 

Belvedere, E., and Foulkes, D. Telepathy in dreams: A failure to replicate. Perceptual and 
Motor Skills, 1971,55, 783-789. 

Bertini, M., Lewis, H., and Witkin, H. Some preliminary observations with an experimental 
procedure for the study of hypnagogic and related phenomena. In C. T. Tart (Ed.), 
Altered states of consciousness . New York: Wiley, 1969. 

Bevan, J. M. ESP tests in light and darkness. Journal of Parapsychology, 1947, 11, 
76-89. (a) 

Bevan, J. M. The relation of attitude to success in ESP scoring. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1947,//, 296-309. (b) 

Bhadra, B. H. The relationship of test scores to belief in ESP. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1966,56,1-17. 

Bierman, D. J., and Camstra, B. GESP in the classroom. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and 
J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 168-170. 

Birge, W. R. A new method and an experiment in pure telepathy. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1948, 12, 273-288. 

Birge, W. R., and Rhine, J. B. Unusual types of persons tested for ESP: I. A professional 
medium. Journal of Parapsychology, 1942, 6, 85-94. 

Bisaha, J. P., and Dunne, B. J. Precognitive remote viewing in the Chicago area: A replica¬ 
tion of the Stanford experiment. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), 
Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 
84-86. 

Bleksley, A. E. H. An experiment on long-distance ESP during sleep. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1963,27, 1-15. 

Blom, J. G., and Pratt, J. G. A second confirmatory ESP experiment with Pavel Stepanek 
as a “borrowed” subject. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1968, 
62, 28-45. 



212 


John Palmer 


Bond, E. M. General extrasensory perception with a group of fourth and fifth grade re¬ 
tarded children. Journal of Parapsychology, 1937, /, 114-122. 

Braud, L. W. Openness versus closedness and its relationship to psi. In J. D. Morris, 
W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, 
New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 155-159. 

Braud, L. W. Openness vs. closedness and its relationship to psi. In J. D. Morris, W. G. 
Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 162-165. 

Braud, L. W., and Braud, W. G. Further studies of relaxation as a psi-conducive state. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1974, 68, 229-245. 

Braud, W. G. Conscious vs. unconscious clairvoyance in the context of an academic exam¬ 
ination. Journal of Parapsychology , 1975, 39, 277-288. (a) 

Braud, W. G. Psi-conducive states. Journal of Communication, 1975,25, 142-152. (b) 

Braud, W. G. Long-distance dream and presleep telepathy. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, 
and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 154-155. 

Braud, W. G., and Braud, L. W. Preliminary exploration of psi-conducive states: Progres¬ 
sive muscular relaxation. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 

1973, 67, 26-46. 

Braud, W. G., and Braud, L. W. The psi-conducive syndrome: Free-response GESP per¬ 
formance following evocation of “left-hemispheric” vs. “right-hemispheric” functioning. 
In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 

1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 17-20. 

Braud, W. G., and Thorsrud, M. Psi on the tip of the tongue: A pilot study of the influence 
of an “incubation period” upon free response GESP performance. In J. D. Morris, 
W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, 
New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 167-171. 

Braud, W. G., and Wood, R. The influence of immediate feedback upon free-response 
GESP performance during ganzfeld stimulation. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and 
R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 43-45. 

Braud, W. G., Wood, R., and Braud, L. W. Free-response GESP performance during an 
experimental hypnagogic state induced by visual and acoustic ganzfeld techniques: A 
replication and extension. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 
1975 ,69, 105-113. 

Brinkman, W., and Van Hilten, W. [An experimental investigation on the effects on ESP of 
stimulus contents variance.] Spiegel der Parapsychologie, 1972,2, 25-34. (Abstract in 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1972,56, 179.) 

Brodbeck, T. J. ESP and personality. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1969, 
45, 31-32. 

Broughton, R. S. Psi and the two halves of the brain. Journal of the Society for Psychical 
Research, 1915,48, 133-147. 

Broughton, R. S. Brain hemisphere specialization and its possible effects on ESP perfor¬ 
mance. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychol¬ 
ogy 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 98-102. 

Broughton, R. S. An exploratory study on psi-based subject and experimenter expectancy 
effects. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsy¬ 
chology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 173-177. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


213 


Broughton, R. S. Brain hemisphere differences in psi-influenced reaction time. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 86-88. (b) 

Broughton, R., and Millar, B. An attempted confirmation of the rodent ESP findings with 
positive reinforcement. European Journal of Parapsychology , 1975, /, 15-35. 

Brugmans, H. J. F. W. Une communication sur des experiences telepathiques au 
Laboratoire de Psychologie a Groninque faites par M. Heymans, Docteur Weinberg, et 
Docteur H. J. F. Brugmans. In Le Compte Rendu Officiel du Premier Congres Inter¬ 
national des Researches Psychiques . Copenhagen: 1922. 

Buzby, D. E. Clairvoyance, precognition, and religious values. Paper presented at the 
Sixth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1963. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology , 1963,27, 271.) 

Buzby, D. E. Precognition and a test of sensory perception. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1967, 31, 135-142. (a) 

Buzby, D. E. Subject attitude and score variance in ESP tests. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1967, 31 ,43-50. (b) 

Buzby, D. E. Precognition and clairvoyance as related to the Draw-A-Man Test.2<9///7?<:// of 
Parapsychology , 1968, 32, 244-247. (a) 

Buzby, D. E. Precognition and psychological variables. Journal of Parapsychology , 1968, 
32, 39-46. (b) 

Cadoret, R. J. Effect of novelty in test conditions on ESP performance. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1952, 16, 192-203. 

Cadoret, R. J. The effect of amytal and dexadrine on ESP performance. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1953, 17, 259-274. 

Cadoret, R. J. An exploratory experiment: Continuous EEG recordings during clairvoyant 
card tests. Journal of Parapsychology, 1964,2#, 226. (Abstract) 

Cadoret, R. J., and Pratt, J. G. The consistent missing effect in ESP. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1950, 14, 244-256. 

Carington, W. W. Experiments on the paranormal cognition of drawings. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1940,4, 1-129. (a) 

Carington, W. W. Some observations on the experiments with drawings. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1940,4, 130-134. (b) 

Carpenter, J. C. An exploratory test of ESP in relation to anxiety proneness. In J. B. Rhine 
(Ed.), Parapsychology: From Duke to FRNM. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsy¬ 
chology Press, 1965. 

Carpenter, J. C. Scoring effects within the run. Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 73-83. 

Carpenter, J. C. Two related studies on mood and precognition run-score variance. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1968,22, 75-89. 

Carpenter, J. C. Further study on a mood adjective check list and ESP run-score variance. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1969, 33, 48-56. 

Carpenter, J. C. The differential effect and hidden target differences consisting of erotic and 
neutral stimuli. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 
204-214. 

Carpenter, J. C. Validating research on a mood-adjective scale for predicting run-score 
variance. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsy¬ 
chology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 145-148. 

Carpenter, J. C., and Carpenter, J. C. Decline of variability of ESP scoring across a period 
of effort. Journal of Parapsychology, 1967,2/, 179-191. 



214 


John Palmer 


Casler, L. The improvement of clairvoyance scores by means of hypnotic suggestion. Jour¬ 
nal of Parapsychology, 1962, 26,11 -87. 

Casler, L. The effects of hypnosis on GESP. Journal of Parapsychology , 1964,2#, 126-134. 

Casler, L. Self-generated hypnotic suggestions and clairvoyance. International Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1967,9, 125-128. 

Casler, L. Hypnotically induced interpersonal relationships and their influence on GESP. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds Proceedings of the Parapsycholog- 
ical Association No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1971. Pp. 14-15. 

Casper, G. W. A further study of the relationship of attitude to success in GESP scoring. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1951,75, 139-145. 

Casper, G. W. Effect of receiver’s attitude toward sender in ESP tests. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1952, 16, 212-218. 

Cattell, R. B. The scientific analysis of personality. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1965. 

Cavanna, R., and Servadio, E. ESP experiments with LSD-25 and psilocybin (Para¬ 
psychological Monographs No. 5). New York: Parapsychology Foundation, 1964. 

Charlesworth, E. A. Psi and the imaginary dream. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1975, Pp. 85-89. 

Chauvin, R. ESP and size of target symbols. Journal of Parapsychology, 1961,25, 185-189. 

Child, I. L. Statistical regression artifact in parapsychology. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1977, 41, 10-22. 

Child, I. L., and Kelly, E. F. ESP with unbalanced decks: A study of the process in an 
exceptional subject. Journal of Parapsychology, 1973,57, 278-297. 

Child, I. L., and Singer, J. D. Exploration of the paper maze technique for experimental 
study of psi. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in para¬ 
psychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 177-179. 

Coover, J. E. Experiments in psychical research (Psychical Research Monograph No. 1). 
Stanford: Stanford University, 1917. 

Craig, J. G. The effect of contingency on precognition in the rat. In W. G. Roll, R. L. 
Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 154-156. 

Craig, J. G. The effect of the experimenter on precognition in the rat. In J. D. Morris, 
W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, 
New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 97-100. 

Craig, J. G., and Treurniet, W. C. Precognition in rats as a function of shock and death. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1973. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1974. Pp. 75-78. 

Crookall, R. The study and practice of astral projection. London: Aquarian Press, 1961. 

Crumbaugh, J. C. Are negative ESP results attributable to traits and attitudes of subjects 
and experimenters 2 Journal of Parapsychology, 1958, 22, 294-295. (Abstract) 

Dagel, L. T., and Puryear, H. B. The effect of immediate reinforcement in a two-choice 
general ESP test. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of 
the Parapsychological Association No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Para¬ 
psychological Association, 1971. Pp. 18-19. 

Dalton, G. F. Correspondence. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1960, 40, 
266-267. 

Dale, L. A., Taves, E., and Murphy, G. A short report on a series of exploratory studies. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1944, 38, 160-170. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


215 


Damgaard, J. Recent research with Lalsingh Harribance: A summary of additional research 
with Lalsingh Harribance. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the Partipsychological Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North 
Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. Pp. 74-76. 

Dean, E. D. The plethysmograph as an indicator of ESP. Journal of the Society for Psychi¬ 
cal Research , 1962,4/, 351-353. 

Dean, E. D. Plethysmograph recordings as ESP responses. International Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry (Special Issue No. 5), 1966, 439-447. (a) 

Dean, E. D. Psi-missing during examination time as measured by the plethysmograph. 
Paper presented at the Ninth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, 
New York, 1966. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 275-276.) (b) 

Dean, E. D. A procedural postscript to Dr. Manson Sanjar’s “A study of coincident au¬ 
tonomic activity in closely related persons.” Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1970 , 64 , 237-240. 

Dean, E. D. Attempts to use plethysmograph recordings in communications. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological 
Association No. 5, 1968. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1971. Pp. 65-67. (a) 

Dean, E. D. Long-distance plethysmograph telepathy with agent under water. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological 
Association , No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association. 

1971. Pp. 41-42. (b) 

Dean, (E.) D. Can subjects differentiate clairvoyance from precognition? In W. G. Roll, 
R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion, No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. Pp. 
31-32. 

Dean, E. D., and Nash, C. B. Coincident plethysmograph results under controlled condi¬ 
tions. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1967, 44, 1-14. 

Dean, (E.) D., and Otani, S. Long and short distance plethysmographic telepathy tests. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsycholog¬ 
ical Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 

1972. Pp. 80-82. 

Dean, (E.) D., and Taetzsch, R. An ESP test for speakers using computer scoring. Paper 
presented at the Sixth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New 
York, 1963. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1963,27, 275-276.) 

Deguisne, A. Two repetitions of the Anderson-White investigation of teacher-pupil at¬ 
titudes and clairvoyance test results: Part I. High school tests. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1959, 23, 196-207. 

Dimond, S., and Beaumont, J. G. Hemisphere function in the human brain. New York: 
Wiley, 1974. 

Dingwall, E. J. (Ed.). Abnormal hypnotic phenomena: A survey of nineteenth-century cases 
(4 vols.). New York: Barnes & Noble, 1967-1968. 

Drake, R. M. An unusual case of extrasensory perception. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1938,2,184-198. 

Drucker, S. A., Drewes, A. A., and Rubin, L. ESP in relation to cognitive development 
and IQ in young children. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 
1977, 71, 289-298. 

Duane, D. T., and Behrendt, T. Extrasensory electroencephalographic induction between 
identical twins. Science, 1965, 150, 367. 



216 


John Palmer 


Dukhan, H. Experiments with Lalsingh Harribance: Experiments in Trinidad. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Pcirapsychological 
Association No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1971. Pp. 65-66. 

Dukhan, H., and Rao, K. R. Meditation and ESP scoring. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, 
and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 148-151. 

Dunne, B. J., Wamock, E., and Bisaha, J. P. Ganzfeld techniques with independent rating 
for measuring GESP and precognition. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris 
(Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 
1977. Pp. 41-43. 

Duval, P., and Montredon, E. ESP experiments with mice. Journal of Parapsychology, 
196S, 32, 153-166. (a) 

Duval, P., and Montredon, E. Further psi experiments with mice. Paper presented at the 
autumn review meeting of the Institute for Parapsychology, FRNM, 1968. (Abstract in 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1968, 32, 260.) (b) 

Eason, M. J. C., and Wysocki, B. A. Extrasensory perception and intelligence. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1965 ,29, 109-114. 

Eastman, M. The relationship of ESP scores to knowledge of target location, and to birth 
order and family size. Unpublished masters thesis, City University of New York, 1966. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1967 ,31, 168-169.) 

Edmunds, S., and Jolliffe, D. A GESP experiment with four hypnotized subjects. Journal of 
the Society for Psychical Research, 1965, 43, 192-194. 

Eilbert, L., and Schmeidler, G. R. A study of certain psychological factors in relation to 
ESP performance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1950, 14, 53-74. 

Eisenbud, J. Psi and the nature of things. International Journal of Parapsychology, 1963 ,5, 
245-273. 

Eisenbud, J. Perception of subliminal visual stimuli in relation to ESP. International Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1965,7, 161-181. 

Eisenbud, J. Psi and psychoanalysis. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1970. 

Eisenbud, J., Hassel, L., Keely, H., and Sawrey, W. A further study of teacher-pupil 
attitudes and results in clairvoyance tests in the fifth and sixth grades. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1960, 54, 72-80. 

Elkisch, P. Children’s drawings in a projective technique. Psychological Monographs, 1945, 
58, 1-31. 

Esser, A. H., Etter, T. L., and Chamberlain, W. B. Preliminary report: Physiological con¬ 
comitants of “communication” between isolated subjects. International Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1967, 9, 53-56. 

Estabrooks, G. H. A contribution to experimental telepathy. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1961,25, 190-213. (Originally published, 1927.) 

Extra, J. F. M. W. ESP in the rat. Journal of Parapsychology, 1972,56, 294-302. 

Eysenck, H. J. The structure of human personality (2nd ed.). London: Methuen, 1960. 

Eysenck, H. J. Personality and extrasensory perception. Journal of the Society for Psychi¬ 
cal Research, \961,44, 55-71. 

Eysenck, H. J. Precognition in rats. Journal of Parapsychology, 1975,59, 222-227. 

Fahler, J. ESP card tests with and without hypnosis. Journal of Parapsychology, 1957, 
179-185. 

Fahler, J., and Cadoret, R. J. ESP card tests of college students with and without hypnosis. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1958, 22, 125-136. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


217 


Fahler, J., and Osis, K. Checking for awareness of hits in a precognition experiment with 
hypnotized subjects. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 60, 
340-346. 

Feather, S. R. A comparison of performance in memory and ESP tests. In J. B. Rhine 
(Ed.), Parapsychology from Duke to FRNM . Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychol¬ 
ogy Press, 1965. 

Feather, S. R. Influence of response preference on group precognition scores. Paper pre¬ 
sented at the Tenth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New 
York, 1967. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology , 1967, 31, 321.) (a) 

Feather, S. R. A quantitative comparison of memory and psi. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1967, 31, 93-98. (b) 

Feather, S. R., and Brier, R. The possible effect of the checker in precognition tests. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1968 ,32, 167-175. 

Figar, S. The application of plethysmography to the objective study of so-called extrasen¬ 
sory perception. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1959, 40, 162— 
174. 

Fishbein, M., and Raven, B. H. The AB Scales: An operational definition of belief and 
attitude. In M. Fishbein (Ed.), Readings in attitude theory and measurement . New 
York: Wiley, 1967. 

Fisk, G. W. Home-testing ESP experiments: A preliminary report. Journal of the Society 
for Psychical Research, 1951, 36, 369-370. (a) 

Fisk, G. W. Home-testing ESP experiments: Second report. Journal of the Society for 
Psychical Research, 1951, id, 518-520. (b) 

Fisk, G. W., and Mitchell, A. M. J. ESP experiments with clock cards: A new tech¬ 
nique with differential scoring. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1953, 37, 

I- 14. 

Fisk, G. W., and West, D. J. ESP and mood: Report of a “mass” experiment. Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 1956, 38, 320-329. 

Fisk, G. W., and West, D. J. Towards accurate predictions from ESP data. Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 1957, 39, 157-162. 

Foster, E. B. Multiple aspect targets in tests of ESP. Journal of Parapsychology, 1952, 16, 

II - 22 . 

Foulkes, D., Belvedere, E., Masters, R., Houston, J., Krippner, S., Honorton, C., and 
Ullman, M. Long-distance “sensory-bombardment” ESP: A failure to replicate. Per¬ 
ceptual and Motor Skills, 1972, 35, 731-734. 

France, G. A., and Hogan, R. A. Thought concordance in twins and siblings and as¬ 
sociated personality variables. Psychological Reports, 1973, 32, 707-710. 

Freeman, J. (A.). An ESP test involving emotionally-toned objects. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1961,25, 260-265. 

Freeman, J. A. An experiment in precognition. Journal of Parapsychology, 1962 ,26, 123- 
BO. 

Freeman, J. (A.). Boy-girl differences in a group precognition test. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1963,27, 175-181. 

Freeman, J. (A.). A precognition test with a high-school science club. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1964 ,28, 214-221. 

Freeman, J. A. Differential response of the sexes to contrasting arrangements of ESP target 
material. Journal of Parapsychology, 1965,29, 251-258. 

Freeman, J. A. A sequel report on a high-scoring child subject. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1966, 30, 39-47. (a) 



218 


John Palmer 


Freeman, J. A. Sex differences and target arrangement: High-school booklet tests of pre¬ 
cognition. Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 227-235. (b) 

Freeman, J. A. Sex differences, target arrangement, and primary mental abilities. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1967, 31, 271-279. 

Freeman, J. A. Sex differences and primary mental abilities in a group precognition test. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1968, 32, 176-182. 

Freeman, J. A. A precognition test with science teachers. Journal of Parapsychology , 1969, 
33, 307-310. (a) 

Freeman, J. A. The psi-differential effect in a precognition test. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1969,33 , 206-212. (b) 

Freeman, J. A. Sex differences in ESP response as shown by the Freeman Picture-Figure 
Test. Journal of Parapsychology, 1970, 34, 37-46. (a) 

Freeman, J. A. Ten-page booklet tests with elementary-school children. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1916,34, 192-196. (b) 

Freeman, J. A. Mood, personality, and attitude in precognition tests. In W. G. Roll, R. L. 
Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. 
Pp. 53-54. (a) 

Freeman, J. A. Sex differences in precognition tests with seventh grade students. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological 
Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 63-65. (b) 

Freeman, J. A. The psi quiz: A new ESP test. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1973. Pp. 132-134. 

Freeman, J. (A.), and Nielsen, W. Precognition score deviations as related to anxiety levels. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1964, 28, 239-249. 

Friedman, R. M., Schmeidler, G. R., and Dean, E. D. Ranked-target scoring for mood and 
intragroup effects in precognitive ESP. Journal of the American Society for Psychical 
Research, 1916,70, 195-206. 

Gambale, J. Word frequency and associative strength in memory—ESP interaction: A failure 
to replicate. Unpublished master’s thesis, The City College of the City University of 
New York, 1976. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1916,40, 339-340.) 

Gambale, J., Margolis, F., and Crucci, K. The relationship between ESP and memory— 
an attempted replication with modifications. Journal of Parapsychology, 1976, 40, 
340. (Abstract) 

Gatlin, L. L. Meaningful information creation: An alternative interpretation of the psi 
phenomenon. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1977, 71, 1-18. 

Gauld, A. The founders of psychical research. New York: Schocken, 1968. 

Gelade, G., and Harvie, R. Confidence ratings in an ESP task using affective stimuli. 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1975, 48, 209-219. 

Gerber, R., and Schmeidler, G. R. An investigation of relaxation and of acceptance of the 
experimental situation as related to ESP scores in maternity patients. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1957, 21 , 47-57. 

Gerstein, P., and Merker, P. Attitudes toward ESP and choice of target as related to ESP 
performance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1964 ,28, 226. (Abstract) 

Gibson, E. P. A study of comparative performance in several ESP procedures. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1937, 1, 264-275. 

Gibson, E. P., and Stuart, C. E. Atmospheric pressures and ESP score averages. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1942, 6, 95-100. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


219 


Glick, B. S., and Kogen, J. Clairvoyance in hypnotized subjects: Positive results. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological 
Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 58-59. 

Glidden, S. H. A random-behavior maze test for humans. Jon rnal of Parapsychology, 1974, 
38, 324-331. 

Globus, G., Knapp, P., Skinner, J., and Healey, G. An appraisal of telepathic communica¬ 
tion in dreams. Psychophysiology, 1968,4, 365. (Abstract) 

Goldberg, J., Sondow, N., and Schmeidler, G. Psi and the experience of time. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 152-155. 

Goldstone, G. Two repetitions of the Anderson-White investigation of teacher-pupil at¬ 
titudes and clairvoyance test results: Part II. Grade-school tests. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1959, 23, 208-213. 

Greely, A. M. The sociology of the paranormal: A reconnaissance. Beverly Hills: Sage 
Publications, 1975. 

Green, C. E. The effect of birth order and family size on extrasensory perception. Journal 
of the Society for Psychical Research, 1965, 43, 181-191. 

Green, C. E. Extra-sensory perception and the extraversion scale of the Maudsley Person¬ 
ality Inventory. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 43 , 337. (a) 

Green, C. E. Extrasensory perception and the Maudsley Personality Inventory. Journal of 
the Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 43, 285-286. (b) 

Greenwood, J. A., and Stuart, C. E. Mathematical techniques used in ESP research. Jour¬ 
nal of Parapsychology, 1937, 7, 206-225. 

Grela, J. J. Effect on ESP scoring of hypnotically induced attitudes. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1945,9, 194-202. 

Gurney, E., Myers, F. W. H., and Podmore, F. Phantasms of the living (Vol. 1). Gaines¬ 
ville, Florida: Scholars’ Facsimiles and Reprints, 1970. (Originally published, 1886.) 

Habel, M. M. Varying auditory stimuli in the ganzfeld: The influence of sex and overcrowd¬ 
ing on psi performance. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.)., Re¬ 
search in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 
181-184. 

Hall, C. [Experiments with telepathically influenced dreams.] Zeitschrift fur Para- 
psychologie und Grenzgebiete der Psychologie, 1967, 10, 18-47. 

Hall, J. A. GESP tests with fourth-and-fifth grade pupils. Paper presented at the First 
Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1958. (Abstract 
in Journal of Parapsychology, 1958,22, 301.) 

Hallett, S. J. A study of the effect of conditioning on multiple-aspect ESP scoring. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1952, 16, 204-211. 

Hanlon, J. Uri Geller and science. New Scientist, 1974, 64, 170-185. 

Hansel, C. E. M. A critical review of experiments with Mr. Basil Shackleton and Mrs. 
Gloria Stewart as sensitives. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 1960, 
53, 1-42. 

Hansel, C. E. M. ESP: A scientific evaluation. New York: Scribners, 1966. 

Haraldsson, E. Subject selection in a machine precognition test. Jou rnal of Parapsychology, 
1970, 34, 182-191. 

Haraldsson, E. Psychological variables in a GESP test using plethysmograph recordings. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsycholog¬ 
ical Association No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 6-7. 



220 


John Palmer 


Haraldsson, E. Reported dream recall, precognitive dreams, and ESP. In J. D. Morris, 
W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, 
New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 47-48. 

Haraldsson, E. Reading habits, belief in ESP, and precognition. In J. D. Morris, W. G. 
Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 28-29. 

Haraldsson, E., Gudmundsdottir, A., Ragnarsson, A., Loftsson, J., and Jonsson, S. Na¬ 
tional survey of psychical experiences and attitudes toward the paranormal in Iceland. 
In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 
1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 182-186. 

Harary, S. B. A study of psi, memory and expectancy. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and 
R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 121-126. 

Hebda, H. C., Velissaris, C. R., and Velissaris, C. N. The effects of target preference on 
the scoring of fast and slow subjects. Journal of Parapsychology, 1974, 38, 346. 
(Abstract) 

Heyman, S., and Schmeidler, G. R .Attitudes toward time and the impatience effect. Paper 
presented at the Tenth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New 
York, 1967. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1961,31, 316.) 

Hodgson, R. A further record of observations of certain phenomena of trance. Proceedings 
of the Society for Psychical Research, 1897-98, 13, 284-582. 

Honorton, C. Separation of high- and low-scoring ESP subjects through hypnotic prepara¬ 
tion. Journal of Parapsychology, 1964 ,28, 251-257. 

Honorton, C. The relationship between ESP and manifest anxiety. Paper presented at the 
Eighth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1965. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1965, 29, 291-292.) 

Honorton, C. A further separation of high- and low-scoring ESP subjects through hypnotic 
preparation. Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 172-183. 

Honorton, C. Creativity and precognition scoring level. Journal of Parapsychology, 1967, 
31, 29-42. 

Honorton, C. A combination of techniques for the separation of high- and low-scoring ESP 
subjects: Experiments with hypnotic and waking-imagination instructions. Journal of 
the American Society for Psychical Research, 1969, 63, 69-82. (a) 

Honorton, C. Relationship between EEG alpha activity and ESP card-guessing perfor¬ 
mance. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1969, 63 , 365-374. (b) 

Honorton, C. Effects of feedback on discrimination between correct and incorrect ESP re¬ 
sponses. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1970, 64, 404-410. 

Honorton, C. Automated forced-choice precognition tests with a “sensitive.” Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 476-481. (a) 

Honorton, C. Effects of feedback on discrimination between correct and incorrect ESP 
responses: A replication study. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Re¬ 
search, 1971,65, 155-161. (b) 

Honorton, C. Reported frequency of dream recall and ESP. Journal of the American Soci¬ 
ety for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 369-374. (a) 

Honorton, C. Significant factors in hypnotically-induced clairvoyant dreams. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 86-102. (b) 

Honorton, C. Psi-conducive states of awareness. In J. White (Ed.), Psychic exploration: A 
challenge for science. New York: Putnam’s, 1974. (a) 

Honorton, C. States of awareness factors in psi activation. Journal of the American Society 
for Psychical Research, 1974, 68, 246-256. (b) 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


221 


Honorton, C. Psi and mental imagery: Keeping score on the Betts scale. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1975,69, 327-332. 

Honorton, C., and Carbone, M. A preliminary study of feedback-augmented EEG alpha 
activity and ESP card-guessing performance. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research , 1971, 65, 66-74. 

Honorton, C., and Harper, S. Psi-mediated imagery and ideation in an experimental proce¬ 
dure for regulating perceptual input. Journal of the American Society for Psychical 
Research , 1974,6$, 156-168. 

Honorton, C., and Krippner, S. Hypnosis and ESP: A review of the experimental literature. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1969, 63 , 214-252. 

Honorton, C., and Stump, J. P. A preliminary study of hypnotically-induced clairvoyant 
dreams. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1969, 63, 175-184. 

Honorton, C., Davidson, R., and Bindler, P. Feedback-augmented EEG alpha, shifts in 
subjective state, and ESP card-guessing performance. Journal of the American Society 
for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 308-323. 

Honorton, C., Drucker, S. A., and Hermon, H. Shifts in subjective state and ESP under 
conditions of partial sensory deprivation: A preliminary study. Journal of the Ameri¬ 
can Society for Psychical Research , 1973, 67, 191-196. 

Honorton, C., Ramsey, M., and Cabibbo, C. Experimenter effects in extrasensory percep¬ 
tion. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1975, 69, 135-150. 

Honorton, C., Tierney, L., and Torres, D. The role of mental imagery in psi-meditation. 
Journal of the American Society' for Psychical Research, 1974, 68, 385-394. 

Huby, P. M., and Wilson, C. W. M. The effects of centrally acting drugs on ESP ability in 
normal subjects. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1961, 41, 60-67. 

Hudesman, J., and Schmeidler, G. R. ESP scores following therapeutic sessions. Journal of 
the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 215-222. 

Hudesman, J., and Schmeidler, G. R. Changes in ESP scores after therapy sessions. Jour¬ 
nal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1976, 70, 371-380. 

Hume, D. An enquiry concerning human understanding. In R. M. Hutchins and M. Adler, 
(Eds.), Great hooks of the western world (Vol. 35). Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica, 
1952. (Originally published, 1748.) 

Humphrey, B. M. Patterns of success in an ESP experiment. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1943,7,5-19. 

Humphrey, B. M. ESP and intelligence. Journal of Parapsychology, 1945, 9, 7-16. (a) 

Humphrey, B. M. An exploratory correlation study of personality measures and ESP 
scores. Journal of Parapsychology, 1945,9, 116-123. (b) 

Humphrey, B. M. Further position effects in the Earlham College series. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1945, 9, 26-31. (c) 

Humphrey, B. M. Success in ESP as related to form of response drawings: I. Clairvoyance 
experiments. Journal of Parapsychology, 1946, 10, 78-106. (a) 

Humphrey, B. M. Success in ESP as related to form of response drawings: II. GESP 
experiments. Journal of Parapsychology, 1946, 10, 181-196. (b) 

Humphrey, B. M. A further study of ESP and intelligence. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1948,72,213-217. 

Humphrey, B. M. Further work of Dr. Stuart on interest test ratings and ESP. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1949, 13, 151-165. 

Humphrey, B. M. A new scale for separating high- and low-scoring subjects in ESP tests. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1950, 14, 9-23. 

Humphrey, B. M. Introversion-extraversion ratings in relation to scores in ESP tests. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1951, 15, 252-262. (a) 



222 


John Palmer 


Humphrey, B. M. The relation of some personality ratings to ESP scores. Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 1951, 36, 453-466. (b) 

Humphrey, B. M. ESP tests with mental patients before and after electroshock treatment. 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1954, 37, 259-266. 

Humphrey, B. M., and Nicol, J. F. The feeling of success in ESP. Journal of the American 
Society for Psychical Research, 1955, 49, 3-37. 

Humphrey, B. M., and Nicol, J. F. An answer to the “examination.” Journal of the Ameri¬ 
can Society for Psychical Research, 1956, 50, 39-44. 

Humphrey, B. M., and Pratt, J. G. A comparison of five ESP test procedures. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1941,5, 267-292. 

Humphrey, B. M., and Rhine, J. B. A confirmatory study of salience in precognition tests. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1942, 6, 190-219. 

Humphrey, B. M., and Rhine, J. B. The evaluation of salience in Dr. Schmeidler’s ESP 
data. Journal of Parapsychology, 1944, 8, 124-126. 

Hutchinson, L. Variations of time intervals in pre-shuffle card-calling tests. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1940,4, 249-270. 

Investigating the Paranormal. Nature, 1974,257 , 559-560. 

Jackson, M., Franzoi, S., and Schmeidler, G. R. Effects of feedback on ESP: A curious 
partial replication. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1977, 71, 
147-155. 

Jacobson, E. Progressive relaxation (3rd rev. ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1974. 

Jampolsky, G. G., and Haight, M. J. A pilot study of ESP in hyperkinetic children. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 13-15. 

Joesting, R., and Joesting, J. Position effects and target material in ESP. Psychological 
Reports, 1970,26, 75-78. 

Johnson, M. Relationship between dream recall and scoring direction. Paper presented at 
the winter review meeting of the Institute for Parapsychology, FRNM. (Abstract in 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1968, 32, 56-57.) 

Johnson, M. A new technique of testing ESP in a real-life, high-motivational context. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1973,57, 210-217. 

Johnson, M. ESP and subliminality. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), 
Research in parapsychology 1973. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1974. Pp. 
22-24. 

Johnson, M., and Kanthamani, B. K. (H.) The Defense Mechanism Test as a predictor of 
ESP scoring direction. Journal of Parapsychology, 1967, 31, 99-110. 

Johnson, M., and Nordbeck, B. Variations in the scoring behavior of a “psychic” subject. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1972,56, 122-132. 

Jones, J. N., and Feather, S. R. Relationship between reports of psi experiences and sub¬ 
ject variance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1969,55, 311-319. 

Kahn, S. D. Studies in extrasensory perception: Experiments utilizing an electronic scoring 
device. Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1952,25, 1-48. 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.) The experimenters role in language ESP tests. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology 1965,29, 279—280. (Abstract) (a) 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.) A study of the differential response in language ESP tests. Journal 
of Parapsychology , 1965,29, 27-34. 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.) ESP and social stimulus. Journal of Parapsychology, 1966, 30, 
31-38. 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.) The ESP subject: An inquiry into the personality patterns of psi- 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


223 


hitters and missers. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Andhra University, Waltair, 
India, 1968. 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.) Psi in relation to task complexity. Journal of Parapsychology , 1974, 
38, 154-162. 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Kelly, E. F. Awareness of success in an exceptional subject. 

Journal of Parapsychology , 1974, 38, 355-382. (a) 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Kelly, E. F. Card experiments with a special subject: I. 

Single-card clairvoyance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1974, 38, 16-26. (b) 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Kelly, E. F. Card experiments with a special subject: II. The 
shuffle method. Journal of Parapsychology , 1975, 39 , 206-221. 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Rao, H. H. A study of memory-ESP relationships using 
linguistic forms. Journal of Parapsychology , 1974, 38, 286-300. 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Rao, H. H. Response tendencies and stimulus structure. 

Journal of Parapsychology , 1975,59, 97-105. (a) 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Rao, H. H. Response tendencies and stimulus structure. In 
J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 154-157. (b) 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Rao, H. H. The role of association strength in memory-ESP 
interaction. Journal of Parapsychology, 1975,59, 1-11. (c) 

Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), and Rao, H. H. A study of the memory-ESP relationship using 
linguistic forms. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in 
parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 150-154. (d) 
Kanthamani, B. K. (H.), and Rao, K. R. Personality characteristics of ESP subjects: I. 
Primary personality characteristics and ESP. Journal of Parapsychology , 1971, 55, 
189-207. 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.), and Rao, K. R. Personality characteristics of ESP subjects: 111. 

Extraversion and ESP. Journal of Parapsychology , 1972,56, 198-212. 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.), and Rao, K. R. Personality characteristics of ESP subjects: IV. 

Neuroticism and ESP. Journal of Parapsychology , 1973,57, 37-50. (a) 

Kanthamani, B. K. (H.), and Rao, K. R. Personality characteristics of ESP subjects: V. 

Graphic expansiveness and ESP. Journal of Parapsychology, 1973,57, 119-129. (b) 
Keeling, K. R. Telepathic transmission in hypnotic dreams: An exploratory study. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological 
Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 55-58. 

Keil, H. H. J. A GESP test with favorite music targets. Journal of Parapsychology , 1965, 
29, 35-44. 

Kelly, E. F., and Kanthamani, B. K. (H.) A subject’s efforts toward voluntary control. 

Journal of Parapsychology , 1972,56, 185-197. 

Kelly, E. F., and Lenz, J. EEG changes correlated with a remote stroboscopic stimulus: 
A preliminary study. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Re¬ 
search in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. 
Pp. 58-63. (a) 

Kelly, E. F., and Lenz, J. EEG correlates of trial-by-trial performance in a two-choice 
clairvoyance task: A preliminary study. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris 
(Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 
1976. Pp. 22-25. (b) 

Kelly, E. F., Kanthamani, H. (B. K.), Child, I. L., and Young, F. W. On the relation be¬ 
tween visual and ESP confusion structures in an exceptional ESP subject. Journal 
of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1975, 69, 1-32. 



224 


John Palmer 


Kennedy, J. E., and Taddonio, J. L. Experimenter effects in parapsychological research. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1916,40, 1-33. 

Kennedy, J. L. A critical review of “Discrimination shown between experimenters by sub¬ 
jects,” by J. D. MacFarland. Journal of Parapsychology, 1939 ,3, 213-225. 

Klein, J. L. Recent research with Lalsingh Harribance: A comparison of clairvoyance and 
telepathy. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
Parapsychological Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychologi¬ 
cal Association, 1972. Pp. 71-72. 

Koestler, A. The roots of coincidence. London: Hutchinson, 1972. 

Kramer, J. K., and Terry, R. L. GESP and personality factors: A search for correlates. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1973 ,37, 74-75. (Abstract) 

Kreiman, N. [Relationships between ESP and memory.] Cuadernos de Parapsicologia, 
1975,5 (2), 1-13. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1975,39, 362-363.) 

Kreiman, N., and Ivnisky, D. [Effects of feedback on ESP responses.] Cuadernos de 
Parapsicologia, 1973, 6 (2), 1-10. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1973,37, 
369.) (a) 

Kreiman, N., and Ivnisky, D. [An experiment using targets of different affective contents.] 
Cuadernos de Parapsicologia, 1973, 6 (1), 1-14. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1973,37, 369.) (b) 

Kreitler, H., and Kreitler, S. Does extrasensory perception affect psychological experi¬ 
ments? Journal of Parapsychology, 1972,3(5, 1-45. 

Kreitler, H., and Kreitler, S. Subliminal perception and extrasensory perception. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1973,37, 163-188. 

Krippner, S. Coded and non-coded material in a clairvoyance test. Paper presented at the 
Ninth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1966. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1966,39, 281-282.) 

Krippner, S. Experimentally-induced telepathic effects in hypnosis and non-hypnosis 
groups. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1968, 62, 387-398. 

Krippner, S. Electrophysiological studies of ESP in dreams: Sex differences in seventy-four 
telepathy sessions. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1970, 64, 
277-285. 

Krippner, S., and Ullman, M. Telepathy and dreams: A controlled experiment with 
electroencephalogram-electro-oculogram monitoring. Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease, 1970, 151, 394-403. 

Krippner, S., Honorton, C., Ullman, M., Masters, R., and Houston, J. A long-distance 
“sensory bombardment” study of ESP in dreams. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 468-475. 

Krippner, S., Honorton, C., and Ullman, M. A precognitive dream study with a single 
subject. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 192-203. 

Krippner, S., Honorton, C., and Ullman, M. A second precognitive dream study with 
Malcolm Bessent. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 
269-279. 

Krippner, S., Honorton, C., and Ullman, M. A long-distance ESP dream study with the 
“Grateful Dead.” Journal of the American Society of Psychosomatic Dentistry and 
Medicine, 1973,29,9-17. 

Kubis, J. F., and Rouke, F. L. An experimental investigation of telepathic phenomena in 
twins. Journal of Parapsychology, 1937,/, 163-171. 

Lancaster, J. B. A ESP experiment with a dual (color-symbol) target. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1959, 23, 281. (Abstract) 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


225 


Layton, B. D., and Turnbull, B. Belief, evaluation, and performance on an ESP task. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 1975, 77, 166-179. 

Levin, J. A series of psi experiments with gerbils. Journal of Parapsychology, 1975, 39, 
363-365. (Abstract) 

Levine, F., and Stowell, J. The relationship between creativity and clairvoyance . Paper 
presented at the Sixth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New 
York, 1963. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1963 ,27, 272.) 

Lewis, L., and Schmeidler, G. R. Alpha relations with non-intentional and purposeful ESP 
after feedback. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 
455-467. 

Lieberman, R. Role of varied time interval and association strength in memory-ESP in¬ 
teraction for group and individual testing. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1976. Pp. 126-129. 

Lloyd, D. H. Objective events in the brain correlating with psychic phenomena. New 
Horizons, 1973, 7, 69-75. 

Louwerens, N. G. ESP experiments with nursery school children in the Netherlands. Jour¬ 
nal of Parapsychology, 1960 ,24, 75-93. 

Lubke, C., and Rohr, W. Psi and subliminal perception: A replication of the Kreitler and 
Kreitler study. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Ecfs.), Research in 
parapsychology 1974. Metuchen. New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 161-164. 

Lucas, D., and Roll, W. G. Testing the psi association hypothesis. In W. G. Roll, R. L. 
Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 27-28. 

MacFarland, J. D. Discrimination shown between experimenters by subjects. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1938,2, 160-170. 

MacFarland, J. D., and George, R. W. Extrasensory perception of normal and distorted 
symbols. Journal of Parapsychology, 1937, 7, 93-101. 

Maher, M., and Schmeidler, G. R. Cerebral lateralization effects in ESP processing. Jour¬ 
nal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1977, 77, 261-271. 

Mangan, G. L. Evidence of displacement in a precognition test. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1955,79,35-44. 

Mangan, G. L. An ESP experiment with dual-aspect targets involving one trial a day. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1957,27, 273-283. 

Marks, D. F. Individual differences in the vividness of visual imagery and their effect on 
function. In P. W. Sheehan (Ed.), The function and nature of imagery. New York: 
Academic Press, 1972. 

Marsh, M. C. Three ESP experiments using drawings as target material. Publications of 
South African Society for Psychical Research (No. 5), 1962, 4-15. (Abstract \n Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1963,27, 219-220.) 

Martin, D. R., and Stribic, F. P. Studies in extrasensory perception: I. An analysis of 
25,000 trials. Journal of Parapsychology, 1938,2, 23-30. (a) 

Martin, D. R., and Stribic, F. P. Studies in extrasensory perception: II. An analysis of a 
second series of 25,000 trials. Journal of Parapsychology, 1938,2, 287-295. (b) 

Martin, D. R., and Stribic, F. P. Studies in extrasensory perception: III. A review of all 
University of Colorado experiments. Journal of Parapsychology, 1940 ,4, 159-248. 

McBain, W. N., Fox, W., Kimura, S., Nakanishi, M., and Tirado, J. Quasi-sensory com¬ 
munication: An investigation using semantic matching and accentuated affect. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970, 14, 281-291. 



226 


John Palmer 


McCallam, E., and Honorton, C. Effects of feedback on discrimination between correct and 
incorrect ESP responses: A further replication and extension. Journal of the American 
Society for Psychical Research, 1973, 67, 77-85. 

McElroy, W. A., and Brown, W. R. K. Electric shocks for errors in ESP card tests. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1950, 14, 257-266. 

McGuire, K., Percy, E., and Carpenter, J. C. A multivariate approach to the predic¬ 
tion of ESP performance. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), 
Research in parapsychology 1973. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1974. 
Pp. 34-35. 

McMahan, E. A. An experiment in pure telepathy. Journal of Parapsychology, 1946, 10, 
224-242. 

McMahan, E. A., and Bates, E. K. Report of further Marchesi experiments. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1954, 18, 82-92. 

McMahan, E. A., and Rhine, J. B. A second Zagreb-Durham ESP experiment. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1947, 11, 244-253. 

Medhurst, G. The origin of the “prepared random numbers” used in the Shackleton experi¬ 
ments. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 46, 39-55. 

Medhurst, R. G., and Scott, C. A re-examination of C. E. M. Hansel’s criticism of the 
Pratt-Woodruff experiment. Journal of Parapsychology, 38, 163-184. 

Michie, D., and West, D. J. A mass ESP test using television. Journal of the Society for 
Psychical Research , 1957,59, 113-133. 

Mihalasky, J. The influence of sex dominance in group precognition experiments on the 
relationship between hare-tortoise categories. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. 
Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Association No. 7, 1970. Durham, 
North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. Pp. 60-61. 

Millar, B. An attempted validation of the “Lloyd effect.” In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and 
R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 25-27. 

Miller, S. W., and York, M. S. Perceptual defensiveness as a performance indicator on a 
free-response test of clairvoyance. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris 
(Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 
1976. Pp. 162-164. 

Mitchell, A. M. J. Home-testing ESP experiments: Special report on one series of tests. 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1953,57, 155-164. 

Mitchell, E. D. An ESP test from Apollo 14 .Journal of Parapsychology, 1971,55, 89-107. 

Monroe, R. A. Journeys out of the body. New York: Doubleday, 1971. 

Morris, R. L. Obtaining non-random entry points: A complex psi task. In J. B. Rhine and 
R. Brier (Eds.), Parapsychology today. New York: Citadel, 1968. 

Morris, R. L. Psi and animal behavior: A survey. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1970, 64, 242-260. 

Morris, R. L. Recent research with Lalsingh Harribance: Guessing habits and ESP. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsycholog¬ 
ical Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 72-74. 

Morris, R. L. Complex psi and the concept of precognition. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, 
and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 95-97. 

Morris, R. L. The use of detectors for out-of-body experiences. In W. G. Roll, R. L. 
Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1973. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1974. Pp. 114-116. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


227 


Morris, R. L., and Cohen, D. A preliminary experiment on the relationships among ESP, 
alpha rhythm and calling patterns. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Association No. 6, 1969. Durham, North 
Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1971. Pp. 22-23. 

Morris, R. L., Roll, W. G., Klein, J., and Wheeler, G. EEG patterns and ESP results in 
forced-choice experiments with Lalsingh Harribanc e. Journal of the American Society 
for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 253-268. 

Moss, T. ESP effects in “artists” contrasted with “non-artists.” Journal of Parapsychology, 
1969,55, 57-69. 

Moss, T., and Gengerelli, J. A. ESP effects generated by affective states .Journal of Para¬ 
psychology , 1968,52,90-100. 

Moss, T., Paulson, M. J., Chang, A. F., and Levitt, M. Hypnosis and ESP: A controlled 
experiment. A merican Journal of Clinical Hypnosis , 1970, 13 , 46-56. 

Mussig, G. F., and Dean, E. D. Mood as a factor in precognition. Paper presented at the 
Tenth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1967. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology , 1967,5/, 319-320.) 

Musso, J. R. ESP experiments with primary school children. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1965,29, 115-121. 

Musso, J. R., and Granero, M. An ESP drawing experiment with a high-scoring subject. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1973,57, 13-36. 

Myers, F. W. H. Human personality and its survival of bodily death. New York: Arno 
Press, 1975. (Originally published, 1903.) 

Nash, C. B. Correlation between ESP and religious value. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1958,22, 204-209. 

Nash, C. B. Can precognition occur diametrically? Journal of Parapsychology , 1960, 24, 
26-32.(a) 

Nash, C. B. The effect of subject-experimenter attitudes on clairvoyance scores. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1960,24, 189-198. (b) 

Nash, C. B. Comparison of ESP session score averages of subjects with opposed attitudes 
toward psi. Psychics International , 1964, /, 56-69. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1967,5/, 84.) 

Nash, C. B. Opposite scoring direction in ESP. Journal of Parapsychology , 1965, 29, 
122-126. 

Nash, C. B. Relation between ESP scoring and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1966, 60, 56-62. 

Nash, C. B., and Buzby, D. E. Extrasensory perception of identical and fraternal twins. 
Journal of Heredity, 1965,56, 52-54. 

Nash, C. B., and Durkin, M. G. Terminal salience with multiple digit targets. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1959,25,49-53. 

Nash, C. B., and Nash, C. S. Checking success and the relation of personality traits to 
ESP. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1958, 52, 98-107. 

Nash, C. B., and Nash, C. S. Coincident vasoconstrictions in pairs of resting subjects. 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1962,4/, 347-350. 

Nash, C. B., and Nash, C. S. Comparison of responses to ESP and subliminal targets. 
International Journal of Parapsychology, 1963,5, 293-307. 

Nash, C. B., and Nash, C. S. Correlation between ESP scores and intelligence. Interna¬ 
tional Journal of Parapsychology, 1964,6, 309-320. 

Nash, C. B., and Nash, C. S. Relations between ESP scoring level and the personality 
traits of the Guilford-Zimmerman Temperament Survey. Journal of the American So¬ 
ciety for Psychical Research, 1967, 61, 64-71. 



228 


John Palmer 


Nash, C. B., and Richards, A. Comparison of two distances in PK tests. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology , 1947, 77, 269-282. 

Nash, C. S., and Nash, C. B. A test of adding extrasensorially perceived digits. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1959, 23, 126-129. 

Nash, C. S., and Nash, C. B. Effect of target selection, field dependence, and body concept 
on ESP performance. Journal of Parapsychology , 1968, 32, 248-257. 

Nash, C. S., and Nash, C. B. A test of the relationship between ESP, Gestalt completion, 
and man drawing. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings 
of the Parapsychological Association No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Para- 
psychological Association, 1971. Pp. 15-16. 

Nicol, J. F., and Humphrey, B. M. The exploration of ESP and human personality, Journal 
of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1953,47, 133-178. 

Nicol, J. F., and Humphrey, B. M. The repeatability problem in ESP-personality research. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1955, 49, 125-156. 

Nielsen, W. An exploratory precognition experiment. Journal of Parapsychology , 1956 ,20, 
33-39. (a) 

Nielsen, W. Mental states associated with success in precognition. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1956, 20, 96-109. (b) 

Nielsen, W. Relationships between precognition scoring level and mood. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1970, 34 , 93-116. 

Nielsen, W. Mood, introversion, and precognition scores on individual and group targets. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsycholog¬ 
ical Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 88-90. (a) 

Nielsen, W. Studies in group targets: A social psychology class. In W. G. Roll, R. L. 
Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. 
Pp. 55-56. (b) 

Nielsen, W. Studies in group targets: An unusual high school group. In W. G. Roll, R. L. 
Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. 
Pp. 57-58. (c) 

Nielsen, W., and Freeman, J. (A.) Consistency of relationship between ESP and emotional 
variables. Journal of Parapsychology, 1965, 29, 75-88. 

Nowlis, D. P., and Kamiya, J. The control of electroencephalographic alpha rhythms 
through auditory feedback and the associated mental activity. Psychophysiology, 1970, 
6, 476-484. 

O’Brien, D. P. Recall and recognition processes in a memory—ESP paired-associate task. 
Paper presented at the southeastern regional Parapsychological Association confer¬ 
ence, 1976. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1976, 40, 57-59.) 

Osis, K. A test of the occurrence of a psi effect between man and the cat. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1952, 16, 233-256. 

Osis, K. Precognition over time intervals of one to thirty-three days. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1955, 79, 82-91. 

Osis, K. ESP tests at long and short distances. Journal of Parapsychology, 1956, 20, 81-95. 

Osis, K., and Bokert, E. ESP and changed states of consciousness induced by meditation. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 17-65. 

Osis, K., and Carlson, M. L. The ESP channel—open or closed? Journal of the American 
Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 310-319. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


229 


Osis, K., and Dean, (E.) D. The effect of experimenter differences and subjects’ belief level 
upon ESP scores. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1964, 58, 
158-185. 

Osis, K., and Fahler, J. Space and time variables in ESP. Journal of the American Society 
for Psychical Research , 1965,59, 130-145. 

Osis, K., and Foster, E. B. A test of ESP in cats. Journal of Parapsychology , 1953, 17, 
168-186. 

Osis, K., and Pienaar, D. C. ESP over a distance of seventy-five hundred miles. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1956 ,20, 229-232. 

Osis, K., and Turner, M. E. Distance and ESP: A transcontinental experiment. Proceed¬ 
ings of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1968, 27. 

Osis, K., Turner, M. E., and Carlson, M. L. ESP over distance: Research on the ESP 
channel. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 245-288. 

Otani, S. Relations of mental set and change of skin resistance to ESP . Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1955, 19, 164-170. 

Otani, S. Studies on the influence of the mental and physiological conditions upon ESP 
function. Journal of Parapsychology, 1958,22, 296. (Abstract) 

Palmer, J. Scoring in ESP tests as a function of belief in ESP. Part I: The sheep-goat effect. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 373-408. 

Palmer, J. Scoring in ESP tests as a function of belief in ESP. Part II: Beyond the sheep- 
goat effect. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 1-26. 

Palmer, J. ESP scoring as predicted from four definitions of the sheep-goat variable. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 37-39. 

Palmer, J. Three models of psi test performance. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1975, 69, 333-339. 

Palmer, J. Attitudes and personality traits in experimental ESP research. In B. B. Wolman 
(Ed.), Handbook of parapsychology. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977. 

Palmer, J., and Aued, I. An ESP test with psychometric objects and the ganzfeld: Negative 
findings. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsy¬ 
chology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 50-53. 

Palmer, J., and Dennis, M. A community mail survey of psychic experiences. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975, Pp. 130-133. 

Palmer, J., and Lieberman, R. The influence of psychological set on ESP and out-of-body 
experiences. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1975, 69, 193-213. 

Palmer, J., and Lieberman, R. ESP and out-of-body experiences: A further study. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 102-106. 

Palmer, J., and Miller, A. Monetary incentive and the sheep-goat effect. In W. G. Roll, 
R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 1972. Pp. 
11 - 12 . 

Palmer, J., and Vassar, C. ESP and out-of-the-body experiences: An exploratory study. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1974, 68, 257-280. 

Palmer, J., Tart, C., and Redington, D. A large-sample classroom ESP card-guessing exper¬ 
iment. European Journal of Parapsychology, 1976, 1 (No. 3), 40-56. 

Palmer, J. Bogart, D. N., Jones, S. M., and Tart, C. T. Scoring patterns in an ESP ganzfeld 
experiment. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1977, 71, 121-145. 



230 


John Palmer 


Parker, A. ESP in gerbils using positive reinforcement. Journal of Parapsychology, 1974, 
38, 301-311. 

Parker, A. A pilot study of the influence of experimenter expectancy on ESP scores. In 
J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 42-44. (a) 

Parker, A. Some findings relevant to the change in state hypothesis. In J. D. Morris, W. G. 
Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 40-42. (b) 

Parker, A. Parapsychologists’ personality and psi in relation to the experimenter effect. In 
J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 107-109. 

Parker, A., and Beloff, J. Hypnotically-induced clairvoyant dreams: A partial replication 
and attempted confirmation. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 
1970,64,432-442. 

Parker, A., Millar, B., and Beloff, J. A three-experimenter ganzfeld: An attempt to use the 
ganzfeld technique to study the experimenter effect. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and 
R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 52-54. 

Parker, K. A study of immediate memory and ESP. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1976. Pp. 130-134. 

Pegram, M. H. Some psychological relations of extrasensory perception. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1937,7, 191-205. 

Peterson, C. J. Relationships among attitude, memory, and extrasensory perception. Un¬ 
published masters thesis, Wisconsin State University, 1971. (Abstract in Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1972, 36, 94.) 

Pfungst, O. [Clever Hans] (R. Rosenthal, Ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1965. 
(First American edition, C. L. Rahn, trans., 1911.) 

Pleshette, G. Biofeedback regulation of EEG alpha, mental imagery, and psi guessing 
performance. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in para¬ 
psychology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 23-24. 

Pratt, J. G. Clairvoyant blind matching. Journal of Parapsychology, 1937, 7, 10-17. 

Pratt, J. G. The reinforcement effect in ESP displacement. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1951,75,103-117. 

Pratt, J. G. Run salience in the Pratt-Woodruff series. Journal of Parapsychology, 1961,25, 
130-135. 

Pratt, J. G. Computer studies of the ESP process in card guessing: I. Displacement effects 
in Mrs. Gloria Stewart’s records. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Re¬ 
search, 1967, 67, 25-46. (a) 

Pratt, J. G. Computer studies of the ESP process in card guessing: II. Did memory habits 
limit Mrs. Stewart’s ESP success? Journal of the American Society for Psychical Re¬ 
search, 1967, 67, 182-202. (b) 

Pratt, J. G. A decade of research with a selected ESP subject: An overview and reappraisal 
of the work with Pavel Stepanek. Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical 
Research, 1973,56. 

Pratt, J. G. Comments on the Medhurst-Scott criticism of the Pratt-Woodruff experiment. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1974,55, 185-201. (a) 

Pratt, J. G. In search of the consistent scorer. In J. Beloff (Ed.), New directions in parapsy¬ 
chology. London: Elek Science, 1974. Pp. 95-121. (b) 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


231 


Pratt, J. G. Outstanding subjects in ESP. Journal of the American Society for Psychical 
Research, 1975,69, 151-160. 

Pratt, J. G. New evidence supporting the ESP interpretation of the Pratt-Woodruff experi¬ 
ment. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychol¬ 
ogy 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 179-182. 

Pratt, J. G., and Foster, E. B. Displacement in ESP card tests in relation to hits and misses. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1950, 14 , 37-53. 

Pratt, J. G., and Price, M. M. The experimenter-subject relationship in tests for ESP. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1938, 2, 84-94. 

Pratt, J. G., and Woodruff, J. L. Size of stimulus symbols in extra-sensory perception. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1939,2, 121-158. 

Pratt, J. G., and Woodruff, J. L. Refutation of Hansel’s allegation concerning the Pratt- 
Woodruff series. Journal of Parapsychology , 1961,25, 114-129. 

Pratt, J. G., Martin, D. R., and Stribic, F. P. Computer studies of the ESP process in card 
guessing. III. Displacement effects in the C. J. records from the Colorado series. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1974, 68, 357-384. 

Price, A. D. ESP, creativity, and heart rate variability: A new methodology for process-ori¬ 
ented token object studies. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research 
in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 44-47. (a) 

Price, A. D. Subject’s control of imagery, “agent’s” mood, and position effects in a dual¬ 
target ESP experiment. Journal of Parapsychology , 1973,27, 298-322. (b) 

Price, G. R. Science and the supernatural. Science, 1955, 122, 359-367. 

Price, G. R. Apology to Rhine and Soal. Science , 1972, 175, 359. 

Price, M. M. A comparison of blind and seeing subjects in ESP tests. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1938,2, 273-286. 

Price, M. M., and Pegram, M. H. Extra-sensory perception among the blind. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1937,7, 143-155. 

Puthoff, H. E., and Targ, R. A perceptual channel for information transfer over kilometer 
distances: Historical perspective and recent research. Journal of the Institute of Elec¬ 
trical and Electronic Engineers, 1976, 64, 329-354. 

Raburn, L., and Manning, R. Sender relaxation and expectation in telepathy. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 156-158. 

Randall, J. (L.) Group ESP experiments with schoolboys. Journal of Parapsychology, 1972, 
26, 133-143. 

Randall, J. L. Card-guessing experiments with school-boys. Journal of the Society for 
Psychical Research, 1974,47, 421-432. 

Randi, J. The magic of Uri Geller. New York: Ballantine Books, 1975. 

Ransom, C. Recent criticisms of parapsychology: A review .Journal of the American Soci¬ 
ety for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 289-307. 

Rao, K. R. The preferential effect in ESP. Journal of Parapsychology, 1962, 26, 252-259. 

Rao, K. R. Studies in the preferential effect. I. Target preference with types of targets 
unknown. Journal of Parapsychology, 1963 ,27, 23-32. (a) 

Rao, K. R. Studies in the preferential effect. II. A language ESP test involving precognition 
and “intervention.” Journal of Parapsychology, 1963,27, 147-160. (b) 

Rao, K. R. Studies in the preferential effect. III. The reversal effect in psi preference. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1963 ,27, 242-251. (c) 

Rao, K. R. The differential response in three new situations. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1964, 28, 81-92. (a) 



232 


John Palmer 


Rao, K. R. Studies in the preferential effect. IV. The role of key cards in preferential 
response situations. Journal of Parapsychology, 1964,25, 28-41. (b) 

Rao, K. R. The bidirectionality of psi. Journal of Parapsychology, 1965,29, 230-250. (a) 
Rao, K. R. ESP and the Manifest Anxiety Scale. Journal of Parapsychology, 1965 , 29, 
12-18. (b) 

Rao, K. R. Some frustrations and challenges in parapsychology, Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1911,41, 119-135. 

Rao, K. R., and Feola, J. Alpha rhythm and ESP in a free-response situation. In W. G. 
Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1972. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 141-144. 

Reed, B. A comparison of clairvoyance test results under three different testing conditions. 

Journal of Parapsychology, 1959, 23, 142. (Abstract) 

Rhine, J. B. Extrasensory perception (Rev. ed.). Boston: Bruce Humphries, 1973. (Origi¬ 
nally published, 1934.) 

Rhine, J. B. The effect of distance in ESP tests. Journal of Parapsychology, 1937, 1, 
172-184. 

Rhine, J. B. ESP tests with enclosed cards. Journal of Parapsychology, 1938,2, 199-216. (a) 
Rhine, J. B. Experiments bearing on the precognition hypothesis. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1938,2, 38-54. (b) 

Rhine, J. B. Experiments bearing upon the precognition hypothesis: III. Mechanically 
selected cards. Jou rnal of Parapsychology, 1941,5, 1-57. (a) 

Rhine, J. B. Terminal salience in ESP performance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1941, 5, 
183-244. (b) 

Rhine, J. B. Evidence of precognition in the covariance of salience ratios. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1942,6, 111-143. 

Rhine, J. B. Precognition reconsidered. Journal of Parapsychology, 1945,9,264-277. (a) 
Rhine, J. B. Telepathy and clairvoyance reconsidered. Journal of Parapsychology, 1945, 9, 
176-193. (b) 

Rhine, J. B. A digest and discussion of some comments on “Telepathy and clairvoyance 
reconsidered.” Journal of Parapsychology, 1946, 10, 36-50. 

Rhine, J. B. The present outlook on the question of psi in animals. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1951, 15, 230-251. 

Rhine, J. B. The precognition of computer numbers in a public test. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1962,26, 244-251. 

Rhine, J. B. Special motivation in some exceptional ESP performances. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1964, 28, 41-50. 

Rhine, J. B. Position effects in psi test results. Journal of Parapsychology, 1969, 33, 136— 
157. (a) 

Rhine, J. B. Psi-missing re-examined. Journal of Parapsychology, 1969 ,33, 136-157. (b) 
Rhine, J. B. Comments: A new case of experimenter unreliability. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1974,55, 215-225. 

Rhine, J. B., and Feather, S. J. The study of cases of “psi-trailing” in animals. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1962,26, 1-22. 

Rhine, J. B., and Humphrey, B. M. A transoceanic ESP experiment. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1942, 6, 52-74. 

Rhine, J. B., and Pratt, J. G. A review of the Pearce-Pratt distance series of ESP tests. 

Journal of Parapsychology, 1954,75, 165-177. 

Rhine, J. B., Smith, B. M., and Woodruff, J. L. Experiments bearing on the precognition 
hypothesis: II. The role of ESP in the shuffling of cards. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1938,2, 119-131. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


233 


Rhine, J. B., Pratt, J. G., Stuart, C. E., Smith, B. M., and Greenwood, J. A. Extrasensory 
perception after sixty years. Boston: Bruce Humphries, 1966. (Originally published 1940.) 

Rhine, L. E. Some stimulus variations in extrasensory perception with child subjects. Jour¬ 
nal of Parapsychology , 1937,7, 102-113. 

Rhine, L. E. Psychological processes in ESP experiences: Part 1. Waking experiences. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1962,26, 88-111. 

Rhine, L. E. Note on an informal group test of ESP. Journal of Parapsychology , 1968, 32, 
47-53. 

Rice, G. E., and Townsend, J. Agent-percipient relationship and GESP performance. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1962, 26, 211-217. 

Riess, B. F. A case of high scores in card guessing at a distance. Journal of Parapsychology , 
1937, 7, 260-263. 

Riess, B. F. Further data from a case of high scores in card guessing. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1939,2,79-84. 

Rilling, M. E., Adams, J. Q., and Pettijohn, C. A summary of some clairvoyance experi¬ 
ments conducted in classroom situations. Journal of the American Society for Psychical 
Research, 1962, 56, 125-130. 

Rilling, M. E., Pettijohn, C., and Adams, J. Q. A two-experimenter investigation of 
teacher-pupil attitudes and clairvoyance test results in the high school classroom. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1961,25, 247-259. 

Rivers, O. B. An exploratory study of the mental health and intelligence of ESP subjects. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1950, 14, 267-277. 

Rogers, D. P. Negative and positive affect and ESP run-score variance. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1966 ,30, 151-159. 

Rogers, D. P. An analysis for internal cancellation effects on some low-variance ESP runs. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1967,27, 192-197. (a) 

Rogers, D. P. Negative and positive affect and ESP run-score variance: Study II. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1967,27, 290-296. (b) 

Rogers, D. P. Some explorations in affective arousal and ESP Paper presented at the Tenth 
Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1967. (Abstract 
in Journal of Parapsychology, 1967, 27, 318.) (c) 

Rogers, D. P., and Carpenter, J. C. The decline of variance of ESP scores within a testing 
session. Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 141-150. 

Rogers, W. C. A study of like pattern formations in twins. Journal of Parapsychology, 1960. 
24, 69. (Abstract) 

Rogo, D. S. Psi and psychosis: A review of the experimental evidence. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1975,29, 120-128. 

Rogo, D. S. Research in psi-conducive states: Some complicating factors. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1976,46, 34-45. 

Rogo, D. S., Smith, M., and Terry, J. The use of short-duration ganzfeld stimulation to 
facilitate psi-mediated imagery. European Journal of Parapsychology, 1976, 7, (2), 
72-77. 

Roll, W. G. ESP and memory. International Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 1966, 2, 
505-521. 

Roll, W. G. Recent research with Lalsingh Harribance: Physical aspects of the target. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsychologi¬ 
cal Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1972. Pp. 67-69. 

Roll, W. G., and Klein, J. Further forced-choice ESP experiments with Lalsingh Harri¬ 
bance. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 103-112. 



234 


John Palmer 


Roll, W. G., and Solfvin, G. F. Meditation and ESP. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975 . Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1976. Pp. 92-97. 

Roll, W. G., Morris, R. L., Damgaard, J. A., Klein, J., and Roll, M. Free verbal response 
experiments with Lalsingh Harribance. Journal of the American Society for Psychical 
Research , 1973,67, 197-207. 

Roll, W. G., Morris, R. L., Harary, S. B., Wells, R., and Hartwell, J. Further OOBE experi¬ 
ments with a cat as detector. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), 
Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 
55-56. 

Rose, L., and Rose, R. Psi experiments with Australian Aborigines. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology , 1951, 15, 122-131. 

Rose, R. A second report on psi experiments with Australian Aborigines. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology , 1955, 19, 92-98. 

Ross, A. O., Murphy, G., and Schmeidler, G. R. The spontaneity factor in extrasensory 
perception. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1952 ,46, 14-16. 

Rush, J. H., and Jensen, A. A reciprocal distance GESP test with drawings. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1949, 13, 122-134. 

Russell, W. Examination of ESP records for displacement effects. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1943, 7, 104-117. 

Ryzl, M. Training the psi faculty by hypnosis. Journal of the Society for Psychical Re¬ 
search, 1962,41, 234-252. 

Ryzl, M. Precognition scoring and attitude. Journal of Parapsychology, 1968,32, 183-189. (a) 

Ryzl, M. Precognition scoring and attitude toward ESP. Journal of Parapsychology, 1968, 
32, 1-8.(b) 

Ryzl, M., and Pratt, J. G. A further confirmation of stabilized ESP performance in a 
selected subject. Journ al of Parapsychology, 1963 ,27, 73-83. 

Sailaja, P. Confirmatory study of the role of key cards in the language ESP test. Paper 
presented at the Eighth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New 
York, 1965. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1965,27, 290-291.) 

Sailaja, P., and Rao, K. R. Experimental studies of the differential effect in life setting 
{Parapsychological Monographs No. 13). New York: Parapsychology Foundation, 
1973. 

Sanders, M. S. A comparison of verbal and written responses in a precognition experiment. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1962,26, 23-34. 

Sandford, J. and Keil, H. H. J. The effect of “normal” vs. relaxed states of consciousness on 
ESP scoring using a GESP feedback testing device. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and 
R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 24-27. 

Sanjar, M. A study of coincident autonomic activity in closely related persons. Journal of 
the American Society for Psychical Research, 1969, 63 , 88-94. 

Schechter, R., Solfvin, G., and McCallum, R. Psi and mental imagery. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1975, 69, 321-326. 

Scherer, W. B. Spontaneity as a factor in ESP. Journal of Parapsychology, 1948, 12, 126-147. 

Schmeidler, G. R. Position effects as psychological phenomena. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1944, 8, 110-123. 

Schmeidler, G. R. Some relations between picture-frustration ratings and ESP scores. 
Journal of Personality, 1950, 18, 331-343. 

Schmeidler, G. R. Picture-frustration ratings and ESP scores for subjects who showed 
moderate annoyance at the ESP task. Journal of Parapsychology, 1954, 18, 137-152. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


235 


Schmeidler, G. R. Agent-percipient relationships. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research , 1958,42, 47-69. 

Schmeidler, G. R. ESP in relation to Rorschach test evaluation {Parapsychological Mono¬ 
graphs No. 2). New York: Parapsychology Foundation, 1960. 

Schmeidler, G. R. Evidence for two kinds of telepathy. International Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology , 1961,2, 5-43. 

Schmeidler, G. R. ESP and tests of perception. Journal of the American Society for Psychi¬ 
cal Research , 1962,56, 48-51. (a) 

Schmeidler, G. R. Tests of creative thinking. Indian Journal of Parapsychology , 1962,4, 
51-57. (b) 

Schmeidler, G. R. An experiment on precognitive clairvoyance. Part I. The main results. 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1964,22, 1-14. (a) 

Schmeidler, G. R. An experiment on precognitive clairvoyance. Part II. The reliability of 
the scores. Journal of Parapsychology, 1964,22, 15-27. (b) 

Schmeidler, G. R. An experiment on precognitive clairvoyance. Part III. Precognition 
scores related to the subjects ways of viewing time. Journal of Parapsychology, 1964, 
22, 93-101. (c) 

Schmeidler, G. R. An experiment on precognitive clairvoyance. Part IV. Precognition 
scores related to creativity. Journal of Parapsychology , 1964,22, 102-108. (d) 

Schmeidler, G. R. An experiment on precognitive clairvoyance. Part V. Precognition scores 
related to feelings of success. Journal of Parapsychology , 1964, 22, 109-125. (e) 

Schmeidler, G. R. A search for feedback in ESP: Part I. Session salience and stimulus 
preference. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1968,62, 130-141. 

Schmeidler, G. R. High ESP scores after a S warm's brief instruction in meditation and 
breathing. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1970, 64, 100-103. 

Schmeidler, G. R. Mood and attitude on a pretest as predictors of retest ESP performance. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1971, 65, 324-335. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and Allison, L. W. A repetition of Carington’s experiments with free 
drawings. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1948, 42, 97-107. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and Craig, J. G. Moods and ESP scores in group testing. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research , 1972, 66, 280-287. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and LeShan, L. An aspect of body image related to ESP scores. Journal 
of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1970, 64, 211-218. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and Lewis, L. A search for feedback in ESP: Part II. High ESP scores 
after two successes on triple-aspect targets. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research , 1968, 62, 255-262. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and Lewis, L. A search for feedback in ESP: Part III. The preferential 
effect and the impatience effect. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Re¬ 
search, 1969, 63 , 60-69. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and Lindemann, C. ESP calls following an “ESP” test with sensory 
cues. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 60, 357-362. 

Schmeidler, G. R., and McConnell, R. A. ESP and personality patterns. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1958. 

Schmeidler, G. R., Friedenberg, W., and Males, P. Impatience and ESP scores. Paper 
presented at the Ninth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New 
York, 1966. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1966 ,30, 275.) 

Schmidt, H. Clairvoyance tests with a machine. Journal of Parapsychology, 1969, 33, 300- 
306.(a) 

Schmidt, H. Precognition of a quantum process. Journal of Parapsychology, 1969, 33, 
99-108.(b) 



236 


John Palmer 


Schmidt, H. Toward a mathematical theory of psi. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1975, 69, 301-319. 

Schmidt, H., and Pantas, L. Psi tests with internally different machines. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1972,56, 222-232. 

Schouten, S. A. Psi in mice: Positive reinforcement. Journal of Parapsychology, 1972,56, 
261-282. 

Schouten, S. A. Effect of reducing response preferences on ESP scores. European Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1975, /, (1), 60-66. 

Schouten, S. A. Autonomic psychophysiological reactions to sensory and emotive 
stimuli in a psi experiment. European Journal of Parapsychology, 1976, 1, (2), 
57-71. (a) 

Schouten, S. A. Psi in mice: Report on several anpsi experiments. Research Letter of the 
Parapsychology Laboratory No. 6. The Netherlands: University of Utrecht, 1976. Pp. 
1-58.(b) 

Scott, C., and Haskell, P. Fresh light on the Shackleton experiments? Proceedings of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 1974, 56, 43-72. 

Scott, C., and others. The Soal-Goldney experiments with Basil Schackleton: A discus¬ 
sion. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 1974, 56, 209. 

Sharp, V., and Clark, C. C. Group tests for extrasensory perception. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1937, 1, 123-142. 

Sheehan, P. W. A shortened form of Betts’ Questionnaire Upon Mental Imagery. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 1967, 23, 391-398. 

Sheehan, P. W., and Neisser, U. Some variables affecting the vividness of imagery in recall. 
British Journal of Psychology, 1969, 60, 71-80. 

Shields, E. Comparison of children’s guessing ability (ESP) with personality characteristics. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1962, 26, 200-210. 

Shields, E. Reading achievement as related to ESP. Psychics International, 1964, /, 50-54. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1965 ,29, 66-67.) 

Shulman, R. A study of card guessing in psychotic subjects. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1938,2,95-106. 

Sidgwick, E. M. Report on further experiments in thought-transference carried out by Pro¬ 
fessor Gilbert Murray. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 1924, 34, 
212-274. 

Sidgwick, H. President’s address. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 1882, 
7,7-12. 

Sinclair, U. Mental radio (2nd rev. ed.). Springfield, Illinois: Thomas, 1962. 

Skibinsky, M. A comparison of names and symbols in a distance ESP test. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1950, 14, 140-156. 

Smith, B. M., and Gibson, E. P. Conditions affecting ESP performance. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1941,5, 58-86. 

Smith, B. M., and Humphrey, B. M. Some personality characteristics related to ESP per¬ 
formance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1946, 10, 269-289. 

Smith, K., and Canon, H. J. A methodological refinement in the study of “ESP’ and 
negative findings. Science, 1954, 120, 148-149. 

Smith, M., Tremmel, L., and Honorton, C. A comparison of psi and weak sensory influ¬ 
ences on ganzfeld mentation. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), 
Research in parapsychology 1975 . Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 
191-194. 

Smith, S. The mediumship of Mrs. Leonard. New Hyde Park, New York: University 
Books, 1964. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


237 


Smythies, J., and Beloff, J. The influence of stereotactic surgery on ESP. Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 1965, 43, 20-24. 

Soal, S. G. Reply to Science and the supernatural. Journal of the Society for Psychical 
Research, 1955, 38, 179-184. 

Soal, S. G. A reply to Mr. Hansel. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research , 1960, 
53, 43-82. 

Soal, S. G., and Bateman, F. Modern experiments in telepathy. New Haven: Yale Univer¬ 
sity, 1954. 

Soal, S. G., and Goldney, K. M. Letter. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 
1960,40, 378-381. 

Spielberger, C. D. Theory and research in anxiety. In C. D. Spielberger (Ed.), Anxiety and 
behavior. New York: Academic Press, 1966. 

Spinelli, E. The effects of chronological age on GESP ability. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, 
and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 122-124. 

Sprinthall, R. C., and Lubetkin, B. S. ESP: Motivation as a factor in ability. Journal of 
Psychology, 1965 ,60, 313-318. 

Stanford, R. G. Attitude and personality variables in ESP scoring. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1964 ,28, 166-175. (a) 

Stanford, R. G. Differential position effects for above-chance scoring sheep and goats. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1964 ,28, 155-165. (b) 

Stanford, R. G. A further study of high- versus low-scoring sheep. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1965 ,29, 141-158. 

Stanford, R. G. The effect of restriction of calling upon run-score variance. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1966, 30, 160-171. (a) 

Stanford, R. G. A study of the cause of low run-score variance. Jou rnal of Parapsychology, 
1966, 30, 236-242. (b) 

Stanford, R. G. Response bias and the correctness of ESP test responses. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1967, 31, 280-289. 

Stanford, R. G. An effect of restricted spontaneity on ESP run scores. In J. B. Rhine and 
R. Brier (Eds.), Parapsychology today. New York: Citadel, 1968. 

Stanford, R. G. Extrasensory effects upon “memory.” Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1970,64, 161-186. 

Stanford, R. G. EEG alpha activity and ESP performance: A replicative study. Journal of 
the American Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 65, 144-154. 

Stanford, R. G. The differential effect revisited: An interaction of personality and ESP 
task? In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Para- 
psychological Association No. 7, 1970. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological 
Association, 1972. Pp. 12-13. (a) 

Stanford, R. G. Suggestibility and success at augury—divination from “chance” outcomes. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 42-62. (b) 

Stanford, R. G. Extrasensory effects upon associative processes in a directed free-response 
task. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1973, 67, 147-190. 

Stanford, R. G. An experimentally testable model for spontaneous psi events: I. Extrasen¬ 
sory events. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1974, 68, 34-57. 

Stanford, R. G. Response patterns in extrasensory performance. Journal of Communica¬ 
tion, 1975,25, 153-161. 

Stanford, R. G. The application of learning theory to ESP performance: A review of Dr. 
C. T. Tart’s monograph. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1977, 
77,55-80. (a) 



238 


John Palmer 


Stanford, R. G. Are parapsychologists paradigmless in psiland? In B. Shapin and L. Coly 
(Eds.), The philosophy of parapsychology: Proceedings of an international conference. 
New York: Parapsychology Foundation, 1977. (b) 

Stanford, R. G. The question is: Good experimentation or not? A reply to Dr. C. T. Tart. 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research , 1977, 71, 191-200. (c) 

Stanford, R. G., and Associates. A study of motivational arousal and self-concept in psi- 
mediated instrumental response. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Re¬ 
search , 1976, 70, 167-178. 

Stanford, R. G., and Castello, A. Cognitive mode and extrasensory function in a 
timing-based PMIR task. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Re¬ 
search in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 
142-146. 

Stanford, R. G., and Lovin, C. EEG alpha activity and ESP performance. Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1970, 64, 375-384. 

Stanford, R. G., and Mayer, B. Relaxation as a psi-conducive state: A replication and 
exploration of parameters. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 
1974, 68, 182-191. 

Stanford, R. G., and Neylon, A. Experiential factors related to free-response clairvoyance 
performance in a sensory uniformity setting (ganzfeld). In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, 
and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974 . Metuchen, New Jersey: 
Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 89-93. 

Stanford, R. G., and Palmer, J. Meditation prior to the ESP task: An EEG study with an 
outstanding ESP subject. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Re¬ 
search in parapsychology 1972. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1973. Pp. 
34-36. 

Stanford, R. G., and Palmer, J. Free-response ESP performance and occipital alpha 
rhythms. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1975, 69, 235-243. 

Stanford, R. G., and Rust, P. Psi-mediated helping behavior: Experimental paradigm and 
initial results. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in 
parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 109-110. 

Stanford, R. G., and Stanford, B. E. Shifts in EEG alpha rhythm as related to calling 
patterns in ESP run-score variance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1969, 33, 39-47. 

Stanford, R. G., and Stevenson, I. EEG correlates of free-response GESP in an individual 
subject. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1972, 66, 357-368. 

Stanford, R. G., and Stio, A. A study of associative mediation in psi-mediated instru¬ 
mental response. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1976, 70, 
55-64. 

Stanford, R. G., and Thompson, G. Unconscious psi-mediated instrumental response and 
its relation to conscious ESP performance. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1973. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1974. Pp. 99-103. 

Steilberg, B. J. Investigation of the paranormal gifts of the Dutch sensitive Lida T. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1971,35, 219-225. 

Stephenson, C. J. Cambridge ESP-hypnosis experiments 1958-1964 . Journal of the Society 
for Psychical Research, 1965 ,43, 77-91. 

Stevenson, I. An antagonist’s view of parapsychology. A review of Professor Hansel’s ESP: 
A scientific evaluation. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1967, 
6/, 254-267. 

Stevenson, I. Telepathic impressions: A review and report of thirty-five new cases. Char¬ 
lottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1970. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


239 


Stoyva, J., and Kamiya, J. Electrophysiological studies of dreaming as the prototype of a 
new strategy in the study of consciousness. Psychological Review, 1968, 75, 192-205. 

Stuart, C. E. The effect of rate of movement in card matching tests of extra-sensory percep¬ 
tion. Journal of Parapsychology, 1938,2, 171-183. 

Stuart, C. E. An examination of Kennedy’s study of the MacFarland data. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1940,4, 135-141. 

Stuart, C. E. An analysis to determine a test predictive of extra-chance scoring in card¬ 
calling tests. Journal of Parapsychology, 1941,5, 99-137. 

Stuart, C. E. A classroom ESP experiment with the free response method. Journal of 
Parapsychology , 1945, 9, 92-105. 

Stuart, C. E. GESP experiments with the free-response method. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1946, 10, 21-35. (a) 

Stuart, C. E. An interest inventory relation to ESP scores. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1946, 10, 154-161. (b) 

Stuart, C. E. A second classroom ESP experiment with the free response method. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1947, 11, 14-25. 

Stuart, C. E., and Smith, B. M. A second study of the effect of tempo rates of matching. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1942, 6, 220-231. 

Stuart, C. E., Humphrey, B. M., Smith, B. M., and McMahan, E. Personality measure¬ 
ments and ESP tests with cards and drawings. Journal of Parapsychology, 1947, 11, 
118-146. 

Stump, J. P., Roll, W. G., and Roll, M. Some exploratory forced-choice ESP experiments 
with Lalsingh Harribance. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 
1970,64,421-431. 

Szczygielski, D., and Schmeidler, G. ESP and two measures of introversion. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 15-17. 

Taddonio, J. L. Attitudes and expectancies in ESP scoring. Journal of Parapsychology, 
1975, 39, 289-296. 

Taddonio, J. L. The relationship of experimenter expectancy to performance on ESP tasks. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1976,49, 107-114. 

Taddonio, J. L., and O’Brien, D. P. Psi in the classroom: A replication and extension. In 
J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 140-142. 

Taetzsch, R. L. Sheep-goat and decline results of computer-scored audience responses. 
Paper presented at the Seventh Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Associa¬ 
tion, Oxford, England, 1964. (Abstract \n Journal of Parapsychology, 1964, 28, 277- 
278.) 

Taetzsch, R. L. A computer-scored experiment in precognition with company presidents. 
Paper presented at the Eighth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, 
New York, 1965. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1965 ,29, 288-289.) 

Targ, R., and Cole, P. Use of an automatic stimulus generator to teach extrasensory percep¬ 
tion. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychol¬ 
ogy 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 27-29. 

Targ, R., and Hurt, D. B. Learning clairvoyance and precognition with an ESP teaching 
machine. In W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
Parapsychological Association No. 8, 1971. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychologi¬ 
cal Association, 1972. Pp. 9-11. 

Targ, R., and Puthoff, H. Information transmission under conditions of sensory shielding. 
Nature, 1974,25/, 602-607. 



240 


John Palmer 


Targ, R., and Puthoff, H. Mind-reach. New York: Delacorte, 1977. 

Tart, C. T. Physiological correlates of psi cognition. International Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1963,5, 375-386. 

Tart, C. T. Card guessing tests: Learning paradigm or extinction paradigm? Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1966, 60, 46-55. 

Tart, C. T. A second psychophysiological study of out-of-the-body experiences in a gifted 
subject. International Journal of Parapsychology, 1967, 9, 251-258. 

Tart, C. T. A psychophysiological study of out-of-the-body experiences in a selected sub¬ 
ject. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1968, 62, 3-27. 

Tart, C. T. On being stoned: A psychological study of marijuana intoxication . Palo Alto: 
Science and Behavior Books, 1971. 

Tart, C. T. Learning to use extrasensory perception. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1976. (a) 

Tart, C. T. Review of The magic of Uri Geller, by the Amazing Randi; The Geller papers: 
Scientific observations on the paranormal powers of Uri Geller, by C. Panati (Ed.); and 
Uri Geller: My story, by U. Geller. Psychology Today, 1976, 10 (2), 93-94. (b) 

Tart, C. T. Improving real time ESP by suppressing the future: Trans-temporal inhibition. 
In The state of the art in psychic research. New York: Institute of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineers, 1977. (a) 

Tart, C. T. Toward humanistic experimentation in parapsychology: A reply to Dr. Stan¬ 
ford’s review. Journal of the A merican Society for Psychical Research, 1977, 71, 81-101. 
(b) 

Taves, E. Some paranormal experiences of hyperthyroid subjects. Journal of the American 
Society for Psychical Research, 1944, 38, 123-138. 

Taves, E., and Dale, L. A. The Midas touch in psychical research. Journal of the American 
Society for Psychical Research, 1943, 37, 57-83. 

Taves, E., Dale, L. A., and Murphy, G. A further report on the Midas touch. Journ al of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1943, 37, 111-118. 

Tenhaeff, W. H. C. Summary of the results of a psychodiagnostic investigation of forty 
paragnosts. Proceedings of the Parapsychological Institute of the State University of 
Utrecht, No. 2, 1962. 

Terry, J. C. Comparison of stimulus duration in sensory and psi conditions. In J. D. Morris, 
W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, 
New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 179-181. (a) 

Terry, J. C. Continuation of the rodent precognition experiments. In J. D. Morris, W. G. 
Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1976. Pp. 11-14. (b) 

Terry, J. C., and Harris, S. A. Precognition in water-deprived rats. In J. D. Morris, W. G. 
Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New 
Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. P. 81. 

Terry, J. C., and Honorton, C. Psi information retrieval in the ganzfeld: Two confirmatory 
studies. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1976, 70, 207-217. 

Terry, J. (C.), Tremmel, L., Kelly, M., Harper, S., and Barker, P. L. Psi information rate in 
guessing and receiver optimization. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris 
(Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1975. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 
1976. Pp. 194-198. 

Thouless, R. H. A comparative study of performance in three psi tasks. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1949, 13, 263-273. 

Thouless, R. H. An examination of the Humphrey-Nicol experiments on the feeling of suc¬ 
cess in ESP. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1956, 50, 34-39. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


241 


Thouless, R. H. Experiments on psi self-training with Dr. Schmidt’s precognitive ap¬ 
paratus. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1971, 46, 15-21. 

Thouless, R. H. The effect of the experimenter’s attitude on experimental results in para¬ 
psychology. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research , 1976,45, 261-266. 

Timm, U. Mixing-up of symbols in ESP card experiments (so-called consistent missing) as a 
possible cause for psi-missing. Journal of Parapsychology , 1969, 33 , 109-124. 

Treurniet, W. C., and Craig, J. G. Precognition as a function of environmental enrichment 
and time of the lunar month. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), 
Research in parapsychology 1974. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1975. Pp. 
100 - 102 . 

Turner, M. E. A space-time experiment. Psychics International , 1964, 7, 71-77. (Abstract 
in Journal of Parapsychology , 1965,29, 67.) 

Tyrrell, G. N. M. Further research in extrasensory perception. Proceedings of the Society 
for Psychical Research, 1936,44, 99-168. 

Ullman, M., and Krippner, S. A laboratory approach to the nocturnal dimension of 
paranormal experience: Report of a confirmatory study using the REM monitoring 
technique. Biological Psychiatry , 1969, 7, 259-270. 

Ullman, M., Krippner, S., and Feldstein, S. Experimentally-induced telepathic dreams: 
Two studies using EEG-REM monitoring techniques. In G. R. Schmeidler (Ed.), 
Extrasensory perception. New York: Atherton, 1969. 

Ullman, M., Krippner, S., and Honorton, C. A review of the Maimonides dream ESP 
experiments: 1964-1969. Psychophysiology, 1970, 7, 352-353. (Abstract) 

Ullman, M., Krippner, S., and Vaughan, A. Dream telepathy. New York: Macmillan, 1973. 

van Asperen de Boer, S. R., Barkema, P. R., and Kappers, J. Is it possible to induce ESP 
with psilocybin? An exploratory investigation. International Journal of Neuro¬ 
psychiatry, 1966,2, 447-473. 

Van Busschbach, J. G. An investigation of extrasensory perception in school children. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1953, 17, 210-214. 

Van Busschbach, J. G. A further report on an investigation of ESP in school children. 
Journal of Parapsychology, 1955, 19, 73-81. 

Van Busschbach, J. G. An investigation of ESP between teacher and pupils in American 
schools. Journal of Parapsychology, 1956, 20, 71-80. 

Van Busschbach, J. G. An investigation of ESP in the first and second grades of Dutch 
schools. Journal of Parapsychology, 1959,25, 227-237. 

Van Busschbach, J. G. An investigation of ESP in first and second grades in American 
schools. Journal of Parapsychology, 1961,25, 161-174. 

Van de Castle, R. L. An exploratory study of some variables relating to individual ESP 
performance. Journal of Parapsychology, 1953, 17, 61-72. 

Van de Castle, R. L. Differential patterns of ESP scoring as a function of differential 
attitudes toward ESP. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1957, 
57,43-61. 

Van de Castle, R. L. The facilitation of ESP through hypnosis. American Journal of Clini¬ 
cal Hypnosis, 1969, 72, 37-56. 

Van de Castle, R. L. An investigation of GESP among the Cuna Indians of Panama. In 
W. G. Roll, R. L. Morris, and J. D. Morris (Eds.), Proceedings of the Parapsycholog- 
ical Association No. 6, 1969. Durham, North Carolina: Parapsychological Association, 
1971. Pp. 3-4. 

Van de Castle, R. L., and Davis, K. R. The relationship of suggestibility to ESP scoring 
level. Paper presented at the Fifth Annual Convention of the Parapsychological As¬ 
sociation, Durham, 1962. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1962 ,26, 270-271.) 



242 


John Palmer 


Van de Castle, R. L., and White, R. R. A report on a sentence completion form of sheep- 
goat attitude scale. Journal of Parapsychology , 1955, 19, 171-179. 

Van’t Hoff, R., et al. [The influence of four variables on telepathic perception, tested by the 
use of clock-face targets.] Spiegel der Parapsychologie , 1972, 2, 54-66. (Abstract in 
Journal of Parapsychology , 1972, 36, 252.) 

Vasiliev, L. L. Experiments in mental suggestion . Hampshire, England: Institute for the 
Study of Mental Images, 1962. 

Vasse, C., and Vasse, P. ESP tests with French first-grade school children. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1958 ,22, 187-203. 

Waldron, S. Clairvoyance scores of sheep versus goats when subjects attitude toward the 
experimenter and the purpose of the experiments are manipulated. Paper presented at 
the Second Annual Convention of the Parapsychological Association, New York, 1959. 
(Abstract in Journal of Parapsychology, 1959,22, 289.) 

Wallwork. S. C. ESP experiments with simultaneous electroencephalographic recordings. 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1952, 36, 697-701. 

Warcollier, R. [A new test with combined targets without emotional value.] Revue Meta- 
psychique, 1957, 1, (6), 29-33 and 1958,2 (8), 14-20. (Abstract in Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1962 ,26, 70-71.) 

West, D. J. ESP performance and the expansion-compression rating. Jou rnal of the Society 
for Psychical Research, 1950, 35, 295-308. 

West, D. J. ESP tests with psychotics. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1952, 
36, 619-623. 

West, D. J. Home-testing ESP experiments: An examination of displacement effects. Jour¬ 
nal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1953,27, 14-25. 

West, D. J. Comment on Dr. Figar’s paper. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 
1959,40, 172-174. 

West, D. J., and Fisk, G. W. A dual ESP experiment with clock cards. Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 1953,27, 185-189. 

West, L. J. A general theory of hallucinations and dreams. In L. J. West (Ed.), Hallucina¬ 
tions. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1962. 

White, R. (A.) A comparison of old and new methods of response to targets in ESP experi¬ 
ments. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1964, 58, 21-56. 

White, R. A. The influence of persons other than the experimenter on the subject’s scores in 
psi experiments. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1976, 70, 
133-166. (a) 

White, R. A. The limits of experimenter influence on psi test results: Can any be set? 
Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1976, 70, 333-369. (b) 

White, R. (A.), and Angstadt, J. A resume of research at the A.S.P.R. into teacher-pupil 
attitudes and clairvoyance test results. Journal of the American Society for Psychical 
Research, 1961,55, 142-147. 

White, R. (A.), and Angstadt, J. A second classroom GESP experiment with student-agents 
acting simultaneously. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1963, 
57, 227-232. (a) 

White, R. (A.), and Angstadt, J. Student preferences in a two classroom GESP experiment 
with two student-agents acting simultaneously. Journal of the American Society for 
Psychical Research, 1963,57, 32-42. (b) 

White, R. A., and Angstadt, J. A review of results and new experiments bearing on 
teacher-selection methods in the Anderson-White high school experiments. Journal of 
the American Society for Psychical Research, 1965, 59, 56-84. 



Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings 


243 


Whittlesey, J. R. B. Some curious ESP results in terms of variance. Journal of Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1960 ,24, 220-222. 

Wiesinger, C. [Two ESP experiments in the classroom.] Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Albert-Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany, 1971. (Abstract in Journal oj Parapsy¬ 
chology, 1973 ,37, 76-77.) 

Wiklund, N. Aftereffect perception, preconscious perception, and ESP. Journal of Para¬ 
psychology, 1975, 39, 106-119. 

Wiklund, N. Parapsychological temptations: A discussion on decline-effects, sex-effects, 
and post-hoc effects. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research 
in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 125-128. 

Willis, J. Duncan, J., and Udofia, J. ESP in the classroom: Failure to replicate. Psychologi¬ 
cal Reports, 1974, 35, 582. 

Wilson. W. R. Do parapsychologists really believe in ESP? Journal of Social Psychology, 
1964, 64, 379-389. 

Witkin, H. A., Dyk, R. B., Faterson, H. F., Goodenough, D. R., and Karp, S. A. 
Psychological differentiation: Studies of development . New York: Wiley, 1962. 

Wood, G. H., and Cadoret, R. J. Tests of clairvoyance in a man-dog relationship. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1958,22, 29-39. 

Woodruff, J. L. ESP tests under various physiological conditions. Journal of Parapsychol¬ 
ogy, 1943, 7, 264-271. 

Woodruff, J. L., and Dale, L. A. Subject and experimenter attitudes in relation to ESP 
scoring. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 1950 ,44, 87-112. 

Woodruff, J. L., and Dale, L. A. ESP function and the psychogalvanic response. Journal of 
the American Society for Psychical Research, 1952, 46, 62-65. 

Woodruff, J. L\, and George, R. W. Experiments in extrasensory perception. Journal of 
Parapsychology, 1937, /, 18-30. 

Woodruff, J. L.,and Murphy, G. Effect of incentives on ESP and visual perception. Journal 
of Parapsychology, 1943, 7, 144-157. 

York, M. S. The Defense Mechanism Test (DMT) as an indicator of psychic performance as 
measured by a free-response clairvoyance test using a ganzfeld technique. In J. D. 
Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. 
Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, 1977. Pp. 48-49. 

Zenhausern, R., Stanford, R. G., and Esposito, C. The application of signal detection 
theory to clairvoyance and precognition tasks. In J. D. Morris, W. G. Roll, and R. L. 
Morris (Eds.), Research in parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow 
Press, 1977. Pp. 170-173. 

Zorab, G. ESP experiments with psychotics. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 
1957, 39, 162-164. 



