my buddy Billy. Uh very excited to to
have you on my my friend with the the
PIMP podcast. I love love that. So, you
know, you reached out a while back after
coming across some some of my podcasts
with Dr. cruise and you have been an
absolute, you know, blessing for one,
but an inspiration because you're always
talking about
how things are working and how you can
improve and how we're bringing in
regenerative agriculture
with this whole kind of scary thing of
quantum biology, but it's not nearly as
scary as I think people uh would think.
So, brother, give us that uh
introduction to who you are and then a
little bit on why in the world did our
paths even cross.
&gt;&gt; Sure. Well, it's a joy to be here with
you and your uh your awesome audience.
Um, well, for me it was really simple.
Um, I guess to start from the beginning
in a nutshell, I'm a Christian American
heterosexual proun liberty-minded
permaculture designer. So, when you add
all that up, um, it's probably easier to
find Bin Laden than somebody like me.
Um, I have the permaculture pimp cast
and pimp of course stands for
permaculture is my passion and also I
have a YouTube channel called
permapastures farm and where we
evangelize this magnificent design
science called permaculture but
um as you know and as you and I have
talked privately a number of times it's
so many I mean whether I was working as
a journeyman electrician or whether I
was working as a farmer it doesn't
matter every single one of us in this
space has been doing things historically
backwards. And what I mean by that is up
until the time I met you or until I come
across your podcast, I swear Logan,
every single day would be the same sort
of thing. And it didn't matter what time
of year. I'd do all my work in the
morning, and I'm talking outside work.
I'd do all my work in the evening, just
like every other farmer out there, just
like everybody in construction. And then
midday, I would do whatever clerical
work I needed done in the house. Well, I
came across you. Well, first of all, let
me back up a little bit. There was
somebody, and it was strange how this
all just kind of came together. It was
somebody listening to my podcast said,
"Hey, I think you ought to check this
guy out. I think you'd like him." And it
was the interviews that uh Dr. Kruse did
on Danny Jones. I from the word go, from
start to finish, I'm telling you, I
can't even tell you how many times I
listened to that podcast. There's so
many nuggets in there. And so, that
opened up the door. And it wasn't even a
day later, I'm looking up Jack Kruse on
YouTube and then the first thing I find
is your podcast. And so I go through and
I listen to everything you had. Then I I
was like, "Okay, man. Who is this Logan
dude? Let me check him out." So I
download your podcast and I start
binging it. And I'm like, "Dude, this
guy, okay, I got to have him on the
show." And so I've had you on twice and
I can't wait to do it again because in
all in all honesty, Jack Kruse is
fantastic. And and in fact, his his
information has been paradigm changing
for me and my wife and other people that
are within my orbit. But I got to be
honest with you, man, your podcast has
been an even greater blessing because
not only are you covering the
information that he covers, but you
break it down to those of us that are
more in the novice state of things. You
break it down. Look, man, I'm a country
boy. And you break it down to language.
I know Jack says he doesn't dumb it
down, and I don't think that's what
you're doing. You make it understandable
for a guy who works with his hands every
day, which is what I am. And um my wife,
honestly, she's your biggest fan, bro. I
can't wait for you to meet her at this
festival we got coming up next year.
Because I swear you, she is your biggest
fan because you break it down in a way
to where I'm like, "Okay, what's my
marching orders?" I go out there, I get
them, I drive on, and then you know
what's done is done. So, bro, you've
been twice the blessing to me than than
probably I'll ever be for you. But, man,
it has been a joy to get to follow your
work. All the people you inter uh your
interview, your sidekick, man, she's a
blessing as well. I can't even begin to
tell you, bro. It's it everything in my
life has changed on a dime. And I think
a lot of it centers around the work that
you've done in your podcast,
&gt;&gt; man. That's uh that's deep. Thank you,
brother. Yeah. Uh Petra is amazing. I
cannot wait to meet your wife. Uh but
you you're you're in that transition
that is so important for in my opinion
to get our country back on track because
our farmers are our food providers are
that front line uh and and we're in a
really bad situation um on all of it,
right? And uh just where the country is,
where the food system is, the health
crisis, on and on, right? We could we
could go on that forever. But what I
have had a a hard time and what I really
wanted to highlight with you is why that
seems to be so challenging for our
agricultural
people to understand the health side and
and it's been really it's been
frustrating because I love these people.
They see it when they're talking about
soil. They see it when they're talking
about plants and livestock and
rotational grazing and doing things in
line with nature, but their healths are
disaster, right? And so you you've been
implementing those things. So Billy,
what what is that biggest gamecher for
you is as you're implementing this and
why do you think there is that little
bit of not a little bit a huge
disconnect from regenerative agriculture
but then selfhelp?
Man, this is a loaded question. And it's
going to take a minute to unfold, but
let me first say um as I told you before
we begin this podcast, I was just at
Homesteaders of America last weekend and
it's every single weekend this month
whether the following or this weekend
I'll be at Mountain Readiness and then
the following week after that, Healing
for the Ages and then you know
throughout the fall you know um a lot of
people want me to speak at different
places or be a part of whatever they
have going on. So I'm going to be pretty
darn busy. But what I told you, what I
didn't tell you is if you go to
Homesteaders of America, and I don't
know how to say this, it's not just
there. It's every other place where you
see a lot of farmers, permaculture,
homesteaders, whatever the case, you
will see by and large a collection of
people that are in the worst shape you
can imagine. Now, I'm not saying this to
be highly critical because I myself at
one point in time was exactly like so
many others out there. I mean, you will
see people that are dealing with
dreadful
curable
uh ailments that they don't have to
suffer through. And it and trying to get
them to understand, hey, you know what?
I found this dude named Logan. Man, I've
been following his protocol and Dr. Kruse
and my life has changed on a dime. And
for some reason, you know, there's a guy
with a lot of sense of what said there's
no amount of evidence can shatter a
faith consciously based on a lie. So
they have within their heads this
framework, this ideology, this mindset
that this is the way it's always done.
This is the way we ought to do it. And
so you're you're already in an uphill
battle with a lot of the folks that work
in this in this space. Here's the crazy
part about it, and I'll go back to my
own story. If there is a person on this
planet that is more decentralized in how
they govern their farm than me or my
family, I don't know who that is. And
I'm saying all this to make a point. We
grow,
depending on the system we use, if we're
using what's called the chicken tractor
on steroids, we raise all of our meat
birds, all of our eggs for free. In
fact, we make money on the deal because
we produce a cubic yard of compost up to
three cubic yards per week. Okay? All of
our ruminants, we raise them for free.
And we use methods that I didn't invent.
I'm just taking people like Joel
Salatin, Jim Garish, Greg Judy, all
these heroes in this space. And we're
realizing, huh, you mean I don't have to
feed hay all through the winter? I can
just stockpile forage. Huh? Never heard
of that. Even though it seems like
common sense. So, bam, we raised all of
our ruminance for free. Our pigs are the
only thing we spend any money for. And
that's because we um we have we don't
pharaoh our own pigs. So, we buy baby
pigs or piglets and then we raise them
up. And then we we raise all of these
guys, all of our omnivores, we raise
with waist streams. So all of the waist
streams that are coming out of some of
these organic restaurants that, you
know, I'm about 45 minutes north of
Asheville. You know, I'm the final user
from a lot of these places. Um whether
it's organic bread, my pigs and chickens
eat better than most people. I kid you
not. So our claim to fame has been we
have been showing people how to
decentralize your farm. And I thought,
man, I really got this down to a
science. Come to find out when I came
across Jack's first interview, I'm
realizing, bro, I Yeah, I got the farm
figured out, but the the most important
part is myself. And I'll be honest with
you, bro, it was like somebody put my
junk in a bear trap because I was
sitting here thinking, dude, how can you
be so awake and how aware of how getting
back to nature and running your animals
this way is the solution for your
animals and everything on your farm.
There is no waist streams on this farm.
None. Every single thing. Well, except
for any citrus, which we don't even eat
anymore anyway because we don't grow
citrus here in western North Carolina
thanks to what I learned from you. So
everything is either if it lived, it'll
live again. And usually that means in a
compost pile or in the gut of some other
animal. I said all that to say this. The
reason why I think so many farmers, even
the ones that are very, very
decentralized,
I think they're missing the boat on
this, it could be for, well, historical
reasons, like grandma and grandpa always
did it this way, so let's just go out
there, put Roundup on everything, and do
this. Um, we know that that is a
solution to nothing. In fact, it will
keep you on that treadmill forever and
ever. And what I've known in
permaculture, what I've known in
regenerative agriculture is that for
every single step I move towards nature,
I get 10 of them back to me. So then it
only when I saw your work and the work
of Dr. Kruse, I'm like, dude, I felt like
a complete ninka poop at first. I mean,
I had that the first time I heard it, I
knew this has got to be right. So the
first thing I did was like, okay, well,
let me try it out. Let me see if it
works. Because intuitively, I kind of
knew that it would. So I changed
everything up. Instead of doing all my
work in the morning and in the evening,
I'm making sure I got myself that D
Minder app that I got from one of your
one of your guests that recommended it
before. I think it was Dr. Alexis Cowan.
So I got the D Minder app and I'm like,
okay, once I figure this thing out, I'm
like, okay, how do I do every single
thing I need to do outside when I'm able
to get vitamin D? And then all of a
sudden I noticed things start changing.
I mean in a massive way. I started I I
number one I found out that maintaining
um a healthy weight was not even it
wasn't even a problem. I mean I could I
was losing weight and I still wasn't
hungry. I was like okay. And then I come
across another podcast of yours where
I'm like hold on. You mean I'm actually
eating when I'm barefoot and in the sun
kind of doing all this at the same time?
So now it's become something of a of an
addiction at least to where I am right
now. Going back to your central question
though is why is why are other people
not seeing it? I think it goes back to
that quote, no amount of evidence can
shatter a faith consciously based on a
lie. So many of us are so willing to be
spoonfed information whether it's
through the media systems whether it's
from a podcast you like whether it's and
we never ever ever in the course of our
lives ask any critical questions after
we get out of caporal or um compulsory
education we get to that point where we
feel like okay we've arrived and I'm
realizing now that um well I've always
realized that I never am ever going to
find it off and and I knew that just
from the basic farming that I do but I
did not even in a million years stop to
think that maybe those same.
It is an axiomatic truth that apply to
my animals.
Why don't they apply to me? And so now
all of a sudden because of your work and
because of Dr. Kruse, I'm sitting here
saying, "Huh, I observe my animals in a
very different way now. I watch how they
treat sunlight. What they do when
there's well, there's very seldom clouds
in the sky. I mean, there seems like
they're spraying other every other day."
Well, especially well, not right now
when the u when we're in when the
government's on shutdown or whatever.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, we're not, you know, skies are
pretty clear right now. But if you
observe what your animals do when they
have availability of sun,
everything in your paradigm changes. So,
it changed in me. But man, this is why I
wanted you so badly on the show on my
show was because I was like, good night.
This is this is paradigm changing in so
many different ways. It wasn't a hard
sale to get my wife on board. Um, and I
got to be Well, look, I'm I'm going to
quit monologuing for a second here
because honestly, I'm so blown away with
what I've learned from you that I could
go on and on and on about the benefits
of all this stuff. But, um, bro, you've
been a true blessing in my life and my
wife as well. And I am trying to, as
much as I evangelize permaculture, I'm
trying and telling everybody as often as
I can, man, you have got to check out
Logan over there. You have got to listen
to what he's putting out. because bro,
it's it's it's truly paradigm changing
in every way imaginable.
&gt;&gt; Billy, I appreciate that. I'm I'm just
excited that y'all are y'all are doing
so good uh with it, too. But, you know,
I I came from this like everybody else
in like looking for food. You know,
after Lander was diagnosed with cancer,
it was like, well, what's the perfect
anti-cancer diet, right? And and so that
led me into more of the agriculture and
then, you know, having the market, I'm
in the food system, right? Like, I I
know this is this was my world. I I get
that. And so when I I interviewed Jack
for the first time, I don't know if you
you listened to the very first one ever,
I'm like I wasn't actually asking him
about food, but I was asking about
fixing the food system. And he just
straight up like, you know, in in Jack Kruse fashion, gave me a good punch in
the gut and said, "You can't you can't
fix it. That's not the problem." Right?
Like boom, it's it's this, right? It's
light, water, magnetism. And so I I had
my my brain scrambled with the first
time of Jack and I've just been able to
take on this whole regenerative
agriculture and food focus and tie it
into Jack's work and it has made a
massive impact on everybody. And and
this is where we've had, you know, you
brought up Petra earlier.
These principles are how we're going to
cure cancer. When we figure out cancer,
we figure out every other disease,
right? Like this is the cancer is is the
booger, that big one that you figure it,
you know, as as Brian Tracy, you know,
wrote, "Eat that frog." Like that's the
biggest, nastiest, gnarliest frog is is
cancer. And so every single
way of approaching this goes back to
God's laws, the natural loss. It's and
and so we we've even added a little bit
more, Billy, uh, in in my my framework,
building on Jack, he has to get all the
credit, right? like he he brought it in
just like you were talking about with
the Danny Jones podcast. It's light,
water, magnetism, temperature, and time,
right? Like this this in my framework is
where I can apply that temperature and
time to the farmers, right? Because
there is a temperature that we can
plant, right? There's a temperature that
things die that grow. There's a time
that we do this and all of that also
affects, you know, lots of crossover
between lightwater magnetism. But I want
I want to
essentially save the world, right? save
our country by getting people back their
time and their health, right? And get
them on mission for doing things that
are feeding people. So, what is the
biggest first thing that you feel was
the needle mover? And before you answer
that, can you can you kind of like hit
list some of the things that you and
your wife are facing with, you know,
sleep apnnea or or you know, in any sort
of chronic disease and then and then
what was that biggest needle mover that
you noticed?
&gt;&gt; Sure. For me, right off the bat, it was
sleep apnnea and uh high blood pressure.
And of course, I had quit taking the
lysinil that they gave me years ago. And
no matter what they gave me, it never
never moved the needle one bit. Sleep
apnea. They told me when I was diagnosed
with it after leaving the army, they
told me I had the worst case they had
ever seen. In fact, it was so bad that I
nearly got kicked out of basic training
because I snorred so loud. I'd be in the
field out there and guys were like,
"What on earth is that?" Of course, I
had to be told this, but you know,
always had a headache, all this, all
that. Tried everything. Tried a good
diet or what they said is a good diet. I
tried it all, bro. I mean, when I say I
tried it all, I tried it all. And I'm
one of those people that when I'm on
board with something, um, there is no
going back. I mean, I will give it 100%.
I will not go halfway. And nothing ever
moved the needle permanently. nothing
ever was sustaining. So when I came
across you and Jack, I was like, "Okay,
there's a whole lot to digest here." And
like every other thing that's a major
thing in your life, you know, this isn't
a war you win in miles, you win it in
inches. So the first thing I said,
"Okay, what can I do starting tomorrow?"
And it was quite literally that. And I
told my wife, I said, "You got to listen
to this podcast." And then I sent her
over to yours. And of course, she
subscribed immediately and started
listening to everything. So, first thing
um that I did right off the bat is I'm
number one because I work for myself,
I'm able all day long to some capacity
or another, I'm always educating myself.
It doesn't even matter. It's on a
podcast, it's on something, an
audiobook, you name it. Um I'm always
learning something. So, I said, "Okay,
what's the first thing I can do?" Well,
right off the bat, the first thing I did
was
with the sunlight, I changed up
everything. I was like, "Okay, instead
of doing all my work in the morning,"
and then I realized my whole life I've
never been getting vitamin D. I've been
doing everything outside the window that
that narrow depending on where your
latitude is. I've been doing everything
outside of that because I was believing
these, you know, people think MD stands
for medical doctor. Well, a lot of them,
including my oldest brother, think it
stands for medical deity. They're
telling me stay out of the light, wear
shades, do all these different things.
Well, in that first, you know, couple of
podcasts, I'm realizing, man, I'm doing
everything wrong. Okay, shades go away.
I'm going to go find the best blue light
blockers I can get. I'm going to buy
those. Okay, while I'm waiting on those,
what can I do tomorrow? Okay, first
thing I'm going to do, go out there and
get sun. I didn't have the app then. And
now, I don't think you necessarily need
it, but I didn't have it. But that was
the first thing I did. And I'll tell you
what I noticed right off. It maybe
wasn't the first day because I still
wasn't watching my light in the evening.
I didn't yet know how critical that was
as well. So, I was still looking at blue
light after a time where you would
naturally get it. And so, I didn't see
the needle move all that much. Although,
I did see an improvement in my sleep.
But, I'm still using the machine. So, it
was a week later and all of a sudden not
using the machine. In fact, I was using
it and I was waking up with a headache.
My son, who was a sleep medicine tech,
he said, "Dad, I think maybe ought to
take that thing off." I did. Took it
off. Haven't worn it since. In fact, I
need to go throw it in the dumpster.
Even though they told me I had the worst
case of sleep apnnea they've ever seen.
And so, I was like, "Okay, now I'm
excited. I'm like, "Okay, cool. Got rid
of that thing. What else can we get rid
of? Or what else can we add?" Then the
blue light blockers came in. But all the
while, I'm educating myself. I'm
listening to everything you're putting
out and I'm listening to everything I
can find even years old from Dr. Kruse.
Learning, learning, learning. Okay, now
my hygiene, my light hygiene. I got to
get this right. So, every light in this
house, notwithstanding the studio I'm in
right now, but you know, I take
precautions. I'm grounded the whole nine
yards. I do what I can. And of course,
the windows wide open. So, every light
bulb in here got changed out with those
Nero light bulbs. Very expensive. And
now I got incandescents on the way on a
dimmer because I am a journeyman
electrician. Have been one for 30 years
almost. And I'm like, okay, let's get
that right. So even come up with other
hacks. Let's say you want to sit down
and watch a show on TV. I went and
bought this red light film. I think I
sent it through sent it to you through a
text and it blocks out. And folks, if
you wonder whether or not there's not a
one on the market that works. Ask me how
I know, Logan. I bought them all and I
sent them all back. They say, "Oh, this
will block all the blue light." Well, if
you think it blocks the blue light, go
put on your blue light blockers, and if
that color changes, it ain't working.
So, I was like, "Okay, I got to find a
DIY thing," which turned out to be less
expensive than a $30 DIY fix. So, I'm
like, "Okay, well, we want to sit down
and watch some TV." Bam. I'll get that
squared away. Other things we were
having problems with is EMF problems.
Even though I live in the rural, very
rural, when I say rural, folks, I'm
talking I work, I'm outside with no
clothes on.
no shoes on 90% of the time. That's how
rural I live. Nobody's around here. But
we even had EMF problems that were
happening, not only through the dirty
electricity that were coming through,
but some of the other things. And I'm
like, okay, all of those problems
started going away. And then I found out
from you the benefit of melanin. And as
I'm getting darker, as I'm doing all
these mitigation strategies, I'm like,
this is easier than all of the other
things I did. This is an easier
strategy.
It just takes a little bit of
retraining. You know, you have to say,
"Okay, sun's going down. Okay, am I
going to go out there and watch the
sunset?" Which is a little difficult to
do where I live in the mountains, but
you're like, "Okay, do I go down and
watch the sunset?" Now, I'm going to go
in the house my whole life, I just flip
on the light. Don't do that anymore.
Every time that sun goes down, even
though the pernitious things around your
house are kicking off blue light, but
you don't even think about it. It could
be that electronic thermostat you have.
It could be the coffee maker, all the
lights in the fridge. So, what I did, I
took that same stuff that I put over the
TV, covered up everything from the light
in the fridge to the I mean, you name
it, the coffee pot. I mean, you got to
press through that little red plastic to
get through it. But every little
pernitious thing that you don't even
think about, those were the things I
started working on next. And so now it's
a it's a everyday thing where now I'm so
I'll be honest with you Logan to this
point I am so on board that to do it the
wrong way drives me crazy. And that's
why I intentionally whenever I have
meetings I make sure those meetings are
outside the opportunity of make me me
getting vitamin D if I can possibly help
it. That's why I told you I nearly did
this interview. If I didn't have my
great pyrenees out right now, I would
have been outside
out there in the sun with no shirt on
doing this interview. So, um that's how
ingrained it is into my mind and also
knowing that anything we are told,
anything we are officially told, it
turns out to be a manufactured lie. So,
I'm doing the very opposite. I'm I'm
basically raising up myself the way I
raise my animals now. And I'm seeing the
m need needle move in the most massive
way in undreamed of ways. Now I may be
different than a lot of folks out there
because I don't do anything halfway.
When I find out some new way of doing
things I'm like okay I heard Irwin Laor
on your podcast. I'm like okay let me
let me go find I bought his course.
&gt;&gt; So now I'm doing this I'm doing the
static breath holds every morning. It is
like clockwork bro. I do the people care
every in permaculture we have three
ethics. Earth care, people care, and
abundance given to the previous two. I
make sure that people care is at the top
of my list every day because I'm 55
years old, bro. I'm not getting any
younger. I live in a very rugged
environment. And if I'm going to do this
work that I love, if I'm going to
evangelize this magnificent design
science we call permaculture, then I'm
going to have to be in good health. And
I can't be staggering up and down these
I mean, all the knee issues, all those
other things, bro, they're gone.
absolutely positively gone. This is why
I'm telling everybody I possibly can to
look at your work now. And by and large,
I'm not always successful. In fact, it
seems the people that are most in need
of it are not are the ones that are
hardest to uh get on board. I'm doing
little things like, "Hey, check out this
Irwin Lor going through his course, you
know, doing the static breath holds."
Man, I started off I'm not finished with
it yet, but when I started off, I could
hold my breath maybe a minute and a
half. I'm up to 2 minutes and 36 seconds
right now. And I increase it every
single day or, you know, when I'm not,
you know, battling a cold or something
like that. And all these things are
making massive differences in my life
when I'm out here doing my rebounding or
my I'm jogging every day, which I'm able
to do now. When I'm able to do these
things, I'm also weaving in, you know,
in permaculture, we stack functions. So,
I'm like, "Okay, why can't I get
sunlight? Why can't I be active? And why
can't I do the breathing all at the same
time?" So, I'm getting better at this
and I'm stacking functions and I'm
becoming something of a Zen master in my
own life. And it's folks, I'm telling
you, if you if you've ever wondered
whether or not you can do this, well,
I'm a living example that you can
because honestly, everything and then
that's another thing you helped me out
on, Logan, too. The the hundred vitamins
that I was taking a day, hundred
Bro, a hundred everybody from these
people that they call biohackers and all
these others. Bro, I'm not. In fact, I
found out that was one of the last
things I got rid of. And talking to you,
I was not I was like, man, I just feel
like I don't feel wonderful. I got rid
of all those vitamins. Now I feel like a
million bucks. So, I still don't
understand the reasons why, but after
the last time I talked to you privately,
excuse me, I got rid of all those
things. I mean, minus um the fulvic and
humic acids. Um I do use some of those
things, but outside of that, the
multivitamins, all the the oils, all
those things, bro, it's out the door. I
got a whole cabinet full of stuff. Maybe
I need to sell it on Amazon or
something. But uh
&gt;&gt; or put it in the compost pile. Maybe
that'll be a better use for it.
&gt;&gt; There you go. I man this is exactly why
I wanted wanted to have this
conversation uh publicly with you is is
because you have been so passionate and
so bought in and you are a just a
perfect testament of what we can do
right like this is
it if you listen to what Billy just said
this is a very inexpensive way about
approaching everything too the only cost
really is some discipline right you you
you bought some of Scott's uh near
lights But those are kind of expensive.
We don't even have to go to that
extreme, right? We can get a reptile
bulb that's a fraction of that bulb or
we can just not use it. We can use
candles, right? They're just little
things. So, Billy, this is this is
perfect. And the the message, we're
doing it, right? Like you you've got an
event coming up next year where uh
Barbara O'Neal's headlining it and I'm
I'll be there uh presenting as well at
North Carolina. And you're getting the
message out. You're you're doing the
work. you're you're the beacon for what
we can do, but you're also putting out
the awareness and and making it really
attainable. So, I I just couldn't be
happier. Uh just listening to you and
and the results you and your wife are
getting. I that's why I do this, right?
That is the biggest reward I think I
could possibly have is just the the
happiness and passion that that I I get
to see. It's awesome.
&gt;&gt; Well, let me tell you something you
don't know. You inspired that event next
year. Believe it or not, you are a big
inspiration for that event next year.
And yeah, Barbara O'Neal's headlining,
but we're using her as bait for people
to hear you. I'm dead serious, bro. I
didn't I don't know. I don't think I
told you this before. You can ask my
wife if what I'm telling you is true. I
mean, getting Barbara O'Neal is like u
trying to find Bin Laden, bro. Like I
said before, it's it's hard to book her
and she's not cheap. And so I was like,
how do I get the world to hear this
information? How do I do it? Um, I don't
yet have the pocketbook, I think, to get
in Jack Kruse yet, but you know, the
following year, he's going to be the one
we're shooting for. I'm hoping to make
enough money on this to be able to pay
for him to come. But honestly, we use
Barbara. You can ask my wife if I'm
lying to you. Um, I'm using Barbara as
bait to get folks in there, but my
number one motive was to get them to
hear your information. Yeah, we got a
whole line of speakers up there. And I'm
hoping not everybody on the stage I'm
going to agree with. Not even Barbara um
who by the way got me banned off of
YouTube for um for two weeks because she
brought up how an element on the
periodic table might be able to cure an
ailment that you have. I won't bring it
up right now, but I'll tell you
privately. But yeah, that the results
have been so staggering for us that we
were like, "Okay, how do we evangelize
this in a massive way?" So, the idea is
is to bring in you along with Barbara
and don't worry, we'll have a discount
code here before long for you, for your
audience out there to come hear you
because um we're like, how do we get
more people to hear this? And folks, by
and large, they're going to go for the
person who's most heavily um I like
Barbara and I've spoken on the stage
with her before.
Nothing wrong with her, and I love a lot
of what she stands for, but you have a
you have a gift for communicating what
can be very complex ideas. for those of
us out here that are just busy with the
grind, man. I haven't taken the time to
examine the studies the way you have or
understand
um you know, for example, on your
recommendation, I got the Body Electric
right here sitting next to me. Haven't
even read it yet, but I'm going to and I
need to make that a higher priority.
There are other references out there
that I got, you know, to get hopping and
popping on. But honestly, the number one
motive is to get people to realize I'm
like, man, if I've I, bro, I've been
they they wanted to put me on blood
pressure med medicine for 30 years. I
quit taking it years ago because I
couldn't stand the way it made me feel.
And I'm like, hold on, I changed all
this around this sleep apnnea. There's
probably other things that I'm
recovering from that I'm not even aware
of. And I'm like, okay, if I'm seeing
these staggering results from your work,
how do we get this guy stage? How do we
get him up there? And I know you're too
modest to to say, "Hey, man." But
honestly, you are, if you ask my wife,
you are the number one motive. And the
idea after this show is the following
year is to bring in an entire show of
people like you and the guests you've
had on. um tried reaching out to some of
your other guests, but uh they haven't
reached back. Um we're not the
Rockefellers, you know? I mean, we we
have limited funds, but honestly, if I'm
going to pay it forward and do it in the
way that really matters to me, it's
making sure people like you have a
platform that makes sense. Because you
know what? You got people out there like
Joel Salatin talking about how you make
your farm awesome. You got people out
there like Greg Judy. You got all these
other heroes in the farm space that are
as decentralized as you could ever dream
of being when it comes to animal health.
It just doesn't make sense to me to not
apply those same things to my own life.
And we're going to make sure we're going
to do I mean provided that the world
stays spinning and provided we still
have an earth because I am a farmer. I'm
going to kind of need a earth. And
judging by what's going on in this world
right now, it seems questionable as to
whether or not we will from day to day.
But provided everything keeps spinning,
bro. The idea is to get to the point
where we have a decentralized
um gathering, I'll call it that,
festival, whatever the case may be, to
make it where it's as cool, it's as
invogue as anything out there. Because
honestly, I've never saved more money by
doing what you require. And it's never
been easier. And my sleep has never been
better. And you know, some things may
cost money. You know, I did spend a pile
of money to get that Magnetico sleeping
uh those magnets. I sleep on about 320
lbs of magnets every day. Now, that'll
cost you money, but do you need it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you don't you don't
necessarily need it, but you know, it's
things like that. Like I told you, bro,
I don't go halfway. It's um either go
all the way. Boom. Once I saw that
needle move, I'm like, how is everybody
not doing this just by getting up every
I'm already up anyway. It never even
occurred to me to go out there and stare
directly at the sun. My wife and I,
every single day, bro, I'm naked as a
J-bird out there. I don't care what the
weather is, I am naked facing east. As
soon as that mountain, soon as that sun
comes up over that mountain, I'm sitting
out there. Not sitting, I'm out actually
out there and I'm combining things. I'm
listening to my Bible study. I'm doing
all kinds of stuff. I'm sitting out
there and I'm looking at that sunrise
and I'm like, "Oh yeah, this is how it's
done, bro. This is how it's done." It's
things like that
that I mean, bro, I'm sorry if I'm just
monologuing too much, man. I'm just so
excited that I've come across you. I've
asked the good Lord, please put the
right people in my path. Please let me
come across these people that are going
to move the needle in a massive way. And
you know, it was people like you and Dr.
cruise that have made the most profound
difference in my life and that of my
wife. I mean, I won't go into her
medical issues, but All but gone. I
mean, there's some there's some other
things that we have going on that are
more um I I guess I can't really get
into it here in this podcast so much,
but honestly, there are other things
that we do that have incurred the
displeasure of the uh witches and
wiccans out there. Every time I speak in
a crowd, there's always witches in the
back trying to put a hex on a brother.
That's other things altogether. But
those are things of a spiritual nature
and that's part of what we battle
against. Not flesh and blood, but
principalities and powers, you know,
wickedness in high places. All those
things that we battle. But as far as the
things I can deal with, bro, it's your
work and Dr. Kruse that has honestly
moved the needle in a massive way.
&gt;&gt; There ain't no going back.
&gt;&gt; I I love it, brother. Uh we just got to
get continue getting it out. So, um,
let's let's dive into a little bit
about,
uh, what what that food system really
means within
what we face, right? Like, so, you know,
recently had Adam Chapelon, who is an
Arkansas farmer. He's just right down
the road from me, but been really
attempting to go from that commodity to
regenerative a lot of struggles. We
we've seen all in the news and stuff to
where there's big bailouts needing.
We're we're facing epic bankruptcies uh
for for farmers and so like we're got a
big big problem. So when when I give out
dietary guidelines, right, it's it's
extremely complicated. It just blows
people minds, right? It's just it's just
three little things, local, seasonal,
and natural. Like it does it grow there?
Does it grow when you're there? And is
it in a form that is as close to it was
when it was not food? Right. So like
that's it. It is super super easy but it
is challenging for and I really don't
like this word but for consumers to
understand the importance of that right
like we have to have an inlet for say
you're you're some sort of a chronic
condition and you need help well diet
matters right but this is kind of that
end so from your perspective on the
health side right and then from the
agriculture side why is that something
that is so unbelievably important and
maybe any ideas that you have to get
more people to understand that
importance.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, bro. Once again, every step you
take towards nature, you'll get 10 of
them back to you. And we see that in
everything we've done. Part of what we
do around here is when we had that
hurricane that hit western North
Carolina, we had a bunch of toxins flood
alongside the river, wipe people out
completely. We've proven we've proven
that using bacteria, fungi, nematodes,
prozzoa, arthropods, all those things.
We've actually taken that and along with
that um a series of extreophiles,
we've basically taken ground and we've
we have the lab test 30,000 bucks of my
own money to sit here and get a lab
test. Yeah. To find reliable lab
technicians. We've done scalar testing.
We did um lab testing. We took the most
polluted place in all of western North
Carolina, turned it around in six
months. Why? Because you can go out
there, you can put like, you know, when
they had the Gulf oil spill, you can go
out there and put core exit out there
and all it's going to do is sink it to
the bottom, but you're not eating it up.
You're not letting nature do what nature
does. So, I said all that to say this.
We've the closer we get to nature and
this applies to everything, we're going
to get 10 steps back to us. I know I've
said that a number of times, but I can't
emphasize it enough. And because we live
in a curry in a hurry society, we live
in a place where we know the price of
everything and the value of nothing.
Think about that. The the the price of
everything and the value of nothing. So,
what's the value taking your work?
Because I remember asking you a while
back. Um, I remember you had asked Jack Kruse a question regarding fermented food
and I was like, man, that was the exact
question I had and I I hit you up asking
for the answer. If if I'm eating local,
um, like these sheep I have out here
right now. If I'm eating local, like you
said before, and you made it make sense
to me. It has an electromagnetic
barcode, I think, is the term you used
for everything that grows local me to
me. Okay, that's not difficult to do.
You just have to rearrange your
lifestyle. So, let's say for a lot of
people that means going to a legit, and
I say a legitimate farmers market where
you can get legitimate local things and
you'll know whether or not these people
got it out of a buck off a box off of a
truck or whether they grew it at their
own place. It it you don't need a good
eye to see all that. So, if it's grown
local at the farmers market, the easiest
thing is to just buy it from the farmers
market if you can't produce it at home.
If you can produce it at home every
single day of the year, Logan, I make
sure that I eat something off of my
farm. Even in the dead of winter, I'm
making sure that I'm getting those
microbes from my food from my farm. And
I was doing this even before I found
your work. Um whether it's from the high
tunnel, it doesn't matter. There's
something growing at some time of year
and through the summer. I mean, through
the winter. Okay. What do I got growing
out here? uh you got turkeys, you got
deer, you got all the stuff I'm growing
out here, but they are local to me. And
once I figured that out, I'm like, okay,
it didn't get harder, it just got
easier. But we are hooked into a
commodity systems
to to explain this better. I I'll give
you a brief example. I was invited early
on when people found out the work I was
doing here in western North Carolina.
Nobody believed it. I mean, nobody
believed that I was actually raising all
these animals for free and making money,
that we had a profitable farm doing all
this stuff. Nobody believed it. So, they
invited me to go to this farmers
meeting. And of course, I went there and
it was blowing my mind. I'm sitting here
asking folks, okay, what issues do you
want to talk about? And nobody were here
in the mountains, nobody's really a
grain commodities farmer. You're not
going to find that out here. But
everybody's growing, you know, pastured
pork, pastured chickens, you know,
things like that. Every single issue
they brought up to me, I give them a
solution. I'm not saying that I'm, you
know, I'm I'm not some sage, but every
single, like, for example, it's costing
me a fortune to raise these chickens.
And I'm like, well, why don't you go
down to Chipotle, get all of the rice
and beans they throw out? It's non-GMO.
Feed that to your chickens. They're
omnivores. or feed it to your pigs. Bro,
just so you know, a little side note,
I've done entire I've taught entire
classes on how to feed your animals for
free. Just one visit to Chipotle per
week in Asheville, North Carolina was
enough to feed uh you could feed easily
six pigs and about 100 chickens from
just one visit a week. So, I'm telling
these folks, look, you got all these
farm-totable restaurants here. They brag
about all the farmers they got it from.
take their food scraps, you save them a
fortune on dumpster costs because now
they don't have to put it in the
dumpster and then you give them a little
bit, you know, maybe you give them some
duck eggs, maybe you get some chicken
eggs. There's so many ways to go about
this. Had a local college, a local
college, true story, they were wanting
to get rid of all of the food scraps, by
the way, organic food scraps or uh
University of North Carolina and
Asheville. So my wife tells me about it.
I call him up. Lady, all I'm wanting is
the food scraps and she's like, "Um, I
talked to the lady on the phone and she
says, "Well, okay. Um, could you tell us
what you intend to do with it?" And I'm
like, "Well, I intend to make the
world's best compost out of it." You
never tell them you're going to feed
animals because the answer is always
going to be no. So, I tell him, "I'm
going to make the world's best compost
out of it." Which I'm not lying. It's
exactly what I'm doing. And, uh, she
says, "Okay. uh would all we can offer
right now is about a,000 bucks a month.
Um I was stunned on the other side of
the phone. Hold on. I was expecting to
go in there and get them for free. She
says, "Uh we can have our people sort it
all for you and do all this and that."
And I was standing on the other end of
the phone like, "Uh uh uh what what
huh?" And she's like, "We might be able
to give you 2,000." I'm like, "What?"
She says, "And bro, this is the part
that really blew me away." She says,
"But um here's the thing. Uh we have
about 700 lb of organic food waste per
day,
100 lb per day. Remember I told you I
can go to Chipotle, eat six pigs, and
100 meat birds all from one visit. How
many animals do you think you could feed
a day if you're getting and these kids,
these high flutin kids these days want
all organic stuff. So, my point being,
they sent me in here to this farm
meeting. I'm going back to that now. I
can't I can't afford to I can't afford
to raise these chickens and make a
profit. I'm like, "Well, bro, I just
gave you the solution for that. Go down
to this college." Tell them Billy sent
you. Um, we can't raise our um our our
cows and make a profit. Well, then I
come to find out, h well, you're feeding
them grain. That's a problem because
cows were never meant to eat grain.
Okay. for a pasture-raised um you know
grass-fed cow, you're going to need 28
months generally. Okay? So, you're going
to take some time. You're also
mismanaging your paddics. Can't do that.
Can't just stick them out there. Or,
hey, we got pigs that we can't feed. You
know what? You don't want to go to the
college. We got all these other places
that are giving away. Bro, I am having
to turn people away. I would have to
make compost out of all this stuff. So
going back to the system is that of the
I don't know 30 farmers that were in
that room, not a single one
took the same methods I've made to make
myself profitable, highly profitable. So
profitable in fact that I retired at 48.
So if these methods work and I'm proving
that they work, I've taught a number of
people how they work. Why is it we can't
get these farmers who should know
better? You're you you you're just so
addicted to the cycle that you can't
say, "Huh, maybe there is a better way."
And there is a better way. That's why
I'm saying on this farm, nothing goes to
waste. You know, I show people because
I've been trained by Michelin star chefs
on how to process an animal and do it
properly and beautifully, make it
ethical, and do all these things. Well,
every time I process a pig or chickens,
we feed everything to chickens. We we
feed everything to chickens but chicken.
We feed everything to pork but pig but
pigs. So everything that I don't give to
the compost pile, it goes to the to the
pork and everything that doesn't go to
the pork, I mean it it goes vice versa.
And you never have to worry about you
can make money at farming if you quit.
And it and it even applies to the
commodity farmers out there because as I
told you from the very beginning of this
question, how we were able to take
forever chemicals out there and tie them
up in medium and longchain carbonic
acids in 6 months is undreamed of.
Undreamed of. And all we did was take
biomplete compost that we made right
here on this farm along with some
extreaphiles that I got from Dr. Will
Spencer. All we did was combine these
two. Best of both worlds. didn't know
that it would work. But testing proved
that inside of 6 months that nearly all
and I can't even tell mainstream science
this. I can't even tell them that
because they say it it's it's an
impossibility. Let me just give you a
brief um story as to how I knew it was
possible. Check this out. Right after
and not not many people know this story.
Right after the Chernobyl disaster in
Russia, of course, they had geer
counters everywhere. Every place was
absolutely just wiped out except for one
place. One place.
And I can't remember the place, the
exact location in Austria, but it was
called the I want to call it the
Anastasia Farm. That's not the name of
it, but it'll come back to me. They were
growing brassacas that time of year. So,
your cabbages, your broccoli, all that
good stuff. They could not even then get
a geer counter to grow off at that farm.
And to this day, they've never been able
to get a geer counter to go off on it's
called the Luba farm, by the way. It
just came to me.
They believe that's how it's spelled.
The Luca farm. Couldn't get a geer
counter to go off, even though
everything downstream of that thing was
polluted. Nobody could figure out why.
And then a few intrepid researchers
figured out, huh, what are they doing at
that farm that's different from every
other farm in Russia? Come to find out
that they pioneered wind row composting.
Same thing we do here. They were making
biomplete compost and it was so pungent,
so strong, so awesome
that even the radiation the the I would
say the uh fungi within that compost was
tying up that radiation before it could
ever do any damage. From that day until
now, there has never been a geer counter
to grow off on the Luca farm. So all we
did was take those methods that
everybody tried to suppress and it
brings me back to the work of uh people
like Becker and Marino and a lot of the
other people that they've tried to take
their work and suppress it. You know
like Bill Mullison said the problems of
this world become more and more complex
but the solutions are embarrassingly
simple. Once you find out that all you
need to do is make really awesome
compost. You'll be shocked at what you
can do. You'll be surprised at the food
you can produce. You'll be shocked at
how nutrientdense it can be. Only when
we do it in the dictates of nature,
which which takes me right back. That's
why the words you said and what Dr. Kruse
say make all the sense in the world
because I had it all figured out when it
came to my animals. I got it all figured
out when it comes to my breastas. Got it
all figured out with the things in the
high tunnel. Got it all figured out with
everything but me. So once I That's why
I said when I take the uh humic and
fulvic acids, my compost is so great.
You can drink it. You can drink it.
That's how good it is. So, of course, we
look at it under the microscope to make
sure it's all good. But that's the point
is that all these commodity farmers, all
these people, I could make them, I can't
say I, but taking the work of people
like Dr. Elaine Ingam and a number of
others. I'm a student of her work, been
through her course and the whole nine
yards. just taking all this work, which
means getting right back to nature, you
can find out that all of these fields,
probably in areas more situated closer
to you, you don't need all these forever
chemicals out there. You don't need
anhydro ammonia. You don't need um
nitrogen made through the hobo boss
process, which by the way is only a salt
that you're putting down in the soil.
You don't need any of those things. All
you need is to make a compost extract.
In most cases, put it on that soil.
Nature is never ever bare. So you never
leave a bare field out there. Going back
to the work of people like Dr. um not
doctor but Masanubo Fukuoka
um using all these methods that have
been around forever and ever that have
been hidden that have been suppressed
that have been pushed away from us.
Our number one export in this country in
the United States of Amnesia is soil.
It's going down the Mississippi and we
got the ways to halt it and bring it
back to bring it back. But the powers
that shouldn't be would rather have us
in this cycle of going through things
where we need these nitrogen-based
fertilizers which we prove you don't
need. I mean experiment after experiment
that we've conducted here, you don't
need any of it. You just need good
compost and you get you need good
methods and also a little bit of
education. And that's why I'm saying
that's why the work of you and Dr. Kruse
has been so profound. I wasn't a hard
cell. I really wasn't. I wasn't a hard
cell at all. That's because I'm like,
"Okay, I'm already there on these other
things. Now I just need to get myself
dragging across the finish line, which
we're doing every single day around
here."
&gt;&gt; Y'all are doing it. Again, I just I
absolutely love it. the uh the knowledge
and work that you've put out around
agriculture and permaculture and and you
do a lot of of freedom and awareness
stuff that is extremely extremely
important too. Uh too many of us are
scared to kind of speak up to be you
know quote unquote political. Uh but
like if there is anybody that is more
objective and neutral and not one way or
another than you, I don't know them,
right? Like you're you're you're equally
after everybody. So, so don't don't
anybody listening to this, don't think
that we're talking to an extremist on
one way or another. I promise we're not.
Um, but but Billy, this is uh so
important. Uh, love your podcast.
Everybody should check out the the pimp
podcast uh pimpcast. Uh, your your work,
the book, your son's work, trying to get
him into Arkansas to kind of do a big
sheep consult. Uh, there's there's so
much going on. And I I want, you know,
as we wrap this up to emphasize the hope
all it just takes that that person in
the mirror putting in the work,
understanding health and time, all of
that is what is is most important and
that we can get this mission going. We
can make a massive massive change and
we're doing it. Like the network's
there. I'm super super excited about the
future. uh as scary as things, you know,
seem, um we we we've got this and so
thank you for what you're doing. Uh it's
a it's amazing. Well, bro, at the end of
the day, I'm glad you brought up that
part of it, too, because at the end of
the day, I think we're you're either an
activist or an inactivist, but either
way, you're involved. So, that's why I
talk about and I'm a I'm a political
atheist when you get down to brass tax.
I don't trust any of these people. If
you're with the Constitution, then I'm
with you. And that's where that's where
the bar is for me. I don't care. It's
not red state. It's not blue state. It's
the state against you. That's the way
I've always seen it. And that's the way
I'm always going to see it. I'm a big
fan of the founding fathers. I'm a big
fan of what this country was meant to
be. But if at the end of the day I can't
do what I'm doing when they're well, I
can and I'm doing it when they drop
poison out of the sky. Okay, I'm going
to speak up about that. But I also on
the same token understand why people
have this high degree of reluctance in
talking about these other things because
every it's like whackable. Every time
you stand up um I'll do a front porch
talk where I'm just kind of you know
just letting my heart out on the front
porch talking about what I think is
important to me and you'll see the
algorithms on YouTube and you'll see
this thing. Wow, it's going parabolic,
man. Everybody's checking this out. And
then they realize that, oh shoot, he
just might wake up some people. Then all
of a sudden they tamp it down and you'll
go from 300 comments all at once to
zero. But at the end of the day, all I
care about is that the good Lord puts it
in front of the people that can use it
because by and large, most people are
not going to do anything with this
stuff. But that's why I am so addicted
and on point with the work you are
putting out, bro, and why this podcast
has been a massive blessing to me and my
wife. And honestly, everybody out there
that we send it off to, I'll be honest
with you, Logan, I got a pretty big
footprint. A pretty big footprint out
there, whether in the farm space or
otherwise. The most troublesome thing to
me is I've sent your work out
to people that I know that are in
horrendous I mean with some of the most
awful diagnosis you can possibly hope
for. And I'm like, "Hey, I've actually
heard Logan talk about this or I've
heard Dr. Kruse talk about this. Let me
send it over to this guy because if I
tell them, they're just going to, you
know, they're not going to pay
attention. Bro, I think I've actually
had
two people in all the people I know
actually take that work and run with it.
But like Dr. Kruse talks about this, the
quickest way to put yourself in an early
grave is sit here and beat yourself up
over that. Look, you were out there
doing what you were doing and the good
Lord had it come across my desk and now
I'm telling everybody about what you do.
I was so inspired and I'll say this
again, so inspired that we started the
Sovereign Health Summit to get you in
front of thousands of people so they can
see it. For me, you know, to be able to
say, you know what, folks, this has
moved the needle in my life. It can
happen for you, too. You just got to
make some basic simple changes in your
life. And that's how it works. Like I
said from the very beginning, this isn't
a war you win in miles. You win in
inches. And you may be overwhelmed if
you think I got to do A, B, C, and D.
Just start with wherever you can start.
And then from there, you know, add a
little bit more. Then add a little bit
more. And you will, bro, I have never
seen the me needle move in a more
positive way in doing what you guys have
taught me. And u, bro, it's been a real
joy. I never thought I'd be on here
because uh I
you know, you you're a hero in my book,
man. you don't you don't wear a cape or
anything like that, but you are a hero
in my book and it's been a joy to get to
know you and be able to reach out to you
when I got questions from time to time.
&gt;&gt; So, um I'm not sure I've answered all
your questions in the way I'd like. But
&gt;&gt; honestly,
&gt;&gt; you we're coming into winter, so I'm
going to go more into a uh you know, my
diet's about to change, you know, as
things kind of die off. It's apple
season here in western North Carolina.
I'm about to go pick a whole bunch of
them tomorrow. That's another thing, by
the way, Logan, for all the people out
there that are farmers, um, let me just
give it one more tip out there. If you
don't want to go to restaurants, if you
don't want to go to colleges, you don't
want to go to Folks, I've done this in
little one-horse towns in Texas, in
Decab, Texas. Doesn't get any smaller
than that. I've done this thing all over
the United States of States of Amnesia.
But here's one little hack you can do
right now. If you want to treat, if you
want to feed your chickens and your pigs
for as free as you can manage, go to any
apple orchard right now, I don't care
what state you're in. It is not legal
for them to sell apples that are on the
ground and sell them to the general
public. So, what do you think happens
when a guy like me shows up in my big
old truck and I say, "You know what? See
you got all them apples on the ground.
You mind if I take them?" They'll be
like, "Um, no, I don't care. We gota and
what they're going to do half the time
is just throw them in a I mean they'll
throw them in a dumpster. It's insane.
Do you have any idea how many pigs and
chickens you can feed just what comes
from this one granddad's orchard which
is down the road from me and of course I
got my own apple orchard out here. Not
enough for what I need but it's off and
running. I can go down there and I kid
you not, in the in the course of the
apple season, I could fill up my tundra
probably 200 times to the brim and still
not get all the apples that are on the
ground. So, like I said, the problems of
this world are more complex, but the
solutions are embarrassingly simple. So,
there's that's what I do is I show
people how you can raise your animals,
especially your ruminants for absolutely
positively free.
&gt;&gt; I love that, brother. You you got a lot
of good stuff. Um, as as we wrap up, I I
wanted to get a hit list just if people
are like confused about what what does
it mean? What kind of strategy? The the
strategy is very very simple. See the
sunrise right before when you get out of
bed, don't flip on that bathroom light,
the bedroom light, get blasted by the
refrigerator, all those things. Just
just make your way outside, see that
sunrise, relax, get your bare feet on
the ground.
The next thing that matters so much is
just get a little bit of sun throughout
all the days and don't block your photo
receptors. That's your eyes. That's your
skin. Let the sun hit everything, right?
And then when you get back when it's in
the evening, don't don't turn on all the
lights. You don't have the it's like
Billy laid out with the blue light
blockers. If you're going to watch TV,
you know, get get the blocking of the
blue. The blue light is going to disrupt
the melatonin. It's going to disrupt
every part of the system. So if you get
dark at night, you get that sunrise and
you experience all the sun. That's the
biggest biggest takeaway. And it's crazy
that light has that big of a impact. But
when you understand photosynthesis, when
the farmers like, "Oh yeah, that's why
this happens then." The sun, the
temperature, all of these things, the
water that's there, it it it clicks. It
makes so much sense. So, I I have so
many people I get to hear these amazing
stories of, "Hey, this has changed my
life. It didn't cost me a lot of money."
Uh, if you're going to spend money on
supplements, it's it's water, right? Get
you good good high quality spring water.
Don't don't don't trust the filters to
to change out your tap water. Look into
something that the extreme is light
water, but good quality spring water
that's, you know, Icelandic. It's a
there's there's a lot out there. I I do
like a a Alaskan glacier that has maybe
been my new favorite. But water is very
expensive. Get the water right. That's
the money you spend on the supplements.
Outside of that, we really don't. Just
just support your farmer or grow it
yourself. And that that's the protocol
that now does that sound just too too
complicated? Um it's it doesn't cost a
lot of money either. Um it just takes a
little bit of dedication. So, would you
agree with that first that that
assessment as the first step that that
makes that needle move?
&gt;&gt; I think so. Uh, without a doubt. And
honestly, with all the money I'm not
spending on supplements um because of
you, I now I because I live in the
mountains, I know I want uh low detium
detium depleted water as low as I can
possibly get. So, now the money I'm not
spending on supplements and stuff like
that. Well, I got light water. I got a
case of it down there. you showed me how
to um you know how to cut it. I suppose
sounds like we're drug dealers at this
point when it comes to water. And of
course um you know I got a bunch of
glass bottles of that Icelandic. I drink
about a gallon and a half of water a
day. And um of course I supplement also
with the stuff that we have coming out
of the ground here. But yeah, I mean I
would absolutely agree, man. That is the
easiest probably the easiest way to get
started. But honestly, the you're
undoing I think a lot of it with your
light hygiene in the evening
unwittingly. A lot of us are so addicted
I think to the way that we've done
things our whole lives that we're oh
shoot man I open this fridge or
&gt;&gt; and I didn't have my blue light blockers
on and like you said it's still you know
your skin is still a receptor as well.
That's why with the TV instead of just
wearing the blue light blockers if
you're going to watch it I got the whole
screen covered. You know, there's no
blue light coming off this thing at all.
And um it's it's simple things, but like
I said, you don't win this war in miles.
You win it in inches. I started with a
light, got the water squared away. Every
other hack that went along, I'm like,
"Okay, let me get this down. Let me get
this down. Okay, how much of my day can
I spend barefoot? How much can I do
outside?" The cold weather um or the uh
cold plunging, I did try that for a
while. I didn't feel the needle move and
I'm guessing it might have something to
do with the HLlet type of my mom. I'll
have to get with you privately about
that, but I don't feel it. I don't get
this uh euphoric feeling that everybody
else does. But anyway, there's there's
so many other things, so many more
things I'm sure I could add to this, but
man, I got to say it's
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's it's it's life-changing.
&gt;&gt; Y'all are doing it. Y'all have done
amazing. I I greatly appreciate the
talk. I just wanted your story out
there. I I just wanted your work and and
the story is a beacon of hope of I it's
not unattainable. We do not have to be
sick. We do not have to be slaves to the
system. We do not have to be cogs in the
wheel, right? We have so much power. And
when we get together and actually
implement these things and realize that
we've been lied to about everything, it
doesn't matter. It's been a lie. And uh
there's just hope. There's hope and
people are doing it. and there's a
network, a community that we can call
just continue coming together and
strengthening. So, I'm just excited. The
podcast has been a blessing because I've
got to meet people like you. It's been
amazing. I don't know if there there's
probably not another podcast that's had
Jack, Alexis, and Jim Garish, and uh
Gabe and Joel on, right? Like, uh we c
we cover a lot of different ground, but
it's been an absolute blessing. And
God's laws are God's laws, and when we
break them, we're going to have
consequences. So, Billy, thank you, my
friend. Uh let's make sure that you give
all your all your taglines where
everybody can find you and uh follow
along with you, my friend.
&gt;&gt; Sure. Um on YouTube it's Perma Pastures
Farm on uh well X unless you want to see
some of the comedy or some of the
political issues I have. You can check
us out on uh X at permapasturesfarm.
Um the podcast which I had no idea was
going to wind up being like the fastest
growing farm podcast in the world. It's
called the permaculture pimp cast and
pimp stands for permaculture is my
passion. There's a there's a reason I
named it that. Um there's a motive for
all that. But anyway, you can find us at
all those places or even at our website
permapasturesfarm.com.
And uh stay tuned because uh we're going
to be before long promoting this event
that we're going to have next year.
Barbara O'Neal is going to be a
headliner, but u like I said, we're
using her as bait for everybody to see
Logan. So uh yeah, just just keep your
eyes peeled, y'all.
&gt;&gt; Thanks, brother.