In many ways, our whole society and
culture structured on the opposite of
what you're suggesting.
the kinds of ways we come together
frequently are with set agendas and yes
uh I mean even the places where we're
supposed to have real dialogue and I
think of the arms negotiations and that
kind of thing it's really two agendas
and there's no real discussion of or
openness to ideas and putting aside
one's own position in many ways no
that's true you see that we can't see in
in the in the dialogue we can't have
these fixed agendas it's part of our
culture cultural tradition that there's
no point in meeting unless you have some
fixed purpose and then two sides have
two different purposes that can't meet.
Right. It's almost like you're rational
to do that. Yeah. What to get together
without an agenda. No, that's the only
rational way. You see that if you have
an agenda then you could never explore
anything new. You see that's only within
the limits of your agenda which come
from your fixed assumptions. Right now
the two sides start from different
assumptions and therefore they really
have different agendas though they claim
to have the same one that they can't
meet. Right? Now you see in these the
basic assumptions say behind the Russian
and the western positions cannot be
discussed right they can only discuss
some minor points about how many bombs
they're going to make or not make or but
see if they could settle the basic
issues between them we wouldn't need
these bombs right now but they never
consider that right now uh you see
they're defending the basic issues right
they never would never occur to them
that we should really seriously discuss
or dialogue about the basic issues and
really see if we could get somewhere.
Now that would require you see if you
did that there would be a kind of
explosion you
see very probably because each one is
committed to those issues.
See, we had an attempt. We had a
dialogue in Israel where we were talking
about things and somebody got up and
said, "Zionism is getting in the way of
Jewish Arab relationships." And somebody
else got up terribly disturbed and said,
"Without Zionism, our country would go
to pieces." And you know, he could
hardly contain himself and everybody got
very excited. You see, now in that
situation, if some people can come in
who are tangentially who are not that
excited, it sort of diffuses it. You can
get to look at it. If you have quite a
few people whereas if you have a
confrontation of a few people one
against the other nobody can come in.
You see now so you sort of need quite a
few different uh subcultures and points
of view. See, if you just have west and
east meeting, it'll be polarized. But if
you could have intermediate points of
view there, they might listen to each
other and you could start some real
dialogue and which would explore the
basic questions which are dividing
us. Uh now unless we do that, I don't
see any answer to this problem. You see
that we have having those 60,000 nuclear
weapons bombs and could destroy
everything alto together. And if you
think of a thousand years, do you think
people are going to hold back that long?
We have enough weapons for that
equivalent to 2 and a half tons of TNT
for every person on the earth. Yeah. And
then I would consider the destruction
that would do to the ecology and the
climate and you know to everything and
uh as well as to human beings and uh to
the forests and uh the uh and and and so
so if you say well for the moment that
threat has receded but time is long you
see a thousand years is a very short
space in human history and much less in
evolution. And if you try to think of
this balance going on a thousand years
you see so much can happen in a thousand
years. I mean somebody crazy can get
hold of these things
right and uh therefore it seems urgent
to do to go go deeper. You see if we
accept these divisions there's no
answer. You see now in Northern Ireland
there much smaller divisions have gone
on for 350 years and there's no answer
yet.
Right? Uh they can't really dialogue in
it.
So we've talked about the the field of
science and now we're talking about the
field of politics. This really applies
to all fields and professions and
institutions, doesn't it? Yes, it
applies to everything. And in principle,
it would apply to all human
relationships that we really should be
in dialogue
constantly. See, for example, in the
family as it has developed, there's very
little chance for dialogue. It has often
been an authoritarian family and uh and
or else the family is organized around
certain issues of uh which you know
keeping you know biological issues you
could call them and the uh uh there's
very little occasion for really
dialoguing. It must be fairly rare
uh with all that and
yet the the the lack of understanding
between generations or between people in
the same generation requires dialogue.
Right? You see the families break up.
People can't talk to each
other husband and wife and they they
can't the children and the parents don't
really talk to each other.
So let's say you have a group of people
say 20
people. What do you start with? Where do
you start? You say we were just going to
sit down and we're going to dialogue and
well I think I would start first uh we
would have to have a somebody who has
gone into this somewhat has to be
involved in direct in giving some sort
of um guidance at first. I mean uh you
know they call it uh facilitate or
whatever uh that I would start with some
sort of seminar and dialogue to just
discuss dialogue for a while to make to
give people a chance to see what would
be involved in it and then we would
start talking you see what one of the
thing advice I gave see people asked
said we had this seminar and dialogue
say in certain meeting and at a certain
stage people said but what shall we talk
about so I said just forget what we've
said and talk normally you
And they did. You see that? It built up.
At first people were hesitant, but it
began to build up. You see, it at first
it seemed
impossible. And you see, whatever is
important to you, you talked about, you
see, because that's just the issue,
which that's just where the problem is.
So that's what you mean by people
expressing meaning. Yes. Because
importance is meaning, right? You see
significance, value and purpose. And uh
you see people are not expressing what
is their real values or what is
significant to them or their real
purposes. They're afraid what's going to
happen you see that other people won't
agree and they'll
fight and they keep away from it. Now
that means people are superficially
related.
So there's no depth and no hope for
really going beyond the problem. Yeah.
You see they can discuss particular
issues but every issue has its roots in
something bigger. You see you can't. So
let let let's try to put it this way. We
may have all sorts of groups for solving
particular problems. But we need to have
a group that has no particular problem.
An empty space. You see a group which
the word leisure in Greek originally
meant empty space.
that there's a kind of empty space where
anything can
go and where all this can happen. When I
was growing up, they used to talk about
that uh we were going to have a lot more
leisure time and I think leisure time in
particularly in America has become
mostly filled with distractions.
Yes. Well, I think there really isn't
any empty space. No, people are
frightened of that empty space because
they're worried about what might happen
there. They would like it all organized
so it' be sure it'll be all right. But
uh you see but that's just the point.
The dialogue has a is not fixed like
that. It's not secure. There's a certain
sense of insecurity in it. Right? But if
you don't have that, there's no room for
creativity.
It sounds similar. It almost sounds
similar to the Buddhist concept of
emptiness of coming at a problem with
empty mind. Well, there's a relation
between them. But you see it's essential
here to bring this
together to coming at the problem
together with an empty mind. You see
because the difficulty of our of
civilization is that people as I said
before cannot uh work together cannot
cooperate cannot
participate in and any deep level and
it's all breaking up fragmenting you see
and it's getting very dangerous with
modern weapons and and so on and uh we
need I'm saying that the whole of
society has organized as you say to fill
up everything to occupy everything and
there's no face. Therefore, we can sort
of not see all this.
David, continuing with the process of
dialogue or the idea of
dialogue, there's a possibility here of
creating a new kind of community, isn't
there? Yes. Could you talk a little bit
about that? Yes. Well, I think that if
uh people can go into this process of
dialogue and uh face their uh difference
of you know thought and opinion and get
through that so they can all look at it
all together and think together then
there will be a different kind of uh
mind uh well first of all I think I've
said that
uh uh there will be a sense of
participation a sense sense of
fellowship, a different feeling and
there will be a liberation of
intelligence. You see this present
approach of adversarial approach of uh
you know
opposition blocks intelligence. Each
person is just sticking to his view not
really listening to the other one and
just trying to repeating or finding new
arguments or possibly finding a few
points in common. But uh there's no real
opportunity there for creative
intelligence. Now when uh when all these
uh special points of view are suspended
then the mind is open to move in
creative intelligence. Now therefore
it's a combination of a different
feeling and their creative
intelligence. Uh so a mind in which
everybody is thinking together because
all the everybody's holding all the
different points of view in suspension.
What about individual creativity in the
midst of the group? Well, each person is
participating and making his
contribution. You see, uh uh in so far
as he responds to what's happening, then
he's making a contribution. So, the
individual is contributing and
participating as well as partaking of
the uh spirit of the group and of the
content of the thought. So, there isn't
a subordination of the individual. No,
there's no there should be no leader.
There may have to have somebody that
gets it going and gives some advice in
the beginning. But the ideal thing is
that this he should drop away and just
participate. Now uh the individual is
not uh con forced regimented or forced
to conform to the group but uh but
rather he makes his contribution freely
but at the same time he's not trying to
overwhelm the group or dominate it. You
see that is it's not his purpose in
making a contribution to assert himself.
you see primarily.
So is there any goal for the group to
achieve? Do they do you enter into the
into the group uh dialogue with a goal?
There's no specific goal. The only goal
you could say a vague one people must
learn to talk together, right? As we've
been discussing, learn to communicate
and to share, right? Participate in
meaning. Now, but any further definition
of the goal will get in the way because
it makes means fixed assumptions. So
people will have to talk without a goal.
As I've said, this is very foreign to
our culture because people only talk for
entertainment or for use for a specific
purpose. Uh I should say that uh
apparently something similar to this
occurs in earlier forms of society, the
primitive hunter gatherer types. I mean
I read a long time ago of an
anthropologist who studied American
Indians. Some of them are hunter
gatherers and they they in groups of
about 20 to 40. They gather in a circle
regular frequently and constantly and
they talk apparently to no purpose and
make no decisions and they just talk.
But uh by keeping this up everybody
seems to know what to do. You see they
may get together for certain purposes in
smaller groups with per but there there
seems to be no visible purpose to this
talking other than just
sharing meaning. Right? And uh often
that's very egalitarian compared with
our society and uh there may be you know
the older person may you know be
respected for wisdom and so on but uh
the u uh I mean this anthropologist
friend told me that he found that they
had far more freedom there than in our
society because nobody cared exactly
what you thought as long as you didn't
make too much of a nuisance of yourself
and you see the the thought was far
freer In that sense,
how would you relate this say to uh an
individual seeking therapy and being
able to express themselves? Well, it
could you see it's a kind of therapy of
so of of society, right, of the culture.
Now, see the major difficulties we have
in our in our time or for a long time
have been difficulties of society which
are very cha chaotic. You see in fact
most of our
uh people who are ill mentally are
probably it's primarily due to society
most neurosis finally and the uh
therefore if you really uh have therapy
of the individual you're really asking
him you're accepting the assumptions of
society and trying to get him to fit in
but if the assumptions of the society
are themselves not really sane then
that's a very limited sort of thing to
do right now the
Uh you could say that we start out with
people coming into the group, different
subcultures and and all sorts of
conflicts and all the crazy assumptions
of society which begin to come out and
in so far as people can face these and
in a friendly way. You know that spirit
of friendship is strong enough to face
the uh high temperature then this begins
to go. You see and in a way therefore
healing in the sense of making whole
this the this subculture this
microculture we have here right so this
microculture becomes a kind of new
instrument
uh of mind which is intelligent and uh
friendly and perhaps compassionate yeah
where did you first start to get on to
your interest in the dialogue process
yes well to a certain extent Krishna
Morti was interested in in having
dialogue, but it was either one-on-one
or in certain in in groups, but it was
primarily directed toward him that he
would say, "Let's have a dialogue."
meaning not that people should answer
him back although they could but it was
he wasn't really inviting that but
rather that the other person would
listen to Krishna morti free openly and
also listen to his own response
suspending at both and not believing
Krishna morti or his own and just
looking at it so and and we could that's
more accurately I think called thinking
together with Krishna mort and yourself
right and uh the uh Now I think that's
the sort of thing that would be possible
on a program like this if if we have a
dialogue then people who are listening
could do that a kind of participation
right uh now uh but I but the notion of
dialogue on a very organ on a larger
scale you know with a greater objective
was greater meaning rather was I got
from a man called Dr. Patrick
Deari who lives in London, England and
he practiced he has retired now but he
was practicing there as a as a psycho
psychiatrist and during the last world
war he uh worked for the British army
and hospitals and he began to work out
along
with some other with
u what's his name I can't it's his
name's uh folks yes man called folks too
a way of therapy which involved large
groups. In fact, they involved the whole
hospital staff and doctors and patients
and after that he began to apply it in a
smaller scale and he began to see that
it was had a wider significance than
therapy and uh and he began to point in
this the direction which I've been
describing
here. We are we're doing this
conversation having this dialogue on the
grounds of the Krishna Murdy Foundation
and I'd like to take this opportunity
just to ask you about um your own
interaction with Krishna Murdy and um
how do you feel that that interaction
has influenced your own work? Well, yes.
Let me say that I was oriented in many
ways toward the things that Christian
Morti is doing before I met him. In the
sense that in physics I was the quantum
mechanics which raises the question of
the oneness of the observer and the
observed and the whole question of
fragmentation and so on. That is uh all
of these had been interesting me before
and so uh what I what Krishna Morty the
first meeting with Krishna Morty I well
I even felt an interest in thought and
looking into thought but with the first
meeting with Krishna Morty I felt that
and reading his material I felt that we
could really extend this whole thing to
the whole human mind and the whole of
human society. He seemed that it was he
was seriously proposing it and going
trying to bring it
about and this had a very great effect
on me and uh I know I went much further
into it through uh my contact with
Krishna
Morty. Uh so he really raised the idea
of the transformation of the whole human
consciousness which uh had sort of been
in the back of my mind and had believed
for example that changes of society
might have done it but by that time I
was beginning to see in the early 60s
that they won't do it that he said we've
got to directly look at the human mind
itself that that's the thing on which
everything depends
Krishna talked about going beyond
thinking Yes. And we've been talking
about thought. Yeah. So, how do you how
do you go how do you think and and
involve yourself with thought and go
beyond thinking? Well, you see the first
point is that through thought you get to
understand with the aid of thought
anyway. You get to understand this
thinking process, right? Uh which we
also require observation. I think I've
already suggested that. But I could say
there's something which Krishna Mi calls
meditation. Now that word has so many
meanings that it's hard to know what it
will convey but let's say roughly it
means you begin by being sensitive to
how you and aware of how your thought
process is actually working and and you
don't necessarily accept any of it and
nor reject it. It's a little bit like
what we're saying about dialogue, but
you suspend the thought
process in the same sense and look at it
and begin to see how it works and see
what's going wrong and you know the mere
seeing of this is enough to change it.
It doesn't require any further special
action to see that it makes no sense. It
finishes her. The same will happen in
dialogue. You see to see that certain
ways of responding make no sense changes
them. Whereas ordinarily in ordinary
affairs we have to say time is required.
We have the end and the means. We
project an end and we try by means have
some means to achieve it. Right now the
crucial point Christian Mort is saying
the change of thought will not occur
that way. Not through time in the sense
of time as a goal. Right? That that time
is not the essential point but rather
intensity of
perception. Uh now
uh now the the you see as you begin to
see the disorder in thought it begins to
drop away. Then the very act of seeing
the disorder calls into play something
beyond
thought which we can call for in the
first instance awareness and attention.
Right? See awareness is a kind of
sensitivity to differences and
similarities which is already beyond
thought. It means watchfulness, wary.
And then
attentiveness, the attention or attent
it has to be unrestricted attentiveness.
Our ordinary attention is restricted
according to our
thought. Now, in order to be able to
watch thought, we have to have an
unrestricted attention because you
cannot watch thought with attention that
is restricted by
thought. It doesn't mean you can't use
thought, but you cannot be controlled by
thought or limited by thought.
And uh so uh this attention will begin
to feel out the awareness and attention
begin to feel out and bring out what is
happening with thought. Right now as
that dies away then order begins to come
because I we say order is natural but
this disorder is due to this confused
process of thought which has to come to
order. Right? So in bringing order about
not only in thought but in all your
daily life which is in which thought is
heavily
involved therefore the mind begins to
change that is what Krishna Morti says
and it begins to open the way open the
door to something much greater
so in a sense what it's getting rid of
the excess baggage that we carry around
from our previous existence is that yes
it's not really excess baggage but it's
harmful baggage at this it's it's
actually doing us harm It's not really
that it's unnecessary. Yeah. It's
waiting us down. It's filling up our our
Yes. It's occupying the mind and
confusing it and leading us into
destructive processes.
So, we're talking about clarifying the
mind. Yes. Quite. And it becomes more
silent
then, you know, open and uh sensitive.
Right.
Why is it do you think that that most of
us are afraid of that space? It does
seem to be a common characteristic.
Yeah. Well, it's hard to know. I think
it's part of our culture. You see that
part of our culture is to say that we
have great faith in things. You see, now
the word thing is an interesting
derivation in Latin the word the word
same the word real. The root in Latin is
rest. The word rest means thing. Right?
So reality would be all things probably
but then that is root based on the verb
rar r e r i to think. So at that rate
you would say things are what you could
think about right and therefore thought
we know is you know
very cloudy you know it's a a vaporous
unsubstantial thing you can't count on
it. So we say we've got to have things
right to count on right and we can think
about things and set them up and we have
confidence and you know feel secure with
those things or possessions or houses or
whatever it is and
then therefore now the word nothing
strikes terror because you say I don't
want to be nothing. I don't want to have
nothing. I better have something,
right? And but you see the word nothing
may mean just something vacuous and
worthless. But it also means no thing.
That is the emptiness of clarity. In the
emptiness of clarity, there is no thing
cluttering it up. Right.
So this may be what the the Buddhists
talk about the no thingness. Yes. Now
but you see the whole background makes
it creates terror around that because
it's the idea of privation of loss of
everything and suffering and you know
that's all connected. See we have had
such a history of all that that there's
a terror of removing those things on
which we depend. Now not trying to say
you shouldn't have things such as food
and shelter and so on but we are
overdoing it now. We are using things to
create a sense of psychological security
and actually doing ourselves a lot of
harm.
you know and using far more things than
we need and so on.
Krishna Mie even suggested and he
himself claimed that he didn't have a
memory. He didn't remember things. Well,
I that's not quite so simple. I mean, he
does remember fairly well. There was a
period when he lost his memory. I don't
know too much about it, but he had a
change a big change occurred at a
certain phase of his life and he lost c
he doesn't remember too much of certain
parts of his life.
uh but when I was older he could see
that he was perfectly well remembering
what had happened though even a year ago
you know he had ordinary memory
uh but I think he wanted to emphasize
not to give too much importance to
memory
to again being a pattern that we carry
with us because it's the memory which is
what clutters up it's it's not the
things themselves you can't take them
into your mind it's the memory of them
you and the me and the the thought which
says you may not have them.
I'm speaking with David Bow, physicist
and author of wholeness in the implicate
order and co-author of science order and
creativity. We'll be back in 1 minute.
[Music]
One of the aspects that permeates our
conditioning in our culture is the idea
that there's an objective reality. Um
what what is your what is your
commentary or or view of objective
reality? Well, I think that's a very
subtle question. If you remember what I
said about the word reality, it means
all things, right? The the whole quality
of
thinghood and uh that stand
independently of thought, right? But
you're nevertheless able to think about
them, right? that that reality is what
you can grasp in thought and limit in
thought find its limits and its in
thought right now see one view would be
to say there's nothing else now I think
there is a kind of objective reality
because we could all agree on certain
things and to we agree they don't depend
on our way much on our way we think
about them and therefore we can't
dismiss the category of objective
reality altogether you see but we may
perhaps carry it too
far Now the object sort of stands
independent of thought independent of
the subject. You see the subject and
object are correlative notions. One
implies the other. Now the subject the
word I stands for the subject and the
word me stands for me as object or you
could be subject or object or that see
this house is an object. I don't think
it's a subject or some primitive earlier
peoples may have thought the tree was a
subject or that the whole world was a
subject or and religions that's really
implicit. Now uh the subject is supposed
to be active the one who determines
everything you know and uh who is in
relation to everything who is identical
and so on. Now the subject seems far
more vital in some sense than the
object. Uh and people really value the
subject. The object is valued really
because of its significance for the
subject. I mean because of what it does
for
you. So uh now and in so far as we try
to devalue the subject, we will be
taking away some of the value from life.
Right? So we need to consider both. Now
uh modern science tends to devalue the
subject or even wants to eliminate it. I
don't think that that can be done. You
see I think that mind and spirit or
whatever you want to call it goes beyond
what could be grasped in thought. You
see I would call it the unlimited
because thought is what anything that
could be grasped in thought has got to
have limits and boundaries.
So I'd say that there is the unlimited
which and this unlimited must include
the limited or else it would be limited.
You see so everything is basically of
that nature but our thought makes
abstractions like you see what I mean it
takes out some irrelevant aspect but our
thought is never equal to the whole
thing. It's always it's both less and
more. It's less obviously you can't eat
the thought of dinner but it's more
because it has you can do some other
things with that thought right like
reason with it now. So you could say
that thought forms a
representation of whatever you want to
call it of
reality. It is not reality itself. It
represents it. It presents it again
abstractly in the mind and that's like a
map. it will guide us in our action
toward whatever that is. So, but I don't
think we can form a representation of
the subject in
thought and not one that's adequate. And
that's where what the trouble is. We try
to do so. See, because people are led to
they say the world is made of nothing
but objects. And in order to organize
society, we've got to treat people as
objects. You treat yourself as an object
by the word me. And then but then the
subject which is supposed to be
unlimited is equated identified with the
object and that makes a contradiction
right that they're constantly feeling
the object is limited it ought to be
unlimited and therefore you have egotism
people want to get more right be bigger
and stronger be the greatest so I think
uh that that this trend in modern
society to eliminate the
subject is wrong I mean it's it simply
can't work and It's not
appropriate. But the the objective side
is that there's certain things, whatever
they may be, which don't depend
significantly, which we can agree on in
common and don't depend significantly on
how we think.
Well, I'm thinking of relative to
dualistic thinking, the idea of us and
them, you and me. And in some ways,
that's part of the problem, isn't it?
Yes, it's it's part of the problem. You
see because if I think of I as the
subject and you are an object right I I
could then manipulate you for to my use
you as a means to my ends right or I may
even think of myself as I split myself
in two say I am the subject who has will
and and desire and I am also an object
who must be manipulated to satisfy that
will right now that creates a conflict
but since we've said that we're all
really participating together even to
say that about you creates a conflict or
even to say it about nature creates a
conflict, right? So, we must limit
ourselves in how far we say nature is an
object that could be manipulated at
will. Well, in some sense, as long as we
think that way, yeah, we're not able to
come to wholeness, are we? No, because
we have every object is separate and I'm
another object who is separate. Besides
that I'm a subject who is different from
myself as
object and you are both subject and
object and it get it all gets very
fragmented you see so we can't and it
will create tremendous conflict and
since the subject has unlimited value
it's going to give tremendous energy to
the conflict
right now we can't have harmony that way
now there's another way to think which
is that whatever we say anything is it
isn't. You see, it's an abstraction. It
may be more than what we say or
different. That what we say is a
representation of whatever is, but it is
not what is. Right? All right.
Therefore, we could say have any number
of representations, some better than
others. For example, science had a
certain representation of nature in the
19th century. It's got another one in
the 20th century, but in the 21st, it
may get another one. Right? You see,
representations have no special
character. They're not sacred or they
don't grasp reality exactly as it is.
Right? Now, if we think of it that way
and I say, well, however I think of you,
that is only a representation. However,
I think of me or society or of nature,
it is only a representation. And we
therefore have to be open not only to
changing the representation, but to the
a kind of sensitivity which is beyond
thought which enables us to do
it. You know that that we say basically
we're in the unknown in the immeasurable
in the unlimited and every action is
directed toward it but our thought can
can engage the unlimited in a certain
way. You see by means of this
representation we can direct our action
toward the unlimited because everything
is the unlimited right
underneath. Uh in that sense we could
become come to consistency because we're
not going to try to know everything or
dominate everything.
But we just simply say we are they're
participating in the
whole and that's participating in us.
So how do you think that's going to come
about? What do you think is do you have
any views on how to bring this idea of
going beyond dualistic thinking? Well, I
think that into reality. There's several
steps. You see one thing is to you can
go into the dualistic thinking and see
its
incoherence see it to show rationally
that it's not very coherent and but I
think that the two ways I can think of
really one way one way is what say by
being observant as an individual of your
own thought you see the the trouble
arises from your thought which is as you
say dualistic it's it sets up the object
and the subject you see the observer and
the observer now these These are all one
really, but we don't experience them as
one because thought affects how we see
things and experience
things. And once we think that way,
we're going to see it that way,
especially after we happen so it's gone
on so many centuries, you see. So to
start to notice that how we see things
and Yes. And how we see ourselves and
how we see our thought, how we see
society.
uh so that uh we begin to be familiar
with that and suspend our thought our
dualistic
thought as an individual and then the
other side is to do it together in a
group right to back to the dialogue back
to the dialogue where we will establish
that sort of mind on a higher level of
the whole group
right which will be more powerful I
think once it's done I see that to be
able to do that we might call not just
communication But communion
in some ways the whole this whole idea
implies some s kind of sense of outside
of time and space. Yes. Is that what
we're going for to to really move
ourselves beyond the concept of time and
space? Yes. Time and space are
representations. You see and time is
very clear because you see let's think
of time the past is gone right? The
future is not yet. Right? Now we often
represent time as on a line. You see? So
we say here's a point on that line, this
point in time now. But that point
separates what has already gone from
what does not yet exist. So how can it
be? You see that shows that this notion
of time is very abstract. It is not
really directly what is. But it is a
representation like a map. Right? In
fact, we are representing time by space.
Right? That line is space really and not
time. Now the uh because there's a
certain similarity between the order of
space and the order time is the order of
succession and space the order of
coexistence as livenets has said time is
the order of successive existence right
so we represent that order by means of
the concept of time right and space we
represent by means of concepts of
distance and angle and so on see that
these are all represented and that
representation fuses with our perception
so we don't realize we're using it which
has been developed by the human race
over thousands of years and tens of
thousands and we are just using it. You
see, we're just happening. You see, it's
unconscious, right? So, time and space
are representations which are very
necessary and we know we're not
discarding them or anything, but we want
to see what do they really mean. They do
not mean the the way it
is, but they are a way of representing
it so we can order it and organize it
and know what we're doing right now.
uh the what is the mind in time and
space. You see it seems hard to see what
space not a certainly ordinary space our
thoughts are don't seem to be in
ordinary space and are they but they
seem to be in time right but are they
you see that see if the past is gone the
future is not yet this moment is all
there is
right and then there'll be another
moment which succeeds it and another one
but the time in between what
about you see psychologically there may
be no time in the sense that we
represent for material objects
uh it may not be a good
representation. So
uh that and you can see that because to
change a psychological problem it cannot
happen in time. You see if if you are
committed to doing something stupid you
know you can't change it by saying I'm
going to struggle to stop myself from
being stupid. You see I mean you have to
drop it right then and there
right now.
It's tied up with this question of
object. You see, to treat yourself as an
object implies that you exist in objects
ex have continuity through time, right?
So you're then assuming that you as that
the subject since the subjects identify
with the object, you're assuming the
subject has a continuous existence in
time. Now that may be a mistake. You
see, maybe it sort of comes in out. It's
like the television image. The object
which crosses the screen does not exist
in time because it's constantly being
created. You see from the electron
beam you know very fast so you don't see
it. So the subject may not be the sort
of thing that exists continuously in
time but our thought represents it as
existing that way and therefore we're
satisfied it does but if you try to find
it you can't right.
So what are the implications of that?
could implications of moving beyond the
the current conception we have of time.
Well, and you see the and of space and
of existence continuously. You see, if
there is a space, it's of another kind,
right? And uh the
uh it means that time is you see that we
cannot give time as the as the highest
value, right? That you cannot find
meaning in time.
You know there was in the mcado you know
there was the ex lord high executioner I
remember his phrase my my object all
sublime I shall achieve in time to let
the punishment fit the crime right and
you see the object seems very small
compared with what what he's aiming for
that see but you can see that the very
fact that he made that rhyme shows that
he was reflecting a common view he's
making fun of it wasn't he that you're
going to achieve the sublime in time now
the suggestion is it cannot be that's
not the way. Right.
So, what you're implying is that that
there is literally an immortality. Well,
it's it's really
that that the that what we call it has
often been said that the real meaning of
eternity is not the totality of time but
now, right? See, every moment now is
essentially eternity. Right? If you go
deeply into the
moment, all the differences is
abstracting from all the differences,
then essentially they're all one,
right? You see, it's only the
differences which make each this moment
different from another one. But if you
lost your memory, you know, you couldn't
know them and then you wouldn't know
about time at all. Right?
So, what do you what do you think? It's
we the words become uh strange to use
after this conversation. But what do you
think the individual consciousness
represents in the context of what we've
been talking about? Well, I think it's
affected by the collective
representation. I see this the way in
which we experience individual
consciousness is affected by the
collective representation of what an
individual is supposed to be. Right?
which we pick up from the society
unconsciously that we are such and such
a person with such interest and such
goal and such permanence. And you're
suggesting we have to unlearn that. We
have to see it not only unlearn it but
actually see how it works so that we can
see that it has no ground. You see if we
want see that it has no ground then it
has no power over you.
Right? It's all just thought. Now
thought has no ground finally. It's just
memory. You see the only ground we could
give it is reason saying it fits
together or else it fits a fact right
but there is no fact it doesn't make
sense reasonably and there's no fact
which is behind
that so it's sort of empty thought so in
that in that sense nothing makes sense
what well the way Christian Miy would
have put it if we use the word no thing
he says in no thing is complete
security Anything can No thing can get
so no thing makes sense. Yes. Well, no
thing makes sense but anything cannot
make sense as a source of security.
Everything is limited and you can't
count on it. Even diamonds are supposed
to be forever but they can burn up. You
see? So things always change. You can't
count on them and you
change. So he's saying it's only in that
moment that no thing which is beyond
time that you are secure. Right? That is
what you really are in in essence is
secure though the body may or may not be
right as you maximize the security of
the body but you cannot never get
perfect security for the body it's going
to die anyway and as well as other
things happen now but if you say what
are what am I really what is it really
most essential about me you see see one
view is to say it's the body right but
people don't really act that way they
seem to think there's something inside
consciousness that is more valuable. You
see, if you were living in a coma for 50
years, it wouldn't have any
meaning. Uh now, so the consciousness
seems to be important. You see, but what
is this consciousness? We don't know. It
doesn't seem to be based on time
really because of what I've said
right now. If you say maybe have a
ground beyond all the things we talk
about ordinarily things that is and and
beyond no thing right in no thing and in
that case that which is essential in us
doesn't die
right as what dies is a certain
form it doesn't mean it's not clear
whether it means you survive as an
individual or not but you say whatever
you are which is essential and alive
does not That right that's the
suggestion
uh that and it is not even in
time but that which animates us which
really see without which we wouldn't uh
our life even if we were physically
alive it wouldn't mean much right
so do you see I mean here you are a
physicist uh and essentially speaking
like a mystic would speak do you science
and mysticism coming together eventually
in a way that the two fields are really
one. Well, I think it's potentially
possible, you know, that at present
science is not moving that way that
that's a particular feature of our
culture. But I think that the new things
that have been discovered in science
favor that view like what like we
discussed the implicate order and things
like that and uh the um other more
favorable than say classical Newtonian
physics was quite a bit more favorable.
Now certainly Rupert Sheldre's theory of
morphic resonance. Yeah. But that again
that's true but it isn't commonly
accepted again you see. Yes. and saying
that there are possibilities for this to
happen that what you call mysticism you
see but what does the word mean it means
hidden literally but see they would say
it's not a question of anything being
hidden except what the consciousness is
hiding from itself by all this chaotic
movement right that we would rather call
it clarity rather than hiddenness you're
saying ordinary consciousness is the
state in which most things are hidden
from that view and uh uh therefore
Uh we could say that there could be a
state of
clarity. Uh well in some sense we're
really talking about
metaphysics in some way. Are we well?
Yes. Beyond the current conception of
physics. Yes. If you that's one possible
meaning of metaphysics. You see
metaphysics and philosophy is the
discussion of the nature of reality. But
uh you know it can be given this other
meaning.
uh the uh what we're talking is beyond
what can be grasped in thought. You see,
it's not only beyond science, but it's
beyond thought as a whole, right? But
thought may take part in it. It
participates in it, but it does not
grasp it. Do you see the
difference? It does not mean that we
discard thought or devalue thought or
say we should never think, but rather
thought is not dominant. is merely
participating in something more.
And certainly with technology and the
industrial revolution, I mean, we've
basically uh empowered thought and the
rational mind as the end all and be all.
Yes. And the rational mind is not very
rational. Finally, you see that whatever
is r the rational part is at the service
of very irrational impulses. So we we
put everything in the power of thought
and thought can and thought has made the
assumption it can grasp everything and
and order it and so on but it can't. You
see not only we see that it's leading
not leading anywhere. You see, if you
take all this technological progress of
the past 50 years, who would say that
people are happier now than people are
more worried about the future than
ever? Then the fact that more
technological progress could worry us
still more because destruction could be
still greater. Unless we bring to order
this human mind which is behind it all,
this technology can't help us and may
even make it worse.
But in in some ways in in your
suggestion of going beyond thought and
thinking as we know it uh but being able
to use it in a new way. Yeah. Um implies
also in some sense a dissolution of
one's ego identity and
one's identification with a personal
self. Well to yes it may at least in in
some measure. You see, I I think that
the present ego identity, it doesn't
mean you don't have a self. It's not
clear whether you would have have an
individuality. You you would still be an
individual. But the present ego identity
is based, I think, on a wrong mode of
thought. You see, in which a person
identifies with his thoughts and with
his body and with things. Do you see?
And which means that he's creating an
illusion, right? that this self which
people feel they have is not is is only
a show. It is not really there. But it
is such a convincing show that everybody
acts as if it were there and that gives
it an apparent reality. Do you see what
I'm driving at?
Therefore, it's not a matter because
we're supported for what we believe
ourselves to be. Yes. As we believe it
so intensely that we we create its we
create a phenomena as if it were there.
And that seems to prove it. uh but it's
so full of contradiction I think I don't
know if I have time I wouldn't have time
to go into all that but if you go into
it you can see it's a mess of
contradiction and that this this self
that we commonly call the self is really
we could call it the thought of the self
really or the eye thought and that
creates this manifestation this set of
phenomena now that I say that is not re
that has no ground right the Buddhists
say that too I think and uh the um what
what what what really is there we would
have to discover. But as long as that's
filling the field, we can never find
out. But it might not we might have some
sort of genuine being of some kind which
is rather being confused by this thing,
right?
Well, the the mind is a very tricky
instrument and uh in some ways we've
allowed the mind to to basically become
our ruler. Well, it's thought I would
say is a ruler. In some sense, it's
almost mindless thought. You see, that
thought has become the ruler. And uh
thought by saying thought is all there
is. Thought can cover everything. It
implies thought is the ruler. Right.
Yes.
And that I don't think thought can work
that way. You see, it cannot rule. It
will just be chaos if thought tries to
rule. It's got to participate.
In many ways we have chaos as we look
around us. Yes. Yes. I mean we have all
that like we discussed this
fragmentation this break up of
everything. It's thought that has broken
it up. This thought which is taking
over. And so once again we don't treat
that thought as representation. We treat
it as
as a you know as just a copy of what is
right.
So if you say somebody is, you know,
somebody the people of this nation are
evil, you say that's just what they are,
right? You're not representing them as
evil. You see, because you could then
see it's rather silly to just represent
people as evil
because see these thoughts about
ourselves and about other people and
about nature are representations. If we
could take that seriously, it would
change the whole nature of thought.
What do you think it would take for us
to take it seriously? Well, we've got to
do this kind of work. I was saying
sustained work on ourselves and in
groups. So, both individual work and
group work in the dialogue process.
Yes. Now, we really have got to have the
firm intention to do it. You see, which
means we see the value of it. You see
that? See, people can often I like to
make this analogy. Those people who
climbed Mount Everest had a very strong
intention. They thought it was very high
value and they did it. They didn't get
uh distracted by getting halfway up and
finding they were tired or had something
else to do or sick or whatever. Uh but
if they did then they wouldn't do it
right now. I'm not saying it was a good
thing they did it. It's just merely anam
less example that's good to look at. But
that's the sort of spirit you need right
now. See if you have that spirit then I
think you can do it.
Where do you see your work taking you in
the future David?
uh well uh I'm going to go on with my
scientific work uh in physics to develop
new ideas on the quantum theory in space
and time which would be more in line
with what I've been saying and then I
want to we're having dialogues here
discussions anyway we'll call them uh
seminars here at ohigh and other places
on thought I might have some books on
that and then I want to see if we can do
something with dialogue I mean those I
think these are all three different
phases of the whole one thing, right?
David, thank you. Been good talking with
you. Thank you.