Hello, I'm Randall Carlson. I'd like to
welcome you back to another episode of
Squaring the Circle. In recent episodes,
we've been looking at the phenomena of
hypervelocity impacts of comets and
asteroids. We've been looking at the
cosmic environment, close
encounters that have come very close to
Earth, but not actually struck us. In
the most recent episode, we looked at
the big picture, the long range of
impacts into the Earth, and we saw a
gallery of craters that are the impact
scars left over from these great
impacts, also called astrolams if
they're not the classical B-shaped
crater. In this episode, we're going to
bring it a little closer to home and
we're going to look at the evidence for
cosmic impacts within the last 10,000 to
12,000 years. This would be what we call
the holysine in terms of geological
epochs. This is the period of time
during which human civilization arose
out
of simple huntergatherer societies,
foragers and so on. So we see the shift
over into sedentary lifestyles. We see
the dispersion of languages. We see the
first urban
complexes. We
see all of these kinds of things
occurring in the early to mid
holysine. And what has been neglected in
looking at models of human history and
the the rising and the falling of
civilization is the potential role of
cosmic impacts and encounters with
things from space. So it's interesting
that while conventional models of
prehistory still dominate, there's been
a whole lot of research over the last
couple of decades that suggests that
cosmic impacts have played a much
greater role than has previously been
recognized. So that's what we're going
to start looking at in this episode. So
I'm calling this one hypervelocity
impacts in human
civilization cosmic encounters in the
holene. So, we're going to get right
into it here. And I'm going to refer to
an article that I actually came back way
back in 2007 as the paradigm was
beginning to
shift was Mike authored by Mike Ba
Bailey with the department of geography,
archaeology, and
paleoecology at Queens University in
Belfast, UK. And he is an expert in tree
ring analysis.
and he also spent a bunch of time
looking at the evidence for climatic
downturns and connected with evidence
for cosmic impacts occurring or
corresponding at the same time. So the
title of this paper that he published
back in uh 2007 in the journal of
quaternary science was entitled the case
for significant numbers of
extraterrestrial impacts through the
late
holysine
and this is this is I'll just get into a
little bit of it here and this is what
he wrote. It almost seems that there is
a reluctance to take craters seriously.
Given their potential importance in
assessing impact hazards, it is
surprising that their identification is
not afforded more importance by nation
states. In general, they are not
regarded as national priorities and
their study is left to the whim of
individual researchers.
Despite that, there is a reasonable
evidence for at least a dozen craters on
land within the past 5,000
years. That would equate, allowing for
the greater area of the ocean to a
minimum of 40 notable impacts on the
entire Earth's surface in this time
interval. Now the points he makes here
way back in to way back way back in
2007 are still true. There's still not
enough importance being attributed to
this phenomena. And of course one of the
reasons for that now is the dominant
paradigm is anthropogenic climate
change. And if we I've been making this
point all along that if we start looking
at
natural triggers for climate change
whether it's volcanism or changes in
oceanic circulation or changes in solar
variability or in the the galactic ray
bombardment. We could go through a whole
list of potential other influences on
climate. But the point is or cosmic
impact. The point is though is to the to
talk about these things then diverts
attention away from the dominant
paradigm which again is anthropogenic
climate change and they would be
distractions from the from the
imposition of that particular narrative
into the discussion of particularly of
policy. And I think this is probably one
of the main reasons for the neglect of
some of these other factors which I
would consider two of the most important
being the impact phenomena and solar
variability. Well, we will be talking
about solar variability in future
upcoming episodes, but for now we're
focusing on the phenomena of impacts
that could be by asteroids or could be
by comets or cometary related debris in
the holene. So this would have been
cosmic phenomena that could have
directly affected human societies, human
cultures and human
history. So Bailey goes on and he says
in general terms people who thought that
impacts from space were mostly
inconsequential were the products of
earlier 20th century thinking. According
to the vast majority of 20th century
historical and archaeological
researchers, there is no evidence for
anything from space having had any
effect on human populations in the whole
of the time since humanity became
literate. That is within the last 5
millennia. Obviously, if you live on a
planet which has not been hit by
anything within, say, 5,000 years,
there's little to worry about in the
less than century lifespan of a typical
human. Presumably by extrapolation of
this thinking, impacts by comet
fragments would be
inconsequential. In July
1994, however, it was observed that the
impacts on Jupiter were indeed huge. The
largest releasing the equivalent of
millions of megatons. Now, I may think
I'm sure a lot of listeners do remember
the event of July 1994, which was the
impact of the fragments of comet
Shoemaker Levy 9, 21 fragments to be
exact, that plunged into into Jupiter.
And there was a lot of discussion and
controversy leading up to that event as
to whether the the consequences would
be be profound or not. And it turns out
that they were like Bailey says here,
millions of megatons were released. Had
that event
occurred on Earth, had those say 21
objects struck Earth in July of 1994, we
would pretty much be extinct right now.
Okay, so that's kind of a big deal.
Then there was another paper around that
time that came out at the Cambridge
conference correspondence and it was
entitled now this was at the a
presentation at the annual meeting of
the American Association for the
Advancement of Science Dr. Penn excuse
me Dr. Benny Paiser of Liverpool, John
Moore University presented there and
what he did is he presented evidence
suggesting that more than 500 impact
events of extraterrestrial origin have
punctuated earth during the past 10,000
years which comprises most of the
holysine. The great majority or 70% of
these events have been of the Tangusa
type class of atmospheric impacts with
an average energy yield of between 20
and 100 megat tons of TNT. Now, you will
recall, I hope you've seen the episodes
we did on the Tangusa event. You'll know
that the general consensus at this point
is that the energy released during the
Tangusa event was about 15 megat tons,
which was about the size of
the largest hydrogen bombs tested by the
the United States back in the 1950s.
So anyways, Piser is making the point
that the majority of these impacts were
of the Tangusa type. Now you remember
that Tangusa did not create a crater
because it was an air burst. And air
bursts will create tremendous havoc on
the ground in the immediate area of the
burst, but they don't leave the kind of
lasting imprints that you would find
from a direct impact into the ground
itself, which creates a crater or a a
classic B-shaped hole in the ground. So
what he's suggesting here is that more
than a 100 surface impacts including
more than a dozen oceanic impacts are
believed to have repeatedly devastated
whole regions, small countries and early
civilizations around the globe. In a
worsted estimate, Dr. Piser said that up
to eight climatic downturns detectable
in the geological and climatological
records of the holysine may be directly
associated with multiple impact events.
Okay, let me let's reemphasize that up
to eight climatic downturns. So he in
his research he sees a direct link
between climatic phenomena, climatic
variability changes and the incursion of
cosmic objects whether they're direct
impacts or air bursts. Okay, this is
important and this is the thing that
wants to be downplayed and
deemphasized by the estab the proponents
of the establishment narrative which is
that we're only supposed to be looking
at human caused human causes for climate
change. Okay, he goes on here. He says
that episodes of increased cometary or
meteoric activity punctuating societal
evolution should be looked upon as
potential agencies determining the rise
and fall of ancient
civilizations. both the emergence and
the collapse of human cultures, the
pleaene holysine transition and the
Neolithic revolution, the onset and
collapse of the Bronze Age
civilizations, which is something we're
also going to be addressing in greater
detail in future episodes, and even the
collapse of the Roman Empire may be
associated with episodes of increased
cosmic activity and multiple impacts
that may well have included incidences
incidents of cosmic dust loading. Now,
this is another byproduct of cosmic
encounters is the in the the incursion
of dust into the global atmosphere. Now,
what that's going to do, of course, is
make the atmosphere more opaque. It's
going to reflect more sunlight back into
space and it's going to cause a general
decline in co in temperatures which can
have devastating consequences as we've
seen during several of the episodes of
climatic downturn that have led to
agricultural collapses which in turn
have led to famine and which in turn
have led to the the onset of of disease
pandemics because people when they're
malnourished they are not getting enough
nutrition. nutrition and their immune
systems get weak. But again, this is not
something that is supposed to be
included within the mainstream
discussion. So he goes on to say that
while most of these impacts occurred
over unpopulated unpopulated areas of
the globe, there are historical accounts
about devastating cosmic catastrophes.
According to a number of Chinese
records, about 10,000 people were killed
in the city of Chiing Yang in 1490 AD
due to the breakup of a small asteroid.
Then he he goes on to say about a dozen
hypervelocity impact craters that date
from the holene period that is since the
end of the ice age have been discovered
to date. The majority of impacts,
however, that occurred during this
crucial period of societal evolution
have not been detected yet. According to
Dr. Piser, the 14 known impact craters
most certainly paint a rather deceptive
picture of our past. The fact that no
massive impact crater dating to the
holysine has been detected has led to
the belief that no hemispheric or global
impact disaster can possibly have
happened. However, this is a widespread
delusion and that is directly quoting
Dr. Piser. And yet there is still a
regrettable lack of interest in the
scientific community to scrutinize the
holysine for major impact events. And
that is still true to this day in
2024, which to me is an oversight that
could have ultimately very dire
consequences if we don't become more
aware of the cosmic environment of which
our planet is a part and its role in
human societies and civilization on
earth.
So I am now going
to go and show you a map that is the
distribution of known impact sites just
within the past 5,000 years. So let's
see if we can get this here. I would
like to mention that one of our original
sponsors at Cosmographia, CBD from the
Gods, is following us here to our new
podcast, Squaring the Circle. As many of
you know, I've been using their products
for going on four years now. And having
tried a number of CBD brands, CBD from
the gods seems the most effective for my
needs, which is primarily as a sleep aid
and as a remedy for inflammation and
associated pain. I use both the oil and
the sav. My wife also likes their
products, especially the SAV, which
alleviates the pain in her hands, which
is the result of working for years as an
electrician. If you've been thinking
about trying a CBD product and
experiencing the benefits for yourself,
give CBD from the gods a try. To learn
more and see their product line, check
out
CBDrothegods.com. Any purchase of their
products helps our efforts here at
Squaring the Circle to realize our goal
of making this world a better place.
Thanks. Let's see. Let's just roll down
and we will get to that
map. Here it is right here. Okay. So,
you can see here this is the I think
there's at least 14 of them here. Now,
these are all within the past 5,000
years, which is not even half the
holysine,
right? Some of these would have been
only local or regional. Some of them may
have had global consequences. We're
going to look at some of them in more
detail. And then in the next segment
here, we are going to really unpack some
of these particular events and look at
the long-term consequences. We're going
to examine whether or not they had a
role to play in the evolution of human
civilization. So we'll begin here by
looking at a very interesting example.
This was recent grazing impacts on the
earth recorded in the Rioart crater
field in Argentina. Let's look at this
together. The most probable angle of a
meteoroid impact on a planet is
45°. And an impact at 15° from the
horizontal or lower is as likely as at
75° or higher. Yet little direct
evidence for oblique impacts exists on
the Earth. Oblique meaning a very
shallow a very shallow angle of
approach. Okay? Unless the impact angle
is very low, any asymmetry created
during the initial transfer of energy
from impactor to target is lost as the
crater is formed. In other words, you
can come in at an angle and the
explosion is going to create a basically
a round crater, not necessarily an
elliptical
one. And the shallow crater, moreover,
the shallow craters formed by oblique
impact are more easily obscured by
subsequent erosion.
during routine flights two years ago.
Now, this is from Nature, the journal
Nature in 1992, so this has been a while
now since this
discovery. One of us noticed, and that
was Reuben E. Leonza, noticed an
anomalous alignment of oblong rimmed
depressions 4 km by 1 km on the
otherwise featureless farmland of the
Pampas in Argentina.
We argue here from sample analysis and
by analogy with laboratory experiments
that these structures resulted from a
low angle impact and ricochet of a
condritic body originally 150 to 300 m
in diameter. Now 300 m in diameter
that's going to be about six times
greater diameter than Tangusa. So you
can extrapolate up from that you know
the
energies released during this thing
might be on the order of 80 to 100 megat
tons. So this would have been a
regional disaster
here.
that goes on to say, "The Rio Corto
crater field provides a rare opportunity
to invest in investigate energy
partitioning associated with large-scale
oblique impacts and to explore the
complex interactions between impactor,
target, and atmosphere. Previously only
observed in the laboratory and preserved
in different planetary settings. The
size of crater A indicates that the
impact body was about 150 m in diameter
resulting in an estimated energy release
of 350 megat tons of TNT equivalent.
Okay, so this was I was even off by an
order of magnitude here. 30 times larger
than the 1908 Tangusa event for an
assumed impact velocity of 25 km/s.
The age of the implaced lust, which is a
type of top soil, the excellent
preservation state of the smaller
craters, the preserved glassy sheen on
the impact, and the state of the
recovered condrite all suggest an age
considerably less than 10,000 years.
Consequently, it is conceivable that
this event was witnessed by early
inhabitants of South America.
So this shows the recent grazing impacts
on the earth recorded in the Rio Cuartto
graater crater field
Argentina. Okay, you can see this is
like imagine a gigantic version of
skipping a stone on a pond and and you
kind of get the impression of what
happened
here. And then from the aerial view
above, you can see how elongated these
scars actually are. So, and then above
the black and white photograph here is
one of the smaller members of the Rio
CuTau crater field. Approximately 250 m
across the ridge and grooved terrain
extending to the southwest is typical of
craters formed by a tight cluster of
small projectiles in the
laboratory. Okay. And in the next one we
have here a specimen of the Rio Cuartto
Hollisine impact glass
melt and this is from the study by Peter
Schultz 2014. This was a followup on
this and the archaeology of cosmic
impacts. This is lessons from two
midhallles Argentine case studies.
There's another one I don't think we'll
have time to talk about that in this
particular episode.
But let's go on. There is
more. This is a very interesting case.
The 1930 August 13th Brazilian Tangus
man. And so this is from the scientific
journal of the observatory. And this
information was provided by the NASA
astrophysics data
system. and Mark Bailey was also
involved in this the authoring of this
particular report. So let's look at this
a brief note in the journal of the
international meteor organization citing
an article by Kulik remember him
Kulik was Leoned Kulik that it's
referring to here who was the first
scientist to reach the Tangus the site
of the
Tangusa cosmic event.
So this is citing an article by Kulich
in a popular Russian scientific journal
in
1931 and it has drawn attention to a
possible Brazilian twin of the Tungusa
meteoroid explosion in 1908 which
devastated nearly 2,000 km of forest in
an area near the Podkanaya River about
70 km from the central Siberian town of
Vanavaro. Kulik's article contains
information published in the Daily
Herald of March 6, 1931, which itself
refers to report originating from
Catholic missionaries working in Brazil
and published in the newspaper La
Aervara Oservator Romano. There is
currently much interest in the frequency
and the possible hazards to civilization
posed by impacts with the Earth of
relatively small fragments of comets or
asteroids in the 10 to 100 meter Tungusa
object size range. And since neither the
report in the Daily Herald nor that in
La Observator Romana are readily
accessible, we thought that a summary of
the former and a complete translation of
the latter would be of interest to
readers of the observatory. Now, we're
not going to do the
complete translation here about
that, but we'll get into it enough here
that you can sort of get the the the
gist of it.
So, this is the archaeology of cosmic
impacts. Let's see. This is a little bit
out of order here. Was supposed to have
been backed up by the the Rio Quartto
before we jumped into
the before we jumped into the Brazilian
Tangaska. So, we'll just look at this
while we're here and then we'll go
forward. Cosmic impact is a category of
natural catastrophe neglected or
misunderstood by most archaeologists in
reconstructions of past population
dynamics. Let's emphasize that it's a
type of natural catastrophe neglected or
misunderstood by most
archaeologists in reconstructions of
past human population dynamics. We
discussed the nature of impact by
asteroids and comets and what is known
and theorized about the quaternary
period impact record. Now quaternery
we're going back 2.6 million years.
We're not focused on that big of a span
of time in this episode. We're looking
at the last 10 to 12,000 years. As case
studies for our exploration of how
archaeological method and theory can be
productively applied to the study of
cosmic impact. We focus on two confirmed
holysine asteroid impacts in central and
northeastern Argentina. One was the
Rioart, which I just introduced you to,
and the other is the Campo Delchiello,
both likely dating between 6 and 3,000
years before present. We model and
assess the potential destructive effects
of these impacts on contemporary hunting
and gathering populations using several
lines of evidence. The search for
quturnary period cosmic impacts along
with the documentation of the effects of
confirmed cosmic impacts on human
populations particularly of those in
organized in small-cale social groups
represents a challenge and a key
opportunity for our future
archaeological
research. And then I have a quote here
by one of the
preeminent scientists studying impact
phenomena and it he says impact
cratering is the most fundamental
geological process in the solar system.
And we know that now in a large scale
geological we also suspect that in a
paleontological context it is also one
of the most fundamental
processes. What we're not now yet
accepting is the idea that it may be one
of the most fundamental processes in
human civilization. And this is what I'm
trying to get the the attention and the
discussion to shift over away from the
dominant politically contrived narrative
to be looking at this phenomena that it
may have played a very important role in
the evolution of human civilization on
this planet within the last 10,000
years. So now let's get back to
the the
the Brazilian and Guska. Okay. So this
appeared in the new science the journal
New Scientist back in
1995. They're posing the question, did a
falling comet cause rumble in the
jungle?
The diaries of a Catholic missionary
could reveal the cause of a catastrophic
explosion which devastated hundreds of
square
kilometers of the Brazilian rainforest
65 years ago. Father Fidel de
Alviano wrote a report on the explosion
in 1931 for the papal newspaper La
Observator Romano. His article, which
was recently rediscovered by a British
astronomer, describes the blast in
graphic detail, but fails to mention
vital features that would help to
identify the cause. The missing clues
may be in the priest's voluminous
diaries, which are held in the Vatican
library.
The Brazilian Tungusa came to this is
Mike Bailey again to Bailey'seye
attention after he read a reference to
it by in a a reference to it by Nikolai
Vasilev
Vaselv and Janaji I'm probably
butchering his name sorry if you're
still around and you hear this Janades
Andrev in a 1989 issue of the journal of
the international media year
organization. The Russians referred to a
1931 article by Leoned Kulik of the
Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow,
the first man to investigate the Tangus
event. Kulik mentioned reports in
Western newspapers, including the
British Daily Herald, of a massive
explosion in Brazil. But neither he nor
Vasilv or Andrev had access to Western
newspapers. Bailey did, however. He
looked up the Daily Herald story only to
discover that it was based on Dalvano's
article for which it gave no date. On a
subsequent visit to Rome, Bailey
obtained microfilm copies of La
Observator Romano from the period. Thank
you for that, Mike
Bailey. Back at Liverpool, John Moore's
University where Bailey was then a
researcher, he was being workshadowed by
two local school boys. He sent them
searching through the five reels of
microfilm. On the first day, Damen
Markham and James Scriven found a
headline referring to bolides or
exploding meteors. In the article based
on his interviews with terrified locals,
D. Alviano describes how at 8:00 a.m. on
the 13th of August 1930 in the upper
reges reaches of the Amazon close to the
border between Brazil and Peru, the sun
suddenly turned blood red and everything
was plunged into darkness. A fine white
ash rained down followed by an
earpiercing whistle. Finally, three
balls of fire stre across the sky and
exploded, creating earthquakelike
shocks. The explosions were heard
hundreds of kilometers away, and the
forest burnt for months
afterward. Eyewitness accounts of the
fireballs. Now this is from another
report that appeared in the
planetarian the journal planetarian
space science of January
2011. Karaka a probable mini
tunguska. So eyewitness accounts of
fireballs and explosions in the Karaka
area Brazil in August 1930 led to the
suggestion that a large meteorite had
fallen. It was later discovered that a
seismic event had occurred on the same
day and approximately the same hour as
the Karaka event and in the same area.
You will recall from our discussions
about the Tangus event that there was a
6.7 or was it
5.7 RTER scale earthquake associated
with the atmospheric the air burst of
Tangusa. Could this have been related in
the same fashion here? I think it's
likely. Otherwise, it's purely a
coincidence, but an interesting
coincidence nonetheless because as we
explore into this phenomena deeper,
we're going to find that the correlation
between these type of cosmic events and
a terrestrial response in the form of of
a seismic response or an earthquake
actually seems to be a fairly regular
occurrence. There is also description of
going on here. There's also published
description of a circular feature of
about 1.2 km diameter in Lancet images
of the river Kuraca basin. It has been
suggested that this feature could be the
trace of an impact crater produced by
the Kuraca event.
So in August 1930, Father De Alviano
went to the Karaca River near the
Brazilian Peruvian border to carry out
his annual apostolic mission. There he
discovered that the local people were
terrified by fireballs and explosions
that had occurred a few days before his
arrival and that had led them to believe
that the world was at an end. And we
will recall that this is exactly the
response of the Tangusi people in the
area of the Tangusa event is they
thought that this was the end of the
world. Hundreds of eyewitnesses reported
to the Catholic missionary that
around 0800 hours on August 13th, 1930,
a fine red dust began to fall onto the
forest and into the river. Then people
heard several earpiercing whistles that
became increasingly loud. Fishermen on
the river could see the fall of large
fireballs. There were three distinct
explosions, each causing earth tremors.
The ash continued to fall until midday.
Father D. Alviano concluded that a
meteoroid had exploded in the Earth
atmosphere and a note to this effect
appeared on March 31st, 1931 in the
Vatican
newspaper. So where is this one now? The
status of this looks like it was a
Tangusa type event. Maybe not as quite
as powerful, but interestingly about
this one, there were three fireballs
reported. So probably what happened here
is you had a a single item, a single
object coming in and then as it entered
in the atmosphere, it broke up into
three parts and then the offspring of
that was the three fireballs which
apparently exploded in the atmosphere.
Unless the depression that it referred
to in the previous quote was in fact a
crater and one of them actually struck
the ground. This has not been confirmed
because of the fact the rapid recovery
of the rainforest and the the jungle and
so on has made it very difficult to go
in there and determine whether or not it
is actually an impact
crater. So now we're going to go on to
some some more potential impacts during
the holene. The next one is the Eagle
Station impact site.
This report appeared just recently in
the North American Archaeologist in
2023. Now, Kenneth Barnett Tankersley,
I've met him. He was one of the
presenters at the cosmic summit in
2023, and he's done some very important
work associating cosmic impacts with the
Hopewellian culture in the Ohio River
Valley region. And we'll get into that.
So in the abstract it says the Eagle
Station impact site is located along
Eagle Creek in Carroll County, Kentucky.
Palisites, we'll talk about those 23 cm
cm to less than or equal to 3
mm are a rare form of stony meteorites
and they occur in the late archaic
cultural period stratum with heat
altered flaked stone artifacts.
carbonized plant remains and fire
cracked rocks. A calibrated accelerator
mass spectrometry radioarbon age of
3,824 years before present to
3,593 before present. So that would be
1875 before common era to 1644 before
common era. on the palisite bearing
stratum demonstrates that the impact
event occurred during the late holysine.
The habitation site was abandoned after
the impact event and the site was buried
within 200 years by alovvium. The Eagle
Station impact site increases our
understanding of the frequency of late
holysine cosmic impact events and their
possible influence on ancient cultures.
Despite the scientific evidence of the
Eagle Station palisite type locality,
the age of the impact event has never
been chronometrically determined. There
is a growing body of evidence that
ancient cosmic events such as asteroid
impacts, comet air bursts, and meteor
faults have impacted ancient cultures of
various ages worldwide. In North
America, Hopewell archaeological sites
associated with the middle woodland
culture period contain more meteorites
than any other cultural complex. More
specifically, Hopewell archaeological
sites contain an anomalously high
concentration of palisites, the rarest
form of meteorites.
Okay. Then we'll move on to yet
another impact site. So this
was also from 2023. So this is recent
stuff. You can see that this these
discoveries are
ongoing you know for the last 2530 years
since we scientists started really
taking a closer look at the holysine
period which again is focusing on the
near historical period as opposed let's
say to the long-term picture of the role
of great impacts in earth history and
its effect for example on the rise and
fall of of you know mass extinction
events also
the the possibility of major climate
shifts and geological boundaries being
associated with great impacts. So this
is evidence for a large lake holene
strewn field in Kioa County Kansas USA.
Now a strewn field basically let's
picture this you got maybe a low
density object coming into the
atmosphere and fragmenting right this is
what Rio Quartto was. It was a strewn
field. You had multiple impacts of what
was undoubtedly once a single object,
maybe very loosely consolidated, maybe a
very fryable object, but once entering
into the Earth's atmosphere, the the
frictional passage causes it to separate
into multiple pieces, and then you have
what's called a strewn field.
Okay, let's see what we say about this.
There is evidence that Native Americans
have transgenerational knowledge of past
cosmic impact events that have been
passed down through their oral histories
and cultural traditions. The homeland of
one Native American tribe, the
Pawnee, in the great plains of North
America, including Kansas. The Pawnee
are known for the accuracy of their
astronomical knowledge. Panee oral
histories tell of a time when the stars
flew and fell upon the earth. Now I'll
mention that back when I was the lead
researcher for fire from the sky which
was a documentary that was appear funded
and appeared on both TBS and CNN back in
199697.
That's when I first learned about the
Pawnee and their quite remarkable
knowledge of astronomy and their
traditions of potentially cosmic impact.
So, let's go on here and see
what Dr. Tankersley has to say in this
particular
report. The
Brenham/Havland meteor crater is just
one of a Whoops. Whoops, sorry. of a
plethora of impact features comprising a
large approximately 800 hectare late
holysine age strewn field in Kawa
County,
Kansas. More than 10,000 kilograms of
palisites, a rare class of stony
meteorites have been recovered from
impact features and the surface of the
strewn field. Six AMS
radiocarbon ages demonstrate that there
is a
95.4% probability that the impact event
occurred within a range of
1,497 or 1497 before common era and 419
before common era and most likely
between 754 and 419 before common era.
The impact event is well described in
Pawnie oral histories and illustrated in
petroglyphs near the
strewnfield. The age and geographic
extent of the Kioa County, Kansas
strewnfield increases our understanding
of the frequency of cosmic impact events
on Earth and their influence on people
and cultural change.
Now palicites are believed to form
between the silicut mantle or outer
shell and the molten cores of a
differentiated asteroid. The primary
silicut mineral in palacees is olivine
distinguishable by its greenish hue. The
olivine crystals contained in the
Maralatti palisite are of such
consistently high purity that they were
adopted as a scientific standard for the
composition of olivine also known as the
gemstone paradot. Gem quality paradot
has been identified in multiple palisite
meteorites.
Okay, this seems to be associated with
these mid hollesene Hopewellian Ohio
Valley impact or impacts if it was more
than one. And so in this one, we
actually have a backlit slice of the the
Fukang
palite. And this is you can see here the
these are the olivine crystals. So what
you've got is a very here's a very thin
slice and you've got it back lit so that
the light is coming through it and
illuminating the olivine crystals within
the palisite the slice of the
palisite. And here we have cut, polished
and acid etched palisites collected from
impact feature sample sites. This is
multiple different
ones. So this is this is still from the
article evidence for a large lake
hollisine strewnfield in Kawa
County and but there's there's other
examples of palisites. However, as it
mentioned here, they're very they're
rare amongst
meteorites which may have some
interesting implications that we don't
have time to discuss here for this
episode. Okay. So going further into the
evidence for an effect on the Hopwell
culture. Now remember the Hopeal
culture, in case you don't know, they're
the ones who are associated with all the
monumental earthworks and mound building
structures throughout the the the Ohio
River Valley and its tributaries, which
is something we're going to be talking
about in great detail in upcoming
episodes. Not just the the association
potentially with impacts but also the
whole phenomena of monu mon monumental
earthwork structures in itself which is
a pretty amazing thing and is worthy of
deeper
investigation and it's something that
that has fascinated myself and some of
my friends and colleagues for years.
We've made multiple expeditions to
examine these sites. We're planning
actually future excursions to visit some
of the monumental earthwork
sites maybe next year. So Tankersley's
work, the Hopewell cosmic air burst
event, a review of the empirical
evidence. He's done several articles on
this. You can see this
is I think this is available. You can
download it online, I believe. Let's
see. Let's see a review. This yeah this
app appeared in the journal air bursts
and cratering
impacts just published in 2024. Now I
will mention that the archaeological
community has taken great offense to
this idea that there may have been
impacts involved in the cultural and
social evolution of of these early
pre-Colombian societies in North
America.
So it remains controversial, but I think
that the evidence, the weight of
evidence is coming down on the side that
yes, there have been actually
these events that have affected the rise
and fall of human cultures in the past.
And the archaeologists might just need
to man up and and recognize that this is
a feature that they're going to have to
incorporate into their models of history
and prehistory.
but they're not too excited about having
to reorient their thinking at all. And
we find this pretty much across the
spectrum of the archaeological
establishment. Although this is
beginning to change. Okay. Some of the
kinds of proxy evidence found here. Like
the next image is a scanning electron
microscope microraphs of iron and
siliconri microsphererals. This is from
one of the Hamilton County, Ohio, the
Turner earthwork site. And this is the
kind of thing that is formed in
the tremendous heat and pressures of
impacts is these type of microsphererals
here. And again when we're we're looking
into more depth and talking in about the
proxies the the means by which we prove
or disprove the existence of a hyper
velocity
impact. This is one of the criteria we
use which
is
microsphererals. Now one of the sites
that's being referred to here in the
next image is quite interesting. This is
the next image is from the monumental
earthworks of the Mississippi Valley by
Squire and Davis which is going to be a
book that we'll have linked on our
bookstore on the website. It's if you're
interested in doing any research into
the amazing phenomena of pre-colian
earthworks
and
monumental mound building and so on.
This is an indispensable book. So here
this is showing one of
the one of
the what's called the Milford
earthworks. You can see here probably
does not exist except for traces because
now most of this like the date from this
was
1848. So you can see what's happened is
the evolution of society,
urbanization, agriculture, road and
railroad building, all of these things
have obscured and erased probably 90% of
the earthworks that existed prior to the
arrival of the Europeans. However,
thankfully to the work of Squire and
Davis and others, we have a record of
these things. Squire and Davis were
surveyors who spent many years making
carefully detailed surveys of the extent
earthwork structures that still existed
back in the pre-Ivil War days. And here
we see a very interesting Whoops.
complex. I'll just mention a couple of
things here. You see this square here
with the open apertures and these mounds
just inside the apertures. These
apertures were undoubtedly sighting that
if you were standing more or less at the
center of this thing and sighting
through these apertures, you would be
looking at the horizon in various
directions and presumably cosmic events.
I mean things like equinoxial and
solstitial sunrises and so on. For
example, here we have the northeast
right here, southeast right here. So
it's likely that these could have been
solstitial
alignments. I don't specifically know on
this particular earthwork structure
right here. But this is
the relevance to our discussion today.
This is what's very interesting. This
right here, a cometshaped earthwork and
doesn't really exist anymore, but thanks
to Squire and Davis, we've got this. And
this is one of the places where apparent
impact proxies were found. So this is
this is a very interesting piece of
circumstantial evidence right
here. Going on to the next slide
here, we see that the the comet the
Hopewell comet air burst events adds to
our growing body of knowledge of
catastrophic cosmic events which led to
cultural downturns in ancient complex
sedentary and agriculturalbased
societies.
So that's just reiterating what we
discussed earlier. One of the things
here
that this time period of 252 to 383 of
the common era coincides with
historically documented nearearth comets
and occurs immediately prior to the
cultural downturn of the hope well. The
air burst event may have created mass
confusion and resulting resulting in an
upheaval of the social interaction
sphere. I actually I think this this
article is online. The archaeologists
got in such an uproar over this that
that they that the archaeological
establishment put so much pressure on
the journal Nature, which is very
conservative in its
orientation and very much
pro-anthropogenic climate change,
actually redacted the article. And so if
you download it, you're going to get
this version where splashed across
the each page it says
redacted. And again, I think this is
part of a paradigm that we're shifting
out of to become much more open to the
idea of interactions between Earth and
the and the sky, which has not been part
of
archaeological thinking at all.
really since its
inception. But I think the weight of
evidence is going to come down and
essentially
force archaeologists to make some
adjustments in their
thinking. Now this next one, next
example is very
interesting. This is a potentially comet
impact in AD536.
Now this image right
here is showing a series of tree rings.
So you had
u this particular article
was published let's see what was the
year again
2000 it's been it's been a while August
I think
2004 and in the abstract we see here
that there was a global climatic
downturn has previously been observed in
tree ring data associated with the years
AD 536 to 545.
We review the evidence for the
explanation of this event which involves
a comet fragment impacting the Earth and
exploding in the upper atmosphere. The
explosion would create a plume such as
was seen during the impact of comet
Shoemaker Levy 9 with Jupiter. The
resulting debris deposited by the plume
on the top of the atmosphere would
increase the opacity and lower the
temperature. We calculate the size of
the comet required and find that a
relatively small fragment of only about
half a kilometer in diameter could be
consistent with the data. We conclude
that plume formation is a byproduct of
small comet impacts that must be added
to the list of significant global
hazards posed by near earth objects.
So let's go on here. In AD 536, an event
occurred which caused significant
climate change. Dendro chronological or
tree ring evidence in oak trees salvaged
from Irish Pete bogs indicates a
sequence of colder than average summers
at this time. And again, it's referring
to our man Mike Bailey. A similar effect
is seen in phenocandian pine trees. This
would be in Scandinavia. And a study of
European oak tree data as a whole shows
that the event starts in 536 and lasts
until
545. Figure one, which I'll show you in
the next slide, shows the typical
variation in tree ring widths.
North American bristle cone and foxtail
pines, Mongolian tree rings and
Argentinian tree ring data all show the
same effect. So there was something that
happened that was worldwide. The
decrease in rate of growth in these
years corresponds to a global
temperature decrease of up to
approximately 3° centigrade.
In fact, 536 is noted as one of the
coldest two or three years globally in
the last 2,000
years. Figure 2 shows the results for
the Irish oak trees and the US foxtail
pines. Okay, so here we have on the left
we have the dendrochronological data
showing the decreases in rate. So you
can see right here 530 and look what
happens between 536 and 540. You'll see
the tree ring widths here decrease
substantially from their high point down
to this low point right
here. And then this is so this is the
Irish oak trees on the left and on the
right you have US foxtail pine
chronologies. And you can see the same
thing. You can see this precipitous
decline in tree ring width which is
associated with this drop in temperature
global temperature worldwide. Now what's
particularly interesting about this
event 536 to 540 AD is it happens to be
the same dating that's given in the
mythical lit literature about the reign
of King Arthur and the quest for the
Holy Grail. Okay, that's something to
keep in mind
here as we go on.
So in the
next continuing here with the article,
the surprising result of these
calculations is just how small a comet
fragment we have estimated was needed to
cause the observed effects. A comet less
than a kilometer in diameter has not
been previously considered to represent
a global hazard as opposed to a local
hazard, let alone 1 half a kilometer
across. For example, the UK government's
near-Earth object task force classified
impacts from objects in the size range
of 300 to,500 meters to be a large sublo
sub global
hazard and only recommended monitoring
programs of near-earth objects greater
than a kilometer in size. Yet our
estimates show that if plume formation
is a common byproduct of cometary air
bursts, as is believed to be the case,
then a relatively small comet fragment
can have a global impact or effect. A
possible origin for this object could be
the torid meteor stream. This stream is
the result of the fragmentation of a
much larger comet some 20,000 years ago.
The Earth passes through the torid
stream in November and June each year,
resulting in regular meteor showers
normally consisting of microscopic dust
particles. A fragmentation of the stream
is thought to have occurred around 500
and it's referencing Clue and Napier
from 1984. We're going to talk about
their work more in the future. It is
possible that a fragment could then have
collided with earth as it passed through
the beta portion of the stream early in
536 causing the atmospheric dust bail
event. Now, if you recall from our
discussion about the Tangusa event, the
timing of late June, June 30th, when
that event occurred in its earlier
morning rival time from the direction of
the sun are both consistent with the
timing and the direction of from space
from an which the object would appear
are both consistent with it being a
member of the torid meteor stream. So
they don't present any particular
evidence
here specifically tying it this event in
536 AD to the torid media stream but may
it's possible and they are speculating
that it's that it's
possible. So anyways, back to King
Arthur. If you recall,
interestingly, the whole quest for the
Grail was that the land was rendered a
wasteland and the Grail was going the
the
the finding of the Grail was going to
restore not only the the the alien king,
but the alien wasteland around as well.
Now, the evidence suggests that this 536
to
540 545 AD event literally devastated
the landscape of the British Isles over
a long over a broad
period and probably meant there was
cultural collapse, agricultural collapse
and so
on. So, anyways, let's go on with this.
That's something we will come back to.
Again, I've got this list of things that
we're touching upon, but we're going to
come back and we're going to address in
greater detail in upcoming episodes
because this is all of these are
components of a tremendous story
that we're putting together, other
researchers are putting this story
together and realizing that this whole
phenomena of potentially the interaction
between Earth and the
cosmos is embedded into our the legacy
of of our inherited traditions,
including myths and legends, folklore,
and so on, symbolism. And we're going to
be exploring that in depth. And that's
where this really to me gets very
interesting because I think we're going
to have to face the fact that yes, this
has been a a very important component in
the history of our species on this
planet. We're not looking at the
long-term view of humans on the planet
that we now know conservatively is 150
to 200,000 years. We're only looking at
the last 10,000 years here roughly.
Okay? And we're discovering that it's
probably a a
major factor in understanding events
that have transpired here below that
would have had tremendous consequences
for human life ways and societies and so
on.
Okay, so here's the work of Bill
Napier who's done some very important
stuff. This is going back to
1997. Comet catastrophes, cosmic dust
and ecological disasters in historical
times, the astronomical
framework. This is from the proceedings
of the second society for
interdisciplinary studies, Cambridge
conference 1997.
And he's making reference here back to
the Torid system. He says that the
available data from fireball and comet
observations, meteorite impacts, small
lunar craters, and the current
near-Earth environment are assembled to
yield a coherent picture of the
interface between the Earth and its
current interplanetary environment. The
torid complex of meteors, meteoroids,
asteroids, and comet Anki has probably
been a significant and regularly visible
celestial hazard from the last ice age
through to the present day. These data
lead to the expectation that history has
been punctuated by one tongugustaike
impacts singly or as part of fireball
swarms, freezing events of decadal
duration due to cometary dusting of the
stratosphere and three occasional
disastrous inundations of coastal areas
due to small body ocean impacts.
These are three things to really
consider and keep in mind. Tanguska-like
impacts. Now, we saw a 1908 event was a
single object. However, there's evidence
from the strewn fields and I
eyewitnesses from
from other evidence that these things
can occur in clusters or swarms, if you
will.
when we talked in one of our earlier
episodes about showing how comets are
have now a lot of comets have now been
seen to disintegrate. And again, we'll
be covering all of this in these
upcoming episodes to because what we
want to do is make a a very concise and
coherent presentation of this of this
evidence that in my mind demands a
paradigm shift. So part of one of our
goals here is to try to get this
information and this data collected into
a single source so that one can go
through this material, find links for
further research, in-depth investigation
and so on and start bringing this this
knowledge and this information to the
forefront of our thinking about not only
our past but even perhaps more
importantly our future as a
civilization. Okay, after a little
break, welcome back to the second half
of this podcast dealing with the role of
hypervelocity impacts of various kinds
in human history and through the period
called the holene. So, we're going to
continue looking at some of the
evidence, not all of the evidence that's
out there, but we're going to be
consider continuing to look at the
evidence that there have been more
impacts in the last 10 or 11,000 years
than previously recognized by mainstream
science. So, let's just get right back
into it.
So we have more evidence for holosene
impact. So there's a meteorite impact
crater field that's been almost
certainly imp proven in Bavaria. So this
is just a preliminary report on this
particular event. Let's dive in and take
a little deeper look. This appeared in
the journal Meteoritics and Planetary
Science in
2005. As it says, the abstract is
available online. I think maybe the
whole article might still be
available. It's worth a read.
So quoting now from the article,
numerous circular depressions north of
Berghausen in eastern Bavaria with
diameters ranging from meters to tens of
meters in size dispersed over an area of
at least 11 by 7 kilometers are
suspected to have an extraterrestrial
origin since they resemble other small
meteorite impact craters. The
depressions are B-shaped, have high
circularity, and a characteristic rim.
Most of them were formed in
unconsolidated glacial gravels and
pebbles intermixed with fine grain sand
and clay. Now, the fact that they were
in glacial gravels and pebbles, then of
course implies that it's younger than
the end of the last ice age, which
deposited those glacial gravels. An
evident archaeological or local
geological explanation for the origin of
the craters does not exist. A World War
I and two explosive which have been
proposed origin can be excluded since
trees with ages exceeding 100 years can
be found in some of the craters. One
crater was described as early as 1909.
Carbon 14 dating of charcoal found in
one crater yielded an age of 7
1,790 plus or minus 60 years. Hence, a
formation by meteorite impacts that
occurred in Celtic or early medieval
times should be considered. A systematic
archaeological excavation of some
structures and an intensified search for
traces of meteoritic material are
planned. I've not followen up followed
up on that to see what the latest would
be. If any of you listening here are so
inclined, please do that and let me know
what you
find. But let's consider let's go on
here. This appeared in the in the the
magazine The Atlantic popularized
version of some of this by Greg
Easterbrook. And he says that the the
odds that now this is wild stuff here.
The odds that a potentially devastating
space rock will hit Earth this century
maybe as high as 1 in 10. So why isn't
NASA trying harder to prevent
catastrophe? Good
question. Okay. So breakthrough ideas
have a way of seeming obvious in
retrospect. And about a decade ago, a
Columbia University geoysicist named
Dallas Abbott had a breakthrough idea.
She had been pondering the craters left
by comets and asteroids that smashed
into Earth. Geologists had counted them
and concluded space strikes are rare
events and had occurred mainly during
the era of primordial mists. But Abbott
realized this deduction was based on the
number of craters found on land. And
because 70% of Earth's surface is water,
wouldn't most space objects hit the sea?
So she began searching for underwater
crater craters caused by impacts rather
than by other forces such as volcanoes.
What she found is spine chilling
evidence that several enormous asteroids
or comets have slammed into our planet
quite recently. In geologic terms,
Abbott believes that a space object
about 300 meters in diameter, that's
over 1,000 ft. That's many times larger
than Tungusa, hit the Gulf of Carparia,
north of Australia in 536
AD. Now, notice the correlation of
dating events there, right? An object of
that size striking at up to 50,000 mph
could release as much energy as a
thousand nuclear bombs. Now, we know
that the energy release of a thousand
nuclear bombs is going to have global
consequences.
No
doubt we're, you know, the term nuclear
winter came about because scientists in
the 80s were studying the effects of
cosmic impacts and realizing that the
fires, the the initial fires, the
secondary fires, the dust loading of the
atmosphere and so on would cause a
precipitous decline in global
temperature. And that would lead to what
they called the cosmic winter. That in
turn led to the realization that the
detonation of a substantial number of
nuclear weapons would have the same
effect. And that is something we need to
be very concerned with. And there's a
there's an implication to all of this
that I think needs to be emphasized.
Right now, before we do that, I just
want you to notice down here 300 m is
492 ft. And that's about 280 times the
volume of the Tundusa object. Right now,
now here's the thing that we we have to
address as we get into this idea that
cosmic impacts during our own historic
times may be way more common than we'd
previously expected. And we now know
that there have been, and I'm going to
be presenting this in one of the next
episodes, the number of fireball
explosions that have been documented by
the Department of Defense. Now the
concern and it's a it's a very
legitimate concern is that in times of
heightened international tension such as
we're entering right now as we as you
know the the Biden administration is
pushing us into an escalating war
against Russia is that during these
times of heightened tension if there's a
fireball case and and this has actually
happened historically number of fireball
events have actually been mistaken for
nuclear missile launches. Now, this is
something to keep in mind that nobody's
talking about this. I mean, there's no
not no mention of this during the
debates the other night that we saw.
Neither of the Republicans, maybe a few
of the Republicans are are addressing
this. I don't see any Democrats at all
because they're fully on board again
with the anthropogenically caused
climate crisis. We know that they're
pushing for roughly over the next 10
years to spend a trillion dollars or
more on remediation for a completely
contrived climate crisis, which again,
not even part of the debate, but it
needs to be part of the public debate
that we need to have. And we're going to
be having that debate in this podcast.
We're going to be discussing these
things in depth because they need to be
discussed, not ignored, not pushed under
the carpet, not put on the shelf in the
closet and closed the closet door. These
need to be in the forefront of our
policies and our decision making going
forward. I would like to mention that
one of our original sponsors at
Cosmographia, CBD from the Gods, is
following us here to our new podcast,
Squaring the Circle. As many of you
know, I've been using their products for
going on four years now. And having
tried a number of CBD brands, CBD from
the gods seems the most effective for my
needs, which is primarily as a sleep aid
and as a remedy for inflammation and
associated pain. I use both the oil and
the sav. My wife also likes their
products, especially the SAV, which
alleviates the pain in her hands, which
is the result of working for years as an
electrician. If you've been thinking
about trying a CBD product and
experiencing the benefits for yourself,
give CBD from the gods a try. To learn
more and see their product line, check
out
CBDrothegods.com. Any purchase of their
products helps our efforts here at
Squaring the Circle to realize our goal
of making this world a better place.
Thanks. This is now discussing this is
again from 2004 from the lunar and
planetary science number
35. They have conferences every year.
Sand lobes on Steuart Island as probable
impact tsunami deposits. So if you have
an impact obviously into land, it's
going to produce one type, one suite of
potential effects and consequences, it's
going to be very different signature
from one into the ocean. Into the ocean,
you're going to have two primary
effects. One is going to
be the injection of large amounts of
water vapor into the upper levels of the
atmosphere, which then will circulate
around and rain out over a period of
days to weeks, causing torrential
rainfalls wherever the the plume of
water
vapor moves to. And the other effect is
going to be largecale tsunamis. That's
what we're going to look at here. And
it's only going to be a brief
introduction to this this phenomena of
tsunamis. There's whole new literature
and scientific understanding of tsunamis
that's underway right now. Tsunamis are
an underrated hazard. About 500 years
ago, a cosmogenic tsunami produced a
minimum runup, get this, 130
m. 130 m. Let's convert that to feet.
And that works out to be about almost
500
ft in Jervis Bay near Sydney, Australia.
The probable source crater for this
event is Mahuika Crater at 48.3 south
latitude and 166.4 east longitude on the
western edge of New Zealand shelf.
Mahuika impact crater is 20 plus or
minus 2 km in diameter. That's about 12
to 13 miles in diameter. So that's a
pretty substantial crater. Anything
causing a crater that large is going to
have global
effects. And it's less than a thousand
years
old. It has a tectite field that is
found in surface sediments located to
the southeast of the
crater. Tectites are primapacia evidence
of impact origin. We'll when one of
these upcoming EV episodes that I'm keep
referring to, we're going to look at
impact proxies in more detail. The
microsphererals, the aridium deposits,
platinum deposits, platinum group metal
deposits, magnetic grains,
tectites, microactites, and so on. and
the shock warts, the various types of
proxies that we can use to determine
that there was in fact a hypervelocity
impact. Although Jervis Bay is over 1500
km from the Mahuika crater, Steuart
Island is only about 200 km northeast of
that crater. Consequently, the tsunami
runups from the Mahika impact should be
higher on Stewart Island than in Jervis
Bay. We are conducting a field survey in
February 2004 to determine if the
maximum elevations of the sand lobes
represent tsunami runup or windb blown
deposition.
Now, what's interesting here is that
again the you have sort of the
catastrophist wing on one side and you
have the gradualist wing on the other
side who've been arguing that these the
these phenomena that I'm about to show
you some examples of here is caused by
wind and not water. And I think we can
demonstrate pretty conclusively that
they are that they're definitely the
depositional consequences of great
tsunami runups. So in preparation for
our field program, we have obtained
orthographic aerial photo coverage of
the field area. The aerial photos show
many sand lobes that run roughly west to
east but meander along the strike. Now
this was in 2004. We now have Google
Earth with updated imagery. So, I'm not
using the orthographic aerial photos.
I'm using Google Earth because they're
much more much more impressive.
So, Edward Bryant, he's one of the key
researchers
in the effects of great
tsunamis. This is from the journal of
the Siberian Federal University,
Engineering and Technologies.
Interestingly, some of this stuff has to
be published in the foreign press
because of the conservative nature of
the western and American press which is
still dominated by the gradualists and
those who are you know dedicated
to avoiding the implications of
catastrophe in earth and human history.
But we have here this this paper was
entitled tsunami chronology supporting
late holysine
impacts. Let's take a look. So the
holene impact working group has
identified the location of at least
eight impacts into the world's oceans in
the late holene. Each of these was
capable of generating a large tsunami
that should have left a geological
footprint on adjacent adjacent
shorelines. We have identified from
shoreline tsunami deposits five known
impact events. Two of which are
associated with impact craters
identified by the holysine in impact
working group. The other three are
associated with legends and historical
descriptions.
This paper presents the chronology of
tsunami events in New South Wales and
Western Australia on opposite coasts of
Australia and in the UK that are linked
to impact
events. So, we'll take a brief look at
this. Here's New Zealand. Here's what is
referred to as the Mahika Crater. Here's
Steuart Island. You can see it's right
off of the south coast of the southern
island of New Zealand.
Okay. And in the next episode, I'll show
you an example of the kinds of
things like this would be a microactite.
It was found in a dredge that was formed
from the ocean bottom near between
Stewart Island and the Mahika crater.
There's many examples of the finding of
similar
things. So, this is what we call a
microtectite. Let's take another look
here. So, here's Steuart Island off the
southern tip of New
Zealand. And here we have a closerup
view. And you can see here each of these
numbered 1 through six represent tsunami
runup deposits. Right. So, we're going
to take a closer look at some of
those. Let's just scroll on here and see
what we got. Okay. Here's Sand Lobes on
Steuart Island. Now, this is where you
can see the tsunami runup has washed up
and deposited sand. So, the water runs
up, deposits it sand, and then flows
back into the ocean. So, you can see
down here, this is 100
m scale down here. So, this is about
1,000 ft inland, but this isn't even the
most impressive. Let's go to the next
one. Here you see sand lobe deposit
number four. This is number three. So if
you go right up here, you can see this
smaller one right here. Number three is
this one. And then number four and five,
you see down here. So here's number
four, sand lobe deposit. And you can see
here the scale bar down here is about
200 m. So this is probably close to a
mile inland. And you can see that the
water has run up right over this ridge.
The tsunami has run up right over this
ridge and down the other side. And then
when it drained off, it left all of this
material here in its
wake. Okay, so here you see four and
then you see five. So here is a closer
up view of
five. And again, look at the bar down
here is about 1,000 ft. So this is close
to 2 miles inland. So this would have
been a very large tsunami wave making
landfall
here. So here you can see four and five
from kind of a a more distal
view. And this is interesting
because some of you have been watching
my my presentations and stuff are going
to know what imated boulders are. These
are boulders that have been stacked up
by water. Now this is on the little west
island. It's about 25 ft above sea
level, Gulf of Carperia. So this would
have been a tsunami in the a
Australia. And you can see here that
that basically ripped up these boulders
and dumped them on the shoreline and
left them stacked up in
this imation it's called where they're
stacked like this. Here's another view
of the same thing. You can see again
here at the base of this cliff. These
boulders did not come from this cliff.
These boulders were ripped up from the
bedrock some distance off the coastline
and washed ashore by a giant wave, a
tsunami wave that then dumped them
here. And then here's a on the island of
Tongas. Here's a giant tsunami deposited
boulder. I don't know the origin of this
one, but we are going to be looking in
in our comprehensive overview of
catastrophism. We will most definitely
be including in-depth investigations of
all this new incredible research that's
coming out about tsunamis and the scale
of some tsunamis in the past. I mean,
this is a huge huge boulder right here.
And you have to just try to imagine the
power of the wave that could bring this
thing ashore and deposit it. Okay. Now
the the argument is that that a tsunami
wave of this magnitude is beyond that
that one would be expected to result as
a consequence of an earthquake or a
seismic event. Right? This is something
that's perhaps in a in a separate
category of tsunami which then leads one
to like what uh Bryant said in this
earlier slide that I just showed is that
it's likely that waves of this magnitude
are produced by impacts of you know
asteroids or comets into the ocean.
So here's some of the work of Dallas
Abbott using depth sea core samples to
verify the sources of holysine age mega
tsunami
deposits. Although conventional
astronomy suggests that large greater
than one in one kilometer impactors hit
the earth once every 3,000 300,000
years. We have assembled evidence for at
least three large oceanic impacts during
the last 11,000 years. The 1.5 km deluge
comet produced the 29 km Burkel crater
which is astronomically estimated to be
4,800 years old. Now this has actually
been redated since this to be several
thousand years older. We'll be coming
back to this in these upcoming
episodes. This and particularly when we
talk about the traditions of myths,
legends and stories and so on. We're
going to look at some of these stories
of great floods, particularly even the
biblical flood, which you know, a
circumstantial case can be made that it
might have been the result of a major
impact into the Indian
Ocean. And this is where the Burkel
crater is found. The impact may be
responsible for ancient legends about
torrential rainfall, hurricane force
winds, and coastal mega tsunamis. The
deluge was followed by a period of dim
sunlight and colder climate. Around 1440
plus or minus 15 years
a approximately 1 km cometary impactor
produced the 20 km Mahuika crater off
the coast of New Zealand. This impact
may have produced 130 meter runups in
Jervis Bay, Australia and may have
caused the Mayori to move inland. We
have also found a pair of craters in the
Gulf of Carparia that are 18 and 12 km
in diameter. This impact may have
produced 130 meter run-ups in Jervis
Bay, Australia, and may have caused the
Mayori to move inland. And also, the
Mayori have some very interesting
traditions about floods themselves. We
have also found a pair of craters in the
Gulf of Carparia that are 18 and 12 km.
18 kilometers that's going to
be close to close to 10 miles. 12 km
that's going to be close to 7 or 8 miles
in diameter and appear to date again 536
plus or - 200 years AD. If so, their
source bolide was over 600 m in
diameter. In addition, we have candidate
impacts events. Impact events in the
Mediterranean Sea, the North Atlantic,
the North Sea, off the coast of Vietnam,
off the China Korean border, on the
Kgulian plateau in the Caribbean, and
off the coast of Denmark. Now, the one
off the coast of Denmark could be very
much associated with the 536 AD as well
as the Gulf of Carparia one. If that's
the case, we now
got very closely clustered impacts both
in the northern and
hemisphere that could have led to some
of the legends about the wasteland and
so on that we're going to be talking
about. There's a distinct possibility
that the equatorial that is between 30°
north and 30° south candidate impact
events may be related to the climate
downturns that are recorded in tree ring
rec records. The formation of the
Vietnam crater may have produced a rain
of dust that is described in the Chinese
historical record and is inferred to be
related to a major climate downturn.
There was a major historical dust event
veil event that lasted for 18 months
during the 536 and 537 AD that may be
related to the 536 to 541 AD period of
colder climate. Neither of these dust
veil events is associated with a
volcanic eruption. Now, this is
important because this might be the
alternative explanation. But if there's
no evidence of volcanoes erupting,
then then what are we left with? We're
probably left with with impacts. Using
deep sea core samples to verify a crater
candidate for the climate downturn
lasting from 536 to 545 AD, we have
collected data from the JISP 2 core.
This is the Greenland ice sheet project
2 core ice core confirming that the
layers dated from 536 AD to 542 AD
contain high abundances of impact ejecta
within the samples we have examined so
far. There are two apparent peaks in the
abundance of impact ejecta. The most
recent around 541 plus or minus 2 AD.
This layer contains a radioaran fragment
impact glass and silicut impact
sphirerals. This suite could be produced
by a marine impact event. Because all
dust falls out of the atmosphere after 4
years, our data require at least two
impact events. And again, this could be
the one off the coast of Denmark and the
one off the Gulf of
Carparia. Mike Bailey believes that a
large impact occurred near Ireland
around 540 AD. The impact produced
atmospheric effects ses and lakes and
narrowest rings in trees in northern
Europe. Bondic and others at Al found
evidence of a tsunami generating event
in the North Sea around 1500 years ago.
And we have found a crater candidate
Grenle that fits the possible source
area of their North Sea tsunami.
And here we're going to look at a
baometric map showing where Grenle the
location of Grenle just off the coast of
Norway. A is a baometric map showing the
Grenle Crater candidate. You can see
right here in the blue
circle. B is the direction to the source
of the tsunami. Look at this arrow right
here. Right? So this is showing the
direction from which a tsunami came.
A, B, and C. Notice here B up
here and both of those here. And where
is C on here? Okay. So, yeah. So, here's
A, B, and C. So, look at the direction
now. So, this is showing the direction
from which the tsunami came that has now
been documented on the shores of the UK
and up here. and then off the coast of
Denmark. So, I don't know what's found
on Norway, but you know, a lot of this
is initial work that hasn't been
followed up on simply because the the
funding is not available for this kind
of work. This is one of the one of the
points that Graeme Hancock and the
members of the cosmic uh the comet
research group have made over and over
again is that mostly this is funding
that's having to come out of pocket from
these researchers because the hundreds
of billions of dollars are not going to
this kind of research. It's going to
make the case that humans are the cause
of all climate change. And this is one
of the things that I've harped on over
and over again for years now and is
something that under a Harris presidency
is going to continue on. She's already
talked about the the enormous amount of
money she plans to spend on remediating
a climate crisis that doesn't exist. And
you can take issue with that, but we
will definitely be addressing this whole
issue in upcoming episodes. So stay
tuned for that.
Let's wrap up here. We'll look at a
couple more slides, then we're going to
wrap up this
episode. This is evidence from that
Burkel crater
that was dating to about 4,800 years ago
that I said looks like it's actually a
little older. And there are three great
runups that have been now discovered
here and documented.
Fam, phenamosi chevron, ampalaza
chevron, and the faux cap chevron. Now,
a chevron, you know, is sort of a
V-shaped. Canadian geese fly in chevron
formations. Sergeant stripes are
chevrons. And chevrons seem to be when
you have a a an overwash of a tsunami
depositing material by
the inland flow and then the outland se
back seawward flow. It shapes what would
normally be simply current ripples,
giant current ripples into these chevron
formations. And you're going to see here
in a second what they look like. So this
shows the the location of the Burkel
impact crater. Australian chevrons are
on this side and Madagascar chevrons
over here. And we're going to be looking
we're again we're going to be devoting
at least one maybe two episodes to
unpacking this whole phenomena of
gigantic tsunamis in the past. And uh
when we do that we're going to be
looking at the evidence for possible
impact produced tsunamis. Anyways,
here's the location of the Burkel
Crater. We're going to just for this to
conclude this episode, we're going to
look at the the evidence for tsunami
runups here right on the south coast of
Madagascar. So, let's go to the next
slide. And here you can see a giant
gigant giant tsunami deposits on the
southwest coast of Madagascar. This is
the Ampalaza group. If I go back here,
you'll see the Ampalaza chevron is right
here. In the middle you have the phenam
fan phenamoszi chevron and down here you
have the faux cap chevron. So this is
looking at a closer up of
the amplaza and you can see right here
the
runup the great wave came up here and
then flowed back down. You can see the
enormous amount of sand from
the overwash of the wave here.
There's more up here, but we're going to
zoom in here and take a closer
look. So, here you
see the quote. Scientists in the working
group say the evidence for such impacts
during the last 10,000 years known as
the holysine epoch is strong enough to
overturn current estimates of how often
the earth suffers a violent impact on
the order of a 10 megat ton explosion
instead of once in 500,000 to 1 million
years as astronomers now calculate
catastrophic impacts could happen every
few thousand years. Now, since this was
written, the evidence has continued to
accumulate that the this is a more
realistic time scale every few thousand
years. Now, take a look at this giant
wave deposit here. You can see the
chevrons. You can see the water washed
in. Then, right up here where it
reversed, it it deposited the finer
grain sandy sediment and then it flowed
back out. And this this backflow
seawward is what shaped what would have
been current ripples into these chevron
shapes. So first you had the water
coming in, then you had the water
flowing out. Okay, let's look at the
next
one. So this is the fan phantomi group
of chevrons. And what's interesting
here, and this is really driving home
the magnitude of these waves. You can
see all along here the waves washing up.
You can see the chevrons all the way up
into this area. There was a the huge
major wave that made landfall came all
the way up here. There's an escarment
all along here. And we can see that
there are wave deposits not only on the
coastal lower land here, but on the
upper area above the escarment, which we
see very clearly delineated along here.
It's much clearer down here than it is
right here because the escarment, when
that wave hit the escarment, it pretty
much obscured it with both erosion and
deposition of of the material that was
being washed ashore in the
wave. Okay, let's go to the next one.
And here you can see clearly from above
that the major wave came made landfall
here. This is the escarment. Now, this
red box right here is
going to show you there's a a photograph
taken by Dallas Abbott that's coming up
here which is looking at the escarment
and you can get a sense of how huge this
wave had to have
been. Let's go to this one here. You can
see again here's the
escarment or the fault scarp. There's a
fault line right along here and you can
see the wave washed up here on top. And
you'll notice that the deposition is
different. Why? because well most of the
material was deposited on the lower the
lower lands on the coastal side of the
escarment and finer material deposited
on the top end. Now going back again at
this red box the the photograph I'm
about to show you is looking north here
at this section right here at the
escarment and here you can see it. So
here's this looking northwest showing
the fault scarp separating the elevated
plateau region portion of the phenamosi
chevron from the lower
part the lower coastal plane. The near
cliff encompasses chevron deposits that
are continuous on the coastal plane and
discontinuous along 9 km of the uplifted
wall of the fault scarp. The far cliff,
this one here, has ubiquitous chevron
deposits extending from the coastal
plane down here to the top of the
elevated plateau. So the height here,
again, this is that um huge runup wave
of of 130 m minimum, and we
calculated 130
m
was over was up to like 450 ft. So you
got to picture the the magnitude of this
wave that made landfall that was able to
over top the fault scarp here. This was
an enormous wave and anything that would
have been along this coastal region here
in the vicinity of this wave making
landfall would be completely erased 100%
from existence. We've already looked at
this. The ancient I think well no this
was actually an article that appeared in
the New York Times and this is where
we're going to end it for this episode.
At the southern end of Madagascar life
lie four enormous wedge-shaped sediment
deposits called chevrons that are
composed of material from the ocean
floor. Each covers twice the area of
Manhattan with sediment as deep as the
Chrysler building is high. On close
inspection, the chevron deposits contain
deep ocean microossils that are fused
with a medley of metals typically formed
by cosmic impacts. And all of them point
in the same direction toward the middle
of the Indian Ocean, where a newly
discovered crater 18 mi in diameter lies
12,500 ft below the surface. The
explanation is obvious to some
scientists. A large asteroid or comet,
the kind that could kill a quarter of
the world's
population. Get that? A quarter of the
world's population, smashed into the
Indian Ocean 4,800 years ago, producing
a tsunami at least 600 ft high, about 13
times as big as the one that inundated
Indonesia nearly 2 years ago, which was
would have been
2004. The wave carried the huge deposits
of sediment to land. Most astronomers
doubt that any large comets or asteroids
have crashed into the Earth in the last
10,000 years. But the self-described
band of misfits that make up the
2-year-old Hollisine impact working
group say the astronomers simply have
not known how or where to look for
evidence of such impacts along the
world's shorelines and in the deep
oceans. Scientists in the working group
say the evidence for such impacts during
the last 10,000 years, known as the
Hollisine epoch, is strong enough to
overturn current estimates of how often
the Earth suffers a violent impact on
the order of a 10 megaton
explosion. Instead of once in 500,000 to
1 million years, as astronomers now
calculate, catastrophic impacts could
happen every few thousand years. To
reiterate that point, the last slide I
think we'll look at here is a giant
tsunami deposited erratic on India near
Mahabala Purum about 30 mi south of
Shennai on the eastern side of the Dean
Peninsula. This could be
also a deposit and evidence of the the
Burkel Crater
tsunami. We'll leave it off for there.
In the next episode, we're going to
continue with our looking
at myth
mythology
and looking at mythology and legends and
folklore and so on. This one that I just
pulled up here is interesting because
this Tongusca-sized air burst that
destroyed Tal Ham, the middle bronze age
city, has all the earmarks of being the
source of the legend of Sodom and
Gomorrah. So, we will pick up this in
the next episode where we start dealing
with the lore that we've inherited from
our ancestors in the past because it it
has been commented in fact some of the
the critics I've gotten when I've been
presenting this particularly a few years
ago 5 10 years or longer ago. Well, if
there was all of this evidence that that
uh impacts, hypervelocity impacts had
affected earlier cultures and earlier
civilizations, well, then we would have
a much more extensive record of it.
Well, my response now to to that those
critics back then and now is simply
this. We do have the record. We do have
the record. You're just not
interpretating it properly. What you
have to understand is that that the that
the myths, the legends, the folklore,
the symbols that have been used within
these stories, that's the record. That's
the record right there. And it's very
extensive. And to me is one of the most
interesting parts of the study of this
whole phenomena. And if you've been
following these episodes up to this
point, I am hoping that you've got a
good solid foundation now. And if you
don't, please go back and rewatch some
of the the earlier episodes where we
talk about Tangusa, where we talk about
near misses, where we talk about some of
these things, then when we look at the
legacy of the ancient traditions, you
might see it with new eyes. And once you
realize that the whole language in which
these experiences have been encoded is
the language of symbolism. It's the
language of
myth, then I think you'll begin to
appreciate that. Yeah, here's a whole
another component of of evidence that
supports this idea that the cosmos have
played a much larger role in our own
history than have been previously
recognized by historians, prehistorians,
archaeologists, and so on. We already
recognize and admit that it's played a
much bigger role in Earth history than
had been imagined a generation, two
generations ago.
In fact, it may play the fundamental
role in Earth history when we talk about
mass extinctions and ice ages and
climate changes
and massive episodes of volcanism and so
on, right? All of these things are now
being tied into the as consequences of
hypervelocity impact. What we're just in
the very beginning this stages is
recognizing this as a factor in our own
human story on this planet. I think that
needs to be rectified and that's going
to be one of the goals that has
motivated us up to this point and will
continue to motivate us. And we are
going to also be considering some of the
policy and political ramifications of
this new knowledge because it certainly
is not part of the zeitgeist or or the
mental thinking of most of the people in
the political realm. We're also going to
be looking at, and this is a little
further down the line, but the whole
phenomena
of unidentified aerial phenomena or also
unidentified anomalous phenomena as it's
called. And is there a possible
connection or correlation? Because, you
know, again, we're talking about
activity and things that are happening
in the celestial realm in the in the sky
and people's relation to that. Is there
a possible correlation, let's say,
between the kind of phenomena that has
been occurring and has been pretty
solidly documented now up to this point.
Lou Alzando's new book has just been
published that dives into some of this
phenomena. I would submit that there may
be a connection and we can explore that
and will be exploring that in these
upcoming episodes that I keep talking
about. So anyways, I think we'll stop
there for now and we're going to pick
this up again. Let's pick up this thread
diving into the ancient traditions
and mythology and so on. And maybe by
unpacking that, we're going to discover
that there's a whole dimension of
meaning and significance to this legacy
of our inherited wisdom and knowledge of
the past that has been completely
overlooked up to this point. So, I hope
you come back and
and continue on watching this. If you
are so moved, please subscribe. We put
out a newsletter every month that I put
a synopsis of cutting edge scientific
discoveries that might be of interest to
people who watch the Cosmographia
podcast or this podcast. And uh every
month it comes out, we'll soon be
archiving a couple of years worth of
these that will become
available on our new website that's
being built as we speak. So please stay
tuned, come back, check in in the near
future, and we'll have more of this
exciting information to present to you.
Thank you. See you next time.