[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
My aim now is to make sense. of both
philosophy of physics by
using K's K's philosophy
as as a way of understanding it.
So in order to do that I will start by
uh analyzing the way B was apparently
conservative towards classical physics
namely that he was keen on keeping some
classical concepts even in quantum
physics. Uh the the second step will be
to list more systematically the main
features of K's philosophy of science in
general and even of knowledge and put it
in a one one correspondence with some
features of both philosophy of quantum
physics and then the first step will be
to show that even though complimentarity
is a very new concept and it's very
uncontian in its spirit. It can be seen
as a stretching of some elements of of
Kant's philosophy of knowledge. And
finally, I will broaden again the whole
perspective and try to compare two types
of theories of knowledge. A theory of
knowledge which is called
transcendental. I will explain this to
you because I know you are not
philosophers here. and on the other hand
another type of theory of knowledge
which is naturalized and show that B's
theory of knowledge was definitely
transcendental as opposed to
naturalized and uh of course I've put a
very strange little um uh picture
of you know a mobious ribbon because the
road map I've drawn here is a little bit
circular it comes back to itself
self. Now what about the relations
between bore and philosophy? You have
heard this morning professor Halbrun uh
speaking of that speaking of his
training in philosophy. But in order to
get to the topic I will first come back
to the way bore is usually read and
received. People usually think that um
in fact the so-called orthodox or
copenagon interpretation is an
interpretation that was directly
borrowed from bore but things are not so
simple in fact and usually people are a
little bit careful about not borrowing
too much to bo and rather borrow things
elements of thought to uh Heisenberg to
pi to drag to vonoman and so on and so
on and they get a little bit of bor not
too much. Why? Because usually they they
they say and for instance Henry Kofermy
has said in a famous book that uh B was
too philosophical for them. They need
usually something more you know
practical. They need some orientations.
They need a guide to research. and bore
uh gives them rather elements of doubt
of about their own uh ways of
researching. So it it was a little bit
difficult for them to integrate a lot of
B's ideas into their own way of thinking
physics.
Now the second point the second reason
why they didn't like too much to
integrate a lot of bore in their
thinking about quantum physics was that
um in fact nobody really knows what is
B's philosophy nobody knows how to
characterize it in the usual
classification of philosophies sometimes
people say that he was a pragmatist
sometimes that he was an operationalist
sometimes a positivist
sometimes an idolist and so on and so
on. And he he was not really anyone of
these things and probably he was
something else. And I think that the
something else he was he was was
probably much closer to K. And yet
things are not so obvious here again
because when Bo was trained when he was
at the university he had indeed
some lectures in philosophy. He followed
some lectures of philosophy and as
professor Hellbrun has said he followed
the lectures of of
Haralding and but when you see what what
lectures he was following he followed
lectures about Kirkagard and about
formal and and general logic and whereas
Hudding was also giving lectures about
more general items on philosophy of
knowledge. He was giving lectures on
postcantianism and so on and so on. But
B didn't seem to have followed these at
at least according to
Yanfi the who wrote a book about the
connections between the philosopher the
Danish philosopher Haralding and Neils
B. Okay. This another point that makes
difficult to understand why I'm
comparing both philosophy of physics and
K's theory of knowledge is that usually
people think that modern
physics meant the end of K's philosophy
of knowledge. It was a terrible
challenge at least to the to K's
philosophy of knowledge. uh and for
instance you have a remark by Albert
Einstein in 1924 that he said that in in
view of general
relativity one cannot stick any longer
to consist of appar concepts and
norms the same for Heisenberg he said
that in view of quantum mechanics the
apparative concepts which can considered
as undisputable truth are no longer
contained in the scientific ific system
of modern physics. So it's very clear
that every single item of K's philosophy
of knowledge seems to have been
challenged by modern physics. the
so-called appriary forms of sensibility
which are space and time as shaped by u
by um you know
geometry were challenged by general
relativity which used
remman's
geometry and the so-called apparic
concepts uh or categories that were used
and posited by namely the category
category of substance, the category of
causality and the category of
reciprocity were challenged by quantum
mechanics. For instance, uh Heisenberg
challenged the category of
causality. Shreddinger challenged the
category of substance as a little chunk
of matter that is permanent in space and
time. So everything was challenged
apparently by modern physics. What is
left finally of K's philosophy after the
onrise of modern physics? Okay. So we
have here a little a strong doubt and
yet in the 30s you find two important
philosophers Ernst Caser and Grete
Herman who were both Neocantian thinkers
who said that modern physics were was
the most extraordinary vindication of
K's philosophy. So clearly there was a
tension here. You have physicists who
say this is not the case and you have
philosophers who are happy to say oh yes
finally you vindicated can philosophy.
So now let's try to to to understand
this.
Okay, in order to understand this, I
want to probe into one point of B's
philosophy of physics, which is his
apparently, I say apparently
conservative attitude towards classical
physics, his need to keep on with uh
classical concepts.
uh you know that in 1913 in the famous
articles about the the B's atom model
uh Bo posited several assumptions that
were not very um very coherent with one
another and afterwards a few years later
few very few years later Bore said that
these were horrid assumptions
Okay. So what kind of assumptions did he
make? He made assumptions such that um
you know some some parts of his model of
atom was ruled by classical physics.
some parts we were um um ruled by the
so-called quantum rules that were
borrowed and adapted from plank and
Einstein and um you know and there were
also strange connections because on the
one hand he was positing the idea of a
continuous trajectory of the electron
around the nucleus and the on the other
hand he was positing the sudden and
undescribable able transition of the
electron from one an or one one orbit to
another. So um okay were these
assumptions incoherent? No, I don't
think so. And usually people didn't
think so because in some way there were
precise rules to use at a certain point
classical mechanics and at other points
the quantum rules and even at some
points when they were absolutely needed
the the rules of classical
electronamics by way of the famous
correspondence
principle. So it was not the problem of
incoherence but the problem of a lack of
unity. The the problem that you know the
model of the
atom which was formulated by bore was
like a patchwork. It was bits and
pieces. So it was so uh patchy that
people thought that it could only be a
provisional state of physics and at that
at a certain later stage uh this
patchwork will be entirely replaced by a
purely quantum uh
theory. Yet the strange thing is that
Bore didn't do that immediately at least
because uh you know from 1913 to 1925 he
progressively adapted his initial
compromise trying to find the right
place for the intervening of the new
quantum concepts and the old classical
concepts. So classical physics was still
there. For instance, he formulated the
famous famous correspondence principle
that allowed him to find the uh
amplitude of the lines the spectral
lines whereas there were there was
nothing in his own model to to find the
amplitude of the spectral line. On the
other hand, he was um trying to
understand the kind of relations that
were was still in uh in in progress
between classical physics and quantum
physics. On the one hand, there was some
kind of continuity because you needed at
least to posit that at the limits of
large quantum numbers uh the the quantum
laws of radiation were tending towards
the classical laws of radiation. So
there was a connection by continuity in
that case. But on the other hand there
was a huge gap because uh even though
the results were converging at the
limits of large quantum numbers um the
concepts were quite dissimilar. There
was only a quantitative convergence but
no conceptual convergence between the
two uh lines of thinking.
So B tried many kinds of compromises in
order to see where was the true line of
division between classical and the new
quantum concepts. And he he formulated
what is now known as a bad compromise
which is the theory of quantum radiation
of B Kmerson Slater in 1924. According
to
this theory of radiation, the electron
was still thought of as
going around the nucleus on an orbit,
just as in the initial B
model. But the radiation was no longer
represented by a real field, but by a
virtual field, which interacted with the
electrons only on a stochastic way. And
therefore there was when you had this
virtual field on an electron you had
only a certain probability of transition
at the emission and a certain
probability of transition at the
reception of the virtual field. So there
was in that case no conservation of
energy and momentum and there was uh
only at least at the individual uh level
but these uh principles of conservation
were only uh valid at the statistical
level. But it was soon seemed that even
this type of compromise between um you
know the validity of classical
principles of conservation at a
statistical level and nonvalidity at the
individual level um was not um giving
the right results. So this was also
abandoned. Finally, you know, in about
1924,
uh, several scientists tried to
completely replace the picture of an
electron going through an orbit around
the nucleus by purely quantum rules. And
they called that quantum mechanics
because they were replacing the old
classical mechanics by quantum by a
quantum theoretical scheme.
So there was the famous paper by Max
Bourne who used for the first time the
name quantum mechanic in
in German quantum mechanics and there
was the celebrated paper of Heisenberg
in 1925 who formulated matrix
mechanics.
Um so the idea of Heisenberg that is
that you could still apply the
Hamilton's equations and but only on on
matrices which matrices which were
non-comitative types of symbols as
opposed to the ordinary commutative
numbers.
But even though uh at that stage you
know you had complete replacement of
even the mechanical uh laws by new laws
of quantum physics. Um Heisenberg and
Boore estimated that this type of theory
was still an application of the old
correspondence principle between
classical physics and quantum physics.
Here is what B said. The laws of
Heisenberg are a precise formulation of
the tendencies embodied in the
correspondence principle. And
Heisenberg did said exactly the same. My
theory, he said, is a quantitative
formulation of the correspondence
principle. That means that classical
physics was still there. At least it was
still there as you see in the form of uh
the Hamilton's equation.
Can I just interrupt that? Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. I really think that's a
misunderstanding because I think that
that what they meant there is that it
had become the formulation of the
corresponding principle had grown into
this formulation of amplitudes for going
from one state to the other and this was
a natural development of that. It was
not to say that it was a correspondence
principle in the sense of going to the
classical. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's true.
But you know the the you know the the
classical physics was still there at any
rate. It was still there in the form of
equation and you will see you you know
quite well actually that classical
physics was never abandoned in that in
get that
case. Okay. So uh why were there were
there why there was such a persistence
of maybe forms of classical physics and
classical concepts. You know you have to
explain that the first possibility is
that objects are intrinsically mixed.
They have classical features in them and
they have quantum features in them. But
B's style was not to say that he said uh
that that in fact the true reason was
not ontological. It had nothing to do
with the nature of things. It has to do
something with the power of
knowledge. Uh classicity according to
him was not something that was to be
found in micro object. It was a
condition of possibility for knowing
them. And uh here is a quote from Nils
Bo. uh it continues to be the
application of these concepts where he
meant the classical concepts
uh alone that makes it possible to
relate the symbolism of the quantum
theory to the data of experience. So
classical concepts were still needed in
order to make this connection between
the symbolism of quantum physics and the
data of experience which were found in
the laboratory with microscopic tools
and so on and so on.
So but in we have to understand in that
case that it's not true that um that um
bore felt or believed that class that
apparatuses in the laboratory were
intrinsically
uh classical and that he believed in
their reality
uh in on the model of classical physics.
He didn't draw a an ontological divide
between the quantum and the classical
domain, but rather only an
epistemological divide between the
objects of the quantum theory and and
the logical linguistic tools that are
used at the laboratory in order to
formulate the value of a a measurement,
the result of a measurement.
So the divide was not an ontological
divide but it was rather an
epistemological divide. So um this is
something that was well understood of
course by Lando and Lifets who are
probably the physicist who who the
modern physicist who gave the most boran
type of interpretation of quantum
physics. According to Lando Sheets,
quantum mechanics holds a special
position among among physical theories.
It contains classical mechanics as a
limiting case that we have seen and it
needs it as a foundation because we have
to presuppose that class that
instruments can be described in the
classical way. Now the only thing that
is needed in that case is to show that
there is a self-consistency of this loop
between the um you know the use of
classical concepts as a limiting case
and the use of the classical concepts
as a presupposition and this proof of
self-consistence I think has been given
under the form of the coherence. The
coance is can be read this
way. Now let me come to uh describing
some features of K's theory of knowledge
and compare that to both Kantlike
epistemology. Uh the I think the main
point that has to be understood in
Kant's philosophy of knowledge is what
he called the copernican
revolution. Okay. Now what what is the
revolution of
copernicus? Because if you want to
understand
uh the canan cicus revolution we first
have to understand what copernicus
himself did. Now if we analyze the
revolution of copernicus I think that
there are two meanings of this
revolution. The first meaning of this
revolution is that Copernicus disentered
man from his or her initially central
position in the universe. You know
initially uh there was an
anthropocentric model of the universe in
which the earth was central and all the
other planets were going
around. But there is a second meaning of
copernic revolution. It is that we
cannot say for instance that trae an
apparent trajectory of a planet on the
star uh heavens or on the celestial
vault
rather you know has to be explained by
the intrinsic properties and the
intrinsic trajectories of this planet.
In fact, this apparent trajectory of the
planet on the celestial vault has to be
explained by the relation between us on
our planet earth and the um the planet
that we are observing. Therefore the
second type of meaning of of copernican
revolution is relativity of attributes
with respect to the knower who is a
certain human being on the earth and
it's exactly the second acceptation of
the copernican revolution that was
retained by Kant in his philosophy of
knowledge and here is the celebrated
formulation of Kant's copernican
revolution namely going back to human
being as the the source of a certain
relation between this human being and
what is to be known. So Kant said this
or wrote rather in his famous preface to
the second edition of the critique of
the pure reason he said thus far it has
been assumed that all our cognition must
conform to objects. Let us try to find
out by experiment whether we shall not
make better progress if we assume that
objects must conform to our
cognition. So revert everything not try
to to to conform cognition to objects
but show what objects owe to the form of
cognition.
Now that means that the form of objects
is predetermined by a set of
preconditions of cognitive
preconditions. But this doesn't mean of
course uh that that cognition creates
objects. This would be completely wrong.
This just means that that object is not
something completely beyond experience
but it's just a mode of ordering
experience in such a way that a certain
bunch of experience becomes common to
all of us at every moment and at every
place. so that we can build an
intersubjectively valid knowledge that
that can be uh used by everybody in
every lab in every place. So this this
is K's idea objectivity not as just you
know copy of something out there but
objectivity as an effort to reach
intersubjective agreement.
Now uh Bore did something very similar
actually because of course first of all
we have to remember that the
epistemological rather than ontological
status of classical concepts according
to him. Secondly we have to understand
his uh you know his position during the
scientific revolution he was um he was
promoting namely the creation of quantum
theory. In any scientific revolution in
and is and especially especially in this
quantum revolution all ontologies are
questioned. The old ontologies of little
bodies of fields of waves of ether of
everything are questioned. There is a
sort of tabularazza. Everything is
thought again. people think uh should I
maintain this idea of a little body
going around a nucleus or or should I
just skip this concept and so on and so
on and therefore the only firm ground
which is found is experience. It is
results of experiments in the lab and
even closer to us uh you know lived
experience. This is the only thing that
cannot be doubted in some
way and this is exactly in fact what
bore implicitly understood and he
explained that the aim the task of
science is both to extend the range of
our experience and to reduce it to
order. He didn't say that we have to
probe into the intimate nature
of objects and so on. He insisted that
we have to order
experience. So here again exactly as in
Kant go back to experience and try to
understand the conditions of possibility
of the experience.
He gave uh also a reflective analysis of
cognition which has to some similarities
to to count when he said for instance
that the boundary of our concepts is
exactly congruent with the boundaries of
our possibilities of obser obser of
observation. Why? Because you know uh
usually um you know some some
scientists not very many but in in in
classical time some scientists believed
that their concepts could go much beyond
observation and that they could
reconstruct things as they are in
themselves independently on the fact
that we observe them or not. But this
was not the case of K uh and not the
case of B's philosophy
either. Also uh Bore insisted that all
knowledge presents itself within a
certain conceptual framework which is
quite similar to the idea of Kant
according to which all knowledge is
preconditioned by certain forms of
thought and according to Bore here again
we in spite of their limitation we can
by no means dispense with those forms of
perception which color our whole
language and in terms of which All
experience must ultimately be
experienced. Here again as in Kant you
have a certain framework of thought and
this framework of thought is absolutely
needed to go further and build a certain
region of
knowledge. Okay. But there is a
difference with uh with Kant. So the
spirit is quite similar this sort of
copernican revolution. this attention to
cognition, this attention to experience,
this attention to the conceptual
framework of knowledge. Yet there is an
an important difference. The difference
is that according to uh Kant concepts
must apply to special temporal data as
they are formatted so to speak by
perception. But according to Bo this is
no longer possible because um concepts
should in in the new situation of
quantum physics concept no longer apply
to special temporal picture. This is the
famous criticism of pictures that that
is so celebrated in in both
philosophy. Um so in order to predict
phenomena according to Bo we should not
use special temporal representations but
we should use what he called a purely
symbolic scheme that was the the scheme
of prediction of quantum physics
permitting predictions as to results
obtainable under conditions specified by
means of classical concepts and you have
a symbolic scheme and say for instance
the Hilbert space formally ISM and well
just just to give an example and you
give predictions about data that are
obtained in a certain laboratory and
that are expressible by means of
classical
concepts. Now is this a serious
divergence between bore and
count? Is it for instance, you know, the
idea the very idea that you can
modify, you know, as as Bore said, uh
that you you must always pre be prepared
to expect alterations in the point of
views best suited for the ordering of
experiments.
this very idea that you should alter so
to speak uh the the conceptual framework
according to the evolution of physics
was completely averse to Kant. According
to Kant you had
appar
time. Now okay this this is the I would
say the the popular view of K. But in
fact when you read Kant carefully you
you realize that Kant's epistemology was
not a dogma but what we what can be
called a research program a
philosophical research program as
compared to a to a scientific research
program. uh for instance the Neocantian
school of the late 19th century Germany
uh you know the the Neocantian school
ruled by Herman Cohen Paul and then
Casira insisted that in fact you can
completely take over the whole of K's
philosophy and turn it into a new
research program with the possibility
that the precondition for knowledge that
the forms of thought that is used to to
shape out knowledge can evolve according
to the evolution of physics
itself. Um first point so we see here
that we can uh take you know we can
draw K towards bore but we can also draw
B towards K. How? Because according to
Bore um you know the classical uh the
classical concepts that are
themselves you know the concepts on
which Kant based his whole critic of
purism are something that cannot be
completely skipped. We have to keep them
in order to uh to get microfysical
knowledge beyond classical uh the the
domain of validity of classical physics.
So we we have a domain of validity of
classical physics here. We have a domain
beyond this do this uh domain broader
domain which is ruled by quantum
physics. But we still need to accept
this validity of classical concepts
inside a certain domain to be able to go
further towards uh micro objects ruled
by quantum rules and quantum theories.
So the classical ordering of experience
around us on at the m microscopical
level is a condition of possibility of
quantum knowledge according to bore. And
therefore I could call that an
anthropological condition of possibility
of microscopic of macrofysical
knowledge. And this was formulated
beautifully by Heisenberg who unders
understood well some parts of Neilsb's
thinking. He said that what Kant had not
foreseen was that these appar concepts
can be the conditions for science and at
the same time have a limited range of
applicability. So this is a revolution
in philosophy just as much as it is a
revolution of science because that means
that you have only a limited range of
validity of this appar rules of count.
And yet this limited range of validity
of the appar rules of count are
conditions of possibility of any
knowledge that would go beyond this
domain of validity. So this is an
interesting um ordering. Now the second
another very important point of
convergence between u the philosophy of
knowledge of Kant and the philosophy of
physics of Nitsbbor is the relational
status of
attributes.
Um Kant thought that there was no such
thing in the whole knowledge especially
physical knowledge as intrinsic
attributes. He insisted that whatever
characteristics we are acquainted with
in matter are nothing but relations.
Okay, this is a philosophy. I think it's
a way it's a nice way to understand uh
you know in a snapshot the philosophy of
Kant. Kant's philosophy is a philosophy
of relations as opposed to a philosophy
of intrinsic properties or intrinsic
attributes or even intrinsic objects.
And you know the famous concept of thing
in itself namely the which is typical of
K also the concept of the thing uh that
that uh it can be described as it is in
itself independently on earth of us
sorry. Well, in fact should be
understood as a word for the impos
possibility to to substract the
contribution of the knower from what is
known. Namely, it is impossible to say
that what we call properties can be
completely made independent on the way
uh we are exploring them. it this this
disentangling between uh us as knowing
subjects and you know the the object
itself in itself is impossible. This is
one crux I think of gun's philosophy.
But uh according to Bor things are
exactly are quite similar because as he
said in 1929 for instance the properties
of atoms are always obtained by
observing their reactions and collisions
or under the influence of radiation.
Therefore, you cannot speak of
attributes of objects independently on
the possibility we have to explore them
by way of interacting with
them. This gave rise to the idea to the
picture of disturbance. People say okay
there are phenomena out there and
unfortunately in order to know them we
have to disturb them. But this was not
uh the way um Ninsbbo saw this this
situation of knowledge. According to
him, we should not say that there are
phenomena out there that are
unfortunately disturbed. In fact,
phenomena are in are completely um you
know defined by their uh being uh you
know they're emerging out of a certain
relations between our instruments of
knowledge and the micro environment we
are trying to explore.
Um so interaction he says forms an
inseparable part of the phenomena. You
cannot
disentangle. It's a whole it's called
the wholeness of the phenomenon.
Now we another point um complimentarity
can be seen as a completely new concept
and certainly a very uncontian concept
but yet even this concept of compliment
can easily be understood and was
understood in fact by nil himself as a
stretching of K's requirements for
knowledge.
uh now first of all let's understand
what is the connection between the
thesis of the relationality of
attributes and the concept of
complimentarity and explained that in
classical physics where the influence of
measurement can be substracted data
supplement each other and can be
combined in a consistent picture of the
behavior of the object under
consideration but in quantum physics
it's not the
Because in fact um you know evidence
obtained under different experimental
conditions cannot be comprehended within
a single picture but must be regarded as
complimentary. Why? Because the you know
each each mode of access cannot be
disentangled from the phenomenon it is
giving rise to.
uh there there has been many claims that
in fact this uh this idea of
complimentarity was uh wrong. For
instance, uh the famous Afar experiment,
but that was very quickly dismissed by
by uh other experiments and arguments.
And there have been many um experiments
that can be called a quantitative which
way analysis because you know that in in
the usual uh pattern of complimentarity
you can either have the the information
on on the which way a certain particle
has gone or you have the interference
the wavelike interference but you cannot
have both things at the same time. But
here you you can also modulate this. You
certainly know that much more than I do.
You can modulate that quantitatively.
And um and
have you
know an a balance between a little bit
of which way information and a little
bit of interference
phenomena. Okay. The complimentarities
are of three types. The three types of
complimentarity are one um the
complimentarity between conjugate
variables which depend on incompatible
uh experimental devices. The
complimentarity between causation and
special temporal location of phenomena.
You cannot have both at the same time.
You cannot you cannot apply both the
coal scheme and have a perfect special
temporal
coordination also the well-known
complimentarity between the wave and
particle pictures not between wave and
particle nature of things here again but
wave and particle pictures that are used
by us in order to make sense of the
micro environment.
Now there are two problems with these
ideas of complimentarity. First of all
when we say that um uh you know the two
conjugate variables that are assessed by
two
incompatible types of apparatuses we say
that they are mutually exclusive. But
why should we say at the same time that
they are jointly indispensable as the
normal concept of
complimentarity requires
um why should we say that at any rate
it's usually what Nilsbor said he said
evidence obtained under different
experimental conditions must be regarded
as complimentary in the sense that only
the totality of the phenomena exhausts
the possibility
information exhaust sorry the possible
information about the object. So that
means that there is behind phenomena a
certain object that makes a sort of
unity a hidden unity between the two
types of conjugate variables such as the
position and the
momentum. So there is aboutness. All
these predicates are about something
which is beneath that. So my question is
is it still possible to refer to some
micro object in itself
independently of uh of any mode of
access to it.
Even though there is no such thing
according to bore and according to Kant
as as a micro attribute in itself, it
looks like there is still something like
a hidden uh micro object in itself that
is making a sort of principle of unity
of all these conjugate variables or
should we
rather look for a new mode of
objectification that is completely uh
averse to the old picture of a certain
particle holding the two types of
attribute of position and momentum and
uh invent a new set of concepts. The two
attitudes were advocated by two very
important creators of quantum mechanics.
The first
um position was held by Nilsbor who had
accepted that we still had to use the
old visual visualizable concepts. We
still have to use them because they are
the only one we have the only one we can
use.
Where was Shreddinger insisted that we
have to do the other strategy namely
inventing new concepts that are
completely different from the usual uh
classical concepts in order to order the
quantum phenomena. So the these are two
attitudes and um I think we we are still
I I I think in between the two. Some
elements of the common discourse of
physicists looks like we are still
referring to particles that hold several
attributes and some other elements of
the discourse of physicists especially
in quantum field theory are quite far
from from this usual
picture and they are closer certainly to
shredding reading of of quantum physics.
Now um another problem of
complimentarity is as I told you that
one version of complimentarity insists
that there is you know incompatibility
between spacetime location and causation
whereas in K's theory of knowledge the
two things are going together.
How can we compensate for this
dismantling of K's connection between
the category of causality and special
temporally shaped sensory experience?
How is it possible? And Bore invented
the new way. He invented the new way
which had to do precisely with
complimentarity. Quantum physics, he
said, forces us to replace the ideal of
causality. replace the ideal of
causality by a more general viewpoint
complimentarity. So complimentarity was
at the same time a dismantling of the
normal pattern of articulation between
causality and space-time location and at
the same time it was a replacement for
causality. According to B complimentity
he added is called for to provide a
frame wide enough to embrace the account
of fundamental regularities of nature
which cannot be comprehended within a
single picture. So we don't have a
single picture of what is going on in
nature but we have a scheme a scheme of
complimentarity. So it's replacing the
usual pattern of
ordering special temporal phenomena
according to a rule of
causality. Now I'm as I told you I will
broaden a little bit my debate and
compare two types of philosophies of
knowledge and especially two types of
readings of the measurement problem of
quantum mechanics. one which is called
naturalized and the other one which is
called transcendental. Actually here
again I will explain of course what is
transcendental and what is
naturalized. Okay, what is
transcendental? Uh first of all we have
to be very careful not to mix up as many
especially many uh English-speaking
philosophers do. We don't have to to mix
up the word transcendental with the word
transcendent.
The two words have a certain comp
component of meaning which is common to
both uh which is to exceed
experience. But there are two opposite
ways to exceed experience. One way to
exceed experience is to exceed
experience from beneath and the other
way of exceeding experience is to
explain for for or to towards something
which is beyond us.
So
um so the transcendental condition is
something not something actually it's a
structure which uh conditions our
experience without being part of
experience whereas a transcendent thing
is something which is beyond experience.
So you see the difference here I have a
structure which is behind me and that
preconditions experience and in the
other case I'm trying to go through the
screen of appearances towards something
which I cannot be
seen. Okay so according to Kant the
knower is precisely a
transcendental structure. The knower is
not known in the act of knowing. Why?
Not because it's so mysterious, but just
because it is knowing precisely for the
precise reason that it is now knowing.
And and Professor Hellbrron wonderfully
explained us this issue of
of certain infinite series of objects
and subjects.
um in the philosophy of Kirkagard and
Paul Martin Müller. And this is exactly
the the same. Of course, actually the
inspiration was from Kant because okay,
if you want to uh know an object, you
have to be a knowing subject. But if you
now know want to know the knowing
subjects, what do you have to be?
Another knowing subject that knows the
knowing subject and so on and so on. But
there is always something that is
escaping the escaping knowledge not
because of something so mysterious but
just because of the very act of
knowledge.
Um so in in the same case in B's
philosophy of physics the instrumental
precondition of a quantum description
cannot be described quantum mechanically
it is to be described somehow and so
quantum so bar describes it classically
rather than quantum
mechanically. So there is a kind as I
told you a kind of extra territoriality
of measuring device in both. thought uh
the idea that according to him the
instrument is part of the knower but not
of the
known. The reason for that as I
explained you is not that there is a
special nature of measuring instruments
but just that instrument measuring
instruments have a certain function in
our knowledge that has to be fulfilled
somehow.
This condition this function is that of
a condition of possibility of
interubjective agreement about
experimental result. We have to be
definite about the results when we state
them after having obtained them in the
laboratory. And uh very precise sign in
in B's thought that indeed he was not
trying to say
that measuring apparatuses have a
special nature that makes them liable
only to classical description. is that
according to him the boundary between
what is what can be described by quantum
physics and what is to be described in
classical terms is shifting. Okay. This
means that there is no absolute
boundary. It's just a practical boundary
which is meant to help us uh in our
theoretization.
Now there is a big advantage of this
transcendental status of measurement
device. The advantage is that it
dissolves the measurement problem from
the outset. And this is probably why
Nitsbbor never saw that there was a
problem in the measurement problem.
Other people saw that even in his
laboratory but he thought that it was a
wrong problem that was dissolved in fact
from the outset. And I think from from
his own point of view this was perfectly
right because if you accept a classic
like actualistic description of
measuring instrument if you take that as
a presupposition of quantum account of
phenomena there is no need for a
mechanism of transition between
potentialities and actuality. It's
already done from the outset from your
very presuppositions.
Similarly, since the quantum description
is prevented from extending to the
totality of the measurement chain,
including the pointers, then there is no
such thing as the superposition of point
microates. So the the measurement
problem doesn't even have to arise. It's
not it's not solved of course, but it
doesn't have to arise.
Now of course you know that this
strategy has been criticized a lot and
especially by John Bell in a paper
celebrated paper against
measurement. Um and Bell insisted that
we should not stick to propositions that
are valid only for all practical
purposes. For instance, the classicity
of instruments is only valid for all
practical purposes. And this could be
very well accepted by a borean thinker
of quantum mechanics. And so you don't
have to accept either in that case uh
what what Bell called B's shifty split
this famous uh you know split between
the classical part and the quantum part
of the of the measurement chain that
could be shifted freely according to
practical
needs. And so what Bell advocated was
the project of a naturalized theory of
knowledge. Namely try to make even the
instrument of knowledge an object of
physics an object of our best
theories. Uh for instance Bum said that
very clearly. He said the measurement
process should be understood as a
special case of the general laws
applying to the entire universe. But B
didn't say that this could not be done.
He just said that even the if this be
done the function of the apparatus has
to be uh fulfilled somehow.
and Perez, especially Asher Perez, uh
made a wonderful uh
blike reply to Bells and Bomb's urge
towards a
naturalized theory of knowledge, namely
a theory of knowledge that made the very
apparatus of knowledge part of the
nature studied by physics. So the
counter objection of Perez and Zurich
was that quantum theory can indeed
describe anything absolutely anything
including every piece of the instrument
of the in measuring instrument you want
you want but it cannot describe
everything because it has to stick to a
certain presupposition at a certain
point. You have to keep a certain
presupposition to speak of what you have
observed to speak of what you are
theorizing formalizing and so on and so
on that you need a meta theory when you
have a theory and the idea that you can
naturalize everything is tantamount to
say for instance in the case of goodel
theorem that you can you you want to ask
arithmetic to to give a proof of its
consistency. It's quite similar and many
similarities have been drawn between the
problem of measurement and um and the
good
serum. Now, so I conclude I conclude
that okay, Bo B was not explicitly Kian.
This is absolutely obvious. But yet
there are as you saw there are several
features of B's philosophy of physics
that are very isomorphic to K's
philosophy of knowledge and we can say
at this point because of this
impossibility advocated especially by
Perez and Zurich of extending quantum
theory to everything rather than
anything that both Kantac interpret
retation of quantum theory is not too
much outmoded. Instead, I think because
of its extreme generality, because of
its, you know, its connection with
certain patterns, fundamental patterns
of the general theory of knowledge, it
might well represent what I call a
general framework for any future
philosophy of
physics. And the acronym is
FAF. And this is quite similar. This
acronym was chosen for its similarity
with Emanuel K's polygamina to any
future metaphysics. But here it's
polygomina to any future philosophy of
physics. Thank you very much for your
attention.
[Music]