reference 
collectioi 
book 


kansas  city 
public  library 
kansas  city, 
missouri 


STACKS  REF  821  S545d 

Shelley,  Percy  Bysshe, 

1792-1822.  en 
A.  defence  of  poetry, 

[1904] 


A  DEFENCE  OF  POETRY 


A  DEFENCE 
OF  POETRY 


PERCY  BYSSHE  SHELLEY 

EDITED  BY  MRS.  SHELLEY 


REPRINTED    FROM  THE 
EDITION  OF  MDCCCXLV 


THE  BOBBS-MERFttL  COMPANY 
INDIANAPOLIS 


Copyright  1904 

by 
The  Bobbs-Merrill  Company 


Reference 

PNI03 

.  Sfc 


PREFACE  BY  THE  EDITOR. 

]E  find,  in  the  verse  of  a  poet, 
"the  record  of  the  best  and 
happiest  moments  of  the 
best  and  happiest  minds/'  * 
But  this  is  not  enough — we  desire  to 
know  the  man.  We  desire  to  learn 
how  much  of  the  sensibility  and  im- 
agination that  animates  his  poetry  was 
founded  on  heartfelt  passion,  and  puri- 
ty, and  elevation  of  character;  whether 
the  pathos  and  the  fire  emanated  from 
transitory  inspiration  and  a  power  of 
weaving  words  touchingly;  or  whether 
the  poet  acknowledged  the  might  of 
his  art  in  his  inmost  soul ;  and  whether 

+  "A  Defence  of  Poetry/' 

5 
CITY  (MO.)  PUBLIC  UBRARJ 

RdD 
6817O74 


his  nerves  thrilled  to  the  touch  of 
generous  emotion.  Led  by  such  curi- 
osity, how  many  volumes  have  been 
filled  with  the  life  of  the  Scottish 
plough-boy  and  the  English  peer;  we 
welcome  with  delight  every  fact  which 
proves  that  the  patriotism  and  tender- 
ness expressed  in  the  songs  of  Burns, 
sprung  from  a  noble  and  gentle  heart; 
and  we  pore  over  each  letter  that  we 
expect  will  testify  that  the  melancholy 
and  the  unbridled  passion  that  darkens 
Byron's  verse,  flowed  from  a  soul  de- 
voured by  a  keen  susceptibility  to 
intensest  love,  and  indignant  brood- 
ings  over  the  injuries  done  and  suffered 
by  man.  Let  the  lovers  of  Shelley's 
poetry— of  his  aspirations  for  a  broth- 
erhood of  love,  his  tender  bewaiiings 
springing  from  a  too  sensitive  spirit— 
his  sympathy  with  woe,  his  adoration 
of  beauty,  as  expressed  in  his  poetry; 
turn  to  these  pages  to  gather  proof  of 
sincerity,  and  to  become  acquainted 
with  the  form  that  such  gentle  sym- 

6 


pathies  and  lofty  aspirations  wore  in 
private  life. 

"A  Defence  of  Poetry"  is  the  only 
entirely  finished  prose  work  Shelley 
left.  In  this  we  find  the  reverence 
with  which  he  regarded  his  art.  We 
discern  his  power  of  close  reasoning, 
and  the  unity  of  his  views  of  human 
nature.  The  language  is  imaginative 
but  not  flowery;  the  periods  have  an 
intonation  full  of  majesty  and  grace; 
and  the  harmony  of  the  style  being 
united  to  melodious  thought,  a  music 
results,  that  swells  upon  the  ear,  and 
fills  the  mind  with  delight.  It  is  a 
work  whence  a  young  poet,  and  one 
suffering  from  wrong  or  neglect,  may 
learn  to  regard  his  pursuit  and  himself 
with  that  respect,  without  which  his 
genius  will  get  clogged  in  the  mire  of 
the  earth:  it  will  elevate  him  into  those 
pure  regions/where  there  is  neither 
pain  from  the  stings  of  insects,  nor 
pleasure  in  the  fruition  of  a  gross 
appetite  for  praise.  He  will  learn  to 

7 


rest  his  dearest  boast  on  the  dignity  of 
the  art  he  cultivates,  and  become  aware 
that  his  best  claim  on  the  applause  of 
mankind,  results  from  his  being  one 
more  in  the  holy  brotherhood,  whose 
vocation  it  is  to  divest  life  of  its  material 
grossness  and  stooping  tendencies,  and 
to  animate  it  with  that  power  of  turn- 
ing all  things  to  the  beautiful  and  good, 
which  is  the  spirit  of  poetry. 


8 


A  Defence  of  Poetry 
by  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 


ADEFENCE 
OF  POETRY 

CCORDING 
TO  ONE  MO 
DE  OF  RE- 
CARDING  *s 
THOSE  TWO 
CLASSES  OF 
MENTAL  AC 
TFHWHICH 
ARE  CALLED 
reason  and  imagination,  the  former 
may  be  considered  as  mind  contem- 
plating the  relations  borne  by  one 
thought  to  another,  however  produced; 
and  the  latter,  as  mind  acting  upon 
those  thoughts  so  as  to  colour  them 
with  its  own  light,  and  composing  from 
them,  as  from  elements,  other  thoughts, 


each  containing  within  itself  the  princi- 
ple of  its  own  integrity.  The  one  is  the 
16  jiouiiv,  or  the  principle  of  synthesis, 
and  has  for  its  objects  those  forms 
which  are  common  to  universal  nature 
and  existence  itself;  the  other  is  the 
%6  Aoyl&iv,  or  principle  of  analysis,  and 
its  action  regards  the  relations  of  things 
simply  as  relations;  considering 
thoughts,  not  in  their  integral  unity, 
but  as  the  algebraical  representations 
which  conduct  to  certain  general  re- 
sults. Reason  is  the  enumeration  of 
quantities  already  known;  imagination 
is  the  perception  of  the  value  of  those 
quantities,  both  separately  and  as  a 
whole.  Reason  respects  the  differences, 
and  imagination  the  similitudes  of 
things.  Reason  is  to  imagination  as 
the  instrument  to  the  agent,  as  the 
body  to  the  spirit,  as  the  shadow  to 
the  substance. 

Poetry,  in  a  general  sense,  may  be 
defined  to  be  "the  expression  of  the 
imagination:"  and  poetry  is  connate 

12 


with  the  origin  of  man.  Man  is  an 
instrument  over  which  a  series  o£  ex- 
ternal and  internal  impressions  are 
driven,  like  the  alternations  of  an  ever- 
changing  wind  over  an  Aeolian  lyre, 
which  move  it  by  their  motion  to  ever- 
changing  melody.  But  there  is  a  prin- 
ciple within  the  human  being,  and 
perhaps  within  all  sentient  beings, 
which  acts  otherwise  than  in  the  lyre, 
and  produces  not  melody  alone,  but 
harmony,  by  an  internal  adjustment  of 
the  sounds  or  motions  thus  excited  to 
the  impressions  which  excite  them. 
It  is  as  if  the  lyre  could  accommodate 
its  chords  to  the  motions  of  that  which 
strikes  them,  in  a  determined  propor- 
tion of  sound;  even  as  the  musician 
can  accommodate  his  voice  to  the 
sound  of  the  lyre.  A  child  at  play  by 
itself  will  express  its  delight  by  its  voice 
and  motions;  and  every  inflexion  of 
tone  and  every  gesture  will  bear  exact 
relation  to  a  corresponding  antitype  in 
the  pleasurable  impressions  which 

13 


awakened  it;  it  will  be  the  reflected 
image  of  that  impression;  and  as  the 
lyre  trembles  and  sounds  after  the 
wind  has  died  away,  so  the  child  seeks, 
by  prolonging  in  its  voice  and  motions 
the  duration  of  the  effect,  to  prolong 
also  a  consciousness  of  the  cause.  In 
relation  to  the  objects  which  delight  a 
child,  these  expressions  are  what  poetry 
is  to  higher  objects.  The  savage  (for 
the  savage  is  to  ages  what  the  child  is 
to  years)  expresses  the  emotions  pro- 
duced in  him  by  surrounding  objects  in 
a  similar  manner;  and  language  and 
gesture,  together  with  plastic  or  picto- 
rial imitation,  become  the  image  of  the 
combined  effect  of  those  objects,  and 
of  his  apprehension  of  them.  Man  in 
society,  with  all  his  passions  and  his 
pleasures,  next  becomes  the  object  of 
the  passions  and  pleasures  of  man;  an 
additional  class  of  emotions  produces 
an  augmented  treasure  of  expressions; 
and  language,  gesture,  and  the  imita- 
tive arts,  become  at  once  the  repre- 

14 


sentation  and  the  medium,  the  pencil 
and  the  picture,  the  chisel  and  the 
statue,  the  chord  and  the  harmony. 
The  social  sympathies,  or  those  laws 
from  which,  as  from  its  elements, 
society  results,  begin  to  develop  them- 
selves from  the  moment  that  two 
human  beings  co-exist;  the  future  is 
contained  within  the  present,  as  the 
plant  within  the  seed;  and  equality, 
diversity,  unity,  contrast,  mutual  de- 
pendence, become  the  principles  alone 
capable  of  affording  the  motives  ac- 
cording to  which  the  will  of  a  social 
being  is  determined  to  action,  inas- 
much as  he  is  social;  and  constitute 
pleasure  in  sensation,  virtue  in  senti- 
ment, beauty  in  art,  truth  in  reasoning, 
and  love  in  the  intercourse  of  kind. 
Hence  men,  even  in  the  infancy  of 
society,  observe  a  certain  order  in  their 
words  and  actions,  distinct  from  that 
of  the  objects  and  the  impressions 
represented  by  them,  all  expression 
being  subject  to  the  laws  of  that  from 

'5 


which  it  proceeds.  But  let  us  dismiss 
those  more  general  considerations 
which  might  involve  an  inquiry  into 
the  principles  of  society  itself,  and 
restrict  our  view  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  imagination  is  expressed 
upon  its  forms. 

In  the  youth  of  the  world,  men  dance 
and  sing  and  imitate  natural  objects, 
observing  in  these  actions,  as  in  all 
others,  a  certain  rhythm  or  order.  And, 
although  all  men  observe  a  similar, 
they  observe  not  the  same  order,  in 
the  motions  of  the  dance,  in  the  melody 
of  the  song,  in  the  combinations  of 
language,  in  the  series  of  their  imita- 
tions of  natural  objects.  For  there  is 
a  certain  order  or  rhythm  belonging  to 
each  of  these  classes  of  mimetic  repre- 
sentation, from  which  the  hearer  and 
the  spectator  receive  an  intenser  and 
purer  pleasure  than  from  any  other: 
the  sense  of  an  approximation  to  this 
order  has  been  called  taste  by  modern 
writers.  Every  man  in  the  infancy  of 

16 


art,  observes  an  order  which  approxi- 
mates more  or  less  closely  to  that  from 
which  this  highest  delight  results:  but 
the  diversity  is  not  sufficiently  marked, 
as  that  its  gradations  should  be  sensi- 
ble, except  in  those  instances  where 
the  predominance  of  this  faculty  of 
approximation  to  the  beautiful  (for  so 
we  may  be  permitted  to  name  the 
relation  between  this  highest  pleasure 
and  its  cause)  is  very  great.  Those  in 
whom  it  exists  in  excess  are  poets,  in 
the  most  universal  sense  of  the  word; 
and  the  pleasure  resulting  from  the 
manner  in  which  they  express  the 
influence  of  society  or  nature  upon 
their  own  minds,  communicates  itself 
to  others,  and  gathers  a  sort  of  redup- 
lication from  that  community.  Their 
language  is  vitally  metaphorical;  that 
is,  it  marks  the  before  unapprehended 
relations  of  things  and  perpetuates 
their  apprehension,  until  the  words 
which  represent  them,  become,  through 
time,  signs  for  portions  or  classes  of 
c  17 


thoughts  instead  of  pictures  of  inte- 
gral thoughts;  and  then  if  no  new  poets 
should  arise  to  create  afresh  the  asso- 
ciations which  have  been  thus  disor- 
ganised, language  will  be  dead  to  all 
the  nobler  purposes  of  human  inter- 
course. These  similitudes  or  relations 
are  finely  said  by  Lord  Bacon  to  be 
"the  same  footsteps  of  nature  im- 
pressed upon  the  various  subjects  of 
the  world"t — and  he  considers  the 
faculty  which  perceives  them  as  the 
storehouse  of  axioms  common  to  all 
knowledge.  In  the  infancy  of  society 
every  author  is  necessarily  a  poet, 
because  language  itself  is  poetry;  and 
to  be  a  poet  is  to  apprehend  the  true 
and  the  beautiful  in  a  word,  the  good 
which  exists  in  the  relation,  subsisting, 
first  between  existence  and  perception, 
and  secondly  between  perception  and 
expression.  Every  original  language 
near  to  its  source  is  in  itself  the  chaos 

^De  Augment.  Scient,  cap.  i,  lib.  iii. 
18 


of  a  cyclic  poem:  the  copiousness  o£ 
lexicography  and  the  distinctions  of 
grammar  are  the  works  of  a  later  age, 
and  are  merely  the  catalogue  and  the 
form  of  the  creations  of  poetry. 

But  poets,  or  those  who  imagine 
and  express  this  indestructible  order, 
are  not  only  the  authors  of  language 
and  of  music,  of  the  dance,  and  archi- 
tecture, and  statuary,  and  painting; 
they  are  the  institutors  of  laws,  and 
the  founders  of  civil  society,  and  the 
inventors  of  the  arts  of  life,  and  the 
teachers,  who  draw  into  a  certain  pro- 
pinquity with  the  beautiful  and  the 
true,  that  partial  apprehension  of  the 
agencies  of  the  invisible  world  which 
is  called  religion.  Hence  all  original 
religions  are  allegorical,  or  susceptible 
of  allegory,  and,  like  Janus,  have  a 
double  face  of  false  and  true.  Poets, 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  the 
age  and  nation  in  which  they  appeared, 
were  called,  in  the  earlier  epochs  of  the 
world,  legislators,  or  prophets:  a  poet 

'9 


essentially  comprises  and  unites  both 
these  characters.  For  he  not  only 
beholds  intensely  the  present  as  it  is, 
and  discovers  those  laws  according  to 
which  present  things  ought  to  be 
ordered,  but  he  beholds  the  future  in 
the  present,  and  his  thoughts  are  the 
germs  of  the  flower  and  the  fruit  of 
latest  time.  Not  that  I  assert  poets 
to  be  prophets  in  the  gross  sense  of 
the  word,  or  that  they  can  foretell  the 
form  as  surely  as  they  foreknow  the 
spirit  of  events:  such  is  the  pretence 
of  superstition,  which  would  make 
poetry  an  attribute  of  prophecy,  rather 
than  prophecy  an  attribute  of  poetry. 
A  poet  participates  in  the  eternal,  the 
infinite,  and  the  one;  as  far  as  relates 
to  his  conceptions,  time  and  place  and 
number  are  not.  The  grammatical 
forms  which  express  the  moods  of 
time,  and  the  difference  of  persons, 
and  the  distinction  of  place,  are  con- 
vertible with  respect  to  the  highest 
poetry  without  injuring  it  as  poetry; 

ao 


and  the  choruses  of  Aeschylus,  and  the 
book  of  Job,  and  Dante's  Paradise, 
would  afford,  more  than  any  other 
writings,  examples  of  this  fact,  if  the 
limits  of  this  essay  did  not  forbid  cita- 
tion. The  creations  of  sculpture, 
painting,  and  music  are  illustrations 
still  more  decisive. 

Language,  colour,  form,  and  religious 
and  civil  habits  of  action,  are  all  the 
instruments  and  materials  of  poetry; 
they  may  be  called  poetry  by  that 
figure  of  speech  which  considers  the 
effect  as  a  synonyme  of  the  cause. 
But  poetry  in  a  more  restricted  sense 
expresses  those  arrangements  of  lan- 
guage, and  especially  metrical  language, 
which  are  created  by  that  imperial  fac- 
ulty, whose  throne  is  curtained  within 
the  invisible  nature  of  man.  And  this 
springs  from  the  nature  itself  of  lan- 
guage, which  is  a  more  direct  repre- 
sentation of  the  actions  and  passions  of 
our  internal  being,  and  is  susceptible  of 
more  various  and  delicate  combinations, 

21 


than  colour,  form,  or  motion,  and  is 
more  plastic  and  obedient  to  the  con- 
trol of  that  faculty  of  which  it  is  the 
creation.  For  language  is  arbitrarily 
produced  by  the  imagination,  and  has 
relation  to  thoughts  alone;  but  all 
other  materials,  instruments,  and  con- 
ditions of  art  have  relations  among 
each  other,  which  limit  and  interpose 
between  conception  and  expression. 
The  former  is  as  a  mirror  which 
reflects,  the  latter  as  a  cloud  which 
enfeebles,  the  light  of  which  both  are 
mediums  of  communication.  Hence 
the  fame  of  sculptors,  painters,  and 
musicians,  although  the  intrinsic  pow- 
ers of  the  great  masters  of  these  arts 
may  yield  in  no  degree  to  that  of  those 
who  have  employed  language  as  the 
hieroglyphic  of  their  thoughts,  has 
never  equalled  that  of  poets  in  the 
restricted  sense  of  the  term;  as  two 
performers  of  equal  skill  will  produce 
unequal  effects  from  a  guitar  and  a 
harp.  The  fame  of  legislators  and 

22 


founders  of  religions,  so  long  as  their 
institutions  last  alone  seems  to  exceed 
that  of  poets  in  the  restricted  sense; 
but  it  can  scarcely  be  a  question, 
whether,  if  we  deduct  the  celebrity 
which  their  flattery  of  the  gross  opin- 
ions of  the  vulgar  usually  conciliates, 
together  with  that  which  belonged  to 
them  in  their  higher  character  of 
poets,  any  excess  will  remain. 

We  have  thus  circumscribed  the 
word  poetry  within  the  limits  of  that 
art  which  is  the  most  familiar  and  the 
most  perfect  expression  of  the  faculty 
itself.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to 
make  the  circle  still  narrower,  and  to 
determine  the  distinction  between 
measured  and  unmeasured  language; 
for  the  popular  division  into  prose  and 
verse  is  inadmissible  in  accurate  phi- 
losophy. 

Sounds  as  well  as  thoughts  have 
relation  both  between  each  other  and 
towards  that  which  they  represent, 
and  a  perception  of  the  order  of  those 


relations  has  always  been  found  con- 
nected with  a  perception  of  the  order 
of  the  relations  of  thoughts.  Hence 
the  language  of  poets  has  ever  affected 
a  certain  uniform  and  harmonious  recur- 
rence of  sound,  without  which  it  were 
not  poetry,  and  which  is  scarcely  less 
indispensable  to  the  communication 
of  its  influence,  than  the  words  them- 
selves, without  reference  to  that  pecu- 
liar order.  Hence  the  vanity  of  trans- 
lation; it  were  as  wise  to  cast  a  violet 
into  a  crucible  that  you  might  discover 
the  formal  principle  of  its  colour  and 
odour,  as  seek  to  transfuse  from  one 
language  into  another  the  creations  of 
a  poet.  The  plant  must  spring  again 
from  its  seed,  or  it  will  bear  no  flower 
—and  this  is  the  burthen  of  the  curse 
of  Babel. 

An  observation  of  the  regular  mode 
of  the  recurrence  of  harmony  in  the 
language  of  poetical  minds,  together 
with  its  relation  to  music,  produced 
metre,  or  a  certain  system  of  tradi- 

24 


tional  forms  of  haimony  and  language. 
Yet  it  is  by  no  means  essential  that  a 
poet  should  accommodate  his  language 
to  this  traditional  form,  so  that  the 
harmony,  which  is  its  spirit,  be  ob- 
served. The  practice  is  indeed  conve- 
nient and  popular,  and  to  be  preferred, 
especially  in  such  composition  as 
includes  much  action:  but  every  great 
poet  must  inevitably  innovate  upon 
the  example  of  his  predecessors  in  the 
exact  structure  of  his  peculiar  versifi- 
cation. The  distinction  between  poets 
and  prose  writers  is  a  vulgar  error. 
The  distinction  between  philosophers 
and  poets  has  been  anticipated.  Plato 
was  essentially  a  poet—the  truth  and 
splendour  of  his  imagery,  and  the 
melody  of  his  language,  are  the  most 
intense  that  it  is  possible  to  conceive. 
He  rejected  the  measure  of  the  epic, 
dramatic,  and  lyrical  forms,  because  he 
sought  to  kindle  a  harmony  in  thoughts 
divested  of  shape  and  action,  and  he 
forbore  to  invent  any  regular  plan  of 
d  25 


rhythm  which  would  include,  under 
determinate  forms,  the  varied  pauses 
of  his  style.  Cicero  sought  to  imitate 
the  cadence  of  his  periods,  but  with 
little  success.  Lord  Bacon  was  a 
poet*  His  language  has  a  sweet  and 
majestic  rhythm,  which  satisfies  the 
sense,  no  less  than  the  almost  super- 
human wisdom  of  his  philosophy 
satisfies  the  intellect;  it  is  a  strain 
which  distends,  and  then  bursts  the  cir- 
cumference of  the  reader's  mind,  and 
pours  itself  forth  together  with  it  into 
the  universal  element  with  which  it 
has  perpetual  sympathy.  All  the 
authors  of  revolutions  in  opinion  are 
not  only  necessarily  poets  as  they  are 
inventors,  nor  even  as  their  words 
unveil  the  permanent  analogy  of 
things  by  images  which  participate  in 
the  life  of  truth;  but  as  their  periods 
are  harmonious  and  rhythmical,  and 

*  See  the  Filum  Labyrinthi,  and  the 

Essay  on  Death  particularly. 

26 


contain  in  themselves  the  elements  of 
verse;  being  the  echo  of  the  eternal 
music.  Nor  are  those  supreme  poets, 
who  have  employed  traditional  forms 
of  rhythm  on  account  of  the  form  and 
action  of  their  subjects,  less  capable  of 
perceiving  and  teaching  the  truth  of 
things,  than  those  who  have  omitted 
that  form,  Shakespeare,  Dante,  and 
Milton  (to  confine  ourselves  to  mod- 
ern writers)  are  philosophers  of  the 
very  loftiest  power. 

A  poem  is  the  very  image  of  life 
expressed  in  its  eternal  truth.  There 
is  this  difference  between  a  story  and 
a  poem,  that  a  story  is  a  catalogue  of 
detached  facts,  which  have  no  other 
connection  than  time,  place,  circum- 
stance, cause  and  effect;  the  other  is 
the  creation  of  actions  according  to 
the  unchangeable  forms  of  human 
nature,  as  existing  in  the  mind  of  the 
Creator,  which  is  itself  the  image  of 
all  other  minds.  The  one  is  partial, 
and  applies  only  to  a  definite  period  of 

27 


time,  and  a  certain  combination  of 
events  which  can  never  again  recur; 
the  other  is  universal,  and  contains 
within  itself  the  germ  of  a  relation  to 
whatever  motives  or  actions  have  place 
in  the  possible  varieties  of  human 
nature.  Time,  which  destroys  the 
beauty  and  the  use  of  the  story  of  par- 
ticular facts,  stripped  of  the  poetry 
which  should  invest  them,  augments 
that  of  poetry,  and  for  ever  develops 
new  and  wonderful  applications  of  the 
eternal  truth  which  it  contains.  Hence 
epitomes  have  been  called  the  moths 
of  just  history;  they  eat  out  the  poetry 
of  it.  A  story  of  particular  facts  is  as 
a  mirror  which  obscures  and  distorts 
that  which  should  be  beautiful:  poetry 
is  a  mirror  which  makes  beautiful  that 
which  is  distorted. 

The  parts  of  a  composition  may  be 
poetical,  without  the  composition  as 
a  whole  being  a  poem.  A  single  sen- 
tence may  be  considered  as  a  whole, 
though  it  may  be  found  in  the  midst 


of  a  series  of  unassimilated  portions; 
a  single  word  even  may  be  a  spark  of 
inextinguishable  thought.  And  thus 
all  the  great  historians,  Herodotus, 
Plutarch,  Livy,  were  poets;  and 
although  the  plan  of  these  writers, 
especially  that  of  Livy,  restrained  them 
from  developing  this  faculty  in  its 
highest  degree,  they  made  copious  and 
ample  amends  for  their  subjection,  by 
filling  all  the  interstices  of  their  sub- 
jects with  living  images. 

Having  determined  what  is  poetry, 
and  who  are  poets,  let  us  proceed  to 
estimate  its  effects  upon  society. 

Poetry  is  ever  accompanied  with 
pleasure:  all  spirits  upon  which  it  falls 
open  themselves  to  receive  the  wis- 
dom which  is  mingled  with  its  delight. 
In  the  infancy  of  the  world,  neither 
poets  themselves  nor  their  auditors 
are  fully  aware  of  the  excellence  of 
poetry:  for  it  acts  in  a  divine  and  un- 
apprehended  manner,  beyond  and 
above  consciousness;  and  it  is  reserved 


for  future  generations  to  contemplate 
and  measure  the  mighty  cause  and 
effect  in  all  the  strength  and  splendour 
of  their  union.  Even  in  modern  times, 
no  living  poet  ever  arrived  at  the  ful- 
ness of  his  fame;  the  jury  which  sits 
in  judgment  upon  a  poet,  belonging  as 
he  does  to  all  time,  must  be  composed 
of  his  peers:  it  must  be  impanneled  by 
Time  from  the  selectest  of  the  wise  of 
many  generations.  A  poet  is  a  night- 
ingale, who  sits  in  darkness  and  sings 
to  cheer  its  own  solitude  with  sweet 
sounds;  his  auditors  are  as  men  en- 
tranced by  the  melody  of  an  unseen 
musician,  who  feel  that  they  are  moved 
and  softened,  yet  know  not  whence  or 
why.  The  poems  of  Homer  and  his 
contemporaries  were  the  delight  of 
infant  Greece;  they  were  the  elements 
of  that  social  system  which  is  the  col- 
umn upon  which  all  succeeding  civili- 
sation has  reposed.  Homer  embodied 
the  ideal  perfection  of  his  age  in 
human  character;  nor  can  we  doubt 

30 


that  those  who  read  his  verses  were 
awakened  to  an  ambition  of  becoming 
like  to  Achilles,  Hector,  and  Ulysses: 
the  truth  and  beauty  of  friendship, 
patriotism,  and  persevering  devotion 
to  an  object,  were  unveiled  to  the 
depths  in  these  immortal  creations: 
the  sentiments  of  the  auditors  must 
have  been  refined  and  enlarged  by  a 
sympathy  with  such  great  and  lovely 
impersonations,  until  from  admiring 
they  imitated,  and  from  imitation  they 
identified  themselves  with  the  objects 
of  their  admiration.  Nor  let  it  be 
objected,  that  these  characters  are 
remote  from  moral  perfection,  and 
that  they  can  by  no  means  be  consid- 
ered as  edifying  patterns  for  general 
imitation.  Every  epoch,  under  names 
more  or  less  specious,  has  deified  its 
peculiar  errors;  Revenge  is  the  naked 
idol  of  the  worship  of  a  semi-barbar- 
ous age;  and  Self-deceit  is  the  veiled 
image  of  unknown  evil,  before  which 
luxury  and  satiety  lie  prostrate.  But  a 


poet  considers  the  vices  of  his  contem- 
poraries as  the  temporary  dress  in 
which  his  creations  must  be  arrayed, 
and  which  cover  without  concealing 
the  eternal  proportions  of  their  beauty. 
An  epic  or  dramatic  personage  is  un- 
derstood to  wear  them  around  his 
soul  as  he  may  the  ancient  armour  or 
the  modern  uniform  around  his  body; 
whilst  it  is  easy  to  conceive  a  dress 
more  graceful  than  either.  The  beauty 
of  the  internal  nature  cannot  be  so  far 
concealed  by  its  accidental  vesture, 
but  that  the  spirit  of  its  form  shall 
communicate  itself  to  the  very  dis- 
guise, and  indicate  the  shape  it  hides 
from  the  manner  in  which  it  is  worn. 
A  majestic  form  and  graceful  motions 
will  express  themselves  through  the 
most  barbarous  and  tasteless  costume. 
Few  poets  of  the  highest  class  have 
chosen  to  exhibit  the  beauty  of  their 
conceptions  in  its  naked  truth  and 
splendour;  and  it  is  doubtful  whether 
the  alloy  of  costume,  habit,  etc.,  be 

35* 


not  necessary  to  temper  this  planetary 
music  for  mortal  ears. 

The  whole  objection,  however,  of 
the  immorality  of  poetry  rests  upon  a 
misconception  of  the  manner  in  which 
poetry  acts  to  produce  the  moral  im- 
provement of  man.  Ethical  science  ar- 
ranges the  elements  which  poetry  has 
created,  and  propounds  schemes  and 
proposes  examples  of  civil  and  domestic 
life:  nor  is  it  for  want  of  admirable  doc- 
trines that  men  hate,  and  despise,  and 
censure,  and  deceive,  and  subjugate  one 
another.  But  poetry  acts  in  another 
and  diviner  manner.  It  awakens  and 
enlarges  the  mind  itself  by  rendering 
it  the  receptacle  of  a  thousand  unap- 
prehended  combinations  of  thought. 
Poetry  lifts  the  veil  from  the  hidden 
beauty  of  the  world,  and  makes  famil- 
iar objects  be  as  if  they  were  not  famil- 
iar; it  reproduces  all  that  it  represents, 
and  the  impersonations  clothed  in  its 
Elysian  light  stand  thenceforward  in 
the  minds  of  those  who  have  once 
e  33 


contemplated  them,  as  memorials  of 
that  gentle  and  exalted  content  which 
extends  itself  ovei  all  thoughts  and 
actions  with  which  it  coexists.  The 
great  secret  of  morals  is  love;  or  a  going 
out  of  our  nature,  and  an  identification 
of  ourselves  with  the  beautiful  which 
exists  in  thought,  action,  or  person,  not 
our  own.  A  man,  to  be  greatly  good, 
must  imagine  intensely  and  compre- 
hensively; he  must  put  himself  in  the 
place  of  another  and  of  many  others; 
the  pains  and  pleasures  of  his  species 
must  become  his  own.  The  great  in- 
strument of  moral  good  is  the  imagi- 
nation; and  poetry  administers  to  the 
effect  by  acting  upon  the  cause.  Poetry 
enlarges  the  circumference  of  the 
imagination  by  replenishing  it  with 
thoughts  of  ever  new  delight,  which 
have  the  power  of  attracting  and  assi- 
milating to  their  own  nature  all  other 
thoughts,  and  which  form  new  inter- 
vals and  interstices  whose  void  for 
ever  craves  fresh  food.  Poetry  strength- 

34 


ens  the  faculty  which  is  the  organ  of 
the  moral  nature  of  man,  in  the  same 
manner  as  exercise  strengthens  a  limb. 
A  poet  therefore  would  do  ill  to  em- 
body his  own  conceptions  of  right  and 
wrong,  which  are  usually  those  of  his 
place  and  time,  in  his  poetical  crea- 
tions, which  participate  in  neither.  By 
this  assumption  of  the  inferior  office 
of  interpreting  the  effect,  in  which 
perhaps  after  all  he  might  acquit  him- 
self but  imperfectly,  he  would  resign 
a  glory  in  a  participation  in  the  cause. 
There  was  little  danger  that  Homer, 
or  any  of  the  eternal  poets,  should  have 
so  far  misunderstood  themselves  as  to 
have  abdicated  this  throne  of  their 
widest  dominion.  Those  in  whom  the 
poetical  faculty,  though  great,  is  less 
intense,  as  Euripides,  Lucan,  Tasso, 
Spenser,  have  frequently  affected  a 
moral  aim,  and  the  effect  of  their 
poetry  is  diminished  in  exact  propor- 
tion to  the  degree  in  which  they  com- 
pel us  to  advert  to  this  purpose. 

35 


Homer  and  the  cyclic  poets  were 
followed  at  a  certain  interval  by  the 
dramatic  and  lyrical  poets  of  Athens, 
who  flourished  contemporaneously 
with  all  that  is  most  perfect  in  the 
kindred  expressions  of  the  poetical 
faculty;  architecture,  painting,  music, 
the  dance,  sculpture,  philosophy,  and 
we  may  add,  the  forms  of  civil  life. 
For  although  the  scheme  t>f  Athenian 
society  was  deformed  by  many  imper- 
fections which  the  poetry  existing  in 
chivalry  and  Christianity  has  erased 
from  the  habits  and  institutions  of 
modern  Europe;  yet  never  at  any  other 
period  has  so  much  energy,  beauty,  and 
virtue  been  developed;  never  was  blind 
strength  and  stubborn  form  so  disci- 
plined and  rendered  subject  to  the  will 
of  man,  or  that  will  less  repugnant  to 
the  dictates  of  the  beautiful  and  the 
true,  as  during  the  century  which  pre- 
ceded the  death  of  Socrates.  Of  no 
other  epoch  in  the  history  of  our  spe- 
cies have  we  records  and  fragments 

36 


stamped  so  visibly  with  the  image  of 
the  divinity  in  man.  But  it  is  poetry 
alone,  in  form,  in  action,  or  in  lan- 
guage, which  has  rendered  this  epoch 
memorable  above  all  others,  and  the 
storehouse  of  examples  to  everlasting 
time.  For  written  poetry  existed  at 
that  epoch  simultaneously  with  the 
other  arts,  and  it  is  an  idle  inquiry  to 
demand  which  gave  and  which  received 
the  light,  which  all,  as  from  a  common 
focus,  have  scattered  over  the  darkest 
periods  of  succeeding  time.  We  know 
no  more  of  cause  and  effect  than  a 
constant  conjunction  of  events:  poetry 
is  ever  found  to  co-exist  with  what- 
ever other  arts  contribute  to  the  hap- 
piness and  perfection  of  man.  I  appeal 
to  what  has  already  been  established 
to  distinguish  between  the  cause  and 
the  effect. 

It  was  at  the  period  here  adverted 
to,  that  the  drama  had  its  birth;  and 
however  a  succeeding  writer  may  have 
equalled  or  surpassed  those  few  great 

37 


specimens  of  the  Athenian  drama 
which  have  been  preserved  to  us,  it  is 
indisputable  that  the  art  itself  never 
was  understood  or  practised  according 
to  the  true  philosophy  of  it,  as  at 
Athens.  For  the  Athenians  employed 
language,  action,  music,  painting,  the 
dance,  and  religious  institutions,  to 
produce  a  common  effect  in  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  highest  idealisms  of 
passion  and  of  power;  each  division 
in  the  art  was  made  perfect  in  its  kind 
by  artists  of  the  most  consummate 
skill,  and  was  disciplined  into  a  beauti- 
ful proportion  and  unity  one  towards 
the  other.  On  the  modern  stage  a  few 
only  of  the  elements  capable  of  express- 
ing the  image  of  the  poet's  conception 
are  employed  at  once.  We  have  trag- 
edy without  music  and  dancing;  and 
music  and  dancing  without  the  highest 
impersonations  of  which  they  are  the 
fit  accompaniment,  and  both  without 
religion  and  solemnity.  Religious  insti- 
tution has  indeed  been  usually  ban- 

38 


ishcd  from  the  stage.  Our  system  of 
divesting  the  actor's  face  of  a  mask, 
on  which  the  many  expressions  appro- 
priated to  his  dramatic  character  might 
be  moulded  into  one  permanent  and 
unchanging  expression,  is  favourable 
only  to  a  partial  and  inharmonious 
effect;  it  is  fit  for  nothing  but  a  mono- 
logue, where  all  the  attention  may  be 
directed  to  some  great  master  of  ideal 
mimicry.  The  modern  practice  of  blend- 
ing comedy  with  tragedy,  though  liable 
to  great  abuse  in  point  of  practice,  is  un- 
doubtedly an  extension  of  the  dramatic 
circle;  but  the  comedy  should  be  as  in 
King  Lear,  universal,  ideal,  and  sublime. 
It  is  perhaps  the  intervention  of  this 
principle  which  determines  the  balance 
in  favour  of  King  Lear  against  the 
Oedipus  Tyrannus  or  the  Agamemnon, 
or,  if  you  will,  the  trilogies  with  which 
they  are  connected;  unless  the  intense 
power  of  the  choral  poetry,  especially 
that  of  the  latter,  should  be  considered 
as  restoring  the  equilibrium.  King 

39 


Lear,  if  it  can  sustain  this  comparison, 
may  be  judged  to  be  the  most  perfect 
specimen  of  the  dramatic  art  existing 
in  the  world;  in  spite  of  the  narrow 
conditions  to  which  the  poet  was  sub- 
jected by  the  ignorance  of  the  philoso- 
phy of  the  drama  which  has  prevailed 
in  modern  Europe.  Calderon,  in  his 
religious  Autos,  has  attempted  to  fulfil 
some  of  the  high  conditions  of  dra- 
matic representation  neglected  by 
Shakespeare;  such  as  the  establishing 
a  relation  between  the  drama  and 
religion,  and  the  accommodating  them 
to  music  and  dancing;  but  he  omits  the 
observation  of  conditions  still  more 
important,  and  more  is  lost  than  gained 
by  the  substitution  of  the  rigidly- 
defined  and  ever-repeated  idealisms  of 
a  distorted  superstition  for  the  living 
impersonations  of  the  truth  of  human 
passion. 

But  I  digress—The  connection  of 
scenic  exhibitions  with  the  improve- 
ment or  corruption  of  the  manners  of 

40 


men,  has  been  universally  recognised; 
in  other  words,  the  presence  or  absence 
of  poetry  in  its  most  perfect  and  uni- 
versal form  has  been  found  to  be  con- 
nected with  good  and  evil  in  conduct 
or  habit.  The  corruption  which  has 
been  imputed  to  the  drama  as  an  effect 
begins,  when  the  poetry  employed  in 
its  constitution  ends:  I  appeal  to  the 
history  of  manners  whether  the  periods 
of  the  growth  of  the  one  and  the 
decline  of  the  other  have  not  corres- 
ponded with  an  exactness  equal  to  any 
example  of  moral  cause  and  effect. 

The  drama  at  Athens,  or  whereso- 
ever else  it  may  have  approached  to 
its  perfection,  ever  co-existed  with  the 
moral  and  intellectual  greatness  of  the 
age.  The  tragedies  of  the  Athenian 
poets  are  as  mirrors  in  which  the 
spectator  beholds  himself,  under  a  thin 
disguise  of  circumstance,  stript  of  all 
but  that  ideal  perfection  and  energy 
which  every  one  feels  to  be  the  inter- 
nal type  of  all  that  he  loves,  admires, 
f  41 


and  would  become.  The  imagination 
is  enlarged  by  a  sympathy  with  pains 
and  passions  so  mighty,  that  they  dis- 
tend in  their  conception  the  capacity 
of  that  by  which  they  are  conceived; 
the  good  affections  are  strengthened 
by  pity,  indignation,  terror  and  sorrow; 
and  an  exalted  calm  is  prolonged  from 
the  satiety  of  this  high  exercise  of 
them  into  the  tumult  of  familiar  life: 
even  crime  is  disarmed  of  half  its  hor- 
ror and  all  its  contagion  by  being  rep- 
resented as  the  fatal  consequence  of 
the  unfathomable  agencies  of  nature; 
error  is  thus  divested  of  its  wilfulness; 
men  can  no  longer  cherish  it  as  the 
creation  of  their  choice.  In  a  drama  of 
the  highest  order  there  is  little  food  for 
censure  or  hatred;  it  teaches  rather 
self-knowledge  and  self-respect.  Nei- 
ther the  eye  nor  the  mind  can  see  it- 
self, unless  reflected  upon  that  which 
it  resembles.  The  drama,  so  long  as  it 
continues  to  express  poetry,  is  as  a 
prismatic  and  many-sided  mirror, 

4* 


which  collects  the  brightest  rays  of 
human  nature  and  divides  and  repro- 
duces them  from  the  simplicity  of  these 
elementary  fprms,  and  touches  them 
with  majesty  and  beauty,  and  multi- 
plies all  that  it  reflects,  and  endows  it 
with  the  power  of  propagating  its  like 
wherever  it  may  fall. 

But  in  periods  of  the  decay  of  social 
life,  the  drama  sympathises  with  that 
decay.  Tragedy  becomes  a  cold  imita- 
tion of  the  form  of  the  great  master- 
pieces of  antiquity,  divested  of  all 
harmonious  accompaniment  of  the 
kindred  arts;  and  often  the  very  form 
misunderstood,  or  a  weak  attempt  to 
teach  certain  doctrines,  which  the 
writer  considers  as  moral  truths;  and 
which  are  usually  no  more  than  spe- 
cious flatteries  of  some  gross  vice  or 
weakness,  with  which  the  author,  in 
common  with  his  auditors,  are  infec- 
ted. Hence  what  has  been  called  the 
classical  and  domestic  drama.  Addi- 
son's  "Cato"  is  a  specimen  of  the  one; 

43 


and  would  it  were  not  superfluous  to 
cite  examples  of  the  other!  To  such 
purposes  poetry  can  not  be  made  sub- 
servient. Poetry  is  a  sword  of  light- 
ning, ever  unsheathed,  which  consumes 
the  scabbard  that  would  contain  it. 
And  thus  we  observe  that  all  dramatic 
writings  of  this  nature  are  unimagina- 
tive in  a  singular  degree;  they  affect 
sentiment  and  passion,  which,  divested 
of  imagination,  are  other  names  for 
caprice  and  appetite.  The  period  in 
our  own  history  of  the  grossest  degra- 
dation of  the  drama  is  the  reign  of 
Charles  II.,  when  all  forms  in  which 
poetry  had  been  accustomed  to  be 
expressed  became  hymns  to  the  tri- 
umph of  kingly  power  over  liberty  and 
virtue.  Milton  stood  alone  illumina- 
ting an  age  unworthy  of  him.  At  such 
periods  the  calculating  principle  per- 
vades all  the  forms  of  dramatic  exhi- 
bition, and  poetry  ceases  to  be  expressed 
upon  them.  Comedy  loses  its  ideal  uni- 
versality: wit  succeeds  to  humour;  we 

44 


laugh  from  self-complacency  and  tri- 
umph, instead  of  pleasure;  malignity, 
sarcasm,  and  contempt  succeed  to 
sympathetic  merrimentj  we  hardly 
laugh,  but  we  smile.  Obscenity,  which 
is  ever  blasphemy  against  the  divine 
beauty  in  life,  becomes,  from  the  very 
veil  which  it  assumes,  more  active  if 
less  disgusting:  it  is  a  monster  for  which 
the  corruption  of  society  for  ever  brings 
forth  new  food,  which  it  devours  in 
secret. 

The  drama  being  that  form  under 
which  a  greater  number  of  modes  of 
expression  of  poetry  are  susceptible  of 
being  combined  than  any  other,  the 
connexion  of  poetry  and  social  good  is 
more  observable  in  the  drama  than  in 
whatever  other  form.  And  it  is  indis- 
putable that  the  highest  perfection  of 
human  society  has  ever  corresponded 
with  the  highest  dramatic  excellence; 
and  that  the  corruption  or  the  extinc- 
tion of  the  drama  in  a  nation  where  it 
has  once  flourished,  is  a  mark  of  a 

45 


corruption  of  manners,  and  an  extinc- 
tion of  the  energies  which  sustain  the 
soul  of  social  life.  But  as  Machiavelli 
says  of  political  institutions,  that  life 
may  be  preserved  and  renewed,  if  men 
should  arise  capable  of  bringing  back 
the  drama  to  its  principles.  And  this 
is  true  with  respect  to  poetry  in  its 
most  extended  sense:  all  language, 
institution  and  form,  require  not  only 
to  be  produced  but  to  be  sustained:  the 
office  and  character  of  a  poet  partici- 
pates in  the  divine  nature  as  regards 
providence,  no  less  than  as  regards 
creation. 

Civil  war,  the  spoils  of  Asia,  and  the 
fatal  predominance  first  of  the  Mace- 
donian, and  then  of  the  Roman  arms, 
were  so  many  symbols  of  the  extinc- 
tion or  suspension  of  the  creative  facul- 
ty in  Greece.  The  bucolic  writers,  who 
found  patronage  under  the  lettered 
tyrants  of  Sicily  and  Egypt,  were  the 
latest  representatives  of  its  most  glor- 
ious reign.  Their  poetry  is  intensely 


melodious;  like  the  odour  of  the  tube- 
rose, it  overcomes  and  sickens  the 
spirit  with  excess  of  sweetness;  whilst 
the  poetry  of  the  preceding  age  was 
as  a  meadow-gale  of  June,  which  min- 
gles the  fragrance  of  all  the  flowers 
of  the  field  and  adds  a  quickening  and 
harmonising  spirit  of  its  own  which 
endows  the  sense  with  a  power  of 
sustaining  its  extreme  delight.  The 
bucolic  and  erotic  delicacy  in  written 
poetry  is  correlative  with  that  softness 
in  statuary,  music,  and  the  kindred 
arts,  and  even  in  manners  and  institu- 
tions, which  distinguished  the  epoch 
to  which  I  now  refer,  "Nor  is  it  the 
poetical  faculty  itself,  or  any  misappli- 
cation of  it,  to  which  this  want  of 
harmony  is  to  be  imputed.  An  equal 
sensibility  to  the  influence  of  the  senses 
and  the  affections  is  to  be  found  in  the 
writings  of  Homer  and  Sophocles:  the 
former,  especially,  has  clothed  sensual 
and  pathetic  images  with  irresistible 
attractions.  Their  superiority  over 

47 


these  succeeding  writers  consists  in  the 
presence  o£  those  thoughts  which 
belong  to  the  inner  faculties  of  our 
nature,  not  in  the  absence  of  those 
which  are  connected  with  the  external: 
their  incomparable  perfection  consists 
in  a  harmony  of  the  union  of  all.  It  is 
not  what  the  erotic  poets  have,  but 
what  they  have  not,  in  which  their 
imperfection  consists.  It  is  not  inas- 
much as  they  were  poets,  but  inasmuch 
as  they  were  not  poets,  that  they  can 
be  considered  with  any  plausibility  as 
connected  with  the  corruption  of  their 
age.  Had  that  corruption  availed  so  as 
to  extinguish  in  them  the  sensibility  to 
pleasure,  passion,  and  natural  scenery, 
which  is  imputed  to  them  as  an  im- 
perfection, the  last  triumph  of  evil 
would  have  been  achieved.  For  the 
end  of  social  corruption  is  to  destroy 
all  sensibility  to  pleasure;  and,  there- 
fore, it  is  corruption.  It  begins  at  the 
imagination  and  the  intellect  as  at  the 
core,  and  distributes  itself  thence  as  a 

48 


paralysing  venom,  through  the  affec- 
tions into  the  very  appetites,  until  all 
become  a  torpid  mass  in  which  hardly 
sense  survives.  At  the  approach  of 
such  a  period,  poetry  ever  addresses 
itself  to  those  faculties  which  are  the 
last  to  be  destroyed,  and  its  voice  is 
heard,  like  the  footsteps  of  Astraea, 
departing  from  the  world.  Poetry  ever 
communicates  all  the  pleasure  which 
men  are  capable  of  receiving:  it  is  ever 
still  the  light  of  life;  the  source  of 
whatever  of  beautiful  or  generous  or 
true  can  have  place  in  an  evil  time.  It 
will  readily  be  confessed  that  those 
among  the  luxurious  citizens  of  Syra- 
cuse and  Alexandria,  who  were  delight- 
ed with  the  poems  of  Theocritus,  were 
less  cold,  cruel,  and  sensual  than  the 
remnant  of  their  tribe.  But  corruption 
must  utterly  have  destroyed  the  fabric 
of  human  society  before  poetry  can 
ever  cease.  The  sacred  links  of  that 
chain  have  never  been  entirely  disjoin- 
ted, which  descending  through  the 

g  49 


minds  of  many  men  is  attached  to 
those  great  minds,  whence  as  from  a 
magnet  the  invisible  effluence  is  sent 
forth,  which  at  once  connects,  ani- 
mates, and  sustains  the  life  of  all.  It  is 
the  faculty  which  contains  within  itself 
the  seeds  at  once  of  its  own  and  of 
social  renovation.  And  let  us  not  cir- 
cumscribe the  effects  of  the  bucolic  and 
erotic  poetry  within  the  limits  of  the 
sensibility  of  those  to  whom  it  was 
addressed.  They  may  have  perceived 
the  beauty  of  those  immortal  compo- 
sitions, simply  as  fragments  and  isola- 
ted portions:  those  who  are  more  finely 
organised,  or  born  in  a  happier  age, 
may  recognise  them  as  episodes  to  that 
great  poem,  which  all  poets,  like  the 
co-operating  thoughts  of  one  great 
mind,  have  built  up  since  the  beginning 
of  the  world. 

The  same  revolutions  within  a 
narrower  sphere  had  place  in  ancient 
Rome;  but  the  actions  and  forms  of 
its  social  life  never  seem  to  have  been 

50 


perfectly  saturated  with  the  poetical 
element.  The  Romans  appear  to  have 
considered  the  Greeks  as  the  selectest 
treasuries  of  the  selectest  forms  of 
manners  and  of  nature,  and  to  have 
abstained  from  creating  in  measured 
language,  sculpture,  music,  or  archi- 
tecture, anything  which  might  bear  a 
particular  relation  to  their  own  condi- 
tion, whilst  it  should  bear  a  general  one 
to  the  universal  constitution  of  the 
world.  But  we  judge  from  partial  evi- 
dence, and  we  judge  perhaps  partially. 
Ennius,  Varro,  Pacuvius,  and  Accius, 
all  great  poets,  have  been  lost.  Lucre- 
tius is  in  the  highest,  and  Virgil  in  a 
very  high  sense,  a  creator.  The  chosen 
delicacy  of  expressions  of  the  latter, 
are  as  a  mist  of  light  which  conceal 
from  us  the  intense  and  exceeding 
truth  of  his  conceptions  of  nature.  Livy 
is  instinct  with  poetry.  Yet  Horace, 
Catullus,  Ovid,  and  generally  the  other 
great  writers  of  the  Virgilian  age, 
saw  man  and  nature  in  the  mirror  of 


Greece.  The  institutions  also,  and  the 
religion  of  Rome,  were  less  poetical 
than  those  of  Greece,  as  the  shadow 
is  less  vivid  than  the  substance.  Hence 
poetry  in  Rome  seemed  to  follow, 
rather  than  accompany,  the  perfection 
of  political  and  domestic  society.  The 
true  poetry  of  Rome  lived  in  its  insti- 
tutions; for  whatever  of  beautiful,  true, 
and  majestic,  they  contained,  could 
have  sprung  only  from  the  faculty 
which  creates  the  order  in  which  they 
consist.  The  life  of  Camillus,  the  death 
of  Regulus;  the  expectation  of  the  sen- 
ators, in  their  godlike  state,  of  the 
victorious  Gauls;  the  refusal  of  the 
republic  to  make  peace  with  Hanni- 
bal, after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  were 
not  the  consequences  of  a  refined  cal- 
culation of  the  probable  personal  ad- 
vantage to  result  from  such  a  rhythm 
and  order  in  the  shows  of  life,  to  those 
who  were  at  once  the  poets  and  the 
actors  of  these  immortal  dramas.  The 
imagination  beholding  the  beauty  of 

5* 


this  order,  created  it  out  of  itself  accor- 
ding to  its  own  idea;  the  consequence 
was  empire,  and  the  reward  ever-living 
fame.  These  things  are  not  the  less 
poetry,  quia  carent  vate  sacro.  They 
are  the  episodes  of  that  cyclic  poem 
written  by  Time  upon  the  memories 
of  men.  The  Past,  like  an  inspired 
rhapsodist,  fills  the  theatre  of  ever- 
lasting generations  with  their  harmony. 
At  length  the  ancient  system  of  re- 
ligion and  manners  had  fulfilled  the 
circle  of  its  revolutions.  And  the  world 
would  have  fallen  into  utter  anarchy 
and  darkness,  but  that  there  were 
found  poets  among  the  authors  of  the 
Christian  and  chivalric  systems  of 
manners  and  religion,  who  created 
forms  of  opinion  and  action  never  be- 
fore conceived;  which,  copied  into  the 
imaginations  of  men,  became  as  gene- 
rals to  the  bewildered  armies  of  their 
thoughts.  It  is  foreign  to  the  present 
purpose  to  touch  upon  the  evil  pro- 
duced by  these  systems:  except  that  we 

53 


protest,  on  the  ground  of  the  principles 
already  established,  that  no  portion  of 
it  can  be  attributed  to  the  poetry  they 
contain. 

It  is  probable  that  the  poetry  of 
Moses,  Job,  David,  Solomon,  and  Isa- 
iah had  produced  a  great  effect  upon 
the  mind  of  Jesus  and  his  disciples. 
The  scattered  fragments  preserved  to 
us  by  the  biographers  of  this  extraor- 
dinary person,  are  all  instinct  with  the 
most  vivid  poetry.  But  his  doctrines 
seem  to  have  been  quickly  distorted. 
At  a  certain  period  after  the  preva- 
lence of  a  system  of  opinions  founded 
upon  those  promulgated  by  him,  the 
three  forms  into  which  Plato  had  dis- 
tributed the  faculties  of  mind  under- 
went a  sort  of  apotheosis,  and  be- 
came the  object  of  the  worship  of 
the  civilised  world.  Here  it  is  to  be 
confessed  that  "Light  seems  to  thick- 
en," and 

"The  crow  makes  wing  to  the  rooky 
wood, 

54 


Good  things  of  day  begin  to  droop 

and  drowse, 
And  night's  black  agents  to  their  preys 

do  rouze." 

But  mark  how  beautiful  an  order  has 
sprung  from  the  dust  and  blood  of  this 
fierce  chaos!  how  the  world,  as  from 
a  resurrection,  balancing  itself  on  the 
golden  wings  of  knowledge  and  of 
hope,  has  reassumed  its  yet  unwearied 
flight  into  the  heaven  of  time.  Listen 
to  the  music,  unheard  by  outward  ears, 
which  is  as  a  ceaseless  and  invisible 
wind,  nourishing  its  everlasting  course 
with  strength  and  swiftness. 

The  poetry  in  the  doctrines  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  mythology  and  institu- 
tions of  the  Celtic  conquerors  of  the 
Roman  empire,  outlived  the  darkness 
and  the  convulsions  connected  with 
their  growth  and  victory,  and  blended 
themselves  in  a  new  fabric  of  manners 
and  opinion.  It  is  an  error  to  impute 
the  ignorance  of  the  dark  ages  to  the 
Christian  doctrines  or  the  predomi- 

55 


nance  of  the  Celtic  nations.  Whatever 
of  evil  their  agencies  may  have  con- 
tained sprang  from  the  extinction  of 
the  poetical  principle,  connected  with 
the  progress  of  despotism  and  super- 
stition. Men,  from  causes  too  intricate 
to  be  here  discussed,  had  become  insen- 
sible and  selfish:  their  own  will  had 
become  feeble,  and  yet  they  were  its 
slaves,  and  thence  the  slaves  of  the  will 
of  others:  lust,  fear,  avarice,  cruelty,  and 
fraud,  characterised  a  race  amongst 
whom  no  one  was  to  be  found  capable 
of  creating  in  form,  language,  or  insti- 
tution. The  moral  anomalies  of  such 
a  state  of  society  are  not  justly  to  be 
charged  upon  any  class  of  events  im- 
mediately connected  with  them,  and 
those  events  are  most  entitled  to  our 
approbation  which  could  dissolve  it 
most  expeditiously.  It  is  unfortunate 
for  those  who  can  not  distinguish 
words  from  thoughts,  that  many  of 
these  anomalies  have  been  incorpora- 
ted into  our  popular  religion. 

56 


It  was  not  until  the  eleventh  centu- 
ry that  the  effects  of  the  poetry  of  the 
Christian  and  chivalric  systems  began 
to  manifest  themselves.  The  principle 
of  equality  had  been  discovered  and 
applied  by  Plato  in  his  Republic,  as  the 
theoretical  rule  of  the  mode  in  which 
the  materials  of  pleasure  and  of  power 
produced  by  the  common  skill  and 
labour  of  human  beings  ought  to  be 
distributed  among  them.  The  limita- 
tions of  this  rule  were  asserted  by  him 
to  be  determined  only  by  the  sensibility 
of  each,  or  the  utility  to  result  to  all. 
Plato,  following  the  doctrines  of  Tim- 
aeus  and  Pythagoras,  taught  also  a 
moral  and  intellectual  system  of  doc- 
trine, comprehending  at  once  the  past, 
the  present,  and  the  future  condition 
of  man.  Jesus  Christ  divulged  the 
sacred  and  eternal  truths  contained  in 
these  views  to  mankind,  and  Christi- 
anity, in  its  abstract  purity,  became  the 
exoteric  expression  of  the  esoteric  doc- 
trines of  the  poetry  and  wisdom  of 

h  57 


antiquity.  The  incorporation  of  the 
Celtic  nations  with  the  exhausted 
population  o£  the  south,  impressed 
upon  it  the  figure  of  the  poetry  exist- 
ing in  their  mythology  and  institutions. 
The  result  was  a  sum  of  the  action  and 
reaction  of  all  the  causes  included  in 
it;  for  it  may  be  assumed  as  a  maxim 
that  no  nation  or  religion  can  super- 
sede any  other  without  incorporating 
into  itself  a  portion  of  that  which  it 
supersedes.  The  abolition  of  personal 
and  domestic  slavery,  and  the  emanci- 
pation of  women  from  a  great  part  of 
the  degrading  restraints  of  antiquity, 
were  among  the  consequences  of  these 
events. 

The  abolition  of  personal  slavery  is 
the  basis  of  the  highest  political  hope 
that  it  can  enter  into  the  mind  of  man 
to  conceive.  The  freedom  of  women 
produced  the  poetry  of  sexual  love. 
Love  became  a  religion,  the  idols  of 
whose  worship  were  ever  present.  It 
was  as  if  the  statues  of  Apollo  and  the 

58 


Muses  had  been  endowed  with  life  and 
motion,  and  had  walked  forth  among 
their  worshippers;  so  that  earth  became 
peopled  by  the  inhabitants  of  a  diviner 
world.  The  familiar  appearance  and 
proceedings  of  life  became  wonderful 
and  heavenly,  and  a  paradise  was 
created  as  out  of  the  wrecks  of  Eden. 
And  as  this  creation  itself  is  poetry,  so 
its  creators  were  poets;  and  language 
was  the  instrument  of  their  art:  "Gal- 
eotto  fu  il  libro,  e  chi  lo  scrisse."  The 
Provencal  Trouveurs,  or  inventors, 
preceded  Petrarch,  whose  verses  are  as 
spells,  which  unseal  the  inmost  en- 
chanted fountains  of  the  delight  which 
is  in  the  grief  of  love.  It  is  impossible 
to  feel  them  without  becoming  a  por- 
tion of  that  beauty  which  we  contem- 
plate: it  were  superfluous  to  explain 
how  the  gentleness  and  the  elevation 
of  mind  connected  with  these  sacred 
emotions  can  render  men  more  ami- 
able, more  generous  and  wise,  and  lift 
them  out  of  the  dull  vapours  of  the 

59 


little  world  of  self.  Dante  understood 
the  secret  things  of  love  even  more 
than  Petrarch.  His  Vita  Nuova  is  an 
inexhaustible  fountain  of  purity  of  sen- 
timent and  language:  it  is  the  idealised 
history  of  that  period,  and  those  inter- 
vals of  his  life  which  were  dedicated 
to  love.  His  apotheosis  of  Beatrice  in 
Paradise,  and  the  gradations  of  his 
own  love  and  her  loveliness,  by  which 
as  by  steps  he  feigns  himself  to  have 
ascended  to  the  throne  of  the  Supreme 
Cause,  is  the  most  glorious  imagination 
of  modern  poetry.  The  acutest  critics 
have  justly  reversed  the  judgment  of 
the  vulgar,  and  the  order  of  the  great 
acts  of  the  "Divine  Drama,"  in  the 
measure  of  the  admiration  which  they 
accord  to  the  Hell,  Purgatory,  and 
Paradise.  The  latter  is  a  perpetual 
hymn  of  everlasting  love.  Love,  which 
found  a  worthy  poet  in  Plato  alone  of 
all  the  ancients,  has  been  celebrated 
by  a  chorus  of  the  greatest  writers  of 
the  renovated  world;  and  the  music 

60 


has  penetrated  the  caverns  of  society, 
and  its  echoes  still  drown  the  disso- 
nance of  arms  and  superstition.  At 
successive  intervals,  Ariosto,  Tasso, 
Shakespeare,  Spenser,  Calderon,  Rous- 
seau, and  the  great  writers  of  our  own 
age,  have  celebrated  the  dominion  of 
love,  planting  as  it  were  trophies  in  the 
human  mind  of  that  sublimest  victory 
over  sensuality  and  force.  The  true 
relation  borne  to  each  other  by  the 
sexes  into  which  human  kind  is  dis- 
tributed, has  become  less  misunder- 
stood; and  if  the  error  which  con- 
founded diversity  with  inequality  of 
the  powers  of  the  two  sexes  has  been 
partially  recognised  in  the  opinions  and 
institutions  of  modern  Europe,  we  owe 
this  great  benefit  to  the  worship  of 
which  chivalry  was  the  law,  and  poets 
the  prophets. 

The  poetry  of  Dante  may  be  con- 
sidered as  the  bridge  thrown  over  the 
stream  of  time,  which  unites  the 
modern  and  ancient  world.  The  dis- 

61 


torted  notions  of  invisible  things  which 
Dante  and  his  rival  Milton  have  ideal- 
ised, are  merely  the  mask  and  the 
mantle  in  which  these  great  poets 
walk  through  eternity  enveloped  and 
disguised.  It  is  a  difficult  question  to 
determine  how  far  they  were  conscious 
of  the  distinction  which  must  have 
subsisted  in  their  minds  between  their 
own  creeds  and  that  of  the  people. 
Dante  at  least  appears  to  wish  to  mark 
the  full  extent  of  it  by  placing  Riph- 
aeus,  whom  Virgil  calls  justissimus 
unus,  in  Paradise,  and  observing  a  most 
heretical  caprice  in  his  distribution  of 
rewards  and  punishments.  And  Mil- 
ton's poem  contains  within  itself  a 
philosophical  refutation  of  that  system, 
of  which,  by  a  strange  and  natural 
antithesis,  it  has  been  a  chief  and  pop- 
ular support.  Nothing  can  exceed  the 
energy  and  magnificence  of  the  char- 
acter of  Satan  as  expressed  in  "Paradise 
Lost."  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
he  could  ever  have  been  intended  for 


the  popular  personification  of  evil. 
Implacable  hate,  patient  cunning,  and 
a  sleepless  refinement  of  device  to  in- 
flict the  extremest  anguish  on  an  ene- 
my, these  things  are  evil;  and,  although 
venial  in  a  slave,  are  not  to  be  forgiven 
in  a  tyrant;  although  redeemed  by 
much  that  ennobles  his  defeat  in  one 
subdued,  are  marked  by  all  that  dis- 
honours his  conquest  in  the  victor. 
Milton's  Devil  as  a  moral  being  is  as 
far  superior  to  his  God,  as  one  who 
perseveres  in  some  purpose  which  he 
has  conceived  to  be  excellent  in  spite 
of  adversity  and  torture,  is  to  one  who 
in  the  cold  security  of  undoubted  tri- 
umph inflicts  the  most  horrible  revenge 
upon  his  enemy,  not  from  any  mistaken 
notion  of  inducing  him  to  repent  of  a 
perseverance  in  enmity,  but  with  the 
alleged  design  of  exasperating  him  to 
deserve  new  torments.  Milton  has  so 
far  violated  the  popular  creed  (if  this 
shall  be  judged  to  be  a  violation)  as  to 
have  alleged  no  superiority  of  moral 

63 


virtue  to  his  God  over  his  Devil.  And 
this  bold  neglect  of  a  direct  moral  pur- 
pose is  the  most  decisive  proof  of  the 
supremacy  of  Milton's  genius.  He  min- 
gled as  it  were  the  elements  of  human 
nature  as  colours  upon  a  single  pallet 
and  arranged  them  in  the  composition 
of  his  great  picture  according  to  the  laws 
of  epic  truth;  that  is,  according  to  the 
laws  of  that  principle  by  which  a  series 
of  actions  of  the  external  universe  and 
of  intelligent  and  ethical  beings  is  cal- 
culated to  excite  the  sympathy  of  suc- 
ceeding generations  of  mankind.  The 
Divina  Commedia  and  Paradise  Lost 
have  conferred  upon  modern  myth- 
ology a  systematic  form;  and  when 
change  and  time  shall  have  added  one 
more  superstition  to  the  mass  of  those 
which  have  arisen  and  decayed  upon 
the  earth,  commentators  will  be  learn- 
edly employed  in  elucidating  the  relig- 
ion of  ancestral  Europe,  only  not  ut- 
terly forgotten  because  it  will  have  been 
stamped  with  the  eternity  of  genius. 


Homer  was  the  first  and  Dante  the 
second  epic  poet:  that  is,  the  second 
poet,  the  series  of  whose  creations  bore 
a  defined  and  intelligible  relation  to  the 
knowledge  and  sentiment  and  religion 
of  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  and  of  the 
ages  which  followed  it,  developing  it- 
self in  correspondence  with  their  de- 
velopment. For  Lucretius  had  limed  the 
wings  of  his  swift  spirit  in  the  dregs  of 
the  sensible  world;  and  Virgil,  with  a 
modesty  that  ill  became  his  genius,  had 
affected  the  fame  of  an  imitator,  even 
whilst  he  created  anew  all  that  he  copied; 
and  none  among  the  flock  of  mock-birds, 
though  their  notes  were  sweet,  Apol- 
lonius  Rhodius,  Quintus  Calaber, 
Nonnus,  Lucan,  Statius,  or  Claudian, 
have  sought  even  to  fulfil  a  single  condi- 
tion of  epic  truth.  Milton  was  the  third 
epic  poet.  For  if  the  title  of  epic  in  its 
highest  sense  be  refused  to  the  Aeneid, 
still  less  can  it  be  conceded  to  the 
Orlando  Furioso,  the  Gerusalemme 
Liberata,  the  Lusiad,or  the  Fairy  Queen, 
i  65 


Dante  and  Milton  were  both  deeply 
penetrated  with  the  ancient  religion  of 
the  civilised  world;  and  its  spirit  exists 
in  their  poetry  probably  in  the  same 
proportion  as  its  forms  survived  in  the 
unref  ormed  worship  of  modern  Europe. 
The  one  preceded  and  the  other  fol- 
lowed the  Reformation  at  almost  equal 
intervals,  Dante  was  the  first  religious 
reformer,  and  Luther  surpassed  him 
rather  in  the  rudeness  and  acrimony, 
than  in  the  boldness  of  his  censures  of 
papal  usurpation.  Dante  was  the  first 
awakener  of  entranced  Europe;  he 
created  a  language,  in  itself  music  and 
persuasion,  out  of  a  chaos  of  inharmoni- 
ous barbarisms.  He  was  the  congre- 
gator  of  those  great  spirits  who  presi- 
ded over  the  resurrection  of  learning; 
the  Lucifer  of  that  starry  flock  which 
in  the  thirteenth  century  shone  forth 
from  republican  Italy,  as  from  a  heaven, 
into  the  darkness  of  the  benighted 
world.  His  very  words  are  instinct  with 
spirit;  each  is  as  a  spark,  a  burning 

66 


atom  of  inextinguishable  thought;  and 
many  y,et  lie  covered  in  the  ashes  of 
their  birth,  and  pregnant  with  the 
lightning  which  has  yet  found  no  con- 
ductor. All  high  poetry  is  infinite;  it  is 
as  the  first  acorn,  which  contained  all 
oaks  potentially.  Veil  after  veil  may 
be  undrawn,  and  the  inmost  naked 
beauty  of  the  meaning  never  exposed. 
A  great  poem  is  a  fountain  for  ever 
overflowing  with  the  waters  of  wisdom 
and  delight;  and  after  one  person  and 
one  age  has  exhausted  all  its  divine 
effluence  which  their  peculiar  relations 
enable  them  to  share,  another  and  yet 
another  succeeds,  and  new  relations 
are  ever  developed,  the  source  of  an 
unforeseen  and  an  unconceived  delight . 
The  age  succeeding  to  that  of  Dante, 
Petrarch,  and  Boccaccio,  was  character- 
ised by  a  revival  of  painting,  sculpture, 
and  architecture.  Chaucer  caught  the 
sacred  inspiration,  and  the  superstruc- 
ture of  English  literature  is  based  upon 
the  materials  of  Italian  invention. 

67 


But  let  us  not  be  betrayed  from  a 
defence  into  a  critical  history  of  poetry 
and  its  influence  on  society.  Be  it 
enough  to  have  pointed  out  the  effects 
of  poets,  in  the  large  and  true  sense  of 
the  word,  upon  their  own  and  all  suc- 
ceeding times. 

But  poets  have  been  challenged  to 
resign  the  civic  crown  to  reasoners  and 
mechanists,  on  another  plea.  It  is  ad- 
mitted that  the  exercise  of  the  imagi- 
nation is  most  delightful,  but  it  is 
alleged  that  that  of  reason  is  more 
useful.  Let  us  examine  as  the  grounds 
of  this  distinction  what  is  here  meant 
by  utility.  Pleasure  or  good,  in  a  gen- 
eral sense,  is  that  which  the  conscious- 
ness of  a  sensitive  and  intelligent  being 
seeks,  and  in  which,  when  found,  it 
acquiesces.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
pleasure,  one  durable,  universal,  and 
permanent;  the  other  transitory  and 
particular.  Utility  may  either  express 
the  means  of  producing  the  former  or 
the  latter.  In  the  former  sense,  what- 

68 


ever  strengthens  and  purifies  the  aff ec- 
tions,  enlarges  the  imagination,  and 
adds  spirit  to  sense,  is  useful.  But  a 
narrower  meaning  may  be  assigned  to 
the  word  utility,  confining  it  to  express 
that  which  banishes  the  importunity 
of  the  wants  of  our  animal  nature,  the 
surrounding  men  with  security  of  life, 
the  dispersing  the  grosser  delusions  of 
superstition,  and  the  conciliating  such 
a  degree  of  mutual  forbearance  among 
men  as  may  consist  with  the  motives 
of  personal  advantage. 

Undoubtedly  the  promoters  of  util- 
ity, in  this  limited  sense,  have  their 
appointed  office  in  society.  They  follow 
the  footsteps  of  poets,  and  copy  the 
sketches  of  their  creations  into  the 
book  of  common  life.  They  make  space, 
and  give  time.  Their  exertions  are  of 
the  highest  value,  so  long  as  they  con- 
fine their  administration  of  the  con- 
cerns of  the  inferior  powers  of  our 
nature  within  the  limits  due  to  the 
superior  ones.  But  whilst  the  sceptic 

69 


destroys  gross  superstitions,  let  him 
spare  to  deface,  as  some  of  the  French 
writers  have  defaced,  the  eternal  truths 
charactered  upon  the  imaginations  of 
men.  Whilst  the  mechanist  abridges, 
and  the  political  economist  combines 
labour,  let  them  beware  that  their 
speculations,  for  want  of  correspond- 
ence with  those  first  principles  which 
belong  to  the  imagination,  do  not  tend, 
as  they  have  in  modern  England,  to 
exasperate  at  once  the  extremes  of 
luxury  and  want.  They  have  exempli- 
fied the  saying,  "To  him  that  hath, 
more  shall  be  given;  and  from  him  that 
hath  not,  the  little  that  he  hath  shall 
be  taken  away."  The  rich  have  become 
richer,  and  the  poor  have  become  poor- 
er; and  the  vessel  of  the  state  is  driven 
between  the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  of 
anarchy  and  despotism.  Such  are  the 
effects  which  must  ever  flow  from  an 
unmitigated  exercise  of  the  calculating 
faculty. 

It  is  difficult  to  define  pleasure  in  its 
70 


highest  sense;  the  definition  involving 
a  number  of  apparent  paradoxes.  For, 
from  an  inexplicable  defect  of  harmo- 
ny in  the  constitution  of  human  nature, 
the  pain  of  the  inferior  is  frequently 
connected  with  the  pleasures  of  the 
superior  portions  of  our  being.  Sorrow, 
terror,  anguish,  despair  itself,  are  often 
the  chosen  expressions  of  an  approxi- 
mation to  the  highest  good.  Our  sym- 
pathy in  tragic  fiction  depends  on  this 
principle;  tragedy  delights  by  affording 
a  shadow  of  the  pleasure  which  exists 
in  pain.  This  is  the  source  also  of  the 
melancholy  which  is  inseparable  from 
the  sweetest  melody.  The  pleasure  that 
is  in  sorrow  is  sweeter  than  the  pleas- 
ure of  pleasure  itself.  And  hence  the 
saying,  "It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of 
mourning,  than  to  the  house  of  mirth." 
Not  that  this  highest  species  of  pleas- 
ure is  necessarily  linked  with  pain. 
The  delight  of  love  and  friendship,  the 
ecstacy  of  the  admiration  of  nature,  the 
joy  of  the  perception  and  still  more  of 

71 


the  creation  of  poetry,  is  often  wholly 
unalloyed. 

The  production  and  assurance  of 
pleasure  in  this  highest  sense  is  true 
utility.  Those  who  produce  and  pre- 
serve this  pleasure  are  poets  or  poet- 
ical philosophers. 

The  exertions  of  Locke,  Hume,  Gib- 
bon, Voltaire,  Rousseau,*  and  their 
disciples,  in  favour  of  oppressed  and 
deluded  humanity,  are  entitled  to  the 
gratitude  of  mankind.  Yet  it  is  easy  to 
calculate  the  degree  of  moral  and  in- 
tellectual improvement  which  the 
world  would  have  exhibited,  had  they 
never  lived.  A  little  more  nonsense 
would  have  been  talked  for  a  century 
or  two;  and  perhaps  a  few  more  men, 
women,  and  children  burnt  as  heretics. 
We  might  not  at  this  moment  have 

+ Although  Rousseau  has  been  thus 
classed,  he  was  essentially  a  poet.  The 
others,  even  Voltaire,  were  mere 
reasoners. 

7* 


been  congratulating  each  other  on  the 
abolition  of  the  Inquisition  in  Spain. 
But  it  exceeds  all  imagination  to  con- 
ceive what  would  have  been  the  moral 
condition  of  the  world  if  neither  Dante, 
Petrarch,  Boccaccio,  Chaucer,  Shake- 
speare, Calderon,  Lord  Bacon,  nor 
Milton,  had  ever  existed;  if  Raphael 
and  Michael  Angelo  had  never  been 
born;  if  the  Hebrew  poetry  had  never 
been  translated;  if  a  revival  of  the  study 
of  Greek  literature  had  never  taken 
place;  if  no  monuments  of  ancient  sculp- 
ture had  been  handed  down  to  us;  and 
if  the  poetry  of  the  religion  of  the  an- 
cient world  had  been  extinguished  to- 
gether with  its  belief.  The  human  mind 
could  never,  except  by  the  intervention 
of  these  excitements,  have  been  awak- 
ened to  the  invention  of  the  grosser 
sciences,  and  that  application  of  analyt- 
ical reasoning  to  the  aberrations  of 
society,  which  it  is  now  attempted  to 
exalt  over  the  direct  expression  of  the 
inventive  and  creative  faculty  itself. 

j  73 


We  have  more  moral,  political  and  his- 
torical wisdom  that  we  know  how  to 
reduce  into  practice;  we  have  more  scien- 
tific and  economical  knowledge  than  can 
be  accommodated  to  the  just  distribu- 
tion of  the  produce  which  it  multiplies. 
The  poetry  in  these  systems  of  thought 
is  concealed  by  the  accumulation  of 
facts  and  calculating  processes.  There 
is  no  want  of  knowledge  respecting 
what  is  wisest  and  best  in  morals,  gov- 
ernment, and  political  economy,  or  at 
least,  what  is  wiser  and  better  than 
what  men  now  practise  and  endure. 
But  we  let  "I  dare  not  wait  upon  I 
would,  like  the  poor  cat  in  the  adage." 
We  want  the  creative  faculty  to  imagine 
that  which  we  know;  we  want  the 
generous  impulse  to  act  that  which  we 
imagine;  we  want  the  poetry  of  life: 
our  calculations  have  outrun  concep- 
tion; we  have  eaten  more  than  we  can 
digest.  The  cultivation  of  those  sciences 
which  have  enlarged  the  limits  of  the 
empire  of  man  over  the  external  world, 

74 


has,  for  want  of  the  poetical  faculty, 
proportionally  circumscribed  those  of 
the  internal  world;  and  man,  having  en- 
slaved the  elements,  remains  himself  a 
slave,  To  what  but  a  cultivation  of  the 
mechanical  arts  in  a  degree  dispropor- 
tioned  to  the  presence  of  the  creative 
faculty,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  knowl- 
edge, is  to  be  attributed  the  abuse  of 
all  invention  for  abridging  and  combin- 
ing labour,  to  the  exasperation  of  the 
inequality  of  mankind?  From  what 
other  cause  has  it  arisen  that  the  dis- 
coveries which  should  have  lightened, 
have  added  a  weight  to  the  curse  im- 
posed on  Adam?  Poetry,  and  the  prin- 
ciple of  Self,  of  which  money  is  the 
visible  incarnation,  are  the  God  and 
Mammon  of  the  world. 

The  functions  of  the  poetical  faculty 
are  two-fold;  by  one  it  creates  new 
materials  of  knowledge,  and  power,  and 
pleasure;  by  the  other  it  engenders 
in  the  mind  a  desire  to  reproduce  and 
arrange  them  according  to  a  certain 

75 


rhythm  and  order  which  may  be  called 
the  beautiful  and  the  good.  The  culti- 
vation of  poetry  is  never  more  to  be 
desired  than  at  periods  when,  from  an 
excess  of  the  selfish  and  calculating 
principle,  the  accumulation  of  the  ma- 
terials of  external  life  exceed  the  quan- 
tity of  the  power  of  assimilating  them 
to  the  internal  laws  of  human  nature. 
The  body  has  then  become  too  unwieldy 
for  that  which  animates  it. 

Poetry  is  indeed  something  divine.  It 
is  at  once  the  centre  and  circumference 
of  knowledge;  it  is  that  which  compre- 
hends all  science,  and  that  to  which  all 
science  must  be  referred.  It  is  at  the 
same  time  the  root  and  blossom  of  all 
other  systems  of  thought;  it  is  that  from 
which  all  spring,  and  that  which  adorns 
all;  and  that  which,  if  blighted,  denies 
the  fruit  and  the  seed,  and  withholds 
from  the  barren  world  the  nourishment 
and  the  succession  of  the  scions  of  the 
tree  of  life.  It  is  the  perfect  and  con- 
summate surface  and  bloom  of  all 

76 


things;  it  is  as  the  odour  and  the  colour 
of  the  rose  to  the  texture  of  the  ele- 
ments which  compose  it,  as  the  form 
and  splendour  of  unfaded  beauty  to  the 
secrets  of  anatomy  and  corruption. 
What  were  virtue,  love,  patriotism, 
friendship— what  were  the  scenery  of 
this  beautiful  universe  which  we  inhab- 
it; what  were  our  consolations  on  this 
side  of  the  grave— and  what  were  our 
aspirations  beyond  it,  if  poetry  did  not 
ascend  to  bring  light  and  fire  from  those 
eternal  regions  where  the  owl-winged 
faculty  of  calculation  dare  not  ever 
soar?  Poetry  is  not  like  reasoning,  a 
power  to  be  exerted  according  to  the 
determination  of  the  will  A  man  can- 
not say,  "I  will  compose  poetry."  The 
greatest  poet  even  can  not  say  it;  for 
the  mind  in  creation  is  as  a  fading  coal, 
which  some  invisible  influence,  like  an 
inconstant  wind,  awakens  to  transitory 
brightness;  this  power  arises  from  with- 
in, like  the  colour  of  a  flower  which 
fades  and  changes  as  it  is  developed, 

77 


and  the  conscious  portions  of  our  na- 
tures are  unprophetic  either  of  its  ap- 
proach or  its  departure.  Could  this 
influence  be  durable  in  its  original  purity 
and  force,  it  is  impossible  to  predict  the 
greatness  of  the  results;  but  when 
composition  begins,  inspiration  is  al- 
ready on  the  decline,  and  the  most 
glorious  poetry  that  has  ever  been  com- 
municated to  the  world  is  probably  a 
feeble  shadow  of  the  original  concep- 
tions of  the  poet.  I  appeal  to  the  great- 
est poets  of  the  present  day,  whether 
it  is  not  an  error  to  assert  that  the  finest 
passages  of  poetry  are  produced  by 
labour  and  study.  The  toil  and  the  delay 
recommended  by  critics  can  be  justly 
interpreted  to  mean  no  more  than  a 
careful  observation  of  the  inspired  mo- 
ments, and  an  artificial  connexion  of 
the  spaces  between  their  suggestions 
by  the  intertexture  of  conventional  ex- 
pressions; a  necessity  only  imposed  by 
the  limitedness  of  the  poetical  faculty 
itself;  for  Milton  conceived  the  Para- 

78 


dise  Lost  as  a  whole  before  he  execu- 
ted it  in  portions.  We  have  his  own 
authority  also  for  the  muse  having 
"dictated"  to  him  the  "unpremeditated 
song/'  And  let  this  be  an  answer  to 
those  who  would  allege  the  fifty-six 
various  readings  of  the  first  line  of  the 
Orlando  Furioso.  Compositions  so 
produced  are  to  poetry  what  mosaic  is 
to  painting*  This  instinct  and  intuition 
of  the  poetical  faculty  is  still  more  ob- 
servable in  the  plastic  and  pictorial 
arts;  a  great  statue  or  picture  grows 
under  the  power  of  the  artist  as  a  child 
in  the  mother's  womb;  and  the  very 
mind  which  directs  the  hands  in  form- 
ation is  incapable  of  accounting  to  itself 
for  the  origin,  the  gradations,  or  the 
media  of  the  process. 

Poetry  is  the  record  of  the  best  and 
happiest  moments  of  the  happiest  and 
best  minds.  We  are  aware  of  evanes- 
cent visitations  of  thought  and  feeling 
sometimes  associated  with  place  or 
person,  sometimes  regarding  our  own 

79 


mind  alone,  and  always  arising  unfore- 
seen and  departing  unbidden,  but  ele- 
vating and  delightful  beyond  all  expres- 
sion: so  that  even  in  the  desire  and  the 
regret  they  leave,  there  cannot  but  be 
pleasure,  participating  as  it  does  in  the 
nature  of  its  object.  It  is  as  it  were  the 
interpenetration  of  a  diviner  nature 
through  our  own;  but  its  footsteps  are 
like  those  of  a  wind  over  the  sea,  which 
the  coming  calm  erases,  and  whose 
traces  remain  only  as  on  the  wrinkled 
sand  which  paves  it.  These  and  cor- 
responding conditions  of  being  are  ex- 
perienced principally  by  those  of  the 
most  delicate  sensibility  and  the  most 
enlarged  imagination;  and  the  state  of 
mind  produced  by  them  is  at  war  with 
every  base  desire.  The  enthusiasm  of 
virtue,  love,  patriotism,  and  friendship 
is  essentially  linked  with  such  emotions; 
and  whilst  they  last,  self  appears  as 
what  it  is,  an  atom  to  a  universe.  Poets 
are  not  only  subject  to  these  experien- 
ces as  spirits  of  the  most  refined  organ- 

80 


isation,  but  they  can  colour  all  that 
they  combine  with  the  evanescent  hues 
of  this  ethereal  world;  a  word,  a  trait 
in  the  representation  of  a  scene  or  a 
passion  will  touch  the  enchanted  chord, 
and  reanimate,  in  those  who  have  ever 
experienced  these  emotions,  the  sleep- 
ing, the  cold,  the  buried  image  of  the 
past,  Poetry  thus  makes  immortal  all 
that  is  best  and  most  beautiful  in  the 
world;  it  arrests  the  vanishing  appari- 
tions which  haunt  the  interlunations  of 
life,  and  veiling  them,  or  in  language 
or  in  form,  sends  them  forth  among 
mankind,  bearing  sweet  news  of  kind- 
red joy  to  those  with  whom  their  sisters 
abide — abide,  because  there  is  no  portal 
of  expression  from  the  caverns  of  the 
spirit  which  they  inhabit  into  the  uni- 
verse of  things.  Poetry  redeems  from 
decay  the  visitations  of  the  divinity  in 
man. 

Poetry  turns  all  things  to  loveliness; 
it  exalts  the  beauty  of  that  which  is 
most  beautiful,  and  it  adds  beauty  to 
k  81 


that  which  is  most  deformed;  it  marries 
exultation  and  horror,  grief  and  pleas- 
ure, eternity  and  change;  it  subdues  to 
union  under  its  light  yoke  all  irrecon- 
cilable things.  It  transmutes  all  that  it 
touches,  and  every  form  moving  within 
the  radiance  of  its  presence  is  changed 
by  wondrous  sympathy  to  an  incarna- 
tion of  the  spirit  which  it  breathes;  its 
secret  alchemy  turns  to  potable  gold 
the  poisonous  waters  which  flow  from 
death  through  life;  it  strips  the  veil  of 
familiarity  from  the  world,  and  lays 
bare  the  naked  and  sleeping  beauty, 
which  is  the  spirit  of  its  forms. 

All  things  exist  as  they  are  perceived: 
at  least  in  relation  to  the  percipient. 
"The  mind  is  its  own  place,  and  of 
itself  can  make  a  heaven  of  hell,  a  hell 
of  heaven."  But  poetry  defeats  the  curse 
which  binds  us  to  be  subjected  to  the 
accident  of  surrounding  impressions. 
And  whether  it  spreads  its  own  figured 
curtain,  or  withdraws  life's  dark  veil 
from  before  the  scene  of  things,  it 

82 


equally  creates  for  us  a  being  within 
our  being.  It  makes  us  the  inhabitants 
of  a  world  to  which  the  familiar  world 
is  a  chaos.  It  reproduces  the  common 
universe  of  which  we  are  portions  and 
percipients,  and  it  purges  from  our  in- 
ward sight  the  film  of  familiarity  which 
obscures  from  us  the  wonder  of  our 
being.  It  compels  us  to  feel  that  which 
we  perceive,  and  to  imagine  that  which 
we  know.  It  creates  anew  the  universe, 
after  it  has  been  annihilated  in  our  minds 
by  the  recurrence  of  impressions  blunt- 
ed by  reiteration.  It  justifies  the  bold 
and  true  words  of  Tasso:  Non  merita 
nome  di  creatore,  se  non  Iddio  ed  il 
Poeta. 

A  poet,  as  he  is  the  author  to  others 
of  the  highest  wisdom,  pleasure,  virtue, 
and  glory,  so  he  ought  personally  to  be 
the  happiest,  the  best,  the  wisest,  and 
the  most  illustrious  of  men.  As  to  his 
glory,  let  time  be  challenged  to  declare 
whether  the  fame  of  any  other  institu- 
tor  of  human  life  be  comparable  to  that 

83 


of  a  poet.  That  he  is  the  wisest,  the 
happiest  and  the  best,  inasmuch  as  he 
is  a  poet,  is  equally  incontrovertible: 
the  greatest  poets  have  been  men  of 
the  most  spotless  virtue,  of  the  most 
consummate  prudence,  and,  if  we  would 
look  into  the  interior  of  their  lives,  the 
most  fortunate  of  men:  and  the  excep- 
tions, as  they  regard  those  who  pos- 
sessed the  poetic  faculty  in  a  high  yet 
inferior  degree,  will  be  found  on  con- 
sideration to  confine  rather  than  destroy 
the  rule.  Let  us  for  a  moment  stoop  to 
the  arbitration  of  popular  breath,  and 
usurping  and  uniting  in  our  own  per- 
sons the  incompatible  characters  of 
accuser,  witness,  judge,  and  execution- 
er, let  us  decide  without  trial,  testimo- 
ny, or  form,  that  certain  motives  of 
those  who  are  "there  sitting  where  we 
dare  not  soar,"  are  reprehensible.  Let 
us  assume  that  Homer  was  a  drunkard, 
that  Virgil  was  a  flatterer,  that  Horace 
was  a  coward,  that  Tasso  was  a  mad- 
man, that  Lord  Bacon  was  a  peculator, 

84 


that  Raphael  was  a  libertine,  that  Spen- 
ser was  a  poet  laureate.  It  is  inconsis- 
tent with  this  division  of  our  subject 
to  cite  living  poets,  but  posterity  has 
done  ample  justice  to  the  great  names 
now  referred  to.  Their  errors  have  been 
weighed,  and  found  to  have  been  dust 
in  the  balance;  if  their  sins  "were  as 
scarlet,  they  are  now  white  as  snow:" 
they  have  been  washed  in  the  blood  of 
the  mediator  and  redeemer,  Time.  Ob- 
serve in  what  a  ludicrous  chaos  the 
imputations  of  real  or  fictitious  crime 
have  been  confused  in  the  contempo- 
rary calumnies  against  poetry  and  poets; 
consider  how  little  is,  as  it  appears— or 
appears,  as  it  is;  look  to  your  own 
motives,  and  judge  not,  lest  ye  be 
judged. 

Poetry,  as  has  been  said,  differs  in 
this  respect  from  logic,  that  it  is  not 
subject  to  the  control  of  the  active 
powers  of  the  mind,  and  that  its  birth 
and  recurrence  have  no  necessary  con- 
nexion with  the  consciousness  or  will, 

85 


It  is  presumptuous  to  determine  that 
these  are  the  necessary  conditions  of  all 
mental  causation,  when  mental  effects 
are  experienced  unsusceptible  of  being 
referred  to  them.  The  frequent  recur- 
rence of  the  poetical  power,  it  is  obvi- 
ous to  suppose,  may  produce  in  the 
mind  a  habit  of  order  and  harmony 
correlative  with  its  own  nature  and 
with  its  effect  upon  other  minds.  But 
in  the  intervals  of  inspiration,  and  they 
may  be  frequent  without  being  durable, 
a  poet  becomes  a  man,  and  is  abandoned 
to  the  sudden  reflux  of  the  influences 
under  which  others  habitually  live.  But 
as  he  is  more  delicately  organised  than 
other  men,  and  sensible  to  pain  and 
pleasure,  both  his  own  and  that  of 
others,  in  a  degree  unknown  to  them, 
he  will  avoid  the  one  and  pursue  the 
other  with  an  ardour  proportioned  to 
this  difference.  And  he  renders  himself 
obnoxious  to  calumny,  when  he  neglects 
to  observe  the  circumstances  under 
which  these  objects  of  universal  pursuit 

86 


and  flight  have  disguised  themselves  in 
one  another's  garments. 

But  there  is  nothing  necessarily  evil 
in  this  error,  and  thus  cruelty,  envy,  re- 
venge, avarice,  and  the  passions  purely 
evil,  have  never  formed  any  portion  of 
the  popular  imputations  on  the  lives  of 
poets. 

I  have  thought  it  most  favourable  to 
the  cause  of  truth  to  set  down  these 
remarks  according  to  the  order  in 
which  they  were  suggested  to  my  mind, 
by  a  consideration  of  the  subject  itself, 
instead  of  observing  the  formality  of  a 
polemical  reply;  but  if  the  view  which 
they  contain  be  just,  they  will  be  found 
to  involve  a  refutation  of  the  arguers 
against  poetry,  so  far  at  least  as  regards 
the  first  division  of  the  subject.  I  can 
readily  conjecture  what  should  have 
moved  the  gall  of  some  learned  and  in- 
telligent writers  who  quarrel  with  cer- 
tain versifiers;  I  confess  myself,  like 
them,  unwilling  to  be  stunned  by  the 
Theseids  of  the  hoarse  Codri  of  the  day. 

87 


Bavius  and  Maevius  undoubtedly  are, 
as  they  ever  were,  insufferable  persons. 
But  it  belongs  to  a  philosophical  critic 
to  distinguish  rather  than  confound. 

The  first  part  of  these  remarks  has 
related  to  poetry  in  its  elements  and 
principles;  and  it  has  been  shown,  as 
well  as  the  narrow  limits  assigned  them 
would  permit,  that  what  is  called 
poetry,  in  a  restricted  sense,  has  a  com- 
mon source  with  all  other  forms  of 
order  and  of  beauty,  according  to  which 
the  materials  of  human  life  are  suscep- 
tible of  being  arranged,  and  which  is 
poetry  in  an  universal  sense. 

The  second  part  will  have  for  its 
object  an  application  of  these  principles 
to  the  present  state  of  the  cultivation 
of  poetry,  and  a  defence  of  the  attempt 
to  idealise  the  modern  forms  of  man- 
ners and  opinions,  and  compel  them 
into  a  subordination  to  the  imaginative 
and  creative  faculty.  For  the  literature 
of  England,  an  energetic  development 
of  which  has  ever  preceded  or  accom- 


panied  a  great  and  £ ree  development  of 
the  national  will,  has  arisen  as  it  were 
from  a  new  birth.  In  spite  of  the  low- 
thoughted  envy  which  would  under- 
value contemporary  merit  our  own  will 
be  a  memorable  age  in  intellectual 
achievements,  and  we  live  among  such 
philosophers  and  poets  as  surpass  be- 
yond comparison  any  who  have  ap- 
peared since  the  last  national  struggle 
for  civil  and  religious  liberty.  The  most 
unfailing  herald,  companion,  and  fol- 
lower of  the  awakening  of  a  great 
people  to  work  a  beneficial  change  in 
opinion  or  institution,  is  poetry.  At 
such  periods  there  is  an  accumulation 
of  the  power  of  communicating  and 
receiving  intense  and  impassioned  con- 
ceptions respecting  man  and  nature. 
The  persons  in  whom  this  power  re- 
sides, may  often,  as  far  as  regards  many 
portions  of  their  nature,  have  little  ap- 
parent correspondence  with  that  spirit 
of  good  of  which  they  are  the  ministers. 
But  even  whilst  they  deny  and  abjure, 
1 


they  are  yet  compelled  to  serve,  the 
power  which  is  seated  on  the  throne 
of  their  own  soul.  It  is  impossible  to 
read  the  compositions  of  the  most  cele- 
brated writers  of  the  present  day  with- 
out being  startled  with  the  electric  life 
which  burns  within  their  words.  They 
measure  the  circumference  and  sound 
the  depths  of  human  nature  with  a 
comprehensive  and  all-penetrating 
spirit  and  they  are  themselves  perhaps 
the  most  sincerely  astonished  at  its 
manifestations;  for  it  is  less  their  spirit 
than  the  spirit  of  the  age.  Poets  are 
the  hierophants  of  an  unapprehended 
inspiration;  the  mirrors  of  the  gigantic 
shadows  which  futurity  casts  upon  the 
present;  the  words  which  express  what 
they  understand  not;  the  trumpets 
which  sing  to  battle,  and  feel  not  what 
they  inspire;  the  influence  which  is 
moved  not  but  moves.  Poets  are  the 
unacknowledged  legislators  of  the 
world. 


90 


This  copy  of  "A  Defence  of  Poetry" 
is  one  of  an  edition  of  500  copies 
printed  on  French  Hand-made  paper 
and  8  on  Imperial  Japan  Vellum  at  the 
press  of  Geo.  F.  McKiernan  6i  Co.,  in 
Chicago:  after  which  the  type  has  been 
distributed.  Designed  by  and  printed 
under  the  supervision  of  Ralph  Fletcher 
Seymour  for  the  Publishers,  The 
Bobbs-Merrill  Company,  Indianapolis. 


26220 


a 


