Hello. Hello. My name is George. I'm a
producer here at How to Academy, and
it's such a pleasure to see such full
house. So, thank you so much for joining
us. Um, as a producer, I get to do the
fun housekeeping bits, which is just to
say, um, that copies of Slavoy's book,
Quantum Theory, are available for sale
out there, and we're delighted that
Slavo will be joining us after the show
to sign and he'll be doing that around
here. So, please make sure you form an
orderly line. Focus on the orderly,
focus on the line part of that down
here, um, after the show. um a man that
doesn't really need much of an
introduction. You know who he is.
Philosophical rock star um consumate
Joker, film star, um and uh the author
of books including uh on progress um uh
Too Late to Awaken, Quantum Theory, um
and we're delighted that he's joining us
for another show. So um so so yeah, I'm
very very excited about this and we are
delighted as well that he'll be in
conversation with Alex O' Connor who is
the uh podcaster video maker um better
known often um as Cosmic Skeptic. So um
please join me in giving them a huge
round of applause and enjoy the
conversation. Thanks.
&gt;&gt; Go ahead. Go ahead. Thanks.
Thank you.
&gt;&gt; This is for you.
&gt;&gt; That's for me. Yeah, we're we're going
to try and stick to the rules timewise.
Um we've already broken one rule because
we seem to have swapped names, but I'm
sure no one's particularly confused. Um
Slavoid, how are you? How is it being
back in London?
Well, I'm unfortunately still alive, but
uh
getting close to it. No, seriously. I
wonder if you have the same attitude as
me. I am not afraid of death. I'm afraid
of long dying.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; This makes a point maybe. I spoke with a
professor in New York who was who was
there when Hannah Arent was dying
&gt;&gt; and it was ideal. She invited people to
her home. They were talking and she was
like in a hotel like this. Put the head
down, dozed off a little bit, then she
reawakened, talked a little bit, fell
asleep to go, reawakened, then fell
asleep and didn't awaken.
That was it. Isn't this wonderful?
Sorry, let go on.
&gt;&gt; Well, I actually uh of course we'll do
questions at the end which people are
submitting with the QR code. One of the
questions was already that we've had
about how you deal with death as an
atheist materialist and we were talking
upstairs and it seems like our biggest
point of overlap is our interest in
theology and perhaps that's a good place
to start. You're you consider yourself
what an atheist materialist. Would you
call yourself that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, it's a very precise term. I
would love to explain it although I
would like to avoid repeating myself too
much. I I think it can be in very simple
short terms very briefly.
Uh I define myself as Christian atheist.
&gt;&gt; Atheist absolutely none of that stuff
you know maybe is maybe God is not. I'll
also absolutely note that Richard
Docky's approach how do they call
themselves cultural Christians
&gt;&gt; like the idea is we know there is no God
but nonetheless among the existing
ethical moral orders Christianity is
relatively the best no no it's much more
precise first I my definition of
atheism
is not simply there is no god. Yes, it's
parts of it of course. But uh if you ask
people or a person, do you believe in
God or no? Sorry, you may have noticed I
have even a little bit of temperature.
So be patient. Uh
you know it's a very complex question.
You should know this as skeptic. You
know although when we the people took
over the people it will be end of you
will have to say communism or not. No
skepticism there. It's gulak or a seat
in Moscow in
sorry let's go on quite more seriously I
promise
for me crucially here the debate which
defines this best between I quoted in my
uh uh in my Christian atheism book at
the beginning between Einstein and
Neil's bore Einstein with all respect
for him defined as
Spulosian, he said, "Of course, there is
no personal God, blah blah." But when
you look at the universe from a proper
scientific distance, you see the
wonderful harmony of all of it.
And this gives you a satisfactory
feeling to some kind of a
almost religious experience, divine
order and so on.
And uh uh this is how also Einstein
uh
grounded his famous physics against
quantum physics. God doesn't play dice.
You know
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And you know what is I repeated it a
couple of times in my work li
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; It is don't tell God what to do. I don't
this is not a theological statement. The
point is that for me the fundamental
religious stance
&gt;&gt; is precisely
and I'm sorry if you know this line of
thought but I think it's crucial. It's
precisely this idea that
truth does not reside in this global
perspective. Let's see it in totality.
For me the worst of Christianity or any
other
global religious approach
is this metaphor which even today is
often used like if you think you are
seeing something horrible.
This is like looking at a painting great
painting for from too close. Imagine and
sorry for the vulgar case. Imagine var
in the sense of everybody knows it mona.
If you look at it from one inch or
closer you see just a stain. If you
withdraw back you will see that this
what appeared to you as stain ethical
evil whatever contributes to global
harmony. I think that
for me the way I read Christianity it
renounces exactly this global
perspective what Lenians would have
called the big other this idea that no
matter how confused things appear to us
all the horrors in our daily experience
globally it's a harmonious totality
that's why but we did it yesterday here.
We don't have to go to one. That's my
interest in quantum physics. The basic
point is that precisely there is no
totality
which is elevated above the texture of
reality. Every totality, every unity,
every view of all of it is partial. But
let me just conclude very quickly. Uh so
I think that why my obsession with
Christianity as an atheist because I
think that what Christianity stages
the story of crucifixion and so on as
Hegel who is my source here to it
what dies on the cross is not a
representative messenger of God like God
is abdor Okay, let's send my son down to
help people. Okay, they crucified it. It
didn't work. So, come back to me, my
son. We'll try again. No. What dies
Hegel says this, what dies on the cross
is God of beyond itself. For Hegel, what
dies on the cross is this very idea that
there is some higher force. It doesn't
have to be personal God. It can be and
in this sense for me Stalin is deeply
religious not only he was when he was
young. You know that Stalin he wrote
when he was young theological student he
wrote some short religious poems which
became national treasures people even
don't know the stalling and read them
but what I want to say is that you know
why stalin is
still theological and stalism because it
still has this fate of no matter how
horrible things are now if you look at
them from proper distance you can
somehow justify it. You you can see that
these are just small stains
but from a proper distance you see that
these states contribute to global
harmony. And this is why the most
intelligent justification of Stalinist
purges was written by book published in
1946 I think by Maurice Merloonti
the famous colleague of starter then
they split called I think humanism and
terror. His idea is that uh uh yes
Stalinist terror is a horrible thing but
if the result of this terror will be a
thriving happy new communist society
then retroactively it will be justified
for me this is precisely what the death
of Christ means and prohibits this
stance. No, let's take 20th century.
There are other horrors in 21st century.
Let's take uh the standard name
colonalization in modern era or them uh
uh gulak awitz and so on. Isn't it
obscene to say yeah Awitz is sustain if
you look too close at it but from a
proper distance uh it contributes to
global harmony.
We see an urge to do this because I met
in Israel years ago
a group of Jews a small sect but not
leas small some 200,000 people who read
try to read Holocaust in this way
&gt;&gt; it is that Jews got to too satisfied
with sorry with living among
uh Christians in the west and God in his
infinite wisdom organized holocaust to
remind them it's time for you to return
home. But it's for me a crazy very
tragic position. For me Christianity
means first
and that's for me even at the mystical
level here. I'm not afraid to assume the
term how he by he I mean John Milbank
your great orthodox
Christian he called me a mystical
materialist.
Yeah, why not? By this I means that the
experience that there is no big other as
lon would have put it. That is to say
that there is no higher rational scheme
that would somehow justify or enable us
to locate to provide meaning to horrors
that are happening. We have to renounce
this. It's not just bad news because at
the same time it opens up a space for
freedom for free action. This is why I
think the unique thing about
Christianity is it's simply a story put
in theological terms about how God dies.
God precisely at this transcendental
aprioris rang provides meaning to our
lives. Even in Marxism you usually find
this all the class struggle horrors
don't worry too much. Oh, at the end
communalism will come out of this and uh
we get Holy Spirit. That's what
fascinates me. As I often debating with
theological friends and what uh as I
often like to say what is Holy Spirit?
It's the first forum of communist party
for me in the sense of comrades. They
are there egalitarian community. You
know, that's how I read Christ famous
words. You know, when they tell him uh
he's preaching in a tent, your family is
out there and he shows at people in
there and says, "This is my family, my
followers." It doesn't mean you have to
hate your family. I think family stands
here for the entire social hierarchic
order. The idea of holy spirit is you
know as St. Paul says for me there are
no Jews or tagans whatever term he use
there are no no men and women and so on.
We are just united in Christ. I I think
that this idea of a
egalitarian community of comrades. My
good friend Judy Dean wrote a wonderful
short book on the notion of comrade.
tried trying to read it totally outside
this usual uh uh notion of you know
comrade communist stalinist comrade is
something somebody with whom you are not
supposed to be friendly you just share
the commitment to a course so I think
all this topic of uh of
second coming and so on I think it's a
vagger misreading. I have a very stalist
reading of gospels. All that
has to be censored that as if Christ
will really come. No, God is over. You
can read I don't know in which uh in
which uh in which of the four
gospels that when people ask Christ some
apostles are uh uh how will we know that
you are back who says when there is a
love among couple of you I am there and
I take this literally
so I read in the now you will say I This
is for me, sorry to insult you
preemptively in advance. This is for me
the idiots question. But why don't you
say this directly? Why do you need this
detour through religion? Ah my answer is
because this trust into big other which
is for me the fundamental form of
religion in some higher cosmic order. It
can be personal God or not. This is
something that is not simply
a historical
sign of alienation and so on. It is
something that pertains to our very
symbolic order. When as lon says when
you speak you in some sense already
believe and I think that's how all
radical theologians read.
Sorry.
Read the death of Christ that this very
basic theological structure trust into
the big other disintegrates. It's a
terrifying experience. Your world has to
break down and then from zero point you
get holy ghost or holy spirit. I will
not go into all these problems but what
I'm saying is that that would be my
reading why I am a Christian atheist
because it's not you can be also a
non-Christian atheist. I think to be
truly an atheist you have to go through
this Christian experience of the best of
God. If you don't go through it then
then then
you are like standard communist and so
on big other some theological structure
survives and just to conclude maybe this
can bring us to political topic no
&gt;&gt; uh I for example today
it's it's not just Gaza Ukraine whatever
the usual suspects two of the news
recent news which maybe you follow then
which really horrified me where uh you
know uh I think versa books already
published or not a book called scam
analysis
of what happens in that triangle Myanmar
uh Laos
uh Thailand
there is there a gangster community
tens of thousand people specialized in
digital scam. They contact through the
web people all around the world. The
world on the one hand
trying to get some money for you,
promising investment. On the other hand,
erotic challenge like ladies talk to
you, send you their pictures, you again
send them blah blah blah. Okay, doesn't
matter. What matters is this. Do you
know what
what money we are talking here about?
This small gangster triangle there
turns around
so much money that only two world
economies turn around more money. United
States and China. They are incredibly
incredibly financially strong. Point
two,
they work through slaves instead of
direct slavery. They typical story, it
was now fashionable of Fandela Russian
girl, beautiful model. They told her a
nice post to to to be a hostess whatever
in Thailand. She landed there. They took
her on a track, went to that Myanmar
camp. Then she was forced to seduce men
via phone to work for 14 to 17 hours a
day. and he had to fulfill a quota
getting to after she didn't fill the
quota you get to another building where
you are kept cate and they are gradually
taking your body part till you die
selling them this is again a are we
aware this is what is happening and I it
would be very difficult to justify it in
any theological term or I read another
thing in southern Libya
Many refugees from Sudan, Eritraa walk
through to eat to reach northern Libya
to go across. Yes. What happens is that
they are kidnapped when they walk alone
through the desert and again we are not
talking about 50 people. There are a
couple of camps altogether. There are
people think definitely over 10,000
people. They identify you. Then they
torture you in front of a camera and
they send to your family which is
already in Europe or there in Sudan.
They say long clips regularly every week
of how you are slowly tortured and
dying. And then they say if you don't
send us money he will die. Then to add
insult to injury when you die you get
the last message if you want the body
another 100,000
of I mean uh things happen shapen like
this and for me a trope perch Christian
attitude is not oh everything will be at
some point redeemed no I think the basic
Christian attitude is the one I like
things from good commercial movies from
time to time you have a good line
in one of them I forgot which one I
think even Brett Pete plays in it a guy
who is basically not bad but he's caught
in a shelf destructive n when he finally
dies the priest says what can we as
Christians do in such a situation you
see somebody shelf
in a self-destructive mood. You could
just say, "I know you have your faith. I
cannot do anything but just this pure
idea of being a passive witness." Like I
am here with you no matter what you do.
I think this not some active salvation
is the basic attitude of Christianity.
So my view is again it's very desperate
along these lines again that's my basic
position.
&gt;&gt; If your view is
&gt;&gt; elder attack
&gt;&gt; if your view
&gt;&gt; if it is that Christianity is not
literally true. Um you you don't sort of
believe in the resurrection. In fact you
don't even think that's what
Christianity is ultimately about. It's
gone under the under the front just
there.
&gt;&gt; See it there. Yeah. Uh earlier you said
you know you don't like this cultural
Christianity thing and I don't either
but I wonder if it's for different
reasons because I'm wondering what it is
that separates you from such a view. I
mean they say I don't think Christianity
is true. I think there are some elements
which rightly if rightly identified
provide a helpful sort of metaphor to
allow us to all get along. It sounds
like you're saying something not too
dissimilar. So what is it that's
different between your position and
theirs both? Today my about Christianity
is just that's why I like Paul the big
one. So Paul you know intelligent
Christians theologians notice something
Paul is not interesting interested at
all in all the what miracles
Christ does and so on. The basic message
of Paul is Christ died on the cross.
What does this mean? what comes beside
it's unimportant So for me in
Christianity we find even more than in
Buddhism I think this idea of
the big other doesn't exist. I don't
find this in other religions. For
example in uh uh let's to let's take a
quick look at two other religions of the
book.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. uh giraism and Islam.
&gt;&gt; Islam is simple simple in the sense that
just Christ is celebrated there but not
as directly son of God which means God
but as another messenger of God.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
That doesn't interest me. God must die
in my universe. Not just stay stay up
there. And then uh
Judaism what I find attractive in
Judaism you find many interesting things
is this idea of God as radical
otherness. All my Lawian
Jewish friends, Jewish also in the sense
of commitment to Jewish theology claim
this that in Christianity
there is still love. Love links you to
God.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But only in Judaism anxiety of the
otherness. This God is a other who
doesn't give you a clear answer. you
never know what he means and so on. But
I think this is a wrong reading of uh
Christianity. I think love that you get
in Christianity and now I will give you
a surprise you know which whom I now
even co-published in Italian a book on
Padre Rafael Nogaro a big person in
Vatican where he goes into this openly.
He said
you shouldn't love God. You should love
your people around you. And God is this
love itself. For him the greatest sin is
to say I love God. No, God is
love.
In a world without God. So I I don't
find in any other religion something uh
something similar although I know in
Judaism and in Christianity
you find wonderful things. For example
in Judaism my favorite story is I wonder
if you know it at two places in Thail
you find something which is incredibly
almost materialist. You find two rabbis
fighting. I'm sorry if you know the
story. It's two times repeated. Once in
a serious way, once in a more comical
way. They struggle about theological
point. And the guy who is losing the
debate says, "Let's call Jehovah. He
will decide." And Jehovah, an old man
comes. And then you know what does the
guy who was winning the debate? What
does he say? These are Jewish sacred
writings. He says,
not in these terms. I translate it into
today's terms. off, old guy. You
created a stupid, confused world. We are
now desperately trying to make something
out of it. You screwed it up. off.
You know how God Jehovah reacts? He
said, "Oh my god. Oh my god. You got
me." And runs away.
This is something that I appreciate in
Islam. It's the same with some element
of Sufi mysticism. But uh
uh you know what for me that's why I
consider myself an atheist Protestant.
&gt;&gt; What would you say as a skeptic to this
logic? Uh you know the problem with uh
uh Paulio Pilatus wife
he tried to convince her husband this is
a sacred man Jesus don't allow him to be
crucified and so on and typically
Catholics
almost not all but majority almost treat
her as a saint. Oh my god. She knew
Christ was
she she suspected it. She was good
almost a saint. I much more agree with
uh with uh a radical Protestant who
claims
quite correctly in polinian way
Paulinian St. Paul he was directly an
organ of the devil. Why? Because let's
say that Paulius Pilates would have set
free Jesus Christ. What would then
happen? No Christianity nothing just one
that you know Christ came here to die
and not to redeem us but to redeem us in
the sense of holy ghost space of freedom
that's
this is why I hope we share this. I am
an atheist who find so many interesting
things debated if you read them properly
in the theological topic. No, for
example, when people ask me, sorry,
maybe you know this story, it's crucial
for me, maybe you know it. When people
ask me, okay, critique of ideology, tell
me which is for you the first book of
the critique of ideology. I say book of
how do you pronounce it? He job the guy.
&gt;&gt; Job. Yeah. The guy who got No.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And I don't be this obsity that at
the beginning you know basically God and
devil have a nice after dinner chat and
debate like how can we prove that people
really believe in you and then the
crucial moment is this one when job
loses everything
then you get ideology three I think it's
three friends come to him and each of
them has a simple message. No, your
suffering has a deeper meaning.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; The first man tells him even if you
don't feel guilty, look deeper. You must
have done something wrong. That's basic
ideology. The second guy says, maybe
it's just temptation. God is tempting
you. And so on and so on. And then a
miracle happens. Job
delights. Job is very interesting
figure.
He is not passive. Let's suffer. No,
he's very mad. He said, "No, that's all
bullshit." And then Jehovah
comes and says critic of ideology. All
that those three guys were telling you
is
&gt;&gt; Mhm. You were totally right. It has no
meaning your suffering. So then Job
Job asked Lot but nonetheless why did
you do this to me then? And uh now we
come to the big theological point. Uh uh
Jehovah gives a speech which is I think
usually totally misunderstood. It's
usually read as the assertion of a
radical gap between
us humans and God. You know all the
stuff where were you when I created
these like I created so many great like
we are not on the same level.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. But my beloved Catholic, a genius,
Gilbert Kis Chesterton,
he has a sharp text. You can get it on
on on
uh Google immediately on his reading of
book of Job. His reading is wonderful.
He said that if you read it between the
lines,
Jehovah's answer to Job is you think
that you are something special. Look
around. It's not only you. I screwed up
all the work of creation. It's all one
big mess.
You see, one can learn so much from
intelligent theology. even
predestination. My good friend who
recently died, Fred Jansson said, and it
surprised me because before I understand
understood it, that
predestination is the most precious
category for every Marxist
&gt;&gt; because it doesn't simply mean
everything is decided in advance.
It means that with our activity now we
are reinterpreting
recreating a certain vision of the past.
Predestination doesn't mean it's decided
in advance. It is that the true change
is in changing the past itself
because with as my god I referring here
to another conservative TS Elliott the
famous line of him where he says with
every really new big work of art not
only a new era begins but all the past
its meaning uh changes and okay I could
go on here But it's time for me to stop
into uh uh where I find parallel between
this and quantum physics. So I for this
much more modest pessimist stance there
are mega horrors in the world. I don't
simply believe in any progress and
Christianity just means all we can count
on is our love, our solidarity.
&gt;&gt; I spoke too much
&gt;&gt; on on the on the minor point of of
Pilate's wife. I find this interesting.
Right. to the extent with which you
associate with the Christian story and
tradition.
Jesus says of Judas that
&gt;&gt; Judas is the only true hero friend. It's
absolutely clear to me that that uh they
made a deal basically Jesus ordered
Judas to betray him.
&gt;&gt; That's that's one reading.
&gt;&gt; You have please now I like it. Please
attack
&gt;&gt; the the there are some versions of
Christianity which think something like
that went on. But if you're talking
about the story in the gospels, Jesus
says of Judas, it would be better if he
were never born. So there's a strange
Oh, how I read it.
&gt;&gt; Sorry to interrupt you, then you can
counter it.
&gt;&gt; It says that Judas is for me the
greatest hero. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; He through his betrayal enables Christ
to do what he came for.
So, so in the sense huh that f
&gt;&gt; Judas is the true hero. He does
something that he knows it's the worst
cry he will pay terrible price in
whatever but he does it because the
status Christianity god his missing
matters to him more which is why uh you
know I am don't be afraid I am for
Palestine and so on all that but there
is a a Jewish friend of mine who now
lost his job there he's good guy who
totally the best maybe you know it the
best defense of Judah.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; He says listen if we Jews know how to do
one thing it is to sell something which
we know it's precious for its proper
price. And he says no Jew would sell God
for shitty 30 point silver coins.
It cannot be you know sorry but tell me
your version. Yes. But it but it's true.
I don't I don't think he would have done
that. Of course, we don't know what
actually happened. But as
&gt;&gt; but it doesn't matter. You think that
any of these maybe something happened
close as you're associating with the
story, right? We we know that yes, I
mean this is a reading that people have,
right? That if Judas didn't do this,
then God's mission wouldn't have been
fulfilled. So in some sense, Judas was
like a necessary part of God's plan. And
yet we are
&gt;&gt; but he knew it. That's why Christ gives
him a kiss that kiss and so on. He
assumed the most desperate tragic role
that you can imagine.
&gt;&gt; So why then do you think firstly that he
was paid for it and secondly that Jesus
says of him it would be better if you
were never born. I'll tell you why I
think this happens and I think this is
interesting. Yeah. Is that you say that
you know Pilate's wife is an agent of
the devil. I think in the Christian
story you can see Judas as an agent of
the devil but you can ask a more
fundamental question which is why does
the devil exist in the first place? If
God creates very first question
&gt;&gt; although quite clearly God might have
some some need for this I mean the first
name for
&gt;&gt; but there is another name for of God for
me I'm here very orthodox you know who
are my source where the real Christian
story begins.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh uh how do you call them from Meister
Echart to Jako Bome this Rian mystics.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. They were the first to really
break out of this uh uh benevolent image
of God and to admit that there is a
terrifying evil aspect in God himself.
You don't need dualism and our great
writers knew this. For example, why do I
like France Casca?
You remember in the castle
the uh there it's not Joseph K it's just
K the how do you call it he measured
length no
&gt;&gt; he once tries to approach the castle but
up on the mountain but the clo closer he
comes to the castle the more he thinks
this is not a great castle less than
small dirty houses and so
the message for me is that
God is like sorry this will it will be
just a metaphor I apologize in advance
but in
some country I think it's clear I'm not
sure they had a special term I apologize
I consider myself a feminist in advance
but they have a term for a woman who
looks nice from 20 30 yards and then
when you come too close to
You see he's not so beautiful
with women that's sexism but for God it
holds. I think if you come too close to
God, you see God literally is devil is
the same otherwise we are in again in
some paganism and another ah would you
agree this my god I love this talk sorry
if I repeat old stuff because only we
materialists can have real theological
debates even that's why I go along very
well we have debates with Rowan Williams
with John Milbank and so on. They would
be very angry to say this but I consider
them in my sense without knowing they
are already materialists. I put so uh
again uh uh you remember the debate
about two years ago or three when before
Pope Francis the good one died.
&gt;&gt; Uh he this is for me one of the worst
things he did with all respect for him.
You remember he
accepted the suggestion that we are how
do you call this? Oh God who is in
heaven blah blah blah this famous uh
prayer the elementary prayer that we
should change that line
&gt;&gt; and don't lead us into temptation.
&gt;&gt; The idea is that this yes wounded God.
No he said protect us from temptation.
&gt;&gt; Yes. God does not leave temptation
&gt;&gt; crazy. My answer is look God says don't
eat from the how does it say from the
apple tree of from the tree of the
knowledge of G. Yeah. Yeah. But then
what the Why did he put the tree
in the very center of the paradise? It's
pure pure pure. I lead you to
temptation. For what it's worth, I think
that the Italians have been saying
protect us from temptation in Italian
like since since the since the start. I
think it's a suggestion that only the
English translation be changed.
&gt;&gt; So because I maybe but I spoke with some
real guys who knew the original and it's
not just protect us. it is stronger
meaning but uh uh which is why I think
uh and here again I'm a Hegelian the
fall that's the paradox for me the same
logic as you find all the time in sheel
in quantum mechanics we don't have time
for what isn't the fall
something that retroactively creates
what you fall from Hegel's reading is
that paradise before the Fall before
knowledge, before consciousness is
simply animal kingdom and then only
through the fall you become aware
where you have fallen from goodness. So
there is no goodless prior to the fall.
I sympathize with this to the extent but
you just heard about but
&gt;&gt; but but no there's no but this time
&gt;&gt; there's an and this time which is that
of course if if the whole thing that
Adam and Eve do is that they sin and the
re the way that they sin is by eating
from the knowledge the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; If they didn't have the knowledge of
good and evil yet to eat from the tree
can't have been evil or at least not
knowing evil. And so it's sort of a
retrospectively justified uh evil which
you have analogized
with quantum mechanics.
&gt;&gt; No, it the says that in quantum
mechanics I think that we don't have
time to go into it now. Uh the for me
that how I read collapse in quantum
&gt;&gt; mechanics I the you know there are two
sorry I speak now as a stalinist. There
are two deviations leftist and the
rightist in the in quantum mechanics.
The rightists are those who try to
reduce quantum waves oscillations to our
ordinary reality. for example, but he
was a communist leftist, but
nonetheless, David Bomb.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; His idea is that there still are
particles and quantum waves are just
waves emitted by particles. But the
basic element are particles and so on
and so on. Then you have some I call
them ironically leftists who thinks that
quantum waves are leftist progressive
idea of flow of production and then
collapse equals alienation
in the sense that a creative process
gets
forced into a fixed identity.
I I think it's a false dilemma. I think
as I try to develop in this book that uh
what they call collapse
comes first. I don't buy this or leftist
version that there is a happy domain of
wave oscillations plurality and so on uh
fix and then my god I don't know from
where you get alienation and this would
you agree with this this brings me to a
more general point my third sorry
my friend
uh Todd McGavan wrote a book I don't
fully agree with him but his basic
insight is right in defense of
alienation.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I agree with this at all levels to
do something good to feel good to fight
for good whatever
alienation
has to be here. Alienation opens up the
space for our freedom and uh because
without alienation we will be in some
suffocating proximity and so on. I think
it's the time to turn around uh the the
table here which is why let me make a
crazy jump to our contemporary society.
I shake it when you have racist
problems.
What I hate is this idea the logic of
integration
it happens and then you can be from left
or from the right. You can be leftist
rightist. You can say uh uh they are a
foreign body. They don't want to
integrate or as the leftist you usually
say we are not ready to integrate them.
But my idea is it. Why should they
integrate? Why should there are many
people in the world I hate quite a lot
of people even ethnic groups and so on.
Why not? The big problem for me is the
ethnic Abers and so on. They are a vast
group. We will never be able not only to
understand them but I will go a step
further here. Do we even understand
ourselves? I think that I don't believe
that uh the other now I'm talking about
ethnic other another nation and so on
that they are uh deep in their own world
and we cannot ever be sure did we
understand it. No, I think that quite
often a distance
gives you better insight into it. For
example, the example that I often
mention in my books is uh Shakespeare. I
think this is a sodo problematic this
without studying all the historical
context can we really understand
Shakespeare? No, it's quite clear in
Hamlet and so on for example best known
claps
was self-contradictory there. He didn't
know. So to amuse you it's a nice joke.
It will come from a text that will
appear in my next book. You know that
famous phrase f time is out of joint.
I was here to set it straight but read
it properly.
How did time get out of joint for me?
Hamlet is the ultimate evil person in
the drama. First I totally buy did you
read uh John Abd's novel Gertrroot and
Claudius
which is a total rehabilitation of
Claudius. The idea is that Hamlet's
father was an evil retirey.
He wanted to kill Claudius blah blah.
They killed him out of pure despair. And
then that is the final lines of the book
are and then every king was everybody
was happy in the land of Denmark but at
the end uh and then Hamlet returned from
Wittenberg where and everything went
wrong. You know why be careful of
something on what day was Hamlet born?
On the day when Hamlet one, Hamlet's
father
uh re uh uh uh uh won
independence
from Norwiges and Hamlet is a traitor. I
think you remember what happens. Nobody
noticed this at the end. who takes over
Fort Limbbras
who is a Norwegian prince who came there
to occupy Denmark.
So Hamlet ends with Hamlet liquidating
the family there and installing as it
were a foreign occupier as that not to
lengthen the obvious felonyist stuff.
Are you aware how terribly Hamlet is
treating not only his mother but
especially Oilia?
I think that the only and we can see
this today today better than Hex
himself. That's why as I always repeat
that version of Hamlet that I know is
Akira Korosava's film from 62
with a wonderful title only bad people
sleep well.
The idea is wonderful. No really bad
people are not oh my god you sleep bad
blah blah. No they don't care. They are
simply evil. If you see that because of
your seeds you are already holding. So
uh how does Hlett at the age set things
straight? It's a very conservative view.
Uh howlet's father threw the world out
of joint by giving independence to
Denmark. Hamlet set it straight by
reinstalling
Norway. I I love this totally uh totally
inconsistent but very productive
reading. So my point here so that I
don't get lost is that uh uh the same
holds for great novelist. Look what do
you know about Ireland? Ireland as a
country existed in the 20th century to
give birth to Joyce. I don't like Joyce
but Joyce and Beckett. They both had to
move outside to do it. Look at
Hollywood. Who gave in the 30s4s the
best image of despair of the American
life? European immigrant directors
especially though now they had a
terrible leader uh Orban uh Hungarians
you know Kazablanca the great movie
&gt;&gt; Mhm. directed by Michael Curtis. You
know who he was? Miki Kurteshi a
Hungarian. He even didn't speak English.
Well, he had to have an interpreter to
direct. So, what I'm saying is that at
this level, I agree with my right-wing
friend, but he's not an idiot German
guy, Peter Flutterike, whose idea is
that in today's global society, we are
getting too close to each other.
My idea is not in a big block
where I would like to live. There are
apartment and there is an Indian there,
a black African there, a Chinese guy
there. No, I want to politely ignore
them. We friendly not to each other and
maybe why not from time to time we get
friendly but not obligatory. I don't
want this pressure. I believe that we
not only don't understand others but
even basically don't understand
ourselves and we have to learn to live
with this.
&gt;&gt; We uh started a little bit late so I've
got permission to go a little bit late
when it gets to audience Q&amp;A. People
have been submitting questions and well
let's just see how far we get.
&gt;&gt; I'm very sorry for those. I'm disgusted
by all the I mean I
I'm sorry.
&gt;&gt; I'm sure we we can forgive you. Um
&gt;&gt; upstairs we were talking about the UK
Conservative and Labor Party. Somebody
has asked I'm going to put two questions
kind of together here based on what we
were talking about. Somebody here asked
about the UK's future. They actually
asked well about the UK's future. They
actually asked whether it's the future.
Um, but there's another question here,
an anonymous question. How do we stop
leftist infighting? And based on what we
were talking about upstairs, I think I
might just throw them both.
&gt;&gt; You mean you mean uh this that
immediately after Corbin and that uh
Indian lady, I'm so sorry. Don't take me
for a racist. I always sana
&gt;&gt; it's it's not it's not me. It's not my
question. I don't
&gt;&gt; I know. I know it is.
that immediately when they tried to do
this new leftist party there was a split
immediately.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; But what I Okay, I will give you my
&gt;&gt; Yeah. How do we stop that kind of thing?
&gt;&gt; Deeper deeper insight.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I think something similar is
happening nonetheless a vague parallel
somewhere more openly somewhere less
openly in many western
countries. What is happening in United
States and up to a certain point also in
the UK?
In United States in reality,
we have a four parties or at least
agents. We have traditional
Republican establishment,
traditional
democratic establishment and then we
have and they are dead. They are living
dead. To repeat my old joke, they are
alive because they forgot to notice that
they are already dead.
They there is no political life in them.
And then you get two only living options
in a bad sense also. I'm not for Trump
but it's Trumpian populism and it's
so-called democratic socialists. And the
problem here is that of course these
four parties don't work at the same
level. So what to do politically
on on the right? Unfortunately, Trump
occupied
the Republican party. It's almost
nothing on the left. The meaning of
Mani's victory and I think there are big
troubles ahead. But nonetheless,
something unique happened. Uh he
intelligently he followed Trump. You
know the big democratic trauma in of the
democratic establishment in United
States is let's not move too much to the
left because then we will lose center.
But why didn't they learn from Trump
that it's the exact opposite which is
true? How did Trump win? Not to play the
center but to state radically what is to
be said. and Mannani got this even maybe
more than Bernie Sanders and AOC. That's
how you win. This is why
there are then all possible
combinations. For example,
the guy who is disgusting, but I
appreciate him, the Trumpian leftist,
uh, Steve Bannon. He said already years
ago that the ideal government for the US
would have been a coalition of Trumpians
and democratic socialists
because they all are in some sense
revolutionary. They want a substantial
change. Why I make this ambiguous
statements as if I like Trump? I follow
here. Here I agree with him not
everywhere. Varuakis who said the left
was blah blah talking for decades we
have to move out of uh global
capitalism. Trump did it. Are we aware
what Trump did with his tariffs and so
on? He broke all the rules of glo all
the rules of a global market and so on.
And uh so where do I see hope? I uh what
Mandami did I think
he's following Berley who said something
absolutely ingenious already more than
Bernie Sanders or really more than 10
years ago. He said we shouldn't worry
about the center. We should target poor
white farmers workers who otherwise vote
for Trump. They are our public. we
should target them. And I think this is
what Mandami did. And she won in a quite
surprising way. I I simply couldn't
believe it how with all the Jewish, not
all the Jews, many Jews supported
Mandami, but the Jewish establishment,
enormous amounts of money and so on. So
uh uh this is I think the future that
the true elections at this point in the
United States would have been the
elections between Trumpians and
democratic socialists. These are it is
not a statement of preference of value.
They are the only two living political
options. And here in the UK it's
similar. First when I met Corbyn at Hon
we just chatted for 10 minutes
he laughed and agreed with me when I
told him you have a very strange
political constellation now here in the
UK you have one big center right party
in power it's called labor party here
then you have some crazy right wiggers
and
small group and whatever remain of the
Conservative Party and I said this in a
very evil way. What's the main
distinction? It's that apart from Rachel
Reeves and some others, if you want
white men, male to rule you, you have
Labor Party. If you want blacks, women,
Indians to rule you, go to Conservative
Party.
It's very complex situation. So let's be
frank. The only true elections here
would have been Faraj against
the new Labor Party. But in those cases
I see big problems because in this
direct confrontation
there will be strange alliances. Did you
see with Mandami the scandal of Trump
supporting a Democrat Cuomo?
So there will be strange alliances. The
problem is Dishwag to decide at what
point should we risk the Syria left our
own
party or to work within the established
party? I think Mardami was right at this
point to remain within the Democratic
party. He should now make a good Stalin
make a good Stalinist perch of
Democratic party in the state of New
York getting it over and then connect
with many other states where democratic
socialists are. So you know what's so
ridiculous when Trump said Montami said
a pure communist sorry me are we aware
where we are measured by what social
democracy meant when Harold Wilson was
here all the glorious days of Swedish
social democracy measured by those
standards what Mandani is doing is very
modest but you know what gives me hope
I loved the period of uh of uh co not
only because I'm getting old and bitter
and hate people and I was able to be a
older but do you notice the miracle of
co
a big lesson for the left evil guys like
your Boris Johnson or Trump in the world
they were doing measures which I'm sorry
were almost
radical socialist even communist you
know elements of this uh how do you call
it income
income for everybody for example
&gt;&gt; universal basic income there were
elements of this okay Trump also gave
lot to big companies but nonetheless
every family got regularly a check for
$2,000 and so on now why is this
important nobody or few people noticed
it till that point when you as Vanami is
doing it Now when we said why don't we
raise the taxes for for the rich just a
little bit no the system will collapse
and so on but you know what happened in
the time of co all the rules were broken
even Trump evoked that law from early
50s where it says that in the critical
situation the government can order
companies what to produce and so on. So
I think this is the great positive
lesson of of uh of co
you can do radical things if you do them
in the right way. No, don't be afraid.
It's not ne necessary that there will be
chaos. And in this sense I remain uh as
I say ironically moderately conservative
communist.
By commission I mean there will be new
crisis I'm sure worse than that one
nuclear war ecological crisis artificial
intelligence whatever you want and we
are here still if I may conclude at the
level of my good friend Alena Zupankit
part of my Stalinist Lenian troa in
Slovenia blood Alena and me he by He pub
she he published a short book called
disavow training that today it's too
simple to ask do you believe in god or
not or what a typical attitude is this I
don't believe it but secretly I believe
it or the other way around let me give
you a personal example that I love uh it
happened to me I will be caught in
ideological I remember very
traumatic memory here's ago, I was
sitting at the table with a friend who
pretended to know to read your destiny
from the lines in your palm. And I said,
"What a bullshit."
Then he, my god, he was bright. He asked
me the right question. He said, "Okay,
if it's allow me to do it."
And I said, "No, no, no, no, no. I don't
want to." because it's But he
told me, "But if it's why be
afraid of it?" No, you know it's
He caught me. Although I
rationally knew that it's I
was afraid that something will come out
there. And I think that's how politics
works works today. It's not just that we
uh pretend to believe but really don't
believe it's and here I agree with your
agnostic states is much worse. Many
people pretend to be cynical skeptics
and so on but the facto in their acts
they believe.
So my position of the god is that
doesn't mean let's be cynical there is
no no it means active engagement in my
next book there will be I like so much
popular movies another popular movie
called Munich not but about 38
negotiations between Chamberlain and
Hitler in Munich there is a debate
between an English guy who says we
should negotiate endlessly there is
always hope and then a German guy more
radical anti-Nazi
says beautiful definition hope is
means hope is for those who are too lazy
to act now hope is somebody else will do
it later for me so the condition of
absolute condition of being active now
is to abandon hope. For me the best
political moto is the entrance to Dantes
hell lhat inspir leave all hope those
who enter that should be today's
politics I don't believe any great
vision hope through political act
begins with begins in total despair in
the sense of we don't know where we are
it's lost so let's begin somewhere and
at let's begin with what here I'm
totally a pragmatist everything is
possible alliance with conservatives to
fight this danger to fight that danger
and so on just I think that uh
that precisely this sense of confusion
today that we don't even know where we
are
conclude with a joke which I'm
absolutely sure that most of you know,
but it's my favorite joke lately because
I invented it. I even learned it's
already in sh my books. You know, it's
an old o east European joke and I
rewrote it to fit today's situation. I'm
sorry if you know it. The three big guys
today put he she the Chinese and Trump
confront God each can ask a question.
First Putin says how will it be? We will
occupy Ukraine. We will be masters of
Europe. God says unfortunately maybe you
will get Ukraine but in 10 years from
now you will be a Chinese colony. Putin
turns around and starts to cry. Then he
asks ah we will get all of Russia. We
will be God says it's not so simple.
Maybe you will get Russia but
economically it will not work well. you
will have not to occupy Taiwan but to
rely on Taiw Taiwan and so on.
He turns around and starts to cry. Then
Trump probably you know if you are
minimally Hegelian in Hegelian
reflexivity what will be the end? Trump
says so what will be with my great
America 10 years from now? God turns
around and starts to cry. That's that's
what I meant by that of God. Trump is
something so new it's desperate. She
changed the rules radically. Let's use
the opportunity instead of this fixation
of how horrible uh uh Trump is, which is
a lie, I think. Yes, Trump is horrible,
but he is horrible because he correctly
detected what was the fake in the
predominant American welfare state
model. Please hit back. I don't feel
&gt;&gt; well you know earlier you you were
describing yourself as as somewhat
Christian in the sense that you're a
Christian atheist that you identify with
something about Christianity and then
you say that your political motto is to
abandon hope.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And you draw from imagery of literally
entering into hell. You can understand
why some Christians might look wor
the the the death of God. Yeah. There is
no heaven. There is nothing up there. We
are abandoned to ourselves and as many
very intelligent theodist. I have some
strange contacts in Norway of all
places. Incidentally, I like Norway for
very filthy reason.
But good. They know that Norway is the
only remaining welfare state which
because they had enough not so much oil
as natural gas and so on, they can do
it. So uh they claim that God may be in
heaven but Christ belongs to hell.
Christ works in hell together with uh
all other sinners showed that some of
them even proposed a wonderful formula
better with Christ in hell than with God
in heaven. So in this sense I don't see
a problem. The message of Christ is
despair but despair in the sense that
there is no hope but in the precise
sense that we cannot count on any big
other on any yes
&gt;&gt; big vision just in this sense.
&gt;&gt; So we've got we've got maybe five
minutes there there I can squeeze two in
here in that the first question I'm just
interested in this. Someone has asked
how you feel about us having more
comfortable chairs than everybody else.
as well. No, this is a question where
one can only answer with a half obscene
jokes.
&gt;&gt; Sorry, suck you. You sit there and
listen, we are doing the work up here.
So yes, we deserve better care. I see it
quite well and it's the shame h or I
would be more hypocritical since I have
this high senator status. No, with Lalza
I can even if routed the cheapest ticket
I can check in first class even if I
have economy ticket and there I I feel
compassion I like so much to take a look
at economy checking where there are old
line of people and I feel such sympathy
for them why because I'm not there
because I'm here so it's the same with
me be sure I feel a deep sympathy for
you there.
Yeah.
No, but quite seriously, let's make a
more serious point.
Do these middle class leftists who if
you get some money, it makes them feel
guilty. Do they know how alienated they
are from ordinary people? All so-called
ordinary people that I know and I have
very good relations for them. They don't
have this attitude. Oh no, you can have
money, grab it, spend it and so on. They
appreciate money. I shade this deep
proverbs like uh uh money is not all.
Yeah, you can say this when you have
enough money.
&gt;&gt; I mean you you know what I mean? uh we
can really not in any deep moralistic
sense learn a lot from uh from ordinary
so-called it's a wrong term ordinary
people sorry let's
&gt;&gt; finally um
briefly if possible
&gt;&gt; sorry
&gt;&gt; uh briefly we're we're running out of
time um but there
&gt;&gt; no but that's why I talk so much so that
with all hypocrisy I can say now I would
love to go on for two hours and so on no
but I'm already thinking collides with
sorry please I
&gt;&gt; I just I'm interested in in ending where
we started and coming full circle
because
&gt;&gt; the first words out of your mouth
prompted me to to think of a question
that was submitted quite early and we've
talked about Christianity and religion
and one of the things that's missing
perhaps from the analysis thus far is
this idea that's quite important to
religion of afterlife and somebody has
asked as an atheist materialist at least
in the sense of what happens after death
&gt;&gt; how do you find peace with death from
that perspective knowing that
consciousness
&gt;&gt; you know which category is here my key
category it's a wonderful category I
think I explained this in my books 10
years ago already
I I in K you find a wonder I'm sorry
some of you know this you find a
wonderful distinction I'm so sorry for
this between uh
negate ing a predicate and asserting a
nonpredicate. For example, if I say
uh you are dead, I you no sorry if I say
you are not alive
then it means you are dead it's
unambiguous but if I negate a predicate
no sorry assert a nonpredicate
if I don't if I say you aren't dead
sorry let mistake, it means you are
alive. But if I say you are undead,
it means something much more horrible.
We're in the domain of Stephen King and
so on. Undead zombies and so on. And my
idea is that it's a very paradoxical
extent in my other books that what Freud
called death drive has nothing to do
with this nirvana we appear in
the void. It's this obscene undeadness.
And so I think the proper material sorry
the proper materialist stance is not to
just to say we are all
mortal. we guy, but to assert
not as that there really are ghosts, but
uh as Lon says so wonderfully,
big subject subjects already entails a
symbolic death in the sense that you
maintain a distance for your from your
immediate uh animal awareness and so
So as Lon puts it uh when he speaks
about the second death,
this second death is our normal life in
some sense being a human being who
dwells in the symbolic order means in
some sense that you already are a fallen
being fallen being you died and so on.
So it's crucial for me that
a certain mode of undeadness which is
horrible is what pertains to human
subjectivity
and uh in this sense the in this sense
I'm not uh I'm not afraid of death. I
think the true trauma is this unbadness
spectral life which is our everyday life
in which we live and here I see we don't
have time for it a danger of artificial
intelligence that it this perverted
unbadness will flourish just think about
I wrote a short text about about
sexuality it's already happening.
If you combine uh immersing yourselves
in digital world with uh with collecting
machines with your erotic centers and so
on, we will be able soon to have
extremely
intense orgasmic experiences.
But maybe even without dirty dreams,
without representations,
&gt;&gt; it will just be the and this will be
something horrible for me. This will be
close to undeadness
&gt;&gt; on that. Um
I really sad that we didn't have even
more time because I think seriously you
are on to something with your
cosmic skepticism. You know what would
be please allow him to finish the uh I
one thing I don't get quite clearly
about your view
uh I hope you are not just cos
skepticist in this usual sense reality
is out there but we cannot ever be sure
if we got it and so on the le of quantum
mechanics for me is
what is in some sense and I sto this
expression with some top uh quantum
guys. What is reality itself has an
inbuilt skepticism in the sense of it is
this but maybe it's not this that a
certain skeptic uncertitude is inscribed
its objective out there. It's not that
reality is out there. We cannot ever be
sure did we get to know it and so on.
How far are you ready to go into this?
Well, the truthful answer, even if we
weren't over time, is that the reason I
called my channel Cosmic Skeptic is
because I thought it sounded cool when I
was 17.
&gt;&gt; Sorry. Because I I thought it sounded
cool uh when I was a when I was a teen.
&gt;&gt; So, how are you now when you are mid50s
or what I would say?
&gt;&gt; We're getting
&gt;&gt; No, because again where I agree with
you, sorry, I hope we're not losing
time. is that you have to I want to save
you from this keep usual skeptical
attitude we are all manipulated today we
don't know no I think you know or people
say all this manipulative no more than
ever today those in power are a straight
of truth the le of lon is not we cannot
ever be sure if we reached the truth is
the lesson of psycho analysis and of is
the opposite one. It's even no matter
how much you try to lie, you cannot get
rid of truth. Truth will return in a
symptom in your sleeps and so on.
&gt;&gt; I have to insist you will be outside
signing books. I understand uh if people
are interested in getting that done on
the way out. But
&gt;&gt; just please I'm tired. Don't do this.
Oh, professor. If you call me professor,
you Oh, professor, could I just ask you
a question? You know what's my usual
answer? You can, but a question to which
the answer is yes or no.
&gt;&gt; The signing is down here, not out the
front. Sorry for those uh at the back.
Um but I'm going to insist that that is
where we leave things, ladies and
gentlemen.
No, just to conclude I'm so glad for
this debate with you because you are
aware of something that we live in an
era of confusion where philosophy
we need philosophy even if in our daily
life. Yes. Like abortion yes or no. Oh,
you have already to decide is is an
unborn baby. We need thinking today. I'm
here against marks. You know my joke.
Markx said uh philosophers have only
interpreted
we have to change. No, in 20th century
we tried to change the world too much.
He's right. It's time to interpret it.
&gt;&gt; Thank you everyone.