Dr. Bach is um an AI strategist at
Liquid AI and he's also the director of
the California Institute for Intelligent
for Machine Consciousness. His work
spans cognitive architectures models of
emotion perception and the self. Um Dr.
Bach has held positions at Humboldt
University, MIT Media Lab, Harvard
program for evolutionary dynamics and
Intel Labs. Today he will explore the
mechanisms and architecture underlying
consciousness itself. Please welcome.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Christine.
It's a great honor to be again in
Iceland again for an ETI conference and
very happy to talk about um some
thoughts that I have about one of the
frontiers of uh our most favorite topic.
What is the mind? What is intelligence?
How uh does the mind make sense of the
universe? How does it come into being?
The hypothesis that I'm currently
exploring is what I call the machine
consciousness hypothesis. And I I gave a
a brief talk in the workshop about uh
the difficulties of testing for
consciousness. And this machine
consciousness hypothesis basically is
made out of several steps. One is you
could say the organismic consciousness
hypothesis of what consciousness is an
organism. And the second one is that we
can recreate these conditions that exist
in organism is lead to the formation of
consciousness in machines. And if uh
both conjectures are true, it would mean
that we can test the former one by
building the latter by realizing the
latter.
And so in this way testing for
consciousness gets replaced by an
interpretation and we can make this
interpretation modular by defining the
phenomenology until we are satisfied.
This captures this what it's likeness of
consciousness. We define the
functionality. This is what
consciousness is doing and we can talk
about how the implementation space and
the search would look like and so on.
But we can basically decouple these
different elements. But before we can
discuss things like this, we need to
reach an agreement of what we mean by
consciousness for our purposes. And
there are basically three approaches
that people can be using when they talk
about consciousness. The first one is
about this experience of what it's like
which we call phenomenology.
And there are several aspects to the
terminology of consciousness for me that
uh in the way in which I use the word
refer to what this what it's likeness
and the first one is consciousness is
always happening now in this moment. And
it also seems to be what creates the
sense of nowness. So this what
characterizes now is what's currently
the case in my perception.
And then there is um a beyond this
present also a presence and this is
basically the second order thing that is
happening that you're not just
perceiving but you also perceive that
you are perceiving and some philosophers
call this higher order thought because
it's a thought about something else but
I don't think it's a thought it's a
perception a thought is somewhat
decoupled you can hold a thought for as
long as you like and it doesn't have to
relate to what's around you thought in a
sense is not so much in time but the
thinking happens in in real time right
you observe observe yourself to be
thinking because you observe yourself
exerting your mental muscles in in this
moment. So there's a perception involved
when you think and uh this perception of
perception that you are noticing what's
happening that is this what is the
second order perception of consciousness
which gives it a reflexive tinge and you
can also move beyond that you can have a
first or a person perspective or a
perspective from a self that looks from
a certain angle and this means that you
zoom a little bit further out and you
integrate it to the point where you
simultaneously with the object that is
being perceived and with the fact that
it is being perceived also perceive the
direction from which you perceive it
right that you have a self and in this
in this way the observer can constitute
itself but this is optional you can also
have states in deep meditation uh or in
states of um dreams at night where you
can experience that stuff is just
happening and there's nobody present who
looks from a particular direction so
there's still consciousness but there is
no self and there's also a state where
you can transcend the self where you
basically go to a fourth order
perspective where you realize that
perception is itself a representation
inside of your mind and you basically
get to see this interplay between the
self and the thing that's being
perceived from the outside where you see
how your world model is being projected
into the self model and you're no longer
that self and you realize oh I'm not
actually Yosha I'm not that guy I run on
his brain as far as I know but I'm just
this consciousness and this guy is a
story that is being created by me about
uh what it would be like if this
organism had a name and an identity and
the social uh um things that it cares
about and so on.
And the other approach for consciousness
that is typically being taken in the
sciences is looking at the mechanisms
that might facilitate it. For instance,
the neural correlates of consciousness,
the default mode network, the stuff
that's goes on in the anterior insula
and the prefrontal cortex and the
colostrum and so on. and also the
outside perspective looking at the
mechanical interactions of the organism
and and its world. But it's very
difficult to relate these two
descriptions to each other. How is it
possible that a mechanical thing
experiences what it's like? And this
difficulty of associating this
experience, the psychological reality
with the mechanical reality that we
typically look at in the sciences is uh
called the hard problem. And this hard
problem seems to be a somewhat recent
problem. Most cultures don't have it. It
seems to be part of our scientific
culture and I wondered whether it's
something that we came up with after the
enlightenment after we got rid of the
Christian superstitions but when you
read Ga and uh Brenano and so on they're
all post enlightenment and they don't
have this issue it seems to be a 20th
century thing where we basically
forgotten how to deal with this kind of
dreaming reality and I think that there
is a way in which we can make sense of
it and this is basically we look at the
operation of consciousness consciousness
is an operator on mental states. But
your mental states are representations
that you hold in your mind. You yourself
are a representation in your mind.
You're interacting with other
representations dynamically. And
consciousness is an operator that
changes the content of your mind when it
comes along. And so we can ask ourselves
how do my mental state changes when
consciousness happens. So for instance,
between deep sleep and waking up, what
is what changes? And what hap uh what
changes back when you space out and fall
asleep and what happens when you have an
epiphany. And this operation of
consciousness is something that makes us
more coherent. And we can observe that.
And uh when we look at the philosophy of
mind, we do have a number of approaches
that talk about the big difficulty of
dealing with the heart problem that a
lot of angles in philosophy. For
instance, the position that maybe
consciousness does not actually play a
causal role because it cannot be
explained mechanically in its
interaction with the world and actually
it's plausible that organism does
everything that we observe ourselves to
be doing without consciousness. And this
idea that consciousness has no causal
role is called epiphenomenalism.
The problem with epiphenalism that
consciousness is basically only
observing what's happening and cannot
actually trigger anything in the
physical world. So it can be in a
separate dualist domain that is
separated from the physical universe and
does not impinge on it. The difficulty
with this position is that the
epiphanalist in order to tell us that
they are an apillinist need to move
their mouth or their fingers on a
keyboard or something. Right? And this
movement in the physical world is not
caused by them being conscious. It's
just a mechanical act that is unrelated
to whether they're conscious or not. So
the problem is if an epiphenist tells
you that their consciousness is not uh
impinging on the physical world, you
don't need to listen to them because
it's unrelated to whether they're
conscious or not.
Another position is that there
consciousness is um happening in the
interaction between a body and an
organism and it's not representational.
It's not mere computation. There's
something else going on. It's the touch
with the mystical reality substance that
makes you conscious. Uh there is um the
general idea of the mind body problem
that gets seen as central. There's the
position of mysterionism which says that
consciousness is outside the realm of
being understandable by our minds.
There's no way in which we can make
sense of it. Even if an explanation
exists, we would not be able to fit into
our mind. Then there's illusionism which
says that conscious doesn't actually
exist and we only need to explain why
people some people claim to have it.
Then as panschism which says that
conscious is basically in everything and
it somehow can be explained just by
being an intrinsic property of matter
and just correlates in the organisms and
expresses itself. Then there's the idea
that consciousness is primary and the
physical world is just a figment of the
imagination of consciousness. And then
there are ideas that say oh we need
completely new physics to understand
consciousness somehow.
But there are also a bunch of theories
that converge that for instance Plato
himself who was usually credited with
inventing idealism. If you read his
theories, he was not actually an
idealist in the sense that he believed
that um the consciousness is primary or
mental experience is primary but it's
the starting point. Right? Plato talks
about these ideal forms but these ideal
forms there's for instance the ideal
form of a table is sometimes given as an
example and that's probably not some of
the um core archetypes of the universe
or of God itself but tables are created
by human beings in particular cultural
contexts and they are an archetype in
our perception right the way in which we
classify the world there is something
like an ideal table and so actually the
forms that Plato is talking about that
are at mixtures uh when we create
thoughts and so on are actually
dimensions in an embedding space. And I
suspect that Plato is the first guy who
wrote about the embedding space that we
discovered much later in AI. And he in
some uh of his text alludes to a world
outside of our perception, outside of
this mental construction that we
experience. And that world is an outside
simulated world that is isomorphic to
the world that we experience in these
forms. In his um Aristotilianism
basically Aristotle says that um the
world is physical mechanical and it's a
mathematical object at the lowest level
the logos and then on top of uh the
physical world you have software you
have forms that shape dynamically how
the world is working and this is what
Aristotle calls the soul and we have um
computationalist functionalism which is
um basically the position that we can
describe arbitrary systems using
constructive languages which means using
computation and functionalism means When
we talk about objects, how did we get to
these objects? Well, we constructed them
over the observation of behavior over
functions. And so it's a position that
allows us to make sense of how we model
reality and by extension also the mind
and consciousness or virtualism is the
idea that um consciousness is not
physical object. It's not a mechanism.
It is exists as if and by existing as if
it becomes real because it has cause of
power on the world and thereby
instantiates itself. And it's this idea
of a cartisian theater, global workspace
theory, attention schema theory,
consciousness being a model of our
attentional control and so on. Adaptive
resonance theory that explains it as
some kind of resonance between um um
neural activation states. And all these
theories are basically aspects of of
blind people touching the elephant from
different sides but in a way that fits
together. And so there is a convergence
of theories.
And this to get back to this machine
consciousness hypothesis that to me it
has basically two aspects. The
functional nervous system hypothesis
which says that consciousness is a
causal pattern that forms in brains and
facilitates attention learning and how
we coherently model the world and so on
and control and the way in which
consciousness works automatically needs
leads to phenomenology and we should
explain why that is the case. And then
uh the structure of consciousness is
induced by self-organization
in in the brain. And uh the machine
consciousness extension says okay when
we understand consciousness in this way
if the theory is correct then initially
we might also be able to induce the same
principles of self-organization on a GPU
maybe and then if we observe
consciousness to emerge on the GPU this
would test the first hypothesis or
validate the first hypothesis.
What is the role of consciousness in the
mind? So the way in which I usually
characterize it is this cortical
conductor that you are the astro of your
mental orchestra and this u mental
orchestra is made out of lots of
instruments that basically make up
processing streams. roughly every brain
area corresponding to an instrument in
the mental orchestra and they all play
their different parts of the melody of
the mind. And whenever there is
incoherence in there, your consciousness
steps in and directs attention on this
incoherence to resolve it. And as a
result, you get this enlarged coherent
bubble of now that you're in. And
another one is that we observe that
consciousness does not seem to come late
in our development. It's not the result
of us becoming very very smart and at
some point in the course of our
development it clicks and we are
suddenly conscious but instead babies
are already conscious and we also
observe if a baby does not become
conscious if it does not wake up if it
does not start to have this directed
coherent attention it doesn't learn it
doesn't turn into a human being it
remains vegetative and so consciousness
uh seems to be a prerequisite for
turning into a human being that's why I
think it's basically a learning
algorithm for a biological system that
enables the rest.
So consciousness creates the world and
the self and the mind. And then um last
year I talked about the cyber animist
hypothesis. It basically says that um
spirits can be understood as
self-organizing software agents in
nature and the difference between living
and dead things in nature that there is
coherent software running on the living
things and when this coherent software
breaks down then the living thing dies.
region of the physical universe comes up
for grabs for other self-organized
software agents that try to move in and
control it. And this is a perspective
that is in some sense unifying the
animous perspective of other cultures
which basically all say the same thing
that the difference between living and
dead things is that spirits possess the
living things and the spirits are causal
structures that themselves are not
physical mechanisms but they can move
across the physical mechanisms and
possess them. And our scientific
worldview uh rejects this notion of
spirits. But in computer science, we
sometimes talk about this and we notice
this right. And uh the famous book
structure interpretation of computer
programs by Ebson and Susman in the
introduction um they described that
computational processes are abstract
beings that inhabit computers and we
conjure the spirits of the computer with
our spells. The computational process is
much like a sorcerer's idea of a spirit
cannot be seen or touched. It's not
composed of matter at all. However, it
is very real. And in here, this is very
much a joke, right? It's very
light-hearted and a bit tongue and
cheek. And what I would suggest is that
let's take this seriously. Spirits are
this ancient word spirit actually means
it's a computer program. And of course,
a computer program in nature cannot rely
on being on a GPU that is completely
controllable and deterministic. Instead,
it needs to entrain itself on the world.
And it needs to be in this way
self-organizing autopoetic the ability
to create itself and to colonize the
universe. And so the software in this
sense is still the principle of
software. The software in this way
explains the mind body problem.
For Aristotle there are several layers
to our soul to our psyche. The first one
is the layer that plants have the
vegetative layer. It's um concerned with
growth and nutrition. And there is an
animal layer above this. Uh there's
animals in addition to growth and
nutrition, morphogenesis and so on have
perception and decision- making. And uh
the human soul in addition to the animal
soul is characterized by our ability to
make sense of the world to reason about
it to reflect it at a high level and
build abstractions over it. And these
things three things together and
Aristotle's perspective make up the
human soul. And it's a perspective that
is still I think quite much the null
hypothesis in our science. And um for me
it's also mostly the perspective that I
take when I look at the world. But um
the soul is in this sense of Aristotle
the self-organizing course of pattern
the agentic software that determines the
structure and function and dynamics of
the biological organism. And to make
this happen, it needs to implement
multiple layers of functionality, right?
There needs to be some kind of message
passing between cells. The individual
cells need to communicate with each
other in such a way that they understand
what's being communicated across them.
So in the sense that they perform a
predictable function and can adjust
their function if the uh if this is not
achieved. So they may have to learn to
some degree. For learning, you need some
kind of reward protocol. You need uh
cells need to understand or have a
measure of which software they should
run at expense of which other software
they could also be running in the same
time. There needs to be an architecture
that makes that decision some kind of
market that says which spirits are being
run on which group of cells. Uh there
needs to be uh some kind of protocol
that assigns semantics to the patterns
that move across the cells. some kind of
language of thought and there needs to
be a model what's good for the organism
that the cells are composing right some
kind of veilance model for the organism
that says oh for the organism itself not
just for the computation this is what
the organism should be doing so for
instance look for food or look for a
mate or um deal with the fact that your
mate has left you and world and a self
model of the host need to be uh
constructed on it right so the host
organism needs to have a model of what
it's like to be in the world and what
it's like to be itself have and what it
should be doing with this and there
needs to be some kind of reflexive model
where the organism can model what it's
that it's actually making these models
and how to improve this at which of
these tasks involve consciousness. I
don't really know. So I don't know at
which level you have this organization
where something is self-reflective and
colonizes actively from this single
point of coherence where an observer is
manifesting and then uses itself its own
uh observational coherence to start to
make sense of the rest of the world
around it. So there might be some layers
which are more mechanical and less
intelligent and it's at some level of
organization you have this it could be
that there is a form of consciousness on
multiple levels but they don't talk to
each other in the same way as for
instance the my body seems to have a
mind of its own right and it is talking
to my brain but my brain is using a
different code it talks in spike trains
and it does not sense the same things
that my body is sensing outside of my
brain
and so uh my brain has its own
consciousness and u I don't know if my
body is conscious but it does seem to
have a degree of sentience an ability to
make sense of the world and have
feelings of its own. So um when we look
at the functions of consciousness in in
our mind we observe that we have
contents which are projections of
features and objects and scenes that are
projected into a self that cares about
them and the self is like a puppet that
is pulled with strings and these strings
basically we experience them and they
pull on us like as feelings as emotions
we have an unconditional reaction to
them that pulls the puppet that we are
this self that is experiencing self it's
exposed to a world which is a game
engine running my brain that projects
all of you into me based on the
dimensions that I care about. And when
the strings pull on me, it means that my
outer mind is making a decision that I
should care about this, that my
alignment should change in a particular
way. And I have an involuntary reaction
to being pulled by these strings. I get
into a new configuration. I have a new
problem to solve and the outcome of my
modeling of my attempts at problem
solving sometimes inform the behavior of
the organism. So I observe myself trying
to deal with the problem that the outer
mind is positing to me. I come up with a
solution and then sometimes I observe my
body doing this thing that I intended to
do. And this way I also contract
construct my own illusion of being able
to control my body.
The cyber animist hypothesis is
basically saying that consciousness is
stabilizing self-organizing software
agents. And this organization of
consciousness is allowing us to uh have
a ghost to have a psyche to have
basically a a piece of software that
doesn't want to die until its purposes
are satisfied until its core loops are
closed. And uh if we look at the
morphogenesis of the organism, it might
be that the morphogenesis of the
organism is driven by similar principles
as the morphogenesis of our own mind.
The generation of structure in the mind
is something that allows us to separate
the world into objects that have
geometric shapes and that have
intentions that we can reflect over and
so on. Maybe there is a similar thing
happening in the way in which the
organism comes coherent with itself and
we only have one head instead of growing
multiple heads and so on. And Mike
Leaven has posited the hypothesis that
these structural principles might
actually be the same ones just at
different time scales. I don't know
whether that's true, but it would also
uh indicate a possibility that plants
might have minds that are similar to
ours except they don't have a nervous
system. So they much much slower and
maybe more noisy and they manifest at
different time spans and use different
codes. of course not spike trains but uh
all the other channels that are
available to cells that talk to adjacent
cells for instance uh electromagnetic
impulses u mechanical vibration
chemicals that you're exchanging and so
on and uh if we accept this possibility
then we will also naturally come to the
conclusion that forests for instance
might develop internets because all
these plants are growing next to each
other and they cannot really build
firewalls for very long so they will
need to figure out a joint protoc call
in which they can peacefully coexist.
But if you are a software that has
learned to run as a self-organizing
colonizing agent on the fl of a plant
and the plant next to you speaks pretty
much the same code, it's uh very likely
that you're able to become dislocated
and move around in this forest. And so
now we are back in fairyland in the
ideas of our ancestors. Again, I don't
know whether that's true, but if I find
it very interesting that from the
perspective of a computer scientist who
is a normal rationalist physicalist,
certainly all these things seem to be at
least possibilities that are not
excluded by physics and that we should
look for to have evidence for them. And
it turns out we do have evidence for
there being long range communication in
forests and in ecosystems. And there are
also been degrees of coherence that are
quite surprising to the degree of the
that forests are conttoring the weather
and their environment and that they are
uh have joined responses against in
invasion by um insects that are harmful
to trees and so on and so on. And
there's the more radical animist
hypothesis that the physical universe
itself might be an intelligent agent. I
suspect that it's a hallucination, but
uh who knows? Maybe the reason that the
universe is fine-tuned and that it works
the way it does is not simply because we
happen to be in the lucky corner of the
universe fractals, but maybe this is
because uh it's an intelligent thing
that is uh actively adjusting itself so
in in a way that is intelligent and that
might require also some degree of
becoming aware of what it's doing so it
can look ahead into the future and
control itself in this way. Again, it's
nothing that I believe in uh but it's
basically the borderline condition of um
something that borders on pansychism.
So uh if we treat consciousness to go
back to our own consciousness to my
humble brain consciousness that I'm only
talking about normally when I want to
understand this I think of it as a um
machine learning algorithm and it seems
to be driven not by next token
prediction over very long time spans it
seems to work by a different principle
by a different loss function and this
loss function seems to be the
maximization of coherence in the mind
that I basically try to minimize the
constraint violations and could that
these things minimizing the prediction
error and maximizing of coherence turn
out to be the same thing at some level
or very very similar to each other but I
don't know that what I observe is that
the foundation models that we built
become coherent much much later than we
do basically we seem to be optimizing
for coherence much earlier and so we
need far less training data to make
sense of the world and we don't start by
memorizing all the patterns that we see
and then gradually discover more
structure in them instead We are trying
to discover the structure first and then
if you have time we begin to memorize.
So to summarize the role of
consciousness in my mind genesis theory
comes first and uh and builds the mental
organization and uh your model of the
world and of yourself. Uh its purpose is
also to orchestrate and harmonize the
operations of the mind by directing
attention of in the areas where you have
conflicts and uh incoherence. Um the
cyber animism hypothesis says that it's
a principle that allows the
self-organization of agentic software in
nature and uh it's might be a biological
machine learning algorithm.
What is the epistemic status of the
these theories? Well, I don't know
whether they're true. There are
possibilities, there are conjectures
that we might be able to test. And what
are the metaphysical prerequisites? What
needs to be true for us to consider
these theories as true? And the
foundation on the metaphysical level is
this position of computationalist
functionalism.
Computationalist functionalism doesn't
claim by itself that computers can
think. That's not what it says. It
doesn't say that forman machines are the
right way to do it. It doesn't say that
uh a MacBook can run a person or an H100
can it. It's a much more general
position. It's not an empirical
hypothesis. It's a metaphysical
position. Computationalism is a theory
of representation and functionalism is a
theory of epistemology. It's so it's not
empirical. It goes before empirical
ideas. So what is epistemology?
Epistemology is the field in psychology
that is concerned about what is the
nature of knowledge? What is the nature
of truth? How can you claim something to
be true and why do you do this under
which conditions? And in function
computationalist functionalism what's
foundational in epistemology is
information. Information is basically
discernable differences. And the meaning
of information is the relationship that
it has to changes in other information.
This is models that we are building that
relate information to each other. And
the invariances in these changes in
information is what we call functions.
They're basically mappings from certain
patterns to other patterns that allow us
to model transitions in the world, the
dynamics of it. And the objects that we
observe in the world, we construct them
over the invariances in those
relationships.
And this is what we call functionalism.
Right? So objects are uh bundles of
functions.
And they uh objects are basically
subunivers and because we cannot
comprehend the universe as a whole, we
carve it up into little small systems.
And these systems are tightly coupled
within and loosely coupled across each
other. So if I have an object like this,
I can take this from the ground and the
ground doesn't change very much. this
object doesn't change very much because
the relationships between this and this
are relatively sparse and the
relationship within this are such that
if I break them the object disappears
for me in the vein which I model reality
right but causality would be the
interaction between for instance this
thing and the table and the table stops
it from falling down right it's a causal
interaction that these two subsystems of
the universe that I am using to model
reality are interacting and so causality
in this perspective is an artifact of us
separate separating in the universe into
subsystems which is not naturally the
case. So we impose the separation as a
result we get interacting systems. This
interaction is causality and uh
knowledge is a representation of a model
in some kind of language that is
describing the predictive and
observational patterns.
Epistemology is generally not about whom
to believe. It's about why to believe
something. And we observe that human
beings uh fall broadly into different
categories according to what kind of
epistemology they have. Uh a lot of the
way in which humans are interacting is
not so much about the ground truth. But
it's more important which group you
belong to, which group you can be
trusted to, which hive mind you are part
of. And your beliefs are a marker of
having the right uh being part of the
inroup. And so it's often much more
important for people instead of figuring
out what's actually the case to figure
out what does my in-group believe so I
will get tenure or that I will get a job
or and right and this sometimes is a
conflict with what's actually true
because if for instance if you let
scientific institutions get to a point
where it's much more important that you
have the right opinions about everything
rather than to have the right criteria
to rationally determine what's true
independently of what other people think
is true. then you cannot really do
science anymore at some point.
So uh one way in which you can think of
epistemology is that everything that is
not impossible is possible and the
confidence gets assigned according to
the evidence. That's a relatively simple
principle and once you once you discover
this you can compare to all the
alternatives and see if you go back.
So if we take the space of metaphysics
of possible metaphysics the space that
we are in here then number of positions
for instance reality is roughly as we
experience it which is called direct
realism then um we can take a
subjectivist perspective that basically
every angle is valid and the subject is
primary in this there are social
constructions of reality innate one we
basically we are born with the right way
to construct reality there is the
rationalist way to do it the activist
way to do it and so on and several
others and within this rational branch
We can uh emphasize different aspects.
We can uh say that we make sense of
reality by constructing our models using
perception and cognition. We can do this
using language. We can use it with
classical mathematics or we can use it
with computational models. And um so
prees um um being as perceiving is
basically this slogan of perception and
cognition. Language is a semiformal
approach. When you in philosophy talk
about things in natural language and try
to make sense of it. Then when you try
to become a bit more formal like
physicists they use classical
mathematics systems of differential
equations to make sense of reality and
AI is using constructive mathematics
computational models that you can
actually run in simulations
and mathematics is basically all the
formal languages and constructive
mathematics is the subset of mathematics
that actually works that you can
implement on computers to I think to
exist means to be implemented and there
are parts of mathematics that don't work
and They basically they have in the
header file some kind of definition for
instance that you are in this function
is going to uh have has a value with
infinitely many digits in it and after
you've read all these digits the
universe can go to the next step and the
such a function cannot be implemented of
course but under the hood you can do a
good approximation and you just do the
first 20 digits and it's good enough or
you have some process that gives you
more and more digits the longer you
compute but you never get to the last
one and you work in parallel. So in
practice you can work with the
heteropiles of classical mathematics as
long as you bear in mind that this is
not the foundational structure of the
universe because it cannot actually be
implemented in what good has discovered
and others if you assume that it could
be implemented then your computer will
break. So there's basically no computer
in anywhere in mathematics or in the
universe that is able to run this kind
of um con non-constructive mathematics.
And if you look at the status of
mathematics, we can look at the
hypothesis that reality itself is a
mathematical object. Um then there is
the idea that everything that is that
can be known is mathematical because it
needs to be represented in some kind of
language and mathematics is the domain
of all the languages. And then there is
the hypothesis that minds are what does
mathematics. So all mental mathematics
or mental activity can be described in
mathematical terms.
And the classical mathematicians say
that there are some mathematical objects
that cannot be computed. They cannot be
constructed but they nevertheless exist.
And the computationalists say no no that
doesn't make sense. You are
hallucinating these objects. You cannot
just posit the existence of these
objects. And we can show that if you
actually do this at some point you run
into contradictions.
And instead what you have to do is you
take a simple table of automatter and
then you can build everything up from
this table of automata. There are many
ways in which you can do that and
they're all equivalent and that's called
the church chewing thesis. So it doesn't
really matter whether you use Python or
assembler or basic um or the touring
machine or the lambda calculus. They all
do the same stuff. They just let you
think about this in different ways but
they can all be compiled into each
other. And of course there are some
philosophers which don't believe that
which take good to mean the other way
around which basically say there are
some proofs that only humans can make
that computers cannot make. And if this
was the case then I would expect that
open air has some people who make sure
that certain proofs don't get into the
computer because it will blow up the
data center and uh only people can make
those proofs and surprise there is no
such mathematician working for open AI
or philosopher there is no group of
people within open AI that's actively
looking for proofs that cannot be done
in the computer that can only be done by
humans. Instead, everybody who works in
these companies quite naturally assumes
yeah okay there are some things that the
computer cannot do at this point but
it's not because it doesn't fit into the
computer but only fits into human brain
but it is because our current training
procedures and um learning algorithms
and ways in which we optimize them and
so on are to dump.
So when we go back to our tree of
metaphysics, we basically we are here in
this branch and uh when we take
classical mathematics we have geometric
hypermp computation differential
equations with infinite resolution. Um
then we have uh a costal
hypercomputation which also allows you
to use future results in the past. Um we
have completely unknown mathematics that
still needs to be discovered to make uh
sense of um quantum collapse in a novel
way that would create consciousness as a
side effect maybe. And then we have
constructive mathematics that is built
on automata. This is what we do in
computer science.
So what kind of language does our mind
use? What language is consciousness
implemented in? Is consciousness
implemented in the mind? Is it
implemented in physics? Is implemented
below physics? You don't know that,
right? And so we can test this by trying
to build systems that look for such
languages. And there are some uh people
in philosophy who think that machine
consciousness is a preposterous idea
like Anel Seth and uh Thomas Nagel and
so on and Net Block and uh there are
some arguments that they will bring
forth for instance that consciousness in
is ineffable which means you cannot
functionalize it you cannot um really
capture what it means. Then there are
limitations to computation that uh that
basically human minds somehow do more
than computation and then uh that you
need quantum computation instead of
classical computation that uh the nature
of experience is not subset independent
it only works on certain substrates and
otherwise it doesn't regardless of what
the subset is doing it needs to it's
what the subset is being then uh there
is this question of whether telepathy
plays a role um I don't know how many of
you are aware of this but in the 1950
paper that Alan Turing talks about the
Turing test. He also discusses the
possibility of telepathy and he uh asked
this question, what if telepathy was
real? Would this doom our hopes of ever
building AI? And it's super interesting
that most people who were uh summarizing
this paper skipped this section and some
of his biographers talk about it and one
of them basically said oh this was
because Turing uh read this paper from
the 1930s where a number of people
discussed the possibility of telepathy
despite the paper not being properly
peer-reviewed.
But uh of course when Turing wrote this
in 1950 peer review was not really a
thing. So uh for uh back then uh when
people looked at the world they thought
there are individual intellects which
try to make sense of the world uh on
their own and they talk to each other
about this and in this way they get
deeper and it's actually making sense of
the world is an interaction between
intellects and not between committees of
peer reviewers that reach a consensus
and everything that is outside of the
consensus is not scientific. for for
touring is he doesn't know whether
telepathy exists uh and it's not
completely out the question because so
many people are so sure about it and
describe their experiments and so
regardless of whether that's true let's
go into the possibility what would this
imply and he doesn't go very far in it
but what it might imply is that parts of
your what makes you you of your own mind
of your own functionality are computed
outside of your brain right if telepathy
is possible if you can somehow transmit
information without having a direct
neuron to you and connection, but you
can somehow vibe with other people. And
it doesn't need to be something that is
breaking physics, right? It could be
simply you stand next to somebody and
your bodies go into resonance with each
other in similar ways as the cells
within your own body go into resonance
and you can observe such a resonance
between mothers and infants, right?
where they seem to be very synchronized
or with people that you have very good
chemistry with that you feel that you
have perception of their emotion and of
their uh some of their physiological
states just by standing next to them
without looking at them. And if we take
this to be an instance of telepathy, it
means that some of the functionality of
your own mind relies on a feedback loop
through the other organism. And so
having a system that is completely in
isolation to the world might be missing
something important. And if you take the
extreme position like Mike Leaven, then
could be that consciousness is largely
an ambient pattern that is not
discovered independently in every
organism in you, but it's something that
inspired by the vibes around you that
basically because other organisms are
have exhibiting the same pattern. Your
own multisellular arrangement is picking
up on this pattern and is basically
resonating with it and as a result your
method development is much faster. By
itself that is not uh an argument
against AI but it might make it
practically more difficult right because
the search space becomes much larger
how could we possibly implement
consciousness can we do this on GPUs so
can we build models of self-organization
one approach that I'm currently looking
at is taking instead of neural networks
neural cellular automata where basically
the pattern of computation is somewhat
mobile over the substrate and it's no
longer that every neuron is learning an
individual function over its
neighborhood and is adjusting its space
individually. But every uh unit is
learning a global function that tells it
when an activation front comes in with
the following shape. This is how I
respond and the nodes around it know the
same function as a result the whole
thing can shift around depending on the
needs and you basically project the
architecture on the substrate. Um
there's an algorithm which is called
wave function collapse which has been
developed in the context of game design
and uh it basically is describing when
you learn the dependencies of different
parts of your model and you uh then
fixate some of them based for instance
on perceptual features how does the
probability of the intermediate features
changes and this is a gradual process
where you collapse the probabilities
that's why wave function collapse and uh
this might also be an algorithm that can
be used for implementing perception
there many models in the space of
evolutionary dynamics and so on that can
allow us to go closer to this vision of
developmental learning and I think in
many ways AI researchers thought for the
most part that developmental learning
should be the default and the kind of AI
that we have right now is a big
surprise. We did not really expect that
we would basically not have an agent
that develops intelligence but an agent
that is imitating the whole of human
intellectual behavior and then you try
to distill from it the core of
intelligence as we currently do. So it's
a quite interesting perspective that we
have right now that instead of building
intelligence up from a core that is
growing out and becomes more and more
sophisticated we now uh take something
that is basically the entire human
creative output that has found its way
to the internet and into digitized form
and then we try to distill the
underlying principles.
One uh particular way in which I'm
currently thinking about a possible
implementation is derived from an idea
of how cortical columns are working. So
the idea is that the cortical columns
are arrangement of neurons that uh get
trained to approximate particular
functions and they are on top of a state
machine that sends control messages that
can turn these columns into different
states depending on their role in the
architecture at any given moment. In
this way you get areas where the uh
cortical columns are tightly coupled and
then you have different areas that form
hierarchies and allow you to have
different domains of perception. So some
of them might be contrast features and
color features and others might be
geometrical features and the geometrical
features are combined from textures that
you bind in a particular way at a higher
level. And so you can build a cognitive
architecture or imagine that it's
self-organizing in such a way. And uh
the units that uh allow this
construction um I I call them request
confirmation networks. And basically
every of these units is a small state
machine that is able to inhibit or
activate the other units across certain
dimensions. As a result, you get
self-executing scripts. And uh the goal
is to basically to build um
self-organizing self-arning scripts that
can executing themselves without any
kind of external control. And they uh in
different nodes have to have different
states. So they have an untrained state
in which they're just basically dormant
and don't do anything yet. Then uh you
have a training phase in which they
organized into hierarchical scripts to
explain reality. Then you have a latent
phase where they are already trained but
are not bound yet in a particular scene
graph into a particular representation
of reality. Then you have a binding
phase where you are looking at a scene
and try to make sense of it and it
organizes into some kind of dynamic
computational architecture that allow
exists in working memory and then can
start to simulate reality. And then you
have an initialized phase in which we
start to look for particular objects and
you start to make requests. And then
these requests percolate across the
children of the dependencies of these
individual nodes, the different sub
features that need to be the case. And
then you get back confirmations from
these uh children. And um when you
succeed or fail, you need to um read the
process by either returning to the
latent phase depending if the scene has
changed or to the formation or to the
binding phase. So this is a dynamic
process that is basically computational
architecture that continually reruns and
it enables a hypothesis based perception
process and hypothesis based perception
works bottom up top down. So bottom up,
there are certain things in your visual
field or in your propriception that may
be features of high level objects that
you don't know whether they're the case,
but maybe you see a bunch of vertical
structures and you know contextually
that you are in a forest or in a parking
lot. And depending on this, you may
activate hypothesis for trees or for uh
lanterns and so on. And then you
actively look for features that can
validate those hypothesis top down. So
you have a bottom up queueing process
that gives you a superp position of
possible things that could be the case
in the world and you go top down and try
to collapse these superpositions and if
you cannot get a match then maybe you
need to collect more information. So you
start looking around and you get new
more perspectives and so on. You look
more closely and if this doesn't fail
then uh maybe you need to think harder
you need to resolve things. You need to
get attention in how can I interpret
this feature? What could this be? And if
this doesn't click, maybe that you need
to trigger learning behavior where you
start to construct new scripts.
And there are a number of challenges
that we need to resolve if you want to
get this to work. For instance, um the
feature nodes need to represent their
preconditions. And the preconditions
have to be satisfied and propagated back
to the requesttor. This is working. The
same feature instance cannot be
simultaneously bound multiple times.
Right? So you uh can every feature that
you are looking at. For instance, if you
see um some blob of color in your visual
field and you decide, okay, this is part
of somebody's laptop or somebody's
bottle and so on. It cannot be part of
anything else, right? So you carve up
the space in such a way that all these
features that you're observing get
assigned to something in the right way
and not multiple times. And often you
need to have the same wide rectangle
multiple times in your field of vision.
So you need to create multiple instances
of it and make sure that they don't
interfere with each other. And then uh
this whole thing needs to uh work in
such a way that you can propagate the
requests back and forth in your graph in
an overlapping way without these
overlapping requests interfering with
each other in the architecture. And the
requests need to lead to dynamic anytime
models. You need to get a result all the
time, right? You need to be able to have
continuous perception. So this request
confirmation process cannot have
infinitely many steps or very large
numbers of steps. It needs to give you
uh good enough results within very short
numbers of steps that are periodically
repeated and in the process of
periodically repeating them get more and
more accurate
and uh you have to be able to
dynamically change the scene on the fly
without this request confirmation
process breaking down. If the change
scene changes, you need to be able to
insert new objects, modify existing ones
and so on. So there are a lot of
challenges that need to be solved if you
want to solve this analytically coding
it by hand. So instead, what you should
probably be doing is to define a search
space for the correct architecture and
then let the machine do it. You're
almost at the end. Um is of course an
important question. Does AI need
consciousness at all? Regardless of
whether AI needs consciousness, I think
it's fascinating to research it because
we want to know how it works in us and
what purpose it solves. But it is an
open question of whether in order to
become fully coherent AI needs to have a
similar coherence maximization
algorithms as we do. Maybe there's
something better that we can implement
on the GPUs. Larry Nean uh wrote that it
was unlikely that God has created beings
with souls and no intelligence in one of
his science fiction novels, but it was
quite possible that he had created
intelligent beings with no souls. And I
think that the opposite thesis might be
true that there are souls which are not
generally intelligent. Right? A lot of
organisms that we meet are not generally
intelligent, but they have souls. But
it's not clear if we can build general
intelligent system without a general
purpose psyche, without a general
purpose ghost.
If we are building machines that are not
conscious, uh we might be in a very
weird future where it's difficult for us
to negotiate with them because they're
not going to be at the same eye level
with us. Right? For us, what's important
is not that we are bipedal or that we
have human bodies in general, but that
we are conscious. That's really in many
ways what defines us. And it's more
important than many of the other
features that we have. And if we want to
relate something with us that is able to
recognize us, it should be able to
relate to us as conscious beings because
this is what we want to be seen as. And
uh there are number of outcomes that
could be happening with respect to AGI.
Of course, one could be that AGI is
never going to happen because we're just
not going to be able to pull it off.
Then it could be that uh the AGIs that
we build get centralized, that maybe
there's three or four big companies that
allowed to have AGIS and the governments
and the companies make sure that
everybody else only gets something
that's very harmless. So, it's safe.
That's a possible outcome. And it's one
that many people in the AI companies
would prefer. It's not just because
they're evil, but some of them are
generally concerned about safety, right?
What? How what happens if we give
everybody their own AGI and the AGI can
run around and everybody in this hedge
fund is trying to game the out of
each other? Then uh we this could maybe
controlled by having decentralized AIs
looking at each other, right? In the
same way as human beings being
intelligent can create a lot more havoc
than docs uh looking at each other.
Human beings can control each other and
as a result they build much more
interesting structure that is ultimately
more stable. You could also have a
situation where individual human beings
are in control of individual AI. Could
also have a situation where everybody is
basically becoming AI where people are
merging with AI and moving onto the new
substrate and uh bodies become
incidental. You can just organize matter
into bodies when you need them. But
depends on the purpose, right? And so
you no longer identified with having a
body or with a particular body. you're
more identified with the type of mind
that you are and with the type of
thoughts that you're having and how you
relate to the other thoughts in in the
global infosphere. It could also be a
perspective where we all get enslaved by
a big machine that makes us work for it,
right? Imagine some giant hedge fun
takes over the economy and squeezes
every last drop of productivity out of
us. Um, we could also have a situation
where we are controlled by really dump
AI, right? Imagine that you have
something that takes uh current
governmental institutions in the US and
um makes them very strong instead of
very smart. So they cannot be dislodged
and they're able to control you and make
sure that no competition can ever emerge
and uh we all get to serve something
really dumb and boring. That would be a
depressing outcome. One of my favorite
outcomes would be that every individual
human being has its own AI and that we
extend our consciousness into the AI. So
instead of universal basic income uh how
about universal basic intelligence?
Imagine a world where everybody is
competent.
It is I think this is amazing. This this
uh this vision of human emancipation
where every individual is able to make
sense of reality and every human being
is mature and everybody has a contract
with eight billion other human beings.
And this is an amazing world. I think is
this is a a fascinating vision that I
like a lot.
Maybe at the end can we move beyond
consciousness? Right? Maybe
consciousness is lame. Maybe we want to
have super consciousness instead. Right?
The stuff that I'm seeing it doesn't
have that many features at a given time
because my brain is mushy. I cannot keep
track of more than a handful of features
for every object. And the number of
hierarchies maybe four levels of
hierarchy then I need to uh zoom in and
uh look differently and so on. And if I
were implemented on a GPU, I don't have
these limitations, at least not for any
obvious mathematical reason. So I can
have a much higher resolution in time
and in space in which I perceive things.
They can take many perspectives at once
that they can unify.
But why stop at superconsciousness? How
about hyperconsciousness?
So maybe you take many many conscious
perspectives, many conscious agents and
you all integrate all of them into one
unified perspective.
Or you have postconsciousness. Maybe
consciousness no longer necessary. We
have something that is optimal already
and that doesn't require attention
anymore and doesn't require
self-reflection anymore. And so maybe
this is more boring, but uh it's
something that doesn't require you to go
into the state of where you experience
yourself as something.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Postconciousness.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh maybe this is a good point to
stop and uh I hope we have uh time for a
couple questions.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you very much.
&gt;&gt; Uh Yasha, thank you. You've made me very
happy with your talk. Um I I I wonder,
you know, you you initially towards the
beginning of the talk, you described a
property of consciousness as being, you
know, present, right? the the experience
of presentness is is somehow involved in
in consciousness and I I
&gt;&gt; you know I I I'm curious what your
thoughts are on how we exist in time
then right like in what way I mean you
know obviously uh this was discussed
yesterday you know things like our
memories of the past are actually you
know encoded you know physically in the
present as well in our in our neural
substrate but um you know in what way is
our lineage where we've come from like
that isn't directly encoded in our
substrate in that way like in what way
is that part of our consciousness or and
when we're making predictions about how
things things that haven't happened yet
right in what way is that part of our
consciousness do you think
&gt;&gt; so my consciousness I subjectively only
experience now and the other thing is
more or less a story and this period of
now is not a single point in time it's
more like a small interval that is
slightly dynamic is about 3 seconds long
usually and the stuff in my perception
that I can not fit into this anymore
that is no longer coherent with what my
sensory information tells me drops out
and becomes past and the possibilities
that I cannot already perceive are the
future right and uh in this way I
construct future and past but they are
actually constructs and when I
deconstruct them I notice that all my
experience is actually about the present
and uh that's also can be practically
useful so if you're stressed stressing
out about something. If you're
suffering, most of your suffering is not
about stuff that is present. The present
is usually fixable, right? If you're
cold, you can take a blanket. Uh if you
feel unhappy, you can make yourself a
hot chocolate and a lot of things will
be better. But uh the thing that you
have heartbreak or that you're going to
lose your job tomorrow or whatever this
is happening tomorrow or this was
happening yesterday. So if you only
create this compartment of now, you're
usually okay by dropping out all these
other stories. Of course there are
intense moments of torture and dying and
so on. But as Vinnie Depu says, one day
I will die, all the other days I will
not. And so if you focus on this moment
of now, you realize that uh there is
this particular moment where the needle
is going in the gramophone right now and
you have this large uh arc that you
normally use to make sense of it. But if
you zoom in it in this single small
point, there's so much information that
you can populate and that you can
inhabit that uh it becomes much more
manageable. And so your uh option to
construct yourself your own model of
reality and what you are in reality over
a long longer time span is not something
that needs to be part of your
experience. And this experience of the
future and the past is not something
that uh needs to concern you in the same
way as this conscious experience this
phenomenology of the now because the
future and the past don't have a direct
phenomenology. What you get is the eco
of your expectations and memories and
violations of them. But all these things
are not necessarily present. They're
really just constructs that evoke
emotion and the emotion about them is
real. But the present itself is not
real. It doesn't need to be taken as
real. You also don't need to take the
present as real. Of course, there uh
have been studies in Switzerland that
dealt with fear of death uh by uh giving
people uh inospaces
uh under controlled conditions large
doses of psychedelics and as a result uh
people depersonalize and uh they don't
become unconscious and they don't
necessarily become loopy but they they
get disengaged from this long
construction of life and basically drop
into this moment and then uh this is a
state that alleviates fear of death
because When you realize you only exist
in this moment, then death is a
hypothetical thing in which you are
suspended. But the fact that you stop in
time is not more scary than the fact
that you stop in space. Right? I'm not
scared by the fact that I stop here and
here. Uh and I don't feel better if I
extend more and more. And why would I
would need to do the same thing in time?
I get a certain amount of now and that's
it.
&gt;&gt; One more quick question. And we have
coffee and finger food outside. So
please go ahead make it count.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So okay Yosha thank you for the
talk. I agree a lot with the functional
aspect.
&gt;&gt; So I guess two combined simple
questions. One is how does the
phenomenology come out of this model?
And the other is does the fact that you
called it the simplest machine learning
algorithm does this explain why it's
very hard to pinpoint exactly what
conscious experience is because sort of
asmtoing towards the simplest thing
which one may never fully approach. So
the simple thing that does it
efficiently
um possibly multiple organizations that
can exist and that can compete with each
other and the thing that you are is the
thing that has succeeded in some kind of
competition in your mind. Gary Adelman
has invented this term neural Darianism
for the idea that your mental
organization might be the result of an
evolution inside of your individual
mind, right? That in the mind of the
infant or of the being that is growing
up, there are number of different orders
that compete with each other and it
converges into the one that is
discoverable and the most efficient
among the discoverable ones.
A friend of mine once told me that her
first memory was at the age of seven.
And this is the moment when she became
conscious and she was sitting in class
and he was looking at the whiteboard and
the teacher was writing something on the
whiteboard and was here I am.
And I told her you know I don't think
that you could get to this point without
being conscious. So uh I think what
happened was that uh you killed the
previous consciousness, right? There was
a previous organization in your mind and
you staged a revolution against it and
because you were more efficient, you
were able to take over and you started a
new archive, a new protocol, a new
memory threat. And she was a bit freaked
out and she told me, you know, my mother
always told me you were exceptionally
dull child until this point.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Yosha. Thank you.