CASE LIBRARY 


1880 


SUCCESSOR TO 
CLEVELAND LIBRARY 
ASSOCIATION 
1848 


AFFILIATED WITH 
WESTERN RESERVE 


UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES fy 





Duzac’s 
Semitic Tert aw Translation Series, 


Wol. XII. 


Luzac's Semitic Tert and Translation Series. 


VOL.I: THe LauGHan_e STorIES COLLECTED By Bar-HEBRzAUS. 
Syriac Text and Translation, with Notes, Introduction, etc. 
By E, A. Wallis Budge. 21s. net. 


VOL. IL: Tue Lrrrers and Inscriprions or HAMMURAPI, 
Kinc or BanyLon, ABOUT B.C. 2200; to which are added 
a series of letters of other kings of the First Dynasty of 
Babylon. Vol. I: Introduction and Babylonian ‘lexts, 
By L. W. King. 219. net. 


VOL. Ul: Tar Letters snp Inscriprions or HAMMURARI, 
Kine or BasyLon, ABOUT B.C. 2200; to which are added 
a scries of letters of other kings of the First Dynasty of 
Babylon. Vol. If: Babylonian Texts, continued. By 
L. W. King. 18s, net. 


VOL. IV: Tue History of tHE VirGIn Mary, AND THE 
History oF THE Lrxenrss or Curist. Vol. I: Syriac 
Texts. By E. A. Wallis Budge. 12s. 6d. net. 


VOL. V: Tue History or tHe VirGin Mary, anv THE 
History oy ra£ Likeness or Curist. Vol. If:' English 
Translations. By E. A. Wallis Budge. ros. 6d. net. 


VOL. VI: Tur Reports or THE MaGicians AND ASTROLOGERS 
or NINEVEH AND BaByLon. Vol. 1: Cuneiform Texts. By 
R.C. Thompson. 12s. 6d, net. 


VOL. VIL: Tur Reports or THE MAGICIANS AND ASTROLOGERS 
or NINEVEH AND Bapyton, Vol. IT: English Translation 
and Transliteration. By R.C. Thompson. 12s. 6d. net. 


VOL. VIIL: THe Lerrers anv Inscriptions of HaMMURABI, 
KING oF BABYLON, ABOUT B.C. 2200; to which are added 
a series of letters of other kings of the First Dynasty of 
Babylon. Vol. III: English Translations, with Translitera- 
tions, Commentary, Vocabularies, Introduction, etc. By 
L. W. King. 18s. net. 


VOL. IX: Tue Hisrorrs or Raspan HorMizp THE PERSIAN 
AND Raspan Bar-‘Ipta. Vol. 1: Syriac Texts. By E. A. 
Wallis Budge. 125. 6d. net. 


VOL. X: Tue Hisrorres or Rappan HorMizD THE PERSIAN 


VOL. 


AND RappBan Bar-‘Iprd. Vol. II: English Translations. 
By E. A. Wallis Budge. 125. 6d. net. 


XI: Tue Histortes oF RappAN Hormizp THE PERSIAN 
AND Rappan Bar-‘IprA. Vol. IIL: English Translation of 
the Metrical Life of Rabban Hormizd by Sergius of 
Adh6rbaijan. By E. A. Wallis Budge. 12s, 6d. net. 


VOL. XII: THE Seven TaBLets of CREATION. Vol. I: English 


Translations, Transliterations, Glossary, Introduction, etc. 
By L. W. King. 18s. 


VOL. XUI: Taz Seven Tasrets or Creation. Vol. Il: 


VOL. 


VOL. 


VOL. 


VOL. 


VOL. 


Supplementary [Babylonian and Assyrian} Texts. By L. W. 
King. 155. 


XIV: Assyrian INCANTATIONS, SPELLS, AND FORMULA, 
DIRECTED AGAINST THE ATTACKS oF Evit SpiRIts, trans- 
literated and translated. Vol. IL. By R. C. Thompson. 
(In the Press.) 


XV: AssyrR1AN IncANTATIONS, SPELLS, AND FORMULA, 
DIRECTED AGAINST THE ATTACKS OF Evit Sprrits, trans- 
literated and translated, with Vocabulary, Indexes, and an 
Introduction. Vol. Il. ByR.C. Thompson. (Jn the Press.) 


XVI: Tue Hisrory or Baratim anp ViwAsitr. The 
Ethiopic Version, translated from the Arabic by Enbakém, 
for the Ethiopian king Galdwdéwas, a.p. 1553. Vol. I, 
Part 1: the Ethiopic Text. By E. A. Wallis Budge. (la 
the Press.) 


XVII: Tue History or BaratAm anp YEwAsir, The 
Ethiopic Version, translated from the Arabic by Enbaékém, 
for the Ethiopian king Galdwdéwds, a.p. 1553. Vol. I, 
Part 2: the Ethiopic Text, continued. By E. A. Wallis 
Budge. (Zn the Press.) 


XVIII: Tue History or Baratam anp YEwAsir. The 
Ethiopic Version, translated from the Arabic by Enbakém, 
for the Ethiopic king Galawdéwds, a.v. 1553. Vol. II: 
English Translation, Introduction, etc. By E. A, Wallis 
Budge. (Jn the Press.) 


VOL. XIX: A Contripurion To Basyronian History, being 


a series of Babylonian Historical Texts with English Trans- 
lations. By L. W. King. (Jz the Press.) 


THE SEVEN TABLETS OF CREATION. 





Reverse. 
Part of the Sixth Tablet of the Creation Series recording the Creation of Man 
(Brit. Mus., No. 92,629). 


THE SEVEN TABLETS 


OF 


CREATION, 


OR THE BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN LEGENDS 
CONCERNING THE CREATION OF THE WORLD 
AND OF MANKIND. 


EDITED BY 


L. W. KING, M.A, F.S.A,, 


ASSISTANT IN THE DEPARTMENT OF EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES BRITISH MUSTUM, 


VOL. I. 


LNGLISH TRANSLATIONS, ETC. 


G 
London : 
LUZAC AND CO. 
1902. 


[All Rights Reserved. | 


HERTFORD 
PRINTED BY STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS, 





Oreface. 


Prruaes no section of Babylonian literature has been 
more generally studied than the legends which record 
the Creation of the world. On the publication of 
the late Mr. George Smith's work, “ The Chaldean 
Account of Genesis,” which appeared some twenty- 
seven years ago, it was recognized that there was 
in the Babylonian account of the Creation, as it 
existed in the seventh century before Christ, much 
which invited comparison with the corresponding 
narrative in the Book of Genesis. It is true that the 
Babylonian legends which had been recovered and 
were first published by him were very fragmentary, 
and that the exact number and order of the Tablets, 
or sections, of which they were composed were quite 
uncertain; and that, although they recorded the 
creation of the heavens and of the heavenly bodies, 
they contained no direct account of the creation of 
man. In spite of this, however, their resemblance 
to the Hebrew narrative was unmistakable, and in 
consequence they at once appealed to a far larger 
circle of students than would otherwise have been 
the case. 

After the appearance of Mr. Smith’s work, other 
scholars produced translations of the fragments which 


XII PREFACE. 





he had published, and the names of Oppert, Schrader, 
and Sayce will always be associated with those who 
were the first to devote themselves to the inter- 
pretation of the Creation Legends. Moreover, 
new fragments of the legends have from time to 
time been acquired by the Trustees of the British 
Museum, and of these the most important is the 
fine text of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation 
Series, containing the account of the fight between 
the god Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, which 
was published in 1887 by Dr. Wallis Budge, and 
translated by Professor Sayce in the same year. 
Professor Sayce’s translation of the Creation Legends 
marked a distinct advance upon those of his pre- 
decessors, and it was the most complete, inasmuch 
as he was enabled to make use of the new tablet 
which restored so much of the central portion of the 
story. In the year 1890, in his important work 
Die Kosmologie der Babylonier, Professor Jensen of 
Marburg gave a translation of the legends together 
with a transliteration and commentary; in 1895 
Professor Zimmern of Leipzig translated all the 
fragments then known, and a year later Professor 
Delitzsch of Berlin also published a_ rendering. 
Finally, two years ago, Professor Jensen issued a new 
and revised translation of the Creation Legends in the 
opening pages of the first part of his work MLythen 
und Epen, the second part of which, containing his 
notes and commentary, appeared some months ago. 


PREFACE. XUL 





In the course of the year r1goo, the writer was 
entrusted with the task of copying the texts of a number 
of Babylonian and Assyrian legends for publication 
in the series of Canetform Texts from Babylonian 
Tablets, etc., in the British Museum, and, among the 
documents selected for issue, were those relating 
to the Creation of the world. Several of the texts 
of the Creation Legends, which had been used by 
previous translators, had never been published, and 
one tablet, which Mr. George Smith had consulted 
in 1876, had not been identified by subsequent 
workers. During my work I was so fortunate as to 
recognize this tablet, and was enabled to make copies 
of all the texts, not only of those which were previously 
known, but also of a number of new duplicates and 
fragments which I had meanwhile identified. These 
copies appeared in Cuneiform Texts, Part XIII 
(1901), Plates 1-41. The most interesting of the 
new fragments there published was a tablet which 
restored a missing portion of the text of the Second 
Tablet of the Creation Series, and of this, on account 
of its interest, I gave a translation in a note to the 
plate on which the text appeared. It was not my 
intention at that time to publish anything further 
upon the subject of the Creation Legends. 

While I was engaged, however, in searching for 
fragments of other Babylonian legends for publication 
officially, it was my good fortune to come across 
a fine duplicate of the Second Tablet of the Creation 


XIV PRIEFACE. 





Series. A further prolonged search was rewarded 
by the finding of other fragments of the poem, and 
a study of these showed me that the earlier portions 
of the text of the Creation Story, as already known, 
could be considerably augmented. Among them, 
moreover, was a fragment of the poem which refers 
to the Creation of Man; this fragment is extremely 
important, for in addition to its valuable contents it 
also settles the disputed question as to the number of 
Tablets, or sections, of which the Creation Series was 
composed. In view of the additional information as 
to the form and contents of the poem which this new 
material afforded, it was clearly necessary that a new 
translation of the Creation Legends should be made, 
and this I undertook forthwith. 

The new fragments of the poem which I had 
identified up to the summer of last year are inscribed 
upon tablets of the Neo- Babylonian period. At 
the conclusion of the examination of tablets of this 
class, I lithographed the newly identified texts in 
a series of plates which are published in the second 
volume of the present work. These plates were 
already printed off, when, at the beginning of the 
present year, after my return from Assyria, I identified 
a fresh group of fragments of the poem inscribed, 
not upon Neo-Babylonian, but upon Assyrian tablets. 
At that time I was engaged on making a detailed 
catalogue, or hand-list, of the smaller fragments in 
the various collections of Assyrian tablets from 


PREFACE. xv 





Kuyunjik, and, as a result of previous study of the 
legends themselves and of the Assyrian commentaries 
to the Seventh Tablet of the series, I was enabled 
to identify ten new fragments of the poem which are 
inscribed upon tablets from the library of Ashur- 
bani-pal at Nineveh. In order to avoid upsetting the 
arrangement of the plates in Vol. II, the texts of 
the new Assyrian fragments are published by means 
of outline blocks in Appendices I and II to the 
present volume. 

Those who have studied the published texts of the 
Creation Series will remember that the material used 
by previous translators of the legends has consisted 
of some twenty-one tablets and fragments inscribed 
with portions of the poem. The number of new 
tablets and fragments belonging to the Creation Serics 
which are here used and translated for the first time 
reaches the total of thirty-four, but, as I have joined 
up six of these to other similar fragments, this total 
has been reduced to twenty-eight. Thus, in place 
of the twenty-one tablets previously known, forty- 
nine separate tablets and fragments have now been 
identified as containing portions of the text of the 
Creation Series. 

The new information, furnished by the recently 
discovered material regarding the Story of Creation, 
may here be briefly summarized. Hitherto our 
knowledge of the contents of Tablets I and II of 
the series has been very fragmentary. After the 


XVI “PREFACE. 





narrative of the creation of the great gods in the 
opening lines of the poem, and a fragmentary 
reference to the first symptoms of revolt exhibited 
by the primeval monsters, Apsii and Tiamat, and 
Mummu, the minister of Apsi, there occurred a great 
gap in the text, and the story began again with the 
account of how Tiamat prepared to wage war against 
the gods. Apsii and Mummu have at this point 
entirely disappeared from the narrative, and the ally 
of Tiamat is the god Kingu, whom she appoints to 
command her forces. What followed the creation of 
the great gods, what was the cause of the revolt, what 
was the fate of Apsi and Mummu, and what were the 
events which led up to Tiamat’s preparations for 
battle, are questions that have hitherto remained 
unanswered. We now know that the account of the 
creation of the gods was no fuller than that which 
has come down to us from Damascius. After the 
birth of Lakhmu and Lakhamu, Anshar and Kishar, 
Anu, Bél (ie, Enlil, or Illil), and Ea (Nudimmud), 
the text does not proceed to narrate in detail the 
coming forth of the lesser deities, but plunges at once 
into the story of the revolt of the primeval forces of 
chaos. We now know also that it was Apsi, and not 
Tiamat, who began the revolt against the gods; and 
that, according to the poem, his enmity was aroused, 
not by the creation of light as has been previously 
suggested, but by the disturbance of his rest in 
consequence of the new “way” of the gods, which 
tended to produce order in place of chaos. 


PREFACE. XVII 





One of the most striking facts which the new 
fragments furnish with regard to the contents of the 
legends is the prominent part played by the god Ea 
in the earlier episodes of the story. After Apst and 
Mummu had repaired to Tiamat and had hatched with 
her their plot against the gods, it was the god Ea, 
who, abounding in all wisdom, detected their plan and 
frustrated it. The details of Ea’s action are still 
a matter of uncertainty, but, as I have shown in the 
Introduction, it is clear that Apsi and Mummu were 
overthrown, and that their conqueror was Ea. More- 
over, it was only after their downfall, and in order 
to avenge them, that Tiamat began her preparations 
for battle. She was encouraged in her determination 
by the god Kingu, and it was in consequence of the 
assistance he then gave her that she afterwards 
appointed him leader of her host. 

Another point which is explained by the new 
fragments concerns the repetitions in Tablets I, II, 
and III of the lines containing the account of Tiamat’s 
preparations for battle. The lines describing this 
episode are given no less than four times: in Tablet I, 
in Tablet II, and twice in Tablet III. We now 
know that the first description of Tiamat’s preparations 
occurs after the account of her determination to avenge 
her former allies ; and in the Second Tablet the lines 
are put into the mouth of Ea, who continues to play 
a prominent part in the narrative, and carries the 
tidings to Anshar. How Anshar repeated the lines 


B 


XVIII PREFACE. 





to Gaga, his messenger, and how Gaga delivered the 
message to Lakhmu and Lakhamu, is already well 
known. 

Perhaps the most striking of all the new fragments 
of the poem here published is that which contains the 
opening and closing lines of the Sixth Tablet, and, at 
last, furnishes us with a portion of the text describing 
the Creation of Man. We now know that, as in the 
Hebrew narrative, the culminating act of Creation was 
the making of man. Marduk is here represented as 
declaring to Ea that he will create man from his own 
blood, and from bone which he will form; it is im- 
portant to note that the Assyrian word here used for 
“bone,” zsszmedu, which has not hitherto been known, 
corresponds to the Hebrew word ‘esem, “bone,” which 
occurs in Gen. ii, 23, in connection with the account 
of the creation of woman. The text thus furnishes 
another point of resemblance between the Babylonian 
and the Hebrew stories of Creation. The new 
fragment also corroborates in a remarkable degree 
the account given by Berossus of the Babylonian 
version of the creation of man. According to the 
writer's rendering of the passage, Marduk declares 
that he will use his own blood in creating mankind, 
and this agrees with the statement of Berossus, that 
Bél directed one of the gods to cut off his (ie. Bél’s) 
head, and to form mankind from his blood mixed with 
earth. This subject is discussed at length and in detail 
in the Introduction, as well as a number of new points 


PREFACE. XIX 





of resemblance between the Babylonian and the 
Hebrew accounts of the Creation which are furnished 
by other recently identified fragments of the poem. 

With regard to the extent and contents of the 
Creation Series, we now know that the Tablets of 
which the series was composed are seven in number ; 
and we also possess the missing context or frame- 
work of the Seventh Tablet, which contains addresses 
to Marduk under his fifty titles of honour. From 
this we learn that, when the work of Creation was 
ended, the gods gathered together once more in 
Upshukkinakku, their council-chamber ; here they 
seated themselves in solemn assembly and proceeded 
to do honour to Marduk, the Creator, by reciting 
before him the remarkable series of addresses which 
form the contents of the last Tablet of the poem. 
Many of the missing portions of the Seventh Tablet, 
including the opening lines, it has been found possible 
to restore from the new fragments and duplicates 
here published. 

In the following pages a transliteration of the text 
of the Creation Series is given, which has been 
constructed from all the tablets and fragments now 
known to be inscribed with portions of the poem, 
together with a translation and notes. For com- 
parison with the legends contained in the Creation 
Series, translations have been added of the other 
Babylonian accounts of the history of Creation, and 
of some texts closely connected therewith. Among 


XxX PREFACE. 





these mention may be made of the extracts from 
a Sumerian text, and from a somewhat similar one 
in Babylonian, referring to the Creation of the Moon 
and the Sun; these are here published from a so-called 
“ practice-tablet,” or student’s exercise. A remarkable 
address to a mythical river, to which the creation of 
the world is ascribed, is also given. 

In the first Appendix the Assyrian commentaries to 
the Seventh Tablet ‘are examined in detail, and some 
fragments of texts are described which bear a striking 
resemblance to the Seventh Tablet, and are of con- 
siderable interest for the light they throw on the 
literary history of the poem. Among the texts dealt 
with in the second Appendix one of the most interesting 
is a Babylonian duplicate of the tablet which has been 
supposed to contain the instructions given by Marduk 
to man after his creation, but is now shown by the 
duplicate to be part of a long didactic composition 
containing moral precepts, and to have nothing to do 
with the Creation Series. Similarly, in the fourth 
Appendix I have printed a copy of the text which has 
been commonly, but erroneously, supposed to refer to 
the Tower of Babel. The third Appendix includes 
some hitherto unpublished astrological texts of the 
period of the Arsacidae, which contain astrological 
interpretations and explanations of episodes of the 
Creation story; they indicate that Tiamat, in her 
astrological character, was regarded as a star or 
constellation in the neighbourhood of the ecliptic, 


PREFACE. XxI 





7 


and they moreover furnish an additional proof of 
the identification of her monster brood with at any 
rate some of the Zodiacal constellations. 

During the preparation of this work I have, of 
course, consulted the translations and renderings of 
the Creation Legends which have been made by 
other workers on the subject, and especially those 
of Professors Jensen, Zimmern, and Delitzsch. I have 
much pleasure in expressing here my indebtedness to 
their published works for suggestions which I have 
adopted from them. 

To Mr. R. Campbell Thompson J am indebted for 
the ready assistance he has afforded me during my 
search for new fragments and duplicates of the 
legends. 

In conclusion, my thanks are due to Dr. Wallis 
Budge for his friendly suggestions which I have 
adopted throughout the progress of the work. 


L. W. KING. 
Lonpon, July 31st, 1902. 


Contents. 


PAGE 


PREEAGE® fe: jem eler sudo. capo oe a's = ey 9, lo ra ea> gt wit SRT 
INTRODUCTION :— 
I. DESCRIPTION AND LITERATURE OF THE POEM 
ENUMA ELISH .« «© «© «© «© © © @ «@ i xXXV 
Il. CONTENTS OF THE POEM AND DISCUSSION OF 
NEW MATERIAL. « «© 6© © «© «© © «© «© «© Xxx 
Ill, COMPOSITION OF THE POEM . . . 1. LXVI 
1V. DATE AND ORIGIN OF THE BABYLONIAN CREATION 
; LEGENDS - «6 6 + 6 + ee ee we) OLXKID 
V. INFLUENCE OF THE BABYLONIAN CREATION 
LEGENDS AND PARALLELS IN HEBREW 
LITERATURE 204 8 Ow Se CLERXE 
VI. AUTHORITIES FOR THE TEXT OF THE POEM ENUMA 
ELISH AND THE ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. . XCVII 
VII, RECONSTRUCTION AND ARRANGEMENT OF THETEXT = CXX 
TRANSLITERATIONS AND TRANSLATIONS :— 
I, Tue Seven TABLETS or THE History o¥ CREATION. 
I, THE FIRST TABLET «6 1 6 ee ee ee 2 
II.. THE SECOND TABLET. » «se + + + e + + 22 
IW. THE THIRD TABLET «ee ee ee ee ee 38 
IV. THE FOURTH TABLET. . . - + se + + + + 58 
Vv. THE FIFTH TABLET « «ee + ee ee ee) 78 
VI. THE SIXTH TABLET . «ee ee + ee + e886 
VII. THE SEVENTH TABLET . «© + + ee + + s+) 92 
EPILOGUE . 2. 6 6 + 6 ee ee ee ee 210 
IJ. Oryer Accounts oF THE History oF CREATION. 
‘I, ANOTHER VERSION OF THE DRAGON-MYTH . . . 116 
Il, A REFERENCE TO THE CREATION OF THE CATILE 
AND THE BEASTS OF THE FIELD. . - «© + + I22 
Ill. A REFERENCE TO THE CREATION OF THE MOON 
AND THE SUN «oe 6 8 6 ee te ee ee DG 
Iv. AN ADDRESS TO THE RIVER OF CREATION . - - 128 
Vv. ANOTHER VERSION OF THE CREATION OF THE 
WORLD BY MARDUK . «. - + 6 © 2 «© «© # 130 


VI. THE ‘CUTHAEAN LEGEND OF THE CREATION” . 


140 


XXIV CONTENTS. 





APPENDICES :— 


I. ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES AND PARALLEL TEXTS 
TO THE SEVENTH TABLET OF THE CREATION 


PAGE 


SERIES Moc 60 Many gig ot Soh eS, Le Pes, as UES, 
Il. ON SOME FRAGMENTS OF THE SERIES ZNUMA 
ELISH, AND.ON SOME TEXTS RELATING TO THE 
HISTORY OF CREATION . . . ) ee ee 182 
II. -ON SOME TRACES OF THE HISTORY OF CREATION 
IN RELIGIOUS AND ASTROLOGICAL LITERATURE. 204 
IV. SUPPOSED ASSYRIAN LEGENDS OF THE TEMPTATION 
AND THE TOWER OF BABEL . . . . . ss 219 
v. A “PRAYER OF THE RAISING OF THE HAND” TO 
ISHTAR? fo ogue. ce $s ac VES oo a ee. Sa, SED. 
INDICES, GLOSSARY, Etc. :— 
I. "INDEX TO TEXTS. 
A. CUNEIFORM TEXTS FROM BABYLONIAN TABLETS, 
ETC., IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM, PART XIII 
(1901), PLATES I-4I ww ee ew ee 239 
B. SUPPLEMENTARY TEXTS, PUBLISHED IN VOL. II, 
PLATES I-LXXXIV- 0. ee ee eo ee 24T 
C. SUPPLEMENTARY TEXTS, PUBLISHED IN APPEN- 
DICES I, Hi, ANDI. «ee ee ee 24h 
Il. INDEX TO REGISTRATION.NUMBERS. . . «6 + 245 
Ill. GLOSSARY OF SELECTED WORDS . . . . . . + 251 
Iv. INDEX TO NAMES OF DEITIES, STARS, PLACES, ETC. 266 
PLATES :— 
I. THE SIXTH TABLET OF THE CREATION: SERIES . . VIII 
YI. THE FIRST TABLET OF THE CREATION SERIES . .XXXV 


Ill. THE SECOND TABLET OF THE CREATION SERIES + XLIIT 
IV. THE FOURTH TABLET OF THE CREATION SERIES .XLVII 


Vv. THE FIFTH TABLET OF THE CREATION SERIES . 
VI. THE SEVENTH TABLET OF THE CREATION SERIES . 


Ir 
LXxI 


Introduction. 


Tue great Assyrian poem, or series of legends, which The Creation 
narrates the story of the Creation of the world and of “Enna 
man, was termed by the Assyrians and Babylonians 
Enuma els, “When in the height,” from the two 
opening words of the text. The poem consisted of 
some nine hundred and ninety-four lines, and was 
divided into seven sections, each of which was inscribed 
upon a separate Tablet. The Tablets were numbered 
by the Assyrian scribes, and the separate sections of 
the poem written upon them do not vary very much 
in length, The shortest Tablet contains one hundred 
and thirty-eight lines, and the longest one hundred and 
forty-six, the average length of a Tablet being about 
one hundred and forty-two lines. The poem embodies 
the beliefs of the Babylonians and Assyrians con- 
cerning the origin of the universe; it describes the 
coming forth of the gods from chaos, and tells the 
story of how the forces of disorder, represented by 
the primeval water-gods Apsi and Tiamat, were over- 
thrown by Ea and Marduk respectively, and how 
Marduk, after completing the triumph of the gods over 
chaos, proceeded to create the world and man. The 
poem is known to us from portions of several Assyrian 
and late-Babylonian copies of the work, and from 


XXVI INTRODUCTION. 





gnscrtion extracts from it written out upon the so-called “practice- 
au" tablets,” or students’ exercises, by pupils of the 


Babylonian scribes. The Assyrian copies of the work 
are from the great library which was founded at 
Nineveh by Ashur-bani-pal, king of Assyria from 
B.c. 668 to about B.c. 626; the Babylonian copies and 
extracts were inscribed during the period of the kings 
of the Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods ; and one 
copy of the Seventh Tablet may probably be assigned 
to as late a date as the period of the Arsacidae. 
All the tablets and fragments, which have hitherto 
been identified as inscribed with portions of the text 
of the poem, are preserved in the British Museum. 
Fist From, the time of the first discovery of fragments 
ublication ‘ - : 2 4 
pgranry of the poem considerable attention has been directed 
Gooree Seni towards them, for not only are the legends themselves 
the principal source of our knowledge of the Baby- 
lonian cosmogony, but passages in them bear a striking 
resemblance to the cognate narratives in the Book 
of Genesis concerning the creation of the world. 
The late Mr. George Smith, who was the first to 
publish an account of the poem, recognized this 
resemblance and emphasized it in his papers on 
the subject in 1875.1 In the following year in 





1 Mr. Smith described the legends in a letter to the Daily 
Telegraph, published on March 4th, 1875, No. 6,158, p. 5, col. 4. 
He there gave a summary of the contents of the fragments, and on 
November 2nd.in the same year he read a-paper on them before the 


THE CREATION LEGENDS. XXVII 





his work “The Chaldean Account of Genesis”? smits 
he gave translations of the fragments of the poem ee 
which had been identified, and the copies which he 

had made of the principal fragments were published.? 

After Smith’s death the interest in the texts which he 

had published did not cease, and scholars continued 


to produce renderings and studies of the legends.® 





Society of Biblical Archeology. In noting the resemblance between 
the Babylonian and the Hebrew legends it was not unnatural that 
he should have seen a closer resemblance between them than was 
really the case. For instance, he traced allusions to “the Fall of 
Man” in what is the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series; one 
tablet he interpreted as containing the instructions given by “the 
Deity” to man after his creation, and another he believed to 
represent a version of the story of the Tower of Babel. Although 
these identifications were not justified, the outline which he gave 
of the contents of the legends was remarkably accurate. It is 
declared by some scholars that the general character of the larger 
of the Creation fragments was correctly identified by Sir H. C. 
Rawlinson several years before. 

1 The Chaldean Account of Genesis, London, 1876; German 
edition, edited by Delitzsch, Leipzig, 1876. New English edition, 
edited by Sayce, London, 1880. 

? By November, 1875, Smith had prepared a series of six plates 
containing copies of portions of the First and Fifth Tablets, and 
also of the Fourth Tablet which he entitled “War between the 
Gods and Chaos,”. and of the Seventh Tablet which he styled 
“Tablet describing the Fall.” These plates were published in 
the Zransactions of the Society of Biblical Archeology, vol. iv (1876), 
and appeared after his death. 

3 See the papers by H. Fox Talbot in T.S.B.A. » Vol. viv, 
pp- 349 ff., and vol. v, pp. 1ff., 426 ff., and Records of the Past, 
vol. ix (1877), pp. 115 ff, 135 ff.; and the translations made by 
Oppert in an appendix to Ledrain’s Histoire d’Isracl, premitre 
partie (1879), pp. 411 ff, and by Lenormant in Les origines de 


Recent trans- 
lations of the 
legends, 


XXVIII INTRODUCTION. 





In 1883 Dr. Wallis Budge gave an account of a fine 
Babylonian duplicate of what proved to be the Fourth 
Tablet of the Creation Series ; this document restored 
considerable portions of the narrative of the fight 
between Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, and added 
considerably to our knowledge of the story of Creation 
and of the order in which the events related in the 
story took place! In the Hibbert Lectures for 1887 
Professor Sayce translated the new fragment of the 
text,’ and in the following year published a complete 
translation ® of all fragments of the Creation Legends 
which had up to that time been identified. In 1890 
Professor Jensen, in his studies on the Babylonian 
cosmogony, included a translation of the legends 
together with a transliteration and a number of 
valuable philological notes and discussions. In 1895 


Phistoire (1880), app. i, pp. 494 ff. The best discussion of the 
relations of the legends to the early chapters of Genesis was 
given by Schrader in the second edition (1883) of his Kedlin- 
schriften und das Alte Testament, English translation, 1885~1888 ; 
I hear from Professor Zimmern that the new edition of this work, 
a portion of which he is editing, will shortly make its appearance. 


1 The tablet was numbered 82-9-18, 3,737; see below, p. cvi, 

No. 29. Budge gave a description of the tablet in the Proceedings 
of the Society of Biblical Archeology for Nov. 6th, 1883, and 
published the text in P.S.B.A., vol. x (1887), p. 86, pls. 1-6. 
- ® See Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated 
by the Religion of the Ancient Babylonians (Hibbert Lectures for 
1887), pp. 379 ff. ; 

3 In Records of the Past, new series, vol. i (1888), pp. 122 ff. 

* See Die Kosmologie der Babylonier (Strassburg, 1890), pp. 263 ff. 


PREVIOUS TRANSLATIONS. XXIX 





Professor Zimmern published a translation of the Recent trans- 
legends, similar in plan to Sayce’s earlier edition ; in eons ct me 
it he took advantage of some recently identified 
fragments and duplicates, and put forward a number 

of new renderings of difficult passages! In 1896 

a third German translation of the legends made its 
appearance ; it was published by Professor Delitzsch 

and included transliterations and descriptions of the 

various tablets and fragments inscribed with portions 

of the text? Finally, in 1900 Professor Jensen 
published a second edition of his rendering of the 
legends in his Mythen und Epen;* this work was 

the best which could be prepared with the material 

then available.‘ 





1 Zimmern published his translation as an appendix to Gunkel’s 
Schipfung und Chaos in Urzett und Endzeit (Gottingen, 1895), 
pp. 401 ff. 

* Das Babylonische Weltschipfungsepos, published in the Adhand- 
lungen der philologisch-historischen Classe der Kinigl. Stichsischen 
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, xvii, No. ii. 

3 Assyrisch-Babjlonische Mythen und Epen, published as the sixth 
volume of Schrader’s Keehinschrifiliche Bibliothek ; part 1, containing 
transliterations and translations (1900); part 2, containing com- 
mentary (1901). 

4 In addition to the translations of the legends mentioned in 
the text, a number of papers and works containing descriptions 
and discussions of the Creation legends have from time to time 
been published. Among those which have appeared during the 
last few years may be mentioned the translations of portions of 
the legends by Winckler in his Kerlinschriftliches Textbuch sum 
Alten Testament, ii (1892), pp. 88 ff.; Barton’s article on Tiamat, 
published in the Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xv 
(1893), pp. 1ff.; and the translations and discussions of the 


XXX INTRODUCTION. 





Identification In the most recent translations of the Creation Series, 
onew tS those of Delitzsch and Jensen, use was made in all of 
twenty-one separate tablets and fragments which had 
been identified as inscribed with portions of the text 
of the poem!’ In the present work thirty-four 





legends given in Jastrow’s Religion of Babylonia and Assyria (1898), 
pp. 407 ff.,.in my own Babylonian Religion and Mythology (1899), 
pp. 53 ff, by Muss-Arnolt in Assyrian and Babylonian Literature, 
edited by R. F. Harper (1901), pp. 282 ff., and by Loisy, Les mpthes 
babyloniens et les premiers chapttres de la Genése (1901). Discussions 
of the Babylonian Creation legends and their connection with 
the similar narratives in Genesis have been given by Lukas in 
‘Die Grundbegriffe in den Kosmogonien der alten Volker (1893), 
pp. 1-46, by Gunkel in Schép/ung und Chaos in Uraeit und Endzett 
(1895), pp. 16 ff., by Driver in Authority and Archeology, edited 
by Hogarth (1899), pp. 9 ff., and by Zimmern in Beblische und 
babylonische Urgeschichte (Der alte Orient, 1901); an exhaustive 
article on “Creation” has also been contributed by Zimmern 
and Cheyne to the Encyclopedia Biblica, vol. i (1899), cols. 938 ff. 
_' Delitzsch’s list of fragments, enumerated on pp. 7 ff. of 
his work, gave the total number as twenty-two. As No. 21 he 
included the tablet K. 3,364, but in Appendix II (pp. 201 ff.) 
I have proved, by means of the Neo-Babylonian duplicate No. 
33,851, that this tablet is part of a long composition containing 
moral precepts, and has no connection with the Creation Series. 
He also included K. 3,445 +R. 396 (as No. 20), but there are 
strong reasons for believing that this tablet does not belong to the 
series Lnuma elis, but is part of a variant account of the story of 
Creation; see further, Appendix II, pp. 197ff. On the other 
hand he necessarily omitted from his list an unnumbered fragment 
of the Seventh Tablet, which had been used by George Smith, 
but had been lost sight of after his death; this fragment I 
identified two years ago as K.9,267. It may be added that the 
total number of fragments correctly identified up to that time was 
twenty-five, but, as four of these had been joined to others, the 
number of separate tablets and fragments was reduced to twenty-one. 


THE NEW MATERIAL. XXXI 





additional tablets and fragments, inscribed with Identification 
portions of the text of the Creation Series, have been 
employed; but, as six of these join other similar 
fragments, the number of separate tablets and 
fragments here used for the first time is reduced to 
twenty-eight. The total number of separate fragments 
of the text of the Creation Series is thus brought up 
to forty-nine." The new material is distributed among 
the Seven Tablets of the Creation Series as follows :— 
To the four known fragments of the First Tablet 
may now be added eight others,’ consisting of two 
fragments of an Assyrian tablet and four Babylonian 
fragments and two extracts inscribed upon Babylonian 
“‘ practice-tablets.” To the three known fragments 
of the Second Tablet may be added four others,® 
consisting of parts of one Assyrian and of three 
Babylonian tablets. To the four known fragments 
of the Third Tablet may be added five others,‘ 





* On pp. xcvii ff. brief descriptions are given of these forty- 
nine separate fragments of the Creation Series, together with 
references to previous publications in which the text of any of 
them have appeared. The whole of the old material, together with 
part of the new, was published in Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian 
Tablets, etc., in the British’ Museum, part xiii. The texts of the 
new tablets and fragments which I have since identified are 
published in the lithographed plates of Vol. II, and by means of 
outline blocks in Appendices I and II (see pp. 159 ff.). For the 
circumstances under which the new fragments were identified, see 
the Preface to this volume. 

* See below, p. xcviiif., Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, 

% See below, p. ci, Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 18. 

* See below, p. ciiif., Nos. 22, 24, 25, 26, and 27. 


Identification 
of new texts. 


The birth of 
the gods. 


XXXII INTRODUCTION. 





consisting of fragments of one Assyrian and one 
Babylonian tablet and extracts inscribed upon three 
Babylonian “ practice-tablets.”. To the five known 
fragments of the Fourth Tablet only one new duplicate 
can be added,’ which is inscribed upon a Babylonian 
“ practice-tablet.” To the three known fragments of 
the Fifth Tablet may be added two others,? consisting 
of parts of two Assyrian tablets. Of the Sixth 
Tablet no fragment has previously been known, and 
its existence was only inferred from a fragment of the 
catch-line preserved on copies of the Fifth Tablet ; 
fragments of the text of the Sixth Tablet are published 
for the first time in the present work from part of 
a Babylonian tablet.* Finally, to the two known 
fragments of the Seventh Tablet may now be added 
seven others,‘ inscribed upon five Assyrian fragments 
and portions of two Babylonian tablets. 

The new fragments of the text of the First and 
Second Tablets of the Creation Series throw light 
on the earlier episodes in the story of Creation, and 
enable us to fill up some of the gaps in the narrative. 
By the identification of the Tablet K. 5,419¢,’ George 
Smith recovered the opening lines of the First Tablet, 
which describes the condition of things before Creation 





1 See below, p. cvi, No. 32. 

2 See below, p. eviii, Nos. 37 and 38. 

8 See below, p. cix, No. 40. 

4 See below, p. cixf., Nos. 41, 42, 44, 46, 47; 48, and 49. 
5 See below, p. xeviif., No. 1. 


THE NEW MATERIAL. XXXII 





when the primeval water-gods, Apsii and Tiamat, per- 
sonifying chaos, mingled their waters in confusion. The 
text then briefly relates how to Apst and Tiamat were 
born the oldest of the gods, the first pair, Lahmu and 
Lahamu, being followed after a long interval by Anshar 
and Kishar, and after a second interval by other deities, 
of whose names the text of K. 5,419¢ only preserves 
that of Anu. George Smith perceived that this 
theogony had been reproduced by Damascius in his 
summary of the beliefs of the Babylonians concerning 
the creation of the world.t| Now, since Damascius 
mentions “IAAwos and Ads along with ‘Avos, it was 
clear that the text of the poem included a description 
of the birth of the elder Bél (ie. Enlil or Illil) and of 
‘Ea in the passage in which Anu’s name occurs. But 
as the text inscribed upon the obverse of K. 5,419¢, 





' The following is the text of the passage in which Damascius 
summarizes the Babylonian beliefs: —Té» é& BapBdpwr corkact 
BaBurdyvioe pév Thy pilav tov Ghwv dpxv orp mapevat, Evo bé woety 
TavOé cai Arasiy, tov pév Aracwy dvépa tis TavOé rowbovtes, Tavtyy 
56 pytépa Ooty dvopafovtes, eE &v povoyer} maida yevvyOjvar tov 
Mwipiv, abtov oar tov voytoy Koopov ex tiv dvoivy dpxdy Tap- 
ayopevov, "Ex 6€ rv abtiev ddrAWv yevedy mpocrOeiv, Aaxjy cai Aayor. 
Eka at tpéryy é« tév adtav, Kiocap) nai ’Acowpov, €E ay yevéoOa 
apets, "Avov cal "INduwor kai ’Aov' rod 6¢ “Aod nat Aadxys viov yevéaOae 
zov Bidov, ov dypeoupyor iva’ paow.—Quaestiones de primis principiis, 
cap. 125 (ed. Kopp, p. 384). The Aaxyv and Aaxov of the text 
should be emended to Aayyy and Aaxov, which correspond to 
Lahamu and Lahmu. Of the other deities, Taveé corresponds 
to Tiamat, *Avacwy to Apsti, Krooep9 to Kishar, ’Acowpos to Anshar, 
and “Aves to Anu; Mwupés corresponds to Mummu (see below, 
p. xxxviii, note 1). 


‘The birth of 
the gods. 


The birth of 
the gods. 


Damascius and 


the birth of 
Marduk 


XXXIV INTRODUCTION. 





and of its Neo-Babylonian duplicate 82-7-14, 402, 
breaks off at 1. 15, the course of the story after this 
point has hitherto been purely a matter for conjecture. 
It appeared probable that the lines which followed 
contained a full account of the origin of the younger 
gods, and from the fact that Damascius states that 
ByaAos, the Creator of the world, was the son of Ads 
(ie. Ea) and Aavky (ie. Damkina), it has been 
concluded that at any rate special prominence was 
given to the birth of Bél, ie. Marduk, who figures 
so prominently in the story from the close of the 
Second Tablet onwards. 

The new fragments of the First Tablet show that 
the account of the birth of the gods in the Creation 
Series is even shorter than that given by Damascius, 
for the poem contains no mention of the birth and 
parentage of Marduk. After mentioning the birth of 
Nudimmud (i.e. Ea),? the text proceeds to describe 
his marvellous wisdom and strength, and states that 


he had no rival among the gods; the birth of no 


other god is recorded after that of Ea, and, when 
Marduk is introduced later on, his existence, like that 
of Mummu and of Gaga, appears to be tacitly assumed. 
It would seem, therefore, that the reference made by 





1 See below, p. xcvili, No. 2. 

? It is interesting to note that Ea is referred to under his own 
name and not by his title Nudimmud upon new fragments of the 
poem in Tabl. I, |. 60 (p. 12 f.), Tabl. IT, 1. 5 (p. 22 f.), and Tabl. VI, 
1. 3 (p. 86f.) and 1. 11 (p. 88 f.). 


PLATE II. 





Part of the First Tablet of the Creation Series (Brit. Mus., No. 45,528 + 46,614). 


THE NEW MATERIAL. XXXVIL 





Damascius to Marduk’s parentage was not derived 
from the text of the Creation Series, but was added 
by him to complete his summary of the Babylonian 
beliefs concerning the origin of the gods. 

This omission of Marduk’s name from the earlier ta the hero of 
lines of the First Tablet and the prominence given or eke Creation 
to that of Ea may at first sight seem strange, but it ae 
is in accordance with the other newly recovered 
portions of the text of the First and Second Tablets, 
which indirectly throw an interesting light on the 
composite character and literary history of the great 
poem.’ It will be seen that of the deities mentioned 

- in these earlier lines Nudimmud (Ea) is the only god. 
whose characteristics are described in detail ; his birth, 
moreover, forms the climax to which the previous 
lines lead up, and, after the deseription of his character, 
the story proceeds at once to relate the rebellion of 
the primeval gods and the part which Ea played in. 
detecting and frustrating their plans. In fact, Ea and 
not Marduk is the hero of the earlier episodes of the 
Creation story. 

The new fragments of the text show, moreover, The cause of 
that it was Apsti and not Tiamat who began the tebelion, 
rebellion against the gods. While the newly created. 
gods represented the birth of order and system in the 
universe, Apsii and Tiamat still remained in confusion 
and undiminished in might. Apsi, however, finding 





* See further, pp. Ixvi ff. 


The cause of 
Apst’s 
rebellion, 


XXXVIII INTRODUCTION. 





that his slothful rest was disturbed by the new order 
of beings whom he had begotten, summoned Mummu,' 
his minister, and the two went together to Tiamat, 
and lying down before her, took counsel with her 





1 The Mwiinés of Damascius; see above, p. xxxili, n. 1. The 
title Mummu was not only borne by Apsi’s minister, who, according 
to Damascius, was the son of Apsi and Tiamat, but in Tabl. I, 1. 4, 
it is employed as a prefix to the name of Tiamat herself. In this 
passage I have conjecturally rendered it as ‘‘ chaos” (see p. 2 f.), 
since the explanatory text S. 747, Rev., 1. 10 (see below, 
pp. 162, 170), gives the equation Mu-um-mu = rig-mu, There is, 
however, much to be said for Jensen’s suggestion of the existence 
of a word mummu meaning “form,” or ‘ mould,” or “ pattern” 
(cf. Mythen und Epen, p. 302f.). Jensen points out that Ea is 
termed mu-um-mu ba-an ha-la, “the mummu (possibly, pattern) 
who created all” (cf. Bettrage zur Assyriologie, ii, p. 261), and he 
adds that the title might have been applied in this sense to 
Tiamat, since in Tabl. I, 1. 113, and the parallel passages, she is 
described as pa-ti-Ra-at ka-la-ma, and from her body heaven and 
earth were created; the explanation, given by Damascius, of 
Mummu, the son of Apsii and Tiamat, as voyrés xéopos is also 
in favour of this suggestion. Moreover, from one of the new 
fragments of the Seventh Tablet, K. 13,761 (see p. 102 f.), we now 
know that one of Marduk’s fifty titles was Mummu, which is there 
explained‘as ba-a[n.... . J, i-e., probably, da-a[x ka-da], “ Creator 
{of all]” (cf. Ea’s title, cited above). In view of the equation 
Mu-um-mu = rig-mu (Jensen’s suggested alternatives sim-mu and 
bi-18-mu are not probable), we may perhaps conclude that, in 
addition to the word mummu, ‘form, pattern,” there existed 
a word mummu, ‘chaos, confusion,” and that consequently the 
title Mummu was capable of two separate interpretations. If such 
be the case, it is possible that the application of the title to 
Tiamat and her son was suggested by its ambiguity of meaning ; 
while Marduk (and also Ea) might have borne the name as the 
“form” or “idea” of order and system, Tiamat and her son 
might have been conceived as representing the opposing “form” 
or “idea” of chaos and confusion. 


THE NEW MATERIAL, XXXIX 





regarding the means to be adopted to restore the 

old order of things. It may be noted that the 

text contains no direct statement that it was the 
creation of light which caused the rebellion of the pis patred of 
primeval gods.!. Apsii merely states his hatred of «jmne ™* 
the adkatu or ‘‘way” of the gods, in consequence 

of which he can get no rest by day or night; and, 

from the fact that he makes use of the expressions 

“by day” and “by night,” it may be inferred that 

day and night were vaguely conceived as already in 
existence. It was therefore the substitution of order 

in place of chaos which, according to the text of 

the poem, roused Apsii’s resentment and led to his 
rebellion and downfall.” 





! Jensen’s translation of what is 1. 50 of the First Tablet 
tepresents Mummu as urging Apsi to make the way of the gods 
“like night,” and implies that it was the creation of light which 
caused the rebellion. L. 50, however, is parallel to 1. 38, and it is 
certain that the adv. mu-Sif is to be rendered “ by night,” and not 
“like night.” In]. 38 Apsi complains that ‘by day” he cannot 
rest, and “by night” he cannot lie down in peace; Mummu then 
counsels him to destroy the way of the gods, adding in l. 50, 
“Then by day shalt thou have rest, by night shalt thou lie down 
{in peace)”; see pp. 3 ff. Jensen’s suggested rendering of im-ma 
as-ru-nim-ma, in place of tm-ma-as-ru-nim-ma, in Tabl. I, 1. 109 
and the parallel passages, is therefore also improbable. 

2 This fact does not preclude the interpretation of the fight 
between Marduk and Tiamat as based upon a nature-myth, 
representing the disappearance of mist and darkness before the 
rays of the sun. For Marduk was originally a solar deity, and 
Berossus himself mentions this interpretation of the legend (see 
further, p. Ixxxii, and the quotation on p. livf., notes 2 and 1). 


‘The overthrow 
of Apsit and 

the capture of 
Mummuby Ea. 


Tiamat’s 
determination 
to avenge 
Apsii and 
Mummu, due 
to Kingu's 
prompting. 


XL INTRODUCTION. 





Our knowledge of the part played by Ea in the 
overthrow of Apsii and Mummu is still fragmentary, 
but we know from 1. 60 of the First Tablet that it was 
he who detected the plot against the gods ; it is also 
certain that the following twenty lines recorded the 
fate of Apst and his minister, and there are clear 
indications that it was Ea to whom their overthrow 
was due. In Tablet HH, ll. 53 ff, Anshar, on learning 
from Ea the news of Tiamat’s preparations for battle, 
contrasts the conquest of Mummu and Apsi with the 
task of opposing Tiamat, and the former achievement 
he implies has been accomplished by Ea. It is clear, 
therefore, that Ea caused the overthrow of Apsti' and 
the capture of Mummu,? but in what way he brought 
it about, whether by actual fighting or by “his pure 
incantation,” ® is still a matter for conjecture. In view 
of the fact that Anshar at first tried peaceful means 
for overcoming Tiamat‘ before exhorting Marduk to 
wage battle against her, the latter supposition is the 
more probable of the two. The subjugation of Apsi 
by Ea explains his subsequent disappearance from 
the Creation story. When Apsii is next mentioned, 
it is as “the Deep,”’® and not as an active and 
malevolent deity. 

After the overthrow of Apst, Tiamat remained 
unconquered, and she continued to represent in her 








* Cf. Tabl. 1, 1. 97. * Cf. Tabl. 1, 1. 98. 
3 Cf. Tabl. I, 1. 62. ‘Cf, Tabl. II, ll. 75 ff 
5 Cf. Tabl. IV, |. 142. 


THE NEW MATERIAL, XLI 





own person the unsubdued forces of chaos.’ But, 
as at first she had not herself begun the. rebellion, 
so now her continuation of the war against the 
gods’ was due to the prompting of another deity. 
The speech in which this deity urges Tiamat 
to avenge Apsti and Mummu occurs in Tablet I, 
Il. 93-104, and, inasmuch as she subsequently promoted 
Kingu to be the leader of her forces “‘ because he had 
given her support,” it may be concluded that it was 
Kingu who now prompted her to avenge her former ra's continued 
spouse.? Ea, however, did not cease his active the forces of 
opposition to the forces of disorder, but continued eae 
to play the chief réle on the side of the gods. He 
heard of Tiamat’s preparations for battle, he carried 
the news to Anshar, his father, and he was sent by 
him against the monster. It was only after both he 
and Anu had failed in their attempts to approach 
and appease Tiamat * that Anshar appealed to Marduk 
to become the champion of the gods. 
Another point completely explained by the new The repetitions 


in the First, 
fragments of the text is the reason for the repetitions Second, and | 
which occur in the first three tablets of the series. 
It will be seen that Tablet I, Il. 109-142, are repeated 


in Tablet H, ll. 15~48; that Tablet IT, Il. 11-48, are 





‘ It is possible that the fragments of 1. 88 f. of Tabl. 1 are not to 
be taken as part of a speech, but as a description of Tiamat’s state 
of confusion and restlessness after learning of Apsi’s fate. 

? See also p. 14, n. 1. 

3 On the probable order of the attempts made by Ea and Anu 
respectively to oppose Tiamat, see Appendix II, p. 188, n. 1. 


XLII INTRODUCTION. 





The repetitions repeated in Tablet III, ll. 15-52; and that Tablet III, 


Second ana UL. 1 5-66, are repeated in the same Tablet, Il. 73-124. 


Tara THe “The lines which are repeated have reference to 
Tiamat’s preparations for battle against the gods, 
and to Anshar’s summons of the gods in order that 
they may confer power on Marduk as their champion. 
From the new fragments of the text we now know 
that the lines relating to Tiamat’s preparations occur 
on the First Tablet in the form of narrative, 
immediately after she had adopted Kingu’s suggestion 
that she should avenge the overthrow of Apsi and 
Mummu; and that in the Second Tablet they are 
repeated by Ea in his speech to Anshar, to whom 
he carried the news. The context of the repetitions 
in the Third Tablet is already known; Anshar first 
repeats the lines to his minister Gaga, when telling 
him to go and summon the gods to an assembly, and 
later on in the Tablet Gaga repeats the message 
word for word to Lahmu and Lahamu. 

Berossusand ‘The constant repetition of these lines was doubtless 

brood of “intended to emphasize the terrible nature of the 
opposition which Marduk successfully overcame ; and 
the fact that Berossus omits all mention of the part 
played by Ea in the earlier portions of the story is 
also due to the tendency of the Babylonian priests 
to exalt their local god at the expense of other deities. 
The account which we have received from Berossus 
of the Babylonian beliefs concerning the origin of the 
universe is largely taken up with a description of 


PLaTE III. 





Part of the Second Tablet of the Creation Series (No. 40,559}. 


THE NEW MATERIAL. XLV 





the mythical monsters which dwelt in the deep at kerossus and 
. . * the monster- 
a time when the world had not come into being and brood of 
: Tiamat. 
when darkness and water alone existed.!. Over these 
monsters, according to Berossus, reigned a woman 


named ’Opopxa, who is to be identified with Tiamat,? 





‘ The account of the Creation given by Berossus in his history 
of Babylonia was summarized by Alexander Polyhistor, from whom 
Eusebius quotes in the first book of his Chronicon; the following 
is his description of the mythical monsters which existed before 
the creation of the world :—IevécOae Gyoi xpovov év YJ 10 wav oxdtos 
cai Bwp elvar, cal év rodrous Cia reparddy, Kai idiopuels rds lddas 
exovra Cwoyovetsba dvOpwrovs yap serrépovs yevvyOijvat, evdovs 
8é Kai terparzépous Kai Surpoowrous’ Kat cua pev exovtas bv, Kepadas 
8é bdo, dvépecay re Kal yuvarxedav, nai aidoia &é diacd, dppev kai Oru" 
kat éxépovs dvOpwrovs Tods pev aiyy oxedy Kai Képata exovras, Tous bE 
irrov mobas, tous 86 7a driow pev péepy tmmwy, ta be . eurpocbcy 
dvOpwrwy, ods immoxevtavpovs ry tddav etvat. ZwoyovnOijvac dé Kal 
ravpous dvOpwrwy xeharas exovtas kai xivas rTeTpaswpdtous, odpas 
ixOdbos ex riav drisOev pepby exovtas, Kai trrous Kuvoxepddous Kat 
dvOpwrrovs, kai érepa Cia kepadas pev Kat odbpata inrwy éxovta, obpis 
68 ixObwv' Kat ddda Sé CHa TavrodaTev Onpiwy pophas éxovra. 
TIpos 6€ todrors ixOdas wai épretd wai oes wai d\Na Cia wretove 
Ouvpacta Kat rapydraypevas tas Sets GAPAWY exovTa’ av Kal Tas 
cixovas év 1H 700 Biyhov vap dvaxetoOu, dpxew 6€ tovTwy mdvtwr 
quvatka oT] dvona ’Opmopxa civat' tod7o 6€ Xudéaioti pev Oadard, 
‘EMAquiati 8& pcOeppyvederar Oddaooa [xara 82 isdyrypov cedjvy |.— 
Eusebi chronicorum liber prior, ed. Schoene, col. 14 f. 

2 The reading ’Oepea is an emendation for opopwea, cf. op. cit., 
col. 16, n. 6; while for @a\a76 we should probably read Gapzd, 
ie., the Babylonian 7am/u, “sea, ocean” = Tiamat, cf. Robertson- 
Smith, Zeits. fiir Assyr., vi, p. 339. The name “Oncpea may 
probably be identified with Ummu-Hubur, “the Mother-Hubur,” 
a title of Tiamat which occurs in Tabl. I, 1. 113 and the parallel 
passages. The first part of the name gives the equation 
On=Ummu, but how Hubur has given rise to the transcription 
opxa is not clear. Jensen has attempted to explain the difficulty 


Omorka and 
Bél. 


XLVI INTRODUCTION. 





while the creatures themselves represent the monster- 
brood which Tiamat formed to aid her in her fight 
against the gods.!| Compared with the description of 
the monsters, the summary from Berossus of the 
incidents related on the Fourth Tablet is not very full; 
the text states that Bijdos (ie. Bél) slew ’Opopxa, 





by suggesting that "Opcpxa = Ummu-urki, and urki he takes as 
an Assyrian translation of Hubur. For Hubur he suggests the 
meaning “that which is above, the North” (mainly from the 
occurrence of Hu-bu-ur*! = Su-bar-tum, the Upper or Northern 
part of Mesopotamia, in IIR, pl. 50, 1. 51, cf. also VR, pl. 16, 
1. 19); and, since what is in the North would have been regarded 
by the Babylonians as “behind,” the title Hudur might have been 
rendered in Babylonian as urku. This explanation is ingenious, 
but that the title Hubur, as applied to Tiamat, had the meaning 
“that which is above, the North,” cannot be regarded as proved 
(cf. also Mythen, p. 564). Gunkel and Zimmern, on the other 
hand, see in ’Opepea the equivalent of the Aramaic words 'Om ’orga, 
“Mother of the Deep,” the existence of which they trace to the 
prevalence of the Aramaic dialect in Babylonia at the time of 
Berossus (see Schipfung und Chaos, p. 18 f., n. 1); according to 
this explanation the title "Oucpxa would be the Aramaic equivalent 
of Ummu-Hubur, for Zusur may well have had the meaning 
“deep, depth.” Thus, on the fragment S. 2,013 (sce below, 
p. 196 f.) the meaning ‘‘depth,” rather than “the North,” is 
suggested by the word; in |. 9 of this fragment the phrase Wu-dur 
pal-ka-ti, “the broad Hubur,” is employed in antithesis to Samie) 
ru-ku-u-ti, “the distant heavens,” precisely as in the following 
couplet 7i-amat sap-li-ti, ‘the Lower Ocean (Tiamat),” is opposed 
to Tt-amat e-li-t, “the Upper Ocean (Tiamat).” For a possible 
connection between the lower waters of Tiamat and Hubur, the River 
of the Underworld, see below, p. Ixxxiii, n. 2, and p. xcivf., n. 3. 


* According to the poem, Tiamat is definitely stated to have 
created eleven kinds of monsters. The summary from Berossus 
bears only a general resemblance to the description of the monsters 
in the poem. 


“(9106 “ony “spy “Wg) seueg uoNVaID eyI Jo IIqUL WMO] sy} Jo eT 














‘AI Givid 


THE NEW MATERIAL. ~ XLIX 





and having cleft her in twain, from one half of her he 
made the earth, and from the other the heavens, 
while he overcame the creatures that were within her, 
ie. the monsters of the deep.! 

The actual account of the creation of the world by Thecreation of 
Marduk, as related in the Creation Series, begins hese me 
towards the end of the Fourth Tablet,? where the eas 
narrative closely agrees with the summary from 
Berossus. Marduk is there related to have split 
Tiamat into halves, and to have used one half of her 
as a covering for heaven. The text then goes on to 
state that he founded heaven, which is termed E-shara, 

a mansion like unto the Deep in structure, and that 
he caused Anu, Bél, and Ea to inhabit their respective 
districts therein. The Fifth Tablet does not begin 
with the account of the creation of the earth, but 
records the fixing of the constellations of the Zodiac, 
the founding of the year, and Marduk’s charge to the 
Moon-god and the Sun-god, to the former of whom 
he entrusted the night, his instructions relating to the 
phases of the Moon, and the relative positions of 
the Moon and the Sun during the month. The 
new fragments of the Fifth Tablet contain some 
interesting variants to this portion of the text,* but, 





1 See below, p. livf., note 1. 2 Cf. Il. 135 ff. 

5 For instance, the fragment K. 13,774 (see below, pp. 1go ff.) 
in |, 8, in place of ‘ He set the stations of Bél and Ea along with 
him,” reads “‘ He set the stations of Bél and Anu along with him.” 
According to the text Marduk appoints Nibir (Jupiter), Bél (the 

D 


L INTRODUCTION. 





with the exception of the last few lines of the text, 
they throw no light on what the missing portions of 


The creation of the Tablet contained. In view, however, of the 


the earth and 
of vegetation, 


The creation 
of man. 


statement of Berossus that from one half of Tiamat 
Bél formed the earth, we may conjecture that an 
account of the creation of the earth occurred upon 
some part of the Fifth Tablet. It is also probable 
that the Fifth Tablet recorded the creation of 
vegetation. That this formed the subject of some 
portion of the poem is certain from the opening lines 
of the Seventh Tablet, where Marduk is hailed as 
“ Asari, ‘ Bestower of planting,’ ‘{ Founder of sowing],’ 
‘Creator of grain and plants,’ ‘ who caused [the green 
herb to spring up]!’”; and the creation of plants and 
herbs would naturally follow that of the earth. 

From the new fragment of the Sixth Tablet, 
No. 92,629, we know that this portion of the poem 
related the story of the creation of man. As at the 





north pole of the equator), and Ea (probably a star in the extreme 
south of the heavens) as guides to the stars, proving that they 
were already thus employed in astronomical calculations. In place 
of Ea, K. 13,774 substitutes Anu, who, as the pole star of the 
ecliptic, would be of equal, if not greater, importance in an astro- 
nomical sense. Another variant reading on K. 13,774 is the 
substitution of kakkaba-su, ‘his star,” in place of “ Mannar-ru, 
the Moon-god, in ]. 12; the context is broken, but we cannot 
doubt that suk-nat mu-si, “a being of the night,” in 1. 13 refers 
to the Moon-god, and that Marduk entrusted the night to the 
Moon-god according to this version also. Further variants occur 
in |. 17f. in the days enumerated in the course of Marduk’s 
address to the Moon-god ; see below, p. 191 f. 


PLATE V. 





Part of the Fifth ‘l'ablet of the Creation Series (KK. 3,567 + K, 8,588). 


THE NEW MATERIAL. LUT 





beginning of his work of creation Marduk is said to The creation 
have “devised a cunning plan”?! while gazing upon oa 
the dead body of Tiamat, so now, before proceeding 

to man’s creation, it is said that “his heart prompted 

him and he devised [a cunning plan].”? In the 
repetition of this phrase we may see an indication 

of the importance which was ascribed to this portion 

of the story, and it is probable that the creation of 
man was regarded as the culmination of Marduk’s 
creative work. It is interesting to note, however, 
that the creation of man is not related as a natural 
sequel to the formation of the rest of the universe, 

but forms the solution of a difficulty with which 
Marduk has been met in the course of his work as 
Creator. To overcome this difficulty Marduk devised 

the “cunning plan” already referred to; the context 

of this passage is not very clear, but the reason for 
man’s creation may be gathered from certain indica- 
tions in the text. : 

We learn from the beginning of the Sixth Tablet The reason of 
that Marduk devised his cunning plan after he had™ 
“heard the word of the gods,” and from this it is 
clear that the Fifth Tablet ends with a speech of 
the gods. Now in Tablet VI, 1. 8, Marduk states 
that he will create man ‘that the service of the gods 
may be established”; in l. 9 f., however, he adds that 





1 See Tabl. IV, 1. 136. 
? See Tabl. VI, Ll. 2. 


LIV INTRODUCTION. 





The ressonot he will change the ways of the gods, and he appears 
to threaten them with punishment. It may be con- 
jectured, therefore, that after Marduk had completed 
the creation of the world, the gods came to him and 
complained that there were no shrines built in their 
honour, nor was there anyone to worship them. To 
supply this need Marduk formed the device of creating 
man, but at the same time he appears to have decided 
to vent his wrath upon the gods because of their 
discontent. It is possible, however, that Ea dissuaded 
Marduk from punishing the gods, though he no doubt 
assisted him in carrying out the first part of his 
proposal. 

Pie seconnt Tn Il. 5 ff. of the Sixth Tablet Marduk indicates the 

man'screation means he will employ for forming man, and _ this 
portion of the text corroborates in a remarkable 
manner the account given by Berossus of the method 
employed by Bél for man’s creation. The text of the 
summary from Berossus, in the form in which it has 
come down to us,’ is not quite satisfactory, as the 





1 See below, p. Iviii. 

? After the description of the monsters of the deep referred to 
above (see p. xlv), the summary from Berossus records the creation 
by Bél of the earth, and the heavens, and mankind, and animals, 
as follows:—Odrws 6€ tdy Chwy cvveoryKotwy, eravedOovTa Bjdov 
oxioat THY Yyovaica peony, Kal 7o pév Fuso adrhs Tojoue yiv, To bE 
ado Hyucv odpavoy, kai 7a év airy faa adavioar, dddrAnyopixs b€ Pyar 
robt0 medvawwdoyhabu bypod yap bv70s Tob mavros Kai Cuwy ev abt 
yeyevrynpéver, todt0v Tov Ocby dpedeiv Tv éavt0d Kehadyy, Kai To puey 
alua rods dddovs Ocovs Pupaou 7H yi, Kai diawAdou rods dvOpwrovs* 
810 vocpods te elvar Kat Ppovpcews Oeius petéxew. Tov dé Bidov, ov 


THE NEW MATERIAL. LV 





course of the narrative is confused. The confusion Confusion in 
is apparent in the repetition of the description of man’s 
creation and in the interruption of the naturalistic 
explanation of the slaying of Omorka. An ingenious 
but simple emendation of the text, however, was 
suggested by von Gutschmidt which removes both 
these difficulties. The passage which interrupts 
the naturalistic explanation, and apparently describes 
a first creation of man, he regarded as having been 
transposed; but if it is placed at the end of the 
extract it falls naturally into place as a summary 
by Eusebius of the preceding account of man’s 
creation which is said by Alexander Polyhistor to 
have been given by Berossus in the First Book of 
his History.'. By adopting this emendation we obtain 





Ada peOeppnvedouar, pecov tepdvra TO oKdTOS Xwplout yy Kal odpavor 
dx? GMdpwr, Kai SatdEar tov xécpov. Ta b¢ Coa ode eveyedvra my 
708 Qwros Sdvamw POapivar, iSdvra 6 tov BHdov xwpav epynpov Kai 
kapropspov Keredoar evi rdv Octiv ty Kepadjv dhedovTe avr0d Tp 
droppvevr aiuate. pupacat ry yiv wat diarddoat avOpwrovs Kai Onpia 
ra Suvdpeva tov dépa hépew. “Arorehécar dé tov Bijdov kai dotpa Kai 
Bow Kal ceMjvyv Kal rods wévte Thav}ras. Taira Gyow 6 rodvicrwp 
*ANeEavdpos ‘tov Bypwoody év 1H tpuity paoxew.—Luseb. chron. lid. 
pri., ed. ScHoene, col. 16f. For the probable transposition of the 
passage which occurs in the text after yeyevyyuevwv, see the 
following note. 


' The t#ansposition of the passage suggested by von Gutschmidt 
necessitates only one emendation of the text, viz. the reading of 
rot&vde in place of tov 6c before BjAov. The context of this passage 
would then read iypod yap dvt0s to wavtos Kat Cwwy ev adrp 
yeyeveypever roudvdc, Bidov, bv Aca weOeppyvedtovot, pécov Temovta 
70 oxoTos xwploa yfv cal otpavay dx addpwr, cai deatdkuc tov 


The employ- 
ment of 
Marduk’s 
blood for 
man’s creation, 


LVI INTRODUCTION. 





a clear and consecutive account of how Bél, after the 
creation of heaven and earth, perceived that the land 
was desolate ; and how he ordered one of the gods to 
cut Off his (i.e. Bél’s) head, and, by mixing the blood 
which flowed forth with earth, to create men and 
animals. 

This passage from Berossus has given rise to con- 
siderable discussion, and more than one scholar has 
attempted to explain away the beheading of Bél, the 
Creator, that man might be formed from his blood. 
Gunkel has suggested that in the original legend the 
blood of Tiamat was used for this purpose ;' Stucken,® 
followed by Cheyne,* has emended the text so that it 
may suggest that the head of Tiamat, and not that 
of Bél, was cut off; while Zimmern would take the 
original meaning of the passage to be that the god 





xoopov; and the summary by Eusebius, at the end of the extract, 
would read Tadra gyow 6 rodvictwp “AdéEavépos tov Bypwoooy ev ri 
mpwry Pdoxew rodrov tov Beov dhedety rv éavtod Kepadijv, Kal 10 
puey aina rods dddrovs Ocods hupaca 7) Ys kat Svamdoat rods 
dvOpwrous' 615 voepods re elvac Kai Ppovycews Peias petéxery ; 
cf. Schoene, of. ci#., col. 16 f., note 9. The emendation has been 
accepted by Budde, Die Biblische Urgeschichte, p. 477 §., by Jensen, 
Kosmologie, p. 292, and by Gunkel and Zimmern, Schipfung und 
Chaos, p. 19 f. 

Cf. Schipfung und Chaos, p. 20 f. 

* For éav7od in both passages Stucken would read adie; 
cf. Astralmythen der Hebraeer, Babylonier und Aegypler, i, p. 55- 

% Cheyne, who adopts Stucken’s suggestion, remarks: “ It 
“stands to reason that the severed head spoken of in connection 
“with the creation of man must be Tidmat’s, not that of the 
“Creator”; cf. Encyclopedia Biblica, i, col. 947, note. 


THE NEW MATERIAL. LVII 





beheaded was not Bél, but the other deity whom he The employ- 
addressed! In 1. 5 of the Sixth Tablet, however, Maral’ 
Marduk states that he will use his own blood for mar’screation. 
creating man ;? the text of this passage from Berossus 

is thus shown to be correct, and it follows that the 

account which he gave of the Babylonian beliefs 
concerning man’s creation does not require to be 


emended or explained away. 





1 In the Zeits. fur Assyr., xiv, p. 282, Zimmern remarks: “ Somit 
“ darf man wol doch nicht... . annehmen, dass urspriinglich 
“ das Blut der Tiamat gemeint sei, allerdings auch nicht das Blut 
“ des Schdpfergottes selbst, sondern das irgend eines Gottes..., 
“der zu diesem Zwecke geschlachtet wird.” In making this 
suggestion Zimmern was influenced by the episode related in 
col. iii of the fragmentary and badly presérved legend Bu. 91-5-9, 
269 (cf. Cuneiform Texts, pt. vi, and Mythen, p. 275, note), which 
he pointed out contained a speech by a deity in which he gives 
orders for another god to be slain that apparently a man may be 
formed from his blood mixed with clay (cf. Z.A., xiv, p. 281). 
The episode, however, has no connection with the first creation 
of man, but probably relates to the creation of a man or hero to 
perform some special exploit, in the same way as Uddushu-namir 
was created by Ea for the rescue of Ishtar from the Underworld, 
and as Ea-bani was created by the goddess Aruru in the First 
Tablet of the Gilgamesh-epic (cf. also Jensen’s remarks in his 
Mythen und Epen, p. 275 f.). 1 learn from Professor Zimmern and 
Professor Bezold that it was the tablet Bu. 91-5-9, 269, and not 
an actual fragment of the Creation Series, to which Professor 
Zimmern refers on p. 14 of his Brblische und babylonische 
Urgeschichte. Although, as already stated, this fragment is not, 
strictly speaking, part of a creation-legend, it illustrates the fact 
that the use of the blood of a god for the creation of man was 
fully in accordance with Babylonian beliefs. 

? See below, p. 86 f., n. 7. 


Ea's share in 
man’s creation, 


The method of 


man's creation, 


LVIII INTRODUCTION. 





Jensen has already suggested! that the god whom 
Bél addressed was Ea, and the new fragment of. the 
Sixth Tablet proves that this suggestion is correct. 
In the Sixth Tablet Marduk recounts to Ea his 
intention of forming man, and tells him the means he 
will employ. We may therefore conclude that it 
was Ea who beheaded Marduk at his request, and, 
according to his instructions, formed mankind from 
his blood. Ea may thus have performed the actual 
work of making man, but he acted under Marduk’s 
directions, and it is clear from Tablet VII, Il. 29 
and 32, that Marduk, and not Ea, was regarded as 
man’s Creator. 

According to Berossus, man was formed from the 
blood of Bél mixed with earth. The new fragment 
of the Sixth Tablet does not mention the mixing of 
the blood with earth, but it is quite possible that this 
detail was recounted in the subsequent narrative. On 
the other hand, in the Babylonian poem Marduk 
declares that, in addition to using his own blood, he 
will create bone for forming man. Berossus makes 
no mention of bone, but it is interesting to note that 
isstmtu, the Assyrian word here‘ used for “ bone,”? is 
doubtless the equivalent of the Hebrew word ‘esezz, 





1 See Kosmologie, p. 293. 

? The word is here met with for the first time, the reading of 
GIR-PAD-DU(var. DA), the ideogram for “ bone,” not having ‘been 
known previously. 


THE NEW MATERIAL. LIX 





“bone,” which occurs at the end of the narrative of 
the‘creation of woman in Gen. ii, 23. 

The blood of Bél, according to Berossus, was The creation 
employed not only in man’s creation but in that of oe 
animals also, and it is possible that this represents the 
form of the legend as it was preserved upon the Sixth 
Tablet. Though, in that case, the creation of animals 
would follow that of man, the opening lines of the 
Sixth Tablet prove that man’s creation was regarded 
as the culmination of Marduk’s creative work. The 
“cunning plan,” which Marduk devised in order to 
furnish worshippers for the gods, concerned the 
creation of man, and if that of animals followed it 
must have been recorded as a subsidiary and less 
important act.1. In this connection it may be noted 
that the expression 7a Svvapeva Tov dépa pépev, 
which Berossus applies to the men and animals 
created from the blood of Bél, was probably not based 
on any description or episode in the Creation story as 





1 On p. 200 it is remarked that, until more of the text of the Fifth 
and Sixth Tablets is recovered, it would be rash to assert that the 
fragment K. 3,445 +R. 396 (cf. Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 24 f.) 
cannot belong to the Creation Series. The phrase #-kun kakkada 
(Obv., l. 35) might perhaps refer to the head of Tiamat (cf. ru-pu- 
uk-tu Sa Ti-a{mat], inl. 29), which would not be inconsistent with 
the fragment forming part of the Fifth Tablet as suggested on 
p. 198. Ifthe fragment were part of the Sixth Tablet, the kafkadu 
in l. 35 might possibly be Marduk’s head (compare also ¢k-sur-ma 
in |. 31 with Zv-uwk-sur in Tabl. VI, 1. 5). In view, however, of the 
inconsistencies noted on p. 199 f., it is preferable to exclude the 
fragment at present from the Creation Series. 


LX INTRODUCTION. 





_recorded on the Seven Tablets, but was suggested by 


The supposed 
instructions to 
man after his 
creation, 


The final scene 
in the Creation 


story. 


the naturalistic interpretation of the legend furnished 
by Berossus himself. 

With reference to the creation of man, it was 
suggested by George Smith that the tablet K. 3,364 
was a fragment of the Creation Series, and contained 
the instructions given to man after his creation by 
Marduk. This view has been provisionally adopted 
by other translators of the poem, but in Appendix II? 
I have shown by means of a duplicate, No. 33,851, 
that the suggestion must be given up. Apart from 
other reasons there enumerated, it may be stated that 
there would be no room upon the Sixth Tablet of 
the Creation Series for such a long series of moral 
precepts as is inscribed upon the tablets K. 3,364 and 
No. 33,851. It may be that Marduk, after creating 
man, gave him some instructions with regard to the 
worship of the gods and the building of shrines in 
their honour, but the greater part of the text must 
have been taken up with other matter. 

The concluding lines of the Sixth Tablet are partly 
preserved, and they afford us a glimpse of the final 
scene in the Creation story. As the gods had 
previously been summoned to a solemn assembly that 
they might confer power upon Marduk before he set 
out to do battle on their behalf, so now, when he had 
vanquished Tiamat and had finished his work of 





1 See pp. 20: ff. 


PLATE VI. 


ear 
eas 


OAS hind 
Gavan 





Part of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (Brit. Mus., No. 91,139+93,073). 


THE NEW MATERIAL. LXITI 





creation, they again gathered together in Upshukki- The finat scene 
naku, their council-chamber, and proceeded to magnify none Creation 
him by every title of honour. We thus obtain the 

context or setting of the Seventh, and last, Tablet of 

the Creation Series, the greater part of which consists 

of the hymn of praise addressed by the gods to 

Marduk as the conqueror of Tiamat and the Creator 

of the world. 

The hymn of the gods takes up lines 1-124 of the The Seventh 
Seventh Tablet, and consists of a series of addresses in Creation” 
which Marduk is hailed by them under fifty titles of e 
honour. The titles are Sumerian, not Semitic, and 
each is followed by one or more Assyrian phrases 
descriptive of Marduk, which either explain the title 
or are suggested by it. Of the fifty titles which the 
hymn contained, the following list of eleven occur in 
the first forty-seven lines of the text :— 


Asari: ™ Asar-ri, Tabl. VII, Lr; p. 92 f. The Fifty Titles 

Asaru-alim : “ Asaru-alim, Tabl. VII, 1.3; p.92f. 

Asaru-alim-nuna : “ Asaru-alim-nun-na, Tabl. VII, 
15; p.o2f. 

Tutu: “ Zw-¢u, Tabl. VII, 1.9; p. 92f. 

Zi-ukkina : Z7-ukkin-na, var." Zi-ukkin, Tabl. VI, 
115; p.o4f. 

Zi-azag: “Zt-azag, Tabl. VII, 1.19; p. 96f.;. var. 
™ Na-at-azag-g|a|, p. 161. ; 

Aga-azag : ™ Aga-azag, Tabl. VII, 1. 25; p. 96f. 

Mu-azag : ™ Mu(ie. ka+11)-azag, Tabl. VII, |. 33; 


ie 


var. ™ Mu/(i.e. Sar)-azag, p. 173. 


LXIV INTRODUCTION. 





‘TheFifty Titles Shag-zu : ™ Sag-2it, Tabl. VII, 1.35; p.98f. 

Zi-si: ™ Zi-sz, Tabl. VH, 1.41; p. roof. 

Sub-kur: “ Sus-kur, Tabl. VII, 1. 43; p. roof. 

In the gap in the text of the Seventh Tablet, 
between ll. 47 and 105, occur thé following ten titles 
of Marduk, which are taken from the fragments 
K. 13,761 and K. 8,519 (and its duplicate K. 13,337), 
and from the commentary K. 4,406 :— 

Agi]... . ]: “A-gi[t? . . . . J, Tabl. VII 

(K. 13,761); p. ro2f.; var.“ G2[ ], p. 163. 

Zulummu : “Zu-lum-nu, Tabl. VIL (K. 133761) ; 

p. 102f. 
Mummu : “ Ma-wm-mu, Tabl. VIL (K. 13,761) ; 
p. 102 f. 
Mulil: “Afw-d2, Tabl. VII (K. 13,761); p. rozf. 
Gishkul :  Gzs-kud, Tabl. VII (K. 13,761) ; p. 102 f. 
Lugal-abl ... . ]: ™“ZLugal-ab-[.... ], Tabl. VIL 
(K. 13,761); p. 102 f. 

Pap[ .... J]: “Papf.... |, Tabl. VII 
(K. 13,761); p. 102 f. 

Lugal - durmah : “Lugal-dur- mah, Tabl. VII 
(K. 8,519), and K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 8; 
pp. 104f., 165. 

Adu-nuna : “A-du-nun-na, Tabl. VII (K. 8,519) and 
K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, lL. 23; pp. 104 f, 166. 

Lugal-dul(or du)-azaga: “ Lugal-dul-azag-ga, Tabl. 
VII (K. 8,519); p. 106f. 


THE NEW MATERIAL. LXV 





Four other titles, occurring in the concluding portion The FiftyTitles 
f 


of the text of the Seventh Tablet, are :— 
Nibiru : “W72-d¢-ru, var. [\Ne-di-rz7, Tabl. VU, 
1. 109; p. 108 f. 
Bél-matati : de-ef matati, var. ™ Bel matati, Tabl. 
VII, 1 116, p. r1of.; cf also En kur-KUR 
(i.e. 682 matatc), p. 168. 
Ea: ™£-a, Tabl. VII, 1. 120; p. riof. 


Yansha: Hansa**”, var. Ha-an-sa-a, Tabl. VII, 
1,123, p. 110f.; cf. also ™ Hansa, p. 178. 


From the above lists it will be seen that the 
recovered portions of the text of the Seventh’ Tablet 
furnish twenty-five out of the fifty names of Marduk. 
From the list of the titles of Marduk preserved on 
K. 2,107 + K. 6,086,! and from No. 54,228, a parallel 
text to the Seventh Tablet,’ seven other names may be 
obtained, which were probably among those occurring 
in the missing portion of the text ; these are :— 

Lugal-en-ankia : ™ Lugal-en-an-ki-a, K. 2,107, col. ii, 

L.19; p. 173. 

Gugu : ™ Gu-gu, K. 2,107, col. ii, 1. 22; p. 173. 

Mumu: “™ Mu-mu, K. 2,107, col. ii, 1. 23; p. 173. 


Dutu: “ Du-tu, K. 2,107, col. ii, 1. 24; p. 173. 





) See pp. 171 ff. 
2 See pp. 175 ff 


The Fifty Titles 
of Marduk, 


‘The epilogue 
to the Creation 
Series, 


The composite 
nature of the 
CreationSeries, 


LXVI INTRODUCTION. 





Dudu: ™ Du-du,. K. 2,107, col. ii, 1. 25; p. 173. 

Shag-gar (?): Sag-gar, No. 54,228, Obv.,l. 13; p. 177. 

En-bilulu : “ Eu-dc-lu-lu, No. 54,228, Obv., 1. 14; 

p. 178.7 

By these titles of honour the gods are represented 
as conferring supreme power upon Marduk, and the 
climax is reached in ll. 116 ff. of the Seventh Tablet, 
when the elder Bél and Ea, Marduk’s father, confer 
their own names and power upon him. Marduk’s 
name of Hansha, “ Fifty,” by which he is finally 
addressed, in itself sums up and symbolizes his fifty 
titles. At the conclusion of these addresses there 
follows an epilogue ® of eighteen lines, in which the 
study of the poem is commended to mankind, and 
prosperity is promised to those that rejoice in Marduk 
and keep his works in remembrance. 

The story of the Creation, in the form in which 
it has come down to us upon tablets of the seventh 
and later centuries before Christ, is of a distinctly 





* In view of the fact that the Semitic name Bé-md/aii occurs as 
one of Marduk’s titles, it is not impossible that the title Bé/-dani, 
which is applied to him in the Epilogue to the Seventh Tablet 
(1. 129, see p. 112), also occurred as one of his fifty titles in the 
body of the text. It is unlikely that the name Marduk itself was 
included as one of the fifty titles, and in support of this view it 
may be noted that the colophon to the commentary R. 366, etc. 
(see p. 169), makes mention of “fifty-one names” of Marduk, 
which may be most easily explained by supposing that the scribe 
reckoned in the name Marduk as an additional title. 

* See below, p. 169. 


COMPOSITION OF THE POEM. LXVII 





composite character, and bears traces of a long pro- 

cess of editing and modification at the hands of the 
Babylonian priests. Five principal strands may be 

traced which have been combined to form the poem ; 

these may be described as (1) The Birth of the gods; Component 
(2) The Legend of Ea and Apsu ; (3) The Dragon- Creation 
Myth; (4) The actual account of Creation ; and (5) 

The Hymn to Marduk under his fifty titles. Since 

the poem in its present form is a glorification _ of 
Marduk as the champion of the gods and the Creator 

of the world, it is natural that more prominence should 

be given to episodes in which Marduk is the hero 

than is assigned to other portions of the narrative in 

which he plays no part. Thus the description of 
Tiamat and her monster-brood, whom Marduk con- 
quered, is repeated no less than four times,’ and the 
preparations of Marduk for battle and his actual fight 

with the dragon take up the greater part of the Fourth 

Tablet. On the other hand, the birth of the older 

gods, among whom Marduk does not figure, is con- 

fined to the first twenty-one lines of the First Tablet ; 

and not more than twenty lines are given to the piementsin 
account of the subjugation of Apsi by Ea. That unednnectea 
these elements should have been incorporated at all es 
in the Babylonian version of the Creation story may 

be explained by the fact that they serve to enhance 

the position of prominence subsequently attained by 





1 See above, p. xlif. 


The 
Dragon-Myth. 


LXVIII INTRODUCTION. 





Marduk. Thus the description of the birth of the 
older gods and of the opposition they excited among 
the forces of disorder, was necessarily included in 
order to make it clear how Marduk was appointed 
their champion; and the account of Ea’s success 
against Apsii served to accentuate the terrible nature 
of Tiamat, whom he was unable to withstand. From 
the latter half of the Second Tablet onwards, Marduk 
alone is the hero of the poem. 

The central episode of the poem is the fight 
between Marduk and Tiamat, and there is evidence 
to prove that this legend existed in other forms than 
that under which it occurs in the Creation Series. 
The conquest of the dragon was ascribed by the 
Babylonian priests to their local god, and in the poem 
the death of Tiamat is made a necessary preliminary 
to the creation of the world. On a fragment of 
a tablet from Ashur-bani-pal’s library we possess, 
however, part of a copy of a legend’ which describes 
the conquest of a dragon by some deity other than 
Marduk.? Moreover, the fight is there described as 
taking place, not before creation, but at a time when 
men existed and cities had been built. In this version 





» See below, pp. 116 ff. | 

2 Jensen makes Bél the slayer of the dragon in this legend 
(cf. Mythen und Epen, p. 46), from which it might be argued that 
Marduk is the hero in both versions of the story. But Jensen’s 
identification of the deity as Bél was due to a mistake of Delitzsch, 
who published an inaccurate copy of the traces of the deity’s name 
upon the tablet; see below, p. 120, n. I. 


COMPOSITION OF THE POEM. LXIX 





men and gods are described as equally terrified at the 
dragon’s appearance, and it was to deliver the land 
from the monster that one of the gods went out and 
slew him. This fragmentary tablet serves to prove 
that the Dragon-Myth existed in more than one form 
in Babylonian mythology, and it is not improbable 
that: many of the great cities of Babylonia possessed 
local versions of the legend in each of which the 
city-god figured as the hero.’ 

In the Creation Series the creation of the world variant 
is narrated as the result of Marduk’s conquest of Cou 
the dragon, and there is no doubt that this version 
of the story represents the belief most generally 
held during the reigns of the later Assyrian and 
Babylonian kings. We possess, however, fragments 
of other legends in which the creation of the world 
is not connected with the death of a dragon. In one 
of these, which is written both in Sumerian and 
Babylonian,’ the great Babylonian cities and temples 
are described’ as coming into existence in consequence 
of a movement in the waters which alone existed 
before the creation of the world. Marduk in this 





} The so-called ‘‘Cuthaean Legend of the Creation” (cf. pp. 140 ff.) 
was at one time believed to represent another local version of the 
Creation story, in which Nergal, the god of Cuthah, was supposed 
to take the place of Marduk. But it has been. pointed out by 
Zimmern that the legend concerns the deeds of an Old-Babylonian 
king of Cuthah, and is not a Creation legend; see below, p. 140 f., 
note 1. 

’ # See below, pp. 130 ff. 


Variant 
accounts of the 
Creation. 


LxXxX INTRODUCTION. 





version also figures as the Creator, for, together with 
the goddess Aruru,! he created man by laying a reed 
upon the face of the waters and forming dust which 
he poured out beside it; according to this version also 
he is described as creating animals and vegetation. 
In other legends which have come down to us, not 
only is the story of Creation unconnected with the 
Dragon-Myth, but Marduk does not figure as the 
Creator. In one of these “the gods” generally are 
referred to as having created the heavens and the 
earth and the cattle and beasts of the field;? while 
in another the creation of the Moon and the Sun is 
ascribed to Anu, Bel, and Ea.’ 

From the variant accounts of the story of Creation 
and of the Dragon-Myth, which are referred to in the 
preceding paragraphs, it will be clear that the priests 
of Babylon made use of independent legends in the 
composition of their great poem of Creation’; by 





* Elsewhere this goddess figures in the réle of creatress, for 
from the First Tablet of the Gilgamesh-epic, col. ii, Il. 30 ff., we 
learn that she was credited with the creation of both Gilgamesh 
and Ea-bani. Her method of creating Ea-bani bears some 
resemblance to that employed in the creation of man according 
to the Sumerian and Babylonian version above referred to; she 
first washed her hands, and then, breaking off a piece of clay, 
she cast it upon the ground and thus created Ea-bani (cf. Jensen, 
Mythen und Epen, p. 120 f.). 

? See below, p. 122 f. 

5 See below, pp. 124 ff. 

‘In addition to the five principal strands which have been 
described above as forming the framework of the Creation Series, 


COMPOSITION OF THE POEM. LXxI 





assigning to Marduk the conquest of the Dragon' and 

the creation of the world they justified his claim to the 

chief place among the gods. As a fit ending to the 

great poem they incorporated the hymn to Marduk, 
consisting of addresses to him under his fifty titles. The hymn to 
This portion of the poem? is proved by the Assyrian MMs iy tiles 
commentary, R. 366, etc.,* as well as by fragments of 
parallel, but not duplicate, texts* to have béen an 
independent composition which had at one time no 
connection with the series Exuma elif. In the poem 

the hymn is placed in the mouth of the gods, who 

at the end of the Creation have assembled together 

in Upshukkinaku ; and to it is added the epilogue of 
eighteen lines, which completes the Seventh Tablet of 

the series. 





it is possible to find traces of other less important traditions which 
have been woven into the structure of the poem. Thus the 
association of the god Kingu with Tiamat is probably due to the 
incorporation of a separate legend with the Dragon-Myth. 


It may be here noted that the poem contains no direct 
description of Tiamat, and it has been suggested that in it she 
was conceived, not asa dragon, but as a woman. The evidence 
from sculpture and from cylinder-seals, however, may be cited 
against this suggestion, as well as several phrases in the poem 
itself (cf. e.g., Tabl. LV, ll. 97 ff). It is true that in one of the 
new fragments of the poem Tiamat is referred to as sinmisatu, 
ie. “woman” or “ female” (cf. Tabl. II, 1. 122), but the context 
of this passage proves that the phrase is employed with reference 
to her sex and not to her form. 

? Tabl. VII, ll. 1-124. 

* See below, p. 169. 

4 See below, pp. 175 ff. 


“‘LXXH INTRODUCTION. 





The date of In discussing the question as to the date of the 
the Creation io Li oe : 
legends. Creation legends, it is necessary to distinguish clearly 


between the date at which the legends assumed the 
form in which they have come down to us upon the 
Seven Tablets of the series Euuma els, and the 
date which may be assigned to the legends them- 
selves before they were incorporated in the poem. 
Of the actual tablets inscribed with portions of the 
text of the Creation Series we possess none which 
dates from an earlier period than the seventh 
century B.c. The tablets of this date were made 
for the library of Ashur-bani-pal at Nineveh, but it is 
. obvious that the poem was not composed in Assyria 
at this time. The legends in the form in which we 
possess them are not intended to glorify Ashur, the 
national god of Assyria, but Marduk, the god of 
Babylon, and it is clear that the scribes of Ashur- 
bani-pal merely made copies for their master of 
older tablets of Babylonian origin. To what earlier 
date we may assign the actual composition of the 
poem and its arrangement upon the Seven Tablets, 
is still a matter for conjecture; but it is possible to 
offer a conjecture, with some degree of probability, 
after an examination of the various indirect sources 
of evidence we possess with regard to the age of 
Babylonian legends in general, and of the Creation 
legends in particular. 
Internal With regard to the internal evidence of date fur- 


evidence of 


date, nished by the Creation legends themselves, we may 


DATE OF CREATION LEGENDS. LXXIIL 





note that the variant forms of the Dragon-Myth and 
of the account of the Creation, to which reference 
has already been made, presuppose many centuries of 
tradition during which the legends, though derived 
probably from common originals, were handed down 
independently of one another. During this period we 
may suppose that the same story was related in 
different cities in different ways, and that in course of 
time variations crept in, with the result that two or 
more forms of the same story were developed along 
different lines. The process must have been gradual, 
and the considerable differences which can be traced in 
the resultant forms of the same legend may be cited as 
evidence in favour of assigning an early date to the 
original tradition from which they were derived. 

Evidence as to the existence of the Creation legends pyigence from 
at least as early as the ninth century p.c. may be fopUiant 
deduced from the representations of the fight between ™* 
Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, which was found 
sculptured upon two limestone slabs in the temple 
of Ninib at Nimriid.1. The temple was built by Ashur- 
nasir-pal, who reigned from B.c. 884 to B.c, 860, and 
across the actual sculpture was inscribed the text of 
a dedication to Ninib by this king. The slab there- 
fore furnishes direct proof of the existence of the 
legend more than two hundred years before the 





‘The slabs are preserved in the British Museum, Nimroud 
Gallery, Nos. 28 and 29. 


Evidence from 
historical 
inscriptions, 


LXXIV INTRODUCTION. 





formation of Ashur-bani-pal’s library. Moreover, the 
fight between Marduk and Tiamat is frequently found 
engraved upon cylinder-seals, and, although the 
majority of such seals probably date from the later 
Assyrian and Persian periods, the varied treatment of 
the scene which they present points to the existence of 
variant forms of the legend, and so indirectly furnishes 
evidence of the early origin of the legend itself. 

From an examination of the Babylonian historical 
inscriptions which record the setting up of statues 
and the making of temple furniture, we are enabled 
to trace back the existence of the Creation legends 
to still earlier periods. For instance, in a text of 
Agum,' a Babylonian king who reigned not later than 
the seventeenth century B.c., we find descriptions of 
the figures of a dragon? and of other monsters * which 
he set up in the temple E-sagil at Babylon; and in 
this passage we may trace an unmistakable reference 
to the legend of Tiamat and her monster - brood. 
Agum also set up in the temple beside the dragon 
a great basin, or laver, termed in the inscription 
a tamtu, or “sea.”* From the name of the laver, 
and from its position beside the figure of the dragon, 





» An Assyrian copy of this inscription, which was made for the 
library of Ashur-bani-pal, is preserved in the British Museum, and 
is numbered K. 4,149; the text is published in VR, pl. 33. 

? Cf. col. iti, I. 13. 

3 Cf. col. iv, ll. 50 ff. 

* Cf. col. iii, 1. 33. 


DATE OF CREATION LEGENDS. LXXV 





we may conclude that it was symbolical of the abyss Evidence from 
of water personified in the Creation legends by Tiamat eo, 
and Apsi. Moreover, in historical inscriptions of still 
earlier periods we find allusions to similar vessels 
termed afsé, i.e, “deeps” or “oceans,”! the presence 
of which in the temples is probably to be traced to the 
existence of the same traditions. 

The three classes of evidence briefly summarized 
above tend to show that the most important elements 
in the Creation legends were not of late origin, but 
must be traced back in some form or other to remote 
periods, and may well date from the first half of the 
third millennium z.c., or even earlier. It remains to 
consider to what date we may assign the actual 
weaving together of these legends into the poem 
termed by the Babylonians and Assyrians Enuma elis. 
Although, as has already been remarked, we do not gyidence from 
possess any early copies of the text of the Creation ste 

+ sos . 7 legends :— 
Series, this is not the case with other Babylonian 
legends. Among the tablets found at Tell el-Amarna, 
which date from the fifteenth century z.c., were frag- 
ments of copies of two Babylonian legends, the one (,) copies of 


containing the story of Nergal and Ereshkigal,? and 52453" 





1 Such “deeps” were set up by Bur-Sin, King of Ur about 
B.C. 2500 (cf. IR, pl. 3, No. xii, 1), and by Ur-Nina, a still earlier 
king of Shirpurla (cf. De Sarzec, Découvertes en Chaldeée, pl. ii, No. 1, 
col. iii, 1. 5 f.). 

? Two separate fragments of this legend were found, of which 
one is in the British Museum and the other, made up of four 


(2) Copies of 
legends about 
B.C, 2100, 


LXXVI INTRODUCTION. 





the other inscribed with a part of the legend of Adapa 
and the South Wind.’ Both these compositions, in 
style and general arrangement, closely resemble the 
legends known from late Assyrian copies, while of 
the legend of Adapa an actual fragment, though not 
a duplicate, exists in the library of Ashur-bani-pal.? 
Fragments of legends have also been recently found 
in Babylonia which date from the end of the period 
of the First Dynasty of Babylon, about 3.c. 2100, 
and the resemblance which these documents bear to 
certain legends previously known from Assyrian copies 
only is not only of a general nature, but extends even 
to identity of language. Thus one of the recovered 
fragments is in part a duplicate of the so-called 
“Cuthaean Legend of Creation” ;* two others contain 
phrases found upon the legend of Ea and Atar-hasis, 
while upon one of them are traces of a new version 





smaller fragments, is in Berlin, Their texts are published by 
Budge and Bezold, Zhe Tell el-Amarna Tablets, p. 140 f. and pl. 17 
(Bu. 88-10-13, 69), and by Winckler and Abel, Der Thontafelfund 
von El-Amarna, p. 164 f. (Nos. 234, 236, 237, and 239); cf. also 
Knudtzon, Bettriige sur Assyr., iv, pp. 130 ff. For a translation of 
the fragments, see Jensen, Mythen und Epen, pp. 74 ff. 


\-' For the text, see Winckler and Abel, of. czz., p. 166 @ and 4, 


and cf. Knudtzon, #.A., iv, pp. 128 ff. For translations, see 
E. T. Harper, 2.A., ii, pp. 420 ff., Zimmern in Gunkel’s Schépfung 
und Chaos, pp. 420 ff., and Jensen, Mythen und Epen, pp. 94 ff. 

? K. 8,214, published by Strong, P.S.B.A., xvi, p. 274f.; see 
Jensen, ALythen und Epen, pp. 98 ff. 


3 See below, p. 146f., n. 4. 


DATE OF CREATION LEGENDS. LXXVII 





of the Deluge-story.' Still more recently the Trustees 
of the British Museum have acquired three fragments 
_ of Babylonian legends inscribed upon tablets which date 
from a still earlier period, i.e. from the period of the 
kings of the Second Dynasty of Ur, before B.c. 2200 ;? 





* The old Babylonian fragment Bu. 91-5-9, 269 (cf. Cun. Texts, vi, 
and see above, p. lvii; n. 1), and the Deluge-fragment of the reign 
of Ammizaduga (published by Scheil, Receueil de travaux, xx, 
pp. 55 ff.) both contain phrases found upon the legend of Atar- 
hasis, K. 3,399; cf. Zimmern, Zedts. fir Assyr., xiv, p. 278 f. 
The text of K. 3,399, which has not hitherto been published, 
is included as plate 49 in part xv of Cuneiform Texts ; for trans- 
lations, see Zimmern, of. cit., pp. 287 ff., and Jensen, Mythen, 
Pp. 274 ff. 

* The tablets are numbered 87,535, 93,828, and 87,521, and 
they are published in Cuneiform Texts, pt. xv (1902), plates 1-6. 
The opening addresses, especially that upon No. 87,535, are of con- 
siderable interest ; in this tablet the poet states that he will sing 
the song of Mama, the Lady of the gods, which he declares to be 
better than honey and wine, etc. (col. i, (1) [z]a-ma-ar ™ Bi-li- 
tt-tli a-za-ma-ar (2) tb-ru us-si-ra hu-ra-du $i-me-a (3) ** Ma-ma 
za-ma-ra-Sa-ma e-li di-ik-pi-i-im u ka-ra-nim ta-bu (4) fa-bu-u eli 
di-t8-pi u ka-ra-ni-i-im, etc.). The goddess Mama is clearly to be 
identified with Mami, who also bore the title Bz/it-d7 (cf. Jensen, 
Mythen, p. 286 f., n. 11); and with the description of her offspring 
in col. i, I. 8 ff. (% Ma-ma i§-t1-na-am u-li-td-ma ... . “ Ma-ma 
Si-e-na u-li-id-ma .. . . ™ Ma-ma Sa-la-ti u-l[7}-1[d-ma}) we may 
compare Mami’s creation of seven men and seven women in the 
legend of Atar-hasis (cf. Jensen, of. c7#., p. 286f.). The legend 
No. 93,828 also concerns a goddess referred to as Belit-ili, whom 
Bél summons into his presence (cf. col. i, ll. ro ff.). The texts 
are written syllabically almost throughout, and simple syllables 
preponderate ; and it is interesting to note that the ending # with 
the force of a preposition, which occurs in the Creation legends, is 
here also employed, cf. No. 87,521, col. iii, 1. 4, mu-ut-ti1 
um-mi-Su, and possibly col. vi, 1. 3, gi-ir-bi-7 The texts are 


(3) Copies of 
legends before 
B,C, 2200, 


Copies of 
legends before 
B,C, 2200, 


LXXVIII INTRODUCTION. 





and to the same period is to be assigned the fragment 
of a legend which was published a few weeks ago by 
Dr. Meissner,’ and probably also the new fragment of 
the Etana-myth, published last year by Father Scheil.? 
These five fragments are of peculiar interest, for they 
show that early Semitic, as opposed to Sumerian, 
legends were in existence, and were carefully pre- 
served and studied in other cities of Mesopotamia 





carefully written (it may be noted that a a,has been omitted by 
the scribe in No. 93,828, col. i, 1. 7), the lines vary considerably 
in length, and the metre is not indicated by the arrangement of 
the text. Though fragmentary the episodes described or referred 
to in the texts are of considerable interest, perhaps the most 
striking being the reference to the birth of Ishum in col. viii of 
No. 87,521, and the damming of the Tigris with which the text 
of No. 87,535 concludes. I intend elsewhere to publish translations 
of the fragments. 

1 Hin alibabylonisches Fragment des Gilgamosepos, in the Mittedlungen 
der Vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft, 1902, 1. The fragment here 
published refers to episodes in the Gilgamesh-epic, the name of 
Gilgamesh being written or8, ie. “ Gré-ru-BAR. From the 
photographic reproductions published by Dr. Meissner, it is clear 
that the Gilgamesh fragment, in the nature of the clay employed, 
and in the archaic forms of the characters, resembles the three 
fragments in the British Museum. Unlike them, however, the 
lines of its text do not appear to be separated by horizontal lines 
ruled upon the clay. 

? Father Scheil has published the text in late Assyrian characters 
in the Recueil de travaux, xxiii, pp. 18 ff., and he does not give 
a photograph of the tablet. From his description (“C’était une 
“belle grande tablette de terre cuite, avec, par face, trois ou quatre 
“colonnes . .°. L’écriture en est archaique et, sans aucun doute 
“possible, antérieure 4 Hammurabi’), we may conclude that it 
dates from the same period as the three tablets in the British 
Museum described above. 


DATE OF CREATION LEGENDS. LXXIX 





than Babylon, and at a period before the rise of that 
city to a position of importance under the kings of 
the First Dynasty. 

The evidence furnished by these recently discovered 
tablets with regard to the date of Babylonian legends 
in general may be applied to the date of the Creation 


legends. While the origin of much of the Creation sumerian 
. lust origin of much 
legends may be traced to Sumerian sources,' it is of the Creation 


clear that the Semitic inhabitants of Mesopotamia at ree 
a very early period produced their own versions of 
the compositions which they borrowed, modifying and 
augmenting them to suit their own legends and beliefs. 
The connection of Marduk with the Dragon-Myth, 
and. with the stories of the creation of the world and 


See above, p. Ixxv. Cf. also the Sumerian influence exhibited 
by the names of the older pairs of deities Lahmu and Lahamu, 
Anshar and Kishar, as well as in the names of Kingu, Gaga, 
etc.; while the ending 2%, employed as it constantly is in the 
Creation Series with the force of a preposition, may probably 
be traced to the Sumerian ku, later fu, @ (cf. Jensen, 
Kosmologie, p. 266). The Assyrian commentaries to the Seventh 
Tablet, moreover, prove the éxistence of a Sumerian version of 
this composition, and as the hymn refers to incidents in the 
Creation legends, the Sumerian origin of these, too, is implied. 
The Sumerian version of the story of the Creation by Marduk and 
Aruru (see below, pp. 130 ff.) cannot with certainty be cited as 
evidence of its Sumerian origin, as from internal evidence it may 
well be a later and artificial composition on Sumerian lines. That 
we may expect, however, one day to find the original Sumerian 
versions of the Creation legends is not unreasonable ; with respect 
to the recovery of the ancient religious literature of the Sumerians, 
the remarkable series of early Sumerian religious texts published 
in Cun. Texts, pt. xv, plates 7-30, may be regarded as an earnest 
of what we may look for in the future. 


LXXX INTRODUCTION, 





man, may with considerable probability be assigned to 
Probable date the subsequent period during which Babylon gradually 
of the . ele . . . . 
association of attained to the position of the principal city in Meso- 


Marduk with Aas tos Z f 
the Creation potamia, On tablets inscribed during the reigns of 
legends, 3 = 
kings of the First Dynasty we may therefore expect 
to find copies of the Creation legends corresponding 
closely with the text of the series Exuma elis. It is 
possible that the division of the poem into seven 
sections, inscribed upon separate tablets, took place 
Probable date at a later period; but, be this as it may, we may 


of the 


composition of conclude with a considerable degree of confidence that 

pom | ‘ 7 

Enuma di the bulk of the poem, as we know it from late Assyrian 
and Neo-Babylonian copies, was composed at a period 
not later than B.c, 2000. 

The political influence which the Babylonians 
exerted over neighbouring nations during long periods 
of their history was considerable, and it is not sur- 
prising that their beliefs concerning the origin of the 
universe should have been partially adopted by the 

Influence ofthe races with whom they came in contact. That Baby- 
Babylonian . : os 
Creation lonian elements may be traced in the Phoenician 
legends. : : 
cosmogony has long been admitted, but the imperfect, 
and probably distorted, form in which the latter has 
come down to us renders uncertain any comparison 


of details. Some of the beliefs concerning the 





* For the account of the Phoenician cosmogony according to 
Sanchuniathon, see Eusebius, Praep. ev., i, 9 f., who quotes from 
the Greek translation of Philo Byblius; the accounts of Eudemus 
and Mochus are described by Damascius, cap. 125 (ed. Kopp, 


INFLUENCE OF CREATION LEGENDS. UXXXI 





creation of the world which were current among the 
Egyptians bear a more striking resemblance to the 
corresponding legends of Babylonia. Whether this 
resemblance was due to the proto-Semitic strain which 
probably existed in the ancient Egyptian race,’ or ts 
to be explained as the result of later Babylonian 
influence from without, is yet uncertain. But, whatever 
explahation be adopted, it is clear that the conception 
of chaos as a watery mass out of which came forth 
successive generations of primeval gods is common 
to both races? It is in Hebrew literature, however, 
that the most striking examples of the influence of the 
Babylonian Creation legends are to be found. 

The close relation existing between the Babylonian 
account of the Creation and the narrative in Genesis 
i, 1~ii, ga has been recognized from the time of the 





p. 385). For summaries and comparisons of these cosmogonies, 
see Lukas, Die Grundbegriffe in den Kosmogonien der alten Volker, 
pp. 139 

1 Cf. Budge, History of Leypt, vol. i, pp. 39 ff. 

* Other Egyptian beliefs, according to which the god Shi 
separated heaven and earth and upheld the one above the other, 
may be compared to the Babylonian conception of the making 
of heaven and earth by the separation of the two halves of Tiamat’s 
body. For detailed descriptions of the Egyptian cosmogonies, 
see Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter, pp. too ff. ; 
and for a convenient summary of the principal systems, see Lukas, 
op. cit., pp. 47 ff. Though the Babylonian and Egyptian cosmogonies, 
in some of their general features, resemble one another, the detailed 
comparisons of the names of deities, etc., which Hommel attempts 
in his Babylonische Ursprung der dgyptischen Kultur, are rather 
fanciful. 


Points of 
resemblance 
between the 
Creation 
legends and 
Gen, i, r= 
ii, 4a i—~ 


(t) The 
description of 
chaos, 


(2)The creation 
of light. 


LXXXII INTRODUCTION, 





first discovery of the former,’ and the old and 
new points of resemblance between them may here 
be briefly discussed. According to each account the 
existence of a watery chaos preceded the creation of 
the universe ; and the Hebrew word ¢ehdm, translated 
“the deep” in Gen. i, 2, is the equivalent of the 
Babylonian 7zamat, the monster of the deep personi- 
fying chaos and confusion. In the details of the 
Creation there is also a close resemblance between 
the two accounts. In the Hebrew narrative the first 
act of creation is that of light (Gen. i, 3-5), and it 
has been suggested that a parallel possibly existed 
in the Babylonian account, in that the creation of 
light may have been the cause of the revolt of 
Tiamat. From the new fragments of the poem we 
now know that the rebellion of the forces of disorder, 
which was incited by Apsii and not Tiamat, was 
due, not to the creation of light, but to his hatred 
of the way of the gods which produced order in 
place of chaos.? A parallelism may still be found, 
however, in the original form of the Babylonian myth, 
according to which the conqueror of the dragon was 
undoubtedly a solar deity... Moreover, as has been 
pointed out above,* day and night are vaguely con- 
ceived in the poem as already in existence at the 





’ See above, p. xxvi f. 

? See above, p. xxxix, and below, p. 10, n. 1. 
% See above, p. xxxix, n. 2. 

* See above, p. xxxix. 


HEBREW PARALLELS. LXXXIII 





time of Apsi’s revolt, so that the belief in the 
existence of light before the creation of the heavenly 
bodies is a common feature of the Hebrew and the 
Babylonian account. 

The second act of creation in the Hebrew narrative (3)The creation 
is that of a firmament which divided the waters that Canes 
were under the firmament from the waters that were 
above the firmament (Gen. i, 6-8). In the Babylonian 
poem the body of Tiamat is divided by Marduk, and 
from one-half of her he formed a covering or dome 
for heaven, ie. a firmament, which kept her upper 
waters in place. Moreover, on the fragment S. 2,013 7 
we find mention of a 7?-amat e-li-ti and a T7-amat 
Sap-li-ti, that is, an Upper Tiamat (or Ocean) and 
a Lower Tiamat (or Ocean), which are the exact 
equivalents of the waters above and under the 
firmament.” 





1 See below, p. 196 f. 

* According to Babylonian belief the upper waters of Tiamat 
formed the heavenly ocean above the covering of heaven; but 
it is not clear what became of her lower waters. It is possible 
that they were vaguely identified with those of Apst, and were 
believed to mingle with his around and beneath the earth. It 
may be suggested, however, that perhaps all or part of them were 
identified with Hubur, the River of the Underworld which was 
believed to exist in the depths of the earth (cf. Jensen, AZythen, 
p- 307). The fact that Tiamat bore the title Ummu-Hubur, ‘the 
Mother Hubur,” may be cited in support of this suggestion, as 
well as the occurrence upon S. 2,013 (cf. p. 197) of the phrases 
Sami(e) ru-ku-u-ti and Hu-bur pal-ka-ti, corresponding to 7t-amat 
e-l-t and Ti-amat sap-li-1i respectively ; see also p. xlvi, note. 


LXXXIV INTRODUCTION. 








(a)Thecreation The third and fourth acts of creation, as narrated in 


of vegetation. Gen, j, 9-13, are those of the earth and of vegetation. 
Although no portion of the Babylonian poem has 
yet been recovered.which contains the corresponding 
account, it is probable that these acts of creation were 
related on the Fifth Tablet of the series! Berossus 
expressly states that Bél formed the earth out of one 
half of Omorka’s body, and as his summary of the 
Babylonian Creation story is proved to be correct 
wherever it can be controlled, it is legitimate to 
assume that he is correct in this detail also. More+ 
over, in three passages in the Seventh Tablet the 
creation of the earth by Marduk is referred to: I. 115 
reads, ‘Since he created the heaven and fashioned 
the firm earth” ;? the new fragment K. 12,830 (restored 
from the commentary K, 8,299) states, “He named 
the four quarters (of the world)” ;* and another new 
fragment, K, 13,761 (restored from the commentary 
K. 4,406), definitely ascribes to Marduk the title 
“Creator of the earth.”* That the creation of vege- 
tation by Marduk was also recorded in the poem may 
be concluded from the opening lines of the Seventh 
Tablet, which are inscribed on the new fragment 
K. 2,854, and (with restorations from the commentary 
S. 11, etc.) ascribe to him the titles “ Bestower of 





1 See above, p. 1. 

* See below, p. 109. 
3 See below, p. 101. 
4 See below, p. 103. 


HEBREW PARALLELS. LXXXV 





planting,” “Founder of sowing,” “Creator of grain 
and plants,” and add that he “caused the green herb 
to spring up.”? 

To the fifth act of creation, that of the heavenly (s)Thecreation 
bodies (Gen. i, 14-19), we find an exceedingly close tole 
parallel in the opening lines of the Fifth Tablet of the 
series? In the Hebrew account, lights were created 
in the.firmament of heaven to divide the day from the 
night, and to be for signs, and for seasons, and for 
days, and years. In the Babylonian poem also the 
stars were created and the year was ordained at the 
same time; the twelve months were to be regulated 
by the stars; and the Moon-god was appointed “ to 
determine the days.” As according to the Hebrew 
account two great lights were created in the firmament 
of heaven, the greater light to rule the day and the 
lesser to rule the night, so according to the Babylonian 
poem the night was entrusted to the Moon-god, and 
the Moon-god’s relations to the Sun-god are described 
in detail. On the Seventh Tablet, also, the creation 
of heaven and the heavenly bodies is referred to; in 
1. 16 Marduk is stated ‘to have established for the 
gods the bright heavens,”* and 1. 111 f. read, “For 
the stars of heaven he upheld the paths, he shepherded 
all the gods like sheep!” * 





1 See above, p. I, and below, p. 93. 
2 See below, pp. 78 ff. 

3 See below, p. 95- 

* See below, p. 109. 


LXXXVI INTRODUCTION, 





(6)Thecreation To the sixth and seventh acts of creation, ie., 
ofanimals. — ; A 
the creation of creatures of the sea and winged 
fowl, and of beasts and cattle and creeping things 
(Gen. i, 20-25), the Babylonian poem as yet offers 
no parallel, for the portion of the text which refers 
to the creation of animals is still wanting. But since 
Berossus states that animals were created at the 
same time as man, it is probable that their creation 
was recorded in a missing portion either of the Fifth 
or of the Sixth Tablet. If the account was on the 
lines suggested by Berossus, and animals shared in 
the blood of Bél, it is clear that their creation was 
narrated, as a subsidiary and less important episode, 
after that of man.’ But, although this episode is still 
wanting in the poem, we find references on other 
Assyrian Creation fragments to the creation of beasts. 
Thus, for the creation of the creatures of the sea in 
Genesis, we may compare the fragmentary text 
K. 3445+R. 396, which records the creation of 
nakivé, “dolphins(?).”? And for the creation of 
beasts of the earth and cattle, we may compare the 
tablet D.T. 41,’ which, after referring generally to 
the creation of “living creatures” by ‘the gods,” 
proceeds to classify them as the cattle and beasts of 
the field, and the creatures of the city, the two 





* See above, p. lix. 
? See above, p. lix, n, 1, and below, p. 198. 
® See below, p. 122 f.- 


HEBREW PARALLELS. LXXXVII 





classes referring respectively to wild and domesticated 
animals,' 

The account of the creation of man, which is (7) The creation 
recorded as the eighth and last act of creation in 
the Hebrew account (Gen. i, 26-31), at length finds 
its parallel in the Babylonian poem upon the new 
fragment of the Sixth Tablet, No. 92,629.? It has 
already been pointed out that the Babylonian account 
closely follows the version of the story handed down 
to us from Berossus,> and it may here be added that 
the employment by Marduk, the Creator, of his own 
blood in the creation of man may perhaps be com~ 
pared to the Hebrew account of the creation of man 
in the image and after the likeness of Elohim.* 
Moreover, the use of the plural in the phrase “Let 
us make man” in Gen. i, 26, may be compared with 
the Babylonian narrative which relates that Marduk 
imparted his purpose of forming man to his father Ea, 





1 The portion of the text on which this reference to the creation 
of beasts is inscribed forms an introduction to what is probably 
an incantation, and may be compared to the Creation legend of 
Marduk and Aruru which is employed as an introduction to an 
incantation to be recited in honour of the temple E-zida (see 
below, p. 130f.,n.1). The account given of the creation of the 
beasts is merely incidental, and is introduced to indicate the period 
of the creation by Nin-igi-azag of two small creatures, one white 
and one black, which were probably again referred to in the following 
section of the text. 

* See below, pp. 86 ff. * See above, pp. liv ff. 

* See also below, p. xciii. It may be also noted that, according 
to Babylonian belief, the great gods (cf. the plural of Elohim) were 
always pictured in human form. 


(8) The 
instructions to 
man after his 
creation. 


LXXXVIII INTRODUCTION. 





whom he probably afterwards instructed to carry out 
the actual work of man’s creation.’ 

A parallel to the charge which, according to the 
Hebrew account, Elohim gave to man and woman 
after their creation, has hitherto been believed to exist 
on the tablet K. 3,364, which was supposed to contain 
a list of the duties of man as delivered to him after his 
creation by Marduk. The new Babylonian duplicate 
of this text, No. 33,851, proves that K. 3,364 is not 
part of the Creation Series, but is merely a tablet of 
moral precepts, so that its suggested resemblance to 
the Hebrew narrative must be given up. It is not 
improbable, however, that a missing portion of the 
Sixth Tablet did contain a short series of instructions 
by Marduk to man, since man was created with the 
special object of supplying the gods with worshippers 
and building shrines in their honour. That to these 
instructions to worship the gods was added the gift of 
dominion over beasts, birds, and vegetation is possible, 
but it must be pointed out that the Babylonian version 
of man’s creation is related from the point of view 
of the gods, not from that of man. Although his 
creation forms the culmination of Marduk’s work, it 
was conceived, not as an end and aim in itself, but 
merely as an expedient to satisfy the discontented 
gods.’ This expedient is referred to in the Seventh 





1 See above, p. lviii. 
® See above, p. liiif., and below, p. 85, note 3, and p. 88 f., notes 
1 and 3. 


HEBREW PARALLELS. LXXXIX 





Tablet, 1. 29, in the phrase “ For their forgiveness 
(ie. the forgiveness of the gods) did he create 
mankind,” and other passages in the Seventh Tablet 
ténd to show that Marduk’s mercy and goodness are 
extolled in his relations, not to mankind, but to the 
gods.’ In one passage’ man’s creation is referred to, 
but it is in connection with the charge that he forget 
not the deeds of his Creator.” 

The above considerations render it unlikely that the 
Babylonian poem contained an exact parallel to the 
exalted charge of Elohim in which He placed the 
rest of creation under man’s dominion. It is 
possible, however, that upon the new fragment of 
the Seventh Tablet, K. 12,830 (restored from the 
commentary K. 8,299),° we have a reference to the 
superiority of man over animals, in the phrase 
‘mankind [he created], [and upon] him understanding 
{he bestowed (?)...]”; and if this be so, we may 
compare it to Gen. i, 284, Moreover, if my sug- 
gested restoration of the last word in 1. 7 of the 
Sixth Tablet be correct, so that it may read “] will 
create man who shall inhabit [the earth],*” we may 





* See especially, Il. 7 f., 9 ff, 15 ff., 23, and 27 f. 

* L. 31f., which read, “ May his (ie. Marduk’s) deeds endure, 
may they never be forgotten in the mouth of mankind whom his 
hands have made!” 


* See below, p. roo f. 


* See below, p, 87; the account of Berossus is in favour of 
this restoration. 


(9) The 
dominion of 
man over 
creation, 


(ro) The word 
of the Creator, 


(tr) The order 
of Creation, 


XC INTRODUCTION. 





compare it to Gen. i, 28a, in which man is commanded 
to be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.’ 

A suggestion has been made that the prominence 
given to the word of the Creator in the Hebrew 
account may have found its parallel in the creation by 
a word in the Babylonian poem. It is true that the 
word of Marduk had magical power and could destroy 
and create alike; but Marduk did not employ his 
word in any of his acts of creation which are at present 
known to us. He first conceived a cunning device, 
and then proceeded to carry it out by hand. The 
only occasion on which he did employ his word to 
destroy and to create is in the Fourth Tablet, Il. 19-26,? 
when, at the invitation of the gods, he tested his power 
by making a garment disappear and then appear again 
at. the word of his mouth, The parallelism between 
the two accounts under this heading is not very close. 

The order of the separate acts of creation is also not 
quite the same in the two accounts, for, while in the 
Babylonian poem the heavenly bodies are created 
immediately after the formation of the firmament, in 
the Hebrew account their creation is postponed until 
after the earth and vegetation have been made. It is 
possible that the creation of the earth and plants has 
been displaced by the writer to whom the present 
form of the Hebrew account is due, and that the 





1 The new parallel to Gen. ii, 23, furnished by 1. 5 of the Sixth 
Tablet, is referred to below, p. xciv. 
2 See below, p. 60 f. 


HEBREW PARALLELS. XCI 





order of creation was precisely the same in the original 
forms of the two narratives. But even according to the 
present arrangement of the Hebrew account, there 
are several striking points of resemblance to the 
Babylonian poem. These may be seen in the existence 
of light before the creation of the heavenly bodies ; 
in the dividing of the waters of the primeval flood by 
means of a firmament also before the creation of the 
heavenly bodies ; and in the culminating act of creation 
being that of man. 

It would be tempting to trace the framework of the fie) The Seren 
Seven Days of Creation, upon which the narrative Seven Tablets 
in Genesis is stretched, to the influence of the Seven 
Tablets of Creation, of which we now know that the 
great Creation Series was composed. The reasons for 
the employment of the Seven Days in the Hebrew 
account are, however, not the same which led to the 
arrangement of the Babylonian poem upon Seven 
Tablets. In the one the writer’s intention is to give the | 
original authority for the observance of the Sabbath; in 
the other there appears to have been no special reason 
for this arrangement of the poem beyond the mystical 
nature of the number “seven.” Moreover, acts of 
creation are recorded on all of the first six Days in the 
Hebrew narrative, while in the Babylonian poem the 
creation only begins at the end of the Fourth Tablet.’ 
The resemblance, therefore, is somewhat superficial, but 





} There is, however, a parallel between the Seventh Day on 


The Seven 
Days and the 
Seven Tablets 
of Creation, 


XCIL INTRODUCTION. 





it is possible that the employment of the number “seven” 
in the two accounts was not fortuitous. Whether the 
Sabbath was of Babylonian origin (as seems probable) 
or not, it is clear that the writer of the narrative in 
Genesis was keenly interested in its propagation and 
its due observance. Now in Exilic and post-Exilic times 
the account of the Creation most prevalent in Babylonia 
was that in the poem Exuma efis, the text of which 
was at this time absolutely fixed and its arrangement 
upon Seven Tablets invariable. That the late revival 
of mythology among the Jews was partly due to their 
actual study of the Babylonian legends at this period is 
sufficiently proved by the minute points of resemblance 
between the accounts of the Deluge in Genesis and 
in the poem of Gilgamesh.’ It is probable, therefore, 
that the writer who was responsible for the final 
form of Gen. i- ii, 4a, was familiar with the Babylonian 
legend of Creation in the form in which it has come 
down to us. The supposition, then, is perhaps not too 





which Elohim rested from all His work, and the Seventh Tablet 
which records the hymns of praise sung by the gods to Marduk 
after his work of creation was ended. 

' See my Babylonian Religion and Mythology, pp. 138 ff. The fact 
that the Jews of the Exile were probably familiar with the later forms 
of Babylonian legends explains some of the close resemblances 
in detail between the Babylonian and Hebrew versions of the same 
story. But this is in perfect accordance with the borrowing of 
that very story by the Hebrews many centuries before; indeed, to 
the previous existence of ancient Hebrew versions of Babylonian 
legends may be traced much of the impetus given to the revival 
of mythology among the exiled Jews. 


HEBREW PARALLELS. XCHI 





fanciful, that the connection of the Sabbath with the 
story of Creation was suggested by the mystical 
number of the Tablets upon which the Babylonian 
poem was inscribed. 

Further resemblances to the Babylonian Creation Points of 


resemblance 


legends may be traced in the second Hebrew between. 
abylonian 


: é 11 legends and the 
account of the Creation which follows the first in (sendsandihe 


Gen. ii, 46-7. According to this version man was scountof the 
formed from the dust of the ground, which may be 
compared to the mixing of Bél’s blood with earth 
according to the account of Berossus, the use of the 
Creator's blood in the one account being paralleled by 
the employment of His breath in the other for the 
purpose of giving life to the dust or earth. Earth is 
not mentioned in the recovered portion of the Sixth 
Tablet, but its use in the creation of men is fully in 
accordance with Babylonian beliefs. Thus, according 
to the second Babylonian account of the Creation,! 
Marduk formed man by pouring out dust beside a 
reed which he had set upon the face of the waters. 
Clay is also related to have been employed in the 
creation of special men and heroes ; thus it was used 
in Ea-bani’s creation by Aruru,’ and it is related to 
have been mixed with divine blood for a similar 
purpose in the fragmentary legend Bu. 1-5-9, 269.° 
To’ the account of the creation of woman in 
Gen. ii, 18 ff. we find a new parallel in 1. 5 of the 





? See below, pp. 130 ff. ® See above, p. Ixx, n. 1. 
3 See above, p. lvii, n. 1. 


XCIV INTRODUCTION. 





Sixth Tablet of the Creation Series, in the use of 
the word <zss¢mtu, “bone,” corresponding to the 
Hebrew ‘ese which occurs in the phrase “bone of 
my bones” in Gen. ii, 23. 
Paradise and In addition to the Babylonian colouring of much 
Creation. of the story of Paradise we may now add a new 
parallel from the Babylonian address to a mythical 
River of Creation, inscribed on S. 1704 and the Neo- 
Babylonian Tablet 82-9-18, 5311.1. This short 
composition is addressed to a River to whom the 
creation of all things is ascribed,’ and with this river 
we may compare the mythical river of Paradise 
which watered the garden, and on leaving it was 
divided into four branches. That the Hebrew River 
of Paradise is Babylonian in character is clear; and 
the origin of the Babylonian River of Creation is 
also to be found in the Euphrates, from whose waters 
southern Babylonia derived its great fertility. The 





1 See below, p. 128 f. 

? With the Babylonian River of Creation, suggested by the 
Euphrates, we may compare the Egyptian beliefs concerning Hap 
or Hapi, the god of the Nile, who became identified with most 
of the great primeval Creation gods and was declared to be the 
Creator of all things. Considering the importance of the Nile 
for Egypt, it is easy to understand how he came to attain this 
position. Brugsch sums up his account of this deity in the words: 
“ So ist der Nilgott im letzten Grunde der geheimnissvolle Urheber 
“ aller Wohithaten, welche die von ihm befruchtete agyptische Erde 
“ den Géttern und Menschen zu bieten vermag, er ist ‘der starke 
“‘Schépfer von allem’”; see Religion und Mythologie der alten 
Aegypier, p. 641. 

‘It is possible that this River, though suggested by the 


DATES OF BABYLONIAN INFLUENCE. XCV 





life-giving stream of Paradise is met with elsewhere 
in the Old Testament, as, for instance, in Ezekiel 
xlvii, and it is probable that we may trace its 
influence in the Apocalypse.* 


It is unnecessary here to discuss in detail the probate dates 


: . { Babylonia 
evidence to prove that the Hebrew narratives of the jnauence on 


; , f : Heb 
Creation were ultimately derived from Babylonia, and mythology. 


were not inherited independently by the Babylonians 
and Hebrews from a common Semitic ancestor.? For 
the local Babylonian colouring of the stories, and 
the great age to which their existence can be traced, 
extending back to the time of the Sumerian inhabitants 
of Mesopotamia,’ are conclusive evidence against the 
second alternative. On the other hand, it is equally 
unnecessary to cite the well-known arguments to prove 


Euphrates, is to be identified with Hudur, the River of the Under- 
world, to whom an incantation in the terms of the one under 
discussion might well have been addressed. A connection 
between Tiamat and the river Hubur has been suggested above 
(cf. p. Ixxxiii, n. 2), and, should this prove to be correct, we might 
see in the phrase danat(at) ka-la-ma, applied to the River, a parallel 
to pa-ti-ka-at ka-la-ma, the description of Ummu-Hubur (Tiamat) 
in Tablet I, 1. 113 and the parallel passages. 


‘The connection which Gunkel and Zimmern would trace 
between the River of Paradise and the River of Water of Life in 
the Apocalypse on the one side and the “ water of life,” mentioned 
in the legend of Adapa, on the other, cannot be regarded as 
proved. The resemblance in the expressions may well be 
fortuitous, since there are few other points of resemblance between 
the narratives in which the expressions occur. 

? On these subjects, see my Bad. Rel. and Myth., pp. 108 ff. 

® See above, pp. Ixxv and lxxix. 


XCVI INTRODUCTION. 





Probable dates the existence among the Hebrews of Creation legends 
of Babylonian 


influenceon similar to those of Babylonia for centuries before the 
mythology, = Exile. The allusions to variant Hebrew forms of the 
Babylonian Dragon-Myth in Amos ix, 3, Isaiah li, 9, 
Psalm -Ixxiv, 13 f., and Ixxxix, 9 f, and Job xxvi, 12f,, 
and ix, 13, may be cited as sufficient proof of the early 
period at which the borrowing from Babylonian sources 
must have taken place; .and the striking differences 
between the Biblical and the known Babylonian versions 
of the legends prove that the Exilic and post-Exilic Jews 
must have found ready to their hand ancient Hebrew 
versions of the stories, and that the changes they 
introduced must in the main have been confined to 
details of arrangement and to omissions necessitated by 
their own more spiritual conceptions and beliefs. The 
discovery of the Tell el-Amarna tablets proved con- 
clusively that Babylonian influence extended through- 
out Egypt and Western Asia in the fifteenth century 
B.c., and the existence of legends among the letters 
demonstrated the fact that Babylonian mythology 
exerted an influence coextensive with the range of 
her political ties and interests. We may therefore con- 
jecture that Babylonian myths had become naturalized 
in Palestine before the conquest of that country by 
the Israelites. Many such Palestinian versions of 
Babylonian myths the Israelites no doubt absorbed ; 
while during the subsequent period of the Hebrew kings 
Assyria and Babylonia exerted a direct influence upon 
them. It is clear, therefore, that at the time of their 


AUTHORITIES FOR TEXT. XCVIL 








exile the captive Jews did not find in Babylonian 
mythology an entirely new and unfamiliar subject, 
but recognized in it a series of kindred beliefs, differing 
much from their own in spiritual conceptions, but 
presenting a startling resemblance on many material 
points. 
Now that the principal problems with regard to the ‘he forty-nine 
tablets and 


contents, date, and influence of the Creation Serics, tmgments 
insoribed with 


Enuma elis, have been dealt with, it remains to the text of te 
describe in some detail the forty-nine fragments and Se. 
tablets from which the text, transliterated and trans- 
lated in the following pages, has been made up. After 
each registration-number is given a reference to the 
published copy of the text in Cuneiform Texts from 
Babylonian Tablets, etc., in the British Museum, pt. xiii, 

or in Vol. II of this work, or in Appendices I and II 

of this volume; a brief description of each tablet is 
added, together with references to any previous 
publication of the text. After the enumeration of 
the known copies of each tablet, a list is given of the 
authorities for the separate lines of the tablet, in order 

to enable the reader to verify any passage in the text 
with as little delay as possible. 

The following twelve tablets and fragments are Copies of the 
inscribed with portions of the text of the First Tablet ane reason 
of the series :-— 

1. K. 5,419¢: Cuneiform Texts, pt. xiii (1901), pl. 1. 
Obverse: Il. 1-16; Reverse: catch-line and 
colophon, 






XCVIII INTRODUCTION. 





Copies of the Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 34 in. by1Zin. For earlier 
First Lablet of publications of the text, see George Smith, 7.S.B.A., vol. iv, 
Series, p- 363f., pl.i; Fox Talbot, 7.S.B.A., vol. v, pp. 428 ff.; 


Menant, Manuel de la langue Assyrtenne, p. 378 f.; Delitasch, 
Assyrische Lesestiicke, 1st ed., p. 40, 2nd ed., p. 78, 3rd ed., 
p- 93; Lyon, Assyrian Manual, p. 62; and my First Steps in 
Assyrian, p. 122 f. 


2. No. 93,015 (82-7-14, 402): Cun. Texts, pt. xiit, 
pls. 1 and 3. Obverse: Il. 1-16; Reverse: 


Il. 124-142 and colophon. 

Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, zt in. by 2}in. For 
an earlier publication of the text, see Pinches, Bab. Or, Rec., 
vol. iv, p. 26f. The fragment is probably part of the same 
tablet as that to which No. ro belonged. 

3. No. 45,528 + 46,614: Vol. II, pls. i-vi. Obverse: 
W. 1-48; Reverse: Il. 111-142, catch-line, and 
colophon. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, formed from two fragments, 
which I have joined; 2}in. by 54in. This text has not been 


previously published. 
4. No. 35,134: Vol. II, pl. vii. Obverse: Il. 11-21; 
no reverse. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 1$in. by zin. This text 
has not been previously published. 


5. No. 36,726: Vol. II, pl. viii. Obverse : Il. 28-33. 


Neo-Babylonian ‘ practice-tablet”; the text, which forms 
an extract, measures 2 in. by 1tin. This text has not been 
previously published. 


6. 81-7-27, 80: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 2. Obverse: 
ll. 31-56; Reverse: Il. 118-142. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2fin. by 3in. This text, which 
was referred to by Pinches in the Bad. Or. Rec., vol. iv, p. 33, 
was used by Zimmern for his translation in Gunkel’s Schipfung 


AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET I. XCIX 





und Chaos, p. 402 f.; it was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, 
Weltschipfungsepos, p. 25 f., and by Jensen, Mythen und Epen, 
pp. 2 ff. 

7. K. 3,938: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 3. Obverse: 
ll. 33-42; Reverse: Il. 128-142. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, rin. by 1fin. This fragment 
was used by George Smith, Chaldean Account of Genesis, p.93 f., 
and by subsequent translators; the text was given in trans- 
literation by Delitzsch, Weltschipfungsepos, p. 27. 

8. K. 7,871: Vol. I, Appendix II, pp. 183 ff. Obverse : 
ll. 33-47 ; no reverse. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1}in. by rin. The fragment 
may belong to the same tablet as No. 11. This text has not 
been previously published. 

9. No. 36,688: Vol. I, pl. vii. Obverse: Il. 38-44. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian “ practice-tablet” ; the text, which 
forms an abstract, measures 1} in. by 14in. This text has not 
been previously published. 


10. No. 46,803: Vol. II, pls. ix-xi. Obverse: I. 46-67; 
Reverse : Il. 83-103. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 in. by2in. The fragment 
is probably part of the same tablet as that to which No. < 
belonged. This text has not been previously published. 


11. K. 4,488: Vol. I, Appendix H, pp. 185 ff. 
Obverse : Il. 50-63; no reverse. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, 12in. by 14 in.; see above, No. 8. 
This text has not been previously published. 


12. 82-9-18, 6,879: Vol. II, pls. xii and xiii. No 
obverse; Reverse : Il. 93-118. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 13in. by 2$in. This text 
has not been previously published. 


Copies of the 
First Tablet of 
the Creation 
Series. 


se INTRODUCTION. 





Authorities for 
the lines of the 


First Tablet. as follows :-— 


Il. 1-10 
Tl. 11-16 
I. 17-21 
ll, 22-27 
Il, 28-30 
ll. 31-32 
1. 33 

Il. 34-37 
Il. 38-42 
1. 43 

l. 44 

1. 45 

ll. 46-47 
1, 48 

1. ao 

iL. 50-46 
iL, 57-63 
ll. 64-67 
ll. 68-82 
Il. 83-92 
Il. 93-103 


Il. 104-110: 
Wo rrr-117: 
: Nos. 


1. 118 


UL. 119-123 : 
Il. 124-127 : 
Il. 128-142 : 


The authorities for the lines of the First Tablet are 


Taswet I. 


: Nos. 1, 2, and 3. 

: Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
: Nos, 3 and 4. 

: No. 3. 

: Nos. 3 and 5. 

: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: Nos. 
: No. ro. 

: Wanting. 

: No. 10. 

: Nos. 10 and 12. 


3, 5, and 6. 

3, 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
3, 6, 7, and 8. 
3, 6, 7, 8, and 9. 
3, 6, and 8. 

3, 6, 8, and 9. 

3, 6, and 8. 

3, 6, 8, and ro. 
3, 6, and 10. 

6 and 10. 

6, 10, and 11. 
to and 11. 


No. 12. 

Nos. 3 and 12. 

3, 6, and 12. 
Nos. 3 and 6. 

Nos. 2, 3, and 6. 
Nos. 2, 3, 6, and 7. 


AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET II. cl 





The following seven tablets and frag! 
inscribed with portions of the text of the Second Tablet ef the Creation 


of the series :— 


18. 


14. 


15. 


16, 


17. 


18. 


No. 40,559: Vol. II, pls. xiv-xxi. Obverse: 
Il. 1-40; Reverse: Il. (111)-(140), catch-line, and 
colophon. 

Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2$in. by 44 in. This 
text has not been previously published. 

No. 38,396: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 4. Obverse: 
Il. 11-29; Reverse: Il. (105)-(132). 

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 3}in. by zin. This text 
has not been previously published. 

No. 92,632 + 93,048: Vol. II, pls. xxii-xxiv. 
Obverse : Il. 14-29 ; Reverse: Il. (114)-(131). 

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, formed from two fragments 
which I have joined; 1$in. by r$in. This text has not been 
previously published. 

K. 4,832: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 5. Obverse: 
Il. 32-58; Reverse: Il. (104)-(138). 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, i¢in. by 3+in. This tablet 
was known to George Smith, see Chald. Acc. of Gen., p. 923 
its text was published by S. A. Smith, AZzscel/aneous Texts, 
pl. 8f. 


79-7-8, 178: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6. Obverse: 
Il. (69)-(75); Reverse : Il. (76)-(85). 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 34in. by rfin. This text, which 
was identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by 


Delitzsch, Weltschépfungsepos, p. 30, and by Jensen, ALpthen 
und Epen, p. 10 f. 


K. 10,008: Vol. I, App. II, pp. 187 ff No 
obverse ; Reverse : probably between Il. 85 and 104. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1gin. by ziin. This text has not 
been previously published. 


ments are Copies of the 


CI INTRODUCTION. 





19. K. 292: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6. No obverse ; 
Reverse : Il. (131)-(140). 


Lower part of an Assyrian tablet, 2} in. by 24 in. 


of this tablet, which was known to George Smith, was given 
in transliteration by Delitzsch, Welschopfungsepos, p. 31, and 


by Jensen, Mythen und Epen, p. 10. 


Authorities for ‘The authorities for the lines of the Second Tablet 


Second Tablet. are as follows :— 


Il, t-10 

I. 11-13 

Il. 14-29 

Ik. 30-31 

IL. 32-40 

Il. 41-58 

Il. 59-(68) 
Il. (69)-(85) 


between Il. (86) and (103) : No. 18. 


1. (104) 


Il. (105)-(110) : 
IL (111)-(113) : 
I. (114)-(126) : 


1. (127) 


Il. (128)-(129) : 


1. (130) 
1. (131) 
1. (132) 


Il. (133)-(138) : 
Il. (139)-(140) : 


Taster IL. 

: No. 13. 

: Nos. 13 and 14. 

: Nos. 13, 14, and 15. 

: No. 13. 

: Nos. 13 and 16. 

: No. 16. 

: Wanting. 

: No. 17. 

: No. 16. 
Nos. 14 and 16. 
Nos. 13, 14, and 16. 
Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16, 

: Nos. 13, 15, and 16. 
Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16, 

: Nos. 13, 15, and 16. 

: Nos. 13, 15, 16, and 19. 

: Nos. 13, 14, 16, and 19. 
Nos. 13, 16, and 19. 
Nos. 13 and 19. 


AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET III. CHI 





The following nine tablets and fragments are 
inscribed with portions of the text of the Third 
Tablet :— 


20. K. 3,473 + 79-7-8, 296 + R.615: Cun. Texts, 


21. 


pt. xili, pls. 7-9. Obverse: Il. 1-85; Reverse: 
Il. 86-138. 


Parts of an Assyrian tablet, 2$in. by 8%in. The three 
fragments of this tablet, which have been recovered, join, but, 
as they are much warped by fire, they have not been stuck 
together. For earlier publications of the text, see S. A. Smith, 
Miscellaneous Texts, pis. 1-5, and my First Steps in Assyrian, 
pp. 124 ff. The text of K. 3,473 had been already recognized 
by George Smith, see Chald. Acc. Gen., p. 92 f. 


No. 93,017 [88-4-19, 13]: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, 
pls. 10 and 11. Obverse: Il. 47-77; Reverse: 
ll. 78-105. 

, Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2} in. by 3fin. This text, 
which was identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration 


by Delitzsch, Weltschipfungsepos, p. 36 f., and by Jensen, ALythen 
und Epen, pp. 14 ff. 


22. 82-9-18, 1,403+6,316 [No. 61,429]: Vol. II, 


pls. xxv-xxviii. Obverse: Il. 5-15, 52-61; Reverse: 
Il. 62-76, 124-128. 

Part of a Neo-Babylonian “ practice-tablet,” inscribed with 
a series of five-line extracts from the text; 2in. by 3 in. 
A copy of the text of 82-9-18, 1,403, is given in Cun. Zexts, 
pt. xiii, pl. 13; since then I have joined to it the fragment 
82-9-18, 6,316, and the text is therefore repeated in Vol. II. 
This text has not been previously published. 


28. K. 8,524: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 12. Fragment 


from the end of Obv. or beginning of Rev. : 
Il. 75-86. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, rZin. by igin. The text was 


Copies of the 
Third Tablet 
of the Creation 
Series. 


Copies of the 
Third Tablet 
of the Creation 
Series, 


CIV 


INTRODUCTION. 





24. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


referred to by Pinches in the Bad. Or. Rec., vol. iv, p. 30, and 
was given in transliteration by Delitasch, Weltschipfungsepos, 


p- 31. 
82-9-18, 6,950 + 83-14-18, 1,868: Vol. II, pl. xxix. 
Duplicate of Il. 19-26 and 77-84; variants are 


noted in the text under Il. 19-26. 

Neo-Babylonian ‘ practice-tablet”; the text forms an extract 
measuring 2$in. by 1tin. A copy of the text of 83-1-18, 1,868, 
is given in Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 12; since then I have joined 
to it the fragment 82-9-18, 6,950, and the text is therefore 
repeated in Vol. II]. This text has not been previously 
published. 

K. 6,650: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 9. Duplicate 
of Il. 38-55 and 96-113; variants are noted in the 


text under Il. 38-55. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 in. by 3$in. This text has not 
been previously published. 

No. 42,285: Vol. II, pls. xxx-xxxiii. Obverse : 
Il. 46-68 ; Reverse: Il. 69-87. 

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 in. by 2$in. This text 
has not been previously published. 

82-9-18, 5,448 + 83-1-18, 2,116: Vol. II, pl. xxxiv. 
Obverse : Il. 64-72. ; 

Part of a Neo-Babylonian “practice-tablet”; the text, which 
forms an extract, measures 22in. by 13 in. A copy of the text 
of 83-1~18, 2,116, is given in Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 12; since 
then I have joined to it the fragment 82-9-18, 5,448, and 
the text is therefore repeated in Vol. 11. This text has not 
been previously published. 

K. 8,575: Cun. Texts, pt. xiil, pl. 12. Obverse : 
Il. 69-76; Reverse : Il. 77-85. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2?in. by 2} in. This text, which 
was identified by Bezold, Catalogue, p. 941, was given in 
transliteration by Delitasch, Weltschipfungsepos, p. 38. 


AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET III. CV 





The authorities for the lines of the Third Tablet (yon 


are as follows :—~ 


. T+4 

2 5-15 
. 16-18 
. 29-26 
+ 27-37 
» 38-45 
. 46 

» 47-51 
+ 52°55 
- 56-63 
. 64-68 
. 69-72 
» 73°74 
75-76 
77-84 
. 85 

. 86 


87 


. 88-95 

» 96-105 
. 106-113: 
. [E4123 : 
. 124-128 : 
. 129-138 


Third Tablet. 


Taster ITI. 


: No. 20. 

: Nos. 20 and 22. 

: No. 20. 

: Nos. 20 and 24. 

: No. 20. 

: Nos. 20 and 25. 

: Nos. 20, 25, and 26. 

: Nos. 20, 21, 25, and 26. 

: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 25, and 26. 

: Nos. 20, 21, 22, and 26, 

: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, and 27. 

: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, and 28. 
: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, and 28. 

: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, and 28. 
: Nos. 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, and 28, 
: Nos. 20, 21, 23, 26, and 28, 


: Nos. 20, 21, 23, and 26. 
: Nos. 20, 21, and 26. 


: Nos. 20 and 21. 

: Nos. 20, 21, and 25. 
Nos. 20 and 25. 
No. 20, 

Nos. 20 and 22. 

: No. 20. 


cvi INTRODUCTION. 





Copies ofthe The following six tablets and fragments are inscribed 
Fourth Tablet 


of the Creation with portions of the text of the Fourth Tablet :— 
29. No. 93,016 [82-9-18, 3,737]: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, 
pls. r4-15. Obverse: ll. 1-44; Reverse: Il. 116-146. 
Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 3$in. by 4% in. 
For an earlier publication of the text, see Budge, P.S.2.A., 
vol. x, p. 86, pls. 1-6. 
80. K. 3,437+R.641: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pls. 16-19. 
Obverse: Il. 36-83; Reverse: Il. 84-119. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3in. by 5)in. For an earlier 
publication of the text of K. 3,437, see George Smith, 
T.S.B.A., vol. iv, p. 363f., pls. § and 6; and of K. 3,437+ 
R. 641, see Delitasch, Assyrische Lesestiiche, pp. 97 ff., and my 
First Steps in Assyrian, pp. 137 ff. 


81. 79-7-8, 251: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 20. Obverse: 


ll. 35-49; Reverse : Il. 103-107. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, rin. by 2tin. The text, which 
was identified by Pinches, was used in transliteration by 
Delitasch, Weltschopfungsepos, pp. 41 ff., and by Jensen, Adythen 
und Epen, pp. 22 ff. This fragment probably belongs to the 
same tablet as No. 34. 


82. No. 93,051: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 20. Obverse: 
Il, 42-54; Reverse: Il. 85-94. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian “‘ practice-tablet,” inscribed with 
the text divided into sections of five lines; 24 in. by r$in. This 
text has not been previously published. 


83. K.5,420¢: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 21. Obverse: 
ll. 74-92; Reverse : Il. 93-119. 
Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3¢in. by 3+in. Restorations 
and variants were taken from this tablet by George Smith for 
his edition of K. 3,437; see above, No. 30. 
84, R. 2, 83: Cun, Texts, pt. xiii, pl.19. No obverse ; 
Reverse: Il. 117-129. 


AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET IV. 


CVII 





Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2} in. by 1fin. 


The text, which 


was identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by 


Delitasch, Weltschipfungsepos, p. 45. 


This fragment probably 


belongs to the same tablet as No. 31. 
The authorities for the lines of the Fourth Tablet Autporities for 


are as follows :— 


the lines of the 
Fourth Tablet, 


Taster IV. 
I. 1-34 =: No. 29. 
1. 35 : Nos. 29 and 31. 
Il. 36-41 =: Nos. 29, 30, and 31. 
Il. 42-44 =: Nos. 29, 30, 31, and 32. 
Il. 45-49 =: Nos. 30, 31, and 32. 
Il, 50-54 =: Nos. 30 and 32. 
Il. 55-73: No. 30. 
ll. 74-84 : Nos. 30 and 33. 
Il. 85-94 : Nos. 30, 32, and 33. 
Ul. 95-102: Nos. 30 and 33. 
Il. 103-107 : Nos. 30, 31, and 33. 
Il. 108-115 : Nos. 30 and 33. 
1. 116 : Nos. 29, 30, and 33. 
Il. 117-119 : Nos. 29, 30, 33, and 34. 
il, 120-129 : Nos. 29 and 34. 
Il. 130-146 : No. 29. 


The following five tablets and fragments are inscribed copies of the 


with portions of the text of the Fifth Tablet -— 
85. K. 3,567 +K. 8,588: Cua. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 22. 


Fifth Tablet of 
the Creation 
Series. 


Obverse : Il. 1-26; Reverse: catch-line. 


Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 3$in. by 2hin. 


For 


earlier publications of the text, see George Smith, 7.S.2.4., 
vol. iv, p. 363 f, pl. 2; Delitzsch, Assyrische Lesestiicke, 
3rd ed., p. 94; and my First Steps in Assyrian, pp. 158 fi. 


cVIIl INTRODUCTION. 








Copies of the 86. K. 8,526: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 23. Obverse : 


Fifth ‘Vablet of 
the Creation 
Series, 


Authorities for 
the lines of the 
Fifth Tablet. 


37. 


38. 


Il. 1-18; Reverse : Il. (138)-(140). 

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, rin. by z¥in, The text 
was used by George Smith for his edition of No. 35, and in 
the other copies of that tablet mentioned above; it was given 
in transliteration by Delitzsch, Weltschipfungsepos, p. 48 f. 

K. 13,774: Vol. I, Appendix IJ, pp. 190 ff. 
Obverse : Il. 6-19; no reverse. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, iin. by thin. This text has 
not been previously published. 

K. 11,641: Vol. I, Appendix IJ, pp. 192 ff. 
Obverse : Il. 14-22; Reverse: Il. (128)-(140), 
catch-line, and colophon. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2}in. by 3$in. This text has 
not been previously published. 


89. K.3,449a: Cun, Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 23. Obverse: 


as 


ll. (66)-(74) ; Reverse : Il. (75)-(87). 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, z}in. by r}in. This text, which 
was first identified and translated by George Smith, Chald. Ace. 
of Gen., p. 94f., was given in transliteration by Delitasch, 
Weltschépfungsepos, p. 50, and the reverse by Jensen, Mythen 
und Epen, p. 32. 


The authorities for the lines of the Fifth Tablet are 
follows :-— 


Taster V. 
Il. 1-5 : Nos. 35 and 36. 
Il. 6-13 : Nos. 35, 36, and 37. 
ll. 14-18 : Nos. 35, 36, 37, and ‘38. 
1. 19 : Nos. 35, 37, and 38. 
Il. 20-22 : Nos. 35 and 38. 


Il. 23-26 : No. 35. 


_ AUTHORITIES FOR TABLETS V AND VL CIX 





Il. 27-(65) : Wanting. 
Il. (66)-(87) : No. 39. 
Il. (88)-(127) : Wanting. 
IL. (128)-(137) : No. 38. 
Il. (138)-(140) : Nos. 36 and 38. 
The following fragment is inscribed with a portion Copy of the 


: Sixth Tablet of 
of the text of the Sixth Tablet :— the Creation 


Series, 
40. No. 92,629: Vol. II, pls. xxxv and xxxvi. 
Obverse: Il. 1-21; Reverse: Il. 138-146, catch- 
line, and colophon, 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2}in. by 2tin. This text 
has not been previously published, 


The following nine tablets and fragments are Copies of the 
able! 
inscribed with portions of the text of the Seventh of the Creation 


Tablet :— ; 
41. K. 2,854: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 159. Obverse: 
Il. 1-18; Reverse uninscribed. 
Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 2in. by rd in. This text 
has not been previously published. 
42. No. 91,139+93,073: Vol. II, pls. xxxviii-xlv. 
Obverse : ll. 3-40; Reverse: Il, 106-141. 


Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 22in. by 4$in. This text 
is made up of two fragments which I have joined; it has not 
previously been published. 


43. K. 8,522: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pls. 26 and 27. 
Obverse : Il. 15-45; Reverse: Il. 105-137. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2}in. by 34in. For earlier 

publications of the text, see George Smith, Z.S.2.A., vol. iv, 


p. 363f, pls. 3 and 4, and Delitzsch, Assyrische Lesestiiche, 
3rd ed., p. 95 f. 


cx 


INTRODUCTION. 





Copies of the 44. No. 35,506: Vol. II, pls. xlvi-xlviiii Obverse: 


Seventh Tablet 
of the Creation 
Series. 


45. 


46. 


47. 


48. 


49. 


Il. 14-36; Reverse : Il. 105-142. 


Part of a.Neo-Babylonian tablet, 24in. by 4¢in. This text, 
which probably dates from the period of the Arsacidae, has 
not been previously published, 


K. 9,267: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 28. Obverse : 
Il, go-47 ; Reverse: Il. 109-138. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3$in. by 2in. Restorations and 
variants were taken from this tablet by George Smith for his 
edition of K, 8,522; see above, No. 43. 


K. 12,830: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 163. Obverse 


or Reverse : between Il. 47 and 105. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, $in. by fin. This text has not 
been previously published. 


K. 13,761: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 164. End of 
Obverse and beginning of Reverse: between 


Il. 47 and 105. 


. Part of an Assyrian tablet, rfin. by rin. This text has 
not been previously published. 


K. 8,519: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 165. End of 
Obverse and beginning of Reverse: between 
Il. 47 and 105. 

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 12in. by rfin. This text has 
not been previously published.* 
K. 13,337: Vol. 1, Appendix I, p. 166. Duplicate 
of No. 48; between Il. 47 and 105. 


Part of an Assyrian tablet, fin. by rin. This text, which 
is a duplicate of K. 8,519, has not been previously published. 





1] learn from Professor Zimmern that he also has identified this 
fragment as part of the Seventh Tablet by its correspondence with 


the 


commentary K. 4,406, published in IIR, pl. 31 (see below, 


p. exviii). 


“AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET VII, CXI 





The authorities for the lines of the Seventh Tablet Authorities for 


are as follows :— 


the lines of the 
Seventh 
Tablet. 


Taser VII. 


Il. 1-2: No. 41. 
Il. 3-13 : Nos. 41 and 42. 
lL14 : Nos. 41, 42, and 44. 
Il. 15-18 =: Nos. 41, 42, 43, and 44. 
Il. 19-36 =: Nos. 42, 43, and 44. 
Il. 37-39 «=: Nos. 42 and 43. 
1. 40 : Nos. 42, 43, and 45. 
Il. q1-45 =: Nos. 43 and 45. 
Il. 46-47: No. 45. 
between Il. 47 and 105: Nos. 46, 47, 48, and 49. 

1. 105 : Nos. 43 and 44. 
ll. 106-108 : Nos. 42, 43, and 44. 
Il. 109-137 : Nos. 42, 43, 44, and 45. 
1. 138 : Nos. 42, 44, and 45. 

Il. 139-141 : Nos. 42 and 44. 
lL. 142 : No. 44. 


The above forty-nine tablets and fragments, inscribed peseription of 


with portions of the text of the Creation Series, belong 


to two distinct periods. 
were made for the library of Ashur-bani- pal at 
Nineveh, and they are beautifully written in the 
Assyrian character upon tablets of fine clay.1. The 


the tablets. 


The older class of tablets 





1 That the copies were not always made from Babylonian tablets 
is proved by the colophon of K. 292 (cf. Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6), 
which states that this copy of the Second Tablet was made from 


Description of 
the tablets. 


CXII INTRODUCTION. 





Neo-Babylonian tablets, on the other hand, are, as 
a rule, less carefully written ; they vary considerably 
in size and shape, and were made at different periods 
for private individuals, either for their own use,’ or 
that they might be deposited in the temples as 
votive offerings? Some of these Babylonian copies 





an Assyrian archetype (gad-ri ”* Aséur*™), Upon some tablets 
Ashur-bani-pal’s label was scratched after the tablet had been 
baked, e.g., K. 3,567 + K. 8,588 (Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 22). 
Other Assyrian copies, though giving the catch-line to the next 
tablet, are without colophons, e.g., K. 3,473, etc. (cf. Cun. Zexts, 
pt. xiii, pl. 9), and K. 8,526 (cf. Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 23); the copy 
of the last tablet, K. 2,854 (see below, p. 159), the reverse of which 
is blank, was probably also without a colophon. 


1 Cf, No. 40,559 (vol. ii, pl. xxi), a copy of the Second Tablet 
which was made for a certain Nabii-ahé-iddina; and No. 45,528+ 
46,614 (vol. ii, pl. vi), a copy of the First Tablet, which is described 
as the property of Nabii-meshétik-urri, a worshipper of Marduk and 
Sarpanitu, and is said to have been copied from an original at 
Babylon on the ninth day of Iyyar, in the twenty-seventh year of 
Darius. A certain Nabi-balatsu-ikbi, the son of Na’id-Marduk, 
appears to have owned a complete set of the Seven Creation 
Tablets, for we possess fragments of the First and of the Sixth 
Tablet in the series which belonged to him (cf. No. 93,015, 
Cun. Texts, pl. 3, where the first word of the second line of the 
colophon, which puzzled Delitzsch, is clearly Juiz; No. 46,803, 
vol. ii, pls. ix ff. ; and No. 92,629, vol. ii, pl. xxxvii). 

* Thus the fine copy of the Fourth Tablet, No. 93,016, which 
was written by the scribe Nabi-bélishu, was, according to its 
colophon (cf. Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 15), deposited by the smith 
Na’id-Marduk as a votive offering in the temple E-zida. In his 
transliteration of this colophon Delitzsch has made an odd blunder; 
he has not recognized the common phrase ana balat napiai'”’-su, 
“for the preservation of his life,’ which occurs at the end of 
line 3 of the colophon, and has taken it as a proper name 


DESCRIPTION GF THE TABLETS. CXIIL 





are fine specimens of their class, e.g. Nos. 3, 13, 21, Description of 
29, and 42,‘ and the characters and words upon them mae tani: 
are carefully written and spaced; others, however, 
consist of small, carelessly made tablets, on to which 

the poem is crowded.? On all the tablets, whether 
Assyrian or Babylonian, which possess colophons, 

the number of the Tablet in the Series is carefully 
given.’ The extracts from the text, which were 
written out by students upon “ practice-tablets,” no 

doubt in order to give them practice in writing and 

at the same time to enable them to learn the text 

by heart, are naturally rather rough productions.‘ 

One characteristic which applies to all the tablets, 





™ rIN-z1”-Su (see Weltschopfungsepos, p. 41), a transliteration which 
turns the sentence into nonsense. 


1 See pls. ii, iii, iv, and vi, and the frontispiece to Vol. II. 
Photographic reproductions of the reverse of No. 21 and the 
obverse of No. 29 are given in the Guide to the Babylonian and 
Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum, pls. vi and vii. 

2 Cf. e.g., Nos. 93,015 (No. 2), 46,803 (No. 10), and 92,629 
(No. 40), all of which were probably written by the same scribe. 

3 Cf. the notes duppu I*4" E-nu-ma e-lié on No. 45,528, etc. 
(vol. ii, pl. vi); duppu E-nu-ma e-lis ri-eé on No. 93,015 (Cun. 
Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 3); [(dupplu L7*4% B-nu-ma e-lis on K. 292 
(Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6); duppu IV*X4""4 E-nu-ma e-lis, which 
follows a note as to the number of lines in the text upon No. 93,016 
(Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 15); and dup-pi VX"? L-nu-ma e-li8 on 
K. 3,567 (Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 22). 

4 The “ practice-tablets” fall into two classes. In one class 
the tablets are wholly taken up with portions of the text of the 
Creation Series, which is written out upon them in sections of 
five verses separated by horizontal lines; cf. Nos. 82-g~-18, 

H 


The Assyrian 
and Neo- 
Babylonian 
forms of the 
text, 


CXIV INTRODUCTION, 





whether Assyrian or Neo-Babylonian, is that the text 
is never written in columns, but each line of the poem 
is written across the tablet from edge to edge! As 
a result, the tablets are long and narrow in shape, 
and are handled far more conveniently than broader 
tablets inscribed with two or more columns of writing 
on each side. 

The forms of the text of the poem, which were in 
use in the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian periods, are 
identical, and it is incorrect to speak of an Assyrian 
and a Babylonian “recension.” At the time of 
Ashur-bani-pal the text had already been definitely 
fixed, and, with the exception of one or two phrases, 
the words of each line remained unchanged from that 
time forward. It is true that on the Babylonian 
tablets the words are, as a rule, written more 
syllabically, but this is a general characteristic of 
Babylonian copies of historical and literary texts. 
Moreover, upon several of the more carefully written 
tablets, the metre is indicated by the division of the 





1,403 + 6,361 (No. 22) and 93,051 (No. 32). In the other class 
short extracts from the text are inscribed upon tablets containing 
other matter, all of which the pupil has written out for practice; 
cf. Nos. 36,726 (No. 5), 36,688 (No. 9), 82-9-18, 6,950 + 83-1-18, 
1,868 (No. 24), and 82~9-18, 5,448 + 83~-1-18, 2,116 (No. 27). The 
second class are the more carelessly written of the two. 

» The only apparent exceptions to this rule occur on some of the 
Neo-Babylonian tablets, in which two lines of the text are occasionally 
written on one line of the tablet when they are separated from each 
other by a division-mark. This is simply due to want of space, 
which necessitated the crowding of the text. 


FORMS OF TEXT. CXV 





halves of each verse,’ an arrangement which is not 
met with on any of the Assyrian tablets. But both 
the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian copies represent the 
same “recension” of the text, and, as has already 
been indicated? are probably the descendants of 
a common Babylonian original. The following table 
will serve to show the number of Assyrian and Neo- 
Babylonian copies of each of the Seven Tablets under 
which the forty-nine separate fragments of the text 
may be arranged :— 


TABLET. ASSYRIAN TEXT. Neo-Bas. Text. Neo-Bas. EXTRACTS. 


I Four copies (Nos. Four copies Two “ practice- 
1, 6, 7, 8, 11). (Nos. 2, 3, 4, _ tablets” 
10, 12). (Nos. 5, 9). 


Nos. 8 and 11 are proba- = Nos. 2 and 10 are 
bly parts of the same probably parts of 
tablet. “ the same tablet. 


II Four copies(Nos. Three copies 


16, 17, 18, 19). (Nos. 13, 14, 
Nos. 18 and rg are proba- sy 5). 
bly not parts of the same * 
tablet. 
III Four copies (Nos. Two copies Three “ prac- 


20, 23, 25, 28). (Nos. 21, 26). _ tice-tablets” 


Nos, 23 and 25 are proba- (Nos. 22,24, 
bly not parts of the same 
tablet; it is possible, 2 7). 


however, that No. 23 is 
part of a copy of Tabl. II, 
its text corresponding to 
Il, 13-24. 





1 See below, p. cxxii. 
? See above, pp. Ixxii ff. 


Table showing 
the number of 
Assyrian and 
Neo-Babyl- 
onian copies 
of the Seven. 
Tablets, 


CXVI INTRODUCTION. 





Table showing TABLET. ASSYRIAN TEXT. 


th ber of . 
Assyrianand &V Three copies 
Neo-Babyl- 
ce copies (Nos. 39, 31, 33, 
of the.Seven 
Tablets. 34). 
Nos, 31 and 34 are proba- 
bly parts of the same 
tablet. 


V Four, or five, 
copies (Nos. 35, 
36, 371 38, 39). 


Nos. 35 and 39 are possi- 
bly parts of the same 
tablet, 


VI 


VII Four, or five, 
-copies (Nos. 41, 
43, 45, 46, 47, 


48, 49). 

-Nos, 41 and 46 are proba- 
bly parts of the same 
tablet, and Nos. 47 and 
49 are probably parts of 
another tablet; it is 
possible that No. 45 is 
a part of the same tablet 
as Nos. 41 and 46. 


Nuo-Bas. Text, 


One copy 
(No. 29). 


One copy 
(No. 40). 


Two copies 
(Nos. 42, 44). 


Neo-Ban. EXTRActs. 

One “practice- 
tablet” 
(No. 32). 


Assyrian In the arrangement and interpretation of the 


Commentaries 


to the Seventh text .of the Seventh Tablet we receive considerable 
assistance from some fragments of Assyrian com- 
mentaries which have come down to us. These were 
compiled by the Assyrian scribes in order to explain 
that composition, and they are of the greatest value 


Tablet, 


for the study of the text. 


The contents of these 


documents, and their relation to the text of the Seventh 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES, CXVILI 





Tablet, are described in detail in Appendix I,’ but the 
following facts with regard to the size of the tablets 
inscribed with the commentaries, and to previous 
publications of portions of them, may here be con- 
veniently given. 

The most important class of commentary takes the commentary 
form of a bilingual list, and, as has been pointed out a 
elsewhere,” presupposes the existence of a Sumerian 
version of part of the text of the Seventh Tablet of 
the Creation Series. The text of the commentary is 
inscribed in a series of double columns; in the left 
half of each column it gives a list of the Sumerian 
words, or ideograms, and, in the right half, opposite 
each word is added its Assyrian equivalent. It is 
noteworthy that the list is generally arranged in the 
order in which the words occur in the Assyrian text 
of the Seventh Tablet. The columns of the com- 
mentary are divided into a number of compartments, 
or sections, by horizontal lines impressed upon the 
clay, and the words within each compartment 
refer either to separate couplets, or to separate lines, 
of the Seventh Tablet. Of this class of commentary 
we possess six fragments of two large tablets which 
were inscribed with five or six double columns of 
writing on each side; the two tablets are duplicates 
of one another, having been inscribed with the same 





1 See below, pp. 157 ff. 
? See above, p. Ixxix, n. 1, and below, p. 158. 


CXVIII INTRODUCTION, 





version of the commentary. The following is a 
description of the six separate fragments, the two 
large tablets, to which they belong, being headed 
respectively A and B :— 


Fragments of A 
the first class of 44+ 
Commentary, 


(1) S.11+5S. 980+S. 1,416. For the text, see 
Vol. II, pls. li-liii and lv; cf. also App. I, 

pp. 158 ff, 167 f. 
The fragment is the top left hand portion of the tablet; 
it measures gin. by 7in. The text of S.11 +S, 980 was 
published in V R., pl. 21, No. 4. The fragment S. 1,416, 


which I have joined to the other two, has not been previously 
published. 


(2) K.4,406. For the text, see Vol. II, pls. liv-lv ; 
cf. also App. I, pp. 163 ff. 

The fragment is-the top right hand portion of the tablet; 
it measures 4}in. by 4$in. The text has been previously 
published in II R., pl. 31, No, z. 

(3) 82-3-23, 151. For the text, see Vol. II, pl. liv ; 
cf. also App. I, p. 162. 


The fragment measures 1$in. by 22 in.; it has not been 
previously published. 


(1) R. 366+ 80-7-19, 288+293. For the text, 
see Vol. II, pls. lvi-lviii; cf. also App. I, 
pp. 160, 168 f. 


The fragment is from the left side of the tablet; it measures 
2tin. by stin. The fragment R. 366 was published in V R., 
pl. 21, No. 3; 80~7-19, 293, was joined to it by Bezold, 
Catalogue, p. 1,608. The third fragment, 80-7-19, 288, was 
identified by Zimmern and published in the Zevs. fiir Assyr., 
xii, p. 401 f. 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. CXIX 





(2) K. 2,053. For the text, see Vol. II, pls. lix-Ix ; 
cf. also App. I, pp. 161, 167 f. 


This fragment measures 2$in. by 2}in.; it has long been 
known to be a duplicate of S. 11 4 S. 980 (see Bezold, Casalogue, 
p- 396), but its text has not been previously published. 


(3) K. 8,299. For the text, see Vol. II, pl. Ix; 
cf. also App. I, p. 162 f. 


This fragment measures 3in. by r}in.; it has not been 
previously published. 


In addition to the above commentary in the form 
of a bilingual list, we possess single specimens of 
a second and a third class of explanatory text. The 
second class contains a running commentary to 
passages selected from other Tablets of the Creation 
Series in addition to the Seventh, and is represented 
by the tablet S.747.!_ The third class, represented by 
the obverse of the tablet K. 2,107 + K. 6,086,? gives 
explanations of a number of titles of Marduk, several 
of which occur in the recovered portions of the text of 
the Seventh Tablet. Each of these two commentaries 
furnishes information on various points with regard to 





} The tablet S. 747, which measures 4? in. by 34 in., is published 
in Cun, Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 32, and its connection with the text of 
the Creation Series is described in Appendix I, p. 170 f. The 
text was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, Weltschipfungsepos, 
p- 58f. 

» The tablet K. 2,107-+K. 6,086, which measures 4 in. by 5}in., 
is published in Vol. II, plate Ixif., and a transliteration and 
a translation of the text are given in Appendix I, pp. 171 ff. Col. ii of 
the single fragment K.2,107 was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, 
Weltschipfungsepos, p. 155. 


The second 
and third 
classes of 
Commentary. 


CXX INTRODUCTION. 





the interpretation of the Seventh Tablet, but, as may 
be supposed, they do not approach in interest the six 
fragments of the commentary of the first class. 

The The transliteration of the text of the Creation 


reconstruction i . , . Sg : 
ofthe text of Series, which is given in the following pages, has 


the Creation 

Series. been made up from the tablets, fragments, and 
extracts enumerated on pp. xcvii ff; while several 
passages in the Seventh Tablet have been con- 
jecturally restored from the Assyrian Commentaries 
just described. In the reconstruction of the text 
preference has usually been given to the readings 
found upon the Assyrian tablets, and the variant 
readings of all duplicates, both Assyrian and Neo- 
Babylonian, are given in the notes at the foot of the 
page. The lines upon each tablet of the Series have 

Numbering of been numbered, and, where the numbering of a line is 
conjectural, it is placed within parentheses. Great 
assistance in the numbering of the lines of detached 
fragments of the text has been afforded by the fact 
that upon many of the, Neo-Babylonian copies every 
tenth line is marked with a figure “10” in the left- 
hand margin; in but few instances can the position of 
a detached fragment be accurately ascertained by its 
shape. The lines upon the Second and Fifth Tablets 
have been conjecturally numbered up to one hundred 
and forty. Upon the Sixth Tablet the total number 
of lines was one hundred and thirty-six or one hundred 
and forty-six ; and, in view of the fact that the scribe 
of No. 92,629 has continued the text to the bottom of 


RECONSTRUCTION .OF TEXT. CXXI 





the reverse of the tablet, the larger number is the ‘The number of 
A is Z ines upon the 

more probable of the two. The following is a list of Tablets. 

the total number of lines inscribed upon each of the 


Seven Tablets of the Series :— 


Tablet I, 142 lines. 


» If, (140) ,, 
joe LEM, F98e | 55 
» IV, 146 ,, 
» - V, (140). 
» VI, 146 ,, 
go WIT) tans 55 


Although it is now possible to accurately estimate Gaps in me 
the number of lines contained by the Creation Series, ““* 
there are still considerable gaps in the text of several 
of the Tablets. The only Tablets in which the whole 
or portions of every line are preserved are the Third 
and Fourth of the Series. Gaps, where the text is 
completely wanting, occur in Tablet I, Il, 68-82, and 
in Tablet II, IL 59-(68).!. The greater part of the 
text of Tablet V is wanting, but by roughly estimating 
the position of the fragment K. 3,449@, which occurs 
about in the centre of the text, we obtain two 
gaps, between Il. 26 and (66) and between Il. (87) and 
(128). Of Tablet VI we possess only the opening 
and closing lines, the rest of the text, from 1. 22 to 
l. 137, being wanting. Finally, the gap in the text of 


? In the gap in Tablet II, ll. 86-103, may probably be inserted 
the new fragment K. 10,008 ; see Appendix II, pp. 187 ff. 


‘The metre of 
the poem, 


CXXIL INTRODUCTION. 





Tablet VI, between Il. 47 and 105, is partly filled up 
by the fragments KK. 12,830, 13,761, 8,519, 13,337; 
which together give portions of thirty-nine lines. 

Upon some of the Babylonian copies the metre is 
indicated in writing by the division of the halves of 
each verse, and, wherever this occurs upon any tablet 
or duplicate, the division has, as far as possible, 
been retained in the transliteration of the text. In 
accordance with the rules of Babylonian poetry, the 
text generally falls into couplets, the second verse 
frequently echoing or supplementing the first ; each of 
the two verses of a couplet is divided into halves, and 
each half-verse may be further subdivided by an 
accented syllable? This four-fold division of each 





1 On Nos. 45,528 + 46,614 (No. 3), 82-9-18, 6,879 (No. 12), 
38,396 (No. 14), 42,285 (No. 26), and 93,016 (No. 29); cf. also the 
‘‘practice-tablets,” Nos. 82~-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316 (No. 22) and 
82-9-18, 5,448 + 83-1-18, 2,116 (No. 27). 

? For the first description of the metre of the poem, see Budge, 
PS.B.A,, vol. vi, p. 7; and for later discussions of the metre of 
Babylonian poetry in general, see Zimmern’s papers in the Zez/s. 
Jér Assyr., viii, pp. 121 ff, x, pp. 1 ff, xi, pp. 86 ff, and xii, 
pp. 382 ff.; cf. also D. M. Mueller, Die Propheten tn threr urspriing- 
lichen Form, i, pp. 5 ff. It may be noted that in addition to 
the division of the text into couplets, the poem often falls 
naturally into stanzas of four lines each. That the metre was 
not very carefully studied by the Neo-Babylonian scribes is 
proved by the somewhat faulty division of the verses upon some 
of the tablets on which the metre is indicated, and also by the 
fact that the pupils of the scribes were allowed, and perhaps told, 
to write out portions of the poem in sections, not of four, but of 
five lines each (see above, p. cxiiif., n. 4). 


ARRANGEMENT OF TEXT. CXXIII 





verse will be. apparent from the following connected ee mete 
transliteration of the first half-dozen lines of the 

poem, in which the subdivisions of the verses are 

marked in accordance with the system of the 
Babylonian scribes as found upon the tablet 

Sp. ii, 265@' :— 


1f. enuma | ets || & nabt | Samamu 
Saplis | ammatum || Suma | Mk zakrat 

3h. Apsiima | ristit || zaru - sun 
mummu | Tiamat || wuallidat | gimrisun 

5f. mé - sunu || estends | thikitma 
gipara | lakissura || susa | Za Set 


It will be seen that the second verse of each couplet 
balances the first, and the caesura, or division, in the 
centre of each verse is well marked. The second half 
of verse 3 and the first half of verse 5, each of which 
contains only one word, may appear rather short for 
scansion, but the rhythm is retained by dwelling on 
the first part of the word and treating the suffix almost 
as an independent word. It is unnecessary to trans- 
literate more of the text of the poem in this manner, 
as the simple metre, or rather rhythm, can be 
detected without difficulty from the syllabic trans- 
literation which is given in the following pages. 





* Published by Zimmern, Z.A., x, p. 17 f. 


Transliterations 
and 


Translations, 


The Seven Tablets of He History of 


Creation. 


The Cirst Tablet. 


I. ¢-"u- ma e- lish 


2, sap - lis? 


3. Apsii- mat vis-tu-u 
4. mu-~um-mu Tt-amat 
5. mer” - Sm - nus 

6. gi-pa-ra la ki-ts-su-ra? 
7. @- Nu» ma ani” 9 

8 


9. tb-ba-nu-u-ma™ tine 


am - ma - tune 


. Su-ma la xuk-ku-ru 


la na-bu-u sa-ma-mu 
Su-mas la sak-vat 
Bat - ru « Su - un 


mu-al-li-da-at® gim-ri-Su-un 
i8-te-nis i-hi-ku-u-ma 
su-sa~ae la se-? 
ma- na - nee 


[8¢- ma]" 


la Su-pu-u 


Si-ma-tu la 


hi -vi(b|8 $[a-ma-mi]* 





1 No. 45,528 -+ 46,614, e-d7-2¥, 


For the principles on which the 


text has been made up, see the Introduction. 


2 No. 
* No. 
* No. 
® No. 
7 No. 
5 No. 
* No. 


45,528, etc., sap-lt-18, 


93,018, su-sa-’, 


3 No. 93,015, Su-mu. 


45,528, etc., omits ma; No. 93,015 reads Apsu(u). 
93,015, mu-um-ma-al-li-da-al (see the Glossary). 
93,018, me*-su-un 3 No. 45,528, etc., mu-u-Su-ni. 
93,015, gt-par-ra la hu-su-ru. 


9 No. 45,528, etc., ddnz. 


93,015, Su-um la su-uk-hu-ru. 


" Conjectural restoration; it is probable that not more than two 


signs are wanting on K. 5,419¢. 


I. 


The Seven Tablets of Be History of 


Creation. 


The Cirst Tabet. 


1. When in the height heaven was not named, 

2. And the earth beneath did not yet bear a name, 

3. And the primeval Apst, who begat them, 

4. And chaos, Tiamat, the mother of them both,— 

5. Their waters were mingled together, 

6. And no field was formed, no marsh was to be seen ; 

7. When of the gods none had been called into being, 

8. And none bore a name, and no destinies [were 
ordained)" ; 

9. Then were created the gods in the midst* of 
heaven], 





4 ma is omitted by Nos. 93,015 and 45,528, etc. 

18 The traces of the character upon No. 48,528, etc., suggest 77d. 

M The first sign of the word in No. 45,528, etc., is probably sa; 
the restoration of the second half of the line as &¢-77[8 | S[a-ma-mi], 
“in the midst of heaven,” is therefore possible. The existence 
of Sama&mu, or “heaven,” so early in the Creation-story is not 
inconsistent with Marduk’s subsequent acts of creation. After 
slaying Tiamat his first act was to use half of her body as 
a covering for the Sama@mu (cf. Tabl. 1V, 1. 138, $a-ma-ma 
u-sa-al-lil); it is therefore clear that the Jam@mu was vaguely 
conceived as already in existence. 


4 j CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





10. ™Lak-mu' ™ La-ha-mu us-ta-puu [ ... Jj? 
ii. a- ai iv -bu-u food | id he: cat Sy aS, 


12. An-sar*Ki-Sar 1b-ba-nu-u® e- ili} - su -[nu® 


13. ur- rt - ku? ame” us-st®[ . : J 
14. “A-nu® a-pil™-su-nu [ 2... JruM >... . J 
15. An-sar ™ A-num [ . . ] 
16, u ™ A - num™ ut - [ ] 


17. ™Nu-dim-mud sa abé”-su a - lid® - [ res 
18, pal- ka uz-nu ha-sis e@)-([ .. . .. 7} 
19. gu-us-Sur ma-a-di-is [ 

20. la ist S[a]-n{i]-ma® [ 2. 2... 
21. tn-nin-dumat{...]-u® [ . . 


& 


poru 








1 Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015 insert the copula w. 

2 The end of the line should possibly be restored as [mi?-fa-ris], 
“together,” or ‘at one time.” 

5 No. 93,015 reads a-di-7. It is preferable to take the word as 
the plur. of the subs. ad#, rather than as the prep. adz, which is not 
written with the long final vowel. 

4 Nos. 45,528, etc., and 35,134 insert the copula x. 

5 No. 45,528, etc., 2b-da-nu-ma. 

® If the reading e-/[7]-Su-[uz . . . ] be correct, the second 
half of the line possibly refers to the precedence in rank taken by 
AnSar and Kigar over Lahmu and Lahamu. This suggestion is 
based on the fact that it is AnSar, and not Lahmu, to whom Ea 
appeals on hearing of the revolt of Tiamat, and that it is AnSar 
who subsequently directs the movements of the gods. 

7 No. 48,528, etc., u-ur-ri-ku; No. 35,134, u-tr-ri-ku; No. 
93,015, u-ri-ke, 

® K.5,419c reads w[y- . . . J3 No. 45,528, etc., w-us-sz; in 
the translation I have taken the word as the Pret. Kal. from as#, 
but it is possible that the word is not complete. 


THE BIRTH OF THE GODS. 5 





10, Lahmu and Lahamu were called into being [.. ]? 
11. Ages*increased,[ . . - - J, 

12. Then Ansar and KiSar were created, and over 

them[ .... ] 

13. Long were the days, then there came forth*[. . ] 
14. Anu, theirson, [ 2... 2. 2 ee eee 
15. AnSarandAnu[ .......... | 
16. Andthe god Anu [ . . . ; = iy i] 
17. Nudimmud, whom his fathers [his] bedetrers# fe 
18. Abounding in all wisdom, [ . . . . . . ]¥ 


19. He was exceeding strongf . . . . . . . | 

20. Hehadnorival[ . . . . . 2... ] 

21. (Thus) were established and[were . . . . .” 
the great gods (?) ]. 





® Nos. 45,528, etc., 93,015, and 35,134 read ™ A-num. 

1 Nos. 45,528, etc., and 35,134 prove that the traces of this sign 
on K. 5,419¢ and No. 93,015 are those of pz/, not dz. 

u The traces upon No. 45,528, etc., suggest the reading 
{da-ni }-nu. 

@ No. 35,134, “A-nu-um. The traces which follow upon 
No. 45,528, etc., are not clear. 

8 The word may possibly be restored e-lid-[di-u], as suggested 
in the translation. 

4 No. 35,134, pal-ku. ha-sis is probably a participle. 

%* L. 18 evidently contains a description of Nudimmud (Ea), 
and, in view of the important part he plays in the First and Second 
Tablets, it is not improbable that Il. 19 and 20 also refer to him. 

6 This restoration is in accordance with the traces upon Nos, 
35,134 and 45,528, etc. 

W No. 35,134, [ea-nin-d]u-u[ . . . ). 

8 uw is evidently the final syllable of a second verb. The subject 
of both verbs (possibly some such phrase as #/@nz rabiii, “ the great 
gods,” cf. I. 29) was contained in the second half of the line. 


6 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





22. e-Su-u T[t-amat u Apsit!' . 2... 1 we we |] 


23. da-al-hu-nim-ma sete Ge 
24. tna su--a-ru? su-[ 2. 6 we ee ee | 
25. la na-Sst-ir Apsit x i, aie Sa? BAT 
26, u Ti-amat | su|-ka-am-mu-m[a}-a[t4]}* [ . . . j 
27. im-has-sa-am-m{ a t\p>-Sse-ta®-Su-un [ . 1. . 2 2 | 


28. la fa-bat al-kat-su-nu Su-nu{-)[t]27 ¢-ga- me®-la 
29.0 - nu - su Apsit aza-vi ilaint rva-bi-u-ten 


30. is-st-ma Mu-um-mu’ suk-kal-la-su  t-zak-kar-su 


31. Mu-uim-mu® — suk-kal-Li mu-tib-ba ka- bit-ti-ta 
32. al-kam-ma si-rt-i8" Ti-amat™ toni - [il - li - ik]® 
33. u-li-ku-~ma ku-ud-mi- 184 Ti-(amat]® sak- pu 
34. a-ma-tt tm-tal-li-ku as-Sum ilant [ma-ri-e-su-un)' 


35. Aplst pal- a- su i-pu-[S$am-ma 7-kab- bi] 





1 This restoration is not certain, but it is consistent with the 
traces upon No. 45,528, etc., and it gives good sense. L. 21 thus 
concludes the account of the creation of the gods, and in 1. 22 the 
narrative returns to Apsi and Tiamat. 

? The signs should possibly be divided as ¢-2a Su--a. 

* The traces of the character after S« suggest du. 

‘ This restoration is not quite certain. One sign is wanting at 
the beginning of the word; the traces of the two signs with which 
it concludes suggest the reading -ma-af, For the meaning of 
Sukammumu, cf. IIR, pl. 21, col. iv, 1. 18, Sa-Ram-mu-mu (not 
Su-gam-mu-mu as H-W-B., p. 640) Sa u-me (i.e. “ storms”). The 
word is peculiarly applicable to Tiamat. 

* The traces seem to me to be those of 7, but Aa/ is possible. 

* I think the signs are clearly se-éa, and not /; if the reading 
were i, the restoration [swk]-hal-/i-Su-un would be possible. 


APSU CONSULTS TIAMAT. 7 





22. 


23. 
24. 
25. 


26, 


27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 


31. 
32. 
33: 
34- 


35- 


But Tiamat and Apsi]! were (still) in con- 
fusion[ . . . . |, 

They were troubled and [ . . . .. . 

Indisorder(??) . . — .. . 

Apsi was not diminished in might [ 

And Tiamat roared*> . . . 

She smote, and their deeds [ 

Their way wasevil . . [ . J. . 

Then Apsi, the begetter of the great gods, 

Cried-unto Mummu, his minister, and said unto 
him : 

“ QO Mummy, thou minister that rejoicest my spirit, 

“Come, unto Tiamat let us [go]*!” 

So they went and before Tiamat they lay down, 

They consulted on a plan with regard to the gods 
[their sons].!® 

Apsii opened his mouth [and spake], 


ee ee ee ef 





7 The sign upon No. 36,726 may be a carelessly written #7; we 
can hardly read tit-r3t (cf. Briinnow, No. 1,512). The text is 
taken from a practice-tablet, and several of the characters upon it 
are roughly made. 

® The reading of ¢a a for ga me is also possible. 

* No. 36,726, AZu-um-mu. 

No. 36,726, suk-kal-lu ; 81-7-27, 80, sukkallu. 

N 81-7-27, 80, ris. 

- Y No. 36,726, Za-a-ma-t; 81-7-27, 80,**[ 2. . 2. J. 

*8 Conjectural restoration. The end of the line should perhaps 
be restored as 7 ni-[2/-Zik ni-i-ni]; in any case the line must have 
run over upon the edge of the tablet No. 36,726. 

M 81-7-27, 80, kud-mes. % No. 36,726, Za-a-ma-ti. 

%* The restoration of this and the following line is conjectural. 


8 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





36. a-na[T]z-am([at] el-l-tu-ma i-za[k-kar a-ma-tum)' 


37.tm-[ 2... | al-kat-su-n[u . . . . J 
38. ur-[r]a la Su-up-Su-ha-ak® mu-si [la sal-la-ak]® 


39. lu-us-hal-lik-ma al-kat-su-nu lu*-[ 1. 6 1 1. J 
40. ku-u-lu® lis-sa-kin-ma 28 mi-ts-lal [ni-i-ni]}? 
41. Té-amat an-ni-ta i-na [se - mi - sa}8 
42. ¢-2u-uz-ma® il-ta-si e-li-[ta® . . . . | 
43. [.. ] mar-si-ifug[..] e-[— 2... 2 ee. J 


44. -mut-ta it-ta-di ana [Apsi t-zak-kar|* 
45. [mi]-na-a  ni-t-nu sa ni - i[p- pu - us]® 
46. [all-kat-su-nu lu Sum-ru-sa-at-ma 7% ni-[is-lal ni-t-ni]* 


47. [¢]-pu-ul-ma ™ Mu-um-mu Apsit® 7¢-ma-al-[li- ku) 
48. [... ] 48 la ma-gi-ru" mi-lik Mu-[um-mu (?))® 





1 This line is conjecturally restored. 

® 81-97-27, 80, [su-up]-iu-ha-ku. 

® The end of the line obviously contained some parallel phrase 
to la $u-up-§u-ha-ak ; this has been restored from l. 50. 

4 On No. 45,528, etc., there are traces of the character which 
follows Zz; it does not seem to be ws. 

5 K. 3,938 and 81-7-27, 80, ku-lu. 

® gis omitted by 81-7-27, 80. 

7 For this restoration, see Il. 96, 100, and toz. 

® Cf, Tablet IV, 1. 87. 

® K. 3,938 reads [¢]-2/z-m[ a]. 

0 For this restoration, cf. Tablet IV, 1. 89, and Tablet III, 1. 12s. 

UNo. 36,688, #7. 


THE PLOT AGAINST THE GODS. 9 





36. And unto Tiamat, the glistening one, he addressed 
[the word]’: : 

B75 8s oe ey, 2 Sitheir'way.[ ses es 

38. “ By day I cannot rest, by night [I cannot lie 
down (in peace)].* 

39. “ But I will destroy their way, Iwill[ . . . |], 

40. “ Let there be lamentation, and let us lie down 
(again in peace).” 

41. When Tiamat [heard]* these words, 

42. She raged and cried aloudf . . . . |}. 

43. [She . . . ]grievously[ . . . . J, 

44. She uttered a curse, and unto [Apsii she spake|": 

45. ‘ What then shall we [do]*? 

46. “ Let their way be made difficult, and let us [lie 
down (again) in peace].\*" 

47. Mummu answered, and gave counsel unto Apsii, 

48.[ . . . ] and” hostile (to the gods) was the 
counsel Mu[mmu gave] **: 








® Conjecturally restored; another possible restoration is ¢-na 
[ilani marta], ie, “She uttered a curse against [the gods, 
her sons.” 


8 The line is conjecturally restored. 

™ For the restoration, cf. |. 40, and p. 8, note 7. 

No. 45,528, etc, 4p-[ . . . j. 

8 The traces upon 81-7-27, 80 suggest the copula w before /a; 
the first word of the line was probably another adj. descriptive of 
Mummu’s counsel. 

UV No. 46,803, ra. 

8 The restoration Mu-[um-mu] is not certain, as in I. 47 on 
81-7-27, 80 the name is written with the determinative. 


10 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





49. [a]-4k k?\-at — al-ka-s[ul-ujn]? est-[ 2 1. ] 


° 


50. [ur-r]is le S$[ulp-su-Ra-at mu- Sif lu sal - la- [at] 
51. [as -me)>-sum-ma Apsii im-met-ru pa-nu-us-[S\u 


52. [Sa Lim]3-ni-e-ti ik-pu-du a-na ilani® m{a)>-ri-e-su 


53... . ]) @-4-dr k-[.. ws J 
54. [...-w]st-[... ] bir-ka-a-su [2]-na-sa-ku8 Sa-a-su 


55. [ek lim-ni-e-ti]® tk-pu-du bu-{ulk-ri-su-un 


56.[ 2. 2 1. ww Jere - Su - md us - tan - nu - ni 
BFL ety pot te Ate, oo 8 nag aan GE a ig Selec Cage A Sede 
58. ku-l[u . . 1. . . Sa-ku-um)j?-mi-is us - bu 
BOs aT Sh for UE een Atle des es eee eae, eS a BS ee 





1 This passage is very broken, but the sign is possibly ’; it is 
probably not ma, as Jensen suggests. In the following line the 
reading of §(u]p-Su-fa-at upon $1-7-27, 80 is certain; and the 
precatives are to be taken as in the 2 m.s., not the 3 f.s. The 
parallelism of this passage with 1. 38, moreover, proves that mz-Sis 
is to be rendered “by night,” not “like the night”; and the 
expression cannot therefore be cited as proving that it was the 
creation of light which caused the revolt of Apst. For a further 
discussion of this point and of the suggested reading of im ma 
as-ru-nim-ma in |. 109, see the Introduction. 

2 The last sign of the line preserved by 8:-7-27, 80 is either 
eorun, Ife, it is to be identified with the e of No. 46,803, and the 
preceding word must be read as ad-ka-s[u]; to read al-ka-fa] is 
consistent with the traces upon the tablet, but is hardly probable. 


MUMMU’S COUNSEL. II 





49. “Come, their way is strong, but thou shalt 
destroy [it]; 

50. “Then by day shalt thou have rest, by night 
shalt thou lie down (in peace).” 

51. Apsi [hearkened unto]* him and his countenance 
grew bright, 

52. [Since] he (ie. Mummu) planned evil against the 
gods his sons. 

53-[ .- . . . ]hewasafraidf . . . . ], 

54. His knees [became weak(?)], they gave way® 

beneath him, 

55. [Because of the evil]* which their first-born had 
planned. 

56.[ . . . . Jtheir[ . . . they altered(?). 


Sit) aoe St Bhs. OR ne en they [eee oes 
58. Lamentation[ . . . . ] they sat in [sorrow] ° 


BOs iL cet. ay tcc ak nase ie wre eee ae 











% Conjectural restoration. 4 No. 46,803, mz. 

® The traces on No. 46,803 suggest the reading [dani]. 

5 This seems to be the reading of No. 46,803. 

7 No. 46,803, Obv,, |. 8, contains ll. 53 and 54 of the text, and 
the division-mark is not preserved; the sign [«] may therefore 
belong to the second half of ]. 53. 

§ 81-7-27,.80 reads u(?)-na-as-Sa[k . . . J. In K. 2,056, 

‘col. id (last three lines), a verb ma-Sa-ku forms a group with nadé 
and makitu; cf. also H-W-B., p. 486, col. a. 

° Cf. Tablet II, 1. 6. 

% L. 59 formed the first half of 1. 11 of the Obverse of 
No. 46,803, but mone of it has been preserved. The scribe of 


Nos. 46,803 and 93,015 has written several couplets of the text in 
single lines on his tablet. 


12 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





60. [e-l]i-e ™“H-a ha-sis mi-tim [Bla-[s]u! é-se-’-a me-ki-su-un® 


61[ . Ste RE 8 Gag hdd te es 
62. [ - . Re ku su(?)-tu-rut ta-a-sSu el-lum 
63.[ . . . . flees Sa kit-tu kit-[ . . . . jt 
64.[ . Se igs ME ar FEB eke A ae fe NE TS 
65.[ . ]fu-tal-lat{ . 6 6 6) kueu-ru 
66.[ . J 67,-[ . . . . = najym® 
[Lines 68-82 are wanting. ] 
83. . - -4Je 84.[ . . . - -alm-ra 
85. [ . ee fhe, ee Sa Se Eek ae ll ee, ee 
863.[P (oie bee ee 8 eb BF gtl'- mil- 
87.[ .- ome of US eS a ia ce at Re ae Oe JS 
83. — . » jga-am-ma®  i-dal-lah® ™ Ti-amat 
89. f . eee ee J) te du ul- [k]2 
90. f . ] da-a-vi- sam 
CC) om ae } li-s mut- tum 





1 The reading [4]a-[5]u is not quite certain; there are traces of 
only two signs. 

2? The word mekw occurs oe in Tablet II, l. 81 (me-hu-us 
Ti-a-ma-tt), and Tablet IV, 1. 66 (sa ™ Kin-gu 
me-ki-§u), and from the context of these passages it is clear that 
the word describes an act or state capable of inspiring terror. 
ILR, pl. 36, No. 3, Obv., 1. 49 f., explains the group [Kk ]a-SAL as 
me-ku-u Sa KA (ie. pa or Sinnu), and a following group as “ ditto” 
(ie. me-ku-u) $a am@li. If we may connect this me-ku-w with 
the meku in the passages quoted above, we may perhaps assign to 
it some such meaning as “‘ muttering, growling, snarling.” It is 
probable that Apst, Mummu, and Kingu, as well as Tiamat, were 
conceived as monsters and not endowed with human forms. 


EA LEARNS THE PLOT. 13 





60. Then Ea, who knoweth all that [is],1 went up and 
he beheld their muttering? 


62.[ . . . . |... . his pure incantation 
64. [ fg OO AE Ye Teena ahs Re Sy Ae wep can file 
65. [ i ede eS a ce ee Pmisery: 
66. [ Sears | OF ae 8 < er ] S 


[Lines 68-82 are wanting.] 


896i [edits Sep de i BATE cae oat) ay] voto 





85.[ 2. ew ee ee ee) . 6] the god Anu, 
86.[ . 2. 2. 2. ee ee ee an aven|ger.’ 
Fal ph hs it ke AeA Gh, tne Saylor fob cee SS 8 at Ul” 
88. [ . . . . J and®he shall confound Tiamat.” 
BOE etd ce ae Gl Ge Bh SNE! Ge oats, cept 
9. [ 2... ee ee ee ee J for ever. 

Otel). ate a am a ae ace « J] the evil, 


3 No. 46,803, Obv., 1. 12, contained Il. 61 and 62 of the text. 

‘ Li, 62 ff. are so broken that the reading of the signs which are 
preserved is not certain. 

5 No. 46,803, Obv., |. 14, contained I. 64 and 65 of the text. 

* It is probable that No. 46,803, Obv., 1. 15, contained il. 66 and 
67 of the text. 

7 Conjectural restoration ; the reading of gd is not certain. 

° No. 46,803, Rev., l. 5, contained ll. 87 and 88 of the text. 

® Perhaps read a-ga-am-ma, “swamp”; but the a is not certain. 

© Tiamat is possibly the subject of the verb. 

1 Jt is possible that the verb in Tablet IV, II. 63 and 64, should 
be transliterated ¢-du/-/u-Su, and connected with the verb in the 
present passage and with ¢a-du-ui-i[z’] in 1. 99. 


14 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





o2.[ 2... 2. 2 we ew.) teresa iz-zak-kar 
93.-[ ... . 2...» J [ . . ]} bakit t-na-ru-ma 
O4.[ . - . . . J+Ai-ma ka- i+ if us- bu? 
95. [ 6 Re oe ee pu- luh- tum 
96.[ . 2... 1... ] al ni-sa-al-lal ni-i-ni 
97. eee ee we | Apesuu  har-ba-[..j* 


mmr 


98. «see ot ™ Mu-um-mu sa ik-ka-mu-u ina su-[ . . ]% 


99. [ - wee ] aH ta-  du- ul- Ur}? 





to. [ . 2. 1... J ot nt-tg-lal ni-t-[ni]§ 
rot. [ ee ee) [Beef in-mu-ra® e-na-tu-u-[.. 
102. [ eee ew ew ew ) 2 ni-tg-lal ni-c- [ni] 
103. [ soe ee ee] gimil-la-su-nu tir-vi-[.,]" 
ro4. [ ee eee J ana sa-ki-ku su-uk-[...J 
wo. ff . ee ee ee J? @fmla-tum tla el-[ he) 





1 The speech that follows is evidently addressed to Tiamat. 
The speaker refers to the evil fate which has overtaken Apsi and 
Mummu in their revolt against the gods (cf. Il. 97 and 98); he 
encourages Tiamat to take vengeance for them (]. 103), and, by 
continuing the struggle, to obtain with him the slothful peace 
which she desires (jl. roo ff.). From the fact that Tiamat sub- 
sequently promoted Kingu to lead her forces ‘“ because he had 
given her support ” (cf. 1, 127), and addressed him as her “ chosen 
spouse,” it may be inferred that the speaker of ll. 93 ff. was Kingu. 

2 82-9-18, 6,879, ft iL Se ‘f 

3 No. 46,803 also reads sa, preceded by traces of another sign. 

4 One sign is wanting at the end of the line, perhaps ma. 

5 No. 46,803, Rev., l. 14, contains ll. 97 and 98 of the text. It is 
possible that 1. 98 begins with the words w * Mu-um-mu, in which 
case Su (or ku) would form the last sign of line 97. Elsewhere on 
the tablet, however, the scribe has not omitted the division-signs 
when writing two lines of the text together; cf. No. 46,803, Obv., 
ll. g and ro. It is safer to assume that no part of 1. 98 has been 
preserved by No. 46,803. 


THE FATE OF APSU AND MUMMU. 15 





g92.[ ... |]... . he spake:? 

93. “[ . 4 re ie . ] he hath conquered and 
94. “[.. 4] he [weepeth] ahd sitteth in tribulation (?). 
95. “[ 2... i! cer RE ce. ee tf OF fear, 

Os EYE oe a. Mes a we shall not lie down (in peace). 
97. “[ . . . . . . 7] Apsii is laid waste (?),4 
98. “[ . . ..}and Mummu, who were taken captive, 


99. “f . . . . | . . thoudidst . . . ;’ 





too. “[ . . . . «J let us lie down (in peace). 
tor “[..... ]... they will smite(??)[... ]. 
to2. “[ . . . . « J] let us lie down (in peace). 
103. “[ . . . ] thou shalt take vengeance for them, 
104. “[ . ] unto the tempest shalt thou[ .. . |!” 


105. [And Tiamat hearkened unto}” the word ‘bE the 
bright god, (and said) : 





® 82-9-18, 6,879 gives a variant reading for the second half of 
the line: la e-dif ina ma-a-[ . . . 

* Cf. 1. 89, and p. 13, note rr. 

8 829-18, 6,879 gives a variant aia for the second half of 
the line: wi(-)éa-ra-mi{-)nal . 

° The first two signs of the word are not quite certain. 

© 82-9~18, 6,879, t-na-tu-u . 

™ The word should probably be restored as fir-r?. [2], or der-ri-[ma]. 

® The first half of the line may possibly be restored as [28-me-ma 
Ti-amat), as suggested in the translation; or [%2-du-ma Ti-amat 
a-na], cf. Tablet II, 1. (113). According to this interpretation the 
speech of the god (Kingu) ends with 1. 104, Tiamat replies in 
1. 106, and with |. 107 the narrative begins the description of 
Tiamat’s preparations for battle. It is possible that the speech 
does not end with 1. 104, but continues to J. 106; in that case 
1, 106 may be restored in some such way as ‘“‘[The leadership of 
the gods unto me] shalt thou entrust,” and for a-[m]a-tum in 
]. 105 we should perhaps read a- [D]e-tum. The former inter- 
pretation seems to me preferable, as it assigns a line to Tiamat in 
which she assents to Kingu’s proposals. 


16 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





wo6.[ . . . . . «| Me ta-ad-di-nuini-pu-us[..} 
wo7e-[ . ... 2 . . ] tani ktevrib [ . . . ] 
ws. ff 2... 2... lan lant ba-ni-[... i}? 


109. [¢m-ma-as-ru-nim-ma\ t-du-us Ti-amat ti-be-[u-ni}§ 


110. [ts-au kap:du la sa-ki-pu| mu - ga u [im - ma] 
iit. [nma-su-u tam-ha-rja na-szar-bu-bu la-[ab-bu] 
112. [wnken-na Sit-ku-nu]-ma t-ban-nu-u  su-l[a-a-ti] 
113. [Um - mu - Hu - bulr* pa-ti-ka-at ka-lla-ma] 
114. [us-vad-di kalk-ku la mah-ru it-fja-llad — sirmahke[*| 





115. [eak-tu- ma Ssiln-ni la pa-d{u-u]  at-ta-[’-2] 


116. [¢m-tu ki-ma] da-mu 2u-mur-[su-nu] us-ma-al-(li] 


117. [usumgallé”| na-ad-ru-tum pu-ul-ha-[a]-ti u-sal-[bis-ma] 


118. [me-lam-m]\e us-das-sa-a i-li-i$® [um - tas - sil] 


119. [a-mi]r-su-nu Sar~ba-ba [l}if - Blar - mi - im] 


120. [ze]-mur-su-nu lis-tah-}i-dam-ma lai-ni--u[i-rat-su-un] 





* We may perhaps restore the end of the line as 7 ni-pu-ué 
[Sa-as-ma]; cf. Tablet IV, 1. 86. 


* The word may possibly be restored as Ja-n7-[a/]. 
* Lines rog-142 have been restored from Tablet III, ll. 19-52. 
+ A title of Tiamat. 


° In the parallel passages the majority of the duplicates read és, 
not 2H, which precludes the translation “‘she made them even as 


TIAMAT PREPARES FOR BATTLE. 17 





14. 


115. 
116, 


117. 
118. 


119g. 
120. 


“{... ] shalt thou entrust! let us wage [war]!”* 
[ . . . . ]the gods in the midst of [ .. . ] 
| for the gods did she create.? 


[They banded themselves together and] at the 
side of Tiamat [they] advanced ; * 


. [They were furious, they devised mischief without 


resting] night and [day]. 

[They prepared for battle], fuming and raging ; 
[They joined their forces] and made war. 
{Ummu-Hubulr,* who formed all things, 

[Made in addition] weapons invincible, she 
spawned monster-serpents, 





[Sharp of] tooth, and merciless of fang ; 


[With poison instead of] blood she filled [their] 
bodies. 

Fierce [monster-vipers] she clothed with terror, 

[With splendour] she decked them, [she made 
them] of lofty stature.° 

[Whoever beheld] them, terror overcame him,‘ 

Their bodies reared up and none could withstand 
[their attack]. 





gods.” The same variety of reading occurs in a parallel expression 
in IVR, pl. 60* [67], B, Obv., 1. 31, and C, Obv., 1. 11, ¢a-na- 
da-a-tt Sarri e-li§ (so B; C, lis) u-mas-sil, “1 have made the 
honour of the king to be exalted.” 

® No. 45,528, etc., sar-ba-bi-is Ui-th-hlar-mi-im], “he was 
overcome by terror,” or possibly, ‘his terror overcame him” ; 
of the two I think it preferable to assign a passive meaning to 
li-th-har-mi-im and to take Sar-ba-b7-i% as an adverb. 


18 CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





121. [ws-2¢]z!  ba-as-mu® siv-rus u ™(La- ha-mm] 
122. [ugall|e” UR - BE”3 takrab - amelie] 
123. [u-m]e da-ab-ru-te® niin-améilu u ku - [sa - vik - ku] ® 
124. [na-S}t hak-ku la pa-du-u la a-di-ru [ta-ha- zi] 
125. [gab-sa] te-ri-tu-sa la mak-ra $t-[na-a-ma 
126. [a] p-pu-na-ma' is-ten es-rit® kima® su-a-ti ul s-tab-st 
127. t-na ilani™ bu-uk-rvi-sa™ su- ut is-ku-nu-[si pu-uf-r2] 
128. u-Sa-as-ki 8 Kin-gu ina bi-vi-su- nu Sa-a-s(u us-vab-bi-is] 


129. a-li-kut' mah-ri™ pa-an um-ma-ni mu--ir-ru-[ut puhri}* 
130. [na]-as® kakku ti-ts-bu-tu'? te-bu-[u] a-na-|an- tu} 








t No. 45,528, etc., [uS-a’z-m]a, or [us-27-2]z. 

? In the list of monsters created by Tiamat, both here and in the 
parallel passages, it is probable that the words which occur in the 
singular are used collectively. 

3 In ILR, pl. 6, col. i, 1. 26, [uR]-nE is explained as fal-du 
Se-gu-u, “raging hound”; the reading of the ideogram is not 
certain, 

4 No. 45,528, etc., inserts w. ® No. 45,528, etc., um. 

* Restored from Tablet II, I. 29; No. 45,528, etc., BE (or 
GUD, but not fw)[ ... . 

7 No. 93,015, [a]p-pu-na-a-la. 8 No. 93,015, e-ri-e-d2. 

® No. 45,528, etc., Az-ma. 

1 That is, eleven kinds of monsters; since the plural is used in 


TIAMAT’S BROOD OF MONSTERS. 19 





121. 


122. 


123. 


-124. 


125. 


126, 


[She set] up vipers,? and dragons, and the 
(monster) [Lahamu], 

{And hurricanes], and raging hounds,’ and 
scorpion-men, 

And mighty [tempests], and fish-men, and 
[rams]; 

[They bore] cruel weapons, without fear of [the 
fight]. 

Her commands [were mighty], [none] could 
resist them ; 

After this fashion, huge of stature, [she made] 
eleven (monsters).'° 


127, Among the gods who were her” sons, inasmuch 


128, 


129. 
130. 


as he had given [her support], 
She exalted Kingu; in their midst [she raised] 
him [to power]. 
To march before the forces, to lead [the host], 
To give the battle-signal, to advance to the attack, 





the case of many of the classes, it is clear that Tiamat created more 


than 


an 
2 
3 
u 
15 
16 
n 
18 
wy 


20 


one of each. 

No. 45,528, etc., [dani ]™. 

No. 93,015, bu-uk-ri-Su-nu, i.e. the sons of Apsii and Tiamat. 
Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015, ka. 

No. 93,015, -ku-fu; No. 45,528, etc, [... -kJa[... ]. 
No. 45,528, etc., [m]a-ah-ra; No. 93,015, mahri. 

Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015, pa-nz. 

No. 93,018, um-ma-nu mu-’-tr-ru-tu pu-ul f-ri}. 

K. 3,938, na-se-e; No. 45,528, etc., ma-Se. 

No. 45,528, etc., e-2s-bu-dum. 

81-7-27, 80 reads di-ku-u, ‘‘to summon to the attack.” 


20 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 





131. 
132. 


133. 


134. 


135. 
136, 


137. 


138, 


139. 


140. 


141. 


142. 


Su-ud tam~ha-ru' ra-ab sik - kaw tu- iu? 


ip-kid-ma_ ka-tus-Su* u-Se-$i-ba-as-Su ina [kar-r1] 
ad-di* ta-a-ka ina puhur’ ilani™® u - sar - bi - ka 
ma-li-kut™ ilani*’ gim-ra-at-su-nu ka tus-[Su us-mal-l] 


lu Sur-ba-ta-ma ha-t-ri e- du- u at- ta 
li-ty-tab-bu u zik-ru-ka elt kali-[su-nu .. “A-nun-na-ki |“ 


id-din-§u-ma" dupsimati” 7¢-rva-[tu-us|]® — u-Sat-mi-ih 
ha-ta\ kibit-ka la in-nin-na-a U[t-kun  si-it pt-i-ka] 
e-nin-na® ™Kin-gu® su -us-ku-u li-ku-u [A-nu-te} 
ina tlant [ma-r|i-e-su'® si - ma - [ta iS - ti- mu) 
ip-Sa pi-ku-nu ™Gibil® de - nt - th - ha 


n@id ina™ kit-mu-ru ma-ag-Sa-ru® lis’ - [rab ~ bi - ib] 





1 
2 
4 
5 
6 
8 


10 
u 


No. 45,528, etc., fa-am-ha-ru ; No. 93,015, fa-am-ha-a-ta. 

No. 93,015, rab sik-kat-tu-tu. * No. 45,528, etc., ka-tu-[u]s-su. 
K. 3,938, a-d?; No. 93,015 reads KU, i.e. addi. 

No. 45,528, etc., 2-[na] pu-hur. 

No. 93,015, 2ant. 7 No. 45,528, etc., hu-ut. 

K. 3,938, 2a[ nz]. * No. 45,528, etc., /u-u. 

No. 93,015, dz Su-ur-ba-ta-a ha-’-a-r7. 

Restored from Tablet III, 1. 104. The Anunnaki are possibly 


the subject of the sentence. 


B 


No. 45,528, etc., id-din-[S]um-ma ; No. 93,015, 1d-din-ma. 


KINGU LEADS THE REBEL HOST. 2I 





131. To direct the battle, to control the fight, 


132 


133. 


134. 


135 


. Unto him she entrusted ; in [costly raiment] she 


made him sit, (saying) : 

“ T have uttered thy spell, in the assembly of the 
gods I have raised thee to power. 

“The dominion over all the gods [have I 
entrusted unto him]. 


. “ Be thou exalted, thou my chosen spouse, 
136. 


“« May they magnify thy name over all [of them 
the Anunnaki].”" 


. She gave him the Tablets of Destiny, on [his] 


breast she laid them, (saying) : 


138. “ Thy command shall not be without avail, and 


{the word of thy mouth shall be established].” 





139. Now Kingu, (thus) exalted, having received [the 
power of Anu], 

140. [Decreed] the fate among the gods his sons, 
(saying) : 

141. “ Let the opening of your mouth [quench] the 
Fire-god ; 

142. “ Whoso is exalted in the battle, let him [display 
(his) might}!” 

% No. 93,085, ?-rat-Su. * No. 93,015, ka-afl 2 ws )s 


1s 


a2 


No. 45,528, etc., 2-na-an-[w]a; No. 93,015, im-na-nu. 
81-97-27, 80, ["Kr']-in-gu. 

The scribe of No. 93,015 has written ma for Su by mistake. 
No. 45,528, etc., a-na tlan’* maré*-su, “for the gods his sons.” 
Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015, pi-7-hu-nu. 

No, 93,015, “ BIL-GI; 81-7-27, 80 and No. 45,528, *GIS-BAR. 
ina is omitted by Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015. 

81-79-27, 80, 7[a]. 


She Second Tablet. 


u-kab-bilt}-ma’ Ti-a-ma-itum pi-ti-ik- Su 
[im-ni-e-ti ik]*-ta-sar a-na ilant ni-ip-ri-su 
[ana tu-ur gi-mil)®-li Apsi u-lam-mi-in  Ti-amat 
[ 2... -ulst ded ts-mi-da ana “H-a ip-ta-Sar® 


Bo NE 


5. [és-me-ma|® “EH-a a-ma-tum Ssu-a- tim 
6 [mar-si}-is us-ha-ri-ir-ma Ssa-ku-um-mi-is us bu 
7. [ame” =u) - ri - ku - ma Ug - fa - Su a- mu - hu 
8 


. [ur-fa-su as-ri|-is An-Sar a-bi-su Su-u us-tar-dé 
9. [l-Lk]-ma mak-rut a-bi a-l-di- su An-sar 


10. {mine-mu}-u Ti-amat ik-pu-du u-sa-an-na-a a-na sa-a-$u 
I 


mn 


» [wm-ma Tt\’-amat a-lit-ti-a-nt t-at-ir-ra-an-na-a-tt 


12. [pe]-ud-ru Sit*-ku-na-at-ma ag-gi-if la - ab - bat 
13. [és|-Ru-ru-Sim-ma iland gi- mi- ir- su- un 


14. [a-ds] sa at-tu-nu tab-na-a i-da-a-sa al- ka 





1 The beginning of 1. r has been restored from the catch-line on 
Tablet I, preserved by No. 45,528 + 46,614. 

* Conjectural restoration. 

® For this restoration cf, Tablet I, 1. 103. 

4 The sign is possibly ¢a. 

6 The rendering of this line is a little uncertain. The beginning 
may perhaps be restored as [pu-uf-ru-ws; in that case a passive 
meaning must be assigned to #-éa-Sar, and the line translated, 
“How she had collected her [forces] unto Ea was divulged.” 


Pe Pn 


OMAN 


10. 
It. 


12. 
13. 
14. 


The Second Tablet. 


Tiamat made weighty! her handiwork, 

[Evil]? she wrought against the gods her children. 

[To avenge]* Apst, Tiamat planned evil, 

But how she had collected her [forces, the god 

] unto Ea divulged.* 

Ea fhearkened to]® this thing, and 

He was [grievous]ly afflicted and he sat in sorrow. 

[The days] went by, and his anger was appeased, 

And to [the place of] Ansar his father he took 
[his way]. 

[He went] and standing before’ Ansar, the father 
who begat him, 

[All that] Tiamat had plotted he repeated unto him, 

[Saying, “TiJjamat our mother hath conceived 
a hatred for us, 

“ With all her force she rageth, full of wrath. 

“ All the gods have turned to her, 

“ [With] those, whom ye created, they go at her 
side. 





For i-ta-Sar we may also read 7-ta-hir, and for the object of 
ts-mi-da we may perhaps restore [arkab/u]§; the line may then be 
translated, “But when [ . . . . J] had yoked his [chariot], 
unto Ea he repaired.” It may be noted that not very much is 
missing from the beginning of the line. 

§ Lines 5-10 have been conjecturally restored. 

7 Or, possibly, “addressing AnSar.” 

® Lines 11-19 have been restored from Tablet ITI, ll. 73-81. 

® No. 38,396, S¢-ct. 10 No. 38,396, ad-hu. 


a 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





15. 


16. 


17; 
18, 
19. 
20. 


21. 
22 


23 


24 


25. 
26. 


[¢nc]-ma-as-ru-nim-ma t-du-us Tt-amat te-bu-u-ni' 
[tz]-2u kap-du la sa-ki-pu mu-sa u tm - ma? 
[na]-su-u tam-ha-ra* na-zar-bu-bu la-ab-bu 
unken-na sit-ku-nu-ma t>-ban-nu-u — su-la-a-tum® 


[U]m -ma- Hu-bu-ur' pa-ti-ik-ka-at® ka-la-mu 
us-rad'-di kak-ku la mah-ru™ it-ta-lad — sir-ma-hu™ 


sak-tu-ma Sin-nu la pa-du-u at - ta - >. um 


im-tu ki-ma da-am™ 2u-mur-su-nu us - ma - al - lu™ 
usumgalle” na-ad-ru-ti pu-ul-fa-a-ti® u ~ gal - bis’ - ma 
me-lam-mu uS-das-Sa-a i-li-is um-tas-$si-il' 


a-mi-tr-su-nu  Sar-ba-bi-is li - if - har - mi - im" 
eu-mur-Ssu-nu lis-tah-[i-da-aim ma la i-nt--e t-rat®-su-un 


ile 


us-2t-tz-ma ba-as-mu sirrussu® u ™ La-ha-mu 





No. 38,396, 4e-b7-u-nu. ® No. 92,632 + 93,048, mz. 
No. 38,396, 72. + No. 92,632, etc., dz. 
No. 38,396, @. ® No, 92,632, etc., f. 


No. 38,396, [U ]m-mu-Hu-bur. 

Nos. 38,396 and 92,632, etc., pa-/-ka-at. 

No. 38,396, ra-ad. © No. 38,396, ma-har. 
No. 92,632, etc., siv-mak; No. 38,396, sirmahe”. 

No. 38,396, a¢-/a-’-u-um ; No. 92,632, etc., af-4a-’-am. 
No. 38,396, da-mu; No. 92,632, etc., da-mit. 


EA CARRIES THE TIDINGS TO ANSAR. 25 








15. 


16, 
17. 
18, 
19. 


20. 


21, 
22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 
26. 


27. 


“They are banded together and at the side of 
Tiamat they advance ; 

“ They are furious, they devise mischief without 
resting night and day. 

“ They prepare for battle, fuming and raging ; 

“ They have joined their forces and are making war. 

“ Ummu-Hubur, who formed all things, 

“ Hath made in addition weapons invincible, she 
hath spawned monster-serpents, 

“ Sharp of tooth, and merciless of fang. 

“With poison instead of blood she hath filled 
their bodies. 

“ Fierce monster-vipers she hath clothed with 
terror, 

“With splendour she hath decked them, she hath 
made them of lofty stature.’ 

“« Whoever beholdeth them is overcome by terror," 

“Their bodies rear up and none can withstand 
their attack, 

“She hath set up vipers, and dragons, and the 
(monster) Lahamu, 





4 
wb 
16 


No. 


Nos. 38,396 and 92,632, etc., da. 

No. 38,396, [GA]t-BuR na-ad-ru-lum pu-ul-ha-a-tum. 

So No. 38,396; No. 92,632, etc., reads um-fa-as $2-22, and 
45,528 + 46,614, um-lak-J-ir (= umiasSil), For the phrase 


2-l-t8 um-tas-s-1l, see above, p. 16 f., note 5. 


wt 


See above, p. 17. 18 Nos. 38,396 and 92,632, etc., dam. 


No, 38,396, t-n7-’-1m; No. 92,632, t-m-u, 


20 


No, 92,632, ra-al. * No. 92,632, serrusst™, 


26 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





28. 


29. 
30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 
36. 


37- 


3 


3 


40. 


Al. 


id 


ro) 


u- gal ~la UR - BE”? u akrab? - amélu 


u-me da-ab-ru-ti nin-améilu u ku-sa-vik- ku 


na-st kak-ku la pa-du-u la a-di-ru ta-ha-szi 


gab-sa te-ri-tu-sa la ma-har-ra si-na-ma 


ap-pu-na-ma is-ten es-vit hi-ma Su-a-ti us-tab-st 
tna ilani® bu-uk-vi-sa Swut iS-ku-nu-st pu-uh-ru 
u-sa-as-ka “ Kin-gu ina bi-vi-su-nu sa-a-su us-vab-bi-ts8 


a-li-ku-ut mah-ru pa-ni um-ma-nu mu-ir-vu-tum* pu-uh-rus 


na-se-e kak-ku  tt-is-bu-tum te-bu-u —a-na-an-tuni® 


[sa-u]d? ta-am-ha-vra va-ab Ssik- kat-u- tum 


[~p-kid-m]a ka-tu-us-Su u-Se-St-ba-as-$t i-na® — kar-vi 
[ad-di ta-a\-ka i-na pu-hur ilani®  u-Sar-bi-ka 
[ma-li-kut| ilani [gim-vat-su-nu ka-tuk-ka| us-mal-ld 


[4 -u sur-ba-ta-ma fa-ti-ri e-du-u ajt-ta 





a 
2 
3 
5 


For this ideogram see above, p. 18, note 3. 
No. 38,396 prefixes the determinative , 

K. 4,832, [us]-rad-bi. 1K. 4,832, fu. 
K. 4,832, pusre. ® K. 4,832, “2. 


EA CARRIES THE TIDINGS TO ANSAR. 27 





28. 


20. 
30. 


3. 
32. 


33: 


34. 


35- 
36. 


37: 
38. 


39. 


40. 


4t. 


“ And hurricanes and raging hounds, and scorpion- 
men, 

“ And mighty tempests, and fish-men and rams ; 

“ They bear cruel weapons, without fear of the 
fight. 

“ Her commands are mighty, none can resist them ; 

“ After this fashion, huge of stature, hath she 
made eleven (monsters). 

“ Among the gods who are her sons, inasmuch as 
he hath given her support, 

“She hath exalted Kingu; in their midst she 
hath raised him to power. 

“To march before the forces, to lead the host, 

“To give the battle-signal, to advance to the 
attack, 

“{To direct]’ the battle, to control the fight, 
“Unto him [hath she entrusted]; in costly 
raiment she hath made him sit, (saying) : 

“ «TT have uttered] thy [spell], in the assembly of 
the gods | have raised thee to power, 

“(The dominion over all] the gods have I 
entrusted [unto thee]. 


cee 


[Be thou exalted], thou [my chosen spouse], 





7 Lines 37-48 have been restored from Tablet III, ll. 41-52 and 
99-110. 
® KK. 4,832, [ . 6 - Jetu-u-dt °K, 4,832, da. 


28 CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





iS 


42. [lt-tr-tab-bu-u zik-ru-ka elt satu eres }ub-bi? 
43. [(ta-din-Sum-ma  dupsimati® t-va-tu-us] u-[Sal-m]e-th 
44. [ka-ta kibit-ka la in-nin-na-a\ li-kun s{i-1}t pi t-ka 
45. [¢u-na-nu = Kin-gu  Su-us-kuj-u fi-ku-u*™ A-nu-tt 
46. [an tlant maré"-3a]) Si-ma-ta is -th-mu 
47. (pp - su pi- ku ~ nul) ™Gibil l- ni- ik - ha 


48. [na’id tna kit-mu-ri] ma-ag-sa-va lis-vab-bi-ib 


49. [#s'- me-ma “Ansar sa Ti-a-ma\*-tu rabis dal-hat 


BO fw sw a je oe oe Sa] pare se it - tas - ka 
su. ] @ na-~fat* ka-ras- su 
52[.. ]-su  Sa-gi-ma-su  us-tah- ha-ak 
ie Bae J- 4 lu - ku - un - tu 
54. [ coe eee ww Je persue i-Mas- St at-ta 





55. [ Mu - um - mu ul? Apsit ta - na ~ rab 





1 In the parallel passage, Tablet III, 1. 104, No. 93,017 reads at 
the end of the line “ A-nun-na-ki. This is in favour of Jensen’s 
suggestion that the present passage should be restored as “" #-nw]- 
uk-ki; cf. the list of gods, K. 2,100 (published by Bezold, P.S.B.A., 
vol. xi, March, 1889), col. iv, |. 8, which explains “2-nu-uk-h? as 
4 -nun-na-[ hi]. 

? Conjectural restoration. 

3 For the first half of the line Delitzsch suggests the restoration 
siinku imhasma, “ he smote his loins.” 


ANSAR’S LAMENTATION. 29 





42. “‘{May they magnify thy name over all of 
thei <2 5846 Sb EEE 

43. ‘“ {She hath given him the Tablets of Destiny, on 
his breast she] laid them, (saying): 

44. “ ‘[Thy command shall not be without avail], and 
the [word] of thy mouth shall be established.’ 

45. ‘““[Now Kingu, (thus) exalted], having received 

a the power of Anu, 

46. “ Decreed the fate [for the gods, her sons}, 
(saying) : 

47. “ ‘Let [the opening of your mouth] quench the 
Fire-god ; 

48. “ ‘[Whoso is exalted in the battle], let him display 
(his) might !’” 

49. [When AnSar heard how Tiamat]? was mightily 
in revolt, 


sof... . . . . . J,® he bit his lips, 
51.[ . . . . . ], his mind was not at peace, 
52. His[ . . . ], he made a bitter lamentation : 
5308 |] battle, 


Bae Lg. oe ee. oe thou 
55. “[Mummu and]? Apsi thou hast smitten,° 





4 The reading faz is certain. 

5 fa-na-ra | take as the Pret., not the Pres. From 1l. 93 ff. of the 
First Tablet it may be inferred that Apsii was conquered before 
Tiamat made her preparations for battle. It is clear, therefore, that 
in the present passage /a-na-ra is to be taken as the Pret. and not 
as the Pres.; and, as AnSar is addressing Ea, it may be concluded 
that Ea was the conqueror of Apsi. In accordance with this con- 
clusion is the fact that it was the god Ea who first discovered the 
conspiracy of Apsi and Tiamat (see Tablet I, 1. 60). 


30 CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





56. [Zi-amat u-sa-as-ki ™Kin|-gu a-li' ma-har-sa 


BAD et ae AS fe: ie SS oh ]-2@ ta - Sim - ta 
58 [ . . . . . . . | dant] “N[u] - dilm - mud}? 


[A gap of about ten lines occurs here.] 


(OVP Ces ak b Sod eee le ob ee Gey ee we 
(JO) 49302 oy od BO Ba a Seo a ec ot ea met 
(ZU) 3, oe ee ee ise OE cee as hs a te Jest 
(72) [“An-Sar ana] ma-ri-su  [a-ma-tu 1 |-zak-kar 
(73)[ . . . . @e-nu-u ka-su-[su] kar-ra-di 
(74) [Sa Sa-ka-a  e-mu}-ka-a-su las ma-har —te-bu-Su 


(75) [al-kam]-ma mut-tis Ti-amat i-ziz-za at-ta 
(76)[ . . . . Jt hkab-ta-tas lib-bu-us' lip-pu-us 


(77) [sum-ma-ma] la se-ma-ta a- mat - ka 
(78) [@-ma-tlu-nt at-me-Sim-ma st-¢ lip-pa-as-ha? 


(79) [és - me - ec] - ma sik - ri abi - Su An - Sar 
(80) 





us-te-Sir har|-ra-an-Sa-ma u-vu-uh-$a us tar-di 


(81) [et-Ze-ma]® ™ A-num me-ku-us" Ti-a-ma-tt i-se-’-am-ma 





> T think there is no doubt @- should be taken as the adv. 
“where?” The beginning of the line is conjecturally restored. 

* The reading of Nudimmud at the end of the line is certain. 
Before the determinative the sign AN is visible. 

* The numbers of the lines, when conjectural, are enclosed 
within parentheses. 


ANSAR SENDS ANU TO TIAMAT. 31 





56. “ [But Tiamat hath exalted Kin]gu, and where’ is 
one who can oppose her?” 

STi wig ahs, . . . | deliberation 

58 [.... the. . ofl dhe gods, N[u|di{mmud]? 


[A gap of about ten lines occurs here. } 


(69)* [ 

(FOV on OR Af Ste ota dy Ba As 

GOs face [ 

(72) [Ansar unto] his son ee [the ora 

(73) “C. |]... my mighty hero, 

(74) “ [Whose] stretgtl [is great] and whose onslaught 
cannot be withstood, 

(75) “ [Go] and stand before Tiamat, 

(76) “[That] her spirit [may be appeased],* that her 
heart may be merciful. 

(77) “ [But if] she will not hearken unto thy word, 

(78) “ Our [word] shalt thou speak unto her, that she 
may be pacified.” § 

(79) [He heard the] word of his father AnSar 

(80) And [he directed] his path to her, towards her he 
took the way. 

(81) Anu [drew nigh],° he beheld the muttering’ of 
Tiamat, 


7 





4 The first part of the line probably contained some such phrase 
as lip-pa-aS-Sur, as suggested in the translation. 

* The sense of the couplet seems to be that, should Tiamat not 
listen to Anu, she might perhaps respect the authority of AnSar. 

8 For this restoration, cf. Tablet IV, 1. 65. 
7 See above, p. 12, note 2. 


32 CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





(82) [wl i--’-a ma-har-Sa])' i-tu-va ar- kis 


I ao ogy es Oo ee aes C] SS Ansar 
(Bay [oe ee ee SE) eR Rar oe 
bare e\li - ta 


[A gap of about twenty lines occurs here. ] 


(104) [ Cen ogocs oe al] 
(105) [ mu-tir] gi-mil-lu a-[.. } 
(106) [ wey Wi Rode Beh Ge] ars [aa]?® 
(107) [ coe ee ee  ] ae Sar pi-ris- tt -s{u) 
(108) [ ] @-ta-mit-su 
(109) [ . | abi-ka 
(110) at-ta-ma ma-ri mu-nap-pi-su > lib - bi - su 


(t)[ . . . 1 1. Btlt-ru-bi-is® t-hi-e- mat 
[ 2... . . ] ¢-ma-ru-uk~-ka® ni-t- hud 


(113) 7-du-ma be-lum a-na a-ma-tum a- bi-su 
(114) tt-hi-e-ma it-ta-zi-iz ma-ha-ri-is An-Ssar 
(118) é-mur-Su-ma An-Sar lib-ba-iu tu-ub-ba-a-ti im-la® 





1 This line has been restored from Tablet ILI, 1. 53. 


2 The last word of the line may possibly be restored as a-[na-hu], 
in which case the line would form part of a speech of Marduk to 
An§ar. 

8 This restoration is not certain. 4K. 4,832, me. 


5 Literally, ‘‘ who maketh broad his heart”; cf. I. 71, 1-bu-us 
Uip-pu-us, “that her heart may be merciful.” The phrase, as 
applied to Marduk, implies that he shows mercy on the gods by 


ANSAR APPEALS TO MARDUK. 33 





(82) [But he could not withstand her], and he turned 


back. 
(83) Doe 2 eo ke ae ye ew Anbar 
(84)[ . . . . . . . . J] he spake unto him: 
(85) Te eee bee le eo pone 


[A gap of about twenty lines occurs here.] 


(104) [ ] 


(1o5)[ . . . . . . Jamavenger[ . . . }? 
(106) [ puss Bee AN oe ] vafliant]* 
(107) [ . . . . . Jin the place of his decision 
(108) [ . . . . .). . Jhe spake unto him : 
(109) EC og G Ske ae Sw, 9") thy father 
(110) “ Thou art my son, who maketh merciful’ his 
heart. 
(111) “[ . . . ]to the battle shalt thou draw nigh, 
(112) “[. . . ]he that shall behold thee shall have 
peace.” 


(113) And the lord rejoiced at the word of his father, 
(114) And he drew nigh and stood before AnSar. 
(115) AnSar beheld him and his heart was filled with 


joy: 





consenting to become their avenger. This seems to me preferable 
to my previous translation, ‘(who maketh valiant his heart” 
(cf. Cun. Texts, part xiii, pl. 4, note). 

© K, 4,832, des. 7 No. 40,559, f7-h7-ma. 

"K. 4,832,[ . . . ]-0k 

® No. 40,559, mi-i-ht; K. 4,832, u7-ip-ha. 

10 K. 4,832, and Nos. 40,559 and 92,632, etc., rt. 

Nos. 40,559 and 92,632, etc., /-ub-ba-ta im-li. 


34 CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





(116) [¢]s- 52-22 sap)-ti-su  a-di-ra-su — ut-te-ts-si? 
(117) [@-b¢]> la Ssuk-tu-mat pi-tit Sa-ap-tu-uk® 
(118) lu-ul-lik-ma lu-sa-am-sa-a ma-la lib-bi-ka 
(119) [An-sar]® la = Suk-tu-mat = pi-tt+ — Sa-ap-tu-uk® 
(120) [lu-ul-L]k-ma lu-sa-am-sa-a ma-la lib-bi-ka? 
(121) a@-u  ztk-1t ta-ha-za-su u-Se- gi- had 
(122) [.. ] Z2-amat $a si-in-ni-Sa-tum! ta-ar-ka™ i-na kak-ku™ 


(123)[. . . ]P-xnu-u fi-di iu su~-l-i1% 
(124) Rt-Sa-ad = Ti-amat ur-ru-hi-is  ta-kab-ba-as_ at-ta 


(125)[ . 2. 2. YP emu-u fi-di ou su-h-i18 


(126) [At-sa-ad] Ti-amat ur-ru-fit-is ta-kab-ba-as at-ta 





1 Nos. 40,559 and 92,632, etc., Ja-ap. 

2 No. 40,559, sw. 

* Conjectural restoration ; the traces of the second sign in the 
line on No. 38,396 may be those of d/ or sar. 

* No. 40,559, pr-/a. 

5 Nos. 40,559 and 92,632, Sap-/u-uk; K. 4,832, Sap-fuk. 

® Conjectural restoration; for a somewhat similar change of one 
word when a couplet is repeated, see Tablet IV, ll. 3-6. 

7 It is clear that at this point Marduk ceases to speak, and that 
AnSar’s answer begins with the following line. 

5 Literally, ‘Of what man has his battle caused thee to go 


MARDUK CONSENTS TO FIGHT TIAMAT. 35 





(116) He kissed him on the lips and his fear departed 
from him. 

(117) “[O my father],* let not the word of thy lips 
be overcome, : 

(118) “ Let me go, that I may accomplish all that is 
in thy heart. 

(119) “[O Ansar],° let not the word of thy lips be 
overcome, 

(120) “.[Let me] go, that I may accomplish all that is 
in thy heart.”” 

(121) “ What man is it, who hath brought thee forth 
to battle ? § 


(122) “[ . . . } Tiamat, who is a woman, is armed 
and attacketh thee.” 
(r23) 8 ee ] . . rejoice and be glad ; ” 


(124) “ The nese of Tiamat shalt thou swiftly trample 
under foot. 

(125) “[ . . ] . « rejoice and be glad; ” 

(126) “ [The neck] of Tiamat shalt thou swiftly 
trample under foot. 





forth.” No. 40,559 reads w-Se-st-ma; according to this reading it 
is possible to take g7k-r7 as the subject, and /a-ha-za-iu as the 
object, of the verb. 

® No. 40,559, Sa st-tn-ni-sa-at. 

1 7a-ar-ka I take as the Pres. Kal. from Gru, followed by the 
direct accusative. 

_ "K. 4,832, da Rake. 

% It is possible that the first word of the line should be restored 
[2#-28-ba]-nu-u, in which case Aé-di and su-l-i2 must be taken as 
substantives, “let there be joy and gladness.” 

OK. 4,832, 2. 


36 CREATION SERIES, TABLET II. 





(127) [ma] - rt mu - At-u gim - rt) ug ~ NU 
(128) [Z?-ama]t Su-up-si-ik i-na te-e-hka® el-lu 
(129) [ur - ha - ka} ur - ru ~ he - ig Su - tar -di- ma 
(130) [ . . . . ] Ja ut-tak-ka* Su-te-e-vi® ar-ka-nis 


(131) [th-d]u-m[a ble-lum a-na® a-mat a- bi- su 
(132) [e]--2s  Uib-ba-Su-ma  a-na—a-bi-su™ —t-zak-kar 
(133) be - lum wlani® = st - mat® lant © rabiuti* 
(134) sum-ma-ma ana-ku mu-tir gi-mil-li-ku-un 
(135) a-kam-me Ti-amat-ma" u-bal-lat ka-a-su-un 
(136) suk-na-ma  pu-uk-ra — Su-te-ra—t-ba-a—Sim-ti® 


(137) tra Up-Su-ukkin-na-ki mit-ha-ris ha-dis tis-ba-ma'8 
(138) ip-su pi-ta ki-ma ha-tu-nu-ma™ si-ma ta” lu-si-im 


(139) fa ut-tak-kar = mim™-mu-u — a-ban-nu-u —a-na-ku 
(140) ai i-tur ai t-in-nin-na-a™— se-kar  Sa-ap ®-ti-ia 





‘K. 4,832, (gi-m)ir. 2 No. 38,396, ta de-e- he. 

3 Ky 4,832, ed-d2. 

4 ut-tak-ka is possibly Pres. Iftaal from nak, or Pres. Piel from 
eféku, with (or without) the 2 m. s. pron. suffix; if the former, the 
beginning of the line may perhaps be restored as [da-m-ka], as 
suggested in the translation. 

5 K. 4,832,[ . . . -t]r; No. 92,632, {a- . . . J. 

® K. 4,832 seems to have read [7]a. 

7K. 4,832, abi-su. 5 No. 40,559, [sani ]”. 


MARDUK’S REQUEST. 37 





(127) “ O my [son], who knoweth all wisdom, 

(128) “ Pacify [Tiama]t with thy pure incantation. 

(129) “ Speedily sét out upon thy way, ° 

(130) “ For [thy blood (?)] shall not be poured out,* 
thou shalt return again.” 

(131) The lord rejoiced at the word of his father, 

(132) His heart exulted, and unto his father he spake : 

(133) “ O Lord of the gods, Destiny of the great gods, 

(134) ‘If I, your avenger, 

(135) ‘ Conquer Tiamat and give you life, 

(136) “ Appoint an assembly, make my fate pre- 
eminent and proclaim it.” 

(137) “In Upsukkinaku seat yourselves joyfully 
together, 

(138) “ With my word in place of you will I decree 
fate. 

(139) “ May whatsoever I do remain unaltered, 

(i40) “ May the word of my lips never be changed 
nor made of no avail.” 





® No. 40,559, d@mal™. 0 K. 4,832 and No. 40,559, dani’. 

No. 40,559, [7 ]¢-amat-am-ma. 

® In No. 40,559, 1. 136 reads: [ . . .  J-uh-ru Su-te-tr-ba-’ 
Sim-tum, “ [Appoint an as]sembly, make my fate pre-eminent.” 

‘8 In No. 40,559, 137 reads: [ . . . -f]u-whkin-na-ham 
mit-ha-ri-ts ha-dt-is ti-i$-b[,a}-ma. 

4 No, 40,559, ha-a-/u-nu-ma. ® No. 40,559, um. 

% No. 40,559, mi-im. "No. 40,559, t-21-na-a. 

8K. 292, s[ap}. 


The Third Cabet. 


1. An- Sar pa- a- su a- pu- Ssam- ma 
2. [a-na ™“Ga-ga  suk-kal-li]*-Su a-ma-tu — i-2zak-kar 
3. [“Ga-ga suk-kal]?-lum mu-tib ka - bit - ti-ia 


4. [a-na “™Lah-mu u ™La-hja*-mu ka-a-ta lu-us-pur-ka 
5BE eee ee we YF We ts-bu- ru te-h-’ 


60... .. .. . ) subika ana maf-ri-kat 


aT ee ee ew ee ee Dint® — na~- gab®- su-un 
8. [Z-sa-nu lis-ku-n\ut ina ki-vi-e-ti lis- bus 


9. [as-na-an li-k\e-[l\ut lip-ti-ku ku-vu-na 
10. [a-na™ Marduk muy-tir-ri gi-mit-li-su-nu" Ui-Si-mu sim-ta* 


11. [a-“:k])® ™“Ga-ga kud-me-su-nu 7t- stz~-ma 





12. [wim-mu-u| a-zak-ka-ru-ka su-un-na-a ana™ sa-a-su-un 





1 The first two words in the line are restored from the catch-line 
in Tablet II; see K. 292 and No. 40,559. 

2 Lines 2-4 are conjecturally restored; for the restoration of 
1. 3, cf, the similar line spoken by Apsit when addressing Mummu 
in Tablet I, 1. 31. 

® Jensen compares 1. 14, and suggests the restoration [/e-ri/ 
lib-bi-ra], i.e. ‘The purpose of my heart] thou canst understand.” 

* 82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316 reads ma-ah-ri-za, i.e. “thou shalt bring 
before me”; this reading gives better sense, as it is possible to 
refer the phrase to an answer to the summons, which Gaga is 
directed to bring from Lahmu and Labamu. As, however, the 
duplicate is merely a practice-tablet containing extracts from the 
text, I have retained the reading of K. 3,473, etc. 


The Third TaBEet. 


1. Ansar opened his mouth,! and 
2. [Unto Gaga], his [minister],’ spake the word : 
3. “[O Gaga, thou minis|ter? that rejoicest my 


spirit, 
Aus [Unto Lahmu and Lahjamu? will I send thee. 
Ge Ne S5 2h. S . . . ]* thou canst attain, 
6, ETA Oa ; thou shalt cause to be brought 
before thee.* 
asf let]* the gods, all of them, 


8. [Make ready for a feast]},” at a banquet let 
them sit, 
g. “ {Let them eat bread],’ let them mix wine, 





1o, “ [That for Marduk],” their avenger, they may 
decree the fate. 
11, “[Go,]' Gaga, stand before them, 


12. “{And all that] I tell thee, repeat unto them, 
(and say) : 





5 Jensen suggests the restoration [/z-/-li-ku-u-nd il |ani, “let the 
gods come.” 

§ 82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, [g ]a-ad. 

7 Lines 8 and g are restored from I]. 133 and 134. 

8 82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, lu-us-bu. 

® 82-g~18, 1,4.03 + 6,316, ku-ru-un-nu. 

© Conjecturally restored. 
K. 3,437, ete., reads Su-Su-nu, i.e. gimilli-su-nu. 
82-9~18, 1,403 + 6,316, Sim-tum. 
82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, ku-ud-mi-Su-nu 1-2i-12-ma. 
M 82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, a-na. 


n 


at] 


13 


40 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





13. 
14. 


15. 


16. 


17, 
18. 


19 


20. 


21. 
22. 


23 
24. 


25. 
26. 


[An - Sar]! ma-vu-ku-nu u-ma-’-t-ra-an-nt 


(te- rit]? lbbi-su u-sa-as-bi-ra-an-ni ia-a-ti 
[um-ma  Ti-a|jmat®  a-lit-ta-ni4 —t-ztr-ra-an-na-si* 
[pu-uhp-ru Sit-k\u®-na-at-ma ag-gis lab- bat 
ts - fu - ru ~ Sim - ma tani gi - mir - Su - un 
a-adi sa at-tu-nu tab-na-a t-da-sa al-ka 
im-ma-as-ru-nim-ma  t-du-uS 1 Ti-amat — te-bu-u-ni® 


iz-au kap-du la sa-ki-pu mu-sa u im-ma 


na-su-u tam-fa-ri na-zar-bu-bu lab- bu 


unken-na — Sit-ku-nu-ma — t-ban-nu-u — su-la-a-{ti]* 


Um -mu- Hu- bur pa-ti-kat® ka-la-([ma] 
us-vad-di ka-ak-ki la mah-ri it-ta-lad sirmahé["]" 


zak-tu-ma sin-nt® la pa-du-u at-ta-’-[/]% 
im-tu ki-ma da-mi™ gu-mur-su-nu — us-ma-al-l[t |" 





e 


Restored from |. 71. * Restored from 1. 72. 
Restored from I. 73. + 82-g-18, 1,403 + 6,316, mu, 
82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, 7-22-17-ra-an-na-a-ti. 

Restored from 1. 74. 

829-18, 6,950 + 83-1-18, 1,868, c-du-su. 

82-9-18, 6,950, etc., fe-bi-u-n7. 

82-9-18, 6,950, etc., ¢m-mu.  ' 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., ru. 
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., /a-ab-bu.  82-9-18, 6,950, etc., [5 Jz. 


ANSAR’S INSTRUCTIONS TO GAGA. 4t 





13. 
14. 


15. 
16. 


17. 
18. 


19. 


20. 


21, 
22. 


23. 
24. 


25. 
26. 


“ {Ansar|,’ your son, hath sent me, 

“(The purpose]? of his heart he hath made 
known unto me. 

“THe saith that Tialmat* our mother hath con- 
ceived a hatred for us, 

[With all]® her force she rageth, full of wrath. 

“ All the gods have turned to her, 

“With those, whom ye created, they go at her 
side. 

“ They are banded together, and at the side of 
Tiamat they advance ; 

“ They are furious, they devise mischief without 
resting night and day. 

“ They prepare for battle, fuming and raging ; 

“ They have joined their forces and are making 
war. 

“ Ummu-Hubur, who formed all things, 

“ Hath made in addition weapons invincible, she 
hath spawned monster-serpents, 

“ Sharp of tooth and merciless of fang. 

“With poison instead of blood she hath filled 
their bodies. 





13 


u 


16 


u 


19 


20 


ah 


Restored from |. 80; 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., reads /um. 
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., du-ur. ® 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., ka-as. 
Restored from 1. 81 ; 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., reads mu. 

Restored from 1. 82. 18 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., S2-7%-na. 
Restored from |. 83; 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., reads an-/a-’-a[m). 
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., da-me. 

Lines 26-32 have been restored from Jl. 84-90. 


42 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 
34. 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39. 
40. 


4i. 


usumgalle”® na-ad-ru-u-ti pul-ha-a-ti _u-Sal-bis-[ma] 
me-lam-me us-das-sa-a e-liS um - tas- [sil] 
a-mir- su-nu  Ssar-ba-ba  lis- har - [mi - im] 
au-mur-su-nu lis-tap-ht-dam-ma la t-ni--u i-rat-su-[un] 
us- az ba-as-mu sir-rus-su u “La-ha-[mi] 
u- gal- lum UR- BE? «4 akrab- amél{u) 


u-mi da-ab-ru-ti niin-amilu u_ ku-sa-rik-[ku}> 
na-as kakke* la pa-di-i la a-di-ru ta-h{a-ai)* 


gab-sa te-ri-tu-Sa la ma-har si-na-a-{ma] 
ap-pu-un-na-ma es-tin es-ri-lum kima su-a-tu us-tab-[S] 
tna tlani . bu-uk-ri-sa  Su-ut is'-kun-& [ pu-uh-rt] 
u-Sa-as-ki ™ Kin-gu ina bi-ri-su{nu §a-a-$u) us-rab-[di-s] 


[a]-ti-kut mah-ri pa-an um-ma-ni {mu-ir-ru-ut puri] 
[na-a]s kakke*>  ti-ts-bu-tu — te-[bu-u —a-na-an-tu 





[su-ud) tam-ha-ri va-ab_ sik-[ka-tu-ti 





See above, p. 16 f., note 5. ® See above, p. 18, note 3. 
Restored from Tablet II, I. 29. 


ANSAR’S INSTRUCTIONS TO GAGA. 43 








27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 


33 
34. 


35- 
36. 
37: 
38. 


39: 
40. 


41. 


‘«‘ Fierce monster- vipers she hath clothed with 
terror, 

“ With splendour she hath decked them, she hath 
made them of lofty stature. 

“ Whoever beholdeth them, terror overcometh 
him, 

“Their bodies rear up and none can withstand 
their attack. 

“She hath set up vipers, and dragons, and the 
(monster) Lahamu, 

“ And hurricanes, and raging hounds, and scorpion- 
men, 

« And mighty tempests, and fish-men, and rams ; 

“ They bear merciless weapons, without fear of 
the fight. 

“Her commands are mighty, none can resist 
them ; 


“ After this fashion, huge of stature, hath she 


made eleven (monsters). 

‘Among the gods who are her sons, inasmuch as 
he hath given her [support], 

“ She hath exalted Kingu; in their midst she 
hath raised [him] to power. 

“To march before the forces, [to lead the host], 

“TTo] give the battle-signal, to advance [to the 
attack], 

“(To direct] the battle, to control the [fight], 








4 Lines 34-45 have been restored from 1]. 92-103. 
5K. 6,650, [na-Sa-Ja, or [ma-Se-Je, hakhu, 


44 CREATION SERIES, TABLET IIL. 





42 [p-kid|-ma fa-tus-su u-se-si-ba-as-{Su ina kar-ri] 
43. [ad-d|i ta-a-ka ina puhur tani [u-sar-bi- ka] 
44. [ma]-li-ku-ut ilant gi-mir[Su-nu' ka-tuk-ka* us-mal-li} 


45. [le-u] sur-ba-ta-ma ha-'-i-vi® e-du-[u at-tal 
46. li-ir-tab-bu-u 2ik-ru-ka eli kali-su-n{u . . ” A-nun-na-ki|* 


47. td-din-Sum>-ma  dupsimati” § t-va-tu-us® — u-Sat-mi-ih 
48. ka-ta kibit-ka la in-nin-na-a li-kun si-it pi-i-tka]’ 
49. in-na-nu “™ Kin-gu su-us-Ru-u li-ku-u ["A-nu-ti]8 


50. an tlant = médré*-Sa® st-ma-ta is'- ¢[d - mu\™ 
hi. p- su pi-ku-nu® “Gribils t-ni-ih- ha 


52. naid ina” kit-mu-ri® ma-ag-sa-vi lis’- rab-bi-ib" 





1K. 6,650, gim-rat-su-nu. 

2 K. 6,650, ka-dus-§[u]; according to this reading, 1. 44 does not 
form part of Tiamat’s speech, or we may suppose that in this line 
Tiamat addresses her followers and not Kingu (cf. note 7). 

3 K. 6,650, Aa--ri. 

* Restored from 1. 104; the Anunnaki are possibly the subject 
of the sentence (see below, p. 52 f., note 8). 

5 K. 6,650, Su. 

® So No. 42,285; K. 6,650 reads #-ra-a[t-su]. 

7 Restored from Tablet II, ]. 44; No. 42,285 reads pr-7-su, “the 
word of his mouth shall be established,” i.e., Tiamat addresses her 
followers in the second half of the line. 

® Restored from Tablet II, |. 45; No. 42,285 reads e-nu-tr, 
“tordship, rule.” 


ANSAR’S INSTRUCTIONS TO GAGA. 45 





42. 
43. 
44. 


45. 
46. 


47. 
48. 
49. 


50. 
51. 


52. 


“Unto him [hath she entrusted; in costly 
raiment] she hath made him sit, (saying) : 

“ «TT have] uttered thy spell, in the assembly of 
the gods [I have raised thee to power], 

«“<«?The} dominion over all the gods [have I 
entrusted unto thee]. 

*«(Be] thou exalted, [thou] my chosen spouse, 

“« May they magnify thy name over all of [them 
: the Anunnaki].’ 

“ She hath given him the Tablets of Destiny, on 
his breast she laid them, (saying) : 

«“ «Thy command shall not be without avail, and 
the word of [thy]’ mouth shall be established.’ 

“Now Kingu, (thus) exalted, having received 
{the power of Anu},* 

“ Decreed the fate for the gods, her sons, (saying): 

“«Let the opening of your mouth quench the 
Fire-god '*; 

“ «Whoso is exalted in the battle, let him display 
(his) might!’ 





9 
10 
wu 


K. 6,650, miré-fa ; No. 93,017, ma-ri-e-Ja. 
No. 93,017, st-ma-tu; No. 42,285, Stma-tt, 
Restored from Tablet II, 1. 46; No. 42,285 reads ws-#-u, or 


us-ti-Sam. 


1 
13 
1¢ 
No 
16 
16 


K. 


Mw 


K. 6,650, [7-8 ja. 

K. 6,650, pr-t-ku-nu; No. 93,017, pi-ku-un. 

K. 6,650 and No. 93,017, *BriL-ct; K. 3,473, etc., and 
. 42,285, “ GIS-BAR. 

ina is omitted by K. 6,650 and No. 93,017. 

No. 93,017, &il-mu-ra ; 82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, ket-mu-ru. 
6,650 probably reads 2 (not S2#)-mu-ra. 

82-g~18, 1,403, etc., 4-ra-ab-bi-7b. 


46 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





53. 
54. 
55. 


56. 


57. 


58. 


59 
69. 


61. 


62 
63 
64, 


65 


as-pur-ma “A-nu-um' ul i-l-’-a?® ma-har*-sa 
“ Nu-dim-mud i-dur-mat i-tu-rva ar~ kis? 
‘-ar ™ Marduk ab-kal-lu® ilani ma-ru-ku-uni 


ma-ha-vts® Ti-amat® lib-ba-su a-va ub-la 
ip-Su pi-t-su  i-ta-ma-a a-na ta-a-ti 
Sum-ma-ma a-na-ku mu-tir™ gi-mil-li-ku-un 
a-kam-me Ti-amat-ma u-bal-lat ka-su-un™ 
Suk-na-a-ma'*  pu-uh-vu  su-ti®-rat-ba-a—Sim-td 
t-na Up-su-ukkin-na-ki™ mit-ha-vis 8 ha-dis™ tas-ba-ma® 
ip-Su pi-ia ki-ma ka-tu-nu-ma™ $i-ma-tu lu-sim-ma™ 
la ut-tak-kar mim™®-mu-u a-ban-nu-w a-na-ku 


ai t-tur™ at in-nin-na-a se-kar Ssap-ti-ia® 


hu-um-ta-nim-ma $t-mat-ku-nu ar-qis* si-ma-su 





re 


® 


12 


K. 6,650, No. 93,017, and 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., “A-num. 
82-9-18, 1,403, etc, @L-’-im; No. 42,285, t-d7--7. 

No. 42,285, Za-ar. # 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., 2-du-ur-ma. 
No. 42,285, Aé-25. 

No. 93,017, 82-9~18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, abhad. 
No. 42,285, ma-ruk-ku-un. ® 82-9-18, 1,403, etc, 72-28. 
No. 93,017, Z?-a-ma-ti. 10 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., 2-2. 
82-g-18, 1,403, etc., mu-Lir-re. 





No. 93,017, Zam-tfam-ma; 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, 


Ti-amat-am-ma. 


ANSAR’S INSTRUCTIONS TO GAGA. 47 








53. “I sent Anu, but he could not withstand her ; 

54. “ Nudimmud was afraid and turned back. 

55. “ But Marduk hath set out, the director of the 
gods, your son ; 

56. “To set out against Tiamat his heart hath 
prompted (him). 

57. “ He opened his mouth and spake unto me, 


(saying) : 

58. “ ‘If J, your avenger, 

59. “ * Conquer Tiamat and give you life, 

60. “* Appoint an assembly, make my fate pre- 
eminent and proclaim it. 

61. “In Upgukkinaku seat yourselves joyfully to- 
gether ; 

62. “ ‘With my word in place of you will 1 decree fate. 

63. “ ‘ May whatsoever I do remain unaltered, 


64. “‘ May the word of my lips never be changed 
nor made of no avail.’ 

‘ Hasten, therefore, and swiftly decree for him 
the fate which you bestow, 


65. 





1 No. 42,285, ha-a-Su-un. 4 No. 93,017, suk-na-ma. 

% No. 93,017, 7a. © 82-9-18, 1,403, etc, fe. 

1 No. 93,017, &u 3 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., ham. 

8 82-918, 1,403, etc., me-dl-ha-ri-[ 23]. 

19 No. 42,285, d-z5. 2 No, 42,285, fa-as-ba-ma. 

1 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., ka-a-tu-[ nu-ma]. 

% No, 42,285, s2-ma-dum lu-si-im. ™ 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., md-27m, 

* 829-18, 1,403, ete., fa-u7, % No. 42,285, Sap-d7-2, 

© 829-18, 1,403, etc., No. 42,285 and 82-9-18, 5,448 + 83-1-18, 
2,116, ar-fi-28, 


48 CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





66. Zil- lik! lim-fu-va? na-kar-ku-nu dan-nu 
67. i -lik “Ga - ga ur -ha- su u-Sar - di-ma 


68. as- rif ™Lah-mu u ™ La-ha-me> ilani”™* aber-sud 
69. us-kin-ma is-sik® kak-ka-va’ Ssa- pal-su-un 
70.2 - Siv9 tz - atz - ma 7 - sak - kar - Su - un 


71. An-Sar" ma-ru”-khu-nu u+ma-’-ir-an-ni 


72. te-vit lib-bi-su u-Sa-as-bi-ra-an-ni™ ta-a-ti 
73. um-ma Ti-amat a-lit-ta-ni™ i-sir-ra-an-na-$i™ 


74. pu-uh-ru® sit!®-ku-na-at-ma ag-gis™® lab - bat 
75. tS - hu-ru- sim - ma lini gli -mir™ ~ §u-un 
76.a-di ga at-tu-nu tab-na-a t-da-sa® al-ku™ 


77. tm-ma-as-ru-nim-ma t-du-us™ Ti-a-ma-ti® te-bu-ni™ 





82-g-18, 1,403, etc., and 82-9-18, 5,448, etc., insert ma. 
No. 42,285,[ . . . J-der. 
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., and 82-9-18, 5,448, etc., @ La-ha-mu. 
82~-9-18, 1,403, etc., No. 42,285 and 82-9-18, 5,448, etc., ani. 
No. 42,285 and 82-9-18, 5,448, etc., ab-67-e-su. 
829-18, 1,403, etc., Se-2k. 
No. 42,285 and 82-09-18, 5,448, etc., 7v; K. 8,575, 77. 
82-9-18, 1,4.03, etc., No. 42,285 and 82-9-18, 5,448, etc., read 
ma-har-iu-un, ‘ before them.” 

® No. 93,017 reads zk-mzs, “he bowed himself down.” 

© 82-9~18, 1,403, etc., 7z-2a-az; No. 42,285 and 82-9-18, 5,448, 
ete, [ . . . J-az 

4 No. 93,017 and 82-9-18, 1,403, An-Sar-ma, 

No. 93,017, 77. 


ese aoe ew 


GAGA GOES TO LAHMU AND LAHAMU. 49 





66. 
67. 
68. 


69. 
70. 


71. 
72, 


73: 


74. 
75: 
76. 
77 


“That he may go and fight your strong enemy |” 

Gaga went, he took his way and 

Humbly before Lahmu and Lahamu, the gods; 
his fathers, ; 

He made obeisance, and he kissed the ground at 
their feet. 

He humbled himself;® then he stood up and 
spake unto them, (saying) : 

“« AnSar, your son, hath sent me, 

“The purpose of his heart he hath made known 
unto me. 

“ He saith that Tiamat our mother hath conceived 
a hatred for us, 

“ With all her force she rageth, full of wrath. 

“ All the gods have turned to her, 

“ With those, whom ye created, they go at her side. 

“They are banded together and at the side of 
Tiamat they advance ; 





3 


82-9-18, 1,403, etc., and 82-9-18, 5,448, etc., u-ma--1- 


ra-an-[ni'}. . 


vy 
16 
ots 


82-9-18, 1,403, etc., [re-r]e-t Lbdi-su. 
No. 93,017, u-Sa-as-bir-an-nt. © 829-18, 1,403, me. 
82-9-18, 1,403, 7-20-17-ra-an-na-ti; No. 42,285, ¢3-at-dr-ra~ 


an-na-a-tt, 


18 


a 


2 


No. 93,017, 7a. 9 829-18, 1,403, etC., Sach. 
82~9~18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, gr-2i. 

No. 93,017, 829-18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, /a-ab, 
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, mz-r. 

K. 8,575, ¢-da-a-Ssa. * No. 42,285, a/ ka. 

K. 8,575, ¢-du-su. 

K. 8,524 and K. 8,575, Zea-a-ma-ti; No. 42,2%5, Ti-amat. 

No. 42,285, fe-d7-27. 


50 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





78. 


79 
80. 


81. 
82. 


83 
84. 


85 


86. 


87. 
88. 


tg-su kap-du la sa-hki-pu mu-st' u im-ma* 


na-Ssu-u tam-fa-ri? na-zar-bu-bu lab - but 


unken-na> sit-ku-nu-ma t-ban-nui-u® su-la-a-tt? 


Um - mu - Hu - bur pa- ti - kat® ka - la - ma® 
us-rad-di kakké* la mah-ri it-ta-lad sirmahe”™ 


zak~-tu-ma Ssin-ni la pa-du-u at-ta-’-7« 
im-ta kima da-a-mi™  gu-mur-su-nu™ us-ma-al-li 


usumgalle” na-ad-ru-ti pul-ha-a-ti® u-$al-bis- ma 
me -lam-me us-das-sa-a i-lis" um-tas- sis 


a-mir-si-nu Ssar-ba-ba li- th - har - mi-im 
au-mir-su-nu™ L3-tah-hi-dam-ma la i-ni--u trat-su-un 





89. us-siz ba-as-mui sir-rus-su® u ™La-ha-mt 
90. # - gal - lum UR - BE* u akrab - amélu 

1K, 8,575 and No. 42,285, mu-sa. 

? No. 42,285, m-mu. 5 No. 93,017, 7a. 

* No. 42,285 and No. 93,017, /a-ab-bu. 

5 No. 93,017, un-hi-en-na. ® No. 42,285, [7-da]n-nu-ma. 

7 No. 93,017, fam. ® No. 42,285, ka-at. 

® No. 42,285, mu. ® No. 93,017, hakku la ma-har. 


2 


No. 42,285, ser-mah; No. 93,017, si7-mah-t. 
No. 42,285 reads /a-af-’-7m, a scribal error for a¢-/a-’-1m. 


GAGA’S MESSAGE. Sr 





78. 


79- 
80. 


81. 
82. 


83. 
84. 


85. 
86. 


87. 
88. 


89. 


90. 


“ They are furious, they devise mischief without 
resting night and day. 

“ They prepare for battle, fuming and raging ; 

“They have joined their forces and are making 
war. 

“ Ummu-Hubur, who formed all things, 

“ Hath made in addition weapons invincible, she 
hath spawned monster-serpents, 

“ Sharp of tooth and merciless of fang. 


*«‘ With poison instead of blood she hath filled their 
bodies. 

“ Fierce monster-vipers she hath clothed with 
terror, 


“With splendour she hath decked them, she hath 
made them of lofty stature.” 

“ Whoever beholdeth them, terror overcometh him, 

“Their bodies rear up and none can withstand 
their attack. 

“She hath set up vipers, and dragons, and the 
(monster) Lahamu, 

“ And hurricanes, and raging hounds, and scorpion- 
men, 





” 
14 
8 
iW 
ot 
20 
2 


No. 93,017, cm-tu ki-ma da-mi. 
No. 42,285 seems to have had a variant reading. 


No. 42,285, la. 6K. 8,524, pul-ha-ia. 
K. 8,524, e-de; see above, p. 16 f., note 5. 
No. 42,285, [1 Jm-/as-s7-11. 8 No. 93,017, 3e-mur-su-nu. 


No. 93,017, @ SIR-RUS™, 
No. 93,017, UD-GAL” UR-BE”; for the ideogram UR-BE, see 


above, p. 18, note 3. 


52 


CREATION’ SERIES, TABLET III. 





Qt. tne” § da-ab-ru-ti niin-amilu u [hku-sa-rik- ku} 
92. na-as kakke*? la pa-di-i la a-di-ru ta-ha-2 
93. gab-Sa te-ri-tu-Sa la ma-har Si-~na-ma 


94. ap-pu-un-na-ma* i§-tin es-rit ki-ma Su-a-tu us-tab-st 


96. 


97. 
98. 
99. 
100. 


IOl 


102. 


103 
104. 


105 


.tnat lant bu-uk-vi-sa Su-ut iS-ku-nu-S pu-uh-rt 
u-Sa-as-ki ™ Kin-gu ina bi-ri-Su-nu sa-a-su us-rab-bi-is 
a-li-ku-ut mak-ri> pa-an um-ma-ni mu-tr-ru-ut pubrt 
na-as kakké** ti-is-bu-tu te-bu-u a-na-an-tt 
Su-ud  tam-ha-ri? ra-ab_ Sik-ka-tu-ti 
ip-kid-ma ka-tus-su  u-se-Si-ba-as-Su ina kar-vi 
.ad-di ta-a-ka ina puhur tlani u-sar-bi-ka 


ma-li-kut tlani gim-rat-su-nu ka-tuk-ka — us-mal-li 


le-nu sur-ba-ta-ma fa-t-ri e-du-u at-ta 
. L-ir-tab-bu-u zik-ru-ka eli kali-Su-nu ,, . A-nun-na-[ki 8 


. ta-dfin-SJum-ma dupsimati” t-ra-alt-su  u-Sat-nit-1f]* 





1 


Restored from Tablet II, 1.29; No. 93,017 reads Hal erasure ]-K1. 


2 No, 93,017, Aak~kut. * No. 93,017, ap: pu-na-nta. 
* No. 93,017, tna. 5 No. 93,017, a-l2-kut ma-har. 
® No. 93,017, #a-se-e kakhu. 7 No. 93,017, 7a 


e 


In the parallel passage in 1. 46, K. 6,650 reads KAKX (i.e. ha/Z)- 


GAGA'S MESSAGE, 53 








91. “And mighty tempests, and fish-men, and 
[rams] ;? 

92. “ They bear merciless weapons, without fear of the 
fight. 

93. “ Her commands are mighty, none can resist them ; 

94. “ After this fashion, huge of stature, hath she 
made eleven (monsters). 

95. ‘“ Among the gods who are her sons, inasmuch as 
he hath given her support, 

96. “ She hath exalted Kingu; in their midst she hath 
raised him to power. 

97. ‘To march before the forces, to lead the host, 

98. “ To give the battle-signal, to advance to the attack, 

99. “ To direct the battle, to control the fight, 

too. “ Unto him hath she entrusted ; in costly raiment 
she hath made him sit, (saying) : 

tor, “ ‘IT have uttered thy spell, in the assembly of the 
gods I have raised thee to power, 

102. “ ‘The dominion over all the gods have I 
entrusted unto thee. 

103. “ ‘Be thou exalted, thou my chosen spouse, 

104, “ ‘ May they magnify thy name over all of them 
‘ the Anunna[ki].’ 

105. ‘She hath given him the Tablets of Destiny, 
on [his] breast [she laid them], (saying) : 

Su-n[u . . . ], In the present line on No. 93,017 there are 


traces of kali-su-nu followed by traces of two signs and by the word 
* A-nun-na-[ki] which ends the line. The Anunnaki are possibly 
the subject of the sentence. 


® Line 105 has been restored from 1. 47. 


54 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





106, 


107, 


108. 


109. 


I10. @ 


III, 
112. 
113. 


114. 


115. 


116. 


ih 
118. 


119. 


120. 
I2t, 
122. 


ka-ta kibit-ka la in-nin(ua-a li-kun si-it pi-i-ka\* 
in-na-na ™Kin-gu  Su-us-ku-[u  li-ku-u ™ A-nu-ti] 
an ilani mare" ~Sa Si-[ma-ta  is- te - mu] 
ip-su pi-i-ku-nu ™Gibil [li - ni - ih - hal 
wid ina kit-mu-ru  ma-ag-s[a-ri_ lis'- rab - bi- ib} 
as-pur-ma ™A-nu-um ul i[li-’-a ma-har- sa} 
™ Nu-dim-mud e-dur-ma t-[tu-ra ar- kis} 
>. tr ™ Marduk ab-kal-[lu i\a[ni ma-ru-ku-un] 
ma-ha-vis Ti-amat li{b-ba-su  a-va ub- lal 
ip-su pi-i-su [i-ta-ma-a a-na ia-a-ti] 
Sum-ma-ma a-na-ku [mu-tir gi-mil-li-ku-un]| 
a-kam-me Ti-amat-mla u-bal-lat ka-su-un] 
Suk-na-a-ma pu-upvu  s[u-ti-ra t-ba-a sim-ti] 
t-na Up-Su-ukkin-na-ki milt-ha-vis fa-dis tas-ba-ma] 
ip-su pi-ia ki-ma Ra-tu-nu-ma st-ma-tu lu-Sim-ma] 


la ut-tak-kar — mim-miluj-u = a-ban-nu-u —_ [a-na-ku] 


[ale ¢-tur [ad tm]-nin-na-a se-kar [sap-ti-ia} 





1 Lines 106-108 have been restored from Il. 48-50 and Tablet II, 
ll. 44-46. 


GAGA’S MESSAGE. 53 





106. 


107. 


108. 


109. 


110, 


Itt. 
I12. 


113. 


114. 


115. 


116. 


117. 
118. 


119. 


120. 
20. 
122. 


“«« Thy command shall not be without avail, [and 
the word of thy mouth shall be established], ? 
“ Now Kingu, (thus) exalted, [having received 
the power of Anu], 

“TDecreed the fate] for the gods, her sons, 
(saying) : 

“Let the opening of your mouth [quench]? the 
Fire-god ; 

“«* Whoso is exalted in the battle, [let him display ] 
(his) might!’ 

“T sent Anu, but he could not [withstand her]; 

“ Nudimmud was afraid and [turned back]. 

“ But Marduk hath set out, the director of the 

[gods, your son]; 

“To set out against Tiamat [his heart hath 
prompted (him)]. 

“He opened his mouth [and spake unto me], 
(saying) : 

“ «Tf I, [your avenger, 

«Conquer Tiamat and [give you life], 

“Appoint an assembly, [make my fate pre- 
eminent and proclaim it]. 

“«JIn Upgukkinaku [seat yourselves joyfully 
together] ; 

“ «With my word in place of [you will I decree fate]. 

“ « May whatsoever [1] do remain unaltered, 

«May the word of [my lips| never be changed 
nor made of no avail.’ 





* Lines 109-124 have been restored from ll, 51-66. 


56 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET III. 





123. 


124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 


128. 
129. 
130. 
131. 
132. 
133. 


134. 
135. 
136. 


137. 
138. 


[Alu-um-ta-nim-ma  $i-mat-ku-nuar-his — [st-ma-Ssu] 


[4-42 lim-hu-va na-kar-ku-nu  dan-nu 
[2]s'- mu-ma ™Lah-ha ™ La-ha-mu ts-su-u e-li-tum 


™ Teigi nap-har-su-nu i-nu-ku mar -si- ws 





mi-na-a nak-vra a-di ir-suu si-bi-tt mle... jI 
la ni-i-di ni-i-ni sa Ti-amat e-plis-ti-sa}* 
tk - Sa - Su - nim - ma il ~ lak - [ku ~ ni\> 
ilanit rabiti ka-li-su-nu mu-Ssim-(mu Ssim-ti]§ 
t-riu-bu-ma mut-ti-is An-Sar im-luu [ . J 
in-nis-ku* a-pu-u a-hi ina pupri [ . . . . | 
li-Sa-nu is-ku-nu ina ki-ri-e-ti [us'- bul 


as-~na-an i-ku-lu ip-ti-ku  [ku-ru-na\s 
St-vi-sa mat-ku u-sa-an-nt [... }[rJa-[d]c?-su-[un] 
Si-ik-ru ina Sa-te-e ha-ba-su zu-um-[ri}® 


ma-?-dis e-gu-u ka-bit-ta-su-un® i-te-el-[ti}> 
a-na™ Marduk mu-tir gi-mil-li-Su-nu t-sim-new Sim-—[tu]§ 





1 The characters s¢-b:-2¢ are clearly written on 82-9-18, 1,403, 
etc., and they are followed by traces of the sign ze. 

* There is room for this restoration. 

* Conjectural restoration. 

4 in-nis-ku may be taken as the. Nifal of nasaku; cf. Tablet I, 
1. 116, where An§ar is described as kissing Marduk upon the lips. 


THE BANQUET OF THE GODS. 57 





123. 


124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 


128, 
129. 
130. 
131. 
132. 
133: 


134. 
135; 
136. 


137. 
138. 


“ Hasten, therefore, and swiftly [decree for him] 
the fate which you bestow, 

“ That he may go and fight your strong enemy!” 

Lahmu and Lahamu heard and cried aloud, 

All of the Igigi wailed bitterly, (saying) : 

“What has been altered so that they should 

“ We do not understand the dfeed] of Tiamat!” 

Then did they collect and go, 

The great gods, all of them, who decree [fate]. 

They entered in before An§ar, they filled]... ]; 

They kissed one another,‘ in the assembly [. . . }. 

They made ready for the feast, at the banquet 
[they sat]; 

They ate bread, they mixed [sesame-wine].° 

The sweet drink, the mead, confused their [. . ], 

They were drunk with drinking, their bodies 
were filled. 

They were wholly at ease, their spirit was exalted ; 

Then for Marduk, their avenger, did they decree 
the fate. 





5 It is possible that more than two signs are wanting, in which 
case a longer form of the verb must have been employed. 

® Restored from 1. 9. 

* The traces are possibly those of m7; one sign is wanting at the 
beginning of the word. : 

® The reading a-bit-/a-Su-un is certain. 


The GKourth Tablet. 


I. id- du- sum- ma pa ~ vak vi - bu - tim’ 
2. ma-ha-ri-is ab-bi-e-Su a-na ma-li-ku-tum tr-me?* 
3. at-ta-ma kab-ta-ta t-na ilini ra-bu-tum 
4. St-mat-ka la ga-na-an se - kar - ka 4 ~ nui 
5. ™ Marduk kab-ta-ta i-na iléni va- bu-tum 


6. Si-mat-ka la Sa-na-an se -kar-kha “A - num 


7. if-tu u-mi-im-ma la in-nin-na-a hi- bit-ka 


8. su-us-ku-u u Ssu-us-pu-lu Si-i lu-u ga-at-ka 
9. lu-u ki-na-at si-it pi-i-ka la sa-ra-ar  se-kar-ka 


10. ma-am-ma-an i-na ilant i-tuk-ka la it-ti-tk 


Il. sa-na-nu-tum ir-Sat pa- rak ilant- ma 
12,@- Sar sa-gi-su-nu lu-u ku-un as-ru-uk-ka 


13. ™ Marduk at-ta-ma  mu-tir-ru gi-mil-li-ni 
14. ni-id-din-ka Sar-ru-tum —kis'- Sat kal gim-vi-e-ti 


15. t-sam-ma i-na pu-hur® lu-u Ssa-ga-ta a-mat-ka 


16. kak-ki-ka ai ip-pal-tu-u li-va-i-su na-ki-ri-ka 





* The catch-line on the Third Tablet, preserved by K. 3,473, etc., 
reads ru-bu-u-ti. 

2 The lines which follow contain the words addressed by the 
gods to Marduk, after he had taken his seat in their presence. 


The Gourth Tabet. 


They prepared for him a lordly chamber, 
. Before his fathers as prince he took his place.” 
“ Thou art chiefest among the great gods, 
“ Thy fate is unequalled, thy word is Anu ! 
“O Marduk, thou art chiefest among the great 
gods, 
. “ Thy fate is unequalled, thy word is Anu! 
7. “ Henceforth not without avail shall be thy 
‘command, 
8. “ In thy power shall it be to exalt and to abase. 
g. “Established shall be the word of thy mouth, 
irresistible shall be thy command ; 
io. “ None among the gods shall transgress thy 
boundary. 
11. ‘“ Abundance, the desire of the shrines of the gods, 
12, “ Shall be established in thy sanctuary, even 
though they lack (offerings). 
13. “ O Marduk, thou art our avenger! 
14. “ We give thee sovereignty over the whole world. 
15. “ Sit thou down in might,’ be exalted in thy 
command, 
16. “ Thy weapon shall never lose its power, it shall 
crush thy foe. 


wm & Oop 


an 





5 This is preferable to the rendering “take thy seat in the 


assembly (of the gods)”’; for the other gods had an equal right to 
sit in the assembly. 


60 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET Iv. 





17. 


18. 


19. 


20, 


21. 


22. 


23. 
24. 


25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 


31. 
32. 


be- lum Sa tak-lu-ka na-pis-ta-su gi-mil-~ma 
u ile Sa lim-ni-e-ti i-hu-eu tu-bu-uk nap - Sat - su 
Pa ‘ rare y By 
us-at-2u-ma i-na bi-ri-Su-nu lu~ba-su is = ten 
a-na™ Marduk bu-uk-vi-Su-nu $u~nu ig - gak~ vu 
St - mat - ka be - lum lu-u mah-va-at  iuani-ma 


a-ba-tum u ba-nu-u ki- bi H-itk - lu - nu 


ip- Sa pi- t- ka li-’-a-bit  lu-ba- sn 
tu-ur ki-bi-sum-ma la-~ba- su hi-is- lim 


tk-bi-ma i-na pi-t-Su ?-a- bit lu - ba~ su 
t-tu-ur tk-bi-'um-ma lu - ba Su it - tab + nt 
ki- ma gi-it pi-t-su i-mu-ru  ilani  ab-bi-e-Su 
th-du-u th-ru- bu ™Marduk - ma sar - ru 
u- use si- pu- Su ™hatta "kuss&® u pala(a)' 


id-di-nu-su kak-ku la ma-ah-ra da--i-bu  ga-ai-ri 


a-lik-ma sa Ti-amat nap-Sa-tu-us pu-ru-’-ma> 
Sa-a-ru da-mi-Sa ana pu-uas-ra-tum U-bil-le-ndt 





' The translation of pa/w as “ring” is provisional; the palz was 
certainly a symbol of power. 


THE GODS CONFER POWER ON MARDUK. 61 





pass 


19. 
20, 
21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26, 


27 


28. 


29. 


30. 


3h. 


32. 


. ©©O lord, spare the life of him that putteth his 


trust in thee, 

“ But as for the god who began the rebellion, 
pour out his life.” 

Then set they in their midst a garment, 

And unto Marduk their first-born they spake : 

“May thy fate, O lord, be supreme among the 
gods, ° 

“To destroy and to create ; speak thou the word, 
and (thy command) shall be fulfilled. 

“ Command now and let the garment vanish ; 

“And speak the word again and let the garment 
reappear !” 

Then he spake with his mouth, and the garment 
vanished ; 

Again he commanded it, and the garment re- 
appeared. 

When the gods, his fathers, beheld (the fulfilment 
of) his word, 

They rejoiced, and they did homage (unto him, 

' saying), “ Marduk is king!” 

They bestowed upon him the sceptre, and the 
throne, and the ring,’ 

They give him an invincible weapon, which over- 
whelmeth the foe. 

“ Go, and cut off the life of Tiamat,? 

“ And let the wind carry her blood into secret 
places.” 





2 Lines 31 and 32 contain the final address of the gods to 
Marduk before he armed for the fight. 


62 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV. 





33. 
34. 
35. 


36. 


37. 
38. 


39. 
40. 
4l. 
42. 
43. 


44. 


45 


46. 


z-St-mu-ma sa “Bel si-ma-tu-us lini  ab-bi-e-Su 
u-ru-uh Su-ul-min u tas-me-e us-ta-as-bi-tu-us har-ra-nit 


2b - Sim- ma “Rasta kak-~ha- su u- ad - di 
mul-mul-lum us-tar-ki-ba u-kin-su* ba -at~-nu 
is - 3 - ma ™mittat im-na-su u-Sa-hi-iz 
Rasta uw "iS pa-tum® i-du-us- su i-lu-ul® 
is - kun bi- tr - ku’ ¢- na pa- ni- Su 
nab-lu® mus-tah-mi-tu zu-mur-su — um-ta-al-la” 


i-pu-us-ma sa-pa-ra Ssul-mu-u kir-bis’ Ti-amat™ 
tr-bit-tt Sa-a-vi® us-te-ts-bi-ta ana la a-si-e mim-mi-sa 
Situ iltéinu Sadi aharrit 
t-du-us sa-pa-ra" us-tak-vi-ba® ki-is-td abi-su® ™ A-nim 
tb-ni im-Qul-la Sava lim-na" me-ha-a® a-sam-Su-tum 
ve 


Sar arbai sar sibi® sara @ Sara la Sanan™ 





1 
3 


K. 3,437, etc., omits Zum. 2K. 3,437, etc. se. 
The scribe of No. 93,016 does not make a clear distinction 


between the signs da and ma, and it is possible that the word is 
ma-at-nu; its meaning is not certain. 


4 
5 


© 


a 
12 


K. 3,437, ete., mif-fa. 

K. 3,437, etc., omits the determinative. 

K. 3,437, ete., 2-ud. 

K. 3,437, etc., and 79-7-8, 251, NUM-GIR, i.e. dirku. 

K. 3,437, etc., and 79-7-8, 251, da. 

K. 3,437, etc., me. 0K. 3,437, etc., wm-fal-le, 
No. 93,016, &z[7]-d[ 2 ]-2¥ Zam-tim. 

No. 93,016, ¢rbiétim(tim) sare”. 


MARDUK ARMS FOR BATTLE. 63 





33. 
34. 
35: 
36. 
37: 
39. 
40. 
4I. 


42. 


44. 


45. 


After the gods his fathers had decreed for the 
lord his fate, 

They caused him to set out on a path of prosperity 
and success. 

He made ready the bow, he chose his weapon, 

He slung a spear upon him and fastened it... ? 


He raised the club, in his right hand he grasped (it), 


. The bow and the quiver he hung at his side. 


He set the lightning in front of him, 

With burning flame he filled his body. 

He made a net to enclose the inward parts of 
Tiamat, 

The four winds he stationed so that nothing of 
her might escape ; 

The South wind and the North wind and the 
East wind and the West wind 

He brought near to the net, the gift of his father 
Anu. ‘ 

He created the evil wind,” and the tempest, and 
the hurricane, 


. And the fourfold wind, and the sevenfold wind, 


and the whirlwind, and the wind which had no 
equal ; 





8 No. 93,016, mt-im-me-Sa. M No. 93,051, rt. 

® After us-fak-rt-ba, No. 93,051 reads a-mal . . . 

® No. 93,016, (a-b]z-5[«] 

™ No. 93,051, Sa-ar lim-nu. This phrase must be taken as an 
explanation of zm-2ul-la, i.e. “the evil wind,” and not as the name 
of a separate wind; for the list only comprises seven winds 
(cf. 1. 47). 

8 No. 93,051, me-hu-u. ® No. 93,051, VII-di-7m. 

0 For Im-Nu-p1-a, No. 93,051 reads IM-DI-A-NU-DI-[A]. 


64: CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV. 





47. u-Se-sa-am-ma $ave"! — fa tb-nu-u —_si-bit-ti-su-un 
48. Rir-bis? = Ti-amat  $u-ud-lu-hu —ti®-bu-u—aarhi-sut4 
49. 1S-$t-ma be-lum a-bu-ba> kakka-su  raba(a)® 


50. narkabla u-mu? la mah-ri  ga-lit-ta® tr-kab 


51. ¢s-meid-sim'-ma ty-bit na-as-ma-di i-du-us-sa i-lud 8 


52. [Sa].gi-su! la padu-u  ra-fi-su — mu-up-par-sa® 
53. [ . . . . ]8-t  Sin-na-su-nu na-Ssa-a im-ta™ 
4.[ . 2 . «8 2) -du-u sa-pa-na lam-du™ 
55.[ 2... - . ]-8@ va-as-ba [tye - ku - un - tum 


86. Su-me-la u [im-na... ]-a tpatifu.... elu-d[zP! 
57. na-ah-llap-ti-su . . . . \~ti pul-ha-ti [ha|-lip-ma 








1 No, 93,051, Sa-a-72. ® No. 93,051, [Air-bi-2 |S. 
3 No. 93,651, 4. * No. 93,051, ar-i-Su. 
5 No. 93,051, bu. ® No. 93,051, hak-ha-Su ra-ba-a-am. 


7 K. 3,437) etc., reads w-mu, ‘a storm,” not s7-krn, “a con- 
struction”; and this reading is supported by the duplicate 
No. 93,051. Marduk is represented driving the storm as his 
chariot, drawn by fiery steeds. 

8 No. 93,051, rt. ® No. 93,051, /um. 

” No. 93,051, 27-ka-ab. 4 No. 93,051, sum. 

® No. 93,051, ZV na-as-ma-du. 8 No. 93,051, -du-uS-Su t-lu-ul. 

“™ No. 93,05r reads[ . . . J-gt-§¢; only one sign is wanting 
from the beginning of the line, and this is conjecturally restored 


MARDUK’S CHARIOT AND HORSES. 65 





47. He sent forth the winds which he had created, the 
seven of them; 

48. To disturb the inward parts of Tiamat, they 
followed after him. 

49. Then the lord raised the thunderbolt, his mighty 
weapon, 

50. He mounted the chariot, the storm’ unequalled for 

"terror, 

51. He harnessed and yoked unto it four horses, 

52. Destructive," ferocious, overwhelming, and swift of 
pace ; 

53. [ - . + « + J were their teeth, they were 
flecked with foam ; 

54. They were skilled inf . . . J, they had been 
trained to trample underfoot. 

55.[ . . . . . . « J,,mighty in battle, 

56. Leftand[right . . . 2. 2... 2. JP 

57. His garment was[ . . . . J], he was clothed 
with terror, 





as Sa in the transliteration. The new duplicate disproves the 
restorations which have previously been suggested. 

® No. 93,051, Su. 
® Delitzsch suggests the restoration, [mala riz}#7, “‘ full of slaver.” 
No. 93,051, ‘um. 
Delitzsch suggests the restoration J/as@ma, “galloping” ; 
Jensen, kamara, “ casting down.” 

© K. 3,437, etc., gives traces of 2. 

No. 93,051, [/]a-a[m]-d[w}. 

1 Lines 55 and 56 are taken by Delitasch as referring to Marduk, 
and by Jensen as referring to the horses; their suggested 
restorations differ accordingly. 


n 


318 


66 CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV. 





58. me-lam-mi-su sah-[ pu al-pi-ir rlal-su-us- su 


59. us-te-sir-ma [far-rva-an-su1 uly-ha-su  u-Sar-di-ma 
60. as-vis Ti-amat [sa ag]®-gat pa-nu-us-su is-kun 
61. ¢- na Sap oti a he YP au - kal - lu 
62. u-mti-im-ta [ .. . ]-¢! ta-me-th lak-tus-su 
63. 2- na u-mi-su t-t[ulj-lu-su® lant ¢-tud-lu-su 
64. tant abé- su t-tul-lu-su  ilani i - tul-lu- Su 


65. zt-hi-ma be-lum kab-lu-us Ti-a-ma-ti i-bar-ri 


66. sa ™“Kin-gu ha-’-vri-§a i-se-’-a me-ki-sus 


67. 2 - na - at - tal - ma e- st ma - lak - Su 


68. sa-pi-th te-ma-su-ma st-ha-ti ip-Sit-su 


69. « alant” ri - su - su a-tli- ku i- di - su 
70. t-mu-vul . . -almi-ta a-Sa-ri-du— nt-til-Su-un 1-84 


7i. [d]a-di-[ . . J8 Te-amat ul u-ta-ri hi-Sad-sa 
72.t-na Ssap-t{?] sa lul-la-a? u-kal sar-ra-a-ti® 





There is just room upon the tablet for this restoration. 

? It is possible that more than two signs are wanting. 

* In the broken portion of the line there is not room for more 
than three signs. 

* Jensen reads sam-mi-im ta-m{?]-7, “a plant of magical power.” 
If, however, fa and 7 are parts of the same word it is certain that at 
least two signs are wanting between them. 

5 The verb is possibly not to be taken from za¢alu, but should 
perhaps be transliterated 7-dul-/u-su; see above, p. 13, note 11. 


MARDUK SETS OUT. 67 





58. 


59. 
60. 


61. 


62. . 


63. 
64. 


66 
67 


68 
69. 
7O 


71. 
72. 


With overpowering brightness his head was 

crowned. 
Then he set out, he took his way, 
And towards the [rag]ing Tiamat he set his face. 
On his lipsheheldf . . . J, 

. . ]*he grasped in his hand. 

Then hey beheld* him, the gods beheld him, 
The gods his fathers beheld him, the gods beheld 


him. 


. And the lord drew nigh, he gazed upon the 


inward parts of Tiamat, 
He perceived the muttering® of Kingu, her spouse. 
As (Marduk) gazed, (Kingu) was troubled in his 
gait, 
His will was destroyed and his motions ceased. 
And the gods, his helpers, who marched by his side, 
Beheld their leader’s[ . . . Jj,’ and their sight 
was troubled. 
But Tiamat[ . . . ], she turned not her neck, 
With lips that failed not® she uttered rebellious 
words :° 





5 See above, p. 12, note z. 

7 The sign is am or kar; not more than one sign is wanting 
before it. : 

5 The first sign in the line seems to be zd; there is not more 
than one sign wanting. 

® Lit., ‘‘that were full”; Z/-/a-a is probably Perm. Piel from 
lala (cf. H-W-B., p. 377): 

%© Lit., ‘she held fast.rebellion.” 


68 CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV. 





73-( . . flaf 2. © J) Sa be-lum ilani ti-bu-ka 
74. [aS]-ru-us-Su-un ip-hu-ru su-nu as -ruk-ka® 


75. [ts-S¢]8-ma be-lum a-bu-ba kakka- su vraba(a) 
76.[ . . . Ti)*-amat sa th-mi-lu ki-a-am  is-pur-4 
77-[ + + 6 6 Jo ba-a-ti e-lS na-sa-ti- [ma] 
78 [ 2. 1. «  ]8-ba-ki-ma di-ki a-na-an-[ti] 
79. soe ee ee ) abe -Su-nu i-da-[ ... ] 
80. [ . . . . ]-Su-ne ta-azi-rvi? ri-e-[ 1... J 


8.f . . . “Kin- glu a-na fa-'-ru- ¢t[i>- ki] 
82.[ . . . . ]-se a@-na pa-va-as “ An-nu-ti” 





83. - 1 + lim-nyi-e-ti te- fe -’ -e - ma 
84.{ . . . alani? abee)-a li-mut-ta-hi® — tuk-tin-ni 
85. [le sla-an-da-at um-mat-ki lu rit-ku-su su-nu kakhé® -ki 


86. en-di-im-ma a-na-ku u ka-a-si i ni-pu-us Sa-as-ma 





* One sign is wanting at the beginning of the line, and there are 
traces of three signs after éa. 

? As the beginning of 1. 73 is wanting, the meaning of Tiamat’s 
taunt is not quite clear. : 

% Conjectural restoration ; cf. 1. 37. 

* Possibly restore [a-na 77 ]-amat. 
Probably restore [af-/2-ma ra]-ba-a-tt. 
Possibly restore [w-b2-lu lib]-ba-ki-ma. 


MARDUK REPROACHES TIAMAT. 69 





px 
74. 


75: 
76. 
77: 


78. 


79+ 
80. 
81. 
82. 


83. 
84. 


85. 


86. 


“T . . . . | thy coming as lord of the gods, 

“From their places have they gathered, in thy 
place are they!””? 

Then the lord [raised]* the thunderbolt, his 
mighty weapon, 

[And against]* Tiamat, who was raging, thus he 
sent (the word) : 

“[Thou]* art become great, thou hast exalted 
thyself on high, 

“ And thy [heart hath prompted]* thee to call to 
battle. . 

oe . . © |theirfathers[ . . . J, 

oP ay theirf[ . . . ]thou hatest{ . . . ], 

s [Thou hast exalted Raat to be Fibyisp spouse, 

“Thou hast . . . J] him, that, even as Anu, 
he should issue decrees. 

“fo... . ] thou hast followed after evil, 

“ And [against]” the gods my fathers thou hast 
contrived thy wicked plan. 

“ Let then thy host be equipped, let thy weapons 
be girded on! 

“ Stand! I and thou, let us join battle!” 





7K. 5,4200¢, fa-gir-rt. 

® Possibly restore [/u-Sa-as-hi ™ Kin-g]u; cf. Tablet I, ll. 128 
and 135, and the parallel passages in Tablets II and UI. 

®* K. 5,420¢ gives traces of ¢2. 

°K. 5,420¢, “A 2...) ]. MK. 5.4200, feei-[ 2... 

” Probably restore [a-na iJani.  K. 5,4200, ha. 

4 No, 93,051, ka-a-Su. 


7O 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV. 





87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
gl. 


92. 


93- 


95 
96. 


97. 
98 


99 
100. 


Iol. 
102, 


103. 


Ti -amat an-ni-ta i-na_  Se- mi - sa 


mah ~ pu -tis’* i-te-mi? u-sa-an-ni' te-en- Sa 


ts - st - ma Ti-amat Sit - mu- ris? e-li-ta 
Sur - St8® ma-al-ma-lis? it-ru-ra is-da-a-[sa]® 
@-man-ni Sip-ta it-ta-nam-di ta-a-{sa]® 
u ildnt sa tahéet u-sa-’-lu Su-nu kakké*-su-u{n}™ 
in-nin-du-ma Ti-amat abkal ilani® * Marduk 


Sa-as-meS it-tib-bu kit-ru-bu ta-ha- ae -is 


us-pa-ri-ir-ma be-lum sa-pa-ra-su u-sal-mi-st 


im-hul-lu™ sa-bit ar-ka-ti pa-nu-us-§u™ um-das-sir 


ip-te-ma pi-t-sa Ti-amat a-na la-’-a-ti-su 
im-Qul-la us-te-ri-ba ana la ka-tam Ssap-ti-su 


ig-2u-ti sare" kar -Sa-sa  i-sa-nu-ma 
in-ni-haz lib-ba-sa-ma pa-a-sa us-pal-ki 


is- suk mul-mul-la th-te-pi ha-vas-sa' 
kir-bi-Sa  u-bat-ti-ka u-sal-lit lib-ba 


th - mi - Si - ma nap - sa - tas u-bal-k 





* No. 93,051, tna Se-me-e-Sut. * No. 93,051, f-75. 

% No. 93,051, me. + No. 93,051, 2x. 

5 No. 93,051, 72-28. ® No. 93,051, [Sec ]¥. 

7 No. 93,051, [2-2 ]§. 5 No. 93,051, tt-ru-ru i8-da-a-ku. 
® No. 93,051, Za-a-Su. 


THE DEATH OF TIAMAT. 71 





87. 


88. 


89. 


go. 


gl. 


92. 


93. 


94- 


95: 
96. 


97: 
98. 


99. 
100. 


When Tiamat heard these words, 

She was like one possessed, she lost her reason. 

Tiamat uttered wild, piercing cries, 

She trembled and shook to her very foundations. 

She recited an incantation, she pronounced her 
spell, 

And the gods of the battle cried out for their 
weapons. 

Then advanced Tiamat and Marduk, the counsellor 
of the gods ; 

To the fight they came on, to the battle they drew 
nigh. 

The lord spread out his net and caught her, 

And the evil wind that was behind (him) he let 
loose in her face. 

As Tiamat opened her mouth to its full extent, 

He drove in the evil wind, while as yet she had 
not shut her lips. 

The terrible winds filled her belly, 

And her courage was taken from her, and her 
mouth she opened wide. 


101. He seized the spear and burst her belly, 


102. 


103. 


He severed her inward parts, he pierced (her) 
heart. 
He overcame her and cut off her life ; 





© K. 5,420¢, u~fa--a-lu; No. 93,051,[ - - + -s ja-a-lu. 
U No. 93,051, kak-Re-Ku. % K, 5,420¢, me. 
KK. 5,4200¢, da. , «K. 5,420¢, fa. 
* K. 5,420¢, sum. 8 K. §,420¢, su. 


72 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET Iv, 











104. sa - lam - Sa! id-da-a eli - $a Z-2a-sa* 
108. ud - tu Tt - amat a-lik pa-ni t-na-ru 
106 ki-is-ri-sa up-tar-ri-ra pu-hur-sa is-sap-ha 
107. % tldint vt - su - Sa a-l- ku i- di - sa 
108, 2t-tar-ru ip-la-fiu u-sah-fi-ru ar-kat-su-un§ 
1OQ. @ - Se - Sa - ma nap - sa ~ tus e@- fi - 1M 
110. ni-ta la-mu-u na-par-su-dis* la h-’-e 
Vii. [e]- str -Su-nu-t- mai kakke#-su-nu u~ sab-bir 
112. sa~pa-vrif na-du-ma ka-ma-ris us - bu 
113.0... ]o+du tub-ha-a-ti ma-lu-u du-ma-mu 
114, Se-7it- su na-Su-u  ha-lu-u hi suk - his 
115. w is-ten es-vit nab-ni-ti su-ut pul-ha-ti t-sa-nu® 
116. 192 -tl-la gal-li-e a-li-ku ka-(.. .8-n]i-sa 
117. it-ta-di9 siv-vi-e-th t@-di-Su-nfu.... | 
118. ga-du tuk-ma-ti-su-nu Sa-pal-su [ik]-0[]-us ° 
1K. 5,420¢ and 79-78, 251, Sa-lam-tuk. 2K, 5.4200, 22-22-20. 
8K. 5,4.20¢, w-sah-ht-ra al-hat-su-un, 1K, 5,4.20¢, dts. 


5 The sign begins with a single horizontal wedge; we cannot 
therefore read [as]-Aup. It is possible that the first word is a verb 
in the Permansive, parallel to za-du, us-bu, and ma-lu-u; we may 
perhaps read [em]-du, and translate the line, “standing in the 
4, they were filled with lamentation.” 


THE ROUT OF THE REBEL HOST. 73 





104. He cast down her body and stood upon it. 

105. When he had slain Tiamat, the leader, 

106. Her might was broken, her host was scattered. 

1o7. And the gods her helpers, who marched by her 
side, 

108. Trembled, and were afraid, and turned back. 

109. They took to flight to save their lives ; 

110. But they were surrounded, so that they could not 
escape. 

111. He took them captive, he broke their weapons ; 

112. In the net they were caught and in the snare 
they sat down. 

113. The [ . . ] . . of the world they filled 
with cries of grief. 

114. They received punishment from him, they were 
held in bondage. ; 

115. And on the eleven creatures which she had filled 
with the power of striking terror, 

116, Upon the troop of devils, who marched at 
There fs ss ee > te 

117. He brought affliction, their strength [he . . . ]; 

118. Them and their opposition he trampled under 
his feet. 





® So K. 5,420c; in K. 3,437, etc., the sign which follows # is 
a} Ala) or [a]. . 

7 In No. 93,016 the line begins: TE-LaL-MkS, i.e. gall7”. 

® There are traces of at least three signs betwcen da and the last 
sign but one in the line, which is [#]2, or [7]r. 

® No. 93,016, #f-ta-ad-d[7'}. 

© I think there is no doubt that the sign is as. 


74 


CREATION SERIES, 


TABLET IV. 





119. 


120. 


121. 


122. 


123. 


124. 
125. 


126. 
127. 


128. 


129. 
130. 
131. 
132. 


133. 


“ 


th-mt-Su-ma 


2 ~ kim - Su - ma 


t-na  ki-§tb-bt 


as - tu lim - ni - 5u® 
ai - bul mut -ta-'- du 
ir-nit-ti An-Sar e-li 


iti ™ Dug-ga(-je su*-a[ . 
dupsimati® 


th-nu-kam-ma 


na-ki-ru9 


™ Kin-gu sa iv-tab-bu-u\ ina [e?-i)-su-un 


. emn-ni-su 


la 


Si- ma-ti- sut 


iv -tu-us> it-mu-uh 


tk-mu-u t-sa-au 


¥ Yee 
U-SA-PU-U SU-VI-Samt 


ha-li-is  uS- si - But 


ni-is-mat ™ Nu-dim-mud tk-Su-du Marduk kar-du 


elt ilini*® ka-mu-tum 


gi-r0-1g 
tk-bu-us-ma be - lum 
tna mi-t-su la pa-di-t 


> 


u- par -ri-? - ma 


fa-a-ru il-ta- nu 


i-mu-ru-ma ab-bu-su 


Ti-amat™ ga tk-mu-u 


si-bit-ta-Su u-dan-nin-ma 


i-tu-ra ar-ki-is 


Sa Tt-a-ma-tum™ i-sid-sa 
u-nat-ti mu-uh-ha 
us - la-at da-mi-sa 
a-na pu-us-rat us-ta- bil 


th-du-u i-t- su 





1 Rm. 2, 83, ¢r-4a-bu-u. 

2 The beginning of the sign ¢ is preserved by K. 5,420¢. 

® The sign is clearly written and is sw, not /a as Delitzsch and 
Jensen transliterate it; the end of the line may perhaps be restored 
as Su-a-[Su] tm-ni-Su. 

* Rm. 2, 83, da si-m[a@l- . . 


}. 


MARDUK RETURNS TO TIAMAT. 75 





119. 
120. 
12k. 
122. 
123. 


124. 
125. 


126. 
127. 


128. 
129. 
130. 


131. 
132. 


133. 


Moreover, Kingu, who had been exalted over 
them, 

He conquered, and with the god Dug-ga he 
counted him. 

He took from him the Tablets of Destiny that 
were not rightly his, 

He sealed them with a seal and in his own 
breast he laid them. 

Now after the hero Marduk had conquered and 
‘cast down his enemies, 

And had made the arrogant foe even like... , 

And had fully established Ansar’s triumph over 
the enemy, 

And had attained the purpose of Nudimmud, 

Over the captive gods he strengthened his 
durance, 

And unto Tiamat, whom he had conquered, he 
returned. 

And the lord stood upon Tiamat’s hinder parts, 

And with his merciless club he smashed her skull. 

He cut through the channels of her blood, 

And he made the North wind bear it away into 
secret places. 

His fathers beheld, and they rejoiced and were 
glad ; 





5 Rm. 2, 83, ev-dus. 5 Rm. 2, 83, d2m-nt-e-3u. 

™ Rm. 2, 83, bz. ® Rm, 2, 83, mut-la-du. 

* Rm. 2, 83, elf na-hi-ri. 1 Rm. 2, 83, and ka-mu-u-ft. 
" Rm. 2, 83 probably read fa-d Je. 

@ Rm. 2, 83, Li-a-ma-H. 3 Rm. 2, 83, [7 ]-a[mas]. 


76 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV, 





134. 
135. 
136. 


137. 
138. 


139. 
140. 
141. 


142. 


143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 


Si-di-e Sul-ma-nu 


t-nu-uh-ma  be-lum 
Sir ku-pus u-sa-a-2u 
th-pi-$t-ma ki-ma nu-nu 


av vee. ae 
tt-t5-lu-us-$a 1s-ku-nam-ma 


7§-du-ud par-ku ma-as-sa-rit 
me-e-Sa la Ssu-sa-a 
Samé(e) i-bi-ir 

us-tam-hi-ir mi-ik-vat apsi 


tm-Su-uh-ma be-lum sa 
es-gal-la tam-Ssi-la-su 

E - $ar - va 
™ Bal 4 ™ Bea 


es - gal-la 
mh Anum 


u-sa-bi-lu 


y v y 
SU-NiU ANA Sa-a-Su 


Sa-lam-tu-us t-bar-ri 
t-ban-na-a— ntk-la-a-ti 


mas-di-e ana S$tna-Su 


Sa-ma-ma u-sa-al- lil? 


bi - it 
um -ta-'~ ir 


u“- S@ - as - 
Su - nu - th 
as-va-tum t-hi-tam-ma 


Su - bat ™ Nu - dim - mud 


apsi bi-nu-tu-us- su 
u-ki-in E - sar - va 
Sa tb-nu-u Sa-ma- mu 


ma-ha-2i-Su-un us-ram-na 





1 The meaning of ku-pu is uncertain; Jensen takes Sir as a 
determinative, and assigns to ku-fu the meaning “trunk, body.” 
2 See above, p. 3, note 14. 


THE STABLISHING OF THE HEAVENS, 77 





134. 
135. 
136. 


137. 
138. 


139. 
140. 
141. 


142. 


143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 


Presents and gifts they brought unto him. 

Then the lord rested, gazing upon her dead body 

While he divided the flesh of the . . . |} 
and devised a cunning plan. 

He split her up like a flat fish into two halves ; 

One half of her he stablished as a covering for 
heaven.? 

He fixed a bolt, he stationed a watchman, 

And bade them not to let her waters come forth. 

He passed through the heavens, he surveyed the 
regions (thereof), 

And over against the Deep* he set the dwelling 
of Nudimmud. 

And the lord measured the structure of the Deep, 

And he founded E-Sara, a mansion like unto it. 

The mansion E-Sara which he created as heaven, 

He caused Anu, Bél, and Ea in their districts to 
inhabit. 





3’ For the reason of this change in the use of the word afsz, in 
contrast with its personal meaning in the First Tablet, see the 
Introduction. 


The Gifth TaBeet. 


1. u- ba-as-Sim man-za-sa an ilani ‘vabatit) 
2. kakkabani*® tam -Sil-su-nu  lu-ma-st® us'-2t-iz 
3. u-ad-di Satta mi-is-ra-ta u-ma-as- sir 
4. X/l arhe” = kakkabani® TTT 44" ys ~ gi ~ ig 
5. if-tu u-mi sa Ssatti us-sli . . . ] wsgu-ra-ti 
6. u-Sar-sid man-2za-az ™ Ni-bi-rvi* ana ud-du-u rik-si-su-un 
a-na la e-pis an-nt la e-gu-u ma-na-ma 


man-2za-as “Bel u “E-a u-[k}n it-te- su 
ip-te-ma abullé* ina gi-h ki-lal-la-an 


oo aos 


Si-ga-ru ud-dan-ni-na su-me-la u im-na 


Il. tna ka~bit-ti-Sa-ma*t is-ta-kan e-la-a-ti 
12, “Nannar-ru us-te-pa-a  wu-sa  ik-ti-pa 


13. w-ad-di-sum-ma $su-uR-nat mu-Si a-na ud-du-u u-me 


14. ar-hi-sam la na-par-ka-a ina a~gi-[e] u-sir 





+ The catch-line on the Fourth Tablet, preserved by No. 93,016, 
reads: u-ba-as-Sim ma an-za-2a an tant ra bi-u-tum. 
? A list of the seven /vmast-stars, or constellations, is given in 


The Gifth Tablet. 


. He.(iie. Marduk) made the stations for the great 
gods ; . 

2. The stars, their images, as the stars of the Zodiac,’ 
he fixed. 

3. He ordained the year and into sections he divided it; 

4. For the twelve months he fixed three stars. 

5. After he had[... | the days of the year[... | 
images, 

6. He founded the station of Nibir® to determine 
their bounds ; 

7. That none might err or go astray, 

8. He set the station of Bél and Ea along with him. 

9. He opened great gates on both sides, 

10. He made strong the bolt on the left and on the 

right. 

11. In the midst‘ thereof he fixed the zenith ; 

12, The Moon-god he caused to shine forth, the night 
he entrusted to him. 

3. He appointed him, a being of the night, to deter- 
mine the days ; 

14. Every month without ceasing with the crown he 

covered (?) him, (saying) : 





IIR, pl. 57, No. 6, ll. 53-56; see further, Jensen, Kosmologie, 
pp. 47 f. 

5 Le. Jupiter. 

4 This meaning is conjecturally assigned to habzviu, 


80 CREATION SERIES, TABLET y, 





15. ¢-na v8 arhi-ma na-pa-hi [i-nal ma-a-ti 
16, karv-nt na-ba-a-ta' ana ud-du-u VI u-mi? 


17¢-na  timi VILEAN — a-ga-a [Sum - sul - la 


18. [wmje XIV-tu lu-u su-tam-hu-rat mes-l[d... ju 
19. [e-7]u-ma  Samas ina sid Samé(e) [.... }ha 


20.[ 2... a su-tak-si-ba-am-ma bint ar{ . . Ja-us’ 


alte 


2u[....]..4 a-na far-ra-an ™ Samas Ssu-tak-rib-[ma] 


p 
22. [ena tind... |*4" lu Su-tam-hu-rat ™ Samas lu sa-na[..] 


23-0 2 6 1. . Je Ste um> ba-'’-t u-ru-up- sa 


24. f 1. ee we ee Se-tak-ri-ba-ma di-na di-na 


Bee bow Seg ee oe ae a ole] aa eee 
260 | a0 Sey Ga a ee ee oe So) Se ee eee 





1 na-ba-a-la is possibly the Perm. from zadz#; Jensen takes it as 
the Infinitive from maéafu with an Imperative meaning. 

2 The reading of VZ w-md is certain. K. 3,567 + K. 8,588 reads 
VI... J-mt, while the duplicate K. 8,526 reads[| . . . Ju-mu 
(see also First Steps in Assyrian, p. 160). George Smith’s reading 
Sa-ma-mu, “to determine heaven,” which has been followed by 
Zimmern and Delitzsch, gives little sense; Jensen reads a(s)a(?)-me, 
which he does not translate. The reading ana ud-du-w VI u-mt, 


MARDUK’S CHARGE TO THE MOON-GOD. 81 





15. “ At the beginning of the month, when thou 
shinest upon the land, , 

16. “ Thou commandest! the horns to determine six 
days,” 

17. “ And on the seventh day to [divide] the crown. 

18. “ On the fourteenth day thou shalt stand opposite, 


the half [ . . . ]. 

19. “ When the Sun-god on the foundation of heaven 
[i.e a2et feng ] thes; 

20.“ The{ . . . Jthoushalt causeto . . . , 
and thou shalt make his—_ . . . |. 

ar “[.. . . J]. . unto the path of the Sun-god 
shalt thou cause to draw nigh, 

22. “[And on the . . . day] thou shalt stand 
opposite, and the Sun-god shall .. [ .. . ] 

23. “[ 2. . . 4. . . . « J] to traverse her way. 

24. “f 2. . . . | thou shalt cause to draw nigh, 
and thou shalt judge the right. 

a5 “E . 2 ew ew «J to destroy 

26 ky ee ie ke ku De eames 


“ ” 





“to determine six days,” agrees well with 1. 13, where Marduk is 
described as appointing the Moon-god a-na ud-du-u u-me, “to 
determine the days”; moreover, the phrase is appropriately 
followed in 1, 17 by the statement of the Moon-god’s duty on the 
seventh day. 

5 One sign is wanting. * Perhaps read a7da’t. 

® Possibly read zé¢u. 


82 


CREATION’ SERIES, TABLET V. 





(66) 


(67) 
(68) 
(69) 
(70) 
(71) 
(72) 
(73) 
(74) 
(75) 


(76) 
7) 
(78) 


(79) 
(80) 


(81) 


(82) 


[The following twenty-two lines are taken from K. 3,4492, 
and probably form part of the Fifth Tablet.*] 


uw-([. ] 
sar - ba - bu [ J 
BS ES Pe a's ] 
ina E ~ sag - gil [ ] 
kun - na [ | 
man - 2a - age “{ 7] 
want” § rabute” [ fae 

thant PAB Ne oo Aces ent Bb OR os oe ne ed wy 
im-hur-ma[... 2.2... eee ee J 


sa-pa-ra Sa t-te-ip-pu-Su i-mu-ru ilani® [abé*-su 


emu-rvuma “Rasta kit nu-uk-ku-lat [ip?-sit-sa 


ip-$it i-te-ip-pu-su i-na-a-diu 


is-3i-ma ™ A-num ina puhur ilani® { . 


Rasta it - ta - Stk card (MEraeaere oan | 


im-bi-ma Sa *kasti ki-a-am  [Sumé” - Sa 


ag-su a-vik lu is-te-nu-um-ma_ sa-nu [ 





Sal-su sum-$a **** Kastu ina Samée) [ . 





1 If K. 3,449@ forms part of the Fifth Tablet, the position of the 
fragment may be roughly ascertained from the fact that the end of 
the obverse and the beginning of the reverse are preserved. The 
first line preserved was probably not earlier, though it may have 
been some Jines later, than the 66th line of the text. 


MARDUK’S BOW IN HEAVEN. 83 





[The following twenty-two lines are taken from K. 3,4492, 
and probably form part of the Fifth Tablet.'} 
(66). [ 


(O7)m Soc, Be ‘[e ames Fhe oP gr ak cir Stig cs oar a] 

(68) From [ . 

(69) In E-sagil [ 

(70) To establish [ 

(71) The station of [ 

(72) The great gods [ 

(73) The gods [ 

(74) Hetookand [ . . ] 

(75) The gods [his fathers] beheld ies net Weick he 
had made, 

(76) They beheld the bow and how [its work] was 
accomplished. 

(77) They praised the work which he had done 
[ } 





(78) Then Anu raised [the . . . . J] in the 
assembly of the gods. 

(79) He kissed the bow, (saying), “Itis[.... J!” 

(80) And thus he named the names of the bow, 
(saying), 

(81) “‘Long-wood’ shall be one name, and the 
second name [shallbe . . . . J, 

(82) “And its third name shall be the Bow-star, in 
heaven [shall it . . . . J!” 





* The traces upon the tablet are possibly those of wp. For the 
restoration cf. IVR, pl. 12, Obv., 1. 24; Delitzsch suggests the 
reading epiissa. 


84 CREATION SERIES, TABLET V. 





(83) w-Rin-ma  gi-is-gal-la-sa [ 
(84) wl- tu St-ma-a-ti sa [ 

(85) [7d -d]i- ma ™kussa [ 

(86)[ . . . . J da sameé[(e) 
(87)[ - . + . ]- meef 


[The following traces of the last thirteen lines of the Fifth Tablet are 
taken from the reverse of K. 11,641 and from the reverse of K. 8,526.! 


(128) [ 2. we wee ee Jeet [ 


(29) [ 2 6 ee w]e te n-th ne - | 
(90)[ 2 1. ee we wt bla- su ee 


(131) [ . rrr on 2, ce ee 


(32)[ 2. ee ee ne le laf a Ai 
2. Eland t- kab - bul - u 


(133) Do. ee es 
(34) [ . 6. . J samee)? [ . 
(35)[ . . . « ] ma-a- ru-k[u- un 


(136) [ 6 ew we ew Je et it -[ 
(137)[ 2 6. ee J we bal - li - itt 


(138) [ . . . mel-lam-me mit... | ust 


(30) [ . 1. . | f@ um-[ . 2. ) ne-[ 


CEA) ise ce detect as we ete ah] 


ee a 





ey ei ee 


ni - 2 - te 





1 The reverse of K, 8,526 gives traces of the last three lines of 
the text; the greater part of the traces are taken from the reverse 
of K. 11,641, The obverse of K. 11,641 gives portions of ll. 14~22 ; 


for the text, see Appendix JI. 


* The reading Sama(e) is probable; there is not room on the 


tablet for the restoration ™ [Z7]-a. 


THE COMPLAINT OF THE GODS. 85 





(83) Then he fixed a station for it [ aoe ] 
(84) Now after the fate of [ . . . ....- J 
(85) [Heset]athrone [ ; ] 
(86)[ . . . . Jin heaven [ | 


[The following traces of the last thirteen lines of the Fifth Tablet are 
taken from the reverse of K. 11,641 and from the reverse of K, 8,526.!] 


(128) "— . . 2. » Jhim— . . . . - J” 
(129) “[  . Jthem[..... |” 
(130)860 kos ces, “Phim sae ce 
(7331) “—[ -. - Jthm[ ..... J” 
(132) “[ ... Jtheir— . ... Jmay[.... ]” 


(993)h DE eS ew es ‘| the gods spake, 
(134)[ +. + + + ]theheavens— . . . Js? 
(735) “[ + +. + your}Json[ . . . 











(136) “[....Jjourf.... ]hathhef.... ]” 
(137) “[.... . ] he hath caused to live... . J” 
(138) “[ . . . . Jsplendourf . . . - J” 
(139) “[ Jnote[y se ee fet)” 
(140) “[. jJwef 2... J!” 





3 In the speech that follows it may be conjectured that the gods 
complained that, although Marduk had endowed the heavens with 
splendour and had caused plants to live upon the earth, yet there 
were no shrines built in honour of the gods, and there were no 
worshippers devoted to their service; see below, p. 88, note 1. 


The Sixth Tablet. 


1. ™ Marduk Bik - v0 tlant ina Se - mi - su) 


2. [wb]? - bal lib-ba-su i-ban-na-a [nik-la-a-ti)§ 


3. [p]-su pi-t-Su a-na “E-a_ [i*~- sak - kar} 


4. [Sa]® ina lib-bi-Su us-ta-mu-u t-nam-din [ana S§a-a-su]® 


5. da-mi™ ly-uk-sur-ma ts-si-im-[tuju® lu-[ . . . J? 
6. lu-us-stz-ma améla(a) lu a-melu..[... |] 
7. lu-ub-ni-ma  amélaja) a-sib [— 2... JY 





' The end of the line has been restored from the catch-line of 
Tablet V, preserved by K. 8,526; the traces upon-K. 3,567, etc., 
suggest the reading ima Se-[m]i-[e-stu]; K. 11,641 reads [7 ]na 
Se-me-[. . 

? Conjectura! restoration. 

* For this restoration, cf. Tablet IV, 1. 136. 

4 The beginning of the sign 7 is visible. 

5 One sign only is missing at the beginning of the line. 

® Conjectural restoration. 

7 It is possible that the final vowel of da-m7 is not the 7 of the 
1 sing. pron. suffix; in that case the phrase should be translated 
“Blood will I take.” In view of the fact, however, that, according 
to Berossus, Bél first formed mankind from his own blood mixed with 
earth, it appears to me preferable to take the 7 as the pron. suffix 
and translate da-mz as “ my blood.” Berossus does not state that 
Bél used his own bone for forming man, and this agrees with the 


The Sirth Tablet. 
1. When Marduk heard the word of the gods,' 


2, His heart prompted him and he devised [a cunning 
plan]. 

3. He opened his mouth and unto Ea [he spake], 

4. [That which]|* he had conceived in his heart he 
imparted [unto him]®: 

5. “ My blood? will I take and bone § will I [fashion],® 

6. “ J will make man, thatman may ..[... } 


7. “1 will create man who shall inhabit [the earth],’ 





absence of the.pronominal suffix from 7s-gi-¢m-[tu]m. According 
to my rendering of the line, Marduk states his purpose of forming 
man from his own blood, and from bone which he will create; see 
further, the Introduction. 

® The traces of the last sign of the word appear to be those of 
tum. Ithink there can be no doubt that 2s-s¢-zm-[/u]m corresponds 
to the Hebrew ‘esem, “bone,” which is employed in Gon. ii, 23, in 
the phrase ‘esem measdmat, “bone of my bones.” In connection 
with the feminine form of the word 7s-s¢-m-[éu]m, it may be noted 
that, in addition to the plur. ‘dsamim, the fem. form ‘ésami¢h is also 
found. 

® The verb may perhaps be restored as /u-[ud-ni], as suggested 
in the translation. : 

” The last word of the line may perhaps be restored as ¢rsitim, 
as suggested in the translation. 


88 CREATION SERIES, - TABLET VI. 





8. lu-u en-du dullu ilani-ma su-nu lu-u pa-pa[!... J 
g. lu-Sa-an-ni-ma_al-ka-ka-ti ilani lu-nak-ki-lir ... J? 
10. is-te-nis’ lu kub-bu-tu-ma* a-na liin-na lwu [... 


11. 2- pu-ul-lu-su-ma *"E-a a-ma-tum i-alak-kar 


5 


12. [ . . |-¢[eae S]ee-ret sal-fu(?)-tene* Sa tléni u-sa-an-[... | 


13.[ . . 2. . t]e%ad-nam-ma is-ten a-[, ] 
14.[ .. . Win-nja'-ab-bit-ma nise™ hil-[ 

i [ 2. ee ee ew ]- ma lint 5 

16. ]-na-din-ma su-nu li-[ ... J 


[ 
7. . 1 ee ef erma ilénd [ 
WBE... 1. we J) @-ra t-[nJam-[ 
19 [eo ey 2 oe ek aa ee 
2o.[ . 1... 1. “A)-nun-na-ki [ 
21. Met pote 8 Se oe Re Re Ee betes 











1 The word is probably papahu; literally the line reads, “ Let 
the service of the gods be established, and as for them let [their] 
shrines [be built].” It is interesting to note the reason that is 
here implied for the creation of mankind, i.e., that the gods may 
have worshippers. There is clearly a reference to this in 1. 29 of 
the Seventh Tablet, where, after referring to Marduk’s mercy upon 
the gods, his enemies, the text goes on a-na pa-di-Su-nu tb-nu-u 
a-me-lu-tu, ‘‘ For their forgiveness did he create mankind.” 

2 It is probable that the end of the line contained some 
expression parallel to a/-ka-ha-d2, 

3 It seems to me preferable to assign to the Piel of [Aadasu] its 
usual meaning “‘to oppress,” rather than to render the passage as 


THE REASON OF MAN’S CREATION. 89 








10. 


It. 
12. 


13. 
14. 


15. 
16, 


18. 
19. 
20. 
2. 








“ That the service of the gods may be established, 

and that [their] shrines’ [may be built]. 
. But I will alter the ways of the gods, and I will 

change [their paths] ;? 

“ Together shall they be oppressed,’ and unto 
evil shall [they . . . . }” 

And Ea answered him and spake the word : 

ca ieee \the{ . . . . J of the gods 
I have [changed] * ; 

[ .... J]. . andone. [| ... J 

[ . +». shall be dejstroyed’ and men will I 

[... . . jand the gods— .. . - 

[.... J. . andthey[ .. . . J 

[ . + + J. . andthegodst . . . . ] 

[nd ee oe wr “the gods lo: en do] 

[ .. . . . Jthe Anunnaki[ 2. . . | 





“ Together shall they be honoured.” The sense seems to be that 
Marduk, by the creation of man, will establish the worship of the 
gods, but at the same time will punish the gods for their complaints, 
It is possible that in his speech that follows Ea dissuades Marduk 
from carrying out the second part of his proposal. 

4 The signs at the beginning of the line are not very clear. 
The signs read as w/, $a, and Zu are probably not to be taken as 
the single character #4. ° 

5 Possibly, “1 have [related |.” 

® Possibly [ Ja. 

’ The word is conjecturally restored. 


go CREATION SERIES, TABLET VI. 





{The rest of the text is wanting ! with the exception of the 
last few lines of the tablet, which read as follows. ] 


TSS ID) ‘sg Be ee we Sb i ee ee OT 2 ara 
£36, DS Ge te ge oe, Ye! eras GA al oer: ar 
140. ki-¢ ma-[ 2... 1. J] me f[ aa | 
141. -du-u [ .... ]J-mu-u [.. oa 
142. ¢-na  Up-su-ukkin-na-ka  uS- ta-ad-[ wf 
143. Sa ma-ru kar-va-du mu-tir [gi-mil-li-su-nu . . . | 
144. ni-¢-nu Sa za-ni-nu ul-lu-[ ..... ] 
145. u-si-bu-ma ina pupri-su-nu — t-nam-bu-[ ] 
146.[ .. . }se na-gab-su-nu u-zak-k[a-ru-su . . . J]? 





1 It is probable that the missing portion of the text corresponded 
closely with the account of the creation of man and animals given 
by Berossus; for a further discussion of this subject, see the 
Introduction. The tablet K. 3,364 (Cum. Texts, part xiii, pl. 29 f.) 
has been thought to belong to the Creation Series, and to contain 
the instructions given by Marduk to man after his creation. Had 
this been so, it would have formed part of the Sixth Tablet. On 
plates lxiv ff. of Vol. II is published the text of a Neo-Babylonian 
tablet, No. 33,851, which gives a duplicate text to K. 3,364; and 
in Appendix II I have given reasons for believing that the text 
inscribed upon K. 3,364 and No. 33,851 has no connection with 


THE LAST ASSEMBLY OF THE GODS. gt 





[The rest of the text is wanting ' with the exception of the 
last few lines of the tablet, which read as follows.] 


T38e[, e fe Ck a wee wD | 
P30u(b eta Se Bema Al eh | 
140. When [ . .... J]. £ j 
141. They rejoiced [ . . J. . | 


142. In Upgukkinnaku they set [their dwelling]. 

143. Of the heroic son, their avenger, [they cried]: 

144. “ We, whom he succoured, . . [ . . . J!” 

145. They seated themselves and in the assembly they 
~namedfhim . . . . J, 

146. They all [cried aloud (?)], they exalted [him . .. | 





the Creation Series, but is part of a long composition containing 
moral precepts. Another fragment which it has been suggested 
belongs to one of the later tablets of the Creation Series is 
K. 3,445 +R. 396 (Cun. Texts, part xiii, pl. 24f.; cf also its 
duplicate K. 14,949, pl. 24); but there are strong reasons against 
the identification of the text as a fragment of the series Luma 
elif, though it may well be part of a parallel version of the Creation 
story (see further, Appendix IT). 

* The address of the gods to Marduk forms the subject of the 
Seventh Tablet of the series. 


The Seventh Tabhfet, 


1. Asar-+t Sa-rie — mi-vis-t[t' = mu-kin — t2-va-td]? 


2. ba-nu-u Se-am u ki-e mu-sle-si ur-ki-ti}® 


= 


3. ™ Asaru-alim sa ina bit mil-ki kab-t{u a-tar mil-ki| 


4. dant =u - tak - ku-u a- air 


a 


5. ™ Asaru-alim-nun-na ka-ru-bu nu-ur [a-bt a-li-di-§u} 





6. mus-te-Sir te-vit “A-nim ™Bal [uw ™“E-al? 


7. Su-u-ma  za-nin-Su-nu— mu-ud-du-u [ . ... | 


8. Sa Su-ku-us-su fegaliu® us-sa% [ . . . . J 


9. ™ Tu-tu ba-an  te-dis-ti-Su-nu [su - wu] 





1 No. 92,629 (catch-line), me-r[s- . . J. 

? The end of the line has been restored from the commentary 
S. 11 +5. 980, Obv., col. i, Il. 4 and 5; see Appendix I. 

3 Restored from S. 11, etc., Obv., col. i, ll. g and 10; see 
Appendix I. 

4 Restored from S. 11, etc., Obv., col. i, 1. 15 and 16, which 
gives the words a/-ru and mil-ku as occurring at the end of the 
line; the restoration a/-ru mil-ki-Su, “ whose counsel is mighty,” 
is also possible. 

5 The end of the line may perhaps be restored from the 


The Seventh Tablet. 


1. O Asari, “ Bestower of planting,” “(Founder of 
sowing],”? 

2. “ Creator of grain and plants,” “who caused [the 
green herb to spring up]!”* 

3. O Asaru-alim, “who is revered in the house of 
counsel,” ‘‘[who aboundeth in counsel],”* 

4. The gods paid homage, fear [took hold upon 
them]!* 

5. O Asaru-alim-nuna, “the mighty one,” “the 
Light of [the father who begat him],” ° 

6. “ Who directeth the decrees of Anu, Bel, [and 


Ea]!”? 
7. He was their patron, he ordained [their . . . . ]; 
8. He, whose provision is abundance, goeth forth 


g. Tutu [is]!® “He who created them anew ;” 





commentary S. 11, etc., in some such way as a-d[r 7-hu-us-su- 
nu-tt\; see Appendix I. 

* The restoration is taken from the astrological fragment, 
No. 32,574, Obv., 1. 3; see Appendix III. 

7 Conjectural restoration. ® No. 91,139 + 93,073, Aegalla(la). 

® No. 91,139, etc., w-us-s[7']. 

% Restored from the commentary R. 366-+80-7-19, 288-4293; 
Obv., ll. 1-4 (see Appendix I). The title Tutu is there explained 
as da-a-nu, “creator,” while its two component parts (ru + TU) 
occur in the Sumerian version of the line as the equivalents of 
ba-nu-u and e-di-su. 


94 CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





10. &-Hil sa-gi-su-nu-ma’  Su-nu— lu-u— [ pa-as-feu-ni]? 
11. 4b - ni - ma> — sipti* tani li ~ [nu - ful? 
12. ag-gis? lu8S te-bu-u li-ni-’-u [t-rat-su-nu]* 
13. dunt Su-us-ku-u-ma ina puhur’ tlind [.... 8 


14. ma-am-man ina tlani® Su-a-$u la um-—[mas-sa-lu] 
15." Tu-tu ™Zi-ukkin-na" na-pis-ti um-ma-ni [ilént]* 


16. Sa u-kin-nu an itlani Ssamée(e) el - lu - [t7] 
17. al-kat-su-un ts-ba-tu-ma’ u-ad-du-u [ . . . . |% 


18. ai im-ma-Si i-na® a-pa-tiM ip-Se-ta[su ... . ]8 





' No. 91,139, etc., sag-gi-Su-nu-ma, 

* Lines 10-12 have been conjecturally restored from the 
commentary R. 366, etc., Obv., ll. 5-18 (see Appendix I); the 
sentences I take as conditionals. For another occurrence of the 
verb sag@ (1, 10), see Tablet IV, 1. 12. 

5 No. 91,139, etc., [de ]d-[n]7-ma. 

4 No. 91,139, etc., S¢p-d2. 

5 No. 91,139, etc., [a ]g-gi-2%. 

5 No. 91,139, etc. du-w, 

7 No. 91,139, etc., ena pu-fur. 

® It is probable that another precative came at the end of the 
line, and if this was so the verb was given in 1. 24 of the Obv. of 
the commentary R. 366, etc. In No. 91,139, etc,, not very much 
is wanting at the end of the line. 

» No. 91,139, etc., ma-am-ma-an t-na tant. 

© No. 91,139, etc., Sa-a-su. 


THE HOMAGE OF THE GODS TO MARDUK. 95 





10. Should their wants be pure, then are they 
_ [satisfied] ;? 

11. Should he make an incantation, then are the gods 
[appeased] ;? 

12, Should they attack him in anger, he withstandeth 
(their onslaught]! ? 

13. Let him therefore be exalted, and in the assembly 
of the gods [lethim . . . . J;8 

14. None among the gods can [rival him]! 

15. Tutu is Zi-ukkina, “the Life of the host [of the 
gods],”” 

16. Who established for the gods the bright heavens. 

17. He set them on their way, and ordained [their 
path (?)];™ 

18. Never shall: his [ . . . . | deeds be for- 

, gotten among men. 





"No, 35,506, ™ Zi-ukhin. 

" The end of the line is conjecturally restored from K. 2,107 
K. 6,086, Obv., col. ii, 1. 29 (see pl. lxii), which explains the 
title ™ Z1-UKKIN as nap-Sal nap-har tani”. 

3 No. 35,506 and K. 8,522, a-na. 

M No. 35,506, ts-ba-tu-u, 

% Some such word as ur-ha-Su-nu should possibly be restored 
at the end of the line; for a fragment of the commentary to the 
line, see Appendix I. 

’ K, 8,522, ina. 

" K, 8,522 and No. 35,506, a-pa-a-tt. 

* According to S. 11 +S. 980, Obv., col. ii, 1. 7, a word 
ku-u[l- . . . ] occurred at the end of the line, but this is not 
certain, as the commentary evidently gives a variant reading for 
the beginning of the line (see Appendix I); Jensen's suggested 
restoration is disproved by No. 35,506 (see pl. xlvi). 


96 CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





19. ™Tu-tu ™Zi-azag Sal-sis’ im-bu-u  mu-kil'  te-Lil-té 
20. 2 sa-a-ri  fa-a-bi —be-el_— taS-me-e = ma-ga-ri? 
21. mu-Sab-Si si-im-vi u® ku-bu-ut-te-e mu-hin hegalli & 
22. Sa mimma-ni> i-su® ana ma-’-di-e’ u-tir-ru 


23. t-na pu-us-ki dan-ni® ni-si-nu® SsGr-su  ta-a-bu 
24. Uk-bu-u lit-ta-’-du"™ lid-lu-la® da-l-li-su 


25. ™ Tu-tu¥™ A ga-azag ina™ ribitt)" li-sar-ri-hu ab-ra-a-te™ 
26. be-el'®  Sip-tu'® —ellitim(tim)” = mu-bal-lit® § — mia -t-td 


27. Sa an™ ilani ka-mu-ti® ir-Su-u ta-at-ru% 
28. ap-sa-na en-du™® u-Sa-as-si-ku® eli ilani*™™ na-ki-vi-su® 





1 The text of the commentary read mu-kin, i.e. “the Founder of 
Purification ” ; for other variant readings in the line, see Appendix I. 
® The text of Il. 20 and 21 corresponds to that of the 
commentary. 
5 w is omitted by Nos. 91,139 + 93,073 and 35,506. 
* No. 91,139, etc., hegalla(la). 
No. 91,139, etc., [a2-2 ]m-ma-n[z']. 
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., 7-s2. 
No. 91,139, etc., ma-a-di-e. 
No. 91,139, etc., [plu-us-ku [da}n-nu; No. 35,506 reads 
{ pu-u|s-ka and omits the adjective. 
» No. 35,506, m2-s7-n7. 
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., fa-ar-Su, 
No. 35,506, d2-it-fa-’-7d. 
No. 91,139, etc., U-td-iu-lu; No. 35,506, lid... . . i. 
K. 8,522, here and in ll. 33, 41, and 43, reads “ min (i.e. 


5 
6 
7 
8 


THE TITLES OF MARDUK. 97 





19. 
20. 
2l. 
22. 
24. 


25. 
20. 


27. 
28. 


Tutu as Zi-azag thirdly they named, “the 
Bringer ' of Purification,” 

“ The God of the Favouring Breeze,” “ the Lord 
of Hearing and Mercy,” 

“ The Creator of Fulness and Abundance,” “ the 
Founder of Plenteousness,” 

“ Who increaseth all that is small.” 

“In sore® distress we felt his favouring breeze,” 

Let them say, let them pay reverence, let them 
bow in humility before him ! 

Tutu as Aga-azag may mankind fourthly magnify! 

“The Lord of the Pure Incantation,’ ‘the 
Quickener of the Dead,” 

“Who had mercy upon the captive gods,” 

“ Who removed the yoke from upon the gods his 
enemies,” 





Tutu), which is written in small characters on the edge of the 
tablet. 


Mu 


No. 35,506, z-na. 

Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, 72-d2-7. 

No. 91,139, etc., 2a. 

No. 91,139, etc., 47. 

No. 91,139, etc., 87. : 

No. 91,139, etc., Sip-227; No. 35,506, [#]s-7p-4i. 
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., ed-/2-t. 
No. 35,506, /{i-7f]. 

an is omitted by No. 91,139, etc. 

No. 91,139, etc., 4a; No. 35,506, dum. 
No. 91,139, etc., 77. 

No. 35,506, dz. 

No. 91,139, etc., ka. 

Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., e-/¢ danz. 
No. 91,139, etc., Ja. 


98 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 








29.a-na pa-di-su-nu' ib-nu-u a~me~lu-tu? 
30. ri-~ me?-nu-u sa bult-lu-tu ba-su-u it-th-su 
31. u-ku-na-ma ai im-ma-sa-a a-ma-tu- su 
32. ina® pi-t sal-mat kakkadu® sa ib-na-a ka-ta-a-Su 
33. Tu-tu ™ Mu-azag ina® hansi(si)® ta-asu ellu 
pa-st-na"— Lit }®-tab-bal 

34. Sa ina Sipti-Su™ ellitim(tim)"* is-su-hu na-gab lim-nu-ti' 
a Sag-au mu-di-e lib-bi ilani® sa t-bar-ru-u kar-su 
36. e- pis lim-ni-e-ti la u-se-su-u it-ti-~su 
37. mu-kin pulriM sa ilani [ . . . . Lib -bi-Su-un 
38. mu-kan-ns la ma-gi-[vi ss... . . J 
39. mu - Se - Sir kit-te na-[ ...... ] 
40. Sa Sa - ar - u 1: oa ae | 

' See above, p. 88, note 1. 

2 No. 35,506, a-me-lu-t; No. 91,139, etc., a-me-lu-ut-/um. 

5 Nos. 35,506 and 91,239, etc., mi. 

+ Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., du-wd. 

5 Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., 7-na. 

5 No. 91,139, etc., kak-Ra-[d ]u. 

” Literally, “ the black-headed ones.” 

8 


9 
0 
u 


No. 35,506, [7 ]-na. 

No. 35,506, fa-an-iu; No. 91,139, etc., ha-a[m- . . . 
No. 35,506, e/-lu. 

No. 91,139, etc., p[a]-a--na. 


THE TITLES OF MARDUK. 909 





29. “ For their forgiveness ' did he create mankind,” 
30. “ The Merciful One, with whom it is to bestow 


life!” 

31. May his deeds endure, may they never be for- 
gotten 

32. In the mouth of mankind’ whom his hands have 
made! 


33. Tutu as Mu-azag, fifthly, his “Pure Incantation” 
may their mouth proclaim, 

34. ‘Who through his Pure Incantation hath de- 
stroyed all the evil ones!” ; 

35: Sag-zu, “who knoweth the heart* 
“ who seeth through the innermos} 

36. “ The evil-doer he hath not caus 
with him!” deleetie Go tee 

37. “ Founder of the assembly of ‘the gods,” “ ‘Twho 
. . . . | their heart!” 

38. “ Subduer of the disobedient,” Sins Sante. Se 

39. “ Director of Righteousness,” “[o. . 2 . J,” 

40. “ Who rebellion and[ . . . 2. . 1. dE” 





Y No, 91,139, etc., L-zt. 

® No. 91,139, etc., Sp-A-su. 

* No. 91,139, etc. e-H-[ . . . J; No. 35,506,[ . 2. J-dee2. 

4 No. 91,139, etc., du. 

© No. 35,506, tb-rul . . . ], 

“ No. 91,139, etc., pu-uh [ru]; the scribe has omitted the vw by 
mistake. 

Jensen suggests the restoration [mu-/7-75], i.e. “ [who 
gladdened] their heart.” 

® No. 91,139, etc., 27-28. 






100 CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





qu. [Tae- tu] ™Zi- st mu-sat)-[ 2. 6 1 we ] 
42. mu-uk-khis su-mur-~ra-t [ ..... j? 


43. [Tu - tu] Sup - kur Ssal- sis? na-si[h at- b¢]* 


44. mu-[sap|-pi-ch [ki]p>-di-su-nu [ 

45. mlu-bal- [nap-hjar rag - gf{t 

go 0...) #D... ]-& [ 

ry el ee ea ad a 


(ieee Ae 


(The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 12,830,® but 
their position in the text is uncertain.] 


eee yay 


[Be Pe Be -ra-a-te] sal-mat [hakkadi ib-ni-ma\? 









te-[e-mu . . . 1. « J 
j- gt  mu- | 

] T@t-amat [ . 1... 
] we- Tw. way 
De eset ee Wet <b FP RR ope eh 
[Roe eh Blea SIRE alan ne 


ee 





1 The reading of K. 9,267, I think, is se/ rather than Se. 

* The end of this line may perhaps be restored from K. 2,107, 
etc., col. ii, 1. 30 (see pl. Ixii and Appendix I), as na-st-th $a-bu-t0, 
‘‘who destroyed the mighty.” 

3 This does not appear to agree with ll. 25 and 33, but the 
reading of K. 9,267 is clear. : 

* The sign following za is broken, but the reading s2% is possible. 
On K. 2,107, etc., col. ii, 1. 31 the title Suh-kur is explained as 
mu-bal-lu-u at-bi, and, though the following lines give explanations 
of other titles, they contain the synonymous expressions mu-bal-lu-u 





THE TITLES OF MARDUK. 10l 





41. Tutuas Zi-si, “the[ . 2. 2 2. wee ], 
42. ‘““ Who put an end to anger,” “[who . . . . J!"? 
43- Tutu as Sub-kur, thirdly,’ “the [Destroyer of 


the foe],”* 
44. “ Who put their plans to confusion,” “[... . 4,” 
45. ‘“ Who destroyed all the wicked,” “[ . . . . J,” 
46.[ . .. . . Jletthem[. ..... J! 


[The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 12,830,° but 
their position in the text is uncertain. ] 


[He named the four quarters (of the world) ], 
mankind {he created],” 

[And upon] him understanding[ . . . . 48 

[ly woe Fe: J] amab se aio a Se 

‘ane » . jdistantt . . 2. 2... J 

[ soak vee Sapam’ 3 4 soca d ca J] 





nap-har at-bi na-st-if rag-gi and na-st-if nap-har rag-gi (see pl. \xii 
and Appendix I). 

5 The traces of the sign on K. 9,267 are those of A7p, not a@. 

° That the fragment K. 12,830 belongs to a copy of the Seventh 
Tablet is proved by the correspondence of its first two lines with 
the fragment of the commentary K. 8,299, Rev. (see pl. Ix). Its 
exact position in the gap between ll. 47 and ros is not certain. 

* The line has been conjecturally restored from the commentary 
K. 8,299, Rev., ll. 3-6; see Appendix I. 

® The first part of the line has been restored from the 
commentary K. 8,299, Rev., Il. 7~9; see Appendix I. 


102 


CREATION SERIES, TABLET VIL. 





[The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 13,761.'] 


(Oy PP Se ado 9 


(10) 


vab - bu [, 

A - gill 

ba-nu-ui [trsttim(tim)* 
Zu -lum-mu ad-di- { 


na- din mil-ki u mim- mia 


™ Mu-um-mu ba-aln 
 Mu-lil samé(e) [ . . 
Sa ana du- un - ni - | 
“Gis’- kul lit - ba -[ 


Gere dad Eo aoe eS 
™ Lugal - ab - [ * 

$A Fa, [ahs i Bc Wak Sots 
Pape | ug oe wok ee 

cf et a a 

ihe [ . 


wa 
a 





1 That the fragment K. 13,761 belongs to a copy of the Seventh 
Tablet is proved by the correspondence of its fourth, fifth, sixth, 
seventh, eighth, and ninth lines with the commentary K. 4,406, 
col. i (pls. livf., and see Appendix I). As the sixth line 
preserved by the fragment is the first line of the reverse of the 
tablet, it may be concluded that its place is about in the middle 


Rev., 


of the text. 


The arrangement of the text, however, upon different 


copies of the same tablet varies considerably, a large space being 


THE TITLES OF MARDUK. 


103 





(The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 13,761."] 


[ae 3 
(10)? [ Behe te Sot 
“The mighty one[ ...... 
Agil re 
“The Creator of [the earth * 
Zulummu i ws ew Lt 


“The Giver of counsel and of whatsoever 


Ealtece eae 


Mummu, “the Creator [of ...... J!” 


Mulil, the heavens[ . . . . we. 
Who for us: a. [Pe ah weap Ps 
Giskul, let[ . 2... . 


(so) “ Who brought the gods to naught [... . ] 


Lugal-ab[  . . . . 


“Who if [3202-6 ald ao a ees 


Pap{ . . a) Ase50) air ae, foe 
OWhiosini | ai. ee Rie he BO hme 


, 


” 











sometimes left blank at the end of the reverse; thus the reverse of 
the copy of the Seventh Tablet, of which K. 8,519 is a fragment 


(see p. 104 f.), begins at a different point. 


2 In the margin of the fragment K. 13,761 every tenth line is 


indicated by the figure ‘“ 10.” 
3 For the commentary to this line, see Appendix I. 


* Restored from the commentary K. 4,406, Rev., col. i, 1. 9. 


5 The commentary K. 4,406 presupposes a variant reading for 


this line; see Appendix I. 


104, CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





[The following lines are taken from the fragment K, 8,519 and its 
duplicate K. 13,3373! this portion of the text was not 
separated by much from that preserved by K. 13,761.?] 


6 obs ayo bd oh ce me Se a oh Re 
- kit - me - sa 
nap - har be - lim 


Sa-hka)-a e-mu-ka- Sut 


aoe 


[“ Lugal-dur-mag Sar m|\ar°-[kas tana” be-el dur-ma-hi® 


$a tna Su - bat Sarru-u- tt Sur - bu- ut 


[‘a]® ina tlani ma-? - dis gt - ru 
[* A-du-nun-na\® ma-lik ™ B-a ba-an ilani® abe” ~Su 


sa a ~ [xual tal ~ lak - tt vu - bua - th ~ su 





1 That the fragments K. 8,519 and K. 13,337 belong to two 
copies of the Seventh Tablet is proved by their correspondence 
with the commentary K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii (pl. livf.). 

2 This is clear from the fact that col. i of the reverse of 
K. 4,406 gives the commentary to the earlier lines preserved by 
the preceding fragment, K. 13,761. The three columns of the 
commentary, parts of which are preserved on one side of K. 4,406, 
are probably cols. i, ii, and iii of the reverse of the tablet; if this 
is so, it follows that the lines on K. 8,519 and K. 13,337 follow 
those on K. 13,761. But, as it is possible that K. 4,406 gives the 
last three columns of the obverse of the tablet, a conjectural 
numbering of the lines of the text has not been attempted. 

8 With the phrase [ . . . . #]ap-har de-lim, compare the 
explanations of a title of Marduk given by K. 2,107 + K. 6,086 
(see pl. Ixi and Appendix I), Obv, col. iijlg,[— . 6. . 6 
nap-har be-li a-Sa-rid nap-har be-li, “{The . . . J of all lords, 
the Chief of all lords.” 

4 The commentary K. 4,406 presupposes a variant reading for 


THE TITLES OF MARDUK. 105 





[The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 8,519 and its 
duplicate K. 13,33731 this portion of the text was not 
separated by much from that preserved by K. 13,761.7]} 


ie: bette beset 

Eo soe + ee « “the Chief (?) of ] all lords,” 

LS arot » + . . Supreme] is his might!* 

[Lugal- sauna, “the King]* of the band of the 
gods,” “the Lord of rulers,” ® 

“ Who is exalted in a royal habitation,”’ 

“{Who]*® among the gods is _ gloriously 
supreme!” ; 

[Adu-nuna],? “the Counsellor of Ea,” who 
created the gods his fathers, 

Unto the path of whose majesty 





this line; cf. Appendix I, With the phrase given in the text, 
which is repeated ten Jines lower down, compare the explanation 
of a title of Marduk on K, 2,107, etc., l. 16, be-lum Sa e-mu-ka-a-Su 
Sa-ka-a, “The Lord whose might is supreme.” 

° For the restoration of the beginning of the line from the 
commentary K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, ll. 8 ff., see Appendix I. 

* The word durmahu was employed as a Babylonian priestly 
title. It may here be rendered by some such general phrase as 
“ruler,” unless it is to be taken as a proper name. 

7 This line and the one that follows it are rather shorter than 
usual, but, according to the commentary K. 4,406 (see Appendix IT), 
nothing appears to be missing at the beginning of either. It may 
be noted that the arrangement of the four lines that follow differs 
on the duplicate K. 13,337. 


® Conjectural restoration. 

* This line and the two which follow it are restored from the 
commentary K. 4,406, Rev,, col. ii, ll.. 23 ff (see Appendix I); 
for the title “ A-du-nun-na, cf. also K. 2,107, etc., |. 20. 


106 CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





Ya-a ul- mas -sa- lu ilu ai - um- ma 


woes ew ) Dul - azsag u-ta- da- su 


[ 2... ee ee ul - bat - su el - lit 
[ 2 oe... jbar la has-su ™ Lugal-dul-azag-ga 
2 oe ee we ) Sa-ha-a e-mu-ka-su 


toe ee ee we Sane ker-bis Tam-tim 





[eee ee ee ee tee bi- ka ta-ha-at 


[The numbering of the following lines is based on the marginal 
numbers upon No. 91,139 + 93,073.!] 


TOSS De. ee Sh tk BIR) ee es ee] Saree 
106.[ . . . . -*]u kakkaba sla t-na sa-me-e Su-pu-u]* 
107. lu-u sa-bit® resu-arkat' su-nu Sa-a-su lu-u pal-su| .. ]® 


108, ma-a $a kir-bis? Ti-amat 7-tib®-bi-[ru la a-ni-u}® 


' See pls. xl, xiii f 

2 The end of the line has been restored from S. 11, etc., Rev., 
col. ii, Il. 3~6 (see pl. lii and Appendix I). 

8 No. 91,139, etc., [de-7]é. : 

4 ré{u-arkat is written KUN-SAG-GI on Nos. 35,506, 91,139, etc., 
and K. 8,522. The expression 7#su-arkdé, literally “ the beginning 
-the future,” may be taken as implying Marduk’s complete control 
over the world, both at its creation and during its subsequent 
existence. It is possible that Se-nw is the pronominal suffix and 
should be attached to the preceding word, i.e. 2éu-arka/u-su-nu, 
‘their beginning and future,” that is, “the beginning and future of 
mankind.” 


THE TITLES OF MARDUK. 107 





[No] god can ever attain! 

[ .j. + +. in] Dul-azag he made it known, 
[ . |... . . . . J pure is his dwelling! 
f .J. . . the . . . J of those without 
uhderstanding is Lugal-dul-azaga ! 

ae s - + « . . J] supreme is his might! 
[os heh |their[ . . . Jin the midst 

of Tiamat, 
[- hb... ee ] «ss ofthe battle! 


[The numbering of the following lines is based on the marginal 
* numbers upon No. 91,139 + 93,073-'] 


TOS. [ay dee ae las oe ee ohm; 

106.[ . . . . . ]« the star, which [shineth in 
the heavens].? 

107. May’ he hold the Beginning and the Future,‘ 
may they ® pay homage ® unto him, 

108. Sayiag, “ He who forced his way through the 
midst of Tiamat [without resting],° 





5 T.e., mankind. 

5 Possibly restore pal-su-[u] or pal-su-[ni]; it is also possible 
that nothing is wanting. The meaning assigned to galasu in the 
translation is conjectural. 

7 No. 91,139, tna hir-be. 

® No. 91,139 appears to read -A[7(or#) . . . J. 

® The end of the line is restored from the commentaries S. 11, 
etc., Rev., col. ii, ll. 19-21, and K. 2,053, Rev., col. ii, ll. 3-5 
(cf. pls. lii and lix, and Appendix I). 


108 CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





109. Sum-su lu’ “Ni-bi-rut a-hi-au® kir-bi-sut 
110. Sa kakkabani*#® sa-ma-me® al-hat-su-nit [i-ki-tl-lu? 
Il. Rima® si-e-ni® li-ir-ta-a ilani gim-va-su-un™ 


112. ik-me Ti-amat ni-sir-ta-Sa® li-si-dk ui lik-ri 


113. ak - va - tas'* nite* la - ba - ris™ 4 - me 


114. Zis-s¢-ma" la uk-ta-U8 L-bi-il™ ana sa-a-tt 


115. as-Su% as-r+1™ ib-na-a ip-ti-ka® dan-ni-na* 





1 No. 91,139, lu-u. 

2 Cf. Tablet V, 1. 6; No. 35,506, [* |Ne-bi-r7. 

3 No. 35,506, a-h7-22. 

‘ It is possible that in No. 35,506, Rev., 1. 4 (second half of the 
line), an additional line of the text was inserted between ll. 109 and 
110 of the text; it is also possible that the second half of the line 
was left blank. From the traces upon the tablet ity would seem 
that at the end of 1. 109 the scribe has written his ih 
three times. 

5 No. 91,139, etc., kakkabu. 

6 K. 9,267 and Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., mz. 

" For i-ki-il-lu the commentaries S. 11, etc., and K. 2,053 (see 
Appendix I) give the variant reading /yhim, i.e. ‘he ordained their 
paths.” 

§ Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., Ai-ma. 

* No. 91,139, etc., nu. 

© No. 91,139, ete., Zz-27-’-a. 

"The commentaries presuppose a variant text for the end of the 
line (cf. Appendix I). 

» No. 91,139, etc., Ui-tk-mi; No. 35,506,[ . . . . -mji 


of division 


THE HOMAGE OF MANKIND TO MARDUK. 109 





109. “ Let his name be Nibiru, ‘the Seizer of the 
Midst’! # 

110. “ For the stars of heaven he upheld’ the paths, 

111. “ He shepherded all™ the gods like sheep! 

112. “ He conquered Tiamat, he troubled and ended 
her life,” 

113. In the future of mankind, when the days grow old, 

114. May this be heard without ceasing, may it hold 
sway” for ever ! 

115. Since he created the realm (of heaven)” and 
fashioned the firm earth,” 





8 Nos, 35,506 and 91,139, etc., na-pis-ta-iu; K. 9,267, na- 

- . . J, ie. na-[ pif-ta-Sa]; the text of the commentary 

S. 11, etc., also read napistu. mnaszrlu, lit. “treasure,” is evidently 
to be taken in this passage as synonymous in meaning with napiS/u. 

M4 No. 91,139, etc., fa-as. 

Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., 72-75. 

No. 35,506, w-mu. 

No. 91,139, etc., Zi-ds-st-e-ma; No. 35,506, Uv-ts-st-e-[ . .  ]. 
No. 91,139, etc., Zu. 

® No. 91,139, etc., [dé-r]é-1k, “ may it endure.” 

No. 91,139, etc., a-n[a]. 

No, 91,139, etc., as-sSum. 

2 K. 9,267, ra; No. 91,139, etc., 7z. That asvu, lit. ‘ place,” in 
this passage refers to heaven is proved by the commentary R. 366, 
etc., Rev., col. ii, 1. 3 f. (see pl. lvii), which gives the equations 
AN = a-ru, and a-ru = Sa-mu-u. 

3 No. 91,139, etc., -t-ku; No. 35,506, ip-id-7k; K. 9,267, 
(ot). 

* No. 35,506, wz; No. 91,139, etc., mz. The commentary R. 
366, etc. (see above, n. 22), |. 7 f., explains danminu as referring to 
the earth by the equations RU = dan-ni-ni and dan-ni-nu= 
irsitim( tim). 


5 
16 
Ww 
18 


TIO CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





116. de-el matati} sum-su it-ta-bi a-bi? ™ Bes 
117. stk- vit = =™Igigtg =im-bu-u na - gab - Su - un® 
118. 2s°- me-ma® “E-a ka-bit-ta-su i-te-en- gu’ 


119. ma-a sa abe*-su8 u-Sar-ri-hu zik-ru-u-su® 
120, Su-u hki-ma ia-a-ti-ma “E-a lu-u sum-su 
121. ri-kis par-si-ia ka-l-su-nu li- bil- ma” 
122. gim-vi  te-vi-ti-ia" — fu-u st - tab - bal 
123. ina atk ~ rt Hansa 47" 8 lant rabiitt 


124. hansa*4™ 4 Sumée” -Su™ im-bu-u u-sa-ti-ru® al-kat-su™ 


Epifogue, 


125. di-is-sab-tu-ma® mak®-ru-u  li-kal-lim 





1 Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., ” Bél matali. 

2 No. 91,139, etc., a-du. 

3 The text of ll. 116 and 117 corresponds to that followed by the 
commentary R. 366, etc. (see Appendix I). 

4 No. 91,139, etc., va ath-ri. 

5 No. 35,506, zu. The text of the commentary R. 366, etc., gave 
a variant and fuller reading for the second half of the line. 

® Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., 2-me-e-ma. 

7 No. 91,139, etc., ¢-¢a-an-gi. Lines 118-123 are omitted by 
K. 9,267, possibly by mistake, in consequence of z7k-r7 occurring 
at the beginning of |. 117 and also of I..123. 

8 No. 91,139, etc., ab-bi-[e]-Su. 

® Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., 2e-hirsu. 

© No. 91,139, etc., -d7-el-ma. 


THE FIFFY TITLES OF MARDUK. Til 





116. 


117. 


118, 


119. 
120. 
121, 
122. 
123. 
124. 


125, 


“ The Lord of the World,” the father Bél hath 
called his name. 

(This) title, which all the Spirits of Heaven 
proclaimed,® ; 

Did Ea hear, and his spirit was rejoiced, (and 
he said) ot 

“ He whose name his fathers have made glorious, 

“ Shall be even as I, his name shall be Ea! 

“The binding of all my decrees shall he control, 

“ All my commands shall he make known!” 

By the name of “ Fifty ” did the great gods 

Proclaim his fifty names, they made his path 
pre-eminent.” 


Epifogue. 


Let them” be held in remembrance, and let the 
first man proclaim them ; 





"No. 91,139, etc., e-r7-e-t7-ta. 
*% No, 91,139, etc., 7-7. 


Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., Ha-an-Sa-a. 


*K. 9,26%.[ « 2 « « Jeep Novgr,1g9, ete. [ 2. & xed 


16 


Ww 


Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., Se-m2-e-St. 
K. 9,267, -sa-tir. 
From the commentary R. 366, etc., and the explanatory text 


S. 747, it may be concluded that the Seventh Tablet, in its original 
form, ended at |. 124. It is probable that ll. 125-142 were added 
as an epilogue at the time when the composition was incorporated 
in the Creation Series (see Appendix I). 

*® No. 91,139, etc., [dei ]-sa-ab-fu. 

© No. 91,139, etc., [ma]-ah. * T.e., the names of Marduk. 


112 CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





126. en- ku! mu-du-u mit-ha-ris lim-tal-ku* 
127. i-Sa-an-ni-ma a-bu® ma-vit l-Sa-hi-izs 
128. sa" 9P'75 4 na-ki-di? Ui-pat-ta-a uz-na-su-un® 
129. d-ig-gi-ma® a-na “Bel ilant “ Marduk 
130. mat-su lid-dis-sa-a” $su-u lu Ssal-~ma¥ 
131. ki-na-at a-mat-su la e-na-at® ki- bitM-su 
132. g¢-1¢ pi-i-su la us-te-pi-il® ilu ai-um-ma 


133. 2k-ki-lim-mu-ma® ul u-tar-ra" ki- sad -su® 


134. ina sa-ba-st-Su uz-za-su ul t-mah-har-su ilu ma-am-man? 


135. 74 -u-ku lib-ba-su™ va-pa-as™ ka-rals-su]® 





1 Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., insert the copula w. 

2 No. 91,139, etc., mi-tt-ha-ri-t5 Li-im-tal-ku. 

3 No. 35,506, a-ba; K. 9,267 probably read abu. 

£ Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., ma-ri-28; K. 9,267, mart, 

® K. 9,267, Zu-Sa-hi-[ 2. 2 ]e 

® No. 91,139, etc, [ 2 2 2 6 Jee 

7 K. 9,267, na-hid; Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., ma-ki-du. 

® K. 9,267, wana” -Su-[ . . ]; No. 91,139, etc., uz-n7-Su. 

® No. 91,139, ete., [2 Ja ig &.aeenn "ils 

No. 91,139, etc., U-7d-[di]-ef-Sa-a; K. 9,267 and No. 35,506, 
it. ire fen leit, Si 
: K. 9,267 and No. 91,139, etc., Zu-z. 
% No. 91,139, etc., Sa-al-ma. 


EPILOGUE. 113 





126. Let the wise and the understanding consider 
them together ! 


127. Let the father repeat them and teach them to 


his son ; 

128. Let them be in the ears of the pastor and the 
shepherd! 

129, Let-a man rejoice in Marduk, the Lord of the 
gods, 


130. That he may cause his land to be fruitful, and 
that he himself may have prosperity ! 

131. His word standeth fast, his command is un- 
altered ; 

132. The utterance of his mouth hath no god ever 
annulled. ; 

133. He gazed in his anger, he turned not his neck ; 

134. When he is wroth, no god can withstand his 
indignation. 

135. Wide is his heart, broad® is his compassion ; 





® K.9,267,[ . . . . ]-na-ta. 
4 No. 35,506, d2-z#. 

No. 91,139, etc., uS-le-pi-el-l[u]. 
No. 35,506,[ . . . .  -m uuu. 

K. 9,267, [u]-far; No. 91,139, etc., w-la-ré. 
8K. 9,267, kisad-[ . 

K. 9,267, man-[ .. 

® No. 91,139, etc., [ ]-2- ba: Su. 

* So Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc.; K. 9,267, [rJa-pa-as. K. 8,522 
gives the variant reading su-’-zd, “firmly established (?) is his 
compassion.” 

™ So K. 9,267; K. 8,522 reads da[r]- als ee No. 35,506, 
ha-ra-ai-sa ; No. 91,139, etc., ka-[ ‘ 


8 


Tig CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII. 





136. Sa an-ni u hab-la-ti ma-har-su ba'-[... ] 


137. ta[k]-lim-ti mah-ru-u  id-bu-bu pa-nu-us- su] 





138 [ . . . ] tor [ ... }han ana tef.... J 
139.[ . ... ;at ™ Marduk lu-u ilani [....] 
140.[ . . . . . jmat-tu-u Su-ulm- ©. 2. . . . Jj 
que... . 1. ] d-hu-u-ma [.... ] 
TAQ ss oe th be Pe et 8 Grp ae Doane ode bo dy Oo JB 

? So K. 9,267 and No. 91,139, etc.; K. 8,522,2[ . . . . J. 


2 This is probably the last line of the tablet. It may here be 
noted that, for the text of the Seventh Tablet given in the 
preceding pages, only those fragments have been used which are 
proved by the commentaries to contain missing portions of the 
text. Several other fragments, which from their contents and style 
of writing may possibly belong to copies of the text, have not been 


EPILOGUE. 1I5 





136. The sinner and evil-doer in his presence 


[at ees 


137. They received instruction, they spake before him, 


138.1, afte Mew ee unto oe aces J: 
139.[ . . . . . J] of Marduk may the gods 
140. [May]they[ .... his]name[.... |! 
141.[ . . . . ]they took and[ . .. . ]; 


TAP Swe Syed Cocke a ge OM ie te ae eo a 





included. The text of one such fragment (S. 2,013) is of peculiar 
interest and is given in Appendix II; in]. 10f. it refers to Z?-amat 
e-li-tt and Ti-amat sap-li-ti, “The Ocean (Tiamat) which is above” 
and ‘The Ocean (Tiamat) which is beneath,” a close parallel to 
“the waters which were above the firmament” and “the waters 
which were under the firmament” of Gen. i, 7; see the Introduction. 


Il. 
OfBer Gecounts of the History of 


Creation, 





lL. GnotBer Werston of fhe Mragon-Wtypth,’ 


Onvy, 

I. tta-an- fu alini” nise” adla- ] 

21 - da -ta-a@ niseX e - [ ] 

3.a-na tk-kil-li-Si-na ul [ ... i 

4.a-na vin-ma-ti-si-na ul t-sab-[ .. +] 
man = nub - uit - ma Ste [ie ierore ye ee be 


tam - th» um ~- ma suru [ oe te ban, ote Ri i 
™ Bel ina Sam@(e) ¢-te-sir {[ . se. ss | 
L kas~pu mu-rak-su Il kas-p(u.. .. je 


PX an 





1 For the text, see Cunevform Texts, part xiii, pl. 331, Rm. 282; 
for a previous publication, cf. Delitzsch, Assyrisches Worterbuch, 
p- 390f.; translations have been given by Zimmern in Gunkel’s 
Schépfung und Chaos, pp. 417 ff., and by Jensen in Schrader’s Kein. 
Bibl., vi, pp. 44. ff. Strictly speaking, the text is not a creation 
legend, though it gives a variant form of the principal incident in 
the history of creation according to the version Zauma elis. In the 
tablet Rm. 282 the fight with the dragon did not precede the 
creation of the world, but took place after men had been created 
and cities had been built; see further the Introduction. 

2 The form of the name here used is Tamu, ‘the Sea.” 

5 The faspu is the space that can be covered in two hours 
travelling, i.e., about six or seven miles. These general dimensions 
of the size of the dragon are in accordance with the statement 
made in 1. 8f. of the reverse to the effect that after the dragon 
had been slain his blood flowed for more than three years, The 


i 
OtBer Cecounts of Be History of 
Creation. 


Another Version of the Mragon-Utpts.' 








Oxy. 
1. The cities sighed, men [ i|é 
2. Men uttered lamentation, [they |, 
3. For their lamentation there was none [to hele 
4. For their grief there was none to take [them by 
the hand}. 
5. Who wasthe dragonf{ . . . . . . . . |? 
6. Tiamat? wasthe dragon{[ . . . . . . . |! 
7. Bél in heaven hath formed £ : 
8. Fifty pales in his on one kaspu ‘This height ht],® 
second measurement in the line is taken by Zimmern to refer to 
the dragon’s breadth, but, as Jensen points out, this is not 
consistent with the measurement of the mouth given in the 


following line. Even Zimmern’s readings of 60 Gar in 1]. 10 and 
65 GAR in l. 11 do not explain, but render still more anomalous, 
the $ GAR inl. 9. Without going into the question of the probable 
length of the Babylonian cubit, it is obvious that the dragon's 
breadth can hardly have been given as so many miles, if its mouth 
only measures so many feet. This difficulty can be got over by 
restoring sirafiiu in place of the suggested rupussu at the end of 
1. 8. We then have a consistent picture of the dragon as a long 
thin snake, rearing his head on high; his coils might well have 
been believed to extend for three hundred or three hundred and 
fifty miles, and the raising of his head in the air to a height of six 
or seven miles would not be inconsistent with the measurement of 
his mouth as six cubits, i.e., some ten feet or more across. 


118 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





9 
10. 
It. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 


16. 


Wy 
18. 
19. 
20. 
2t. 
22. 


23. 


24. 


$ GAR pi-2-+-su J GAR [... 
J GAR k-ma-a-ti Sa uas- . . ., 
ana’ V GAR ws - su - vi ¢-[ 2... 


t-na mée*® IX ammatu t-Sad-da-[ad 
u-Se-tk-ki zei-im-bat-su i-[ . 
ilint sa Samé(e) ka-li-su-nu [ . . 


tna Samé(e) tlani® ka-an-su ana pan [ 
u sa ™Sin ina ulinni-su ur-ru-[ . 


man-nu tl-lak-ma lab-t . . 
ma-a-tum ra-pa-as-tum u-se~ta-[ 
“u Sarru-u-te ip - pu-aufs 2... 
a- lik “Tishus lab-bi alu- .. 
ma-a-ta ra-pa-as-ta Su-zi-da . 
u Sarru-u-ta e~ pu-us [ .. 


tas-pu-ra-an-nt be-el dal-fu-ut* nari [ . 


ul i-di-e-ma Sa lab-bi [ ... 


[The rest of the Obverse and the upper part of the Reverse of the 


tablet is wanting.>} 


so ee 








1 


See Jensen, Kerlins. Bibi., vi, p. 3643; Zimmern takes the 


upright wedge as part of the number, cf. the preceding note. 
2 Lines 17-19 are the appeal of the gods to the Moon-god; 
ll. 20-22 contain the address of the Moon-god to TiShu; and 
Il. 23 &. give TiShu’s answer to the Moon-god. 
3 For this value of the sign sux, cf. Briinnow, No. 3,013, and 
Jensen, Ked/ins. Bibi., vi, p. 365. 


THE SIZE OF THE DRAGON. 119 





9. Six cubits is his mouth, twelve cubits [his . . . . ], 
10. Twelve cubits is the circuit of his [ears . .. . ]; 
11. For the space of! sixty cubits he... . ]a bird; 
12. In water nine cubits deep he draggeth[ . ... ]. 
13. He raiseth his tail on high. ge ey ae de Ts 
14. Allthe godsofheaven[ . . ..... |. 


15. In heaven the gods bowed themselves down 
before [the Moon-god . . . . J; 

16. The border of the Moon-god’s robe they hasti{ly 
grasped]: 

17. “ Who will go and [slay] the dragon,” 

18. “ And deliver the broad land [from 2 

19. “And become king [over . . . . . . J?” 

20. “ Go, Tishu,? [slay] the dragon, 

21. “ And deliver the broad land [from a> 

22. ‘And become king[over . . . . . . |!” 

23. “ Thou hast sent me, O lord, [to . . . . | 
the raging (creatures) * of the river, 

24. ‘ But I know not the[. . . . ] of the Dragon!” 


[The rest of the Obverse and the upper part of the Reverse of the 
tablet are wanting.®] 





4 Jensen, 77-fu-ut, which he renders as “moisture.” The plural, 
dalhiiti, may perhaps be explained by supposing that, according 
to this version also, the dragon had other creatures to help her in 
the fight. 

5 Of ll. 25 and 26 the following traces are preserved: (25) 


{.-. ..] mak-fa- 2... J, 6) Fe ee J 


meet. <% 


120 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





REVS “Seas Ge Og We a Tce : 
I1.f . . . ] pa-a-sSu t-pu-us-ma ana ™'— . 1. ] 
2. Su-us-hi-it urpa mi-ha-a [ ..... ] 
3. ku-nu-uk-ku na-pis-ti-ka t-na pa-ni-ka [ . . . J 
4. us - kam - ma lab - ba oe rn oe ae re | 
5.u-Sa-as-li-it ur-pa mi-ha-a [ ] 
6. ku-nu-uk-ku na-pis-ti-su ina pa-ni-su {. j 
g7.ts- su- kam- ma lab- bi [ 1. . ] 
8. LIT sanati*®” LTT arhe” timu I*** u [ . . . . JP 
9. Sa lab- bi il-la-ku da-mu-su [ .... jh 





1 Jensen suggests the restoration “ B[2], which he deduces 
from the traces upon the tablet as published by Delitzsch; for, as 
he states, the only other restoration possible would be ™ [tar], 
and this is rendered unlikely by the masculine form of the 
imperatives in ll. 2 and 4. This would prove that the slayer of 
the dragon was Bél, or Marduk, in both the versions of the story. 
As a matter of fact, the traces are incorrectly given by Delitzsch ; 
they represent the sign AN and not the conflate sign AN-+- EN 
(cf. Cun. Txts., pt. xiii, pl. 34), and it is not possible to conclude 
from the text who is the hero of this version. 

Jensen suggests the restoration af . KAS-PU], i.e., “ for three 
years, three months, a day and[ . hours].” The trace of the 


THE SLAYING OF THE DRAGON, 121 





1. [And . . . . J] opened his mouth and [spake] 
unto the god'[ . . . . J: 
2. “ Stir up cloud, and storm [and tempest]! 
3. “ The seal of thy life [shalt thou set] before thy 
face, 
4. “ Thou shalt grasp it, and thou shalt [slay] the 
_ dragon.” 
He stirred up cloud, and storm [and tempest], 
He [set] the seal of his life before his face, 
He grasped it, and [he slew] the dragon. 


aon nn 


For three years and three months, one day and 
[one night]? 
9. The blood of the dragon flowed[ . . . . J 





next character after w is the single diagonal wedge (cf. Cun. Txts., 
pt. xiii, pl. 34); according to Jensen’s restoration this sign can 
only be the number “10,” ie. X Kas-Pu, ‘twenty hours,” a not 
very probable reading. The diagonal wedge is more probably the 
beginning of the sign Mz, i.e. maiz, and the end of the line may be 
restored as wmu I®4" u [miisu T*4"]; this may be rendered “ one 
day and one night,” or possibly, as Zimmern in his translation 
suggests, “ day and night.” 

8 Line 9 is the last line of the text. The lower part of the 
tablet is taken up with the common colophon found upon tablets 
from ASur-bani-pal’s palace. : 


122 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





Il. @ reference fo the Creation of the Cattfe and 


the Beasts of the Giefd.' 


1. e-nu-ma ilani® t-na pu-uh-ri-su-nu tb-nu-u [ 
2. u-ba-as-$im-mu [bu}-ru-mi ik-su-[ur 
3. u-sa-pu-u [stk-na}at na-pis-ti [ 


4. bu-ul sévi [u-ma-alm séri u nam-mas-se-e [ 


5. w[Z)-tu®[ . . . . ) ana Sik-na-at na-pis-ti[ .. . 


6.[ . . 4. ]% strié u nam-mas-Se-e ali u-za-’-[1-2u 


7. L.. . pu-ule-ri nam-mas-ti gi-mir nab-ni-ti[ .... 


8 [. . . . | Sa tna pu-uh-ri kim-ti-ia s(e- . 


}? 


48 


{* 





1 For the text, see Cunezform Texts, part xiii, pl. 34, D.T. 41; 
for a previous publication, cf. Delitzsch, Assyrische Lesestiiche, 3rd 
ed., p. 34f.; and for previous translations, see George Smith, Zhe 
Chaldean Account of Genesis, p. 76f., Zimmern in Gunkel’s Schépfung 
und Chaos, and Jensen in Schrader’s Keilius. Bibl., vi, p. 42 f. 
This fragment, which George Smith suggested might be part of 
the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series, does not belong to that 
series; it contains the introduction or opening lines of a text,” 
and describes the creation of two small creatures by Nin-igi-azag, 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 123 





Il. @ reference to the Creation of the Cattfe and 
he Beasts of the Giefd, 


1. When the gods in their assembly had made [the 
world,’ 

2. And had created the heavens, and had formed [the 
earth],* 

3. And had brought living creatures into being 

4. And {had fashioned|* the cattle of the field, and 
the beasts of the field, and the creatures [of 


the city],— 

5. After® [they had . . . . J} unto the living 
creatures[ . . . . J, 

6. [And between the beasts|® of the field and the 
creatures of the city had dividedf . . . . J, 

7. {And had . . . . J all creatures, the whole 
ofcreation[ . . . . ], 

8. [And had . . . . J], which in the whole of 
my family[ . . . . |, 





“The lord of clear vision.” The reference to the creation of 
cattle and beasts of the field is merely incidental; it occurs in 
the long opening sentence and indicates the period at which the 
two smail creatures were made; see further the Introduction. 

? Possibly restore kud/atu at the end of the line. 

5 Possibly restore zs7#/; Jensen suggests dan-ni-nu (cf. p. 108, 
1. 145). 

* Probably restore a/7 bn at the end of the line. 

5 The reading u([/]-tu is certain from the traces on the tablet. 

® Probably restore the beginning of the line as ana bud. 


124 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 








9. [.... ]l-t-ma ™ Nin-igt-azag Sind su-fa[ri. ... ] 
10. [ . . . pul-uh-ri nam-mas-ti us-tar-ri-t[h . .. . 
tn... . ™)]Gu-la ha-ma-a-ni inf... . . J 
w2[ . . . . . . jétha pi-st [u sa-al-mi. . . . | 
13.[ . . . . . ]iééa pi-si u sa-[al-mi . . . . | 
VoD oe oe oe ee Pes aaa ee oe J 


[The rest of the text is wanting.] 


@ reference fo Be Ereation of the Woon 
and the Sun.* 


1, uD> AN-NA (DINGIR) EN-LIL-LA (DINGIR) EN - KI 
DINGIR - [E - NE]® 





1 Possibly restore the verb as [24-m7']-7-ma; Jensen suggests the 
restoration [¢-¢e-/2 ]-2-ma and adds 7b-na-a at the end of the line. 

® Restore ina at the beginning of the line; at the end of the 
line Jensen suggests the reading mab-nzt-su-un, 

3 The traces of the character before s7 are those of fa or ¢; we 
cannot, therefore, read [ . . . pi]-s¢ nfm dc}, “[ - ] 
he calleth the white one by name [ . . i It is probable, 
however, that the second section of the text also dealt with the two 
smail creatures whose creation is described in the first paragraph. 

* The text is taken from the obverse of the tablet 82-7-14, 
4,005, which is published in vol. ii, pl. xlix. The tablet is one of the 
so-called ‘ practice-tablets,” or students’ exercises, and contains 
on the obverse an extract from a Sumerian composition (Il. 1-7), 
an extract from a Babylonian composition (il. 8-14) very similar 
to the Sumerian extract which precedes it, and on the lower part 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 125 





g. [Then did] Nin-igi-azag [fashion]! two small 
; creatures[ .. 

10. [Among] all the Beasts he made [their form]? 
glorious 

II. . . . . J|the goddessGula . . [ 

12. . 2. . . J. . one white [and one black 


: 
dove cha ls 
F-gt ey bsg 


13. one white and one black 








3 
PA Se eat Geko Vy ae ee GA eee Se 
{The rest of the text is wanting. ] 





& reference fo the Creation of the Utoon 
and the Sun.’ 
1, When® the gods® Ana, Enlil, and Enki 





of the tablet a number of grammatical notes arranged in three 
columns and referring to the extracts given above. The first word 
of 1. 8 is broken, but the traces suggest the word J[a]-n[7]-[¢], 
which may be rendered ‘‘ version.” Lines 8—14 are not, however, 
a literal translation of Il. 1-7, though they appear to have been 
taken from a somewhat similar Babylonian text. It is clear that 
the extracts formed the opening lines of the compositions to 
which they belonged, and that the scribe has written them out for 
comparison, adding notes on some of the expressions which occur. 

* That both the Sumerian and Babylonian extracts are to be 
taken as single sentences, and not broken up into separate phrases, 
is proved by the note in 1. 15. Here the scribe equates uD with 
e-nu-ma, and to e-nu-ma adds the grammatical note 7-41 $u-ta-mu-u 
mal-ma-lis, “ corresponding to Sifami.” 

® The end of the line should possibly be restored as DinGrR- 
[GAL-GAL-La}, * the great gods.” 


126 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





2. (MAL + GAR)!-NE-NE-GI-NA-TA ME?-GAL-GAL-LA-[TA] 


3. MA-TU? (DINGIR) EN-ZU-NA MU -UN-GI-NE-E[S] 
4.U- SIR SIR- SIR-DA* ITU U-TU- UD- DA 


U -iTt AN - KI-A MU - UN - GI - NE - ES 
6.MA-TU® AN-NA IM-PA-UD-DU SA-A-NE 
. SAG AN - NA. IGI - BAR - RA_ TA - UD - DU 


wn 


N 


8. s[a]-n[z]}-[e]?  e-nu-maS “A-num “Boal ™ E-a 
9. tlant® rvabati*’ ina mil-ki-su-nu ki-¢-nu 
10, usurati”™  Samb(e) u  irsitim(tim) is - ku - nu 
11.a@- na kate" ilant® vabiti” u - kin - nu 


12.u-mu ba-na-a arha ud-du-su sa inattali” 
13. a-me-lut-tum * Samas® ina libbi bab asi-ku i-mu-ru 


14. ki-vib Same(e) u_ irsitim(tim) ki-nis — us-ta-mu-u 





‘ Cf. Briinnow, No. 5,525. 

2 Cf. Br., No. 10,374. 

* The group MA-TU occurs in the Cylinder Inscription of Tiglath- 
pileser I, col. i, 1. 6, in the expression fa-4u-u Ma-TU, applied to 
Sin; and, from the occurrence of the parallel expression sa-ku-u 
nam-ri-ri on the obelisk of Shalmaneser II, 1. 6, ma-Tu is rendered 
namriru, “brightness.” In 1. 17 of the text the scribe furnishes 
the new equation Ma-TU = “"SES-KI-RU, and at the end of the 
line he adds the explanation Ru =e-di-iu. MA-TU, therefore, 
signifies the brightness of the New Moon, and in the present 
passage may be translated “ renewal.” 

* The group SIR-SIR = dani (Br., No. 4,304); as# (No. 4,302), 


CREATION OF THE MOON AND SUN. 127 





2. Through their sure counsel’ and by their great 
commands? 

3. Ordained the renewal * of the Moon-god, 

4. The reappearance of the moon,* and the creation 
of the month, 

And ordained the oracle® of heaven and earth, 

. The New Moon® did Ana cause to appear, 

7. In the midst of heaven he beheld it come forth. 


nw 


8. [Version].’. When* Anu, Bél and Ea, 
9. The great gods, through their sure counsel 
ro. Fixed the bounds of heaven and earth, 
11. (And) to the hands of the great gods entrusted 
12. The creation of the day and the renewal of the 
month which they might behold, 
13. (And) mankind beheld the Sun-god® in the gate 
of his going forth, 
14. In the midst of heaven and earth they duly 
created (him).!° 


and napaju (No. 4,327); in l. 18 the scribe equates u-sIR with 
ar-ha, but, as ITU occurs in the second half of 1. 4, it is preferable 
to take u-SIR as referring to the moon itself (cf. Br., No. 7,860). 

* Cf. Br., No. 9,426. 

® See above, note 3. 

7 See above, p. 125, note 4. 

® See above, p. 125, note 5. 

® It is interesting to note that in the Semitic version the creation 
of the sun is substituted for that of the moon, although in the 
preceding line the renewal of the month is referred to. 

The reverse of the tablet, which is badly preserved (see vol. ii, 
pl. 1), is inscribed with some grammatical and astrological notes. 


128 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





IV. Gn Mddress fo Be River of Ercation.’ 


I. Siptu at - ti? naru banatlat)® ka - la - mu] 
2.€ - mu - ma th - ru - ki tlénd * rabiti™ 
3.ima  a- hi- kit [es - ku - nu] dunt - kat 


4. ina libbi-ki ™#H-a Sar ap-si-t ib-na{a Su-bat-su® 


a-bu-ub la ma-har ka-a-si i$-ruk-[ku]? 
@-Sa-tun usz-sa na-mur-rva-ti pu-luh- tit} 
“Ea uo ™Marduk® is-ru-ku-nik-kim-ma 


a[t]-ni te-ni-se-e-ti ta-din-ni at-ti® 


Sey ay 


navu vabititi) ndru sir-tt ndvu es-1t-e-ti™ 





1 This mystical river of creation was evidently suggested by the 
Euphrates, on the waters of which the fertility of Babylonia so 
largely depended; for a comparison of similar conceptions of 
a river of creation both in Egyptian and in Hebrew mythology, 
see the Introduction. The text forms the opening words of an 
incantation and is taken from the reverse of S. 1,704, with 
restorations and variant readings from the obverse of 82-9-18, 
5.311 (cf. Appendix II). A translation of the former tablet has 
been given by Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 403. 

? 82-9-18, 5,311, atta. 

82-9-18, 5,311, ba-na-a-i_um]. 

82-9-18, 5,311, 2a a-hi-ha. 

82-9~18, 5,311, dum-ki; the division of Il. 2-4 in the text is 
taken from 82-9-18, 5,311. 

§ 829-18, 5,311, ma kir-bi-ka *™ Ea (AN-BAT) Sar apst ib-na-a 
§u-bat-su; it is possible that the line in S. 1,704 read dum-ka ina 
Libbi-ki * Ea Sar ap-st-i ib-na-[ a}. 


3 


ry 


5 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. ~ 129 





IV. @n Ardress to he River of Creation.’ 


. O thou River, who didst create all things, 


4 


nN 


. When the great gods dug thee out, 


w 


. They set prosperity upon thy banks,® 
. Within thee Ea, the King of the Deep, created 
his dwelling,® 


as 


5. The deluge they sent not before thou wert!” 

6. Fire, and wrath, and splendour, and terror 

7. Have Ea and Marduk ® presented unto thee! 

8. Thou judgest the cause of mankind! 

g. O. River, thou art mighty! O River, thou art 
supreme! O River, thou art righteous!” 





7 Upon 82-9-18, 5,311, ll. 5-7 read as follows: (5) #-ru-uh-hu 
im-ma uz-zu na-mur-tum pu-luh-tum (6) a-bu-bu la mah-ri ka-a-su 
im-bi-ka (7) [p]e-hé ™ Ea (an. Bat) u ™ Marduk (AN. ASAR.LU.SAR) 
i-ru-ku im-ma. It may be noted that the duplicate in 1. 5 reads 
im-ma, “daylight,” for 7-Sa-/um, “fire,” and for 1. 7 gives the 
interesting variant reading “At thy word did Ea and Marduk 
bestow the daylight.” 

® AN. ASAR.LU. SAR. 

® 82-9-18, 5,311 reads [ . . ]-u te-nd-Se-e-tum ta-dan-nu al-ta, 

 82-9-18, 5,311 omits 1. 9, and from this point onwards it seems 
probable that the tablets ceased to be duplicates, The invocation 
to the river ceases with |. 9, the lines which follow on each tablet 
containing the personal petitions of the suppliant (cf. Appendix II). 


130 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





V. 


Oxy, 
I. 


Gnother Version of the Creation of he Worfd 
Bp Utarduf.’ 


EN? E AZAG-GA E DINGIR-E-NE KI MIN NU MU-UN-RU 
bitu el-lim bit ilint” ina as-vi el-lim ul e-pu-us 





2. GI NU E ais NU DIM 
ka-~nu-u ul a-st Z- st ul ba - ni 
3. MUR) -NU SUB GIS-U-RU NU DIM 
Ui-bit-ti ul na-da-at na-al-ban-ti ul ba-na-at 
4. E NU RU URU NU DIM 
bitu ul e- pu-us alu ul ba - nt 
5. URU NU DIM A- DAM NU MU-UN-[GAR] 
alu ul e-pu-us nam-mas-su-u ul sa- hin 
6. EN - LIL(K1) NU RU E-KUR-RA NU DIM 
Ni-ip-pu-ru ul e-pu-us E-kur ul ba-ni 
7. UNUG(KI) NU RU E-AN-NA NU DIM 
U -vuk ul e- pu-us E- MIN wl ba-ni 
8. ABZU NU RU NuUN(KI) NU DIM 
ap-su-u ul e-pu-[us|) “Eridu ul ba-ni 
‘ For the text, see Cuneiform Texts, part xiii, pls. 35 ff. (82-5— 
22, 1,048); and for previous translations, see Pinches, /.R.A.S., 


vol. xxiii (new series), pp. 393 ff.; Zimmern in Gunkel’s Schipfung 
und Chaos, p. 419f.; and Jensen in Schrader’s Kedlins. Bibl., vi, 


Pp- 


38 ff. The variant legend of the creation is contained on the 


portion of the obverse of the tablet which has been preserved, 
but it docs not form the principal subject of the composition ; it 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 131 





V. Another Mersion of the Creation of te World 
By WMarduk. 


Osv. 
1. The holy house, the house of the gods, in the 
holy place had not yet been made ; 


2. No reed had sprung up, no tree had been created. 


3. No brick had been laid, no building had been 
set up ; 

4. No house had been erected, no city had been 
built ; 

5. No city had been made, no creature had been 
created. 


6. Nippur had not been made, E-kur had not been 


built ; 

7. Erech had not been created, E-ana had not been 
built ; 

8. The Deep had not been created, Eridu had not 
been built ; 





is merely an elaborate introduction to an incantation which was 
intended to be recited in honour of E-zida, the great temple of 
Nabi at Borsippa. The reverse of the tablet contains the 
concluding lines of the incantation. For a further discussion of 
the legend on the obverse, see the Introduction. 

2 gn, ie. s#p/u, “incantation,” the word placed at the beginning 
of most religious and magical compositions intended for recitation. 





132 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 

9. E AZAG DINGIR-RI-E-NE KI-DUR-BI NU DIM 
bitu el-lum bit ilani® su-bat-su ul ip-se-it 

Io, [NIGIN] KUR-KUR~-RA-GE  A-AB-BA-A-BA 
nap - har ma-~-~ta-a- tu tam - tum - ma 

11. [u] Sac A-AB-BA-GE RAD - NA - NAM 
t-nu sa ki-rib tam-tin ra -tu- uit- ma 

12. [U-BI-A NUN(KI)] BAa-RU E-SAG-IL-LA  BA-DIM 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


ina u-mi-su “Evidu e-pu-us E-MIN ba- ni 


[E-SAG-IL]A SAG ABZU E-E-NE  (DINGIR) LUGAL- 
DUL-AZAG-GA MU-NI-IN-RI-A 
E-MIN Sa ina ki-rib ap-si-t * Lugal-dul-azag-ga ir-mu-u 


[Ka-DINGIR-RA](KI BA-RU E-SAG-IL-LA $U-UL 
Babilu*’ e - pu - [us| E-sag-ila suk - lul 


((DINGIR) A]-NUN-NA-GE-E-NE URU-BI  BA-AN-RU 

uani® “A~nun-na-ki  mit-ha-vis e-pu-us 

[URU] AZAG-GA KI-DUR SAG-DUG-GA  GE-E-NE-MU- 
MAH-A MI-NI-IN-SA-A 

alu el-lum Su-bat tu-ub lib-bi-Su-nu  si-ris im-bu-u 

[(PINGIR)] GI-SI-MA “GI-DIR I-NE-NA A NAM-MI-NI- 
IN-KESDA 

™ Marduk a-ma-am ina pa-an me-e ir-ku-us 


SAHAR-RA NI-SAR A-KI A-DIR NAM-MI-IN-DUB 

@-pi-ri ib-ni-ma it-ti a-mi as - pu - uk 

DINGIR-RI-E-NE KI-DUR SAG-DUG-GA NE-IN-DUR-RU- 
NE-ES-A-MA 


ilani ina Ssu-bat tu-ub lib-bi ana su-su- bi 


THE CREATION OF DRY LAND. 133 





10. 


12, 


13. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


. Of the holy house, the house of the gods, the 


habitation had not been made. 


All lands were sea. 


. At that time there was a movement in the sea; 


Then was Eridu made, and E-sagil was built, 


E-sagil, where in the midst of the Deep the god 
Lugal-dul-azaga' dwelleth ; 


. The city of Babylon was built, and E-sagil was 


finished. 


. The gods, the Anunnaki, he’ created at one time ; 


The holy city, the dwelling of their hearts’ desire, 
they proclaimed supreme. 


Marduk laid a reed upon the face of the waters, 


He formed dust and poured it out beside the reed. 


. That he might cause the gods to dwell in the 


habitation of their hearts’ desire, 





* Or, Lugal-du-azaga. * Le, Marduk, 





134 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 

20. NAM- LU-  GISGAL- LU BA- RU 
a- me ~- lu - a ib - ta - ne 

21. (DINGIR) A-RU-RU KUL do, DINGIR-TA! NE-IN-SAR 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25 


26, 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30 


31. 


32. 


“MIN g#-ir a-me-lu-ti it-ti-su ib-la-nu 
BIR - ANSU GAR - ZI - 1G EDIN - NA BA - RU 
bu-ul sévi si-kin na-pis-ti ina sgi-e-vi ib-ta-ni 
(1D) IDIGNA (1D) BURANUNU ME-DIM KI GAR-RA-DIM 
MIN # MIN 7-ai-ma ina as-vi if-ku-un 
MU ~-NE-NE-A NAM - DUG MI-NI-IN-SA-A 
Sum - Si ~ na ta - bis im ~ bt 


GI-BE GI-SE-RU SUG GIS-GI GIS-TER-GID-GE BA-DIM 
us-Su di-it-ta ap-pa-ri fa-na-a u ki-su ib-ta-ni 


U - RIG EDIN - NA BA - RU 
ur - ki - it gt - vim ib - ta - ni 
[KUR - KU]R - RA SuG GIS - GI- NA - NAM 
ma-ta-a-tum ap - pa-rt a- pu - um - ma 
[ . . . . ] GUD-Lip-BA GE SURIM... LU AMaS-A 


lit-lu pu-ur-Sa me-ru la-ah-ru pu-had-sa im-mir su-pu-ri 


[os Sr sec, Pe TER GiS - TER - BI - NA- NAM 
ki - va ~ tu u ki- Sa- tu- ma 
ieee aera a | MI- NI-IN-LU-UG 
a- tu - au sap - pa - vt 1% - BA - az - Yu - Su 
[ue aes @ « ] (ZAG AsAB-BA-GE [ 2 se a « J] 


be-lum ™ Marduk ina pa-at tam-tim tam-la-a u-mal-l 


» . . | GIS-Gt PA-RIM NE-[IN- GAR] 


[ 
[ .. . . -x]Ja a-pa na-ma-la is - ku - un 


THE CREATION OF MANKIND. 135 





20. 


2I. 


22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 


32. 


He formed mankind. 


The goddess Aruru together with him! created 
the seed of mankind. 

The beasts of the field and living creatures in the 
field he formed. 

He created the Tigris and the Euphrates, and he 
set them in their place ; 


Their names he declared in goodly fashion. 


The grass, the rush of the marsh, the reed, and 
the forest he created, 
The green herb of the field he created, 


The lands, the marshes, and the swamps ; 


The wild cow and her young, the wild calf; the 
ewe and her young, the lamb of the fold; 
Plantations and forests ; 


The he-goat and the mountain-goat . . . . him. 


The lord Marduk laid in a dam by the side of the 
sea, 


[He . . . . Jaswamp, he made a marsh, 





* The Sumerian version reads “together with the god.” 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





33. 
34. 
35- 
36. 
37- 
38. 
39. 
40. 
[The 


Rev. 
I. 


Lena % O65) MU - UN - TUK 
; 7 * us ~ ta - Si 
[Gr BA - RU] GIs BA - DIM 
ka -na-a@a ib-tla-ni d- sa ih - ta - ni 
Eats eke eee, cert KI- A BA - DIM 
[ ] tna af-ri ib-ta-ni 
{MUR BA-AN-SuB] GIS-U-RU  BA- AN-RU 


[i - bit-tu id-di ma-all-ban-tu tbh-ta-ni 


[E BA - RU] URU MU - UN - DIM 
[ditu e- pu - us alu ib - ta - nie 
URU. MU-UN-DIM] A-DAM KI MU-UN-GAR-[RA] 


[alu e@ - pu- us nam -~- mas - Su-ui is-tja- kan 
EN - LIL(KI) BA- RU] E-KUR-RA-GE  BA- DIM 
[Ni -ip-pu-ru  e-pu-us E - kur tb - ta ~ ni) 
[UNUG(KI) BA - RU E - AN - NJA_ BA - D[IM] 
[U - uk e- pu-us E- MIN @ - ta - nt] 





rest of the Obverse and the beginning of the Reverse of the tablet are 
wanting, 

[ ‘ ose terns 3 ] 

[ ]- mat par-si [ ] 

[ oe ] 

[ te-ki-lin-mu-u [ ] 

[ GAL}AN-ZU KI-GAL DINGIR-RI-[E-NI-GE] 


4. suk-kal-la-ka si-t-ru ™ Pap-sukal ir-su ma-lik tlani® 


. (DINGIR) NIN-A-HA-KUD-DU DU (DINGIR) EN-KI-GA-GE 


“MIN mar - tt “E- a 


THE CREATION OF CITIES. 137 





33- 
34 
35: 
36. 
37: 
38. 
39: 


40. 


] he brought into existence. 


[Reeds he form]ed, trees he created ; 


[ . . . . . . . he made in their place. 





[Bricks he laid], buildings he set up ; 
[Houses e made], cities he built ; 
[Cities he made], creatures he created. 
[Nippur he made], E-kur he built ; 


[Erech he made, E-an]a he built. 


[The rest of the Obverse and the beginning of the Reverse of the tablet are 


wanting. ] 


Rev, 


I. 


2. 


[ .. . . . ]thedecree[ 2... . J 


Pia evened ta bee co 


3f. Thy exalted minister is Papsukal, the wise 


5- 


counsellor of the gods. 


May Nin-aha-kudu, the daughter of Ea, 


138 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





NIG-NA-[ . . . . ] HU-MU~-RA-AB-EL-LA 
ina nike - na - ki el - lu ul - lil - ka 


7. GI-BIL-LA EL-[LA] HU-MU-RA-AB-~LAH-LAH-GA 


tna MIN th - bi ub - bi - ib - ka 

. DUK-A-GUB-BA [EL-LA  ABZU] KI NER-DU-NaA-ZU 
U-MU-UN-NA-AZAG 

ina MIN-e el-la sa ap-st-i a-Sar tal-lak-ti-ka ul-lu 


10, MU - DUG-GA (DINGIR) ASAR - LU - SAR LUGAL 


II 


12. 


13 


AN - KI - SAR - RA - GE 
ina MIN-e “Marduk sar kis-Sat samé(e) u ivsitim(tim) 
. HE-GAL KUR-RA-GE -SAG-ZU — HA-BA-RA-AN-TU-TU 
nu-kus ma-a-ti ana lib-bi-ka li-vu-ub 
ME-ZU U-UL-DU-A-SU SU-HA-RA-AN-DU-DU 
par-su-ka ana u-mu [sa]-a-ti lis-tak-li- lu 
. E-Z1-DA KI-DUR MAH AN-NA (DINGIR) NINNI 
KI - DUR, ME - EN 


14. E-MIN sub-tum sir-tum na-ram lb-bi “™A-nu 


15 


u ™Ts~tar at-ta 


. AN-GIM HE-EN-AZAG-GA [KI-GIM HE]-EN-EL-LA 
SaG-AN-GIM HE? 


162 [aire ee ee ES Ae HE - IM - TA - GUB? 





1 The scribe has not written out the rest of the verb; it is 


probable that he intended it to be read as fe-[en-lah-lah-ga|, as 
indicated in the translation. In Assyrian the line would read hima 
Samé lilil kima irsiti libib hima hirib Sam? limmir. 


ADDRESS TO E-ZIDA. 139 





6. Purify thee with the pure censer, 
7. And may she cleanse thee with cleansing fire! 


8f. With a cup of pure water from the Deep shalt 
thou purify thy way ! 


10. By the incantation of Marduk, the king of the 
hosts of heaven and earth, 


11. May the abundance of the Jand enter into thee, 
12, And may thy decree be accomplished for ever! 
13f. O E-zida, thou glorious dwelling, thou art dear 


unto the hearts of Anu and Ishtar! 


15. May (Ezida) shine like the heavens, may it be 
bright like the earth, may it [be glorious]’ like 
the heart of heaven, 

16. [And may .°. . . | be firmly established!” 





2 In Assyrian Zzez. Line 17 gives the title of the prayer as 
INIM-INIM-MA[ . . . « ] GA-GA-NE-GE; and 1. 18 gives the 
catch-line to the next tablet, which may perhaps be restored as 
Siptu 0% | Mar-gid-da| sumbu Sa-ma-mi, ““O [Margida], thou 


» 


waggon of the heavens 








140 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 
Vi. EGe “Cuthacan Begend of the Creation.” * 
Couumn I. 
[The upper half of the column is wanting.] 
[a ..... J? 2 d@ MEeGan[.... ] 
3. di-en-Su purussa  [ 
4. utukku piru-su ekimmu piru-s{u . . . . . | 
5. bal elati® u saplati® bel ™ A-nun-n[a-kt . . . | 


6. Sa me” dal-hu-te isati{u) me” ga-ku-te Ila itsati(u)) 


7. Sa St-tk-la-su Sab-su ummanu su-a-tu th-mu-u 


th - Su - au cd - Na ~ ru 


8. ina nart® ul Ssatir ul esib-am-mat pag-ri ui pu-u-tds 





1 The text is taken from the tablet K. 5,418@ and its duplicate 
K. 5,460 (see Cunetform Texts, part xiii, pls. 39-41). The legend 


was 
Creati 


or some years known as “the Cuthaean legend of the 
ion.” It was thought that the text was put in the mouth of 


the god Nergal, who was supposed to be waging war against the 
brood of Tiamat; and it was assumed that Nergal took the place 


of M 
clear, 
Baby 


arduk in accordance with local tradition at Cuthah. It is 
however, that the speaker is not the god Nergal, but an old 
onian king, who recounts how the gods delivered him and 


his land from hordes of monsters. In the description of the 
monsters in col. i, Tiamat is said to have suckled them, but this 
reference does not justify their identification with the monster 
brood of the Creation Series; it is more probable that Tiamat is 
called their foster-mother in order to indicate their terrible nature, 
In The Chaldean Account of Genesis, pp. 102 ff., George Smith gave 





OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 141 








VI. The “Cuthacan Begend of the Creation.” 


CoLumN I. 
[The upper half of the column is wanting. ] 


if... . ]* 2 Hewaslordof..[....]3 

3. His judgment was the decisionfof . . . . ]. 

4. The fiend was his offspring, the spectre was his 
offspring [ .. aes 

5. He was lord of the height and of the depths, he 
was lord of the Anunnaki[ . . . ]. 


6. A people who drink turbid water, and ae not 
pure water, 

7. Whose sense is perverted, had taken (men) captive, 
had triumphed over them, and had committed 
slaughter. 

8. On a tablet nought was written, nought was left 
(to write).* In mine own person? 





a translation of the legend, and, though he describes it as 
a “Legend of Creation,” he correctly recognized the general 
character of its contents. For later translations see Sayce, Records 
of the Past, vol. xi, pp. 109 ff., and vol. i (new series), pp. 149 ff. ; 
Zimmern, Zeits. fiir Assyr., xii, pp. 319 ff.; and Jensen, Kezlins. 
Bibl, vi, pp. 290ff. For earlier publications of the text of 
K. 5,640, see S. A. Smith, Miscellaneous Texts, pl. 6f., and of the 
text of K. 5,418, see Winckler, Sammlung von Keilschrifttexten, ii, 
pl. 7of. 

2 The first six lines which are preserved are taken from K. 5,640. 

* K. 5,640," nazi. 

4 Le. the land was in confusion, so that no business was 
transacted and no records were kept. 

5 Cf. Zimmern, Z.A., xii, p. 323- 


142 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





9g. ina mati! ul u-se-si-ma ul ak-ta-vab-su 


10, umman®” pag-ri is- sur? hur-ri a-me-lu- ti 
a-vi- bu pa-~ nu - Su - un 
Il.:2b - Su - nu - th - ma lan’? rabiuti® 


12. ina kak - kar th ~ nu - u  ilani® a- lu - su 


13. Ti - a- ma- tu u- Se - nik - Su - nu - 
14. Sa - sur - Su - nu ™ Be - lt-2t- li u- ban - ut 
15. ma ki-rib Ssadi(¢) tir-ti-bu-ma® t-te-it-lu-ma 


w-ta- St- tu mi - na - tt 


16. VII sarréni* (ni)® at-hu-u su-pu-u ba-nu-tu 
17, CCCLX .M1*4" um - nia - na - tu - Su - nu 


18. An-ba-ni-nt abu-su-nu Ssarru ummu-su-nu 
[sar] - ra - tu 4Me-li-k 


19. ahu-Su-nu rabii(u) a-lik pa-ni-su-nu” Me-ima-an-gab sum-Su 


20. sanii(u) alu-[Su-nul® "“Me-du-du sum - iu 


m 


21. salsu{su) abu - [Su - nu -. )- dul sum - su 





1 The reading is not certain; mu is possible, i.e. faéfa, “for 
a year.” The phrase is omitted by K. 5,640, in which the line 
begins with ud. 

2 K. 5,640, zssur. 

5K. 5,640, fa. 

4 Literally, “ city.” 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 143 





9. 


Io. 


Il 
12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16, 
17, 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


From my land! I went not forth, and I did not 
give them battle. 

A people who had the bodies of birds of the 
hollow, men who had the faces of ravens, 

Had the great gods created, 

And in the ground the gods created a dwelling- 
place‘ for them. 

Tiamat gave them suck, 

The Lady of gods brought them into the world. 

In the midst of the mountain (of the world) they 
became strong, they waxed great, they multi- 
plied exceedingly. 

Seven kings, brethren, fair and comely, 

Three hundred and sixty thousand’ in number 
were their forces, 

Anbanini, their father, was king; their mother, 
Melili, was queen. 

Their eldest brother, their leader, was named 
Memangab ; 

[Their]® second brother was named Medudu ; 

{Their] third brother was named[ . . . . Jlul; 





5 K, 5,640, 2r-/e-[bu]-u-ma; the scribe has omitted du by mistake. 

6 K. 5,640 omits mz. 

7 It is probable that 360,000, and not 6,000, should be read, in 
view of the large numbers which occur in col. ii, Il. 19 ff. 

® The restoration of the pronominal suffix in this and the 
following lines is conjectural. 


144 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





24, 


Il. 


. vibii(2) al[fu-Su-nu *.... -dja-da sum-su 
. hanSu(su) [ahu-su-nu "oo... ]-dak Ssum- su 
se[sSu(su) ahu-su-nu ™. i... -r]a)  sum-su 


[stbi(u) aku-Su-nue ™ . . . 1 . | Sum-su? 


Corumn II. 
[The upper half of the column is wanting. ] 


2. [a-tuk (?)]-Re [rJa-[d]é-se lim-nu-te [ 2. . 6... J 





3.7 - dt -u te-en-su u-tlr- ... | 
400 [oo 5 we & Tse al - plu - . . . | 
5.[ . 6. jst arvat Limuttt matati” it-ta-[ . . . J 
6. a[Z]5 - si mare aye" ou - ma -’ - [ir] 
7. (Vil a-na pa-an\ VIT ™"*" puhadu al - pu - tluy® 
8. [a - kin  guhhe|*? elluti* 
9. a@ - Sal - mia] tlani®™ rabiiti™ 
0. “Ttar ™E 1 ww. | ™ Za-ma-ma ™ A-nu-ni-tum 


7 
™TpaAs . 6. www |) ™Samas ku - ra - du 
12, 2-[ 2... 2... | tlani*® ana a-la-ki-ia 


[ .. 2... J-@ wl t-di-na-am- ma 





1 Possibly Sac. 

? This is the last line of the column. 

3 The missing portion of the column probably continued the 
description of the hordes of monsters, who were oppressing the 
land. The king then enquires of the gods whether he should give 
the enemy battle (cf. ll. 6 ff.). 

« This rendering is conjectural. 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 145 





22. [Their] fourth brother was named [.. . . dada; 

23. [Their] fifth [brother] was named[ . . . . jdah; 

24. [Their] sixth [brother] was named[. . . . rju; 

25. [Their seventh brother] was named[ . . . . |? 
CoLuMN IL. 


[The upper half of the column? is wanting.] 

2. Evil [fiends] and demons that lie in wait[ .. . ] 

3. Pursuing after (a man), turned [him] from his 
purpose. 

4.1ny, eee ee did EE eo cee So} 

5-[ . . .« . Jan evil curse was [cast upon (?)] 
the lands.‘ ; 

6. [I]* cried unto the magicians, and I directed them, 

7. I set out the lambs for sacrifice [in rows of ] seven. 

8. [I placed there also] the holy[ . . . . 4,’ 

g. And I enquired of the great gods, 

ro. Of IStar, andf[ . . . . 4], and Zamama, and 
Anunitum, 

i. And[ . . . . jand Samaé, the warrior. 

12. And the gods [commanded me] that I should go, 
but{ . . . . J] they gave not (unto me). 





® The beginnings of ll. 6-8 are restored from col. tii, Il. 18-z0. 

® The sign is TU, not TU (= a2). 

" The ideogram is explained as gu-uh-}[w] in K. 4,174 (see 
Thompson, Cun. Texts, part xi, pl. 47, and Jensen, K.Z., vi, 
p. 294). The traces of the third sign upon the tablet are those 
of Au, not du. 

® Restored from col. iii, 1. 23. 


10 


146 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





13. ki - a@ - am ak - bt a@- na hb - bi - ta 

um - ma la - u@ a- na - ku - mat 
Iq. a@-u UR-BAR-[ ..... 1...» ] 6-0” 
IS. aé-% UR-BAR-[ ...... . |] Sa-d-tu 


16. lul-lik ki-¢ at®*-kil [ . . . ]-pis hib-bi-ia 


17,% lu-ud-adi> sa parsilli ta-a-ti lu-us - bat 
18, sattu mah - ri - tu ina ka - §a - adi* 





? The exclamatory phrase Zu- -u a-na-ku-ma may perhaps be best 
rendered in this way. 

* The sign is ar, not TUR; in other signs the scribe tends to 
carry through his horizontal wedges. 

* The word /u-ud-di evidently refers to a weapon of some kind. 

* It was pointed out by Zimmern (Z.A., p. 317.) that another 
version of this portion of the legend is preserved on a fragment of 
an Old-Babylonian tablet, the text of which is published in Neo- 
Assyrian characters by Scheil, Recueil de travaux, xx, p. 65 f. 
According to Scheil, the fragment in question forms the third or 
fourth column of a tablet, and in 1], 8 he read the name of the king 
Tukulti-bél-niSi; but its parallelism with I. 22 f. of col. ii of the 
“Cuthaean Legend,” as Zimmer pointed out, disproved the 
reading, and in place of Scheil’s 17-Ku-#7 [i.e. /uhkulfi(t’) ], a-ka-st 
[or ad], and @-na-as in 1. 8 f. we may probably read ¢s-s7-hu, a-ka-la, 
and a-na-}7 (cf. also Jensen’s transliteration and translation of the 
text in A.B., vi, pp. 298 ff.). The column of text preserved by the 
fragment reads as follows: (1) 7m-ta-ha-as fa-ap-da-a u-ul 1-21- 
[.. - e ed (2) buna Sa-nt-i TT {u)-s(¢] l-mu um-ma-ni 
u-Se-si-am-ma (3) im-ta-ha-as ta-ap-da-a u-ma-al-li si-ra (4) t-na 
Sa-al-S Su-8 H-mi um-ma-na u-ke-si-am-ma (5) e-li Sa pa-na u-wa 
(ie. pr)-at-te-cr Su-a-tt (6) i8-tu VI Su-8i li-mt um-ma-ni t-nt-ru 
(7) tm-ta-ha-as ta-ap-da-a ra-bi-a (8) a-na-ku is-si-hu en-nt-s¢ 
(9) a-ka-la a-na-hi a-Su-us am-ti-ma (10) um-ma a-na-hu $U(?)-AN 
a-na pali-ia mi-nam ub-lam (11) a-na-ku Sar-rum la mu-sa-lim [ma}- 
“i-Su (12) [wu] r@a@ la mu-sa-lim ni-S-Su (13) ta-a-8 pale(e) mi-nam 
ub-lam (14) hi-t lu-us-ta-ag-[?]-ma (15) pa-ag-ri u um-ma-ni lu-se-st 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 147 





13. Then spake I unto my heart, 
: Saying: “ By my life !? 


14, Whois . . [ . . . . ]my friend? 

15. Whois . . f[ . . . . Jasorcerer? 

16. But I will go, since -I have put my trust in the 
[ . . . . Jof my heart, 


17. And my weapon? of iron will I take!” 
18. As the first year drew nigh,* 





(16) a-na hu-ul-lu-uk si-ri Ak-ka-di-¢ (17)? nakra da-an-na 


td-ki-am-ma (18) C - + ee fe fal?)-am-fa-ri-a t-[?)-gt-a 
(19) [ 2 2s J gu-uk-ha-ni-e (20) . 
Ak-ha-di-t tarpasnn C aeteeah va J, (1) He fought, and conquered 


(lit. “ he fought a defeat”), and left not [one remaining]. (2) The 
second time, one hundred and twenty thousand warriors I sent 
forth, and (3) he fought, and conquered, and filled the plain (with 
their bodies). (4) The third time, sixty thousand warriors I sent 
forth, and (5) I caused them to be mightier than before. (6) After 
he had slain the three hundred and sixty thousand warriors, (7) and 
had fought, and had achieved a mighty victory, (8) I was desperate, 
powerless, (9) and afflicted, I was cast down and full of woe, and 
I lamented, (10) saying: ‘As forme . . . what have I brought 
upon my realm? (11) lama king who hath brought no prosperity 
unto his country, (12) and a shepherd who hath brought no 
prosperity unto his people. (13) As for me and my realm, what 
have I brought upon (upon us) (14) by . . . « and (15) 
causing myself and my warriors to go forth? (16) To destroy the 
plain of Akkad (17) he hath summoned a SEN. foe, and (18) 
[i -2 Sed ee ae Go). 2s 

(20) re J to overwhelm Akkad [ . oral aa From 
the summary in 1 6, the last line of the preceding column may 
probably be restored, as ‘‘ The first time, one hundred and eighty 
thousand warriors I sent forth.” Jensen also connects the fragment 
K. 8,582 (see Haupt, Mimrodepos, p. 78) with the ‘ Cuthaean 
legend,” since it describes in the first person the putting to flight 
and capture of twelve warriors, and contains the formula {/]:-a-am 
ak-bi ana hib-bi-a[a]; cf. K.B., vi, p. 300f. 


148 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





19. fT Susi. MM ummanu u-Sse-si-ma ina lbbi-su-nu 
asten(en) baltu ul ititra(ra) 
20. Sanitum(tum) Ssattu ina kasadi(di) XC.M ado. 


21. salultum(tum) Sattu ina kasadidi) LX.M+VII.C do. 


22, is - si - fu en - ni - Su a-ha la 

a- Su - us us - ta - ni ~ th 
23. ki-a-am ak-bi a-na lib-bi-ta um-ma lu-u, a-na-ku-ma 
24.'a - na pa-l-e mi - na - a e - sip) 


25.a-na-ku  sarru la mu-sal-li-mu mati - Su 


Cozumn III. 


1. rt-e-um la mu-Ssal-li-mu um-ma-ni- su 
2. ki lu-us-tak-kan-ma pag-ri u pu-ti lu- se-si 
3. Sa-lum-mat ni-si mu-$ mu-u-tu namlaru a-ru-ur-tu 
. na-mur-va-tu har-ba-su  ni-pil-su . a nt-tb-ri- tu 
. [fa-sa-ak]-hu di-lb-tu ma-la ba-su-u 


- + J+ Se - ne wt- tar - da 


To. - ee ee 4 i] - Sa - hin a - bu - be 


SMA E 
= 


[ek ee ce ee oe a ba ba panst* 





T Lit., “added to.” 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 149 





19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 
24. 
25. 


Ow ans 


One hundred and twenty thousand warriors I sent 
out, but not one returned alive. 

As the second year drew nigh, ninety thousand 
warriors I sent out, but not one returned alive. 

As the third year drew nigh, sixty thousand 
seven hundred warriors I sent out, but not one 
returned alive. 

Despairing, powerless, and afflicted, I was full of 
woe, and I groaned aloud, 

And I spake unto my heart, saying: “ By my life! 

“ What have I brought upon! my realm? 

“T am a king who hath brought no prosperity 
unto his country, 


Coiumn III. 
“ And a shepherd who hath brought no prosperity 
unto his people. 


. “But (this thing) will I do. In mine own person 


will I go forth! 


. “The pride of men, and night, and death, and 


disease, and trembling, 
“ And fear, and terror, and . . . , and hunger, 


. “And [famine], and misery of every kind 


“Pursue after their[ . . 2. 2. 1. 1... 
“TBut . . . . let] there be a deluge, 
“To... . . the] deluge of old time!” 





2 The reading of 81 as paz7 is not certain. 


150 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





Oe Ty satay Be, ob wis PR ce eel, AS BABS 805 
10. ¢-sak-[ka-ru . ww ww ew we ww JO SU 


PE SeaRiE Rel GN Ay aa’ SBN OR te ae OE oso se 
12. tak-ba-nin-ma*® [ .. . 2. 1 we ee le 
13.4 Sub-su-u [ .. . 2... 1 1 ww se J- pe 
PE os BUR mE ee ee a a J 

14. sag-muk sa ributdd) Sati . . . 1 . . )- pa 
15. wa te-me-ki Sa “E-a[...... j-a 
Sa wlan” [rabar |” * 


16. nike sag-muk elati”m” [ 2 2. 1. ww we ws J 


17. te-ri-e-te elliti® — 2. ee we ew wee J 
18. al - st mare™ we bay" uw - [ma -? - t]r 
19. VIJ a-na pa-an VII ”"**puhadu al - plu - tu 
20, u - kin guhhers ell [adi |?’4 
21. a - Sal - ma tlani* ral bits |** 


22. ™Is-tar [™ . 2. 2 ™Za-ma-ma  ™ A-nu-nt-tjum 


23.pap 2. ww wee Sama hu - va - die 
2ghimar? [ook dee Te 2838S ee ee ae ee on 


[The lower half of the column is wanting,® except for traces of what is probably 
the last line of the column, preserved by K.5,640.] 


Ate [ e Boater eR Rite ed ae ee ae 





1 The fragments of the tablet K. 5,418¢ are not quite correctly 
put together, the beginnings of ll. 9 ff. being one line higher on 
the tablet than the ends of the lines to which they correspond. 

2 It would seem that one of the gods urged the king to make 
offerings and supplication at the Feast of the New Year, before 
undertaking his fourth expedition. From Hl. 14ff. it is clear that 
the king followed the god’s advice; and, from the conclusion of 
col. iv, it may be inferred that he at last met with success against 
his enemies. 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 151 





9. 'Thenthe god[ ........ .. J spake,? 


10. Andsaidf . 2... 1. ee ee ed: 
#re*Dherpods [2 cod ce va hk en Be] 
12. “ Thou didst speak unto me®and[...... | 
13. “Andto make[f . . 2. . 1... ws ] 
those. gets sk he, ody ene ty AE A" tes 
14. The New Year’s Feast in the fourth y[ear . . . |, 
15. With supplication unto Ea,[the . . . . ]of 


the great gods, 
16. Pure offerings for the Feast of the New Year 
bios SK All 
17. Pureomens[ . . . . . . ]- 
18. I cried unto the magicians, and I [directed them], 
19. I set [out] the lambs for sacrifice in rows of seven. 
20. I placedthere also the holy . 2. . ff 
21. And I enquired of the great gods, 
22. Of Istar, [and . . . . , and Zamama, and 


Anunitjum, a 
23. Andf . . . . , and Samas, the warrior. 
24. ‘The-son'{ iss. 2 2 5e-b we eo Oe | 


[The lower half of the column is wanting,® except for traces of what is probably 
the last line of the column, preserved by K. 5,640.] 





> Possibly the 2nd pers. plur., ‘ye commanded and”; but as 
the god appears to be addressing the king, the rendering in the 
translation is preferable. 

4 The end of the sign mg is preserved. 

5 See above, p. 145, 0. 7- 

6 It is clear that in the missing portion of the column the king 
describes the defeat of his foes, since in col. iv he refers to the 
record of his history as an encouragement to future princes who 
may succeed him on the throne. 


152 


OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 








Cotumn IV. 
weeele . . 2. . J 2 mise*e fT . 2. J 
3. al nak-[yi . . . . ) 4. alu Saals ... | 
Bete ME [oe ee ee ae | Fe Sf = a] 
6. Sarru dan-[mu . . . . J w-lu-[ ow... ] 
7. tani” [ 2... enje-te w-[ 2. 2 1. ] 
8. fa-die . . 2 1 ]-R wd [ww plil-su-nu-ti 
g. at-ta sarru issakku ruba le mamma Sa-na-ma 
10. sa ilu. i-nam- bu- su Sarvu-ta — ippus(us). 
ul, duppa-[si-nja! e-pu-us-ka nara as-tur- kha 
12,2 - na Kuta ina E - Sid - lam 
13.2 - na pa - pak * Nergal e- a - bak - ka 
14. nara an -na-a a+ mur - ma 
15. $a pi-i “nar an~na-a i s-me-ma 
16. la te - st- th - hu? la te ~ en - nis - Su 
17. la ta - pal - lah? la ta - tar - ru - ur 
18. is - da - a‘ ~ ka li ~u ki ~ na 
19. at-ta ina su-un sinnisti-ka S$t-pir lu tippus(us) 
20, diivan’™ - ka tuk - kil 
21. fi - ra - ti ~ ka me # mul - bi 
1K, 5,640, se. 


2K, 5,640, la ée-th-st-1h-hu. 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 153 





Oo ON A 


12. 
13. 


14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
. Stablish thyself firmly, 
19. 
20. 
aq. 


_ Corumn IV. 
. Together with [ . . . ..] 2. The people 
didnotf . . . . j 
. The city of the [foe . . . . J] 4. That city 
.Unto [| . . . 1. . . . . J there was 
. Amighty king) 2... J... ET... | 
.Thegods[ ....]... D~.. ss J 
. Myhand[ . . . . did not conquer them. 


. Thou, O king, or ruler, or prince, or anyone 


whatsoever, 


. Whom the god shall call to rule over the kingdom, 
I. 


A tablet concerning these matters have I made 
for thee, and a record have I written for thee. 

In the city of Cuthah, in the temple E-shidlam, 

In the shrine of Nergal, have I deposited it for 
thee. 

Behold this memorial tablet, 

And hearken unto the words thereof, 

And thou shalt not despair, nor be feeble, 

And thou shalt not fear, nor be affrighted. 


Sleep in peace beside thy wife, 
Strengthen thy walls, 
Fill thy trenches with water, 





3 K. 5,640, da-ag. 
4K. 5,640 omits a. 


154 OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION. 





22, pi-sa-an-na-ti-ka Se-im-ka kaspa - ka 

busi - ka makkura - ka 
23.[ ... ])) - Ha ul- nu - ti - kha Su - rib 
24.[ . . . . wue-klu-us-ma tub-ka-a-ti e-mid 


25. [pa - gar - ka} u- sur pu-ut-ka sul -~ lim 


26) Pos. eke we Ae ks SOS A ar] e tu - gt - su 
27... 6. ee eee ee Joma e ta-as-nik-su 
BBE ici bP ae se At Sheva vlmapr tbe Sah oe RA 


[The lower half of the column is wanting. ] 


1 One sign is wanting at the beginning of the line; the traces 
suggest GUD, i.e. alpu-ka, “ thy cattle.” The reading of the second 
sign as 4a is not certain. 

2 In this address to future rulers, the general moral which the 
king would draw from his own history appears to be, that safety 
is to be found in following the commands of the gods. Further- 
more, he recommends his successors upon the throne, not to take 


THE “CUTHAEAN LEGEND.” 155 





22. Bring in thy treasure-chests, and thy corn, and 
thy silver, and thy goods, and thy possessions, 

23. Andthy[ . . . ],' and thy household stuff. 

24. Fix firmly{the . . . J, and build surrounding 
walls. 

25. Guard [thy body] and take heed for thy person. 

26.[ . . . . ], thou shalt not go out unto him, 

27.[ . . . . J, thou shalt not draw nigh unto him. 


Orley gs yea a TENG Soe, ead 


[The lower half of the column is wanting.} 





the field against an invading foe, but to shelter themselves behind 
the walls of the city of Cuthah. It will be seen from the above 
translation that the text does not contain a legend of creation 
(cf. p. r40f., note 1). The reference to Tiamat in col. i, however, 
is of considerable interest from the evidence which it furnishes 
with regard to the early date of the dragon-myth; see further, the 
Introduction. 


Appendices. 


I 


Aooprian Commentaries and Parafler Certs to the 
Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series, 


THE Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series was a composition 
which received much attention from the Babylonian and 
Assyrian scribes, and specimens of three classes of com- 
mentaries have come down to us, which were compiled to 
explain the whole, or portions, of its contents. The first and 
most important class consists of a commentary to each line 
of the text; and of this class we have a single version 
inscribed upon fragments of two large tablets, duplicates of 
one another. A second class seems to have contained a kind 
of running commentary to passages selected not only from 
the Seventh Tablet, but also from the other tablets of the 
Creation Series ; the fragment S.747 belongs to this class of 
explanatory text. A third class, represented by K. 2,107 + 
K. 6,086, gives explanations of a number of titles of the god 
Marduk, several of which occur in those portions of the text 
of the Seventh Tablet which have been recovered. The 
greater part of this Appendix deals with these commentaries, 
and with the information which they supply concerning 
the contents and interpretation of the Seventh Tablet. At 
the end of the Appendix some fragments of texts are 
discussed, which bear a striking resemblance to the Seventh 
Tablet, and prove that the religious literature of Babylonia 
included parallel texts composed on very similar lines. The 
evidence which the commentaries and the fragments of parallel 
texts furnish, with regard to the form and literary development 
of the Creation Series, is also of considerable value. 

To the commentary of the first class, which refers to every 
line of the Seventh Tablet, the following fragments belong : 


158 APPENDIX I. 





S.11 +S. 980+ S. 1,416, K. 4,406, 82-3-23, 151, R. 366+ 
80-7-19, 288 + 293, K. 2,053, and K. 8,299. These six 
fragments are separate portions of two large tablets, which 
were inscribed with duplicate texts. I think there is little 
doubt that S. 11 + S. 980 + S. 1,416 (vol. ii, pls. li ff. and Iv) 
and K. 4,406 (pl. livf.) are parts of the same tablet, a large 
one inscribed with five or six double columns of writing on 
each side ; 82-3-23, 151 (pl. liv) is a smaller fragment of the 
same tablet. The remaining three fragments R. 366 + 80-7- 
19, 288 + 293 (pls. lviff.), K. 2,053 (pl. lixf.), and K. 8,299 
(pl. lx) are parts of a duplicate commentary to the Seventh 
Tablet. The commentary is in the form of a bilingual list, 
and presupposes the existence of a Sumerian version of the 
Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series; it gives a list of the 
Sumerian words, or ideograms, and opposite each word is 
added its Assyrian equivalent, generally in the order in 
which the words occur in the Assyrian text. The compart- 
ments, or sections, into which the columns of the commentary 
are divided, refer to the separate couplets, and frequently to 
the separate lines of the Seventh Tablet ; and it will be seen 
that it is often possible to restore the text of the Seventh 
Tablet from the information which they furnish! The 
following paragraphs deal with the sections of the com- 
mentary which have been preserved :— 

S. 11 + S. 980, Obv., col. i (pl. li), Il. 1-10, the commentary 
to ll. 1 and 2 of the text, read: (1) [] ASAR-RI sa-rik 
(2) RU: Sa-ra-ku (3) SAR: mtinris-tu (4) A: ts-va-tu (5) SI- 
DU: ka-a-nu (6) RU: ba-nu-u (7) SAR: Se-tm (8) SAR: fu-u 
(9) MA: a-su-u (10) SAR: ar-ku. From this we may restore 
IL 1 and 2 of the Seventh Tablet (see the text of K. 2,854 in 
the block on p. 159) as “Asar-vi Sa-rik mt-ris-t[¢ mu-kin 





* For references to previous publications of various portions of 
the commentary, see the Introduction. The text of five additional 
fragments of the Seventh Tablet, which I came across after the 
lithographed texts in vol. ii had been printed off (see Appendix IT), 
are published in this Appendix near the paragraphs dealing with 
the portions of the commentary which refer to them. 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. 159 





iz-ra-ti}, and ba-nu-u Se-am u ki-e mu-s([e-si ur-ki-ti], As the 
verb sa-ra-ku occurs in |, 2 of the commentary, it would be 
possible to take the signs GAR and RIG in 1. 1 as part of the 
title, and transliterate the line as [*] ASAR-RI-GAR-RIG ; and 
this would agree with the explanations of the title given in 
the Seventh Tablet, as GAR = 4anu (cf. Briinnow, No. 11,962) 
and RIG = urkitu (cf. Br, No. 5,165). But in 1. 1 of the 
Seventh Tablet the signs GAR-RIG are clearly to be rendered 





Creation Series, Tablet VIT, I, 1-18 (K. 2,854}. 


Sa-rig, and it is preferable to render them in this way also in 
the commentary. The title “ ASAR-RI is therefore explained 
as Sa-rtk (as in R. 366, etc. Obv., col. i, lL. 1, “Tu-TU is 
explained as ba-a-nu); or, which is perhaps preferable, the 
scribe wrote the two opening words of the Semitic version 
of the text as a heading to the commentary. 

S. 11, etc., Obv., col. i, Il. 11-16, the commentary to 1. 3 of 
the text, read: (11) ““ASARU-ALIM (12) SA: 47-2-du (13) SA: 
mil-ku (14) ALIM: kab-tu (15) SA: at-ru (16) SA: meil-ku. 


160 APPENDIX I. 





The text reads“ Asaru-alim sa ina bit mil-ki kab-t[u ....]; 
the end of the line may therefore be restored as a-tar mitl-ki, 
or possibly as at-ru mil-kiv3u, Lines 17-20, the commentary 
to 1. 4 of the text, read (17) DINGIR: 7-/um (18) SA: u-ku-u 
(19) [DIJR-DIR: a-da-ru (20) [DIR]-DIR: a-fa-zu. The text 
reads tani u-tak-ku-u a-d[ir . . . . ]; the end of the 
line may perhaps be restored as a-d[2r 7-hu-us-su-nu-ti }. 
Lines 21-22, the beginning of the commentary to l. 5 of the 
text, give the title [] As[ARU]-ALIM-NUN-NA, and_ the 


explanation [ . . ]-ru-6u, which may be restored from 
the text as [ka]-ru-bu. The text reads ™ Asaru-alim-nun-na 
ka-vru-bunu-ur{ . . . . 4; see further, p. 93, n. 6. 


R. 366 + 80-7-19, 288 4+ 293, Obv., col. i (pl. Ivi), IL 1-4, 
corresponding to 1. 9 of the text, read: (1) “TU-TU: ba-a-nu 
(2) TU: ba-nu-u (3) TU: e-de-su (4) DA: Su-u. From this 
1. 9 may be restored as ™ Tu-tu ba-an te-dis-ti-su-nu [su-u], 
see above, p. 93, n. 10. Lines 5-9 (cf. also S. 1,416, col. i, 
pi. lv), corresponding to |. 10 of the text, read: (5)[ ] KU: 
el-lum (6)[ DJU: sa-gu-w (7) [ DJA: Su-u (8)[ S]A: leu 
(9){ . . ]: pa-Sa-hu. The text of the line reads 4-“i1 sa-gi- 
su-nu-ma Su-nu luu{. . . . J; the end of the line 
may be conjecturally restored as /u-u [pa-as-hu-nz], see above, 
p.94f. Lines 10-13, corresponding to 1. 11 of the text, read : 
(10) TU: [ba-wu]-u (11) MU: Sip-tum (12) DINGIR: 2-d[unz] 
(13) TI: va-a-hu ; 1, 11 may therefore be conjecturally restored 
as lib-ni-ma sip-ti ilani li-[nu-hu], see above, p.94f. Lines 
14-18, corresponding to |. 12 of the text, read: (14) IB: 
a-ga-gu (15)SA: leu (16) IB: ¢e-bu-u (17) TU: m0--u 
(18) GABA : ¢v-¢um, from which 1. 12 may be restored as ag-gzs’ 
lu te-bu-u li-ni-’-u [i-rat-su-ni], see above, p.94f. Lines 19-24, 
which form two sections upon the tablet, read: (19) DA: lu-u 
(20) DA: Sa-ku-u (21) TA: z-x[a] (22) MU: ple- ty 
(23) DINGIR: [zum] (24)[ .. . . ]: [ }. 
It will be seen that these two sections correspond to a | singie 
line (I. 13) of the text, which reads: /u-w su-us-ku-u-ma ina 
puhur iant[ . . . . J; from 1. 22 of the commentary 
we therefore obtain the new value MU = f[u-ub-rw]. 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. 161 





K, 2,053, Obv. (pl. lix), I. 1-4 (ef. pl. li, S. 11 +S. 980, 
Obv., col. ii, 1. 1), the commentary to 1. 17 of the text, read: 


(yest. 42 Tease. aw 2 ete fs ed 
(4)NA:[ . . . . ]. The text reads al-kat-su-un is-ba- 
tu-ma wu-ad-du-u[ . . . . J; 1. 2 of the commentary may 


therefore be restored as ZI: [sa-ba-tu], cf. Br, No. 2,330; 
zu in |. 4 is the equivalent of u-ad-du-u, and the equivalent 
of NA in |. 4 may possibly be restored as sw-zu, the 3 m. pl. 
pron. suffix (but cf. p. 95, 0.15). S.1£-+5S. 980, Obv., col. ii, 
Il. 2-7 (cf. also K. 2,053, Obv., Il. 5-10), which form two sections 
upon the tablet, correspond to |. 18 of the text and read: 
(2)TA: af . . . | (3) KU: def . © © J (4) TA: #f{xa] 
(5) UKKIN : a-p[a-t2] (6) 1B: tp-Se-[t7] (7) GAB: ku-u[l- . . . 
The text reads ad tm-ma-Si t-na a-pa-ti ip-se-taf. . .. «45 
it is clear therefore from 1. 3 that the commentary gives 
a slightly variant text, or at any rate a variant reading for 
the second word in the line. Lines 8-13 (cf. also K. 2,053, 
Obyv., 1. 11), corresponding to |. 19 of the text, read: (8) “do. 
# NA-ZI-AZAG-G[A] (9) RU: ba-nu-[u] (10) RU: n2-bu-[u] 
(11) Zt: &a-a-nu (12) AZAG : el-dum (13) AZAG : ¢e-Uil-tum. 
The text reads ™ Tu-tu ™Zi-azag Sal-sts im-bu-u mu-kil 
ze-lil-ti; the commentary thus gives a variant form of the title, 
and presupposes a longer (or an alternate) form of the line, for 
no equivalents occur in the text to Il. (9) and (12); while for 
mu-kil the text of the commentary read mu-hin (as in J. 21 
of the text, cf. 1. 23 of the commentary). Lines 14-19, 
corresponding to |. 20 of the text, read: (14) DINGIR : 7-lum 
(15) TU (so glossed): sa-a-ri (16) DU (so glossed): ¢a-a-bi 
(17) DINGIR:: be-lei (18) ZL: Se-mu-u (19) ZL: ma-ga-ru. 
The text reads 7 sa-a-ré ta-a-bi be-el tas-me-e u ma-ga-rt. 
Lines 20-24, corresponding to |. 21 of the text, read: (20) ZI: 
ba-Su-u (21) AZAG: st-tut-ru (22) UA: ku-bu-ut-te-e (23) ZI: 
ka-a-n[u](24)[ . . |: Zeglallul. The text reads su-sab-si 
se-tm-ri u ku-bu-ut-te-e mu-kin hegalli. 

S. 1,416, col. ii (see pl. lv), joining S. 11, etc., gives traces 
of two sections of the commentary which should correspond 
to about 1. 25 of the text. S. 11 + S.980, Obv,, col. iii (pl. li) 


YI 


162 APPENDIX 1 





gives traces of three sections of the commentary. The third 
section (l. 9) begins with a title of Marduk; this may 
possibly refer to }. 33 or 1. 35 of the text, but the traces of 
the preceding section do not appear to correspond to |. 32 
or 1. 34. According to its position in the commentary, 
however, this fragment should refer to about that portion of 
the text. The fragment 82-3-23, 151 (pl. liv) includes traces 
of the right half of three sections of the commentary ; the 
second section consists of the following words : w#t-seu, 
ir-pi-e-tu, ma-lu-u, ka-st-pu, ni-St, tt-’-u-tu, and na-da-nu. The 
signs us-mu, taken in conjunction with zv-f7-e-¢u, may perhaps 
be compared with the phrase Mu-use-mu ir-pi-e-tu ut-tak-st- 
ba-am-ma, which occurs in the explanatory text S. 747, Rev., 
1, to (see below, p. 170), where it is followed by the comment 
Mu-um-mu = rig-mu. We might perhaps restore the first 
line of the section as “Alu-um-mu, running across the 
column ; but Mummu, explained as vzgiz, is certainly not 
the title of Marduk, but the name of Apsii’s minister ; it is 
therefore possible wse-mu in the commentary refers to Tiamat, 
and may perhaps be regarded as a title (cf. Ummu-Hubur). 
The sense of the second half of the line appears to be 
that Marduk is the guardian of mankind and gives them 
nourishment. 

K. 8,299, Obverse (pl. 1x) gives traces of the right half of 
three sections of the commentary. The Reverse, Il. 3-14 
give the right half of the commentary to the first two lines 
preserved by the fragment K. 12,830 (see the block on 


p. 163). Lines 3-6 read: (3) [ . . . J: mé(?)-dee-[u] 
(4)... . J: &b-ra-a-te (5)[ . . . J: sal-mat kabkadi 
(6) [.. . . J]: ba-nu-u. The first line preserved by 
K. 12,830 reads[ . . . 1 . J sal-mat{[ . . . hs 


this may conjecturally be restored as [26-7 £2b-va-a-de] s ‘sal mat 
[kakkadi 1b-ni-ma]. The first sign in 1. 3 of K. 8,299 is 
broken and its reading as mz is not certain; zr is possible, 
as suggested in the copy on pl. Ix. Lines 7—14, from the 
right half of the commentary to the second line preserved 
by K. 12,830, read: (7)[ . . . Ji ede (8)[ . . . ]: 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. 163 





Sa-a-Su (9)[ . . . J: tee-mu (1o)[ . . . J: — . . J 
mu (tI)[ ... J {4Je-a (22)[ . . . J: Gig 
(13) [ - Ji [.. . em (4yC- - eat ae 
The text ‘tends [ .... . jasetel. . . Tg 
the first part of the line may therefore be eatored: as tek 
Sal-a-5u te-[e-mu. . . . J, but the restoration of the 


second half of the line is ‘not certain. 
K. 4,406, Reverse,! col. i (pls. livf.), corresponding to the 
fourth line preserved by the fragment K. 13,761 (see the 





Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (K, 12,830). 


block on p. 164), read: (1) GIL: ma-[ . . ] (2) IL: 
Sa-ku-[u] (3) MA: na-sa-[ku(?)] (4) GIL: a-gu-[u] (5) GIL: 
a-Sa-[vu] (6) GIL: Sal-¢[um(?)] (7) Sar a-gi-e: Sar-ra-[ . . 

Of the text only the beginning of the title is preserved, 
MA-gifl . . . . . J; in lL 1 of the commentary the 
sign A is omitted before GIL, and it is possible that ma-[ . . ] 
in the right half of the line is not to be taken as an 
explanation of the title, but as part of the title itself. Lines 
8-13, corresponding to the next line of the text, read: 





1 It is possible that the text of K. 4,406 is from the obverse and 
not from the reverse of the tablet ; see above, p. 104, n. 2. 


164 APPENDIX I. 





(8) MA: ba-nu-u (9) IM: tr-s[e-d] (10) AN: e-[/at-w] (11) GIS: 
mul. . . | (12) GIN: &la-a-nu(?)] (13) DINGIR: [2-Ze72(?)]. 
Of the text only the first word, da-nu-u, has been preserved. 
Lines 14-25 correspond to the next two lines of the text, 
and the title in I. 14 may be restored from the text as 
* ZU-[LUM-MU}. The next line of the text reads ™ AZv-uin- 
mu ba-aln . . . . . |; the commentary, Il. 26-209, 
evidently presupposes a variant reading for this line, for it 
does not begin with the title “ Mu-uM-Mu, although 
MU-UM-M[U], without the determinative, occurs in ll. 27 
and 29. 






[BROKEN SURFACE} 





OBVERSE. Reverse. 
Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (I. 13,761). 


K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, ll. 1-7 give the following words in 
the explanatory half of the column: ¢-wa, i-Lum, a-fu, su-ru- 
bu-u, va-bu-u, e-til-lum, and nap-har-rum. They should 
correspond to the fourth line preserved by the fragment 
K. 8,519 (see the blocks on p. 165), which reads [ 

S§a-ka]-a e-mu-ka-su. Vt is clear therefore that they presuppose 
a variant reading for the line, which may perhaps be con- 
jecturally restored as ¢-wa ilénd a-hi-e-Su Sur-bu-u ra-bu-u 
e-til nap-ha-ri, “He is mighty among the gods his brethren, 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. 165 





great is the lord of all!” With e-tel-dum and nap-har-ru 
may be compared []ap-har be-lim, which occurs at the end 
of the preceding line preserved by K. 8,519. Lines 8-13, 





cot for TT EES YA 


OBVERSE. 
Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (K. 8,539). 


the commentary to the following line on K. 8,519, read: 
(8) ["] LUGAL-DUR-MAH (9) LUGAL: Sar-vu (10) DUR: 
mar-ka-su (11) DINGIR: @-dunt (12) LUGAL: be-dem (13) DUR- 


TE ATT TE ot ot wf gE f}—— 





REVERSE. 
Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (K. 8,519). 


MAH: dur-ma-hu. The text of K. 8,519 and its duplicate 


K. 13,337 (see the block on p. 166) may be restored as 
(* Lugal-dur-mah sar m)ar-\k\as ilani” be-el dur-ma-hi. Lines 


166 APPENDIX I. 





14~22, the commentary to the following couplet on K. 8,519, 
read : (14) LU: sa-a (15) KU(DUR?): za (16) DUR: sub-cum 
(17) LUGAL: Sar-ru (18) MAH: vu-bu-u (19) KU (DUR?) : 
@-na (20) DINGIR : #-dus (21) MAH: ma-’-dt (22) MAH: si-2-ru. 
The text of the two lines reads sa ina Su-bat sarru-u-ti 
Sur-bu-u and [sa] ina tlant*” ma--dis si-ru. Lines 23-28, 
the commentary to the following line on K. 8,519, read: 
(23) * A-DU-NUN-NA (24) A-DU: wdl-ku (25) NUN: ™ E-a 
(26) RU (so glossed) : da-nu-u (27) DINGIR : t-luat (28) A: 
a-bu, The text may therefore be restored as [" A-du-nun-na] 
ma-lik ™E-a ba-an ilani™® abe*-su, Vines 29-35, the 





Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (IX. 13,337). Duplicate 
of K. 8,519. 


commentary to the following couplet on K. 8,519, read: 
(29) RA: Sa-a (30) RA: a-na (31) A[D]U: a-lak-tu (32). .]: 
[rz]1-du-w (33) NU: la-a (34) RU (?): [s2a-$a-lu (?)] (35) 
DIN[GIR]: [2-lem]. The text of the two lines may therefore 
be restored as sa a-[na] tal-lak-t ru-bu-ti-su and d[a-a 
u)-mas-sa-lu tle ai-um-me. 

K. 4,406, Rev., col. iii (pls. liv and Iv) gives traces of four 
sections of the commentary. Of the first section only the 
ends of words in the right half of the column remain. The 
second section reads: (9) [ . . . J-SIGISSE-SIGISSE 





* The sign is much defaced (cf. the traces given on pl. lv), but 
is probably rz. 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. 167 





(10) UD-DU: sa-Ru-u (11) RA: t-2a (12) E: b¢-2-tu (13) SIGISSE- 
SIGISSE: zk-ri-bu (14) RA: ra-mu-u (15) RA: a-Sa-bu. Line 9 
appears to give the end of a title of Marduk, which is perhaps 
explained as sa-ku-u ina bitati”, “Who is exalted in the 
temples”; the second half of the line probably contained 
a second explanatory phrase. Lines 16-19 read: (16) DINGIR: 
z-lum (17) IGi: mah-ru (18) [T]U: e-ve-bu (19)[ . . . Js 
kat-ru-u ; from this it is possible to build up the line as ¢/auz 
ma-har-Su h-se-ri-bu kat-ra-Su-un, “ Let the gods bring their 
gifts into his presence” ; a reference to this line is sesaibly 
contained in the explanatory text, S. 747, Rev., 1. 6, which 
begins [ . . . . be-se-rt-bu kat-ra-su-un (see below, 
Pp. 170); the fourth section gives the first word of the next 
line as a-d, 

S.11 + S. 980, Rev., col. i (pls. liif.), and its duplicates, 
K. 2,053, Rev., col. i (pls. lix f.), and R. 366 + 80-7-19, 293, 
Rev., col. i (pl. Ivii), give traces of seven sections of the 
commentary, which appear to correspond to a portion of the 
text between Il. go and 100. S. 11 +S. 980, Rev., col. ii 
(r lii), ll. 1-6, corresponding to 1. 106 of the text, read: 

Te cf » jee (2) Ce 2 we |: 

Lea ye [he a-if 0) G) [R]a: fafa] (4) RA: ¢-2a (5) AN: Sa-me-e 
(6) DU-DU: Su-pu-u. The text reads [[ . . 2 or) 
hakkaba sja . . . . ],so that the end of the fine may be 
conjecturally restored as §[a ¢-na Sa-me-e Su-pu-u]. LI. 7-12, 
corresponding to |. 107 of the text, read: (7) RA: du-w 
(8) RA:: sa-ba-tu (9) KUN-SAG-GE: rt-e-s% ar-kat (10) AN: 
ri-e-Su (11) RU: ar-kat (12) [ . . JSA-A-RU: pa-la-su. 
The text reads lu-u sa-bit resu-arkat §u-nu $a-a-su lu-w tp 
], see above, p. 106f. Lines 13-21 (cf. pl. lix for 

the duplicate commentary, K. 2,053, Rev., col. ii, Il, 1-5), 
corresponding to 1. 108 of the text, read: (13) [ ] MA: ma-a 
(14) [ ] MA: ma-ru (15) RA: Sa-a se) RA: @-a (£7) IR 
(so glossed on S. It, ete, cf 1. 26): &iy-be (18) NE-RU 
(possibly ERIM, cf. Briinnow, No. 4,603): ¢am-tine (19) GID: 
e-bi-ru (20) RA: la-a (21) NE: na-a-hu. The text reads 
ma-a $a kir-bis Ti-amat i-tib-bi[ . . . . . J, and from the 


168 APPENDIX 1. 





commentary the end of the line may conjecturally be restored 
as 2-t2b-bi-[ru la a-ni-hu). Lines 22-26 (K. 2,053, Il. 6-10), 
corresponding to I. 10g of the text, read: (22) NE: su-aus-su 
(23) RA: duu (24) NI-BI-RU : Ne-bi-ru (25) RA: a-ha-2u (26) IR 
(so glossed): &ér-bu. The text reads sam-Ssu lu Ni-bi-ru a-ht- 
zu kir-bi-su. Vines 27-31 (K. 2,053, ll. 11-14), corresponding 
to l. 110 of the text, read: (27) RA: Sa-a (28) AN: Lak-ka-bu 
(29) AN: Samé(e) (duplicate sa-me-e) (30) RA (so glossed) : 
a-la-ku (31) RA (so glossed): #a-a-nu. The text reads 
sa kakkabani*® §a-ma-me al-kat-su-nu lieki-tl-lu ; for li-ki-dl-la 
the commentaries thus give the variant reading /ékin, “he 
ordained.” Lines 32~38 (K. 2,053, ll. 15-21), corresponding to 
1. 121 of the text, read: (32) HAR: &i-ma (33) RI: se-e-nu 
(34) RI: r2--u (35) DINGIR: 2-lume (36) HAR: /2b-07 (37) SAG: 
lib-bi (38) SAG: pu-u-ru. The text reads hima st-e-nd H-tr- 
ta-a tlini gim-ra-su-un ; thus for gim-ra-su-un the text of the 
commentaries evidently gave a variant reading. Lines 39-44, 
corresponding to 1. 112 of the text, read: (39) IR: ha-meu-uw 
(40) NE-RU (see above): ¢am-tim (41) IR: si{ . . ] 
(42) Si: na-p[2s-tu} (43) KIR: sa- [a-Fe] (4A IR S| oo ah. 
The text reads: Wk-me Ti-amat ni-sir-ta-Sa (var. na-pis- ete) 
li-si-ik u lik-vi; the commentary thus supports the variant 
reading to the text. : 

R. 366 + 80-7-19, 293, Rev., col. ii (pl. Ivii), 1. 1, which 
reads[ . . . J]: [ sa]-a-¢[z], corresponds to the last word 
of l. 114 of the text. Lines 2-8, corresponding to |. 115 of the 
text, read: (2) IR: su-u (3) AN: aS-ru (4) as-ru: Sa-mu-u 
(5) RU (so glossed): ba-nu-u (6) RU: pa-ta-ku (7) RU: dan- 
ni-ni (8) dan-ni-nu : irsitim(tim). The text reads as-Su as-vt 
ib-na-a ip-ti-ka dan-ni-na; \\. 4 and 8 of the commentary 
explain asvu as referring to heaven, and danzinw as referring 
to the earth; a reference to this line also possibly occurs in 
the explanatory text, S. 747, Rev., I. 10 (see below, p. 170). 
Lines 9-13, corresponding to 1. 116 of the text, read: (9) EN 
KUR-KUR (i.e. 62 matati): sum-su' (10) MA: Su-mu (11) MA: 
na-bu-u (12) A: a-bu (13) EN KUR-KUR: “EN-LIL (ie. 
™ Bel); 1. 9 thus explains 62 matdi? as “his name,” 


ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES. 169 





i.e. Marduk’s name, and 1. 13 gives it as the title of Enlil, 
or the elder Bél, who in the text transfers it to Marduk. 
The text of the line reads be-el madlati Sum-su it-ta-bi a-bi 
“ Bel, Lines 14-17, corresponding to |. 117 of the text, 
read: (14) MA: stk-r? (15) AN: ““Jg¢gd (16) MA: nzt-bee 
(17) UzU: nag-bu. The text reads sik-ri (var. ina zih-ri) 
“ Tgigt tm-bu-u na-gab-su-un, Vines 18-23, corresponding 


to 1 118 of the text, read: (18) [ . . «J: Seemu-u 
Gg) [ . . . J: “[B-a] (20) [ . . . J: Ma-bit-tv] 
(21) [ Jur: val: . . J (22) [ J] ut: na-g[ux] 
(23) [ ] ui: #e[ . . . ]. The text of the line reads 


is-me-ma “E-a ka-bit-ta-su i-le-en-gu; the text of the 
commentary therefore gave a fuller form for the second half 
of the line. Lines 24-27, corresponding to |. 119 of the text, 
read: (24) A: ma-[a] (25) A: a[bu] (26) A: sur-r[a-Qz] 
(27) MA: atk-[rz]. The text of the line reads ma-a sa abé*-su 
u-Sar-rt-lwu gik-ru-u-su. 

At this point the scribe of R. 366, etc. ceases to give the 
commentary in the form of a bilingual list, and in Il. 28-34 
he writes out the text of the Assyrian version of ll. 120-124 
of the composition. Then follows a colophon of three lines 


which read: (35) an-nu-u-tu(?)ul kali u[. . ] 
(36). Sa LI sume” Sa [ . . . . . | (37) Sa ina libbi 
“Asar-ri[ . . . . |, “These are not all (?) and 
[ ie Se te of the fifty-one names of{ . . . . . J 
which are in (the composition entitled) ‘Asarif . owe 


The reading of 1. 35 is not certain, but the colophon seems 
to imply that the commentary was not complete, or else that 
the fifty (or fifty-one) names of Marduk were not all given 
in the composition itself. Two important facts may be 
deduced from the colophon. The first is that the Seventh 
Tablet of the Creation Series is here treated as an independent 
composition which takes its title from its opening line. The 
second is that in this independent form the composition ended 
with |, 124 of the tablet. It is clear, therefore, that I]. 125-142 
of the Seventh Tablet are in the nature of an epilogue, which 
was added to the composition at the time it was incorporated 
as the concluding tablet in the series Enuma elis. 


170 APPENDIX |. 





The supposition that the text of the Seventh Tablet ended 
originally at 1 124 receives additional support from the 
‘ explanatory text S.747 (see Cunetform Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 32).! 
When complete it is probable that the tablet, of which S. 747 
formed a part, contained a kind of running commentary to 
the whole of the Creation Series; only fragments of the 
beginning and of the end of the commentary are prescrved 
by S.747, and these refer to the First Tablet and to the 
Seventh Tablet of the Series respectively. Thus, S.747, Obv., 


1.1, which reads [ . . 2...  rt8=tueu sa-ru-su-un, 
followed by the comment za-ru-w=[ . . . . . refers 
to Tablet I, 1. 3; 1 3, which reads[ . . 2... -t]e 
gu-su-u nap-pa[ . . . |, refers to Tablet I, 1.6; and the 


mention of Za in 1. 5 is in accordance with the prominent 
part which the god plays in Tablet I, in detecting and 
defeating the plot of Apsii and Tiamat. On the other hand, 
the reverse of S. 747 appears to deal with the Seventh Tablet 
of the Series ; thus, 1. 3 may perhaps be compared with the 
equation NUN =" £-a, given by K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 25, 
in the commentary to a line of the Seventh Tablet (see above, 
p. 166); 1. 6 possibly contains a reference to the line of the 
Seventh Tablet to which the commentary K. 4,406, Rev., 
col. iii, Il. 16-19, corresponds (see above, p. 167); the words 
inl. 1o,[ . . . | dan-ni-na (or [ . . . u}-dan-ni-na) 
ty-si-tum, possibly refer to |. 115 of the Seventh Tablet, 
while the second half of the same line perhaps contains 
a reference to the line of the Seventh Tablet, to which 
the commentary 82~3-23, 151, section 2, corresponds (sec 
above, p. 162, and for the verb u¢-/ak-s2-ba-am-ma, cf. 
Tablet V, 1. 20); and the words rz-e-su ar-ka-tu in 1. 11 
clearly refer to 1. 107 of the Seventh Tablet. Line 12 of 
S. 747 quotes 1. 124 of the Seventh Tablet, followed by the 
explanatory equations L (ie. “Fifty”) = Ha-an-sa-a (ice. 
Marduk’s last title) and L=“ Bel. Now, as |. 12 is the last 
‘ line of S. 747, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the 





1 See above, p. 157. 


TITLES OF MARDUK. 17t 





portion of text it explains came at the end of the com- 
position to which the commentary refers. 

The tablet K.2,107 -+ K. 6,086 (pls. |xif.), which has already 
been referred to,' is not strictly a commentary to the Seventh 
Tablet of the Creation Series, but is of value for explaining 
some of the titles of Marduk which occur therein. The 
second column is subdivided by a perpendicular line; in the 
left half of the column are inscribed the titles of Marduk, and 
in the right half the explanations are set opposite them. 
Lines 9-18 form a single section, and probably give a number 
of alternative explanations referring to a single title which 
was written in the left half of 1.9. In the following trans- 
literation of the text a translation of each Assyrian rendering 
in the right half of the column is added beneath it :-— 


TITLE. EXPLANATION. 
i. [ Wanting. j : [ - 


soe. fd ma-tim ali un nist 
“[The . . . ] of land, city, and people.” 


2. [ Wanting J: [ ma-tijn ai wu ni- st 


“(The . of lajnd, city, and people.” 


3. [ Wanting Js... . | mas-hi-ti ana ali u ni- 
“(The . . . . J of drink unto city and 
people.” 
4-[ Wanting J: [.-... ] a-i-id “ Sin u  Samas 
“(The . . . ] Begetter of the Moon and 
the Sun.” 
5. { Wanting ] : [... ] nap-har be-li a-sa-rid nap-har be-li 
“(The . . . ] of all lords, the Chief of all 
lords.” 


6. [ Wanting J: [ -n\i ka-la ti-me-a-ti 


“[The Creator(?)} of all words(?).” 





* See above, p. 157. 


172 


APPENDIX I. 





10. 


Il. 


TITLE. 
[ Wanting. 
mal Wanting. 


): 


}: 


EXPLANATION. 


(ces -1\¢ nap-har  tt-me-a-ti* 
“(The Creator(?)] of all words(?).” 
[ « « ]* sar ka-la ili u Sarre 
“[The .. . Jofthe[ . .. ], the King 
of all gods and kings.” 
| ace ee | dln? 
“[The . . . Jof the gods.” 

[ . . . Samlee) u — ivsttim(tim) 
“(The . . . of healven and earth.” 

[ .. . Ssame\e) u irsitin( tim) 
“(The . . . of heaven] and earth.” 


[ j we Boy 


“fThe . . . . . Jof Bal” 


be-lum [ . . . Ssamje(e) u irsitim(tim) 


“The Lord [ . . . ] of heaven and 
earth.” 
be - lum a-S$t-ir lant # 


“The Lord, the Blesser of the gods.” 
be - lui ga-me-tl dlani* 
“The Lord, the Benefactor of the gods.” 
be-lum sa e-mu-ka-a-su sa-ka-a 

“The Lord, whose might is supreme.” 
be - et Babili ®* 

“The Lord of Babylon.” 
mud - dis Babli ™ 
“The Renewer of Babylon.” 





‘ This line gives a slightly variant explanation of the title in |. 6. 


TITLES OF “MARDUK. 173 





TITLE. EXPLANATION, 
19. * LUGAL-EN-AN-KI-A : be-el ilini” sa Samé u irsiti Sar 
tlani® sa same u irsité 
“The Lord of the gods of heaven 
and earth, the King of the 
gods of heaven and earth.” 
20. “A -DU-NUN-NA: ma-lik “Bel uo “E-a 
“The Counsellor of Bél and Ea.” 
ar. ™Tu - TU : mu-al-lid ilani*® mu-ud-di-is 
wani* 
“The Begetter of the gods, the 
Renewer of the gods.” 





22, "Gu - GU : mu - tak - kil alent” 

“The Strengthener of the gods.” 

23. “Mu - MU :mu- us - pi - is ilani™ 
¢ “The . . . of the gods.” 

24. Du - TU : ba - nit ka - la tlani™ 
“The Creator of all the gods.” 

25. Du - DU 1 miu-ut-tar-ru-u wlan” 


; “The Leader of the gods.” 
26. Mu - AZAG : Sa 84 - pat - su el - hit 
“Whose Incantation is pure.” 
27, "Mu - AZAG : sa tu - uw - Su el - lit 
“Whose Spell is pure.” 
28. * Sac ( - SUD) - ZU : mu-di-e Libbi ilani™ ib-bu ru-u-hu 
(hi-bi es-Su)* 
“Who knoweth the heart of the 


gods, the wide heart (recent 
break}.” 





1 The note f7-b7 ef-Su, which is written in. smaller characters, 
signifies that the end of the line was broken in the original tablet 
from which the scribe was copying. 


174 APPENDIX I. 





TITLE. 
29. ZI (~ do.) - UKRIN 


30. “Zi ( - do) ~ St 


31. ™ Suu (- do) - KUR: 


32. ™T 2 2. i(-do.)-KUR : 
33. [ Wanting. ] 

34. [ Wanting. J : 
35. [ Wanting. ye 
36. [ Wanting. J: 


EXPLANATION, 


: nap - Sat nap - har wlant* 


“The Life of all the gods.” 


ma - st - th Sa - bu - tt 


“The Remover! of the mighty.” 
mu - bal - le - u at ~ bi 
“The Destroyer of the foe,” 
nut-bal-lu-w nap-har ai-bi na-si-ift 

rag-gt 
“The Destroyer of all foes, the 
Remover of the wicked.” 


:na-st-th nap-har vag - gt 


“The Remover of all the wicked.” 

[ . . 4. valg-gt e-su-u vag-gt 

“(The . . . of the] wicked ; the 
Annihilator of the wicked.” 

{ . 0. ragl-gi e-su-u nap-har 
rag-gt 

“(The . . . of the wicked; the 
Annihilator of all the wicked.” 

We Bs Hease eater oe hate 


In the earlier part of the text the titles which were given on 
the left side of the column in [1]. 1-6 and 8 and 9 are wanting, 
but the explanations on the right side recall many phrases 
of the Seventh Tablet, from among which we may compare 
those given in 1. § with the end of the 3rd line preserved by 
the fragment K. 8,519 (see above, p. 104f.), and that in 1, 16 
with the 4th and rqth lines of the same fragment. Of the 





» Le., “ Destroyer.” 


PARALLEL TEXTS TO TABLET VII. 175 





titles given in ll. 19 ff, compare |. 20 with * A-du-nun-na and 
its explanation in the 8th line preserved by K. 8,519; 1. 21 
with 7x-zz in 1, 9 of the Seventh Tablet (see above, p. 92f.); 
l. 27 with “ Mu-azag in 1. 33 (see above, p. 98f); 1. 28 with 
% Sag-au in 1, 35 (see above, p. 98f.); L. 29 with ™ Zi-ukkin-na 
in 1. 1§ (see above, p. 94f.); lL 30 with  Zz-s7 in I. 41 (see 
above, p. toof.); and 1. 31 with “Suh-kur in 1. 43 (see 
above, p. roof). It is possible that col. i of the Obverse of 
K. 2,107 + K. 6,086 (see pl. lxi) also contained explanations 
of the Seventh Tablet, or at any rate referred to the Creation 
Series,as].qreads[..... jApsiand is... .. 
Tt (?) -amat. 

It was stated on p. 157 that fragments exist of compositions 
very similar in character to the Seventh Tablet of the 
Creation Series. Remains of one such composition are 
preserved by the fragment of a Neo - Babylonian tablet, 
No. 54,228, the text of which is published in vol. ii, pl. xiii, 
and by its two Assyrian duplicates, R. 395 (see vol. ii, pl. 1xii) 
and R. 2, 538 (see the block on p. 176). R. 2, 538 is 
a duplicate of No, 54,228, Obv., ll. 6-15 ; R. 395, Rev., ll. 3-5 
correspond to No. 54,228, ll. 8, 10, and 12, The Obverse 
of R. 395, which does not correspond to any portion of the 
text preserved by the other two fragments, reads as follows :— 


WE ac .ele th) tet Jee bce J 


3.a@ ib -ba-S-[mja ™[ . ] 
4. tp-te-ma ina iné” sa nérati[™ ] 
5. e-pis zib-bat-sa tur-ma [ ] 
6. vi-es ta-mar-ti it- fa- ] 
7. is-mi-ma “Bel pa-su j 
8. is- S- ma mett-ta tle - } 
Ot 8b oe tus 2 oo TOR MP ae J 


If this fragment is in the form of narrative, it follows that 
ll. 1~6 are the concluding lines of a speech, since 1. 7 reads 


176 » APPENDIX I. 





“Bél hearkened and his mouth[ . . . . J.” Bél did not 
answer, however, for 1. 8 reads “ He raised the club[. .. . ].” 
Now the phrase 2s-s7-ma m7t-ta occurs in Tablet IV of the 
Creation Series, 1. 37, but the context on this fragment does 
not suggest a variant account either of the arming of Marduk 
for battle or of the actual fight with Tiamat. Moreover, 
the Reverse of the fragment, which is in part a duplicate of 
No. 54,228 and R. 2, 538 (see above), is inscribed with 
addresses in honour of Marduk under some of the titles 





Fragment of a parallel text to the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series 
(R. 2, §38). Duplicate of No. 54,228. 


which occur on the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series. 
It is therefore probable that the Obverse of R. 398 contains 
a part of the same composition. Line 4, which reads “ He 
opened[ . . . . Jat the sources of the rivers[. . . . j” 
would in that case refer to some act of creation on the part of 
Marduk, and the lines which follow would celebrate incidents 
in the battle with Tiamat. 


PARALLEL TEXTS TO TABLET VIL. 177 





Only a few traces of characters are preserved on the 
Reverse of R. 395, but enough is left to prove that ll. 3, 4, 
and 5 are duplicates of No. 54,228, Obv., Il. 8, 10, and i2. 
The following is the text of No. 54,228 with restorations and 
variants from R. 395 and R. 2, 538 :— 


Ov. 

LD... fol...) ale. Ba bf] 
3.4 -pu-us is-ri-[ 2... eae ] 
4.%u a-vrik is- kur?) nut-[— ... as | 
5. GIS-GID-DA a-rnk [ ?? 
6. Asar-ri Sa-vik me-[yis-8 2... 

vA ig - ra - tum a-f[ 

8. ba-nu-u  — Se- im “u gu-e [ 


9. glu] - «4 gt - hiy - tlu . 

10. Tu -tu ba-an® te-dis-[ti- su-nu 
wi.) Sum = ilani” «sa oma-ha- wt? [ 
12. ™ Sag- au mu-di-e lib-bi illani*? 
13. @Sag-gar(?)8 ba-ru-u hb- oi [ 


Fg ee ee ee 





1 Possibly 2[a- 

2 It will be noticed that il. 4-17 are written in couplets, the 
second half of each couplet being set back a little from the edge 
of the tablet. It is just possible that these second lines give 
explanations of phrases in the lines which precede them. It 
appears on the whole more probable, however, that they form part 
of the actual text; in that case the couplets in ll. 8f., 10f., and 
12 f. are written as single lines on the fragment R. 395. 

3 Restored from Tablet VII, 1. 1, see above, p. 92. 

4 So the traces upon No. 54,228 appear to read; R. 2, 538 


{g]u-um. 
5 R. 395, a7 
6 For 1. 11, R. 2, 538 reads Sa ina Babili*"[ . i 


7 The traces of the following lines upon R. 395 do not correspond 
to the portions of the text preserved by No. 54,228. 
8 R. 2, 538 omits the title at the beginning of the line. 


12 


178 APPENDIX I, 





14, “En-bt-lu-lu be-lum mu-dis mati-su [.. ] 
15. na-mad su-’-u' mu-sab-su [ i 
16. Tutu? sa pi-t-ik mati i-[ ‘| 
17; “Tutu ™ Marduk tam~-tum Oa?) - ] 
18, Zi-amat iddu(du) su-lu-[ j 
19. Sa ina vi-e- Si u ar -ka- {u® ] 
20. ™ Nabit ina BAR-NAM** amu VIF [ 2... J 
ai,“A-du-nun-na ma-lk ™[ . . 1 . ] 
22, ™ Ninib ™ Hansa 76 -[ J 
23... . ] @-lak-ti m-[. . ] 
a4{ .. . ) sei — 2... J 25 ] 
REV. 

t [-% te Sy ar tae DAY on | 
3. gi-pa-vi [ . . . J 4. mi-[.. J-7@)-[.-..] 
5.a-st-tum [ ... J] 6E.... ma [.... ] 


Fragmentary as the text of No. 54,228 is, a glance at the 
above transliteration will suffice to show that it preserves 
part of a composition which is very similar in character to 
the Seventh Tablet. That it does not form a missing portion 
of the text of that composition, is clear from the occurrence 
of certain phrases and titles of Marduk found in parts of the 
text of the Seventh Tablet which have already been identified ; 
moreover, they are here arranged in a different order and 
with a different context. Thus, |. 6f. correspond to the 





© R. 2, 538, 2% 

2 In this and the following line Tu +7v is written as a con- 
flate sign. 

5 Conjectural restoration. 

4 Possibly ina parakki Simati®. 


PARALLEL TEXTS TO TABLET VII. 179 





opening line of Tablet VII; 1. 8 corresponds to Tab, VII, 
1, 21; 1. 10 corresponds to Tab. VII, 1. 9; 1. 12 corresponds 
to Tab, VII, 1. 35,2 and 1. 13 may be compared with the 
second half of the same line; 1. 19 is clearly parallel to 
Tab. VII, 1. 107; 1. 21 corresponds to the line of Tab. VII 
preserved by K. 8,519, 1. 8 (see above, p. 104) ; with Hansa 
in 1. 22, cf. Tab. VII, | 123; and with 1. 23, cf. K.8 519, 
1. 8, and the commentary to this line, K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 
1. 31 (see above, p. 166, and vol. ii, pl. lv), which gives the 
reading a-dak-tu. It may also be noted that in Il. 4 and 5 
we have a reference to isu avik, “Long-bow,” the first name 
given by Anu to Marduk’s bow upon K. 3,449a, which 
probably forms part of the Fifth Tablet (see above, p. 82 f); 
GIS-GID-DA in |, 5 is evidently the Sumerian form of the 
name. The title of Marduk, En-bilulu, which occurs in 1. 14, 
and is there explained as “the Lord who hath renewed his 
land,” is found also upon the fragment K. 5,233, which is 
described in the following paragraph. 


‘It may here be noted that on the fragment S. 298 occur 


the eure lL. 8 - +] ba-nu-u Se-im u hie mu-dis-Su 
[os . 4 “ft # . ], Creator of grain and plants, 
Renewer ‘of Ewaec ¥ 73 as two other lines of the same 
fragment read c eR «| mus-te-Si-ru Bae exe ey dh 
“T 2... ] Director of the ‘decrees off. . 1,” and [ nha hari ss 
bal-nu-u tenis... .. Wf .. J Creator of 
mankind[ ..... 4,” it is clear that the fragment is part of 


a composition containing addresses to Marduk as lord of Creation. 
Too little is preserved to show whether in this text, as in the 
Seventh Tablet, he was addressed under his Sumerian titles. 

* On an Assyrian fragment of a hymn, K. 12,582, occurs the 
following couplet :— 

™ Sag-2u mu-dive lib-b[¢ 


a-pir a-gi-e belu-u-tu [ova vel Ss tat as oes, RN 
et Sag- zu, who knoweth the heart fof the ods eta ‘ j 
«Who weareth the crown of dominion[ . . oo y us 


It is possible that this fragment also belonged to a ; composition, 
similar in character to the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series. 


180 APPENDIX I. 





It has already been remarked that the commentaries to 
the Seventh Tablet presuppose the existence of a Sumerian 
version of the text, and in the fragment K. 5,233, the text of 
which is given in the accompanying block, we may see 
a confirmation of this supposition. The fragment is part of 
an Assyrian tablet inscribed with a bilingual composition, 
and in each line of the Sumerian text which is preserved 
Marduk is addressed under a new title. In the following 


EN Seance eT 
wi SY orf ge rf 





Fragment of a bilingual composition in honour of Marduk (K. 5,233). 


transliteration and translation of the fragment the first couplet 
preserved is numbered “1,” but it should be noted that it 
does not mark the beginning of the text :— 


I. [2°02 


OM BE Pes Ye oe 
™ Marduk sa tu-u-se [ . .. 2... J 
Marduk, whose spell[ . 2 2 2 2. 2. 2. Y! 


BILINGUAL ADDRESS TO MARDUK. 181 








2, PNGIR ASARU-ALIM-NUN-NA ZI SU-UD-GAL[ . . . . ] 
™ Marduk na-din na-plis-t) 2... | 

Marduk, the giver of [life . . .. ... J! 

3. PNG | | NAM-ISIB-BA-A-NI-KU  GA[R- . . . - J 
“ Marduk sa ina sip-ti-su H-[ . . . . J 

Marduk, who by his incantation{ . .. . J! 

4. PNCRTY ~TU  SAR-AZAG-GA-BI [ ...-..- J 
Mardi sa ina SAR-AZAG-gi-su [ . - ] 

Mara\k, whobyhis . . . [ .. ]! 

3. PERSaG- zu" Sun -[KUR eee 
* Marduk ™ Mu-bal-[lu-u ai-bi . . . . | 

Marduk, the Destroyer [of the foe ]! 

6. 78k EN - BI - LU - LU GABI=i[. dre a age ep 
Marduk MUS] 2. n> 2G ek, J] 
Marduk, : who: ff) ass et oe 


It is possible that the title in 1. 1 may be restored as 
PINCRMIG-~AZAG from Tab. VII, 1 33. Of the other titles 
under which Marduk is here addressed, ASARU-ALIM-NUNA 
(. 2) occurs in Tab. VII, 1. 5, Tutu (1. 4) in Tab. VII, |. 9, 
Sac-zu (1. 5) in Tab. VH, 1. 35, and SUH-KUR in Tab. VII, 
1. 43. The restoration of the Assyrian version of |. 5 is taken 
from K. 2,107 + K. 6,086, Obv., col. ii, 1. 31 (see above, p. 174, 
and vol. ii, pl. Ixii). The title EN-BILULU also occurs in the 
parallel text to the Seventh Tablet preserved by No. 54,228 
and R. 2, 538 (see above, p. 178 f.). 


182 APPENDIX It. 





II. 


On some fragments of the Series 
“Enuma efish.” and on some terts relating to the 
History of Creation. 


In this appendix some unpublished fragments of tablets of 
the Creation Series are given, which I came across after the 
lithographed plates of vol. ii had been printed off. At the 
beginning of the present year, while engaged on making 
a hand-list of the smaller fragments in the various collections 
from Kuyunjik, I identified ten such fragments as belonging 
to copies of the First, Second, Fifth, and Seventh Tablets 
of the Creation Series. The texts of five of these (KK. 2,854, 
12,830, 13,761, 8,519, and 13,337), which belong to copies of 
the Seventh Tablet, are included in Appendix I under the 
sections dealing with those portions of the commentary which 
rendered it possible to identify them. The texts of the 
remaining five fragments (KK. 7,871, 4,488, 10,008, 13,774, 
and 11,641), belonging to copies of the First, Second, and 
Fifth Tablets, are given in the following sections which are 
marked A, B, and C. In section D two small Assyrian 
fragments (K. 12,0006 and 79-7-8, 47) are described, which 
possibly contain portions of the text of the Creation Series. 
In section E the text is given of the fragment (S. 2,013), 
which contains a reference to Ti-amat e-Ui-ti and Ti-amat 
Sap-li-t?. Section F deals with the fragments K. 3,445 + 
R. 396 and K. 14,949, which probably contain an account of 
the creation of the world by AnSar, in place of Marduk. In 
section G the text is given of an address to the River of 
Creation which occurs in the opening lines of incantations 
upon the fragments S. 1,704 and 82-9-18, 5,311. Finally, in 





1 It may be noted that all of them have been used for the text 
of the Seventh Tablet as transliterated and translated on pp. 92 ff. 


FRAGMENTS OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 183 





section H the tablet K. 3,364, which has been supposed to 
contain the instructions given by Marduk to man after his 
creation, is shown to be part of a long text containing moral 
precepts. 

A. TWO FRAGMENTS OF THE FirsT TABLET OF THE 
CREATION SERIES.— The fragment K. 7,871, the text of 
which is given in the accompanying block, is from the right- 





Creation Series, Tablet I, ll. 33-47 (K. 7,871). 


hand edge of the obverse of a tablet, and the ends of lines 
which it preserves correspond to Tablet I, ll. 33-47. As the 
first sheet of this volume had been printed off at the time 
I came across it, the information it supplies as to this 
imperfectly preserved portion of the text of the First Tablet? 
may be briefly noted. 





1 See above, pp. 6-9. 


184 APPENDIX I. 





In 1. 33 the new fragment supports the reading sak-pu at the 
end of the line; in 1. 34 it confirms the suggested restoration 
[ma-ri-e-su-un], probably reading [saré2 |” -su-un ; the couplet, 
Il. 35 and 36, which may be conjecturally restored as Ag[sa 
pa)-a-Su t-pu-[sam-ma i-kab-bi], a-na [T\-amlat) el-Li-tu-ma 
t-2alk-kar a-ma-tum, it condenses into a single line which may 
probably be restored as [Apsé pa-a-Su ¢-pu-sam]-ma izakkar-$1, 
“[Apsii opened his mouth] and spake unto her” ; the end of 
1. 37 may now be restored as al-kat-su-nu e-li-ia, i.e. “their 


way [is . . . . Junto me”; the suggested restoration of the 
end of |. 38 as wu-st [la sal-da-ak] is confirmed, the fragment 
reading [ . . . . . ] @@ sa-al-la-ku; the end of 1. 39 


may now be restored as lu-Sap-pi-ih, ie. “Their way will 
I destroy and cast down”; the suggested restoration of the 
end of I. 40 as [mz-2-n2] is confirmed, the fragment reading 
ni-i-n{z]; the suggested restoration of the end of 1. 41 as ¢-2a 
[se-m-Sa] is confirmed, the fragment reading za Se-mi-e-[Sa], 
The suggested restoration (from Tab. IV, l. 89 and Tab. III, 
1. 125) of the phrase 2/-ta-sd e-li-{ta] in 1. 42 is shown to be 
incorrect, the fragment reading [ . . . . . jeki har-mi- 
{ . . ]; the line should run z-zu-wa-ma (var. [e]-272-m[a]}) 
i-ta-st e-li (var. elt) far-mi-[ga(?)]. For the end of 1. 43 
K. 7,871 reads{ . . . . . J-gat e-dis-st-{ . . ], and the 
verb preserved by No. 45,528 + 46,614 (see vol. ii, pl. iii) may 
probably be read ug-[g]x-ga[z]; the line may thus be partly 
restored as [ . . ] mar-st-28'! ug-[g]e-ga[?t] e-dis-st-[. 2. 1, 
“— .. J she was grievously angered, alone(she . . . . 4”; 
Kz, 871 probably gave a variant reading for the verb, as the 
traces it gives of the sign before gat (or £af) are not those of 
gu? The suggested restoration of the end of |. 44 as a-na 
[Apsé t-zak-kar] is shown by K. 7,871 to be incorrect, the 
fragment reading[ . . . . . Jawa kar-st-[ . . ]; the 





‘It may here be noted that the principal traces of this line upon 
the obverse of 81-7-27, 80 (see Cun. Txts., part xiii, pl. 2) probably 
represent the word mar-sz-75. 

® The restoration of the line as[ . . ] mar-si-i¥ ug-| g ju-gat 
ef... }-kate-di§-S-[ . . J is also possible. 


FRAGMENTS OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 185 





line may probably be restored as -mut-ta (var. ti) it-ta-dé 
a-na kar-si-{sa (?)], “ She plotted evil in [her] heart (?).” The 
end of |. 45, according to the fragment, reads[. . . . . je 
nu-us-hal-lak ; it is possible that we may restore the line as 
[mt]-na-a ni-t-nu $a nit p-pu-us lu)-u nu-us-hal-lak, “What, 
then, shall we do? Let us destroy!” The end of 1. 46, 
according to the fragment, reads[ . . . . . }-du-tu da- 
[ ... ]} unless this represents a variant reading, the 
suggested restoration ¢ mé-[7s-dal ni-¢-nd| is incorrect. For 





Creation Series, Tablet I, Il. 50-63 (KK. 4,488). 


1.47 the fragment reads[ 2 . 2... Jaf. . tn; 
which corresponds to é-ma-al-[li-kuv] at the end of the line. 
Another new fragment of the First Tablet is K. 4,488, 
which gives portions of the second halves of Il. 50-63; for 
the text see the accompanying block. For Il. §0 and 51 the 
fragment reads[ . . . . . mju-Sis [uw . 1. ] 
and [ . . . . . J tme-me-vru pla. . ee | and 
gives no variants to the text as known from other tablets ; 


186 APPENDIX IL. 





‘for 1. 52the fragment reads[ . . . . . @]b-pu-du an ilani 
mar, . . . |, which gives the variants ax for a-na and 
mar[2* -$) for m[a]-ré-e-5u ; the fragment reads[.... . }+ 
t-di-ir ki-sad-| . . ] for 1. 53, which may probably be 
restored as[ . . . . ] &-te-dir (war.[ . ]-¢i-di-ir) hi-Sad- 
[se], “[ . . . . his] neck was troubled.” For 1. 54 the 
fragment reads[ . . . . . -§]u u-na-Sak Sa-a[. . . ]; 


it is clear, therefore, that for the restoration [2]-va-sa-ku we 
should read [z]-na-sa-ku, and that the duplicate 81-7-27, 80 
reads u-na-as-Sa[k], as suggested on p. 11, n. 8 For 1. 55 
the fragment reads[ . . . | pu-uf-ruus[. . J; 
for the suggested reading (upon 81-7-27, 80 and No. 46,803) 
bu-[u)e-ré-su-un, “their first-born,” we should read pu-[a]g-! 

ri-Su-un, “ they all,” or “their assembly,” and the line may be 
translated “[Because of the evil] which they had planned 
together.” For 1. 56 the fragment reads[ . . . . .- 
SJu-nu us-tan-nu-{ . . ),and gives no variants to the text; 

the verb at the end of 1. 57 may be restored from the fragment 
as 7-dul-lu, “they lay in wait.” For |, 58 the fragment reads 
[ . . 2... |4u-um-mes us-[. . J, and confirms the 


1 The traces of this sign upon No. 46,803 are those of wf, rather 
than wk (see vol. ii, pl. ix). 

® This verb occurs also in Tablet I, 1. 89, which reads[.... ] 
t-du-ul-[Ii], ie. “{ . . . . J he lay in wait,” and again in 
1]. 99, which reads [| . . . . . ]-At-d fa-du-ul-i[7], ie. 
se : ] thou hast Iain in wait. ~” The meaning of the 
verb dl has been pointed out by Thompson in Hebraica, vol. xvii, 
p- 163, note 3, where he shows that its participle occurs in an 
Assyrian letter in the sense of “scout”; he also cites IV R, pl. 30%, 
Obv., 1. 16, where ¢-du-[ud] (var. 7-dul) may well have the meaning 
“to prowl” or ‘to lie in wait.” On p. 13, note 11 and p. 66, 
note § it was suggested that the verb ¢-fu-/u-Su, which occurs in 
Tablet IV, ll. 63 and 64, should be transliterated ¢-dud-/u-Su and 
connected with the verbs in Tablet J, Il. 89 and 99. The reading 
t-ful-lu-su, suggested by Delitzsch, gives good sense, but is not 
quite satisfactory from the omission of the doubled dental. Jensen 
(cf. K.B., vi, pp. 24.f., 334) reads 2-dud-lu-iu, and also suggests for 


FRAGMENTS OF CR. SER., TABLETS I AND IL. 187 





suggested restoration of the second half of the line as 
[se-ku-une]-mi-is' us-bu. Of 1. 59 the fragment gives the end 
as[ . . . . . ]-su ze-lé-[’(?)], the traces of the last sign 
reading HI[ . ]; in 1. 60 it gives the variant me-ki-Su-n[u] 
for me-ki-Su-un ; of 1. 61 it gives the last word as[..... ] 
u-ki-s[u},“{ . . . . ]he watched him”; in 1. 62 it gives 
the variant e¢-lu for el-lum, and of 1. 63 it only gives slight 
traces of two signs. 

B. A FRAGMENT OF THE SECOND TABLET OF THE 
CREATION SERIES. The fragment K. 10,008 is probably 
a fragment of the Creation Series, and if this is so the only 
place to which it is possible to assign it is the gap between 
ll. (85) and (104) of the Second Tablet (see above, p. 32f.) ; 
this will be clear for the following reasons. It will be seen 
that the greater part of the fragment is inscribed with part 
of a speech of AnSar. Linesto andtrread[ .... . 
™“1A-nam ulili?[ oo... jJand[..... |-mud i-dur-ma 
tt[u- 1... ], and may be restored as [as-pur-ma “]A-nam 
ul i-li-’-[a ma-har-sal, [Nu-dim)-mud t-dur-ma t-tlu-ra 
ar-kis}, “{I sent] Anu, but he could not [withstand her]; 
{Nudim]mud was afraid and turned [back].” Now these 
lines occur in Tablet III, 1. 53f, in the course of AnSar’s 
instructions to Gaga, and again in 1. 111 f,, in AnSar’s message 
as delivered by Gaga to Lahmu and Lahamu. Now, although 
the phrase “ Marduk abkal ilani occurs in the following line 
in each of these passages, the rest of the context upon 
K. 10,008 shows that it is not a duplicate of the Third 
Tablet. It therefore follows that the fragment cannot belong 
to a later tablet than the Second. : 

Now 11. (72)-(82) of the Second Tablet describe how Ansar 
sent Anu against Tiamat, and it is probable that in the gap 





dalu the meaning ‘to run round,” “to prowl round.” In view 
of the use of the participle in the sense of “scout,” we may perhaps 
render the phrase in Tablet IV, ll. 63 f. as “the gods watched him 
from hiding”; the repetition of the phrase emphasises Marduk’s 
courage in setting out alone to do battle with Tiamat. 


188 APPENDIX IL. 





after 1. 58 occurred the account of how Nudimmud was sent 
against Tiamat and how he turned back.! It therefore follows 
that the text of K.10,008 must be put in the gap between 
Il. (85) and (104). On this assumption the greater part of the 
fragment (at least down to 1. 12) carries on the speech of 
An§Sar, which begins at |. (85). In this speech Ansar refers 
to the fate of Apsii (K. 10,008, 1. 2), and the subsequent 
appointment of Kingu by Tiamat to lead the rebel forces? 





1 In view of the fact that in Tablet ITI, ll. 53 f. and 111 f. Angar 
refers first to Anu’s attempt to oppose Tiamat, and then to that of 
Nudimmud, it might legitimately be urged that this represents 
the order in which the events took place. And, as Anv’s attempt 
is described in Tablet II, ll. (72)-(82), I was inclined, before 
I came across K. 10,008, to put Nudimmud’s attempt in the gap 
between Il. (85) and (104). But the order in which AnSar refers 
to the setting out of Anu and Nudimmud is not necessarily 
chronological. Morcover, as Nudimmud had already overcome 
Apsi, and as it was he who brought the news of Tiamat’s revolt 
to Angar, it would be only natural that he should be the first to be 
sent against her; in support of this view it may be further noted 
that Nudimmud’s name occurs in 1]. 58. On the other hand, if it 
be insisted that An§ar’s references in Tablet 1JI must be taken to 
imply that Nudimmud’s setting out against Tiamat followed that 
of Anu, it is necessary to place the account referring to Nudimmud 
after the line conjecturally numbered as (85). And, as the earlier 
lines of K. 10,008 do not appear to refer to this cpisode, it follows 
that the gap after I. 58 is less than ten lines and that after 1. (85) is 
greater than twenty lines; or else that K. 10,008 does not belong 
to the series Znuma els, but contains a variant account of the story 
of Creation. On the whole it appears to me preferable to suppose 

‘that the order in which the events are referred to in An§ar’s 
speech is not to be taken as chronological, but as leading up to 
a climax; he says, “ Anu J sent, but he could not withstand her ; 
and even Nudimmud was afraid and turned back.” 

? With the phrase m-lam-mi e§-rit in 1. 4 may be compared 
Tablet I, 1]. 118 and 126, and the parallel passages. The apparent 
reference to ten in place of eleven monsters is noteworthy. 


FRAGMENT OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET I. 189 





and carry on the war against the gods (1. 7f.); he then 
describes how he sent Anu and Nudimmud against Tiamat, 
and how they could not withstand her and turned back 
(l. tof), and in the following line (1. 12) he either begins 
his appeal to Marduk, or, as appears to me more probable, 





Fragment of the Second Tablet of the Creation Series (K. 10,008). 


states his intention of appealing to Marduk to become the 
champion of the gods. The fragment may be transliterated 
as follows :— 

TP Mee teat re = ASR pee (Pana og ete: 3] 
Bolte a: 83-3 BR ed ss ue OR ok Ge Se 
3. .. . . ] -tar-rmu-su [ww arae| 


190 APPENDIX II. 





] mi-lam-mi es rift 
eu?) -ma--ni hum (?) -mu-r[a- 
}-62 ap-sa-na la sa-ki-pa [ 
nyu ™ Kin-gu  Su-us-[Ru-u 
]-ma Ti-a-ma-ifz . 
‘ j-ak lib-bi-su i-[ Bane 
10. [as-pur-ma ™|A-nam ul i-li-’-[a ma-har- sal 
11. [Nu - dim|-mud i-dur-ma i-tu-ra ar - kis) 
12... . ™Mardulk abkal ilini” [ 2... 2. ] 


cen hy ad, el 


13 [ ] p-u-ku klu- j 
14. [ ] 4-sa-an-nt [ ] 
15. [ ] wpitu [ ] 
16. [ ] bul- -[ j 
17. [ |] ma-lu-{[ i] 
TBE [oe ce a ee tee a ] 


With 1, 13 we may compare /p-ti-ku ku-ru-na in Tablet IVI, 
1. 9, and @-t¢-ku [Ru-ru-na] in |. 134; and with w-sa-an-nt 
we may compare Tablet III, 1 135. These phrases upon 
K. 10,008 may be explained by supposing that AnSar’s 
appeal to Marduk was accompanied by the mixing and 
drinking of wine. 

C. Two FRAGMENTS OF THE FirtH TABLET OF THE 
CREATION SERIES—The first eleven lines of the fragment 
K. 13,774 correspond (with some interesting variants) to the 
text of the Fifth Tablet, 1]. 6-16; while the last three lines 
of the fragment give a variant text to that found in Il. 17-19 
upon other copies of the Fifth Tablet. The unimportant 
variants may be first noted as follows: in 1. 6 K. 13,774 gives 
the variant vz as the last syllable of ’ Vz-d2-ri, and for ana 
reads a-na; in 1. to it reads w-dan-ni-na for ud-dan-ni-na ; 
in 1. 13 it reads s'k-nat for su-uk-nat; in |. 14 it reads ag[Z] 
for a-gi-[e]; and in I. 16 it reads a-va for ana, In 1, 8 it 
gives a more interesting variant, reading “A-num in place 


FRAGMENT OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET V. IQt 





of ” B-a; that is to say, I. 8, according to this version, would 
read, “He set the station of Bél and Anu along with him,” 
in place of “ He set the station of Bél and Ea along with 
him.” For a further discussion of this reading, see the 
Introduction. 

In l. 12 occurs a still more interesting variant; according 
to K. 13,774 the first half of the line runs [[ . . . ak]kaba- 
Su us-te-pa-a,“[ . . . . J his star he caused to shine 
forth,” in place of ” NMannar-ru us-te-pa-a, “The Moon-god 





Creation Series, Tablet V, Il. 6-19 (K. 13,774). 


he caused to shine forth.” As the beginning and end of the 
line are wanting, it would be rash to conjecturally restore 
them; but it may be regarded as certain that the phrase 
Suk-nat mu-st, “a being of the night,” in 1. 13 refers to the 
Moon-god, and that the lines which follow contain Marduk’s 
charge to him. In the course of Marduk’s address to the 
Moon-god, in Il. 17 and 18, which upon other copies of the 
Fifth Tablet contain directions with regard to the 7th and 
14th days of the month, K. 13,774 gives the variant readings 


192 APPENDIX II. 





C7) Ps ee xe ot PLEO PoE ae le fad 
(8) . 2... 1 1” Vamut . . . . . 4 The 
traces of |. 19 upon K. 13,774. do not correspond to the text 
of this line as already known. 

K. 11,641 is part of another copy of the Fifth Tablet, and 
contains on its obverse parts of ll. 14-22, and on its reverse 






(BROKEN SURFACE) 


” FBROKEN SURFACE] 


Creation Series, Tablet V, ll. 14-22 (K. 11,641, Obverse). 


parts of lines which may be conjecturally numbered as 
ll. (128)-(140). The information which the obverse of the 
fragment supplies with regard to the text of the Fifth Tablet 


FRAGMENT OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET V. 193 





is not very great, and may be noted as follows: the traces 
of ll. 14 and 17 upon K. 11,641 give no variants nor restora- 


tions; for ].1§ the fragment reads[ . . . . . ~pla-hie- 
[ .... . . }#é, and proves that the suggested restoration 






[BROKEN SURFACE] 


[BROKEN SURFACE} 


Creation Series, Tablet V, the last thirteen lines (K. 11,641, Reverse). 


[e-na] is incorrect; the end of this line should read e-[/] 

ma-a-ti, which gives the same sense as before. In I. 16 the 

fragment gives the variant [a]-a for ana; in 1. 18 for mes-/[7] 

it gives the variant m7z-i(?)-[ . . . . J]; in lL. 19 it gives 
13 


194 APPENDIX II, 





traces of the last character but one in the line, which does 
not correspond to those given by K. 3,567 + K. 8,588; at the 
end of 1. 20 it gives the variant reading [a|v-a-n7s, and it is 
possible that K. 3,567, etc, read av-A[a-nu]-us'; in 1. 21 it 
confirms the suggested restoration of the sign ma at the end 
of the line; and in |. 22 it gives slight traces of the last two 
characters in the line. 

The reverse of K. 11,641 has already been used on p. 84 f, 
in the transliteration and translation of the end of the Fifth 
Tablet. On p. 85, note 3, it is pointed out that the last six 
lines contain the complaint of the gods to Marduk in 
consequence of which he conceived the plan of creating 
mankind, It may here be noted that of the last line of the 
tablet, K. 11,641 seems to give traces of MES, the plural sign ; 


[BROKEN SURFACE 





A possible fragment of the Creation Series (79-7-8, 47). 


this may have been followed by a pronominal suffix, 4a, or 
may have immediately preceded the word nz-2-nu preserved 
by the fragment K. 8,526. 

D. Two POSSIBLE FRAGMENTS OF THE CREATION 
SERIES.—In Cumeiform Texts, part xiii, pl. 24, the text is 
given of a small fragment, K. 12,000 4, of which the following 


isatransliteration: (1)[ . . -... J(@[... J 
anla ... .. J@G)D . . . ) amma [ ede] 
(4)[..... ] Teamat wf... ..d)]@0...] 
in-na-at-[. . . . . | (6) [a]r-nu-us-sulul . . 2 1. |] 
(7) [e-pla-fu-se[o ... CS) Pies chins ]. From the style 


of the writing and the mention of Tiamat, it is possible that 
the fragment belongs to the Creation Series. 
Another possible fragment of the Creation Series is 79-7-8, 


POSSIBLE FRAGMENTS OF CREATION SERIES. 195° 





47, the text of which is given in the block on p. 194. In 
the character of the clay and the style of writing it closely 
resembles K. 11,641, which is a fragment of a copy of the 
Fifth Tablet (see above, pp. 192 ff); while the mention of the 
gods ™ La-fa-mu in |. 2, An-sar in 1. 3, and [Bl in 1 4 
is in favour of its being a fragment of a tablet of the series.! 





' Reference may also be made to the fragment R. 982 + 80~ 
7-18, 178, of which the first few lines of the obverse are given in 
transliteration by Delitzsch, Weltschipfungsepos, p. 110f., note 135 
for the text, see Cuneiform Texts, part xiii, pl. 31. In the character 
of its clay and in its style of writing this fragment resembles 
tablets of the Creation Series; cf. also 1. 2f. of the reverse, 2z@ 
hi-rib apst tb-n[a. 2. . . J, tb-mi-Su-ma™ Beal... 

The fragments of legends, K. 7,067 and K. 8,572 ‘have been 
catalogued by Bezold as possibly belonging to tablets of the 
series L-nu-ma e-li$, and their texts are therefore given in Cun, 
Futs., part xiii, pl. 313 the first line preserved by K. 7,067 


probably reads ™ &-a ina [ap]st |, . . « « « 4, followed by 
the line and” rabuti* im-tal-ku-ma[ . . . . . J, while the 
first line of K, 8,572 reads [ . . . « . da a-me-lu Sum-iu 
wo... . + J, but the grounds are slender for assigning 


them to the Creation Series. To this series the minute fragment 
K. 11,048 (see Cun, Txts. part xiii, pl. 31) is assigned (with 
a query) by Bezold in the Ca/alogue, vol. v, p. 2,078, presumably 
from the character of the writing, unless K. 11,048 is a misprint. 
The fragment K. 12,000¢ (Cun. Txts., part xiii, pl. 31) is also 
assigned by Bezold to the series (see Catalogue, vol. v, p. 2,078). 
Its colophon states that it is the First Tablet of a series styled 
E-n[u-ma . . » . . J, but as the traces of the last four lines 
of the text do not correspond to the last four lines of the First 
Tablet of the series Hnuma eli‘, and as the catch-line does not 
correspond to the first line of the Second Tablet, it is clear that 
K. 12,000¢ is a fragment of the First Tablet of some other series. 
K. 10,791 (Cun. Zx/s., part xiii, pl. 31) is another fragment which 
Bezold suggests may belong to the series Luuma eh, presumably 
from the occurrence of the verbs 2b-a-n7 in ll. 2 and 3 and 
ib-ba~nu-u in |. 4. As, however, it belongs to a text which is 
arranged in columns and divided into sections, it is clear that it 
does not belong to the Creation Series. 


196 APPENDIX II. 





E. A REFERENCE TO “ THE WATERS THAT WERE 
ABOVE” AND “THE WATERS THAT WERE BENEATH” THE 
FIRMAMENT.—The text may here be given of an interesting 
fragment, S. 2,013, which has been copied by Bezold 
(cf. Jensen in Schrader’s Keilins. Bibl, vi, p. 307) and by 
Delitzsch (cf. Handworterbuch, p. xii), but has, I believe, not 
yet been published. If it is part (as is hardly probable) of 
the Creation Series, the reference to the upper and the lower 
Tiamat in |. 10 f. shows that it cannot belong to an earlier 
tablet than the Fifth; while in general style it appears to 
resemble the addresses found on the Seventh Tablet, rather 





Fragment referring to the Upper Tiamat and the Lower Tiamat (S. 2,013). 


than to be in narrative form. It will be seen, however, from 
the accompanying block that the lines are divided in writing 
into halves; this is characteristic of several neo-Babylonian 
copies of tablets of the Creation Series, but does not 
occur upon any of the Assyrian copies that have yet been 
identified. The text of the fragment may be transliterated as 
follows :— 


THE UPPER AND THE LOWER TIAMAT. 197 





] radii?) . 2. 








i er 
2. Shi ] mu f ] 
“3. [ oe ag me uf... ] 
4.[ 2 | fabli u ta-ha[ei... 
5. ~ J) >... jee teatime [ . ] 
6. { - | [mahkar bit zikkurrati’ 1b-ba-[ 

7 - ] nam-ru Ssal-ba-bu [ 

8. [ . | sa Same) ru-ku-u-ti [ ] 
9. [ . ] sa Hu-bur pal-ka-ti [ .... J 
10. . ) sa ina Ti-amat e-li-ti [ 

i [ . ] sa ina Ti-amat Sap-li-ti{ . . . Jj 
12. [ J >... )] wrti-kis ka-l[a-mu(?) .. ] 
13. [ TL... ]#e@)hye. 2. | 


For a discussion of the title Habur and of the phrases 
Ti-amat e-li-ti and Ti-amat Sap-li-ti, see the Introduction. 

F. ANSAR AND THE HISTORY OF CREATION.—A frag- 
ment, which it has been thought may perhaps belong to one 
of the later tablets of the Creation Series,? is K. 3,445 +R. 396 
(cf. Cun. Texts, part xiii, pl. 24f.)3; the smaller fragment 
K. 14,949 (op. cit, pl. 24) is a duplicate. Lines 1-26 of the 
obverse contain only traces of the beginnings of lines, among 





1 Possibly read [ma ]har E-igi-e-nir. 

2 Cf. George Smith, Chaldean Account of Genesis, pp. 67 ff, 
Bezold, Ca/alogue, vol. ii, p. §34, and Delitasch, Weltschipfungsepos, 
pp- 19, 51 ff, 87f., 109f. The text of the reverse of K. 3,445 was 
given by S. A. Smith in Adzscellancous Tests, pl. 10. 

3 In shape and writing the fragment resembles some of the 
tablets of the Creation Series. It may be noted that each tenth 
line of the text is indicated in the margin of the tablet by the 
figure “‘10.” Thus, on the Obv., ll. 2, 12, 22, and 32 are so 
marked, and on the Rev., Il. 7, 16, 25, and 35; on the Rev. 
sometimes two lines of the text are written in one line of the tablet. 


198 APPENDIX II. 





which it may be noted that 1. 11 possibly begins with the 
name of Marduk. From |. 27 onwards the obverse reads: 


(27) ul-tu u-me ul. Be 1 (28) ma-as-rat mu-Si u 
tm[mi..... ] (29)? ru, pus $a Ti-a{mat.... ] 
(30) Ansar ip-ta[ . . - ] GD tk-sur-ma ana 
[ee=2 » | (32) te-b2 Sa-a-vé tT ae tote Gea ] (33) Su-uk-tur 
im[ . . . | (34) wad-di-ma ra- . 

(35) és-kun Rakkada [ woe nw SJ] CG ee- bu. sip ee it- 
1s ete ete 167) ip-te-e-man[a- ..... ] (38) na-hi-ré 
Sa up[. . . . . J) (9) pu-uk n[a- , J 
(40) nam-ba-[. . ]. The occurrence of the : names 


of AnSar (1. 30) and possibly of Marduk (1. 11), the reference 
to “the slaver,” or “the breadth,” of Tiamat (1. 29) and 
possibly to her head (1. 35), and the mention of “springs” 
(1. 36£.), “deeps” (1. 40), and monsters of the deep (“dolphins?”) 
in I, 38, would not be inconsistent with the fragment forming 
part of the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series. 


The reverse of the fragment reads as follows:—(1)[..... ] 
(2) ha-Sur-ru[ 2... VQ) Lhe wes ]4e-tk-ma[..... ] 
(4)[ -. 1+. me sarf ow... TOC - ] 
 Adad[..... ] (6) es-kun ef... .. 17) us-bar dation 
[ so. es J] (8) ul-te me-lam-me [ : 

(0) a-ga-mil-su apsit va-sub-[bu . . . . . T' (to) 2 rr 
e-ma-si as-Sa[k- . . 2. . . | (11) ina si-ma-ak-hi-su 
[ ] (12) tlant* ma-la ba-su-[u . . Al 
(13) Dah -mu ue mPa, » . J 4) i-pue-s Su-ma 
PaPyf..... ] (15) pornerana An-sar[. ewe J 
(16) ¢ ™ Six sa[r- . . - . | G7) sa-nu-u ig-eak-ru 
[.. -. . . J) G8)"™E . 2... (19) e-nu-ma a-na 





} The sign following éa is not wz, so that the reading 7b-éa-n7 is 
impossible. 

® The duplicate K. 14,949 gives a variant reading for this line: 
Sul. . 
8 Omitted by K. 14, vee 

“ The traces of the first sign of the name upon K. 14,949 suggest 
La, ie. ™ Lfla-ha-mu]. 


ANSHAR AND THE CREATION. 199 





[ . . . . . J] (20) pil?)-ka ma-ak-tum ki- it. : ] 
(21) wl-tu u-meat-laT .. 1... J (22) metin-meu-w at- la 
ta-kab-bu[ . . . . . | (23) An-Sar pa-a-Su epus(us)-ma 
t-Rab-bi:a-na™[ 2... . | (24) e-li-nu ap-si-i Su-bat 
[ . - . 20. ) (25) mi-th-vit E-Sar-va $a ab-nu-u a-na-ku : 
a eee ee bos) Sap-lis as-ra-ta u-dan-ni- eo ee j 
(27) lu-pu us-ma bita lu su-bat{ . . . ~~ | (28) ae bu- 
us-Su ma-ha-za-su lu-Sar-Sid-ma:[.. . . . | (29) e-nu-ma 
ul-tu apsti-be[ 2. 6 2 © © | (30) as-vu [ ash fe AG 
nu-bat-ta[ ..... J@GDel . .. . . j bat silt 
[a ee ae we ow P92): ese us = ¥ eS pee kun- 
Ess j-Au-nue[ . 1 (33) on ave hi 
bitati ilani* rabati aot ee 4 ni-p ae + Can j 
Ga[ .. - ram abu- -Suan-na-a[. se fe if a-su 
Leer 7 Cag [ite a ee ee ola hka-ma: elt 
minima Sa tb-na-a ka-ta-a-ka[. . . . « | (36) man-[nu 
Aa i-St: eli Rak-ka-vu $a ib-na-a ka- se elie eee 
(37) man-[nue . . . . . pRate-st: Assur™ Sa taz-ku-ra 
mu?)yfo. . . 1. ] 8) asf 2. 2 1. Jani t-dé 
da-ri-gam{[ 2... . J GOL... . . jeuk-ka-ni 
Ui-bil-luent{ 2... . © J (o)ste . 1 1. mts ma- 
na-ma Sip-vi-nt Sa-ni (41) asvu[ . 2... | na-ah ur- 
[ .. 2... ] (42) hdu[ 2. © ©. (43) tani” 
suf[ . . . 1. 1 (44) Satdu[ . . . . . J (45) p-te-e- 


FE Aesth ed Ae A 

The mention of Lahmu in |. 13 of the reverse may also be 
cited in favour of the fragment belonging to the Creation 
Series, while the references to Adad (1. 5) and to the city of 
ASSur (1. 37) are not necessarily inconsistent with this view. 
Lines 23 ff., however, can scarcely be reconciled with the end 
of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series. These lines 
read: “(23) AnSar opened his mouth and spake, and unto 


the god[ . . . . he addressed the word]: (24) ‘ Above 
the Deep, the dwelling of{ . . . . ], (25) opposite E-Sara 
which I have created,{ . . . . ] (26) I have strengthened 
the regions in the depth [ . . . . Jj (27) I will build 


a house that it may be a dwelling for[ . . . . J] (28)In 


200 APPENDIX Ii. 





the midst thereof will I found his district (lit. city, cf. Tabl. IV, 
lL 146)and[ . . . . }’” In this speech Ansar, and not 
Marduk, appears as the god of creation, which is scarcely in 
harmony with the general tenour of the Creation Series. 
Moreover, in 1. 25 AnSar definitely states that he created 
E-Sara, whereas in Tablet IV, ll. 144-146, it is related that 
Marduk, and not An§Sar, created E-Sara. Until more of the 
text of the Fifth and Sixth Tablets is recovered, it would be 
rash to assert that the fragment cannot belong to the Creation 
Series ; meanwhile, in view of the inconsistencies noted, it is 
preferable to assume that it does not form part of that work, 
but is a fragment of a closely parallel version of the story in 
which AnSar plays a more prominent part. 

G. THE RIVER OF CREATION.~On p. 128f. a trans- 
literation and translation are given of an address to a mystical 











SEE RE TRE Dr PRG BT rte 
ei ME Gt Ew 
r¥Q SH af Ht K= Ff 

RR RH eb os ATT BT fe Sey 
BIE SH StH SAA AEE So ES 
KS —S— COUR RAT Ge KEY 
Saal wird dob Me EI Sf FY 
PAR FS Wt OM we 


Fragment of an incantation-tablet containing an address to the River of Creation 
(82-9-18, 5,311, Obverse), 


river of creation, which forms the opening lines of incantations 
upon the reverse of S. 1,704 and the obverse of 82-9-18, 5,311. 
As the text of these fragments has not been previously 
published, the obverse of the one and the reverse of the 
other are given in the accompanying blocks. It will be 
noted that Il. 1~8 of 82-9-18, 5,311 correspond to Il. 1-7 of 


THE RIVER OF CREATION. 201 





S. 1,704. The eighth line of S. 1,704, which concludes the 
direct address, or invocation, to the river, is omitted by 
82-9-18, 5,311, and from this point onward it would seem 
that the tablets cease to be duplicates. The insertion of the 
common formula, given in the ninth line of 82-9-18, 5,311, 
would not by itself prove this, but what remains of the tenth 
line of 82-9-18, 5,311 does not correspond to the ninth line 


ate rte Hee BRT ites 
AeA ey Gf meta HK OS 
EH eS Se B= 





Fragment of an incantation-tablet containing an address to the River of Creation 
(S. 1,704, Reverse). 


of S.1,704. We are justified, therefore, in treating the address 
to the river as an independent fragment, which has been 
employed as the introduction to two different incantations. 

H. THE SUPPOSED INSTRUCTIONS TO MAN AFTER HIS 
CREATION.—The tablet K. 3,364 (Cux. Tx¢s., pt. xiii, pl. 29 f) 
was thought by George Smith to contain the instructions 
given to the first man and woman after their creation. In 


202 APPENDIX II. 





The Chaldean Account of Genesis, p. 80, he says, “ The obverse ! 
of this tablet is a fragment of the address from the deity to 
the newly created man on his duties to his god” ; and a little 
later on he adds, “ The reverse of the tablet appears, so far 
as the sense can be ascertained, to be addressed to the 
woman, the companion of the man, informing her of her 
duties towards her partner.” In his Babylonische Weltschép- 
Sungsepos, pp. 19f, 54f. 88f, and 111f, Delitzsch also treats 
the tablet as forming part of the Creation Series. The 
recovered portion of the Sixth Tablet of the Creation Series, 
however, and the Neo-Babylonian duplicate of K. 3,364, the 
text of which is published in vol. ii, pls. lxiv-lxvi (No. 33,851), 
together disprove the suggested connection of K. 3,364 with 
the Creation Series. The reasons on which this conclusion 
is based may be briefly stated as follows :—(1) The recovered 
portion of the Sixth Tablet indicates that the description of 
the creation of man there given was very similar to the 
account furnished by Berossus; and it follows that the greater 
part of the text must have been in the form of narrative. 
If Marduk gave man any instructions after his creation, these 
can have occupied only a small part of the tablet. But 
both the obverse and reverse of K. 3,364 contain moral 
precepts, and the same is the case with columns ii and iii 
of the new duplicate No. 33,851.35 For such a long series of 
moral instructions there is no room upon the Sixth Tablet 
of the Creation Series. (2) Col. ii of No. 33,851 refers to 
certain acts which are good, and to others which are not good, 





1 The side of the tablet which George Smith refers to as the 
obverse is really the reverse; this is rendered certain by the 
duplicate No. 33,851. 

? In my Babylonian Religion and Mythology, p. 821., I also 
provisionally adopted this view. 


3 In col. i of this tablet only the ends of lines are preserved, and 
in col. iv a part of the colophon. 


THE “DUTIES OF MAN.” 203 





in the eyes of Samas! This is quite consistent with the 
character of Samaé as the judge of heaven and earth, but he 
does not appear in this character in the Creation Series, 
where he is referred to merely as the sun which Marduk 
created and set upon his course. (3) In the duplicate, No. 
33,851, the text is arranged in columns, two on each side of 
the tablet. This fact in itself is sufficient to prove that the 
composition has nothing to do with the series Enuma elis. 
The text upon tablets of the Creation Series is never arranged 
in columns, but each line is written across the tablet from 
edge to edge. This characteristic applies not only to the 
copies of the Creation Series from Kuyunjik, but also to the 
Babylonian copies of all periods, and even to the rough 
“practice - tablets” on which students wrote out extracts 
from the poem. 

The text inscribed upon K. 3,364 and No, 33,851 is, in fact, 
a long didactic composition containing a number of moral 
precepts, and has nothing to do with the Creation Series.” 
The composition in itself is of considerable interest, however, 
for enough of it remains to show that it indicates a high 
standard of morality. 


1 Cf. l. 9, wl ta-a-bi eld #« Sama’ [oe ee sy e “Seeand Lirg, 
fa-a-bi eli ™ Samasi-[ . . . . « ]. The signs an-up in these 
passages are clearly to be rendered ™ Samai, and not tlu-tu, 
“godhead,” in the sense in which z/u-u-fi occurs in K. 3,364, 
Rev., l. 14. 

2 It may be noted that the phrase a-h7l kar-s7 (K. 3,364, Rev., 
1. 5, and No. 33,851, col. iii, 1. 4), which has been thought by some 
to be the title of a power of evil termed ‘‘the Calumniator” 
(cf. Bezold, Catalogue, vol. ii, p. 526), is not a proper name or 
title, but should be rendered simply as “a slanderer.” 


204. APPENDIX III. 





Il. 


On some traces of the History of Creation in 
Refigions and Astrofogicaf Riterature. 


THERE is abundant evidence to prove that under the late 
Assyrian kings, and during the Neo-Babylonian and Persian 
periods, the history of the Creation as told upon the Seven 
Tablets of the series Zxuma elis’ was widely read and studied, 
and there can be no doubt that it exercised a considerable 
influence on the religious literature which continued to gather 
around Marduk’s name. In the fragmentary hymns and 
prayers which have come down to us, however, it is difficult 
to determine how far the priestly and popular conceptions 
of Marduk were influenced by the actual story of the Creation 
as we know it, and to what extent they were moulded by 
earlier legends and beliefs, and by Marduk’s own position as 
the native god of Babylon. That actual phrases from the 
Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series were made use of in 
other similar compositions is sufficiently proved by the 
fragments published at the end of Appendix I; and in view 
of this fact we may perhaps hear echoes from the earlier 
tablets of the series in some of the phrases and attributes 
applied to Marduk in the contemporary religious texts. It 
would be impossible within the limits of the present work 
to attempt an exhaustive treatment of this subject, but, as 
a striking instance of such allusions to the Creation story, 
reference may here be made to the fragment K. 3,351, which, 
I believe, has not hitherto been translated.! 





. A rather rough copy of this tablet is included in Craig’s 
Religious Texts, pl. 43. As several signs, including 1. 4, are 
there omitted, and others are incorrectly copied, the text of the 
obverse is given in the block on p. 205. 


INFLUENCE OF CREATION LEGENDS, 205 





The upper part of the tablet is broken and rubbed, but the 
greater part of the text is well preserved and clearly written, 
and may be transliterated as follows :— 


if . ef til-lum mar E-al. . . «| mut-tal-lum 
2... ]&[estsat] Samee) u irsiti(te) m[u)-Sim $t-ma-a-ti 
a ee a eee oe ee ae ea er at; 




















‘aif 

1 ERAT FE PSE wT fr Bar Al PEAT ORT BIA 
ol HT GES fer FM eo TT MTL 
PET KT ES te F BPTI PRE EL 
rf St 4H ET Ke PE Ail 
earl pe HITE Foe BRT Foe HIE WIC 
AT BE ot ore BEA Sr det MEF 
BAT oe BK ba ol oh fer BERT WT 
RR i oh he BY EMT 
oof BY Saf ET TE mi ot RY AS 

SW Re ieee oe ee a 
: 7 Tee rd ET 





Part of a Hymn to Marduk (K. 3,351). 


] Oel-xfu]-t ™Tu- te 
] Sar-ra-tum rabitum(tum) fi-rat ™ Sag-zu 


4[ 

ee 

6. [Je -d[um] ™ Biel rujoa sa su-tu-ru fa-si-su 
zo 


. . . | kabliu tahiet ina kat abkalli tlani® ™ Marduk 


206. APPENDIX IIL 





8. [Sle a-na ta-ha-2i-su Sami(u) t-ru-ub- bu 

9. a-na u-ta-az-2zu-mi-su id-dal-la-hu ap-su-u 
10. a@- na al - kip hakki - Su tlani®” = i-tur-+u 
Il.a-na te-bi-Su ig-2i Sa-’-ir-ru ul ib- st 
12. be-lum ra-as-bu $a ina pu-kur ilani®™ rabati” 

Sin-na-as-su la ib-ba-su-u 

13.72-na bu-ru-mi elliti® Sa-ru-uk ta-lu-uk- su 
14. tna E-kur bit tak-na-a-ti  Sa-ku-u — par-su u-su 
15. 2-na im-~ful-lue t-nam-bu-tu  kakke”- Su 
16. i-na nab-li-su u-tab-ba-tu Sadini” mar- su-ti 
17. $a tam-tim gal-la-ti i-sa-am-bu-’ ru-up-pu-Sa 
18. apil E-sar-ra_ zi-kir-§u— kar-rad tlani™ ni-bit-su 
19. wl-tu a-sur-vak-ka be-lum ilani® Ssu-ut da-ad-me 


20. i-na pa-an ‘*“kaSti-su ta-2zi-ti im-me-du  Sa-ma-mi 


21. Sa AB-MAH sal-lu-tum fa-mu-u uu Sa-ru 
22f .. 2... ) Sa] Balh]-su-nu ™ A-nun-na-ki 
BEE ce ooh ee lease, Se De | Lgigt 
BAA ee pean te Gen yak ie te tek OE a ed 


The fragment contains the opening lines of a hymn to 
Marduk,! of which the following is a translation :— 
1.QOlord[ ... . ],sonof Ea, theexalted[. ...], 
2. [Who . . . . ] the [hosts] of heaven and earth, who 
ordaineth destinies ! 





' The composition is addressed to Marduk, who is named in 
1. 7 and is referred to in the three preceding lines under his titles 
Tutu, Sagzu, and Bél; moreover, in ]. 1 he is termed the ‘son 
of Ea.” The Reverse of the tablet contains the last five lines of 
Agur-bani-pal’s common colophon. 


INFLUENCE OF CREATION LEGENDS. 207 





oe 


DAMP Y 
mae 


the . . . . Joffspring, 


the . . . . off|spring is Tutu! 
], the great queen, the consort of Sagzu! 


O lord Bél, thou prince, who art mighty in understanding ! 


[The . . . . J of war and battle is in the hand of 
Marduk, the director of the gods, 


At whose battle heaven quaked, 


g. At whose wrath the Deep is troubled! 


Io. 
fl. 
12. 


13. 
14. 


15. 
16, 
17. 
18. 


19. 


20. 
2r.. 
22. 
23. 
24. 


At the point of his weapon the gods turned back ! 
To his furious attack there was no opponent ! 


O mighty lord, to whom there is no rival in the assembly 
of the great gods! 


In the bright firmament of heaven his course is supreme ! 


In E-kur, the temple of true worship, exalted is his 
decree ! 


With the evil wind his weapons blaze forth, 
With his flame steep mountains are destroyed ! 
He overwhelmeth the expanse of the billowing ocean! 


The Son of E-Sara is his name, the Hero of the gods is 
his title ! 


From the depth! is he lord of the gods of human 
habitations ! 


Before his terrible bow the heavens stand fast ! 
plague and destruction, and tempest, 


[ .. . . .'. . Jofall the Aunnaki, 
[Cas sertad: oh 2) «7 )theigignt. 





1 Tn this phrase we may probably see an antithesis to “the 
heavens” in the following line; for other passages in which the 
word asurrakku occurs, cf. Delitzsch, Handworterbuch, p. 111, and 
Muss-Arnolt, Concise Dict., p. 121. 


208 APPENDIX III. 





It will be noticed that in Il. 8-11 the hymn describes the 
quaking of the heavens at Marduk’s battle, the trouble of the 
Deep at his wrath, and the flight of the gods from the point 
of his weapon. We have here an unmistakable reference to 
the battle of Marduk with Tiamat, and the subsequent flight 
of the gods, her helpers. The reference in 1 12 to Marduk’s 
supremacy in the assembly of the gods does not necessarily 
refer to the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series, but the 
tmhullu, or “evil wind,” in 1.15, and Marduk’s “ flame” in 1. 16 
are clearly reminiscences of the Fourth Tablet, ll. 45 and 96, 
and 1, 4o; and in “the billowing ocean (¢am-tim)” in 1. 17 
we may possibly see a reference to Tiamat. Finally, the 
mention of Marduk’s bow in |. 20 may be compared with the 
Fourth Tablet, |. 35, and with the fragment of the Fifth 
Tablet which describes the translation of the bow to heaven 
as the Bow-star (see above, p. 82 f.). 

Such references to the Creation story are of considerable 
interest, but they do not add anything to the facts concerning 
Marduk’s character which may be gathered from the Creation 
Series itself An additional interest, however, attaches to 
some astrological’ fragments which I have come across, inas- 
much as they show that at a late period of Babylonian 
history the story of the fight between Marduk and Tiamat 
had received a very definite astrological interpretation. One 
of the fragments exhibits Tiamat as a star or constellation 
in the neighbourhood of the ecliptic, and, moreover, furnishes 
an additional proof of a fact which has long been generally 
recognized, viz., the identification of the monster-brood of 
Tiamat with at any rate some of the signs of the Zodiak. 

The most important of the astrological fragments above 
referred to is made up of three pieces, Nos. 55,466, 55,486, 
and §5,627, which I have rejoined, and its text is published 
in vol. ii, pls. Ixvii-Ixxii. It measures 5/in. by 3Zin., and is 
part of a large tablet which was inscribed with two, or 
possibly three, broad columns of writing on each side. The 
fragment of the tablet recovered gives considerable portions 
of the first and last columns of the text, as well as traces of 


THE CREATION LEGENDS AND ASTROLOGY. 209 





the second column on the obverse and of the last column but 
one on the reverse. The colophon, which possibly contained 
the date at which the tablet was inscribed, has not been 
preserved, but from the character of the writing and the 
shape of the tablet it may be concluded that it does not 
belong to an earlier period than that of the Arsacide ; 
it may possibly be assigned to as late a date as the first 
century B.C. 

From the first section which has been preserved of col. i 
it is clear that the text is closely connected with the story 
of the Creation. This will be apparent from the following 
transliteration and translation of the portions of Il. 1-7 which 
have been preserved: (1) [ Jun sa kate Su 


mul-mul is-si-ma[..... |{ay[ ow... ™Kinj-gu 
ha-mi-vi-Su ina kakki la ga-ba-al i{t|-ta-kis-alm]-m{a] 
G3) E— . 2... 0. ] Téamat tk-mu-u il-ku-u sarru-us-su 
(4) [.. 2... dup|stmati” sa ™ Kin-gu it-mu-hu pa-tu-us-Su 
(5)[ . . . . . Jen ib-ni-ma bab ap-si-t u-sa-as-bit 
(6)[ .. . . . Jjeweu ana la ma-st-e ip-Sse-e-ti Ti-amat 
QM)... . . . )wkal-lam ab-bi-e-Su,“()[ . . 6 ee J 
whose hands removed the Spear, and [ ..... J 
(2)[ . . . . . Kin]gu, her spouse,.with a weapon not 
of war was cut off, and (3) [ 2.2 | Tiamat he 
conquered, he took her sovereignty. (4)[ . ... . ] 
the Tablets of Destiny from Kingu he took in his hand. 
(s)[ . . . . . J] he created, and at the Gate of the Deep 
he stationed. (6)[ . . . . . ] that the deeds of Tiamat 
should not be forgotten (7)[ . . . . . J] he causeth his 


fathers to behold.” 


In the first line we may probably see a reference to Marduk’s 
drawing forth of the #zlmul/u, or spear, which we know from 





' It is possible that mu/-mud is here, not Marduk’s actual weapon, 
but Mul-mul, the Spear-star of Marduk; and the verb 7s-st-ma may 
have the intransitive meaning, “ disappeared.” In view of the fact 
that the following tines refer to episodes in the Creation story, 
I think the rendering suggested above is preferable. 


4 


210 APPENDIX TIT. 





Tablet IV of the Creation Serics, ]. 101, he plunged into the 
belly of Tiamat, after he had filled her with the evil wind. 
Line 2 may be explained as referring to Marduk’s conquest 
of Kingu after Tiamat’s death, without further fighting, 
though it is possible that it has some connection with the 
obscure expression in Tablet IV, ]. 120. In 1. 3 the text 
returns to Marduk’s defeat of Tiamat ; and with the capture 
of the Tablets of Destiny from Kingu, referred to in 1. 4, we 
may compare Tablet IV, 1. 121 f. Line 5 possibly refers to 
an episode in the Creation which may have been recorded 
in the missing portion of Tablet V of the Creation Series. 
With it we may compare the fixing of a bolt by Marduk 
and the stationing of a watchman, in order to keep the 
waters above the firmament in their place (cf. Tablet IV, 
11.137 ff.); it is possible that a similar guardian was stationed 
by Marduk in order to restrain the waters of the Deep. Linc 
6f. apparently refer to the instructions given by Marduk to 
the gods, “his fathers,” in order “that the deeds of Tiamat 
(ie. her revolt and subsequent conquest by himself) should 
not be forgotten.”! It is possible that the instructions which 
Marduk is here represented as giving to the gods refer to 
their positions in heaven and to the heavenly bodies associated 
with them. If this interpretation is correct, it follows that 
the later Babylonians, at any. rate, looked upon the astrological 
aspect of the Creation story as in accordance with definite 
instructions given by Marduk himself. While they believed 
that Marduk actually slew Tiamat and subsequently created 
the universe as narrated in the tablets of the Creation Series, 
they held that the association of the principal actors in the 
story with some of the more important stars and constellations 
was also Marduk’s work, his object being to ensure that the 
history of the creation of the world should always be kept in 
remembrance. 

The first section which is preserved of the text, referring 





‘ This rendering appears preferable to the possible reading, 
la ba-Si-e, icc. “that the deeds of Tiamat should be no more.” 


THE CREATION LEGENDS AND ASTROLOGY. 211 





as it does to some of the most striking episodes recorded in 
the Creation Series, appears to be of the nature of an 
introduction to what follows. The second section reads: 


(8)[ .. . . . ™Mardule(?) u-kal-la-mu par-si-su-[niu] 
(9)[ . . . . . ]-tm E-la-mu-u sa[ 2... 2. J 
a-Sak-[ku] (lo) ff... ee | Tt-amat itba-am-ma[..... ] 
ni[fm . . . . . JCI . . Ty-amat ina lib-bi™ Sin 
in-n[am?)- . . .. . J 2). . . | “Marduk ina lib-bi 
“Tam-tim[ . . 2. . | (13) Red Sa vu-bu-u ™ Marduk 
ana Sa-kan a-blu-bu . . . . . | (14) t-ma ri-kis st-pit-td 
u me-lul-ti-su t-kab[. . . . . | (18) e-lis’ a sap-lis he- 


mut-tum u-sa-tar-ma\ i-kap-pu-du sur-va-[a-tum] (16) ina 
u-mu Su-u agit tas-ri-th-tum Sa nu-uk-ku-ri Sup-pal u-kal- 
Wi 2 2. | (17) ana muh-hi paras e-nu-tum sa la si-ma- 
a-tum t-Sah-kan pa-ni(?) - [su] (18) tani” ma -ha- st 
man A RRadi®! emi nise" Su-nu u-Sah-ha-su ul ul-la-a-tum?* 
(19) a-mat su-us-tum (?) t-dib-bu-bu i-kab-bu-u ma-ag-vi-tum 
(20) mt-tl-ki la tus-$ir(?) im-tal-lik t-te-ip-iu sur-ra-a-tum 
(21) tg-ga ag-na ™ Bel u-fal-lak es-ri-e-tum (22) E-la-ma-a 
ft-e-mu t-Sak-kan-ma t-sap-pan ma-a-tum (23) ana ku-ure 
Sa-kan a-bu-bu ana S§ul-mu \Z-DIM-MU epus(us) NAM-BUL-BL. 

In this section Marduk and Tiamat appear in their ‘astro- 
logical characters, Marduk probably as Jupiter, and Tiamat 
as a constellation in the neighbourhood of the ecliptic. The 
approach of Tiamat and the Moon and of Marduk (ie. Jupiter) 
and Tiamat would seem from ll. 13 ff. to portend the sending 
of an abubu, or deluge,’ upon the earth, followed by rebellion 
and tumult among gods and men. If unchecked, the wrath 
of Bél (ic. Marduk) would result in the destruction of the 
temples and in the ruin of the land. To prevent the sending 
of a deluge and to change the omen to one of prosperity, 





1 The sign is MA, not Iz. : 

? For wl ul-la-a-tum, as parallel to ma-ag-ri-tum (cf. 1. 19), see 
Jensen, Kosmologie, p. 121 f. 

2 Or, possibly, a thunderbolt. 


212 APPENDIX III. 





the text enjoins the performance of certain NAM-BUL-BI 
prayers.! 

The third and last section of the first column reads: 
(24) ina “* Diazu Sa ni-pi-su Sa sa-kap ° nakiri ina Babili™ 
ts pu us (2 5) ina lib-bi sa *™ Mustabarrii-miitanu u™ Sin ble” 
ni-sir-tum sa” Elamtu*! (26) NUM-LU*”? “ SAG-ME-GAR 

 Samas béle” ni-sir-tum $a” Akkadi®™ (27) 80[ . . }- 
ioe idati ("| sa nu-uk-ku-vi pali Babili®' ?-u-kal- lia 
(28) NAM-BUL-BI ina ald i-te- pu-us KIS 27-sir-tum sa ™ Sin 
(29) TE Su-ci a Mul-mul TE ga Elamtu *! (30) Ki ni-sir-tum 


sa ™ Samas TL U-KU-MAL ™[ 2... . (31) KI m- 
sir-tum $a ™ Mustabarrit-mitanu [6 6... | (32) KI 
ni-sir-tum Sa ™ SAG-ME-GAR **"T  , 6... | (33) tna 
ore" Tap - pat -tuim ina kar-nu-te di-[ . . 1... J 
G4) [ . . . 2. }ba-ba-an paras e-nu-tum[ 2... . J 
G5)[ . . . . . J muk-fe Sip(?)-tum[. . } 


This section is concerned with the positions of the planets 
Mustabarrit-miitanu (Mercury) and SAG-ME-GAR (Jupiter) and 
of the moon and sun, and of the stars SU-GI and Mulmul; 
and it would seem that a change in the dynasty ruling at 
Babylon was portended by the relative positions of Mercury 
and Jupiter. To that extent this section resembles the one 
that precedes it, but there is little apparent connection 
between this portion of the text and the Creation Series. 
It is possible, however, that this section was continued in 
col. ii, and that the missing portion had some connection with 
the legend.! 








1 This may be the title of a special class of incantations (cf. my 
Magic and Sorcery, p- 129), or the expression may possibly be 
employed, as in some other passages, to indicate generally a class 
of incantations, or ceremonies, intended to avert the effects of an 
evil omen (cf. Thompson, Reports of Magicians and Astrologers, 

xivii f.). 

Ms Cf. Epping and Strassmaier, Z.A., vii, p. 221 f. 

3 Possibly afar. 

4 Of col. ii only traces of the beginnings of a few lines are 
preserved from the lower half of the. column ; they read: (1) e- 


S TGel ne or SE a te ed 


THE CREATION LEGENDS AND ASTROLOGY. 213 





The greater part of the reverse of the fragment is inscribed 
with the upper half of the Jast column, which in some respects 
is the most interesting portion of the text. The lines that 
have been preserved read as follows: (1) ena “*" Tap-pat-tum 


Sa nt-pi-su an-nu-tul . - . | (2) ana muh-hi™ Marduk 
alike( fu) ina kak-kar a soe ee. 1G) ue ™ Kin-gu 
Su-u :ab-bt : 7" AB: ab-[ . - | (4) Te Bir! 7i-amat 
pu-uh-ri ana sal-tum ki-i[ .. ea (5) epus(us) Ti-amat 
u ™ Kin-gt ana ts-ten ttiiri*®’-ma yan . | ©) a-ha-mes 


in-nam-mar-ru- as-Su an-nt-t TE Enc - sa KI TE Akrabu 
PAD[ . . . . . ] (7) Bxsi-da: TE Enzu : ** Uh-2u 
Sum-Su par-st $a Ti-amat (8) kul-lu gi-tz-2a-ni-lum u pu-us- 
Sa-ni-tum Sa it-ti lib-bi YE” E(u) (9) ana muh-hi “* Engu 
u TE MULU-BAD? zna 26-62 TE BIR KA-BI 72-antat u™ Kin-gt 
(10) Su-nu : gi-iz-sa-ni-tu : ki-is-sa-ni-tu Sum-su ana mug-Qt 
TE Bir &t-dz-2u (11) pu-us-Sa-ni-tum pu-u-za-ni-tum Sum-Su 
ana mup-pi TE KA fa- bi (12) TE KA : TE MULU-BAD T7-amat 
tu-ra-am-tum Sum-su Sani pa-nu-su zikru u sinnistu su-u 
(13) tna lib-bi ki-t t-kat Sa VE Akrabu it-ti  Nin-lil u ™ Nin- 
hi-gal (14) basi(u) ina muh-hi par-sa $a Ti-amat as-ba’ Gud 
u Akrabu is-ten §u-u (15) GIR : su-ka-ki-pu : GIR lu-u: 
UT... pi as-su an-ni-t ina?" Tap-pat-tum (16) 1 a-sak-ku 
TE Enzu ina KY TE MULU-BAD tna agi tas-ré-ift-tum illiku( ku) 
(7){ . . . . . )}da TE UYTU-KA-GAB-A iva Lb-bi te 





4 ™C. (5). alu[ . od (6) 9a) a 4g 
Ce LOGS ii ee 
{7 ae 4 (10) ud ( ae i “Similarly only 
traces remain of ‘the first column prserves upon the reverse of 
the tablet, which read: (1) [ . « ) (2) “ Na-na-[a 
1(3) Sa bu-laf... T (4) A hi-na- ale i 
Gs, beginning a new section) ia “ard | (6) hai 
1G) alle 


“Le. Caper. The sign was read by Strasenaior and Epping as 
Sau, Sahu (see Astron. aus Bab., App., p. 7), but Jensen has shown 
that it is not Sau, but the sign Br. No. 2,024 (see Kosmologie, 
p- 313), which pethaps has the value Bir. As the tenth sign of 
the Zodiac it should possibly be read as Ladd. 

2 Explained as pa-gar asakkd (Ip-pA) in VR., pl. 46, No. 1, 
Obvy., lL. 28. 


214 APPENDIX III. 





BIR KI ni-sir-tum sa” Blamtu[™] (8), . 2... | su-nu 
u-tiv-ru-nim-ma ana sal-tum tz-st-su-u ™ Samas ina lib-bi 
[..... JQ@9)[— ... . . J Sa * SAG-ME-GAR 
ni-me-du TE KAK-SI-DI « TE PAN ina pa-ni "Ts. ] 
(20) [. . . . . ) ta-fa-at ki-ma tz-ai-aurit..... | 
(21)[..... Juibat.....]@2)C..--- ] 
™ Samas [bellu ™ Nin-ib sum-su ana... [- 1... J 
(23)[ . 2... . jbaese TAB i-sak-ki-pu IGl MAR 
™Nin-i[6 .. . . . 7] @a[ ... . - | hak-hu 
Su-u kak ku a-bu-bu ™ Marduk ina sumi- su ka - bi) 
(25)[ . . . . . PIAN! a-bu-bu hak-ka-Su rabaa) as-su 
Sa™ Nin-ib a-st aS-Su an-nt-tif..... TZ) se sachs ] 
t-kab-bu-u Ki SIR NAM LUL Sa timu XVITE"" ina KI SIG 
[..-.. J@7 0... 1. ) ™ Bel kar-va-du sa 
ina ag-gu lib-bi-su a-sak-ku [..... Wii [soca 72 Se 
t-si-fu tu-ku-un-lum ™ Nin[..... ) (29) [.---- ]-tumn 
ina idi-su [2 ]-leK-\lu(?) B-kur[ oo... I GO) erga s } 
ma-su[. vs. Jan-nakif..... Vb awa jer 
WED ne a ce eR ee ge eee ee ie 
Gat... --. 1G3)_ ] 


It will be noticed that this portion of the text is in the 
main explanatory. Unlike col. i, these lines of the text do 
not run on in the form of connected sentences, but are broken 
up into a number of equations and explanations of terms and 
titles ; thus, some terms are explained by a play upon words 
(cf. ll. 3 and 10f.), while in other places the reason is given for 
certain titles (cf. Il. 6 and 7) or additional names (cf. lL. 12). 
With regard to the connection of passages in this column 
with the Creation Series, it may be noted that Kingu, in 
addition to Marduk and Tiamat, is introduced. He is here 
associated in an astrological sense with Tiamat, and their 
alliance in opposition to Marduk is clearly referred to in 
ll. 4-6. Moreover, the fact that Caper and Scorpio are 
mentioned in close connection with this passage shows that 





! Either the Bow-star, or, possibly, [17-3 ]AN, ie. SY haste, 
Marduk’s bow. 


TUE CREATION LEGENDS AND ASTROLOGY. 205 





they here occur, not only in their astronomical sense as 
constellations of the Zodiac, but’ also in their mythical 
character as monsters in the host of Tiamat. The reference 
to Marduk’s “mighty weapon” in |. 24f. is also noteworthy. 
After the sheets of vol. ii had been printed off I came 
across two other fragments of somewhat similar astrological 
texts, which furnish additional illustrations of the manner in 
which the legends of the Creation were connected by the 
later Babylonians with astrological phenomena. The smaller 
of these fragments, No. 40,959, the text of which is given in 





OBVERSE, 





REVERSE, 


Fragment of an astrological explanatory text (No. 40,959). 


the accompanying block, preserves a few traces of signs from the 
beginning of the obverse and from the end of the reverse of 
the tablet. A few complete words occur in I. 2 of the reverse, 
which reads [ . . . . . jedi: Mk-mi Ti-amat napista-su 
Je. . . 2 . 453 1 112 of the Seventh Tablet of the 
Creation Series reads /ik-me (var. li-ik-m2) Ti-amat nt-siv-ta-$u 
(var. na-pis-ta-su) li-st-ik u lik-ri (see above, p. 108 f.), and it 
is clear that this line is here quoted upon the fragment. 
Both the obverse and reverse of No. 40,959 resemble the 
last column of No. 55,466, etc, in being of an explanatory 


216 APPENDIX IIL 





nature, and it is probable that the quotation from the Seventh 
Tablet is here introduced in an astrological context. 

The larger of the two fragments is No. 32,574, and the text 
of its obverse is published in the accompanying block. This 
text also is explanatory, and of an astrological character, and, 
like No. 40,959, it has in some respects a close connection 
with the Creation Series. Thus 1. 2 reads [ é 
ALI]M-NUN-NA: nu-ur Sa ™ Anu ™ Bel u *[E-a:] a[sar]v : 
[ . . 43 now ™ Asaru-alim-nun-na occurs as one 
of the titles of Marduk in 1. § of the Seventh Tablet of the 







VERE nh oS C4 GE 


Peake Ee SEL ET rE AST TPT AEE 
ETE Oo PETE SPL oS woh 2 
eRe A whe SRT FE RK 

rhb Ee mt LE RR LY oP SRE 
wf ET F Poh re GWT CE rf 








Fragment of an astrological explanatory text (No. 32,574, Obverse). 


Creation Series, and with the explanation of the title here 
given as “the Light of Anu, Bél, and Ea,” we may compare 
the explanation in 1. 6 of the Seventh Tablet, which reads 
mus-te-Sir te-rit ™ A-nim ™ Bel [u * E-al, “who directeth the 
decrees of Anu, Bdl, [and Ea].” Moreover, |. 3 of the fragment 
reads[ . . . . . AJLIM-NUN-NA! ha-ru-ba nu-ur a-bi 





‘ At the beginning of the line there is hardly room for the 
restoration [ Asaru-A]LIM-NUN-NA; it is probable that the line 
read [" A ]tImM-NUN-NA, which may be regarded as a shorter form 
of the same title. 


THE CREATION LEGENDS AND ASTROLOGY. 217 





a-li-di-iu[ .. . J]; now 1.5 of the Seventh Tablet 
reads ™ A sariu- alin nun-na ka-vru-bu nu-ur[. 

and the end of the line may probably be restored eras the 
fragment as nu-ur [a-bi a-l-di-su) Line g of the fragment 
treads tm-bi Sumu-ka a-bi lant” NU-NAM-NIR[. 2... ale 
this also possibly refers to Marduk, and may be compared 
with the Seventh Tablet, 1. 116 and Il. 118 ff. 










TT ALL HE re a GE < rE L 
oo Ibe < SeF EE EF oF Kt 
AeP ag Ach Wis ep baa 


Fragment of an astrological explanatory text (No. 32,574, Reverse and Edge). 


The text of the reverse of No. 32,574 (see the accompanying 
block) is also explanatory, and reads: (1) [ 
(2) SIGISSE : ta-a-b¢: UR: zab-lum:[ . 2. 2 . | (3) mu- 
su-u Sa sar Nippuri™ : sul-mu[. . » . ) () Gi8-Srp 
KL-IN-GL-RA : fu-la me[..... ] (5) K KI-IN-GI : Nippuru*’ : 





1 See above, p. 92 f. 


218 APPENDIX Ill. 





IR: Sa-la-la[ .. 2. ] 6)“ Zu-u im-has kap-pa-su ws-bir : 
Sip[ ... . . J () sa ana beli-su kar-nu sab-ru u mu-sa- 
kil-su[ . . . . . ] (8) ™ Kin-gu uu" Nisannu ga ™ Anu 
eM Bl gma Jl oe a ee ey er Le = KU - MALS 
™ Dumu-si:™*Kin-g[u . 2. 2. . . JGo[.....] 
“ Al-ma-uu UD-DU AG: [ . . . . « J (it) [#2] -¢g-meu 
Sak-na-at:; E-kur: EL... . . }. In ll 8f. Kingu is 


introduced, but there is no other evidence of a connection 
between the Creation Series and this portion of the text; 
in fact, 1. 6, beginning, “Zi smote and broke his wing,” 
evidently gives a quotation from a legend of the Storm-god 
Zi, which has nothing to do with: the Creation Series. 
Indirectly, however, this line proves that other Babylonian 
legends were, like those of the Creation, connected by the 
later Babylonians with certain of the heavenly bodies. The 
four lines inscribed upon the edge of the tablet give a portion 
of the colophon, from the last line of which we learn that the 
tablet belonged to a series, the title of which reads[..... 
“| Marduk u ™ Sar-pa-ni-tum BE-SI;! and it is possible that 
the other astrological fragments above described (Nos. 55,466, 
etc., and 40,959) are parts of tablets belonging to the same 
series. The occurrence of Marduk’s name in the title is in 
accordance with the suggested connection between these 
fragments and the Creation Series. 





* The last two signs are not very carefully written, but they are 
distinctly BE-Sr and not ES-BAR (i.e. purussz). With this title we 
may compare that which occurs at the beginning or upon the edge 
of many of the late Babylonian astronomical tablets, viz., 7z@ a-mat 
tt Bel u ™ Belti-ia purussu, “ At the word of the Lord and of my 
Lady, a decision!” ; cf., e.g., Epping, Astronomisches aus Babylon, 
p- 153. The Sé@ and Bélti-1a are probably Marduk and 
Sarpanitum. 


APPENDIX IV. 219 





IV. 


Supposed Asoprian feqends of the Temptation 
and the Tomer of Babel. 


In vol. ii, pl. Ixxiiif. the text is given of a fragment of 
a legend (K. 3,657), which was thought at one time by George 
Smith and others! to contain an Assyrian version of the 
story of the Tower of Babel (cf. Gen. xi, 1 ff). The text is very 
broken, but from what remains of col. i it would appear to 
be part of a legend concerning a god, or possibly a king, who 
plotted evil in his heart and conceived a hatred against the 
father of all the gods. In col. i, Il. 5 ff. the passage occurs on 
which the supposed parallel with the story of the Tower of 
Babel was based, for these lines were believed to refer to the 
building of a tower at Babylon, and to describe how the 
tower erected by the builders in the day was destroyed in 
the night by a god, who confounded their speech and confused 
their counsel. There is, however, no mention of a tower or 
building of any sort, and Babylon is referred to as suffering 
through the evil designs of the god or king, described in Il. 2-4. 
Moreover, the lines supposed to recount the destruction of the 
tower by night really describe how the complaints of the 
oppressed people prevented the king, or possibly an avenger 
of the people, from getting any sleep at night upon his couch. 
The tablet is too broken to allow of a completely satisfactory 
explanation of the nature of the legend, but the rendering 





1’See Chaldean Account of Genesis, pp. 160 ff., German ed. (edited 
by Delitzsch), p. 122 f.; cf. also Boscawen, 7'S.2.A,, v, pp. 3041, 
and Records of the Past, vol. vii, pp. 129 ff. 


220 APPENDIX IV. 





of Il. 1-14 given below! will suffice to show that the suggested 
connection between this legend and the story of the Tower 
of Babel was not justified. 

As with the story of the Tower of Babel, so also has it 
been claimed that an Assyrian legend has been found which 
presents a close parallel to the story of the temptation of 
Eve in the garden of Eden, narrated in Gen. iii. That the 
description of paradise in Gen. ii shows traces of Babylonian 
influence is certain,? and it is not impossible that a Babylonian 
legend may at some future time be discovered which bears 


1 The first fourteen lines of col. i may be rendered as follows :— 
( ») [4 «+ sue) abD. JC « +} 
ui-Su Lib- Ja-Su a-le-1m-na (3) [ee e Ja-b7 ha- la ‘tani? 
teatmru (4) [2 0 eee tYi-Su lib- bak Pe te-im-na(5)[... 6. 
Babilu® | sa-mi-id a-na tl-ki-im (6) [si-th-ru u rja-bu-u u-ba-al-lu 
dul-la(7)[ oe ee Bab\ilu® sa-mi-id a-na tl-hi-im (8) [st-th-ru] 
u ra-bu-u u-ba-al-lu dul-la (g)[ . . . « . -t|m-ma-as-st-na 
ha-la u-mi t-Su-us (10) [i ]-na ta-az-2t-im-ti-Si-na t-na ma-at-lt 
(11) w-ul u-kat-ta S1-tt-ta (12) [t-nja ug-ga-ti-su-ma_ te-me-ga-am 
ie kes -ah (13) [a-na] Su-ba-al-ku-ut pa-li-e ine 2-hu-un 

4) [u5(?)- fjan-ni te-ma ut-tak-ki-ra mi- mace un. 
: i) [ke Rae j their [ . pe EE os ] 
aS heart plotted evil. (3) . . . . . J the ‘father of ‘the 
gods he hated; (4)[ . . . - . ] his heart plotted evil. 
(Cy eee ere Babylon] was yoked to forced labour; (6) [small 
and] great rendered(?) service. (7)[ - . . . - Babjylon was 
yoked to forced labour ; (8) [small] and great rendered(?) service. 
(9) [Through] their [ . . . . ], all day was he afflicted; 
(10) through their lamentation, upon (his) couch (11) he obtained 
no sleep. (12) [In] the anger of his heart he put an end to (?) 
GUTH che (13) [to] overthrow the kingdom he set his face. 
(14) [He chan ]ged (their) understanding, their counsel was altered 
ae) SE -’ Too little is preserved of cols. ii and iii to allow 
oft a connected translation, but it may here be noted that col. ii 
contains references to the gods “ LUGAL-DUL (or DU)-AZAG-GA 
(l. 1) and * En-ui (1. 2), and to the goddess “* Dam-hi-na (1. 8), 
and col. ili to the god “ Nu-Nam-nir (I. 5). 
? For a further discussion of this subject, sce the Introduction. 





THE TEMPTATION AND THE TOWER OF BABEL. 221 





a close resemblance to the story of the temptation of Eve 
by the serpent! The tablet which has been supposed to 
contain an Assyrian version of the story? is K. 3,473 + 
79-7-8, 296 + R. 615, which is one of the principal copies 
of the Third Tablet of the Creation Series. The closing lines 
of the Third Tablet recount how the gods gathered to a feast 
at AnSar’s bidding before they decreed the fate for Marduk, 
their avenger*; the passage which recounts how the gods 
ate bread (1. 134) was believed to contain a reference to man’s 
eating the fruit of the trée of knowledge, and Marduk was 
supposed to be described in 1. 138, not as the avenger of the 
gods, but as the “ Redeemer” of mankind. This suggestion 
was never widely adopted and has long been given up, but 
it had meanwhile found its way into some popular works ; 
and, as enquiries are still sometimes made for the Assyrian 
version of the story of the Temptation, it is perhaps not 
superfluous to state definitely the fact of its non-existence. 


1 The cylinder seal, Brit. Mus., No. 89,326, has been thought to 
furnish evidence of the existence of such a legend, as it represents 
a male and a female figure seated near a sacred tree, and behind 
the female figure is a serpent. George Smith published a woodcut 
of the scene in Zhe Chaldean Account of Genesis, p. gt 3 for 
a photographic reproduction of the impression of the seal, see my 
Bab. Rel. and Myth, p. 113. 

? The suggestion was first made in the Bab. and Or. Rec., iv 
(1890), pp. 251 ff. 

3 See above, p. 56f., Il. 129-138. 


222 APPENDIX V. 





V. 


@ “Mraper of the Raising of the Hand” 
fo Ishtar. 


In the following pages a transliteration and a translation are 
given of a remarkable “ Prayer of the Raising of the Hand” 
to [Star, No. 26,187, the text of which is published in vol, ii, 
pls. Ixxvff An explanation is perhaps neccessary of the 
reasons which have led to the publication of this tablet in 
a book dealing with legends of Creation and with texts con- 
nected therewith. In a previous work, entitled “ Babylonian 
Magic and Sorcery,” I had collected all the texts belonging 
to the series of “ Prayers of the Raising of the Hand” which 
were known to me at the time ; when later on I came across 
the text of No. 26,187 it followed that it must necessarily 
be published by itself, apart from other tablets of its class, 
It would, of course, have been possible to delay its publication 
until it could be included in a work dealing with a number 
of miscellaneous religious compositions, but, in view of the 
Onv. 

1, Siptu u-sal-li-ki be-lit be-li-e-ti i-lat t-la-a-tt 

2. ™ Tstar Sar-ra-ti kul-lat da-ad-me mus-te-§i-rat te-nt-Se-e-tt 

3. “Ir-ni-nt! mut-tal-la-a-ti va - bit © [gigi 


4. gas-ra-a-ti ma-al-ka-a-ti su-mu-ki si-ru 


5. at-ti-ma na-an-na-rat Sante) u trsitim(tim) ma-rat 
& Sin ka ~ vit - te 





1 IStar, to whom the prayer is offered (cf. 1. 106), is in this linc 
and in l. 105 addressed by the title Imini; in ]. 12 she is addressed 
as Gutira. It is well known that in course of time IStar was 
identified by the Babylonians and Assyrians with other goddesses, 


A PRAYER TO ISTITAR. 223 





interesting nature of its contents, it has seemed preferable 
to make it available without further delay for students of 
Babylonian religion, by including it as an appendix to the 
present work. It will be seen that the text, both from the 
beauty of its language and from its perfect state of preserva- 
tion, is one of the finest Babylonian religious compositions 
that has yet been recovered. The tablet measures 6Zin. by 
2%in., and is of the long narrow shape which is one of the 
characteristics of the larger tablets of the series to which it 
belongs. From the colophon (cf. Rev, ll. 111 ff) we gather 
that it was copied from an original at Borsippa by a certain 
Nergal-balatsu-ikbi, who deposited it as a votive offering in 
E-sagila, the temple of Marduk at Babylon, whence it was 
probably removed before the destruction of the temple. The 
text is addressed to IStar in her character as the goddess 
of battle, and she is here identified with Irnini and with 
Gutira (see below, note). Lines 1-41 contain addresses to 
the goddess, descriptive of her power and splendour, and 
at 1, 42 the suppliant begins to make his own personal 
petitions, describing his state of affliction and praying for 
deliverance. A rubric occurs at the end of the text (cf. 
ll. 107 ff), giving directions for the performance of certain 
ceremonies and for the due recital of the prayer. 


1. I pray unto thee, lady of ladies, goddess of goddesses ! 

2. O Ishtar, queen of all peoples, directress of mankind ! 

3. O Irnini} thou art raised on high, mistress of the Spirits 
of heaven ; 

4. Thou art mighty, thou hast sovereign power, exalted is 
-thy name ! 


5. Thou art the light of heaven and earth, O valiant daughter 
of the Moon-god. 





e.g., Ninni, Nana, Anunitum, and Bélit; and when so identified 
she absorbed their names, titles, and attributes. In these passages 
we have two additional instances of her identification with other 
deities. 


224 APPENDIX V. 





Osy. 
6. mut-tab-bi-la-at kakk@” Sa-ki-na-at tu - ku - un - ta 
7. ha-mi-mat gi-mir par-si a-pi-rat a-gi-e be-lu-ti 
8.. belt?! su-pu-ui nar-bu-ki eli ka-la tlani™ si-ru 


9. mul-ta-nu-ka-a-ti mus-lam-hi-sa-at ale? mit-gu-ri-tt 


10, mut - ta - ad - di - na - at it- ba ~ ru? 
il. it- dur-ti be-lit tu-sa-vi mut-tak-ki-pat® eristi-ia 


12. “Gu-tir-a* Sa tu-ku-un-ta fal-pat la-bi-sat har-ba-sa 

13. gam-ra-a-ti Sib-ta u purussé lik-ti irsitim( time) u sa-ma-mi> 

14. suk-ku es-ri-e-ti ni-me-da u parakke”™ u-tuk-ku  ka-a-si 

15. e-ki-a-am la sumu-ki e-ki-a-am la par - su - ki 

16. e-kt-a-am la us-su-ra usurdti*-ki e-ki-a-am la innadi*™ 
parakhé” - ki 

17, e-ki-a-am la va-ba-a-ti e-ki-a-am la si-va-a- ti 


18.“ A-num ™ Bel u * E-a ul-lu-u-ki ina ilani® u-sar-bu-u 
be-lu-ut-ki 





1 As the determinative AN is employed before the ideogram, it is 
possible that here and in Il. 29 and 104 it should be rendered as 
the proper name, or title, Bes (cf. the preceding note). Elsewhere 
in the prayer, however, the word takes in addition the 1 &. pron. 
suffix (cf. ll. 43, 56, 59, 72, 73, 79, 93, and 94); it seems more 
probable, therefore, that the ideogram is employed for the sub- 
stantive dé/tu, “lady.” 

? This line probably continues the class of attributes ascribed to 
the goddess in the preceding line, and does not form a contrast 
to it; the meaning “strength” rather than “ friendship” is 


A PRAVER TO ISHTAR. 225 





on 


10. 
Il. 


12, 


13. 


14. 


15. 


‘16. 


17. 
18, 


Ruler of weapons, arbitress of the battle ! 

Framer of all decrees, wearer of the crown of dominion ! 

O lady,! majestic is thy rank, over all the gods is it 
exalted ! ‘ 

Thou art the cause of lamentation, thou sowest hostility 
among brethren who are at peace ; 

Thou art the bestower of strength !? 

Thou art strong, O lady of victory, thou canst violently 
attain’ my desire! 

O Gutira,t who art girt with battle, who art clothed with 
terror, 

Thou wieldest the sceptre and the decision, the control of 
earth and heaven !° 

Holy chambers, shrines, divine dwellings, and temples 
worship thee ! 

Where is thy name not (heard)? Where is thy decree 
not (obeyed) ? 

Where are thine images not made? Where are thy 
temples not founded ? 

Where art thou not great? Where art thou not exalted ? 

Anu, Bél, and Ea have raised thee on high, among the 
gods have they made great thy dominion, 





therefore to be assigned to i#-a-ru. In support of this view, cf. the 
attributes in the following lines, and the occurrence of 2/-bur-f in 
1, 11, where any other meaning but ‘Thou art strong” is out of 
the question. 
_ * It is clear that in this passage we must assign some such active 
meaning to the Ifteal of nakapu. 
: See above, p. 222 f., n. t. 
* The second half of the line is in apposition to the phrase 
Sibfa u purussa, ‘‘the sceptre” representing the control of earth 
and ‘the decision” that of heaven. 


15 


226 APPENDIX V. 





Oxy, 
19. u-sa-as-ku-ki ina nap-har ™ Igigi u-sa-ti-ru man-za-as-ki 


20. a-na hi-is-sat Su-me-ki Sami(u) u trsitind tim) t-ru-ub-bu) 
21. dani* i-ru-bu i-nar-rvu-tu A - nun -na-ki 
22. Sumu-kt ra-as-bu is-tam-ma-ra te - ni - Se-~e- ti 
23.at-tt- ma va-ba-a-ti u gsi-ra-a-t 
24. nap-har sal-mat kak-Rka-di* nam-mas-su-u te-nt-Se-e-td 
t-dal-la-lu  kur-di-ki 
25. at-in ba-hu-la-a-ti ina kit-ti u mi-Sa-ri ta-din-ni at-ti 
26. tap-pal-la-si hab-lu u sak-Su® tus-te-es-Se-vi ud-da-kam 
27. a-4u-lap-ki be-lit Samé&e) u irsitim(tim) ri-e-a-at nise* 
a-pa-a-ti 
28. a-hu-lap-ki be-lit E-an-na* kud-du-su su-tum-mu el-lu 
29. a-hu-lap-ki™ belti® ul a-ni-ha stpa”"-ki la-si-ma bir-ka-a-kt 
30. a-hu-lap-hi be-lit ta-ha-zi ka-li-su-nu tanm- fia- ri 
31. su-pu-u-tum la-ab-bat “Teigi mu-kan-ni-sat ilani” Sab-su-ti 


32. lt-’-a-at ka-li-su-nu ma-al-ku sa-bi-ta-at sir-vit Sarrani*™ 


33. pi-ta-a-at pu-su-um-me® sa ka-li-Si-na arditi # 





‘ The verb radu is here used of the “ quaking” of the heaven 
and earth (see above, p. 206 f., 1. 8), and in the following line of 
the “trembling” of the gods; for its use in the former sense in 
the astrological reports, cf. Thompson, Reports of the Magicians and 
Astrologers, vol. ti, p. 129. 

? Literally ‘the black-headed,” i.e. mankind. 


A PRAYER TO ISHTAR, 227 





19, 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26, 
27. 
28, 
29. 
30. 
31. 


32. 


33. 


They have exalted thee among all the Spirits of heaven, 
they have made thy rank pre-eminent. 

At the thought of thy name the heaven and the earth 
quake, 

The gods tremble, and the Spirits of the earth falter. 

Mankind payeth homage unto thy mighty name, 

For thou art great, and thou art exalted. 

AJ] mankind? the whole human race, boweth down before 
thy power, 

Thou judgest the cause of men with justice and 
righteousness ; 

Thou lookest with mercy on the violent man, and thou 
settest right the unruly * every morning, 

How long wilt thou tarry, O lady of heaven and earth, 

’ shepherdess of those that dwell in human habitations ? 

How long wilt thou tarry, O lady of the holy E-anna,! 
the pure Storehouse? ; 
How long wilt thou tarry, O lady,’ whose feet are 
unwearied, whose knees have not lost their vigour ? 
How long wilt thou tarry, O lady of all fights and of the 
battle ? 

O thou glorious one, that ragest among the Spirits of 
heaven, that subduest angry gods, 

That hast power over all princes, that controllest the 
sceptre of kings, 

That openest the bonds ® of all handmaids, 





* The word sak-Su is practically synonymous with 4ad-/u, and 
conveys the meaning of ‘destruction ” or “violence,” rather than 
“ wrong.” 


4 
6 
6 


Le., the temple of [Star in the city of Erech. 
See above, p. 224, n. 1. 
The rendering of the word pusummu is conjectural. 


228 


APPENDIX V. 





Osy. 


34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 


38. 
39. 


40. 
4l. 
42. 


43. 
44. 
45. 


46. 
47. 
48. 


49. 


na-an-se-a-at na-an-di-a-at fa-vit-ti “ [star  ra-bu-u 
kuv-adi-kt 

na-mir-tum di-par Same) u irsitim(tim) Ssa-ru-ur 
kal da-ad-me 


ta@-3at-it kab-lu la ma-far a-li-lat tam-ha-ri 

a-ku-ku-u-tum' sa ana ai-bi nap-hat  sa-ki-na-at 
Sul-lu-ug-ti ik-du-ti : 

mu-um-mil-tum “Is-tar mu-pah-hi-rat pu-uh-ri 

t-lat stkriiti®” ™I§-tar sinnisati® sa la t-lam-ma-du 
mi-lik-$u  ma-am-man 

a-Sar tap-pal-la-si i-bal-lut °”" mitu i-te-ib-bi mar-su 

is - Si- ir la a- sa - ru a-mi-ru pa-ni-ki 


ana-ku al-si-ki an-hu Su-nu-hu Sum-ru-su  arad-ki 
a-mur-in-ni-ma ™ bélti-ia li-ki-e un- ni- ni- ta 
ki-nis nap-li-sin-ni-ma_ §i-mi-e tas - li - ti 
a-hu-lap-ia ki-bi-ma ka-bit-ta-ki lip- pa- as- ra 
a-hu-lap sumri-ia na-as-si sa ma-lu-u e-Sa-a-ti u dal-ha-a-tt 
a-hu-lap lib-bi-ia Sum-vu-su Sa ma-lu-u dim-ti u ta-ni-hi 


a-hu-lap te-ri-ti-ia na-as-sa-a-ti e-Sa-a-ti u dal-ha-a-ti 


a-hu-lap biti-ia $su-ud-lu-bu sa u-na-as-sa-su  nissati® 





1 


For the meaning of the word akukiutum, cf. UR, pl. 39, 


K. 2,057, Obv., col. ii, 1. 5, where a-ku-ku-/_um] and a-sam-Su-tum 


A PRAYER TO ISHTAR. 229 





34. 


35- 
36. 
37. 


38. 
39. 


40. 


EN 


42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 


48. 


49. 


That art raised on high, that art firmly established,— 
O valiant Star, great is thy might! 


Bright torch of heaven and earth, light of all dwellings, 


Terrible in the fight, one who cannot be opposed, strong 
in the battle! 

O whirlwind,! that roarest against the foe and cuttest off 
the mighty ! 

O furious Ishtar, summoner of armies ! 

O goddess of men, O goddess of women, thou whose 
counsel none may learn ! 

Where thou lookest in pity, the dead man lives again, the 
sick is healed ; 


. The afflicted is saved from his affliction, when he beholdeth 


thy face! 

I, thy servant, sorrowful, sighing, and in distress cry unto 
thee. 

Look upon me, O my lady, and accept my supplication, 

Truly pity me, and hearken unto my prayer ! 

Cry unto me “It is enough!” and let thy spirit be 
appeased ! 

How long shall my body lament, which is full of restless- 
ness and confusion ? 

How long shall my heart be afflicted, which is full of 
sorrow and sighing ? 

How long shail my omens be grievous in restlessness and 
confusion ? 

How long shall my house be troubled, which mourneth 
bitterly ? 





occur as equivalents of two ideograms which form a section by 
themselves ; see also Delitzsch, Handwiriterbuch, p. $3. 


230 


APPENDIX V. 





Orv. 


50. 
SI. 


52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 


56. 


a-hu-lap kab-ta-ti-ia $a us-ta-bar-ru-u dim-ti u_ ta-ni-hi 
™ Ty-ni-ni [ .. |}-¢-tum la-ab-bu na-ad-ru lib-ba-ki li-nu-ha 


rvi-t-mu  Sab-ba-su-u_ka-bit-ta-ki lip- pa- as$- ra 

damkati¥®? ima" -ki lib-Ssa-a e - i - ta 

ina bu-nt-ki nam-ru-ti ki-nis’ nap-li-sin-ni ta-a-st 

uk-ki-$i u-pi-sa limnéti® sa sumri-va ntiru-ki nam-ru 
lu-mur 

a-di ma-ti ™ belti-ia belé™ da-ba-bi-ia ni-kil-mu-u-in-ni-ma 


Rev. 


57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 


61. 
62. 


63. 


64. 


65. 


ina sur-ra-a-ti u la ki-na-a-tt t-kap-pu-du-ni lim-ni-e-tt 
vi-du-u-a ha-du-u-a is-tam-ma-ru eli-ia 
a-di ma-ti ™ belti-ta lil-lu*® a-ku-u — t-ba--an-ni 
tb-na-an-ni muk-ku® ay-ku-um-ma ana-ku— am-mir-ki* 


on -Su-ti id-ni-nu-ma ana-ku e-nt-is 
a-Sab-bu-’ ki-ma a-gi-t sa up-pa-ku Saru lim-na 


t-Sa-’ it-ta-nap-vas lib-bi hi-mais-sur Sa-ma-mi 


a-dam-mu-uin ki-ma su-um-ma-tum mu-St uu ur- ra 
na - an - gu -la- ku ~ ma> a-bak-ki sar - bis 





* The scribe has erased the first character of the word and has 
not rewritten it. 


The meaning assigned to Z//x in the translation is conjectural ; 


among other passages in which the word occurs, cf. especially 
IV R, pl. 27, No. 4, 1. 57, and its context; see also Delitzsch, 
Handwirterbuch, p. 377, and Muss-Arnolt, Concise Dictionary, p. 481. 

* Some such general meaning is probably to be assigned to 


A PRAYER TO ISHTAR. 231 





50. 
51. 


52. 
53. 
34. 
55. 


56. 
57. 


58. 
59. 
60, 


6I. 
62. 


63. 


64. 
63. 


How long shall my spirit (be troubled), which aboundeth 
in sorrow and sighing ? 

O[ . . . J! Irnini, fierce lioness, may thy heart have 
rest ! 

Is anger mercy? Then let thy spirit be appeased ! 

May thine eyes rest with favour upon me; 

With thy glorious regard truly in mercy look upon me! 

Put an end to the evil bewitchments of my body ; let me 
behold thy clear light ! 

How long, O my lady, shall mine enemies persecute me? 

How long shall they devise evil in rebellion and 
wickedness, 

And in my pursuits and my pleasures shall they rage 
against me? 

How long, O my lady, shall the ravenous demon? 
pursue me? 

They have caused me continuous affliction,’ but I have 
praised * thee. 

The weak have become strong, but [ am weak ; 

I am sated like a flood which the evil wind maketh to 
rage. 

My heart hath taken wing, and hath flown away like 
a bird of the heavens ; 

I moan like a dove, night and day. 

I am made desolate,> and I weep bitterly ; 





mukku in this passage; the subject of the verb is probably im- 
personal, and it may be taken as followed by the double accusative. 
‘It is clear that in this passage an active meaning is to be 
assigned to mamaru; cf. im-mir-su-ma, V R, pl. §5, Il. 27 and 37,. 
and #-mu-ka nam-mar, 82-3-23, 4.344, etc. (P:S.B.A., xviii, p. 258), 
cited by Muss-Amolt, Concise Dictionary, p.. 684. 
5 iv, 1 from nagalu, cf. Syr. x’ gal. 





232 APPENDIX V. 

Rev, 

66. ina ’-u-a a-a Sum-ru-sa-at ka - bit - ue 
67. mi-na-a e-pfu-us ithi-ia u “tis-tar-ia a-na-ku 


68. 


69. 
70. 


71. 
72. 


73 


74. 
75. 
76. 


77- 
78 
79. 


80. 
81. 


82. 
83. 


84. 


85. 


ki-t la pa-lih tlita u “iStart-ia ana-ku ip -Se-ik 


Sak-nu-nim-ma mur-su ti--i hu-lu-uk-ku-u u Sul-lu-uk-ti 
Sak-na-ni ud-da-a-ti suh-hur pa-ni u ma-li-e lib-ba-a-ti 


us-2u ug-ga-ti me-nat’ ilint® uo a-me-lu- tt 

a-ta-mar ™ belti-ta timé* uk-ku-lu-ti arhe* na-an-du-ru-ti 
Sanati®™ Sa ni-zik-té 

a-ta-mar “"bélti-ia Sib-ta t-Si-ti u sah - mas - ti 


u-kal-la-an-ni mu-u-tu u Sap - Sa - ku 
Su-har-ru-ur sa-gi-e-a Su-bar-vu-rat a ~- sir - “ 
elt bite babi u kar-ba-a-ti-ia Sa-ku-um-ma-ti tab-kat 


ili-ia ana a-Sar sa-nim-ma suh-hu-ru pa - nu - Su 
sap-hat ww-la-ti ta-bi-ni pur - ru - ur 
u-pa-ka a-na ™ bélti-ia ka-a-s$i ib-Ssa-ki uana”- ai 


u- sal-l- ki kRa-a-S ’-i-ti pu-ut-rv 
pu-ut-ri ar-ni® Sir-ti hab-la-ti u fi- ti- te 


mi-e-st hab-la-ti-ia li-ki-e un- ni- ni- ia 
vu -um-mi-ia ki-vrim-ia su-bar-ra-ai suk-ni 


$u-te-Si-rt kib-si nam-vris e-til-lis it-ti ameluti* lu-ba- siike 


ki-bi-ma ina ki-bi-ti-ki ilu zi-nu-u l-is-lim 





s 


has 


Literally, “‘ numbers of, the host of.” 
Under the line, and between the signs #7 and sr, the scribe 
written the division mark followed by the word “$4, “my 


A PRAYER TO ISHTAR. 233 





66. 
67. 
68. 


69. 
70. 


71. 
72. 
73- 


74. 
75. 


. Over my house, my gate, and my fields is affliction 


77. 


78. 
79. 


80. 


81. 


82. 
83. 


84. 


85. 


With grief and woe my spirit is distressed. 

What have I done, O my god and my goddess? 

Is it because I feared not my god or my goddess that 
trouble hath befallen me? 

Sickness, disease, ruin, and destruction are come upon me; 

Troubles, turning away of the countenance, and fulness 
of anger are my lot, 

And the indignation and the wrath of all! gods and men. 

I have beheld, O my lady, days of affliction, months of 
sorrow, years of misfortune ; 

I have beheld, O my lady, slaughter, turmoil, and 
rebellion. 

Death and misery have made an end of me! 

My need is grievous, grievous is my humiliation ; 


poured forth. 

As for my god, his face is turned elsewhere ; 

My strength is brought to nought, my power is broken ! 

But unto thee,O my lady, do I give heed, I have kept 
thee in my mind ; 

Unto thee therefore do I pray, dissolve my ban! 

Dissolve my sin,? my iniquity, my transgression, and my 
offence ! 

Forgive my transgression, accept my supplication! 

Secure my deliverance, and let me be loved and carefully 
tended ! 

Guide my footsteps in the light, that among men I may 
gloriously seek my way! 

Say the word, that at thy command my angry god may 
have mercy, 





confusion”; he probably had omitted the word by mistake and 
intended it to be inserted after a7-n7. 


234 


APPENDIX V. 





Rev. 


86. 
87. 


88. 
89. 
90. 
gl. 


92. 
93. 


94. 


95- 


96. 


97. 
98. 


99. 
100, 
101. 


102. 


103. 
104. 


“tart sats = bu - sa 
@- té- u su - sub 
bi-k-ti! -in-na-pi-ik 
sa-pi-th-tu td-tla- ti 
tarbasu  li-ir-pis  Lis-tam-di-lu 
mug-+t li-bi-en ap-pi-ia 


ki - nis nap-li-sin-ni-ma 


a-di ma-ti ™ bélti-a gi-na-ti-ma 


li - ta - va 
lim-me-ir — ki-nu-nt 
ai - pa - vt 
lip - hur 
Su - pu - ve 


Si-me-e su-pi-e-a 


[erasure by the scribe] 2 


suh-fu-ru — pa-nu-ki 


a-di ma-ti™ béltt-ia va-’-ba-ti-ma ua-su-za-at kab-ta-at-ki 


tir-vi ki-Sad ki sa istu ad-di-ia a-mat damigtin(tim) 
pa-ni-ki Suk-ni 

ki-ma me” pa-sir navi ka-bit-ta-ki lip- pa- as- ra 

thk-du-ti-ia ki-ma kak-ka-ru lu- kab- bi- its 


Sab-su-ti-ia kun-nu-sim-ma Su-pal-si-hi ina sap-li-da 


su-pu-u-a u su-lu-u-a lil-l-ku  eli-hi 
ta-at-ra-tu-ki rab-ba-a-ti lib-Sa-a_ eli-ia 
a-mi-ru-u-a ina stiki li-Sar-bu-u zi - ki - ki 


u ana-ku ana sal-mat kakkadt tlu-ut-ki u kur-di-ki lu-sa-pi 


mT§ tar - 
“belti® - 


ma si- rat “™[$-tar-ma_ sar-vat 


ma §¢ - vat ™ belti-ma Sar-rat 





1 Probably Perm. Kal from dé; the word, however, is possibly 
the lengthened form of 6é##, its occurrence being due to the 
necessities of rhythm. 


A PRAYER TO ISHTAR. 235 





86. 
87. 


88, 
89. 
go. 


92. 


93- 
94. 
95. 
96. 


97- 
98. 


99. 


Too. 
101. 


102, 


103. 
104. 


And that my goddess, who is wroth, may turn again ! 

The darkness hath settled down, so let my brazier be 
bright ; 

Thou art the ruler,' let then my torch flame forth! 

May my scattered strength be collected ; 

May the fold be wide, and may my pen be bolted fast ! 


. Receive the abasement of my countenance, give ear unto 


my prayer, 

Truly pity me, and [accept my supplication}! 

How long, O my lady, wilt thou be angry and thy face 
be turned away? 

How long, O my lady, wilt thou rage and thy spirit be 
full of wrath ? 

Incline thy neck, which (is turned) away from my affairs, 
and set prosperity before thy face ; 

As by the solving waters of the river may thine anger be 
dissolved ! 

My mighty foes may I trample like the ground ; 

And those who are wroth with me mayest thou force into 
submission and crush beneath my feet! 

Let my prayer and my supplication come unto thee, 

And let thy great mercy be upon me, 

That those who behold me in the street may magnify 
thy name, 

And that I may glorify thy godhead and thy might 
before mankind ! 

IStar is exalted! Star is queen! 


My lady % is exalted! My lady is queen! 





2 The scribe has erased the second half of the line; we may 
probably restore some such phrase as /:-Ai-e un-nz-ni-1a, as suggested 
in the translation, 

3 See above, p. 224, n. 1. 


236 


APPENDIX V. 





Rev. 
105. 


106. 


107. 


108. 


109. 


110. 


Iti. 


T12, 


113. 


™ Ty-ni-nt ma-rat ™ Sin ka-vit-ti ma-hi-va ul isat 





INIM-INIM-MA §$U-IL-LA 7“ [NNANNA(NA)-KAN ! 





epus anna KI KIS TAR AD gusuru arku mit ellu tasallah 
Iv kbnati™ libbi falaki(?)* tanaddi(di) 


immeru telike(e) * sarbatu te-si-en igalu tanaddi(dt) 
rikké*” upuntu burasu 


tattabak(ak) mi-i-ha tanakki(ki)-ma li — tus-hin 
mi-nu-tu an-ni-tu ana pan ™Is-tar 


Salultu Sanitu tamannu(nu) KI-ZA-ZA-ma® ana arki-ka 
la tabart 





Siptu sa-ku-tum “TIs-tar mu-nam-mi-rat kib-va-a-ti* 


gab-ri Bar-sip™ kima labiri-su ™* Nergal-balat-su-ip-bi 
apil ™A-ta-rad-kal-me °°” asipu 


ana baliti-su istur tibri-ma ina E-sag-ila u-kin 





} Line 106 gives the title of the prayer; then follows a rubric 
of four lines giving directions for the performance of certain 
ceremonies and for the due recital of the prayer. 

? In the four bricks, which, if the suggested rendering is correct, 


A PRAYER TO ISHTAR. 237 





105. Irnini, the valiant daughter of the Moon-god, hath not 


a rival! 





106. Prayer of the Raising of the Hand to [Star 





107. This shalt thou do 


a green bough shalt thou 


sprinkle with pure water; four bricks from a ruin? 
shalt thou set in place ; 
108. a lamb shalt thou take; with sarbatu-wood shalt thou 


fill (the censer), an 


d thou shalt set fire (thereto) ; 


sweet-scented woods, some upuntu-plant and some 


cypress-wood 
109. shalt thou heap up; a 
thou shalt not bow 


drink offering shalt thou offer, but 
thyself down. This incantation 


before the goddess Istar 
110. three times shalt thou recite, . . . . and thou shalt 


not look behind thee 


ir. “O exalted [8tar, that givest light unto the (four) 


quarters of the world 


pra 


112. (This) copy from Borsippa, (made) like unto its original, 
hath Nergal-balatsu-ikbi, the son of Atarad-kalme, the 


magician, 


113. written for (the preservation of) his life, and he hath 
revised it, and hath deposited it within the temple of 


E-sagila. 





are here directed to be brought from a ruin, we may perhaps see 


a symbolical offering to I8tar 
battle and destruction. 


in her character of the goddess of 





® Possibly 47 sa-za-ma, but cf. Briinnow, No. 9,843. 
4 Line 111 gives the catch-line for the next tablet. 


Jndices, Glossary, fe. 


Inder to Torts. 


A. CUNEIFORM TEXTS FROM BaBYLONIAN TABLETS, ETC., IN 
THE British Museum, Parr XIII (1901), PLATES 1-41. 


PLATE, 
1. K. 5,419¢, Obv. : Cr, Ser., Tabl. I, Il. 1-16. 
ay Rev. : Traces of catch-line to Tabl. II, 
and colophon. 
No. 93,015, Obv.: Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, ll. 1-16. 


2. 81-727, 80, Obv. : 3 sy ll. 31-56. 
Rev. : a as ll. 118-142. 
3. K. 3,938, Obv. : a » Ihe 33-42. 
» Reve: 4 = I, 128-142. 
No. 93,015, Rev. : ‘s > UL. r2qg-142, and 
colophon. 
4. No. 38,396, Obv. : ‘5 Tabl. II, ll. 11-29. 
” Rev. : Py » IL. (105)~{(132). 
5. KK. 4,832, Obv.: ‘s oy ll. 32-58. 
»  Rev.: 9 ” ll. (104)-(138). 
6. 797-8, 178, Obv. : is y» I. (69)-(75). 
” Rev. : os * ll. (76)-(85). 
K. 292, Rev. : 3 i I. (131)-(140), 


catch-line to Tabl. III, 
and colophon. 


7. K. 3,473, etc., Obv. : »  Tabl. III, ll, 1-56. 
8. x» Obv.(cont.): 4, i I. §7-85. 
»  Rev.: ” ” ii, 86-113. 
9. » Rev. (cont.): 5, ” Il. 114-138, and 
catch-line to Tabl. IV. 
K, 6,650: a ey, ll. 38-55, or 


96-113. 


240 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 





PLATE. 


10. 


12. 


QL. 
22. 
28. 


24. 


25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 


No. 93,017, Obv. : 
35 Rev. : 
K. 8,575, Obv. : 
» Rev: 
K. 8,524: 
83-1-18, 2,116: 


83-1-18, 1,868 : 
82-9-18, 1,403: 


No. 93,016, Obv.: 
Rev.: 


” 


K. 3,437, etc., Obv.: 


» 
Rev.: 
Rev. (cont.): 


” 
R. 2, 83: 
No. 93,051, Obv.: 
” Rev. : 

79-7-8, 251, Obv.: 

” Rey. : 
5,420¢, Obv. : 

se Rev. : 
3,567, etc., Obv.: 
vs Rev.: 
8,526, Obv.: 

» Rev: 
3:449a, Obv.: 

Rev.: 
12,0000: 
14,949 : 


32445, CtC.? 
>» Rev. (cont.): 


8,522, Obv.: 

»  Rev.: 
9,267, Obv. : 
Rev.: 


K. 
K. 
K. 
K. 
K. 
K. 
K. 
K. 


K. 


” 


Obv. (cont.): 


Cr. Ser., Tabl. III, ll. 47-77. 

Ml. 78-105. 

ll. 69-76. 

ll. 77-85. 

ss 3 Il. 75-86. 

joined to 82~9-18, 5,448 ; see vol. ii, 
pl. xxxiv. 

joined to 82-9~-18, 6,950; see vol. ii, 
pl. xxix. 

joined to 82~9-18, 6.316; see vol. ii, 
pls. xxv fi. 

Cr. Ser, Tabl. IV, ll. 1-44. 

Il. 116-146, 
catch-line to Tabl. V, 
and colophon. 

IL, 36-59. 
= ll. 60-83. 

IL. 84-107. 
« 108-119. 
I. 117-129, 
il. 42-54. 
ll. 85-94. 
IL. 35-49. 
+ 103-107. 
ll. 74-92. 
” ll. 93-119. 
a" Tabl. V, ll. 1-26. 
catch-line to-'Tab].VI, and colophon. 
Cr. Ser., Tab. V, Il. 1-18. 
I. (138)-(140). 
Nl. (66)-(74). 


” I. (75)-{87)- 
see Appendix II, p. 194. 


see Appendix H, p. 197 f. 

see Appendix II, pp. 197 ff. 

see Appendix II, pp. 198 ff. 
Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, ll. 15-45. 
Hl. 105-137. 
ll. 40-47. 
ll. 109-138. 


” ” 


” » 


” ” 


” ” 


” 


” ” 


” ” 


” 


o” ” 


” ” 


” ” 








INDEX TO TEXTS. 241 
PLATE. 
29-30. K. 3,364: see Appendix II, pp. 201 ff. 
31. K. 7,067: see Appendix II, p. 195, note 1. 
K. 10,791: see Appendix II, p. 195, note 1 
K. 8,572: see Appendis II, p. 395, note 1. 
K. 11,048: see Appendix II, p. 195, note 1. 
K, 12,000¢: see Appendix II, p. 195, note 1. 
R. 982, etc.: see Appendix II, p. 195, note 1. 
82. S.747: see Appendix I, p. 170 f. 
33.  R. 282, Obv.: see pp. 116 ff. 
34. vy Rev.: see p. 120f. 
DT. 41: see pp. 122 ff. 


35-88. 82-s-22, 1,048: 


see pp. 130 ff. 
89-41. K. 5,418a@ and K. 5,640: see pp. 140 ff. 


B. SuppLeMENTARY TEXTS, PUBLISHED IN VoL. II, 


PLATE, 


II. 
TIt. 
Iv. 


VI. 


vil. 
"VIL 
x. 


XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 


Pirates I-LXXXIV. 


No. 45,528, etc., Obv.: 


” 


No. 35,134: 

No. 36,688: 

No. 36,726: 

No. 46,803, 
”» 


” 


Obv. (cont.): 
Obv. (cont.) : 
Rev.: 

Rev. (cont.): 
Rev. (cont.): 


Obv. : 
Obv. (cont.) : 
Rev.: 
Rev. (cont.): 


82-9-18, 6,879, Rev.: 


» 
No. 40,559; 
» 


” 


Rey. (cont.) : 


Obv. : 
Obv. (cont.): 
Obv. (cont.): 


” 


” 


” 


” 


’ 


” 


” 


” 


Cr. Ser., Tabi. I, H. 1-16. 
i. 
ll. 
i. 


17-32. 
33-48. 
I1I-124. 


Ih. 125-139. 


I. 


140-142, 


catch-line to 
Tab). Il,and 
colophon. 


i. 
i. 
il. 
ll. 
ll. 
I. 
ll. 
ie 
HL. 
Tabl. II, ll. 
ll. 
I. 


1-21, 
31-43. 
28-33. 
46-60. 
62-67. 
83-go. 
gI-103. 
93-104. 
105-118. 
I-10, 
11-20. 
21~30. 


16 





242 INDEX TO TEXTS. 
PLATE, 
XVII. No. 40,559, Obv. (cont.): Cr. Ser., Tabl. II, ll. 31-40. 
XVIT. a Rev. : f yy l.(Crrr)-(119). 
XIX, a Rev. (cont.): 4 wy tl.(120)-(128). 
XX. . ii Rev. (cont.): i oy lhe(129)—(137)- 
XXI. 5 Rev. (cont.) : a »» ll. (138)-(240), 
catch-line to 
Tabl. IfI,and 
colophon. 
XXII. No. 92,632, etc., Obv.: - » We r4r2g. 
XXIII. sj Obv., (cont.): > » Il. 26-29. 
3 Rev.: a wll. (114)-(1 19). 
XXIV. va Rev. (cont.): ” yl. (220)~(131). 
XXV. 829-18, 1,403, etc., Obv. : » Tabl. III, ll. s-rs. 
XXVI. ‘a Obv, (cont.) : 5 sy Il. 52-67. 
XXVIII. ; Rev.: ra » 1. 62-91. 
XXVIII. - Rev. (cont.): Ky » =U. 72-128, 
XXIX. 82-9-18, 6,950, etc. : _ » Il. 49-26 or 
77-84. 
XXX. No. 42,285, Obv. : e » I. 46-57. 
XXXII. 4s Obv. (cont.): i » IL 58-68. 
XXXII. 7 Rev.: i 2» ‘Il. 69-77. 
XXXIII. a Rev. (cont.) : ‘i » UL. 78-87. 
XXXIV. 82-9-18, 5,448, etc.: 4 » He 64-72. 
XXXV. No. 92,629, Obv.: »  Tabl. VI, ll. 1-10. 
XXXVI 55 Obvy. (cont.): a » MA rr-an 
XXXVII. * Rev.: se i 1, 138-146, 
catch -line to 
Tabl. VII, and 
colophon. 
XXXVIII. No. 91,139, etc., Obv. : » Tabl. VII, li. 3-12. 
XXXIX, nf Obv. (cont.): i Ih 13-24. 
XL. % Obv. (cont.) : i » tb 22-30. 
XII. a Obv. (cont.): me » Tl. 31-40. 
XLII. Bs Rev. : 6 ‘% 1. 106-114. 
XLITI. - Rev. (cont.): AN si eT15-123. 
XIIV. Ns Rev. (cont.): na i 1, 124-132. 
XLV. 3 Rev. (cont.) : e ni + 133-14I. 
XLVI. No. 35,506, Obv. : 3 8 1. 14-30. 
XLVII. " Obv. (cont.) : ie » WL 31-36. 
% Rev. : - % » 105-120. 








_ INDEX TO TEXTS. 243 





PLATE, 
XLVIII. No. 35,506, Rev. (cont.) : Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, ll. 121-142. 
XLIX-L. 82-7-14, 4,005: see pp. 124 ff. 
Ii. S. 11, etc., Obv.: Commentary to Cr. Ser., 
Tabi. VII, ll. 1-5, 17-21, 
etc.; see Appendix I, 
pp. 158 if. 
LI. a3 Rev.: Comm. to Tabl. VII, ll. 106- 
109, etc.; see Appendix 1, 
p- 167 f. 
LI. - Rev. (cont.): Comm. to Tabl. VII, 11. ro9— 
112, etc.; see Appendix I, 
p. 168. 
LIV. = 82-3-23, 151: Comm. to Tabl. VIL; see 
Appendix I, p. 162. 
K. 4,406, Rev. : Comm. to Tabl. VII (KK. 


13,761, 8,519, etc.); see 
Appendix I, pp. 163 ff. 
LV. as Rev. (cont.): Comm, to Tabl. VIT (KK. 
13,761, 8,519, etc.); see 
Appendix I, pp. 163 ff. 
S.1,416 Comm. to Tabl. VII, Il. 9-10, 
etc.; see Appendix I, 
p- 160f. 
LVI. R. 366, etc., Obv. : Comm. to Tabl. VII, Il. 9-135 
see Appendix I, p. 160. 
Lil. a Rev. : Comm. to Tabl. VII, J riqg- 
118, etc.; see Appendix I, 
p. 168 f. 
‘LVIII. a3 Rev. (cont.): Comm. to Tab]. VII, 1. rr9; 
Cr. Ser., Tabl. VIT, ll. i20- 
124, and colophon; see 
Appendix I, p. 169. 


LIX. = K. 2,053, Obv.: Comm. to Tabl. VII, Il. 17-19; 
see Appendix I, p. 161. 
Ss Rev. : Comm. to Tabl. VII, ll. 108- 


110, etc. ; see Appendix I, 
p. 167 £. 


244 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 





PLATE. 


LX. 
K. 8,299: 


LXI._ K. 2,107, etc., Obv.: 
LXII. 3 
R. 395: 
LXIII. No. 54,228: 
LXIV-LXVI. No. 33,851: 


LXVII-LXXII. No. 55,466, etc. 


LXXIII-LXXIV. K. 3,657: 
LXXV-LXXXIV. No. 26,137: 


K. 2,053, Rev. (cont.) : 


Obv. (cont.) : 


Comm. to Tabi. VII, l. 111, 
etc.; see Appendix I, 
p- 168. 

Comm.to Tab]. VII(K. 12,830, 
etc.); see Appendix I, 
p. 162 f. 

see Appendix I, pp. 171 ff. 

see Appendix I, p. 173f. 

see Appendix I, pp. 175 ff. 

see Appendix I, pp. 175 ff. 

see Appendix II, p. 202 f. 

see Appendix IIT, pp. 208 ff. 

see Appendix IV, p. 219 f. 

see Appendix V, pp. 222 ff. 


C. SuppLEMENTARY TEXTS, PUBLISHED IN APPENDICES 
I, I], anv III. 


APPENDIX. 
I, p. 159, K. 2,854: Cr. Ser., Tab]. VII, ll. 1-18. 
I, p. 163, K. 12,830: * a between 1.47 
and 105. 
T, p. 164, K. 13,761: a 4 betweenll. 47 
and ros. 
J, p. 165. K. 8,519: i Pr betweenll. 47 
and 105. 
I, p. 166, K. 13,337: 5 ” between ll. 47 
‘ and 105. 
I,p.176. R.2, 538: Parallel textto Tabl. VII; see pp. 175 ff. 
I, p. 180. K. 5,233: » a5 see p. 180f, 
TT, p. 183, K. 7,871: Cr. Ser, Tabl. I, ll. 33-47- 
TI, p. 185. K. 4,488: ” ” Il. 50-63. 
II, p. 189, K. 10,008: es Tabl. II, between Il. 
: (85) and (104). 
TI, p. 191, K. 13,774: = Tabl. V, Il. 6-19. 
II, p. 192. K. 11,641, Obv. : my rr ll. 14-22. 
II, p. 193. 5 Rev.: 5 x» Il. (428}(t40), 


catch-line to Tabl. VI, 
and colophon. 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 245 





APPENDIX. 
II, p. 194. 79-7-8, 47: Poss. frag. Cr. Ser. ; see p. 194 f. 
II, p. 196, S. 2,013: see p. 196f. 
II, p. 200. 82-9~18, 5,341: see p. 128 f. 
II, p. 201. S. 1,704: see p. 128f. 
TIT, p. 205. K. 3,351: see pp. 204 ff. 
III, p. 215. No. 40,959: Astrol. expl. text; see p. 215 f. 
ITI, p. 216. No. 32,574, Obv.: 5 a; see p. 216 f. 
III, p. 217, 33 Rev.: 5 $5. see p. 217 f. 
Il. 
Inder fo Registration: umBers. 
REGISTRATION NO, TEXT. CONTENTS. 
K, 292. Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 6 Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
ll. (131)-(140). 
K, 2,053. Vol. II, pls. lix-Ix. Comm., Cr. Ser. VIT; 
see pp. r61, 167 f. 
K. 2,1074-K. 6,086; Vol. II, pls. Ixi-Ixii. see pp. 171 ff. 
K, 2,854. App. I, p. 159. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VI, 
ll. 1-18. 
K, 3,351. : App. III, p. 205. see pp. 204 ff. 
K. 3,364. Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. z2g-30. see App. Il, p. 
zon ff. 
K, 3,487--R, 641.. a » pls. 16-19. Cr. Ser., Tabl. 
IV, Il. 36-119. 
K. 3,445+R. 396. 58 » pls.24-25. see App. II, p. 
197 ff. 
K, 34492. 7 ~~ pl. 23. Cr. Ser., Tabl. V, 


ll. (66)-(87). 


246 INDEX TO TEXTS. 





REGISTRATION NO, TEXT. 


CONTENTS. 
K. 8,473+-79-7-8, Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 7-9. Cr. Ser., Tabl. 
296+R. 615. WI, i. 1-138. 
K. 3,567 +-K. 8,588. 1» «pl. 22. Cr. Ser., Tabl.V, 
I. 1-26, 
K. 3,657. Vol. I, pls. Ixxiii-Ixxiv. see App. IV, p. 
‘ 21gf. 
K. 3,938. Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 3. Cr. Ser., Tabl. 1, 
Nl. 33-42, 128-142. 
K, 4,406. Vol. IL, pls. liv-lv. Comm., Cr. Ser. VIL; 
see pp. 163 ff. 
K, 4,488. App. I, p. 185. Cr, Ser., Tabl. I, 
ll. 50-63 ; see pp. 185 ff. 
K. 4,832. Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 5- Cr. Ser., Tabl. IT, 
: ll. 32-58, (104)-(138). 
K. 5,233. | App. I, p. 180. see p. 180 f. 
K. 5,418a. Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 39-40. see pp. 140 ff. 
K. 5,419¢. a »  phr Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
. IL. 1-16. 
K. 5,4206. os »  pl.zr. Cr. Ser., Tabl. IV, 
ll. 74-119. 
K. 5,640. rp » «phe gr. see pp. 140 ff. 
K. 6,086. see K. 2,107. 
K. 6,650. Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 9. Cr. Ser., Tabl. III, 
ll. 38-55, or 96-113. 
K. 7,067. os oe (pleats see App. II, p. 
195, 1.1. 
K. 7,871. App. II, p. 183. Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
ll. 33-47 ; see pp. 183 ff. 
K. 8,299, Vol. II, pl. Ix. Comm., Cr. Ser. VII; 
see p. 162 f. 
K, 8,519. App. I, p. 165. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 
between ll. 47 and ros. 
K, 8,522. Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 26-27. Cr. Ser., Tabl. 
VIT, tL. 15-45, 105-137. 
K. 8,524, 9 »  plerz. Cr. Ser, Tabl. 
IU, ll. 75-86. 
K, 8,526. ” » = —pl. 23. Cr. Ser., Tabl.V, 
Il. 1-18, (138)}-(1 40). 
K. 8,572. ” » pl. jr. see App. II, p. 


195, MN. 1. 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 247 





REGISTRATION NO, 


K. 8,575. 


K. 8,588. 
K. 9,267. 


K. 10,008. 


, 10,791. 
K. 11,048, 
K. 11,641, 
K, 12,0005. 
K. 12,0000. 
K. 12,830, 
K. 18,337. 
K. 13,761. 
K. 13,774, 
K, 14,949, 
§.11-+8. 980-1 
8. 1,416, 
8.747. 
8. 980. 
8. 1,416. 


8. 1,704. 
8. 2,013. 
DT. 41. 


TEXT. CONTENTS. 
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 12. Cr. Ser., Tabl. III, 
ll. 69-85. 
see K. 3,567. 


Cun, Txts., XIJI, pl. 28. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 

ll. 40-47, 109-138. 

App. II, p. 189. Cr. Ser., Tabl. II, 

between JI. (85) and 

(104); see pp. 187 ff. 

Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 33. see App. II, p. 195, 
ni. 

* » pl. 31. see App. II, p. 195, 
nei. 

App. II, p. 192 f. Cr. Ser., Tabl. V, 

ll. 14-22 (see pp. 192 ff.), 
(128)-(140). 

Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 24. see App. II, p. 194. 

7 »  pl.3t. seeApp. II, p. 195, 
ni. 

App. I, p. 163. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 

between Il. 47 and 105. 

» ~~ 166. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 

between ll. 47 and 105. 

P+ 164. Cr. Ser., Tab}. VI, 

between Il. 47 and ros. 

App. I, p. 191. Cr. Ser., Tabl. V, 

ll. 6-19; see pp. 190 ff. 

Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 24. see App. II, p. 197 f. 

Vol. II, pls. li-liii, lv. Comm., Cr. Ser. VIL; 

see pp. 158 ff., 167 f. 

Cun, Txts., XIII, pl. 32. see App. IJ, p. 17of. 

see S. 11. 


Vol. I, pl. lv. Comm., Cr. Ser. VII; 
see S. rt. 
App. II, p. 201. see p. 128 f. 
PS p. 196. see p. 196f. 


Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 34. see pp. 122 ff. 


248 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 





REGISTRATION NO. 

BR, 282. 

BR, 366-4-80-7-19, 
2884293. 

R. 395. 

R. 396, 

R. 615, 

R. 641. 

R. 982 + 80-7-18, 
178, 

R. 2, 83, 


R, 2, 538. 
79-7-8, 47. 
79-7-8, 178. 


79-7-8, 251. 


79-7-8, 296. 
80-7-18, 178, 
80-7-19, 288. 
80-7-19, 293. 
81-7-27, 80. 


82-83-28, 151. 


82-5-22, 1,048. 
82-7-14, 402. 
82-7-14, 4,005. 
82-9-18, 1,403+- 
6,316. 
82-9-18, 3,737, 
82-9-18, 5,311. 
82-9-18, 5,448+- 
83-1-18, 2,116. 
82-9-18, 6,316. 
82-9-18, 6,879. 


TEXT. 


CONTENTS. 


Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 33-34. see pp. 116 ff. 


Vol. I, pls. lvi-lviii. 


Vol. II, pl. Ixii. 
see K. 3,445. 
see K. 3,473- 
see K. 3,437. 


Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 31. 


” ” 


App. I, p. 176. 
App. II, p. 194. 
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 6. 


” » 


see K. 3,473. 

see R. 982. 

see R. 366. 

see R. 366. 

Cun. Txts., XIU, pl. z. 


Vol. Ii, pl. liv. 


Cun. Txts., pls. 35-38. 
see No. 93,015. 
Vol. II, pls. xlix-l. 

a pis. xxv-xxvili. 


see No. 93,016. 
App. II, p. 200. 
Vol. I, pl. xxxiv. 


see 82-918, 1,403. 
Vol. II, pls. xii-xiii. 


pl. 19. 


pl. zo. 


Comm., Cr. Ser. VIL; 


see pp. 160, 168 f. 
see App. I, pp. 175 ff. 


see App. II, p. 195, 
nt. 

Cr. Ser., Tabl. 1V, 
W. 117-129. 
see pp. 175 ff. 

see p. 194 f 

Cr. Ser., Tab]. II, 

il. (69)-(85). 

Cr. Ser., Tabl. IV, 

ll. 35-49, 103~107. 


Cr, Ser., Tabl. I, 
I. 31-56, 118-142. 
Comm., Cr. Ser. VII; 
see p. 162. 
see pp. 130 ff. 


see pp. 124 ff. 
Cr. Ser., Tabl. ILI, 
Il. 5-15, 52-128. 


see p. 128 f. 
Cr. Ser., Tabi. III, 
Nl. 64-72. 


Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
IL. 93-118. 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 249 





REGISTRATION NO. TEXT. CONTENTS. 


82-9-18, 6,950+ Vol. UI, pl. xxix. Cr. Ser, Tabl. TI, 
83-1-18, 1,868. ll. 19-26 or 77-84. 


83-1-18, 1,868. see 82-9-18, 6,950. 
83-1-18, 2,116. see 82-9~-18, 5,448. 


88-4-19, 13. see No. 93,017. 
No. 26,187. Vol. U, pls. lxxv-lxxxiv. see App. V, pp. 222 ff. 
No. 82,574. App. IIL, p. 216f. see pp. 216 ff. 
No. 33,851. Vol. II, pls. Ixiv-Ixvi. see App. II, p. 202 f. 
No. 35,184. ey pl. vii. Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
I, ri-21. 
No. 35,506. pls. xlvi-xlviii. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 
lL, 14-36, 105-142. 
No, 36,688. » Pil. vii. Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
Il. 38~43. 
No. 36,726. - pl. viii. Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
: Nl, 28-33. 
No, 38,396. Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 4. Cr. Ser., Tabl. II, 
IL. 11-29, (105)-(132). 
No. 40,559. Vol. I, pls. xiv—xxi. Cr. Ser., Tabi. II, 
Il. 1-40, (111)-(140). 
No, 40,959. App. III, p. 215. see p. 215 f. 
No, 42,285. Vol. IL, pls. xxx-xxxiii. Cr. Ser., Tabl. U1, 
I. 46-87. 
No, 45,528+46,614.  ,, pls. i-vi. Cr. Ser, Tabl. I, 
Il. 1-48, 111~139. 
No, 46,614. see No. 45,528. 
No. 46,803. Vol. II, pls. ix-xi. Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
ll. 46-60, 62-67, 83-103. 
No. 54,228. rf pl. Ixiii. see App. I, pp. 175 ff. 
No, 55,466+-55,486+ 
55,627. ” pls. Ixvii-Ixxii see App. ITI, pp. 208 ff. 
No, 55,486, see No. 55,466. 
No, 55,627. see No. 55,466. 


No, 91,139+-93,073, Vol. I, pls. xxxviii-xlv. Cr. Ser., Tab]. VII, 
ll. 3-40, 106-141. 


250 


INDEX TO TEXTS. 





REGISTRATION NO, 


No. 92,629. 
No, 92,632+-93,048. 


No, 93,015 
(82-7-14, 402). 

No. 93,016 
(82-9-18, 3,737)- 


No. 98,017 
(88-4-19, 13). 

No. 93,048, 

No. 93,051. 


No, 93,073. 


‘TEXT. CONTENTS. 
Vol. II, pls. xxxv-xxxvii. Cr. Ser., Tabl. VI, 
ll, 1-21, 138-146. 
i pls. xxii-xxiv. Cr. Ser., Tabl. IT, 
© Me r4-29, (114)-(131)- 
Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 1, 3- Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 
IL. 1-16, 124-142. 
3 » pls. 14-15. Cr. Ser., Tabl. 
IV, I. 1-44, 
116-146. 

An » pls. ro-nt. Cr. Ser., Tabl. 
HI, ll. 47-105. 

see No. 92,632. 
Cun. Txts., XII, ph 20. Cr. Ser., Tabl. IV, 
IL. 42-54, 85-94. 

see No. 91,139. 


Ill. 


Glossary of Selected Words. 


x 


4, enclitic interrogative particle : 
S$ab-ba-su-u, p. 230, 1. 52. 
“deluge ; thunder - 
bolt(?)”: @-bu-ba (var. bu), 
Tabl. IV, 1. 49 (p. 64); 
a-bu-ba, Tabl. IV, 1. 75 
(p. 68). 
abaku, III 2, ‘‘ to cause to bring, 
to cause to be brought”: 
Imper. S«-b2-ka, Tabl. III, 
1, 6 (p. 38). 
abalu, I1, ‘to bring”; I2, “to 
bring out,to proclaim(?)”: 
Lit (var. li-2#) -tab-bal,Tabl. 
VII, 1. 33 (p. 98); a 
(var. tt) -ta-bal, Tabl. 
VII, 1. 122 (p. 110). 
abaru, I1, ‘‘to be strong”; 
12, dow: Perm. 7-bur-/7, 
p. 224, 1. 11. 
itbaru, “strength”: 7-da-ru, 
_ p. 224, 1. 10. 
ebéru, I 1: ¢-d7-ru, p. 167. 
Iz, ‘to pass through, to 
forcé a way into”: 7-47b- 
bi-ru, Tabl. VII, 1. 108 
(p. 106). 
abatu, II 2, ‘to be destroyed”: 
u-tab-ba-tu, p. 206, |. 16. 
agagu, IL 1, ‘‘to make angry”: 
Perm.ug-[g]u-ga[t],Tabl. 
I, 1. 43 (p. 184). 


abubu, 








ugallu, “hurricane”: Tabl. I, 
1. 122 (p. 18); Tabl. 1, 
1. 28 (p. 26); Tabl. III, 
1. 32 (p. 42), 1. 90 (p. 50). 
adi, “age”: plur. a-d? (var. 
a-di-t), Tabl. I,].11 (p. 4). 
“course, way, affair”: 
ad-di-ia, p. 234, 1. 95. 
idu, “side”; zdus, ‘to the side 
of": t-du-us sa-pa-ra 
(var. vz), Tabl. IV, 1. 44 
(p. 62). 
idu, “to know; to choose (?)”: 
e-du-u, Tabl. I, lL. 135 
(p. 20); Tabl. II, 1. 47 
(p. 26); Tabl. III, 1. 45 
(p. 44), 1 103 (p. 52), 
uddu, ‘ daylight.” 
uddakam, adv., “in the morn- 
ing, every morning”: 
ud-da-kam, p. 226, 1. 26. 
“trouble”: plur. «d-da- 
a-ti, p. 232, 1. jo. 
edélu, I 1, “to bolt.” 
Ill z, “to be bolted”: 
Lis-tam-di-lu, p. 234; 1. 90. 
adaru, Iz, “to be troubled”: 
Pret. 7-/e-dir, var. [. . ]- 
dt-di-ir, Tabl. I, 1. 53 (pp- 
10, 186). 
({azimu], II 2, “to be angry(?)”: 
Inf. u-fa-a2z-2u-mi-su, p. 
206, 1. 9. 


adi, 


uddi, 


252 


GLOSSARY. 





ahazu, I 1, ‘to take; to under- 
take, to begin”: ¢-Au-zu, 
Tabi. IV, |. 18 (p. 60). 
IVi, “to be taken”: z#- 
nt-haz, Tabl. IV, 1. 100 
(p. 79). 
ahulap, interrog. adv., “how 
long ?”: a-fu-lap, p. 228, 
I. 46, 47, 48, 49, p. 230, 
1. 50; with suffix, a-fu- 
lap-hki, p.226, 11.27, 28, 29, 
30; with £262, by trans- 
ference of meaning, “to 
‘cry ‘It is enough!’ ”: 
a-hu-lap-ia ki-bi-ma, p. 


228, 1.45. 

etii, “to be dark” ; Inf. “dark- 
hess”: e-fu-uw, p. 234, 
1. 87. 


ekiam, interrog. adv., ‘‘where?”: 
e-hi-a-am, p. 224, ll. 15, 
16, 17. 
“hungry, ravenous ” : 
a-hu-u, p. 230, 1. 59. 
akukitu, “whirlwind”: a@-ku- 
hu-u-tum, p. 228, |. 37. 
[akalu], “to be afflicted”: 
Pres. a-ka-la, p. 146, n. 43 
p. 148, 1. 22. 
ukkulu, “afflicted” : 
lu-ti, p. 232, 1. 72. 
[akan], Il1, ‘to put an end 
to”: Imper. wk-ki-si, p. 
230, 1. 55. 
ali, interrog. adv., ‘‘where?”: 
a-li, Tabl. II, 1. 56 (p. 30). 
eli, “high”; fem. plur. ea¢, 
“the height; the zen- 
ith(?)”: e-da-a-t, Tabl. 
V, 1. 11 (p. 78). 


aki, 


uk-ku- 








aladu, I, ‘‘ to bear.” 

Ilr, do.: Part. mu-al-li- 
da-at, var. mu-um-ma-al- 
Ui-da-at (= muwailidat), 
Tabl. I, |. 4 (p. 2). 

alaku, “to go.” 
malaku, “ going, gait”: ma- 
lak-Su, Tabl. IV, 1. 67 
(p. 66). 
ulinnu, “ border (?) of a robe”: 
ulinni-Su, p. 118, 1. 16. 
amu, “reed (?)": a-mz, p. 132, 
1. 18; @-ma-am, p. 132, 
1.17. 
{amii], “to speak.” 
amatu, ‘speech; thing, deed”: 
a-ma-tu-su, Tabl. VII, 
1. 31 (p. 98). 
emi, [1, “to be like.” 

Ill1, ‘‘to make like; to 
create”: us-fa-mu-u, p. 
126, 1. 143 §u-la-mu-u, 
p. 125, n. 5. 

“day”; isu amimma, 

“henceforth”: 7-tu u- 

mi-im-ma, Tab), IV, |. 7 

(p. 58). 

amu, “tempest”: Tabi. I, 1. 123 
{p. 18); Tabl. II, 1. 29 
(p. 26); Tabl. III, l. 33 


imu, 


(p. 42), l gt (p. 52)5 
applied to Marduk’s 
chariot, Tabl. IV, 1. 50 


(p. 64). 

emédu, IV 1, ‘‘to be established; 
to advance”: tn-nin-du- 
ma, var. [in-nin-d |u-u{, ], 
Tabl. I, 1.21 (p. 4); i#- 
nin-du-ma, Tabl. IV, 1. 93 


{p. 70). 


GLOSSARY. 


253 





imbullu, ‘evil wind”: 2m-Aul- 
Zu (var. la), Tabl. IV, 
1, 96 (p. 70); zm-Rul-la, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 45 (p. 62), 
1. 98 (p. 70); 2m-hel-le, 
p- 206, 1. 15. : 

[amalu], I11, intrans., “to be 
furious”: Part. mu-um- 
mil-tum, p. 228, 1. 38. 

ammatu, ‘the sure earth”: 
Tabl. I, 1. 2 (p. 2). 

unkennu, ‘might, strength, 
forces”: unken-na, Tabl. 
I, l. 112 (p. 16); Tabl. 
II, 1. 18 (p. 24); Tabl. 
Ill, 1. 22 (p. 40), 1. 80 
(p. 50); un-hi-en-na, 
Tabl. IIL, I. 80 (var., p. 
50, n. §). 

[eséhu], “to despair”: Pres. 
is-st-fu, p. 146, n. 43 p. 
148, 1. 223; fe-st-2h-hu, 
var. te-18(sic)-s?-1h-hu, p. 
152, 1. 16. 

asurakku, ‘bed ofariver; depth”: 
a-sur-rak-ka, p. 206, |. 19. 

apu, “swamp”: a-fa, p. 134, 
1, 325 a-pu-um-ma, p. 134, 
27° : 

appunu, “huge”: [a]p-pu-na- 
a-ta, Tabl. I, 1. 126 (var., 
p- 18). 

appunama, adv., “of huge 

size”: ap-pu-na-ma, Tabl. 
I, |. 126 (p. 18); Tabl. 
Il, 1. 32 (p. 26); Tabi. 
IIL, 1. 94 (var., p. 52); 
ap-pu-un-na-ma, Tabl. 
III, 1. 36 (p. 42), 1 94 
(p. 52). 


epékn, II 1, ‘to cause to rage”: 
up-pa-ku, p. 230, |. 62. 

apparu, “marsh”: af-pa-ri, p. 
134, ll. 25, 27. 

upigu, “ bewitchment”: u-7-sa, 
Pp- 230, I. 55. 

agu, I1, “to go out”; IIL 1, 
“to cause to go out; to 
take oneself off, to take 
to flight”: w-Se-su-ma, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 109 (p. 72). 

issimtu, “bone”: ¢-s7-7m-[éu]m, 
Tabl. VI, 1. § (p. 86). 

esépu, “to add to; to bring 
upon”: Pret. e-s7p, p. 148, 
1. 24. 
ukii: w-ku-u, p. 160. 
IIz, “to pay homage, to 
worship”: wu-/fak-ku-u, 
Tabl. VII, 1. 4 (p. 92); 
u-tuk-ku, p. 224, 1, 14. 
akrab-amélu, “ scorpion-man”: 
Tab). I, 1. 122 (p. 18); 
Tabl. II, 1. 28 (p. 26); 
Tabl. III, 1. 32 (p. 42), 
1. go (p. 50). 

‘aru, aru, “to set out, to set out 
against, to attack”: ’-7r, 
Tabl. ITI, 1. 55 (p. 46), 
1. 113 (p. 54)3 da-ar-ha, 
Tabi. II, |. 122 (p. 34). 

araku, 11, ‘“‘to be long, to 
endure”: [/-r]i-zk, Tabl. 
VII, 1. 114 (var., p. 108 f.). 

II1, “to lengthen; to be 

long”: ur-rt-ku, varr. 

u-ur-ri-ku, u-ri-ki, Tabl. 

I, 1. 13 (p. 4); [e}-rt-he- 

ma, Tabl. II, 1. 7 (p. 22). 

urris, adv., “ by day”: [wr-r]ii, 
Tabl. I, lL. 50 (p. 10). 


254 


GLOSSARY. 





erésu, ‘‘ to desire.” 
erigtu, “desire”: = erist7 
(8a-D1)-da, p. 224, 1. rr. 
esi, “to rage, to be in con- 
fusion; to destroy”: 
Imper.e-se{. . . J, Tabl. 
I, 1. 49 (p. 10). 
asabu, Iz, “to seat oneself”: 
Imper. “#3'-ba-ma, var. 
u-i§-bLa]-ma, Tabl. IL, 
1. 137 (p. 36); ¢a8-ba-ma, 
var. fa-as-ba-ma, Tabl. 
ILI, 1. 61 (p. 46f.), 1. 119 
(p. 54) 3 “-Sam-ma, Tabl. 
IV, 1. 15 (p. 58). 
eégallu, “mansion”: e§-gad-la, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 144f. (p. 76). 
ugumgallu, “monster - viper” : 
usumgallé™, Tabl. 1.1. 117 
(p- 16); Tabl. II, 1. 23 
(p. 24); Tabl. III, 1. 27 
(p. 42), 1. 85 (p. 50). 
agaméutu, “hurricane”: a-fam- 
Su-tum, Tabl. IV, 1. 45 
(p. 62). 
aéaru, “to humble oneself”: 
Pret. ¢-Sr, Tabl. III, 1. 70 
(p. 48). 
asirtu, “humiliation”: @-str-t1, 
p- 232, |. 75. 
“place”; employed as 
synonym for “heaven”: 
aS-ru = $a-mu-u, p. 168; 
as-ri (varr. ra, rte), Tabl. 
VU, l. 115 (p. 108). 
asri8, “towards”: as-r78, Tabl. 
IV, 1. 60 (p. 66). 
a’ru, ‘shrine, sanctuary”: af- 
ru-uk-ka, Tabl. IV, l. 12 
(p. 58). 


airu, 








ussu, “grass”: 
1. 25. 

etillig, “gloriously”: e-f-7s, 
Pp» 232, 1. 84. 

(ataru], IL 1, “to make exceed- 
ing strong”: u-wati.e. 
PI)-af-fe-tr, p. 146, nN. 4. 

atta’u, “fang (?)”: Tabl. I, 
l. 115 (p. 16); Tabl. II, 
I. 21 (p. 24); Tabl. II, 
1. 25 (p. 40), 1. 83 (p. 50). 


USs-SU, Ps 134, 


3 


bélu, “to rule, control, hold 
sway”: /i-bil-ma, var. li- 
br-el-ma, Tab}. VII, 1. 122 
(p. 110); (?) 4-d2-2, Tabl. 
VI, 1. 114 (p. 108). 

(bari], III 1, “to tend care- 
fully’: Inf. Su-bar-ra-ai, 
p. 232, 1. 83. 

Ill"2, “to abound in”: 

us -ta~bar-ru-t, p. 230, 
1. 50. 

burumu, “heaven”: dbx-ru-mi, 
p- 206, 1. 13; [bu |-ru-mi, 
p. 122, 1. 2. 

basmu, “viper”: Tabl.I,1. 12¢ 
(p. 18); Tabl. II, 1. 27 
(p. 24); Tabl. III, 1. 31 
(p. 42), 1. 89 (p. 50). 

batnu: éa(?)-at-nu, Tabl. IV, 
1. 36 (p. 62). 


A 


gubhu: gubhe®, P. 
p- 150, |. 20. 


144, 1. 8; 


GLOSSARY. 


255 





gall, ‘devil’: gal-l-e, var. 
galle#, Tabl. IV, 1. 116 
(P72). 
gisgallu, “station”: g?-7s-gal- 
Ja-Sa, Tabl. V, 1. 83 (p. 
84). 
giparu, “field (?),” or possibly 
: akind of tree: gi-pa-ra, 
var. gi-par-ra, Tabl. I, 
1. 6 (p. 2). 
gasaru, [1, “to strengthen.” 
IL1, “to make very strong”: 
Perm. gu-us-sur, Tabl. 1, 
1. 19 (p. 4). 
magiéaru, “might”: Tabl. 1, 
1. 142 (p. 20); Tabl. II, 
1. 48 (p. 28); Tabl. II, 
1. 52 (p44), 1 10 (p. 
54). 


4 

dabru, “mighty (?)”: Tabl. I, 
1,123 (p. 18); Tabl. II, 
1. 29 (p. 26); Tabl. III, 
1. 33 (P- 42), 1. 91 (p. 52). 

dalu, “to move about; to scout; 
to prowl round, to watch 
from hiding”: Pret. ¢-dul- 
fu, Tabl. I, 1. 57 (p. 186); 
t-du-ul-[Ir'], Tabl. I, 1. 89 
(p. 12); fa-du-ul-I[t), 
Tabl. I, 1. 99 (p. 14); 
t-dul-lu-su, Tabl. IV, 1. 
63 f. (pp. 66, 186 f.). 

dalabu, III1, “to trouble”: 
Perm. Se-ud-/u-bu, p. 228, 
1. 49. 





dullu, “service (of the gods)”: 
dul-lu, Tabl. VI, 1. 8 (p. 
88). 

danninu, ‘firmness; the firm 
earth”: dan -nt-nu= 
irsitim(tim), p. 168; dan- 
ni-na, Tabl. VII, L 115 
(p. 108). 

dupsimtu, pl. dupsimat’, “the 
Tablets of Destiny”: 
Tab). I. 1. 137 (p. 20); 
Tabl. I, 1. 43 (p. 28); 
Tab). TIL, 1. 47 (p. 44), 
1. 105 (p. 52); Tabl. IV, 
lL r2r (p. 74); p. 209, 
1. 4. 

durmahu, “ruler (?)”": dur-ma- 
&z, p. 104 (Tabl. VII); 
dur-ma-hu, p. 165. 

{dasii], Is, “to cause to be 
fruitful”: dé@-dis-Sa-a, var. 
li-td- [di] -ef-Sa-a, Tabl. 
VII, |. 130 (p. 112). 

TIL", “to cause to abound 

in, to clothe with”; Pret. 
us-das-Sa-a, Tabl. I, 1. 118 
(p. 16); Tabl. I], 1. 24 
(p. 24); Tabl. ITI, 1. 28 
(p. 42), 1 86 (p. §0). 


dittu, udittu, “rush”: di-d/-a, 
p. 134, |, 25. 
t 
Zaza: i-2a-az-ru-su, Pe 1345 


1. 30. 
zakaru, I 1, ‘‘to be high.” 
IL1, “to exalt”: w-zek-ka- 
ru-su], Tabl. VI, 1. 146 
(Pp. 90). 


256 


GLOSSARY. 





zakiku, “tempest”: za-ki-ku, 
Tabl. I, 1. 104 (p. 14). 

[zaru], Pret. zzir, “to hate, to 
conceive a hatred for”: 
Tabl. II, lL 11 (p. 22); 
Tabl. III, 1. 15 (p. 40), 
1. 73 (p. 48). 

{zarbabu], IVs, ‘to fume, to 
rage”: Perm. na-zar-bu- 
bu, Tabl. I, 1. 111 (p. 
16); Tabl. II, l. 17 (p. 24); 
Tabl. UI, l..21 (p. 40), 


1. 79 (p. 50). 


n 


habasu, “to be filled, to be 
bloated (?)”: Perm. ha- 
ba-su, Tabl. III, 1. 136 
(p. 56). 
halaku, IIl1, “to destroy”: 
Pres. (not as Prec.) 2u- 
us-hal-lak (== nusahlak, 
Tabl. I, 1. 45 (p. 185). 
“to destroy (?)”: fa- 
mu-t, p. 206, |. 21. 
hasdsu, “to think, to know”: 
Part. fa-sts, Tabl. I, 1. 18 
(p. 4), 1. 60 (p. 22). 
hipi, 1 2, “to shatter, to burst”: 
th-te-pi, Tab). IV, 1. 101 
(p. 70). 
haku, ‘to mingle together,” 
intrans.: Pret. 7-47-hu-u- 
ma, Tabi. I, 1. § (p. 2). 
[harmamu], IIf1, ‘to destroy, 
to overcome(?)”: Zf-far- 
mi-im, Tabl. I, 1. 119 (p. 
16); Tabl. III, 1. 29 (p. 
42). 


hami, 





IV 1, do. (?): 2-2h-har-mi- 
zm, Tabl. TI, }. 25 (p.24); 
Tabl. III, 1. 87 (p. 50). 


ic) 


tabu, ‘‘to besound, tobehealed”: 
Pres. 7-/e-1b-b7, p. 228, 

1. go. 
tubtu, “joy”: plur. 7u-2b-da-a- 
“  #, Tab). II, 1. 115 (p. 32). 


3 


kabatu, {I 1, “to make weighty ; 
to oppress”: u-kab-bi[/]- 
ma, Tabl. II, 1. 1 (p. 22); 
hub-bu-tu-ma, Tabl. VI, 
1. 10 (p. 88). 
kabittu, “ midst (?)”: ka-dit- 
tt-Sa-ma, Tabl. V, 1. 11 
(p. 78). 
kubutti, “abundance”: u- 
bu-ut-te-e, Tabl. VIL, 1. a1 
(p- 96); Pp. 161. 
kalu, II 1, “to uphold, to hold, 
tobring”: Z-A2-2-/u,Tabl. 
VII, 1. cro (p. 108}; mu- 
kil, Tabi. VII, 1. 19 (p. 96). 
Kali, II 1, ‘to make an end of”: 
u-kal-la-an-nt, p.232,).74. 
IIz, ‘to cease (?)”: (?) wh- 
éa-li (var. lu), Tab). VII, 
1. 114 (p. 108), 
{kalamu], 111, “to inform.” 
taklimtu, “instruction”: /a[k]- 
lim-ti, Tabl. VII, 1. 137 
(p. 114). 





GLOSSARY. 257 
{kalmii], IVi, “to look with | kasasu, “to collect (?)”: Pret. 
anger upon,to persecute”: th-Sa-Su-nim-ma, Tabl. 


Perm. 27-hil-mu-u-in-ni- 
ma, p. 230, |. 56. 

IV 1, ‘to be taken 
captive”: Pret. c-ha- 
mu-u, Tabl. 1, 1. 98 (p. 14). 
kamaru, I 2, Inf. &ifmuru, 

“battle”: Tabl. I, 1. 142 

(p. 20); Tabl. IT, 1. 48 

(p. 28); Tabl. ILL, 1. 52 

(p- 44), 1. 110 (p. 54). 
kamaru, “ snare.” 

kamarii, “in the snare”: 

ha-ma-rif, Tabl. IV, L112 
(p. 72). 


kami, 


kanii, 111, ‘to tend carefully.” ° 


taknitu, ‘‘ fostering care, true 
worship” : fak-na-a-tt, 
p. 206, I. 14. 
kiniinu, “brazier”: &t-nu-ni, 
Pp. 234, 1. 87. 
kisukku, “ bondage.” 
kisukkis; ‘‘ in bondage ” : 
hi-suk-kis, Tabl. 1V, lo reg 
(p. 72). 
kusarikku, “ram”: Tabl. I, 
\. 123 (p. 18); Tabl. Il, 
1, 29 (p. 26); Tabl. III, 
1. 33 (p. 42) 1. 91 (p. 52). 
kupu, “trunk (?)”: Sor ku-pu, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 136 (p. 76). 
kipdu, “plan”: [47 1p-d?-Su-nu, 
Tabi. VIL, |. 44 (p. roo). 


kirimmu, “love”:  kz-rim-ia, 
p. 232, 1. 83. 
karru, “costly raiment (?)”: 


Tabl. I, 1. 132 (p. 20); 

* Tabi. II, 1. 38 (p. 26); 
Tabl. IL], }. 42 (p. 44), 
1, 100 (p. §2). 





III, 1. 129 (p. 56). 

katamu, ITI 1, ‘to overcome”: 
Perm. suk-/u-mat, Tabl. 
II, 119 (p. 32). 


5 


[Wi], “to be strong; to be able.” 
la’atu, ‘full extent”: a-na 
Ja-’-a-ti-su(var. $a), Tabl. 
IV, L. 97 (p. 70)- 
[lababu], “to rage”: Tabl. II, 
l. 12 (p. 22), le 17 (p. 24)3 
Tabl. III, ll. 16, 21 (p. 40), 
1. 74 (p. 48), 1. 79 (p. $0) 5 
p. 226, 1. 31. 
labbu, “lion, lioness”: /a-ad- 
bu, p. 230 (J. 51). 
labbu,“ dragon”: lab-b7,p.118, 
1.17, 20, 243 p. 120, ll. 7, 
9; Jab-ba, p. 120, 1. 4. 
labanu, lebénu, ‘‘to abase”: 
Inf. Z-bi-en, p. 234, 1. 91. 


Tuddu, a weapon: /u-ud-di, 
p. 146, L147. 

lala, 11, ‘to be full.” 

Il1, “to make full”: 

Perm. Zu-da-a, Tabl. IV, 
1. 72 (p. 66). 

lillu, “demon”: J/-dz, p. 230, 
1. 59. 


lami, “to surround.” 
limitu, ‘‘circumference, cir- 
cuit”: pl. &-ma-a-tz, p. 118, 
1. 10. 


7 


258 


GLOSSARY. 





liménu, Iz, “to plan evil’: 

il-fe-1m-nad, P. 220, N. Te 
II, ‘‘to do evil, to plan 

evil”: Pret. «-lam-mi-in, 
Tabi. 11, 1. 3 (p. 22). 

lumagu, “zodiacal constella- 
tion”: Ju-ma-5, Tabl. V, 
1. 2 (p. 78). 

lasamu, “to be vigorous”: le- 
stma, p. 226, 1, 29. 

lapatu, ‘to place, to set out (?)”: 
al-pu-tlu], p. 144, 1.73 
al-plu-t]u, p. 150, 1. 19. 


a) 


magaru, “to be favourable.” 
mitguru, “peaceful”: 

gu-ru-tt, p. 224, 1. g. 

mehi, “tempest”: me-fa-a, var. 
me-hu-u, Tabl. LV, 1. 45 
(p. 62). 

mibhu, “drink offering”: m7- 
th-ha, p. 236, 1. 10g. 

mahasu, III2, “to render hostile, 
to cause hostilityamong”: 
mus-tam-hi-sa-at, Pp. 224, 
‘leg. 

maharig, “over against, before”: 
ma-ha-ri-i8(var.ris), Tabl, 
UW, lorrg (p. 32); ma-fa- 
ri-t8, Tabl. IV, ]. 2 (p. 58). 

mati, 11, “to lament”; am-fi- 
ma, P. 146, n. 4. 

12, do.: 7-da-ja-a, p. 116, 

1.2. 


mit- 





mittu, “club (?)”: ““méffa, var. 
mit-fa, Tabl. IV, 1. 37 
(p. 62); me-ti-Su, Tabdl. 
IV, 1. 130 (p. 74)3 mi#-da, 
P- 175- 
meku, ‘snarling, muttering”: 
me-ki-iu-un(var. nu), 
Tabl. I, 1. 60 (pp. 12, 187); 
me-hu-us, Tabl. IL, 1. 81 
(p. 30); me-At-Su, Tabl. 
IV, L. 66 (p. 66). 
mali, ‘to fill; to be full.” 
tamli, “dam”: 
134, Ll. 31. 
millu, “troop (?)": md -d-Ja, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 116 (p. 72). 
malmalis, adv., ‘corresponding 
with”: mal-ma-lis, p. 125, 
n. 5. 
mulmullu, “spear”: mul-mul- 
lum, var. mul-mul, Tabi. 
IV, 1. 36 (p. 62); mal- 
mul, p. 209, lL. r. 
mummu, “chaos”: Tabl. I, 1. 4 
(p. 2); = rig-mu, p. 162. 
{masaru], Il1, “to divide”: 
u-ma-as-sir, Tabl. V, 1. 3 
(p. 78). 
misru, “section (?)” + plur. m- 
is-ra-ta, Tabl. V, 1. 3 
(p. 78). , 
[masaru], IV 1, “to be banded 
ogether (?)”: tm-ma-as- 
ru-nin-ma, Tabl. I, h. 109 
(p. 16); Tab WH, Lo 15 
(p. 24); Tabl. ILD, 1. 19 
(p. 40); L. 77 (p. 48). 
mukku, ‘“‘affliction(?)”: muk-hu, 
Pp» 239, |. 60. 


sam-la-a, p. 


o 





GLOSSARY. 259 





mararu, ‘to be bitter.” 
namurratu, “anger, terrible 
splendour; fear (?)”:: 
na-mur-ra-t, p. 128, 1.63 
na-mur-ra-tu, p. 148, |. 4. 
[méiu], “to forgive”: Imper. 
mi-e-St, Pp. 232, 1. 82. 
“by night”:  mu-S, 
Tabl. I, 1. 50 (p. 10). 

“ flat (?)": mas-di-e, 
Tabl. LV, 1. 137 (p. 76). 
masalu, I 1, ‘to be like.” 

II 2z, “to make like”: Pret. 
um-tas-8i1, Tabl. I, 1. 118 
{p. 16), Tabl. III, 1. 28 
(p. 42), 1. 86 (p. 50); 
um-tas-st-1l, vart. um-ta-as- 
St-il, um-tas-si-ir, Tabl. 
Il, 1. 24 (p. 24); um- 
tas-Si-l, Tabl. ILI, 1. 86 
(var., p. 51). 

“before”: mut-Hi, 
Tabl. II, 1. 75 (p. 30); 
mut-ti-i, Tabl. ILL, 1. 131 
(p. 56). 
nabii, “to name, to proclaim”: 

Imper. 7-da-a, Tabl. II, 
1,136 (p. 36); Tabl. III, 
1, 60 (p. 46), 1. 118 (p. 54). 
nabatu, ‘‘to blaze forth”: z-zam- 
bu-{u, p. 206, |. 15. 
nagi, I1: na-g[u-w], p. 169. 
IVz, “to be rejoiced”: 
t-fe-en-gu, var. it-ta-an-gu, 
Tabl. VII, 1. 118 (p. 110). 
nagalu, 1Vi, “to be made 
desolate” : Perm. na-an- 
gu-la-ku-ma, p. 230, 1. 65. 


miusis, 


masdi, 


muttis, 





nadi, IV1, ‘to be placed, to 
be established”: Perm. 
na-an-dt-a-at (fr. nadi, 
rather than IV1, Perm. 
fr. em@du), p. 228, 1. 34. 
(nadaru], “to rage.” 
nanduru, “afflicted, sorrow- 
ful”: mna-an-du-ru-t, p. 
232, 1. 72. 
niziktu, “misfortune”: m7-27k-17, 
Pp. 232, 1. 72. 
niknaku, “‘censer”: 
p- 138, l. 6. 
nakapu, Iz, ‘to violentlyattain”: 
mut - tak- ki - pat, p. 224, 
aur 
namalu, ‘marsh (?)”: 
p. 134, 1. 32. 
namaru, ‘to be bright; to 
praise”: am-mir-ki, p. 
230, l. 60. 
namurtu, “splendour”: xa- 
mur-tum, Pp. 129, 0. 7. 
nin-amélu, “ fish-man”: Tabl. 
I, 1.123 (p. 18); Tabl. 11, 
1. 29 (p. 26); Tabl. III, 
1. 33 (p. 42)> 1. 91 (p. 52). 
{mannartu], “light”: #a-an-na~ 
rat, p. 222, 1. 5. 
nisi, 11, ‘‘to remove, to carry 
away”: /~7s-st~e-ma, 
Tabl. VII, 1. 114 (p. 108). 
Ilz, ‘to disappear, to 
depart”: Pret. w/-fe-2s-s7 
(var. sw), Tabl. I, 1. 116 
(p- 34)- 
nasahu, ‘to carry off, to remove, 
to destroy”:  zs-sw-Au, 
Tabl. VII, 1. 34 (p. 98). 


nth-na-kt, 


na-ma-la, 


260 


GLOSSARY. 





nasaku, ‘to place; to place the 
hand upon, to grasp, to 
seize”: zs-suk, Tabl. 1V, 
1. ror (p. 70); 2s-st-ham- 
ma, p. 118, 1.73 us-hkam~ 
ma, p. 118, 1. 4. 
nasasu, II 1, with zzssatu, ‘to 
mourn bitterly”: «-na- 
as-Sa-Su, Pp. 228, 1, 49. 
nassu, “sorrowful, grievous, 
lamenting”: ma-as-s?, p. 
228, 1.46; na-as-sa-a-ft, 
p. 228, Ll. 48. 
nissatu, ‘‘ mourning, lamenta- 
tion”: nissatié”, p. 228, 
1. 49. 
napahu, “to flame out; to roar 
against (of a wind)”: 
nap-hat, p. 228, 1. 37- 
nipra, “offspring, child”: 27- 
ip-ri-Su, Tabl. II, l. 2 
(p. 22). 
napagsu, Il1, ‘“‘to make broad, 
io make merciful” : Part. 
mu-nap-pi-su, Tabl. II, 
1. tro (p. 32). 
nisirtu, “treasure”; employed 
as synonym for “life”: 
at-sir-ta-su, var. na pis ta- 
uw, Tabl. VI, 1. 112 (p. 
108). 
naku, 11, ‘to lament.” 
IIIz,‘‘tocause lamentation”: 
mul-ta-nu-ka-a-ti, p. 224, 
]. 9. 
naki, 112, ‘to be poured out”: 
Pres. ut-/ak-ka(?), Tabl. . 
II, 1. 130 (p. 36). 





naratu, “to become weak, to 

falter”: d-nar-re-in, p. 

226, 1. ar. 

1Vi1, ‘to be raised on 

high”; Perm. za-an-Se-a- 

at, p. 228, 1. 34. 

nagaku, III 1, ‘to remove from”: 
u- Sa-as-si~hu(var. ha), 
Tabl. VII, 1. 28 (p. 96). 

nagaku, I 1, “to kiss”: [7 ]s-32-78, 
Tabl. II, 1. 116 (p. 34). 

T2, do.: i-/a-Sk, abl. V, 
1. 79 (p. 82). 
Ve, “to kiss one another”: 

Pret. in-nis-ku, Tabl. III, 
1. 132 (p. 56). 

nasaku, II1, “to give way 
beneath (?)”: [w]-na-Sa- 
ku, varr. u-na-as-ia{h .. }, 
u na-sak, Tabl. 1,1. 54 (pp. 
To, 186). 

nagaru, “to diminish”: Perm. 
na-st-ir, Tab]. 1,1.25(p.6). 


nasi, 


is} 


“to want, lack, need”: 
Inf. sa-gu-u, p. 1603 sa- 
gi-su-nu, Tabl. TV, l. 12 
(p. 58); sa-gi-Su-nu-ma, 
Tabl. VIL, 1. 10 (p. 94); 
Sa-gi-e-a, p. 232, |. 75. 
[sihi], ‘to cease”: Perm. sz: fa- 

4, Tabl. IV, |. 68 (p. 66). 
sakapu, ‘‘to lie down, to rest’: 
Part. sa-ki-pu, Tabl. 1, 
lL. 110 (p. 16), Tabl. II, 
1. 16 (p. 24), Tabl. ILI, 
1. 20 (p. 40), L. 78 (p. 50) ; 
Perm. sak-pu, Tabl. I, 
1. 33 (p. 6). 


sagt, 


GLOSSARY. 


261 





(sali},II1: “to pray, to sup- 
plicate”: Inf. su-lu-u-a, 
P- 234, 1. 99. 


sinnistu, ‘female, woman”: 
st-in-nt-Sa-tum, var. 
st-in-ni-Sa-at, Tabl. II, 


1, 122 (p. 34). 
[sap], II1, “to pray”: Inf. 
Su-pUu-u-a, Pp. 234, |. 99. 
sapahu, II1, “to make of no 
effect, to cast down”: 
Prec. /u-sap-pi-7h, Tabl. I, 
1. 39 (p. 84). 
saparu, “net.” 
saparis, “in the net”: sa-pfa- 
rt8, Tabi. IV, 1.112 (p.72). 
supuru, “ fold” : 
234, 1. go. 
sararn, ‘‘to oppose, to resist(?)”: 
sa-ra-ar, Tabl. IV, l. 9 
(p- 58). 
sarru, f. plur. sarra/7, ‘re- 
bellion”: sar-ra-a-iti, 
Tabi. IV, 1. 72 (p. 66). 


su-pu-ri, p. 


5 


pagru, “body”; pa-ag-r7, “ my 
body, myself,” p. 146 f., 
n. 4; cf, also pale. 
symbol of royalty, 
“ring(?)”: pala(a), Tabl. 
IV, 1. 29 (p. 60). 
[{pélu], III 2, ‘to alter, annul”: 
us-te-pi-tl, var. us-te-pi-el- 
Wu], Tabl. VII, 1. 132 
(p. 112). : 


pali, 








palasu, ‘‘to pay homage to(?)”: 
pal-su[.. ], Tabl. VII, 
1. 107 (p. 106); pa-la-su, 
p. 167. 

(palsit], [Vis nz-prl-su-u, p. 148, 
4. 

({palsahu}, III 1, “to crush”: 
Imper. Su-pal-st-ht, p.234, 
1. 98. 

{paltii], IV 1, “to succumb, to 
be defeated (?)”: 7p-pal- 
tu-u, Tabl. IV, 1. 16 
(p. 58). 

pusummu, “bond (?)": pu-su- 
um-me, p. 226, 1. 33. 

pisannu, “ treasure-chest ” : 
pi-sa-an-na-ti-ka, P. 154, 
1, 22. 

(paku], II 1, “to give heed to”: 
u-pa-ha, p. 232, |. 79. 

{parSadu], 1V 1, “to escape”: 
na-par-su-dis (var. di-z), 
Tabl. LV, 1. 110 (p. 72). 

pasahu, IIl1, “to pacify”; 
Perm. “to rest”: su-up- 
Su-ha-ak (var. ku), Tabl. I, 
1. 38 (p. 8); Sup-Su-ha-al, 
Tabl. I, 1. 50 (p. 10). 

{peséku], “to be in trouble”: 
Pret. ip-Se-zk, p. 232, 1. 68. 

pasaru, Iz, ‘to divulge(?)”: 


ip-ta-Sar (?): Tabl. II, 
1. 4 (p. 22). 
pitu, “front; person”: pu- 


ut-ka, p. 154,1.253 pag-rt 
u pu-u-tt (var. pu-t7), 
“my own person, my- 
self,” p.140, 1.8, p.148, 1.2. 
pitku, ‘‘ handiwork” : p7-di ch-Su, 
Tabi. IL, 1..1 (p. 22). 


262 


GLOSSARY. 





¥ 


sabatu, I 1, ‘to take.” 

Iz, Inf. éesdudu, “ to begin”: 
Tabl. I, 1. 130 (p. 18); 
Tabl. II, 1. 36 (p. 26); 
‘Tabl. III, }. 40 (p. 42), 
1. 98 (p. 52). 

IV1, ‘to be held fast, to 
be heldin remembrance”: 
Ui-1s-sab-tu-ma, var. (li-7s |- 
sa-ab-iu, Tabl, VII, 1. 125 
(p. 110). 

sabaru, 12, “to attain (?),” or 
“to understand(?)”: Inf. 
ti-ts-bu-ru, Tabl. III, 1. 5 
(p. 38). 

I 1, “to impart to, to make 
known to”: Pret. w-sa- 
as-bi-ra-an-ni, Tabl. III, 
1. 14 (p. 40), 1. 72 (p. 48) 5 
u-§a-ag-bir-an-ni, Tabl. 
III, 1. 72 (var., p. 48 f.). 

salalu, “to lie down, to lic 
down to rest”: Pret. 
ni-ts-lal, Tab). I, 1. 40 
(p. 8), l. 46 (but cf. p. 185), 
lL. 100, 102 (p. 14); Pres. 
ni-sa-al-lal, Tabl. I, }. 96 
(p. 14); Perm. sal-/a-[at], 
Tabl. I, 1. 50 (p. 10); 
sa-al-la-ku, Tabl. I, 1. 38 
(p- 184). 

sallitu, “plague”: 
p. 206, l. zr. 


sal-lu-tum, 


simru, “fulness”:  s/-im-ri, 
Tab}. VII, 1. 21 (p. 96); 
§-tm-rit, p. 161. 











susi, “marsh”: sa-sa-a, var. 
su-sa-’, Tabl. I, |. 6 (p. 2). 

(saru?], Il1, ‘to cover (?)”: 

u-sir, Tabl. V, Lo 14 

(p. 78)- 

“unto”: g¢-rd-t, var. 

gt-r78, Tabl. I, 1. 32 (p. 6); 

gt-ri-a, Tabl. IV, 1. 128 

(p. 74). 

sirmahu, plur. si7mahi, ‘‘monster- 
serpent”: Tabi. I, L114 
(p. 16); Tabl. II, 1. 20 
(p. 24); Tabl. IIT, 1. 24 
(p. 40), 1. 82 (p. 50). 

sirritu, ‘“‘sceptre”: szr-rif, p. 
226, |. 32. 

sirrussu, “dragon”: Tabl. I, 
l, rar (p. 18); Tabl. IT, 
1. 27 (p. 24); Tabl. II, 
1. 31 (p. 42), 1. 89 (p. 50). 


siris, 


P 


kablu, “midst, inward parts”: 
hab-lu-us Ti-a-ma- tt, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 65 (p. 66). 

kudmis, “before”: u-ud-mi- 
i, var. kud-mes, Tabl. I, 
1. 33 (p- 6). 

kudduSa, “pure, holy”: 
du-Su, p. 226, t. 28. 

kapu, Iz, “to entrust to”: 
th-tt-pa, Tabl. V, 1. 12 
(p- 78)» 

(Kas&buj, I1f 2: Imper. sa-/ak- 
gf-ba-am-ma, Tabl. V, 1.20 


(p. 80). 


hud- 


GLOSSARY. 


263 





Kasaru, I1, “to collect, to 
take”: Ze-wk-sur-ma, Tabl. 
VI, J. 5 (p. 86). 
Iz, “to make, to fix, to 
form, to contrive”: Pret. 
(ek ]-¢a-sar, Tabl. II, 1. 2 
(p. 22); Perm. &7-7s-su-ra, 
Tabl. I, |. 6 (p. 2). 
Il1, do.: Perm. hu-gu-ru, 
Tabl. I, 1. 6 (var., p. 2). 
karabu, I2, Inf. £etrubu, “battle.” 
kitrubis, “to the battle”: 
[Ae ]t-ru-bi-dé (var. dif), 
Tabl. II, l. 111, p. 32. 
kirbu, “midst, inward parts”: 
hir-biS (var. bi-i8) Tt-amat, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 41 (p. 62), 
1. 48 (p. 64); hur-ba¥ 
Tam-tim, p. 106; kir-bis 
(var. t-na kir-b1) Ti-amat, 
Tabl. VIL, 1. 108 (p. 106); 
a-hi-su(var. 12) kir-b1-Su, 
a title of Marduk, Tabl. 
VII, 1. 109 (p. 108); hiv 
bu, pp. 107, 168. 
karbati, plur., “fields”: ar-ba- 
a-ti-ia, Pp. 232, |. 76. 
kisu, “forest”: Ar-su, p. 134, 
I. 25. 
kistu, “forest”: plur. dr-sa- 
tu-Ma, Pp. 134, |. 29. 


4 


ra’abu, ‘to rage”: Perm. ra--, 


ba-it-ma, Pp. 234, |. 94. 
rabu, “to quake”: ¢-ru-ub-bu, 

p. 206, 1.8; p. 226, 1.20; 

t-ru-bu, p. 226, 1. 21. 





rabi, IlI2, “to make pre- 
eminent”: Imper. Su-/e~ 
tr ba’, Tabl. II, 1. 136 
(var., p. 36f.). 

(rababu}, IL 1, “‘to make great” : 
li-ra-ab-bi-t6, Tabi, III, 
1. 52 (p. 45): 

Ut" 1, dow: dis-rab-br-1b, 
Tabl. I, lL. 142 (p. 20); 
Tabl. II, 1. 48 (p. 28); 
Tabl. Ill, 1. 52 (p. 44), 
1. 110 (p. 54). 
“to follow, 
Inf. ‘ pursuit, 
tion”: 
1h 58. 

ratu, “ water-channel (on land); 
"current, movement (in 

water)”: va-fu-um-ma, 
p- 32, Lord. 
rakabu, IIl2, “to sling on 
(a spear)”: w5-/ar-hi-ba, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 36 (p. 62). 
rakasu, ‘to fix, to lay”: dr-ku-us, 
p. 132, 1. 17. 
riksu, “limit, bound (?)”: 
rth-st-$u-un, Tabl. V, 1. 6 
(p. 78). 
markasu, “band”: [m]ar-kas, 
p. 104.5 mar-ka-st, p. 165. 
rami, II 1, ‘‘to set free”: Inf. 
“deliverance”:  ru-um- 
mi-ta, Pp. 232, 1. 83. 

résu, I1, ‘‘to smite, to crush(?)”: 

di-ra-i-su, Tabl. IV, 1. 16 

(p- 58). 

‘distant; wide, com- 
passionate (of theheart)”: 
ru-u-ku, Tabl. VU, 1.135 
(p. 112), P. 173- 


ridi, pursue” ; 
occupa- 


1t-du-U-a, P. 230, 


riku, 


264 


GLOSSARY. 





résu-arkat, “the Beginning and 
the Future”: zéu-arki?, 
Tabl. VIL, 1. 107 (p. 106); 
ri-e-Su-ar-kat, p. 167; cf. 
also Sa ina ri-e-S¢ u ar-ka- 
fis she epe ig 4-is. 

y 

6'n, ‘to take wing, to fly”: 
t-Sa-’, p. 230, 1. 63. 

Be’, “to seek, to look for; to 
perceive, to behold”: 
7-se’-a, Tabl. I, 1. 60 
(p. 12), Tabl. IV, 1. 66 
(p. 66); 7@-Se-~-am-ma, 
‘Yabl. II, |. 81 (p. 30); 4 
Se-’-e-ma, var. te-e-[ ... J, 
Tabl. LV, |. 83 (p. 68); 
Perm. se~ (= Se’), Tabl. I, 
1. 6 (p. 2). 

§a/alu, 11, ‘to ask.” 

Il 1, “to demand, to cry 
out for”: u-Sa’-lu, var. 
u-Sa~-a-lu, Tabl.1V, |. 92 
(p- 70). 

Sabi, Iz, “to overwhelm”: 
é-sa-am-bu-’, p. 206, 1. 17. 

Sabaku, “ to turn, to pervert (?)”: 
Sab-Su, p. 140, |. 7. 

[Sudu], con. st. Jud, “ height, 
supremacy”; sud tamhari, 
“command in battle” : 
Tabl. I, lL. 131 (p. 20); 
Tabi. II, 1. 37 (p. 26); 
Tabl. III, lL. 41 (p. 42), 
1. 99 (p. 52)- 

§adadu, ‘to drag”: Pres. ¢-5ad- 
da-[ad], p. 118, 1. 12. 

{Sahadu], I2, ‘to rear up”: 
LS-tah-hi-dam-ma, Vabl. I, 





1. 120 (p. 16); Tabl. III, 
I. 30 (p. 42), 1. 88 (p. 50); 
Lis-tah-hi-da-am (var.dan)- 
ma, Tabi. IL, 1. 26 (p. 24). 
Suharruru, “to be afflicted”: 
Pret, us-ha-r7-ir-ma, Tabl. 
II, l. 6 (p. 22); Perm. 
Su-har-ru-ur,  Su-har-rus 
rat, p. 232, 1. 75. 
Sahatu, 11, ‘‘to rage.” 
Ill 1, ‘to cause to rage, to 
stir up”: w-Ja-ab-i-t, 
p. 120, 1 53 Su-us-f2-24, 
p- 120, I. 2. 
Siklu, ‘sense (?)”: 
p. 140, 1. 7. 
Sikkatu, “supremacy, control” ; 
rab-Sikkati, “chief” ; rab- 
Stkhatalu,  ** chieftain - 
ship”: Tabl. I, Ll 131 
(p. 20); Tabl. II, 1. 37 
(p. 26); Yabl. III, 1. 41 
(p. 42), 1. 99 (p. §2). 
Sakanu, ‘‘to set; to provide.” 
Sukuttu, ‘‘provision” : Sa-hu- 
us-su, Tab]. VII, 1. 8 
(Pp. 92)- 
Sakaru, ‘‘to drink”; Perm. “ to 
be drunk (?) 2: se-ch-ru 
(poss. subs., ‘‘ carouse’’), 
‘Tabl. HI, 1. 136 (p. 6). 
Salummatu, “glory, pride”: 
Sa-lum-mat, p. 148, |. 3. 
Salaku, ‘‘to cut out, to cut off.” 
Sulluktu, *‘ cutting off, de- 
struction”: 5ed-lu-uk-1t, 
p. 228, l. 373 p. 232, 1. 69. 
Sumu, “name,” plur. sem? : Sa- 
mi-e-Su, Tabl. VII, lL. 124 
(var., p. 120). 


si-th-la-Su, 


GLOSSARY. 


265 





Semi, I r, ‘to hear.” 
IV 1, “to be heard”: 
(?) des-Si-ma (or nasi, 11; 
cf. var. fr. nisi, p. 109, 
n. 17), Tabl. VII, 1. 114 
(p. 108), 
§amaru, 12, ‘to rage”: 2s-/am- 
ma-ru, p. 230, |. §8. 
Sumurratu, ‘confusion, rage, 
anger”: Su-mur-ra-tu, 
Tabl. VII, |. 42 (p. roo). 
Sitmuris, “ wildly” : Se/-mu-r2¥ 
(var. 77-28), Tabl. LV, 1. 89 
(P- 70). 
Bani, ‘‘to repeat”; Inf. Janu, 
“version”: SLa]-n[7']-[e], 
p. 126, |. 8. 
Sananu, “to rival.” 
Sinnatu, “rivalry” » s¢7-na-as- 
Su, .p. 206, 1. 12. 
Basi, I 2, “to cry”: d-/a-st, 
Tabi. I, 1. 42 (p. 8). 
Sipru, ‘‘ business, occupation ”: 
Se-pir, p. 152, 1. 19. 
sukammumu, ‘to roar”: Perm. 
[Se]-ka-am-mu-m{a}-alt), 
Tabl. I, 1. 26 (p. 6). 
Bakummis, Sakumme, ady., “in 
“sorrow”: [Sa-hu-um]-mi- 
‘a8, var. (Sa’]-u-um-me, 
Tabl. I, 1. 58 (pp. 10, 186) ; 
Sa-ku-um-mi-is, Tabl. U1, 
1. 6 (p. 22). 
Bakasu, “to destroy.” 
Saksu, ‘violent, unruly”: 
Sak-Su, p. 226, |. 26. 
Saru, “wind”: sar arba’d, “the 
fourfold wind”; sar s7éz 
(var. VIL -67-7m), ‘the 


sevenfold wind”; sara 





@a, “the whirlwind” ; 
Sara la Sanan, “ the wind 
which had no equal,” 
Tabl. IV, 1. 46 (p. 62). 

[Sarn], “to oppose (?)”: Part. 
$a’ -ir-ru, p. 206, |. 11. 

sértu, ‘punishment ”: Se-ri/-sw, 
Tabl. IV, |. 114 (p. 72). 

Sarbabu, “terror (?)”: Sar-da- 
6a, Tabl. I, 1. 119 (p. 16); 
Tabl. III, |. 29 (p. 42), 
1. 87 (p. 50); sar-ba-bi-2s 
(probably with pron. suff., 
not adv.), Tabl. II, 1. 25 
(p. 24). 

Saraka, “‘to present, to furnish”: 
w-ruk-[hi], p. 128, 1. 55 
-ru-uk-ku, Pp. 129, 0. 73 
iS-ru-ku-ntk-kim-ma, p. 
128, 1. 7. 

Sariiru, “light”: Se-ru-ur, p. 
228, 1. 35. 

Suri8am, adv.(?): Se-ri- Sam, 
Tabl. IV, 1. 124 (p. 74). 

Sa8mu, “ battle, fight.” 

SaSme’, ‘‘to the fight”: Sa- 
as-mes, Tabl. IV, 1. 94 
(p- 7°)- 

Sutummu, ‘ storehouse”: 

lum-mu, p. 226, |, 28. 


¥ 


Su~ 


n 
tabinu, “‘ power, might”: /a-d7- 
ni, p. 232, L. 78. 
tubuktu, “enclosing wall”: 
tub-ha-a-tt, p. 154, le 24. 
tahazu, “battle.” 
tahazi8, “to the battle’: /a- 
ha-zi-t8, Tabl. IV, Ll. 94 
(p- 79)- 


IV. 


Inder fo names of Deities, Stars, Places, efe. 


Adad, god: * Adad, p. 198,1.5. 

Adu-nuna, title of Marduk: 
i A-du-nun-na, Tabl. VII 
(K. 8,519 and comm, K. 
4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 23), 
pp. 104 f., 166; p. 173, 1. 20; 
p. 178, 1. 21. 

Aga-azag, title of Marduk: 
# Aga-azag, Tabi. VII, |. 25 
(p. 96 f.). 

Agi[l .. . ], title of Marduk: 
™ A-gill... ], Tabl. VII 
(K. 13,761), p. 102 f.; var. 
“ Gr ], p. 163- 

Akkadi, Akkad: Ak-ka-di-7, p. 
147,note, 1.20; Akkadiu*’, 
p. 212, 1.26; ™ Akkadi *’, 
p- 211, 1.18; si-7¢Ahk-ha-di-i, 
p- 147, note, |. 16. 

Akrabu, Scorpio: Afrabu,p.213, 
ll. 6, 13, 14. 

Alim-nuna, possibly shorter form 
of Asaru-alim-nuna, title of 
Marduk: [... A]LIM-NUN- 
NA, p- 216. 

Almanu, deity: 
p. 218, 1. ro. 

Ana, the god Anu: AN-NA, p. 
124, 1. 1; p. 126, 1. 6; see 
also Anu. 

Anbanini, mythical king: Ax-da- 
ni-nt, p. 142, 1, 18. 


te Al-ma-nu, 


Aniar, god: An-Sar, Tabl. I, ll. 
12,15 (p.4f.); Tabl. IL, ll. 
8,9 (p. 22 f.), l. 49 (p. 28 f.), 
1. 72 (p. 30, restore An-Sar), 
1.79 (p. 30f.), Il. 83, 114, 
115 (p. 32f.), L119 (p. 34f.)5 
Yabl. I, 1. 1 (p. 38 f.), 
1.13(p. 4of.), 1. 71 (p. 48 f.), 
1. 131 (p. 56f.); Tabl. IV, 
1. 125 (p. 74.f.)3 pe 1953 
p. 198, ]. 30, 1. 15 (Rev.); 
p- 199, 1. 23; = ’Acowpds, 
see Introduction. : 

Anu, god: ™ A-nu, Tabl. I, 
log (p. 4f.)3  A-num, 
Tabl. I, I. 14 (var., p. 5), 
ll. 1g, 16 (p. 4f.), 1. 85 
(p. 12f.); Tabl. II, 1. 81 
{p. 30f.); Tab). 111, 1. 53 
(var, p. 46); Tabl. IV, 
I. 4, 6 (p. 58f.),.1. 146 
(p. 76f.); Tabl. V, 1 8 
(var. for ™ E-a, K. 13,774, 
p- 1g0f.), 1. 78 (p. 82f.), 
p. 126, 1. 8, p. 224, 1. 18; 
“ A-nu-um, ‘Vabl. I, 1. 16 
(var., p. §); Tabl. IL, lL. 53 
(p. 46f.), le rrr (p. 54f.)5 
* A-nim, Tabl. IV, bk 44 
(p. 6zf.); Tabl. VII, 1. 6 
(p. 92f.); [] A-nam, 
Tabl. H, between Hl. 85 
and 104. (K. 10,008, p. 190); 





™ Anu, p. 216, |. 2, p. 218, 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 


267 





18; AN-NA=™ A-nu, 
p- 138, l. 13 f.; =’Aves, see 
Introduction. 

Anunitu, goddess: “ A-nu-ni- 
tum, p. 144, 1. 103; p. 150, 
1. 22. 

Anunnaki, the spirits of the 
earth: “4-nun-na- ki, 
Tabl. I, 1. 136 (p. zo0f.); 
Tabl. II, 1. 46 (p. 44), 
1, 10g (p. 52 f.)3 Tabl. VI, 
1. zo (p. 88£.), p. 140, 1. 5, 
p- 206, 1. 22, p. 226, 1]. 21; 
[(pincIR) A]-NUN-NA-GE-E- 
NE=""4-nun-na-ki, p. 132, 
1. 15; see also Enukki. 

Aniitu, the power of Anu: ™4- 
nu-tt, Tabl. I, 1. 139 
(p. 20f.); Tabl. II, 1. 45 
(p. 28f.); Tabl. II, tl. 49 
(var. e-new-ti, ‘ lordship,” 
Pp. 44), 1. 107 (p. 54f)5 
 An-nu-tt, Tabl. IV, lL. 82 
(var. “AD... ], p. 68f.). 

Apsi, (1) primeval water-god : 
Ap-su-u, Tabl. I, 1. 97 
(p. 14 f); Ap-[..--], 
Tabl. I, 1. 47 (var., p- 9)3 
Apsiu), Tabl. 1, 1. 3 (var., 
p. 2); Apsé, Tabl. I, Ll 3 
(p. 2f.), Il. 22, 25, 29, 35 
(p. 6f.), L 47 (p. 8£), L gr 
{p. rof.); Tabl. If, lL 3 
(p. 22f.), 1. 55 (p. 28f.), 
between Il. 85 and 104 
(K. 10,008, p. 189), p- 1753 
= ’Araowy, see Introduction ; 
(2)the Deep, not personified: 
ap-su-u, p.206, 1.93 ap-st-2, 
p. 128, 1. 4; a@psz, Tabl. IV, 
lk, aqgz, 





143 (p. 76 f)3 5 


ABZU = a@p-su-u, p. 130, |. 8, 
p. 132, l. 13, p. 138, 1. 8£.; 
bab ap-st-i, “the Gate of 
the Deep,” p. 209, L. 5. 

Aruru, goddess: (DINGIR)A-RU- 
RU, p. 134, 1. 21, 

Asari, title of Marduk: * Asar- 
rt, Tabl. VI, |. 1 (pp. 92 f, 
158); p.177, l. 6; in title 
of composition, p. 169. 

Asaru-alim, title of Marduk: 
% Asaru-alim, Tabi. VII, 
1. 3 (pp. 92 f., 159). 

Asaru-alim-nuna, title of 
Marduk: ™Asaru-alim-nun- 
na, Tabi. VIL, 1.5 (pp. 92 f, 
160); 2/N® AsARU - ALIM - 
NUN-NA, p. 181, 1 23 
{. 4... ALTJM-NUN-NA, 
p- 216, 1. z. 

A®Sur, city: “ Assur*’, p. 199, 
1. 37. 

Babilu, Babylon: [Bad |ilu*’, 
p- 220, n. 13 Babili®’, 
p- 172, ll. 17, 18, p. 212, 
li. 24, 27; [Ka-pinGrR- 
RA](K1) = Babilu*’, p. 132, 
1. 14. 

Barsip, Borsippa: Bar- sip*’, 
p- 236, |. 112. 

Bél, Enlil, Illil, the elder Bél: 
™ Bl, Tabl. IV, 1. 146 
(p. 76f); Tabl. V, L 8 
(p- 78f.); ‘Vabl. VII, l. 6 
(p- 92f.), 1. 116 (p. 110), 
p- 116, l. 7, p. 126, 1. 8, 
p- 172, 1. 12, p. 195, p. 216, 
l. 2, p. 218, lL. 8, p. 224, 
1. 18; ="D\Awos, see Intro- 
duction. 


268 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 





Bél, see Marduk, 

Bél ilani, title of Marduk: 

™ Bel lan’, Tabl. VIL, 1. 129 

(p. 112); ch. be-lum ilani, 

Tabl. IV, 1. 73 (p. 68 f.). 

matati, title of Marduk: 

be-el maliti. var. Bel mata lt, 

Tabl. VIL, 1. 116 (p. rrof.); 

EN KUR-kKUR (i.e, dz 

matatt), p. 168; EN KuR- 

kUR =" En-LiL (ie. Be), 

p- 168. 

Bélit-ili, goddess: “ Be-Lit-i-li, 
p- 142, L 14. 

Bir(?), Caper: Bir (possibly 
read Lali), p. 213, Il. 4,9, 
10; p. 214, lL. 17. 

Buranunu, Euphrates: (1p)Bu- 
RANUNU, p. 134, |. 23. 

Damkina, goddess:  Dam-kr- 
na, Pp. 220, n. 13 = Aadey, 
sce Introduction. 

Dudu, title of Marduk: ” Du-pu, 
p. 173, 1. 25. 

Dugga(?), god: % Dug-ga(-)e, 
Tabl. IV, |. 120 (p. 74 f.). 

Dul(or Du)-azag: Dui - azag, 
Tabl. VIL(K.8,519),p. 106f. 

Dumuzi, god : ” Dumu-zi, p. 218, 
1. 9. 

Duty, title of Marduk : “Du-To, 
p- 173, 1. 24. 

Ea, (1) god: “#-a, Tabl. I, 
1. 60 (p. 12f.); Tabl. U1, 
1. 5 (p. 22f.); Tabl. IV, 
1. 146 (p. 76f.); Tabl. V, 
1.8 (p. 78 f.); Tabl. VI,1. 3 
(p. 86f), L an (p. 88f.); 
Tabl. VII, 1. 6 (p. 92 f.), 
p. 10g f, 1. 118 (p. rrof.), 


Bel 





p. 126, 1. 8, p. 128, Il. 4, 7, 
p- 136, 1 5, p. 195, m 
(dis), p. 205, 1. 1, p. 216, 1. 2, 
p. 224, 1.18; % Ha, p. 177, 
1.2; = "Aus, see Introduction; 
(2) title of Marduk:  Z-a, 
Tabl. VII, |. 120(p. 110 f.). 

E-ana, temple of [Star in Erech : 
L-an-na, p. 226, 1,28; E-an- 
NA, p. 130, 1]. 7, p. 136, 1. 40. 

E-igi-e-nir, temple: Z-7gi-e-nir 
(possible reading), p. 197, 
ned. 

E-kur, temple of Bél in Nippur : 
Li-hur, p. 206, 1.14; E-KoR- 
RA = E-hkur, p. 130, 1. 63 
E-KUR-RA-GE = E-hur, p. 
136, |. 39; H-kur, p. 206, 
1]. 14; (?) B-kur, p. 214, 
I, 29, p. 218, L ts. 

Elamtu, Elam: ”Zlamiu*’, 
p. 212, 1.25, p. 214, 1.173 
Elamtu®’, p. 212, |. 29. 

Elami, Elamite; the Elamites: 
E-la-mu-u, p. 211, |. 93 
E-la-ma-a, p. 211, 1. 22. 

En-bilulu, title of Marduk: 
Tin -bi-lu-lu, p. 178, 
No. 54,228, 1.14.3 4" En- 
BI-LU-LU, p. 181, K. 5,233, 
1. 6. 

Enhi, god: * ENn-yI, p. 220, n. 1. 
Enki, Ea: (pincir) Ew - kr, p. 
124, 1.1; p. 136, 1. 5. 
Enlil, the elder Bél: (pincir) 
EN-LIL-LA, p. 124, |. 1. 
Envkki, the Anunnaki: [... ]- 
uk-ki, Tabl. Il, 1. 42 

(p. 28 f.). 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 


269 





Enzu, Sin: (DINGIR) EN-zU-NA, 
p- 126, |. 3. 

Enzu, star: Luzu, p. 213, ll. 6, 
7, 16; oO" Bree, p. 233, 
1. 9. 

Eridu, city: Nun(x1) =““Zridu, 
p- 130, 1. 8; p. 132, 1. 12. 

E-sagil, temple of Marduk at 
Babylon: Z£-sag-g7/, Tabl. V, 
1. 69 (p. 82f.); Z-sag-ila, 
p- 236, 1. 113; E-SAG-IL-La, 
p- 132, 1.12; [E-sac-1rja, 
p- 132, 1.13; E-SAG-IL-LA= 
E-sag-tla, p. 132, 1. 14. 

E-sara, heaven: #-sar-ra, Tabl. 
IV, Il. 144, 145 (p. 76 f.)5 
p- 199, 1. 25; api L-Sar-ra, 
title of Marduk, p. 206, Ll. 18. 

E-sidlam, temple of Nergal in 
Cuthah: Z£-s1d-lam, p. 152, 
1.12. 

E-zida, temple of Nabi at Bor- 
sippa: E-zr-pa, p. 138, 
1.1353 (?) H-zi-da, p. 213, 
ly 

Gaga, god: “ Ga-ga, Tabl. III, 
MN. 2, 3, 11 (p. 38f.), 1. 67 
(p. 48 f.). 

Gibil, god: Gi, Tabdl. I, 
l. tq (p. 20f.); Tabl. II, 
l. 47 (p. 28f.); Tabl. III, 


lL. gr (p. 44f.), 1, 109 
(p- 546). : 

Gil[ J, title of Marduk; see 
Agifl... j. 


Giskul, title of Marduk: * Gis- 
kul, Tabl. VII (K. 13, 761), 
p. 102 f, 

Gud, Mars: Gud, p. 213, 1. 14. 





Gugw, title of Marduk: ” Gu-gu, 
p- 173, L. 22. 

Gutira, goddess; identified with 
IStar: “ Gu-tir-a, p. 224, 
112. 

Hansa, title of Marduk: Han- 
sae, var. Ha-an-sa-a, 
Tabl. VII, 1. 123 (p. 110 f.); 
# Hansa, p. 178, |. 22. 

Hubur, title: Hu-bur pal-ha-ti, 
p. 197, |. 9- 

Idigna, Tigris: (1p)IpieNa, p. 
134, 1. 23. 

Igigi, the spirits of heaven: 
™ Taigi, Tabl. IT, |. 126 
(p. 56f.); Tabl. VIL (p. 
110f.); p. 206, |. 23, p. 222, 
1, 3, p- 226, Il. 19, 31. 

Irnini, goddess; identified with 
IStar:  Jr-ni-ni, p. 222, 
1. 33 p. 230, 1. 513 p. 236, 
l. 105. 

Istar, goddess: ™ Ji-/ar, p. 138, 
1. 13f., p. 228, 1. 38, p. 234, 
1. 3, p. 236, I. 109, 111; 
 Tytar, p. 144, 1.10, p. 150, 
]. 22, p. 222, 1. 2, p. 228, 
1. 34, p. 236, 1. 106, 

Isu-arik, ‘‘ Long-wood,” one of 
the names of Marduk’s bow: 
ts-su a-rik, Tabl. V, 1. 81 
(p. 82 f.); tse a-rth, p. 177, 
1.43 GiS-G1p-pa, p. 177, 1.5. 

Kaksidi, Kakkab-mesré, star: 
Kak-st-pi, p. 214, 1. 19. 

Karrad ilani, title of Marduk: 
kar-rad ilani*, p. 206, }. 18. 

Kastu, star: ***" Kaste (one 
of the names of Marduk’s 
bow), Tabl. V,1. 82 (p. 82f.). 


270 


INDEX TO DEITIES, FTC. 





Kingu, god: * Avn-gu; Tabl. I, 
1.128(p.18F.),1.139(p.20f.); 
Tabl. II, 1. 34 (p. 26f.), 1. 45 
(p. 28f.), 1. 56 (p. 30 £.), 
between Il. 85 and 104 (p. 
190); Tab). Ill, 1. 38 (p. 
42f.), 1. 49 (p. 44F), 1. 96 
(p. §2f.), l. 107 (p. 54 £)5 
Tabl. IV, 1. 66 (p. 66 f.), 
1, 81(p.68f.), l.119(p.74f.), 
p- 209, ll. 2, 4, p. 213, 1. 3, 
p- 218, ll. 8, 93 “ Azn-gi, 
p- 213, I. 5,93 [% Ki}-in- 
gu, Vabl.I,1. 136 (var.,p.21). 

KiSar, deity: A7far, Tabl. I, 
l. 12 (p. 4f.)3 = Keooapy, 
see Introduction. 

Kuti, Cuthah: Kusw*', p. 152, 
l. 12. 

Lahamu, (1) deity: * Za-fa-mu, 
Tabl. 1,1]. 10(p.4f); Tab). 
IT, 1. 4 (p. 38f), 1. 68 
(var., p. 48), 1. 125 (p. 56 f.), 
p- 195, p. 198, n. 4; * La- 
fa-me, Tabl. Il, 1 68 
(p. 48 f); = Aaxy (for 
Aaxy#), see Introduction ; 
(2) monster: “ La-ha-mu, 
Tabl. II, 1. 27 (p. 24 f); 
& Ta-ha-mi, Yabl. 1,1. 121 
(p. 18f.); Tabl. IU, 1. 31 
(p. 42 f.), 1. 89 (p. sof). 

Lahha, Lahmu: Zah-ha, Tabl. 
IL, Ll. 125 (p. 56f.). 

Lahmu, deity: “ Zah-mu, Tabl. 
I,l. ro (p.4f.); Tabl. HU, 


1. 4 (p. 38f.), 1. 68 (p. 48f)5 | 


p. 198, 1. 13; = Aaxés (for 

Aaxes), see Introduction. 
Lugal-abl .... J, title of 

Marduk: **Lugal-ab-[...]; 





Tabl. VII (K. 
p- 102 f. 

Lugal-dul(or du)-azaga, title of 
Marduk: ™ Lugal-dul-asag- 
ga, Tabl. VIL (K. 8,519), 
p. 106f.; (pincir)LuGaL- 
DUL-AZAG-GA =™*Lugal-dul- 
azag- ga, p. 132, 1. 133 
#TUGAL - DUL - AZAG - GA, 
p- 220, Nn. I. 

Lugal-durmah, title of Marduk: 
we Lugal-dur-mah, Tabl. VIL 
(K. 8,519, and comm. 
K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 
1. 8), pp. 104 f., 165. 


13,761), 


" Lugal-en-ankia, title of Marduk: 


#uY UGAL-EN-AN-KI-A, p.173, 
1. 19. 

Lu-ku-mal, star: #**" Lu-Ku- 
MAL, Pp. 212, |. 30; p. 218, 
l. 9. 

Marduk, god: “Afarduk, Tabl. 11 
(K. 10,008), between Il. 85 
and 104 (p. 190); Tabl. ITI, 
1. 10 (p. 38 f.), 1.55 (p. 461), 
1. 3113 (p. 54f.), 1 138 
(p. 56f.); Tabl. IV, I. 5, 
13 (p. 58f.), ll. 20, 28 
(p. 60f.), 1 93 (p. 7of); 
1. 126 (p. 74f.); Tabl. V1, 
la (p. 86f.); Tabl. VU, 
1. rzg (p. r12f.), 1 139 
(p. r14f.), p- 134, 1. 31, 
p- 178, 1. 17, p. 180, 1. a, 
p-. 181, Il. 2, 3, 45 5, 6, 
p- 205, 1. 7, p. 211, ll. 8, 
12, 13, p. 213, Ll. 2, p. 214, 
]. 24, p. 218; Marduk 
(AN-ASAR-LU-SAR), p. 128, 
1.73 (DINGIR)ASAR-LU-5AR 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 


271 





= Marduk, p. 138, 1. 103 
[(@orcir)] Gi - $1 - Ma = 
Marduk, p. 132, 1. 173 
referred to as Bel and tu: 
% Bel, Table IV, |. 33 
(p. 62f.), pe. 175, 1 7, 
p. 205, 1. 6, p. 2ur, 1. 21, 
p. 214, 1 293 be-lum, 
Tabl. JI, I. 113 (p. 32f.), 
1. 131 (p. 36£.); Tabl. IV, 
IL 17, 21 (p. 60f.), 1. 49 
(p. 64 f.), 1. 65 (p. 66 f.), 1. 75 


(p. 68f.), 1.95 (p.70f.), 129 | 


(p. 74 f.), L. 135 (p. 76 £.)3 
= Bios, see Introduction. 

Margida, star: #*""[ Mar-gid- 
da], p. 139, n. 2. 

Medudy, mythical prince: "If- 
du-du, p. 142, 1. 20. 

Melili, mythical queen: 7-1: 
ii, p. 142, 1. 18. 

Memangab, mythical prince: 
” Me-ma-an-gab, p. 142, 1.19. 

Mu-azag, title of Marduk: 
 Mu-azag, Tabl. VII, |. 33 
(p. 98f.); Mu - azac, 
p- 173, 1. 273 var. ™ Mu 
(i.e. SAR)-AZAG, p. 173, 1. 26. 

Mulil, title of Marduk: ”Jfu- 
fil, Tabl. VIL (K. 13,761), 
p- 102 f. 

Mulmul, star: Mul-mul, p. 212, 
1, 293; p. 209, n. 1 (possible 
reading). 

Mulu-bad, star: Mutu - pap, 
p- 213, ll. 9, 12, 16. 

Mummu, minister of Apsi: 
Mu-um-mu, Tabi. I, 1). 30, 
31 (p. 6F.), 1. 48 (p. Sf); 
™ Mu-um-mu, Tabl. I, 1. 30 





(var., p. 7), 1. 31 (var, p. 7), 
1. 47 (p. 8), 1. 98 (p. 14.f.)5 
Tabl. HU, lL 55 (p. 28f.)3 
= Mwiis, see Introduction. 

Mummu, title of Tiamat; sec 
Glossary, sub mummu. 

Mummu, title of Marduk: *AZu- 
um-mu, Tab). VII (p. 13,761), 
p. 102 f. 

Mumu, title of Marduk: “ AfZu- 
mu, p. 173, 1. 23. 

Mustabarri-mitanu, Mercury: 
™ Mustabarrii-mittanu,p.212, 
I. 25, 34. 

Nabi, god: ™NMuba, p. 
1. 20. 

Nana, goddess: “Wa-na-[a], 
p- 213, note. , 
Nannar, god: “ Nannar - ru 
(var. [hak |kaba-su), Tabl. V, 

1,12 (pp. 78f., 191). 

Na-zi-azaga, title of Marduk: 
@ Na-z1-AZAG-G[ A], p. 161, 

Nergal, god:  Wergal, p. 152, 
1.13. 

Nibiru, (1) Jupiter: “ Mi-b¢-ri 
(var. ru), Tabl. V, 1. 6 (pp. 
78f., 190); (2) title of 
Marduk: @ Wi-b¢-ru, var. 
(J We-bi-r7, Tabl. VIL, 1. 109 
(p. 108f.); Ni-bi-ru = i+ 
bi-ru, p. 168. 

Nin-aha-kudu, goddess: (pIN- 
GIR)NIN-A-HA-KUD-DU, p. 
136, 1.5. 

Ninib, god: ™ Min-ib, p. 214, 
ll. 22, 23, 25; ” Mini, p. 
178, |. 22. 

Nin-igi-azag, god: 
azag, p. 124, 1. g. 


178, 


 Nin-tgi- 


272 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 





Ninkigal, i.e. EreSkigal, goddess: 
™ Nin(ie. Eres) ~ kt - gal, 
p. 213, L. 13- 

Ninlil, goddess: * Win-Jil, p.213, 
lL 13. 

Nippur, city: Wippuru*’, p. 217, 
lg; Mippurt®’, p.217, 1.33 
EN-1iL(K1) = Ni-1p-pu-ru, 
p. 130, 1. 6, p. 136, 1. 39. 

Nudimmud, title of Ea: * Nu- 
dim-mud, Tabl. I, 1. 17 (p. 
4f.); Tabl. II, 1. 58 (p.30f.), 
between Il. 85 aid 104 (p. 
190); Tabl. III, 1. 54 (p. 
46f.) 1 112 (p. 54f); 
Tabl. IV, 1. 126 (p. 74£.), 
1. 142 (p. 76f.). 

Nunamnir, god: * Vu-nam-nir, 
p. 217, 1.93 p. 220, n. 1. 

Omorka, title of Tiamat: ’Opucpxa, 
see Introduction. 

Pan, star: PAN, p. 214, II. 19, 25. 

Pap-[ .. .|, title of Marduk: 
“ Pap-[ ... ], Tabl. VIL 
(K. 13,761), p. 102 f. 

Pap-sukal, god: ™ Pap-sukal, 
p. 136, |. 4. 

Sag-gar (?), title of Marduk: 
i Sag-gar(?), No. 54,228, 
Pp. 177, 1. 13- 

Sag-me-gar, Jupiter:  Sac-mE- 


GAR, p. 212, Il. 26, 32; 
Aakheou SaG-ME-GAR, P. 214, 
T2195 


Sag-zu, title of Marduk: Sag: 
su, Tabl. VII,}. 35 (p. 98 f.), 
p- 177, 1 12, p. 179, n. 2, 
p. 205, le 5, cf. p. 173, 
1.28; P’* Sac-zu, p. 181, 
1.5. 





Samas, the Sun-god, the sun: 
as Samas, Tabl. V, ll. 19, 21, 
22 (p. 8of.), p. 126, I. 13, 
p-. 171, 1. 4, Pp. 203, n. 1, 
p. 212, ll. 26, 30, p. 214, 
I. 18, 22; ™ Sa-mas, p. 
144, l. 11, p- 150, 1. 23. 

Sarpanitu, goddess: “” Sar-pa- 
ni lum, p. 218. 

Sin, the Moon-god, the moon: 
au Sin, p. 118, 1.163 p. 129, 
lass p. 173, 143 p. 198, 
1.16; p.2ri, ]. 113 p. 212, 
N.25, 28; p.222, 1.5; p. 236, 
l. 105. 

Su-gi, star: Su-c1, p. 212, 1. 29. 

Suh-kur, title of Marduk: “ Suf- 
kur, Tabl. VIL,1.43(p 100f.), 
cf. p. 174, 1 313 24° Suu 
[kur], p. 181, L 5. 

Tiamat, primeval, mythical mon- 
ster; constellation in the 
neighbourhood = of _ the 
ecliptic: Z2-amaf, Tabl. I, 
I. 4 (p. 2f.), Il. 22, 26, 32, 
33(p.6F.), Il. 36, 4t (p. 8 f.), 
1. 109 (p. 16f.); Tabl. II, 
I. 3, 10, 11 (p. 22f.), 1. 15 
(p. 24 f.), Il. 56, 75 (p. 30f.), 
ll, 122, 124, 126 (p, 34f.), 
1. 128 (p. 36 £.); Tabl. IL, 
ll. 15, 19 (p. 40f.), 1. 56 
(p. 466), 1 73 (p. 488), 
1. 77 (var, p. 49), L114 
(p. 54f.), 1 128 (p. s6f.); 
Tabl. LV, 1. 31 (p. 60f.), 
lo ar (p. 62 f.), 1. 48 (p. 64), 
ll. 60, 71 {p. 66), 1. 76 
(p. 68 f.), ll. 87, 89, 93, 97 
(p. of), 1. 105 (p. 72), 
1, 128 (p. 74 f.), 1. 129 (var., 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 273 





Pp: 75); Tabl. VII(K. 12,830, 
p. 100 f.}, 1. 108 (p. 106 f.), 
1. 112 (p. ro8f.), p. 175, 
p- 178, 1. 18, p. 194, p. 198, 
1. 29, p. 209, ll. 3, 6, p. 211, 
ll. ro, 11, p. 213, Il. 4, 5, 7, 
9,12, 14, p. 2153 @ Zt-amat, 
Tabi. I, I. 88 (p. 12 f.); 
maT ca jelah Ty kgs 
(var., p. 7); Zt-amat-ma, 
Tabl. II, 1. 135 (p. 36 f-); 
Tabl. III, 1. 59 (p. 46f.), 
L117 (p. 54f.); Zamat- 
am-ma, Tabl. II, 1. 135 
(var., p. 37); Tabl. III, l. 59 
(var., p. 46); Zt-a-ma-iu, 
Tabl. I, 1. 49 (p. 28f.), 
p. 142, 1.13; Zi-a-ma-tum, 
Tabl. II, 1. 1 (p. 22 f.)3 
Tabl. IV, I. 129 (p. 74f.)3 
Ti-a-ma-ti, Tabl. II, 1. 81 
(p. 30 f.), between Il. 85 and 
104. (p. 190); Tabl. III, 
1, 56 (var, p. 46), 1. 77 
(p. 48f.); Tabl. IV, 1. 65 
(p. 66f.), 1. 128 (var., p. 
75); Ta-a-ma-ti, Tabl. I, 
1, 32 (var., p. 7), l. 33 (var, 
p- 7); Tabl. III, 1. 77 (var., 
p. 49); Zam-tim, Tabl. IV, 
1.41 (var., p. 62); Tabl. VII 
(K, 8,519, p. 106 £.);  Zam- 
fim, p.211, 1.123; Zam-tam- 
ma, Tabl. III, 1. §9 (var. 
p- 46); fam-tu-um-ma, p. 
116, 1. 6; =Tavé, and 
=@add70, i.e, Oaprd, see 
Introduction; Zt-amaé e-li- 
4, p. 197, 1. 103; Zi-amat 
Sap-li-H, p. 197, 1. 11. 





Tishu, god: ™ Zikthu, p. 118 F., 
1. 20, 

Tutu, title of Marduk: * Zz-/x, 
Tabl. VII, 1. 9 (p. 92f.), 
lo 1s (p. 94f.), I. 19, 25 
(p. 96f.), 1. 33 (p. 98f.), 
l 4r (p. r00f.), Ll 43 
(p. coof.), p. 177, lL 10, 
p- 205, 1. 4; Tu- tu, 
p- 173, 1. 213 °%* Tu-Tu, 
p. 181, 1.43  Zutu, p. 178, 
ll. 16, 17. 

Uhau, star: **°" U7p-gu, p. 213, 
| Ey J 

Ummu-Hubur, title of Tiamat: 
Um - mu - Hu -bur, Tabi. I, 
l, 113 (p. 16f.); Tabl. II, 
1. 19 (var., p. 24); Tabl. II, 
1. 81 (p. 50f.); Um-mu-Hu- 
bur (var. bu-ur); Tabl. ILI, 
1. 23 (p. 40f.); Um-ma-Hu- 
bu-ur, Tabl. II,).19 (p.24f.). 

Unug, see Uruk, 

Upiukkinaki, the council - 
chamber of the gods: Up- 
Su -ukkin-na-ki, Tabl. 11, 
1. 137 (p. 36f.); Tabl. II, 
lL 119g (p. 54f.); Up-Su- 
ukkin-na-ki (varr. ku, kam); 
Tabl. III, 1. 61 (p. 46f.); 
Up-su-ukkin-na-ka, Tabl. VI, 
1. 142 (p. 90f.). 

Uruk, Erech: Unuc(x1)= U- 


vuk, p. 130,17; p. 136, 
1. 40. 
Utu-ka-gab-a, star: Utu-Ka- 


GAB-A, p. 213, 1. 17. 
Zag-muk, Feast of the New 
Year: Zag-muk, p. 150, 
il. 14, 16, 
18 


274 


INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC. 





Zamama, god: ™Za-ma-ma, 
p- 144, L103 p. 1§0, 1. 22, 

Zi-azag, title of Marduk : ” Z- 
azag, Tabl. VII, lL tg 
(p. 96f.); var. Na-zi- 
AZAG-G[A], P. 161. 

Zi-si, title of Marduk: * Z7-s7, 
Tabl. VIL, Ll. 41 (p. 100 f.); 
cf, p. 174, 1. 30. . 


Zi» ukkina, title of Marduk: 
& Zi-ukkin-na, abl, VII, 
lors (p. 94f.)3 ™ Zeukken, 
Tabi. VII, 1. 15 (var., p. 95); 
cf. p. 174, L. 29. 

Zi, god: * Zu-u, p. 218, 1, 6. 

Zulummu, title of Marduk : 
Zu -lum-mu, Tabl. VII 
(K. 13,761), p. t0ozf, cf. 


p. 164. 





A SELECTION 


OF 


MESSRS, LUZAC & CO0.’S PUBLICATIONS 


IN AND ON THE FOLLOWING LANGUAGES 


AND LITERATURES ! 
ARABIC, SYRIAC, HEBREW, 
BABYLONIAN, 


ASSYRIAN, PERSIAN, Erc. 


‘Messrs. LUZAC & Co., having been appointed OFFICIAL 
AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF INDIAN GOVERNMENT 
PUBLICATIONS and PUBLISHERS TO THE SECRETARY 
OF STATE FOR INDIA IN COUNCIL, are able to supply at 
the shortest notice all Works published by the GOVERNMENT 
OF INDIA, 


They have also been appointed OFFICIAL ENGLISH 
AGENTS AND PUBLISHERS to the ASIATIC SOCIETY OF 
BENGAL, THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY OF ST, PETERSBURG, 
and THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, and keep all Works 
published by the above Society and University in stock. 


ORIENTAL STUDENTS are invited to submit to Mesars, 
LUZAC & Co. their MANUSCRIPTS for publication before 


sending them elsewhere. 


Messrs. LUZAC & Oo. are able to supply at the shortest 
notice and most favourable terms ALL ENGLISH, FOREIGN, 
and ORIENTAL BOOKS and PERIODICALS, MONTHLY 
LISTS issued regularly and sent gratis on application. 


Messrs. LUZAC & Co. have a Large Stock of New and 
Second-hand Oriental Works, of which they issue regularly 


Lists and Catalogues, which are to be had on application. 


Messrs. Luzac & Co.’s List of Books and Periodicals. 


American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literature (continuing 
Hebraica).—Edited by WILLIAM R. HARPER and the Staff of the 
Semitic Department of the University of Chicago. Published 
quarterly, Annual subscription, 145. 


American Journal of Theology.—Edited by Members of the Divinity 
Faculty of the University of Chicago. Quarterly. Annual sub- 
scription, 13s. 6¢@. Single numbers, 35. 6d. 

‘The theologians of America are attempting to supply a real need . . . it 
aims at a complete presentation of all recent theological work . . . we give ita 
hearty welcome, as a scheme likely to prove of real utility to theological students and 
to the cause of truth.” —Guardian. 


Babylonian and Oriental Record, The.—A Monthly Magazine of the 
Antiquities of the East. Edited by W. St. CHap Boscawen and 
Rev. H. M. MACKENZIE. Single numbers. 1s. 6d. each. 


Beveridge (A. S.).—The History of Humayin, By Gul-Baden Begam 
(Princess Rose-Body). Translated, with Introduction, Notes, Illus- 
trations, and Biographical Appendix ; and reproduced in the Persian 
from the only known manuscript of the British Museum, by A. S. 
BEVERIDGE. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xiv, 332, and 96 pages of Persian 
text. With ro plates. 10s. net. 


Bezold (Ch.).—Oriental Diplomacy: being the transliterated Text of 
the Cuneiform Despatches between the King of Egypt and 
Western Asia in the Fifteenth Century before Christ, discovered at 
Tell el Amarna, and now preserved in the British Museum. With 
full Vocabulary, Grammatical Notes, etc., by CHARLES BEZOLD, 
Post 8vo. Cloth, pp. xliv, 12g. 185. net. 

“ For the Assyriologist the book is a serviceable and handy supplement to the 
British Museum volume on the Tell el Amarna tablets. The author is specially 
skilled in the art of cataloguing and dictionary making, and it is needless to say that 
he has done his work well."— The Academy. 

“Die in dem Hauptwerke (The Tell el Amarna Tablets in the British Museum, 
with autotype Facsimiles, etc.) vermiste Transcription des Keilschrift-textes der 
Tafeln, sowie ein sehr ausfithrliches, mitunter die Vollstindigkeit einer Concordanz 
erreichendes Vocabulary bietet die Oriental Diplomacy von C. Bezold, das eben 
deshalb gewissermassen als Schliissel zu dem Publicationswerke betrachtet werden 
kann.” —Liter, Centralbiatt. 


Bibliaa—A Monthly Magazine, devoted to Biblical Archeology and 
Oriental Research. Annual subscription, including postage, 6s. 6a. 
Single numbers, 62, « 

«The object of the Bid/ia is to present the latest information in regard to the work 
of the Egyptian Exploration Fund, the Palestine Exploration Fund, and the work of 
American, French, and German Explorers. Attention is given also to Classical and 
Medizeval Archzeology, reviews of new books, etc." 


Biblical World, The.—Edited by WILLIAM R. HARPER. Published 
monthly. Annual subscription, 9s. Single numbers, 1s. 
*« The Biblical World makes a faithful record and helpful critic of present Biblical 
Work, as well as an efficient practical and positive independent force in stimulating 
and instructing the student, preacher, and teacher.” 


4 Messrs. Luzac & Cos 


Broénnle (Paul). — Contributions towards Arabic Philology. Part I: 
The Kitab al-maksiir wa’l-mamdid. By Ibn Wallad. Being a 
Treatise, Lexicographical and Grammatical, from Manuscripts in 
Berlin, London, Paris. Edited with Texts, Critical Notes, Intro- 
duction, Commentary, and Indices. By Dr. Pavt, BRONNLE. 
I: Arabic Text. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xii, 128. 7s. 6d. net ; paper 
covers, 6s. net. 

“‘ This is the first of a series of ten parts, in which it is intended to publish some 
important works of the earliest Arabic authors, together with systematic investigations 
into the various branches of Arabic Philology.” 

“‘In the second part, which contains the Introduction and Commentary to the 
Arabic text given in the first part, along with a Preface and Bibliography to the whole 
series, the author will have opportunity of enlarging at some length upon the 
principles by which he has been guided in embarking upon this scheme.” 


Browne (E. G.).—Account of a rare Manuscript History of Ispahan. 
8v0, pp. 90. 15. 6d. net. 


Browne (E. G.).— Biographies of Persian Poets. Contained in 
Chapter V, Section 6, of the Tdrikh-i-Guzida, or “Select History,” 
of Hamdulléh Mustawfi of Qazwin. Translated by E, G. BROWNE. 
8vo, pp. 80. 25, net. 


Browne (E. G.).—The Chahér Magéla (Four Discourses) of Nidbdmi-i- 
‘artidi-i-samarqandi. Translated into English by E. G. BROWNE. 
Demy 8vo. Cloth, pp. 139. 4s. net. 


Browne (E. G.).—The Tadhkiratu ’Sh-Shu’ard (Memoirs of the Poets) 
of Dawlatshdh bin *Ald’u ’d-dawla Bakhtishdh al-Ghdzf of Samar- 
qand. Edited in the Original Persian, with Prefaces and Indices, 
by E. G. BROWNE. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xvi, 10, 622. 18s, net. 


Budge (E. A. Wallis).—Oriental Wit and Wisdom, or the ‘‘ Laughable 
Stories.” Collected by Mar. Gregory John Bar - Hebraeus, 
Maphrian of the East from A.D. 1264 to 1286. Translated from the 
Syriac by E. A. WALLIS Bunce, M.A., Litt.D., D.Lit. Roy. 8vo. 
Cloth, pp. xxvii, iv, 204. 6s. net. 

“Tn the Preface to the prevent publication the satisfactory remark is made that 
the volume containing both the Syriac ‘Text and the Translation, published 1897, 
price 21s. (see the notice in the Atheneum for March 13th, 1897), ‘has been well 
received, both in England and on the Continent,’ and that ‘in answer to many 
requests from Students of Literature generally,’ Messrs. Luzac & Co, ‘ have decided 
to issue the English Translation of it separately in a handy form.’ 

“«Tn such circumstances the new volume is likely to succeed, and we need only add 
that, although many of the sayings are at war with the finer esthetic taste of the 
present day, the collection is fairly representative, and of considerable value. Of 
some special interest appears to us to be the twentieth chapter, ‘ Physiological 
Characteristics described by the Sages.’ ""— Atheneum. 


Budge (E. A. Wallis).—The History of the Blessed Virgin Mary and 
The History of the Likeness of Christ which the Jews of Tiberias 
made to mock at. The Syriac Texts edited with English Trans- 
Jations by. E. A, WALLIS BubcGk, M.A., Litt.D., D.Lit., Keeper 
of the Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum. 
Vol. I, The Syriac Texts, pp. xi, 224. 125. 6d. net. Vol. II, 
English ‘Translations, pp. xvil, 246. tos. 6d. net. [Luzac’s Semitic 
Text and Translation Series, Vols. IV and V.] 


List of Books and Periodicals. 5 


‘To Mr. Budge belongs, however, the great merit of having very materially 
enriched no fewer than four different branches of Oriental Literature. Several of his 
editions will no doubt serve as the groundwork for future publications. . , . The 
general aspect of the volumes is all that could be desired." —Atheneum. 

“Tt may be regarded as an exceptionally excellent commentary on the New 
Testament, the main lines of which it closely follows, for in dealing with the same 
facts it lets in a great deal of light on the manners, customs, and ideas of the country 
and the period. . . . The translations are in admirable English, and evince 
singular ability."—Catholic Times, 


Budge (E. A. Wallis).—The Histories of Rabban Hormizd the Persian 
and Rabban Bar-Idta. Vol. I, Syriac Texts. Roy. 8vo, pp. xvi, 
202. 12s. 6d. net. [Luzac’s Semitic Texts and Translation Series, 
Vol. IX.] 


Budge (E. A. Wallis)—The Histories of Rabban Hormizd the Persian 
and Rabban Bar-’Idta Vol. II, Part 1, English ‘Translations. 
Roy. 8vo, PR. xlii, 304. 10s. 6d. net. [Luzac’s Semitic Text and 
Translation Series, Vol. X.] 


Budge (E. A. Wallis)—The Histories of Rabban Hormizd the Persian 
and Rabban Bar-'Idta. Vol. II,,Part 2, The Metrical Life of Rabban 
Hormizd by M4r. Sergius of Adhérbaijan. English ‘Translations. 
Roy. 8vo, pp. 230. 10s. 6d. net. [Luzac’s Semitic Text and Translation 
Series, Vol. XI.] 


Budge (E. A. Wallis),—The History of Baralam and VYéwdséf. The 
Ethiopic Version translated from the Arabic by Enbakém for the 
Ethiopian King Galawdewds, A.D. 1553. 2 vols. in 3. Vol. I, 
The Ethiopic Text ; Vol. 11, English Translation, Introduction, etc, 
(In the Press.) 


Budge (E. A, Wallis). — The Laughable Stories collected by Bar- 
Hebraeus. The Syriac Text, with an English Translation, by 
E. A. WALLIS BunczE, Litt.D., F.S.A., Keeper of the Department 
of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum. 8vo. Cloth. 
21s. net. [Luzac’s Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vol. I.] 
““Dr. BuDGE's book will be welcome as a handy reading-book for advanced 
students of Syriac, but in the meantime the stories will be an addition to the literature 
of gnomes and proverbs, of which so many are found in India, and in Persian, 
Hebrew, and Arabic, although not yet published. We are happy to say that 
Dr. BupGe's new book is well edited and translated as far as we can judge."— 
Atheneum. 
«The worthy Syrian Bishop's idea of humour may excite admiration when we 
a that he collected his quips in the grey dawn of the middle ages."—Pal/ Mall 
raxetle. 


Bulletin de !Institut francais d’Archéologie Orientale. Publié sous le 
direction of M. E. CHaSSINET. Vol. I. 4to. £1 6s. net. [Messrs. 
Luzac & Co, are the sole agents for the sale of this “ Bulletin” for 
England and America.] 


Cowper (B. H.). — Principles of Syriac Grammar. Translated and 
abridged from the work of Dr. HOFFMANN. 8vo. Cloth, pp. 184. 
75. 6a. net. 


Crow (F. E.),—Arabic Manual. A Colloquial Handbook in the Syrian 
Dialect. For the use of visitors to Syria and Palestine, containing 
a simplified Grammar, a Comprehensive English and Arabic 


6 Messrs. Luzac & Co's 


Vocabulary and Dialogues. The whole in English Characters, 
carefully Transliterated, the Pronunciation being fully indicated. 
Crown 8vo. Cloth, pp. viii, 334. 7s. 6d. 

‘' Messrs. Luzac have now issued a manual of colloquial Syrian Arabic, which 
will be of the greatest use to visitors, merchants, and consular officers ae. 
Mr, Crow, formerly one of the most brilliant linguists of the student-interpreters of 
Constantinople, afterwards Vice-Consul at Beyrut.”—The Spectator. 


Dawlatshah, see Browne. 


Efes Damim.—— A Series of Conversations at Jerusalem between a 
Patriarch of the. Greek Church and a Chief Rabbi of the Jews, 
concerning the Malicious Charge against the Jews of using Christian 
Blood. By J. B. Levinsoun. Translated from the Hebrew by 
Dr. L, Lozws. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xvi, 208. (Published 8s.) 
Reduced price, 2s. 6d. 


Gaster (M.).— The Chronicles of Jerahmeel, or the Hebrew Bible 
Historiale. A Collection of Jewish Legends and Traditions. Trans- 
lated for the first time from an unique manuscript in the Bodleian’ 
Library, With an Introduction, Notes, and full Index, and five 
Facsimiles. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, pp. cxii, 341. With 5 plates. tos. net. 


Gibb (E. J. W.).—A History of Ottoman Poetry. By E. J. W. Grips, 
M.R.A.S. Vol. I. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xxi, 454. 215. net. 
(Vol. II in the Press.) 

“ The work, of which this volume is the first instalment, is planned on a magnificent 
scale, and its execution, if one may judge of the whole by a part, will fully answer 
to the conception. The first volume will take its rightful place as one of the most 
masterly contributions ever made to Oriental learning by an English scholar.”— 
Athenaeum, 

«‘ Mr. Gibb writes as a master. He is undoubtedly the highest authority on Ottoman 
literature in this country. No genuine student of poetry in its manifold expressions 
can afford to neglect so curious and interesting a phase in its history.” —Sfectator. 

“This beautiful book will be welcomed not only by scholars, but by all who love 
the mysterious East. Messrs. Luzac & Co. must be congratulated on the manner in 
which they have brought out the book. It is to be hoped that the second volume 
will soon see the light.” —- Westminster Review. 


Haririi—The Assemblies of al Hariri. Translated from the Arabic 
with an Introduction and Notes, Historical and Grammatical, by 
TH. CHENERY and F. STEINGASS. With Preface and Index by 


F, F. ARBUTHNOT. 2 vols. 8vo. Cloth, pp. x, 540, and xi, 395. 
30s, net. 


Harper (Robert Francis).—Assyrian and Babylonian Letters, belonging 
to the K. Collection of the British Museum. By ROBERT FRANCIS 
HARPER, of the University of Chicago. Vols. 1 to VIII. Post 8vo. 
Cloth. Price of each vol., 25s. net. 

“The Assyriologist will welcome them with gratitude, for they offer him a mass 


of new material which has been carefully copied and well printed, and which cannot 
fail to yield important results." —A/heneum. 


** The book is well printed, and it is a pleasure to read the texts given in it, with 
their large type and ample margin.""—Academy. 
Hartmann (Martin). — The Arabic Press of Egypt. By MARTIN 
HARTMANN. 8vo. Cloth, pp. ii, 93. 35. 6a. 
‘© A learned critical list of Arabic Publications.” —A theneum, 
“Such compilations as the present are valuable as Works of Reference, and as 


showing the intellectual activity of all those people who fall under British influence,""— 
Asiatic Quarterly Review. 





List of Books and Periodicals. 7 


Hebraica.—A Quarterly Journal in the interests of Semitic Study. Edited 
by WittiAM R. Harper and the Staff of the Semitic Department 
of the University of Chicago. Published quarterly. Annual sub- 
scription, 14s. See American Journal of Semitic Languages, etc. 


Jastrow's Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Babli and Yerushalmi, 
and the Midrashic Literature. Compiled by M. JASTROW, Ph.D. 
Parts lto XV. qto. Boards. 5s. each part. 

“ This is the only Talmudic dictionary in English, and all students should subscribe 


to it. The merits of this work are now too well known to need repetition,”-— 
Jewish Chronicle. 


King (Leonard W.).—Babylonian Magic and Sorcery. Being “The 
Prayers of the Lifting of the Hand.” The Cuneiform Texts of a 
Group of Babylonian and Assyrian Incantations and Magical 
Formulz, edited with Transliterations. Translations and full 
Vocabulary. from Tablets of the Kuyunjik Collection preserved in 
the British Museum. By LEonarp W. Kina, M.A., Assistant in 
the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British 
Museum. Roy. 8vo. Cloth. 185, net. 

‘‘ We cannot pretend to form an adequate judgment of the merits of Mr. Kinc's 
work, but it is manifestly conceived and executed in a very scholarly spirit." Times. 

“Mr, KING's book will, we believe, be of great use to all students of Mesopotamian 
religions, and it marks an era in Assyriological studies in England. . . . A word 


of special praise is due to Mr. KiNG for the excellence of his autograph plates of 
text." —Atheneum. 


King (Leonard W.).— The Letters and Inscriptions of Hammurabi, 
King of Babylon about B.C. 2200, to which are added a Series of 
Letters of other Kings of the First Dynasty of Babylon. The 
Original Babylonian Texts, edited from Tablets in the British 
Museum, with English Translations, Summaries of Contents, etc. 

’ By L. W. Kinc, M.A, F.S.A., Assistant in the Department of 
Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum, In three 
volumes. Vol. I, Introduction and Babylonian Texts. Vol. II, 
Babylonian Texts (continued). Vol. III, ‘Transliterations, English 
Translations, Vocabularies, Indices, etc. Roy. 8vo. Cloth. Vol. I, 
ais. net; Vol. II, 18s. net; Vol. III, 185. net. [Euzac’s Semitic 
Text and Translation Series, Vols. II, III, and VIII.] 

“The concluding volumes of this important book are out at last. Mr. King 
supplies an excellent vocabulary for both the Sumerian and Semitic words used in 
these texts, and although his translation differs somewhat from that adopted by 
German cuneiform scholars, -he has kept most commendably clear from philological 
discussion. . . . Altogether, both he and the Museum are to be congratulated 
on the completion of a difficult task.” —A¢heneum. 

‘Mr. King may be congratulated on his copies of the cuneiform texts, and still 
more on his translations and notes. . . . The notes contain very full references to 
the dates found in the legal documents of the period, by means of which several of 
the mutilated passages in the annals can be restored. . . . The value of these 
annals can scarcely be over-estimated.’’"—(Professor Sayce) Expository Times, 


King (Leonard W.).—The Seven Tablets of Creation, or the Babylonian 
and Assyrian Legends concerning the Creation of the World and of 
Mankind. 2 vols. Vol. 1, English Translations, Transliterations, 
Glossary, Introduction, etc. Vol. II, Supplementary (Babylonian 
and Assyrian) Texts. Roy. 8vo. Vol. I, 18s.; Vol. II, 15s. 
[Luzac’s Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vols. XII and XIII} 


8 Messrs. Luzac & Cos 


King (Leonard W.).—A Contribution to Babylonian History, being a 
Series of Babylonian Historical Texts with English Translations. 
[Luzac’s Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vol. XIX.] /x che 
Press. 


Land (J. P. N.).—The Principles of Hebrew Grammar. By J. P. N. 
LAND, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of 
Leyden. Translated from the Dutch by REGINALD LANE POOLE, 
‘Balliol College, Oxford. Demy 8vo. Cloth, pp. xx, 219. (Published 
7s. 6d.) Reduced price, 5s. 


Loewe (L.).—A Dictionary of the Circassian Language. In two parts. 
English—Circassian—Turkish, and Circassian —English—Turkish. 
8vo. Cloth. (Published 215.) Reduced price, 6s. 


Loewe (L.).—Efes Damim, see Efes. 


Luzac’s Oriental Grammars Series. Vols. I and II, see Wynkoop; 
Vol. III, see Rosen ; Vol. IV, see Crow. 


Luzac’s Oriental List. Containing Notes and News on, and a Biblio- 
graphical List of all new Publications on Africa and the East. 
Published monthly. Annual subscription, 3s. Yearly volumes 
(with Index, half-bound), 5s. each. 


Vol. I (1890) is entirely out of print. A few copies of Vols, II, III, 
and IV are left at 10s. each, Vols. V to XIII (1894-1902) are still to be 
had at $s. each. 


Luzac’s Semitic Text and Translation Series. Vols. I, IV, V, IX, X, 
XI, and XVI to XVIII, see Budge ; Vols. II, 11], VIII, XII, XIII, 
and XIX, see King ; Vols. VI, VII, XIV, and XV, see Thompson. 


Margoliouth (D. S.)—Arabic Papyri of the Bodleian Library, Repro- 
duced by the Collotype Process. With Transcription and Trans- 
lation. Text in 4to, pp. 7 and 2 facsimiles in large folio. 5s. 


Margoliouth (D. S.).—Chrestomathia Baidawiana. The Commentary of 
El-Baidawi on Sura III. Translated and explained for the use 
of Students of Arabic. By D. S. MARGOLIOUTH, M.A., Laudian 
Professor of Arabic in the University of Oxford, etc., etc. Post 8vo. 
Cloth, 12s. net. 

“The book is as scholarly as it is useful. Of particular importance are the 
numerous grammatical annotations which give the beginner an insight into the 
method of the Arabic national grammarians, and which form an excellent preparatory 


study for the perusal of these works in the original. . . , The introduction, and the 
remarks in particular, show how well Mr. MARGoLIOUTH has mastered the immense 
literatures of Moslem Tradition, Grammar, and Kalaim. . . . The perusal of the 


book affords pleasure from beginning to end."—Journal Royal Asiatic Society, 


Michell (R. L. N.).—An Egyptian Calendar for the Koptic year 1617 
(1900-1901 A.D.). Corresponding with the years 1318-1319 of the 
Mohammedan Era. By ROLAND L. N. MICHELL. Demy 8vo. 
130 pp. Cloth, 3s. Paper covers, 2s. 6¢. 


Some Notices of an Egyptian Calendar for the year 1395 A.H. (1878 A.D.) 
Published by Mr. MICHELL in Egypt in 1877. 


List of Books and Periodicals. 9 


"One of the strangest pieces of reading probably ever offered under the name of 
contemporary literature. . . . There is no fear that anyone who uses this 
little book for consultation during a visit to Egypt will fail to see any particular 
celebration for want of exact information as to its probable date,""—Saturday Review. 

“This quaint and entertaining pamphlet may claim a foremost place among 
curiosities of modern literature. : Never was information so new, so old, 
so varied, so fantastic, or packed in so small a compass. . . . The Glossary 
may be described as a local gazetteer,:a brief biographical dictionary of holy and 
historical personages, an epitome of popular customs and superstitions, and a 
handbook of the agricultural and natural phenomena of the Nile Valley."—Academy. 


Mirkhond.—The Rauzat-us-Safa ; or Garden of Purity. Translated from 
the original Persian by E, REHATSEK ; edited by F. F. ARBUTHNOT. 
8vo. Cloth, Vols. I to V. 10s. net each volume. 

Vols. x and 2 contain: The Histories of Prophets, Kings, and Khalifs. 
Vols. 3 and 4 contain: The Life of Muhammad the Apostle of Allah, 


Vol. 5 contains: The Lives of Abi Bakr, O'mar, O’thmdn, and Alf, the four 
immediate successors of Muhammad the Apostle. 


Muallakat.— The Seven Poems suspended in the Temple at Mecca. 
Translated from the Arabic. By Capt. F. E. JoHnson. With an 
Introduction by Shaikh Faizullabhai. 8vo. pp. xxiv, 238. 75. 6a, 


Picart (Bernard).—Scénes de la vie Juive dessinées d’aprés Nature par 
Bernard Picart 1663-1733. Sixteen Plates (Reproduction en helio- 
gravure Dujardin). Together in a beautiful cloth cover, richly 
ornamented with gold and colours. Folio. (Frcs. 50.) 125, 6a net. 


Rogers (R. W.).—A History of Babylonia and Assyria. By ROBERT 
WiLuiaM RoceRs, Ph.D. (Leipzig), D.D., LU.D., F.R.G.S., 
Professor in Drew Theological Seminary, Madison, New Jersey. 
Third edition. Two vols. Royal 8vo. Cloth, pp. xx, 430, and 
xv, 418. 205. net. 


‘The first volume of one of the most useful works yet published on Assyriclogy 
has just appeared. It is not only a history of Babylonia and Assyria brought up to 
date, it is also a history of Assyrian and Babylonian excavation and of cuneiform 
decipherment. For the first time the reader has placed before him a full and 
interesting account of one of the romances of historical science—the discovery and 
decipherment of the cuneiform inscriptions.” —Exfosetory Times. 

“TI consider Rogers's ‘ History of Babylonia and Assyria’ a really useful book, the 
best of its kind so far written in English. The fairness with which the author 
endeavours to represent different views so frequently held with regard to the earlier 
dynasties and events makes his work especially desirable for the student in the 
class-room,”—H. V. Hivprecut, Ph.D,, D.D., LL.D., Prafessor in the University 
of Pennsylvania, Scientific Director of Babylonian Exploration Fund, 


Rosen (F.)—-A Modern Persian Colloquial Grammar. Containing a 
short Grammar, Dialogues and Extracts from Nasir Eddin Shah's 
Diaries, Tales, etc, and a Vocabulary. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 
pp. xiv, 400. Ios. 6d. 

“Dr, ROSEN’s learned work will be useful to all who have occasion to go to 
Persia, Baluchistan, and Afghanistan. ‘The Vocabulary will be a boon to students, 
especially as it is in the same volume with the grammar and the dialogues."— 
Publ. Circular. 

“Very useful to students." — Westminster Review. 


* Excellent guide to the acquisition of Persian.” —A static Quarterly Review. 


Io Messrs. Luzac & Co.'s 


Ruben (Paul}.— Critical Remarks upon some Passages of the Old 
Testament. By Paut RUBEN, Ph.D. 4to. Cloth, pp. ii, 24, 14. 
38. 6d. Paper covers, 2s. 6a. 

“It may suffice to congratulate ourselves that a scholar of vigorous mind and 
accurate philological! training is devoting his leisure to a subject worthy of attention, 
.« . . . Very many of the notes are ina high degree stimulating and suggestive. 
The get-up of the book is excellent,"— Academy. 

‘'Dr, RUBEN shows much originality, a wide knowledge of authorities, and a true 
grasp of critical principles."—/ewish Chronicle. 


Sauerwein (G.).—A Pocket Dictionary of the English and Turkish 
Languages. Small 8vo. Limp cloth, pp. 298. 3s. 6d. net. 


Sayce (A. H.).—Address to the Assyrian Section of the Ninth International 
Congress of Orientalists. 8vo, pp. 32. Is. 


Scholia on Passages of the Old Testament. By Max Jacos, Bishop of 
Edessa, Now first edited in the original Syriac, with an English 
Translation and Notes by G. PHILLIP, D.D. 8vo. Paper covers. 
5s. net. 


Thompson (R. Campbell).—The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers 
of Nineveh and Babylon. In the British Museum. The Original 
Text, printed in Cuneiform Characters, edited with Translations, 
Notes, Vocabulary, Index, and an Introduction, By R. CAMPBELL 
TuHompson, B.A, (Cantab.), Assistant in the Department of Egyptian 
and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum. In two vols. Vol. I, 
The Cuneiform Texts. Vol. II, English Translations, Vocabulary, 
etc, Roy. 8vo. Cloth. 12s. 6d. net each. 

‘Mr, Thompson gives us the cuneiform text of what is, practically, the complete 
series of the Astrological Reports of the Royal Library at Nineveh—that is to say, 
copies of about 280 tablets and transliterations of about 220 duplicates, without 
reckoning the transliterations of the texts of the original series. In addition, we 
find a translation of the tablets in English, and a vocabulary, with references, and 
a subject index. The work in each of these sections has been carefully done."”— 
Nature. 

“The value of the book is enhanced by its excellent indices. Those who wish 
to know what the astrological lore of Babylonia was like cannot do better than 
study it,""—-Eapository Times, 


Thompson (R. Campbeil).—Assyrian Incantations, Spells, and Formule, 
directed against the Attacks of Evil Spirits. Translated and Trans- 
literated, with Vocabulary, Indexes, and an Introduction. 2 vols. 
Roy. 8vo. (J the Press.) 


Tiele (C. P.), Western Asia, according to the most recent Discoveries, 
Rectorial Address on the occasion of the 318th Anniversary of the 
Leyden University, 8th February, 1893. Translated by ELIZABETH J. 
TayLor. Small 8vo. Cloth, pp. 36. 15. 6a. 

‘An authoritative summary of the results of recent Oriental research and 
discovery,"— The Times. 


“« The address presents a graphic picture of the political situation in Western Asia 
in the fifteenth and fourteenth centuries 8,C."—Aforning Post, 


List of Books and Periodicals. It 


Transactions of the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists. — 
London, 5th to 12th September, 1892. Edited by E. DELMAR 
MorGAN. 2 vols. Roy. 8vo. Cloth. 35s. 

Vol. I contains: Indian and Aryan Sections. 21s, 
Vol. II contains: Semitic, Egypt and Africa, Geographical, Archaic Greece and 


the East, Persia and Turkey, China, Central Asia and the Far East, Australasia, 
Anthropology and Mythology Sections, 215. 


Vambéry (A.).—The Travels and Adventures of the Turkish General 
Sidi Ali Réis in India, Afghanistan, Central Asia, and Persia, during 
the years 1553-1556. Translated from the Turkish, with Notes, 
by A.V. 8vo, pp. xviii, 123. 5s. 

‘' This book is highly interesting.” — Westminster Review. 


Wildeboer (G.).—The Origin of the Canon of the Old Testament. An 
Historico-Critical Enquiry. Translated by WISNER BACON. Edited 
with Preface by Professor GEORGE F. Moore. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, 
pp. xii, 182, 75. 6a. 

‘We will only add that we cordially echo the Professor's hope that his book may 


not only be read by professed students, but that it may come also into the hands of 
such as have already left the University." Guardian. 


Wilkinson (J. R.),-—-A Johannine Document in the First Chapter of 
St. Luke’s Gospel. Roy. 8vo, pp. 38. Cloth, 2s. Paper cover, 1s. 6a. 


Winckler (H.).—The Tell-El-Amarna Letters. Transliteration, English 
Translation, Vocabulary, etc. Roy. 8vo, Cloth, pp. xlii, "416, and 
50 pages Indices. 215. net. 
The same, in paper covers, 20s. 


«« The present work does not aim to give the final exposition of the Tell-cl-Amarna 
Letters, but only the beginning of such exposition. The author has solved many 
difficulties,”” 

“* The purpose of the vocabularies and catalogue of proper names is to make easy 
the penetration and independent investigation of our subject, Especially in case of 
the first, it was important to hit upon a sclection from the innumerable repetitions. 
A full citation of all the places would make their examination almost impossible.” 


Wright (W.).—The Book of Jonah in four Semitic versions. Chaldee, 
Syriac, Aethiopic, and Arabic. With corresponding Glossaries. 8vo. 
Cloth, pp. 148. 4s. net. 


Wynkoop (J. D.).—Manual of Hebrew Syntax. Translated from the 
Dutch by C. VAN DEN BIESEN. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xxii, 152, and 
Index. 2s. 6d. net. 

“It is a book which every Hebrew student should possess, . . . we recommend 
it for general usefulness, and thank Dr. Van den Biesen for giving it to the English 
reader." —Jewish World. 

“It is one of those books which will become indispensable to the English student 
who will desire to become acquainted with the construction of Hebrew syntax . 
this takes a high rank and will undoubtedly become a general textbook on the 
subject in many colleges and universities." —A merican Hebrew News. 


Wynkoop (J. D.).—Manual of Hebrew Grammar. Translated from the 
Dutch by C. VAN DEN BIESEN. 8vo. Cloth, 25. 6a. net. 

“We have nothing but praise for the Rev. WyNnKoop’s Manual of Hebrew 
Grammar. It is clear and concise: the rules are very intelligible, and the examples 
are telling. . . . We heartily recommend this book, and congratulate Messrs. 
Luzac on the style of its production.” —Asiatic Quarterly Review. 


Electronic publication prepared by 


Kelvin Smith Library 
Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, Ohio 
for 


ETANA Core Texts 
http://www.etana.org/coretexts.shtml 


EIANA 


Electronic Tools and Ancient Near Eastern Archives 








