This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


NVPL  RESEAflCH  UBMRIES 


3  3433  06213926  0 


x«^ 

^^^ 


DON     QUIXOTE 

OF    LA    MANCHA 


THE     HISTORY    OF 
THE    INGENIOUS    GENTLEMAN 

DON    QUIXOTE 

OF    LA    MANCHA 

TRANSLATED   FROM   THE  SPANISH 
BY 

P.   A.    MOTTEUX 


VOLUMK     SCCONO 


£Mn&urdb 

JOHN     GRANT 

1908 


CONTENTS. 


PART  II.— BOOK  L 


CHAPTER  L 

Paoi 
THE  PLEASANT  NEW  ADVENTURE   THE  OURATE  AND  BARBER  MET 

WITH  IN  SIERRA  MORENA,  OR  BLAOK  MOUNTAIN  .  .  1 

CHAPTER  XL 

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BEAUTIFUL  DOROTHEA'S  DISCRETION,  WITH 

OTHER  PLEASANT  PASSAGES 27 


CHAPTER  m. 

THE  PLEASANT  BTRATAQEM8  USED  TO  FREE  THE  ENAMOURED 
KNIGHT  FROM  THE  RIGOROUS  PENANCE  WHICH  HE  HAD 
UNDERTAKEN 48 

CHAPTER  rV 

THE    PLEASANT    DL^OGUE    BETWEEN    DON    QUIXOTE    AND     HIS 

SQUIRE  CONTINUED,  WITH  OTHER  ADVENTX7BES  .  .         69 

CHAPTER  V. 

WHAT  BEFEL  DON  QUIXOTE  AND  HIS  COMPANY  AT  THE  OTN  85 


ri  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VL 

Paob 

TBI  NOVEL  OF  THE  0URI0U8  IMPERTINENT  ....         97 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

IN     WHICH     THE    HISTORY    OP    THE    CURIOUS    IlfPERTINENT    IS 

rUBtiUED 129 


CHAPTER  VHL 

THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  NOVEL  OF  THE  CURIOUS  IMPERTINENT; 
WITH  THE  DREADFUL  BATTLE  BETWIXT  DON  QUIXOTE  AND 
CERTAIN  WINE-SKINS 163 


CHAPTER  EX. 

CONTAINING   AN   ACCOUNT  OF   MANT   SURPRISING    ACCIDENTS  IN 

THE  INN 177 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  BISTORT  OF  THE  FAMOUS  PRINCESS  MICOMICONA  CONTINUED. 

WITH  OTHER  PLEASANT  ADVENTURES  .  .  .  .192 


CHAPTER  XI. 

A  CONTINUATION   OF   DON   QUIXOTE'S  CURIOUS   DISCOURSE   UPON 

ARMS  AND  LEARNING 210 


CHAPTER  XH 

WHERE  THE  CAPTIVE  RELATES  HIS  LIFE  AND  ADVENTURES  218 

CHAPTER  Xm. 

THE  8TORT  OF  THE  CAPTIVE  CONTINUED  .      233 


CONTENTS.  Tii 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

PAca 

THB  ADVBNTURBS  OF  THE  CAFTIVB  CONTINUED  .  •  254 


CHAPTER  XV. 

AN   ACCOUNT  OP   WHAT   HAPPENED   IN    THE   INN,  WITH   SEVERAL 

OTHER  OCCURRENCES  WORTH  NOTICE  ....      286 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE   PLEASANT   STORY   OF   THE    YOUNG   MULETEER,  WITH    OTHER 

STRANGE  ADVENTURES  THAT  HAPPENED  IN  THE  INN    .  .       297 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

A  CONTINUATION  OF  THB  STRANGE  ADVENTURES  IN  THE  INN         .      316 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

THE  CONTROVERSY  ABOUT  MAMBRINO'S  HELMET  AND  THB  PACK- 
SADDLE,  DISPUTED  AND  DECIDED  ;  WITH  OTHER  ACCIDENTS, 
NOT  MORE  STRANGE  THAN  TRUE 331 

CHAPl^ER  XIX. 

THE  NOTABLE  ADVENTURE  OF  THE  OFFICERS  OF  THE  HOLY 
BROTHERHOOD,  WITH  DON  QUIXOTE'S  GREAT  FEROCITY  AND 
ENCHANTMENT 344 

CHAPTER  XX. 

PROSECUTING    THB    COURSE    OF    DON    QUIXOTE*S    ENCHANTMENT, 

WITH  OTHER  MEMORABLE  OCCURRENCES     ....      358 

CHAPTER  XXL 

CONTAINING  A  CONTINUATION  OF  THE  CANON's  DISC0UR8B   UPON 

BOOKS  OF  KNIGHT-ERRANTRY,  AND  OTHER  CURIOUS  MATTER      375 


viii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIL 

Pagb 
A  RBLATION  OF  THB  WIBB  OONFXRBNOB  BETWEEN  8AN0H0  AND  HIS 

HABTEB 387 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 

THE  NOTABLE  DISPUTE  BETWEEN  THE  OANON  AND  DON  QUIXOTE ; 

WITH  OTHER  MATTERS 399 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE  goatherd's  TALE 411 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

OF  THE  COMBAT  BETWEEN  DON  QUIXOTE  AND  THE  GOATHERD  ; 
WITH  THE  RARE  ADVENTURE  OF  THB  PENITENTS,  WHICH  THE 
ENIGHT  HAPPILY  ACCOMPLISHED  WITH  THE  SWEAT  OF  HIS 
BROWS •  •  •  .      421 

NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST  ......      441 

NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND  466 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Designed  and  Etched  by  Ad.  Lalauze. 


DOROTHEA  AT  THE  FOUNTAIN, 

LUCINDA  FAINTING,       .... 

ANSELMO  AND  CAMILLA, 

DON  QUIXOTE  ATTACKING  THE  WINESKINS, 

THE  RECONCILIATION,   .... 

ZORAIDA'S  FATHER  ON  THE  SEA-SHORE,  . 

MY  LORD  JUDGE  AND  DON  QUIXOTE, 

DON  QUIXOTE  HANGING  FROM  THE  INN. 

DON  QUIXOTE  IN  THE  CART,  . 

VINCENT  DE  LA  ROSA,   .... 


to  face  Title 
Page  22 
127 
164 
185 
875 
288 
814 
860 
416 


THE 

LIFE    AND    ACHIEVEMENTS 


OF  THE  RENOWNED 


DON    QUIXOTE    DE    LA    MANCHA. 


PART  II.    BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  L 

THE  PLEASANT  NEW  ADVENTURE  THE  CURATE  AND 
BARBER  MET  WITH  IN  SIERRA  MORENA,  OR  BLACK 
MOUNTAIN. 

Most  fortunate  and  happy  was  the  age  that 
ushered  into  the  world  that  most  daring  knight 
Don  Quixote  de  la  Mancha!  for  from  his 
generous  resolution  to  revive  and  restore  the 
ancient  order  of  knight-errantry,  that  was  not 
wholly  neglected,  but  almost  lost  and  abolished, 
our  age,  barren  in  itself  of  pleasant  recreations, 
derives  the  pleasure  it  reaps  from  his  true 
history,  and  the  various  tales  and  episodes 
thereof,  in  some  respects  no  less  pleasing, 
artftil,  and  authentic,  than  the  history  itself. 
We  told  you  that  as  the  curate  was  preparing 
to  give  Cardenio  some  seasonable  consolation, 
he  was  prevented  by  a  voice,  whose  doleftd 
complaints  reached  his  ears.  ''0  heavens," 
cried  the  unseen  mourner,  "is  it  possible  I 
have  at  last  found  out  a  place  that  will  afford 
a  private  grave  to  this  miserable  body,  whose 

IL  A 


S  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

load  I  80  repine  to  bear  ?  Yes,  if  the  silence 
and  solitude  of  these  deserts  do  not  deceive 
me,  here  I  may  die  concealed  from  human 
eyes.  Ah  me !  ah  wretched  creature !  to  what 
extremity  has  affliction  driven  me,  reduced  to 
think  these  hideous  woods  and  rocks  a  kind 
retreat!  it  is  true,  indeed,  I  may  here  freely 
complain  to  heaven,  and  beg  for  that  relief 
which  I  might  ask  in  vain  of  false  mankind : 
for  it  is  vain,  I  find,  to  seek  below  either 
counsel,  ease,  or  remedy."  The  curate  and  his 
company,  who  heard  all  this  distinctly,  justly 
conjectured  they  were  very  near  the  person  who 
thus  expressed  his  grief,  and  therefore  rose 
to  find  him  out.  They  had  not  gone  about 
twenty  paces,  before  they  spied  a  youth  in  a 
country  habit,  sitting  at  the  foot  of  a  rock  be- 
hind an  ash-tree ;  but  they  could  not  well  see 
his  fitce,  being  bowed  almost  upon  his  knees,  as 
he  sat  washing  his  feet  in  a  rivulet  that  glided 
by.  They  approached  him  so  softly  that  he  did 
not  perceive  them:  and,  as  he  was  gently 
paddling  in  the  clear  water,  they  had  time  to 
discern  that  his  legs  were  as  white  as  alabaster, 
and  so  taper,  so  curiously  proportioned,  and  so 
fine,  that  nothing  of  the  kind  could  appear 
more  beautiful.  Our  observers  were  amazed 
at  this  discovery,  rightly  imagining  that  such 


DON  QUIXOTE.  S 

tender  feet  were  not  used  to  trudge  in  rugged 
ways,  or  measure  the  steps  of  oxen  at  the 
plough,  the  common  employments  of  people  in 
such  apparel;  and  therefore  the  curate,  who 
went  before  the  rest,  whose  curiosity  was 
heightened  by  this  sight,  beckoned  to  them 
to  step  aside,  and  hide  themselves  behind 
some  of  the  little  rocks  thkt  were  by ;  which 
they  did,  and  from  thence  making  a  stricter 
observation,  they  found  he  had  on  a  grey 
double-skirted  jerkin,  girt  tight  about  his  body 
with  a  linen  towel.  He  wore  also  a  pair  of 
breeches,  and  gamashes  of  grey  cloth,  and  a 
grey  huntsman's  cap  on  his  head.  His  gam- 
ashes  were  now  pulled  up  to  the  middle  of  his 
leg,  which  really  seemed  to  be  of  snowy 
alabaster.  Having  made  an  end  of  washing  his 
beauteous  feet,  he  immediately  wiped  them 
with  a  handkerchief,  which  he  pulled  out 
from  under  his  cap ;  and  with  that,  looking  up, 
he  discovered  so  charming  a  face,  so  accom- 
plished a  beauty,  that  Cardenio  could  not 
forbear  saying  to  the  curate,  that  since  this  was 
not  Lucinda,  it  was  certainly  no  human  form, 
but  an  angel.  And  then  the  youth  taking  oflF 
his  cap,  and  shaking  his  head,  an  incredible 
quantity  of  lovely  hair  flowed  down  upon  his 
shoulders,   and  not  only   covered   them,   but 


4  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

almost  all  his  body ;  by  which  they  were  now 
convinced,  that  what  they  at  first  took  to  be 
a  country  lad,  was  a  young  woman,  and  one 
of  the  most  beautiful  creatures  in  the  world. 
Cardenio  was  not  less  surprised  than  the  other 
two,  and  once  more  declared,  that  no  face 
could  vie  with  hers  but  Lucinda's.  To  part 
her  dishevelled  tresses,  she  only  used  her 
slender  fingers,  and  at  the  same  time  dis- 
covered so  fine  a  pair  of  arms,  and  hands  so 
white  and  lovely,  that  our  three  admiring 
gazers  grew  more  impatient  to  know  who  she 
was,  and  moved  forward  to  accost  her.  At  the 
noise  they  made,  the  pretty  creature  started; 
and  peeping  through  her  hair,  which  she 
hastily  removed  from  before  her  eyes  with 
both  her  hands,  she  no  sooner  saw  three  men 
coming  towards  her,  but  in  a  mighty  flight 
she  snatched  up  a  little  bundle  that  lay  by 
her,  and  fled  as  fast  as  she  could,  without  so 
much  as  staying  to  put  on  her  shoes,  or  do  up 
her  hair.  But  alas!  scarce  had  she  gone  six 
steps,  when  her  tender  feet  not  being  able  to 
endure  the  rough  encounter  of  the  stones,  the 
poor  afirighted  fair  fell  on  the  hard  ground ;  so 
that  those  from  whom  she  fled,  hastening 
to  help  her,  "  Stay,  madam,*'  cried  the  curate, 
"  whoever  you  be  you  have  no  reason  to  fly ; 


DON  QUIXOTE.  5 

we  have  no  other  design  but  to  do  you 
service."  With  that,  approaching  her,  he 
took  her  by  the  hand,  and  perceiving  she  was 
so  disordered  with  fear  and  confusion,  that  she 
could  not  answer  a  word,  he  strove  to  compose 
her  mind  with  kind  expressions.  ''Be  not 
afraid,  madam,"  continued  he;  "though  your 
hair  has  betrayed  what  your  disguise  concealed 
from  us,  we  are  but  the  more  disposed  to  assist 
you,  and  do  you  all  manner  of  service.  Then 
pray  tell  us  how  we  may  best  do  it.  I  imagine 
it  was  no  slight  occasion  that  made  you  obscure 
your  singular  beauty  under  so  unworthy  a  dis- 
guise, and  venture  into  this  desert,  where  it 
was  the  greatest  chance  in  the  world  that  ever 
you  met  with  us.  However,  we  hope  it  is  not 
impossible  to  find  a  remedy  for  your  misfor- 
tunes ;  since  there  are  none  which  reason  and 
time  will  not  at  last  surmount :  and  therefore, 
madam,  if  you  have  not  absolutely  renounced 
all  human  comfort,  I  beseech  you  tell  us  the 
cause  of  your  affliction,  and  assure  yourself  we 
do  not  ask  this  out  of  mere  curiosity,  but  a 
real  desire  to  serve  you,  and  either  to  condole 
or  assuage  your  grief." 

While  the  curate  endeavoured  thus  to  re- 
move the  trembling  fair-one's  apprehension, 
she  stood  amazed,  staring,  without  speaking  a 


6  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

word,  Bometimes  upon  one,  sometimes  npon 
another,  like  one  scarce  well  awake,  or  like  an 
ignorant  clown  who  happens  to  see  some 
strange  sight.  But  at  last  the  curate,  having 
given  her  time  to  recollect  herself,  and  persist- 
ing in  his  earnest  and  civil  entreaties,  she 
fetched  a  deep  sigh,  and  then  unclosing  her 
lips,  broke  silence  in  this  manner.  ''Since 
this  desert  has  not  been  able  to  conceal  me, 
and  my  hair  has  betrayed  me,  it  would  be 
needless  now  for  me  to  dissemble  with  you; 
and  since  you  desire  to  hear  the  story  of  my 
misfortunes,  I  cannot  in  civility  deny  you, 
after  all  the  obliging  offers  you  have  been 
pleased  to  make  me:  but  yet,  gentlemen,  I 
am  much  afraid,  what  I  have  to  say  will  but 
make  you  sad,  and  afford  you  little  satisfac- 
tion ;  for  you  will  find  my  disasters  are  not  to 
be  remedied.  There  is  one  thing  that  troubles 
me  yet  more ;  it  shocks  my  nature  to  think  I 
must  be  forced  to  reveal  to  you  some  secrets 
which  I  had  a  design  to  have  buried  in  myt 
grave:  but  yet  considering  the  garb  and  the 
place  you  have  found  me  in,  I  &ncy  it  will  be 
better  for  me  to  tell  you  all,  than  to  give 
occasion  to  doubt  of  my  past  conduct  and  my 
present  designs,  by  an  affected  reservedness." 
The  disguised  lady  having  made  this  answer, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  7 

with  a  modest  blush  and  extraordinary  discre- 
tion,  the  curate  and  his  company,  who  now 
admired  her  the  more  for  her  sense,  renewed 
their  kind  oflfers  and  pressing  solicitations; 
and  then  they  modestly  let  her  retire  a  moment 
to  some  distance  to  put  herself  in  decent  order. 
Which  done,  she  returned,  and  being  all  seated 
on  the  grass,  after  she  had  used  no  small  vio- 
lence to  smother  her  tears,  she  thus  began  her 
story. 

"  I  was  bom  in  a  certain  town  of  Andalusia,^ 
from  which  a  duke  takes  his  title,  that  makes 
him  a  grandee  of  Spain.  This  duke  has  two 
sons,  the  eldest,  heir  to  his  estate,  and,  as  it 
may  be  presumed,  of  his  virtues ;  the  youngest, 
heir  to  nothing  I  know  of,  but  the  treachery 
of  Vellido,*  and  the  deceitfiilness  of  Galalon.f 
My  father,  who  is  one  of  his  vassals,  is  but  of 
low  degree ;  but  so  very  rich,  that  had  fortune 
equalled  his  birth  to  his  estate,  he  could  have 
wanted  nothing  more,  and  I,  perhaps,  had 
never  been  so  miserable ;  for  I  verily  believe, 
my  not  being  of  noble  blood  is  the  chief 
occasion  of  my  ruin.  True  it  is  my  parents 
are  not  so  meanly  bom,  as  to  have  any  cause 
to  be  ashamed  of  their  original,  nor  so  high  as 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1  to  Chap.  4,  Book  IV. 

*  Who  murdered  Sancho,  King  of  Castile. 

t  Who  betrayed  the  French  army  at  Boncesvallea. 


8  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

to  alter  the  opinion  I  have  that  my  misfortune 
proceeds  from  their  lowness.  It  is  true,  they 
have  been  farmers  from  father  to  son,  yet 
without  any  mixture  or  stain  of  infamous  or 
scandalous  blood.  They  are  old  rusty  ♦  Chris- 
tians (as  we  call  our  true  primitive  Spaniards), 
and  the  antiquity  of  their  family,  together  with 
their  large  possessions,  and  the  port  they  live 
in,  raises  them  much  above  their  profession, 
and  has  by  little  and  little  almost  universally 
gained  them  the  name  of  gentlemen,  setting 
them,  in  a  manner,  equal  to  many  such  in  the 
world's  esteem.  As  I  am  their  only  child, 
they  ever  loved  me  with  all  the  tenderness  of 
indulgent  parents;  and  their  great  affection 
made  them  esteem  themselves  happier  in  their 
daughter,  than  in  the  peaceable  enjoyment  of 
their  large  estate.  Now  as  it  was  my  good 
fortune  to  be  possessed  of  their  love,  they 
were  pleased  to  trust  me  with  their  substance. 
The  whole  house  and  estate  was  left  to  my 
management,  and  I  took  such  care  not  to 
abuse  the  trust  reposed  in  me,  that  I  never 
forfeited  their  good  opinion  of  my  discretion. 
The  time  I  had  to  spare  from  the  care  of  the 
family,  I  commonly   employed  in  the  usual 

*  BamdomM  in  the  original :  a  metaphor  taken  from  rusty  baoon, 
yellow  and  monldy,  aa  it  were,  with  age.  It  la  a  ianner'a  daughter 
^Maks  this 


DON  QUIXOTE.  9 

exercises  of  young  women,  sometimes  making 
bone-lace,  or  at  my  needle,  and  now  and  then 
reading  some  good  book,  or  playing  on  the 
harp ;  having  experienced  that  music  was  very 
proper  to  recreate  the  wearied  mind :  and  this 
was  the  innocent  life  I  led.  I  have  not 
descended  to  these  particulars  out  of  vain 
ostentation,  but  merely  that  when  I  come  to 
relate  my  misfortunes,  you  may  observe  I  do 
not  owe  them  to  my  ill  conduct.  While  I 
thus  lived  the  life  of  a  nun,  unseen,  as  I 
thought,  by  any  body  but  our  own  family,  and 
never  leaving  the  house  but  to  go  to  church, 
which  was  commonly  betimes  in  the  morning, 
and  always  with  my  mother,  and  so  close  hid 
in  a  veil  that  I  could  scarce  find  my  way; 
notwithstanding  all  the  care  that  was  taken  to 
keep  me  from  being  seen,  it  was  unhappily 
rumoured  abroad  that  I  was  handsome,  and 
to  riiy  eternal  disquiet,  love  intruded  into 
my  peaceful  retirement.  Don  Ferdinand, 
second  son  to  the  duke  I  have  mentioned, 
had  a  sight  of  me" — Scarce  had  Cardenio 
heard  Don  Ferdinand  named,  but  he  changed 
colour,  and  betrayed  such  a  disorder  of  body 
and  mind,  that  the  curate  and  the  barber 
were  afraid  he  would  have  fallen  into 
one  of  those  frantic  fits  that  often  used  to 


10  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

take  him ;  but  by  good  fortune  it  did  not  come 
to  that,  and  he  only  set  himself  to  look  sted- 
fastly  on  the  country  maid,  presently  guessing 
who  she  was ;  while  she  continued  her  story, 
without  taking  any  notice  of  the  alteration  of 
his  countenance. 

"No  sooner  had  he  seen  me,"  said  she, 
"but,  as  he  since  told  me,  he  felt  in  his  breast 
that  violent  passion  of  which  he  afterwards 
gave  me  so  many  proofe.  But  not  to  tire  you 
with  a  needless  relation  of  every  particular,  I 
will  pass  over  all  the  means  he  used  to  inform 
me  of  his  love :  he  purchased  the  good-will  of 
all  our  servants  with  private  gifts :  he  made  my 
father  a  thousand  kind  offers  of  service :  every 
day  seemed  a  day  of  rejoicing  in  our  neigh- 
bourhood, every  evening  ushered  in  some  ser- 
enade, and  the  continual  music  was  even  a 
disturbance  in  the  night.  He  got  a  number  of 
infinite  love-letters  transmitted  to  me,  I  do  not 
know  by  what  means,  every  one  fiill  of  the 
tenderest  expressions,  promises,  vows,  and  pro- 
testations. But  all  this  assiduous  courtship 
was  so  far  from  inclining  my  heart  to  a  kind 
return,  that  it  rather  moved  my  indignation ; 
insomuch,  that  I  looked  upon  Don  Ferdinand 
as  my  greatest  enemy,  and  one  wholly  bent  on 
my  ruin:   not  but  that  I  was  well  enough 


DON  QUIXOTE.  11 

pleased  with  his  gallantry,  and  took  a  secret 
delight  in  seeing  myself  thus  courted  by  a 
person  of  his  quality.  Such  demonstrations  of 
love  are  never  altogether  displeasing  to  women, 
and  the  most  disdainful,  in  spite  of  all  their 
coyness,  reserve  a  little  complaisance  in  their 
hearts  for  their  admirers.  But  the  dispro- 
portion between  our  qualities  was  too  great  to 
suffer  me  to  entertain  any  reasonable  hopes, 
and  his  gallantry  too  singular  not  to  offend 
me.  Besides,  my  father,  who  soon  made  a 
right  construction  of  Don  Ferdinand's  preten- 
sions, with  his  prudent  admonitions  concurred 
with  the  sense  I  ever  had  of  my  honour,  and 
banished  from  my  mind  all  favourable  thoughts 
of  his  addresses.  However,  like  a  kind  parent, 
perceiving  I  was  somewhat  uneasy,  and  imag- 
ining the  flattering  prospect  of  so  advantageous 
a  match  might  still  amuse  me,  he  told  me  one 
day  he  reposed  the  utmost  trust  in  my  virtue, 
esteeming  it  the  strongest  obstacle  he  could 
oppose  to  Don  Ferdinand's  dishonourable  de- 
signs ;  yet  if  I  would  marry,  to  rid  me  at  once 
of  his  unjust  pursuit,  and  prevent  the  ruin  of 
my  reputation,  I  should  have  liberty  to  make 
my  own  choice  of  a  suitable  match,  either  in 
our  own  town  or  the  neighbourhood ;  and  that 
he  would  do  for  me  whatever  could  be  expected 


12  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

from  a  loving  father.  I  humbly  thanked  him 
for  his  kindness,  and  told  him,  that  as  I  had 
never  yet  had  any  thoughts  of  marriage,  I 
would  try  to  rid  myself  of  Don  Ferdinand  some 
other  way.  Accordingly  I  resolved  to  shun 
him  with  so  much  precaution,  that  he  should 
never  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  me; 
but  all  my  reservedness,  fer  from  tiring  out  his 
passion,  strengthened  it  the  more.  In  short, 
Don  Ferdinand,  either  hearing  or  suspecting  I 
was  to  be  married,  thought  of  a  contrivance  to 
cross  a  design  that  was  likely  to  cut  off  all  his 
hopes.  One  night,  therefore,  when  I  was  in 
my  chamber,  nobody  with  me  but  my  maid, 
and  the  door  double-locked  and  bolted,  that  I 
might  be  secured  against  the  attempts  of  Don 
Ferdinand,  whom  I  took  to  be  a  man  who 
would  stick  at  nothing  to  compass  his  designs, 
unexpectedly  I  saw  him  just  before  me ;  which 
amazing  sight  so  surprised  me,  that  I  was 
struck  dumb,  and  fainted  away  with  fear.  So 
I  had  not  power  to  call  for  help,  nor  do  I 
believe  he  would  have  given  me  time  to  have 
done  it,  had  I  attempted  it;  for  he  presently 
ran  to  me,  and  taking  me  in  his  arms,  while 
I  was  sinking  with  the  fright,  he  spoke  to 
me  in  such  endearing  terms,  and  with  so  much 
address,  and  pretended  tenderness  and  sin- 


DON  QUIXOTE.  18 

cerity,  that  I  did  not  dare  to  cry  out  when  I 
came  to  myself.  His  sighs,  and  yet  more  his 
tears,  seemed  to  me  undeniable  proofe  of  his 
vowed  integrity ;  and  I  being  but  young,  bred 
up  in  perpetual  retirement,  from  all  society 
but  my  virtuous  parents,  and  unexperienced  in 
those  affairs,  in  which  even  the  most  knowing 
are  apt  to  be  mistaken,  my  reluctancy  abated 
by  degrees,  and  I  began  to  have  some  sense  of 
compassion,  yet  none  but  what  was  consistent 
with  my  honour.  However,  when  I  was  pretty 
well  recovered  from  my  first  fright,  my  former 
resolution  returned;  and  then,  with  more 
courage  than  I  thought  I  should  have  had, 
*  My  lord,'  said  I,  *  if  at  the  same  time  that 
you  offer  me  your  love,  and  give  me  such 
strange  demonstrations  of  it,  you  would  also 
offer  me  poison,  and  leave  to  take  my  choice, 
I  would  soon  resolve  which  to  accept,  and 
convince  you  by  my  death,  that  my  honour  is 
dearer  to  me  than  my  life.  To  be  plain,  I  can 
have  no  good  opinion  of  a  presumption  that 
endangers  my  reputation;  and  unless  you  leave 
me  this  moment,  I  will  so  effectually  make  you 
know  how  much  you  are  mistaken  in  me,  that 
if  you  have  but  the  least  sense  of  honour  left, 
you  will  prevent  the  driving  me  to  that  ex- 
tremity as  long  as  you  live.     I  was  bom  your 


14  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

vassal,  but  not  yonr  slave ;  nor  does  the  great- 
ness of  your  birth  privUege  yon  to  injure  yonr 
inferiors,  or  exact  from  me  more  than  the 
duties  which  all  vassals  pay ;  that  excepted,  I 
do  not  esteem  myself  less  in  my  low  degree, 
than  you  have  reason  to  value  yourself  in  your 
high  rank.  Do  not  then  think  to  awe  or  dazzle 
me  with  your  grandeur,  or  fright  or  force  me 
into  a  base  compliance;  I  am  not  to  be  tempted 
with  titles,  pomp  and  equipage;  nor  weak 
enough  to  be  moved  with  vain  sighs  and  frdse 
tears.  In  short,  my  will  is  wholly  at  my 
father's  disposal,  and  I  will  not  entertain  any 
man  as  a  lover,  but  by  his  appointment. 
Therefore,  my  lord,  as  you  would  have  me 
believe  you  so  sincerely  love  me,  give  over  your 
vain  and  injurious  pursuit ;  suffer  me  peaceably 
to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  life  in  the  free  pos- 
session of  my  honour,  the  loss  of  which  for 
ever  embitters  all  life's  sweets ;  and  since  you 
cannot  be  my  husband,  do  not  expect  firom  me 
that  affection  which  I  cannot  pay  to  any  other.' 
— *  What  do  you  mean,  charming  Dorothea  ? ' 
cried  the  perfidious  lord.  *  Cannot  I  be  yours 
by  the  sacred  title  of  husband?  Who  can 
hinder  me,  if  you'll  but  consent  to  bless  me  on 
those  terms  ?  Too  happy  if  I  have  no  other 
obstacle  to  surmount.   I  am  yours  this  moment, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  15 

beautiful  Dorothea;  see,  I  give  you  here  my 
hand  to  be  yours,  and  yours  alone  for  ever: 
and  let  all-seeing  heaven,  and  this  holy  image 
here  on  your  oratory,  witness  the  solemn 
truth/'' 

Cardenio,  hearing  her  call  herself  Dorothea, 
was  now  fully  satisfied  she  was  the  person 
whom  he  took  her  to  be;  however,  he  would 
not  interrupt  her  story,  being  impatient  to  hear 
the  end  of  it ;  only  addressing  himself  to  her, 
"  Is  then  your  name  Dorothea,  madam  ?  "  cried 
he.  **  I  have  heard  of  a  lady  of  that  name, 
whose  misfortunes  have  a  great  resemblance 
with  yours.  But  proceed,  I  beseech  you,  and 
when  you  have  done,  I  may  perhaps  surprise 
you  with  an  account  of  things  that  have  some 
aflSnity  with  those  you  relate."  With  that 
Dorothea  made  a  stop  to  study  Cardenio  s  face, 
and  his  wretched  attire,  and  then  earnestly 
desired  him,  if  he  knew  anything  that  con- 
cerned her,  to  let  her  know  it  presently ;  telling 
him,  that  all  the  happiness  she  had  left,  was 
only  the  courage  to  bear  with  resignation  all 
the  disasters  that  might  befall  her,  well  assured 
that  no  new  one  could  make  her  more  unfortu- 
nate than  she  was  already.  **  Truly,  madam," 
replied  Cardenio,  "I  would  tell  you  all  I  know, 
were  I  sure  my  conjectures  were  true ;  but  so 


16  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

&r  as  I  may  judge  by  what  I  have  heard 
hitherto,  I  do  not  think  it  material  to  tell  it  you 
yet,  and  I  shall  find  a  more  proper  time  to  do 
it."  Then  Dorothea  resuming  her  discourse: 
"  Don  Ferdinand,"  said  she,  "  repeated  his 
vows  of  marriage  in  the  most  serious  manner ; 
and  giving  me  his  hand,  plighted  me  his  feith 
in  the  most  binding  words,  and  sacred  oaths. 
But  before  I  would  let  him  engage  himself 
thus,  I  advised  him  to  have  a  care  how  he 
suffered  an  unruly  passion  to  get  the  ascendant 
over  his  reason,  to  the  endangering  of  his 
future  happiness.  ^  My  lord,'  said  I,  ^  let  not  a 
few  transitory  and  imaginary  charms,  which 
could  never  excuse  such  an  excess  of  love, 
hurry  you  to  your  ruin.  Spare  your  noble 
fikther  the  shame  and  displeasure  of  seeing  you 
married  to  a  person  so  much  below  your  birth ; 
and  do  not  rashly  do  a  thing  of  which  you  may 
repent,  and  that  may  make  my  life  uncomfort- 
able.' I  added  several  other  reasons  to  dis- 
suade him  from  that  hasty  match,  but  they 
were  all  unregarded.  Don  Ferdinand,  deaf  to 
every  thing  but  to  his  desires,  engaged  and 
bound  himself  like  an  inconsiderate  lover,  who 
sacrifices  all  things  to  his  passion,  or  rather 
like  a  cheat,  who  does  not  value  a  breach  of 
vows.     When  I  saw  him  so  obstinate,  I  began 


DON  QUIXOTE.  17 

to  consider  what  I  had  to  do.  I  am  not  the 
first,  thought  I  to  myself,  whom  marriage  has 
raised  to  unhoped  for  greatness,  and  whose 
beauty  alone  has  supplied  her  want  of  birth 
and  merit.  Thousands  besides  Don  Ferdinand 
have  married  merely  for  love,  without  any 
regard  to  the  inequality  of  wealth  and  birth. — 
The  opportunity  was  fair  and  tempting;  and 
as  fortune  is  not  always  favourable,  I  thought 
it  an  imprudent  thing  to  let  it  slip.  Thought 
I  to  myself,  while  she  kindly  offers  me  a  hus- 
band who  assures  me  of  an  inviolable  affection, 
why  should  I,  by  an  unreasonable  denial,  make 
myself  an  enemy  of  such  a  friend?  —  And 
then  there  was  one  thing  more ;  I  apprehended 
it  would  be  dangerous  to  drive  him  to  despair 
by  an  ill-timed  refusal ;  nor  could  I  think  my- 
self safe  alone  in  his  hands,  lest  he  should 
resolve  to  satisfy  his  passion  by  force; 
which  done,  he  might  think  himself 'free  from 
performing  a  promise  which  I  would  not 
accept;  and  then  I  should  be  left  without 
either  honour  or  an  excuse :  for  it  would  be  no 
easy  matter  to  persuade  my  father,  and  the 
censorious  world,  that  this  nobleman  was  ad- 
mitted into  my  chamber  without  my  consent. 
All  these  reasons,  which  in  a  moment  offered 
themselves    in   my   mind,  shook    my    former 

IL  B 


18  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

resolves ;  and  Don  Ferdinand's  sighs,  his  tears, 
his  vows,  and  the  sacred  witnesses  by  which 
he  swore,  together  with  his  graceful  mien,  his 
extraordinary  accomplishments,  and  the  love 
which  I  fancied  I  read  in  all  his  actions,  helped 
to  bring  on  my  ruin,  as  I  believe  they  would 
have  prevailed  with  any  one's  heart  as  free  and 
as  well  guarded  as  was  mine.  Then  I  called  my 
maid  to  be  witness  to  Don  Ferdinand's  vows 
and  sacred  engagements,  which  he  reiterated 
to  me,  and  confirmed  with  new  oaths  and 
solemn  promises;  he  called  again  on  heaven, 
and  on  many  particular  saints,  to  witness  his 
sincerity,  wishing  a  thousand  curses  might  &11 
on  him,  in  case  he  ever  violated  his  word. 
Again  he  sighed,  again  he  wept,  and  moved 
me  more  and  more  with  fresh  marks  of  affec- 
tion; and  the  treacherous  maid  having  left 
the  room,  the  perfidious  lord,  presuming  on 
my  weakness,  completed  his  pernicious  design. 
The  day  which  succeeded  that  unhappy  night, 
had  not  yet  began  to  dawn,  when  Don  Ferdi- 
nand, impatient  to  be  gone,  made  all  the  haste 
he  could  to  leave  me.  For  after  the  gratifica- 
tions of  brutish  appetite  are  past,  the  greatest 
pleasure  then  is,  to  get  rid  of  that  which 
entertained  it  He  told  me,  though  not  with 
80  great  a  show  of  affection,  nor  so  warmly  as 


DON  QUIXOTE.  19 

before,  that  I  might  rely  on  his  honour,  and 
on  the  sincerity  of  his  vows  and  promises ;  and 
as  a  further  pledge,  he  pulled  oflF  a  ring  of 
great  value  from  his  finger,  and  put  it  upon 
mine.  In  short,  he  went  away,  and  my  maid, 
who,  as  she  confessed  it  to  me,  let  him  in 
privately,  took  care  to  let  him  out  into  the 
street  by  break  of  day,  while  I  remained  so 
strangely  concerned  at  the  thoughts  of  all 
these  passages,  that  I  cannot  well  tell  whether 
I  was  sorry  or  pleased.  I  was  in  a  manner 
quite  distracted,  and  either  forgot,  or  had  not 
the  heart,  to  chide  my  maid  for  her  treachery, 
not  knowing  yet  whether  she  had  done  me 
good  or  harm.  I  had  told  Don  Ferdinand 
before  he  went,  that  seeing  I  was  now  his  own, 
he  might  make  use  of  the  same  means  to  come 
again  to  see  me,  till  he  found  it  convenient  to 
do  me  the  honour  of  owning  me  publicly  for 
his  wife;  but  he  came  to  me  only  the  next 
night,  and  from  that  time  I  never  could  see 
him  more,  neither  at  church  nor  in  the  street, 
though  for  a  whole  month  together  I  tired  my- 
self endeavouring  to  find  him  out.  Being 
credibly  informed  he  was  still  near  us,  and 
went  a-hunting  almost  every  day,  I  leave  you 
to  think  with  what  uneasiness  I  passed  those 
tedious   hours,  when  I  perceived  his  neglect, 


20  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

and  had  reason  to  suspect  his  breach  of  faith. 
So  unexpected  a  slight,  which  I  looked  upon 
as  the  most  sensible  affliction  that  could  be&Jl 
me,  had  like  to  have  quite  overwhelmed  me. 
Then  it  was  that  I  found  my  maid  had  be- 
trayed me.  I  broke  out  into  severe  complaints 
of  her  presumption,  which  I  had  smothered  till 
that  time.  I  exclaimed  against  Don  Ferdi- 
nand, and  exhausted  my  sighs  and  tears  with- 
out assuaging  my  sorrow.  What  was  worse,  I 
found  myself  obliged  to  set  a  guard  upon  my 
very  looks,  for  fear  my  father  and  mother 
should  inquire  into  the  cause  of  my  discontent, 
and  so  occasion  my  being  guilty  of  shameful 
lies  and  evasions  to  conceal  my  more  shameful 
disaster.  But  at  last  I  perceived  it  was  in  vain 
to  dissemble,  and  I  gave  a  loose  to  my  resent- 
ments; for  I  could  no  longer  hold,  when  I 
heard  that  Don  Ferdinand  was  married  in  a 
neighbouring  town  to  a  young  lady  of  rich  and 
noble  parentage,  and  extremely  handsome, 
whose  name  is  Lucinda." — Cardenio  hearing 
Lucinda  named,  felt  his  former  disorder,  but 
by  good  fortune  it  was  not  so  violent  as  it 
used  to  be;  and  he  only  shrugged  up  his 
shoulders,  bit  his  lips,  knit  his  brows,  and 
a  little  while  after  let  fall  a  shower  of  tears, 
which  did  not  hinder  Dorothea  from  going  on. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  21 

"This  news,"  continued  she,  "instead  of 
freezing  up  my  blood  with  grief  and  astonish- 
ment, filled  me  with  burning  rage.  Despair 
took  possession  of  my  soul,  and  in  the  trans- 
ports of  my  fury  I  was  ready  to  run  raving 
through  the  streets,  and  publish  Don  Fer- 
dinand's disloyalty,  though  at  the  expense  of 
my  reputation.  I  do  not  know  whether  a 
remainder  of  reason  stopped  these  violent 
motions,  but  I  found  myself  mightily  eased  as 
soon  as  I  had  pitched  upon  a  design  that 
presently  came  into  my  head.  I  discovered 
the  cause  of  my  grief  to  a  young  country 
fellow  that  served  my  father,  and  desired  him 
to  lend  me  a  suit  of  man's  apparel,  and  to  go 
along  with  me  to  the  town  where  I  heard  Don 
Ferdinand  was.  The  fellow  used  the  best 
arguments  he  had  to  hinder  me  firom  so 
strange  an  undertaking;  but  finding  I  was 
inflexible  in  my  resolution,  he  assured  me  he 
was  ready  to  serve  me.  Thereupon  I  put  on 
this  habit  which  you  see,  and  taking  with  me 
some  of  my  own  clothes,  together  with  some 
gold  and  jewels,  not  knowing  but  I  might 
have  occasion  for  them,  I  set  out  that  very 
night,  attended  with  that  servant,  and  many 
anxious  thoughts,  without  so  much  as  ac- 
quainting my  maid  with  my  design.     To  tell 


21  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

you  the  truth,  I  did  not  well  know  myself 
what  I  went  about ;  for  as  there  could  be  no 
remedy,  Don  Ferdinand  being  actually  married 
to  another,  what  could  I  hope  to  get  by  seeing 
him,  unless  it  were  the  wretched  satisfaction 
of  upbraiding  him  with  his  infidelity  ?  In  two 
days  and  a  half  we  got  to  the  town,  where 
the  first  thing  I  did  was  to  inquire  where 
Lucinda's  father  lived.  That  single  question 
produced  a  great  deal  more  than  I  desired 
to  hear ;  for  the  first  man  I  addressed  myself 
to,  showed  me  the  house,  and  informed  me 
of  all  that  had  happened  at  Lucinda's  marriage, 
which  it  seems  was  grown  so  public,  that  it 
was  the  talk  of  the  whole  town.  He  told  me 
how  Lucinda  had  swooned  away  as  soon  as 
she  had  answered  the  priest,  that  she  was 
contented  to  be  Don  Ferdinand's  wife;  and 
how  after  he  had  approached  to  open  her 
stays,  to  give  her  more  room  to  breathe,  he 
found  a  letter  under  her  own  hand,  wherein 
she  declared  she  could  not  be  Don  Ferdinand's 
wife,  because  she  was  already  contracted  to 
a  considerable  gentleman  of  the  same  town, 
whose  name  was  Cardenio ;  and  that  she  had 
only  consented  to  that  marriage  in  obedience 
to  her  fetther.  He  also  told  me,  that  it 
appeared  by  the  letter,  and  a  dagger  which 


DON  QUIXOTE.  2S 

was  found  about  her,  that  she  designed  to 
have  killed  herself  after  the  ceremony  was 
over:  and  that  Don  Ferdinand,  enraged  to 
see  himself  thus  deluded,  would  have  killed 
her  himself  with  that  very  dagger,  had  he 
not  been  prevented  by  those  that  were  present. 
He  added,  it  was  reported,  that  upon  this 
Don  Ferdinand  immediately  left  the  town; 
and  that  Lucinda  did  not  come  to  herself  till 
next  day,  and  then  she  told  her  parents  that 
she  was  really  Cardenio's  wife,  and  that  he 
and  she  were  contracted  before  she  had  seen 
Don  Ferdinand.  I  heard  also  that  this 
Cardenio  was  present  at  the  wedding;  and 
that  as  soon  as  he  saw  her  married,  which 
was  a  thing  he  never  could  have  believed, 
he  left  the  town  in  despair,  leaving  a  letter 
behind  him,  fall  of  complaints  of  Lucinda's 
breach  of  faith,  and  to  inform  his  friends  of 
his  resolution  to  go  to  some  place  where  they 
should  never  hear  of  him  more.  This  was  all 
the  discourse  of  the  town  when  we  came 
thither,  and  soon  after  we  heard  that  Lucinda 
also  was  missing,  and  that  her  father  and 
mother  were  grieving  almost  to  distraction, 
not  being  able  to  learn  what  was  become  of 
her.  For  my  part,  this  news  revived  my 
hopes,   having  reason   to  be   pleased  to  find 


24  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

Don  Ferdinand  unmarried.  I  flattered  myself 
that  heaven  had  perhaps  prevented  this  second 
marriage,  to  make  him  sensible  of  violating 
the  first,  and  to  touch  his  conscience,  in  order 
to  his  acquitting  himself  in  his  duty  like  a 
christian,  and  a  man  of  honour.  So  I  strove 
to  beguile  my  cares  with  an  imaginary  pros- 
pect of  a  far  distant  change  of  fortune,  amusing 
myself  with  vain  hopes  that  I  might  not  sink 
under  the  load  of  aflSiction,  but  prolong  life; 
though  this  was  only  a  lengthening  of  my 
sorrows,  since  I  have  now  but  the  more  reason 
to  wish  to  be  eased  of  the  trouble  of  living. 
But  while  I  staid  in  that  town,  not  knowing 
what  I  had  best  to  do,  seeing  I  could  not  find 
Don  Ferdinand,  I  heard  a  crier  publicly 
describe  my  person,  my  clothes,  and  my  age, 
in  the  open  streets,  promising  a  considerable 
reward  to  any  that  could  bring  tidings  of 
Dorothea.  I  also  heard  that  it  was  rumoured 
I  was  run  away  from  my  father's  house  with 
the  servant  who  attended  me ;  and  that  report 
touched  my  soul  as  much  as  Don  Ferdinand's 
perfidiousness ;  for  thus  I  saw  my  reputation 
wholly  lost,  and  that  too  for  a  subject  so  base 
and  so  unworthy  of  my  nobler  thoughts. 
Thereupon  I  made  all  the  haste  I  could  to  get 
out  of  the  town  with  my  servant,  who  even 


DON  QUIXOTE.  26 

then,  to  my  thinking,  began  by  some  tokens 
to  betray  a  faltering  in  the  fidelity  he  had 
promised  me.  Dreading  to  be  discovered,  we 
reached  the  most  desert  part  of  this  mountain 
that  night:  but,  as  it  is  a  common  saying, 
that  misfortunes  seldom  come  alone,  and  the 
end  of  one  disaster  is  often  the  beginning  of  a 
greater,  I  was  no  sooner  got  to  that  place, 
where  I  thought  myself  safe,  but  the  fellow, 
whom  I  had  hitherto  found  to  be  modest  and 
respectful,  now,  rather  incited  by  his  own 
villainy  than  my  beauty,  and  the  opportunity 
which  that  place  offered,  than  by  anything 
else,  had  the  impudence  to  talk  to  me  of  love ; 
and  seeing  I  answered  him  with  anger  and 
contempt,  he  would  no  longer  lose  time  in 
clownish  courtship,  but  resolved  to  use  violence 
to  compass  his  wicked  design.  But  just 
heaven,  which  seldom  or  never  fails  to  succour 
just  designs,  so  assisted  mine,  and  his  brutish 
passion  so  blinded  him,  that,  not  perceiving 
he  was  on  the  brink  of  a  steep  rock,  I  easily 
pushed  him  down,  and  then,  without  looking 
to  see  what  was  become  of  him,  and  with  more 
nimbleness  than  could  be  expected  from  my 
surprise  and  weariness,  I  ran  into  the  thickest 
part  of  the  desert  to  secure  myself  The  next 
day  I  met  a  countryman,  who  took  me  to  his 


S6  THE  ACmEVElfENTS  OF 

house  amidst  these  mountains,  and  employed 
me  ever  since  in  quality  of  his  shepherd. 
There  I  have  continued  some  months,  making 
it  my  business  to  be  as  much  as  possible  in  the 
fields,  the  better  to  conceal  my  sex.  But  not- 
withstanding all  my  care  and  industry,  he  at 
last  discovered  I  was  a  woman,  which  made 
him  presume  to  importune  me  with  beastly 
offers ;  so  that  fortune  not  &youring  me  with 
the  former  opportunity  of  freeing  myself,  I  left 
his  house,  and  chose  to  seek  a  sanctuary 
among  these  woods  and  rocks,  there  with  sighs 
and  tears  to  beseech  heaven  to  pity  me,  and  to 
direct  and  relieve  me  in  this  forlom  condition ; 
or  at  least  to  put  an  end  to  my  miserable  life, 
and  bury  in  this  desert  the  very  memory  of  an 
unhappy  creature,  who,  more  through  ill  for- 
tune than  ill  intent,  has  given  the  idle  world 
occasion  to  be  too  busy  with  her  &me." 


DON  QUIXOTE.  J7 


CHAPTER  n. 


AN   ACCOUNT   OP  THE   BEAUTIFUL  DOROTHEA'S  DIS- 
CRETION, WITH  OTHER  PLEASANT  PASSAGES. 


"This,  gentlemen,"  continued  Dorothea,  "is 
the  true  story  of  my  tragical  adventure ;  and 
now  be  you  judges  whether  I  had  reason  to 
make  the  complaint  you  overheard,  and 
whether  so  unfortunate  and  hopeless  a  creature 
be  in  a  condition  to  admit  of  comfort.  I  have 
only  one  favour  to  beg  of  you ;  be  pleased  to 
direct  me  to  some  place  where  I  may  pass  the 
rest  of  my  life  secure  from  the  search  and 
inquiry  of  my  parents ;  not  but  their  former 
aflfection  is  a  sufficient  warrant  for  my  kind 
reception,  could  the  sense  I  have  of  the 
thoughts  they  must  have  of  my  past  conduct 
permit  me  to  return  to  them;  but  when  I 
think  they  must  believe  me  guilty,  and  can 
now  have  nothing  but  my  bare  word  to  assure 
them  of  my  innocence,  I  can  never  resolve  to 
stand  their  sight."  Here  Dorothea  stopt,  and 
the  blushes  that  overspread  her  cheeks  were 
certain    signs    of   the    discomposure    of    her 


28  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

thoughts,  and  the  unfeigned  modesty  of  her 
soul.  Those  who  had  heard  her  story  were 
deeply  moved  with  compassion  for  her  hard 
fate,  and  the  curate  would  not  delay  any 
longer  to  give  her  some  charitable  comfort  and 
advice.  But  scarce  had  he  begun  to  speak, 
when  Cardenio,  addressing  himself  to  her, 
interrupted  him.  "How,  madam,"  said  he, 
taking  her  by  the  hand,  "are  you  then  the 
beautiful  Dorothea,  the  only  daughter  of  the 
rich  Cleonardo?'*  Dorothea  was  strangely 
surprised  to  hear  her  father  named,  and  by  one 
in  so  tattered  a  garb.  "And  pray  who  are 
you,  friend,"*  said  she  to  him,  "that  know  so 
well  my  father's  name  ?  for  I  think  I  did  not 
mention  it  once  throughout  the  whole  narration 
of  my  afflictions." — "  I  am  Cardenio,"  replied 
the  other,  "that  unfortunate  person,  whom 
Lucinda,  as  you  told  us,  declared  to  be  her 
husband.  I  am  that  miserable  Cardenio,  whom 
the  perfidiousness  of  the  man  who  has  reduced 
you  to  this  deplorable  condition,  has  also 
brought  to  this  wretched  state,  to  rags,  to 
nakedness,  to  despair,  nay,  to  madness  itself, 
and  all  hardships  and  want  of  human  com- 
forts ;  only  enjojring  the  privilege  of  reason  by 
short  intervals,  to  feel  and  bemoan  my  miseries 

^  r  ^uign  90U  vo$f  Kentiano  ;  Le.,  And  pray,  who  are  you,  brother  t 


DON  QUIXOTE.  29 

the  more.  I  am  the  man,  fair  Dorothea,  who 
was  the  unhappy  eye-witness  of  Don  Ferdi- 
nand's unjust  nuptials,  and  who  heard  my 
Lucinda  give  her  consent  to  be  his  wife ;  that 
heartless  wretch,  who,  unable  to  bear  so  strange 
a  disappointment,  lost  in  amazement  and 
trouble,  flung  out  of  the  house,  without  staying 
to  know  what  would  follow  her  trance,  and 
what  the  paper  that  was  taken  out  of  her 
bosom  would  produce.  I  abandoned  myself 
to  despair,  and  having  left  a  letter  with  a 
person  whom  I  charged  to  deliver  it  into 
Lucinda's  own  hands,  I  hastened  to  hide  my- 
self from  the  world  in  this  desert,  resolved  to 
end  there  a  life  which  from  that  moment  I  had 
abhorred  as  my  greatest  enemy.  But  fortune 
has  preserved  me,  I  see,  that  I  may  venture  it 
upon  a  better  cause ;  for  from  what  you  have 
told  us  now,  which  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt, 
I  am  emboldened  to  hope  that  providence  may 
yet  reserve  us  both  to  a  better  fate  than  we 
durst  have  expected.  Heaven  will  restore  you 
Don  Ferdinand,  who  cannot  be  Lucinda's,  and 
to  me  Lucinda,  who  cannot  be  Don  Ferdi- 
nand's. For  my  part,  though  my  interests 
were  not  linked  with  yours,  as  they  are,  I  have 
so  deep  a  sense  of  your  misfortunes,  that  I  would 
expose  myself  to  any  dangers  to  see  you  righted 


30  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

by  Don  Ferdinand;  and  here,  on  the  word  of  a 
gentleman  and  a  christian,  I  vow  and  promise 
not  to  forsake  you  till  he  has  done  you  justice, 
and  to  oblige  him  to  do  it  at  the  hazard  of 
my  life,  should  reason  and  generosity  prove 
inefifectual  to  force  him  to  be  blest  with 
you." 

Dorothea,  ravished  with  joy,  and  not  know- 
ing how  to  express  a  due  sense  of  Cardenio's 
obliging  oflFers,  would  have  thrown  herself  at 
his  feet  had  he  not  civilly  hindered  it.  At  the 
same  time  the  curate,  discreetly  speaking  for 
them  both,  highly  applauded  Cardenio  for  his 
generous  resolution,  and  comforted  Dorothea. 
He  also  very  heartily  invited  them  to  his 
house,  where  they  might  furnish  themselves 
with  necessaries,  and  consult  together  how  to 
find  out  Don  Ferdinand,  and  bring  Dorothea 
home  to  her  father,  which  kind  oflFer  they 
thankfully  accepted.  Then  the  barber,  who 
had  been  silent  all  this  while,  put  in  for  a  share, 
and  handsomely  assured  them,  he  would  be 
very  ready  to  do  them  all  the  service  that 
might  lie  in  his  power.  After  these  civilities, 
he  acquainted  them  with  the  design  that  had 
brought  the  curate  and  him  to  that  place,  and 
gave  them  an  account  of  Don  Quixote's  strange 
kind  of  madness,  and  of  their  staying  there  for 


DON  QUIXOTE.  31 

his  squire.  Cardenio,  hearing  him  mentioned, 
remembered  something  of  the  scuffle  he  had 
with  them  both,  but  only  as  if  it  had  been  a 
dream;  so  that  though  he  told  the  company 
of  it,  he  could  not  let  them  know  the  occasion. 
By  this  time  they  heard  somebody  call,  and  by 
the  voice  they  knew  it  was  Sancho  Panza, 
who,  not  finding  them  where  he  had  left  them, 
tore  his  very  lungs  with  holloaing.  With 
that,  they  all  went  to  meet  him ;  which  done, 
they  asked  him  what  was  become  of  Don 
Quixote?  "Alas!"  answered  Sancho,  "I  left 
him  yonder,  in  an  ill  plight.  I  found  him  in 
his  shirt,  lean,  pale,  and  almost  starved,  sigh- 
ing and  whining  for  his  lady  Dulcinea.  I  told 
him,  how  that  she  would  have  him  come  to 
her  presently  to  Toboso,  where  she  looked  for 
him  out  of  hand ;  yet  for  all  this  he  would  not 
budge  a  foot,  but  even  told  me  he  was  resolved 
he  would  never  set  eyes  on  her  sweet  face 
again,  till  he  had  done  some  feats  that  might 
make  him  worthy  of  her  goodness.  So  that," 
added  Sancho,  "  if  he  leads  this  life  any  longer, 
I  fear  me  my  poor  master  is  never  like  to  be 
an  emperor,  as  he  is  bound  in  honour  to  be, 
nay,  not  so  much  as  an  archbishop,  which  is 
the  least  thing  he  can  come  oflF  with;  there- 
fore, good  sir,  see  and  get  him  away  by  all 


32  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

means,  I  beseech  you." — The  curate  bid  him 
be  of  good  cheer,  for  they  would  take  care  to 
make  him  leave  that  place  whether  he  would 
or  not;  and  then  turning  to  Cardenio  and 
Dorothea,  he  infonned  them  of  the  design 
which  he  and  the  barber  had  laid,  in  order  to 
his  cure,  or  at  least  to  get  him  home  to  his 
house.  Dorothea,  whose  mind  was  much  eased 
with  the  prospect  of  better  fortune,  kindly 
undertook  to  act  the  distressed  lady  herself, 
which  she  said  she  thought  would  become  her 
better  than  the  barber,  having  a  dress  very 
proper  for  that  purpose ;  besides  she  had  read 
many  books  of  chivalry,  and  knew  how  the 
distressed  ladies  used  to  express  themselves 
when  they  came  to  beg  some  knight-errant's 
assistance.  "This  is  obliging,  madam,''  said 
the  curate,  "  and  we  want  nothing  more ;  so 
let  us  to  work  as  fiust  as  we  can ;  we  may  now 
hope  to  succeed,  since  you  thus  happily  facili- 
tate the  design.''  Presently  Dorothea  took  out 
of  her  bundle  a  petticoat  of  very  rich  stuflF,  and 
a  gown  of  very  fine  green  silk;  also  a  necklace, 
and  several  other  jewels  out  of  a  box;  and 
with  these  in  an  instant  she  so  adorned  herself, 
and  appeared  bo  beautiful  and  glorious,  that 
they  all  stood  in  admiration  that  Don  Ferdi- 
nand should  be  so  injudicious  as  to  slight  so 


DON  QUIXOTE.  SS 

accomplished  a  beauty.     But  he  that  admired 

her  most  was  Sancho  Panza;  for  he  thought 

he  had  never  set  eyes  on  so  fine  a  creature,  and 

perhaps  he  thought  right:    which  made  him 

earnestly  ask  the  curate  who  that  fine  dame 

was,  and  what  wind  had  blown  her  thither 

among  the  woods  and  rocks? — "Who  is  that 

fine  lady,  Sancho?"  answered  the  curate;  "she 

is  the  only  heiress  in  a  direct  line  to  the  vast 

kingdom  of  Micomicon.      Moved  by  the  fame 

of  your  master's  great  exploits,  that  spreads 

itself  over  all  Guinea,  she  comes  to  seek  him 

out,  and  beg  a  boon  of  him ;  that  is,  to  redress 

a  wrong  which  a  wicked  giant  has  done  her." 

—"Why,   that's  well,"    quoth    Sancho;   "a 

happy  seeking,  and  a  happy  finding.      Now,  if 

my  master  be  but  so  lucky  as  to  right  that 

wrong,  by  killing  that  son  of  a  whore  of  a 

giant  you  tell  me  of,  I  am  a  made  man.     Yes, 

he  will  kill  him,  that  he  will,  if  he  can  but 

come  at  him,  an  he  be  not  a  hobgoblin ;  for  my 

master  can  do  no  good  with  hobgoblins.     But, 

Mr  Curate,  an  it  please  you,  I  have  a  favour  to 

ask  of  you.    I  beseech  you  put  my  master  out 

of  conceit  with  all  archbishoprics,  for  that  is 

what  I  dread ;  and  therefore,  to  rid  me  of  my 

fears,  put  it  into  his  head  to  clap  up  a  match 

with  this  same  princess ;  for  by  that  means  it 
n.  0 


34  THE  ACmEVEMENl^S  OP 

will  be  past  his  power  to  make  himself  arch- 
bishop, and  he  will  come  to  be  emperor,  and  I 
a  great  man,  as  sure  as  a  gun.  I  have  thought 
well  of  the  matter,  and  I  find  it  is  not  at  all 
fitting  he  should  be  an  archbishop  for  my  good; 
for  what  should  I  get  by  it  ?  I  am  not  fit  for 
church  preferment,  I  am  a  married  man ;  and 
now  for  me  to  go  trouble  my  head  with  getting 
a  licence  to  hold  church  livings,  it  would  be 
an  endless  piece  of  business ;  therefore,  it  will 
be  better  for  him  to  marry  out  of  hand  this 
same  princess,  whose  name  I  cannot  tell,  for 
I  never  heard  it." — "  They  call  her  the 
Princess  Micomicona,"  said  the  curate;  **for 
her  kingdom  being  called  Micomicon,  it  is  a 
clear  case  she  must  be  called  so/' — "Like 
enough,"  quoth  Sancho;  "for  I  have  known 
several  men  in  my  time  go  by  the  names  of 
the  places  where  they  were  born,  as  Pedro  de 
Alcala,^  Juan  de  Ubeda,  Diego  de  Valladolid ; 
and  mayhap  the  like  is  done  in  Guinea,  and 
the  queens  go  by  the  name  of  their  kingdoms." 
— "It  is  well  observed,"  replied  the  curate: 
"As  for  the  match,  I'll  promote  it  to  the  ut- 
most of  my  power."  Sancho  was  heartily 
pleased  with  this  promise;  and,  on  the  other 
side,  the  curate  was  amazed  to  find  the  poor 

1  See  Api)endiz,  Note  1,  Chap.  IL,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  S6 

fellow  80  strangely  infected  with  his  master's 
mad  notions,  as  to  rely  on  his  becoming  an 
emperor.  By  this  time  Dorothea  being  mounted 
on  the  curate's  mule,  and  the  barber  having 
clapped  on  his  ox-tail  beard,  nothing  remained 
but  to  order  Sancho  to  show  them  the  way, 
and  to  renew  their  admonitions  to  him,  lest 
he  should  seem  to  know  them,  and  to  spoil  the 
plot,  which,  if  he  did,  they  told  him  it  would 
be  the  ruin  of  all  his  hopes,  and  his  master's 
empire.  As  for  Cardenio,  he  did  not  think  fit 
to  go  with  them,  having  no  business  there; 
besides,  he  could  not  tell  but  that  Don  Quixote 
might  remember  their  late  fray.  The  curate, 
likewise,  not  thinking  his  presence  necessary, 
resolved  to  stay  to  keep  Cardenio  company; 
so,  after  he  had  once  more  given  Dorothea  her 
cue,  she  and  the  barber  went  before  with 
Sancho,  while  the  two  others  followed  on  foot 
at  a  distance. 

Thus  they  went  on  for  about  three  quarters 
of  a  league,  and  then  among  the  rocks  they 
spied  Don  Quixote,  who  had  by  this  time  put 
on  his  clothes,  though  not  his  armour.  Im- 
mediately Dorothea,  understanding  he  was  the 
person,  whipped  her  palfrey,  and  when  she 
drew  near  Don  Quixote,  her  squire  alighted 
and  took  her  from  her  saddle.     When  she  was 


S6  THE  ACmEYEMENTS  OF 

upon  her  feet,  she  gracefully  advanced  towards 
the  knight,  and,  with  her  squire,  falling  on  her 
knees  before  him,  in  spite  of  his  endeavours  to 
hinder  her;  "Thrice  valorous  and  invincible 
knight,"^  said  she,  **  never  will  I  rise  from  this 
place,  till  your  generosity  has  granted  me  a 
boon,  which  shall  redound  to  your  honour,  and 
the  relief  of  the  most  disconsolate  and  most 
injured  damsel  that  the  sun  ever  saw:  and 
indeed  if  your  valour  and  the  strength  of  your 
formidable  arm  be  answerable  to  the  extent  of 
your  immortal  renown,  you  are  bound  by  the 
laws  of  honour,  and  the  knighthood  which  you 
profess,  to  succour  a  distressed  princess,  who, 
led  by  the  resounding  fame  of  your  marvellous 
and  redoubted  feats  of  arms,  comes  from  the 
remotest  regions,  to  implore  your  protection/' 
— "  I  cannot,"  said  Don  Quixote,  ''  make  you 
any  answer,  most  beautifrd  lady,  nor  will  I  hear 
a  word  more,  unless  you  vouchsafe  to  rise." — 
"  Pardon  me,  noble  knight,"  replied  the  peti- 
tioning damsel ;  **  my  knees  shall  first  be 
rooted  here,  unless  you  will  courteously  conde- 
scend to  grant  me  the  boon  which  I  humbly 
request." — "  I  grant  it  then,  lady,"  said  Don 
Quixote,  "  provided  it  be  nothing  to  the  dis- 
service  of  my   king,   my    country,   and   that 

1  See  Appeodiz,  Note  2,  Chap.  11.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  37 

beauty  who  keeps  the  key  of  my  heart  and 
liberty."—''  It  shall  not  tend  to  the  prejudice 
or  detriment  of  any  of  these/*  cried  the  lady. 
With  that  Sancho  closing  up  to  his  master, 
and  whispering  him  in  the  ear,  "  Grant  it,  sir," 
quoth  he,  '*  grant  it,  I  tell  ye ;  it  is  but  a  trifle 
next  to  nothing,  only  to  kill  a  great  looby  of 
a  giant ;  and  she  that  asks  this,  is  the  high  and 
mighty  Princess  Micomicona,  Queen  of  the 
huge  kingdom  of  Micomicon  in  Ethiopia." — 
"Let  her  be  what  she  will,"  replied  Don 
Quixote,  "  I  will  discharge  my  duty,  and  obey 
the  dictates  of  my  conscience,  according  to  the 
rules  of  my  profession."  With  that  turning 
to  the  damsel,  "Kise,  lady,  I  beseech  you," 
cried  he;  "I  grant  you  the  boon  which  your 
singular  beauty  demands." — "  Sir,"  said  the 
lady,  '*  the  boon  I  have  to  beg  of  your  mag- 
nanimous valour,  is,  that  you  will  be  pleased 
to  go  with  me  instantly  whither  I  shall  con- 
duct you,  and  promise  not  to  engage  in  any 
other  adventure,  till  you  have  revenged  me  on 
a  traitor  who  usurps  my  kingdom,  contrary  to 
all  laws  both  human  and  divine." — "  I  grant 
you  all  this,  lady,"  quoth  Don  Quixote;  *'and 
therefore  from  this  moment  shake  oflf  all  de- 
sponding thoughts  that  sit  heavy  upon  your 
mind,  and  study  to  revive  your  drooping  hopes; 


M  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

for  by  the  assistance  of  Heaven,  and  my  stren- 
uous arm,  you  shall  see  yourself  restored  to 
your  kingdom,  and  seated  on  the  throne  of 
your  ancestors,  in  spite  of  all  the  traitors  that 
dare  oppose  your  right.  Let  us  then  hasten 
our  performance ;  delay  always  breeds  danger ; 
and  to  protract  a  great  design  is  often  to  ruin 
it."  The  thankful  princess,  to  speak  her  grate- 
ful sense  of  his  generosity,  strove  to  kiss  the 
knight's  hand ;  ^  however,  he  who  was  in  every 
thing  the  most  gallant  and  courteous  of  all 
knights,  would  by  no  means  admit  of  such 
submission ;  but  having  gently  raised  her  up, 
he  embraced  her  with  an  awful  grace  and 
civility,  and  then  called  to  Sancho  for  his  arms. 
Sancho  went  immediately,  and  having  fetched 
them  from  a  tree,*  where  they  hung  like  trophies, 
armed  his  master  in  a  moment.  And  now  the 
champion  being  completely  accoutred,  **  Come 
on,"  said  he,  "let  us  go  and  vindicate  the 
rights  of  this  dispossessed  princess."  The 
barber  was  all  this  while  upon  his  knees,  and 
had  enough  to  do  to  keep  himself  from  laugh- 
ing, and  his  beard  from  falling,  which,  if  it  had 
dropped  ofif,  as  it  threatened,  would  have  be- 
trayed his  &ce  and  their  whole  plot  at  once. 

»  See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chnp.  II.,  Book  IV. 
*  See  Ai^Mndix,  Note  4,  Chi^  IL,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  39 

But  being  relieved  by  Don  Quixote's  haste  to 
put  on  his  axmour,  he  rose  up,  and  taking  the 
princess  by  the  hand,  they  both  together  set 
her  upon  her  mule.  Then  the  knight  mounted 
his  Kozinante,  and  the  barber  got  on  his  beast. 
Only  poor  Sancho  was  forced  to  foot  it,  which 
made  him  fetch  many  heavy  sighs  for  the  loss 
of  his  dear  Dapple.  However,  he  bore  his 
crosses  patiently,  seeing  his  master  in  so  fair  a 
way  of  being  next  door  to  an  emperor ;  for  he 
did  not  question  but  he  would  marry  that 
princess,  and  so  be  at  least  King  of  Micomicon. 
But  yet  it  grieved  him,  to  think  his  master's 
dominions  were  to  be  in  the  land  of  the 
negroes,  and  that,  consequently,  the  people, 
over  whom  he  was  to  be  governor,  were  all  to 
be  black.  But  he  presently  bethought  himself 
of  a  good  remedy  for  that :  **  What  care  I," 
quoth  he,  "though  they  be  blacks?  best  of  all; 
it  is  but  loading  a  ship  with  them,  and  having 
them  into  Spain,  where  I  shall  find  chapmen 
enow  to  take  them  off  my  hands,  and  pay  me 
ready  money  for  them ;  and  so  I'll  raise  a  good 
round  sum,  and  buy  me  a  title  or  an  office  to 
live  upon  frank  and  easy  all  the  days  of  my 
life.  Hang  him  that  has  no  shifts,  say  I;  it 
is  a  sorry  goose  that  will  not  baste  herself. 
Why,  what  if  I  am  not  so  book  learned   as 


40  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

other  folks,  sure  I  have  a  head-piece  good 
enough  to  know  how  to  sell  thirty  or  ten 
thousand  slaves  in  the  turn  of  a  hand.*  Let 
them  even  go  higgledy-piggledy,  little  and 
great.  What  though  they  be  as  black  as  the 
devil  in  hell,  let  me  alone  to  turn  them  into 
white  and  yellow  boys;  I  think  I  know  how 
to  lick  my  own  fingers.*' 

Big  with  these  imaginations,  Sancho  trudged 
along  so  pleased  and  light-hearted,  that  he 
forgot  his  pain  of  travelling  a-foot.  Cardenio 
and  the  curate  had  beheld  the  pleasant  scene 
through  the  bushes,  and  were  at  a  loss  what  they 
should  do  to  join  companies.  But  the  curate,  who 
had  a  contriving  head,  at  last  bethought  him- 
self of  an  expedient ;  and  pulling  out  a  pair  of 
scissors,  which  he  used  to  carry  in  his  pocket, 
he  snipped  oflf  Cardenio's  beard  in  a  trice ;  and 
having  pulled  off  his  black  cloak  and  a  sad- 
coloured  riding-coat  which  he  had  on,  he 
equipped  Cardenio  with  them,  while  he  him- 
self remained  in  his  doublet  and  breeches.  In 
which  new  garb  Cardenio  was  so  strangely 
altered,  that  he  would  not  have  known  himself 
in  a  looking-glass.  This  done,  they  made  to 
the  high-way,  and  there  stayed  till  Don  Quixote 
and  his  company  were  got  clear  of  the  rocks 

*  LiUralUfy  While  one  may  say,  take  away  these  straws ;  $n  qmtam 
alia  $$90$  pt^a$,  Le.,  in  a  moment 


DON  QUIXOTE.  41 

and  bad  ways,  which  did  not  permit  horsemen 
to  go  so  fast  as  those  on  foot.  When  they 
came  near,  the  curate  looked  very  earnestly 
upon  Don  Quixote,  as  one  that  was  in  a  study 
whether  he  might  not  know  him;  and  then, 
like  one  that  had  made  a  discovery,  he  ran  to- 
wards the  knight  with  open  arms,  crying  out, 
"Mirror  of  chivalry,  my  noble  countryman 
Don  Quixote  de  la  Mancha!  the  cream  and 
flower  of  gentility!  the  shelter  and  relief  of 
the  afficted,  and  quintessence  of  knight- 
errantry  !  how  overjoyed  am  I  to  have  found 
you !  '*  At  the  same  time  he  embraced  his  left 
leg. 

Don  Quixote,  admiring  what  adorer  of  his 
heroic  worth  this  should  be,  looked  on  him 
earnestly;  and  at  last  calling  him  to  mind, 
would  have  alighted  to  have  paid  him  his  re- 
spects, not  a  little  amazed  to  meet  him  there. 
But  the  curate  hindering  him,  "  Keverend  sir,'* 
cried  the  knight,  "  I  beseech  you,  let  me  not 
be  so  rude  as  to  sit  on  horseback,  while  a  per- 
son of  your  worth  and  character  is  on  foot.*' — 
"Sir,"  replied  the  curate,  "you  shall  by  no 
means  alight.  Let  your  Excellency  be  pleased 
to  keep  your  saddle,  since,  thus  mounted,  you 
every  day  achieve  the  most  stupendous  feats 
of  arms  and  adventures  that  were  ever  seen  in 


42  THE  ACraEVEMENTS  OP 

our  age.  It  will  be  honour  enough  for  an  un- 
worthy priest  like  me  to  get  up  behind  some 
of  your  company,  if  they  will  permit  me ;  and 
I  will  esteem  it  as  great  a  happiness  as  to  be 
mounted  upon  Pegasus,  or  the  Zebra,  or  the 
fleet  mare  of  the  famous  Moor  Muzaraque,  who 
to  this  hour  lies  enchanted  in  the  dreary  cavern 
of  Zulema,  not  far  distant  from  the  great 
Compluto."^ — "  Truly,  good  sir,  I  did  not  think 
of  this,"  answered  Don  Quixote ;  "  but  I  sup- 
pose my  lady  the  princess  will  be  so  kind  as 
to  command  her  squire  to  lend  you  his  saddle, 
and  to  ride  behind  himself,  if  his  mule  be  used  to 
carry  double." — "  I  believe  it  will,"  cried  the 
princess ;  *'  and  my  squire,  I  suppose,  will  not 
stay  for  my  commands  to  ofier  his  saddle,  for 
he  is  too  courteous  and  well-bred  to  suffer  an 
ecclesiastical  person  to  go  a-foot,  when  we 
may  help  him  to  a  mule." — "  Most  certainly," 
cried  the  barber ;  and  with  that  dismounting, 
he  offered  the  curate  his  saddle,  which  was 
accepted  without  much  entreaty.  By  ill  for- 
tune the  mule  was  a  hired  beast,  and  conse- 
quently unlucky ;  so,  as  the  barber  was  getting 
up  behind  the  curate,  the  resty  jade  gave  two 
or  three  jerks  with  her  hinder  legs,  that,  had 
they  met  with  Master  Nicholas's  skull  or  ribs, 

*  See  Appendix,  Note  5,  Chap.  IL,  Book  FV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  43 

he  would  have  bequeathed  his  rambling  aflter 
Don  Quixote  to  the  devil.  However,  he  flung 
himself  nimbly  oflf,  and  was  more  afraid  than 
hurt;  but  yet  as  he  fell  his  beard  dropt  oflf, 
and  being  presently  sensible  of  that  accident, 
he  could  not  think  of  any  better  shift  than  to 
clap  both  of  his  hands  before  his  cheeks,  and 
cry  out  he  had  broke  his  jaw-bone.  Don  Quix- 
ote was  amazed  to  see  such  an  overgrown  bush 
of  beard  lie  on  the  ground  without  jaws  and 
bloodless.  "Bless  me,"  cried  he,  "what  an 
amazing  miracle  is  this!  here  is  a  beard  as 
cleverly  taken  oflf  by  accident,  as  if  a  barber 
had  mowed  it."  The  curate,  perceiving  the 
danger  they  were  in  of  being  discovered,  hastily 
caught  up  the  beard,  and,  running  to  the 
barber,  who  lay  all  the  while  roaring  and  com- 
plaining, he  pulled  his  head  close  to  his  own 
bre€M9t,  and  then  muttering  certain  words, 
which  he  said  were  a  charm  appropriated  to 
the  fastening  on  of  fallen  beards,  he  fixed  it  on 
again  so  handsomely,  that  the  squire  was  pres- 
ently then  as  bearded  and  as  well  as  ever  he  was 
before;  which  raised  Don  Quixote's  admiration, 
and  made  him  engage  the  curate  to  teach  him 
the  charm  at  his  leisure,  not  doubting  but  its 
virtue  extended  further  than  to  the  fastening 
on  of  beards,  since  it  was  impossible  that  such 


44  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

a  one  could  be  torn  oflf  without  fetching  away 
flesh  and  all ;  and  consequently  such  a  sudden 
cure  might  be  beneficial  to  him  upon  occasion. 
And  now,  everything  being  set  to  rights, 
they  agreed  that  the  curate  should  ride  first 
by  himself,  and  then  the  other  two  by  turns 
relieving  one  another,  sometimes  riding, 
sometimes  walking,  till  they  came  to  their 
inn,  which  was  about  two  leagues  oflf.  So 
Don  Quixote,  the  princess,  and  the  curate, 
being  mounted,  and  Cardenio,  the  barber,  and 
Sancho,  ready  to  move  forwards  on  foot,  the 
knight,  addressing  himself  to  the  distressed 
damsel,  "  Now,  lady,'*  said  he,  "  let  me  entreat 
your  greatness  to  tell  me  which  way  we  must 
go,  to  do  you  service?"  The  curate,  before 
she  could  answer,  thought  fit  to  ask  her  a 
question,  that  might  the  better  enable  her  to 
make  a  proper  reply.  "Pray,  madam,'*  said 
he,  "  towards  what  country  is  it  your  pleasure 
to  take  your  progress?  is  it  not  towards  the 
kingdom  of  Micomicon  ?  I  am  very  much  mis- 
taken if  that  be  not  the  part  of  the  world 
whither  you  desire  to  go."  The  lady  having 
got  her  cue,  presently  understood  the  curate, 
and  answered  that  he  was  in  the  right. 
"  Then,"  said  the  curate,  "  your  way  lies 
directly  through  the  village  where  I  live,  fi-om 


DON  QUIXOTE.  45 

whence  we  have  a  straight  road  to  Carthagena, 
where  you  may  conveniently  take  shipping; 
and  if  you  have  a  fair  wind  and  good  weather, 
you  may  in  something  less  than  nine  years, 
reach  the  vast  lake  Meona,  I  mean  the  Palus 
Maeotis,  which  lies  somewhat  more  than  a 
hundred  days'  journey  jfrom  your  kingdom." — 
"  Surely,  sir,''  replied  the  lady,  **  you  are  under 
a  mistake ;  for  it  is  not  quite  two  years  since  I 
left  the  place ;  and  besides,  we  have  had  very 
little  fair  weather  all  the  while,  and  yet  I  am 
already  got  thither,  and  have  so  far  succeeded 
in  my  designs,  as  to  have  obtained  the  sight 
of  the  renowned  Don  Quixote  de  la  Mancha, 
the  fame  of  whose  achievements  reached  my 
ears  as  soon  as  I  landed  in  Spain,  and  moved 
me  to  find  him  out,  to  throw  myself  under  his 
protection,  and  commit  the  justice  of  my  cause 
to  his  invincible  valour." — *'  No  more,  madam, 
I  beseech  you,"  cried  Don  Quixote;  "  spare  me 
the  trouble  of  hearing  myself  praised,  for  I 
mortally  hate  whatever  may  look  like  adula- 
tion; and  though  your  compliments  may 
deserve  a  better  name,  my  ears  are  too  modest 
to  be  pleased  with  any  such  discourse:  it  is 
my  study  to  deserve  and  to  avoid  applause. 
All  I  will  venture  to  say  is,  that  whether  I 
have  any  valour  or  no,  I  am  wholly  at  your  ser- 


46  THE  ACraEVEMENTS  OP 

vice,  even  at  the  expense  of  the  last  drop  of  my 
blood ;  and  therefore,  waiving  all  these  matters 
till  a  fit  opportunity,  I  would  gladly  know  of 
this  reverend  clergyman,  what  brought  him 
hither,  unattended  by  any  of  his  servants,  alone, 
and  so  slenderly  clothed ;  for  I  must  confess  I 
am  not  a  little  surprised  to  meet  him  in  this 
condition." — **  To  tell  you  the  reason  in  few 
words,"  answered  the  curate,  "  you  must  know, 
that  Master  Nicholas,  our  friend  and  barber, 
went  with  me  to  Seville,  to  receive  some  money 
which  a  relation  of  mine  sent  me  from  the 
Indies,  where  he  has  been  settled  these  many 
years.  Neither  was  it  a  small  sum,  for  it  was 
no  less  than  seventy  thousand  pieces  of  eight, 
and  all  of  due  weight,  which  is  no  common 
thing,  you  may  well  judge ;  but  upon  the  road 
hereabouts  we  met  four  highwaymen,  that 
robbed  us  of  all  we  had,  even  to  our  very 
beards,  so  that  the  poor  barber  was  forced 
to  get  him  a  chin-periwig.  And  for  that 
young  gentleman  whom  you  see  there,"  con- 
tinued he,  pointing  to  Cardenio,  "after  they 
had  stripped  him  to  his  shirt,  they  transfigured 
him  as  you  see.*  Now  everybody  hereabouts 
says,  that  those  who  robbed  us  were  certainly 
a  pack  of  rogues  condemned  to  the  galleys, 
who,  as  they  were  going  to  punishment,  were 

*  The  priest  had  clipped  off  Cardenio's  beard  in  haste. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  47 

rescued  by  a  single  man,  not  far  from  this 
place,  and  that  with  so  much  courage,  that  in 
spite  of  the  king's  oflScer  and  his  guards,  he 
alone  set  them  all  at  liberty.  Certainly  this 
man  was  either  mad,  or  as  great  a  rogue  as 
any  of  them;  for  would  any  one  that  had  a 
grain  of  sense  or  honesty,  have  let  loose  a  com- 
pany of  wolves  among  sheep,  foxes  among  in- 
nocent poultry,  and  wasps  among  the  honey- 
pots?  He  has  hindered  public  justice  from 
taking  its  course,  broke  his  allegiance  to  his 
lawftil  sovereign,  disabled  the  strength  of  his 
galleys,  rebelled  against  him,  and  opposed  his 
officers  in  contempt  of  the  law,  and  alarmed 
the  holy  brotherhood,  that  had  lain  quiet  so 
long;  nay,  what  is  yet  worse,  he  has  endangered 
his  life  upon  earth,  and  his  salvation  hereafter." 
Sancho  had  given  the  curate  an  account  of  the 
adventure  of  the  galley-slaves,  and  this  made 
him  lay  it  on  thick  in  the  relation,  to  try  how 
Don  Quixote  would  bear  it.  The  knight 
changed  colour  at  every  word,  not  daring  to 
confess  he  was  the  pious  knight-errant  who 
had  delivered  those  worthy  gentlemen  out  of 
bondage.  "These,"  said  the  curate,  by  way 
of  conclusion,  "  were  the  men  that  reduced  us 
to  this  condition ;  and  may  heaven  in  mercy 
forgive  him  who  freed  them  from  the  punish- 
ment they  so  well  deserved ! " 


48  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 


CHAPTER  IlL 

THE  PLEASANT  STRATAGEMS  USED  TO  FREE  THE  EN- 
AMOURED KNIGHT  FROM  THE  RIGOROUS  PENANCE 
WHICH  HE  HAD  UNDERTAKEN, 

Scarce  had  the  curate  made  an  end,  when 
Sancho  addressing  himself  to  him,  ^^  Faith  and 
truth,"  quoth  he,  "  Master  Curate,  he  that  did 
that  rare  job  was  my  master  his  nown  self, 
and  that  not  for  want  of  fidr  warning;  for  I 
bid  him  have  a  care  what  he  did,  and  told  him 
over  and  over,  it  would  be  a  grievous  sin  to 
put  such  a  gang  of  wicked  wretches  out  of 
durance,  and  that  they  all  went  to  the  galleys 
for  their  roguery." — "You  buffle- headed 
clown,"  cried  Don  Quixote,  "  is  it  for  a  knight- 
errant,  when  he  meets  with  people  laden  with 
chains,  and  under  oppression,  to  examine 
whether  they  are  in  those  circumstances  for 
their  crimes,  or  only  through  misfortune  ?  We 
are  only  to  relieve  the  aMcted,  to  look  on  their 
distress,  and  not  on  their  crimes.  I  met  a 
company  of  poor  wretches,  who  went  along 


DON  QUIXOTE.  49 

sorrowftd,  dejected,  and  linked  together  like 
the  beads  of  a  rosary ;  thereupon  I  did  what 
my  conscience  and  my  profession  obliged  me 
to.  And  what  has  any  man  to  say  to  this? 
If  any  one  dares  say  otherwise,  saving  this 
reverend  clergyman's  presence  and  the  holy 
character  he  bears,  I  say,  he  knows  little  of 
knightr-errantry,  and  lies  like  a  son  of  a  whore, 
and  a  base-bom  villain ;  and  this  I  will  make 
him  know  more  efifectually,  with  the  convinc- 
ing edge  of  my  sword ! "  This  said  with  a 
grim  look,  he  fixed  himself  in  his  stirrups,  and 
pulled  his  helm  over  his  brows ;  for  the  basin, 
which  he  took  to  be  Mambrino's  helmet,  hung 
at  his  saddle-bow,  in  order  to  have  the  damage 
repaired  which  it  had  received  from  the  galley- 
slaves.  Thereupon  Dorothea,  by  this  time 
well  acquainted  with  his  temper,  seeing  him 
in  such  a  passion,  and  that  everybody,  except 
Sancho  Panza,  made  a  jest  of  him,  resolved 
with  her  native  sprightliness  and  address,  to 
carry  on  the  humour. — **I  beseech  you,  sir," 
cried  she,  "remember  the  promise  you  have 
made  me,  and  that  you  cannot  engage  in  any 
adventure  whatsoever,  till  you  have  performed 
that  we  are  going  about.  Therefore,  pray 
assuage  your  anger;  for  had  Master  Curate 
known  the  galley-slaves  were  rescued  by  your 

IL  D 


so  THE  ACHIBVEMENTS  OF 

invincible  arm,  I  am  sure  he  would  rather  have 
stitched  up  his  lips,  or  bit  oflf  his  tongue,  than 
have  spoken  a  word,  that  should  make  him 
incur  your  displeasure/' — **  Nay,  I  assure  you/' 
cried  the  curate,  **  I  would  sooner  have 
twitched  oflf  one  of  my  mustachoes^  into  the 
bargain." — **  I  am  satisfied,  madam,"  cried 
Don  Quixote,  "  and  for  your  sake  the  flame  of 
my  just  indignation  is  quenched ;  nor  will  I  be 
induced  to  engage  in  any  quarrel,  till  I  have 
fiilfiUed  my  promise  to  your  highness.  Only, 
in  recompense  of  my  good  intentions,  I  beg 
you  will  give  us  the  story  of  your  misfortunes, 
if  this  will  not  be  too  great  a  trouble  to  you ; 
and  let  me  know  who  and  what,  and  how  many 
are  the  persons  of  whom  I  must  have  due 
and  full  satisfiaction  on  your  behalf." — "  I  am 
very  willing  to  do  it,"  replied  Dorothea ;  "  but 
yet  I  fear  a  story  like  mine,  consisting  wholly 
of  afiOictions  and  disasters,  will  prove  but  a 
tedious  entertainment." — **  Never  fear  that, 
madam,"  cried  Don  Quixote. — **  Since  then  it 
must  be  so,"  said  Dorothea,  "be  pleased  to 
lend  me  your  attention."  With  that  Cardenio 
and  the  barber  gathered  up  to  her,  to  hear 
what  kind  of  story  she  had  provided  so  soon ; 
Sancho    also  hung  his  ears  upon   her   side- 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Book  IV,  Ghapter  IIL 


DON  QUIXOTE.  51 

saddle,  being  no  less  deceived  in  her  than  his 
master;  and  the  lady  having  seated  herself 
well  on  her  mnle,  after  coughing  once  or  twice, 
and  other  preparations,  very  gracefully  began 
her  story, 

*' First,  gentlemen,"  said  she,  "you  must 
know  my  name  is** — here  she  stopped  short, 
and  could  not  call  to  mind  the  name  the  curate 
had  given  her;  whereupon  finding  her  at  a 
non-plus,  he  made  haste  to  help  her  out,  "  It 
is  not  at  all  strange,"  said  he,  "  madam,  that 
you  should  be  so  discomposed  by  your  disasters, 
as  to  stumble  at  the  very  beginning  of  the 
account  you  are  going  to  give  of  them ;  extreme 
affliction  often  distracts  the  mind  to  that 
degree,  and  so  deprives  us  of  memory,  that 
sometimes  we  for  a  while  can  scarce  think  on 
our  very  names :  no  wonder  then,  that  the 
Princess  Micomicona,  lawful  heiress  to  the 
vast  kingdom  of  Micomicon,  disordered  with 
so  many  misfortunes,  and  perplexed  with  so 
many  various  thoughts  for  the  recovery  of  her 
crown,  should  have  her  imagination  and  me- 
mory so  encumbered ;  but  I  hope  you  will  now 
recollect  yourself,  and  be  able  to  proceed," — "  I 
hope  so  too,"  said  the  lady,  "  and  I  will  try  to 
go  through  with  my  story,  without  any  ftirther 
hesitation.    Know  then,  gentlemen,  that  the 


58  THE  ACHIEVEBfENTS  OF 

king,  my  father,  who  was  called  Tinacrio  the 
sage,  having  great  skill  in  the  magic  art, 
miderstood  by  his  profound  knowledge  in  that 
science,  that  Queen  Xaramilla,  my  mother, 
should  die  before  him,  that  he  himself  should 
not  survive  her  long,  and  I  should  be  left  an 
orphan.  But  he  often  said,  that  this  did  not 
so  much  trouble  him,  as  the  foresight  he  had 
by  his  speculations,  of  my  being  threatened 
with  great  misfortunes,  which  would  be  occa- 
sioned by  a  certain  giant,  lord  of  a  great  island 
near  the  confines  of  my  kingdom;  his  name 
Pandafilando,  simamed  of  the  Gloomy  Sight; 
because  though  his  eye-balls  are  seated  in  their 
due  place,  yet  he  afiects  to  squint  and  look 
askew  on  purpose  to  fright  those  on  whom  he 
stares.  My  father,  T  say,  knew  that  this  giant, 
hearing  of  his  death,  would  one  day  invade  my 
kingdom  with  a  powerful  army,  and  drive  me 
out  of  my  territories,  without  leaving  me  so 
much  as  the  least  village  for  a  retreat ;  though 
he  knew  withal  that  I  might  avoid  that  ex- 
tremity, if  I  would  but  consent  to  marry  him ; 
but  as  he  found  out  by  his  art,  he  had  reason 
to  think  I  never  would  incline  to  such  a  match. 
And  indeed  I  never  had  any  thoughts  of 
marrying  this  giant,  nor  really  any  other  giant 
in  the  world,  how  immeasurably  great  and 
mighty  soever  he  were.    My  &ther  therefore 


DON  QUIXOTE.  53 

charged  me  patiently  to  bear  my  misfortunes, 
and  abandon  my  kingdom  to  Pandafilando  for 
a  time,  without  oflfering  to  keep  him  out  by 
force  of  arms,  since  this  would  be  the  best 
means  to  prevent  my  own  death  and  the  ruin 
of  my  subjects,  considering  the  impossibility  of 
withstanding  the  devilish  force  of  the  giant. 
But  withal,  he  ordered  me  to  direct  my  course 
towards  Spain,  where  I  should  be  sure  to  meet 
with  a  powerful  champion,  in  the  person  of  a 
knight-errant,  whose  fame  should  at  that  time 
be  spread  over  all  the  kingdom ;  and  his  name, 
my  father  said,  should  be,  if  I  forget  not,  Don 
Azote,  or  Don  Gigote,'* — '*  And  it  please  you, 
forsooth,"  quoth  Sancho,  "  you  would  say  Don 
Quixote,  otherwise  called  the  Knight  of  the 
Woeful  Figure." — **  You  are  right,"  answered 
Dorothea,  **  and  my  father  also  described  him, 
and  said  he  should  be  a  tall  thin-faced  man, 
and  that  on  his  right  side,  under  the  left 
shoulder,  or  somewhere  thereabouts,  he  should 
have  a  tawny  mole^  overgrown  with  a  tuft  of 
hair,  not  much  unlike  that  of  a  horse's  mane." 
— With  that  Don  Quixote  calling  for  his  squire 
to  come  to  him,  **  Here,"  said  he,  *'  Sancho, 
help  me  oflF  with  my  clothes,  for  I  am  resolved 
to  see  whether  I  be  the  knight  of  whom  the 
necromantic  king  has  prophesied." — "  Pray,  sir, 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  III.,  Book  IV. 


04  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

why  would  you  pull  oflF  your  clothes/'  cried 
Dorothea  ? — "  To  see  whether  I  have  such  a 
mole  about  me  as  your  father  mentioned/* 
replied  the  knight. — "  Your  worship  need  not 
strip  to  know  that/'  quoth  Sancho,  "  for  to  my 
knowledge,  you  have  just  such  a  mark  as  my 
lady  says,  on  the  small  of  your  back,  which 
betokens  you  to  be  a  strong-bodied  man/' — 
"  That's  enough,"  said  Dorothea ;  "  friends 
may  believe  one  another  without  such  a  strict 
examination ;  and  whether  it  be  on  the  shoulder 
or  on  the  back-bone,  it  is  not  very  material. 
In  short,  I  find  my  father  aimed  right  in  all  his 
predictions,  and  so  do  I  in  recommendiug  my- 
self to  Don  Quixote,  whose  stature  and  appear- 
ance so  well  agree  with  my  fistther's  description, 
and  whose  renown  is  so  far  spread,  not  only  in 
Spain,  but  over  all  La  Mancha,  that  I  had  no 
sooner  landed  at  Ossuna,  but  the  fame  of  his 
prowess  reached  my  ears ;  so  that  I  was  satis- 
fied in  myself  he  was  the  person  in  quest  of 
whom  I  came." 

"But  pray,  madam/'  cried  Don  Quixote, 
*'  how  did  you  do  to  land  at  Ossuna,  since  it  is 
no  seaport  town? " — "  Doubtless,  sir,"  said  the 
curate,  before  Dorothea  could  answer  for  herself, 
"  the  princess  would  say,  that  after  she  landed 
at  Malaga,  the  first  place  where  she  heard  of 


DON  QUIXOTE.  55 

your  feats  of  arms,  was  Ossuna," — "That  is 
what  I  would  have  said,"  replied  Dorothea. — 
"It  is  easily  understood,"  said  the  curate; 
"  then  pray  let  your  majesty  be  pleased  to  go 
on  with  your  story." — "  I  have  nothing  more 
to  add,"  answered  Dorothea,  "  but  that  fortune 
has  at  last  so  far  favoured  me,  as  to  make  me  find 
the  noble  Don  Quixote,  by  whose  valour  I  look 
upon  myself  as  already  restored  to  the  throne 
of  my  ancestors;  since  he  has  so  courteously 
and  magnanimously  vouchsafed  to  grant  me 
the  boon  I  begged,  to  go  with  me  wheresoever 
I  should  guide  him.  For  all  I  have  to  do  is, 
to  show  him  this  Pandafilando  of  the  Gloomy 
Sight,  that  he  may  slay  him,  and  restore  that 
to  me  of  which  he  has  so  unjustly  deprived  me. 
For  all  this  will  certainly  be  done  with  the 
greatest  ease  in  the  world,  since  it  was  foretold 
by  Tinacrio  the  sage,  my  good  and  royal  father, 
who  has  also  left  a  prediction  written  either 
in  CJialdean  or  Greek  characters  (for  I  cannot 
read  them)  which  denotes,  that  after  the  knight 
of  the  prophecy  has  cut  off  the  giant's  head, 
and  restored  me  to  the  possession  of  my 
kingdom,  if  he  should  ask  me  to  marry  him,  I 
should  by  no  means  reftise  him,  but  instantly 
put  him  in  possession  of  my  person  and  king- 
dom,"    "Well,    friend    Sancho,"    said    Don 


56  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

Quixote,  hearing  this,  and  turning  to  the  squire, 
"what  thinkest  thou  now?  Dost  thou  not 
hear  how  matters  go?  Did  not  I  tell  thee  as 
much  before  ?  See  now,  whether  we  have  not 
a  kingdom  which  we  may  command,  and  a 
queen  whom  we  may  espouse/' — "Ah,  marry 
have  you,"  replied  Sancho,  "and  a  pox  take 
the  son  of  a  whore,  I  say,  that  will  not  wed  and 
bed  her  majesty's  grace  as  soon  as  master 
Pandafilando's  wind-pipes  are  slit.  Look  what 
a  dainty  bit  she  is !  ha !  would  I  never  had  a 
worse  flea  in  my  bed ! "  With  that,  to  show 
^18  joy,  he  cut  a  couple  of  capers  in  the  air; 
and  turning  to  Dorothea,  laid  hold  on  her  mule 
by  the  bridle,  and  flinging  himself  down  on  his 
knees,  begged  she  would  be  graciously  pleased 
to  let  him  kiss  her  hand,  in  token  of  his  owning 
her  for  his  sovereign  lady. 

There  was  none  of  the  beholders  but  was 
ready  to  burst  for  laughter,  having  a  sight  of  the 
master's  madness,  and  the  servant's  simplicity. 
In  short,  Dorothea  was  obliged  to  comply  with 
his  entreaties,  and  promised  to  make  him  a 
grandee,  when  fortune  should  favour  her  with 
the  recovery  of  her  lost  kingdom.  Whereupon 
Sancho  gave  her  his  thanks,  in  such  a  manner 
as  obliged  the  company  to  a  fresh  laughter. 
Then  going  on  with  her  relation,  "  Gentlemen," 


DON  QUIXOTE.  57 

Baid  she,  **this  is  my  history;  and  among  all 
my  misfortunes,  this  only  has  escaped  a  recital, 
that  not  one  of  the  numerous  attendants  I 
brought  from  my  kingdom  has  survived  the 
ruins  of  my  fortune,  but  this  good  squire  with 
the  long  beard :  the  rest  ended  their  days  in  a 
great  storm,  which  dashed  our  ship  to  pieces 
in  the  very  sight  of  the  harbour ;  and  he  and  I 
had  been  sharers  in  their  destiny,  had  we  not 
laid  hold  of  two  planks,  by  which  assistance  we 
were  driven  to  land,  in  a  manner  altogether 
miraculous,  and  agreeable  to  the  whole  series 
of  my  life,  which  seems,  indeed,  but  one  con- 
tinued miracle.  And  if  in  any  part  of  my 
relation  I  have  been  tedious,  and  not  so  exact 
as  I  should  have  been,  you  must  impute  it  to 
what  Master  Curate  observed  to  you,  in  the 
beginning  of  my  story,  that  continual  troubles 
oppress  the  senses,  and  weaken  the  memory.''  — 
**  Those  pains  and  aflflictions,  be  they  ever  so 
intense  and  difficult,"  said  Don  Quixote,  "  shall 
never  deter  me,  most  virtuous  and  high-born 
lady,  from  adventuring  for  your  service,  and 
enduring  whatever  I  shall  suflFer  in  it:  and 
therefore  I  again  ratify  the  assurances  I  have 
given  you,  and  swear  that  I  will  bear  you  com- 
pany, though  to  the  end  of  the  world,  in  search 
of  this  implacable  enemy  of  yours,  till  I  shall 


58  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

find  him ;  whose  insulting  head,  by  the  help  of 
heaven,  and  my  own  invincible  arm,  I  am 
resolved  to  cut  oflF,  with  the  edge  of  this  (I  will 
not  say  good)  sword ;  a  curse  on  Gines  de 
Passamonte,  who  took  away  my  own !  '*  This 
he  spoke  murmuring  to  himself,  and  then  pro- 
secuted his  discourse  in  this  manner:  ^^And 
after  I  have  divided  it  from  the  body,  and  left 
you  quietly  possessed  of  your  throne,  it  shall  be 
left  at  your  own  choice  to  dispose  of  your  per- 
son, as  you  shall  think  convenient :  for  as  long 
as  I  shall  have  my  memory  full  of  her  image, 
my  will  captivated,  and  my  understanding 
wholly  subjected  to  her,  whom  I  now  forbear 
to  name,  it  is  impossible  I  should  in  the  least 
deviate  from  the  afiection  I  bear  to  her,  or  be 
induced  to  think  of  marrying,  though  it  were 
a  Phoenix." 

The  close  of  Don  Quixote's  speech,  which 
related  to  his  not  marrying,  touched  Sancho  so 
to  the  quick,  that  he  could  not  forbear  bawling 
out  his  resentments :  "  Body  o'  me.  Sir  Don 
Quixote,'*  cried  he,  "  you  are  certainly  out  of 
your  wits,  or  how  is  it  possible  you  should  stick 
at  striking  a  bargain  with  so  great  a  lady  as 
this?  Do  you  think,  sir,  fortune  will  put  such 
dainty  bits  in  your  way  at  every  comer  ?  Is  my 
lady  Dulcinea  handsomer,  do  you  think  ?    No, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  69 

marry,  is  she  not  half  so  handsome :  I  conld 
ahnost  say  she  is  not  worthy  to  tie  this  lady's 
shoe-latchets.  I  am  likely,  indeed,  to  get  the 
earldom  I  have  fed  myself  with  hopes  of,  if  you 
spend  your  time  in  fishing  for  mushrooms  in 
the  bottom  of  the  sea.  Marry,  marry  out  of 
hand,  or  Old  Nick  take  you  for  me.  Lay  hold 
of  the  kingdom  which  is  ready  to  leap  into 
your  hands ;  and  as  soon  as  you  are  a  king,  e'en 
make  me  a  marquis,  or  a  peer  of  the  land,  and 
afterwards,  let  things  go  at  sixes  and  sevens,  it 
will  be  all  a  case  to  Sancho." — Don  Quixote, 
quite  divested  of  all  patience,  at  the  blasphemies 
which  were  spoken  against  his  lady  Dulcinea, 
could  bear  with  him  no  longer ;  and  therefore, 
without  so  much  as  a  word  to  give  him  notice 
of  his  displeasure,  gave  him  two  such  blows 
with  his  lance,  that  poor  Sancho  measured  his 
length  on  the  ground,  and  had  certainly  there 
breathed  his  last,  had  not  the  knight  desisted, 
through  the  persuasions  of  Dorothea.  '  *  Think- 
est  thou,"  said  he,  after  a  considerable  pause, 
^^  most  infamous  peasant,  that  I  shall  always 
have  leisure  and  disposition  to  put  up  with  thy 
afironts ;  and  that  thy  whole  business  shall  be 
to  study  new  oflFences,  and  mine  to  give  thee 
new  pardons?  Dost  thou  not  know,  excom- 
municated traitor   (for  certainly  excommuni- 


60  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

cation  is  the  least  punishment  can  fall  upon  thee 
after  such  profanations  of  the  peerless  Dulcinea's 
name),  and  art  thou  not  assured,  vile  slave  and 
ignominious  vagabond,  that  I  should  not 
have  strength  sufficient  to  kill  a  flea,  did  not 
she  give  strength  to  my  nerves,  and  inftise 
vigour  into  my  sinews?  Speak,  thou  villain 
with  the  viper's  tongue ;  who  dost  thou  imagine 
has  restored  the  queen  to  her  kingdom,  cut  off 
the  head  of  a  giant,  and  made  thee  a  marquis 
(for  I  count  all  this  as  done  already),  but  the 
power  of  Dulcinea,  who  makes  use  of  my  arm 
as  the  instrument  of  her  act  in  me?  She 
fights  and  overcomes  in  me,  and  I  live  and 
breathe  in  her,  holding  life  and  being  firom  her. 
Thou  bafie-bom  wretch !  art  thou  not  possessed 
of  the  utmost  ingratitude,  thou  who  seest 
thyself  exalted  fi-om  the  very  dregs  of  the  earth, 
to  nobility  and  honour,  and  yet  dost  repay  so 
great  a  benefit  with  obloquies  against  the  person 
of  thy  benefiujtress.'* 

Sancho  was  not  so  mightily  hurt,  but  he 
could  hear  what  his  master  said  well  enough ; 
wherefore,  getting  upon  his  legs  in  all  haste, 
he  ran  for  shelter  behind  Dorothea's  palfrey, 
and  being  got  thither,  "  Hark  you,  sir,"  cried 
he  to  him,  "  if  you  have  no  thought  of  marry- 
ing this  same  lady,  it  is  a  clear  case  that  the 


DON  QraXOTB.  61 

kingdom  will  never  be  yours ;  and  if  it  be  not, 
what  good  can  you  be  able  to  do  me  ?  Then 
let  any  one  judge  whether  I  have  not  cause 
to  complain.  Therefore,  good  your  worship, 
marry  her  once  for  all,  now  we  have  her  rained 
down,  as  it  were,  from  heaven  to  us,  and  you 
may  aflber  keep  company  with  my  lady 
Dulcinea;  for  I  guess  you  will  not  be  the 
only  king  in  the  world  that  has  kept  a  miss  or 
two  in  a  comer.  As  for  beauty,  do  you  see, 
I'll  not  meddle  nor  make ;  for  (if  I  must  say 
the  truth),  I  like  both  the  gentlewomen  well 
enough  in  conscience ;  though  now  I  think  on 
it,  I  have  never  seen  the  lady  Dulcinea." — 
"How,  not  seen  her,  blasphemous  traitor!" 
replied  Don  Quixote;  "when  just  now  thou 
broughtest  me  a  message  from  her!" — "I 
say,"  answered  Sancho,  "  I  have  not  seen  her 
so  leisurely  as  to  take  notice  of  her  features 
and  good  parts  one  by  one ;  but  yet,  as  I  saw 
them  at  a  blush,  and  all  at  once,  methought  I 
had  no  reason  to  find  fault  with  them." — 
"  Well,  I  pardon  thee  now,"  quoth  Don  Quix- 
ote, "and  thou  must  excuse  me  for  what  I 
have  done  to  thee;  for  the  first  motions  are 
not  in  our  power." — "  I  perceive  that  well 
enough,"  said  Sancho,  "  and  that  is  the  reason 
my  first  motions  are  always  in  my  tongue; 


63  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

and  I  cannot  for  my  life  help  speaking  what 
comes  uppermost/' — "However,  friend  Sancho," 
said  Don  Quixote,  *'  thou  hadst  best  think  be- 
fore thou  speakest ;  for  the  pitcher  never  goes 
so  oft  to  the  well — I  need  say  no  more." — 
"  Well,  what  must  be  must  be,"  answered 
Sancho ;  "  there  is  somebody  above  who  sees 
all,  and  will  one  day  judge  which  has  most  to 
answer  for,  whether  I  for  speaking  amiss  or 
you  for  doing  so/* — "  No  more  of  this,  Sancho," 
said  Dorothea;  "but  run  and  kiss  your  lord's 
hands,  and  beg  his  pardon ;  and,  for  the  time 
to  come,  be  more  advised  and  cautious  how 
you  run  into  the  praise  or  dispraise  of  any 
person;  but  especially  take  care  you  do  not 
speak  ill  of  that  lady  of  Toboso,  whom  I  do 
not  know,  though  I  am  ready  to  do  her  any  ser- 
vice ;  and  for  your  own  part,  trust  in  heaven ; 
for  you  shall  infallibly  have  a  lordship,  which 
shall  enable  you  to  live  like  a  prince."  Sancho 
shrugged  up  his  shoulders,  and  in  a  sneaking 
posture  went  and  asked  his  master  for  his 
hand,  which  he  held  out  to  him  with  a  grave 
countenance ;  and  after  the  squire  had  kissed 
the  back  of  it,  the  knight  gave  him  his  bless- 
ing, and  told  him  he  had  a  word  or  two  with 
him,  bidding  him  come  nearer,  that  he  might 
have  the  better  convenience  of  speaking  to 


DON  QUIXOTE.  63 

him.  Sancho  did  as  his  master  commanded, 
and  going  a  little  from  the  company  with  him ; 
"  Since  thy  return/'  said  Don  Quixote,  apply- 
ing himself  to  him,  "  I  have  neither  had  time 
nor  opportunity  to  inquire  into  the  particulars 
of  thy  embassy,  and  the  answer  thou  hast 
brought ;  and  therefore,  since  fortune  has  now 
befriended  us  with  convenience  and  leisure, 
deny  me  not  the  satis&ction  thou  mayest  give 
me  by  the  rehearsal  of  thy  news/' — "Ask  what 
you  will,''  cried  Sancho,  "and  you  shall  not 
want  for  an  answer;  but,  good  your  worship, 
for  the  time  to  come,  I  beseech  you,  do  not 
be  too  hasty." — "  What  occasion  hast  thou, 
Sancho,  to  make  this  request?"  replied  Don 
Quixote. — "Reason  good  enough  truly,"  said 
Sancho;  "for  the  blows  you  gave  me  even 
now,  were  rather  given  me  on  account  of  the 
quarrel  which  the  devil  stirred  up  between 
your  worship  and  me  the  other  night,  than  for 
your  dislike  of  anything  which  was  spoken 
against  my  lady  Dulcinea."  — "  Pr'ythee, 
Sancho,"  cried  Don  Quixote,  "be  careftd  of 
falling  again  into  such  irreverent  expressions ; 
for  they  provoke  me  to  anger,  and  are  highly 
oflFensive.  I  pardoned  thee  then  for  being  a  de- 
linquent, but  thou  art  sensible  that  a  new  offence 
must  be  attended  with  a  new  punishment." 


64  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

As  they  were  going  on  in  such  discourse  as 
this,  they  saw  at  a  distance  a  person  riding  up 
to  them  on  an  ass,  who,  as  he  came  near 
enough  to  be  distinguished,  seemed  to  be  a 
gipsy  by  his  habit.  But  Sancho  Panza,  who, 
whenever  he  got  sight  of  any  asses,  followed 
them  with  his  eyes  and  his  heart,  as  one  whose 
thoughts  were  ever  fixed  on  his  own,  had 
scarce  given  him  half  an  eye,  but  he  knew  him 
to  be  Gines  de  Passamonte,  and  by  the  looks 
of  the  gipsy  found  out  the  visage  of  his  ass ; 
as  really  it  was  the  very  same  which  Gines  had 
got  under  him ;  who,  to  conceal  himself  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  public,  and  have  the 
better  opportunity  of  making  a  good  market  of 
his  beast,  had  clothed  himself  like  a  gipsy  ;^ 
the  cant  of  that  sort  of  people,  as  well  as  the 
languages  of  other  countries,  being  as  natural 
and  familiar  to  them  as  their  own.  Sancho  saw 
him  and  knew  him;  and  scarce  had  he  seen  and 
taken  notice  of  him,  when  he  cried  out  as  loud 
as  his  tongue  would  permit  him :  ^'  Ah !  thou 
thief,  Genesillo,  leave  my  goods  and  chattels  be- 
hind thee :  get  off  fi^om  the  back  of  my  own 
dear  life :  thou  hast  nothing  to  do  with  my  poor 
beast,  without  whom  I  cannot  enjoy  a  moment's 
ease:  away  from  my  Dapple,  away  from  my 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chapter  III.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  65 

comfort ;  take  to  thy  heels,  thou  villain ;  hence 
thou  hedge  bird,  leave  what  is  none  of  thine !  '* 
He  had  no  occasion  to  use  so  many  words ;  for 
Gines  dismounted  as  soon  as  he  heard  him 
speak,  and  taking  to  his  heels,  got  from  them, 
and  was  out  of  sight  in  an  instant.  Sancho 
ran  immediately  to  his  ass,  and  embraced  him: 
"How  hast  thou  done,"  cried  he,  "since  I 
saw  thee,  my  darling  and  treasure,  my  dear 
Dapple,  the  delight  of  my  eyes,  and  my  dearest 
companion?"  And  then  he  stroked  and 
slabbered  him  with  kisses,  as  if  the  beast  had 
been  a  rational  creature.  The  ass,  for  his  part, 
was  as  silent  as  could  be,  and  gave  Sancho  the 
liberty  of  as  many  kisses  as  he  pleased,  without 
the  return  of  so  much  as  one  word  to  the  many 
questions  he  had  put  to  him.  At  sight  of  this 
the  rest  of  the  company  came  up  with  him, 
and  paid  their  compliments  of  congratulation 
to  Sancho,  for  the  recovery  of  his  ass,  especially 
Don  Quixote,  who  told  him,  that  though  he 
had  found  his  ass  again,  yet  would  not  he  re- 
voke the  warrant  he  had  given  him  for  three 
asses ;  for  which  favour  Sancho  returned  him  a 
multitude  of  thanks. 

While  they  were  travelling  together,  and 
discoursing  after  this  manner,  the  curate  ad- 
dressed himself  to  Dorothea,  and  gave  her  to 

IL  E 


66  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

understand,  that  she  had  excellently  discharged 
herself  of  what  she  had  undertaken,  as  well  in 
the  management  of  the  history  itself,  as  in  her 
brevity,  and  adapting  her  style  to  the  particular 
terms  made  use  of  in  books  of  knight-errantry. 
She  returned  for  answer,  that  she  had  frequently 
conversed  with  such  romances,  but  that  she 
was  ignorant  of  the  situation  of  the  provinces, 
and  the  sea-ports,  which  occasioned  the  blunder 
she  had  made,  by  saying  that  she  landed  at 
Ossuna.  "I  perceived  it,"  replied  the  curate, 
"  and  therefore  I  put  in  what  you  heard,  which 
brought  matters  to  rights  again.  But  is  it  not 
an  amazing  thing,  to  see  how  ready  this  un- 
fortunate gentleman  is  to  give  credit  to  these 
fictitious  reports,  only  because  they  have  the 
air  of  the  extravagant  stories  in  books  of  knight- 
errantry?"  Cardenio  said,  "that  he  thought 
this  so  strange  a  madness,  that  he  did  not 
believe  the  wit  of  man,  with  all  the  liberty  of 
invention  and  fiction,  capable  of  hitting  so 
extraordinary  a  character." — "  The  gentleman," 
replied  the  curate,  "  has  some  qualities  in  him, 
even  as  surprising  in  a  madman,  as  his  un- 
paralleled frenzy:  for,  take  him  but  ofiF  his 
romantic  humour,  discourse  with  him  of  any 
other  subject,  you  will  find  him  to  handle  it 
with  a  great  deal  of  reason,  and  show  himself, 


DON  QUIXOTE  67 

by  his  conversation,  to  have  very  clear  and 
entertaining  conceptions:  insomuch,  that  if 
knight-errantry  bears  no  relation  to  his  dis- 
course, there  is  no  man  but  will  esteem  him  for 
his  vivacity  of  wit,  and  strength  of  judgment" 
While  they  were  thus  discoursing,  Don  Quixote, 
prosecuting  his  converse  with  his  squire 
"  Sancho,"  said  he,  "  let  us  lay  aside  all  manner 
of  animosity ;  let  us  forget  and  forgive  in- 
juries ;  *  and  answer  me  as  speedily  as  thou 
canst,  without  any  remains  of  thy  last  dis- 
pleasure, how,  when,  and  where  didst  thou  find 
my  lady  Dulcinea  ?  What  was  she  doing  when 
thou  first  paid'st  thy  respects  to  her?  How 
didst  thou  express  thyself  to  her  ?  What 
answer  was  she  pleased  to  make  thee?  What 
countenance  did  she  put  on  at  the  perusal  of 
my  letter  ?  Who  transcribed  it  fairly  for  thee  ? 
And  every  thing  else  which  has  any  relation  to 
this  affair,  without  addition,  lies  or  flattery. 
On  the  other  side,  take  care  thou  losest  not  a 
tittle  of  the  whole  matter,  by  abbreviating  it, 
lest  thou  rob  me  of  part  of  that  delight,  which 
I  propose  to  myself  firom  it." — "  Sir,"  answered 
Sancho,  "if  I  must  speak  the  truth,  and  nothing 
but  the  truth,  nobody  copied  out  the  letter 
for  me  ;  for  I  carried  none  at  all." — *'  That's 

*  In  the  oiiginal  Spanish   it   is, — Echemos  pdUaa  a  la  mar:  i.e. 
literallj,  let  ns  throw  small  little  hairs  into  the  sea. 


68  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

right,"  cried  Don  Quixote,  "  for  I  found  the 
pocket-book,  in  which  it  was  written,  two  days 
after  thy  departure,  which  occasioned  exceeding 
grief  in  me,  because  I  knew  not  what  thou 
could'st  do,  when  thou  found'st  thyself  without 
the  letter ;  and  I  could  not  but  be  induced  to 
believe  that  thou  would'st  have  returned,  in 
order  to  take  it  with  thee." — "  I  had  certainly 
done  so,"  replied  Sancho,  "  were  it  not  for  this 
head  of  mine,  which  kept  it  in  remembrance 
ever  since  your  worship  read  it  to  me,  and 
helped  me  to  say  it  over  to  a  parish-clerk,  who 
writ  it  out  for  me  word  for  word  so  purely,  that 
he  swore,  though  he  had  written  out  many  a 
letter  of  excommunication  in  his  time,  he  never 
in  all  the  days  of  his  life  had  read  or  seen  any 
thing  so  well  spoken  as  it  was." — "  And  dost 
thou  still  retain  the  memory  of  it,  my  dear 
Sancho?"  cried  Don  Quixote. — "  Not  I,"  quoth 
Sancho;  "for  as  soon  as  I  had  given  it  her, 
and  your  turn  was  served,  I  was  very  willing 
to  forget  it.  But  if  I  remember  any  thing,  it 
is  what  was  on  the  top ;  and  it  was  thus :  High 
and  subterrene,  I  would  say,  sovereign  lady : 
and  at  the  bottom,  yours  until  death,  the 
Knight  of  the  Woeful  Figure;  and  I  put  be- 
tween these  two  things,  three  hundred  souls 
and  lives  and  pigsnyes." 


DON  QUIXOTE.  «9 


CHAPTER   IV. 

THE  PLEASANT  DIALOGUE  BETWEEN  DON  QUIXOTE  AND 
HIS  SQUIRE,  CONTINUED,  WITH  OTHER  ADVENTURES. 

"  All  this  is  mighty  well,"  said  Don  Quixote; 
"  proceed  therefore ;  you  arrived,  and  how  was 
that  queen  of  beauty  then  employed  ?  On  my 
conscience,  thou  found'st  her  stringing  of  orient 
pearls,  or  embroidering  some  curious  device  in 
gold  for  me  her  captive  knight;  was  it  not 
so,  my  Sancho  ?" — '^  No  faith,"  answered  the 
squire,  "  I  found  her  winnowing  a  parcel  of 
wheat  very  seriously  in  the  back-yard." — 
"  Then,"  said  the  Don,  "  you  may  rest  assured, 
that  every  corn  of  that  wheat  was  a  grain  of 
pearl,  since  she  did  it  the  honour  of  touching  it 
with  her  divine  hand.  Didst  thou  observe  the 
quality  of  the  wheat,  was  it  not  of  the  finest 
sort?" — "  Very  indififerent,  I  thought,"  said  the 
squire. — **  Well,  this,  at  least,  you  must  allow; 
it  must  make  the  finest  whitest  bread,  if  sifted 
by  her  white  hands.  But  go  on;  when  you 
delivered  my  letter,  did  she  kiss  it?  Did  she 
treasure  it  in  her  bosom,  or  what  ceremony  did 


70  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

she  use  worthy  such  a  letter?  How  did  she 
behave  herself? '' — **  Why  truly,  sir/'  answered 
Sancho,  "  when  I  ofiFered  her  the  letter,  she  was 
very  busy  handling  her  sieve;  *and,  pr'ythee 
honest  friend,'  said  she,  *  do  so  much  as  lay  that 
letter  down  upon  that  sack  there;  I  cannot 
read  it  till  1  have  winnowed  out  what  is  in  my 
hands."' — **0  unparalleled  discretion!"  cried 
Don  Quixote;  "she  knew  that  a  perusal  required 
leisure,  and  therefore  deferred  it,  for  her  more 
pleasing  and  private  hours.  But  oh !  my  squire, 
while  she  was  thus  employed,  what  conference 
passed?  What  did  she  ask  about  her  knight,  and 
what  did  you  reply  ?  Say  all,  say  all,  my  dear- 
est Sancho,  let  not  the  smallest  circumstance 
escape  the  tongue ;  speak  all  that  thought  can 
frame,  or  pen  describe." — *'  Her  questions  were 
easily  answered,  sir,"  said  Sancho,  "for  she 
asked  me  none  at  all:  I  told  her  indeed,  in 
what  a  sad  pickle  I  had  lefb  you  for  her  sake, 
naked  to  the  waist ;  that  you  eat  and  slept  like 
the  brute  beaats ;  that  you  would  let  a  razor  as 
soon  touch  your  throat  as  your  beard ;  that  you 
were  still  blubbering  and  crying,  or  swearing 
and  cursing  your  fortune." — "  There  you  mis- 
took," replied  Don  Quixote,  "  I  rather  bless  my 
fortune,  and  always  shall,  while  life  affords  me 
breath,  since  I  am  thought  to  merit  the  esteem 


DON  QUIXOTE.  71 

of  80  high  a  lady  as  Dulcinea  del  Toboso." — 
"There  you  hit  it,"  said  Sancho;  **8he  is  a 
high  lady  indeed,  sir,  for  she  is  taller  than  I 
am  by  a  foot  and  half."* — "Why,  how  now, 
Sancho,"  said  the  knight,  "  hast  thou  measured 
with  her?" — "Ah  marry  did  I,  sir,"  said  the 
squire ;  "for  you  must  know  that  she  desired 
me  to  lend  her  a  hand  in  lifting  a  sack  of  wheat 
on  an  ass ;  so  we  buckled  about  it,  and  I  came 
so  close  to  her,  that  I  found  she  was  taller  than 
I  by  a  fiill  span  at  least." — "  Right,"  answered 
Don  Quixote ;  "  but  thou  art  also  conscious  that 
the  uncommon  stature  of  her  person  is  adorned 
with  innumerablegraces  and  endowments  of  soul. 
But,  Sancho,  when  you  approached  the  charm- 
ing she,  did  not  an  aromatic  smell  strike  thy 
sense,  a  scent  so  odoriferous,  pleasing  and  sweet, 

that  I  want  a  name  for  it;  sweet  as you 

understand  me,  as  the  richest  fragrancy  diffused 
around  a  perfumer's  magazine  of  odours?  This, 
at  least,  you  must  grant  me." — "  I  did  indeed 
feel  a  sort  of  scent  a  little  unsavoury,"  said 
Sancho,  "  somewhat  vigorous  or  so ;  for  I  sup- 
pose she  had  wrought  hard,  and  sweat  somewhat 
plentifolly." — "It  is  false,"  answered  the  knight, 

*  Colo  in  Spanish,  which  Sobrino  b&js  is  but  a  handful,  so  says 
Stevens  in  his  Dictionaiy,  though  he  translates  it  in  this  place  a  cubit. 
Oudiu  says,  it  is  the  breadth  of  four  fingers,  and  the  height  of  the  thumb 
when  raised  up  in  clenching  tlie  fist. 


72  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

**  thy  smelling  has  been  debauched  by  thy  own 
scent,  or  some  canker  in  thy  nose:  if  thou 
could'st  tell  the  scent  of  opening  roses,  fragrant 
lilies,  or  the  choicest  amber,  then  thou  might'st 
guess  at  hers." — "Cry  mercy,  sir,"  said  Sancho; 
"  it  may  be  so  indeed,  for  I  remember  that  I 
myself  have  smelt  very  oft  just  as  Madam  Dul- 
cinea  did  then ;  and  that  she  should  smell  like 
me,  is  no  such  wondrous  thing  neither,  since 
there  is  never  a  barrel  the  better  herring  of 
us." — "  But  now,"  said  the  knight,  "  supposing 
the  corn  winnowed  and  despatched  to  the  miU, 
what  did  she  after  she  had  read  my  letter?" — 
"Your  letter,  sir,"  answered  Sancho,  "your 
letter  was  not  read  at  all,  sir ;  as  for  her  part, 
she  said,  she  could  neither  read  nor  write,  and 
she  would  trust  nobody  else,  lest  they  should 
tell  tales,  and  so  she  cunningly  tore  your  letter. 
She  said,  that  what  1  told  her  by  word  of  mouth 
of  your  love  and  penance  was  enough :  to  make 
short  now,  she  gave  her  service  to  you,  and 
said  she  had  rather  see  you  than  hear  ftom  you ; 
and  she  prayed  you,  if  ever  you  loved  her,  upon 
sight  of  me,  forthwith  to  leave  your  madness 
among  the  bushes  here,  and  come  straight  to 
Toboso  (if  you  be  at  leisure),  for  she  has  some- 
thing to  say  to  you,  and  has  a  huge  mind  to 
see  you :  she  had  like  to  burst  with  laughing 


DON  QUIXOTE.  73 

when  I  called  you  the  Knight  of  the  Woeful 
Figure.  She  told  me  the  Biscayan  whom  you 
mauled  so  was  there,  and  that  he  was  a  very 
honest  fellow ;  but  that  she  heard  no  news  at 
all  of  the  galley-slaves." 

"  Thus  far  all  goes  well/'  said  Don  Quixote ; 
"  but  tell  me,  pray,  what  jewel  did  she  present 
you  at  your  departure,  as  a  reward  for  the  news 
you  brought?  for  it  is  a  custom  of  ancient 
standing  among  knights  and  ladies  errand,  to 
bestow  on  squires,  dwarfs,  or  damsels,  who  bring 
them  good  news  of  their  ladies  or  servants,  some 
precious  jewel  as  a  grateful  reward  of  their  wel- 
come tidings." — ''  Ah !  sir,"  said  Sancho,  '*  that 
was  the  fashion  in  the  days  of  yore,  and  a  very 
good  fashion,  I  take  it:  but  all  the  jewels 
Sancho  got  was  a  luncheon  of  bread  and  a  piece 
of  cheese,  which  she  handed  to  me  over  the 
wall,  when  I  was  taking  my  leave,  by  the  same 
token  (1  hope  there's  no  ill  luck  in  it),  the 
cheese  was  made  of  sheep's  milk." — "It  is 
strange,"  said  Don  Quixote,  "  for  she  is  liberal, 
even  to  profiiseness ;  and  if  she  presented  thee 
not  a  jewel,  she  had  certainly  none  about  her 
at  that  time ;  but  what  is  deferred  is  not  lost, 
sleeves  are  good  after  Easter.*     1  shall  see  her, 

*  A  proverbial  expreasioD,  aignifying  that  a  good  thing  is  always 
seasonable. 


74  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

and  matters  shall  be  accommodated  Knowest 
thou,  Sancho,  what  raises  my  astonishment? 
it  is  thy  sudden  return ;  for,  proportioning  thy 
short  absence  to  the  length  of  thy  journey,  To- 
boso  being,  at  least,  thirty  leagues  distant,  thou 
must  have  ridden  on  the  wind.  Certainly  the 
sagacious  enchanter,  who  is  my  guardian  and 
friend  (for  doubtless  such  a  one  there  is  and 
ought  to  be,  or  I  should  not  be  a  true  knight- 
errant);  certainly,  I  say,  that  wise  magician  has 
furthered  thee  on  thy  journey  unawares;  for 
there  are  sages  of  such  incredible  power,  as  to 
take  up  a  knight-errant  sleeping  in  his  bed,  and 
waken  him  next  morning  a  thousand  leagues 
from  the  place  where  he  fell  asleep.  By  this 
power  knights-errant  succour  one  another  in 
their  most  dangerous  exigents,  when  and  where 
they  please.  For  instance,  suppose  me  fighting 
in  the  mountains  of  Armenia,  with  some  hellish 
monster,  some  dreadful  sprite,  or  fierce  gigantic 
knight,  where  perhaps  I  am  like  to  be  worsted 
(such  a  thing  may  happen),  when  just  in  the 
very  crisis  of  my  fete,  when  I  least  expect  it,  I 
behold  on  the  top  of  a  flying  cloud,  or  riding  in 
a  flaming  chariot,  another  knight,  my  friend, 
who,  but  a  minute  before,  was  in  England  per- 
haps— ^he  sustains  me,  delivers  me  from  death, 
and  returns  that  night  to  his  own   lodging, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  76 

where  he  sups  with  a  very  good  appetite  after 
his  journey,  having  rid  you  two  or  three  thou- 
sand leagues  that  day ;  and  all  this  performed 
by  the  industry  and  wisdom  of  these  knowing 
magicians,  whose  only  business  and  charge  is 
glorious  knight-errantry.  Some  such  expedi- 
tious power,  I  believe,  Sancho,  though  hidden 
from  you,  has  promoted  so  great  a  despatch  in 
your  late  journey." — "  I  believe,  indeed,"  an- 
swered Sancho,  "  that  there  was  witchcraft  in 
the  case,  for  Bozinante  went  without  spur  all 
the  way,  and  was  as  mettlesome  as  though  he 
had  been  a  gipsy's  ass,  with  quicksilver  in  his 
ears." — "  Quicksilver !  you  coxcomb,"  said  the 
knight,  "  ay,  and  a  troop  of  devils  besides ;  and 
they  are  the  best  horse-coursers  in  nature,  you 
must  know,  for  they  must  needs  go  whom  the 
devil  drives ;  but  no  more  of  that.  What  is 
thy  advice  as  to  my  lady's  commands  to  visit 
her?  I  know  her  power  should  regulate  my 
wilL  But  then  my  honour,  Sancho,  my  solemn 
promise  has  engaged  me  to  the  princess's  service 
that  comes  with  us,  and  the  law  of  arms  confines 
me  to  my  word.  Love  draws  me  one,  and 
glory  t'other  way :  on  this  side  Dulcinea's  strict 
commands,  on  the  other  my  promised  faith; 

but it  is  resolved.     I'll  travel   night  and 

day,  cut  off  this  giant's  head,  and,  having  settled 


76  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

the  princess  in  her  dominions,  will  presently 
return  to  see  that  sun  which  enlightens  my 
senses.  She  will  easily  condescend  to  excuse 
my  absence,  when  I  convince  her  it  was  for  her 
fi«ne  and  glory;  since  the  past,  present,  and 
future  success  of  my  victorious  arms,  depends 
wholly  on  the  gracious  influences  of  her  favour, 
and  the  honour  of  being  her  knight" — "  Oh 
sad!  oh  sad!"  said  Sancho;  **  I  doubt  your 
worship's  head  is  much  the  worse  for  wearing. 
Are  you  mad,  sir,  to  take  so  long  a  voyage  for 
nothing?  why  don't  you  catch  at  this  preferment 
that  now  offers,  where  a  fine  kingdom  is  the 
portion,  twenty  thousand  leagues  round,  they 
say ;  nay,  bigger  than  Portugal  and  Castile  both 
together.  Good  your  worship,  hold  your  tongue, 
I  wonder  you  are  not  ashamed.  Take  a  fool's 
counsel  for  once,  marry  her  by  the  first  priest 
you  meet ;  here  is  our  own  curate  can  do  the 
job  most  curiously.*  Come,  master,  I  have  hair 
enough  in  my  beard  to  make  a  counsellor,  and 
my  advice  is  as  fit  for  you  as  your  shoe  for  your 
foot: — a  bird  in  hand  is  worth  two  in  the 
bush,  and 

He  that  will  not  when  he  may. 
When  he  would,  he  shall  have  nay.' 

*  Ab  if  it  waa  done  with  pearl,  in  the  original :  lo  hard  d4  patriate  i.e., 
to  a  nicety. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  77 

"  Thou  advisest  me  thus/'  answered  Don 
Quixote,  "  that  I  may  be  able  to  promote  thee 
according  to  my  promise;  but  that  I  can  do 
without  marrying  this  lady ;  for  I  shall  make 
this  the  condition  of  entering  into  battle,  that 
after  my  victory,  without  marrying  the  princess, 
she  shall  leave  part  of  her  kingdom  at  my  dis- 
posal, to  gratify  whom  I  please ;  and  who  can 
claim  any  such  gratuity  but  thyself?" — ** That's 
plain,"  answered  Sancho ;  **  but  pray,  sir,  take 
care  that  you  reserve  some  part  near  the  sea- 
side for  me ;  that  if  the  air  does  not  agree  with 
me,  I  may  transport  my  black  slaves,  make  my 
profit  of  them,  and  go  live  somewhere  else ;  so 
that  I  would  have  you  resolve  upon  it  presently, 
leave  the  lady  Dulcinea  for  the  present,  and  go 
kill  this  same  giant,  and  make  an  end  of  that 
business  first ;  for  I  dare  swear  it  will  yield  you 
a  good  market." — '*  I  am  fixed  in  thy  opinion," 
said  Don  Quixote;  ''  but  I  admonish  thee  not 
to  whisper  to  any  person  the  least  hint  of  our 
conference;  for  since  Dulcinea  is  so  cautious 
and  secret,  it  is  proper  that  I  and  mine  should 
follow  her  example." — *^  Why  the  devil  then," 
said  Sancho,  "  should  you  send  every  body  you 
overcome,  packing  to  Madam  Dulcinea,  to  &I1 
down  before  her,  and  tell  her,  they  came  firom 
you  to  pay  their  obedience,  when  this  tells  all 


78  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

the  world  that  she  is  your  mistress,  as  much 
as  if  they  had  it  under  your  own  hand  ? " — 
"How  dull  of  apprehension  and  stupid  thou 
art/'  said  the  knight ;  "  hast  thou  not  sense  to 
find  that  all  this  redounds  to  her  greater  glory  ? 
Know,  that  in  proceedings  of  chivalry,  a  lady's 
honour  is  calculated  fi-om  the  number  of  her 
servants,  whose  services  must  not  tend  to  any 
reward  but  the  favour  of  her  acceptance,  and 
the  pure  honour  of  performing  them  for  her 
sake,  and  being  called  her  servants." — *'  I  have 
heard  our  curate,"  answered  Sancho,  "  preach 
up  this  doctrine  of  loving  for  love's  sake,  and 
that  we  ought  to  love  our  Maker  so  for  his  own 
sake,  without  either  hope  of  good,  or  fear  of 
pain :  though,  for  my  part,  I  would  love  and 
serve  him  for  what  I  could  get." — "  Thou  art 
an  unaccountable  fellow,"  cried  Don  Quixote ; 
"  thou  talkest  sometimes  with  so  much  sense, 
that  one  would  imagine  thee  to  be  something 
of  a  scholar." — **A  scholar,  sir?"  answered 
Sancho,  "  lack-a-day,  I  do  not  know,  as  I  am 
an  honest  man,  a  letter  in  the  book." 

Master  Nicholas,  seeing  them  so  deep  in 
discourse,  called  to  them  to  stop  and  drink  at 
a  little  fountain  by  the  road.  Don  Quixote 
halted,  and  Sancho  was  very  glad  of  the  inter- 
ruption, his  stock  of  lies  being  almost  spent, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  79 

and  he  stood  in  danger  besides  of  being  trapped 
in  his  words,  for  he  had  never  seen  Dulcinea, 
though  he  knew  she  lived  at  Toboso.  Cardenio 
by  this  had  changed  his  clothes^  for  those  Do- 
rothea wore  when  they  found  her  in  the  moun- 
tains ;  and  though  they  made  but  an  ordinary 
figure,  they  looked  much  better  than  those  he 
had  put  off.*  They  all  stopped  at  the  fountain, 
and  fell  aboard  the  curate's  provision,  which 
was  but  a  snap  among  so  many,  for  they  were 
all  very  hungry.  While  they  sat  refireshing 
themselves,  a  young  lad,  travelling  that  way, 
observed  them,  and,  looking  earnestly  on  the 
whole  company,  ran  suddenly  and  fell  down 
before  Don  Quixote,  addressing  him  in  a  very 
doleful  manner.  "  Alas !  good  sir,"  said  he, 
"  don't  you  know  me  ?  don't  you  remember 
poor  Andrew,  whom  you  caused  to  be  untied 
firom  the  tree  ?  "  With  that  the  knight  knew 
him ;  and,  raising  him  up,  turned  to  the  com- 
pany :  "  That  you  may  all  know,"  said  he,  '*  of 
how  great  importance,  to  the  redressing  of  in- 
juries, punishing  vice,  and  the  universal  benefit 
of  mankind,  the  business  of  knight-errantry 
may  be,  you  must  understand,  that,  riding 
through  a  desert  some  days  ago,  I  heard  certain 

»  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  IV.,  Book  IV. 
•These  must  be  the  ragged  apparel  Cardenio  wore  before  ho  waa 
dreflsed  in  the  priest's  short  cassock  and  cloak. 


80  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

lamentable  shrieks  and  outcries.  Prompted  by 
the  misery  of  the  afflicted,  and  borne  away  by 
the  zeal  of  my  profession,  I  followed  the  voice, 
and  found  this  boy,  whom  you  all  see,  bound 
to  a  great  oak :  I  am  glad  he  is  present,  be- 
cause he  can  attest  the  truth  of  my  relation.  I 
found  him,  as  I  told  you,  bound  to  an  oak; 
naked  from  the  waist  upwards,  and  a  bloody- 
minded  peasant  scourging  his  back  unmerci- 
fully with  the  reins  of  a  bridle.  I  presently 
demanded  the  cause  of  his  severe  chastisement. 
The  rude  fellow  answered,  that  he  had  liberty 
to  punish  his  own  servant,  whom  he  thus  used 
for  some  faults  that  argued  him  more  knave 
than  fooL  *  Good  sir,'  said  the  boy,  *  he  can 
lay  nothing  to  my  charge,  but  demanding  my 
wages.'  His  master  made  some  reply,  which  I 
would  not  allow  as  a  just  excuse,  and  ordered 
him  immediately  to  unbind  the  youth,  and 
took  his  oath  that  he  would  take  him  home, 
and  pay  him  all  his  wages  upon  the  nail,  in 
good  and  lawful  coin.  Is  not  this  literally 
true,  Andrew  ?  did  you  not  mark,  besides,  with 
what  fisu^e  of  authority  I  commanded,  and  with 
how  much  humility  he  promised  to  obey  all  I 
imposed,  commanded  and  desired?  Answer 
me,  boy ;  and  tell  boldly  all  that  passed  to  this 
worthy  company,   that   it  may  appear    how 


DON  QUIXOTE.  81 

necessary  the  vocation  of  knights-errant  is  up 
and  down  the  high  roads." 

"All  you  have  said  is  true  enough/' 
answered  Andrew ;  "  but  the  business  did  not 
end  after  that  manner  you  and  I  hoped  it 
would."— "How!  "  said  the  knight,  "has  not 
the  peasant  paid  you?  " — **  Ay,  he  has  paid 
me  with  a  vengeance,"  said  the  boy;  "for  no 
sooner  was  your  back  turned,  but  he  tied  me 
again  to  the  same  tree,  and  lashed  me  so 
cursedly,  that  I  looked  like  St  Bartholomew 
flay'd  alive;  and  at  every  blow  he  had  some 
joke  or  another  to  laugh  at  you ;  and  had  he 
not  laid  me  on  as  he  did,  I  fancy  I  could  not 
have  helped  laughing  myself.  At  last  he  left 
me  in  so  pitiful  a  case,  that  I  was  forced  to 
crawl  to  an  hospital,  where  I  have  lain  ever 
since  to  get  cured,  so  wofiilly  the  tyrant  had 
lashed  me.  And  now,  I  may  thank  you  for 
this,  for  had  you  rid  on  your  journey,  and 
neither  meddled  nor  made,  seeing  nobody  sent 
for  you,  and  it  was  none  of  your  business,  my 
master,  perhaps,  had  been  satisfied  with  giving 
me  ten  or  twenty  lashes,  and  after  that  would 
have  paid  me  what  he  owed  me ;  but  you  was 
so  hufiy,  and  called  him  so  many  names,  that 
it  made  him  mad,  and  so  he  vented  all  his  spite 
against  you  upon  my  poor  back,  as  soon  as 

II.  F 


88  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

yours  was  turned,  insomuch  that  I  fear  I  shall 
never  be  mine  own  man  again." — "  The  mis- 
carriage," answered  the  knight,  "  is  only  charge- 
able on  my  departure  before  I  saw  my  orders 
executed;  for  I  might  by  experience  have 
remembered,  that  the  word  of  a  peasant  is 
regulated,  not  by  honour,  but  by  profit.  But 
you  remember,  Andrew,  how  I  swore,  if  he 
disobeyed,  that  I  would  return  and  seek  him 
through  the  universe,  and  find  him,  though 
hid  in  a  whale's  belly." — *'  Ah !  sir,"  answered 
Andrew,  "  but  that's  no  cure  for  my  sore  shoul- 
ders."— "You  shall  be  redressed,"  answered 
the  knight,  starting  fiercely  up,  and  commanding 
Sancho  immediately  to  bridle  Rozinante,  who 
was  baiting  as  fisust  as  the  rest  of  the  company. 
Dorothea  asked  what  he  intended  to  do:  he 
answered,  that  he  intended  to  find  out  the 
villain,  and  punish  him  severely  for  his  crimes, 
then  force  him  to  pay  Andrew  his  wages  to  the 
last  maravedi,^  in  spite  of  all  the  peasants  in 
the  universe.  She  then  desired  him  to  remem- 
ber his  engagements  to  her,  which  withheld 
him  from  any  new  achievement  till  that  was 
finished;  that  he  must  therefore  suspend  his 
resentments  till  his  return  from  her  kingdom. 
"  It  is  but  just  and  reasonable,"  said  the  knight; 

*  Near  the  valae  of  a  farthing. 


DON  QUIXOTE,  88 

"  and  therefore  Andrew  must  wait  with  patience 
my  return :  but  when  I  do  return,  I  do  hereby 
ratify  my  former  oath  and  promise,  never  to 
rest  till  he  be  fully  satisfied  and  paid." — "I 
darenottrust  to  that,"  answered  Andrew;  "but 
if  you  will  bestow  on  me  as  much  money  as 
will  bear  my  charges  to  Seville,  I  shall  thank 
your  worship  more  than  for  all  the  revenge  you 
tell  me  of.  Give  me  a  snap  to  eat,  and  a  bit 
in  my  pocket,  and  so  heaven  be  with  you  and 
all  other  knights-errant,  and  may  they  prove  as 
arrant  fools  in  their  own  business  as  they  have 
been  in  mine." 

Sancho  took  a  crust  of  bread  and  a  slice  of 
cheese,  and,  reaching  it  to  Andrew,  **  There, 
friend,"  said  he,  "  there  is  something  for  thee ; 
on  my  word,  we  have  all  of  us  a  share  of  thy 
mischance," — "What  share?"  said  Andrew. — 
"Why,  the  curst  mischance  of  parting  with 
this  bread  and  cheese  to  thee ;  for  my  head  to 
a  half-penny,  I  may  live  to  want  it ;  for  thou 
must  know,  friend  of  mine,  that  we,  the  squires 
of  knights-errant,  often  pick  our  teeth  without 
a  dinner,  and  are  subject  to  many  other  things, 
which  are  better  felt  than  told."  Andrew 
snatched  at  the  provender,  and,  seeing  no 
likelihood  of  any  more,  he  made  his  leg  and 
marched  off.     But,  looking  over  his  shoulder  at 


84  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

Don  Qnixote,  "Hark  ye,  you  Sir  Knight-errant," 
cried  he,  "  if  ever  you  meet  me  again  in  your 
travels,  which  I  hope  you  never  shall,  though 
I  were  torn  in  pieces,  do  not  trouble  me  with 
your  plaguy  help,  but  mind  your  own  business; 
and  so  fare  you  well,  with  a  curse  upon  you  and 
all  the  knights-errant  that  ever  were  bom." 
The  knight  thought  to  chastise  him,  but  the 
lad  was  too  nimble  for  any  there,  and  his  heels 
carried  him  off,  leaving  Don  Quixote  highly 
incensed  at  his  story,  which  moved  the  com- 
pany to  hold  their  laughter,  lest  they  should 
raise  his  anger  to  a  dangerous  height. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  85 


CHAPTER  V. 

^VHAT    BEFEL   DON   QUIXOTE    AND   HIS   COMPANY   AT 

THE  INN. 

When  they  had  eaten  plentifully,  they  left 
that  place,  and  travelled  all  that  day  and  the 
next,  without  meeting  any  thing  worth  notice, 
till  they  came  to  the  inn,  which  was  so  fright- 
ful a  sight  to  poor  Sancho,  that  he  would 
willingly  not  have  gone  in,  but  could  by  no 
means  avoid  it.  The  inn-keeper,  the  hostess, 
her  daughter,  and  Maritomes,  met  Don  Quixote 
and  his  squire  with  a  very  hearty  welcome. 
The  knight  received  them  with  a  face  of 
gravity  and  approbation,  bidding  them  prepare 
him  a  better  bed  than  their  last  entertainment 
aflforded  him.  "Sir,"  said  the  hostess,  "pay 
us  better  than  you  did  then,  and  you  shall 
have  a  bed  for  a  prince."  And  upon  the 
knight's  promise  that  he  would,  she  promised 
him  a  tolerable  bed,  in  the  large  room  where 
he  lay  before.  He  presently  undressed,  and 
being  heartily  crazed  in  body  as  well  as  in 
mind,  he  went  to  bed.  He  was  scarcely  got 
to  his  chamber,  when  the  hostess  flew  suddenly 


86  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

at  the  barber,  and,  catching  him  by  the  beard, 
"  On  my  life,"  said  she,  "  you  shall  use  my  tail 
no  longer  for  a  beard :  Pray,  sir,  give  me  my 
tail ;  my  husband  wants  it  to  stick  his  thing 
into— his  comb  I  mean,  and  my  tail  will  I 
have,  sir."  The  barber  held  tug  with  her  till 
the  curate  advised  him  to  return  it,  telling  him, 
that  he  might  now  undisguise  himself,  and 
teU  Don  Quixote,  that  after  the  galley-slaves 
had  pillaged  him,  he  fled  to  that  inn ;  and  if 
he  should  ask  for  the  princess's  squire,  he 
should  pretend  that  he  was  despatched  to  her 
kingdom  before  her,  to  give  her  subjects  an 
account  of  her  arrival,  and  of  the  power  she 
brought  to  free  them  all  from  slavery.  The 
barber,  thus  schooled,  gave  the  hostess  her  tail, 
with  the  other  trinkets  which  he  had  bor- 
rowed, to  decoy  Don  Quixote  out  of  the  desert. 
Dorothea's  beauty,  and  Cardenio's  handsome 
shape,  surprised  every  body.  The  curate  be- 
spoke supper,  and  the  host,  being  pretty  secure 
of  his  reckoning,  soon  got  them  a  tolerable 
entertainment.  They  would  not  disturb  the 
knight,  who  slept  very  soundly,  for  his  dis- 
temper wanted  rest  more  than  meat ;  but  they 
diverted  themselves  with  the  hostess's  account 
of  his  encounter  with  the  carriers,  and  of 
Sancho's   being    tossed  in  a  blanket.      Don 


DON  QUIXOTE,  87 

Quixote's  unaccountable  madness  was  the  prin- 
cipal subject  of  their  discourse;  upon  which 
the  curate  insisting,  and  arguing  it  to  proceed 
from  his  reading  romances,  the  inn-keeper  took 
him  up. 

"Sir,"  said  he,  "you  cannot  make  me  of 
your  opinion;  for,  in  my  mind,  it  is  the 
pleasantest  reading  that  ever  was.  I  have 
now  in  the  house  two  or  three  books  of  that 
kind,  and  some  other  pieces,  that  really  have 
kept  me,  and  many  others,  alive.  In  harvest 
time,  a  great  many  of  the  reapers  come  to 
drink  here  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  he  that 
can  read  best  among  us  takes  up  one  of  these 
books,  and  all  the  rest  of  us,  sometimes  thirty 
or  more,  sit  round  about  him,  and  listen  with 
such  pleasure,  that  we  think  neither  of  sorrow 
nor  care.  As  for  my  own  part,  when  I  hear 
the  mighty  blows  and  dreadful  battles  of  those 
knights-errant,  I  have  half  a  mind  to  be  one 
myself,  and  am  raised  to  such  a  life  and  brisk- 
ness, that  I  could  frighten  away  old  age.  I 
could  sit  and  hear  them  from  morning  till 
night.*' — "  I  wish  you  would,  husband,"  said 
the  hostess ;  "  for  then  we  should  have  some 
rest ;  for  at  all  other  times  you  are  so  out  of 
humour,  and  so  snappish,  that  we  lead  a  hellish 
life  with  you." — "  That  is  true  enough,"  said 


«  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

Maritomes;  ^^and  for  my  part,  I  think  there 
are  mighty  pretty  stories  in  those  books, 
especially  that  one  abont  the  yonng  lady  who 
is  hugged  so  sweetly  by  her  knight  nnder  the 
orange-tree,  when  the  damsel  watches  lest 
somebody  comes,  and  stands  with  her  month 
watering  all  the  while ;  and  a  thousand  such 
stories,  which  I  would  often  forego  my  dinner 
and  supper  to  hear." — "  And  what  think  you 
of  this  matter,  young  miss?"  said  the  curate 
to  the  inn-keeper's  daughter. — "  Alack-a-day, 
sir,"  said  she,  ^^  I  do  not  understand  those 
things,  and  yet  I  love  to  hear  them :  but  I  do 
not  like  that  frightful  ugly  fighting,  that  so 
pleases  my  &ther.  Indeed,  the  sad  lamenta- 
tions of  the  poor  knights,  for  the  loss  of  their 
mistresses,  sometimes  makes  me  cry  like  any- 
thing/' —  "I  suppose,  then,  young  gentle- 
woman," said  Dorothea,  "  you  will  be  tender- 
hearted, and  will  never  let  a  lover  die  for  you," 
— "I  do  not  know  what  may  happen  as  to 
that,"  said  the  girl ;  "  but  this  I  know,  that  I 
will  never  give  any  body  reason  to  call  me 
tigress  and  lioness,  and  I  do  not  know  how 
many  other  ugly  names,  as  those  ladies  are 
often  called;  and  I  think  they  deserve  yet 
worse,  so  they  do;  for  they  can  never  have 
soul  nor  conscience,  to  let  such  fine  gentlemen 


DON  QUIXOTE.  89 

die  or  run  mad  for  a  sight  of  them.  What 
signifies  aU  their  fiddling  and  coyness?  If 
they  are  civil  women,  why  do  not  they  marry 
them;  for  that  is  all  their  knights  would  be 
at?*' — "Hold  your  prating,  mistress,"  said  the 
hostess,  "  how  came  you  to  know  all  this?  It 
is  not  for  such  as  you  to  talk  of  these  matters." 
— "The  gentleman  only  asked  me  a  question," 
said  she,  "and  it  would  be  uncivil  not  to 
answer  him." — "  Well,"  said  the  curate,  "  do 
me  the  favour,  good  landlord,  to  bring  out 
these  books,  that  I  may  have  a  sight  of  them." 
"With  all  my  heart,"  said  the  inn-keeper; 
and  with  that,  stepping  to  his  chamber,  he 
opened  a  little  portmantle  that  shut  with  a 
chain,  and  took  out  three  large  volumes,  with 
a  parcel  of  manuscripts,  in  a  fair  legible  letter. 
The  title  of  the  first  was  Don  Cirongilio  of 
Thrace ;  ^  the  second,  Felixmarte  of  Hircania ; 
and  the  third  was  the  History  of  the  great 
Captain  Gon9alo  Hemandes  de  Corduba,  and 
the  Liie  of  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes,^  bound 
together.*  The  curate,  reading  the  title, 
turned  to  the  barber,  and  told  him,  they  wanted 

*  There  were  such  famous  leaders  as  the  Great  Captain,  who  con- 
quered Naples  for  King  Ferdinand  x>f  Spain,  and  Diego  Oarcia  before 
him.  But  romantic  authors  have  added  monstrous  fables  to  their  tru6 
actions. 

*  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Book  FV.,  Chapter  V. 

«  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Book  IV.,  Chapter  V. 


90  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

now  Don  Quixote's  house-keeper  and  his  niece. 
"  I  shall  do  as  well  with  the  books/'  said  the 
barber,  "  for  I  can  find  the  way  to  the  back- 
yard, or  to  the  chimney ;  there  is  a  good  fire 
that  will  do  their  business." — "Business!"  said 
the  inn-keeper,  "  I  hope  you  would  not  burn 
my  books?" — "Only  two  of  them,"  said  the 
curate;  "this  same  Don  Cirongilio,and  his  firiend 
Felixmarte." — "I  hope,  sir,"  said  the  host, 
"they  are  neither  heretics  nor  phlegmatics.*' 
— "  Schismatics,  you  mean,"  said  the  barber. — 
"I  mean  so,"  said  the  inn-keeper;  "and  if 
you  must  burn  any,  let  it  be  this  of  Gon9alo 
Hemandes,  and  Diego  Garcia ;  for  you  should 
sooner  burn  one  of  my  children  than  the 
others." — "These  books,  honest  fiiend,"  said 
the  curate,  "  that  you  appear  so  concerned  for, 
are  senseless  rhapsodies  of  falsehood  and  folly ; 
and  this  which  you  so  despise  is  a  true  history, 
and  contains  a  true  account  of  two  celebrated 
men.  The  first,  by  his  bravery  and  courage, 
purchased  immortal  fame,  and  the  name  of  the 
Great  General,  by  the  universal  consent  of 
mankind ;  the  other,  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes, 
was  of  noble  extraction,  and  bom  in  Truxillo, 
a  town  of  Estremadura,  and  was  a  man  of 
singular  courage,  and  of  such  mighty  strength, 
that  with  one  of  his  hands  he  could  stop  a 


DON  QUIXOTE.  91 

mill-wheel  in  its  most  rapid  motion ;  and  with 
his  single  force  defended  the  passage  of  a 
bridge  against  a  great  army.  Several  other 
great  actions  are  related  in  the  memoirs  of  his 
life,  but  all  with  so  much  modesty  and  un- 
biassed truth,  that  they  easily  pronounce  him 
his  own  historiographer;  and  had  they  been 
written  by  any  one  else,  with  freedom  and  im- 
partiality, they  might  have  eclipsed  your 
Hectors,  Achilleses,  and  Orlandos,  with  all 
their  heroic  exploits." — **  That's  a  fine  jest, 
faith,"  said  the  inn-keeper;  "  my  father  could 
have  told  you  another  tale,  sir.  Holding  a 
mill-wheel !  why,  is  that  such  a  mighty 
matter?  Odds  fish,  do  but  turn  over  a  leaf  of 
Felixmarte  there ;  you  will  find  how  with  one 
single  back-stroke  he  cut  five  swinging  giants 
off  by  the  middle,  as  if  they  had  been  so  many 
bean-cods,  of  which  the  children  make  little 
puppet-friars  ;•  and  read  how,  at  another  time, 
he  charged  a  most  mighty  and  powerful  army 
of  above  a  million  and  six  hundred  thousand 
fighting  men,  aU  armed  cap-a-pie,  and  routed 
them  all  like  so  many  sheep.  And  what  can 
you  say  of  the  worthy  Cirongilio  of  Thrace? 

*  Children,  in  Spain,  make  puppets,  resembling  friars,  oat  of  bean- 
oods,  by  breaking  as  much  of  the  upper  end  as  to  discover  part  of  the 
first  bcAn,  which  is  to  represent  the  bald  head,  and  letting  the  broken 
ood  hang  back  like  a  oowL 


98  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

who,  as  you  may  read  there,  going  by  water 
one  day,  was  assaulted  by  a  fiery  serpent  in  the 
middle  of  the  river;  he  presently  leaped 
nimbly  upon  her  back,  and,  hanging  by  her 
scaly  neck,  grasped  her  throat  fast  with  both 
his  arms,  so  that  the  serpent,  finding  herself 
almost  strangled,  was  forced  to  dive  into  the 
water  to  save  herself,  and  carried  the  knight, 
who  would  not  quit  his  hold,  to  the  very  bot- 
tom, where  he  found  a  stately  palace,  and  such 
pleasant  gardens,  that  it  was  a  wonder;  and 
straight  the  serpent  turned  into  a  very  old 
man,  and  told  him  such  things  as  were  never 
heard  nor  spoken.  Now,  a  fig  for  your  Great 
Captain,  and  your  Diego  Garcia."  Dorothea, 
hearing  this,  said  softly  to  Cardenio,  that  the 
host  was  capable  of  making  a  second  part  to 
Don  Quixote.  *'  I  think  so  too,"  cried  Car- 
denio, "  for  it  is  plain  he  believes  every  tittle 
contained  in  those  books;  nor  can  all  the 
Carthusian  friars  in  the  world  persuade  him 
otherwise." — **  I  tell  thee.  Mend,"  said  the 
curate,  "  there  were  never  any  such  persons  as 
your  books  of  chivalry  mention,  upon  the  fece 
of  the  earth ;  your  Felixmarte  of  Hircania,  and 
your  Cirongilio  of  Thrace,  are  all  but  chimeras, 
and  fictions  of  idle  and  luxuriant  wits,  who 
wrote  them  for  the  same  reason  that  you  read 


DON  QUIXOTE,  98 

them,  because  they  had  nothing  else  to  do." 
— *'  Sir,"  said  the  inn-keeper,  "  you  must  angle 
with  another  bait,  or  you  will  catch  no  fish  ;* 
I  know  what's  what,  as  well  as  another ;  I  can 
tell  where  my  own  shoe  pinches  me ;  and  you 
must  not  think,  sir,  to  catch  old  birds  with 
chaflF.  A  pleasant  jest,  faith,  that  you  should 
pretend  to  persuade  me  now  that  these  notable 
books  are  lies  and  stories !  why,  sir,  are  they 
not  in  print  ?  Are  they  not  published  accord- 
ing to  order?  licensed  by  authority  firom  the 
privy  council?  And  do  you  think  that  they 
would  pennit  so  many  untruths  to  be  printed, 
and  such  a  number  of  battles  and  enchant- 
ments, to  set  us  all  a-madding?" — "I  have 
told  you  already,  friend,"  replied  the  curate, 
^^that  this  is  licensed  for  our  amusement  in 
our  idle  hours;  for  the  same  reason  that  tennis, 
billiards,  chess,  and  other  recreations  are  toler- 
ated, that  men  may  find  a  pastime  for  those 
hours  they  cannot  find  employment  for. 
Neither  could  the  government  foresee  this  in- 
convenience firom  such  books,  that  you  urge, 
because  they  could  not  reasonably  suppose  any 
rational  person  would  believe  their  absurdities. 
And  were  this  a  proper  time,  I  could  say  a  great 

*  In  the  original,  A  otro  perro  con  esse  huesso,  tLcy  i.e.,  To  anotlici 
dog  with  this  bone. 


94  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

deal  in  favour  of  such  writings ;  and  how,  with 
some  regulations,  they  might  be  made  both  in- 
structive and  diverting.  But  I  design,  upon 
the  first  opportunity,  to  communicate  my 
thoughts  on  this  head  to  some  that  may  re- 
dress it.  In  the  mean  time,  honest  landlord, 
you  may  put  up  your  books,  and  believe  them 
true  if  you  please,  and  much  good  may  they  do 
you.  And  I  wish  you  may  never  halt  of  the 
same  foot  as  your  guest,  Don  Quixote." — 
**  There's  no  fear  of  that,"  said  the  inn-keeper, 
"for  I  never  design  to  turn  knight-errant; 
because  I  find  the  customs  that  supported  the 
noble  order  are  quite  out  of  doors." 

About  the  middle  of  their  discourse  entered 
Sancho,  who  was  very  uneasy  at  hearing  that 
knights-errant  were  out  of  fashion,  and  books 
of  chivalry  full  of  nothing  but  folly  and  fiction ; 
he  resolved,  however,  in  spite  of  all  their  con- 
tempt of  chivalry,  still  to  stick  by  his  master ; 
and  if  his  intended  expedition  failed  of  success, 
then  to  return  to  his  family  and  plough.  As 
the  inn-keeper  was  carrying  away  the  books, 
the  curate  desired  his  leave  to  look  over  those 
manuscripts  which  appeared  in  so  fair  a  char- 
acter ;  he  reached  them  to  him,  to  the  number 
of  eight  sheets,  on  one  of  which  there  was 
written  in  a  large  hand,  The  Novel  of  the  Curious 


DON  QUIXOTE.  95 

Impertinent.  "  The  title/'  said  the  curate, 
"  promises  something,  perhaps  it  may  be  worth 
reading  through." — "  Your  reverence,'*  said 
the  inn-keeper,  "  may  be  worse  employed ;  for 
that  novel  has  received  the  approbation  of 
several  ingenious  guests  of  mine  who  have  read 
it,  and  who  would  have  begged  it  of  me ;  but  I 
would  by  no  means  part  with  it,  till  I  deliver 
it  to  the  owner  of  this  portmantle,  who  left  it 
here  with  these  books  and  papers ;  I  may  per- 
haps see  him  again,  and  restore  them  honestly ; 
for  I  am  as  much  a  Christian  as  my  neighbours, 
though  I  am  an  inn-keeper." — **  But  I  hope," 
said  the  curate,  **  if  it  pleases  me  you  will  not 
deny  me  a  copy  of  it." — "  Nay,  as  to  that 
matter,"  said  the  host,  "  we  shall  not  fall 
out." 

Cardenio  having  by  this  perused  it  a  little, 
recommended  it  to  the  curate,  and  entreated 
him  to  read  it  for  the  entertainment  of  the 
company.  The  curate  would  have  excused 
himself,  by  urging  the  unseasonable  time  of 
night,  and  that  sleep  was  then  more  proper, 
especially  for  the  lady.  "A  pleasant  story," 
said  Dorothea,  "  will  prove  the  best  repose  for 
some  hours  to  me ;  for  my  spirits  are  not  com- 
posed enough  to  allow  me  to  rest,  though  I 
want  it,  Master  Nicholas ;  "  and  Sancho  joined 


96  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

in  the  request. — "To  please  ye  then,  and 
satisfy  my  own  curiosity,"  said  the  curate, 
"  I  will  begin,  if  you  will  but  give  your 
attention." 


DON  QUIXOTE.  97 


CHAPTER  VL 

THE  NOVEL  OP  THE  CURIOUS  IMPERTINENT. 

Anselmo  and  Lothario,  considerable  gentlemen 
of  Florence,  the  capital  city  of  Tuscany  in 
Italy,  were  so  eminent  for  their  friendship,  that 
they  were  called  nothing  but  the  Two  Friends. 
They  were  both  young  and  unmarried,  of  the 
same  age  and  humour,  which  did  not  a  little 
concur  to  the  continuance  of  their  mutual 
affection,  though,  of  the  two,  Anselmo  was  the 
most  amorously  inclined,  and  Lothario  the 
greater  lover  of  hunting;  yet  they  loved  one 
another  above  all  other  considerations;  and 
mutually  quitted  their  own  pleasure  for  their 
friend's  ;  and  their  very  wills,  like  the  different 
motions  of  a  well  regulated  watch,  were  always 
subservient  to  their  unity,  and  still  kept  time 
with  one  another.  Anselmo,  at  last,  fell  des- 
perately in  love  with  a  beautiftd  lady  of  the 
same  city;  so  eminent  for  her  fortune  and 
family,  that  he  resolved  by  the  consent  of  his 
friend,  (for  he  did  nothing  without  his  advice), 
to  demand  her  in  marriage.  Lothario  was  the 
person  employed  in  this  affair,  which  he  man- 


M  THE  ACHfEVEMEKTS  OP 

aged  with  that  address,  that  in  few  days  he 
pnt  his  friend  into  possession  of  Camilla,  for 
that  was  the  lady's  name ;  and  this  so  mnch  to 
their  satisfigurtion,  that  he  received  a  thousand 
acknowledgments  from  both,  for  the  equal 
happiness  they  derived  from  his  endeavours. 
Lothario,  as  long  as  the  nuptials  lasted,  was 
every  day  at  Anselmo's,  and  did  all  he  could 
to  add  to  the  sports  and  diversions  of  the  oc- 
casion. But  as  soon  as  the  new-married  pair 
had  received  the  congratulation  of  their  friends, 
and  the  nuptial  ceremonies  were  over,  Lothario 
retired  with  the  rest  of  their  acquaintance,  and 
forbore  his  visits,  because  he  prudently  imag- 
ined that  it  was  not  at  all  proper  to  be  so  fre- 
quent at  his  friend's  house  after  marriage  as 
before;  for  though  true  friendship  entirely 
banishes  all  suspicion  and  jealousy,  yet  the 
honour  of  a  married  man  is  of  so  nice  and  ten- 
der a  nature,  that  it  has  been  sometimes  sullied 
by  the  conversation  of  the  nearest  relations, 
and  therefore  more  liable  to  suffer  from  that  of 
a  friend.  Anselmo  observed  this  remissness  of 
Lothario;  and,  fond  as  he  was  of  his  wife, 
shewed  by  his  tender  complaints  how  much  it 
afifected  him.  He  told  him,  that  if  he  could 
have  believed  be  must  also  have  left  so  dear  a 
correspondence  by  marriage,  as  much  as  be 


DON  QUIXOTE,  99 

loved,  he  would  never  have  paid  so  great  a 
price  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  passion ;  and 
that  he  would  never,  for  the  idle  reputation  of 
a  cautious  husband,  suffer  so  tender  and  agree- 
able a  name  to  be  lost,  as  that  of  the  Two 
Friends,  which,  before  his  marriage,  they  had 
80  happily  obtained ;  and  therefore  he  begged 
him,  if  that  were  a  term  lawful  to  be  used  be- 
twixt them  two,  to  return  to  his  former 
fiuniliarity  and  freedom  of  conversation ;  assur- 
ing him,  that  his  wife*s  will  and  pleasure  were 
entirely  formed  by  his ;  and  that  being  ac- 
quainted with  their  ancient  and  strict  friend- 
ship, she  was  equally  surprised  at  so  unexpected 
a  change. 

Lothario  replied  to  these  endearing  persua- 
sions of  his  friend,  with  such  prudence  and  dis- 
cretion, that  he  convinced  him  of  the  sincerity 
of  his  intentions  in  what  he  had  done ;  and  so, 
in  conclusion,  they  agieed  that  Lothario  should 
dine  twice  a-week  at  his  house,  besides  holi- 
days. Yet  Lothario's  compliance  with  this 
resolution  being  only  not  to  disoblige  his  friend, 
he  designed  to  observe  it  no  farther  than  he 
should  find  it  consistent  with  Anselmo's  hon- 
our, whose  reputation  was  as  dear  to  him  as  his 
own ;  and  he  used  to  tell  him,  that  the  hus- 
band of  a  beautiful  wife  ought  to  be  as  cautious 


100  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

of  the  friends  whom  he  carried  home  to  her 
himself,  as  other  female  acquaintance  and  visit- 
ants. For  a  friend's  or  relation's  house  often 
renders  the  contrivance  of  those  things  easy 
and  not  suspected,  which  could  not  be  com- 
passed either  in  the  church,  the  markets,  or  at 
public  entertainments  and  places  of  resort, 
which  no  man  can  entirely  keep  a  woman  from 
frequenting.  To  this  Lothario  said  also,  that 
every  married  man  ought  to  have  some  friend 
to  put  him  in  mind  of  the  defects  of  his  con- 
duct; for  a  husband's  fondness  many  times 
makes  him  either  not  see,  or  at  least,  for  fear 
of  displeasing  his  wife,  not  command  or  forbid 
her  what  may  be  advantageous  or  prejudicial 
to  his  reputation.  In  all  which,  a  friend's 
warning  and  advice  might  supply  him  with  a 
proper  remedy.  But  where  shall  we  find  a 
friend  so  qualified  with  wisdom  and  truth  as 
Anselmo  demands?  I  must  confess  I  cannot 
tell,  unless  it  were  Lothario,  whose  care  of  his 
friend's  honour  made  him  so  cautious  as  not  to 
comply  with  his  promised  visiting  days,  lest 
the  malicious  observers  should  give  a  scandal- 
ous censure  of  the  frequent'  admission  of  so 
well  qualified  a  gentleman,  both  for  his  wit, 
fortune,  youth  and  address,  to  the  house  of  a 
lady  of  so  celebrated  a  beauty  as  Camilla :  for 


DON  QUIXOTE.  101 

though  his  virtue  was  sufificiently  known  to 
check  the  growth  of  any  malignant  report,  yet 
he  would  not  suffer  his  friend's  honour  nor  his 
own,  to  run  the  hazard  of  being  called  in  ques- 
tion ;  which  made  him  spend  the  greatest  part 
of  those  days,  he  had  by  promise  devoted  to 
his  friend's  conversation,  in  other  places  and 
employments;  yet  excusing  his  absence  so 
agreeably,  that  Anselmo  could  not  deny  the 
reasonableness  of  what  he  alleged.  And  thus 
the  time  passed  away  in  pathetic  accusations 
of  want  of  love  and  friendship  on  one  side,  and 
plausible  excuses  on  the  other. 

"  I  know  very  well,"  said  Anselmo,  walking 
one  day  in  the  fields  with  his  friend,  "  that  of 
all  the  favours  and  benefits  for  which  heaven 
commands  my  gratitude,  as  the  advantage  of 
my  birth,  fortune,  and  nature,  the  greatest  and 
most  obliging  is  the  gift  of  such  a  wife,  and  such 
a  friend ;  being  both  of  you  pledges  of  so  great 
value,  that  though  it  is  impossible  for  me  to 
raise  my  esteem  and  love  equal  to  your  deserts, 
yet  is  no  man  capable  of  having  a  greater. 
And  yet  while  I  am  in  possession  of  all  that 
can  or  usually  does  make  a  man  happy,  I  live 
the  most  discontented  life  in  the  world.  I  am 
not  able  to  tell  you  when  my  misery  began, 
which  now  inwardly  torments  me  with  so  strange, 


102  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

extravagant,  and  singular  a  desire,  that  I  never 
reflect  on  it,  but  I  wonder  at  myself,  and  con- 
demn and  curb  my  folly,  and  would  fain  hide 
my  desires  even  from  myself:  and  yet  I  have 
received  no  more  advantage  from  this  private 
conftision,  than  if  I  had  published  my  extrava^- 
gance  to  all  the  world.  Since  therefore  it  is 
evident  that  it  will  at  last  break  out,  dear 
Lothario,  I  would  have  it  go  no  farther  than 
thy  known  fidelity  and  secrecy;  for  that  and 
my  own  industry,  which  as  my  friend  thou  wilt 
turn  to  my  assistance,  will  quickly,  I  hope,  free 
me  from  the  anguish  it  now  gives  me,  and 
restore  me  that  tranquillity  of  which  my  own 
folly  has  now  deprived  me." 

Lothario  stood  in  great  suspense,  unable  to 
guess  at  the  consequence  of  so  strange  and 
prolix  an  introduction.  Li  vain  he  racked  his 
imagination  for  the  causes  of  his  friend's  afflic- 
tion, the  truth  was  the  last  thing  he  could  think 
of;  but  no  longer  to  remain  in  doubt,  he  told 
Anselmo,  that  he  did  his  friendship  a  particular 
injury,  in  not  coming  directly  to  the  point  in 
the  discovery  of  his  thoughts  to  him,  since  his 
counsels  might  enable  him  to  support,  and, 
perhaps,  to  lose  or  compass  such  importunate 
desires. 

**It  is  very  true,"  replied  Anselmo;    "and 


DON  QUIXOTE.  103 

with  that  assurance  I  must  inform  you,  that  the 
desire  that  gives  me  so  much  pain,  is  to  know 
whether  Camilla  be  really  as  virtuous  as  I 
think  her.  Nor  can  this  be  made  evident  but 
by  such  a  trial,  that,  like  gold  by  the  fire,  the 
standard  and  degree  of  her  worth  be  discovered. 
For,  in  my  opinion,  no  woman  has  more  virtue 
than  she  retains,  after  the  force  of  the  most 
earnest  solicitations.  Casta  est  quam  nemo 
rogavit:  and  she  only  may  be  said  to  be  chaste, 
who  has  withstood  the  force  of  tears,  vows, 
promises,  gifts,  and  all  the  importunities  of  a 
lover  that  is  not  easily  denied :  for  where  is  the 
praise  of  a  woman^s  virtue  whom  nobody  has 
ever  endeavoured  to  corrupt?  Where  is  the 
wonder  if  a  wife  be  reserved,  when  she  has  no 
temptation  nor  opportunity  of  being  otherwise, 
especially  if  she  have  a  jealous  husband,  with 
whom  the  least  suspicion  goes  for  a  reality,  and 
who  therefore  punishes  the  least  appearance 
with  death.  Now  I  can  never  so  much  esteem 
her  who  owes  her  virtue  merely  to  fear  or  want 
of  opportunity  of  being  false,  as  I  would  one 
who  victoriously  surmounts  all  the  assaults  of  a 
vigorous  and  watchful  lover,  and  yet  retains 
her  virtue  entire  and  unshaken.  These,  and 
many  other  reasons,  which  I  could  urge  to 
strengthen  my  opinion,  make  me  desire  that  my 


104  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

Camilla's  virtue  may  pass  through  the  fiery 
trial  of  vigorous  solicitations  and  addresses,  and 
these  offered  by  a  gallant,  who  may  have  merit 
enough  to  deserve  her  good  opinion ;  and  if,  as 
I  am  confident  she  will,  she  be  able  to  resist  so 
agreeable  a  temptation,  I  shall  think  myself  the 
most  happy  man  in  the  world,  and  attain  to  the 
height  and  utmost  aim  of  my  desires,  and  shall 
say,  that  a  virtuous  woman  is  fallen  to  my  lot, 
of  whom  the  wise  man  says,  who  can  find  her? 
K  she  yields,  I  shall,  at  least,  have  the  satisfac- 
tion of  finding  my  opinion  of  women  justified ; 
and  not  be  imposed  on  by  a  foolish  confidence, 
that  abuses  most  men ;  which  consideration  will 
be  sufficient  to  make  me  support  the  grief  I  shall 
derive  fi'om  so  expensive  an  experiment.  And 
assuring  myself,  that  nothing  which  you  can  say 
can  dissuade  me  from  my  resolution,  I  desire 
that  you  yourself,  my  dear  friend,  would  be  the 
person  to  put  my  design  in  execution,  I  will 
ftimish  you  with  opportunities  enough  of 
making  your  addresses,  in  which  I  would  have 
you  omit  nothing  you  may  suppose  likely  to 
prevail  with,  and  work  upon  a  woman  of  quality, 
who  is  modest,  virtuous,  reserved,  and  discreet 
by  nature.  The  most  prevailing  reason  that 
makes  me  choose  you  for  this  affair  above  all 
others,  is,  because  if  she  should  prove  so  frail, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  105 

as  to  be  overcome  by  addresses  and  importun- 
ities, the  victory  will  not  cost  me  so  dear,  since 
I  am  secured  from  your  taking  that  advantage, 
of  which  another  might  make  no  scruple.  And 
so  my  honour  will  remain  untouched,  and  the 
intended  injury  a  secret,  in  the  virtue  of  thy 
silence;  for  I  know  my  friend  so  well,  that 
death  and  the  grave  will  as  soon  divulge  my 
affairs.  Wherefore,  if  you  would  give  me  life 
indeed,  and  deliver  me  from  the  most  perplexing 
torment  of  doubt,  you  will  immediately  begin 
this  amorous  assault,  with  all  that  warmth, 
assiduity,  and  courage,  I  expect  from  that 
confidence  I  put  in  your  friendship." 

Lothario  gave  so  great  an  attention  to 
Anselmo's  reasons,  that  he  gave  him  no  other 
interruption,  than  what  we  mentioned.  But 
now,  finding  his  discourse  was  at  an  end,  full  of 
amazement  at  the  extravagance  of  the  proposal, 
he  thus  replied :  **  Could  I,  my  dear  Anselmo, 
persuade  myself  that  what  you  have  said  were 
any  more  than  a  piece  of  raillery,  I  should  not 
have  been  so  long  silent;  no,  I  should  have 
interrupted  you  at  the  beginning  of  your  speech. 
Sure  you  know  neither  yourself  nor  me,  Ansel- 
mo, or  you  would  never  have  employed  me  on 
such  an  affair,  if  you  had  not  thought  me  as 
much  altered  from  what  I  was,  as  you  seem  to 


106  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

be ;  for  as  the  poet  has  it,  usqtie  ad  aras;  a  true 
friend  ought  to  desire  nothing  of  his  friend  that 
is  offensive  to  heaven.  But  should  a  man  so 
far  exert  his  friendship,  as  to  deviate  a  little 
from  the  severity  of  religion,  in  compliance  to 
his  friend,  no  trifling  motives  can  excuse  the 
transgression,  but  such  only  as  concern,  at  least, 
his  friend's  life  and  honour.  Which  therefore 
of  these,  Anselmo,  is  in  danger,  to  warrant  my 
undertaking  so  detestable  a  thing  as  you  desire? 
Neither,  I  dare  engage.  On  the  contrary,  you 
would  make  me  the  assaulter  of  both,  in  which 
my  own  is  included;  for  to  rob  you  of  your 
reputation,  is  to  take  away  your  life,  since  an 
infamous  life  is  worse  than  death;  and  by 
making  me  the  guilty  instrument  of  this,  as  you 
would  have  me,  you  make  me  worse  than  a 
dead  man,  by  the  murder  of  my  reputation. 
Therefore  I  desire  you  would  hear  with  patience 
what  I  have  to  urge  against  your  extravagant 
desire,  and  I  shall  afterwards  hear  your  reply, 
without  interruption." 

Anselmo  having  promised  his  attention, 
Lothario  proceeded  in  this  manner.  "  In  my 
opinion,  you  are  not  unlike  the  Moors,  who  are 
incapable  of  being  convinced  of  the  error  of  their 
religion,  by  scripture,  speculative  reasons,  or 
those  drawn  immediately  from  the  articles  of 


DON  QUIXOTE.  107 

onr  faith ;  and  will  yield  to  nothing  but  demon- 
strations, as  evident  as  those  of  the  mathematics, 
and  which  can  as  little  be  denied,  as  when 
we  say,  if  from  two  equal  parts,  we  take 
away  two  equal  parts,  the  parts  that  remain 
are  also  equal.  And  when  they  do  not 
understand  this  proposition,  which  they  seldom 
do,  we  are  obliged  by  operation,  to  make  it  yet 
more  plain  and  obvious  to  their  senses :  and  yet 
all  this  labour  will  at  last  prove  ineffectual  to 
the  convincing  them  of  the  verities  of  our 
religion.  The  same  must  be  my  method  with 
you,  since  your  strange  desire  is  so  very  foreign 
to  all  manner  of  reason,  that  I  very  much  fear 
1  shall  spend  my  time  and  labour  in  vain,  in 
endeavouring  to  convince  you  of  your  own 
folly,  for  I  can  afford  it  no  other  name.  Nay, 
did  I  not  love  you  as  I  do,  I  should  leave  you 
to  the  prosecution  of  your  own  odd  humour, 
which  certainly  tends  to  your  ruin.  But  to  lay 
your  folly  a  little  more  open,  you  bid  me, 
Anselmo,  attempt  a  woman  of  honour,  cautious 
of  her  reputation,  and  one  who  is  not  much 
inclined  to  love;  for  all  these  good  qualifications 
you  allowed  her.  Ktherefore  you  already  know 
your  wife  is  possessed  of  all  these  advantages  of 
prudence,  discretion,  honour,  and  reservedness, 
what  have  you  more  to  inquire  after?    And  if 


108  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

you  believe,  as  I  myself  do,  that  she  will  be 
impregnable  to  all  my  assaults ;  what  greater 
and  better  names  will  you  give  her,  than  she 
already  deserves  ?  Either  you  pretend  to  think 
better  of  her,  than  really  you  do,  or  else  you 
desire  you  know  not  what  yourself.  But  then 
if  you  do  not  believe  her  as  virtuous  as  you 
pretend,  why  would  you  put  it  to  the  trial,  why 
do  you  not  rather  use  her  as  you  think  she  de- 
serves ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  she  be  as  good 
as  you  profess  you  believe  her,  why  would  you 
go  to  tempt  truth  and  goodness  itself,  without 
any  reasonable  prospect  of  advantage?  For 
when  the  trial  is  over,  she  will  be  but  the  same 
virtuous  woman  she  was  before.  Wherefore  it 
is  allowed  that  it  is  the  effect  of  temerity,  and 
want  of  reason,  to  attempt  what  is  likely  to 
produce  nothing  but  danger  and  detriment  to 
the  undertaker,  especially  when  there  is  no 
necessity  for  it,  and  when  we  may  easily  foresee 
the  folly  of  the  undertaking.  There  are  but 
these  motives  to  incite  us  to  difficult  attempts, 
religion,  interest,  or  both  together.  The  first 
makes  the  saints  endeavour  to  lead  angelic  lives 
in  these  firail  bodies.  The  second  makes  us 
expose  ourselves  to  the  hazards  of  long  voyages 
and  travels  in  pursuit  of  riches.  The  third 
motive  is  compounded  of  both,  and  prompts  us 


DON  QUIXOTE,  109 

to  act  as  well  for  the  honour  of  God,  as  for  our 
own  particular  glory  and  interest;  as  for  ex- 
ample, the  daring  adventures  of  the  valiant 
soldier,  who,  urged  by  his  duty  to  God,  his 
prince,  and  his  country,  fiercely  runs  into  the 
midst  of  a  dreadful  breach,  unterrified  with  any 
considerations  of  the  danger  that  threatens  him. 
These  are  things  done  every  day,  and  let  them 
be  never  so  dangerous,  they  bring  honour,  glory, 
and  profit,  to  those  that  attempt  them.  But  by 
the  project  you  design  to  reduce  to  an  experi- 
ment, you  will  never  obtain  either  the  glory  of 
heaven,  profit,  or  reputation :  for  should  the 
experiment  answer  your  expectation,  it  will 
make  no  addition,  either  to  your  content,  honour, 
or  riches;  but  if  it  disappoint  your  hopes,  it 
makes  you  the  most  miserable  man  alive.  And 
the  imaginary  advantage  of  no  man's  knowing 
your  disgrace  will  soon  vanish,  when  you  con- 
sider, that  to  know  it  yourself,  will  be  enough 
to  supply  you  perpetually  with  all  the  torment- 
ing thoughts  in  the  world.  A  proof  of  this  is 
what  the  famous  poet  Ludovico  Tansilo,  at  the 
end  of  his  first  part  of  St  Peter's  Tears,  says,  in 
these  words : 

''  Shame,  grief,  remorse  in  Peter's  breast  increase, 
Soon  as  the  blushing  mom  his  crime  betraya 

When  most  unseen,  then  most  himself  he  sees, 
And  with  duo  horror  all  his  soul  surveys. 


110  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

"  For  a  great  spirit  needs  no  censuring  eyes 
To  wound  his  soul,  when  conscious  of  a  fault ; 

But  self-condemned  and  even  self-punish'd  lies, 
And  dreads  no  witness  like  upbraiding  thought"  ^ 

So  that  your  boasted  secrecy,  far  from  alleviat- 
ing your  grief,  will  only  serve  to  increase  it; 
and  if  your  eyes  do  not  express  it  by  outward 
tears,  they  will  flow  from  your  very  heart  in 
blood.  So  wept  that  simple  doctor,  who,  as 
our  poet  tells  us,  made  that  experiment  on  the 
brittle  vessel,  which  the  more  prudent  Rey- 
noldus  excused  himself  from  doing.^  This,  in- 
deed, is  but  a  poetical  fiction,  but  yet  the 
moral  which  it  enforces  is  worthy  being  observed 
and  imitated.  And  accordingly  I  hope  you  will 
discover  the  strange  mistake  into  which  you 
would  run,  principally  when  you  have  heard 
what  I  have  farther  to  say  to  you. 

"  Suppose,  Anselmo,  you  had  a  diamond,  as 
valuable,  in  the  judgment  of  the  best  jewellers, 
as  such  a  stone  could  be,  would  you  not  be 
satisfied  with  their  opinion,  without  trying  its 
hardness  on  the  anvil?  You  must  own,  that 
should  it  be  proof  against  your  blows,  it  would 
not  be  one  jot  the  more  valuable  than  really  it 
was  before  your  foolish  trial;  but  should  it 
happen  to  break,  as  well  it  might,  the  jewel 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  VL 
'  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  VL 


DON  QUIXOTE,  111 

was  then  entirely  lost,  as  well  as  the  sense  and 
reputation  of  the  owner.  This  precious  dia- 
mond, my  friend,  is  your  Camilla,  for  so  she 
ought  to  be  esteemed  in  all  men's  opinions  as 
well  as  your  own.  Why  then  would  you  im- 
prudently put  her  in  danger  of  falling,  since 
your  trial  will  add  no  greater  value  to  her  than 
she  has  already  ?  But  if  she  should  prove  frail, 
reflect  with  yourself  on  the  unhappiness  of 
your  condition,  and  how  justly  you  might 
complain  of  your  being  the  cause  of  both  her 
ruin  and  your  own.  Consider,  that  as  a  mod- 
est and  honest  woman  is  the  most  valuable 
jewel  in  the  world,  so  all  women's  virtue  and 
honour  consist  in  the  opinion  and  reputation 
they  maintain  with  other  people;  and  since 
that  of  your  wife  is  perfect,  both  in  your  own 
and  all  other  men's  opinion,  why  will  you  go, 
to  no  purpose,  to  call  the  reality  of  it  in  ques- 
tion ?  You  must  remember,  my  friend,  that  the 
nature  of  women  is,  at  best,  but  weak  and  im- 
perfect; and  for  that  reason  we  should  be  so 
fer  from  casting  rubs  in  its  way,  that  we  ought, 
with  all  imaginable  care,  to  remove  every  ap- 
pearance that  might  hinder  its  course  to  that 
perfection  it  wants,  which  is  virtue, 

"  K  you  believe  the  naturalists,  the  ermine 
is  a  very  white  little  creature ;  wlien  the  hun- 


118  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

ters  have  found  its  haunts,  they  surround  it  al- 
most with  dirt  and  mire,  towards  which  the 
ermine  being  forced  to  fly,  rather  than  sully  its 
native  white  with  dirt,  it  suflfers  itself  to  be 
taken,  preferring  its  colour  to  its  liberty  and 
life.  The  virtuous  woman  is  our  ermine, 
whose  chastity  is  whiter  than  snow;  but  to 
preserve  its  colour  unsullied,  you  must  observe 
just  a  contrary  method :  the  addresses  and  ser- 
vices of  an  importunate  lover,  are  the  mire 
into  which  you  should  never  drive  a  woman ; 
for  it  is  ten  to  one  she  will  not  be  able  to  free 
herself  and  avoid  it,  being  but  too  apt  to 
stumble  into  it ;  and  therefore  that  should  be 
always  removed,  and  only  the  candour  and 
beauty  of  virtue,  and  the  charms  of  a  good 
fame  and  reputation  placed  before  her.  A 
good  woman  is  also  not  unlike  a  mirror  of 
crystal,  which  will  infallibly  be  dimmed  and 
stained  by  breathing  too  much  upon  it:  she 
must  rather  be  used  like  the  reliques  of  saints, 
adored  but  not  touched;  or  like  a  garden  of 
curious  tender  flowers,  that  may  at  a  distance 
gratify  the  eye,  but  are  not  permitted  by  the 
master  to  be  trampled  on  or  touched  by  every 
beholder.  I  shall  add  but  a  few  verses  out  of 
a  late  new  play,  very  fit  for  our  present  pur- 
pose, where  a  prudent  old  man   advised  his 


DON  QUIXOTE.  113 

neighbour,  that  had  a  daughter,  to  lock  her  up 
close;  and  gives  these  reasons  for  it,  besides 
several  others : 

*  Since  nothing  is  frailer  than  woman  and  glass. 

He  that  would  expose  them  to  fall  is  an  ass ; 

And  sore  the  rash  mortal  is  yet  more  unwise, 

Who  on  bodies  so  ticklish  experiments  tries. 

With  ease  both  are  damaged ;  then  keep  that  with  care 

Which  no  art  can  restore,  nor  no  solder  repair. 

Fond  man,  take  my  counsel,  watch  what  is  so  frail ; 

For,  where  Danaes  lie,  golden  showers  will  prevail' 

"All  I  have  hitherto  urged  relates  only  to 
you ;  I  may  now  at  last  be  allowed  to  consider 
what  regards  myself,  and  if  I  am  tedious,  I 
hope  you  will  pardon  me ;  for,  to  draw  you  out 
of  the  labyrinth  into  which  you  have  run  your- 
self, I  am  forced  on  that  prolixity.  You  call 
me  friend,  yet,  which  is  absolutely  inconsistent 
with  friendship,  you  would  rob  me  of  my 
honour;  nay,  you  stop  not  here,  but  would 
oblige  me  to  destroy  yours.  First,  that  you 
would  rob  me  of  mine  is  evident ;  for  what 
will  Camilla  think,  when  I  make  a  declaration 
of  love  to  her,  but  that  I  am  a  perfidious  vil- 
lain, that  makes  no  scruple  of  violating  the 
most  sacred  laws  of  friendship,  and  who  sacri- 
fices the  honour  and  reputation  of  my  friend  to 
a  criminal  passion.  Secondly,  that  I  destroy 
yours  is  as  evident;  for,  when  she  sees  me 
take  such  a  liberty  with  her,  she  will  imagine 

IL  H 


114  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

that  I  have  discovered  some  weakness  in  her, 
that  has  given  me  assurance  to  make  her  so 
guilty  a  discovery,  by  which  she,  esteeming 
herself  injured  in  her  honour,  you  being  the 
principal  part  of  her,  must  of  necessity  be 
affected  with  the  aflfronts  she  receives.  For 
this  is  the  reason  why  the  husband,  though 
never  so  deserving,  cautious,  and  careful,  suffers 
the  infamy  of  a  scandalous  name  if  his  wife 
goes  astray;  whereas,  in  reason,  he  ought 
rather  to  be  an  object  of  compassion  than  con- 
tempt, seeing  the  misfortune  proceeds  from  the 
vice  and  folly  of  the  wife,  not  his  own  defects. 
But  since  the  reason  and  justice  of  the  man's 
suffering  for  the  wife's  transgression  may  be 
serviceable  to  you,  I'll  give  you  the  best  ac- 
count of  it  I  can ;  and  pray,  do  not  think  me 
tedious,  since  this  is  meant  for  your  good. 
When  woman  was  given  to  man,  and  marriage 
first  ordained  in  paradise,  man  and  wife  were 
made  and  pronounced  one  flesh ;  the  husband, 
therefore,  being  of  a  piece  with  the  wife,  what- 
ever affects  her  affects  him,  as  a  part  of  her ; 
though,  as  I  have  said,  he  has  been  no  occa- 
sion of  it :  for,  as  the  whole  body  is  affected  by 
the  pain  of  any  part,  as  the  head  will  share 
the  pain  of  the  foot,  though  it  never  caused 
that  pain,  so  is  the  husband  touched  with  his 


DON  QUIXOTE.  115 

wife's  infamy,  because  she  is  part  of  him.  And 
since  all  worldly  honours  and  dishonours  are 
derived  from  flesh  and  blood,  and  the  scandalous 
baseness  of  an  unfaithfiil  wife  proceeds  from 
the  same  principle,  it  necessarily  follows,  that 
the  husband,  though  no  party  in  the  offence, 
and  entirely  ignorant  and  innocent  of  it,  must 
have  his  share  of  the  infamy.  Let  what  I  have 
said,  my  dear  Anselmo,  make  you  sensible  of 
the  danger  into  which  you  would  run,  by 
endeavouring  thus  to  disturb  the  happy  tran- 
quillity and  repose  that  your  wife  at  present 
enjoys ;  and  for  how  vain  a  curiosity,  and  ex- 
travagant a  caprice,  you  would  rouse  and  awake 
those  peccant  humours  which  are  now  lulled 
asleep  by  the  power  of  an  unattempted  chastity. 
Reflect  farther,  how  small  a  return  you  can 
expect  from  so  hazardous  a  voyage,  and  such 
valuable  commodities  as  you  venture ;  for  the 
treasure  you  will  lose  is  so  great,  and  ought  to 
be  so  dear,  that  all  words  are  too  inexpressive 
to  show  how  much  you  ought  to  esteem  it. 
But  if  all  I  have  said  be  too  weak  to  destroy 
your  foolish  resolve,  employ  some  other  instru- 
ment of  your  disgrace  and  ruin :  for,  though  I 
should  lose  your  friendship,  a  loss  which  I  must 
esteem  the  greatest  in  the  world,  I  will  have  no 
hand  in  an  affair  so  prejudicial  to  your  honour." 


116  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

Lothario  said  no  more;  and  Anselmo,  dis- 
covering a  desponding  melancholy  in  his  face, 
remained  a  great  while  silent  and  confounded. 
At  last,  "  I  have,"  said  he,  "my  friend,  listened 
to  your  discourse,  as  you  might  observe,  with 
all  the  attention  in  nature,  and  every  part  of 
what  you  have  said  convinces  me  of  the  great- 
ness of  your  wisdom  and  friendship;  and  I 
must  own,  that  if  I  suflfer  my  desires  to  prevail 
over  your  reasons,  I  shun  the  good  and  pursue 
the  evil.  But  yet,  my  friend,  you  ought,  on 
the  other  side,  to  reflect,  that  my  distemper  is 
not  much  unlike  that  of  those  women,  who 
sometimes  long  for  coals,  lime,  nay,  some 
things  that  are  loathsome  to  the  very  sight; 
and  therefore,  some  little  arts  should  be  used  to 
endeavour  my  cure,  which  might  easily  be 
eflfected,  if  you  would  but  consent  to  solicit 
Camilla,  though  it  were  but  weakly  and  re- 
missly ;  for  I  am  sure  she  will  not  be  so  frail 
as  to  surrender  at  the  first  assault,  which  yet 
will  be  sufficient  to  give  me  the  satisfaction  I 
desire ;  and  in  this  you  will  ftilfil  the  duty  of 
our  friendship,  in  restoring  me  to  life,  and 
securing  my  honour,  by  your  powerful  and 
persuasive  reasons.  And  you  are  indeed  bound 
as  my  friend  to  do  thus  much  to  secure  me 
from  betra3ring  my  defects  and  follies  to  a 


DON  QUIXOTE,  117 

stranger,  which  would  hazard  that  reputation 
which  you  have  taken  so  much  pains  to 
preserve ;  since  I  am  so  bent  on  this  experi- 
ment, that,  if  you  refuse  me,  I  shall  certainly 
apply  myself  elsewhere :  and  though  a  while 
your  reputation  may  suflfer  in  Camilla's  opinion, 
yet,  when  she  has  once  proved  triumphant, 
you  may  cure  that  wound,  and  recover  her 
good  opinion,  by  a  sincere  discovery  of  your 
design.  Wherefore,  I  conjure  you  to  comply 
with  my  importunity,  in  spite  of  all  the  ob- 
stacles that  may  present  themselves  to  you, 
since  what  I  desire  is  so  little,  and  the  pleasure 
I  shall  derive  from  it  so  great ;  for,  as  I  have 
promised,  your  very  first  attempt  shall  satisfy 
me  as  much  as  if  you  had  gone  through  the 
whole  experiment." 

Lothario  plainly  saw  that  Anselmo's  resolu- 
tion was  too  much  fixed  for  any  thing  he  could 
say  to  alter  it,  and  finding  that  he  threatened 
to  betray  his  folly  to  a  stranger,  if  he  persisted 
in  a  refusal,  to  avoid  gieater  inconveniences, 
he  resolved  to  seem  to  comply  with  his  desires, 
privately  designing  to  satisfy  Anselmo's  caprice, 
without  giving  Camilla  any  trouble;  and  there- 
fore he  desired  him  to  break  the  matter  to 
nobody  else,  since  he  would  himself  undertake 
it,  and  begin  as  soon  as  he  pleased.      Anselmo 


118  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

embraced  him  with  all  the  love  and  tenderness 
imaginable,  and  was  as  prodigal  of  his  thanks, 
as  if  the  very  promise  had  been  the  greatest 
obligation  that  could  be  laid  on  him.  They 
immediately  agreed  on  the  next  day  for  the 
trial,  at  which  time  Anselmo  should  give  him 
the  opportunity  of  being  alone  with  her,  and 
gold  and  jewels  to  present  her  with.  He 
advised  him  to  omit  no  point  of  gallantry,  as 
serenades  and  songs,  and  verses  in  her  praise ; 
ofifering  to  make  them  himself,  if  Lothario 
would  not  be  at  the  trouble.  But  Lothario 
promised  him  to  do  all  himself,  though  his 
design  was  fer  diflferent  from  Anselmo's. 

Matters  being  thus  adjusted,  they  returned 
to  Anselmo's  house,  where  they  found  the 
beautiful  Camilla  sad  with  concern  for  the 
absence  of  her  husband  beyond  his  usual  hour. 
Lothario  left  him  there,  and  retired  home,  as 
pensive  how  to  come  oflF  handsomely  in  this 
ridiculous  affair,  as  he  had  left  Anselmo  pleased 
and  contented  with  his  undertaking  it.  But 
that  night,  he  contrived  a  way  of  imposing  on 
Anselmo  to  his  satisfaction,  without  offending 
Camilla.  So  next  day  he  goes  to  Anselmo's, 
and  was  received  by  Camilla  with  a  civility 
and  respect  answerable  to  the  uncommon 
iriendship  she  knew  was  between  him  and  her 


DON  QUIXOTE,  119 

husband.  Dinner  being  over,  Anselmo  desired 
his  friend  to  keep  his  lady  company  till  his 
return  from  an  extraordinary  a£fair,  that  would 
require  his  absence  about  an  hour  and  a  half. 
Camilla  desired  him  not  to  go;  Lothario 
offered  to  go  with  him;  but  he  pleaded 
peculiar  business,  entreated  his  friend  to  stay, 
and  enjoined  his  wife  not  to  leave  him  alone 
till  his  return.  In  short,  he  knew  so  well  how 
to  counterfeit  a  necessity  for  his  absence, 
though  that  necessity  proceeded  from  his  own 
folly,  that  no  one  could  perceive  it  was  feigned. 
And  so  he  left  them  together,  without  any  one 
to  observe  their  actions,  all  the  servants  being 
retired  to  dinner. 

Thus  Lothario  found  himself  entered  the 
lists,  his  adversary  before  him  terribly  armed 
with  a  thousand  piercing  beauties,  sufficient  to 
overcome  all  the  men  she  should  encounter, 
which  gave  him  cause  enough  to  fear  his  own 
fate.  The  first  thing  he  did  in  this  first  onset, 
was  to  lean  his  head  carelessly  on  his  hand, 
and  beg  her  leave  to  take  a  nap  in  his  chair, 
till  his  friend  came  back;  Camilla  told  him 
she  thought  he  might  rest  with  more  ease  on 
the  couch*   in  the   next  room;   he  declared 

*  Estrado.    A  space  of  the  yisiting  rooms  of  ladies,  raised  a  foot 
above  the  floor  of  the  rest  of  the  room,  covered  with  carpets  or  mats, 


120  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

himself  satisfied  with  the  place  where  he  was, 
and  so  slept  till  his  fiiend  came  back.  An- 
selmo  finding  his  wife  in  her  chamber,  and 
Lothario  asleep  at  his  return,  concluded  that 
he  had  given  them  time  enough  both  for  dis- 
course and  repose ;  and  therefore  waited  with 
a  great  deal  of  impatience  for  his  friend's 
awaking,  that  they  might  retire,  and  he  might 
acquaint  him  with  his  success.  Lothario  at 
last  awaked,  and  going  out  with  his  fiiend,  he 
answered  his  inquiry  to  this  purpose,  that  he 
did  not  think  it  convenient  to  proceed  farther, 
at  that  time,  than  some  general  praise  of  her 
wit  and  beauty,  which  would  best  prepare  his 
way  for  what  he  might  do  hereafter,  and  dis- 
pose her  to  give  a  more  easy  and  willing  ear 
to  what  he  should  say  to  her :  as  the  devil,  by 
la3dng  a  pleasing  and  apparent  good  at  first 
before  us,  insinuates  himself  into  our  inclina- 
tions so  that  he  generally  gains  his  point 
before  we  discover  the  cloven  foot,  if  his 
disguise  pass  on  us  in  the  beginning.  Anselm()|k 
was  extremely  satisfied  with  what  Lothario^ 
said,  and  promised  him  every  day  as  good  an 
opportunity;  and  though  he  could  not  go 
every  day  abroad,  yet  he  would  manage  his 

on  which  the  ladies  lit  on  eiiBhiona  laid  along  by  the  wall,  or  low 
ftoola ;  being  a  Mooriah  fashion  retained  by  the  Spaniards. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  121 

conduct  80  well,  that  Camilla  should  have  no 
cause  of  suspicion.  He  took  care  to  do  as  he 
said.  But  Lothario  wilfully  lost  the  frequent 
opportunities  he  gave  him;  however,  he  soothed 
him  still  with  assurances,  that  his  lady  was 
inflexible,  her  virtue  not  to  be  surmounted,  and 
that  she  had  threatened  to  discover  his  attempts 
to  her  husband,  if  ever  he  presumed  to  be  so 
insolent  again ;  so  far  was  she  from  giving  the 
least  hope  of  encouragement.  "  Thus  far  it  is 
well/'  said  Anselmo;  **but  yet  Camilla  has 
resisted  nothing  but  words,  we  must  now  see 
what  proof  she  is  against  more  substantial 
temptations.  To-morrow  I  will  furnish  you 
with  two  thousand  crowns  in  gold,  to  pre- 
sent her  with ;  and  as  a  farther  bait  you  shall 
have  as  much  more  for  jewels.  For  women, 
especially  if  they  are  handsome,  naturally  love 
to  go  gaily  and  richly  dressed,  be  they  never 
so  chaste  and  virtuous ;  and  if  she  have  power 
to  overcome  this  temptation,  I  will  give  you 
no  farther  trouble." — '*  Since  I  have  begun 
this  adventure,"  replied  Lothario,  **I  will  make 
an  end  of  it,  though  I  am  sure  her  repulses 
will  tire  out  my  patience,  and  her  virtue 
overcome  any  temptation,  and  baffle  my  en- 
deavours." 

The   next  day  Anselmo  delivered  him  the 


122  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

four  thousand  crowns,  and  with  them  as  many 
perplexing  thoughts,  not  knowing  how  to 
supply  his  invention  with  some  new  story  to 
amuse  his  friend.  However,  at  last  he  resolved 
to  return  the  money,  with  assurance  that 
Camilla  was  as  unmoved  with  presents  as  with 
praise,  and  as  untouched  with  promises  as  with 
vows  and  sighs  of  love;  and  therefore  all 
farther  attempts  would  be  but  a  fruitless 
labour.  This  was  his  intention ;  but  fortune, 
that  meddled  too  much  in  these  affairs,  dis- 
appointed his  designs.  For  Anselmo  having 
left  him  alone  with  his  wife  one  day  as  he 
used  to  do,  privately  conveyed  himself  into 
the  closet,  and  through  the  chinks  of  the 
door  set  himself  to  observe  what  they  did.  He 
found  that  for  one  half  hour  Lothario  said  not 
one  word  to  Camilla,  from  whence  he  con- 
cluded that  all  the  addresses,  importunities, 
and  repulses,  with  which  he  had  amused  him, 
were  pure  fictions.  But,  that  he  might  be  fully 
satisfied  in  the  truth  of  his  surmise,  coming 
from  his  covert  he  took  his  friend  aside,  and 
inquired  of  him  what  Camilla  had  then  said  to 
him,  and  how  he  now  found  her  inclined? 
Lothario  replied,  that  he  would  make  no 
frirther  trial  of  her,  since  her  answer  had  now 
been  so  severe  and  awfiil,  that  he  durst  not  for 


DON  QUIXOTE.  US 

the  future  venture  upon  a  discourse  so  evidently 
her  aversion. 

"  Ah !  Lothario,  Lothario ! ''  cried  Anselmo, 
"is  it  thus  that  you  keep  your  promises?  is 
this  what  I  should  expect  from  your  friendship? 
1  observed  you  through  that  door,  and  found 
that  you  said  not  a  word  to  Camilla ;  and  from 
thence  I  am  very  well  satisfied,  that  you  have 
only  imposed  on  me  all  the  answers  and  rela- 
tions you  have  made.  Why  did  you  hinder 
me  from  employing  some  other,  if  you  never 
intended  to  satisfy  my  desire?'*  Anselmo 
said  no  more,  but  this  was  enough  to  confound 
Lothario,  and  cover  him  with  shame  for  being 
found  in  a  lie.  Therefore  to  appease  his  friend, 
he  swore  to  him,  from  that  time  forward,  to  set 
in  good  earnest  about  the  matter,  and  that  so 
effectually,  that  he  himself,  if  he  would  again 
give  himself  the  trouble  of  observing  him, 
should  find  proof  enough  of  his  sincerity. 
Anselmo  believed  him;  and  to  give  him  the 
better  opportunity,  he  engaged  a  friend  of  his 
to  send  for  him,  with  a  great  deal  of  importun- 
ity, to  come  to  his  house  at  a  village  near  the 
city,  where  he  meant  to  spend  eight  days,  to 
take  away  all  apprehension  and  fear  from  both 
his  friend  and  his  wife. 

Was  ever  man  so  unhappy  as  Anselmo,  who 


124  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

industriously  contrived  the  plot  of  his  own 
ruin  and  dishonour  ?  he  had  a  very  good  wife, 
and  possessed  her  in  quiet,  without  any  other 
man's  mingling  in  his  pleasures ;  her  thoughts 
were  bounded  with  her  own  house,  and  her 
husband,  the  only  earthly  good  she  hoped  or 
thought  on,  and  her  only  pleasure  and  desire ; 
his  will  the  rule  of  hers,  and  measure  of  her 
conduct.  When  he  possessed  love,  honour, 
beauty  and  discretion,  without  pain  or  toil, 
what  should  provoke  him  to  seek  with  so  much 
danger  and  hazard  of  what  he  had  already, 
that  which  was  not  to  be  found  in  nature !  He 
that  aims  at  things  impossible,  ought  justly  to 
lose  those  advantages  which  are  within  the 
bounds  of  possibility,  as  the  poet  sings : 

L 

*^  In  death  I  seek  for  life, 

In  a  disease  for  health, 

For  quietness  in  strife. 

In  poverty  for  wealth, 

And  constant  truth  in  an  inconstant  wife, 

IL 

"  But  sure  the  fates  disdain 

My  mad  desires  to  please, 

Nor  shall  I  e'er  ohtain 

What  others  get  with  ease, 

Since  I  demand  what  no  man  e'er  could  gain." 

The  next  day  Anselmo  went  out  of  town, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  125 

having  first  informed  Camilla,  that  his  fiiend 
Lothario  would  look  after  his  affairs,  and  keep 
her  company  in  his  absence,  and  desired  her  to 
make  as  much  of  him  as  of  himself.  His  lady, 
like  a  discreet  woman,  begged  him  to  consider 
how  improper  a  thing  it  was  for  any  other  to 
take  his  place  in  his  absence;  and  told  him, 
that  if  he  doubted  her  ability  in  managing  her 
house,  he  should  try  her  but  this  time,  and  she 
questioned  not  but  he  would  find  she  had  capa- 
city to  acquit  herself  to  his  satisfaction  in 
greater  matters.  Anselmo  replied,  that  it  was 
her  duty  not  to  dispute,  but  obey  his  command: 
to  which  she  returned,  that  she  would  comply, 
though  much  against  her  will.  In  short,  her 
husband  left  the  town ;  Lothario,  the  next  day, 
was  received  at  her  house  with  all  the  respect 
that  could  be  paid  a  friend  so  dear  to  her 
husband ;  but  yet  with  so  much  caution,  that 
she  never  permitted  herself  to  be  left  alone 
with  him,  but  kept  perpetually  some  of  her 
maids  in  the  room,  and  chiefly  Leonela,  for 
whom  she  had  a  particular  love,  as  having 
been  bred  in  her  father^s  house  with  her  from 
her  infancy. 

Lothario  said  nothing  to  her  the  three  first 
days,  notwithstanding  he  might  have  found  an 
opportunity  when  the  servants  were  gone  to 


126  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

dinner:  for  though  the  prudent  Camilla  had 
ordered  Ijeonela  to  dine  before  her,  that  she 
might  have  no  occasion  to  go  out  of  the  room ; 
yet  she,  who  had  other  affairs  to  employ  her 
thoughts,  more  agreeable  to  her  inclinations 
(to  gratify  which  that  was  usually  the  only 
convenient  time  she  could  find),  was  not  so 
very  punctually  obedient  to  her  lady's  com- 
mands, but  that  she  sometimes  left  them 
together.  Lothario  did  not  yet  make  use  of 
these  advantages,  as  I  have  said,  being  awed 
by  the  virtue  and  modesty  of  Camilla.  But 
this  silence  which  she  thus  imposed  on 
Lothario,  had  at  last  a  quite  contrary  effect. 
For  though  he  said  nothing,  his  thoughts  were 
active,  his  eyes  were  employed  to  see  and  sur- 
vey the  outward  charms  of  a  form  so  perfect, 
that  it  was  enough  to  fire  the  most  cold,  and 
soften  the  most  obdurate  heart.  Li  these 
intervals  of  silence,  he  considered  how  much 
she  deserved  to  be  beloved ;  and  these  consider- 
ations by  little  and  little  undermined  and 
assaulted  the  faith  which  he  owed  to  his  friend. 
A  thousand  times  he  resolved  to  leave  the  city 
and  retire  where  Anselmo  should  never  see 
him,  and  where  he  should  never  more  behold 
the  dangerous  face  of  Camilla ;  but  the  extreme 
pleasure  he  found  in  seeing  her,  soon  destroyed 


DON  QUIXOTE.  127 

80  feeble  a  resolve.  When  he  was  alone,  he 
would  accuse  his  want  of  friendship  and  religion, 
and  ran  into  frequent  comparisons  betwixt 
himself  and  Anselmo,  which  generally  con- 
cluded that  Anselmo's  folly  and  madness  were 
greater  than  his  breach  of  faith;  and  that 
would  heaven  as  easily  excuse  his  intentions  as 
man,  he  had  no  cause  to  fear  any  punishment 
for  the  crime  he  was  going  to  commit.  In  fine, 
Camilla's  beauty,  and  the  opportunity  given 
him  by  the  husband  himself,  wholly  vanquished 
his  fidth  and  friendship.  And  now,  having  an 
eye  only  to  the  means  of  obtaining  that  pleasure, 
to  which  he  was  prompted  with  so  much 
violence;  after  he  had  spent  the  three  first 
days  of  Anselmo's  absence,  in  a  conflict  betwixt 
love  and  virtue,  he  attempted,  by  all  means  pos- 
sible, to  prevail  with  Camilla,  and  discovered 
so  much  passion  in  his  words  and  actions, 
that  Camilla,  surprised  with  the  unexpected 
assault,  flung  from  him  out  of  the  room,  and 
retired  with  haste  to  her  chamber.  Hope  is 
always  bom  with  love,  nor  did  this  repulse  in 
the  least  discourage  Lothario  from  farther 
attempts  on  Camilla,  who  by  this  appeared 
more  charming,  and  more  worthy  his  pursuit. 
She,  on  the  other  hand,  knew  not  what  to  do 
upon  the  discovery  of  that  in  Lothario,  which 


128  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

she  never  could  have  imagined.  The  result  of 
her  reflections  was  this,  that  since  she  could 
not  give  him  any  opportunity  of  speaking  to 
her  again,  without  the  hazard  of  her  reputar- 
tion  and  honour,  she  would  send  a  letter  to 
her  husband  to  solicit  his  return  to  his  house. 
The  letter  she  sent  by  a  messenger  that  very 
night ;  and  it  was  to  this  purpose. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  129 


CHAPTER  VIL 

IN  WHICH  THE   HISTORY    OP    THE    CURIOUS   IMPER- 
TINENT IS  PURSUED. 

"As  it  is  very  improper  to  leave  an  army' 
without  a  general,  and  a  garrison  without  its 
governor;  so  to  me  it  seems  much  more  im- 
prudent to  leave  a  young  married  woman 
without  her  husband;  especially  when  there 
are  no  affairs  of  consequence  to  plead  for  his 
absence.  I  find  myself  so  ill  in  your's,  and  so 
impatient,  and  unable  to  endure  it  any  longer, 
that  if  you  come  not  home  very  quickly,  I 
shall  be  obliged  to  return  to  my  father's,  though 
I  leave  your  house  without  any  one  to  look  after 
it :  for  the  person  to  whom  you  have  entrusted 
the  care  of  your  family,  has,  I  believe,  more  re- 
gard to  his  own  pleasure  than  your  concerns. 
You  are  wise  and  prudent,  and  therefore  I  shall 
say  no  more,  nor  is  it  convenient  I  should." 

Anselmo  was  not  a  little  satisfied  at  the 
receipt  of  this  letter,  which  assured  him  that 
Lothario  had  begun  the  attempt,  which  she 
had  repelled  according  to  his  hopes ;  and  there- 

IL  I 


130  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

fore  he  sent  her  word  not  to  leave  his  house, 
assuring  her  it  should  not  be  long  before  he 
returned.  Camilla  was  surprised  with  his 
answer,  and  more  perplexed  than  before,  being 
equally  afraid  of  going  to  her  father,  and  of 
staying  at  home ;  in  the  first  she  disobeyed  her 
husband,  in  the  latter  ran  the  risk  of  her  honour. 
The  worst  resolution  prevailed,  which  was  to 
stay  at  her  own  house,  and  not  avoid  Lothario's 
company,  lest  it  should  give  some  cause  of 
suspicion  to  her  servants.  And  now  she  repented 
her  writing  to  Anselmo,  lest  he  should  suspect 
that  Lothario  had  observed  some  indiscretion  in 
her,  that  made  him  lose  the  respect  due  to  her, 
and  gave  him  assurance  to  offer  at  the  corrupt- 
ing her  virtue ;  but  confiding  in  heaven  and  her 
own  innocence,  which  she  thought  proof  against 
all  Lothario's  attempts,  she  resolved  to  make 
no  answer  to  whatever  he  should  say  to  her, 
and  never  more  trouble  her  husband  with  com- 
plaints, for  fear  of  engaging  him  in  disputes  and 
quarrels  with  his  fiiend.  For  that  reason  she 
considered  how  she  might  best  excuse  him  to 
Anselmo,  when  he  should  examine  the  cause  ol 
her  writing  to  him  in  that  manner.  With  a 
resolution  so  innocent  and  dangerous,  the  next 
day  she  gave  ear  to  all  that  Lothario  said :  and 
he  gave  the  assault  with  such  force  and  vigour, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  181 

that  Camilla's  constancy  could  not  stand  the 
shock  unmoved,  and  her  virtue  could  do  no 
more  than  guard  her  eyes  from  betraying  that 
tender  compassion,  of  which  his  vows  and  en- 
treaties, and  all  his  sighs  and  tears,  had  made 
her  heart  sensible.  Lothario  discovered  this 
with  an  infinite  satisfaction,  and  no  less  addition 
to  his  flame ;  and  found  that  he  ought  to  make 
use  of  this  opportunity,  of  Anselmo's  absence, 
with  all  his  force  and  importunity  to  win  so 
valuable  a  fortress.  He  began  with  the  power- 
ful battery  of  the  praise  of  her  beauty,  which 
being  directly  pointed  on  the  weakest  part  of 
woman,  her  vanity,  with  the  greatest  ease  and 
&cility  in  the  world  makes  a  breach  as  great  as 
a  lover  would  desire.  Lothario  was  not  unskil- 
ftd  or  remiss  in  the  attack,  but  followed  his  fire 
so  close,  that  let  Camilla's  integrity  be  built 
on  never  so  obdurate  a  rock,  it  must  at  last  have 
fallen.  He  wept,  prayed,  flattered,  promised, 
swore,  vowed,  and  showed  so  much  passion  and 
truth  in  what  he  said,  that  beating  down  the 
care  of  her  honour,  he,  at  last,  triumphed 
over  what  he  scarce  durst  hope,  though 
what  he  most  of  all  desired;  for  she,  at 
last,  surrendered,  even  Camilla  surrendered! 
Nor  ought  we  to  wonder  if  she  yielded,  since 
even  Lothario's  firiendship  and  virtue  were  not 


132  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

able  to  withstand  the  terrible  assault;  an  evident 
proof  that  love  is  a  power  too  strong  to  be  over- 
come by  any  thing  but  flying,  and  that  no 
mortal  creature  ought  to  be  so  presumptuous  as 
to  stand  the  encounter,  since  there  is  need  of 
something  more  than  human,  and  indeed  a 
heavenly  force,  to  confront  and  vanquish  that 
human  passion.  Leonela  was  the  only  confid- 
ante of  this  amour,  which  these  new  lovers  and 
faithless  friends  could  not  by  any  means  conceal 
from  her  knowledge.  Lothario  would  not  dis- 
cover to  Camilla,  that  her  husband,  for  her  trial, 
had  designedly  given  him  this  opportunity,  to 
which  he  owed  so  extreme  a  happiness ;  because 
she  should  not  think  he  wanted  love  to  solicit 
her  himself  with  importunity,  or  that  she  was 
gained  on  too  easy  terms. 

Anselmo  came  home  in  a  few  days,  but  dis- 
covered not  what  he  had  lost,  though  it  was 
what  he  most  valued  and  esteemed:  from 
thence  he  went  to  Lothario,  and  embracing  him, 
begged  of  him  to  let  him  know  his  fate.  "  All 
I  can  tell  you,  my  friend,'*  answered  Lothario, 
"  is  that  you  may  boast  yourself  of  the  best  wife 
in  the  world,  the  ornament  of  her  sex,  and  the 
pattern  which  all  virtuous  women  ought  to 
follow.  Words,  offers,  presents,  all  is  ineffect- 
ual ;  the  tears  I  pretended  to  shed,  moved  only 


DON  QUIXOTE.  133 

her  laughter.  Camilla  is  not  only  mistress  of 
the  greatest  beauty,  but  of  modesty,  discretion, 
sweetness  of  temper,  and  every  other  virtue  and 
perfection,  that  add  to  the  charms  of  a  woman 
of  honour.  Therefore,  my  friend,  take  back 
your  money ;  I  have  had  no  occasion  to  lay  it 
out,  for  Camilla's  integrity  cannot  be  corrupted 
by  such  base  and  mercenary  things  as  gifts  and 
promises.  And  now,  Anselmo,  be  at  last  con- 
tent with  the  trial  you  have  already  made ;  and 
having  so  luckily  got  over  the  dangerous  quick- 
sands of  doubts  and  suspicions  that  are  to  be  met 
with  in  the  ocean  of  matrimony,  do  not  venture 
out  again,  with  another  pilot,  that  vessel,  whose 
strength  you  have  suflBciently  experienced ;  but 
believe  yourself,  as  you  are,  securely  anchored 
in  a  safe  harbour,  at  pleasure  and  ease,  till 
death,  from  whose  force,  no  title,  power  nor  dig- 
nity can  secure  us,  does  come  and  cut  the  cable." 
Anselmo  was  extremely  satisfied  with  Loth- 
ario's discourse,  and  believed  it  as  firmly  as  if 
it  had  been  an  oracle ;  yet  desired  him  to  con- 
tinue his  pursuit,  if  it  were  but  to  pass  away 
the  time :  he  did  not  require  he  should  press 
Camilla  with  those  importunities  he  had  before 
used,  but  only  make  some  verses  in  her  praise, 
under  the  name  of  Cloris ;  and  he  would  make 
Camilla  believe  he  celebrated  a  lady  he  loved, 


134  THE  ACHIEVEMEKT8  OP 

under  that  name,  to  secure  her  honour  and 
reputation  £rom  the  censure  which  a  more  open 
declaration  would  expose  her  to;  he  added, 
that  if  Lothario  would  not  be  at  the  expense  of 
so  much  trouble  and  time,  as  to  compose  them 
himself,  he  would  do  it  for  him  with  a  great 
deal  of  pleasure.  Lothario  told  him  there  was 
no  need  of  that,  since  he  himself  was  sometimes 
poetically  given ;  "  do  you  but  tell  Camilla  of 
my  pretended  love,  as  you  say  you  ¥all,  and  I 
will  make  the  verses  as  well  as  I  can,  though 
not  so  well  as  the  excellency  of  the  subject 
requires.'* 

The  curious  impertinent,  and  his  treacherous 
friend,  having  thus  agreed  the  matter,  Anselmo 
went  home,  and  then  asked  Camilla  on  what 
occasion  she  sent  him  the  letter?  Camilla, 
who  wondered  that  this  question  had  not  been 
asked  her  before,  replied,  that  the  motive  that 
prevailed  with  her  to  write  in  that  manner  to 
him,  was  a  jealousy  she  had  entertained,  that 
Lothario,  in  his  absence,  looked  on  her  with 
more  criminal  and  desiring  eyes  than  he  used 
to  do  when  he  was  at  home ;  but  that  since  she 
had  reason  to  believe  that  suspicion  but  weakly 
grounded,  seeing  he  discovered  rather  an  aver- 
sion than  love,  as  avoiding  all  occasions  of 
being  alone  with  her.     Anselmo  told  her  she 


DON  QUIXOTE.  135 

had  nothing  to  apprehend  from  Lothario  on 
that  account,  since  he  knew  his  affections 
engaged  on  one  of  the  noblest  young  ladies  of 
the  city,  whose  praise  he  writ  under  the  name 
of  Cloris ;  but  were  he  not  thus  engaged,  there 
was  no  reason  to  suspect  Lothario's  virtue  and 
friendship.  Camilla,  at  this  discourse,  without 
doubt,  would  have  been  very  jealous  of  Lothario, 
had  he  not  told  her  his  design  of  abusing  her 
husband,  with  the  pretence  of  another  love,  that 
he  might,  with  the  greater  liberty  and  security, 
express  her  praise  and  his  passion.  The  next 
day,  at  dinner,  Anselmo  desired  him  to  read 
some  of  the  verses  he  had  made  on  his  beloved 
Cloris ;  telling  him,  he  might  say  anything  of 
her  before  Camilla,  since  she  did  not  know  who 
the  lady  was.  "Did  Camilla  know  her,"  replied 
Lothario,  "  that  should  not  make  me  pass  over 
in  silence  any  part  of  that  praise  which  was  her 
due ;  for  if  a  lover  complains  of  his  mistress's 
cruelty,  while  he  is  praising  her  perfections,  she 
can  never  suffer  in  her  reputation.  Therefore, 
without  any  fear,  1  shall  repeat  a  sonnet  which 
I  made  yesterday  on  the  ingratitude  of  Cloris.*' 

A  SONNET. 

**  At  dead  of  night,  when  every  troubled  breast 

By  balmy  sleep  is  eased  of  anxious  pain, 
When  slaves  themselves,  in  pleasing  dreams  are  blest^ 

Of  heaven  and  Gloria,  restless  I  complain. 


136  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

The  rosy  mom  dispels  the  shades  of  night, 

The  son,  the  pleasures,  and  the  day  return ; 
All  nature 's  oheer'd  with  the  reviving  light ; 

I,  only  I,  can  never  cease  to  mourn. 
At  noon,  in  vain,  I  bid  my  sorrow  cease, 
The  heat  increases,  and  my  pains  increase, 
And  still  my  soul  in  the  mild  evening  grieves : 

The  night  returns,  and  my  complaints  renew. 
No  moment  sees  me  free ;  in  vain  I  sue, 

Heaven  ne'er  relents,  and  Gloria  ne'er  relieves."  ' 


Camilla  was  mightily  pleased  with  the 
sonnet,  but  Anselmo  transported;  he  was 
lavish  of  his  commendation,  and  added  that 
the  lady  must  be  barbarously  cruel  that  made 
no  retum  to  so  much  truth,  and  so  violent  a 
passion.  "  What,  must  we  then  believe  all 
that  a  poet  in  love  tells  us  for  truth?"  said 
Camilla. — **  Madam,"  replied  Lothario,  *' though 
the  poet  may  exceed,  yet  the  lover  corrects 
his  fondness  for  fiction,  and  makes  him  speak 
truth."  Anselmo,  to  advance  Lothario's  credit 
with  Camilla,  confirmed  whatever  he  said;  but 
she,  not  minding  her  husband's  confirmations, 
was  suflficiently  persuaded,  by  her  passion  for 
Lothario,  to  an  implicit  faith  in  all  he  said; 
and  therefore  pleased  with  this  composition, 
and  more  satisfied  in  the  knowledge  she  had 
that  all  was  addressed  to  herself,  as  the  true 

*  This  sonnet  occurs  also  in  the  second  act  of  Cervantes'  comedy, 
''LaCaaadelosZelos." 


DON  QUIXOTE.  137 

Clone,  she  desired  him  to  repeat  some  other 
verses  he  had  made  on  that  subject,  if  he  could 
remember  any.  "I  remember  some,"  replied 
Lothario;  **but,  madam,  in  my  opinion,  they 
are  not  so  tolerable  as  the  former;  but  you 
shall  judge  yourself." 

A  SONNET. 

"I  die  your  victim,  cruel  fair; 

And  die  without  reprieve, 
If  you  can  think  your  slave  can  bear 

Your  cruelty,  and  live. 

"  Since  all  my  hopes  of  ease  are  vain, 

To  die  I  now  submit ; 
And  that  you  may  not  think  I  feign ; 

It  must  be  at  your  feet 

"  Yet  when  my  bleeding  heart  you  view, 

Bright  nymph,  forbear  to  grieve; 
For  I  had  rather  die  for  you. 

Than  for  another  live. 

"  In  death  and  dark  oblivion's  grave^ 

Oh  !  let  me  lie  forlorn, 
For  my  poor  ghost  would  pine  and  rave. 

Should  you  relent  and  mourn." 

Anselmo  was  not  less  profuse  in  his  praise 
of  this  sonnet,  than  he  had  been  of  the  other, 
and  so  added  new  fiiel  to  the  fire  that  was  to 
consume  his  reputation.  He  contributed  to 
his  own  abuse,  in  commending  his  false  friend's 


138  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

attempts  on  his  honour,  as  the  most  important 
service  he  could  do  it;  and  this  made  him 
believe,  that  every  step  Camilla  made  down  to 
contempt  and  disgrace,  was  a  degree  she 
mounted  towards  that  perfection  of  virtue 
which  he  desired  she  should  attain. 

Some  time  after,  Camilla  being  alone  with 
her  maixJ,  "I  am  ashamed,"  said  she,  "my 
Leonela,  that  I  gave  Lothario  so  easy  a  con- 
quest over  me,  and  did  not  know  my  own 
worth  enough  to  make  him  undergo  some 
greater  fatigues,  before  I  made  him  so  entire  a 
surrender.  I  am  afraid  he  will  think  my  hasty 
consent  the  effect  of  the  looseness  of  my 
temper,  and  not  at  all  consider  that  the  force 
and  violence  he  used,  deprived  me  of  the 
power  of  resisting." — **  Ah !  madam,"  returned 
Leonela,  "let  not  that  disquiet  you;  for  the 
speedy  bestowing  a  benefit  of  an  intrinsic 
value,  and  which  you  design  to  bestow  at  last, 
can  never  lessen  the  favour;  for  according  to 
the  proverb.  He  that  gives  quickly  gives 
twice." — "  To  answer  your  proverb  with 
another,"  replied  Camilla,  "  That  which  costs 
little  is  less  valued." — "  But  this  has  nothing 
to  do  with  you,"  answered  Leonela,  "  since  it 
is  said  of  love  that  it  sometimes  goes,  some- 
times flies ;  runs  with  one,  walks  gravely  with 


DON  QUIXOTE.  139 

another;  turns  a  third  into  ice,  and  sets  a 
fourth  into  a  flame ;  it  wounds  one,  another  it 
kills :  like  lightning,  it  begins  and  ends  in  the 
same  moment:  it  makes  that  fort  yield  at 
night  which  is  besieged  but  in  the  morning; 
for  there  is  no  force  able  to  resist  it.  Since 
this  is  evident,  what  cause  have  you  to  be  sur- 
prised at  your  own  frailty  ?  And  why  should 
you  apprehend  anything  from  Lothario,  who 
has  felt  the  same  irresistible  power,  and  yielded 
to  it  as  soon?  For  love,  to  gain  a  conquest, 
took  the  short  opportunity  of  my  master's 
absence,  which  being  so  short  and  uncertain, 
love,  that  had  before  determined  this  should  be 
done,  added  force  and  vigour  to  the  lover,  not 
to  leave  anything  to  time  and  chance,  which 
might,  by  Anselmo's  return,  cut  off  all  oppor- 
tunities of  accomplishing  so  agreeable  a  work. 
The  best  and  most  officious  servant  of  love's 
retinue,  is  occasion  or  opportunity:  this  it  is 
that  love  improves  in  all  its  progress,  but  most 
in  the  beginning  and  first  rise  of  an  amour. 
1  trust  not  in  what  I  have  said  to  the  uncer- 
tainty of  report,  but  to  experience,  which 
affords  the  most  certain  and  most  valuable 
knowledge,  as  I  will  inform  you,  madam,  some 
day  or  other;  for  I  am,  like  you,  made  of 
frail  flesh  and  blood,  fired  by  youth  and  youth- 


140  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

fill  desires.  But,  madam,  you  did  not  surrender 
to  Lothario  till  you  had  sufficient  proof  of  his 
love,  firom  his  eyes,  his  vows,  his  promises,  and 
gifts ;  till  you  had  seen  the  merit  of  his  person, 
and  the  beauty  of  his  mind ;  all  which  con- 
vinced you  how  much  he  deserved  to  be  loved. 
Then  trouble  yourself  no  more,  madam,  with 
these  fears  and  jealousies ;  but  thank  your  stars, 
that  since  you  were  doomed  a  victim  to  love, 
you  fell  by  the  force  of  such  valour  and  merit 
that  cannot  be  doubted.  You  yielded  to  one 
who  has  not  only  the  four  S's,^  which  are  re- 
quired in  every  good  lover,  but  even  the 
whole  alphabet;  as  for  example,  he  is,  in  my 
opinion,  agreeable,  bountifiil,  constant,  dutiful, 
easy,  faithfiil,  gallant,  honourable,  ingenious, 
kind,  loyal,  mild,  noble,  officious,  prudent, 
quiet,  rich,  secret,  true,  valiant,  wise;  the  X, 
indeed,  is  too  harsh  a  letter  to  agree  with  him, 
but  he  is  young  and  zealous  for  your  honour 
and  service."  Camilla  laughed  at  her  woman's 
alphabet,  and  thought  her  (as  indeed  she  was) 
more  learned  in  the  practical  art  of  love,  than 
she  had  yet  confessed.  She  then  informed  her 
mistress  of  an  affair  that  had  been  betwixt  her 
and  a  young  man  of  the  town.  Camilla  was 
not  a  little  concerned  at  what  she  said,  being 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  L,  Chap.  VIL 


DON  QUIXOTE.  141 

apprehensive  that  her  honour  might  suflfer  by 
her  woman's  indiscretion ;  and  therefore  asked 
her  if  the  amour  had  passed  any  farther  than 
words?  Leonela,  without  any  fear  or  shame, 
owned  her  guilty  correspondence  with  all  the 
freedom  in  the  world ;  for  the  mistress's  guilt 
gives  the  servant  impudence;  and  generally 
they  imitate  their  ladies'  frailties  without  any 
fear  of  the  public  censure. 

Camilla,  finding  her  error  past  remedy, 
could  only  beg  Leonela  to  disclose  nothing  of 
her  affair  to  her  lover,  and  manage  her  amour 
with  secrecy  and  discretion,  for  fear  Lothario 
or  Anselmo  should  hear  of  it.  Leonela 
promised  to  obey  her ;  but  she  did  it  in  such 
a  manner,  that  Camilla  was  perpetually  in  fear 
of  the  loss  of  her  reputation  by  her  folly ;  for 
she  grew  so  confident  on  her  knowledge  of  her 
lady's  transgression,  that  she  admitted  the 
gallant  into  the  house,  not  caring  if  her  lady 
knew  it,  being  certain  that  she  durst  not  make 
any  discovery  to  her  master ;  for  when  once  a 
mistress  has  suffered  her  virtue  to  be  vanquished, 
and  admits  of  any  criminal  correspondence,  it 
subjects  her  to  her  own  servants,  and  makes 
her  subservient  to  their  lewd  practices,  which 
she  is  slavishly  bound  to  conceal.  Thus  it  was 
with  Camilla,  who  was  forced  to  wink  at  the 


142  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

visible  rendezvous,  which  Leonela  had  with 
her  lover,  in  a  certain  chamber  of  the  house 
which  she  thought  proper  for  the  occasion ;  nor 
was  that  all,  she  was  constrained  to  give  her 
the  opportunity  of  hiding  him,  that  he  might 
not  be  seen  by  her  husband. 

But  all  this  caution  did  not  secure  him  from 
being  seen  by  Lothario  one  morning,  as  he  was 
getting  out  of  the  house  by  break  of  day.  His 
surprise  had  made  him  think  it  a  spirit,  had 
not  his  haste  away,  and  his  muffling  himself  up 
as  he  did,  that  he  might  not  be  known,  con- 
vinced him  of  his  error,  and  thrown  him  into 
a  fit  of  jealousy,  that  had  certainly  undone 
them  all,  had  not  Camilla's  wit  and  address 
prevented  it.  For  Lothario  concluded  that 
Camilla,  that  had  made  no  very  obstinate  re- 
sistance to  him,  had  as  easily  surrendered  to 
some  other ;  and  he  fancied  that  the  person  he 
saw  come  from  her  house  was  the  new  favoured 
lover;  never  remembering  there  was  such  a 
person  as  Leonela  in  the  house,  and  that  he  might 
be  a  lover  of  her's.  For  when  once  a  woman 
parts  with  her  virtue,  she  loses  the  esteem  even 
of  the  man  whose  vows  and  tears  won  her 
to  abandon  it;  and  he  believes  she  will 
with  as  little,  if  not  less  difficulty,  yield 
to  another;    he   perverts  the  least  suspicions 


DON  QUIXOTE.  143 

into  reality,  and  takes  the  slightest  appear- 
ance for  the  most  evident  matter  of  fact 

Thus  Lothario,  distracted  by  the  most  violent 
jealousy  in  the  world,  without  allowing  himself 
time  to  consider,  gave  way  to  the  transports  of 
his  rage  and  desire  of  revenge  on  Camilla,  who 
had  not  injured  him.  He  goes  immediately  to 
Anselmo,  and  having  found  him  a-bed:  **I 
have,  my  friend,"  said  he  to  him,  "these 
several  days  undergone  a  most  severe  conflict 
within  my  mind,  and  used  all  the  force  and 
violence  I  was  capable  of  to  conceal  an  affair 
from  you,  which  I  can  no  longer  forbear  dis- 
covering, without  an  apparent  wrong  to  justice, 
and  my  friendship.  Know,  then,  that  Camilla 
is  now  ready  to  do  whatsoever  I  shall  desire 
of  her;  and  the  reason  that  most  prevailed 
with  me  to  delay  this  discovery,  was,  that  I 
would  be  satisfied  whether  she  were  in  earnest, 
or  only  pretended  this  compliance  to  try  me ; 
but  had  she  been  so  virtuous  as  you  and  I 
believed  her,  she  would,  by  this  time,  have 
informed  you  of  that  importunity  which,  by 
your  desire,  I  used;  but  finding  that  she  is 
silent,  and  takes  no  notice  of  that  to  you,  I 
have  reason  to  believe  that  she  is  but  too 
sincere  in  those  guilty  promises  she  has  made 
me,  of  meeting  me  to  my  satisfaction,  in  the 


U4  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

wardrobe,  the  next  time  your  absence  from  the 
town  should  furnish  her  with  an  opportunity/' 
This  was  true  indeed,  for  that  was  the  place  of 
their  common  rendezvous.  "  Yet  I  would  not 
have  you,"  continued  he,  "take  a  rash  and 
inconsiderate  revenge,  since  it  is  possible, 
before  the  time  of  assignation,  her  virtue  may 
rally,  and  she  repent  her  folly.  Therefore,  as 
you  have  hitherto  taken  my  advice,  be  ruled 
by  me  now,  that  you  may  not  be  imposed  on, 
but  have  a  sufficient  conviction,  before  you 
put  your  resolves  into  execution.  Pretend 
two  or  three  days'  absence,  and  then  privately 
convey  yourself  behind  the  hangings  in  the 
wardrobe,  as  you  easily  may,  whence  you  may, 
without  difficulty,  be  an  eye-witness  with  me 
of  Camilla's  conduct ;  and  if  it  be  as  criminal 
as  we  may  justly  fear,  then  you  may  with 
secrecy  and  speed  punish  her,  as  the  injury 
deserves." 

Anselmo  was  extremely  surprised  at  so  un- 
expected a  misfortune,  to  find  himself  deceived 
in  those  imaginary  triumphs  he  pleased  him- 
self with,  in  Camilla's  supposed  victory  over 
all  Lothario's  assaults.  A  great  while  he  was 
in  a  silent  suspense,  with  his  eyes  dejected, 
without  force,  and  without  spirit;  but  turn- 
ing at  last  to  his  friend,  **  You  have  done  all," 


DON  QUIXOTE.  145 

said  he,  "Lothario,  that  I  could  expect  from 
80  perfect  a  friendship;  I  will  therefore  be 
entirely  guided  by  your  advice;  do  therefore 
what  you  please,  but  use  all  the  secrecy  a  thing 
of  this  nature  requires."  Lothario,  assuring 
him  of  that,  left  him ;  but  fiill  of  repentance 
for  the  rashness  he  had  been  guilty  of  in  telling 
him  so  much  as  he  had,  since  he  might  have 
taken  a  sufficient  revenge,  by  a  less  cruel  and 
dishonourable  way.  He  cursed  his  want  of 
sense,  and  the  weakness  of  his  resolution,  but 
could  not  find  out  any  way  to  produce  a  less 
fatal  event  of  his  treachery,  than  he  could 
justly  expect  from  the  experiment.  But  at 
last  he  concluded  to  inform  Camilla  of  all  he 
had  done;  which  his  freedom  of  access  gave 
him  opportunity  to  do  that  very  day,  when  he 
found  her  alone ;  and  she  began  thus  to  him : 
— "I  am  so  oppressed,  my  Lothario,  with  a 
misfortune  which  I  lie  under,  that  it  will 
certainly  for  ever  destroy  my  quiet  and 
happiness,  if  there  be  not  some  speedy  remedy 
found  for  it:  Leonela  is  grown  so  presump- 
tuous, on  her  knowledge  of  my  affairs,  that  she 
admits  her  lover  all  night  to  her  chamber,  and 
so  exposes  my  reputation  to  the  censure  of  any 
that  shall  see  him  go  out  at  unseasonable  hours 
from  my  house;  and  the  greatest,  and  most 


146  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

remediless  part  of  my  grief  is,  that  I  dare  not 
correct  or  chide  her  for  her  imprudence  and 
impudence ;  for,  being  conscious  of  our  corre- 
spondence, she  obliges  me  to  conceal  her  fail- 
ings, which  I  am  extremely  apprehensive  will 
in  the  end  be  very  fatal  to  my  happiness." 
Lothario  was  at  first  jealous  that  Camilla  de- 
signed cunningly  thus  to  impose  her  own 
privado  on  him  for  Leonela's ;  but  being  con- 
vinced by  her  tears,  and  the  apparent  concern 
in  her  face,  he  began  to  believe  her,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  be  infinitely  confounded  and 
grieved  for  what  he  had  done.  Yet  he  com- 
forted Camilla,  assuring  her  he  would  take 
efiectual  care  for  the  future,  that  Leonela's 
impudence  should  do  her  no  prejudice,  and 
therefore  begged  her  not  to  torment  herself 
any  more  about  it.  Then  he  told  all  the  un- 
happy effects  of  his  jealous  rage,  and  that 
her  husband  had  agreed  behind  the  arras  to  be 
witness  of  her  weakness.  He  asked  her  pardon 
for  the  folly,  and  her  counsel  how  to  redress 
and  prevent  the  ill  effect  of  it,  and  bring  them 
out  of  those  difficulties  into  which  his  madness 
had  plunged  them. 

Camilla  expressed  her  resentment  and  her 
fears ;  and  accused  his  treachery,  baseness,  and 
want  of  consideration  ;  yet  her  anger  and  fears 


DON  QUIXOTE.  U7 

being  appeased,  and  a  woman's  wit  being  always 
more  pregnant  in  difficulties  than  a  man's,  she 
inmiediately  thought  of  a  way  to  deliver  them 
from  the  dangers  that  bore  so  dismal  and  help- 
less a  face.  She  therefore  bid  him  engage 
Anselmo  to  be  there  the  next  day,  assuring  him 
she  did  not  question  but  by  that  means  to  get 
a  more  frequent  and  secure  opportunity  of 
enjoying  one  another  than  they  hitherto  had 
had.  She  would  not  make  him  privy  to  her 
whole  design,  but  bid  him  be  sure  to  come 
after  her  husband  was  hid,  as  soon  as  Leonela 
should  call  him,  and  that  he  should  answer  as 
directly  to  whatsoever  she  should  ask  him,  as  if 
Anselmo  were  not  within  hearing.  Lothario 
spared  no  importunity  to  get  from  her  her  whole 
design,  that  he  might  act  his  part  with  the 
greater  assurance,  and  the  better  to  contribute 
to  the  imposing  on  her  husband. — "  All  you 
have  to  do,"  replied  Camilla,  "  is  to  answer  me 
directly  what  I  shall  demand."  Nor  would  she 
discover  any  more,  for  fear  he  should  not 
acquiesce  in  her  opinion,  which  she  was  so  well 
satisfied  in,  but  raise  difficulties,  and  by  con- 
sequence, obstacles,  that  might  hinder  her 
design  from  having  the  desired  event,  or  run 
her  upon  some  less  successful  project.  Lothario 
complied,  and  Anselmo  in  appearance  left  the 


148  THE  ACmEVEBfENTS  OP 

town  to  retire  to  his  friend  in  the  country,  but 
secretly  returned  to  hide  himself  in  the  wardrobe, 
which  he  did  with  the  greater  ease,  because  Ca- 
milla and  Leonela  wilfully  gave  him  opportunity. 
We  may  easily  imagine  the  grief  with  which 
Anselmo  hid  himself,  since  it  was  to  be  a 
spectator  of  his  own  dishonour,  and  the  loss  of 
all  that  happiness  he  possessed  in  the  embraces 
of  his  beautiftil  and  beloved  Camilla.  On  the 
other  hand,  she  being  now  certain  that  Anselmo 
was  hid,  entered  the  wardrobe  with  Leonela, 
and  fetching  a  deep  and  piteous  sigh,  thus 
addressed  herself  to  her. — "  Ah  !  my  Leonela ! 
would  it  not  be  much  better  that  thou  pierce 
this  infitmous  bosom  with  Anselmo's  dagger, 
before  I  execute  what  I  design,  which  I  have 
kept  from  thee  that  thou  might'st  not  endeavour 
to  disappoint  me  ?  Yet  not  so ;  for,  where  is 
the  justice  that  I  should  suflFer  for  another's 
offence  ?  No,  I  will  first  know  of  Lothario  what 
action  of  mine  has  given  him  assurance  to  make 
me  a  discovery  of  a  passion  so  injurious  to  his 
friend,  and  my  honour.  Go  to  the  window, 
Leonela,  and  call  the  wicked  man  to  me,  who 
doubtless  is  waiting  in  the  street  the  signal 
for  his  admission  to  accomplish  his  villainous 
design;  yet  first  my  resolution  shall  be  per- 
formed, which,  though  it  be  cruel,  is  what  my 


DON  QUIXOTE.  149 

honour  strictly  demands  of  me.  " — "  Alas !  my 
dear  lady,"  cried  the  cunning  Leonela,  **alas! 
what  do  you  intend  to  do  with  that  dagger? 
Is  your  fatal  design  against  yourself  or  Lothario  ? 
Alas !  you  can  attack  neither  without  the  ruin 
of  your  fame  and  reputation.  You'had  better 
give  no  opportunity  to  that  bad  man  by 
admitting  him  while  we  are  thus  alone  in  the 
house  :  consider,  madam,  we  are  but  two  weak 
and  helpless  women,  he  a  strong  and  resolute 
man,  whose  force  is  redoubled  by  the  passion 
and  desire  that  possess  him ;  so  that  before  you 
may  be  able  to  accomplish  what  you  design,  he 
may  commit  a  crime  that  will  be  more  injurious 
to  you  than  the  loss  of  your  life.  We  have 
reason  to  curse  my  master  Anselmo,  who  gives 
such  frequent  opportunities  to  impudence  and 
dishonesty  to  pollute  our  house.  But,  madam, 
suppose  you  should  kill  him,  as  I  believe  you  de- 
sign, what  shall  we  do  with  his  dead  body?" — 
"  What ! "  said  Camilla,  **  why  we  would  leave 
him  in  this  plaee  to  be  buried  by  Anselmo  ;  for 
it  must  be  a  grateftil  trouble  to  him  to  bury 
with  his  own  hand  his  own  infamy  and  dis- 
honour. Call  him  therefore  quickly,  for  me- 
thinks  every  moment  my  revenge  is  deferred,  I 
injure  that  loyalty  I  owe  to  my  husband." 
Anselmo  gave  great  attention  to  all  that  was 


150  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

said,  and  every  word  of  Camilla's  made  a  strange 
alteration  in  his  sentiments,  so  that  he  could 
scarce  forbear  coming  out  to  prevent  his  firiend's 
death,  when  he  heard  her  desperate  resolution 
against  his  life ;  but  his  desire  of  seeing  the  end 
of  so  brave  a  resolve  withheld  him,  till  he  saw 
an  absolute  necessity  of  discovering  himself  to 
hinder  the  mischief.  Now  Camilla  put  on  a  fear 
and  weakness  which  resembled  a  swoon ;  and 
having  thrown  herself  on  a  bed  in  the  room, jLeo- 
nela  began  a  most  doleful  lamentation  over  her. 
— "  Alas !  '*  said  she,  *'  how  unfortunate  should  I 
be,  if  my  lady,  so  eminent  for  virtue  and  chas- 
tity, as  well  as  beauty,  should  thus  perish  in  my 
arms  ?'*  This  and  much  more  she  uttered  with 
that  force  of  perfect  dissimulation,  that  whoever 
had  seen  her  would  have  concluded  her  one  of 
the  most  innocent  virgins  in  the  world ;  and  her 
lady  a  mere  persecuted  Penelope.  Camilla  soon 
came  to  herself,  and  cried  to  Leonela,  **  Why  do 
not  you  call  the  most  treacherous  and  unfaithful 
of  friends?  Go,  fly,  and  let  not  thy  delays 
waste  my  revenge  and  anger  in  mere  words,  and 
idle  threats  and  curses." — "Madam,"  replied 
Leonela,  **  I  will  go,  but  you  must  first  give  me 
that  dagger,  lest  you  conmiit  some  outrage  upon 
yourself  in  my  absence,  which  may  give  an 
eternal  cause  of  sorrow  to  all  your  friends  that 


DON  QUIXOTE.  151 

love  and  value  you." — **Let  not  those  fears  de- 
tain you,"  said  Camilla,  "  but  assure  yourself  I 
will  not  do  anything  till  your  return;  for  though 
I  shall  not  fear  to  punish  myself  in  the  highest 
degree,  yet  I  shall  not,  like  Lucretia,  punish 
myself,  without  killing  him  that  was  the  prin- 
cipal cause  of  my  dishonour.  K  I  must  die,  I 
shall  not  refuse  it ;  but  I  will  first  satisfy  my 
revenge  on  him  that  has  tempted  me  to  come  to 
this  guilty  assignation,  to  make  him  lament  his 
crime  without  being  guilty  of  any  myself." 

Camilla  could  scarce  prevail  with  Leonela  to 
leave  her  alone,  but  at  last  she  obeyed  her  and 
withdrew;  when  Camilla  entertained  herself 
and  her  husband  with  the  following  soliloquy. 
"Good  heaven,"  said  she,  **had  I  not  better 
have  continued  my  repulses,  than  by  this 
seeming  consent  suffer  Lothario  to  think  scan- 
dalously of  me,  till  my  actions  shall  convince 
him  of  his  error?  That,  indeed,  might  have 
been  better  in  some  respects;  but  then  I  should 
have  wanted  this  opportunity  of  revenge,  and 
the  satisfaction  of  my  husband's  injured  honour, 
if  he  were  permitted,  without  any  correction, 
to  go  oflf  with  the  insolence  of  offering  such 
criminal  assaults  to  my  virtue.  No,  no;  let 
the  traitor's  life  atone  for  the  guilt  of  his  false 
and  unfaithful  attempts,  and  his  blood  quench 


152  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

that  lewd  fire  he  was  not  content  should  burn 
in  his  own  breast.  Let  the  world  be  witness, 
if  it  ever  comes  to  know  my  story,  that  Camilla 
thought  it  not  enough  to  preserve  her  virtue 
and  loyalty  to  her  husband  entire,  but  also 
revenged  the  hateful  aflfront,  and  the  intended 
destruction  of  it.  But  it  might  be  most  con- 
venient, perhaps,  to  let  Anselmo  know  of  this 
before  I  put  my  revenge  in  execution ;  yet,  on 
the  first  attempt,  I  sent  him  word  of  it  to  the 
village,  and  I  can  attribute  his  not  resenting  so 
notorious  an  abuse,  to  nothing  but  his  generous 
temper,  and  confidence  in  his  fiiend,  incapable 
of  believing  so  tried  a  fiiend  could  be  guilty  of 
so  much  as  a  thought  against  his  honour  and 
reputation.  Nor  is  this  incredulity  so  strange, 
since  I  for  so  long  together  could  not  persuade 
myself  of  the  truth  of  what  my  eyes  and  ears 
conveyed  to  me ;  and  nothing  could  have  con- 
vinced me  of  my  generous  error,  had  his  in- 
solence kept  within  any  bounds,  and  not  dared 
to  proceed  to  large  gifts,  large  promises,  and  a 
flood  of  tears  which  he  shed,  as  the  undis- 
sembled  testimony  of  his  passion.  But  to 
what  purpose  are  these  considerations?  or  is 
there  indeed  any  need  of  considering,  to  per- 
suade me  to  a  brave  resolve?  Avaunt,  false 
thoughts !     Revenge  is  now  my  task ;  let  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  153 

treacherous  man  approach ;  let  him  come,  let 
him  die,  let  him  perish.  Let  him  but  perish, 
no  matter  what  is  the  fatal  consequence.  My 
dear  Anselmo  received  me  to  his  bosom  spot- 
less and  chaste,  and  so  shall  the  grave  receive 
me  from  his  arms.  Let  the  event  be  as  fatal 
as  it  will,  the  worst  pollution  I  can  this  way 
suflfer,  is  of  mingling  my  own  chaste  blood  with 
the  impure  and  corrupted  blood  of  the  most 
false  and  treacherous  of  friends."  Having  said 
this,  she  traversed  the  room  in  so  passionate  a 
manner,  with  the  drawn  dagger  in  her  hand, 
and  showed  such  an  agitation  of  spirits  in  her 
looks  and  motion,  that  she  appeared  like  one 
distracted,  or  more  like  a  murderer,  than  a 
tender  and  delicate  lady. 

Anselmo,  not  a  little  to  his  satisfaction,  very 
plainly  saw  and  heard  all  this  from  behind  the 
arras,  which,  with  the  greatest  reason  and 
evidence  in  the  world,  removed  all  his  past 
doubts  and  jealousies,  and  he,  with  abundance 
of  concern,  wished  that  Lothario  would  not 
come,  that  he  might  by  that  means  escape  the 
danger  that  so  apparently  threatened  him ;  to 
prevent  which  he  had  discovered  himself,  had 
he  not  seen  Leonela  at  that  instant  bring 
Lothario  into  the  room.  As  soon  as  Camilla 
saw  him  enter,  she  described  a  line  with  the 


154  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

poniard  on  the  ground,  and  told  him,  the 
minute  he  presumed  to  pass  that,  she  would 
strike  the  dagger  to  his  heart.  **  Hear  me," 
said  she,  "and  observe  what  I  say  without 
interruption:  when  I  have  done,  you  shall  have 
liberty  to  make  what  reply  you  please.  Tell 
me  first,  Lothario,  do  you  know  my  husband, 
and  do  you  know  me  ?  The  question  is  not  so 
difficult,  but  you  may  give  me  immediate 
answer ;  there  is  no  need  of  considering,  speak, 
therefore,  without  delay.'*  Lothario  was  not 
so  dull  as  not  to  guess  at  her  design  in  having 
her  husband  hid  behind  the  hangings,  and 
therefore  adapted  his  answers  so  well  to  her 
questions,  that  the  fiction  was  lost  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  reality. — "I  did  never  imagine, 
fair  Camilla,"  said  Lothario,  "  that  you  would 
make  this  assignation,  to  ask  questions  so  dis- 
tant fi-om  the  dear  end  of  my  coming.  K  you 
had  a  mind  still  to  delay  my  promised  happi- 
ness, you  should  have  prepared  me  for  the 
disappointment;  for,  the  nearer  the  hope  of 
possession  brings  us  to  the  good  we  desire,  the 
greater  is  the  pain  to  have  those  hopes  de- 
stroyed. But,  to  answer  your  demands,  I  must 
own,  madam,  that  I  do  know  your  husband, 
and  he  me;  that  this  knowledge  has  grown 
up  with  us  from  our  childhood;  and,  that  I 


DON  QUIXOTE.  155 

may  be  a  witness  against  myself  for  the  injury 
I  am  compelled  by  love  to  do  him,  I  do  also 
own,  divine  Camilla,  that  you  do  too  well 
know  the  tenderness  of  our  mutual  friendship ; 
yet  love  is  a  sufficient  excuse  for  all  my  errors, 
if  they  were  much  more  criminal  than  they  are. 
And,  madam,  that  I  know  you  is  evident,  and 
love  you  equal  to  him,  for  nothing  but  your 
charms  could  have  power  enough  to  make  me 
forget  what  I  owe  to  my  own  honour,  and  what 
to  the  holy  laws  of  friendship,  all  which  I  have 
been  forced  to  break  by  the  resistless  tyranny 
of  love.  Ah !  had  I  known  you  less,  I  had 
been  more  innocent." — **K  you  confess  all 
this,'*  said  Camilla,  "  if  you  know  us  both,  how 
dare  you  violate  so  sacred  a  friendship,  injure 
so  true  a  friend,  and  appear  thus  confidently 
before  mc,  whom  you  know  to  be  esteemed  by 
him  the  mirror  of  his  love,  in  which  that  love 
so  often  views  itself  with  pleasure  and  satis- 
faction, and  in  which  you  ought  to  have  sur- 
veyed yourself  so  far,  as  to  have  seen  how 
small  the  temptation  is,  that  has  prevailed  on 
you  to  wrong  him.  But,  alas !  this  points  me 
to  the  cause  of  your  transgression ;  some  suspi- 
cious action  of  mine,  when  T  have  been  least 
on  my  guard,  as  thinking  myself  alone;  but 
assure  yourself  whatever  it  was,  it  proceeds  not 


156  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

from  looseness  or  levity  of  principle,  but  a 
negligence  and  liberty  which  the  sex  sometimes 
innocently  fall  into,  when  they  think  them- 
selves unobserved.  If  this  were  not  the  cause, 
say,  traitor,  when  did  I  listen  to  your  prayers, 
or  in  the  least  regard  your  tears  and  vows,  so 
that  you  might  derive  from  thence  the  smallest 
hope  of  accomplishing  your  infamous  desires? 
Did  I  not  always  with  the  last  aversion  and 
disdain  reject  your  criminal  passion?  Did  I 
ever  betray  a  belief  in  your  lavish  promises,  or 
admit  of  your  prodigal  gifts  ?  But  since,  with- 
out some  hope,  no  love  can  long  subsist,  I  will 
lay  that  hateftd  guilt  on  some  unhappy  in- 
advertency of  mine,  and  therefore  will  inflict 
the  same  punishment  on  myself  that  your 
crime  deserves.  And  to  show  you  that  I  can- 
not but  be  cruel  to  you,  who  will  not  spare 
myself,  I  sent  for  you  to  be  a  witness  of  that 
just  sacrifice  I  shall  make  to  my  dear  husband's 
injured  honour,  on  which  you  have  fixed  the 
blackest  mark  of  infamy  that  your  malice 
could  suggest ;  and  which  I,  alas !  have  sullied 
too  by  my  thoughtless  neglect  of  depriving 
you  of  the  occasion,  if,  indeed,  I  gave  any,  of 
nourishing  your  wicked  intentions.  Once  more 
I  tell  you,  that  the  bare  suspicion  that  my 
want  of  caution,  and  setting  so  severe  a  guard 


DON  QUIXOTE.  157 

on  my  actions  as  I  ought,  has  made  you 
harbour  such  wild  and  infamous  intentions,  is 
the  sharpest  of  my  afflictions,  and  what  with 
my  own  hands  I  resolve  to  punish  with  the 
utmost  severity.  For,  should  I  leave  that 
punishment  to  another,  it  would  but  increase 
my  guilt.  Yes,  I  will  die ;  but  first,  to  satisfy 
my  revenge  and  impartial  justice,  I  will, 
unmoved  and  unrelenting,  destroy  the  fatal 
cause  that  has  reduced  me  to  this  desperate 
condition." 

At  these  words  she  flew  with  so  much 
violence,  and  so  well-acted  a  fdry,  on  Lothario, 
with  her  naked  dagger,  that  he  could  scarce 
think  it  feigned,  and  therefore  secured  himself 
fi-om  her  blow  by  avoiding  it,  and  holding  her 
hand.  Thereupon,  to  give  more  life  to  the 
fiction,  as  in  a  rage  at  her  disappointed  revenge 
on  Lothario,  she  cried  out,  "Since  my 
malicious  fortune  denies  a  complete  satisfaction 
to  my  just  desires,  at  least  it  shall  not  be  in  its 
power  entirely  to  defeat  my  resolution." — 
With  that,  drawing  back  her  dagger-hand  fi-om 
Lothario  who  held  it,  she  struck  it  into  that 
part  of  her  body  where  it  might  do  her  the 
least  damage,  and  then  fell  down,  as  feinting 
away  with  the  wound.  Lothario  and  Leonela, 
surprised  at  the  unexpected  event,  knew  not 


158  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

yet  what  to  think,  seeing  her  still  lie  all  bloody 
on  the  ground.  Lothario,  pale  and  trembling, 
ran  to  take  out  the  dagger ;  but  was  delivered 
of  his  fears  when  he  saw  so  little  blood  follow 
it;  and  more  than  ever  admired  the  cunning 
and  wit  of  the  beautiful  Camilla.  Yet,  to  play 
his  part  as  well,  and  show  himself  a  friend,  he 
lamented  over  Camilla's  body  in  the  most 
pathetic  manner  in  the  world,  as  if  she  had 
been  really  dead ;  he  cursed  himself,  and  cursed 
his  friend,  that  had  put  him  on  that  fatal  ex- 
periment; and  knowing  that  Anselmo  heard 
him,  he  said  such  things  that  were  able  to  draw 
a  greater  pity  for  him  than  even  for  Camilla, 
though  she  seemed  to  have  lost  her  life  in  the 
unfortunate  adventure.  Leonela  removed  her 
body  to  the  bed,  and  begged  Lothario  to  seek 
some  surgeon,  that  might  with  all  the  secrecy 
in  the  world  cure  her  lady's  wound.  She  also 
asked  his  advice  how  to  excuse  it  to  her  master, 
if  he  should  return  before  it  was  perfectly  cured. 
He  replied.  They  might  say  what  they  pleased, 
that  he  was  not  in  a  humour  of  advising,  but 
bid  her  endeavour  to  staunch  her  mistress's 
blood,  for  he  would  go  where  they  should  never 
hear  more  of  him.  And  so  he  left  them,  with 
all  the  appearance  of  grief  and  concern  that  the 
occasion  required.     He  was  no  sooner  gone,  but 


DON  QUIXOTE.  159 

he  had  leisure  to  reflect,  with  the  greatest 
wonder  imaginable,  on  Camilla's  and  her 
woman's  conduct  in  this  affair,  and  on  the 
assurance  which  this  scene  had  given  Anselmo 
of  his  wife's  virtue ;  since  now,  he  could  not 
but  believe  he  had  a  second  Portia;  and  he 
longed  to  meet  him,  to  rejoice  over  the  best 
dissembled  imposture  that  ever  bore  away  the 
opinion  of  truth.  Leonela  staunched  the  blood, 
which  was  no  more  than  necessary  for  covering 
the  cheat,  and  washing  the  wound  with  wine 
only  as  she  bound  it  up,  her  discourse  was  so 
moving,  and  so  well  acted,  that  it  had  been 
alone  sufficient  to  have  convinced  Anselmo 
that  he  had  the  most  virtuous  wife  in  the  world. 
Camilla  was  not  silent,  but  added  fresh  confir- 
mations. In  every  word  she  spoke,  she  com- 
plained of  her  cowardice  and  baseness  of  spirit, 
that  denied  her  time  and  force  to  despatch 
that  life  which  was  now  so  hateful  to  her.  She 
asked  her  too,  whether  she  should  inform  her 
husband  of  what  had  passed,  or  not?  Leonela 
was  for  her  concealing  it,  since  the  discovery 
must  infallibly  engage  her  husband  in  a  revenge 
on  Lothario,  which  must  as  certainly  expose 
him  too ;  for  those  things  were  never  accom- 
plished without  the  greatest  danger ;  and  that 
a  good  wife  ought  to  the  best  of  her  power 


160  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

prevent  involving  her  husband  in  quarrels. 
Camilla  yielded  to  her  reasons ;  but  added,  that 
they  must  find  out  some  pretended  cause  of  her 
wound,  which  he  would  certainly  see  at  his 
return.  Leonela  replied,  that  it  was  a  difficult 
task,  since  she  was  incapable,  even  in  jest,  to 
dissemble  the  truth.  **  Am  I  not,''  answered 
Camilla,  **  under  the  same  difficulty,  who  can- 
not save  my  life  by  the  odious  refuge  of  a 
falsehood?  Had  we  not  better,  then,  confess 
the  real  truth,  than  be  caught  in  a  lie?'' — 
"Well,  madam,"  returned  Leonela,  "let  this 
give  you  no  further  trouble;  by  to-morrow 
morning  I  shall  find  out  some  expedient  or 
other;  though  I  hope  the  place  where  the 
wound  is,  may  conceal  it  enough  firom  his 
observation  to  secure  us  from  all  apprehension; 
leave,  therefore,  the  whole  event  to  heaven, 
which  always  favours  and  assists  the  innocent" 
Anselmo  saw  and  heard  this  formal  tragedy 
of  his  ruined  honour  with  all  the  attention 
imaginable,  in  which  all  the  actors  performed 
their  parts  so  to  the  life,  that  they  seemed  the 
truth  they  represented.  He  wished  with  the 
last  impatience  for  the  night,  that  he  might 
convey  himself  fi-om  his  hiding-place  to  his 
fiiend's  house,  and  there  rejoice  for  this  happy 
discovery   of   his    wife's    experienced    virtue. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  161 

Camilla  and  her  maid  took  care  to  furnish  him 
with  an  opportunity  of  departing,  of  which  he 
soon  took  hold,  for  fear  of  losing  it.  It  is 
impossible  to  tell  you  all  the  embraces  he  gave 
Lothario,  and  the  joy  and  extreme  satisfaction 
he  expressed  at  his  good  fortune,  or  the  ex- 
travagant praises  he  gave  Camilla.  Lothario 
heard  all  this  without  taking  a  Mend's  share 
in  the  pleasure,  for  he  was  shocked  with  the 
concern  he  had  to  see  his  friend  so  grossly 
imposed  on,  and  the  guilt  of  his  own  treachery 
in  injuring  his  honour.  Though  Anselmo 
easily  perceived  that  Lqthario  was  not  touched 
with  any  pleasure  at  his  relation,  yet  he 
believed  Camilla's  wound,  caused  by  him,  was 
the  true  motive  of  his  not  sharing  his  joy ;  and 
therefore  assured  him,  he  need  not  too  much 
trouble  himself  for  it,  since  it  could  not  be 
dangerous,  she  and  her  woman  having  agreed 
to  conceal  it  from  him.  This  cause  of  his  fear 
being  removed,  he  desired  him  to  put  on  a  face 
of  joy,  since,  by  his  means,  he  should  now 
possess  a  perfect  happiness  and  content;  and 
therefore  he  would  spend  the  rest  of  his  life 
in  conveying  Camilla's  virtue  to  posterity,  by 
writing  her  praise  in  verse.  Lothario  approved 
his  resolution,  and  promised  to  do  the  same. 
Thus  Anselmo  remained  the  most  delightfully 


n. 


162  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

deceived  of  any  man  alive.  He  therefore  car- 
ried Lothario  immediately  to  his  house,  as  the 
instrument  of  his  glory,  though  he  was,  indeed, 
the  only  cause  of  his  infamy  and  dishonour. 
Camilla  received  him  with  a  face  that  ill 
expressed  the  satisfaction  of  her  mind,  being 
forced  to  put  on  frowns  in  her  looks,  while  her 
heart  prompted  nothing  but  smiles  of  joy  for 
his  presence. 

For  some  months  the  fraud  was  concealed ; 
but  then  fortune,  turning  her  wheel,  discovered 
to  the  world  the  wickedness  they  had  so  long 
and  artificially  disguised;  and  Anselmo's  im- 
pertinent curiosity  cost  him  his  life. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  163 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

the  conclusion  op  the  novel  of  the  curious 
impertinent;  with  the  dreadful  battle 
betwixt  don  quixote  and  certain  wine-skins. 

The  novel  was  come  near  a  conclusion,  when 
Sancho  Panza  came  running  out  of  Don  Quix- 
ote's chamber  in  a  terrible  fright,  crying  out, 
"  Help,  help,  good  people,  help  my  master !  He 
is  just  now  at  it,  tooth  and  nail,  with  that  same 
giant,  the  Princess  Micomicona's  foe :  I  never 
saw  a  more  dreadful  battle  in  my  born-days. 
He  has  lent  him  such  a  sliver,  that  whip  oflf 
went  the  giant's  head,  as  round  as  a  turnip." — 
"  You  are  mad,  Sancho,"  said  the  curate,  inter- 
rupted in  his  reading ;  *4s  thy  master  such  a 
devil  of  a  hero,  as  to  light  a  giant  at  two  thou- 
sand leagues'  distance?"  Upon  this,  they 
presently  heard  a  noise  and  bustle  in  the 
chamber,  and  Don  Quixote  bawling  out,  "  Stay, 
villain,  robber,  stay ;  since  I  have  thee  here,  thy 
scimitar  shall  but  little  avail  thee;"  and  with 
this,  they  heard  him  strike  with  his  sword,  with 
all  his  force  against  the  walls. — **  Good  folks," 


DON  QUIXOTE.  165 

now  and  then  a  start  of  some  military  expres- 
sion, as  if  he  had  been  really  engaged  with  some 
giant.  But  the  best  jest  of  all,  he  was  all 
this  time  fast  asleep ;  for  the  thoughts  of  the 
adventure  he  had  undertaken,  had  so  wrought 
on  his  imagination,  that  his  depraved  fancy  had 
in  his  sleep  represented  to  him  the  kingdom  of 
Micomicon,  and  the  giant :  and  dreaming  that 
he  was  then  fighting  him,  he  assaulted  the 
winenskins  so  desperately,  that  he  set  the  whole 
chamber  afloat  with  good  wine.  The  innkeeper, 
enraged  to  see  the  havoc,  flew  at  Don  Quixote 
with  his  fists;  and  had  not  Cardenio  and 
the  curate  taken  him  off,  he  had  proved  a 
giant  indeed  against  the  knight.  All  this 
could  not  wake  the  poor  Don,  till  the  barber, 
throwing  a  bucket  of  cold  water  on  him, 
wakened  him  from  his  sleep,  though  not  from 
his  dream. 

The  shortness  of  her  champion's  shirt  gave 
Dorothea  a  surfeit  of  the  battle.  Sancho  ran  up 
and  down  the  room  searching  for  the  giant's 
head,  till,  finding  his  labour  fiiiitless,  "  Well, 
well,"  said  he,  "now  I  see  plainly  that  this 
house  is  haunted,  for  when  I  was  here  before,  in 
this  very  room  was  I  beaten  like  any  stock-fish, 
but  knew  no  more  than  the  man  in  the  moon  who 
struck  me ;  and  now  the  giant's  head  that  I  saw 


166  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

cut  off  with  these  eyes,  is  vanished ;  and  I  am 
sure  I  saw  the  body  spout  blood  like  a  pump." — 
**What  a  prating  and  a  nonsense  does  this 
damned  son  of  a  whore  keep  about  blood  and  a 
pump,  and  I  know  not  what,"  said  the  inn- 
keeper ;  "  I  tell  you,  rascal,  it  is  my  winenskins 
that  are  slashed,  and  my  wine  that  runs  about 
the  floor  here,  and  I  hope  to  see  the  soul  of  him 
that  spilt  it  swimming  in  hell  for  his  pains." — 
"Well,  well,"  said  Sancho,  "do  not  trouble 
me;  I  only  tell  you,  that  I  cannot  find  the 
giant's  head,  and  my  earldom  is  gone  after  it, 
and  so  I  am  undone,  like  salt  in  water."  And 
truly  Sancho's  waking  dream  was  as  pleasant 
as  his  master's  when  asleep.  The  innkeeper 
was  almost  mad  to  see  the  foolish  squire  harp  so 
on  the  same  string  with  his  frantic  master,  and 
swore  they  should  not  come  off  now  as  before, 
that  their  chivalry  should  be  no  satisfaction  for 
his  wine,  but  that  they  should  pay  him  sauce 
for  the  damage,  and  for  the  very  leathern 
patches  which  the  wounded  wine-skins  would 
want. 

Don  Quixote,  in  the  meanwhile,  believing  he 
had  finished  his  adventure,  and  mistaking  the 
curate,  that  held  him  by  the  arms,  for  the 
Princess  Micomicona,  fell  on  his  knees  before 
him,  and  with  a  respect  due  to  a  royal  presence, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  167 

"  Now  may  your  highness/'  said  he,  "  great  and 
illustrious  princess,  live  secure,  free  from  any 
ftirther  apprehensions  from  your  conquered 
enemy ;  and  now  I  am  acquitted  of  my  engage- 
ment, since,  by  the  assistance  of  heaven,  and 
the  influence  of  her  favour,  by  whom  1  live  and 
conquer,  your  adventure  is  so  happily  achieved/' 
— "Did  not  I  tell  you  so,  gentlefolks?"  said 
Sancho ;  "  who  is  drunk  or  mad  now  ?  See 
if  my  master  has  not  already  put  the  giant  in 
pickle  ?  Here  are  the  bulls,  *  and  I  am  an  earl."  ^ 
The  whole  company  (except  the  innkeeper, 
who  gave  himself  to  the  devil)  were  like  to  split 
at  the  extravagances  of  master  and  man.  At 
last,  the  barber,  Cardenio,  and  the  curate,  hav- 
ing, with  much  ado,  got  Don  Quixote  to  bed, 
he  presently  fell  asleep,  being  heartily  tired; 
and  then  they  left  him,  to  comfort  Sancho 
Panza  for  the  loss  of  the  giant's  head ;  but  it 
was  no  easy  matter  to  appease  the  innkeeper, 
who  was  at  his  wit's  end  for  the  unexpected  and 
sudden  fate  of  his  wine-skins. 

The  hostess,  in  the  meantime,  ran  up  and 
down  the  house  crying  and  roaring :  "In  an  ill 
hour,"  said  she,  "  did  this  unlucky  knight- 
errant  come  into  my  house;  I  wish,  for  my 

*  In  alliuioii  to  the  joy  of  the  mob  in  Spain,  when  they  see  the  bulla 
•oming. 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  VIII.,  Book  IV. 


168  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

part,  I  had  never  seen  him,  for  he  has  been  a 
dear  guest  to  me.  He  and  his  man,  his  horse 
and  his  ass,  went  away  last  time  without  paying 
me  a  cross  for  their  supper,  their  bed,  their 
litter  and  provender ;  and  all,  forsooth,  because 
he  was  seeking  adventures.  What,  in  the 
devil's  name,  have  I  to  do  with  his  statutes  of 
chivalry  ?  If  they  oblige  him  not  to  pay,  they 
should  oblige  him  not  to  eat  neither.  It  was 
upon  this  score  that  the  t'other  fellow  took 
away  my  good  tail ;  it  is  clear  spoiled,  the  hair 
is  all  torn  off,  and  my  husband  can  never  use  it 
again.  And  now  to  come  upon  me  again,  with 
destroying  my  wine-skins,  and  spilling  my 
liquor ;  may  somebody  spill  his  heart's  blood 
for  it  for  me  I  But  I  will  be  paid,  so  I  will,  to 
the  last  maravedis,  or  I  will  disown  my  name,  ^ 
and  forswear  the  mother  that  bore  me."  Her 
honest  maid  Maritornes  seconded  her  fury ;  but 
Master  Curate  stopped  their  mouths  by  pro- 
mising that  he  would  see  them  satisfied  for 
their  wine  and  their  skins,  but  especially  for 
the  tail  which  they  kept  such  a  clatter  about. 
Dorothea  comforted  Sancho,  assuring  him,  that 
whenever  it  appeared  that  his  master  had  killed 
the  giant,  and  restored  her  to  her  dominions, 
he  should  be  sure  of  the  best  earldom  in  her 

*  See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chapter  VIIL,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  169 

disposal.  With  this  he  huckled  up  again,  and 
swore  **  that  he  himself  had  seen  the  giant's  head, 
by  the  same  token  that  it  had  a  beard  that 
reached  down  to  his  middle ;  and  if  it  could  not 
be  found  it  must  be  hid  by  witchcraft,  for 
every  thing  went  by  enchantment  in  that  house, 
as  he  had  found  to  his  cost  when  he  was  there 
before." — ^Dorothea  answered,  that  she  believed 
him ;  and  desired  him  to  pluck  up  his  spirits,  for 
all  things  would  be  well.  All  parties  being 
quieted,  Cardenio,  Dorothea,  and  the  rest,  en- 
treated the  curate  to  finish  the  novel,  which  was 
so  near  a  conclusion  ;  and  he,  in  obedience  to 
their  commands,  took  up  the  book  and  read  on. 
Anselmo  grew  so  satisfied  in  Camilla's  virtue, 
that  he  lived  with  all  the  content  and  security 
in  the  world ;  to  confirm  which,  Camilla  ever 
in  her  looks  seemed  to  discover  her  aversion  to 
Lothario^  which  made  him  desire  Anselmo  to 
dispense  with  his  coming  to  his  house,  since  he 
found  how  averse  his  wife  was  to  him,  and 
how  great  a  disgust  she  had  to  his  company ; 
but  Anselmo  would  not  be  persuaded  to  yield 
to  his  request ;  and  was  so  blind,  that,  seeking 
his  content,  he  perpetually  promoted  his  dis- 
honour. He  was  not  the  only  person  pleased 
with  the  condition  he  lived  in ;  Leonela  was  so 
transported  with  her  amour,  that,  secured  by 


170  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

her  lady's  connivance,  she  perfectly  abandoned 
herself  to  the  indiscreet  enjoyment  of  her 
gallant:  so  that  one  night  her  master  heard 
somebody  in  her  chamber,  and  coming  to  the 
door  to  discover  who  it  was,  he  found  it  held 
fast  against  him ;  but  at  last  forcing  it  open, 
he  saw  one  leap  out  of  the  window  the  instant 
he  entered  the  room :  he  would  have  pursued 
him,  but  Leonela  clinging  about  him,  begged 
him  to  appease  his  anger  and  concern,  since 
the  person  that  made  his  escape  was  her  hus- 
band. Anselmo  would  not  believe  her,  but 
drawing  his  dagger,  threatened  to  kill  her  if 
she  did  not  inmiediately  make  ftdl  discovery  of 
the  matter.  Distracted  with  fear,  she  begged 
him  to  spare  her  life,  and  she  would  discover 
things  that  more  nearly  related  to  him  than  he 
imagined. — "  Speak  quickly  then,"  replied 
Anselmo,  "or  you  die." — **It  is  impossible," 
returned  she,  "  that  in  this  confusion  and  fright 
I  should  say  anything  that  can  be  understood ; 
but  give  me  but  till  to-morrow  morning,  and  I 
will  lay  such  things  before  you,  as  will  surprise 
and  amaze  you :  but  believe  me,  sir,  the  person 
that  leaped  out  of  the  window,  is  a  young  man 
of  this  city,  who  is  contracted  to  me."  This 
something  appeased  Anselmo,  and  prevailed 
with  him  to  allow  her  till  the  next  morning  to 


DON  QUIXOTE.  171 

make  her  confession :  for  he  was  too  well 
assured  of  Camilla's  virtue,  by  the  past  trial,  to 
suspect  that  there  could  be  anything  relating 
to  her  in  what  Leonela  had  to  tell  him: 
wherefore  fastening  her  in  her  room,  and 
threatening  that  she  should  never  come  out  till 
she  had  done  what  she  had  promised,  he 
returned  to  his  chamber  to  Camilla,  and  told 
her  all  that  had  passed,  without  omitting  the 
promise  she  had  given  him  to  make  some 
strange  discovery  the  next  morning.  You  may 
easily  imagine  the  concern  this  gave  Camilla ; 
she  made  no  doubt  but  that  the  discovery 
Leonela  had  promised  was  of  her  disloyalty; 
and  without  waiting  to  know  whether  it  was  so 
or  not,  that  very  night,  as  soon  as  Anselmo 
was  asleep,  taking  with  her  all  her  jewels,  and 
some  money,  she  got  undiscovered  out  of  the 
house,  and  went  to  Lothario,  informed  him  of 
all  that  had  passed,  and  desired  him  either  to 
put  her  in  some  place  of  safety,  or  to  go  with 
her  where  they  might  enjoy  each  other  secure 
from  the  fears  of  Anselmo.  This  surprising 
relation  so  confounded  Lothario,  that  for  some 
time  he  knew  not  what  he  did,  or  what  reso- 
lution to  take ;  but  at  last,  with  Camilla's  con- 
sent, he  put  her  into  a  nunnery,  where  a  sister 
of  his  was  abbess,  and  immediately,  without 


172  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

acquainting  anybody  with  his  departure,  left 
the  city. 

Anselmo,  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  got  up, 
without  missing  his  wife,  and  hurried  away  to 
Leonela's  chamber,  to  hear  what  she  had  to  say 
to  him ;  but  he  found  nobody  there,  only  the 
sheets  tied  together,  and  fastened  to  the  window, 
showed  which  way  she  had  made  her  escape ; 
on  which  he  returned  very  sad  to  tell  Camilla 
the  adventure,  but  was  extremely  surprised 
when  he  found  her  not  in  the  whole  house,  nor 
could  hear  any  news  of  her  from  his  servants ; 
but  finding  in  his  search  her  trunks  open,  and 
most  of  her  jewels  gone,  he  no  longer  doubted 
of  his  dishonour :  so,  pensive  and  half-dressed 
as  he  was,  he  went  to  Lothario's  lodging  to  tell 
him  his  misfortune;  but  when  his  servants 
informed  him  that  he  was  gone  that  very  night, 
with  all  his  money  and  jewels,  his  pangs  were 
redoubled,  and  his  grief  increased  almost  to 
madness.  To  conclude,  he  returned  home, 
found  his  house  empty,  for  fear  had  driven  away 
all  his  servants.  He  knew  not  what  to  think, 
say,  or  do.  He  saw  himself  forsaken  by  his 
friend,  his  wife,  and  his  very  servants,  with 
whom  he  imagined  that  Heaven  itself  had 
abandoned  him ;  but  his  greatest  trouble  was  to 
find  himself  robbed  of  his  honour  and  repu- 


DON  QUIXOTE.  178 

tatioD,  for  Camilla's  crime  was  but  too  evident 
from  all  these  concurring  circumstances.  After 
a  thousand  distracting  thoughts,  he  resolved  to 
retreat  to  that  village  whither  he  formerly 
retired,  to  give  Lothario  an  opportunity  to  ruin 
him ;  wherefore,  fastening  up  his  doors,  he  took 
horse,  full  of  despair  and  languishing  sorrow, 
the  violence  of  which  was  so  great,  that  he  had 
scarce  rid  half  way,  when  he  was  forced  to 
alight,  and,  tying  his  horse  to  a  tree,  he  threw 
himself  beneath  it,  and  spent,  in  that  melancholy 
posture,  a  thousand  racking  reflections,  most 
part  of  the  day ;  till,  a  little  before  night,  he 
discovered  a  passenger  coming  the  same  road, 
of  whom  he  inquired  what  news  at  Florence  ? 
The  traveller  replied,  that  the  most  surprising 
news  that  had  been  heard  of  late,  was  now  all 
the  talk  of  the  city,  which  was,  that  Lothario 
had  that  very  night  carried  away  the  wealthy 
Anselmo's  wife  Camilla,  which  was  all  con- 
fessed by  Camilla's  woman,  who  was  appre- 
hended that  night  as  she  slipped  from  the 
window  of  Anselmo's  house,  by  a  pair  of  sheets. 
"  The  truth  of  this  story  I  cannot  affirm," 
continued  the  traveller ;  **  but  every  body  is  as- 
tonished at  the  accident;  for  no  man  could  ever 
suspect  such  a  crime  from  a  person  engaged  in 
so  strict  a  friendship  with  Anselmo  as  Lothario 


174  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

was ;  for  they  were  called  the  Two  Friends." — 
"  Is  it  yet  known,"  replied  Anselmo,  **  which 
way  Lothario  and  Camilla  are  gone?" — **  No, 
sir,"  returned  the  traveller,  **  though  the 
governor  has  made  as  strict  a  search  after  them 
as  is  possible." — Anselmo  asked  no  more 
questions,  but  after  they  had  taken  their  leaves 
of  each  other,  the  traveller  left  him  and  pursued 
his  journey. 

This  mournful  news  so  afiFected  ,the  unfortu- 
nate Anselmo,  that  he  was  struck  with  death 
almost  that  very  moment.  Getting  therefore 
on  his  horse  as  well  as  he  could,  he  arrived  at 
his  friend's  house.  He  knew  nothing  yet  of  his 
disgrace;  but  seeing  him  so  pale  and  melancholy, 
concluded  that  some  great  misfortune  had 
befallen  him.  Anselmo  desired  to  be  immed- 
iately led  to  his  chamber,  and  ftirnished  with 
pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and  to  be  left  alone  with 
his  door  locked :  when,  finding  that  his  end  ap- 
proached, he  resolved  to  leave  in  writing  the 
cause  of  his  sudden  and  unexpected  death. 
Taking  therefore  the  pen,  he  began  to  write ; 
but,  unable  to  finish  what  he  designed,  he  died 
a  martyr  to  his  impertinent  curiosity.  The 
gentleman,  finding  he  did  not  call,  and  that  it 
grew  late,  resolved  to  enter  his  chamber,  and 
see  whether  his  friend  was  better  or  worse.     He 


DON  QUIXOTE.  175 

found  him  half  out  of  bed,  lying  on  his  face,  with 
the  pen  in  his  hand,  and  a  paper  open  before 
him.  Seeing  him  in  this  posture,  he  drew  near 
him,  called  and  moved  him,  but  soon  found  he 
was  dead ;  which  made  him  call  his  servants  to 
behold  the  unhappy  event ;  and  then  took  up 
the  paper,  which  he  saw  was  written  inAnselmo's 
own  hand,  and  was  to  this  effect : — 

"  A  foolish  and  impertinent  desire  has  robbed 
me  of  life.  If  Camilla  hear  of  my  death,  let  her 
know  that  I  forgive  her ;  for  she  was  not  obliged 
to  do  miracles,  nor  was  there  any  reason  I  should 
have  desired  or  expected  it ;  and  since  I  con- 
trived my  own  dishonour,  there  is  no  cause" 

Thus  far  Anselmo  writ ;  but  life  would  not 
hold  out  till  he  could  give  the  reasons  he 
designed.  The  next  day  the  gentleman  of  the 
house  sent  word  of  Anselmo's  death  to  his 
relations,  who  already  knew  his  misfortunes,  as 
well  as  the  nunnery  whither  Camilla  was  retired. 
She  herself  was  indeed  very  near  that  death 
which  her  husband  had  passed ;  though  not  for 
the  loss  of  him,  but  Lothario;  of  which  she  had 
lately  heard  a  flying  report ;  but  though  she  was 
a  widow  now,  she  would  neither  take  the  veil, 
nor  leave  the  nunnery ;    till,  in  a  few  days,  the 


176  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

news  was  confirmed^  of  his  being  slain  in  a  battle 
betwixt  Monsieur  de  Lautrec,  and  that  great 
general,  Gonzalo  Femandes  de  Cordona,  in  the 
kingdom  of  Naples.^  This  was  the  end  of  the 
offending  and  too  late  penitent  friend;  the 
news  of  which  made  Camilla  immediately  pro- 
fess herself,  and  soon  after,  overwhelmed  with 
grief  and  melancholy,  pay  for  her  transgression 
with  the  loss  of  her  life.  This  was  the  unhappy 
end  of  them  all,  proceeding  from  so  impertinent 
a  beginning. 

"I  like  this  novel  well  enough,"  said  the 
curate ;  "  yet,  after  all,  I  cannot  persuade 
myself  that  there  is  anything  of  truth  in  it ; 
and  if  it  be  purely  invention,  the  author  was  in 
the  wrong ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  there 
could  ever  be  a  husband  so  foolish,  as  to  ven- 
ture on  so  dangerous  an  experiment.  Had  he 
made  his  husband  and  wife  a  gallant  and  a 
mistress,  the  fable  had  appeared  more  probable; 
but,  as  it  is,  it  is  next  to  impossible.  However, 
I  must  confess,  I  have  nothing  to  object 
against  his  manner  of  telling  it." 

^See  Appendix,  Note  4,  Chapter  VIII.,  Book  IV 
*  Ibid, 'Sou  6. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  177 


CHAPTER  IX. 

CONTAINING  AN  ACCOUNT  OP  MANY  SURPRISING 
ACCIDENTS  IN  THE  INN. 

At  the  same  time  the  innkeeper,  who  stood  at 
the  door,  seeing  company  coming,  "  More 
guests,"  cried  he ;  "a  brave  jolly  troop,  on  my 
word.  If  they  stop  here,  we  may  sing,  0  be 
joyful." — "What  are  they?"  said  Cardenio. — 
**  Four  men,"  said  the  host,  "  on  horseback,  a 
la  Ginetttj*  with  black  masks  f  on  their  faces, 
and  armed  with  lances  and  targets ;  a  lady  too 
all  in  white,  that  rides  single  and  masked ;  and 
two  running  footmen." — "Are  they  near?" 
said  the  curate. — "Just  at  the  door,"  replied 
the  innkeeper." — Hearing  this,  Dorothea  veiled 
herself,  and  Cardenio  had  just  time  enough  to 
step  into  the  next  room,  where  Don  Quixote 
lay,  when  the  strangers  came  into  the  yard. 
The  four  horsemen,  who  made  a  very  genteel 

*  A  kind  of  riding  with  short  sUrrups,  which  the  Spaniards  took 
ftt>m  the  Arabians,  and  is  still  used  bj  aU  the  African  and  Easten 
nations. 

t  ArUifoM;  a  piece  of  thin  black  silk,  which  the  Spaniards  wear 
before  their  facM  in  trayellingy  not  for  disgoiae,  but  to  keep  off  the 
dust  and  sun. 

II.  li 


178  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

appearance,  dismounted  and  went  to  help  down 
the  lady,  whom  one  of  them  taking  in  his  arms, 
carried  into  the  house ;  where  he  seated  her  in 
a  chair  by  the  chamber-door,  into  which  Car- 
denio  had  withdrawn.  All  this  was  done 
without  discovering  their  faces,  or  speaking  a 
word;  only  the  lady,  as  she  sat  down  in  the 
chair,  breathed  out  a  deep  sigh,  and  let  her 
arms  sink  down,  in  a  weak  and  fainting  posture. 
The  curate,  marking  their  odd  behaviour, 
which  raised  in  him  a  curiosity  to  know  who 
they  were,  went  to  their  servants  in  the  stable, 
and  asked  what  their  masters  were?  "In- 
deed,* sir,'*  said  one  of  them,  "  that  is  more 
than  we  can  tell  you ;  they  seem  of  no  mean 
quality,  especially  that  gentleman  who  carried 
the  lady  into  the  house,  for  the  rest  pay  him 
great  respect,  and  his  word  is  a  law  to  them." — 
"Who  is  the  lady?''  said  the  curate.— "We 
know  no  more  of  her  than  the  rest,"  answered 
the  fellow,  "  for  we  could  never  see  her  &ce  all 
the  time,  and  it  is  impossible  we  should  know 
her  or  them  any  otherwise.  They  picked  us 
up  on  the  road,  my  comrade  and  myself,  and 
prevailed  with  us  to  wait  on  them  to  Andalusia, 
promising  to  pay  us  well  for  our  trouble ;  so 

*  It  ii  in  the  original  pw  dim  (i.d.,  bj  ten)  instead  of  jmt  Dim 
{yjt^  bjr  Qod),  thinking  to  cheat  the  deyO  of  an  oath. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  179 

that,  bating  the  two  days  travelling  in  their 
company,  they  are  utter  strangers  to  us." — 
"  Could  you  not  hear  them  name  one  another 
all  this  time?''  asked  the  curate. — **  No,  truly, 
sir,"  answered  the  footman,  "for  we  heard 
them  not  speak  a  syllable  all  the  way ;  the  poor 
lady,  indeed,  used  to  sigh  and  grieve  so 
piteously,  that  we  are  persuaded  she  has  no 
stomach  to  this  journey :  whatever  may  be  the 
cause  we  know  not ;  by  her  garb  she  seems  to 
be  a  nun,  but  by  her  grief  and  melancholy,  one 
might  guess  they  are  going  to  make  her  one, 
when  perhaps  the  poor  girl  has  not  a  bit  of 
nun's  flesh  about  her." — **Very  likely,"  said 
the  curate;  and  with  that  leaving  them,  he 
returned  to  the  place  where  he  left  Dorothea, 
who,  hearing  the  masked  lady  sigh  so  frequently, 
moved  by  the  natural  pity  of  the  soft  sex,  could 
not  forbear  inquiring  the  cause  of  her  sorrow. — 
"  Pardon  me,  madam,"  said  she,  "  if  I  beg  to 
know  your  grief;  and  assure  yourself,  that  my 
request  does  not  proceed  from  mere  curiosity, 
but  an  earnest  inclination  to  serve  and  assist 
you,  if  your  misfortune  be  any  such  as  our  sex 
is  naturally  subject  to,  and  in  the  power  of  a 
woman  to  cure." — The  melancholy  lady  made 
no  return  to  her  compliment,  and  Dorothea 
pressed  her  in  vain  with  new  reasons,  when 


180  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

the  gentleman,  whom  the  foot-boy  signified  to 
be  the  chief  of  the  company,  interposed: 
"  Madam,"  said  he,  **  do  not  trouble  yourself  to 
throw  away  any  generous  ofier  on  that  un- 
grateful woman,  whose  nature  cannot  return  an 
obligation ;  neither  expect  any  answer  to  your 
demands,  for  her  tongue  is  a  stranger  to  truth." 
— "  Sir,"  said  the  disconsolate  lady,  **  my  truth 
and  honour  have  made  me  thus  miserable,  and 
my  sufferings  are  sufficient  to  prove  you  the 
falsest  and  most  base  of  men." — Cardenio 
being  only  parted  from  the  company  by  Don 
Quixote's  chamber-door,  overheard  these  last 
words  very  distinctly;  and  immediately  cried 
out,  "Good  heaven,  what  do  I  hear!  what 
voice  struck  my  ear  just  now?"  The  lady, 
startled  at  his  exclamation,  sprung  from  the 
chair,  and  would  have  bolted  into  the  chamber 
whence  the  voice  came;  but  the  gentleman 
perceiving  it,  laid  hold  on  her,  to  prevent  her, 
which  so  disordered  the  lady  that  her  mask 
fell  off,  and  discovered  an  incomparable  face, 
beautiftd  as  an  angeFs,  though  very  pale,  and 
strangely  discomposed,  her  eyes  eagerly  rolling 
on  every  side,  which  made  her  appear  distracted. 
Dorothea  and  the  rest,  not  guessing  what  her 
eyes  sought  by  their  violent  motion,  beheld  her 
with  grief  and  wonder.    She  struggled  so  hard, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  181 

and  the  gentleman  was  so  disordered  by  be- 
holding her,  that  his  mask  dropped  oflf  too,  and 
discovered  to  Dorothea,  who  was  assisting  to 
hold  the  lady,  the  face  of  her  husband  Don 
Ferdinand.  Scarce  had  she  known  him,  when, 
with  a  long  and  dismal  oh !  she  fell  in  a  swoon, 
and  would  have  reached  the  floor  with  all  her 
weight,  had  not  the  barber,  by  good  fortune, 
stood  behind  and  supported  her.  The  curate 
ran  presently  to  help  her,  and  pulling  off  her 
veil  to  throw  water  in  her  face,  Don  Ferdinand 
presently  knew  her,  and  was  struck  almost  as 
dead  as  she  at  the  sight ;  nevertheless,  he  did 
not  quit  Lucinda,  who  was  the  lady  that 
struggled  so  hard  to  get  out  of  his  hands. 
Cardenio  hearing  Dorothea's  exclamation,  and 
imagining  it  to  be  Lucinda's  voice,  flew  into 
the  chamber  in  great  disorder,  and  the  first 
object  he  met  was  Don  Ferdinand  holding 
Lucinda,  who  presently  knew  him.  They 
were  all  struck  dumb  with  amazement :  Doro- 
thea gazed  on  Don  Ferdinand ;  Don  Ferdinand 
on  Cardenio;  and  Cardenio  and  Lucinda  on 
one  another. 

At  last  Lucinda  broke  silence,  and  addressing 
Don  Ferdinand,  **Let  me  go,"  said  she; 
"unloose  your  hold,  my  lord :  by  the  generosity 
you  should  have,  or  by  your  inhumanity,  since 


182  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

it  must  be  so,  I  conjure  you,  leave  me,  that  1 
may  cling  like  ivy  to  my  old  support;  and 
from  whom  neither  your  threats,  nor  prayers, 
nor  gifts,  nor  promises,  could  ever  alienate  my 
love.  Contend  not  against  heaven,  whose 
power  alone  could  bring  me  to  my  dear 
husband's  sight,  by  such  strange  and  un- 
expected means:  you  have  a  thousand  in- 
stances to  convince  you,  that  nothing  but 
death  can  make  me  ever  forget  him  :  let  this, 
at  least,  turn  your  love  into  rage,  which  may 
prompt  you  to  end  my  miseries  with  my  life, 
here  before  my  dear  husband,  where  I  shall  be 
proud  to  lose  it,  since  my  death  may  convince 
him  of  my  unshaken  love  and  honour,  till  the 
last  minute  of  my  life/*  Dorothea  by  this 
time  had  recovered,  and  finding,  by  Lucinda's 
discourse  who  she  was,  and  that  Don  Ferdinand 
would  not  unhand  her,  she  made  a  virtue  of 
necessity,  and  falling  at  his  feet,  "  My  lord," 
cried  she,  all  bathed  in  tears,  ^^  if  that  beauty 
which  you  hold  in  your  arms,  has  not  al- 
together dazzled  your  eyes,  you  may  behold  at 
your  feet  the  once  happy,  but  now  miserable 
Dorothea.  I  am  the  poor  and  humble  villager, 
whom  your  generous  bounty,  I  dare  not  say 
your  love,  did  condescend  to  raise  to  the 
honour  of  calling  you  her  own :  I  am  she,  who. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  183 

once  confined  to  peaceful  innocence,  led  a 
contented  life,  till  your  importunity,  your 
shew  of  honour,  and  deluding  words,  charmed 
me  from  my  retreat,  and  made  me  resign  my 
freedom  to  your  power.  How  I  am  recom- 
pensed may  be  guessed  by  my  grief,  and  my 
being  found  here  in  this  strange  place,  whither 
I  was  led,  not  through  any  dishonourable  ends, 
but  purely  by  despair  and  grief  to  be  forsaken 
of  you.  It  was  at  your  desire  I  was  bound  to 
you  by  the  strictest  tie,  and  whatever  you  do, 
you  can  never  cease  to  be  mine.  Consider,  my 
dear  lord,  that  my  matchless  love  may  balance 
the  beauty  and  nobility  of  the  person  for  whom 
you  would  forsake  me ;  she  cannot  share  your 
love,  for  it  is  only  mine;  and  Cardenio's 
interest  in  her  will  not  admit  a  partner.  It  is 
easier  far,  my  lord,  to  recall  your  wandering 
desires,  and  fix  them  upon  her  that  adores 
you,  than  to  draw  her  to  love  who  hates 
you.  Remember  how  you  did  solicit  my 
humble  state,  and  conscious  of  my  mean- 
ness, ye  paid  a  veneration  to  my  innocence, 
which,  joined  with  the  honourable  con- 
dition of  my  yielding  to  your  desires, 
pronounce  me  free  from  ill  design  or  dishonour. 
Consider  these  undeniable  truths:  have  some 
regard  to  your  honour !  remember  you  are  a 


184  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

Christian!  Why  should  you  then  make  her 
life  end  so  miserably,  whose  beginning  your 
favour  made  so  happy  ?  If  I  must  not  expect 
the  usage  and  respect  of  a  wife,  let  me  but 
serve  you  as  a  slave;  so  I  belong  to  you, 
though  in  the  meanest  rank,  I  never  shall 
complain:  let  me  not  be  exposed  to  the 
slandering  reflections  of  the  censorious  world 
by  so  cruel  a  separation  from  my  lord :  affict 
not  the  declining  years  of  my  poor  parents, 
whose  faithful  services  to  you  and  yours  have 
merited  a  more  suitable  return.  K  you  imagine 
the  current  of  your  noble  blood  should  be 
defiled  by  mixing  with  mine,  consider  how 
many  noble  houses  have  run  in  such  a  channel; 
besides,  the  woman's  side  is  not  essentially 
requisite  to  ennoble  descent.  But  chiefly  think 
on  this,  that  virtue  is  the  truest  nobility,  which, 
if  you  stain  by  basely  wronging  me,  you  bring 
a  greater  blot  upon  your  family  than  marrying 
me  could  cause.  In  fine,  my  lord,  you  cannot, 
must  not  disown  me  for  your  wife:  to  attest 
which  truth,  I  call  your  own  words,  which 
must  be  true,  if  you  prize  yourself  for  honour, 
and  that  nobility,  whose  want  you  so  despise 
in  me.  Witness  your  oaths  and  vows,  witness 
that  Heaven  which  you  so  oft  invoked  to 
ratify  your  promises ;  and  if  all  these  should 


J 


DON  QUIXOTE.  186 

fail,  I  make  my  last  appeal  to  your  own  con- 
science, whose  sting  will  always  represent  my 
wrongs  fresh  to  your  thoughts,  and  disturb 
your  joys  amidst  your  greatest  pleasures." 

These,  with  many  such  arguments,  did  the 
mournful  Dorothea  urge,  appearing  so  lovely  in 
her  sorrow,  that  Don  Ferdinand's  friends,  as 
well  as  all  the  rest,  sympathized  with  her; 
Lucinda,  particularly,  as  much  admiring  her 
wit  and  beauty,  as  moved  by  the  tears,  the 
piercing  sighs  and  moans  that  followed  her 
entreaties;  and  she  would  have  gone  nearer 
to  have  comforted  her,  had  not  Ferdinand's 
arms,  that  still  held  her,  prevented  it.  He 
stood  full  of  confusion,  with  his  eyes  fixed 
attentively  on  Dorothea  a  great  while ;  at  last, 
opening  his  arms,  he  quitted  Lucinda,  *'  Thou 
hast  conquered,"  cried  he,  "charming  Dorothea, 
thou  hast  conquered  me;  it  is  impossible  to 
resist  so  many  united  truths  and  charms." 
Lucinda  was  still  so  disordered  and  weak,  that 
she  would  have  fallen  when  Ferdinand  quitted 
her,  had  not  Cardenio,  without  regard  to  his 
safety,  leaped  forward  and  caught  her  in  his 
arms,  and  embracing  her  with  eagerness  and 
joy:  "Thanks,  gracious  Heaven!"  cried  he 
aloud ;  "  my  dear,  my  faithful  wife,  thy  sorrows 
are  now  ended ;  for  where  canst  thou  rest  more 


186  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

safe  than  in  my  arms,  which  now  support  thee, 
as  once  they  did  when  my  blessed  fortune  first 
made  thee  mine?"  Lucinda  then  opening 
her  eyes,  and  finding  herself  in  the  arms 
of  her  Cardenio,  without  regard  to  ceremony 
or  decency,  threw  her  arms  about  his  neck,  and, 
laying  her  face  to  his,  "  Yes,''  said  she,  **  thou 
art  he,  thou  art  my  lord  indeed !  It  is  even 
you  yourself,  the  right  owner  of  this  poor, 
harassed  captive.  Now,  fortune,  act  thy  worst ; 
nor  fears  nor  threats  shall  ever  part  me  fi-om 
the  sole  support  and  comfort  of  my  life." — 
This  sight  was  very  surprising  to  Don  Ferdinand 
and  the  other  spectators.  Dorothea  perceiving, 
by  Don  Ferdinand's  change  of  countenance, 
and  laying  his  hand  to  his  sword,  that  he 
prepared  to  assault  Cardenio,  fell  suddenly  on 
her  knees,  and,  with  an  endearing  embrace, 
held  Don  Ferdinand's  leg  so  fast,  that  he  could 
not  stir.  **What  means,"  cried  she,  all  in 
tears,  **  the  only  refuge  of  my  hope?  See  here 
thy  own  and  dearest  wife  at  thy  feet,  and  her 
you  would  enjoy  in  her  true  husband's  ann& 
Think  then,  my  lord,how  unjust  is  your  attempt 
to  dissolve  that  knot  which  Heaven  has  tied 
so  fast  Can  you  ever  think  or  hope  success 
in  your  design  on  her,  who,  contemning  all 
dangers,  and  confirmed  in  strictest  constancy 


DON  QUnOTE.  187 

and  honour,  before  your  face  lies  bathed  in 
tears  of  joy  and  passion  in  her  true  lover's 
bosom  ?  For  Heaven's  sake  I  entreat  you,  by 
your  own  words  1  conjure  you,  to  mitigate 
your  anger,  and  permit  that  faithful  pair  to 
consummate  their  joys,  and  spend  their  re- 
maining days  in  peace.  Thus  may  you  make 
it  appear  that  you  are  generous  and  truly  noble, 
giving  the  world  so  strong  a  proof  that  you 
have  your  reason  at  command,  and  your  pas- 
sion in  subjection."  All  this  while  Cardenio, 
though  he  still  held  Lucinda  in  his  arms,  had 
a  watchful  eye  on  Don  Ferdinand;  resolving, 
if  he  had  made  the  least  oflfer  to  his  prejudice, 
to  make  him  repent  it  and  all  his  party,  if 
possible,  though  at  the  expense  of  his  life. 
But  Don  Ferdinand's  friend  the  curate,  the 
barber,  and  all  the  company  (not  forgetting 
honest  Sancho  Panza),  got  together  about  Don 
Ferdinand,  and  entreated  him  to  pity  the  beau- 
tiful Dorothea's  tears;  that,  considering  what 
she  had  said,  the  truth  of  which  was  apparent, 
it  would  be  the  highest  injustice  to  frustrate 
her  lawfiil  hopes ;  that  their  strange  and  won- 
derful meeting  could  not  be  attributed  to 
chance,  but  the  peculiar  and  directing  provi- 
dence of  Heaven ;  that  nothing  (as  Mr  Curate 
very  well  urged)  but  death  could  part  Cardenio 


188  THE  ACmEVEBfENTS  OP 

from  Lucinda ;  and  that  though  the  edge  of  his 
sword  might  separate  them,  he  would  make 
them  happier  by  death,  than  he  could  hope  to 
be  by  surviving;  that,  in  irrecoverable  acci- 
dents, a  submission  to  fate,  and  a  resignation 
of  our  wills,  showed  not  only  the  greatest 
prudence,  but  also  the  highest  courage  and 
generosity;  that  he  should  not  envy  those 
happy  lovers  what  the  bounty  of  Heaven  had 
conferred  on  them,  but  that  he  should  turn  his 
eyes  on  Dorothea's  grief,  view  her  incomparable 
beauty,  which,  with  her  true  and  unfeigned 
love,  made  large  amends  for  the  meanness  of 
her  parentage ;  but  principally  it  lay  upon  him, 
if  he  gloried  in  the  titles  of  nobility  and 
Christianity,  to  keep  his  promise  unviolated; 
that  the  more  reasonable  part  of  mankind 
could  not  otherwise  be  satisfied,  or  have  any 
esteem  for  him.  Also,  that  it  was  the  special 
prerogative  of  beauty,  if  heightened  by  virtue, 
and  adorned  with  modesty,  to  lay  claim  to  any 
dignity,  without  disparagement  or  scandal  to 
the  person  that  raises  it ;  and  that  the  strong 
dictates  of  delight  having  been  once  indulged, 
we  are  not  to  be  blamed  for  following  them 
afterwards,  provided  they  be  not  unlawful. 
In  short,  to  these  reasons  they  added  so  many 
enforcing  arguments,  that  Don  Ferdinand,  who 


DON  QUIXOTE.  189 

was  truly  a  gentleman,  could  no  longer  resist 
reason,  but  stooped  down,  and,  embracing 
Dorothea,  **  Rise,  madam,"  said  he,  **  it  is  not 
proper  that  she  should  lie  prostrate  at  my  feet, 
who  triumphs  over  my  soul.  K  I  have  not 
hitherto  paid  you  all  the  respect  I  ought,  it  was 
perhaps  so  ordered  by  Heaven,  that,  having  by 
this  a  stronger  conviction  of  your  constancy 
and  goodness,  I  may  henceforth  set  the  greater 
value  on  your  merit.  Let  the  fixture  respects 
and  services  I  shall  pay  you,  plead  a  pardon  for 
my  past  transgressions;  and  let  the  violent 
passions  of  my  love,  that  first  made  me  yours, 
be  an  excuse  for  that  which  caused  me  to  for- 
sake you.  View  the  now  happy  Lucinda's  eyes, 
and  there  read  a  thousand  farther  excuses ;  but 
I  promise  henceforth  never  to  disturb  her 
quiet;  and  may  she  live  long  and  contented 
with  her  dear  Cardenio,  as  I  hope  to  do  with 
my  dearest  Dorothea." — Thus  concluding,  he 
embraced  her  again  so  lovingly,  that  it  was 
with  no  small  difficulty  that  he  kept  in  his 
tears,  which  he  endeavoured  to  conceal,  being 
ashamed  to  discover  so  efifeminate  a  proof  of 
his  remorse. 

Cardenio,  Lucinda,  and  the  greatest  part  of 
the  company,  could  not  so  well  command 
their    passions,   but  all  wept  for  joy:    even 


190  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

Sancho  Panza  himself  shed  tears,  though,  as  he 
afterwards  confessed,  it  was  not  for  downright 
grief,  but  because  he  found  not  Dorothea  to  be 
the  Queen  of  Micomicona,  as  he  supposed,  and 
of  whom  he  expected  so  many  favours  and 
preferments.  Cardenio  and  Lucinda  fell  at 
Don  Ferdinand's  feet,  giving  him  thanks,  with 
the  strongest  expressions  which  gratitude  could 
suggest ;  he  raised  them  up,  and  received  their 
acknowledgments  with  much  modesty;  then 
begged  to  be  informed  by  Dorothea,  how  she 
came  to  that  place.  She  related  to  him  all  she 
had  told  Cardenio,  but  with  such  a  grace, 
that  what  were  misfortunes  to  her,  proved  an 
inexpressible  pleasure  to  those  that  heard  her 
relation.  When  she  had  done,  Don  Ferdinand 
told  all  that  had  befallen  him  in  the  city, 
after  he  found  the  paper  in  Lucinda's  bosom, 
which  declared  Cardenio  to  be  her  husband; 
how  he  would  have  killed  her,  had  not  her 
parents  prevented  him;  how  afterwards,  mad 
with  shame  and  anger,  he  left  the  city,  to  wait 
a  more  commodious  opportunity  of  revenge; 
how,  in  a  short  time,  he  learned  that  Lucinda 
was  fled  to  a  nunnery,  resolving  to  end  her 
days  there,  if  she  could  not  spend  them  with 
Cardenio;  that,  having  desired  those  three 
gentlemen  to  go  with  him,  they  went  to  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  191 

nunnery,  and,  waiting  till  they  found  the  gate 
open,  he  left  two  of  the  gentlemen  to  secure 
the  door,  while  he,  with  the  other,  entered  the 
house,  where  they  found  Lueinda  talking  with 
a  nun  in  the  cloister.  They  forcibly  brought 
her  thence  to  a  village,  where  they  disguised 
themselves  for  their  more  convenient  flight, 
which  they  more  easily  brought  about,  the 
nunnery  being  situate  in  the  fields,  distant 
a  good  way  firom  any  town.  He  like- 
wise added,  how  Lueinda,  finding  herself  in 
his  power,  fell  into  a  swoon;  and  that  after 
she  came  to  herself,  she  continually  wept  and 
sighed,  but  would  not  speak  a  syllable;  and 
that,  accompanied  with  silence  only  and  tears, 
they  had  travelled  till  they  came  to  that  inn, 
which  proved  to  him  as  his  arrival  at  heaven, 
having  put  a  happy  conclusion  to  all  his  earthly 
misfortunes. 


192  THE  ACHI£V£M£NT8  OF 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  HISTORY  OP  THE  FAMOUS  PRINCESS  MICOMICONA 
CONTINUED,  WITH  OTHER  PLEASANT  ADVEN- 
TURES. 

The  joy  of  the  whole  company  was  unspeak- 
able by  the  happy  conclusion  of  this  perplexed 
business.  Dorothea,  Cardenio,  and  Lucinda 
thought  the  sudden  change  of  their  aflfairs  too 
surprising  to  be  real ;  and  through  a  disuse  of 
good  fortune,  could  hardly  be  induced  to  be- 
lieve their  happiness.  Don  Ferdinand  thanked 
Heaven  a  thousand  times  for  its  propitious 
conduct  in  leading  him  out  of  a  labyrinth,  in 
which  his  honour  and  virtue  were  like  to  have 
been  lost.  The  curate,  as  he  was  very  instru- 
mental in  the  general  reconciliation,  had  like- 
wise no  small  share  in  the  general  joy;  and 
that  no  discontent  might  sour  their  universal 
satisfaction,  Cardenio  and  the  curate  engaged 
to  see  the  hostess  satisfied  for  all  the  damages 
committed  by  Don  Quixote :  only  poor  Sancho 
drooped  pitifully.  He  found  his  lordship  and 
his  hopes  vanished  into  smoke,  the  Princess 


DON  QUIXOTE.  198 

Micomicona  was  changed  to  Dorothea,  and 
the  giant  to  Don  Ferdinand.  Thus,  very 
musty  and  melancholy,  he  slipt  into  his 
master's  chamber,  who  had  slept  on,  and  was 
just  wakened,  little  thinking  of  what  had 
happened. 

**I  hope  your  early  rising  will  do  you  no 
hurt,"  said  he,  ''  Sir  Knight  of  the  Woeful 
Figure ;  but  you  may  now  sleep  on  till  dooms- 
day if  you  will ;  nor  need  you  trouble  your 
head  any  longer  about  killing  any  giant,  or 
restoring  the  princess,  for  all  that  is  done  to 
your  hand." — "  That  is  more  than  probable," 
answered  the  knight ;  "  for  I  have  had  the 
most  extraordinary,  the  most  prodigious,  and 
bloody  battle  with  the  giant,  that  I  ever  had, 
or  shall  have,  during  the  whole  course  of  my 
life.  Yet  with  one  cross  stroke  I  laid  his  head 
thwack  on  the  ground,  whence  the  great 
eflFiision  of  blood  seemed  like  a  violent  stream 
of  water." — "Of  wine,  you  mean,"  said  Sancho; 
"  for  you  must  know  (if  you  know  it  not  al- 
ready) that  your  worship's  dead  giant  is  a 
broached  wine-skin;  and  the  blood  some  thirty 
gallons  of  tent  which  it  held  in  its  belly ;  and 
your  head  so  cleverly  struck  oflF,  is  the  whore 
my  mother ;  and  so  the  devil  take  both  giant 
and  head,   and  all  together    for   Sancho."— 

II.  N 


194  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

**  What  sayest  thou,  madman  ?'*  said  the  Don ; 
"thou  art  frantic,  sure." — "Rise,  rise,  sir,'* 
said  Sancho,  "and  see  what  fine  work  you 
have  cut  out  for  yourself;  here  is  the  devil- 
and-all  to  pay  for,  and  your  great  queen  is 
changed  into  a  private  gentlewoman,  called 
Dorothea,  with  some  other  such  odd  matters, 
that  you  will  wonder  with  a  vengeance." — "  I 
can  wonder  at  nothing  here,"  said  Don  Quixote, 
"  where,  you  may  remember,  I  told  you  all 
things  ruled  by  enchantment." — "  I  believe 
it,"  quoth  Sancho,  "  had  my  tossing  in  a 
blanket  been  of  that  kind ;  but  sure  it  was  the 
likest  the  tossing  in  a  blanket  of  anything  I 
ever  knew  in  my  life.  And  this  same  inn- 
keeper, I  remember  very  well,  was  one  of  those 
that  tossed  me  into  the  air,  and  as  cleverly  and 
heartily  he  did  it  as  a  man  could  wish,  I  will 
say  that  for  him ;  so  that  after  all  I  begin  to 
smell  a  rat,  and  do  perilously  suspect  that  all 
our  enchantment  will  end  in  nothing  but 
bruises  and  broken  bones." — "  Heaven  will 
retrieve  all,"  said  the  knight;  "I  will  there- 
fore dress,  and  march  to  the  discovery  of  these 
wonderftd  transformations."  —  While  Sancho 
made  him  ready,  the  curate  gave  Don  Ferdi- 
nand and  the  rest  an  account  of  Don  Quixote's 
madness,  and  of  the  device  he  used  to  draw 


DON  QUIXOTE.  196 

him  from  the  Poor  Rock,  to  which  the  sup- 
posed disdain  of  his  mistress  had  banished  him 
in  imagination.  Sancho's  adventures  made 
also  a  part  in  the  story,  which  proved  very 
diverting  to  the  strangers.  He  added,  that 
since  Dorothea's  change  of  fortune  had  baulked 
their  design  that  way,  some  other  trick  should 
be  found  to  decoy  him  home.  Cardenio  offered 
his  service  in  the  affair,  and  that  Lucinda 
should  personate  Dorothea.  **No,  no,"  an- 
swered Don  Ferdinand ;  "  Dorothea  shall 
humour  the  jest  still,  if  this  honest  gentle- 
man's habitation  be  not  very  far  off." — "  Only 
two  days'  journey,"  said  the  curate. — **I  would 
ride  twice  as  far,"  said  Don  Ferdinand,  "for 
the  pleasure  of  so  good  and  charitable  an 
action." — ^By  this  Don  Quixote  had  sallied  out, 
armed  cap-a-pie,  Mambrino's  hehnet  (with  a 
great  hole  in  it)  on  his  head,  his  shield  on 
his  left  arm,  and  with  his  right  he  leaned  on 
his  lance.  His  meagre,  yellow,  weather-beaten 
face,  of  half  a  league  in  length;  the  unac- 
countable medley  of  his  armour,  together  with 
his  grave  and  solemn  port,  struck  Don  Ferdi- 
nand and  his  companions  dumb  with  admira- 
tion ;  while  the  champion,  casting  his  eyes  on 
Dorothea,  with  great  gravity  and  solidity,  broke 
silence  with  these  words. 


196  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

"  I  am  informed  by  this  my  squire,  beautiful 
lady,  that  your  greatness  is  annihilated,  and 
your  majesty  reduced  to  nothing;  for  of  a 
queen  and  mighty  princess,  as  you  used  to  be, 
you  are  become  a  private  damsel.  If  any  ex- 
press order  from  the  necromantic  king  your 
father,  doubting  the  ability  and  success  of  my 
arm  in  the  reinstating  you,  has  occasioned  this 
change,  I  must  tell  him,  that  he  is  no  con- 
jurer in  these  matters,  and  does  not  know  one 
half  of  his  trade ;  *  nor  is  he  skilled  in  the 
revolutions  of  chivalry :  for  had  he  been  con- 
versant in  the  study  of  knight-errantry  as  I 
have  been,  he  might  have  found,  that  in  every 
age,  champions  of  less  fame  than  Don  Quixote 
de  la  Mancha  have  finished  more  desperate 
adventures ;  since  the  killing  of  a  pitifril  giant, 
how  arrogant  soever  he  may  be,  is  no  such 
great  achievement ;  for,  not  many  hours  past, 
I  encountered  one  myself;  the  success  I  will 
not  mention,  lest  the  incredulity  of  some  people 
might  distrust  the  reality ;  but  time,  the  dis- 
coverer of  all  things,  will  disclose  it,  when 
least  expected." — "  Hold  there,"  said  the  host, 
"it  was  with  two  wine-skins,  but  no  giant, 
that  you  fought." — Don   Ferdinand  silenced 

*  LiUraUyf  one  half  of  the  mafls,  the  taying  of  which  ia  one  great 
part  of  the  priestlj  office. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  197 

the  innkeeper,  and  bid  him  by  no  means  in- 
terrupt Don  Quixote,  who  thus  went  on.  **  To 
conclude,  most  high  and  disinherited  lady,  if 
your  father,  for  the  causes  already  mentioned, 
has  caused  this  metamorphosis  in  your  person, 
believe  him  not ;  for  there  is  no  peril  on  earth 
through  which  my  sword  shall  not  open  a  way ; 
and  assure  yourself  that  in  a  few  days,  by  the 
overthrow  of  your  enemy's  head,  it  shall  fix  on 
yours  that  crown,  which  is  your  lawful  inherit- 
ance.'* Here  Don  Quixote  stopt,  waiting  the 
princess's  answer ;  she,  assured  of  Don  Ferdi- 
nand's consent  to  carry  on  the  jest  till  Don 
Quixote  was  got  home,  and  assuming  a  face  of 
gravity,  "  Whosoever,"  answered  she,  "  has 
informed  you,  valorous  Knight  of  the  Woeful 
Figure,  that  I  have  altered  or  changed  my 
condition,  has  imposed  upon  you;  for  I  am 
just  the  same  to-day  as  yesterday.  It  is  true, 
some  unexpected,  but  fortunate  accidents,  have 
varied  some  circumstances  of  my  fortune,  much 
to  my  advantage,  and  far  beyond  my  hopes ;  but 
I  am  neither  changed  in  my  person,  nor  altered 
in  my  resolution  of  employing  the  force  of  your 
redoubtable  and  invincible  arm  in  my  favour. 
I  therefore  apply  myself  to  your  usual  gener- 
osity, to  have  these  words  spoken  to  my  father's 
dishonour  recalled,  and  believe  these  easy  and 


198  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

infallible  means  to  redress  my  wrongs,  the  pure 
eflfects  of  his  wisdom  and  policy,  as  the  good 
fortune  I  now  enjoy  has  been  the  consequence 
of  your  surprising  deeds,  as  this  noble  presence 
can  testify.  What  should  hinder  us  then  from 
setting  forward  to-morrow  morning,  depending 
for  a  happy  and  successful  conclusion  on  the 
will  of  Heaven,  and  the  power  of  your  unparal- 
leled courage?'' 

The  ingenious  Dorothea  having  concluded, 
Don  Quixote  turning  to  Sancho,  with  all  the 
signs  of  fury  imaginable;  **Now  must  I  tell 
thee,  poor  paltry  hang-dog,"  said  he,  "thou 
art  the  veriest  rascal  in  all  Spain;  tell  me, 
rogue,  scoundrel,  did  not  you  just  now  inform 
me,  that  this  princess  was  changed  into- a  little 
private  damsel,  called  Dorothea,  and  the  head 
which  I  lopped  from  the  giant's  shoulders,  was 
the  whore  your  mother,  with  a  thousand  other 
absurdities?  Now,  by  all  the  powers  of 
heaven,"  looking  up,  and  grinding  his  teeth 
together,  "  I  have  a  mind  so  to  use  thee,  as  to 
make  thee  appear  a  miserable  example  to  all 
succeeding  squires,  that  shall  dare  to  tell  a 
knight-errant  a  lie." — '*Good  your  worship," 
cried  Sancho,  **  have  patience,  I  beseech  you : 
mayhap  I  am  mistaken  or  so,  about  my  lady 
Princess  Micomicona's  concern  there ;  but  that 


DON  QUIXOTE.  199 

the  giant's  head  came  off  the  wine -skin's 
shoulders,  and  that  the  blood  was  as  good  tent 
as  ever  was  tipt  over  tongue,  I  will  take  my 
corporal  oath  on  it;  Gadzookers,  sir,  are  not 
the  skins  all  hacked  and  slashed  within  there 
at  your  bed's-head,  and  the  wine  all  in  a  puddle 
in  your  chamber  ?  But  you  will  guess  at  the 
meat  presently,  by  the  sauce ;  the  proof  of  the 
pudding  is  in  the  eating,  master ;  ♦  and  if  my 
landlord  here  do  not  let  you  know  it  to  your 
cost,  he  is  a  very  honest  and  civil  fellow,  that 
is  aU.'*— "  Sancho,"  said  the  Don,  '*!  pro- 
nounce thee  non  compos;  I  therefore  pardon 
thee,  and  have  done." — "  It  is  enough,"  said 
Don  Ferdinand;  **we  therefore,  in  pursuance 
of  the  princess's  orders,  will  this  night  refresh 
ourselves,  and  to-morrow  we  will  all  of  us  set 
out  to  attend  the  lord  Don  Quixote,  in  prose- 
cution of  this  important  enterprise  he  has 
undertaken,  being  all  impatient  to  be  eye-wit- 
nesses of  his  celebrated  and  matchless  courage." 
— "  I  shall  be  proud  of  the  honour  of  serving 
and  waiting  upon  you,  ray  good  lord,"  replied 
Don  Quixote,  "  and  reckon  myself  infinitely 


*  The  original  nms.  It  wU  he  «Mn  in  the  frying  of  the  egge.  When 
eggs  are  to  be  fried,  there  is  no  knowing  their  goodneas  till  they  are 
broken,  Royal  JOieL  Or,  a  thief  stole  a  fiying-pan,  and  the  woman, 
who  owned  it,  meeting  him,  asked  him  what  he  was  carrying  away : 
he  answered.  Ton  will  know  when  your  eggs  are  to  be  fried. 


200  THE  ACfflEVEMENTS  OP 

obliged  by  the  favour  and  good  opinion  of  so 
honourable  a  company;  which  I  shall  en- 
deavour to  improve  and  confirm,  though  at  the 
expense  of  the  last  drop  of  my  blood/' 

Many  other  compliments  had  passed  between 
Don  Quixote  and  Don  Ferdinand,  when  the 
arrival  of  a  stranger  interrupted  them.  His 
dress  represented  him  as  a  Christian  newly  re- 
turned from  Barbary :  he  was  clad  in  a  short- 
skirted  coat  of  blue  cloth,  with  short  sleeves, 
and  no  collar,  his  breeches  were  of  blue  linen, 
with  a  cap  of  the  same  colour,  a  pair  of  date- 
coloured  stockings,  and  a  Turkish  scimitar 
hung  by  a  scarf,  in  manner  of  a  shoulder-belt. 
There  rode  a  woman  in  his  company,  clad  in  a 
Moorish  dress;  her  face  was  covered  with  a 
veil ;  she  had  on  a  little  cap  of  gold-tissue,  and 
a  Turkish  mantle  that  reached  from  her 
shoulders  to  her  feet.  The  man  was  well- 
shaped  and  strong,  his  age  about  forty,  his  face 
somewhat  tanned,  his  mustachios  long,  and  his 
beard  handsome.  In  short,  his  genteel  mien 
and  person  were  too  distinguishable  to  let  the 
gentleman  be  hid  by  the  meanness  of  his  habit. 
He  called  presently  for  a  room,  and,  being 
answered  that  all  were  fall,  seemed  a  little 
troubled;  however,  he  went  to  the  woman 
who  came  along  with  him,  and  took  her  down 


DON  QUIXOTB.  201 

from  her  ass.  The  ladies,  being  all  surprised 
at  the  oddness  of  the  Moorish  dress,  had  the 
curiosity  to  flock  about  the  stranger;  and 
Dorothea,  very  discreetly  imagining  that  both 
she  and  her  conductor  were  tired,  and  took  it 
ill  that  they  could  not  have  a  chamber,  "I 
hope,  madam,  you  will  bear  your  ill  fortune 
patiently,"  said  she;  **  for  want  of  room  is  an 
inconvenience  incident  to  all  public  inns ; 
but  if  you  please,  madam,  to  take  up  with  us," 
pointing  to  Lucinda,  "you  may  perhaps  find 
that  you  have  met  with  worse  entertainment 
on  the  road  than  what  this  place  affords/' — 
The  unknown  lady  made  her  no  answer,  but, 
rising  up,  laid  her  hands  across  her  breast, 
bowed  her  head,  and  inclined  her  body,  as  a 
sign  that  she  acknowledged  the  favour.  By 
her  silence  they  conjectured  her  to  be  undoubt- 
edly a  Moor,  and  that  she  could  not  speak 
Spanish.  Her  companion  was  now  come  back 
from  the  stable,  and  told  them,  **  Ladies,  I 
hope  you  will  excuse  this  gentlewoman  from 
answering  any  questions,  for  she  is  very  much 
a  stranger  to  our  language." — **  We  are  only, 
sir,"  answered  Lucinda,  "  making  her  an  offer 
which  civility  obliges  us  to  make  all  strangers, 
especially  of  our  own  sex,  that  she  would  make 
us  happy  in  her  company  all  night,  and  fare  as 


302  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

we  do :  we  will  make  very  much  of  her,  sir, 
and  she  shall  want  for  nothing  that  the  house 
aflFords." — "  I  return  you  humble  thanks,  dear 
madam,"  answered  the  stranger,  '*  in  the  lady's 
behalf  and  my  own  ;  and  I  infinitely  prize  the 
fevour,  which  the  present  exigence  and  the 
worth  of  the  donors  make  doubly  engaging." 
— "Is  the  lady,  pray,  sir,  a  Christian  or  a 
Moor?"  asked  Dorothea.  "  Our  charity  would 
make  us  hope  she  were  the  former ;  but  by  her 
attire  and  silence,  we  are  afraid  she  is  the 
latter." — **  Outwardly,  madam,"  answers  he, 
"  she  appears  and  is  a  Moor,  but  in  her  heart  a 
zealous  Christian,  which  her  longing  desires  of 
being  baptized  have  expressly  testified.  I  have 
had  no  opportunity  of  having  her  christened 
since  she  left  Algiers,  which  was  her  habitation 
and  native  country;  nor  has  any  imminent 
danger  of  death  as  yet  obliged  her  to  be  brought 
to  the  font,  before  she  be  better  instructed  in 
the  principles  of  our  religion ;  but  I  hope,  by 
Heaven's  assistance,  to  have  her  shortly  bap- 
tized with  all  the  decency  suiting  her  quality, 
which  is  much  above  what  her  equipage  or 
mine  seem  to  promise." 

These  words  raised  in  them  all  a  curiosity 
to  be  fiui^er  informed  who  the  Moor  and  her 
conductor  were ;  but  they  thought  it  improper 


DON  QUIXOTE.  203 

then  to  put  them  upon  any  more  particular 
relation  of  their  fortunes,  because  they  wanted 
rest  and  refreshment  after  their  journey. 
Dorothea,  placing  the  lady  by  her,  begged  her 
to  take  oflF  her  veil.  She  looked  on  her  com- 
panion, as  if  she  required  him  to  let  her  know 
what  she  said;  which,  when  he  had  let  her 
understand  in  the  Arabian  tongue,  joining  his 
own  request  also,  she  discovered  so  charming 
a  face,  that  Dorothea  imagined  her  more 
beautiful  than  Lucinda;  she,  on  the  other 
hand,  fancied  her  handsomer  than  Dorothea ; 
and  most  of  the  company  believed  her  more 
beautiful  than  both  of  them.  As  beauty  has 
always  a  prerogative,  or  rather  charm,  to  attract 
men's  inclinations,  the  whole  company  dedi- 
cated their  desires  to  serve  the  lovely  Moor. 
Don  Ferdinand  asked  the  stranger  her  name ; 
he  answered,  "  Lela  Zoraida ; "  she,  hearing 
him,  and  guessing  what  they  asked,  suddenly 
replied  with  great  concern,  though  very  grace- 
fully, **  No,  no  Zoraida,  Maria,  Maria; ''  giving 
them  to  understand  that  her  name  was  Maria, 
and  not  Zoraida.  These  words,  spoken  with  so 
much  eagerness,  raised  a  concern  in  every  body, 
the  ladies  especially,  whose  natural  tenderness 
showed  itself  by  their  tears;  and  Lucinda, 
embracing  her  very  lovingly,  "Ay,  ay,*'  said 


204  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

flhe,  "  Maria,  Maria ; ''  which  words  the  Moorish 
lady  repeated  by  way  of  answer.  "Zoraida 
Macange,"  added  she,  as  much  as  to  say,  not 
Zoraida,  but  Maria,  Maria. 

The  night  coming  on,  and  the  innkeeper, 
by  order  of  Don  Ferdinand's  friends,  having 
made  haste  to  provide  them  the  best  supper 
he  could,  the  cloth  was  laid  on  a  long  table, 
there  being  neither  round  nor  square  in  the 
house.  Don  Quixote,  after  much  ceremony, 
was  prevailed  upon  to  sit  at  the  head;  he 
desired  the  Lady  Micomicona  to  sit  next  him ; 
and  the  rest  of  the  company  having  placed 
themselves  according  to  their  rank  and  con- 
venience, they  eat  their  supper  very  heartily. 
Don  Quixote,  to  raise  the  diversion,  never 
minded  his  meat,  but  inspired  with  the  same 
spirit  that  moved  him  to  preach  so  much  to 
the  goat-herds,  he  began  to  hold  forth  in  this 
manner.  "  Certainly,  gentlemen,  if  we  rightly 
consider  it,  those  who  make  knight-errantry 
their  profession,  often  meet  with  most  surpris- 
ing and  stupendous  adventures.  For  what 
mortal  in  the  world,  at  this  time  entering 
within  this  castle,  and  seeing  us  sit  together  as 
we  do,  will  imagine  and  believe  us  to  be  the 
same  persons  which  in  reality  we  are  ?  Who 
is  there  that  can  judge,  that  this  lady  by  my 


DON  QUIXOTE.  206 

side  is  the  great  queen  we  all  know  her  to  be, 
and  that  I  am  that  Knight  of  the  Woeful 
Figure  so  universally  made  known  by  &ine? 
It  is  then  no  longer  to  be  doubted,  but  that 
this  exercise  and  profession  surpasses  all  others 
that  have  been  invented  by  man,  and  is  so 
much  the  more  honourable,  as  it  is  more 
exposed  to  dangers.  Let  none  presume  to 
tell  me  that  the  pen  is  preferable  to  the  sword ; 
for  be  they  who  they  will,  I  shall  tell  them 
they  know  not  what  they  say :  for  the  reason 
they  give,  and  on  which  chiefly  they  rely,  is, 
that  the  labour  of  the  mind  exceeds  that  of 
the  body,  and  that  the  exercise  of  arms  depends 
only  on  the  body,  as  if  the  use  of  them  were 
the  business  of  porters,  which  requires  nothing 
but  much  strength.  Or,  as  if  this,  which  we 
who  profess  it  call  chivalry,  did  not  include 
the  acts  of  fortitude,  which  depend  very  much 
upon  the  understanding.  Or  else,  as  if  that 
warrior,  who  commands  an  army  or  defends 
a  city  besieged,  did  not  labour  as  much  with 
the  mind  as  with  the  body.  K  this  be  not 
so,  let  experience  teach  us  whether  it  be 
possible  by  bodily  strength  to  discover  or 
guess  the  intentions  of  an  enemy.  The  form- 
ing designs,  laying  of  stratagems,  overcoming 
of  difficulties,  and  shunning  of  dangers,   are 


206  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

all  works  of  the  understanding,  wherein  the 
body  has  no  share.  It  being  therefore  evident, 
that  the  exercise  of  arms  requires  the  help  of 
the  mind  as  well  as  learning,  let  us  see  in  the 
next  place,  whether  the  scholar  or  the  soldier's 
mind  undergoes  the  greatest  labour.  Now 
this  may  be  the  better  known,  by  regarding 
the  end  and  object  each  of  them  aims  at ;  for 
that  intention  is  to  be  most  valued  which 
makes  the  noblest  end  its  object.  The  scope 
and  end  of  learning,  I  mean  human  learning 
(in  this  place  I  speak  not  of  divinity,  whose 
aim  is  to  guide  souls  to  heaven,  for  no  other 
can  equal  a  design  so  infinite  as  that),  is  to 
give  a  perfection  to  distributive  justice,  bestow- 
ing upon  every  one  his  due,  and  to  procure 
and  cause  good  laws  to  be  observed;  an  end 
really  generous,  great,  and  worthy  of  high 
commendation;  but  yet  not  equal  to  that 
which  knight-errantry  tends  to,  whose  object 
and  end  is  peace,  which  is  the  greatest  bless- 
ing man  can  wish  for  in  this  life.  And  there- 
fore the  first  good  news  that  the  world 
received,  was  that  the  angels  brought  in  the 
night,  which  was  the  beginning  of  our  day, 
when  they  sang  in  the  air,  Glory  to  God  on 
high,  peace  upon  earth,  and  to  men  good-will. 
And  the  only  manner  of  salutation  taught  by 


DON  QUIXOTE.  207 

the  best  Master  in  heaven,  or  upon  earth,  to 
his  friends  and  favourites,  was,  that  entering 
any  house  they  should  say.  Peace  be  to  this 
house.  And  at  other  times  he  said  to  them. 
My  peace  I  give  to  you,  my  peace  I  leave  to 
you,  peace  be  among  you.  A  jewel  and  legacy 
worthy  of  such  a  donor,  a  jewel  so  precious, 
that  without  it  there  can  be  no  happiness 
either  in  earth  or  heaven.  This  peace  is  the 
true  end  of  war;  for  arms  and  war  are  one 
and  the  same  thing.  Allowing  then  this 
truth,  that  the  end  of  war  is  peace,  and  that 
in  this  it  excels  the  end  of  learning,  let  us  now 
weigh  the  bodily  labours  the  scholar  undergoes, 
against  those  the  warrior  suffers,  and  then  see 
which  are  greatest." 

The  method  and  language  Don  Quixote  used 
in  delivering  himself  were  such,  that  none  of 
his  hearers  at  that  time  looked  upon  him  as  a 
madman.  But  on  the  contrary,  most  of  them 
being  gentlemen,  to  whom  the  use  of  arms 
properly  appertains,  they  gave  him  a  willing 
attention;  and  he  proceeded  in  this  manner: 
"These,  then,  I  say,  are  the  sufferings  and 
hardships  a  scholar  endures.  First,  poverty 
(not  that  they  are  all  poor,  but  to  urge  the 
worst  that  may  be  in  this  case),  and  having 
said  he    endures  poverty,   methinks   nothing 


208  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

more  need  be  urged  to  express  his  misery; 
for  he  that  is  poor  enjoys  no  happiness,  but 
labours  under  this  poverty  in  all  its  parts,  at 
one  time  in  hunger,  at  another  in  cold,  another 
in  nakedness,  and  sometimes  in  all  of  them 
together,  yet  his  poverty  is  not  so  great,  but 
still  he  eats,  though  it  be  later  than  the  usual 
hour,  and  of  the  scraps  of  the  rich,  or,  which 
is  the  greatest  of  a  scholar's  misfortunes,  what 
is  called  among  them  going  a  sopping ;  •  neither 
can  the  scholar  miss  of  somebody's  stove  or 
fire-side  to  sit  by,  where,  though  he  be  not 
thoroughly  heated,  yet  he  may  gather  warmth, 
and  at  last  sleep  away  the  night  under  a  roof. 
I  will  not  touch  upon  other  less  material 
circumstances,  as  the  want  of  linen,  and  scarc- 
ity of  shoes,  thinness  and  baldness  of  their 
clothes,  and  their  surfeiting  when  good  fortune 
throws  a  feast  in  their  way :  this  is  the  difficult 
and  uncouth  path  they  tread,  often  stumbling 
and  falling,  yet  rising  again  and  pushing  on, 
till  they  attain  the  preferment  they  aim  at ; 
whither  being  arrived,  we  have  seen  many  of 
them,  who,  having  been  carried  by  a  fortunate 
gale  through  all  these  quick-sands,  from  a  chair 
govern  the  world ;  their  hunger  being  changed 

*  The  author  means  the  sops  in  porridge,  given  at  the  doon  of 
monastenca. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  209 

into  satiety,  their  cold  into  comfortable 
warmth,  their  nakedness  into  magnificence  of 
apparel,  and  the  mats  they  used  to  lie  upon 
into  stately  beds  of  costly  silks  and  softest 
linen,  a  reward  due  to  their  virtue.  But  yet 
their  sufferings  being  compared  to  those  the 
soldier  endures,  appear  much  inferior,  as  I  shall 
in  the  next  place  make  out." 


u. 


210  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 


CHAPTER   XL 

A  CONTINUATION   OP  DON   QUIXOTE's    CURIOUS   DIS- 
COURSE UPON  ARMS  AND  LEARNING. 

"  Since,  speaking  of  the  scholar,  we  began  with 
his  poverty,  and  its  several  parts,  *'  continued 
Don  Quixote,  "  let  us  now  observe  whether  the 
soldier  be  any  richer  than  he;  and  we  shall 
find  that  poverty  itself  is  not  poorer;  for  he 
depends  on  his  miserable  pay,  which  he  receives 
but  seldom,  or  perhaps  never ;  or  else  in  that 
he  makes  by  marauding,  with  the  hazard  of  his 
life,  and  trouble  of  his  conscience.  Such  is 
sometimes  his  want  of  apparel,  that  a  slashed 
buflf-coat  is  all  his  holiday  raiment  and  shirt ; 
and  in  the  depth  of  winter  being  in  the  open 
field,  he  has  nothing  to  cherish  him  against 
the  sharpness  of  the  season,  but  the  breath  of 
his  mouth,  which  issuing  firom  an  empty  place, 
I  am  persuaded,  is  itself  cold,  though  contrary 
to  the  rules  of  nature.  But  now  see  how  he 
expects  night  to  make  amends  for  all  these 
hardships  in  the  bed  prepared  for  him,  which, 
unless  it  be  his  own  fiiult,  never  proves  too 


DON  QCIXOTE.  211 

narrow ;  for  he  may  freely  lay  out  as  much  of 
the  ground  as  he  pleases,  and  tumble  to  his 
content  without  danger  of  losing  the  sheets. 
But  above  all,  when  the  day  shall  come,  where- 
in he  is  to  put  in  practice  the  exercise  of  his 
profession,  and  strive  to  gain  some  new  degree, 
when  the  day  of  battle  shall  come ;  then,  as  a 
mark  of  honour,  shall  his  head  be  dignified 
with  a  cap  made  of  lint,  to  stop  a  hole  made 
by  a  bullet,  or  be,  perhaps,  carried  off  maimed, 
at  the  expense  of  a  leg  or  arm.  And  if  this  do 
not  happen,  but  that  merciful  heaven  preserve 
his  life  and  limbs,  it  may  fall  out  that  he  shall 
remain  as  poor  as  before,  and  must  run  through 
many  encounters  and  battles,  nay  always  come 
off  victorious,  to  obtain  some  little  preferment ; 
and  these  miracles,  too,  are  rare ;  but,  I  pray 
tell  me,  gentlemen,  if  ever  you  made  it  your 
observation,  how  few  are  those  who  obtain  due 
rewards  in  war,  in  comparison  of  those  numbers 
that  perish  ?  Doubtless  you  will  answer,  that 
there  is  no  parity  between  them ;  that  the  dead 
cannot  be  reckoned  up;  whereas,  those  who 
live  and  are  rewarded,  may  be  numbered  with 
three  figures.*  It  is  quite  otherwise  with 
scholars,  not  only  those  who  follow  the  law, 
but  others  also,  who  all  either  by  hook  or  by 

*  t.«i,  Do  not  exceed  handredA. 


213  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

crook  get  a  livelihood,  so  that  though   the 
soldier's  snSerings  be  much  greater,  yet  his  re- 
ward is  much  less.     To  this  it  may  be  answered, 
that  it  is  easier  to  reward  two  thousand  scholars, 
than    thirty   thousand    soldiers,    because   the 
former  are  recompensed  at  the  expense  of  the 
public,  by  giving  them  employments,  which  of 
necessity  must  be  allowed  on  those  of  their 
profession,  but  the  latter  cannot  be  gratified 
otherwise  than  at  the  cost  of  the  master  that 
employs  them ;  yet  this  very  difficulty  makes 
good  my  argument.     But  let  us  lay  this  mat- 
ter aside,  as  a  point  difficult  to  be  decided,  and 
let  us  return  to  the  preference  due  to  arms 
above  learning,  a  subject  as  yet  in  debate,  each 
party  bringing  strong  reasons  to  make   out 
their    pretensions.      Among   others,    learning 
urges,  that  without  it  warfare  itself  could  not 
subsist;  because  war,  as  other  things,  has  its 
laws,  and  is  governed  by  them,  and  laws  are 
the  province  of  learning  and  scholars.     To 
this  objection  the  soldiers  make  answer,  that 
without  them  the  laws  cannot  be  maintained, 
for  it  is  by  arms  that  commonwealths  are  de- 
fended, kingdoms  supported,  cities  secured,  the 
high-way  made  safe,  and  the  sea  delivered  fix)m 
pirates.     In  short,  were  it  not  for  them,  com- 
monwealths, kingdoms,  monarchies,  cities,  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  SIS 

roads  by  land,  and  the  waters  of  the  sea,  would 
be  subject  to  the  ravages  and  concision  that 
attend  war  while  it  lasts,  and  is  at  liberty  to 
make  use  of  its  unbounded  power  and  preroga- 
tive. Besides,  it  is  past  all  controversy,  that 
what  costs  dearest  is,  and  ought  to  be,  most 
valued.  Now  for  a  man  to  attain  to  an 
eminent  degree  of  learning  costs  him  time, 
watching,  hunger,  nakedness,  dizziness  in  the 
head,  weakness  in  the  stomach,  and  other  incon- 
veniences, which  are  the  consequences  of  these, 
of  which  I  have  already  in  part  made  mention. 
But  the  rising  gradually  to  be  a  good  soldier, 
is  purchased  at  the  whole  expense  of  all  that 
is  required  for  learning,  and  that  in  so  surpass- 
ing a  degree,  that  there  is  no  comparison  be- 
twixt them;  because  he  is  every  moment  in 
danger  of  his  life.  To  what  danger  or  distress 
can  a  scholar  be  reduced  equal  to  that  of  a 
soldier,  who,  being  besieged  in  some  strong 
place,  and  at  his  post  or  upon  guard  in  some 
ravelin  or  bastion,  perceives  the  enemy  carry- 
ing on  a  mine  under  him,  and  yet  must  upon 
no  account  remove  from  thence,  or  shun  the 
danger  which  threatens  him  so  near  ?  All  he 
can  do  is,  to  give  notice  to  his  commander, 
that  he  may  countermine,  but  must  himself 
stand  still,  fearing  and  expecting,  when  on  a 


214  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

sudden  he  shall  soar  to  the  clouds  without 
wings,  and  be  again  cast  down  headlong  against 
his  will.  K  this  danger  seem  inconsiderable, 
let  us  see  whether  that  be  not  greater  when 
two  gallies  shock  one  another  with  their  prows 
in  the  midst  of  the  spacious  sea.  When  they 
have  thus  grappled,  and  are  clinging  together, 
the  soldier  is  confined  to  the  narrow  beak,  being 
a  board  not  above  two  feet  wide;  and  yet 
though  he  sees  before  him  so  many  ministers 
of  death  threatening,  as  there  are  pieces  of 
cannon  on  the  other  side  pointing  against  him, 
and  not  half  a  pike's  length  firom  his  body; 
and  being  sensible  that  the  first  slip  of  his 
feet  sends  him  to  the  bottom  of  Neptune's 
dominions;  still,  for  all  this,  inspired  by  honour, 
with  an  undaunted  heart,  he  stands  a  mark  to 
so  much  fire,  and  endeavours  to  make  his  way, 
by  that  narrow  passage,  into  the  enemy's  vessel. 
But  what  is  most  to  be  admired  is,  that  no 
sooner  one  falls,  where  he  shall  never  rise  till 
the  end  of  the  world,  than  another  steps  into 
the  same  place ;  and  if  he  also  drops  into  the 
sea,  which  lies  in  wait  for  him  like  an  enemy, 
another,  and  after  him  another,  still  fills  up  the 
place,  without  suffering  any  interval  of  time  to 
separate  their  deaths ;  a  resolution  and  boldness 
scarce  to  be  paralleled  in  any  other  trials  of  war. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  216 

Blessed  be  those  happy  ages  that  were  strangers 
to  the  dreadfiil  fiiry  of  these  devilish  instru- 
ments of  artillery,  whose  inventor  I  am  satis- 
fied is  now  in  hell,  receiving  the  reward  of  his 
cursed  invention,  which  is  the  cause  that  very 
often  a  cowardly  base  hand  takes  away  the  life 
of  the  bravest  gentleman,  and  that  in  the 
midst  of  that  vigour  and  resolution  which 
animates  and  inflames  the  bold,  a  chance  bullet 
(shot  perhaps  by  one  that  fled,  and  was  frighted 
at  the  very  flash  the  mischievous  piece  gave, 
when  it  went  oflF)  coming,  nobody  knows  how, 
or  from  whence,  in  a  moment  puts  a  period  to 
the  brave  designs,  and  the  life  of  one,  that 
deserved  to  have  survived  many  years.  This 
considered,  I  could  almost  say,  I  am  sorry  at 
my  heart  for  having  taken  upon  me  this  pro- 
fession of  a  knight-errant,  in  so  detestable  an 
age ;  for  though  no  danger  daunts  me,  yet  it 
aflfects  me  to  think,  whether  powder  and  lead 
may  not  deprive  me  of  the  opportunity  of 
becoming  famous,  and  making  myself  known 
throughout  the  world  by  the  strength  of  my 
arm  and  dint  of  my  sword.  But  let  heaven 
order  matters  as  it  pleases ;  for  if  I  compass 
my  designs,  I  shall  be  so  much  the  more 
honoured  by  how  much  the  dangers  I  have 
exposed   myself  to,   are    greater    than    those 


216  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

the    knights-errants    of   former    ages    under- 
went." 

Ail  this  long  preamble  Don  Quixote  made, 
whilst  the  company  supped,  never  minding  to 
eat  a  mouthful,  though  Sancho  Panza  had 
several  times  advised  him  to  mind  his  meat, 
telling  him  there  would  be  time  enough  after- 
wards to  talk  as  he  thought  fit.  Those  who 
heard  him  were  afiresh  moved  with  compassion, 
to  see  a  man,  who  seemed,  in  all  other  respects, 
to  have  a  sound  judgment  and  clear  understand- 
ing, so  absolutely  mad  and  distracted,  when 
any  mention  was  made  of  his  cursed  knight- 
errantry.  The  curate  told  him,  he  was  much 
in  the  right,  in  all  he  had  said  for  the  honour 
of  arms ;  and  that  he,  though  a  scholar,  and  a 
graduate,  was  of  the  same  opinion.  Supper 
being  ended  and  the  cloth  taken  away ;  whilst 
the  innkeeper,  his  wife,  his  daughter,  and 
Maritomes,  fitted  up  Don  Quixote's  loft  for  the 
ladies,  that  they  might  lie  by  themselves  that 
night,  Don  Ferdinand  entreated  the  slave  to 
give  them  an  account  of  his  life ;  conscious  the 
relation  could  not  choose  but  be  very  delightful 
and  surprising,  as  might  be  guessed  by  his 
coming  with  Zoraida.  The  slave  answered, 
he  would  most  willingly  comply  with  their 
desires,  and  that  he  only  feared  the  relation 


DON  QUIXOTE.  217 

would  not  give  them  all  the  satisfaction  he 
could  wish;  but  that  however,  rather  than 
disobey,  he  would  do  it  as  well  as  he  could. 
The  curate  and  all  the  company  thanked  him, 
and  made  fresh  instances  to  the  same  effect. 
Seeing  himself  courted  by  so  many,  "  There  is 
no  need  of  entreaties,"  said  he,  *'  for  what  you 
may  conmiand;  therefore/'  continued  he, 
"  give  me  your  attention,  and  you  shall  hear  a 
true  relation,  perhaps  not  to  be  paralleled  by 
those  fabulous  stories  which  are  composed  with 
much  art  and  study."  This  caused  all  the 
company  to  seat  themselves,  and  observe  a  very 
strict  silence ;  and  then,  with  an  agreeable  and 
sedate  voice,  he  began  in  this  manner. 


nS  THE  ACHIETEMESTS  QP 


CHAPTEB  XIL 

WHERE   THE  CAFTTYE   RELATES   HIS   LIFE   AMD 
ADTEHTLl^ES. 

In  the  motintains  of  Leon  my  &mily  had  its 
first  oii^nal,^  and  was  more  kindly  dealt 
withal  by  nature  than  by  fortune,  though  my 
fiither  might  pass  for  rich  among  the  in- 
habitants of  those  parts,  who  are  bnt  poorly 
provided  for.  To  say  truth,  he  had  been  so, 
had  he  had  as  much  industry  to  preserve,  as  he 
had  inclination  to  dissipate  his  income ;  but  he 
had  been  a  soldier,  and  the  years  of  his  youth 
spent  in  that  employment,  had  left  him  in  his 
old  age  a  propensity  to  spend,  under  the  name 
of  liberality.  War  is  a  school  where  the 
covetous  grow  free,  and  the  free  prodigal  : 
to  see  a  soldier  a  miser,  is  a  kind  of  prodigy 
which  happens  but  seldom.  My  father  was  far 
from  being  one  of  them ;  for  he  passed  the 
bounds  of  liberality,  and  came  very  near  the 
excesses  of  prodigality ;  a  thing  which  cannot 
suit  well  with  a  married  life,  where  the 
children  ought  to  succeed  to  the  estate,  as  well 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XIL,  Book  IV 


DON  QUIXOTE.  219 

as  name  of  the  family.  We  were  three  of  us, 
all  at  man's  estate;  and  my  father,  finding 
that  the  only  way  (as  he  said)  to  curb  his 
squandering  inclination,  was  to  dispossess  him- 
self of  that  which  maintained  it,  his  estate 
(without  which  Alexander  himself  must  have 
been  put  to  it),  he  called  us  one  day  all  three 
to  him  in  his  chamber,  and  spoke  to  us  in 
the  following  manner. 

**  My  sons,  to  persuade  you  that  I  love  you, 
I  need  only  tell  you  I  am  your  father,  and  you 
my  children ;  and  on  the  other  side,  you  have 
reason  to  think  me  unkind,  considering  how 
careless  I  am  in  preserving  what  should  one 
day  be  yours;  but  to  convince  you,  however, 
that  I  have  the  bowels  of  a  parent,  I  have 
taken  a  resolution,  which  I  have  well  weighed 
and  considered  for  many  days.  You  are  all 
now  of  an  age  to  choose  the  kind  of  life  you 
each  of  you  incline  to ;  or,  at  least,  to  enter 
upon  some  employment  that  may  one  day  pro- 
cure you  both  honour  and  profit:  therefore  I 
design  to  divide  all  I  have  into  four  parts,  of 
which  I  will  give  three  among  you,  and  retain 
the  fourth  for  myself,  to  maintain  me  in  my 
old  age,  as  long  as  it  shall  please  heaven  to 
continue  me  in  this  life.  After  that  each  of 
you  shall  have  received  his  part,  I  could  wish 


220  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

you  would  follow  one  of  the  employments  1 
shall  mention  to  you,  every  one  as  he  finds 
himself  inclined.  There  is  a  proverb  in  our 
tongue,  which  I  take  to  contain  a  great  deal  of 
truth,  as  generally  those  sorts  of  sayings  do, 
being  short  sentences  fi-amed  upon  observation 
and  long  experience-  This  proverb  runs  thus, 
Either  the  church,  the  sea,  or  the  court.  As  if 
it  should  plainly  say,  that  whosoever  desires  to 
thrive  must  follow  one  of  these  three ;  either  be 
a  churchman,  or  a  merchant  and  try  his  fortune 
at  sea,  or  enter  into  the  service  of  his  prince  in 
the  court ;  for  another  proverb  says,  that  King's 
chaff  is  better  than  other  men's  corn.  I  say 
this,  because  I  would  have  one  of  you  follow 
his  studies,  another  I  desire  should  be  a  mer- 
chant, and  the  third  should  serve  the  king  in 
his  wars ;  because  it  is  a  thing  of  some  difficulty 
to  get  an  entrance  at  court ;  and  though  war 
does  not  immediately  procure  riches,  yet  it 
seldom  fails  of  giving  honour  and  reputation. 
Within  eight  days'  time  I  will  give  each  of  you 
your  portion,  and  not  wrong  you  of  a  farthing 
of  it,  as  you  shall  see  by  experience.  Now 
therefore  tell  me  if  you  are  resolved  to  follow 
my  advice  about  your  settling  in  the  world." 
And  turning  to  me,  as  the  eldest,  he  bid  me 
answer  first. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  221 

I  told  him,  that  he  ought  not  upon  our 
account  to  divide  or  lessen  his  estate,  or  way  of 
living;  that  we  were  young  men,  and  could 
shift  in  the  world;  and  at  last  I  concluded, 
that  for  my  part  I  would  be  a  soldier,  and  serve 
God  and  the  king  in  that  honourable  profession. 
My  second  brother  made  the  same  regardful 
oflFer,  and  chose  to  go  to  the  Indies ;  resolving 
to  lay  out  in  goods  the  share  that  should  be 
given  him  here.  The  youngest,  and,  I  believe, 
the  wisest  of  us  all,  said  he  would  be  a  church- 
man ;  and  in  order  to  it,  go  to  Salamanca,  and 
there  finish  his  studies.  After  this,  my  father 
embraced  us  all  three,  and  in  a  few  days 
performed  what  he  had  promised;  and,  as  I 
remember,  it  was  three  thousand  ducats  apiece, 
which  he  gave  us  in  money;  for  we  had  an 
uncle  who  bought  all  the  estate,  and  paid  for  it 
in  ready  money,  that  it  might  not  go  out  of  the 
family.  A  little  after,  we  all  took  leave  of  my 
father;  and  at  parting  I  could  not  forbear 
thinking  it  a  kind  of  inhumanity  to  leave  the 
old  gentleman  in  so  strait  a  condition:  I 
prevailed  with  him  therefore  to  accept  of  two 
thousand  of  my  three,  the  remainder  being 
sufficient  to  make  up  a  soldier's  equipage.  My 
example  worked  upon  my  other  brothers,  and 
they  each    of   them    presented    him  with  a 


223  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

thousand  ducats ;  so  that  my  father  remained 
with  four  thousand  ducats  in  ready  money,  and 
three  thousand  more  in  land,  which  he  chose  to 
keep  and  not  sell  out-right.  To  be  short,  we 
took  our  leave  of  my  father  and  the  uncle  I 
have  mentioned,  not  without  much  grief  and 
tears  on  all  sides;  they  particularly  recom- 
mending us  to  let  them  know  by  all  op- 
portunities our  good  or  ill  fortune.  We  pro- 
mised to  do  so,  and  having  received  the  blessing 
of  our  old  father,  one  of  us  went  straight  to 
Salamanca,  the  other  to  Sevil,  and  I  to  Alicant, 
where  I  was  informed  of  a  Genoese  ship,  which 
was  loading  wood  for  Genoa. 

This  year  makes  two  and  twenty  since  I 
first  left  my  father's  house,  and  in  all  that 
time,  though  I  have  writ  several  letters,  I  have 
not  had  the  least  news,  either  of  him,  or  of  my 
brothers.  And  now  I  will  relate,  in  few  words, 
my  own  adventures  in  all  that  course  of  years. 
I  took  shipping  at  Alicant,  arrived  safe  and 
with  a  good  passage  at  Genoa,  from  thence  I 
went  to  Milan,  where  I  bought  my  equipage, 
resolving  to  go  and  enter  myself  in  the  army 
of  Piedmont ;  but  being  come  as  far  as  Alex- 
andria de  la  Faille,  I  was  informed  that  the 
great  Duke  of  Alva  was  passing  into  Flanders^ 

'See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  XIL,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  223 

with  an  army ;  this  made  me  alter  my  first 
resolution.  I  followed  him,  and  was  present  at 
all  his  engagements,  as  well  as  at  the  deaths  of 
the  Counts  Egmont  and  Home ;  and  at  last  I 
had  a  pair  of  colours  under  a  famous  captain 
of  Guadalajara,  whose  name  was  Diego  de 
Urbina.^  Some  time  after  my  arrival  in  Flan- 
ders, there  came  news  of  the  league  concluded 
by  Pope  Pius  V.  of  happy  memory,  in  junction 
with  Spain,  against  the  common  enemy  the 
Turk,  who  at  that  time  had  taken  the  island  of 
Cyprus  from  the  Venetians;  which  was  an 
unfortunate  and  lamentable  loss  to  Christendom. 
It  was  also  certain,  that  the  general  of  this 
holy  league  was  the  most  serene  Don  Juan  of 
Austria,^  natural  brother  to  our  good  King  Don 
Philip.  The  great  fame  of  the  preparations  for 
this  war  excited  in  me  a  vehement  desire  of 
being  present  at  the  engagement,  which  was 
expected  to  follow  these  preparations;  and 
although  I  had  certain  assurance,  and,  as  it 
were,  an  earnest  of  my  being  advanced  to  be  a 
captain  upon  the  first  vacancy :  yet  I  resolved 
to  leave  all  those  expectations,  and  return,  as  I 
did,  to  Italy.  My  good  fortune  was  such,  that 
I  arrived  just  about  the  same  time  that  Don 

*8ee  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chapter  XII.,  Book  IV. 
«76w^Note4. 


224  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

Juan  of  Austria  landed  at  Genoa,  in  order  to 
go  to  Naples,  and  join  the  Venetian  fleet,  as  he 
did  at  Messina.  In  short,  I  was  at  that  great 
action  of  the  battle  of  Lepanto,  being  a  captain 
of  foot,  to  which  post  my  good  fortune,  more 
than  my  desert,  had  now  advanced  me ;  and 
that  day,  which  was  so  happy  to  all  Christen- 
dom, because  the  world  was  then  disabused  of 
the  error  they  had  entertained,  that  the  Turk 
was  invincible  by  sea,  that  day,  I  say,  in  which 
the  pride  of  the  Ottomans  was  first  broke,  and 
which  was  so  happy  to  all  Christians,  even  to 
those  who  died  in  the  fight,  who  were  more  so 
than  those  who  remained  alive  and  conquerors, 
I  alone  was  the  unhappy  man ;  since,  instead 
of  a  naval  crown,  which  I  might  have  hoped 
for  in  the  time  of  the  Romans,  I  found  my- 
self that  very  night  a  slave,  with  irons  on  my 
feet,  and  manacles  on  my  hands.  The  thing 
happened  thus:  Vehali,  King  of  Algiers,^  a 
brave  and  bold  pirate,  having  boarded  and 
taken  the  Capitana  galley  of  Malta,  in  which 
only  three  knights  were  left  alive,  and  those 
desperately  wounded,  the  galley  of  Joan 
Andrea  Doria  bore  up  to  succour  them ;  in  this 
galley  I  was  embarked  with  my  company,  and 
doing  my  duty  on  this  occasion,  I  leaped  into 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  6,  Chapter  XII.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  225 

the  enemy^s  galley,  which  getting  loose  from 
ours,  that  intended  to  board  the  Algerine,  my 
soldiers  were  hindered  from  following  me,  and 
I  remained  alone  among  a  great  number  of 
enemies ;  whom  not  being  able  to  resist,  I  was 
taken  after  having  received  several  wounds; 
and  as  you  have  heard  already,  Vehali  having 
escaped  with  all  his  squadron,  I  found  myself 
his  prisoner;  and  was  the  only  afflicted  man 
among  so  many  joyful  ones,  and  the  only 
captive  among  so  many  free ;  for  on  that  day 
above  16,000  Christians,  who  rowed  in  the 
Turkish  galleys,  obtained  their  long-wished-for 
liberty.  I  was  carried  to  Constantinople,  where 
the  Grand  Seignor  Selim  made  Vehali,  my 
master,  general  of  the  sea,  he  having  behaved 
himself  very  well  in  the  battle,  and  brought 
away  with  him  the  great  flag  of  the  order  of 
Malta,  as  a  proof  of  his  valour. 

The  second  year  of  my  captivity,  I  was  a 
slave  in  the  Capitana  galley  at  Navarino  ;  and 
I  took  notice  of  the  Christians'  fault,  in  letting 
slip  the  opportunity  they  had  of  taking  the 
whole  Turkish  fleet ^  in  that  port;  and  all  the 
Janisaries  and  Algerine  pirates  did  so  expect 
to  be  attacked,  that  they  had  made  all  in 
readiness  to  escape  on  shore  without  fighting ; 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  6,  Chapter  XII.,  Book  IV. 
II.  P 


226  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

SO  great  was  the  terror  they  had  of  our  fleet : 
but  it  pleased  God  to  order  it  otherwise,  not  by 
any  fault  of  the  Christian  general,  but  for  the 
sins  of  Christendom,  and  because  it  is  his  will 
we  should  always  have  some  enemies  to  chastise 
us.  Vehali  made  his  way  to  Modon,  which  is 
an  island  not  &r  from  Navarino,  and  there 
landing  his  men,  fortified  the  entrance  of  the 
harbour,  remaining  in  safety  there  till  Don 
Juan  was  forced  to  return  home  with  his  fleet. 
In  this  expedition,  the  galley  called  La  Fresa, 
of  which  Barbarossa's  own  son  was  captain,  was 
taken  by  the  admiral  galley  of  Naples,  called 
the  Wolf,  which  was  commanded  by  that 
thunder-bolt  of  war,  that  father  of  the  soldiers, 
that  happy  and  never-conquered  captain,  Don 
Alvaro  de  Bacan,  Marquis  of  Santa  Cruz;^ 
and  I  cannot  omit  the  manner  of  taking  this 
galley.  The  son  of  Barbarossa^  was  very  cruel, 
and  used  his  slaves  with  great  inhumanity; 
they  perceiving  that  the  Wolf-galley  got  of 
them  in  the  chase,  all  of  a  sudden  laid  by  their 
oars,  and  seizing  on  their  commander,  as  he  was 
walking  between  them  on  the  deck,  and  calling 
to  them  to  row  hard ;  they  passed  him  on  from 
hand  to  hand  to  one  another,  fi-om  one  end  of 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  7,  Chapter  XII.,  Book  IV. 
•  See  Appendix,  Note  8,  Chapter  XII.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  227 

the  galley  to  the  other,  and  gave  him  such 
blows  in  the  handling  him,  that  before  he  got 
back  to  the  mainmast,  his  soul  had  left  his 
body,  and  was  fled  to  hell.  This,  as  I  said, 
was  the  eflect  of  his  cruelty,  and  their  hatred. 

After  this  we  returned  to  Constantinople; 
and  the  next  year,  which  was  1673,  news  came 
that  Don  Juan  of  Austria  had  taken  Tunis  and 
its  kingdom  from  the  Turks,  and  given  the 
possession  of  it  to  Muley  Hamid,^  having  there- 
by defeated  all  the  hopes  of  reigning  of  Muley 
Hamid,  one  of  the  cruellest,  and  withal  one  of 
the  bravest  Moors  in  the  world.  The  Grand 
Seignor  was  troubled  at  this  loss,  and,  using 
his  wonted  artifices  with  the  Christians,  he 
struck  up  a  piece  with  the  Venetians,  who 
were  much  more  desirous  than  he  of  it. 

The  year  after,  which  was  1674,  he  attacked 
the  Goletta,  and  the  fort  which  Don  Juan  had 
begun,^  but  not  above  half  finished,  before 
Tunis.  All  this  while  I  was  a  galley  slave, 
without  any  hopes  of  liberty ;  at  least,  I  could 
not  promise  myself  to  obtain  it  by  way  of  ran- 
som; for  I  was  resolved  not  to  write  my 
father  the  news  of  my  misfortune.    La  Goletta* 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  9,  Chapter  XIL,  Book  IV. 
*  See  Appendix,  Note  10,  Chapter  XIL,  Book  FV. 
*  The  Qoletta  is  a  fortreas  in  the  Mediterranean,  between  that  sea 
and  the  lake  of  Tonia.    In  1636  Charles  V.  took  it  by  storm. 


228  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

and  the  fort  were  both  taken,  after  some  resist- 
ance ;  the  Turkish  army,  consisting  of  75,000 
Turks  in  pay,  and  above  400,000  Moors  and 
Arabs  out  of  all  Africa  near  the  sea ;  with  such 
provisions  of  war  of  all  kinds,  and  so  many 
pioneers,  that  they  might  have  covered  the 
Goletta  and  the  fort  with  earth  by  handfuls. 
The  Goletta  was  first  taken,  though  always 
before  reputed  impregnable;  and  it  was  not 
lost  by  any  fault  of  its  defenders,  who  did  all 
that  could  be  expected  from  them;  but  because 
it  was  found  by  experience,  that  it  was  practi- 
cable to  make  trenches  in  that  sandy  soil, 
which  was  thought  to  have  water  under  it 
within  two  feet;  but  the  Turks  sunk  above 
two  yards  and  found  none ;  by  which  means, 
filling  sacks  with  sand,  and  laying  them  on  one 
another,  they  raised  them  so  high,  that  they 
over-topt  and  commanded  the  fort,  in  which 
none  could  be  safe,  nor  show  themselves  upon 
the  walls.  It  has  been  the  opinion  of  most 
men,  that  we  did  ill  to  shut  ourselves  up  in  the 
Goletta;  and  that  we  ought  to  have  been  drawn 
out  to  hinder  their  landing ;  but  they  who  say 
so,  talk  without  experience,  and  at  random,  of 
such  things ;  for  if  in  all  there  were  not  above 
7000  men  in  the  Goletta  and  the  fort,  how 
could  so  small  a  number,  though   never  so 


DON  QUIXOTE.  229 

brave,  take  the  open  field  against  such  forces 
as  those  of  the  enemies  ?  And  how  is  it  pos- 
sible that  a  place  can  avoid  being  taken,  which 
can  have  no  relief,  particularly  being  besieged 
by  such  numbers,  and  those  in  their  own 
country  ?  But  it  seemed  to  many  others,  and 
that  is  also  my  opinion,  that  God  Almighty 
favoured  Spain  most  particularly,  in  suflFering 
that  sink  of  iniquity  and  misery,  as  well  as 
that  sponge  and  perpetual  drain  of  treasure,  to 
be  destroyed.  For  infinite  sums  of  money 
were  spent  there  to  no  purpose,  without  any 
other  design  than  to  preserve  the  memory  of 
one  of  the  Emperor's  (Charles  the  Fifth's)  con- 
quests ;  as  if  it  had  been  necessary  to  support 
the  eternity  of  his  glory,  which  will  be  per- 
manent, that  those  stones  should  remain  in 
being.  The  fort  was  likewise  lost,  but  the 
Turks  got  it  foot  by  foot ;  for  the  soldiers  who 
defended  it,  sustained  two-and-twenty  assaults, 
and  in  them  killed  above  26,000  of  those  bar- 
barians ;  and  when  it  was  taken,  of  300  which 
were  left  alive,  there  was  not  one  man  un- 
wounded ;  a  certain  sign  of  the  bravery  of  the 
garrison,  and  of  their  skill  in  defending  places. 
There  was  likewise  taken,  by  composition,  a 
small  fort  in  the  midst  of  a  lake,  which  was 
under  the  command  of  Don  John  Zanoguerra, 


230  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

a  gentleman  of  Valencia,  and  a  soldier  of  great 
renown.  Don  Pedro  Puerto  Carrero,  General 
of  the  Goletta,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  was  so 
afflicted  at  the  loss  of  the  place,  that  he  died 
of  grief  by  the  way,  before  he  got  to  Constan- 
tinople, whither  they  were  carrying  him. 
They  took  also  prisoner  the  commander  of  the 
fort,  whose  name  was  Gabriel  Cerbellon,  a 
Milanese,  a  great  engineer,  as  well  as  a  valiant 
soldier.  Several  persons  of  quality  were  killed 
in  those  two  fortresses,  and  amongst  the  rest 
was  Pagan  Doria,  the  brother  of  the  famous 
John  Andrea  Doria,  a  generous  and  noble- 
hearted  gentleman,  as  well  appeared  by  his 
liberality  to  that  brother;  and  that  which 
made  his  death  more  worthy  of  compassion, 
was,  that  he  received  it  from  some  Arabs,  to 
whom  he  had  committed  his  safety  after  the 
loss  of  the  fort,  they  having  promised  to  carry 
him  disguised  in  a  Moor's  habit  to  Tarbaca, 
which  is  a  small  fort  held  on  that  coast  by  the 
Q^noeses,  for  the  diving  for  coral;  but  they 
cut  off  his  head,  and  brought  it  to  the  Turkish 
General,  who  made  good  to  them  our  Spanish 
proverb,  that  the  treason  pleases,  but  the 
traitors  are  odious ;  for  he  ordered  them  to  be 
hanged  up  immediately,  for  not  having  brought 
him  alive. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  231 

Amongst  the  Christians  which  were  taken 
in  the  fort,  there  was  one  Don  Pedro  de 
Aguilar,^  of  some  place  in  Andalusia,  and  who 
was  an  ensign  in  the  place ;  a  very  brave,  and 
a  very  ingenious  man,  and  one  who  had  a  rare 
talent  in  poetry.  1  mention  him,  because  it 
was  his  fortune  to  be  a  slave  in  the  same 
galley  with  me,  and  chained  to  the  same  bench. 
Before  he  left  the  port  he  made  two  sonnets, 
by  way  of  epitaph  for  the  Goletta,  and  the  fort, 
which  I  must  beg  leave  to  repeat  here,  having 
learned  them  by  heart,  and  I  believe  they  will 
rather  divert  than  tire  the  company. — ^When 
the  captive  named  Don  Pedro  de  Aguilar,  Don 
Ferdinand  looked  upon  his  companions,  and 
they  all  smiled;  and  when  he  talked  of  the 
sonnets,  one  of  them  said,  "Before  you  go  on 
to  repeat  the  sonnets,  I  desire,  sir,  you  would 
tell  me  what  became  of  that  Don  Pedro  de 
Aguilar,  whom  you  have  mentioned.** — "All 
that  I  know  of  him,'*  answered  the  slave,  "  is, 
that  after  having  been  two  years  in  Constan- 
tinople, he  made  his  escape  disguised  like  an 
Arnaut,  *  and  in  company  of  a  Greek  spy ;  but 
I  cannot  tell  whether  he  obtained  his  liberty 
or  no,  though  I  believe  he  did,  because  about 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  11,  Ch&pter  XIL,  Book  FV. 
*  A  trooper  of  Epirus,  Dalmatia,  or  some  of  the  adjacent  countries. 


232  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

a  year  after  I  saw  the  same  Greek  in  Constan- 
tinople, but  had  not  an  opportunity  to  ask  him 
about  the  success  of  his  journey." — **  Then  I 
can  tell  you,"  replied  the  gentleman,  "that 
the  Don  Pedro  you  speak  of  is  my  brother,  and 
is  at  present  at  home,  married,  rich,  and  has 
three  children." — "  God  be  thanked,"  said  the 
slave,  "for  the  favours  he  has  bestowed  on 
him ;  for  in  my  mind  there  is  no  felicity  equal 
to  that  of  recovering  one's  lost  liberty."— "And 
moreover,"  added  the  same  gentleman,  "  I  can 
say  the  sonnets  you  mentioned,  which  my 
brother  made." — "Pray  say  them  then,"  re- 
plied the  slave,  "for  I  question  not  but  you 
can  repeat  them  better  than  L" — "With  all 
my  heart,"  answered  the  gentleman.  "That 
upon  the  Goletta  was  thus." 


DON  QUIXOTE.  233 


CHAPTER  Xm. 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  CAPTIVE  CONTINUED. 

A  SONNET. 

"  Blest  souls,  discharged  of  life's  oppressive  weight, 
Whose  virtue  proved  your  passport  to  the  skies ; 

Tou  there  procured  a  more  propitious  fate, 
When  for  your  faith  you  bravely  fell  to  rise. 

"  When  pious  rage,  difiused  through  every  vein, 
On  this  ungrateful  shore  inflamed  your  blood ; 

Each  drop  you  lost,  was  bought  with  crowds  of  slain. 
Whose  vital  purple  swell'd  the  neighboring  flood. 

"  Though  crushed  by  ruins,  and  by  odds,  you  claim 

That  perfect  glory,  that  immortal  fame, 
Which,  like  true  heroes,  nobly  you  pursued ; 

On  these  you  seized,  even  when  of  life  deprived. 
For  still  your  courage  even  your  lives  survived  j 

And  sure  'tis  conquest  thus  to  be  subdued." 

"  I  know  it  is  just  as  you  repeat  it,"  said  the 
captive. — "  Well  then,"  said  the  gentleman,  I 
will  give  you  now  that  which  was  made  upon 
the  fort,  if  I  can  remember  it. 

A  SONNET. 

"  Amidst  these  barren  fields,  and  ruin'd  tow'rs, 

The  bed  of  honour  of  the  fallen  brave. 
Three  thousand  champions  of  the  Christian  powers 

Found  a  new  life,  and  triumph  in  the  grave. 


234  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

"  Long  did  their  arms  their  haughty  foes  repel, 

Yet  stiew'd  the  fields  with  slaughtered  heaps  in  vain 

Overcome  by  toils,  the  pious  heroes  fell, 
Or  but  survived  more  nobly  to  be  slain. 

"  This  dismal  soil,  so  famed  in  ills  of  old, 
In  eveiy  age  was  fatal  to  the  bold, 

The  seat  of  horror,  and  the  warrior's  tomb  ! 
Yet  hence  to  heaven  more  worth  was  ne'er  resigned 
Than  these  display'd ;  nor  has  the  earth  combined, 

Resumed  more  noble  bodies  in  her  womb." 

The  sonnets  were  applauded,  and  the  captive 
was  pleased  to  hear  such  good  news  of  his 
friend  and  companion.  After  that  he  pursued 
his  relation  in  these  tenns. 

The  Turks  ordered  the  dismantling  of  the 
Goletta,  the  fort  being  razed  to  their  hand  by  the 
siege ;  and  yet  the  mines  they  made  could  not 
blow  up  the  old  walls,  which,  nevertheless,  were 
always  thought  the  weakest  part  of  the  place ; 
but  the  new  fortification,  made  by  the  engineer 
Fratin,  came  easily  down.  In  fine,  the  Turkish 
fleet  returned  in  triumph  to  Constantinople, 
where,  not  long  after,  my  master  Vehali  died, 
whom  the  Turks  used  to  call  Vehali  Fartax, 
which,  in  Turkish,  signifies  the  scabby  rene- 
gade, as  indeed  he  was ;  and  the  Turks  give 
names  among  themselves,  either  from  some 
virtue,  or  some  defect  that  is  in  them;  and 
this  happens  because  there  are  but  four  families 
descended  from  the  Ottoman  family:  all  the 
rest,  as  I  have  said,  take  their  names  from  some 


DON  QUIXOTE.  235 

defect  of  the  body,  or  some  good  quality  of  the 
mind.  This  scabby  slave  was  at  the  oar  in  one 
of  the  Grand  Seignor's  galleys  for  fourteen 
years,  till  he  was  four  and  thirty  years  old ;  at 
which  time  he  turned  renegade,  to  be  revenged 
of  a  Turk,  who  gave  him  a  box  on  the  ear, 
as  he  was  chained  to  the  oar,  forsaking 
his  religion  for  revenge ;  after  which  he 
showed  so  much  valour  and  conduct,  that  he 
came  to  be  King  of  Algiers,  and  Admiral  of 
the  Turkish  Fleet,  which  is  the  third  command 
in  the  whole  empire.  He  was  a  Calabrian  by 
birth,  and  of  a  mild  disposition  towards  his 
slaves,  as  also  of  good  morals  to  the  rest  of  the 
world.  He  had  above  three  thousand  slaves  of 
his  own,  all  which  after  his  death  were  divided, 
as  he  had  ordered  by  his  will,  between  the 
Grand  Seignor,  his  sons  and  his  renegades. 

I  fell  to  the  share  of  a  Venetian  renegade, 
who  was  a  cabin-boy  in  a  Venetian  ship  which 
was  taken  by  Vehali,  who  loved  him  so,  that 
he  was  one  of  his  favourite  boys ;  and  he  eame 
at  last  to  prove  one  of  the  cruellest  renegades 
that  ever  was  known.  His  name  was  Azanaga,^ 
and  he  obtained  such  riches,  as  to  rise  by  them 
to  be  King  of  Algiers;  and  with  him  I  left 
Constantinople,  with  some  satisfaction  to  think, 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  S,  CSiapter  XIII.,  Book  IV 


236  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

at  least,  that  I  was  in  a  place  so  near  Spain 
not  because  I  could  give  advice  to  any  friend 
of  my  misfortunes,  but  because  I  hoped  to  try 
whether  I  should  succeed  better  in  Algiers 
than  I  had  done  in  Constantinople,  where  I 
had  tried  a  thousand  ways  of  running  away, 
but  could  never  execute  any  of  them,  which  I 
hoped  I  should  compass  better  in  Algiers,  for 
hopes  never  forsook  me  upon  all  the  disappoint- 
ments I  met  with  in  the  design  of  recovering 
my  liberty.  By  this  means  I  kept  myself  alive, 
shut  up  in  a  prison  or  house,  which  the  Turks 
call  a  bagnio,  where  they  keep  their  Christian 
slaves,^  as  well  those  of  the  king,  as  those  who 
belong  to  private  persons,  and  also  those  who 
are  called  El  Almacen,  that  is,  who  belong  to 
the  public,  and  are  employed  by  the  city  in 
works  that  belong  to  it  These  latter  do  very 
difficultly  obtain  their  liberty;  for  having  no 
particular  master,  but  belonging  to  the  public, 
they  can  find  nobody  to  treat  with  about  their 
ransom,  though  they  have  money  to  pay  it. 
The  king's  slaves,  which  are  ransomable,  are 
not  obliged  to  go  out  to  work  as  the  others  do, 
except  their  ransom  stays  too  long  before  it 
comes ;  for  then  to  hasten  it,  they  make  them 
work,  and  fetch  wood  with  the  rest,  which  is 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XIIL,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  237 

no  small  labour.  I  was  one  of  those  who  were 
to  be  ransomed;  for  when  they  knew  I  had 
been  a  captain,  though  I  told  them  the  im- 
possibility I  was  in  of  being  redeemed,  because 
of  my  poverty,  yet  they  put  me  among  the 
gentlemen  that  were  to  be  ransomed,  and  to 
that  end  they  put  me  on  a  slight  chain,  rather 
as  a  mark  of  distinction,  than  to  restrain  me  by 
it ;  and  so  I  passed  my  life  in  that  bagnio,  with 
several  other  gentlemen  of  quality,  who  ex- 
pected their  ransom ;  and,  though  hunger  and 
nakedness  might,  as  it  did  often,  afflict  us,  yet 
nothing  gave  us  such  affliction,  as  to  hear  and 
see  the  excessive  cruelties  with  which  our 
master  used  the  other  Christian  slaves;  he 
would  hang  one  one  day,  then  impale  another, 
cut  oflf  the  ears  of  a  third;  and  this  upon 
such  slight  occasions,  that  often  the  Turks 
would  own,  that  he  did  it  only  for  the  pleasure 
of  doing  it,  and  because  he  was  naturally  an 
enemy  to  mankind.  Only  one  Spanish  soldier 
knew  how  to  deal  with  him,  his  name  was 
Saavedra;^  who  though  he  had  done  many 
things  which  will  not  easily  be  forgotten  by 
the  Turks,  yet  all  to  gain  his  liberty,  his 
master  never  gave  him  a  blow,  nor  used  him 
ill  either  in  word  or  deed;  and  yet  we  were 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chapter  XIII.,  Book  IV. 


238  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

always  afraid  that  the  least  of  his  pranks  would 
make  him  be  impaled ;  nay,  he  himself  some- 
times was  afraid  of  it  too :  and  if  it  were  not 
for  taking  up  too  much  of  your  time,  I  could 
tell  such  passages  of  him,  as  would  divert  the 
company  much  better  than  the  relation  of  my 
adventures,  and  cause  more  wonder  in  them. — 
But  to  go  on ;  I  say  that  the  windows  of  a 
very  rich  Moor's  house  looked  upon  the  court 
of  our  prison ;  which  indeed,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  country,  were  rather  peeping- 
holes  than  windows,  and  yet  they  had  also 
lattices  or  jealousies  on  the  inside. 

It  happened  one  day,  that  being  upon  a 
kind  of  terrace  of  our  prison,  with  only  three 
of  my  comrades,  diverting  ourselves  as  well  as 
we  could,  by  trying  who  could  leap  farthest  in 
his  chains,  all  the  other  Christians  being  gone 
out  to  work,  I  chanced  to  look  up  to  those 
windows,  and  saw  that  out  of  one  of  them 
there  appeared  a  long  cane,  and  to  it  was  a  bit 
of  linen  tied ;  and  the  cane  was  moved  up  and 
down,  as  if  it  had  expected  that  some  of  us 
should  lay  hold  of  it.  We  all  took  notice  of 
it,  and  one  of  us  went  and  stood  just  under  it, 
to  see  if  they  would  let  it  fall ;  but  just  as  he 
came  to  it,  the  cane  was  drawn  up,  and  shaked 
to  and  fro  sideways,  as  if  they  had  made  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  239 

same  sign  as  people  do  with  their  head  when 
they  deny.  He  retired  upon  that,  and  the 
same  motion  was  made  with  it  as  before. 
Another  of  my  comrades  advanced,  and  had 
the  same  success  as  the  former ;  the  third  man 
was  used  just  as  the  rest ;  which  I  seeing,  re- 
solved to  try  my  fortune  too ;  and  as  I  came 
under  the  cane,  it  fell  at  my  feet :  immediately 
I  untied  the  linen,  within  which  was  a  knot, 
which  being  opened,  showed  us  about  ten 
zianins,  which  is  a  sort  of  gold  of  base  alloy, 
used  by  the  Moors,  each  of  which  is  worth 
about  two  crowns  of  our  money.  It  is  not  to 
be  much  questioned,  whether  the  discovery  was 
not  as  pleasant  as  surprising ;  we  were  in  ad- 
miration, and  I  more  particularly,  not  being 
able  to  guess  whence  this  good  fortune  came  to 
us,  especially  to  me;  for  it  was  plain  I  was 
more  meant  than  any  of  my  comrades,  since 
the  cane  was  let  go  to  me  when  it  was  refused 
to  them.  I  took  my  money,  broke  the  cane, 
and  going  upon  the  terrace  saw  a  very  fine 
white  hand  that  opened  and  shut  the  window 
with  haste.  By  this  we  imagined  that  some 
woman  who  lived  in  that  house  had  done  us 
this  favour;  and  to  return  our  thanks,  we 
bowed  ourselves  after  the  Moorish  fashion, 
with  our  arms  across  our  breasts.    A  little  after 


240  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

there  appeared  out  of  the  same  window  a  little 
cross  made  of  cane,  which  immediately  was 
pulled  in  again.  This  confirmed  us  in  our 
opinion,  that  some  Christian  woman  was  a 
slave  in  that  house,  and  that  it  was  she  that 
took  pity  on  us;  but  the  whiteness  of  the 
hand,  and  the  richness  of  the  bracelets  upon 
the  arm,  which  we  had  a  glimpse  of,  seemed 
to  destroy  that  thought  again;  and  then  we 
believed  it  was  some  Christian  woman  turned 
Mahometan,  whom  their  masters  often  marry, 
and  think  themselves  very  happy;  for  our 
women  are  more  valued  by  them  than  the 
women  of  their  own  country.  But  in  all  this 
guessing  we  were  far  enough  from  finding  out 
the  truth  of  the  case ;  however,  we  resolved  to 
be  very  diligent  in  observing  the  window, 
which  was  our  north-star.  There  passed  above 
fifteen  days  before  we  saw  either  the  hand  or 
cane,  or  any  other  sign  whatsoever ;  though  in 
all  that  time  we  endeavoured  to  find  out  who 
lived  in  that  house,  and  if  there  were  in  it  any 
Christian  woman  who  was  a  renegade ;  yet  all 
we  could  discover  amounted  to  only  this,  that 
the  house  belonged  to  one  of  the  chief  Moors, 
a  very  rich  man,  called  Agimorato,  who  had 
been  Alcayde  of  the  Fata,  which  is  an  office 
much  valued  among  them.    But  when  we  least 


DON  QUIXOTE.  241 

expected  our  golden  shower  would  continue, 
out  of  that  window  we  saw  on  a  sudden  the 
cane  appear  again,  with  another  piece  of  linen, 
and  a  bigger  knot ;  and  this  was  just  at  a  time 
when  the  bagnio  was  without  any  other  of  the 
slaves  in  it.  We  all  tried  our  fortunes  as  the 
first  time,  and  it  succeeded  accordingly,  for  the 
cane  was  let  go  to  none  but  me.  I  untied  the 
knot,  and  found  in  it  forty  crowns  of  Spanish 
gold,  with  a  paper  written  in  Arabic,  and  at 
the  top  of  the  paper  was  a  great  cross.  T 
kissed  the  cross,  took  the  crowns,  and  returning 
to  the  terrace,  we  all  made  our  Moorish  rever- 
ences ;  the  hand  appeared  again,  and  I  having 
made  signs  that  I  would  read  the  paper,  the 
window  was  shut.  We  remained  all  overjoyed 
and  astonished  at  what  had  happened,  and 
were  extreme  desirous  to  know  the  contents  of 
the  paper ;  but  none  of  us  understood  Arabic, 
and  it  was  yet  more  difficult  to  find  out  a 
proper  interpreter.  At  last  I  resolved  to  trust 
a  renegade  of  Murcia,  who  had  shown  me  great 
proofs  of  his  kindness.  We  gave  one  another 
mutual  assurances,  and  on  his  side  he  was 
obliged  to  keep  secret  all  that  I  should  reveal 
to  him ;  for  the  renegades,  who  have  thoughts 
of  returning  to  their  own  country,  use  to  get 
certificates  firom  such  persons  of  quality  as  are 
u.  Q 


242  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

slaves  in  Barbary,  in  which  they  make  a  sort 
of  an  affidavit,  that  such  a  one,  a  renegade,  is 
an  honest  man,  and  has  always  been  kind  to 
the  Christians,  and  has  a  mind  to  make  his 
escape  on  the  first  occasion.  Some  there  are 
who  procure  these  certificates  with  an  honest 
design,  and  remain  among  Christians  as  long 
as  they  live ;  but  others  get  them  on  purpose 
to  make  use  of  them  when  they  go  a  pirating 
on  the  Christian  shores ;  for  then  if  they  are 
shipwrecked  or  taken,  they  show  these  certifi- 
cates, and  say,  that  thereby  may  be  seen  the 
intention  with  which  they  came  in  the  Turks' 
company;  to  wit,  to  get  an  opportunity  of 
returning  to  Christendom.  By  this  means 
they  escape  the  first  fury  of  the  Christians,  and 
are  seemingly  reconciled  to  the  church  without 
being  hurt;  afterwards  they  take  their  time, 
and  return  to  Barbary  to  be  what  they  were 
before. 

One  of  these  renegades  was  my  firiend,  and 
he  had  certificates  firom  us  all,  by  which  we 
gave  him  much  commendation:  but  if  the 
Moors  had  catched  him  with  those  papers 
about  him,  they  would  have  burnt  him  alive. 
I  knew  that  not  only  he  understood  the  Arabic 
tongue,  but  also  that  he  could  both  speak  and 
write  it  currently.     But  yet  before  I  resolved 


DON  QUIXOTE.  243 

to  trust  him  entirely,  I  bid  him  read  me  that 
paper,  which  I  had  found  by  chance.  He 
opened  it,  and  was  a  good  while  looking  upon 
it,  and  construing  it  to  himself.  I  asked  him 
if  he  understood  it;  he  said,  Yes,  very  well; 
and  that,  if  I  would  give  him  pen,  ink,  and 
paper,  he  would  translate  it  word  for  word. 
We  furnished  him  with  what  he  desired, 
and  he  went  to  work.  Having  finished 
his  translation,  he  said,  "  All  that  I  have 
here  put  into  Spanish  is  word  for  word 
what  is  in  the  Arabic;  only  observe,  that 
wherever  the  paper  says  Lela  Marierij  it  means 
our  Lady  the  Virgin  Mary.*'  The  contents 
were  thus : 

"  When  I  was  a  child,  my  father  had  a  slave, 
who  taught  me  in  my  tongue  the  Christian 
worship,  and  told  me  a  great  many  things  of 
Lela  Marien.^  The  Christian  slave  died,  and 
I  am  sure  she  went  not  to  the  fire,  but  is  with 
Alia,  for  I  have  seen  her  twice  since ;  and  she 
bid  me  go  to  the  land  of  the  Christians  to  see 
Lela  Marien,  who  had  a  great  kindness  for  me. 
I  do  not  know  what  is  the  matter ;  but  though 
I  have  seen  many  Christians  out  of  this  win- 
dow, none  has  appeared  to  me  so  much  a 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  4,  Chapter  XIIL,  Book  IV. 


244  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

gentleman  as  thyself.  I  am  very  handsome 
and  young,  and  can  carry  with  me  a  great  deal 
of  money,  and  other  riches.  Consider  whether 
thou  canst  bring  it  to  pass  that  we  may  escape 
together,  and  then  thou  shalt  be  my  husband 
in  thy  own  country,  if  thou  art  willing ;  but  if 
thou  art  not,  it  is  all  one,  Lela  Marien  will 
provide  me  a  husband.  I  wrote  this  my- 
self; have  a  care  to  whom  thou  givest  it  to 
read ;  do  not  trust  any  Moor,  because  they  are 
all  treacherous ;  and  in  this  I  am  much  per- 
plexed, and  could  wish  there  were  not  a 
necessity  of  trusting  any  one;  because  if  my 
fskther  should  come  to  know  it,  he  would  cer- 
tainly throw  me  into  a  well,  and  cover  me  over 
with  stones.  I  will  tie  a  thread  to  a  cane,  and 
with  that  thou  mayest  fasten  thy  answer ;  and 
if  thou  canst  not  find  any  one  to  write  in 
Arabick,  make  me  understand  thy  meaning  by 
signs,  for  Lela  Marien  will  help  me  to  guess  it. 
She  and  AUa  keep  thee,  as  well  as  this  cross, 
which  I  often  kiss,  as  the  Christian  slave  bid 
me  do." 

You  may  imagine,  gentlemen,  that  we  were 
in  admiration  at  the  contents  of  this  paper,  and 
withal  overjoyed  at  them,  which  we  expressed 
so  openly,  that  the  renegade  came  to  under- 


DON  QUIXOTE.  245 

stand  that  the  paper  was  not  found  by  chance, 
but  that  it  was  really  writ  by  some  one  among 
us;  and  accordingly  he  told  us  his  suspicion, 
and  desired  us  to  trust  him  entirely,  and  that 
he  would  venture  his  life  with  us  to  procure  us 
our  liberty.  Having  said  this,  he  pulled  a 
brass  crucifix  out  of  his  bosom,  and,  with  many 
tears,  swore  by  the  God  which  it  represented, 
and  in  whom  he,  though  a  wicked  sinner,  did 
firmly  believe,  to  be  true  and  faithfiil  to  us 
with  all  secrecy  in  what  we  should  impart  to 
him ;  for  he  guessed,  that  by  the  means  of  the 
woman  who  had  writ  that  letter,  we  might  all 
of  us  recover  our  lost  liberty ;  and  he,  in  par- 
ticular, might  obtain  what  he  had  so  long 
wished  for,  to  be  received  again  into  the 
bosom  of  his  mother  the  church,  firom  whom, 
for  his  sins,  he  had  been  cut  off  as  a  rotten 
member.  The  renegade  pronounced  all  this 
with  so  many  tears,  and  such  signs  of  repent- 
ance, that  we  were  all  of  opinion  to  trust  him, 
and  tell  him  the  whole  truth  of  the  business. 
We  showed  him  the  little  window  out  of  which 
the  cane  used  to  appear,  and  he  from  thence 
took  good  notice  of  the  house,  in  order  to  in- 
form himself  who  lived  in  it.  We  next  agreed 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  answer  the 
Moorish   lady's   note.      So,    immediately   the 


246  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

renegade  writ  down  what  I  dictated  to  him, 
which  was  exactly  as  I  shall  relate ;  for  I  have 
not  forgot  the  least  material  circumstance  of 
this  adventure,  nor  can  I  forget  them  as  long 
as  I  live.     The  words  then  were  these : — 

"The  true  Alia  keep  thee,  my  dear  lady, 
and  that  blessed  Virgin,  which  is  the  true 
mother  of  God,  and  has  inspired  thee  with  the 
design  of  going  to  the  land  of  the  Christians. 
Do  thou  pray  her  that  she  would  be  pleased  to 
make  thee  understand  how  thou  shalt  execute 
what  she  has  commanded  thee ;  for  she  is  so 
good  that  she  will  do  it.  On  my  part,  and  on 
that  of  the  Christians  who  are  with  me,  I  oflFer 
to  do  for  thee  all  we  are  able,  even  to  the 
hazard  of  our  lives.  Fail  not  to  write  to  me, 
and  give  me  notice  of  thy  resolution,  for  I  will 
always  answer  thee;  the  Great  AUa  having 
given  us  a  Christian  slave,  who  can  read  and 
write  thy  language,  as  thou  mayest  perceive  by 
this  letter ;  so  that  thou  mayest,  without  fear, 
give  us  notice  of  all  thy  intentions.  As  for 
what  thou  sayest,  that  as  soon  as  thou  shalt 
arrive  in  the  land  of  the  Christians,  thou 
designest  to  be  my  wife,  I  promise  thee  on  the 
word  of  a  good  Christian,  to  take  thee  for  my 
wife ;    and  thou  mayest  be  assured  that  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  247 

Christians  perform  their  promises  better  than 
the  Moors.  Alia  and  his  mother  Mary  be  thy 
guard,  my  dear  lady." 

Having  writ  and  closed  this  note,  I  waited 
two  days  till  the  bagnio  was  empty,  and  then  I 
went  up  on  the  terrace,  the  ordinary  place  of 
our  conversation,  to  see  if  the  cane  appeared, 
and  it  was  not  long  before  it  was  stirring.  As 
soon  as  it  appeared  I  showed  my  note,  that  the 
thread  might  be  put  to  the  cane,  but  I  found 
that  was  done  to  my  hand;  and  the  cane  being 
let  down,  I  fastened  the  note  to  it.  Not  long 
after  the  knot  was  let  fall,  and  I,  taking  it  up, 
found  in  it  several  pieces  of  gold  and  silver, 
above  fifty  crowns,  which  gave  us  infinite  con- 
tent, and  fortified  our  hopes  of  obtaining  at 
last  our  liberty.  That  evening  our  renegade 
came  to  us,  and  told  us,  he  had  found  out  that 
the  master  of  that  house  was  the  same  Moor 
we  had  been  told  of,  called  Agimorato,  ex- 
tremely rich,  and  who  had  one  only  daughter 
to  inherit  all  his  estate ;  that  it  was  the  report 
of  the  whole  city  that  she  was  the  handsomest 
maid  in  all  Barbary,  having  been  demanded  in 
marriage  by  several  bassas  and  viceroys,  but 
that  she  had  always  refused  to  marry.  He  also 
told  us,  that  he  had  learned  she  had  a  Christian 


248  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

slave  who  was  dead,  all  which  agreed  with  the 
contents  of  the  letter.  We  immediately  held 
a  council  with  the  renegade,  about  the  manner 
we  should  use  to  carry  oflF  the  Moorish  lady, 
and  go  altogether  to  Christendom ;  when  at 
last  we  agreed  to  expect  the  answer  of  Zoraida, 
for  that  is  the  name  of  the  lady  who  now 
desires  to  be  called  Mary ;  as  well  knowing  she 
could  best  advise  the  overcoming  all  the  diffi- 
culties that  were  in  our  way ;  and  after  this 
resolution,  the  renegade  assured  us  again,  that 
he  would  lose  his  life,  or  deliver  us  out  of 
captivity. 

The  bagnio  was  four  days  together  full  of 
people,  and  all  that  time  the  cane  was  invisible; 
but  as  soon  as  it  returned  to  its  solitude,  the 
cane  appeared,  with  a  knot  much  bigger  than 
ordinary;  having  untied  it,  I  found  in  it  a 
letter,  and  a  hundred  crowns  in  gold.  The 
renegade  happened  that  day  to  be  with  us,  and 
we  gave  him  the  letter  to  read ;  which  he  said 
contained  these  words : — 

"  I  cannot  tell,  sir,  how  to  contrive  that  we 
may  go  together  for  Spain;  neither  has  Lela 
Marien  told  it  me,  though  I  have  earnestly 
asked  it  of  her.  All  I  can  do  is  to  furnish  you 
out  of  this  window  with  a  great  deal  of  riches. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  249 

Buy  your  ransom  and  your  friends'  with  that, 
and  let  one  of  you  go  to  Spain,  and  buy  a  bark 
there,  and  come  and  fetch  the  rest.  As  for 
me,  you  shall  find  me  in  my  father's  garden 
out  of  town,  by  the  sea-side,  not  far  from 
Babasso  gate,  where  I  am  to  pass  all  the 
summer  with  my  father  and  my  maids ;  from 
which  you  may  take  me  without  fear,  in  the 
night-time,  and  carry  me  to  your  bark;  but 
remember  thou  art  to  be  my  husband,  and  if 
thou  failest  in  that,  I  will  desire  Lela  Marien 
to  chastise  thee.  If  thou  canst  not  trust  one 
of  thy  friends  to  go  for  the  bark,  pay  thy  own 
ransom  and  go  thyself;  for  I  trust  thou  wilt 
return  sooner  than  another,  since  thou  art  a 
gentleman  and  a  Christian.  Find  out  my 
father's  garden,  and  I  will  take  care  to  watch 
when  the  bagnio  is  empty,  and  let  thee  have 
more  money.     Alia  keep  my  dear  lord." 

These  were  the  contents  of  the  second  letter 
we  received.  Upon  the  reading  of  it,  every 
one  of  us  offered  to  be  the  man  that  should  go 
and  buy  the  bark,  promising  to  return  with  all 
punctuality;  but  the  renegade  opposed  that 
proposition,  and  said,  he  would  never  consent 
that  any  of  us  should  obtain  his  liberty  before 
the  rest ;  because  experience  had  taught  him, 


250  THE  ACraEVEMENTS  OF 

that  people  once  free  do  not  perform  what  they 
promise  when  captives ;  and  that  some  slaves 
of  qualily  had  often  used  that  remedy,  to  send 
one  either  to  Valencia  or  Majorca,  with  money 
to  buy  a  bark,  and  come  back  and  fetch  the 
rest ;  but  that  they  never  returned,  because  the 
joy  of  having  obtained  their  liberty,  and  the 
fear  of  losing  it  again,  made  them  forget  what 
they  had  promised,  and  cancelled  the  memory 
of  all  obligations.  To  confirm  which  he  related 
to  us  a  strange  story,  which  had  happened  in 
those  parts,  as  there  often  does  among  the 
slaves.  Affcer  this,  he  said,  that  all  that  could 
be  done,  was  for  him  to  buy  a  bark  with  the 
money  which  should  redeem  one  of  us ;  that 
he  could  buy  one  in  Algiers,  and  pretend  to 
turn  merchant,  and  deal  between  Algiers  and 
Tetuan ;  by  which  means,  he  being  master  of 
the  vessel,  might  easily  find  out  some  way  of 
getting  us  out  of  the  bagnio,  and  taking  us  on 
board ;  and  especially  if  the  Moorish  lady  did 
what  she  promised,  and  gave  us  money  to  pay 
all  our  ransoms ;  for,  being  free,  we  might  em- 
bark even  at  noon-day ;  but  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty would  be,  that  the  Moors  do  not  permit 
renegades  to  keep  any  barks  but  large  ones,  fit 
to  cruise  upon  Christians ;  for  they  believe  that 
a  renegade,   particularly  a   Spaniard,   seldom 


DON  QUIXOTE.  251 

buys  a  bark,  but  with  a  design  of  returning  to 
his  own  country.  That,  however,  he  knew 
how  to  obviate  that  difficulty,  by  taking  a 
Tagarin  Moor  for  his  partner  both  in  the  bark 
and  trade,  by  which  means  he  should  still  be 
master  of  her,  and  then  all  the  rest  would  be 
easy.  We  durst  not  oppose  this  opinion, 
though  we  had  more  inclination  every  one  of 
us  to  go  to  Spain  for  a  bark,  as  the  lady  had 
advised;  but  were  afraid  that  if  we  contradicted 
him,  as  we  were  at  his  mercy,  he  might  betray 
us,  and  bring  our  lives  to  danger ;  particularly 
if  the  business  of  Zoraida  should  be  discovered, 
for  whose  liberty  and  life  we  would  have  given 
all  ours ;  so  we  determined  to  put  ourselves 
under  the  protection  of  God  and  the  renegade. 
At  the  same  time  we  answered  Zoraida,  telling 
her,  that  we  would  do  all  she  advised,  which 
was  very  well,  and  just  as  if  Lela  Marien  her- 
self had  instructed  her ;  and  that  now  it  de- 
pended on  her  alone  to  give  us  the  means  of 
bringing  this  design  to  pass.  I  promised  her 
once  more  to  be  her  husband.  After  this,  in 
two  days  that  the  bagnio  happened  to  be 
empty,  she  gave  us,  by  the  means  of  the  cane, 
two  thousand  crowns  of  gold ;  and  withal  a 
letter,  in  which  she  let  us  know,  that  the  next 
Juma,  which  is  their  Friday,  she  was  to  go  to 


252  THE  ACmEVEMKNTS  OF 

her  fether's  garden,  and  that,  before  she  went, 
she  would  give  us  more  money ;  and  if  we  had 
not  enough,  she  would  upon  our  letting  her 
know  it,  give  us  what  we  should  think  suffi- 
cient ;  for  her  father  was  so  rich  that  he  would 
hardly  miss  it ;  and  so  much  the  less,  because 
he  entrusted  her  with  the  keys  of  all  his 
treasure.  We  presently  gave  the  renegade  five 
hundred  crowns  to  buy  the  bark,  and  I  paid 
my  own  ransom  with  eight  hundred  crowns, 
which  I  put  into  the  hands  of  a  merchant  at 
Valencia,  then  in  Algiers,  who  made  the  bar- 
gain with  the  king,  and  had  me  to  his  house 
upon  parole,  to  pay  the  money  upon  the  arrival 
of  the  first  bark  firom  Valencia ;  for  if  he  had 
paid  down  the  money  immediately,  the  king 
might  have  suspected  the  money  had  been 
ready,  and  lain  some  time  in  Algiers,  and  that 
the  merchant  for  his  own  profit  had  concealed 
it ;  and,  in  short,  I  durst  not  trust  my  master 
with  ready  money,  knowing  his  distrustful  and 
malicious  nature.  The  Thursday  preceding  that 
Friday  that  Zoraida  was  to  go  to  the  garden, 
she  let  us  have  a  thousand  crowns  more ;  de- 
siring me,  at  the  same  time,  that  if  I  paid  my 
ransom,  I  would  find  out  her  fether's  garden, 
and  contrive  some  way  of  seeing  her  there.  I 
answered  in  few  words,  that  I  would  do  as  she 


DON  QUIXOTE.  253 

desired,  and  she  should  only  take  care  to  re- 
commend us  to  Lela  Marien,  by  those  prayers 
which  the  Christian  slave  had  taught  her. 
Having  done  this,  order  was  taken  to  have  the 
ransom  of  my  three  friends  paid  also;  lest  they, 
seeing  me  at  liberty,  and  themselves  not  so, 
though  there  was  money  to  set  them  free,  should 
be  troubled  in  mind,  and  give  way  to  the  temp- 
tation of  the  devil,  in  doing  something  that 
might  redound  to  the  prejudice  of  Zoraida ;  for 
though  the  consideration  of  their  quality  ought 
to  have  given  me  security  of  their  honour,  yet 
I  did  not  think  it  proper  to  run  the  least 
hazard  in  the  matter ;  so  they  were  redeemed 
in  the  same  manner,  and  by  the  same  mer- 
chant, that  I  was,  who  had  the  money  before- 
hand; but  we  never  discovered  to  him  the 
remainder  of  our  intrigue,  as  not  being  willing 
to  risk  the  danger  there  was  in  so  doing. 


264  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

THE  ADVENTURES  OF  THE  CAPTIVE  CONTINUED. 

Our  renegade  had  in  a  fortnight's  time  bought 
a  very  good  bark,  capable  of  carrying  above 
thirty  people ;  and  to  give  no  suspicion  of  any 
other  design,  he  undertook  a  voyage  to  a  place 
upon  the  coast  called  Sargel,  about  thirty 
leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Algiers  towards 
Oran,  where  there  is  a  great  trade  for  dried 
figs.  He  made  his  voyage  two  or  three  times 
in  company  with  the  Tagarin  Moor  his  partner. 
Those  Moors  are  called  in  Barbary  Tagarins, 
who  were  driven  out  of  Arragon ;  as  they^call 
those  of  Granada,  Mudajares ;  and  the  same  in 
the  kingdom  of  Fez  are  called  Elches,  and  are 
the  best  soldiers  that  prince  has. 

Every  time  he  passed  with  his  bark  along 
the  coast,  he  used  to  cast  anchor  in  a  little  bay 
that  was  not  above  two  bow-shot  from  the 
garden  where  Zoraida  expected  us ;  and  there 
he  used  to  exercise  the  Moors  that  rowed, 
either  in  making  the  Sala,  which  is  a  ceremony 


DON  QUIXOTE.  256 

among  them,  or  in  some  other  employment; 
by  which  he  practised  in  jest  what  he  was  re- 
solved to  execute  in  earnest.  So  sometimes  he 
would  go  to  the  garden  of  Zoraida  and  beg 
some  fruit,  and  her  father  would  give  him 
some,  though  he  did  not  know  him.  He  had 
a  mind  to  find  an  occasion  to  speak  to  Zoraida, 
and  tell  her,  as  he  since  owned  to  me,  that  he 
was  the  man  who  by  my  order  was  to  carry 
her  to  the  land  of  the  Christians,  and  that  she 
might  depend  upon  it ;  but  he  could  never  get 
an  opportunity  of  doing  it,  because  the  Moorish 
and  Turkish  women  never  suflfer  themselves  to 
be  seen  by  any  of  their  own  nation,  but  by 
their  husband,  or  by  his  or  their  father's  com- 
mand ;  but  as  for  the  Christian  slaves,  they  let 
them  see  them,  and  that  more  familiarly  than 
perhaps  could  be  wished.  I  should  have 
been  very  sorry  that  the  renegade  had  seen  or 
spoke  to  Zoraida,  for  it  must  needs  have 
troubled  her  infinitely  to  see  that  her  business 
was  trusted  to  a  renegade ;  and  God  Almighty, 
who  governed  our  design,  ordered  it  so,  that 
the  renegade  was  disappointed.  He  in  the 
meantime  seeing  how  securely,  and  without 
suspicion,  he  went  and  came  along  the  coast, 
staying  where  and  when  he  pleased  by  the  way, 
and  that  his  partner  the  Tagarin  Moor  was  of 


1 


256  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

'  his  mind  in  all  things ;  that  I  was  at  liberty, 

and  that  there  wanted  nothing  but  some  Chris- 
i  tians  to  help  us  to  row ;  bid  me  consider  whom 

\  I  intended  to  carry  with  me  besides  those  who 

1  were  ransomed,  and  that  I  should  make  sure 

j  of  them  for  the  first  Friday,  because  he  had 

1  pitched  on  that  day  for  our  departure.      Upon 

I  notice  of  this  resolution,  I  spoke  to  twelve 

r  lusty  Spaniards,  good  rowers,  and  those  who 

I  might  easiest  get  out  of  the  city:   it  was  a 

great  fortune  that  we  got  so  many  in  such  a 

conjuncture,  because  there  were  above  twenty 

j  sail  of  rovers  gone  out,  who  had  taken  aboard 

most  of  the  slaves  fit  for  the  oar ;  and  we  had 
not  had  these,  but  that  their  master  happened 
to  stay  at  home  that  summer,  to  finish  a  galley 
he  was  building  to  cruise  with,  and  was  then 
upon  the  stocks.  I  said  no  more  to  them,  than 
only  they  should  steal  out  of  the  town  in  the 
evening  upon  the  next  Friday,  and  stay  for  me 
upon  the  way  that  led  to  Agimorato's  garden. 
I  spoke  to  every  one  by  himself,  and  gave 
each  of  them  order  to  say  no  more  to  any  other 
Christian  they  should  see,  than  that  they  stayed 
for  me  there.  Having  done  this,  I  had  another 
thing  of  the  greatest  importance  to  bring  to 
pass,  which  was  to  give  Zoraida  notice  of  our 
design,  and  how  far  we  had  carried  it,  that  she 


DON  QUIXOTE.  257 

might  be  ready  at  a  short  warning,  and  not  to 
be  surprised  if  we  came  upon  the  house  in  a 
sudden,  and  even  before  she  could  think  that 
the  Christian  bark  could  be  come.  This  made 
me  resolve  to  go  to  the  garden  to  try  if  it  were 
possible  to  speak  to  her:  so  one  day,  upon 
pretence  of  gathering  a  few  herbs,  I  entered 
the  garden,  and  the  first  person  I  met  was  her 
father,  who  spoke  to  me  in  the  language  used 
all  over  the  Turkish  dominions,  which  is  a 
mixture  of  all  the  Christian  and  Moorish  lan- 
guages, by  which  we  understand  one  another 
from  Constantinople  to  Algiers,  and  asked  me 
what  I  looked  for  in  his  garden,  and  who  I 
belonged  to?  I  told  him  I  was  a  slave  of 
Arnaute  Mami  (this  man  I  knew  was  his  in- 
timate fiiend),  and  that  I  wanted  a  few  herbs  to 
make  up  a  salad.  He  then  asked  me  if  I  were 
a  man  to  be  redeemed  or  no,  and  how  much 
my  master  asked  for  me  ?  During  these  ques- 
tions, the  beautifiil  Zoraida  came  out  of  the 
garden-house  hard  by,  having  descried  me  a 
good  while  before ;  and  as  the  Moorish  women 
make  no  difficulty  of  showing  themselves  to 
the  Christian  slaves,  she  drew  near,  without 
scruple,  to  the  place  where  her  father  and  I 
were  talking ;  neither  did  her  father  show  any 

dislike  of  her  coming,  but  called  to  her  to  come 
n.  B 


258  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

nearer.  It  would  be  hard  for  me  to  express 
here  the  wonderful  surprise  and  astonishment 
that  the  beauty,  the  rich  dress,  and  the  chann- 
ing  air  of  my  beloved  Zoraida  put  me  in :  she 
was  all  bedecked  with  pearls,  which  hung 
thick  upon  her  head  and  about  her  neck  and 
arms.  Her  feet  and  legs  were  naked,  after  the 
custom  of  that  country,  and  she  had  upon  her 
ankles  a  kind  of  bracelet  of  gold,  and  set  with 
such  rich  diamonds  that  her  father  valued 
them,  as  she  since  told  me,  at  ten  thousand 
pistoles  a  pair;  and  those  about  her  wrists 
were  of  the  same  value.  The  pearls  were  of 
the  best  sort,  for  the  Moorish  women  delight 
much  in  them,  and  have  more  pearls  of  all 
sorts  than  any  nation.  Her  father  was  reputed 
to  have  the  finest  in  Algiers,  and  to  be  worth, 
besides,  above  two  hundred  thousand  Spanish 
crowns;  of  all  which,  the  lady  you  here  see 
was  then  mistress;  but  now  is  only  so  of 
me.  What  she  yet  retains  of  beauty  after 
all  her  suflFerings,  may  help  you  to  guess  at 
her  wonderful  appearance  in  the  midst  of 
her  prosperity.  The  beauty  of  some  ladies  has 
its  days  and  times,  and  is  more  or  less  ac- 
cording to  accidents  or  passions,  which  natur- 
ally raise  or  diminish  the  lustre  of  it,  and 
sometimes  quite  extinguish  it.      All  I  can  say 


DON  QUIXOTE.  269 

is,  at  that  time  she  appeared  to  me  the  best- 
dressed  and  most  beautiM  woman  I  had  ever 
seen ;  to  which,  adding  the  obligations  I  had 
to  her,  she  passed  with  me  for  a  goddess  from 
heaven,  descended  upon  earth  for  my  relief 
and  happiness. 

As  she  drew  near,  her  father  told  her,  in  his 
country  language,  that  I  was  a  slave  of  his 
friend  Amaute  Mami,  and  came  to  pick  a 
salad  in  his  garden.  She  presently  took  the 
hint,  and  asked  me  in  Lingua  Franca,  whether 
I  was  a  gentleman,  and  if  I  was,  why  I  did  not 
ransom  myself?  I  told  her  I  was  already  ran- 
somed, and  that  by  the  price,  she  might  guess 
the  value  my  master  set  upon  me,  since  he  had 
bought  me  for  1500  pieces  of  eight.  To  which 
she  replied,  ''  If  thou  hadst  been  my  father's 
slave,  I  would  not  have  let  him  part  with  thee 
for  twice  as  much;  for,"  said  she,  "you 
Christians  never  speak  truth  in  any  thing  you 
say,  and  make  yourselves  poor  to  deceive  the 
Moors."  —  "That  may  be,  madam,"  said  I, 
"  but  in  truth  I  have  dealt  by  my  master,  and 
do  intend  to  deal  by  all  those  I  shall  have  to 
deal  with,  sincerely  and  honourably." — "  And 
when  dost  thou  go  home?"  said  she. — "To- 
morrow, madam,"  said  I,  "for  here  is  a  French 
bark  that  sails  to-morrow,  and  I  intend  not  to 


260  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

lose  that  opportunity/* — "Is  it  not  better/' 
replied  Zoraida,  "  to  stay  till  there  come  some 
Spanish  bark,  and  go  with  them,  and  not  with 
the  French,  who,  I  am  told,  are  no  friends  of 
yours?" — "No,"  said  I;  "yet  if  the  report  of 
a  Spanish  bark's  coming  should  prove  true,  I 
would  perhaps  stay  for  it,  though  it  is  more 
likely  I  shall  take  the  opportunity  of  the 
French,  because  the  desire  I  have  of  being  at 
home,  and  with  those  persons  I  love,  will 
hardly  let  me  wait  for  any  other  conveniency." 
— "Without  doubt,"  said  Zoraida,  "thou  art 
married  in  Spain,  and  impatient  to  be  with 
thy  wife." — "  I  am  not,"  said  I,  "  married,  but 
I  have  given  my  word  to  a  lady,  to  be  so  as 
soon  as  I  can  reach  my  own  country." — "  And 
is  the  lady  handsome  that  has  your  promise  ?  " 
said  Zoraida.  "  She  is  so  handsome,"  said  I, 
"  that  to  describe  her  rightly,  and  tell  truth,  I 
can  only  say  she  is  like  you."  At  this  her 
father  laughed  heartily,  and  said :  "On  my 
word.  Christian,  she  must  be  very  charming 
if  she  be  like  my  daughter,  who  is  the  greatest 
beauty  of  all  this  kingdom:  look  upon  her 
well,  and  thou  wilt  say  I  speak  truth." 
Zoraida's  father  was  our  interpreter  for  the 
most  of  what  we  talked;  for  though  she 
understood  the  Lingua  Franca,  yet  she  was  not 


DON  QUIXOTE.  261 

used  to  speak  it^  and  so  explained  herself  more 
by  signs  than  words. 

While  we  were  in  this  conversation,  there 
came  a  Moor  running  hastily,  and  cried  aloud 
that  four  Turks  had  leaped  over  the  fence  of  the 
garden,  and  were  gathering  the  fruit,  though  it 
was  not  ripe.  The  old  man  started  at  that, 
and  so  did  Zoraida,  for  the  Moors  do  naturally 
stand  in  awe  of  the  Turks,  particularly  of  the 
soldiers,  who  are  so  insolent  on  their  side,  that 
they  treat  the  Moors  as  if  they  were  their 
slaves.  This  made  the  father  bid  his  daughter 
go  in  and  shut  herself  up  close,  "  whilst,"  said 
he,  "  I  go  and  talk  with  these  dogs ;  and  for 
thee.  Christian,  gather  the  herbs  thou  want'st, 
and  go  thy  ways  in  peace,  and  God  conduct 
thee  safe  to  thy  own  country."  I  bowed  to 
him,  and  he  left  me  with  Zoraida,  to  go  and 
find  out  the  Turks:  she  made  also  as  if  she 
were  going  away,  as  her  father  had  bid  her; 
but  she  was  no  sooner  hid  from  his  sight  by 
the  trees  of  the  garden,  but  she  turned  towards 
me  with  her  eyes  frill  of  tears,  and  said  in 
her  language,  "  Amexi  Christiano,  Amexi," 
which  is,  thou  art  going  away.  Christian,  thou 
art  going:  to  which  I  answered,  "Yes,  madam, 
I  am,  but  by  no  means  without  you ;  you  may 
expect  me  next  Friday,  and  be  not  surprised 


262  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

when  you  see  us,  for  we  will  certainly  go  to 
the  land  of  the  Christians/*  I  said  this  so 
passionately,  that  she  understood  me;  and 
throwing  one  of  her  arms  about  my  neck,  she 
began  to  walk  softly,  and  with  trembling,  to- 
wards the  house.  It  pleased  fortune,  that  as 
we  were  in  this  posture  walking  together  (which 
might  have  proved  very  unlucky  to  us)  we  met 
Agimorato  coming  back  from  the  Turks,  and 
we  perceived  he  had  seen  us  as  we  were ;  but 
Zoraida,  very  readily  and  discreetly,  was  so  far 
from  taking  away  her  arm  from  about  my  neck, 
that,  drawing  still  nearer  to  me,  she  leaned  her 
head  upon  my  breast,  and  letting  her  knees  give 
way,  was  in  the  posture  of  one  that  swoons ;  I  at 
the  same  time  made  as  if  I  had  much  ado  to  bear 
her  up  against  my  will.  Her  fether  came  hastily 
to  us,  and  seeing  his  daughter  in  this  condition, 
asked  her  what  was  the  matter  ?  But  she  not 
answering  readily,  he  presently  said,  **  Without 
doubt  these  Turks  have  frightened  her,  and 
she  faints  away ; "  at  which  he  took  her  in  his 
arms.  She,  as  it  were,  coming  to  herself, 
fetched  a  deep  sigh,  and  with  her  eyes  not  yet 
dried  from  tears,  she  said,  **  Amexi  Christiano, 
Amexi,  begone.  Christian,  begone.'*  To  which 
her  father  replied,  "It  is  no  matter,  child, 
whether  he  go  or  no,  he  has  done  thee  no  hurt, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  263 

and  the  Turks,  at  my  request,  are  gone." — **  It 
is  they  who  frightened  her,"  said  I ;  "  but  since 
she  desires  I  should  be  gone,  I  will  come  an- 
other time  for  my  salad,  by  your  leave;  for 
my  master  says  the  herbs  of  your  garden  are 
the  best  of  any  he  can  have." — "  Thou  may'st 
have  what,  and  when  thou  wilt,"  said  the 
father,  "for  my  daughter  does  not  think  the 
Christians  troublesome;  she  only  wished  the 
Turks  away,  and  by  mistake  bid  thee  begone 
too,  or  make  haste  and  gather  thy  herbs." 
With  this  I  immediately  took  leave  of  them 
both;  and  Zoraida,  showing  great  trouble  in 
her  looks,  went  away  with  her  father.  I  in 
the  meantime,  upon  pretence  of  gathering  my 
herbs  here  and  there,  walked  all  over  the 
garden,  observing  exactly  all  the  places  of 
coming  in  and  going  out,  and  every  comer  fit 
for  my  purpose,  as  well  as  what  strength  there 
was  in  the  house,  with  all  other  conveniences 
to  facilitate  our  business.  Having  done  this,  I 
went  my  ways,  and  gave  an  exact  account  of 
all  that  had  happened  to  the  renegade  and  the 
rest  of  my  friends,  longing  earnestly  for  the 
time  in  which  I  might  promise  myself  my  dear 
Zoraida's  company,  without  any  fear  of  dis- 
turbance. At  last  the  happy  hour  came,  and 
we  had  all  the  good  success  we  could  promise 


264  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

ourselves,  of  a  design  so  well  laid;  for  the 
Friday  after  my  discourse  with  Zoraida,  to- 
wards the  evening,  we  came  to  an  anchor  with 
our  bark,  almost  over-against  the  place  where 
my  lovely  mistress  lived ;  the  Christians,  who 
were  to  be  employed  at  the  oar,  were  already  at 
the  rendezvous,  and  hid  up  and  down  there- 
abouts. They  were  all  in  expectation  of  my 
coming,  and  very  desirous  to  seize  the  bark 
which  they  saw  before  their  eyes,  for  they 
did  not  know  our  agreement  with  the  renegade, 
but  thought  they  were  by  main  force  to  gain 
their  conveyance  and  their  liberty,  by  killing 
the  Moors  on  board.  As  soon  as  I  and  my 
friends  appeared,  all  the  rest  came  from  their 
hiding-places  to  us.  By  this  time  the  city- 
gates  were  shut,  and  no  soul  appeared  in  all 
the  country  near  us.  When  we  were  all 
together,  it  was  a  question  whether  we  should 
first  fetch  Zoraida,  or  make  ourselves  masters 
of  those  few  Moors  in  the  bark.  As  we  were 
in  this  consultation,  the  renegade  came  to 
us,  and  asking  what  we  meant  to  stand 
idle,  told  us  his  Moors  were  all  gone  to 
rest,  and  most  of  them  asleep.  We  told 
him  our  difficulty,  and  he  immediately  said, 
that  the  most  important  thing  was  to  secure 
the  bark,  which  might  easily  be   done,  and 


DON  QUIXOTE.  266 

without   danger,  and  then  we  might  go  for 
Zoraida. 

We  were  all  of  his  mind,  and  so,  without 
more  ado,  he  marched  at  the  head  of  us  to  the 
bark,  and  leaping  into  it,  he  first  drew  a 
scymitar,  and  cried  aloud  in  the  Moorish 
language,  Let  not  a  man  of  you  stir,  except  he 
means  it  should  cost  him  his  life ;  and  while 
he  said  this,  all  the  other  Christains  were 
got  on  board.  The  Moors,  who  are  naturally 
timorous,  hearing  the  master  use  this  language, 
were  firightened,  and  without  any  resistance, 
suffered  themselves  to  be  manacled,  which  was 
done  with  great  expedition  by  the  Christians, 
who  told  them  at  the  same  time,  that  if  they 
made  the  least  noise,  they  would  immediately 
cut  their  throats.  This  being  done,  and  half 
of  our  number  left  to  guard  them,  the  re- 
mainder, with  the  renegade,  went  to  Agimo- 
rato's  garden ;  and  our  good  fortune  was  such, 
that  coming  to  force  the  gate,  we  found  it  open 
with  as  much  facility  as  if  it  had  not  been 
shut  at  all.  So  we  marched  on  with  great 
silence  to  the  house,  without  being  perceived 
by  anybody.  The  lovely  Zoraida,  who  was 
at  the  window,  asked  softly,  upon  hearing  us 
tread,  whether  we  were  Nazarani,  that  is 
Christians  ?    T  answered  yes ;  and  desired  her 


266  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

to  come  down.  As  soon  as  she  heard  my 
voice,  she  stayed  not  a  minute ;  but,  without 
saying  a  word,  came  down  and  opened  the 
door,  appearing  to  us  all  like  a  goddess,  her 
beauty  and  the  richness  of  her  dress  not  being 
to  be  described.  As  soon  as  I  saw  her,  I  took 
her  by  the  hand,  which  I  kissed,  the  renegade 
did  the  same,  and  then  my  friends :  the  rest  of 
the  company  followed  the  same  ceremony ;  so 
that  we  all  paid  her  a  kind  of  homage  for  our 
liberty.  The  renegade  asked  her  in  Morisco, 
whether  her  father  was  in  the  garden  ?  She 
said  yes,  and  that  he  was  asleep.  Then  said 
he.  We  must  awake  him,  and  take  him  with  us, 
as  also  all  that  is  valuable  in  the  house/'  "  No, 
no,'*  said  Zoraida,  "my  father  must  not  be 
touched,  and  in  the  house  there  is  nothing  so 
rich  as  what  I  shall  carry  with  me,  which  is 
enough  to  make  you  all  rich  and  content." 
Having  said  this  she  stept  into  the  house,  bid 
us  be  quiet,  and  she  would  soon  return.  I 
asked  the  renegade  what  had  passed  between 
them,  and  he  told  me  what  he  had  said ;  to 
which  I  replied,  that  by  no  means  any  thing 
was  to  be  done,  otherwise  than  as  Zoraida 
should  please.  She  was  already  coming  back 
with  a  small  tnmk  so  frill  of  gold,  that  she 
could    hardly    carry  it.   when,   to   our    great 


DON  QUIXOTE.  267 

misfortune,  while  this  was  doing,  her  father 
awaked,  and  hearing  a  noise  in  the  garden, 
opened  a  window  and  looked  out:  having 
perceived  that  there  were  Christians  in  it,  he 
began  to  cry  out  in  Arabic,  *'  Thieves,  Thieves! 
Christians,  Christians ! " 

These  cries  of  his  put  us  all  into  a  terrible 
disorder  and  fear ;  but  the  renegade  seeing  our 
danger,  and  how  much  it  imported  us  to 
accomplish  our  enterprize  before  we  were  per- 
ceived, he  ran  up  to  the  place  where  Agimorato 
was,  and  took  with  him  some  of  our  company ; 
for  I  durst  by  no  means  leave  Zoraida,  who  had 
swooned  away  in  my  arms.  Those  who  went 
up  bestirred  themselves  so  well,  that  they 
brought  down  Agimorato  with  his  hands  tied 
behind  him,  and  his  mouth  stopped  with  a 
handkerchief,  which  hindered  him  from  so  much 
as  speaking  a  word;  and  threatening  him 
besides,  that  if  he  made  the  least  attempt  to 
speak,  it  should  cost  him  his  life.  When  his 
daughter,  who  was  come  to  herself,  saw  him, 
she  covered  her  eyes  to  avoid  the  sight,  and 
her  father  remained  the  more  astonished,  for 
he  knew  not  how  willingly  she  had  put  her- 
self into  our  hands.  Diligence  on  our  side 
being  the  chief  thing  requisite,  we  used  it  so 
as  we  came  to  our  bark,  when  our  men  began 


268  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

to  be  in  pain  for  us,  as  fearing  that  we  had  met 
with  some  ill  accident.  We  got  on  board 
about  two  hours  after  it  was  dark ;  where  the 
first  thing  we  did  was  to  untie  the  hands 
of  Zoraida's  father,  and  to  unstop  his  mouth, 
but  still  with  the  same  threatenings  of  the 
renegade,  in  case  he  made  any  noise.  When 
he  saw  his  daughter  there,  he  began  to  sigh 
most  passionately,  and  more  when  he  saw  me 
embrace  her  with  tenderness,  and  that  she, 
without  any  resistance  or  struggling,  seemed  to 
endure  it ;  he,  for  all  this,  was  silent,  for  fear 
the  threatenings  of  the  renegade  should  be  put 
in  execution.  Zoraida  seeing  us  aboard,  and 
that  we  were  ready  to  handle  our  oars  to  be 
gone,  she  bid  the  renegade  tell  me,  she  desired 
I  would  set  her  father,  and  the  other  Moors, 
our  prisoners,  on  shore;  for  else  she  would 
throw  herself  into  the  sea,  rather  than  see  a 
father,  who  had  used  her  so  tenderly,  be 
carried  away  captive  for  her  sake,  before  her 
eyes.  The  renegade  told  me  what  she  said,  to 
which  I  agreed;  but  the  renegade  was  of 
another  opinion ;  saying,  that  if  we  set  them 
on  shore  there,  they  would  raise  the  country, 
and  give  the  alarm  to  the  city,  by  which  some 
light  frigates  might  be  despatched  in  quest  of 
us,  and  getting  between  us  and  the  sea,  it 


DON  QUIXOTE.  269 

would  be  impossible  for  us  to  make  our  escape ; 
and  that  all  that  could  be  done,  was  to  set 
them  at  liberty  in  the  first  Christian  land  we 
could  reach.  This  seemed  so  reasonable  to  us 
all,  that  Zoraida  herself,  being  informed  of  the 
motives  we  had  not  to  obey  her  at  present, 
agreed  to  it.  Immediately,  with  great  silence 
and  content,  we  began  to  ply  our  oars,  recom- 
mending ourselves  to  providence  with  all  our 
hearts,  and  endeavoured  to  make  for  Majorca, 
which  is  the  nearest  Christian  land;  but  the 
north  wind  rising  a  little,  and  the  sea  with  it, 
we  could  not  hold  that  course,  but  were  forced 
to  drive  along  shore  towards  Oran,  not  without 
great  fear  of  being  discovered  from  Sargel,  upon 
the  coast,  about  thirty  leagues  firom  Algiers. 
We  were  likewise  apprehensive  of  meeting  some 
of  those  galliots  which  came  from  Tetuan  with 
merchandize.  Though,  to  say  truth,  we  did 
not  so  much  fear  these  last ;  for  except  it  were 
a  cruizing  galliot,  we  all  of  us  wished  to  meet 
such  a  one,  which  we  should  certainly  take,  and 
so  get  a  better  vessel  to  transport  us  in.  Zoraida 
all  this  while  hid  her  face  between  my  hands, 
that  she  might  not  see  her  father ;  and  I  could 
hear  her  call  upon  Lela  Marien  to  help  us.  By 
the  time  we  had  got  about  thirty  miles  the  day 
broke,  and  we  found  ourselves  within  a  mile  of 


270  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

the  shore,  which  appeared  to  us  a  desart  solitary 
place,  but  yet  we  rowed  hard  to  get  ofiF  to  sea, 
for  fear  of  being  discovered  by  somebody. 
When  we  were  got  about  two  leagues  out  to 
sea,  we  proposed  the  men  should  row  by  turns, 
that  some  might  refresh  themselves ;  but  the 
men  at  the  oar  said  it  was  not  time  yet  to  rest, 
and  that  they  could  eat  and  row  too,  if  those 
who  did  not  row  would  assist  them,  and  give 
them  meat  and  drink ;  this  we  did,  and  a  little 
while  after  the  wind  blowing  fresh,  we  ceased 
rowing,  and  set  sail  for  Oran,  not  being  able  to 
hold  any  other  course.  We  made  above  eight 
miles  an  hour,  being  in  no  fear  of  any  thing  but 
meeting  some  cruizers.  We  gave  victuals  to 
our  Moorish  prisoners,  and  the  renegade  com- 
forted them,  and  told  them  they  were  not 
slaves,  but  that  they  should  be  set  at  liberty 
upon  the  first  opportunity.  The  same  was  said 
to  Zoraida's  father ;  who  answered,  "  I  might 
expect  from  your  courtesy  any  thing  else  per- 
haps, 0  Christians ;  but  that  you  should  give 
me  my  liberty,  I  am  not  simple  enough  to 
believe  it ;  for  you  never  would  have  run  the 
hazard  of  taking  it  from  me,  if  you  intended  to 
restore  it  me  so  easily ;  especially  since  you 
know  who  I  am,  and  what  you  may  get  for  my 
ransom,  which  if  you  will  but  name,  I  do  from 


DON  QUIXOTE.  271 

this  moment  ofifer  you  all  that  you  can  desire  for 
me  and  for  that  unfortunate  daughter  of  mine, 
or  for  her  alone,  since  she  is  the  better  part 
of  me." 

When  he  had  said  this,  he  burst  out  into 
tears  so  violently,  that  Zoraida  could  not  forbear 
looking  up  at  him,  and  indeed  he  moved  com- 
passion in  us  all,  but  in  her  particularly ;  inso- 
much, as  starting  from  my  arms,  she  flew  to  her 
father's,  and  putting  her  head  to  his,  they 
began  again  so  passionate  and  tender  a  scene, 
that  most  of  us  could  not  forbear  accompanying 
their  grief  with  our  tears ;  but  her  father  seeing 
her  so  richly  dressed,  and  so  many  jewels  about 
her,  said  to  her,  in  his  language,  "  What  is  the 
meaning  of  this,  daughter?  For  last  night, 
before  this  terrible  misfortune  befel  us,  thou 
wert  in  thy  ordinary  dress ;  and  now,  without 
scarce  having  had  the  time  to  put  on  such 
things,  I  see  thee  adorned  with  all  the  fineries 
that  I  could  give  thee,  if  we  were  at  liberty  and 
in  fiill  prosperity.  This  gives  me  more  wonder 
and  trouble  than  even  our  sad  misfortune; 
therefore  answer  me."  The  renegade  inter- 
preted all  that  the  Moor  said,  and  we  saw  that 
Zoraida  answered  not  one  word ;  but  on  a  sud- 
den, spying  the  little  casket  in  which  she  was 
used  to  put  her  jewels,  which  he  thought  had 


27S  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

been  left  in  Algiers,  he  remained  yet  more  as- 
tonished, and  asked  her  how  that  trunk  could 
come  into  our  hands,  and  what  was  in  it  ?  to 
which  the  renegade,  without  expecting  Zoraida's 
answer,  replied,  **  Do  not  trouble  thyself  to  ask 
thy  daughter  so  many  questions,  for  with  one 
word  I  can  satisfy  them  all.  Enow  then  that 
she  is  a  Christian,  and  it  is  she  that  has  filed 
off  our  chains,  and  given  us  liberty ;  she  is  with 
us  by  her  own  consent,  and  I  hope  well  pleased, 
as  people  should  be  who  come  firom  darkness 
into  light,  and  firom  death  to  life." — "  Is  this 
true,  daughter?"  said  the  Moor. — "It  is," 
replied  Zoraida. — "How  then,"  said  the  old 
man,  "  art  thou  really  a  Christian  ?  and  art 
thou  she  that  has  put  thy  father  into  the  power 
of  his  enemies  ?  " — To  which  Zoraida  replied, 
"  I  am  she  that  is  a  Christian,  but  not  she  that 
has  brought  thee  into  this  condition,  for  my 
design  never  was  to  injure  my  feither,  but  only 
to  do  myself  good."  — "And  what  good  hast 
thou  done  thyself? "  said  the  Moor. — "  Ask 
that  of  Lela  Marien,"  replied  Zoraida,  "for  she 
can  tell  thee  best."  The  old  man  had  no  sooner 
heard  this  but  he  threw  himself,  with  incredible 
fiiry,  into  the  sea,  where  without  doubt  he  had 
been  drowned,  had  not  his  garments,  which  were 
long  and  wide,  kept  him  some  time  above  water. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  273 

Zoraida  cried  out  to  us  to  help  him,  which  we 
all  did  so  readily,  that  we  pulled  him  out  by  his 
vest,  but  half  drowned,  and  without  any  sense. 
This  so  troubled  Zoraida,  that  she  threw  herself 
upon  her  father,  and  began  to  lament  and  take 
on  as  if  he  had  been  really  dead.  We  turned 
his  head  downwards,  and  by  this  means  having 
disgorged  a  great  deal  of  water,  he  recovered  a 
little  in  about  two  hours'  time.  The  wind  in 
the  meanwhile  was  come  about,  and  forced  us 
toward  the  shore,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  ply 
our  oars  not  to  be  driven  upon  the  land.  It 
was  our  good  fortune  to  get  into  a  small  bay, 
which  is  made  by  a  promontory,  called  the  Cape 
of  the  Caba  Rumia ;  which,  in  our  tongue,  is 
the  Cape  of  the  wicked  Christian  woman ;  and 
it  is  a  tradition  among  the  Moors,  that  Caba, 
the  daughter  of  Count  Julian,  who  was  the 
cause  of  the  loss  of  Spain,  lies  buried  there; 
and  they  think  it  ominous  to  be  forced  into  that 
bay,  for  they  never  go  in  otherwise  than  by 
necessity ;  but  to  us  it  was  no  unlucky  harbour, 
but  a  safe  retreat,  considering  how  high  the  sea 
went  by  this  time.  We  posted  our  sentries  on 
shore,  but  kept  our  oars  ready  to  be  plied  upon 
occasion,  taking  in  the  meantime  some  refresh- 
ment of  what  the  renegade  had  provided, 
praying  heartily  to  God  and  the  Virgin  Mary, 

IL  8 


274  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

to  protect  US,  and  help  us  to  bring  our  design 
to  a  happy  conclusion.  Here,  at  the  desire  of 
Zoraida,  we  resolved  to  set  her  father  on  shore, 
with  all  the  other  Moors,  whom  we  kept  fast 
bound ;  for  she  had  not  courage,  nor  could  her 
tender  heart  suffer  any  longer,  to  see  her  father 
and  her  countrymen  ill  used  before  her  face ; 
but  we  did  not  think  to  do  it  before  we  were 
just  ready  to  depart,  and  then  they  could  not 
much  hurt  us,  the  place  being  a  solitary  one, 
and  no  habitations  near  it.  Our  prayers  were 
not  in  vain  ;  the  wind  fell  and  the  sea  became 
calm,  inviting  us  thereby  to  pursue  our  intended 
voyage :  we  unbound  our  prisoners  and  set  them 
on  shore,  one  by  one,  which  they  were  mightily 
astonished  at. 

When  we  came  to  put  Zoraida's  father  on 
shore,  who  by  this  time  was  come  to  himself, 
he  said,  "  Why  do  you  think.  Christians,  that 
this  wicked  woman  desires  I  should  be  set  at 
liberty?  do  you  think  it  is  for  any  pity  she 
takes  of  me  ?  No  certainly,  but  it  is  because 
she  is  not  able  to  bear  my  presence,  which 
hinders  the  prosecution  of  her  ill  desires:  I 
would  not  have  you  think  neither  that  she  has 
embraced  your  religion,  because  she  knows  the 
difference  between  yours  and  ours,  but  because 
she  has  heard  that  she  may  live  more  loosely 


■  f 


DON  QUIXOTE.  276 

in  your  country  than  at  home/'  And  then 
turning  himself  to  Zoraida,  while  I  and  another 
held  him  fast  by  the  arms,  that  he  might  com- 
mit no  extravagance,  he  said,  "  0  infamous  and 
blind  young  woman,  where  art  thou  going,  in 
the  power  of  these  dogs,  our  natural  enemies? 
Cursed  be  the  hour  in  which  I  begot  thee,  and 
the  care  and  affection  with  which  I  bred  thee/' 
But  I,  seeing  he  was  not  like  to  make  an  end 
of  his  exclamations  soon,  made  haste  to  set  him 
on  shore,  from  whence  he  continued  to  give  us 
his  curses  and  imprecations;  begging  on  his 
knees  of  Mahomet  to  beg  of  God  Almighty  to 
confound  and  destroy  us;  and  when  being 
under  sail,  we  could  no  longer  hear  him,  we  saw 
his  actions,  which  were  tearing  his  hair  and 
beard,  and  rolling  himself  upon  the  ground ; 
but  he  once  strained  his  voice  so  high,  that  we 
heard  what  he  said,  which  was,  ''  Come  back, 
my  dear  daughter,  for  I  forgive  thee  all ;  let 
those  men  have  the  treasure  which  is  already  in 
their  possession,  and  do  thou  return  to  comfort 
thy  disconsolate  father,  who  must  else  lose  his 
life  in  these  sandy  deserts ! " 

All  this  Zoraida  heard,  and  shed  abundance 
of  tears,  but  could  answer  nothing,  but  beg 
that  Lela  Marien,  who  had  made  her  a  Christian, 
would  comfort  him. — "  God  knows,"  said  she, 


276  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

"  I  could  not  avoid  doing  what  I  have  done ; 
and  that  these  Christians  are  not  obliged  to  me, 
for  I  could  not  be  at  rest  till  I  had  done  this, 
which  to  thee,  dear  father,  seems  so  ill  a  thing." 
All  this  she  said,  when  we  were  got  so  fer  out 
of  his  hearing,  that  we  could  scarce  so  much  as 
see  him.  So  I  comforted  Zoraida  as  well  as  I 
could,  and  we  all  minded  our  voyage.  The 
wind  was  now  so  right  for  our  purpose,  that  we 
made  no  doubt  of  being  the  next  morning  upon 
the  Spanish  shore ;  but  as  it  seldom  happens 
that  any  felicity  comes  so  pure  as  not  to  be  tem- 
pered and  allayed  by  some  mixture  of  sorrow, 
either  our  ill  fortune,  or  the  Moor's  curses,  had 
such  an  effect  (for  a  father's  curses  are  to  be 
dreaded,  let  the  father  be  what  he  will)  that 
about  midnight,  when  we  were  under  foil  sail, 
with  our  oars  laid  by,  we  saw  by  the  light  of  the 
moon,  hard  by  us,  a  round-sterned  vessel  with 
all  her  sails  out,  coming  ahead  of  us,  which  she 
did  so  close  to  us,  that  we  were  forced  to  strike 
our  sail  not  to  run  foul  of  her ;  and  the  vessel 
likewise  seemed  to  endeavour  to  let  us  go  by. 
They  had  come  so  near  us  to  ask  from  whence 
we  came,  and  whither  we  were  going  ?  But 
doing  it  in  French,  the  renegade  forbid  us  to 
answer,  saying  without  doubt,  these  are  French 
pirates,  to  whom  every  thing  is  prize.      This 


DON  QUIXOTE.  277 

made  us  all  be  silent ;  and  as  we  sailed  on,  they 
being  under  the  wind,  fired  two  guns  at  us, 
both,  as  it  appeared,  with  chain-shot,  for  one 
brought  our  mast  by  the  board,  and  the  other 
went  through  us,  without  killing  anybody;  but 
we,  perceiving  we  were  sinking,  called  to  them 
to  come  and  take  us,  for  we  were  going  to  be 
drowned ;  they  then  struck  their  own  sails,  and 
putting  out  their  boat,  there  came  about  a  dozen 
French  on  board  us,  all  well  armed,  and  with 
their  matches  lighted.  When  they  were  close 
to  us,  seeing  we  were  but  few,  they  took  us  a- 
board  their  boat,  saying  that  this  had  happened 
to  us  for  not  answering  their  questions.  The 
renegade  had  time  to  take  a  little  coffer  or 
trunk,  full  of  Zoraida's  treasure,  and  heave  it 
overboard,  without  being  perceived  by  any- 
body. 

When  we  were  on  board  their  vessel,  after 
having  learnt  from  us  all  they  could,  they  began 
to  strip  us,  as  if  we  had  been  their  mortal 
enemies:  they  plundered  Zoraida  of  all  the 
jewels  and  bracelets  she  had  on  her  hands  and 
feet ;  but  that  did  not  so  much  trouble  me,  as 
the  apprehension  I  was  in  for  the  rich  jewel  of 
her  chastity,  which  she  valued  above  all  the 
rest.  But  that  sort  of  people  seldom  have  any 
desires  beyond  the  getting  of  riches,  which  they 


278  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

saw  in  abundance  before  their  eyes ;  and  their 
covetousness  was  so  sharpened  by  it,  that  even 
our  slaves'  clothes  tempted  them.  They  con- 
sulted what  to  do  with  us ;  and  some  were  of 
opinion  to  throw  us  overboard,  wrapt  up  in  a 
sail,  because  they  intended  to  put  into  some  of 
the  Spanish  ports,  under  the  notion  of  being  of 
Britany ;  and  if  they  carried  us  with  them,  they 
might  be  punished,  and  their  roguery  come  to 
light:  but  the  captain,  who  thought  himself 
rich  enough  with  Zoraida's  plunder,  said  he 
would  not  touch  at  any  port  of  Spain,  but  make 
his  way  through  the  Straits  by  night,  and  so 
return  to  Rochelle,  from  whence  he  came.  This 
being  resolved,  they  bethought  themselves  of 
giving  us  their  long  boat,  and  what  provision 
we  might  want  for  our  short  passage.  As  soon 
as  it  was  day,  and  that  we  descried  the  Spanish 
shore,  at  which  sight,  so  desirable  a  thing  is 
liberty,  all  our  miseries  vanished  from  our 
thoughts  in  a  moment,  they  began  to  prepare 
things,  and  about  noon  they  put  us  on  board, 
giving  us  two  baiTcls  of  water,  and  a  small 
quantity  of  biscuit;  and  the  captain,  touched 
with  some  remorse  for  the  lovely  Zoraida,  gave 
her,  at  parting,  about  forty  crowns  in  gold,  and 
would  not  suffer  his  men  to  take  from  her  those 
clothes  which  now  she  has  on.    We  went  aboard 


DON  QXnXOTE.  279 

showing  ourselves  rather  thankfiil  than  com- 
plaining. They  got  out  to  sea,  making  for  the 
Straits,  and  we  having  the  land  before  us  for 
our  north-star,  plied  our  oars,  so  that  about 
sunset  we  were  near  enough  to  have  landed 
before  it  was  quite  dark ;  but  considering  the 
moon  was  hid  in  clouds,  and  the  heavens  were 
growing  dark,  and  we  ignorant  of  the  shore,  we 
did  not  think  it  safe  to  venture  on  it,  though 
many  among  us  were  so  desirous  of  liberty,  and 
to  be  out  of  all  danger,  that  they  would  have 
landed,  though  on  a  desert  rock ;  and  by  that 
means,  at  least,  we  might  avoid  all  little  barks 
of  the  pirates  of  the  Barbary  coast,  such  as  those 
of  Tetuan,  who  come  from  home  when  it  is 
dark,  and  by  morning  are  early  upon  the 
Spanish  coast ;  where  they  often  make  a  prize, 
and  go  home  to  bed  the  same  day.  But  the 
other  opinion  prevailed,  which  was  to  row 
gently  on,  and  if  the  sea  and  shore  gave  leave, 
to  land  quietly  where  we  could.  We  did 
accordingly,  and  about  midnight  we  came 
under  a  great  hill,  which  had  a  sandy  shore, 
convenient  enough  for  our  landing.  Here  we 
run  our  boat  in  as  far  as  we  could,  and  being 
got  on  land,  we  all  kissed  it  for  joy,  and 
thanked  God  with  tears  for  our  deliverance.^ 

>  See  Apiwiidix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XIV.,  Book  IV. 


280  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

This  done,  we  took  out  the  little  provision  we 
had  left,  and  climbed  up  the  mountain,  think- 
ing ourselves  more  in  safety  there ;  for  we  could 
hardly  persuade  ourselves,  nor  believe,  that 
the  land  we  were  upon  was  the  Christian 
shore. 

We  thought  the  day  long  a-coming,  and 
then  we  got  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  to  see  if  we 
could  discover  any  habitations ;  but  we  could 
nowhere  descry  either  house,  or  person,  or  path. 
We  resolved,  however,  to  go  farther  on,  as 
thinking  we  could  not  miss  at  last  of  some- 
body to  inform  us  where  we  were  :  that  which 
troubled  me  most  was,  to  see  my  poor  Zoraida 
go  on  foot  among  the  sharp  rocks,  and  I  would 
sometimes  have  carried  her  on  my  shoulders ; 
but  she  was  so  much  concerned  at  the  pains  I  took, 
as  she  could  be  at  what  she  endured  ;  so  leaning 
on  me  she  went  on  with  much  patience  and 
content.  When  we  were  gone  about  a  quarter 
of  a  league,  we  heard  the  sound  of  a  little  pipe, 
which  we  took  to  be  a  certain  sign  of  some 
flock  near  us ;  and  looking  well  about,  we  per- 
ceived, at  last,  at  the  foot  of  a  cork-tree,  a 
young  shepherd,  who  was  cutting  a  stick  with 
his  knife  with  great  attention  and  seriousness. 
We  called  to  him,  and  he  having  looked  up,  ran 
away  as  hard  as  he  could.     It  seems,  as  we 


DON  QUIXOTE.  281 

afterwards  heard,  the  first  he  saw  were  the  rene- 
gade and  Zoraida,  who  being  in  the  Moorish 
dress,  he  thought  all  the  Moors  in  Barbary  were 
upon  him;  and  running  into  the  wood,  cried  all 
the  way  as  loud  as  he  could,  "Moors,  Moors!  arm, 
arm,  the  Moors  are  landed."  We  hearing  this 
outcry,  did  not  well  know  what  to  do ;  but 
considering  that  the  shepherd's  roaring  would 
raise  the  country,  and  the  horse-guard  of  the 
coast  would  be  upon  us,  we  agreed  that  the 
renegade  should  pull  oflF  his  Turkish  habit,  and 
put  on  a  slave's  coat,  which  one  of  us  lent  him, 
though  he  that  lent  it  him  remained  in  his  shirt. 
Thus  recommending  ourselves  to  God,  we  went 
on  by  the  same  way  that  the  shepherd  ran,  still 
expecting  when  the  horse  would  come  upon  us; 
and  we  were  not  deceived,  for  in  less  than  two 
hours,  as  we  came  down  the  hills  into  a  plain, 
we  discovered  about  fifty  horse  coming  upon  a 
half-gallop  towards  us ;  when  we  saw  that,  we 
stood  still,  expecting  them. 

As  soon  as  they  came  up,  and,  instead  of  so 
many  Moors,  saw  so  many  poor  Christian 
captives,  they  were  astonished.  One  of  them 
asked  us  if  we  were  the  occasion  of  the  alarm 
that  a  young  shepherd  had  given  the  country  ? 
Yes,  said  I,  and  upon  that  began  to  tell  him 
who  we  were,  and  whence  we  came ;  but  one  of 


282  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

our  company  knew  the  horseman  that  had 
asked  us  the  question ;  and  without  letting  me 
go  on,  said,  "  God  be  praised,  gentlemen,  for 
bringing  us  to  so  good  a  part  of  the  country,  for 
if  I  mistake  not,  we  are  near  Velez  Malaga; 
and  if  the  many  years  of  my  captivity  have  not 
taken  my  memory  from  me  too,  I  think  that 
you,  sir,  who  ask  us  these  questions,  are  my 
uncle  Don  Pedro  Bustamente."  The  Christian 
slave  had  hardly  said  this,  but  the  gentleman 
lighting  from  his  horse,  came  hastily  to  embrace 
the  young  slave,  saying,  *'  Dear  nephew,  my  joy, 
my  life,  I  know  thee,  and  have  often  lamented 
thy  loss,  and  so  has  thy  mother  and  thy  other 
relations,  whom  thou  wilt  yet  find  alive.  God 
has  preserved  them,  that  they  may  have  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  thee.  We  had  heard  thou 
wert  in  Algiers,  and  by  what  I  see  of  thy  dress, 
and  that  of  all  this  company,  you  must  all  have 
had  some  miraculous  deliverance." — "It  is  so,'* 
replied  the  young  man,  "and  we  shall  have 
time  enough  now  to  tell  all  our  adventures." 
The  rest  of  the  horsemen,  hearing  we  were 
Christians  escaped  from  slavery,  lighted  likewise 
from  their  horses,  offering  them  to  us  to  carry 
us  to  the  city  of  Velez  Malaga,  which  was  about 
a  league  and  a  half  off.  Some  of  them  went 
where  we  had  left  our  boat,  and  got  it  into  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  283 

port,  while  others  took  us  up  behind  them;  and 
Zoraida  rid  behind  the  gentleman,  uncle  to  our 
captive.  All  the  people,  who  had  already  heard 
something  of  our  adventure,  came  out  to  meet 
us;  they  did  not  wonder  to  see  captives  at 
liberty,  nor  Moors  prisoners;  for  in  all  that 
coast  they  are  used  to  it ;  but  they  were  aston- 
ished at  the  beauty  of  Zoraida,  which  at  that 
instant  seemed  to  be  in  its  point  of  perfection; 
for,  what  with  the  agitation  of  travelling,  and 
what  with  the  joy  of  being  safe  in  Christendom, 
without  the  terrible  thought  of  being  retaken, 
she  had  such  a  beautiful  colour  in  her  counten- 
ance, that  were  it  not  for  fear  of  being  too 
partial,  I  durst  say,  there  was  not  a  more  beau- 
tiful creature  in  the  world,  at  least  that  I  had 
seen.  We  went  straight  to  church,  to  thank 
God  for  his  great  mercy  to  us ;  and  as  we  came 
into  it,  and  that  Zoraida  had  looked  upon  the 
pictures,  she  said  there  were  several  faces  there 
that  were  like  Lela  Marien's ;  we  told  her  they 
were  her  pictures,  and  the  renegade  explained 
to  her  as  well  as  he  could  the  story  of  them, 
that  she  might  adore  them,  as  if  in  reality  each 
of  them  had  been  the  true  Lela  Marien,  who 
had  spoke  to  her;  and  she,  who  has  a  good  and 
clear  understanding,  comprehended  immediately 
all  that  was  said  about  the  pictures  and  images. 


284  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

After  this  we  were  dispersed,  and  lodged  in 
different  houses  of  the  town ;  but  the  young 
Christian  slave  of  Velez  carried  me,  Zoraida, 
and  the  renegade,  to  his  father's  house,  where 
we  were  accommodated  pretty  well,  according  to 
their  ability,  and  used  with  as  much  kindness 
as  their  own  son.  After  six  days'  stay  at  Velez, 
the  renegade  having  informed  himself  of  what 
was  needful  for  him  to  know,  went  away  to 
Granada,  there  to  be  re-admitted  by  the  holy 
Inquisition  into  the  bosom  of  the  church.  The 
other  Christians,  being  at  liberty,  went  each 
whither  he  thought  fit.  Zoraida  and  I  remained 
without  other  help  than  the  forty  crowns  the 
pirate  gave  her,  with  which  I  bought  the  ass 
she  rides  on,  and,  since  we  landed,  have  been 
to  her  a  father  and  a  friend,  but  not  a  husband. 
We  are  now  going  to  see  whether  my  father 
be  alive,  or  if  either  of  my  brothers  has  had 
better  fortune  than  I;  though  since  it  hath 
pleased  heaven  to  give  me  Zoraida,  and  make  me 
her  companion,  I  reckon  no  better  fortune  could 
befall  me.  The  patience  with  which  she  bears 
the  inconvenience  of  poverty,  the  desire  she 
shows  of  being  made  a  Christian,  do  give  me 
subject  of  continual  admiration,  and  oblige  me 
to  serve  and  love  her  all  the  days  of  my  life. 
I  confess  the  expectation  of  being  hers  is  not  a 


DON  QUIXOTE.  285 

little  allayed  with  the  uncertainties  of  knowing 
whether  I  shall  find  in  my  country  any  one  to 
receive  us,  or  a  comer  to  pass  my  life  with  her; 
and  perhaps  time  will  have  so  altered  the  affairs 
of  our  family,  that  I  shall  not  find  anybody 
that  will  know  me,  if  my  father  and  brothers 
are  dead. 

This  is,  gentlemen,  the  sum  of  my  adventures, 
which,  whether  or  no  they  are  entertaining,  you 
are  best  judges.  I  wish  I  had  told  them  more 
compendiously ;  and  yet,  I  assure  you,  the  fear 
of  being  tedious  has  made  me  cut  short  many 
circumstances  of  my  story. 


286  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 


CHAPTER   XV. 

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  WHAT  HAPPENED  IN  THE  INN,  WITH 
SEVERAL  OTHER  OCCURRENCES  WORTH  NOTICE. 

Here  the  stranger  ended  his  story,  and  Don 
Ferdinand,  by  way  of  compliment,  in  the  be- 
half of  the  whole  company,  said,  "  Truly,  cap- 
tain, the  wonderful  and  surprising  turns  of 
your  fortune  are  not  only  entertaining,  but  the 
pleasing  and  graceful  manner  of  your  relation 
is  as  extraordinary  as  the  adventures  them- 
selves. We  are  all  bound  to  pay  you  our 
acknowledgments,  and  I  believe  we  could  be 
delighted  with  a  second  recital,  though  it  were 
to  last  till  to-morrow,  provided  it  were  made 
by  you."  Cardenio  and  the  rest  of  the  com- 
pany joined  with  him  in  oflfering  their  utmost 
service  in  the  re-establishment  of  his  fortune, 
and  that  with  so  much  sincerity  and  earnestness, 
that  the  captain  had  reason  to  be  satisfied  of 
their  affection.  Don  Ferdinand  particularly 
proposed  to  engage  the  Marquis  his  brother  to 
stand  godfather  to  Zoraida,  if  he  would  return 
with  him;    and,  farther,  promised  to  provide 


DON  QUIXOTE.  287 

him  with  all  things  necessary  to  support  his 
figure  and  quality  in  town;  but  the  captain, 
making  them  a  very  handsome  compliment  for 
their  obliging  favours,  excused  himself  from 
accepting  those  kind  ofiers  at  that  time. 

It  was  now  growing  towards  the  dark  of  the 
evening,  when  a  coach  stopped  at  the  inn,  and 
with  it  some  horsemen,  who  asked  for  a  lodging. 
The  hostess  answered,  they  were  as  full  as  they 
could  pack.  "Were  you  ten  times  fuller," 
answered  one  of  the  horsemen,  "  here  must  be 
room  made  for  my  Lord  Judge,  who  is  in  this 
coach."  The  hostess,  hearing  this,  was  very 
much  concerned ;  said  she,  "  The  case,  sir,  is 
plain ;  we  have  not  one  bed  empty  in  the 
house ;  but  if  his  lordship  brings  a  bed  with 
him,  as  perhaps  he  may,  he  shall  command  my 
house  with  all  my  heart,  and  I  and  my  husband 
will  quit  our  own  chamber  to  serve  him." — 
"  Do  so,  then,"  said  the  man ;  and  by  this 
time  a  gentleman  alighted  from  the  coach, 
easily  distinguishable  for  a  man  of  dignity 
and  office,  by  his  long  gown  and  great  sleeves. 
He  led  a  young  lady  by  the  hand,  about 
sixteen  years  of  age,  dressed  in  a  riding  suit ; 
her  beauty  and  charming  air  attracted  the  eyes 
of  every  body  with  admiration ;  and  had  not 
the  other  ladies  been  present,  any  one  might 


288  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

have  thought  it  difficult  to  have  matched  her 
outward  graces. 

Don  Quixote,  seeing  them  come  near  the 
door,  "  Sir/'  said  he,  "  you  may  enter  undis- 
mayed, and  refresh  yourselves  in  this  castle, 
which,  though  little,  and  indifferently  provided, 
must  nevertheless  allow  a  room,  and  afford 
accommodation  to  arms  and  learning;  and 
more  especially  to  arms  and  learning,  that, 
like  yours,  bring  beauty  for  their  guide  and 
conductor.  For  certainly,  at  the  approach  of 
this  lovely  damsel,  not  only  castles  ought  to 
open  and  expand  their  gates,  but  even  rocks 
divide  their  solid  bodies,  and  mountains  bow 
their  ambitious  crests  and  stoop  to  entertain 
her.  Come  in,  therefore,  sir;  enter  this 
paradise,  where  you  shall  find  a  bright  con- 
stellation, worthy  to  shine  in  conjunction  with 
that  heaven  of  beauty  which  you  bring.  Here 
shall  you  find  arms  in  their  height,  and  beauty 
in  perfection."  Don  Quixote's  speech,  mien, 
and  garb,  put  the  judge  to  a  strange  nonplus ; 
and  he  was  not  a  little  surprised,  on  the  other 
hand,  at  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  three 
ladies,  who,  being  informed  of  the  judge's 
coming,  and  the  young  lady's  beauty,  were 
come  out  to  see  and  entertain  her.  But  Don 
Ferdinand,  Cardenio,  and  the  curate,  addressing 


$> 


DON  QUIXOTE.  289 

him  in  a  style  very  different  from  the  knight, 
soon  convinced  him  that  he  had  to  do  with 
gentlemen,  and  persons  of  note ;  though  Don 
Quixote's  figure  and  behaviour  put  him  to  a 
stand,  not  being  able  to  make  any  reasonable 
conjecture  of  his  extravagance.  After  the 
usual  civilities  passed  on  both  sides,  they 
found,  upon  examination,  that  the  women 
must  all  lie  together  in  Don  Quixote's  apart- 
ment, and  the  men  remain  without  to  guard 
them.  The  judge  consented  that  his  daughter 
should  go  with  the  ladies,  and  so,  what  with 
his  own  bed,  and  what  with  the  innkeeper's, 
he  and  the  gentlemen  made  a  shift  to  pass  the 
night. 

The  captain,  upon  the  first  sight  of  the 
judge,  had  a  strong  presumption  that  he  was 
one  of  his  brothers,  and  presently  asked  one  of 
his  servants  his  name  and  country.  The 
fellow  told  him,  his  name  was  Juan  Peres  de 
Viedma,  and  that,  as  he  was  informed,  he  was 
bom  in  the  Highlands  of  Leon.  This,  with 
his  own  observation,  confirmed  his  opinion, 
that  this  was  the  brother  who  had  made  study 
his  choice;  whereupon,  calling  aside  Don 
Ferdinand,  Cardenio,  and  the  curate,  he  told 
them  with  great  joy  what  he  had  learned,  with 
what  the  servant  further  told  him,  that  his 

U.  T 


290  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

master  being  made  a  judge  of  the  court  of 
Mexico,  was  then  upon  his  journey  to  the 
Indies;  that  the  young  lady  was  his  only 
daughter,  whose  mother,  dying  in  child-birth, 
settled  her  dowry  upon  her  daughter  for  her 
portion ;  and  that  the  father  had  still  lived  a 
widower,  and  was  very  rich.  Upon  the  whole 
matter  he  asked  their  advice,  whether  they 
thought  it  proper  for  him  to  discover  himself 
presently  to  his  brother,  or  by  some  means  try 
how  his  pulse  beat  first  in  relation  to  his  loss, 
by  which  he  might  guess  at  his  reception. 
"  Why  should  you  doubt  of  a  kind  one,  sir?" 
said  the  curate.  **  Because  I  am  poor,  sir," 
said  the  captain,  "and  would  therefore  by  some 
device  fathom  his  afiections;  for,  should  he 
prove  ashamed  to  own  me,  I  should  be  more 
ashamed  to  discover  myself." — "Then  leave 
the  management  to  me,"  said  the  curate;  "the 
afifable  and  courteous  behaviour  of  the  judge 
seems  to  me  so  very  far  fi-om  pride,  that  you 
need  not  doubt  a  welcome  reception;  but 
however,  because  you  desire  it,  I  will  engage 
to  find  a  way  to  sound  him."  Supper  was 
now  upon  the  table,  and  all  the  gentlemen  sat 
down,  but  the  captain,  who  eat  with  the  ladies 
in  the  next  room.  When  the  company  had 
half   supped,   "My  Lord    Judge,"    said    the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  »1 

curate,  "  I  remember  about  some  years  ago,  I 
was  happy  in  the  acquaintance  and  friendship 
of  a  gentleman  of  your  name,  when  I  was  a 
prisoner  in  Constantinople.  He  was  a  captain 
of  as  much  worth  and  courage  as  any  in  the 
Spanish  infantry,  but  as  unfortunate  as  brave." 
— "  What  was  his  name,  pray,  sir?"  said  the 
judge.  "Ruy  Peres  de  Viedma,"  answered 
the  curate,  "  of  a  town  in  the  mountains  of 
Leon.  I  remember  he  told  me  a  very  odd 
passage  between  his  father,  his  two  brothers, 
and  himself;  and  tnily  had  it  come  from  any 
man  of  less  credit  and  reputation,  I  should 
have  thought  it  no  more  than  a  story.  He 
said,  that  his  father  made  an  equal  dividend 
of  his  estate  among  his  three  sons,  giving  them 
such  advice  as  might  have  fitted  the  mouth  of 
Cato ;  that  he  made  arms  his  choice,  and  with 
such  success,  that  within  a  few  years,  by  the 
pure  merit  of  his  bravery,  he  was  made  captain 
of  a  foot  company,  and  had  a  fair  prospect  of 
being  advanced  to  a  colonel ;  but  his  fortune 
forsook  him  where  he  had  most  reason  to  ex- 
pect her  favour ;  for,  in  the  memorable  battle 
of  Lepanto,  where  so  many  Christians  recovered 
their  liberty,  he  unfortunately  lost  his.  I  was 
taken  at  Goletta,  and,  after  difierent  turns  of 
fortune,  we  became  companions  at  Constan- 


292  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

tinople;  thence  we  were  carried  to  Algiers, 
where  one  of  the  strangest  adventures  in  the 
world  befell  this  gentleman."  The  curate  then 
briefly  ran  through  the  whole  story  of  the  cap- 
tain and  Zoraida,  (the  judge  sitting  all  the  time 
more  attentive  than  he  ever  did  on  the  bench,) 
to  their  being  taken  and  stripped  by  the  French; 
and  that  he  had  heard  nothing  of  them  after 
that,  nor  could  ever  learn  whether  they  came  into 
Spain,  or  were  carried  prisoners  into  France. 

The  captain  stood  listening  in  a  corner,  and 
observed  the  motions  of  his  brother's  counten- 
ance, while  the  curate  told  his  story ;  which, 
when  he  had  finished,  the  judge,  breathing  out 
a  deep  sigh,  and  the  tears  standing  in  his  eyes, 
**0  sir!'*  said  he,  "if  you  knew  how  nearly 
your  relation  touches  me,  you  would  easily  ex- 
cuse the  violent  eruption  of  these  tears.  The 
captain  you  spoke  of  is  my  eldest  brother,  who, 
being  of  a  stronger  constitution  of  body,  and 
more  elevated  soul,  made  the  glory  and  fame  of 
war  his  choice,  which  was  one  of  the  three  pro- 
posals made  by  my  father,  as  your  companion 
told  you.  I  applied  myself  to  study,  and  my 
younger  brother  has  purchased  a  vast  estate  in 
Peru,  out  of  which  he  has  transmitted  to  my 
father  enough  to  support  his  liberal  disposition; 
and  to  me,  wherewithal  to  continue  my  studies, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  293 

and  advance  myself  to  the  rank  and  authority 
which  I  now  maintain.  My  father  is  still  alive, 
but  dies  daily  for  grief  he  can  learn  nothing  of 
his  eldest  son,  and  importunes  Heaven  incess- 
antly, that  he  may  once  more  see  him  before 
death  close  his  eyes.  It  is  very  strange,  con- 
sidering his  discretion  in  other  matters,  that 
neither  prosperity  nor  adversity  could  draw  one 
line  from  him,  to  give  his  father  an  account  of 
his  fortunes.  For  had  he  or  we  had  the  least 
hint  of  his  captivity,  he  needed  not  staid  for 
the  miracle  of  the  Moorish  Lady's  cane  for  his 
deliverance.  Now  am  I  in  the  greatest  uneasi- 
ness in  the  world,  lest  the  French,  the  better 
to  conceal  their  robbery,  may  have  killed  him ; 
the  thoughts  of  this  will  damp  the  pleasure  of 
my  voyage,  which  I  thought  to  prosecute  so  plea- 
santly. Could  I  but  guess,  dear  brother,'*  con- 
tinued he,  "where  you  might  be  found,  I  would 
hazard  life  and  fortune  for  your  deliverance! 
could  our  aged  father  once  understand  you  were 
alive,  though  hidden  in  the  deepest  and  darkest 
dungeon  in  Barbary,^  his  estate,  mine,  and  my 
brother's,  all  should  fly  for  your  ransom  !  And 
for  the  fair  and  liberal  Zoraida,  what  thanks, 
what  recompense,  could  we  provide?  0  might 
I  see  the  happy  day  of  her  spiritual  birth  and 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Book  IV.,  Chapter  XV. 


294  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

baptism ;  to  see  her  joined  to  him  in  faith  and 
marriage,  how  should  we  all  rejoice?"  These 
and  such  like  expressions  the  judge  uttered  with 
so  much  passion  and  vehemency,  that  he  raised 
a  concern  in  every  body. 

The  curate,  foreseeing  the  happy  success  of 
his  design,  resolved  to  prolong  the  discovery  no 
farther;  and,  to  free  the  company  from  sus- 
pense, he  went  to  the  ladies'  room,  and,  leading 
out  Zoraida,  followed  by  the  rest,  he  took  the 
captain  by  the  other  hand,  and,  presenting  them 
to  the  judge,  "  Suppress  your  grief,  my  lord," 
said  he,  "  and  glut  your  heart  with  joy.  Behold 
what  you  so  passionately  desired,  your  dear 
brother,  and  his  fair  deliverer ;  this  gentleman 
is  Captain  Yiedma,  and  this  the  beautifril 
Algerine.  The  French  have  only  reduced  them 
to  this  low  condition,  to  make  room  for  your 
generous  sentiments  and  liberality."  The  cap- 
tain then  approaching  to  embrace  the  judge, 
he  held  him  off  with  both  his  hands,  to  view  him 
well ;  but,  once  knowiog  him,  he  flew  into  his 
arms  with  such  affection,  and  such  abundance 
of  tears,  that  all  the  spectators  sympathized  in 
his  passions.  The  brothers  spoke  so  feelingly, 
and  their  mutual  affection  was  so  moving,  the 
surprise  so  wonderful,  and  their  joy  so  trans- 
porting, that  it  must  be  left  purely  to  imagin- 


DON  QUIXOTE.  295 

ation  to  conceive.  Now  they  tell  one  another 
the  strange  turns  and  mazes  of  their  fortunes, 
then  renew  their  caresses  to  the  height  of 
brotherly  tenderness.  Now  the  judge  embraces 
Zoraida,  then  makes  her  an  offer  of  his  whole 
fortune ;  next  makes  his  daughter  embrace  her; 
then  the  sweet  and  innocent  converse  of  the 
beautiful  Christian  and  the  lovely  Moor,  so 
touched  the  whole  company,  that  they  all  wept 
for  joy.  In  the  meantime,  Don  Quixote  was 
very  solidly  attentive,  and,  wondering  at  these 
strange  occurrences,  attributed  them  purely  to 
something  answerable  to  the  chimerical  notions 
which  are  incident  to  chivalry.  The  captain 
and  Zoraida,  in  concert  with  the  whole  com- 
pany, resolved  to  return  with  their  brother  to 
Seville,  and  thence  to  advise  their  father  of  his 
arrival  and  liberty,  that  the  old  gentleman 
should  make  the  best  shift  he  could  to  get  so 
far  to  see  the  baptism  and  marriage  of  Zoraida, 
while  the  judge  took  his  voyage  to  the  Indies, 
being  obliged  to  make  no  delay,  because  the 
Indian  fleet  was  ready  at  Seville,  to  set  sail  in 
a  month  for  New  Spain. 

Everything  being  now  settled  to  the  uni- 
versal satisfaction  of  the  company,  and  being 
very  late,  they  all  agreed  for  bed,  except  Don 
Quixote,  who  would  needs  guaad  the  castle  while 


296  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

they  slept,  lest  some  lyrant  or  giant,  covetous 
of  the  great  treasure  of  beauty  which  it  inclosed, 
should  make  some  dangerous  attempt.  He  had 
the  thanks  of  the  house,  and  the  judge,  being 
further  informed  of  his  humour,  was  not  a 
little  pleased.  Sancho  Panza  was  very  uneasy 
and  waspish  for  want  of  sleep,  though  the  best 
provided  with  a  bed,  bestowing  himself  on  his 
pack-saddle ;  but  he  paid  dearly  for  it,  as  we 
shall  hear  presently.  The  ladies  being  retired 
to  their  chamber,  and  every  body  else  retired  to 
rest,  and  Don  Quixote  planted  sentinel  at  the 
castle  gate,  a  voice  was  heard  of  a  sudden 
singing  so  sweetly,  that  it  allured  all  their 
attentions,  but  chiefly  Dorothea's,  with  whom 
the  judge's  daughter.  Donna  Clara  de  Viedma, 
lay.  None  could  imagine  who  could  make 
such  pretty  music  without  an  instrument. 
Sometimes  it  sounded  as  from  the  yard,  some- 
times as  from  the  stable.  With  this  Gardenio 
knocked  softly  at  their  door :  ^^  Ladies,  ladies," 
said  he,  "  are  you  awake?  Can  you  sleep  when 
so  charmingly  serenaded?  Do  not  you  hear 
how  sweetly  one  of  the  footmen  sings?" — 
'*  Yes,  sir,"  said  Dorothea,  "  we  hear  him  plain- 
ly." Then  Dorothea,  hearkening  as  attentively 
as  she  could,  heard  this  song. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  S97 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE  PLEASANT  STORY  OP  THE  YOUNG  BfULETEER, 
WITH  OTHER  STRANGE  ADVENTURES  THAT  HAP- 
PENED IN  THE  INN. 

A  SONO. 

I. 

**  Toss'd  in  doubts  and  fears  I  rove 
On  the  stonny  seas  of  love ; 
Far  from  comfort,  far  from  port, 
Beanty's  prLee,  and  fortune's  sport : 
Yet  my  heart  disclaims  despair, 
While  I  trace  my  leading  star. 

IL 

^  But  reservedness,  like  a  cloud, 
Does  too  oft  her  glories  shroud. 
Pierce  to  the  gloom,  reviving  light  t 
Be  auspicious  as  you're  bright 
As  you  hide  or  dart  your  beams, 
Your  adorer  sinks  or  swims." 

Dorothea  thought  it  would  not  be  much 
amiss  to  give  Donoa  Clara  the  opportunity  of 
hearing  so  excellent  a  voice,  wherefore  jogging 
her  gently,  first  on  one  side,  and  then  on  the 
other,  and  the  young  lady  waking,  "  I  ask  your 
pardon,  my  dear,"  cried  Dorothea,  "for  thus 


298  THE  ACHIEVEBiENTS  OF 

interrupting  your  repose ;  and  I  hope  you  will 
easily  forgive  me,  since  I  only  wake  you  that 
you  may  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  one  of 
the  most  charming  voices  that  possibly  you 
ever  heard  in  your  life."  Donna  Clara,  who 
was  hardly  awake,  did  not  perfectly  understand 
what  Dorothea  said,  and  therefore  desired  her 
to  repeat  what  she  had  spoke  to  her.  Dorothea 
did  so ;  which  then  obliged  Donna  Clara  also 
to  listen ;  but  scarce  had  she  heard  the  early 
musician  sing  two  verses,  ere  she  was  taken  with 
a  strange  trembling,  as  if  she  had  been  seized 
with  a  violent  fit  of  a  quartan  ague,  and  then 
closely  embracing  Dorothea,  "  Ah !  dear 
madam,"  cried  she,  with  a  deep  sigh,  **  why 
did  you  wake  me  ?  Alas  !  the  greatest  happi- 
ness I  could  now  have  expected,  had  been  to 
have  stopped  my  ears:  that  unhappy  musician!" 
— **How  is  this,  my  dear?"  cried  Dorothea; 
"  have  you  not  heard  that  the  young  lad  who 
sung  now  is  but  a  muleteer  ?  " — **  Oh  no,  he  is 
no  such  thing,"  replied  Clara,  **  but  a  young 
lord,  heir  to  a  great  estate,  and  has  such  a  full 
possession  of  my  heart,  that  if  he  does  not 
slight  it,  it  must  be  his  for  ever."  Dorothea 
was  strangely  surprised  at  the  young  lady's 
passionate  expressions,  that  seemed  far  to  exceed 
those  of  persons  of  her  tender  years:  "You 


DON  QUIXOTE.  299 

speak  so  mysteriously,  madam,"  replied  she, 
"  that  I  cannot  rightly  understand  you,  unless 
you  will  please  to  let  me  know  more  plainly, 
what  you  would  say  of  hearts  and  sighs,  and 
this  young  musician,  whose  voice  has  caused  so 
great  an  alteration  in  you.  However,  speak  no 
more  of  them  now ;  for  I  am  resolved  I  will  not 
lose  the  pleasure  of  hearing  him  sing.'' — '*Hold," 
continued  she,  "I  fancy  he  is  going  to  entertain 
us  with  another  song." — "  With  all  my  heart," 
returned  Clara,  and  with  that  she  stopt  her 
ears,  that  she  might  not  hear  him ;  at  which 
again  Dorothea  could  not  choose  but  admire; 
but  listening  to  his  voice,  she  heard  the  follow- 
ing song. 

HOPE, 


"  Unconquer'd  Hope  !  thou  bane  of  fear, 

And  last  deserter  of  the  brave ; 
Thou  soothing  ease  of  mortal  care, 

Thou  traveller  beyond  the  grave ; 
Thou  soul  of  patience^  airy  food, 
Bold  warrant  of  a  distant  good, 
Eeviving  cordial,  kind  decoy  : 

Though  fortune  frowns  and  friends  depart, 
Though  Sylvia  flies  me,  flattering  joy, 

Nor  thou,  nor  love,  shall  leave  my  doating  heart 

11. 

•  The  phoenix,  Hope,  can  wing  her  flight 
Through  the  vast  deserts  of  the  skies^ 
And  still  defying  fortune's  spite, 
Kevive,  and  from  her  ashes  rise. 


300  THE  ACHIEYEMEMTS  OF 

Then  soar,  and  promiiey  thoogh  in  tbib. 
What  reason's  self  deapans  to  gain. 
Thoa  onl J,  O  presuming  trust, 

Can'st  feed  ns  still,  jet  nerer  doj : 
And  eren  a  Tirtue  when  mynst, 

Postpone  imt  pain,  and  antedate  our  J07. 

m 

"  No  slaye,  to  lazy  ease  resigned. 

E'er  triomph'd  orer  noble  foes ; 
The  monarch,  Fortone,  most  is  kind 

To  him  who  bfavelj  dares  oppose. 
They  say,  love  sets  his  blessings  high ; 
Bat  who  would  piiie  an  easy  joy ! 
Then  m  my  scomfol  £ur  poraue. 

Though  the  ooy  beauty  still  denies ; 
I  grorel  now  on  earth,  'tis  true, 

But  rais'd  by  her,  the  humble  slaye  may  rise.* 

Here  the  voice  ended,  and  Donna  Clara's 
sighs  began,  which  caused  the  greatest  curiosity 
imaginable  in  Dorothea,  to  know  the  occasion 
of  so  moving  a  song,  and  of  so  sad  a  complaint; 
wherefore  she  again  entreated  her  to  pursue 
the  discourse  she  had  begun  before.  Then 
Clara,  fearing  Lucinda  would  over-hear  her, 
getting  as  near  Dorothea  as  was  possible,  laid 
her  mouth  so  close  to  Dorothea's  ear,  that  she 
was  out  of  danger  of  being  understood  by  any 
other ;  and  began  in  this  manner.  "  He  who 
sung  is  a  gentleman's  son  of  Arragon,  his 
father  is  a  great  lord,  and  dwelt  just  over- 
against  my  fistther's  at  Madrid ;  and  though  he 
had   always  canvas  windows  in  winter   and 


DON  QUIXOTE.  801 

lattices  in  summer,*  yet,  I  cannot  tell  by  what 
accident  this  young  gentleman,  who  then  went 
to  school,  had  a  sight  of  me,  and  whether  it 
were  at  church,  or  at  some  other  place.  I  can- 
not justly  tell  you ;  but  in  short,  he  fell  in  love 
with  me,  and  made  me  sensible  of  his  passion 
from  his  own  windows,  which  were  opposite  to 
mine,  with  so  many  signs,  and  such  showers 
of  tears,  that  at  once  forced  me  both  to  believe 
and  to  love  him,  without  knowing  for  what 
reason  I  did  so.  Amongst  the  usual  signs  that 
he  made  me,  one  was  that  of  joining  his  hands 
together,  intimating  by  that  his  desire  to  marry 
me;  which,  though  I  heartily  wished  it,  I 
could  not  communicate  to  any  one,  being 
motherless,  and  having  none  near  me  whom  I 
might  trust  with  the  management  of  such  an 
affair ;  and  was  therefore  constrained  to  bear  it 
in  silence,  without  permitting  him  any  other 
favour,  more  than  to  let  him  gaze  on  me,  by 
lifting  up  the  lattice  or  oiled  cloth  a  little, 
when  my  fistther  and  his  were  abroad.  At 
which  he  would  be  so  transported  with  joy, 
that  you  would  certainly  have  thought  he  had 
been  distracted.  At  last  my  father's  business 
called  him  away ;  yet  not  so  soon,  but  that  the 

*  Qlaas  windows  are  not  used  in  Spain,  at  least  they  are  not  common, 
and  formerly  there  were  none. 


mat  TSK  ACBOMTeMMara  or 

joan^  gudeman  had  nodoe  of  it  some  time 
befi»e  hjB  depstme;  whence  he  had  it  I  know 
noc  £kr  h  ma  rmprwirihle  ix  me  to  acquaint 
him  widi  it.  This  so  sensSklkj  aflBicted  him^  as 
£sr  maI  nndefstand,  diat  he  fell  dck ;  so  that  I 
coald  not  get  a  aght  of  him  aQ  the  da  j  of  our 
deparmre.  ao  much  as  to  look  a  fiEueweU  on 
him.  Bat  after  two  days'  travel,  just  as  we 
came  into  an  inn,  in  a  TiDage  a  day's  jonmey 
hence,  I  saw  him  at  the  inn-door,  dressed  so 
exactly  like  a  mnleteer,  that  it  had  been  utterly 
impossible  for  me  to  haye  known  him,  had  not 
his  perfect  image  been  stamped  in  my  sonL 
Tes,  yes,  dear  madam,  I  knew  him,  and  was 
amazed  and  oveijoyed  at  the  sight  of  him;  and 
he  saw  me  unknown  to  my  &ther,  whose  sight 
he  carefdlly  avoids,  when  we  cross  the  ways  in 
our  journey,  and  when  we  come  to  any  inn : 
and  now,  since  I  know  who  he  is,  and  what 
pain  and  fatigue  it  must  necessarily  be  to  him 
to  travel  thus  afoot,  I  am  ready  to  die  myself 
with  the  thought  of  what  he  suflfers  on  my 
account ;  and  wherever  he  sets  his  feet,  there 
I  set  my  eyes.  I  cannot  imagine  what  he 
proposes  to  himself  in  this  attempt;  nor  by 
what  means  he  could  thus  make  his  escape 
from  his  father,  who  loves  him  beyond  ex- 
pression, both  because  he  has  no  other  son  and 


DON  QUIXOTE.  308 

heir,  and  because  the  young  gentleman's  merits 
oblige  him  to  it;  which  you  must  needs  confess 
when  you  see  him :  and  I  dare  affirm,  beside, 
that  all  he  has  sung  was  his  own  immediate 
composition;  for,  as  I  have  heard,  he  is  an 
excellent  scholar,  and  a  great  poet.  And  now 
whenever  I  see  him,  or  hear  him  sing,  I  start 
and  tremble,  as  at  the  sight  of  a  ghost,  lest  my 
father  should  know  him,  and  so  be  informed  of 
our  mutual  affection.  I  never  spoke  one  word 
to  him  in  my  life ;  yet  I  love  him  so  dearly, 
that  it  is  impossible  I  should  live  without  him. 
This,  dear  madam,  is  all  the  account  I  can 
give  you  of  this  musician,  with  whose  voice 
you  have  been  so  well  entertained,  and  which 
alone  might  convince  you  that  he  is  no 
muleteer,  as  you  were  pleased  to  say,  but  one 
who  is  master  of  a  great  estate,  and  of  my  poor 
heart,  as  I  have  already  told  you." 

"  Enough,  dear  madam,"  replied  Dorothea, 
kissing  her  a  thousand  times ;  *'  it  is  very  well, 
compose  yourself  till  day-light;  and  then  I 
trust  in  heaven  I  shall  so  manage  your  affairs, 
that  the  end  of  them  shall  be  as  fortunate  as 
the  beginning  is  innocent." — "  Alas!  madam," 
returned  Clara,  "what  end  can  I  propose  to 
myself;  since  his  father  is  so  rich,  and  of  so 
noble  a  family,  that  he  will  hardly  think  me 


304  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

worthy  to  be  his  son's  servant,  much  less  his 
wife?  And  then  again,  I  would  not  marry 
without  my  father's  consent  for  the  universe. 
All  I  can  desire  is,  that  the  young  gentleman 
would  return  home,  and  leave  his  pursuit  of 
me :  happily  by  a  long  absence,  and  the  great 
distance  of  place,  the  pain,  which  now  so  much 
afflicts  me,  may  be  somewhat  mitigated;  though 
I  fear  what  I  now  propose  as  a  remedy,  would 
rather  increase  my  distemper:  though  I  cannot 
imagine  whence,  or  by  what  means,  this 
passion  for  him  seized  me,  since  we  are  both 
so  young,  being  much  about  the  same  age,  I 
believe;  and  my  father  says  I  shall  not  be 
sixteen  till  next  Michaelmas."  Dorothea  could 
not  forbear  laughing  to  hear  the  young  lady 
talk  so  innocently. — "My  dear,"  said  Dorothea, 
"let  us  repose  ourselves  the  little  remaining 
part  of  the  night,  and,  when  day  appears,  we 
will  put  a  happy  period  to  your  sorrows,  or  my 
judgment  fails  me."  Then  they  addressed 
themselves  again  to  sleep,  and  there  was  a 
deep  silence  throughout  all  the  inn ;  only  the 
innkeeper's  daughter  and  Maritomes  were 
awake,  who  knowing  Don  Quixote's  blind  side 
very  well,  and  that  he  sat  armed  on  horse* 
back,  keeping  guard  without  doors,  a  fancy 
took  them,  and  they  agreed  to  have  a  little 


DON  QUIXOTE.  305 

pastime  with  him,  and  hear  some  of  his  fine 
out-of-the-way  speeches. 

You  must  know,  then,  that  there  was  but 
one  window  in  all  the  inn  that  looked  out  into 
the  field,  and  that  was  only  a  hole  out  of 
which  they  used  to  throw  their  straw :  to  this 
same  hole,  then,  came  these  two  demy-ladies, 
whence  they  saw  Don  Quixote  mounted  and 
leaning  on  his  lance,  and  fetching  such  mourn- 
ful and  deep  sighs,  that  his  very  soul  seemed 
to  be  torn  fi-om  him  at  each  of  them:  they 
observed  besides,  that  he  said  in  a  soft  amorous 
tone, — '*0  my  divine  Dulcinea  del  Toboso! 
the  heaven  of  all  perfections!  the  end  and 
quintessence  of  discretion !  the  treasury  of 
sweet  aspect  and  behaviour !  the  magazine  of 
virtue !  and,  in  a  word,  the  idea  of  all  that  is 
profitable,  modest,  or  delightful  in  the  universe! 
What  noble  thing  employs  thy  excellency  at 
this  present  ?  May  I  presume  to  hope  that  thy 
soul  is  entertained  with  the  thoughts  of  thy 
captive-knight,  who  voluntarily  exposes  him- 
self to  so  many  dangers  for  thy  sake?  0  thou 
triformed  luminary,  give  me  some  account  of 
her!  perhaps  thou  art  now  gazing  with  envy 
on  her,  as  she  is  walking  either  through  some 
stately  gallery  of  her  sumptuous  palaces,   or 

leaning  on  her   happy   window,  there  medi- 
u.  u 


306  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

tating  how,  with  safety  of  her  honour  and 
grandeur,  she  may  sweeten  and  alleviate  the 
torture  which  my  poor  afflicted  heart  suflfers 
for  love  of  her;  with  what  glories  she  shall 
crown  my  pains,  what  rest  she  shall  give  to  my 
cares,  what  life  to  my  death,  and  what  reward 
to  my  services.  And  thou,  more  glorious 
planet,  which  by  this  time,  I  presume,  art 
harnessing  thy  horses  to  pay  thy  earliest  visit 
to  my  adorable  Dulcinea;  I  entreat  thee,  as 
soon  as  thou  dost  see  her,  to  salute  her  with 
my  most  profound  respects:  but  take  heed, 
that  when  thou  look'st  on  her,  and  addressest 
thyself  to  her,  that  thou  dost  not  kiss  her  face ; 
for  if  thou  dost,  I  shall  grow  more  jealous  of 
thee,  than  ever  thou  wert  of  the  swift  ingrate, 
who  made  thee  run  and  sweat  so  over  the 
plains  of  Thessaly,  or  the  banks  of  Peneus,  I 
have  forgotten  through  which  of  them  thou 
rannest,  so  raging  with  love  and  jealousy." 
At  these  words  the  innkeeper's  daughter  began 
to  call  to  him  softly : — '*  Sir  knight,"  said  she, 
'*  come  a  little  nearer  this  way  if  you  please." 
— At  these  words  Don  Quixote  turned  his 
head,  and  the  moon  shining  then  very  bright, 
he  perceived  somebody  called  him  from  the 
hole,  which  he  fancied  was  a  large  window 
ftill  of  iron-bars,  all  richly  gilt,  suitable  to  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  307 

stately  castle,  for  which  he  mistook  the  inn ; 
and  all  on  a  sudden,  he  imagined  that  the 
beautiful  damsel,  daughter  to  the  lady  of  the 
castle,  overcome  by  the  charms  of  his  person, 
returned  to  court  him,  as  she  did  once  before. 
In  this  thought,  that  he  might  not  appear  un- 
civil or  ungrateful,  he  turned  Rozinante  and 
came  to  the  hole ;  where  seeing  the  two  lasses, 
"Fair  damsels,"  said  he,  **I  cannot  but  pity 
you  for  your  misplaced  aflfection,  since  it  is 
altogether  impossible  you  should  meet  with 
any  return  from  the  object  of  your  wishes 
proportionable  to  your  great  merits  and  beauty; 
but  yet  you  ought  not  by  any  means  to  con*- 
demn  this  unhappy  knight  -  errant  for  his 
coldness,  since  love  has  utterly  incapacitated 
him  to  become  a  slave  to  any  other  but  to  her 
who,  at  first  sight,  made  herself  absolute  mis- 
tress of  his  soul.  Pardon  me  therefore, 
excellent  lady,  and  retire  to  your  apartment. 
Let  not,  I  beseech  you,  any  ftirther  arguments 
of  love  force  me  to  be  less  gratefiil  or  civil 
than  I  would :  but  if,  in  the  passion  you  have 
for  me,  you  can  bethink  yourself  of  anything 
else  wherein  I  may  do  you  any  service,  love 
alone  excepted,  command  it  freely;  and  I 
swear  to  you  by  my  absent,  yet  most  charming 
enemy,   to   sacrifice  it  to    you    immediately, 


906  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

though  it  be  a  lock  of  Mediisa*s  hair,  which 
are  aU  snakes,  or  the  rerv  son-beams  endoeed 
in  a  glass-Tial.'* 

'^  My  lady  needs  none  of  those  things,  sir 
knight/'  repHed  Maritomes. — "What  then 
would  she  command  ?  "  asked  Don  Qoixote. — 
"  Only  the  honour  of  one  of  yonr  feir  hands,'" 
returned  Maritomes.  ''  to  satisfy,  in  some  mea- 
sure,  that  violent  passion  which  has  obliged  her 
to  come  hither  with  the  great  hazard  of  her 
honour :  for  if  m j  lord,  her  &ther,  should  know 
it,  the  cutting  off  one  of  her  beautiful  ears  were 
the  least  thing  he  would  do  to  her." — "  Oh ! 
that  he  durst  attempt  it !  **  cried  Don  Quixote ; 
"  but  I  know  he  dare  not,  unless  he  has  a  mind 
to  die  the  most  unhappy  death  that  ever  &ther 
suffered,  for  sacrilegiously  depriving  his  amorous 
daughter  of  one  of  her  delicate  members." 
Maritomes  made  no  doubt  that  he  would  comply 
with  her  desire,  and  having  already  laid  her 
design,  got  in  a  trice  to  the  stable,  and  brought 
Sancho  Panza's  ass's  halter  to  the  hole,  just  as 
Don  Quixote  was  got  on  his  feet  upon  Bozin- 
ante's  saddle,  more  easily  to  reach  the  barri- 
caded window,  where  he  imagined  the 
enamoured  lady  staid ;  and  lifting  up  his  hand 
to  her,  said,  '^  Here,  madam,  take  the  hand,  or 
rather,  as  I  may  say,  the  executioner  of  all 


DON  QUIXOTE.  309 

earthly  miscreants;  take,  I  say,  that  hand, 
which  never  woman  touched  before;  no,  not 
even  she  herself  who  has  entire  possession  of  my 
whole  body ;  nor  do  I  hold  it  up  to  you  that 
you  may  kiss  it,  but  that  you  may  observe  the 
contexture  of  the  sinews,  the  ligament  of  the 
muscles,  and  the  largeness  and  dilatation  of  the 
veins ;  whence  you  may  conclude  how  strong 
that  arm  must  be,  to  which  such  a  hand  is 
joined/' — "We  shall  see  that  presently,"  replied 
Maritornes,  and  cast  the  noose  she  had  made 
in  the  halter  on  his  wrist ;  and  then  descending 
from  the  hole,  she  tied  the  other  end  of  the 
halter  very  fast  to  the  lock  of  the  door.  Don 
Quixote  being  sensible  that  the  bracelet  she 
had  bestowed  on  him  was  very  rough,  cried, 
**  You  seem  rather  to  abuse  than  compliment 
my  hand;  but  1  beseech  you  treat  it  not  so 
unkindly,  since  that  is  not  the  cause  why  I  do 
not  entertain  a  passion  for  you ;  nor  is  it  just 
or  equal  you  should  discharge  the  whole  tempest 
of  your  vengeance  on  so  small  a  part.  Con- 
sider, those  who  love  truly,  can  never  be  so 
cruel  in  their  revenge."  But  not  a  soul 
regarded  what  he  said;  for  as  soon  as 
Maritornes  had  fastened  him,  she  and  her 
confederate,  almost  dead  with  laughing,  ran 
away,     and     left    him    so    strongly    obliged, 


810  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

that  it  was  impossible  he  should  disengage 
himself. 

He  stood  then,  as  I  said,  on  Rozinante's  sad- 
dle, with  all  his  arm  drawn  into  the  hole,  and 
the  rope  fiustened  to  the  lock,  being  under  a 
fearful  apprehension,  that  if  Rozinante  moved 
but  never  so  little  on  any  side,  he  should  slip 
and  hang  by  the  arm,  and  therefore  durst  not 
use  the  least  motion  in  the  world,  though  he 
might  reasonably  have  expected  from  Rozin- 
ante's  patience  and  gentle  temper,  that  if  he 
were  not  urged,  he  would  never  have  moved  for 
a  whole  age  together  of  his  own  accord.  In 
short,  the  knight,  perceiving  himself  fest,  and 
that  the  ladies  had  forsaken  him,  immediately 
concluded  that  all  this  was  done  by  way  of  en- 
chantment, as  in  the  last  adventure  in  the  very 
same  castle,  when  the  enchanted  Moor  (the 
carrier)  did  so  damnably  maul  him.  Then  he 
began  alone  to  curse  his  want  of  discretion  and 
conduct,  since  having  once  made  his  escape  out 
of  that  castle  in  so  miserable  a  condition,  he 
should  venture  into  it  a  second  time;  for,  by 
the  way,  it  was  an  observation  among  all 
knights-errant,  that  if  they  were  once  foiled  in 
an  adventure,  it  was  a  certain  sign  it  was 
not  reserved  for  them,^  but  for  some  other  to 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chi4>ter  XVI.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  811 

finish;  wherefore  they  would  never  prove  it 
again.  Yet,  for  all  this,  he  ventured  to  draw 
back  his  arm,  to  try  if  he  could  free  himself; 
but  he  was  so  fast  bound,  that  his  attempt 
proved  fruitless.  It  is  true,  it  was  with  care 
and  deliberation  he  drew  it,  for  fear  Rozinante 
should  stir:  and  then  fain  would  he  have 
seated  himself  on  the  saddle ;  but  he  found  he 
must  either  stand,  or  leave  his  arm  for  a  ransom. 
A  hundred  times  he  wished  for  Amadis's  sword, 
on  which  no  enchantment  had  power  ;  then  he 
fell  a  cursing  his  stars ;  then  reflected  on  the 
great  loss  the  world  would  sustain  all  the  time 
he  should  continue  under  his  enchantment,  as 
he  really  believed  it ;  then  his  adorable  Dulcinea 
came  afresh  into  his  thoughts;  many  a  time 
did  he  call  to  his  trusty  squire  Sancho  Fanza, 
who,  buried  in  a  profound  sleep,  lay  stretched 
at  length  on  his  ass's  pannel,  never  so  much  as 
dreaming  of  the  pangs  his  mother  felt  when  she 
bore  him;  then  the  aid  of  the  necromancers 
Lirgandeo  and  Alquife  was  invoked  by  the  un- 
happy knight.  And,  in  fine,  the  morning  sur- 
prised him,  racked  with  despair  and  confusion, 
bellowing  like  a  ball;  for  he  could  not  hope 
from  day-light  any  cure,  or  mitigation  of  his 
pain,  which  he  believed  would  be  eternal,  being 
absolutely  persuaded  he  was  enchanted,  since 


812  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

he  perceived  that  Eozinante  moved  no  more 
than  a  mountain;  and  therefore  he  was  of 
opinion,  that  neither  he  nor  his  horse  should 
eat,  drink,  or  sleep,  but  remain  in  that  state 
till  the  malignancy  of  the  stars  were  o'erpast, 
or  till  some  more  powerfiil  magician  should 
break  the  charm. 

But  it  was  an  erroneous  opinion ;  for  it  was 
scarce  day-break,  when  four  horsemen,  very 
well  accoutred,  their  firelocks  hanging  at  the 
pommels  of  their  saddles,  came  thither,  and 
finding  the  inn-gate  shut,  called  and  knocked 
very  loud  and  hard ;  which  Don  Quixote  per- 
ceiving fi-om  the  post  where  he  stood  sentinel, 
cried  out  with  a  rough  voice  and  a  haughty 
mein,  **  Knights,  or  squires,  or  of  whatsoever 
other  degree  you  are,  knock  no  more  at  the 
gates  of  this  castle,  since  you  may  assure 
yourselves,  that  those  who  are  within  at  such 
an  hour  as  this,  are  either  taking  their  repose, 
or  not  accustomed  to  open  their  fortress,  till 
Phoebus  has  displayed  himself  upon  the  globe ; 
retire,  therefore,  and  wait  till  it  is  clear  day, 
and  then  we  will  see  whether  it  is  just  or  no, 
that  they  should  open  their  gates  to  you." — 
"  What  a  devil,"  cried  one  of  them,  **  what 
cafitle  or  fortress  is  this,  that  we  should  be 
obliged   to   so  long  a  ceremony?     Pr'ythee, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  313 

friend,  if  thou  art  the  innkeeper,  bid  them 
open  the  door  to  us ;  for  we  ride  post,  and  can 
stay  no  longer  than  just  to  bait  our  horses." — 
"  Gentlemen,"  said  Don  Quixote,  "  do  I  look 
like  an  innkeeper  then?" — "I  cannot  tell 
what  thou  art  like,"  replied  another,  **  but  I 
am  sure  thou  talkest  like  a  madman,  to  call 
this  a  castle." — "  It  is  a  castle,"  returned  Don 
Quixote,  **  ay,  and  one  of  the  best  in  the  pro- 
vince, and  contains  one  who  has  held  a  sceptre 
in  her  hand,  and  wore  a  crown  on  her  head." — 
"It  might  more  properly  have  been  said 
exactly  contrary,"  replied  the  traveller,  "  a 
sceptre  in  her  tail,  and  a  crown  in  her  hand : 
yet  it  is  not  unlikely  that  there  may  be  a  com- 
pany of  strollers  within,  and  those  do  frequently 
hold  such  sceptres,  and  wear  such  crowns  as 
thou  pratest  of:  for  certainly  no  person  worthy 
to  sway  a  sceptre,  or  wear  a  crown,  would 
condescend  to  take  up  a  lodging  in  such  a 
paltry  inn  as  this,  where  I  hear  so  little  noise." 
— *'  Thou  hast  not  been  much  conversant  in 
the  world,"  said  Don  Quixote,  '*  since  thou  art 
so  miserably  ignorant  of  accidents  so  frequently 
met  with  in  knight-errantry." — The  com- 
panions of  him  that  held  this  tedious  discourse 
with  Don  Quixote,  were  tired  with  their  foolish 
chattering  so  long  together,  and  therefore  they 


3U  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

returned  with  greater  ftiry  to  the  gate,  where 
they  knocked  so  violently,  that  they  waked 
both  the  innkeeper  and  his  gaests ;  and  so  the 
host  rose  to  ask  who  was  at  the  door. 

In  the  meantime  Rozinante,  pensive  and 
sad,  with  ears  hanging  down,  and  motionless, 
bore  up  his  outstretched  lord,  when  one  of  the 
horses  those  four  men  rode  upon,  walked  to- 
wards Rozinante,  to  smell  him ;  and  he,  truly 
being  real  flesh  and  blood,  though  very  like  a 
wooden  block,  could  not  choose  but  be  sensible 
of  it,  nor  forbear  turning  to  smell  the  other, 
which  so  seasonably  came  to  comfort  and 
divert  him ;  but  he  had  hardly  stirred  an  inch 
from  his  place,  when  Don  Quixote's  feet,  that 
were  close  together,  slipt  asunder,  and,  tumbling 
from  the  saddle,  he  had  inevitably  fidlen  to  the 
ground,  had  not  his  wrist  been  securely  fiistened 
to  the  rope ;  which  put  him  to  so  great  a  tor- 
ture, that  he  could  not  imagine  but  that  his 
hand  was  cutting  off,  or  his  arm  tearing  from 
his  body;  yet  he  hung  so  near  the  ground, 
that  he  could  just  reach  it  with  the  tips  of 
his  toes,^  which  added  to  his  torment;  for, 
perceiving  how  little  he  wanted  to  the  setting 
his  feet  wholly  on  the  ground,  he  strove  and 
tugged  as  much  as  he  could  to  effect  it ;  not 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  XVI.,  Book  IV. 


i 


DON  QUIXOTE.  815 

much  unlike  those  that  su£fer  the  strapade, 
who  put  themselves  to  greater  pain  in  striving 
to  stretch  their  limbs,  deluded  by  the  hopes  of 
touching  the  ground,  if  they  could  but  inch 
themselves  out  a  little  longer. 


316  THE  ACHIEVEllENTS  OF 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

A  CONTINUATION   OP  THE   STRANGE  ADVENTURES  IN 

THE  INN. 

The  miserable  outcries  of  Don  Quixote 
presently  drew  the  innkeeper  to  the  door, 
which  he  hastily  opening,  was  strangely 
affrighted  to  hear  such  a  terrible  roaring, 
and  the  strangers  stood  no  less  surprised. 
Maritornes,  whom  the  cries  had  also  roused, 
guessing  the  cause,  ran  straight  to  the  loft, 
and,  slipping  the  halter,  released  the  Don,  who 
made  her  a  very  prostrate  acknowledgment, 
by  an  unmerciful  fall  on  the  ground.  The 
innkeeper  and  strangers  crowded  immediately 
around  him  to  know  the  cause  of  his  mis- 
fortune. He,  without  regard  to  their  questions, 
unmanacles  his  wrist,  bounces  from  the  ground, 
mounts  Rozinante,  braces  his  target,  couches 
his  lance,  and,  taking  a  large  circumference  in 
the  field,  came  up  with  a  hand-gallop:  '*  Who- 
ever," said  he,  *'  dare  affirm,  assert,  or  declare, 
that  I  have  been  justly  enchanted,  in  case  my 
lady  the  Princess  Micomicona  will  but  give  me 
leave,  I  will  tell  him  he  lies,  and  will  maintain 


DON  QUIXOTE.  317 

my  assertion  by  immediate  combat/'  The 
travellers  stood  amazed  at  Don  Quixote's 
words,  till  the  host  removed  their  wonder,  by 
informing  them  of  his  usual  extravagances  in 
this  kind,  and  that  his  behaviour  was  not  to 
be  minded.  They  then  asked  the  innkeeper 
if  a  certain  youth,  near  the  age  of  fifbeen,  had 
set  up  at  his  house,  clad  like  a  muleteer; 
adding  withal  some  farther  marks  and  tokens, 
denoting  Donna  Clara's  lover. 

He  told  them,  that  among  the  number  of 
his  guests,  such  a  person  might  pass  him  un- 
distinguished;  but  one  of  them  accidentally 
spying  the  coach  which  the  judge  rid  in,  called 
to  his  companions,  "  0,  gentlemen,  gentlemen, 
here  stands  the  coach  which  we  were  told  my 
young  master  followed,  and  here  he  must  be, 
that  is  certain ;  let  us  lose  no  time,  one  guard 
the  door,  the  rest  enter  into  the  house  to  look 
for  him.  Hold — stay,"  continued  he,  "ride 
one  about  to  the  other  side  of  the  house,  lest 
he  escape  us  through  the  back -yard." — 
"Agreed,"  says  another,  and  they  posted 
themselves  accordingly.  The  innkeeper, 
though  he  might  guess  that  they  sought  the 
young  gentleman  whom  they  had  described, 
was  nevertheless  puzzled  as  to  the  cause  of 
their  so  diligent  search.     By  this  time  the  day- 


318  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

light,  and  the  outcries  of  Don  Quixote,  had 
raised  the  whole  house,  particularly  the  two 
ladies,  Clara  and  Dorothea,  who  had  slept  but 
little,  the  one  with  the  thoughts  her  lover  was  so 
near  her,  and  the  other  through  an  earnest  desire 
she  had  to  see  him.  Don  Quixote,  seeing  the 
travellers  neither  regard  him  nor  his  challenge, 
was  ready  to  burst  with  fiiry  and  indignation ; 
and  could  he  have  dispensed  with  the  rules  of 
chivalry,  which  oblige  a  knight-errant  to  the 
finishing  one  adventure  before  his  embarking 
in  another,  he  had  assaulted  them  all,  and 
forced  them  to  answer  him  to  their  cost ;  but 
being  unfortunately  engaged  to  reinstate  the 
Princess  Micomicona,  his  hands  were  tied  up, 
and  he  was  compelled  to  desist,  expecting 
where  the  search  and  diligence  of  the  four 
travellers  would  terminate.  One  of  them 
found  the  young  gentleman  fast  asleep  by  a 
footman,  little  dreaming  of  being  followed  or 
discovered.  The  fellow  lugging  him  by  the  arm, 
cries  out,  **  Ay,  ay,  Don  Lewis,  these  are  very 
fine  clothes  you  have  got  on,  and  very  be- 
coming a  gentleman  of  your  quality ;  indeed, 
this  scurvy  bed  too  is  very  suitable  to  the  care 
and  tenderness  your  mother  brought  you  up 
with."  The  youth,  having  rubbed  his  drowsy 
eyes,  and  fixed  them  steadfastly  on  the  man, 


DON  QUIXOTE.  319 

knew  him  presently  for  one  of  his  father's 
servants,  which  struck  him  speechless  with 
surprise.  The  fellow  went  on ;  **  There  is  but 
one  way,  sir ;  pluck  up  your  spirits,  and  return 
with  us  to  your  father,  who  is  certainly  a  dead 
man  unless  you  be  recovered." — **How  came 
my  father  to  know,"  answered  Don  Lewis, 
*'that  I  took  this  way,  and  this  disguise?"— 
**One  of  your  fellow  students,"  replied  the 
servant,  "whom  you  communicated  your 
design  to,  moved  by  your  father's  lamentation 
of  your  loss,  discovered  it.  The  good  old 
gentleman  despatched  away  four  of  his  men  in 
search  of  you;  and  here  we  are  all  at  your 
service,  sir,  and  the  joyfullest  men  alive;  for 
our  old  master  will  give  us  a  hearty  welcome, 
having  so  soon  restored  him  what  he  loved  so 
much." — "  That,  next  to  Heaven,  is  as  I  please," 
said  Don  Lewis.  —  **  What  would  you,  or 
Heaven  either,  please,  sir,  but  return  to  your 
father?  Come,  come,  sir,  talk  no  more  of  it; 
home  you  must  go,  and  home  you  shall  go." 
The  footman  that  lay  with  Don  Lewis,  hearing 
this  dispute,  rose,  and  related  the  business  to 
Don  Ferdinand,  Cardenio,  and  the  rest  that 
were  now  dressed;  adding  withal,  how  the 
man  gave  him  the  title  of  Don,  with  other 
circumstances  of  their  conference.     They  being 


320  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

already  charmed  with  the  sweetness  of  his 
voice,  were  curious  to  be  informed  more  par- 
ticularly of  his  circumstances,  and  resolving  to 
assist  him,  in  case  any  violence  should  be 
oflfered  him,  went  presently  to  the  place  where 
he  was  still  contending  with  his  father's 
servant. 

By  this  Dorothea  had  left  her  chamber,  and 
with  her  Donna  Clara  in  great  disorder. 
Dorothea  beckoning  Cardenio  aside,  gave  him 
a  short  account  of  the  musician  and  Donna 
Clara;  and  he  told  her  that  his  father's 
servants  were  come  for  him.  Donna  Clara 
over-hearing  him,  was  so  exceedingly  surprised, 
that  had  not  Dorothea  run  and  supported  her, 
she  had  sunk  to  the  ground.  Cardenio 
promising  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  fair  and 
successful  end,  advised  Dorothea  to  retire  with 
the  indisposed  lady  to  her  chamber.  All  the 
four  that  pursued  Don  Lewis  were  now  come 
about  him,  pressing  his  return  without  delay, 
to  comfort  his  poor  father.  He  answered  it 
was  impossible,  being  engaged  to  put  a  busi- 
ness in  execution  first,  on  which  depended  no 
less  than  his  honour,  and  his  present  and  future 
happiness.  They  urged,  that  since  they  had 
found  him,  there  was  no  returning  for  them  with- 
out him,  and  if  he  would  not  go,  he  should  be 


DON  QUIXOTE.  321 

carried,  "  Not  unless  you  kill  me/'  answered 
the  young  gentleman;  upon  which  all  the 
company  were  joined  in  the  dispute,  Cardenio, 
Don  Ferdinand  and  his  companions,  the  judge, 
the  curate,  the  barber,  and  Don  Quixote,  who 
thought  it  needless  now  to  guard  the  castle 
any  longer.  Cardenio,  who  knew  the  young 
gentleman's  story,  asked  the  fellows  upon  what 
pretence,  or  by  what  authority,  they  could 
carry  the  youth  away  against  his  will. — *^  Sir," 
answered  one  of  them,  ^^  we  have  reason  good 
for  what  we  do ;  no  less  than  his  father's  life 
depends  upon  his  return."  —  "  Gentlemen," 
said  Don  Lewis,  "  it  is  not  proper  perhaps  to 
trouble  you  with  a  particular  relation  of  my 
aflfairs;  only  thus  much,  I  am  a  gentleman, 
and  have  no  dependence  that  should  force  me 
to  any  thing  beside  my  inclination." — "  Nay, 
but  sir,"  answered  the  servant,  *^  reason,  I  hope, 
will  force  you;  and  though  it  cannot  move 
you,  it  must  govern  us,  who  must  execute 
our  orders,  and  force  you  back;  we  only  act 
as  we  are  ordered,  sir." — '*Hold,"  said  the 
judge,  **and  let  us  know  the  whole  state  of 
the  case." — "  0  lord,  sir,"  answered  one  of  the 
servants  that  knew  him,  *'  my  lord  judge,  does  not 
your  worship  know  your  next  neighbour's  child? 
See  here,  sir,  he  has  run  away  from  his  father's 


Tttt  rSE.  jdCHIETESIE5TS  W 

.iniwe,  uifi  jia«  our  m  diese  my  'aUiPrrtfi 
'i:^  the  -ii^aniiai  )f  iiia  raznily^.  i»  Tniir  -wniMip 
.nay  ^efe  *  "Toe  ;migp^  diea  Tiewin^  Tim  mum 
tttKidreir  .cii£P^  oinu  imi  sLatm^  Mm* 
'  W"jar  'esr  is  this,  Doa  Lewis?''  -nfed  Ik: 
'  irhac  -nianry  iorrisne  ire  jnu  ■^^i^^i'iig  <hl 
jryaws  ^.  til  leruMHon  this  metamoEpiiaK 
*>  inh^cnming  joiir  iiiairnj?'*  T!ie  yrnmg 
jentienuiii  :!niiiii  act  answix'  Jk  wanL  and  die 
tears  %>o#i  in  iia  ^^ves :  the  jmige  pecceiTOi^ 
hift  iiflcrier.  iesusti  the  abur  srvana  q> 
iar>nhie  thenweL-^es  ao  larmer.  bm;  Leaswe  de 
jondi  i;ij  his  TianagPTnent:.  t^gngfng  his  wocd 

E>on  Lt^wts.  he  begg^  tzi  know  the 
of  his  dishr. 

During  their  coptprence.  they  heard  a 
ncise  at  die  Lin.  'iijcr,  jccafiooed  bv  two 
atrari^era.  who.  haviiur  loiireii  there  otct  night, 
and  seeing  the  whole  IkmiTy  30  busied  in  a 
cnrlota  inc^irr  into  the  tbnr  honemen^s 
fcTwina»,  thoTight  to  h^ve  made  off  without 
pajing  ttieir  reckoning:  but  the  innkeeper, 
who  minded  no  m^n's  business  more  than  his 
own,  stopped  them  in  the  nick,  and  demanding 
fai^  moner,  npbraided  their  nngenteel  design 
rery  sharply:  they  returned  the  compliment 
with  kick  and  cuff  so  roundly,  that  the  poor 


DON  QUIXOTE.  323 

host  cried  out  for  help.  His  wife  and  daughter 
saw  none  so  idle  as  Don  Quixote,  whom  the 
daughter  addressing,  "  I  conjure  you,  sir  knight," 
said  she,  *^  by  that  virtue  delivered  to  you  from 
heaven,  to  succour  my  distressed  father,  whom 
two  villains  are  beating  to  jelly." — "  Beautiful 
damsel,"  answered  Don  Quixote,  with  a  slow 
tone  and  profound  gravity,  *^your  petition 
cannot  at  the  present  juncture  prevail,  I  being 
withheld  from  undertaking  any  new  adventure, 
by  promise  first  to  finish  what  I  am  engaged 
in ;  and  all  the  service  you  can  expect,  is  only 
my  counsel  in  this  important  affair :  Go  with 
all  speed  to  your  father,  with  advice  to  continue 
and  maintain  the  battle  with  his  utmost 
resolution,  till  I  obtain  permission  from  the 
Princess  Micomicona  to  reinforce  him,  which 
once  granted,  you  need  make  no  doubt  of  his 
safety." — '*  Unfortunate  wretch  that  I  am,'* 
said  Maritomes,  who  overheard  him,  ^^  before 
you  can  have  this  leave,  my  master  will  be  sent 
to  the  other  world." — '^Then,  madam,"  said 
he,  "  procure  me  the  permission  I  mentioned, 
and  though  he  were  sent  into  the  other  world, 
I  will  bring  him  back  in  spite  of  hell  and  the 
devil,  or  at  least  so  revenge  his  fall  on  his 
enemies,  as  shall  give  ample  satisfaction  to  his 
surviving  friends;"  whereupon  breaking  oflfthe 


324  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

discourse,  he  went  and  threw  himself  prostrate 
before  Dorothea,  imploring  her,  in  romantic 
style,  to  grant  him  a  commission  to  march  and 
sustain  the  governor  of  that  castle,  who  was 
just  fainting  in  a  dangerous  engagement." 
The  princess  despatched  him  very  willingly; 
whereupon  presently  buckling  on  his  target, 
and  taking  up  his  sword,  he  ran  to  the  inn 
door,  where  the  two  guests  were  still  handling 
their  landlord  very  unmerciftdly:  he  there 
made  a  sudden  stop,  though  Maritornes  and 
the  hostess  pressed  him  twice  or  thrice  to  tell 
the  cause  of  his  delay  in  his  promised  assistance 
to  his  host. — **I  make  a  pause,"  said  Don 
Quixote,  "because  I  am  commanded  by  the 
law  of  arms  to  use  my  sword  against  none 
under  the  order  of  knighthood;  but  let  my 
squire  be  called,  this  affair  is  altogether  his 
province." — In  the  meantime  drubs  and  bruises 
were  incessant  at  the  inn-gate,  and  the  poor 
host  soundly  beaten.  His  wife,  daughter  and 
maid,  who  stood  by,  were  like  to  run  mad  at 
Don  Quixote's  hanging  back,  and  the  inn- 
keeper's unequal  combat;  where  we  shall  leave 
him,  with  a  design  to  return  to  his  assistance 
presently,  though  his  fool-hardiness  deserves  a 
sound  beating,  for  attempting  a  thing  he  waa 
not  likely  to    go   through   with.      We   now 


DON  QUIXOTE.  325 

return  to  hear  what  Don  Lewis  answered 
the  judge,  whom  we  left  retired  with  him, 
and  asking  the  reason  of  his  travelling  on 
foot,  and  in  so  mean  a  disguise.  The  young 
gentleman,  grasping  his  hands  very  pas- 
sionately, made  this  reply,  not  without  giving 
a  proof  of  the  greatness  of  his  sorrow  by  his 
tears. 

**  Without  ceremony  or  preamble,  I  must 
tell  you,  dear  sir,  that  from  the  instant  that 
heaven  made  us  neighbours,  and  I  saw  Donna 
Clara,  your  daughter  and  my  mistress,  I 
resigned  to  her  the  whole  command  of  my 
affections ;  and  unless  you,  whom  I  most  truly 
call  my  father,  prevent  it,  she  shall  be  my  wife 
this  very  day;  for  her  sake  I  abandoned  my 
fitther's  house;  for  her  have  I  thus  disguised 
my  quality;  her  would  I  thus  have  followed 
through  the  world :  she  was  the  north-star,  to 
guide  my  wandering  course,  and  the  mark  at 
which  my  wishes  flew.  Her  ears  indeed  are 
utter  strangers  to  my  passion;  but  yet  her  eyes 
may  guess,  by  the  tears  she  saw  flowing  from 
mine.  You  know  my  fortune  and  my  quality; 
if  these  can  plead,  sir,  I  lay  them  at  her  feet. 
Then  make  me  this  instant  your  happy  son ; 
and  if  my  father,  biassed  by  contrary  designs, 
should  not  approve  my  choice,  yet  time  may 


326  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

produce  some  favourable  turn,  and  alter  his 
mind."  —  The  amorous  youth  having  done 
speaking,  the  judge  was  much  surprised  at 
the  handsome  discovery  he  made  of  his 
aflfections,  but  was  not  a  little  puzzled  how  to 
behave  himself  in  so  sudden  and  unexpected  a 
matter;  he  therefore,  without  any  positive 
answer,  advised  him  only  to  compose  his 
thoughts,  to  divert  himself  with  his  servants, 
and  to  prevail  with  them  to  allow  him  that 
day  to  consider  on  what  was  proper  to  be  done, 
Don  Lewis  expressed  his  gratitude  by  forcibly 
kissing  the  judge's  hands,  and  bathing  them 
with  his  tears,  enough  to  move  a  heart  of  a 
cannibal,  much  more  a  judge's,  who,  being  a 
man  of  the  world,  had  presently  the  advan- 
tage of  the  match  and  preferment  of  his 
daughter  in  the  wind;  though  he  much 
doubted  the  consent  of  Don  Lewis's  father, 
who  he  knew  designed  to  match  his  son  into 
the  nobility. 

By  this  time  Don  Quixote's  entreaties  more 
tlian  threats  had  parted  the  fray  at  the  inn- 
door  ;  the  strangers  paying  their  reckoning  went 
oflF,  and  Don  Lewis's  servants  stood  expecting 
the  result  of  the  judge's  discourse  with  their 
young  master ;  when,  as  the  devil  would  have 
it  who  should  come  into  the  inn  but  the  barber 


DON  QUIXOTE.  327 

whom  Don  Quixote  had  robbed  of  Mambrino's 
helmet,  and  Sancho  of  the  pack-saddle.  As  he 
was  leading  his  beast  very  gravely  to  the 
stable,  he  spies  Sancho  mending  something 
about  the  pannel ;  he  knew  him  presently,  and 
setting  upon  him  very  roughly,  **Ay,  master 
thief,  master  rogue,"  said  he,  ''  have  I  caught 
you  at  last,  and  all  my  ass's  furniture  in  your 
hands  too  ?"  Sancho  finding  himself  so  unex- 
pectedly assaulted,  and  nettled  at  the  dishon- 
ourable terms  of  his  language,  laying  fast  hold 
on  the  pannel  with  one  hand,  gave  the  barber 
such  a  douse  on  the  chops  with  the  other,  as 
set  all  his  teeth  a  bleeding.  For  all  this  the 
barber  stuck  by  his  hold,  and  cried  out  so  loud, 
that  the  whole  house  was  alarmed  at  the  noise 
and  scuffle ;  "I  command  you,  gentlemen," 
continued  he,  "  to  assist  me  in  the  king's  name; 
for  this  rogue  has  robbed  me  on  the  king's 
high-way,  and  would  now  murder  me,  because 
I  seize  upon  my  goods." — '^That  is  a  lie," 
cried  Sancho,  *'  it  was  no  robbery  on  the  king's 
high-way,  but  lawfiil  plunder,  won  by  my  lord 
Don  Quixote  fairly  in  the  field." — The  Don 
himself  was  now  come  up,  very  proud  of  his 
squire's  behaviour  on  this  occasion,  accounting 
him  thenceforth  a  man  of  spirit,  and  designing 
him   the   honour  of  knighthood  on  the  first 


538  THE  ACHIEVEMEHTB  OF 

opportunity,  thinking  his  courage  might  prove 
a  fatore  ornament  to  the  order.  Among  other 
things  which  the  barber  urged  to  pfrore  his 
claim;  ''Oentlemen/'  said  he,  ''t^us  pack-saddle 
is  as  certainly  my  pack-saddle,  as  I  hope  to  die 
in  my  bed ;  I  know  it  as  well  as  if  it  had  heea 
bred  and  bom  with  me ;  nay,  my  very  ass  will 
witness  for  me ;  do  but  try  the  saddle  on  him, 
and  if  it  does  not  fit  him  as  close  as  can  be, 
call  me  then  a  liar.  Nay,  more  than  that, 
gentlemen,  that  very  day  when  they  robbed  mc 
of  my  pack-saddle,  they  took  away  a  special 
new  basin  which  was  never  used,  and  which 
cost  me  a  crown,'' — ^Here  Don  Quixote  could  no 
longer  contain  himself;  but  thrusting  between 
them,  he  parted  them ;  and  having  caused  the 
pack-saddle  to  be  deposited  on  the  ground  to 
open  view,  till  the  matter  came  to  a  final  de- 
cision; "That  this  honourable  company  may 
know,"  cried  he,  "in  what  a  manifest  error  this 
honest  squire  persists,  take  notice  how  he 
degrades  that  with  the  name  of  basin,  which 
was,  is,  and  shall  be,  the  helmet  of  Mambrino, 
which  I  figiirly  won  from  him  in  the  field,  and 
lawfully  made  myself  lord  of  by  force  of  arms. 
As  to  the  pack-saddle,  it  is  a  concern  that  is 
beneath  my  regard ;  all  1  have  to  urge  in  that 
affair  is,  that  my  squire  begged  my  pemussion 


DON  QUIXOTE,  329 

to  strip  that  vanquished  coward's  horse  of  his 
trappings,  to  adorn  his  own.  He  had  my 
authority  for  the  deed,  and  he  took  them.  And 
now  for  his  converting  it  from  a  horse's  furni- 
ture to  a  pack-saddle,  no  other  reason  can  be 
brought,  but  that  such  transformations  fre- 
quently occur  in  the  affairs  of  chivalry.  For  a 
confirmation  of  this,  despatch,  run,  Sancho,  and 
produce  the  helmet,  which  this  squire  would 
maintain  to  be  a  basin." — "0'  my  faith,  sir," 
said  Sancho,  **  if  this  be  all  you  can  say  for 
yourself,  Mambrino's  helmet  will  prove  as 
arrant  a  basin,  as  this  same  man's  furniture  is  a 
mere  pack-saddle." — "Obey  my  orders,"  said 
Don  Quixote;  *^I  cannot  believe  that  every 
thing  in  this  castle  will  be  guided  by  enchant- 
ment."— Sancho  brought  the  basin,  which  Don 
Quixote  holding  up  in  his  hands,  "Behold, 
gentlemen,"  continued  he,  "  with  what  face 
can  this  impudent  squire  afl&rm  this  to  be 
a  basin,  and  not  the  helmet  I  mentioned? 
Now,  I  swear  before  you  all,  by  the  order 
of  knighthood  which  I  profess,  that  this  is 
the  same  individual  helmet  which  I  won 
from  him,  without  the  least  addition  or 
diminution."  — "  That  I  will  swear,"  said 
Sancho ;  "  for  since  my  lord  won  it,  he  never 
fought    but    once    in   it,   and   that  was    the 


330  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

battle  wherein  he  freed  those  ungracious 
galley-slaves,  who,  by  the  same  token,  would 
have  knocked  out  his  brains  with  a  shower  of 
stones,  had  not  this  same  honest  basin-helmet 
saved  his  skull/* 


DON  QUIXOTE.  331 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

THE  CONTROVERSY  ABOUT  MAMBRINO's  HELMET  AND 
THE  PACK-SADDLE,  DISPUTED  AND  DECIDED ; 
WITH  OTHER  ACCIDENTS,  NOT  MORE  STRANGE 
THAN  TRUE. 

"Pray,  good  gentlemen,"  said  the  barber,  "let 
us  have  your  opinion  in  this  matter ;  I  suppose 
you  will  grant  this  same  helmet  to  be  a  basin." 
— "He  that  dares  grant  any  such  thing," 
said  Don  Quixote,  "must  know  that  he  lies 
plainly,  if  a  knight ;  but  if  a  squire,  he  lies 
abominably." — Our  barber,  who  was  privy  to 
the  whole  matter,  to  humour  the  jest,  and 
carry  the  diversion  a  little  higher,  took  up  the 
other  shaver. —  "Master  Barber,  —  you  must 
pardon  me,  sir,  if  I  do  not  give  you  your  titles, 
— ^I  must  let  you  understand,"  said  he,  "that  I 
have  served  an  apprenticeship  to  your  trade, 
and  have  been  a  freeman  in  the  company  these 
thirty  years,^  and  therefore  am  not  to  learn  what 
belongs  to  shaving.  You  must  likewise  know 
that  I  have  been  a  soldier  too  in  my  younger 
days,  and  consequently  understand  the  diflfer- 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XVIIL,  Book  IV. 


832  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

ences  between  a  helmet,  a  morion,  and  a  close- 
helmet,^  with  all  other  accoutrements  belonging 
to  a  man-of-arms.  Yet  I  say,  with  submission 
still  to  better  judgment,  that  this  piece,  here  in 
dispute  before  us,  is  as  far  from  being  a  basin, 
as  light  is  from  darkness.  Withal  I  affirm,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  although  it  be  a  helmet, 
it  is  not  a  complete  one." — "Eight,**  said  the 
Don,  "for  the  lower  part  and  the  beaver  are 
wanting." — "A  clear  case,  a  clear  case,"  said 
the  curate,  Cardenio,  Don  Ferdinand  and  his 
companions;  and  the  judge  himself,  had  not 
Lewis's  concern  made  him  thoughtftd,  would 
have  humoured  the  matter. — "Lord  have  mercy 
upon  us  now ! "  said  the  poor  barber,  half  dis- 
tracted, "is  it  possible  that  so  many  honourable 
gentlemen  should  know  a  basin  or  a  helmet  no 
better  than  this  comes  to?  Gadzookers,  I  defy 
the  wisest  university  in  all  Spain,  with  their 
scholarships,  to  show  me  the  like.  Well,  if  it 
must  be  a  helmet,  it  must  be  a  helmet,  that  is 
all.  And  by  the  same  rule  my  pack-saddle 
must  troop  too,  as  this  gentleman  says." — "  I 
must  confess,"  said  Don  Quixote,  "  as  to  out- 
ward appearance  it  is  a  pack-saddle;  but,  as  I 
have  already  said,  I  will  not  pretend  to  deter- 
mine the  dispute  as  to  that  point." — "Nay," 
said  the  curate,  "if  Don  Quixote  speak  not,  the 

»  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  XVIIL,  Book  TV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  833 

matter  will  never  come  to  a  decision  ;  because 
in  all  affairs  of  chivalry,  we  must  all  give  him 
the  preference." — '^  I  swear,  worthy  gentlemen,' ' 
said  Don  Quixote,  "that  the  adventures  I  have 
encountered  in  this  castle  are  so  strange  and 
supernatural,  that  I  must  infallibly  conclude 
them  the  eflfects  of  pure  magic  and  enchant- 
ment. The  first  time  I  ever  entered  its  gates, 
I  was  strangely  embarrassed  by  an  enchanted 
Moor  that  inhabited  it,  and  Sancho  himself  had 
no  better  entertainment  from  his  attendants; 
and  last  night  I  hung  suspended  almost  two 
hours  by  this  arm,  without  the  power  of  helping 
myself,  or  of  assigning  any  reasonable  cause  of 
my  misfortune;  so  that  for  me  to  meddle  or 
give  my  opinion  in  such  confused  and  intricate 
events,  would  appear  presumption.  I  have 
already  given  my  final  determination  as  to  the 
helmet  in  controversy,  but  dare  pronounce  no 
definite  sentence  on  the  pack-saddle,  but  shall 
remit  it  to  the  discerning  judgment  of  the 
company ;  perhaps  the  power  of  enchantment 
may  not  prevail  on  you  that  are  not  dubbed 
knights,  so  that  your  understandings  may  be  free, 
and  your  judicial  faculties  more  piercing  to  enter 
into  the  true  nature  of  these  events,  and  not 
conclude  upon  them  from  their  appearances." 
— ''Undoubtedly,"  answered   Don   Ferdinand, 


334  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

"the  decision  of  this  process  depends  upon  our 
sentiments,  according  to  Don  Quixote's  opinion; 
that  the  matter,  therefore,  may  be  fairly  dis- 
cussed, and  that  we  may  proceed  upon  solid 
and  firm  grounds,  we  will  put  it  to  the  vote. 
Let  every  one  give  me  his  suffi*age  in  my  ear, 
and  I  will  oblige  myself  to  report  them  faithfully 
to  the  board. '* 

To  those  that  knew  Don  Quixote,  this 
proved  excellent  sport;  but  to  others  unac- 
quainted with  his  humour,  as  Don  Lewis  and 
his  four  servants,  it  appeared  the  most 
ridiculous  stuff  in  nature;  three  other  travellers 
too  that  happened  to  call  in  by  the  way,  and 
were  found  to  be  officers  of  the  holy  brother- 
hood, or  pursuivants,  thought  the  people  were 
all  bewitched  in  good  earnest.  But  the  barber 
was  quite  at  his  wit's  end,  to  think  that  his 
basin,  then  and  there  present  before  his  eyes, 
was  become  the  helmet  of  Mambrino;  and 
that  his  pack-saddle  was  likewise  going  to  be 
changed  into  rich  horse-furniture.  Every  body 
laughed  very  heartily  to  see  Don  Ferdinand 
whispering  each  particular  person  very  gravely, 
to  have  his  vote  upon  the  important  contention 
of  the  pack-saddle.  When  he  had  gone  the 
rounds  among  his  own  faction,  that  were  all 
privy  to  the  jest,  ''Honest  fellow,"  said  he 


DON  QUIXOTE.  335 

very  loudly,  "  I  grow  weaxy  of  asking  so  many 
impertinent  questions ;  every  man  has  his 
answer  at  his  tongue's  end,  that  it  is  mere 
madness  to  call  this  a  pack-saddle,  and  that  it 
is  positively,  nemine  contradicente^  right  horse- 
furniture,  and  great  horse-fiimiture,  too;  be- 
sides, friend,  your  allegations  and  proofs  are  of 
no  force ;  therefore,  in  spite  of  your  ass  and 
you  too,  we  give  it  for  the  defendant,  that  this 
is,  and  will  continue  the  fiirniture  of  a  horse, 
nay,  and  of  a  great  horse  too." — "  Now  the 
devil  take  me,"  said  the  barber,*  "  if  you  be 
not  all  damnably  deceived;  and  may  I  be 
hanged  if  my  conscience  does  not  plainly  tell 
me  it  is  a  downright  pack-saddle ;  but  I  have 
lost  it  according  to  law,  and  so  fare  it  well. 
But  I  am  neither  mad  nor  drunk  sure,  for  I  am 
fresh  and  fasting  this  morning  from  every  thing 
but  sin." 

The  barber's  raving  was  no  less  diverting 
than  Don  Quixote's  clamours.  "  Sentence  is 
passed,"  cried  he;  **and  let  every  man  take 
possession  of  his  goods  and  chattels,  and 
heaven  give  him  joy." — "This  is  a  jest,  a  mere 
jest,"  said  one  of  the  four  servants;  **  certainly, 
gentlemen,  you  cannot  be  in  earnest,  you  are 

*  In  the  origmal  it  \a  d  iobrebarbero,  i,e,,  the  supemumeraiy  or 
additional  barber,  in  contradistinction  to  the  other  barber  who  appearg 
first  in  the  histoiy. 


336  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

too  wise  to  talk  at  this  rate;  for  my  part,  I  say 
and  will  maintain  it,  for  there  is  no  reason  the 
barber  should  be  wronged,  that  this  is  a  basin, 
and  that  the  pack-saddle  of  a  he-ass." — "  May 
not  it  be  a  she-ass's  pack-saddle,  friend?'*  said 
the  curate. — "That  is  all  one,  sir,"  said  the 
fellow;  **the  question  is  not  whether  it  be  a  he 
or  she-ass's  pack-saddle,  but  whether  it  be  a 
pack-saddle  or  not,  that  is  the  matter,  sir." — 
One  of  the  officers  of  the  holy  brotherhood, 
who  had  heard  the  whole  controversy,  very 
angry  to  hear  such  an  error  maintained, 
** Gentlemen,"  said  he,  "this  is  no  more  a 
horse's  saddle  than  it  is  my  father,  and  he  that 
says  the  contrary  is  drunk  or  mad." — "You 
lie  like  an  unmannerly  rascal,"  said  the  knight; 
and  at  the  same  time  with  his  lance,  which  he 
had  always  ready  for  such  occasions,  he  offered 
such  a  blow  at  the  officer's  head,  that  had  not 
the  fellow  leaped  aside  it  would  have  laid  him 
flat.  The  lance  flew  into  pieces,  and  the  rest 
of  the  officers,  seeing  their  comrade  so  abused, 
cried  out  for  help,  charging  every  one  to  aid 
and  assist  the  holy  brotherhood.  •  The  inn- 
keeper being  one  of  the  fraternity,  ran  for  his 
sword  and  rod,  and  then  joined  his  fellows. 

*  All  these  troops  of  the  holy  brotherhood  carry  wauds  or  rods  as  a 
mark  of  tbeir  office. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  337 

Don  Lewis's  servants  got  round  their  master 
to  defend  him  from  harm,  and  secure  him  lest 
he  should  make  his  escape  in  the  scuffle.  The 
barber  seeing  the  whole  house  turned  topsy- 
turvy, laid  hold  again  on  his  packnsaddle ;  but 
Sancho,  who  watched  his  motions,  was  as  ready 
as  he,  and  secured  the  other  end  of  it. 

Don  Quixote  drew  and  assaulted  the  officers 
pell-mell.  Don  Lewis  called  to  his  servants  to 
join  Don  Quixote  and  the  gentlemen  that  sided 
with  him;  for  Cardenio,  Don  Ferdinand,  and 
his  other  friends  had  engaged  on  his  side. 
The  curate  cried  out,  the  landlady  shrieked, 
her  daughter  wept,  Maritomes  howled,  Doro- 
thea was  distracted  with  fear,  Lucinda  could 
not  tell  what  to  do,  and  Donna  Clara  was 
strangely  frighted;  the  barber  pommelled 
Sancho,  and  Sancho  belaboured  the  barber. 
One  of  Don  Lewis's  servants  went  to  hold 
him,  but  he  gave  him  such  a  rebuke  on  his 
jaws,  that  his  teeth  had  like  to  have  forsook 
their  station ;  and  then  the  judge  took  him 
into  his  protection.  Don  Ferdinand  had  got 
one  of  the  officers  down,  and  laid  on  him  back 
and  side.  The  innkeeper  still  cried  out, 
"Help  the  holy  brotherhood!"  so  that  the 
whole  house  was  a  medley  of  wailings,  cries, 
shrieks,    conftisions,    fears,    terrors,    disasters, 

U.  Y 


338  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

slashes,  buffets,  blows,   kicks,    cufis,    battery, 
and  bloodshed. 

In  the  greatest  heat  of  this  hurly-burly  it 
came  into  Don  Quixote's  head,  that  he  was 
certainly  involved  in  the  disorder  and  confusion 
of  King  Agramant's  camp;  and  calling  out 
with  a  voice  that  shook  the  whole  house; 
** Hold,  valorous  knights,**  said  he,  "all  hold 
your  furious  hands,  sheath  all  your  swords,  let 
none  presume  to  strike  on  pain  of  death,  but 
hear  me  speak."  The  loud  and  monstrous 
voice  surprised  everybody  into  obedience,  and 
the  Don  proceeded :  "I  told  you  before,  gen- 
tlemen, that  this  castle  was  enchanted,  and 
that  some  legion  of  devils  did  inhabit  it :  now 
let  your  own  eyes  confirm  my  words:  do  not  you 
behold  the  strange  and  horrid  confusion  of 
King  Agramant's  army^  removed  hither,  and 
put  in  execution  among  us?  See,  see  how 
they  fight  for  the  sword,  and  yonder  for  the 
horse;  behold  how  some  contend  for  the 
helmet,  and  here  others  battle  it  for  the  stan- 
dard ;  and  all  fight  we  do  not  know  how,  nor 
can  tell  why.  Let  therefore  my  Lord  Judge, 
and  his  reverence  Master  Curate,  represent, 
one.  King  Agramant,  and  the  other  King 
Sobrino,  and  by  their  wisdom  and  conduct 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Cliapter  XVIII.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  339 

appease  this  tumult ;  for,  by  the  powers  divine, 
it  were  a  wrong  to  honour,  and  a  blot  on 
chivalry,  to  let  so  many  worthies,  as  are  here 
met,  kill  one  another  for  such  trifles," 

Don  Quixote's  words  were  Hebrew  to  the 
officers,  who  having  been  roughly  handled  by 
Cardenio,  Ferdinand,  and  his  friends,  would 
not  give  it  over  so.  But  the  barber  was  con- 
tent; for  Sancho  had  demolished  his  beard 
and  pack-saddle  both  in  the  scuffle ;  the  squire 
dutifully  retreated  at  the  first  sound  of  his 
master's  voice;  Don  Lewis's  servants  were 
calm,  finding  it  their  best  way  to  be  quiet; 
but  the  innkeeper  was  refractory.  He  swore 
that  madman  ought  to  be  punished  for  his  ill- 
behaviour,  and  that  every  hour  he  was  making 
some  disturbance  or  another  in  his  house. 
But  at  last,  the  matter  was  made  up,  the  pack- 
saddle  was  agreed  to  be  horse-furniture,  the 
basin  a  helmet,  and  the  inn  a  castle,  till  the 
day  of  judgment,  if  Don  Quixote  would  have  it 
so.  Don  Lewis's  business  came  next  in  play. 
The  judge,  in  concert  with  Don  Ferdinand, 
Cardenio,  and  the  Curate,  resolved  that  Don 
Ferdinand  should  interpose  his  authority  on 
Don  Lewis's  behalf,  and  let  his  servants  know, 
that  he  would  carry  him  to  Andalusia,  where 
he  should    be    entertained    according  to   his 


340  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

quality  by  his  brother  the  marquis ;  and  they 
should  not  oppose  this  design,  seeing  Don 
Lewis  was  positively  resolved  not  to  be  forced 
to  go  back  to  his  father  yet.  Don  Ferdinand's 
quality,  and  Don  Lewis's  resolution,  prevailed 
on  the  fellows  to  order  matters  so,  that  three 
of  them  might  return  to  acquaint  their  old 
master,  and  the  fourth  wait  on  Don  Lewis. 
Thus  this  monstrous  heap  of  confiision  and  dis- 
order was  digested  into  form,  by  the  authority 
of  Agramant,  and  wisdom  of  King  Sobrino. 

But  the  enemy  of  peace,  finding  his  project 
of  setting  them  all  by  the  ears  so  eluded,  re- 
solved once  again  to  have  another  trial  of  skill, 
and  play  the  devil  with  them  all  the  second 
bout:  for  though  the  officers,  understanding 
the  quality  of  their  adversaries,  were  willing  to 
desist,  yet  one  of  them,  whom  Don  Ferdinand 
had  kicked  most  unmercifully,  remembering 
that  among  other  warrants,  he  had  one  to 
apprehend  Don  Quixote,  for  setting  free  the 
galley-slaves,  which  Sancho  was  sadly  afraid 
would  come  about,  he  resolved  to  examine  if 
the  marks  and  tokens  given  of  Don  Quixote 
agreed  with  this  person ;  then  drawing  out  a 
parchment,  and  opening  his  warrant,  he  made 
a  shift  to  read  it,  and  every  other  word  looking 
cunningly  on  Don  Quixote's  face ;  whereupon 


DON  QUIXOTE.  341 

having  folded  up  the  parchment,  and  taking 
his  warrant  in  his  left  hand,  he  clapt  his  right 
hand  fast  in  the  knight's  collar,  crying,  "  You 
are  the  king's  prisoner ! — Gentlemen,  I  am  an 
officer,  here's  my  warrant.  I  charge  you  all  to 
aid  and  assist  the  holy  brotherhood."  Don 
Quixote,  finding  himself  used  so  rudely,  by  one 
whom  he  took  to  be  a  pitiful  scoundrel,  kindled 
up  into  such  a  rage  that  he  shook  with  indig- 
nation, and  catching  the  fellow  by  the  neck  with 
both  his  hands,  squeezed  him  so  violently, 
that  if  his  companions  had  not  presently  fireed 
him,  the  knight  would  certainly  have  throttled 
him  before  he  had  quitted  his  hold. 

The  innkeeper  being  obliged  to  assist  his 
brother  officer,  presently  joined  him  :  the  host- 
ess seeing  her  husband  engaging  a  second  time, 
raised  a  new  outcry,  her  daughter  and  Mari- 
tomes  bore  the  burden  of  the  song,  sometimes 
praying,  sometimes  crying,  sometimes  scolding  : 
Sancho,  seeing  what  passed,  **By  the  lord," 
said  he,  **  my  master  is  in  the  right;  this  place 
is  haunted,  that  is  certain ;  there  is  no  living 
quietly  an  hour  together."  At  last  Don  Fer- 
dinand parted  Don  Quixote  and  the  officer, 
who  were  both  pretty  well  pleased  to  quit  their 
bargain.  However,  the  officers  still  demanded 
their  prisoner,  and  to  have  him  delivered  bound 


342  THE  ACHIfiVEMENTS  OF 

into  their  hands,  commanding  all  the  company 
a  second  time  to  help  and  assist  them  in 
securing  that  public  robber  upon  the  king's 
high  road. 

Don  Quixote  smiled  at  the  supposed  sim- 
plicity of  the  fellows;  at  last,  with  solemn 
gravity,  "Come  hither,"  said  he,  *^you  off- 
spring of  filth,  and  extraction  of  dunghilk! 
dare  you  call  loosing  the  fettered,  fireeing  the 
captive,  helping  the  miserable,  raising  the 
fallen,  and  supplying  the  indigent,  dare 
you,  I  say,  base-spirited  rascals,  call  these 
actions  robbery?  Your  thoughts,  indeed, 
are  too  grovelling  and  servile  to  understand, 
or  reach  the  pitch  of  chivalry,  otherwise 
you  had  understood  that  even  the  shadow 
of  a  knight-errant  had  claim  to  your  adorar- 
tion.  You  a  band  of  officers!  you  are  a 
pack  of  rogues  indeed,  and  robbers  on  the 
highway  by  authority.  What  blockhead  of  a 
magistrate  durst  issue  out  a  warrant  to  appre- 
hend a  knight-errant  like  me?  Could  not  his 
ignorance  find  out  that  we  are  exempt  fi*om  all 
courts  of  judicature?  That  our  valour  is  the 
bench,  our  will  the  common  law,  and  our  sword 
the  executioner  of  justice?  Could  not  his  dul- 
ness  inform  him  that  no  rank  of  nobility  or 
peerage  enjoys  more  immunities  and  privileges? 


DON  QUIXOTE.  343 

Has  he  any  precedent  that  a  knight-errant  ever 
paid  taxes,  subsidy,  poll-money,  or  so  much  as 
fare  or  ferry?  What  tailor  ever  had  money 
for  his  clothes,  or  what  constable  ever  made 
him  a  reckoning  for  lodging  in  his  castle? 
What  kings  are  not  proud  of  his  company; 
and  what  damsels  of  his  love?  And  lastly, 
did  you  ever  read  of  any  knight-errant  that 
ever  was,  is,  or  shall  be,  that  could  not,  with 
his  single  force,  cudgel  four  hundred  such 
rogues  as  you  to  pieces,  if  they  have  the  im- 
pudence to  oppose  him?'' 


344  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE  NOTABLE  ADVENTURE  OP  THE  OFFICERS  OF  THE 
HOLY  BROTHERHOQD,  WITH  DON  QUIXOTE's  GREAT 
FEROCITY  AND  ENCHANTMENT. 

Whilst  Don  Quixote  talked  at  this  rate,  the 
curate  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  officers  that 
he  was  distracted,  as  they  might  easily  gather 
from  his  words  and  actions;  and  therefore, 
though  they  should  carry  him  before  a  magis- 
trate, he  would  be  presently  acquitted,  as  being 
a  madman.  He  that  had  the  warrant  made 
answer,  that  it  was  not  his  business  to  examine 
whether  he  were  mad  or  not;  he  was  an 
officer  in  commission,  and  must  obey  orders; 
and  accordingly  was  resolved  to  deliver  him  up 
to  the  superior  power,  which  once  done,  they 
might  acquit  him  five  hundred  times  if  they 
would.  But  for  all  that,  the  curate  persisted 
they  should  not  carry  Don  Quixote  away  with 
them  this  time,  adding,  that  the  knight  himself 
would  by  no  means  be  brought  to  it ;  and  in 
short,  said  so  much,  that  they  had  been  greater 
fools  than  he,  could  they  not  have  plainly  seen 


DON  QUIXOTE.  345 

his  madness.  They  therefore  not  only  desisted, 
but  offered  their  service  in  compounding  the 
difference  between  Sancho  and  the  barber. 
Their  mediation  was  accepted,  they  being 
officers  of  justice,  and  succeeded  so  well,  that 
both  parties  stood  to  their  arbitration,  though 
not  entirely  satisfied  with  their  award,  which 
ordered  them  to  change  their  pannels,  but  not 
their  halters  nor  the  girths.  The  curate  made 
up  the  business  of  the  basin,  paying  the  barber, 
under-hand,  eight  reals  for  it,  and  getting  a 
general  release  under  his  hand  of  all  claims  or 
actions  concerning  it,  and  all  things  else.  These 
two  important  differences  being  so  happily 
decided,  the  only  obstacles  to  a  general  peace 
were  Don  Lewis's  servants  and  the  innkeeper ; 
the  first  were  prevailed  upon  to  accept  the 
proposals  offered,  which  were,  that  three  of  them 
should  go  home,  and  the  fourth  attend  Don 
Lewis,  where  Don  Ferdinand  should  appoint. 
Thus  this  difference  was  made  up,  to  the  un 
speakable  joy  of  Donna  Clara.  Zoraida,  not  well 
understanding  any  thing  that  past,  was  sad 
and  cheerful  by  turns,  as  she  observed  others  to 
be  by  their  countenances,  especially  her  beloved 
Spaniard,  on  whom  her  eyes  were  more  particu- 
larly fixed.  The  innkeeper  made  a  hideous 
bawling ;  having  discovered  that  the  barber  had 


346  THE  ACUIKVKMENTS  OF 

received  money  for  his  basin.  ^^  He  knew  no 
reason/'  he  said,  ^'  why  he  should  not  be  paid 
as  well  as  other  folks,  and  swore  that  Bozinante 
and  Sancho's  ass  should  pay  for  their  master's 
extravagance  before  they  should  leave  his 
stable."  The  curate  pacified  him,  and  Don 
Ferdinand  paid  him  his  bill.  All  things  thus 
accommodated,  the  inn  no  longer  resembled  the 
confusion  of  Agramant's  camp,  but  rather  the 
universal  peace  of  Augustus's  reign:  upon 
which  the  curate  and  Don  Ferdinand  had  the 
thanks  of  the  house,  as  a  just  acknowledgment 
for  their  so  efiectual  mediation. 

Don  Quixote  being  now  free  from  the 
difficulties  and  delays  that  lately  embarrassed 
him,  held  it  high  time  to  prosecute  his  voyage, 
and  bring  to  some  decision  the  general  enter- 
prize  which  he  had  the  voice  and  election  for. 
He  therefore  fully  resolved  to  press  his  departure, 
and  fell  on  his  knees  before  Dorothea,  but  she 
would  not  hear  him  in  that  posture,  but  pre- 
vailed upon  him  to  rise :  he  then  addressing  her 
in  his  usual  forms,  '^  Most  beautiful  lady,"  said 
he,  "  it  is  a  known  proverb,  that  diligence  is 
the  mother  of  success ;  and  we  have  found  the 
greatest  successes  in  war  still  to  depend  on  ex- 
pedition and  despatch,  by  preventing  the  enemy's 
design,  and  forcing  a  victory  before  an  assault 


DON  QUIXOTE.  347 

is  expected.  My  inference  from  this,  most  high 
and  illustrious  lady,  is,  that  our  residence  in 
this  castle  appears  nothing  conducive  to  our 
designs,  but  may  prove  dangerous ;  for  we  may 
reasonably  suppose  that  our  enemy  the  giant 
may  learn  by  spies,  or  some  other  secret  intelli- 
gence, the  scheme  of  our  intentions,  and  con- 
sequently fortify  himself  in  some  inexpugnable 
fortress  against  the  power  of  our  utmost 
endeavours,  and  so  the  strength  of  my  invincible 
arm  may  be  ineffectual.  Let  us  therefore,  dear 
madam,  by  our  diligence  and  sudden  departure 
hence,  prevent  any  such  his  designs,  and  force 
our  good  fortune,  by  missing  no  opportunity 
that  we  may  lay  hold  of."  Here  he  stopt, 
waiting  the  princess's  answer.  She,  with  a 
grave  aspect,  and  style  suiting  his  extravagance, 
replied,  **  The  great  inclination  and  indefittig- 
able  desire  you  show,  worthy  knight,  in  assisting 
the  injured,  and  restoring  the  oppressed,  lay  a 
fair  claim  to  the  praises  and  universal  thanks 
of  mankind;  but  your  singular  concern,  and 
industrious  application  in  assisting  me,  de- 
serve my  particular  acknowledgments  and 
gratification ;  and  I  shall  make  it  my  peculiar 
request  to  heaven,  that  your  generous  designs, 
in  my  favour,  may  be  soon  accomplished,  that 
I  may  be  enabled  to  convince  you  of  the  hon- 


348  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

our  and  gratitude  that  may  be  found  in  some 
of  our  sex.  As  to  our  departure,  I  shall  de- 
pend upon  your  pleasure,  to  whose  manage- 
ment I  have  not  only  committed  the  care  of 
my  person,  but  also  resigned  the  whole  power 
of  command." — "  Then,  by  the  assistance  of 
the  divine  power,"  answered  he,  "I  will  lose 
no  opportunity  of  reinstating  your  highness, 
since  you  condescend  to  humble  yourself  to 
my  orders ;  let  our  march  be  sudden,  for  the 
eagerness  of  my  desires,  the  length  of  the 
journey,  and  the  dangers  of  delay,  are  great 
spurs  to  my  despatch.  Since,  therefore,  heaven 
has  not  created,  nor  hell  seen  the  man  I  ever 
feared,  fly  Sancho,  saddle  Rozinante,  harness 
your  ass,  and  make  ready  the  lady's  palfrey; 
let  us  take  leave  of  the  governor  here,  and 
these  other  lords,  and  set  out  from  hence 
immediately,'* 

Poor  Sancho,  hearing  all  that  passed,  shook 
his  head.  "Lord,  lord,  master,"  said  he, 
**  there  is  always  more  tricks  in  a  town  than 
are  talked  of,  with  reverence  be  it  spoken." — 
"Ho!  Villain,"  cried  Don  Quixote,  "what 
tricks  can  any  town  or  city  show  to  impair  my 
credit?" — "Nay,  sir,"  quoth  Sancho,  "if  you 
grow  angry,  I  can  hold  my  tongue,  if  that  be 
all;   but  there  are   some   things  which    you 


DON  QUIXOTE,  349 

ought  to  hear,  and  I  should  tell  as  becomes  a 
trusty  squire,  and  honest  servant." — "Say 
what  thou  wilt,"  said  the  knight,  "  so  it  tend 
not  to  cowardice ;  for  if  thou  art  afraid,  keep 
it  to  thyself,  and  trouble  not  me  with  the 
mention  of  fear,  which  my  soul  abhors." — 
"  Pshaw,  hang  fear,"  answered  Sancho,  "  that 
is  not  the  matter;  but  I  must  tell  you,  sir, 
that  which  is  as  certain  and  plain  as  the  nose 
on  your  face.  This  same  madam  here,  that 
calls  herself  the  Queen  of  the  great  kingdom 
of  Micomicon,  is  no  more  a  queen  than  my 
grandam.  For,  do  but  consider,  sir,  if  she 
were  such  a  fine  queen  as  you  believe,  can  you 
imagine  she  would  always  be  sucking  of 
snouts,^  and  kissing  and  slabbering  a  certain 
person  that  shall  be  nameless,  in  this  com- 
pany?" Dorothea  blushed  at  Sancho's  words, 
for  Don  Ferdinand  had,  indeed,  sometimes, 
and  in  private,  taken  the  freedom  with  his  Ups 
to  reap  some  part  of  the  reward  his  affection 
deserved;  which  Sancho  spying  by  chance 
made  some  constructions  upon  it,  very  much 
to  the  disadvantage  of  her  royalty;  for,  in 
short,  he  concluded  her  no  better  than  a 
woman  of  pleasure.  She  nevertheless  would 
take  no  notice  of  his  aspersion,  but  let  him  go 

*  Eodoomdo  in  the  original,  £rom  Hoeieo,  the  snout  of  any  beast 


350  THE  ACHIBVEMENTS  OF 

on ;  "I  say  this,  sir,"  continued  he,  " because 
after  our  tradging  through  all  weathers,  &ii 
and  foul,  day  after  night,  and  night  after  day, 
this  same  person  in  the  inn  here,  is  like  to  di- 
vert himself  at  our  expense,  and  to  gather  the 
fruit  of  our  labours.  I  think  therefore,  master, 
there  is  no  reason,  do  you  see,  for  saddling 
Rozinante,  harnessing  my  ass,  or  making 
ready  the  lady's  palfrey;  for  we  had  better 
stay  where  we  are ;  and  let  every  whore  brew 
as  she  bakes,  and  every  man  that  is  hungry  go 
to  dinner." 

Heavens!  into  what  a  friry  did  these  dis- 
respectftd  words  of  Sancho  put  the  knight! 
His  whole  body  shook,  his  tongue  frJtered, 
his  eyes  glowed.  "  Thou  villainous,  ignorant, 
rash,  unmannerly,  blasphemous  detractor,"  said 
he,  ^^  how  darest  thou  entertain  such  base  and 
dishonourable  thoughts,  much  more  utter  thy 
rude  and  contemptible  suspicions  before  me 
and  this  honourable  presence?  Away  from 
my  sight,  thou  monster  of  nature,  magazine  of 
lies,  cupboard  of  deceits,  granary  of  guile,  pub- 
lisher of  follies,  foe  of  all  honour !  Away,  and 
never  let  me  see  thy  fece  again,  on  pain  of  my 
most  fririous  indignation  ! "  Then  bending  his 
angry  brows,  puffing  his  cheeks,  and  stamping 
on  the  ground,  he  gave  Sancho  such  a  look 


DON  QUIXOTE.  361 

as  almost  frighted  the  poor  fellow  to   anni- 
hilation. 

In  the  height  of  this  consternation,  all  that 
the  poor  squire  could  do,  was  to  turn  his  back, 
and  sneak  out  of  the  room.  But  Dorothea 
knowing  the  knight's  temper,  undertook  to 
mitigate  his  anger.  "  Sir  Knight  of  the  Woeful 
Figure,"  said  she,  ''  assuage  your  wrath,  I  be- 
seech you;  it  is  below  your  dignity  to  be 
oflFended  at  these  idle  words  of  your  squire; 
and  I  dare  not  affirm  but  that  he  has  some 
colour  of  reason  for  what  he  said ;  for  it  were 
uncharitable  to  suspect  his  sincere  understand- 
ing, and  honest  principles,  of  any  felse  or  ma- 
licious slander  or  accusation.  We  must  there- 
fore search  deeper  into  this  aflfair,  and  believe, 
that  as  you  have  found  all  transactions  in  this 
csstle  governed  by  enchantment,  so  some 
diabolical  illusion  has  appeared  to  Sancho,  and 
represented  to  his  enchanted  sight  what  he 
asserts  to  my  dishonour." — "Now  by  the 
powers  supreme,"  said  the  knight,  "your 
highness  has  cut  the  knot.  This  misdemean- 
our of  that  poor  fellow  must  be  attributed 
purely  to  enchantment,  and  the  power  of  some 
malicious  apparition ;  for  the  good  nature  and 
simplicity  of  the  poor  wretch  could  never 
invent  a  lie,  or  be  guilty  of  an  aspersion  to  any 


352  THE  ACHIEYEMENTS  OF 

one's  disadvantage." — "  It  is  evident,"  said 
Don  Ferdinand;  "we  therefore  all  intercede 
in  behalf  of  honest  Sancho,  that  he  may  be 
again  restored  to  your  favour,  sicut  ercU  in  prinn 
cipio,  before  these  illusions  had  imposed  upon 
his  sense."  Don  Quixote  complied,  and  the 
curate  brought  in  poor  Sancho  trembling,  who 
on  his  knees  made  an  humble  acknowledg- 
ment of  his  crime,  and  begged  to  have  his 
pardon  confirmed  by  a  gracious  kiss  of  his 
master's  hand.  Don  Quixote  gave  him  his 
hand  and  his  blessing.  **  Now,  Sancho,"  said 
he,  "  will  you  hereafter  believe  what  I  so  often 
have  told  you,  that  the  power  of  enchantment 
overrules  every  thing  in  this  castle?" — "I 
will,  and  like  your  worship,"  quoth  Sancho, 
*'all  but  my  tossing  in  a  blanket;  for  really, 
sir,  that  happened  according  to  the  ordinary 
course  of  things." — "  Believe  it  not  Sancho," 
replied  Don  Quixote,  *'  for  were  I  not  convinced 
of  the  contrary,  you  should  have  plentiftd  re- 
venge; but  neither  then,  nor  now,  could  I 
ever  find  any  object  to  wreak  my  ftiry  or 
resentment  on." 

Every  one  desired  to  know  what  was  the 
business  in  question;  whereupon  the  innkeeper 
gave  them  an  account  of  Sancho's  tossing,  which 
set  them  all  a  laughing,  and  would  have  made 


DON  QUIXOTE.  353 

Sancho  angry,  had  not  his  master  afresh  assured 
him  that  it  was  only  a  mere  illusion,  which, 
though  the  squire  believed  not,  he  held  his 
tongue.  The  whole  company  having  passed 
two  days  in  the  inn,  bethought  themselves  of 
departing;  and  the  curate  and  barber  found 
out  a  device  to  carry  home  Don  Quixote,  with- 
out putting  Don  Ferdinand  and  Dorothea  to 
the  trouble  of  humouring  his  impertinence  any 
longer.  They  first  agreed  with  a  waggoner 
that  went  by  with  his  team  of  oxen,  to  carry 
him  home :  then  had  a  kind  of  a  wooden  cage 
made,  so  large  that  the  knight  might  conveni- 
ently sit  or  lie  in  it.  Presently  after  all  the 
company  of  the  inn  disguised  themselves,  some 
with  masks,  others  by  disfiguring  their  faces, 
and  the  rest  by  change  of  apparel,  so  that  Don 
Quixote  should  not  take  them  to  be  the  same 
persons.  This  done,  they  all  silently  entered 
his  chamber,  where  he  was  sleeping  very  soundly 
after  his  late  fatigues:  they  immediately  laid 
hold  on  him  so  forcibly,  and  held  his  arms  and 
legs  so  hard,  that  he  was  not  able  to  stir,  or  do 
any  thing  but  stare  on  those  odd  figures  which 
stood  round  him.  This  instantly  confirmed 
him  in  the  strange  fancy  that  had  so  long  dis- 
turbed his  crazed  understanding,  and  made 
him  believe   himself  undoubtedly  enchanted. 


# 


854  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 


f  and  those  frightful  figures  to  be  the  spirits  and 

I  demons  of  the  enchanted  castle.     So  far  the 

curate's  invention  succeeded  to  his  expectation. 
Sancho  being  the  only  person  there  in  his  right 
shape  and  senses,  beheld  all  this  very  patiently, 
i  and  though  he  knew  them  all  very  well,  yet 

f  was  resolved  to  see  the  end  of  it,  or  he  ventured 

to  speak  his  mind.  His  master  likewise  said 
nothing,  patiently  expecting  his  fate,  and 
waiting  the  event  of  his  misfortune.  They  had 
by  this  lifted  him  out  of  bed,  and  placing  him 
in  the  cage,  they  shut  him  in,  and  nailed  the 
bars  of  it  so  fast,  that  no  small  strength  could 
force  them  open.  Then  mounting  him  on 
their  shoulders,  as  they  conveyed  him  out  of 
the  chamber-door,  they  heard  as  dreadM  a 
voice  as  the  barber's  lungs  could  bellow,  speak 
these  words : 

*'  Be  not  impatient,  0  Knight  of  the  Woeful 
Figure,  at  your  imprisonment,  since  it  is 
ordained  by  the  fates,  for  the  more  speedy 
accomplishment  of  that  most  noble  adventure, 
which  your  incomparable  valour  has  intended. 
For  accomplished  it  shall  be,  when  the  rampant 
Manchegan  lion*  and  the  white  Tobosian  dove 
shall  be  united,  by  humbling  their  lofty  and 

*  It  may  be  translated  the  rampant  spotted  lion,  as  well  m  the 
rampant  Manchegan  lion  :  for  the  Spanish  word  Mancka  aignifies  both 
a  spot  and  the  country  La  Mancha,   An  antnuudatable  double  entendm 


DON  QUIXOTE.  856 

erected  chests  to  the  soft  yoke  of  wedlock,  from 
whose  wonderful  coition  shall  be  produced  and 
spring  forth  brave  whelps,  which  shall  imitate 
the  rampant  paws  of  their  valorous  sire.  And 
this  shall  happen  before  the  bright  pursuer  ot 
the  fugitive  nymph  shall,  by  his  rapid  and 
natural  course,  take  a  double  circumference  in 
visitation  of  the  luminous  signs.  And  thou, 
the  most  noble  and  faithful  squire  that  ever 
had  sword  on  thigh,  beard  on  face,  or  sense  of 
smell  in  nose,  be  not  dispirited  or  discontented 
at  this  captivity  of  the  flower  of  all  chivalry ; 
for  very  speedily,  by  the  eternal  will  of  the 
world's  Creator,  thou  shaltfind  thyself  ennobled 
and  exalted  beyond  the  knowledge  of  thy 
greatness.  And  I  confirm  to  thee,  from  the 
sage  Mentironiana,*  that  thou  shalt  not  be 
defrauded  of  the  promises  made  by  thy  noble 
lord.  I  therefore  conjure  thee  to  follow  closely 
the  steps  of  the  courageous  and  enchanted 
knight ;  for  it  is  necessarily  enjoined,  that  you 
both  go  where  you  both  shall  stay.  The  fates 
have  commanded  me  no  more,  farewell.^  For  I 
now  return,  I  well  know  whither." 

The  barber  managed  the  cadence  of  his  voice 
80  artificially  towards  the  latter  end  of  his 

*  Mentironiana  is  i^'framed  word  from  Mentira,  a  lie. 
»  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XIX.,  Book  IV. 


SM  THE  iuCHIBVmiBanS  OF 

prophecy^,  tiiac  ev^i  those  who  wore  made 
acquainted  witdi  the  jest,  had  almoat  taken  it 
ibr  snpematnraL 

Don  Qnixote  was  much  comforted  at  the 
prophecy,  apprehending  preaeitly  the  aoiae  of 
it,  and  applying  it  to  his  marriage  widi  Dolcxnea 
del  Toboso,  from  whose  happy  womb  riionLd 
isme  the  cnfas,  signifying  his  9ons.  to  the  etonal 
glory  of  La  Mancha;  upon  the  strength  of 
which  belief,  raising  his  voice^  and  hearing  a 
profound  sigh;  "Whatsoeva  thon  art^''  said 
he,  ^  whose  happy  prognostication  I  own  and 
acknowledge,  I  desire  thee  to  implore,  in  my 
name,  the  wise  magician,  whose  charge  I  am, 
that  his  power  may  protect  me  in  this  captivity, 
and  not  permit  me  to  perish  befiDre  the  frnitioQ 
of  these  gratefiil  and  incompatible  promises 
made  to  me;  for  the  confirmation  of  sach  hopes, 
I  wonld  think  my  prison  a  palace,  my  fetters 
freedom,  and  this  hard  field-bed  on  which  I  lie, 
more  easy  than  the  softest  down,  or  most 
Inxnrions  lodgings.  And  as  to  the  consolation 
offered  my  sqnire  Sancho  Panza,  I  am  so  con- 
TiDced  of  his  honesty,  and  he  has  proved  his 
hononr  in  so  many  adventures,  that  I  mistrust 
not  his  deserting  me,  through  any  change  of 
fortuue.  And  though  his  or  my  harder  stars 
should  disable  me  fi-om  bestowing  on  him  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  357 

island  I  have  promised,  or  some  equivalent,  his 
wages  at  least  are  secured  to  him  by  my  last 
will  and  testament,  though  what  he  will  receive 
is  more  answerable,  I  confess,  to  my  estate  and 
ability,  than  to  his  services  and  great  deserts." 
Sancho  Panza  made  him  three  or  four  very 
respectful  bows,  and  kissed  both  his  hands,  for 
one  alone  he  could  not,  being  both  tied  together, 
and  in  an  instant  the  demons  hoisted  up  the 
cage,  and  yoked  it  very  handsomely  to  the  team 
of  oxen. 


358  THE  ACmEVEMENTB  OF 


CHAPTER   XX. 

PROSECUTING  THE  COURSE  OP  DON  QUIXOTE's 
ENCHANTBiENT,  WITH  OTHER  MEMORABLE  OCCUR- 
RENCES. 

Don  Quixote  was  not  so  much  amazed  at  his 
enchantment,  as  at  the  manner  of  it:  **  Among 
all  the  volumes  of  chivalry  that  I  have  turned 
over,"  said  he,  "I  never  read  before  of  knights- 
errant  drawn  in  carts,^  or  tugged  along  so 
leisurely,  by  such  slothful  animals  as  oxen.  For 
they  used  to  be  hurried  along  with  prodigious 
speed,  enveloped  in  some  dark  and  dusky  cloud; 
or  in  some  fiery  chariot  drawn  by  winged 
griffins,  or  some  such  expeditious  creatures; 
but  I  must  confess,  to  be  drawn  thus  by  a  team 
of  oxen,  staggers  my  understanding  not  a  little; 
though  perhaps  the  enchanters  of  our  times  take 
a  different  method  from  those  in  former  ages. 
Or  rather  the  wise  magicians  have  invented 
some  course  in  their  proceedings  for  me,  being 
the  first  reviver  and  restorer  of  arms,  which 
have  so  long  been  lost  in  oblivion,  and  rusted 
through  the  disuse  of  chivalry.     What  is  thy 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XX.,  Book  IV 


DON  QUIXOTE.  359 

opinion,  my  dear  Sancho?" — "  Why  truly,  sir," 
said  Sancho,  *'I  cannot  tell  what  to  think,  being 
not  so  well  read  in  these  matters  as  your  wor- 
ship ;  yet  for  all  that,  I  am  positive  and  can 
take  my  oath  on  it,  that  these  same  phantoms 
that  run  up  and  down  here  are  not  orthodox." 
— "Orthodox,  my  friend?"  said  Don  Quixote, 
"  how  can  they  be  orthodox,  when  they  are 
devils,  and  have  only  assumed  these  phantasti- 
cal  bodies  to  surprise  us  into  this  condition? 
To  convince  you,  endeavour  to  touch  them,  and 
you  will  find  their  substances  are  not  material, 
but  only  subtile  air,  and  outward  appearance." 
— '*  Gadzookers,  sir,"  said  Sancho,  ''  I  have 
touched  them,  and  touched  them  again,  sir; 
and  I  find  this  same  busy  devil  here,  that  is 
fiddling  about,  is  as  plump  and  fat  as  a  capon : 
besides,  he  has  another  property  very  different 
from  a  devil ;  for  the  devils,  they  say,  smell  of 
brimstone  and  other  filthy  things,  and  this 
spark  has  such  a  fine  scent  of  essence  about 
him,  that  you  may  smell  him  at  least  half  a 
league." — Meaning  Don  Ferdinand,  who,  in  all 
probability,  like  other  gentlemen  of  his  quality, 
had  his  clothes  perfumed. 

"Alas,  honest  Sancho,"  answered  Don 
Quixote,  "  the  cunning  of  these  fiends  is  above 
the  reach  of  thy  simplicity;  for  you  must  know 


360  THE  ACHIEVEBiENTS  OP 

the  spirits,  as  spirits,  have  no  scent  at  all ;  and 
if  they  should,  it  must  necessarily  be  some  un- 
savoury stench,  because  they  still  carry  their 
hell  about  them,  and  the  least  of  a  perfume  or 
grateful  odour  were  inconsistent  with  their 
torments ;  so  that  this  mistake  of  yours  must 
be  attributed  to  some  farther  delusion  of  your 
sense."  Don  Ferdinand  and  Cardenio,  upon 
these  discourses  between  master  and  man,  were 
afraid  that  Sancho  would  spoil  all,  and  therefore 
ordered  the  innkeeper  privately  to  get  ready 
Bozinante  and  Sancho's  ass,  while  the  curate 
agreed  with  the  officers  for  so  much  a-day  to 
conduct  them  home.  Cardenio  having  hung 
Don  Quixote's  target  on  the  pommel  of  Rozin- 
ante's  saddle,  and  the  basin  on  the  other  side, 
he  signified  to  Sancho  by  signs,  that  he  should 
mount  his  ass,  and  lead  Bozinante  by  the  bridle; 
and  lastly  placed  two  officers  with  their  fire- 
locks on  each  side  of  the  cart. 

Being  just  ready  to  march,  the  hostess,  her 
daughter,  and  Maritomes,  came  to  the  door  to 
take  their  leave  of  the  knight,  pretending  un- 
supportable  grief  for  his  misfortune.  "  Restrain 
your  tears,  most  honourable  ladies,"  said  Don 
Quixote,  "  for  these  mischances  are  incident  to 
those  of  my  profession;  and  firom  these  disasters 
it  is  we  date  the  greatness  of  our  glory  and 


-,  -'  ^■ 


DON  QUIXOTE.  361 

renown ;  they  are  the  eflfects  of  envy,  which 
still  attends  virtuous  and  great  actions,  and 
brought  upon  us  by  the  indirect  means  of  such 
princes  and  knights  as  are  emulous  of  our 
dignity  and  fame :  but  spite  of  all  oppression, 
spite  of  all  the  magic,  that  ever  its  first  inventor 
Zoroafitres  understood,  virtue  wiU  come  off 
victorious ;  and  tiiumphing  over  every  danger, 
will  at  last  shine  out  in  its  proper  lustre,  like 
the  sun  to  enlighten  the  world.  Pardon  me, 
fair  ladies,  if,  through  ignorance  or  omission  of 
the  respects  due  to  your  qualities,  I  have  not 
behaved  myself  to  please  you ;  for,  to  the  best 
of  my  knowledge,  I  never  committed  a  wilful 
wrong.  And  I  crave  the  assistance  of  your 
prayers,  towards  my  enlargement  from  this 
prison,  which  some  malicious  magician  has 
confined  me  to ;  and  the  first  business  of  my 
freedom,  shall  be  a  grateful  acknowledgment 
for  the  many  and  obliging  favours  conferred 
upon  me  in  this  your  castle.'* 

Whilst  the  ladies  were  thus  entertained  by 
Don  Quixote,  the  curate  and  barber  were  busy 
taking  their  leaves  of  their  company ;  and  after 
mutual  compliments  and  embraces,  they  en- 
gaged to  acquaint  one  another  with  their 
succeeding  fortunes.  Don  Ferdinand  entreated 
the  curate  to  give  him  a  particular  relation  of 


362  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

Don  Quixote's  adventures,  assuring  him,  that 
nothing  would  be  a  greater  obligation,  and  at 
the  same  time  engaged  to  inform  him  of  his 
own  marriage  and  Lucinda's  return  to  her 
parents ;  with  an  account  of  Zoraida's  baptism, 
and  Don  Lewis's  success  in  his  amour. 

The  curate  having  given  his  word  and 
honour,  to  satisfy  Don  Ferdinand,  and  the  last 
compliments  being  past,  was  just  going,  when 
the  innkeeper  made  him  a  proflFer  of  a  bundle 
of  papers  found  in  the  folds  of  the  same  cloak- 
bag  where  he  got  The  Curious  Impertinent^ 
telling  him  withal,  that  they  were  all  at  his 
service ;  because  since  the  owner  was  not  like 
to  come  and  demand  them,  and  he  could  not 
read,  they  could  not  better  be  disposed  of. 
The  curate  thanked  him  heartily,  and  opening 
the  papers,  found  them  entitled.  The  Story  of 
Rinconete  and  Cortadillo.  The  title  showing  it 
to  be  a  novel,  and  probably  written  by  the 
author  of  The  Curious  Impertinent^  because 
found  in  the  same  wallet,  he  put  it  in  his 
pocket,  with  a  resolution  to  peruse  it  the  very 
first  opportunity:  then  mounting  with  his 
fiiend  the  barber,  and  both  putting  on  their 
masks,  they  followed  the  procession,  which 
marched  in  this  order.  The  carter  led  the 
van ;  and  next  his  cart,  flanked  on  right  and 


DON  QUIXOTE,  363 

left  with  two  officers  with  their  firelocks ;  then 
followed  Sancho  on  his  ass,  leading  Eozinante; 
and  lastly  the  curate  and  barber  on  their 
mighty  mules  brought  up  the  rear  of  the  body, 
all  with  a  grave  and  solemn  air,  marching  no 
faster  than  the  heavy  oxen  allowed.  Don 
Quixote  sat  leaning  against  the  back  of  the 
cage  with  his  hands  tied  and  his  legs  at  length; 
but  so  silent  and  motionless,  that  he  seemed 
rather  a  statue  than  a  man. 

They  had  travelled  about  two  leagues  this 
slow  and  leisurely  pace,  when  their  conductor 
stopping  in  a  little  valley,  proposed  it  as  a  fit 
place  to  bait  in ;  but  he  was  prevailed  upon  to 
defer  halting  a  little  longer,  being  informed  by 
the  barber  of  a  certain  valley  beyond  a  little 
hill  in  their  view,  better  stored  with  grass,  and 
more  convenient  for  their  purpose.  They  had 
not  travelled  much  farther  when  the  curate 
spied  coming  a  round  pace  after  them  six  or 
seven  men  very  well  accoutred ;  they  appeared, 
by  their  brisk  riding,  to  be  mounted  on  church- 
men's mules,  not  carried  as  the  Don  was,  by  a 
team  of  sluggish  oxen:  they  endeavoured 
before  the  heat  of  the  day  to  reach  their  inn, 
which  was  about  a  league  farther.  In  short, 
they  soon  came  up  with  our  slow  itinerants ; 
and  one  of  them,  that  was  a  canon  of  Toledo, 


364  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

and  master  of  those  that  came  along  with  him, 
marking  the  formal  procession  of  the  cart, 
guards,  Sancho,  Kozinante,  the  curate,  and  the 
barber,  but  chiefly  the  in-caged  Don  Quixote, 
could  not  forbear  asking  what  meant  their 
strange  method  of  securing  that  man ;  though 
he  already  believed,  having  observed  the  guards, 
that  he  was  some  notorious  criminal  in  custody 
of  the  holy  brotherhood.  One  of  the  fraternity 
told  him,  that  he  could  not  tell  the  cause  of 
that  knight's  imprisonment,  but  that  he  might 
answer  for  himself,  because  he  best  could  tell. 

Don  Quixote  over-hearing  their  discourse, 
"  Gentlemen,"  said  he,  "  if  you  are  conversant 
and  skilled  in  matters  of  knight-errantry,  I  will 
communicate  my  misfortunes  to  you;  if  you 
are  not,  I  have  no  reason  to  give  myself  the 
trouble." — "  Truly,  friend,"  answered  the 
canon,  "  I  am  better  acquainted  with  books  of 
chivalry  than  with  Villalpando's  divinity;^  and 
if  that  be  all  your  objection,  you  may  safely 
impart  to  me  what  you  please." — "  With 
heaven's  permission  be  it  so,"  said  Don  Quixote. 
"  You  must  then  understand,  sir  knight,  that  I 
am  borne  away  in  this  cage  by  the  force  of 
enchantments,  through  the  envious  spite  and 
malice  of  some  cursed  magicians ;  for  virtue  is 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  2,  Chapter  XX.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  S65 

more  zealously  persecuted  by  ill  men,  than  it  is 
beloved  by  the  good.  I  am,  by  profession,  a 
knight-errant,  and  none  of  those,  I  assure  you, 
whose  deeds  never  merited  a  place  in  the 
records  of  fame;  but  one  who,  in  spite  of 
Envy's  self,  in  spite  of  all  the  magi  of  Persia, 
the  brachmans  of  India,  or  the  gymnosophists 
of  Ethiopia,  shall  secure  to  his  name  a  place  in 
the  temple  of  Immortality,  as  a  pattern  and 
model  to  following  ages,  that  ensuing  knights- 
errant,  following  my  steps,  may  be  guided  to 
the  top  and  highest  pitch  of  heroic  honour." — 
"  The  noble  Don  Quixote  de  la  Mancha  speaks 
truth,"  said  the  curate,  coming  up  to  the  com- 
pany; "he  is  indeed  enchanted  in  this  cart, 
not  through  his  own  demerits  or  offences,  but 
the  malicious  treachery  of  those  whom  virtue 
displeases  and  valour  offends.  This  is,  sir,  the 
Knight  of  the  Woeful  Figure,  of  whom  you 
have  undoubtedly  heard,  whose  mighty  deeds 
shall  stand  engraved  in  lasting  brass  and  time- 
surviving  marble,  till  envy  grows  tired  with 
labouring  to  deface  his  fame,  and  malice  to 
conceal  him." 

The  canon  hearing  the  prisoner  and  his 
guard  talk  thus  in  the  same  style,  was  in  amaze, 
and  blessed  himself  for  wonder,  as  did  the  rest 
of  the  company,   till   Sancho  Panza  coming 


366  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

up,  to  amend  the  matter,  "Look  ye,  sirs," 
said  he,  "I  will  speak  the  truth,  take  it 
well  or  take  it  ill.  My  master  here,  is 
no  more  enchanted  than  my  mother :  he  is 
in  his  sober  senses,  he  eats  and  drinks,  and 
does  his  needs,  like  other  folks,  and  as  he  used 
to  do ;  and  yet  they  will  persuade  me  that  a 
man,  who  can  do  all  this,  is  enchanted,  for- 
sooth! he  can  speak  too,  for  if  they  will  let 
him  alone,  he  will  prattle  you  more  than  thirty 
attorneys."-  Then  turning  towards  the  curate, 
*'0  Master  Curate,  Master  Curate,"  continued 
he,  "do  you  think  I  do  not  know  you,  and 
that  I  do  not  guess  what  all  these  new  en- 
chantments drive  at!  Yes,  I  know  you  well 
enough,  for  all  you  hide  your  face ;  and  under- 
stand your  design,  for  all  your  sly  tricks,  sir. 
But  it  is  an  old  saying.  There  is  no  striving 
against  the  stream ;  and  the  weakest  still  goes 
to  the  wall.  The  devil  take  the  luck  on  it; 
had  not  your  reverence  spoiled  our  sport,  my 
master  had  been  married  before  now  to  the 
Princess  Micomicona,  and  I  had  been  an  earl 
at  least;  nay,  that  I  was  sure  of,  had  the 
worst  come  to  the  worst ;  but  the  old  proverb 
is  true  again,  fortune  turns  round  like  a  mill- 
wheel,  and  he  that  was  yesterday  at  the  top, 
lies  to-day  at  the  bottom.  I  wonder.  Master 
Curate,  you  that  are  a  clergyman  should  not 


DON  QUIXOTE.  S67 

have  more  conscience;  consider,  sir,  that  I 
have  a  wife  and  family,  who  expect  all  to  be 
great  folks,  and  my  master  here  is  to  do  a 
world  of  good  deeds :  and  do  not  you  think, 
sir,  that  you  will  be  made  to  answer  for  all  this 
one  day?" — "Snuff  me  those  candles,"  said 
the  barber,  hearing  Sancho  talk  at  this  rate: 
"  what,  fool,  are  you  brain-sick  of  your  master's 
disease  too  ?  If  you  be,  you  are  like  to  bear 
him  company  in  his  cage,  I  will  assure  you, 
friend.  What  enchanted  island  is  this  that 
floats  in  your  skull,  or  what  succubus  has  been 
riding  thy  fancy,^  and  got  it  with  child  of  these 
hopes?" — "With  child,  sir!  what  do  you 
mean,  sir?"  said  Sancho,  " I  scorn  your  words, 
sir ;  the  best  lord  in  the  land  should  not  get 
me  with  child,  no,  not  the  king  himself,  heaven 
bless  him.  For  though  I  am  a  poor  man,  yet 
I  am  an  honest  man,  and  an  old  Christian,  and 
do  not  owe  any  man  a  farthing ;  and  though  I 
desire  islands,  there  are  other  folks  not  far  off 
that  desire  worse  things.  Every  one  is  the  son 
of  his  own  works ;  I  am  a  man,  and  may  be 
pope  of  Kome,  much  more  governor  of  an 
island ;  especially  considering  my  master  may 
gain  so  many  as  he  may  want  persons  to  bestow 
them  on.  Therefore,  pray  Master  Barber,  take 
heed  what  you  say;    for  all  consists  not  in 

>  See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chapter  XX,  Book  IV. 


S68  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

bhaving  of  beards,  and  there  is  some  diflference 
between  a  hawk  and  a  hand-saw.  I  say  so, 
because  we  all  know  one  another,  and  nobody 
shall  put  a  false  card  upon  me.  As  to  my 
master's  enchantment,  let  it  stand  as  it  is, 
heaven  knows  best :  and  a  stink  is  still  worse 
for  the  stirring."  The  barber  thought  silence 
the  best  way  to  quiet  Sancho's  impertinence; 
and  the  curate,  doubting  that  he  might  spoil 
all,  entreated  the  canon  to  put  on  a  little 
before,  and  he  would  unfold  the  mystery  of 
the  encaged  knight,  which  perhaps  he  would 
find  one  of  the  pleasantest  stories  he  had  ever 
heard.  The  canon  rid  forward  with  him,  and 
his  men  followed,  while  the  curate  made  them 
a  relation  of  Don  Quixote's  life  and  quality, 
his  madness  and  adventures,  with  the  original 
cause  of  his  distraction,  and  the  whole  progress 
of  his  affairs,  till  his  being  shut  up  in  the  cage, 
to  get  him  home  in  order  to  have  him  cured. 
They  all  admired  at  this  strange  account ;  and 
then  the  canon  turning  to  the  curate :  "  Believe 
me.  Master  Curate,"  said  he,  "I  am  folly  con- 
vinced, that  these  they  call  books  of  knight- 
errantry  are  very  prejudicial  to  the  public. 
And  though  I  have  been  led  away  with  an 
idle  and  false  pleasure,  to  read  the  beginnings 
of  almost  as   many  of  them   as    have   been 


DON  QUIXOTE.  369 

printed,  I  could  never  yet  persuade  myself 
to  go  through  with  any  one  to  the  end;  for 
to  me  they  all  seem  to  contain  one  and  the 
same  thing;  and  there  is  as  much  in  one  of 
them  as  in  all  the  rest.  The  whole  composi- 
tion and  style  resemble  that  of  the  Milesian 
fables,^  which  are  a  sort  of  idle  stories,  designed 
only  for  diversion,  and  not  for  instruction.  It 
is  not  so  with  those  fables  which  are  called 
apologues,  that  at  once  delight  and  instruct. 
But  though  the  main  design  of  such  books  is 
to  please;  yet  I  cannot  conceive  how  it  is 
possible  they  should  perform  it,  being  filled 
with  such  a  multitude  of  unaccountable  extra- 
vagancies. For  the  pleasure  which  strikes  the 
soul,  must  be  derived  from  the  beauty  and 
congruity  it  sees  or  conceives  in  those  things 
the  sight  or  imagination  lay  before  it;  and 
nothing  in  itself  deformed  or  incongruous  can 
give  us  any  real  satisfaction.  Now  what  beauty 
can  there  be,  or  what  proportion  of  the  parts 
to  the  whole,  or  of  the  whole  to  the  several 
parts,  in  a  book,  or  fable,  where  a  stripling  of 
sixteen  years  of  age  at  one  cut  of  a  sword 
cleaves  a  giant,  as  tall  as  a  steeple,  through 
the  middle,  as  easily  as  if  he  were  made  of 
paste-board  ?   Or  when  they  give  us  the  relation 

*  See  Appendix,  Note  4,  Chapter  XX.,  Book  IV. 
XL  2  a 


370  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

of  a  battle,  having  said  the  enemy's  power 
consisted  of  a  million  of  combatants,  yet 
provided  the  hero  of  the  book  be  against 
them,  we  must  of  necessity,  though  never 
so  much  against  our  inclination,  conceive  that 
the  said  knight  obtained  the  victory  only  by 
his  own  valour,  and  the  strength  of  his  power- 
ful arm  ?  And  what  shall  we  say  of  the  great 
ease  and  facility  with  which  an  absolute  queen 
or  empress  casts  herself  into  the  arms  of  an 
errant  and  unknown  knight?  What  mortal, 
not  altogether  barbarous  and  unpolished,  can 
be  pleased  to  read,  that  a  great  tower,  full  of 
armed  knights,  cuts  through  the  sea  like  a 
ship  before  the  wind,  and  setting  out  in  the 
evening  from  the  coast  of  Italy,  lands  by  break 
of  day  in  Prester  John's  country,^  or  in  some 
other,  never  known  to  Ptolemy,  or  seen  by 
Marcus  Paulus?*  If  it  should  be  answered, 
that  the  persons  who  compose  these  books, 
write  them  as  confessed  lies ;  and  therefore 
are  not  obliged  to  observe  niceties,  or  to  have 
regard  to  truth ;  I  shall  make  this  reply,  that 
falsehood  is  so  much  the  more  commendable, 
by  how  much  more  it  resembles  truth ;  and  is 
the  more  pleasing  the  more  it  is  doubtftd  and 

^  See  Appendix,  Note  6,  Chapter  XX.,  Book  IV. 
*  A  Venetian,  and  a  very  great  traveller.    He  lived  in  the  13th 
century,  1272. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  371 

possible.  Fabulous  tales  ought  to  be  suited  to 
the  reader's  understanding,  being  so  contrived, 
that  all  impossibilities  ceasing,  all  great  ac- 
cidents appearing  feasible,  and  the  mind  wholly 
hanging  in  suspense,  they  may  at  once  surprise, 
astonish,  please  and  divert;  so  that  pleasure 
and  admiration  may  go  hand  in  hand.  This 
cannot  be  performed  by  him  that  flies  from 
probability  and  imitation,  which  is  the  per- 
fection of  what  is  written.  I  have  not  seen 
any  book  of  knight-errantry  that  composes  an 
entire  body  of  a  fable  with  all  its  parts,  so  that 
the  middle  is  answerable  to  the  beginning,  and 
the  end  to  the  beginning  and  middle ;  but  on 
the  contrary,  they  form  them  of  so  many  limbs, 
that  they  rather  seem  a  chimasra  or  monster, 
than  a  well-proportioned  figure.  Besides  all 
this,  their  style  is  uncouth,  their  exploits 
incredible,  their  love  immodest,  their  civility 
impertinent,  their  battles  tedious,  their  lan- 
guage absurd,  their  voyages  preposterous ;  and 
in  short,  they  are  altogether  void  of  solid 
ingenuity,  and  therefore  fit  to  be  banished  a 
Christian  commonwealth  as  useless  and  pre- 
judicial." 

The  curate  was  very  attentive,  and  believed 
him  a  man  of  a  sound  judgment,  and  much  in 
the  right  in  all  he  had  urged;  and  therefore 


373  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

told  him,  that  being  of  the  same  opinion,  and 
an  enemy  to  the  books  of  knight-errantry,  he 
had  burnt  all  that  belonged  to  Don  Quixote, 
which  were  a  considerable  number.  Then  he 
recounted  to  him  the  scrutiny  he  had  made 
among  them,  what  he  had  condenmed  to  the 
flames,  and  what  spared  ;  at  which  the  canon  • 
laughed  heartily,  and  said,  "  that  notwith- 
standing all  he  had  spoken  against  those 
books,  yet  he  found  one  good  thing  in 
them,  which  was  the  subject  they  fornished  a 
man  of  understanding  with  to  exercise  his 
parts,  because  they  allow  a  large  scope  for  the 
pen  to  dilate  upon  without  any  check,  de- 
scribing shipwrecks,  storms,  skirmishes  and 
battles ;  representing  to  us  a  brave  commander, 
with  all  the  qualifications  requisite  in  such  a 
one,  shewing  his  prudence  in  disappointing  the 
designs  of  the  enemy,  his  eloquence  in  persuad- 
ing or  dissuading  his  soldiers,  his  judgment  in 
council,  his  celerity  in  execution,  and  his  valour 
in  assailing  or  repulsing  an  assault;  laying 
before  us  sometimes  a  dismal  and  melancholy 
accident,  sometimes  a  delightful  and  un- 
expected adventure ;  in  one  place,  a  beautiful, 
modest,  discreet  and  reserved  lady ;  in  another, 
a  Christian-like,  brave,  and  courteous  gentle- 

•  This  canon  of  Toledo  is  Cervantes  himself  all  along. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  873 

man;  here  a  boisterous,  inhuman,  boasting 
ruffian;  there  an  affiable,  warlike  and  wise 
prince ;  livelily  expressing  the  fidelity  and 
loyalty  of  subjects,  generosity  and  bounty  of 
sovereigns.  He  may  no  less,  at  times,  make 
known  his  skill  in  astrology,  cosmography, 
music  and  policy ;  and  if  he  pleases,  he  cannot 
want  an  opportunity  of  appearing  knowing 
even  in  necromancy.  He  may  describe  the 
subtilty  of  Ulysses,  the  piety  of  ^Eneas,  the 
valour  of  Achilles,  the  misfortunes  of  Hector, 
the  treachery  of  Sinon,  the  friendship  of 
Euryalus,  the  liberality  of  Alexander,  the 
valour  of  Caesar,  the  clemency  and  sincerity  of 
Trajan,  the  fidelity  of  Zopyrus,  the  prudence 
of  Cato;  and  in  fine,  all  those  actions  that 
may  make  up  a  complete  hero?  sometimes 
attributing  them  all  to  one  person,  and  at 
other  times  dividing  them  among  many.  This 
being  so  performed  in  a  grateful  style,  and 
with  ingenious  invention,  approaching  as  much 
as  possible  to  truth,  will  doubtless  compose  so 
beautiful  and  various  a  work,  that,  when 
finished,  its  excellency  and  perfection  must 
attain  the  best  end  of  writing,  which  is  at  once 
to  delight  and  instruct,  as  I  have  said  before  : 
for  the  loose  method  practised  in  these  books, 
gives  the  author  liberty  to  play  the  epic,  the 


S74  THE  ACmEYEMEarS  OF 

lyric,  and  the  dramatic  poet,  and  to  ran 
through  all  the  parts  of  poetry  and  rhetoric; 
for  epics  may  be  as  well  writ  in  prose  *  as  in 
verse." 


*  Tlie  adTentarai  of  T<4pm«rhiM  ka  proof  of  tliiiL 


DON  QUIXOTE.  375 


CHAPTEK  XXI. 

CONTAINING  A  CONTINUATION  OP  THE  CANOn's  DIS- 
COURSE UPON  BOOKS  OP  KNIGHT-ERRANTRY, 
AND  OTHER  CURIOUS  MATTER. 

"  You  are  much  in  the  right,  sir,"  replied  the 
curate ;  **  and  therefore  those  who  have  hitherto 
published  books  of  that  kind,  are  the  more  to 
be  blamed,  for  having  had  no  regard  to  good 
sense,  art,  or  rules,  by  the  observation  of  which 
they  might  have  made  themselves  as  famous  in 
prose,  as  the  two  princes  of  Greek  and  Latin 
poetry  are  in  verse." — **  I  must  confess,"  said 
the  canon,  **I  was  once  tempted  to  write  a 
book  of  knight-errantry  myself,  observing  all 
those  rules;  and  to  speak  the  truth,  I  writ 
above  one  hundred  pages,  which  for  the  better 
trial,  whether  they  answered  my  expectation,  I 
communicated  to  some  learned  and  judicious 
men  fond  of  those  subjects,  as  well  as  to  some 
of  those  ignorant  persons,  who  only  are  de- 
lighted with  extravagancies ;  and  they  all  gave 
me  a  satisfactory  approbation.  And  yet  I 
made  no  farther  progress,  as  well  in  regard  I 
look  upon  it  to  be  a  thing  noway  agreeable  with 


trt  TEL  ACsimasEirxE  or 

it'T  jrofewnoii.  m  'nesaitt^  I  mi:  ^yrMsTTrtf-  -mt 
Hr^nsie  «»:  umii  mart  hhxhstdik  tzisl  lait 
lfe«srue>d :  ^zxd  ujiintrx  i;  "fpart  of  innit  uporan  ib 
l>r  o:>:r;Trieiided  rj  liie  finukli  inniiber  of  liit 
viW:-  tblili  te-CHTiftd  br  lilt  ignnffHTrr  unihiciidfc. 

y'A.'£^jf^\  of  xiAe  pddr  TcjpcL  "iOiD  prmmMLDj 
tt!*r  tii'>«r  -wzj^j  read   f;;iicti    "bcti^a.     Bin    xbe 

gr^^iiTiiWt   laytZTe   I   had  VJ  iax  wno^    mid  T>iTrit 

Iao  iaor»:  of  f^iv-'Tig  iL  vat  liie  m-grrmfint  I 
fonrje)d  'Vj  iijyse]f  dd-lnoed  S-om  liie  jQets  ijott 
uiKiaJ]  V  ^/tied :  -  fcff  thoTisit  L  if  plaT$  iioir  in 
twse-  -a^  v^]J  tiiose  TrLicL  m*  jJio^reiiier  of  lie 
pc^et'fc  k:veiit:oii.  a§  iLciae  that  are  gromided 
ujx/ii  Li^^^on^  be  aH  of  thenL  or,  bowerer,  tbc 
great«*l  part,  inade  "op  of  most  absurd  enrax*- 
gatijd^  and  iBcoLereDdes :  things  tiiat  hare 
uehher  Lead  lior  foot,  side  dot  l»c*ttoin:  and 
vet  the  mnltit Tide  sees  them  with  satisfection, 
efe'teems  aiid  aj:»proTes  them,  thongh  they 
axe  60  fkr  from  being  g«XKi ;  and  if  the  poets 
who  write,  and  the  players  who  act  them, 
ftav  thev  must  be  so  contrived  and  no  other- 
wiiie-  }>ecaii6e  they  please  the  generality  of 
the  audience;  and  if  those  which  are  regular 
and  according  to  art,  eerre  only  to  please 
half  a  score  judicious  persons  who  understand 

Swr  Appendix.  XoCe  1.  CbkjAer  XXL.  Book  IT. 


DON  QUIXOTE,  877 

them,  whilst  the  rest  of  the  company  cannot 
reach  the  contrivance,  nor  know  anything  of  the 
matter ;  and  therefore  the  poets  and  actors  say, 
they  had  rather  get  their  bread  by  the  greater 
number,  than  the  applause  of  the  less :  Then 
may  I  conclude  the  same  will  be  the  success  of 
this  book;  so  that  when  I  have  racked  my 
brains  to  observe  the  rules,  I  shall  reap  no  other 
advantage,  than  to  be  laughed  at  for  my  pains. 
I  have  sometimes  endeavoured  to  convince  the 
actors  that  they  are  deceived  in  their  opinion, 
and  that  they  will  draw  more  company  and  get 
more  credit  by  regular  plays,  than  by  those 
preposterous  representations  now  in  use;  but 
they  are  so  positive  in  their  humour,  that  no 
strength  of  reason,  nor  even  demonstration,  can 
beat  this  opinion  into  their  heads.  I  remember 
I  once  was  talking  to  one  of  those  obstinate 
fellows ;  *  Do  you  not  remember,'  said  I,  *  that 
within  these  few  years,  three  tragedies  were 
acted  in  Spain,  written  by  a  famous  poet  of 
ours,  which  were  so  excellent,  that  they  sur- 
prised, delighted,  and  raised  the  admiration  of 
all  that  saw  them,  as  well  the  ignorant  and 
ordinary  people,  as  the  judicious  and  men  of 
quality;  and  the  actors  got  more  by  those  three, 
than  by  thirty  of  the  best  that  have  been  writ 
since?' — 'Doubtless,  sir,'  said  the  actor,  *you 


378  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

mean  the  tragedies  of  Isabella,  Phillis^  and 
Alexandria.' — *  The  very  same/ 1  replied,  *  and 
do  you  judge  whether  they  observed  the  rules 
of  the  drama ;  and  whether  by  doing  so,  they 
lost  anything  of  their  esteem,  or  &iled  of  pleas- 
ing all  sorts  of  people.  So  that  the  fault  lies 
not  in  the  audience's  desiring  absurdities,  but 
in  those  who  know  not  how  to  give  them  any- 
thing else.  Nor  was  there  anything  preposterous 
in  several  other  plays ;  as  for  example.  Ingrati- 
tude Revenged,  Numancia,  the  Amorous  Mer- 
chant, and  the  favourable  She-enemy ;  nor  in 
some  others,  composed  by  judicious  poets  to 
their  honour  and  credit,  and  to  the  advantage 
of  those  that  acted  them.'  Much  more  I  added, 
which  did  indeed  somewhat  confound  him,  but 
no  way  satisfied  or  convinced  him,  so  as  to 
make  him  change  his  erroneous  opinion." — 
"  You  have  hit  upon  a  subject,  sir,"  said  the 
curate,  "  which  has  stirred  up  in  me  an  old 
aversion  I  have  for  the  plays  now  in  use,  which 
is  not  inferior  to  that  I  bear  to  books  of  knight- 
errantry.  For  whereas  plays,  according  to  the 
opinion  of  Cicero,  ought  to  be  mirrors  of  human 
life,  patterns  of  good  manners,  and  the  very 
representatives  of  truth ;  those  now  acted  are 
mirrors  of  absurdities,  patterns  of  follies,  and 
images  of  ribaldry.     For  instance,  what  can  be 


DON  QUIXOTE.  879 

more  absurd,  than  for  the  same  person  to  be 
brought  on  the  stage  a  child  in  swaddling- 
bands,  in  the  first  scene  of  the  first  act ;  and  to 
appear  in  the  second  grown  a  man  ?  What  can 
be  more  ridiculous  than  to  represent  to  us  a 
fighting  old  fellow,  a  cowardly  youth,  a  rhetorical 
footman,  a  politic  page,  a  churlish  king,  and 
an  unpolished  princess?  what  shall  I  say  of 
their  regard  to  the  time  in  which  those  actions 
they  represent,  either  might  or  ought  to  have 
happened ;  for  I  have  seen  a  play,  in  which  the 
first  act  began  in  Europe,  the  second  was  in 
Asia,  and  the  third  ended  in  Africa  ?  ♦  probably, 
if  there  had  been  another  act,  they  would  have 
carried  it  into  America;  and  thus  it  would 
have  been  acted  in  the  four  parts  of  the  world. 
But  if  imitation  is  to  be  a  principal  part  of  the 
drama,  how  can  any  tolerable  judgment  be 
pleased,  when  representing  an  action  that 
happened  in  the  time  of  King  Pepin  or  Charle- 
magne, they  shall  attribute  it  to  the  Emp»or 
Heraclius,  and  bring  him  in  carrying  the  cross 
into  Jerusalem,  and  recovering  the  Holy 
Sepulchre,  like  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  there 
being  a  vast  distance  of  time  betwixt  these 
actions  ?     Thus  they  will  clap  together  pieces 

*  It  is  to  be  obaerved  that  the  Spanish   plays  have  odIj  three 
jomadas,  or  acta 


S80  THE  ACHIEVE1IENT8  OP 

of  true  history  in  a  play  of  their  own  framing, 
and  grounded  upon  fiction,  mixing  in  it  relar 
tions  of  things  that  have  happened  to  different 
people,  and  in  several  ages.     This  they  do 
without  any  contrivance  that  might  make  it 
appear  probable,  and  with  such  visible  mistakes 
as  are  altogether  inexcusable ;  but  the  worst  of 
it  is,  that  there  are  idiots  who  look  upon  this 
as  perfection,  and  think  everything  else  to  be 
mere  pedantry.     But  if  we  look  into  the  pious 
plays,  what  a  multitude  of  fedse  miracles  shall 
we  find  in  them  ?  how  many  errors  and  con- 
tradictions, how  often  the  miracles  wrought  by 
one  saint  attributed  to  another  ?  nay,  even  in 
the    profane    plays,    they    presume    to    work 
miracles  upon  the  bare  imagination  and  conceit 
that  such  a  supernatural  work,  or  a  machine, 
as  they  call  it,  will  be  ornamental,  and  draw 
the  common  sort  to  see  the  play.     These  things 
are  a  reflection  upon  truth  itself,  a  lessening 
and  depreciating  of  history,  and  a  reproach  to 
all  Spanish  wits;  because  strangers,  who  are 
very  exact  in  observing  the  rules  of  the  drama, 
look  upon  us  as   an   ignorant  and  barbarous 
people,   when   they   see  the    absurdities   and 
extravagancies  of  our  plays.     Nor  would  it  be 
any  excuse  to  allege,  that  the  principal  design 
of  all  good  governments,  in  permitting  plays  to 


DON  QUIXOTE.  381 

be  publicly  acted,  is  to  amuse  the  commonalty 
with  some  lawftil  recreation,  and  so  to  divert 
those  ill  humours  which  idleness  is  apt  to  breed: 
and  that  since  this  end  is  attained  by  any  sort 
of  plays,  whether  good  or  bad,  it  is  needless  to 
prescribe  laws  to  them,  or  oblige  the  poets  or 
actors  to  compose  and  represent  such  as  are 
strictly  conformable  to  the  rules.  To  this  I 
would  answer,  that  this  end  would  be  infinitely 
better  attained  by  good  plays,  than  by  bad  ones. 
He  who  sees  a  play  that  is  regular  and  answer- 
able to  the  rules  of  poetry,  is  pleased  with  the 
comic  part,  informed  by  the  serious,  surprised 
at  the  variety  of  accidents,  improved  by  the 
language,  warned  by  the  frauds,  instructed  by 
examples,  incensed  against  vice,  and  enamoured 
with  virtue ;  for  a  good  play  must  cause  all 
these  emotions  in  the  soul  of  him  that  sees  it, 
though  he  were  never  so  insensible  and  un- 
polished. And  it  is  absolutely  impossible,  that 
a  play  which  has  these  qualifications,  should 
not  infinitely  divert,  satisfy  and  please,  beyond 
another  that  wants  them,  as  most  of  them  do 
which  are  now  usually  acted.  Neither  are  the 
poets  who  write  them  in  fault,  for  some  of  them 
are  very  sensible  of  their  errors,  and  extremely 
capable  of  performing  their  duty;  but  plays 
being  now  altogether  becoming  venal  and  a  sort 


389  THE  ACHECTZMESTS  OF 

of  merchandize,  thej  san^.  and  widi  Rasm.  that 
the  actors  woold  not  parchaee  tiiem.  nnlese  ther 
were  of  that  stamp ;  and  therefore  the  poet 
endeaToors  to  soit  the  hmnoor  q€  the  acton, 
who  IB  to  pay  him  for  hi«  labonr:  For  proof  of 
th»  let  anT  man  ob^erre  that  injSnite  nmnher 
of  plays  compoi^  br  an  exnbezant  Spanish 
wit,^  so  fhn  of  gaiety  and  hnmonr.  in  such 
elegant  verse  and  choice  language*  so  senten- 
tious, and  to  conclade,  in  snch  a  m^gestic  strk, 
that  his  £mie  is  spread  throogfa  the  nnirerse : 
jet  because  he  suited  himself  to  the  £uict  of 
the  actors,  many  of  his  pieces  have  MLen  shwt 
of  their  due  perfection,  though  some  hare 
reached  it.  Others  write  plays  so  incon^der- 
ately,  that  after  they  have  i^^peared  on  the 
stage,  the  actors  have  been  forced  to  fly  and 
abscond,  for  fear  of  being  punished,  as  it  has 
often  happened,  for  having  affix)nted  kings,  and 
dishonoured  whole  &milies.  These,  and  many 
other  ill  consequences,  which  I  omit,  would 
cease,  by  appointing  an  intelligent  and  judicious 
person  at  court  to  examine  all  plays  before  they 
were  acted,  that  is,  not  only  those  which  aie 
represented  at  court,  but  throughout  all  Spain; 
so  that,  without  his  licence,  no  magistrate 
should   suffer  any  play  to  appear  in  public. 

*  Lopes  de  V^giL 


DON  QUIXOTE.  383 

Thus  players  would  be  careful  to  send  their 
plays  to  court,  and  might  then  act  them  with 
safety,  and  those  who  writ  would  be  more 
circumspect,  as  standing  in  awe  of  an  examiner 
that  could  judge  of  their  works.  By  these 
means  we  should  be  furnished  with  good  plays, 
and  the  end  they  are  designed  for  would  be 
attained,  the  people  diverted,  the  Spanish  wits 
esteemed,  the  actors  safe,  and  the  government 
spared  the  trouble  of  punishing  them.  And  if 
the  same  person,  or  another,  were  entrusted  to 
examine  all  the  new  books  of  knight-errantry, 
there  is  no  doubt  but  some  might  be  published 
with  all  that  perfection,  you,  sir,  have  mentioned, 
to  the  increase  of  eloquence  in  our  language,  to 
the  utter  extirpation  of  the  old  books,  which 
would  be  borne  down  by  the  new  ;  and  for  the 
innocent  pastime,  not  only  of  idle  persons,  but 
even  of  those  who  have  most  employment ;  for 
the  bow  cannot  always  stand  bent,  nor  can 
human  frailty  subsist  without  some  lawful 
recreation." 

The  canon  and  curate  were  come  to  this 
period,  when  the  barber  overtaking  them,  told 
the  latter,  that  this  was  the  place  he  had 
pitched  on  for  baiting,  during  the  heat  of  the 
day.  The  canon,  induced  by  the  pleasantness 
of  the  valley,  and  the  satisfaction  he  found  in 


3M  THE  ACHIETEXE3TS  0¥ 

the  ctnate's  conTeiBation,  as  well  as  to  be 
farther  informed  of  Don  Qinxofcer  bofe  than 
company,  giving  order  to  some  of  his  men  to 
ride  to  the  next  inn,  and  if  his  smnpter-mnle 
were  arrived,  to  send  him  down  proTisions  to 
that  valley,  where  the  coolness  of  the  shade, 
and  the  beauty  of  the  prospect,  gave  him  snch 
a  fair  invitation  to  dine ;  and  that  they  should 
make  much  of  themselves  and  their  mules  with 
what  the  inn  could  afford. 

In  the  meantime,  Sancho  having  disen- 
gaged himself  from  the  curate  and  barber,  and 
finding  an  opportunity  to  speak  to  his  master 
alone,  he  brushed  up  to  the  cage  where  the 
knight  sate.  ^'That  I  may  clear  my  con- 
science, sir,''  said  he,  '^  it  is  fitting  that  I  tell 
you  the  plain  truth  of  your  enchantment  here. 
Who,  would  you  think  now,  are  these  two 
fellows  that  ride  with  their  faces  covered? 
Even  the  parson  of  our  parish  and  the  barber; 
none  else,  I  will  assure  you,  sir.  And  they 
arc  in  a  plot  against  you,  out  of  mere  spite 
because  your  deeds  will  be  more  famous  than 
theirs:  this  being  supposed,  it  follows,  that 
you  are  not  enchanted,  but  only  cozened  and 
abused;  and  if  you  will  but  answer  me  one 
qucHtion  fairly  and  squarely,  you  shall  find  thb 
out  to  be  a  palpable  cheat,  and  that  there  is 


DON  QUIXOTE.  S85 

no  enchantment  in  the  case,  but  merely  your 
senses  turned  topsy  tutvy." 

"Ask  me  what  questions  you  please,  dear 
Sancho,'*  said  the  knight,  "  and  I  will  as  will- 
ingly resolve  them.  But  for  thy  assertion, 
that  those  who  guard  us  are  my  old  com- 
panions the  curate  and  barber,  it  is  illusion  all. 
The  power  of  magic  indeed,  as  it  has  an  art 
to  clothe  any  thing  in  any  shape,  may  have 
dressed  these  demons  in  their  appearances  to 
infatuate  thy  sense,  and  draw  thee  into  such  a 
labyrinth  of  confusion,  that  even  Theseus's 
clue  could  not  extricate  thee  out  of  it;  and 
this  with  a  design,  perhaps,  to  plunge  me 
deeper  into  doubts,  and  make  me  endanger  my 
understanding,  in  searching  into  the  strange 
contrivance  of  my  enchantment,  which  in 
every  circumstance  is  so  different  from  all  I 
ever  read.  Therefore  rest  satisfied  that  these 
are  no  more  what  thou  imaginest,  than  I  am  a 
Turk.  But  now  to  thy  questions;  propose 
them,  and  I  will  endeavour  to  answer." 

"  Bless  me,"  said  Sancho,  "  this  is  madness 

upon  madness ;  but  since  it  is  so,  answer  me 

one  question.     Tell  me,  as  you  hope  to  be 

delivered  out  of  this  cage  here,  and  as  you 

hope  to  find  yourself  in  my  lady  Dulcinea's 

arms,  when  you  least  think  on  it ;  as  you " 

u.  2b 


386  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

**  Conjure  me  no  more,'*  answered  Don  Quixote, 
*^  but  ask  freely,  for  I  have  promised  to  answer 
punctually," — "That  is  what  I  want,"  said 
Sancho,  "  and  you  must  tell  me  the  truth,  and 
the  whole  truth,  neither  more  nor  less,  upon 
the  honour  of  your  knighthood." — "Prythee,  no 
more  of  your  preliminaries  or  preambles,"  cried 
Don  Quixote,  **  I  tell  thee  I  will  answer  to  a 
tittle."— " Then,"  said  Sancho,  "I  ask,  with 
reverence  be  it  spoken,  whether  your  worship, 
since  your  being  caged  up,  or  enchanted,  if  you 
will  have  it  so,  has  not  had  a  motion,  more  or 
less,  as  a  man  may  say  ?  " — "  I  understand  not 
that  phrase,"  answered  the  knight. — "Heigh- 
day ! "  quoth  Sancho,  "  don't  you  know  what 
I  mean  ?  Why  there  is  never  a  child  in  our 
country,  that  understands  the  christ-cross-row 
but  can  tell  you.  I  mean,  have  you  had  a 
mind  to  do  what  another  cannot  do  for  you  ?  " 
— "O  now  I  understand  thee,  Sancho,"  said 
the  knight;  **and  to  answer  directly  to  thy 
question,  positively  yes,  very  often  ;  and  there- 
fore prythee  help  me  out  of  this  strait  ;  for,  to 
be  free  with  you,  I  am  not  altogether  so  sweet 
and  clean  as  I  could  wish." 


DON  QUIXOTE.  887 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

A   RELATION   OP  THE    WISE    CONFERENCE    BETWEEN 
SANCHO  AND  HIS  MASTER. 

"Ah!  sir/^  said  Sancho,  "have  I  caught  you 
at  last?  This  is  what  I  wanted  to  know  from 
my  heart  and  soul.  Come,  sir,  you  cannot 
deny,  that  when  any  body  is  out  of  sorts,  so  as 
not  to  eat,  or  drink,  or  sleep,  or  do  any  natural 
occasions  that  you  guess,  then  we  say  com- 
monly they  are  bewitched  or  so ;  from  whence 
may  be  gathered,  that  those  who  can  eat  their 
meat,  drink  their  drink,  speak  when  they  are 
spoken  to,  and  go  to  the  back-side  when  they 
have  occasion  for  it,  are  not  bewitched  or  en- 
chanted/'— "Your  conclusion  is  good,'*  an- 
swered Don  Quixote,  "  as  to  one  sort  of  en- 
chantment; but,  as  I  said  to  thee,  there  is 
variety  of  enchantments,  and  the  changes  in 
them  through  the  alterations  of  times  and 
customs  branch  them  into  so  many  parts,  that 
there  is  no  arguing  from  what  has  been  to 
what  may  be  now.  For  my  part  I  am  verily 
persuaded  of  my  enchantment,  and  this  sup- 


SM  THE  AcmEVEMxans  or 

presses  any  uneasiness  in  m  j  conscience,  which 
might  arise  upon  any  suggestions  on  the  ctm- 
trarj.  To  see  myself  thus  idly  and  dishonour- 
ably borne  about  in  a  cage,  and  withheld  like 
a  lazy  idle  coward  from  the  great  offices  of  my 
function,  when  at  this  hour,  perhaps,  hundreds 
of  wretches  may  want  my  assistance,  would  be 
unsupportable,  if  I  were  not  enchanted.'' — 
"  Yet,  for  all  that,  your  worship  should  try  to 
get  your  heels  at  liberty,"  said  Sancho. 
"  Come,  sir,  let  me  alone,  I  will  set  you  free,  I 
warrant  you ;  and  then  get  you  on  your  trusty 
Bozinante's  back,  and  a  fig  for  them  alL  The 
poor  thing  here  jogs  on  as  drooping  and  heart- 
less, as  if  he  were  enchanted  too.  Take  my 
advice  for  once  now,  and  if  things  do  not  go 
as  your  heart  could  wish,  you  have  time  enough 
to  creep  into  your  cage  again ;  and  on  the  word 
of  a  loyal  squire  I  will  go  in  with  you,  and  be 
content  to  be  enchanted  as  long  as  you  please." 
**  I  commit  the  care  of  my  freedom  to  thy 
maDagement,''  said  Don  Quixote ;  "lay  hold  on 
the  opportunity,  friend  Sancho,  and  thou  shalt 
find  me  ready  to  be  governed  in  all  particulars, 
though  I  am  still  afraid  thou  wilt  find  thy 
cunning  strangely  over-reached  in  thy  pre- 
tended discovery."  The  knight  and  squire 
had  laid  their  plot,  when  they  reached  the 


DON  QUIXOTE,  389 

place  that  the  canon,  curate,  and  barber  had 
pitched  upon  to  alight  in.  The  cage  was 
taken  down,  and  the  oxen  unyoked  to  graze ; 
when  Sancho,  addressing  the  curate,  "  Pray,*' 
said  he,  "  will  you  do  so  much,  as  let  my  lord 
and  master  come  out  a  little  to  slack  a  point, 
or  else  the  prison  will  not  be  so  clean  as  the 
presence  of  so  worthy  a  knight  as  my  master 
requires/^  The  curate  understanding  him, 
answered  that  he  would  comply,  but  that  he 
feared  Don  Quixote,  finding  himself  once  at 
liberty,  would  give  them  the  slip.  "  I  will  be 
bail  for  him,"  said  Sancho,  "  body  for  body, 
sir.'* — "  And  I,''  said  the  canon,  **  upon  his 
bare  parole  of  honour." — '*That  you  shall 
have,"  said  the  knight ;  "  besides,  you  need  no 
security  beyond  the  power  of  art,  for  enchanted 
bodies  have  no  power  to  dispose  of  themselves, 
nor  to  move  from  one  place  to  another,  without 
permission  of  the  necromancer,  in  whose  charge 
they  are:  the  magical  charms  might  rivet 
them  for  three  whole  centuries  to  one  place, 
and  fetch  them  back  swift  as  the  wind,  should 
the  enchanted  have  fled  to  some  other  region." 
Lastly,  as  a  most  convincing  argument  for  his 
release,  he  urged  that  unless  they  would  fi-ee 
him,  or  get  farther  off,  he  should  be  necessitated 
to  offend  their  sense  of  smelling.    They  guessed 


'nui  meatiains  DcevauiT.  and  sacve  hini 
ahtf^irr :  ;md  uhe  iisc  ose  he  made:  of  x. 
jttigceii  gig  he^mxihed  Imubg  ttrgeorfimr 
^lexL  ?narr»hfng  up  w  BcnhuuEfie.  aioppai  him 
ir9rii*e  or  tsiriee  oa  me  bncsocks :  "^  I  tnsK  in 
nie»ffscL  I31C1I  iiow«  and  gbxr  of  hoiae^-Aesct,^ 
Miri  he.  *"  duKC  "ire  ^laH  »oa  be  nsuccd  to  CKir 
former  crrr^mzLSCanees ;  I  mocmfied  on  tiij  back. 
and  dicn  faeroreea  m j  leg?^.  wMLe  I  exoew  the 
fimctzon  fi>r  wtifcfa  hearroL  has  bestowed  me  od 
die  woriiL'*  Then  walking  a  Gtde  ande  with 
iimcho.  he  retnmed  after  a  GoaTauent  star, 
mueL  H^ter  m  body  and  mind,  and  tot  foil 
of  his  aqnire's  project. 

The  canon  gazed  on  hfm,  admiring  his  mi- 
paraDeled  sort  of  madness^  the  rather  became 
in  all  his  words  and  answers  he  displayed  an 
eTcellent  judgment ;  and,  as  we  hare  alieadj 
observed  he  onlr  raved  when  the  disconrse  fell 
npon  knight-errantry :  which  moving  the  canon 
to  compassion,  when  they  had  all  seated  them- 
Helves  on  the  grass,  expecting  the  coming  np  of 
his  sompter-mnle ;  ^'  Is  it  possible,  sir,"  said  he, 
addressing  himself  to  Don  Qoixote,  '^  that  the 
unhappy  reading  of  books  of  knight-^rantry 
should  have  such  an  influence  over  you  as  to 
destroy  your  reason,  making  you  believe  you 
are  now   enchanted,    and    many   other  such 


DON  QUIXOTE.  391 

extravagances,  as  remote  from  truth,  as  truth 
itself  is  from  falsehood  ?  How  is  it  possible 
that  human  sense  should  conceive  there  ever 
were  in  the  world  such  multitudes  of  famous 
knights-errant,  so  many  emperors  of  Trebizond, 
so  many  Amadises,  Felixmartes  of  Hircania, 
palfreys,  rambling  damsels,  serpents,  monsters, 
giants,  unheard-of  adventures,  so  many  sorts  of 
enchantments,  so  many  battles,  terrible  en- 
counters, pompous  habits  and  tournaments, 
amorous  princesses,  earls,  squires,  and  jesting- 
dwarfs,  so  many  love-letters  and  gallantries, 
so  many  Amazonian  ladies,  and,  in  short,  such 
an  incredible  number  of  extravagant  passages, 
as  are  contained  in  books  of  knight-errantry  ? 
As  for  my  own  particular,  I  confess,  that  while 
I  read  them,  and  do  not  reflect  that  they  are 
nothing  but  falsehood  and  folly,  they  give  me 
some  satisfaction;  but  I  no  sooner  remember 
what  they  are,  but  I  cast  the  best  of  them  from 
me,  and  would  deliver  them  up  to  the  flames  if 
I  had  a  fire  near  me ;  as  well  deserving  that 
fate,  because,  like  impostors,  they  act  contrary 
to  the  common  course  of  nature.  They  are 
like  broachers  of  new  sects,  and  a  new  manner 
of  living,  that  seduce  the  ignorant  vulgar  to 
give  credit  to  all  their  absurdities :  nay,  they 
presume  to  disturb  the  brains  of  ingenious  and 


392  THE  ACHIEYEMENTS  OF 

well-bred  gentlemen,  as  appears  by  the  effect 
they  have  wrought  on  your  judgment,  having 
reduced  you  to  such  a  condition,  that  it  is 
necessary  to  shut  you  up  in  a  cage,  and  carry 
you  in  a  cart  drawn  by  oxen,  like  some  lion  or 
tiger  that  is  carried  about  from  town  to  town 
to  be  shewn.  Have  pity  on  yourself,  good  Don 
Quixote,  retrieve  your  lost  judgment,  and  make 
use  of  those  abilities  heaven  has  blessed  you 
with,  applying  your  excellent  talent  to  some 
other  study,  which  may  be  safer  for  your  con- 
science, and  more  for  your  honour ;  but  if,  led 
away  by  your  natural  inclination,  you  will  read 
books  of  heroism  and  great  exploits,  read  in  the 
Holy  Scripture  the  book  of  Judges,  where  you 
will  find  wonderftd  truths  and  glorious  actions 
not  to  be  questioned.  Lusitania  had  a  Yiriatus, 
Rome  a  Caesar,  Carthage  an  Hannibal,  Greece 
an  Alexander,  Castile aCount  Fernan  Gonzalez,* 
Valencia  a  Cid,  Andalusia  a  Gonzalo  Fernandes, 
Estremadura  a  Diego  Garcia  de  Peredez,  Xerez 
a  Gracia  Perez  de  Vargas,  Toledo  a  Garcilasso, 
and  Seville  a  Don  Manuel  de  Leon,  the  reading 
of  whose  brave  actions  diverts,  instructs,  pleases, 
and  surprises  the  most  judicious  readers.  This 
will  be  a  study  worthy  your  talent,  and  by 

*  Fernau  Gonzalez,  Cid,  and  the  rest  here  mentioned,  were  Spanish 
commanders  of  iiote.~See  Note  1,  Cbi^pter  XXIL,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  393 

which  you  will  become  well  read  in  history,  in 
love  with  virtue,  knowing  in  goodness,  improved 
in  manners,  brave  without  rashness,  and 
cautious  without  cowardice ;  all  which  will  re- 
dound to  the  glory  of  God,  your  own  advance- 
ment, and  the  honour  of  the  province  of  La 
Mancha,  whence  I  understand  you  derive  your 
original." 

Don  Quixote  listened  with  great  attention  to 
the  canon's  discourse,  and  perceiving  he  had 
done,  after  he  had  fixed  his  eyes  on  him  for  a 
considerable  space,  **  Sir,"  said  he,  *'  all  your 
discourse,  I  find,  tends  to  signify  to  me,  there 
never  were  any  knights-errant;  that  all  the 
books  of  knight-errantry  are  false,  fabulous,  use- 
less, and  prejudicial  to  the  public ;  that  I  have 
done  ill  in  reading,  erred  in  believing,  and  been 
much  to  blame  in  imitating  them,  by  taking 
upon  me  the  most  painful  profession  of  chivalry. 
And  you  deny  that  ever  there  were  any  Amadises 
of  Gaul  or  Greece,  or  any  of  those  knights  men- 
tioned in  those  books?'' — "  Even  as  you  have 
said,  sir,"  quoth  the  canon. — "  You  also  were 
pleased  to  add,"  continued  Don  Quixote,  "  that 
those  books  had  been  very  hurtful  to  me, 
having  deprived  me  of  my  reason  and  re- 
duced me  to  be  carried  in  a  cage ;  that  there- 
fore, it  would  be  for  my  advantage  to  take  up 


394  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

in  time,  and  apply  myself  to  the  reading  of 
other  books,  where  I  might  find  more  truth, 
more  pleasure,  and  better  instruction." — "You 
are  in  the  right,''  said  the  canon. — "  Then  I 
am  satisfied,"  replied  Don  Quixote,  "  yon  your- 
self are  the  man  that  raves  and  is  enchanted, 
since  you  have  thus  boldly  blasphemed 
against  a  truth  so  universally  received,  that 
whosoever  presumes  to  contradict  it,  as  you  have 
done,  deserves  the  punishment  you  would  inflict 
on  those  books,  which  in  reading  offend  and 
tire  you.  For  it  were  as  easy  to  persuade 
the  world  that  the  sun  does  not  enlighten,  the 
firost  cool,  and  the  earth  bear  us,  as  that  there 
never  was  an  Amadis,  or  any  of  the  other  ad- 
venturous knights,  whose  actions  are  the  sub- 
jects of  so  many  histories.  What  mortal  can 
persuade  another,  that  there  is  no  truth  in  what 
is  recorded  of  the  Infanta  Floripes,  and  Guy  of 
Burgundy ;  as  also  Fierabras  at  the  bridge  of 
Mantible  in  the  reign  of  Charlemagne  ?  which 
passages,  I  dare  swear,  are  as  true  as  that  now 
it  is  day.  But  if  this  be  false,  you  may  as  well 
say  there  was  no  Hector,  nor  Achilles ;  nor  a 
Trojan  war,  nor  twelve  peers  of  France,  nor  a 
King  Arthur  of  Britain,  who  is  now  converted 
into  a  crow,  and  hourly  expected  in  his  king- 
dom.    Some  also  may  presume  to  say,  that 


DON  QUIXOTE.  395 

the  History  of  Guerino  Meschino,  and  that  the 
attempt  of  St  Grial  ^  are  both  false ;  that  the 
amours  of  Sir  Tristan  and  Queen  Iseo  are  apo- 
cryphal, as  well  as  those  of  Guinever  and  Sir 
Lancelot  of  the  Lake ;  whereas  there  are  people 
living  who  can  almost  remember  they  have 
seen  the  old  lady  Quintanona,  who  had  the 
best  hand  at  filling  a  glass  of  wine  of  any 
woman  in  all  Britain.  This  I  am  so  well 
assured  of,  that  I  can  remember  my  grand- 
mother, by  my  father's  side,  whenever  she  saw 
an  old  waiting-woman  with  her  reverend  veil, 
used  to  say  to  me.  Look  yonder,  grandson, 
there  is  a  woman  like  the  old  Lady  Quintan- 
ona ;  whence  I  infer,  she  knew  her,  or  at  least 
had  seen  her  picture.  Now,  who  can  deny  the 
veracity  of  the  History  of  Pierres,  and  the 
lovely  Malagona,  when  to  this  day  the  pin, 
with  which  the  brave  Pierres  turned  his  wooden 
horse  that  carried  him  through  the  air,  is  to  be 
seen  in  the  king's  armoury  ?  which  pin  is  some- 
what bigger  than  the  pole  of  a  coach,  by  the 
same  token  it  stands  just  by  Babieca's  saddle. 
At  Roncesvalles  they  keep  Orlando's  horn, 
which  is  as  big  as  a  great  beam :  Whence  it 
follows,  that  there  were  twelve  peers,  that 
there   were    such    men    as    Pierres,   and  the 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  8,  Chapter  XXII.,  Book  IV. 


396  THE  ACHI£VElf£NT8  OF 

&moiis  Gid,  besides  many  other  adventiirous 
knights,  whose  names  are  in  the  months  of  all 
people.  Yon  may  as  well  tell  me  that  the 
brave  Portngnese,  John  de  Merlo,^  was  no 
knight-errant;  that  he  did  not  go  into  Bnr- 
gnndy,  where,  in  the  city  of  Ras,  he  fought  the 
&mons  Moses  Pierre,  Lord  of  Chamey ;  and  in 
the  city  of  Basil,  Moses  Henry  de  Bamestan, 
coming  off  in  both  victorions,  and  loaded  with 
honour.  Yon  may  deny  the  adventures  and 
combats  of  the  two  heroic  Spaniards,  Pedro 
Barba  and  Gutierre  Quixada,  from  whose  male 
line  I  am  lineally  descended,  who  in  Burgundy 
overcame  the  sons  of  the  Earl  of  St  Paul.  You 
may  tell  me  that  Don  Ferdinand  de  Guevara 
never  went  into  Germany  to  seek  adventures, 
vhere  he  fought  Sir  George,^  a  knight  of  the 
Duke  of  Austria's  court.  You  may  say  the 
tilting  of  Suero  de  Quinnones  del  Passo,  and 
the  exploits  of  Moses  Lewis  de  Falses,  against 
Don  Gonzalo  de  Guzman,  a  Gastilian  knight, 
are  mere  fables ;  and  so  of  many  other  brave 
actions  performed  by  Christian  knights,  as 
well  Spaniards  as  foreigners;  which  are  so 
authentic  and  true,  that  I  say  it  over  again, 
he  who  denies  them   has  neither  sense  nor 


reason." 


See  Appendix,  Note  3,  Chapter  XXII.,  Book  FV. 
*  In  the  origiuftl  it  is  iTtcer,  Le.,  Mtuin  Otorgt. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  897 

The  canon  was  much  astonished  at  the  med- 
ley Don  Quixote  made  of  truths  and  fables,  and 
no  less  to  see  how  well  read  he  was  in  all 
things  relating  to  the  achievements  of  knights- 
errant;  "And  therefore  I  cannot  deny,  sir/* 
answered  he,  "  but  that  there  is  some  truth  in 
what  you  have  said,  especially  in  what  relates 
to  the  Spanish  knights-errant;  and  I  will 
grant  there  were  twelve  peers  of  France,  yet  I 
will  not  believe  they  performed  all  those  ac- 
tions Archbishop  Turpin  ascribes  to  them:  I 
rather  imagine  they  were  brave  gentlemen 
made  choice  of  by  the  kings  of  France,  and 
called  peers,  as  being  all  equal  in  valour  and 
quality;  or  if  they  were  not,  at  least  they 
ought  to  have  been  so ;  and  these  composed  a 
sort  of  military  order,  like  those  of  Saint  Jago, 
or  Calatrava  among  us,  into  which  all  that  are 
admitted,  are  supposed,  or  ought  to  be,  gentle- 
men of  birth  and  known  valour.  And  as  now 
we  say  a  knight  of  St  John,  or  of  Alcantara, 
so  in  those  times  they  said,  a  knight  one  ot 
the  twelve  peers,  because  there  were  but  twelve 
of  this  military  order.  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted 
but  that  there  were  such  men  as  Barnardo  del 
Carpio  and  the  Cid,  yet  we  have  reason  to 
question  whetlier  ever  they  performed  those 
great  exploits  that  are  ascribed  to  them.     As 


^m: 


DON  QUIXOTE.  899 


CHAPTER  XXm. 

THK  NOTABLE  DISPUTE  BETWEEN  THE  CANON  AND 
DON  QUIXOTE  ;    WITH  OTHER  MATTERS. 

"  Very  well,"  cried  Don  Quixote,  "  then  all 
those  books  must  be  fabulous,  though  licensed 
by  kings,  approved  by  the  examiners,  read 
with  general  satisfaction,  and  applauded  by  the 
better  sort  and  the  meaner,  rich  and  poor, 
learned  and  unlearned,  gentry  and  common- 
alty ;  and,  in  short,  by  all  sorts  of  persons  of 
what  state  and  condition  soever,  and  though 
they  carry  such  an  appearance  of  truth,  setting 
down  the  father,  mother,  country,  kindred, 
age,  place  and  actions  to  a  tittle,  and  day  by 
day,  of  the  knight  and  knights  of  whom  they 
treat?  For  shame,  sir,"  continued  he,  **  for- 
bear uttering  such  blasphemies;  and  believe 
me,  in  this  I  advise  you  to  behave  yourself  as 
becomes  a  man  of  sense,  or  else  read  them  and 
see  what  satisfaction  you  will  receive.  As  for 
instance,  pray  tell  me,  can  there  be  any  thing 
more  delightful,  than  to  read  a  lively  descrip- 
tion, which,  as  it  were,  brings  before  your  eyes 


4fM 

tihe  SrAliywtns  ^biTtanzszTB'}  A  ^aK  Lei&e  of  boL- 
in^  pi^ek,  in  wtiictL  an  fnnnnas^  mnftataTife  of 
ierp^ita.  fnakes,  iSf^caSLest.  and  ather  sqtb  <tf 
fierce  ami  ^orible  crgacrpw,  «e  gwrmmfng  and 
trav^amng  backwanii  and  fbrwaxdav  appess  6> 
a.  knigii:s-'<ercaxir  §  sgiitw  Then  ftcxa  die  nmfac 
of  the  lake  a  mixc  doldail  twcb  m  hemtd  m  aaj 
rhene  worda:  'O  knfghtw  wiioeTer  thaa  wn^ 
who  fpoBtg^  on  this  dreadM  kik&  if  duia  wih 
porehaae  tiie  bGaa  concealed  nnda  tiieae  Saaal 
waten,  make  known  &t  ▼alooTr  bj  eaadng 
thyself  into  tike  midsc  of  iheae  bfai^  hnming 
fnxrgea;  for  nnles  dioa  doat  ao,  tiioa  art  not 
wordiy  to  behold  the  mi^itr  woodefs  endoaed 
in  ^kyt  seven  caatiea  of  the  aeren  fidika,  dial 
are  seated  nnder  dieae  gloomj  wsvea.' — ^And 
no  sooner  hare  tiie  laat  aecoitB  of  die  rnoe 
reached  the  knight's  ear,  bat  he,  without 
making  any  fnrther  reflection,  or  considering 
the  danger  to  which  he  exposes  himself, 
and  even  withont  laying  aside  his  ponderons 
armour,  only  recommending  himself  to  hearen 
and  to  his  lady,  plunges  headlong  into  the 
middle  of  the  bnming  lake ;  and  when  least 
he  imagines  it,  or  can  guess  where  he  shall 
stop,  he  finds  himself  on  a  sudden  in  the  midst 
of  verdant  fields,  to  which  the  Elysian  bear  no 
comparison.     There  the  sky  appears  to  him 


DON  QUIXOTE.  401 

more  transparent,  and  the  sun  seems  to  shine 
with  a  redoubled  brightness.  Next  he  dis- 
covers a  most  delightful  grove  made  up  of 
beautiful  shady  trees,  whose  verdure  and 
variety  regale  his  sight,  while  his  ears  are 
ravished  with  the  wild  and  yet  melodious 
notes  of  an  infinite  number  of  pretty  painted 
birds,  that  hop  and  bill  and  sport  themselves 
on  the  twining  boughs.  Here  he  spies  a 
pleasant  rivulet,  which,  through  its  flowery 
banks,  glides  along  over  the  brightest  sand, 
and  remurmurs  over  the  whitest  pebbles  that 
bedimple  its  smooth  surface,  while  that  other, 
through  its  liquid  crystal,  feasts  the  eye  with  a 
prospect  of  gold  and  orient  pearL  There  he 
perceives  an  artificial  fountain,  formed  of  party- 
coloured  jasper  and  polished  marble ;  and  hard 
by  another,  contrived  in  grotesque,  where  the 
small  cockle-shells,  placed  in  orderly  confusion 
among  the  white  and  yellow  shells,  and  mixed 
with  pieces  of  bright  crystal  and  counterfeit 
emeralds,  yield  a  delectable  sight ;  so  that  art 
imitating  nature,  seems  here  to  out-do  her. 
At  a  distance,  on  a  sudden,  he  casts  his  eyes 
upon  a  strong  castle,  or  stately  palace,  whose 
walls  are  of  massy  gold,  the  battlements  of 
diamonds,   and   the   gates   of   hyacinths;    in 

short,  its  structure  is  so  wonderful,  that  though 
u.  2  c 


Z^ic:  JATiii^  sex   lH  ^^rrk    ^ssL  *=!*::>  T-.^  he  80 

^n^u'iiiMg  IS  ax  i€2iiiiir  A  TTTTT^rcgg  tzam  of 
Z€'aki:\i'ii  TJggnffRff  srme  nm  -^  ibe  casde  in 
^rri»fT  T^cnmB  £ii£  jjtLLj  j^csKcL  as  woald 
le  -siiijesF  iir  tk  s  ■^m'jIhf  woe  I  to 
r^iiaas:  ^t*sg  ir-^r^  »  zsusj-  se  tt>  be  found 
ZL  Vffgrrr?  Tren  «:-  s^  tbe  beuxtr  disl 
soBzit^  izte  ztf^  at  aZ  ibe  damsiek«  take 
isut  zrJd  kzi^T.  ^vTiCf  csK  '^imsplf  into  the 
c^crziz-r  jUji^  z^  iis5  ^ATtfi  ufed  vitiioiit  ^leak- 
biz  cat  were,  jesbti  him  into  a  somptnoos 
piTifr,  wTjse  be  is  esQ9ed  tt>  stiip  as  naked 
as  be  was  boczi.  ibai  pcx  into  a  ddicioiis  bath, 
and  perfumed  wztit  pteooos  eaBences  and  odor- 
iferocs  cik:  ana^  which  he  pnts  on  a  fine 
shiTL  delkiviidT  scented:  and  this  done  an- 
other damsel  throws  over  his  shoulders  a  mag- 
nificent rot*,  worth  at  least  a  whole  citv,  if 
not  more.  What  a  aght  is  it,  when  in  the 
next  place  thej  lead  him  into  another  room  of 
state,  where  he  finds  the  tables  so  orderly 
covered,  that  he  is  sorprised  and  astonished? 
There  they  ponr  over  his  hands,  water  distilled 
from  amber  and  odoriferous  flowers:  he  is 
seated  in  an  ivory  chair;  and  while  all  the 


DON  QUIXOTE.  403 

damsels  that  attend  him  observe  a  profound 
silence,  such  variety  of  dainties  is  served  up, 
and  all  so  incomparably  dressed,  that  his  appe- 
tite is  at  a  stand,  doubting  on  which  to  satisfy 
its  desire;  at  the  same  time  his  ears  are  sweetly 
entertained  with  variety  of  excellent  music, 
none  perceiving  who  makes  it,  or  from  whence 
it  comes.  But  above  all,  what  shall  we  say  to 
see,  after  the  dinner  is  ended,  and  tables  taken 
away,  the  knight  left  leaning  back  in  his  chair, 
perhaps  picking  his  teeth,  as  is  usual;  and 
then  another  damsel,  much  more  beautiful 
than  any  of  the  former,  comes  unexpectedly 
into  the  room,  and  sitting  down  by  the  knight, 
begins  to  inform  him  what  castle  that  is,  and 
how  she  is  enchanted  in  it ;  with  many  other 
particulars,  which  surprise  the  knight,  and 
astonish  those  that  read  his  history.  I  will 
enlarge  no  more  upon  this  matter,  since,  from 
what  has  been  said,  it  may  sufficiently  be 
inferred,  that  the  reading  of  any  passage  in 
any  history  of  knight-errantry,  must  be  very 
delightftil  and  surprising  to  the  reader.  And 
do  you,  good  sir,  believe  me  as  I  said  to  you 
before,  read  these  books,  which  you  may  find 
will  banish  all  melancholy,  if  you  are  troubled 
with  it,  and  sweeten  your  disposition,  if  it  be 
harsh.     This  I  can  say  for  myself,  that  since 


404  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

my  being  a  knight-errant,  I  am  brave,  courte- 
ous, bountiful,  well-bred,  generous,  civil,  bold, 
affitble,  patient,  a  sufferer  of  hardships,  im- 
prisonment, and  enchantment.  And  though 
I  have  so  lately  been  shut  up  in  a  cage,  like 
a  madman,  I  expect,  through  the  valour  of  my 
arm,  heaven  &vouring,  and  fortune  not  oppos- 
ing my  designs,  to  be  a  king  of  some  kingdom 
in  a  very  few  days,  that  so  I  may  give  proo6 
of  my  innate  gratitude  and  liberality.  For  on 
my  word,  sir,  a  poor  man  is  incapable  of  exert- 
ing his  liberality,  though  he  be  naturally  never 
so  well  inclined.  Now  that  gratitude  which 
only  consists  in  wishes,  may  be  said  to  be 
dead,  as  faith  without  good  works  is  dead. 
Therefore  it  is,  I  wish  fortune  would  soon  offer 
some  opportunity  for  me  to  become  an  emperor, 
that  I  might  give  proofs  of  my  generosity,  by 
advancing  my  friends,  but  especially  this  poor 
Sancho  Panza,  my  squire,  who  is  the  harm- 
lessest  fellow  in  the  world;  and  I  would 
willingly  give  him  an  earldom,  which  I  have 
long  since  promised  him,  but  that  I  fear  he 
has  not  sense  and  judgment  enough  to  manage 
it." 

Sancho,  hearing  his  master's  last  words, 
"  Well,  well,  sir,"  said  he,  "  never  do  you 
trouble  your  head  about  that  matter ;  all  you 


DON  QUIXOTE.  405 

have  to  do  is  to  get  me  this  same  earldom,  and 
let  me  alone  to  manage  it :  I  can  do  as  my 
betters  have  done  before  me ;  I  can  put  in  a 
deputy  or  a  servant,  that  shall  take  all  trouble 
oflF  my  hands,  while  I,  as  a  great  man  should, 
loll  at  my  ease,  receive  my  rents,  mind  no 
business,  live  merrily,  and  so  let  the  world  rub 
for  Sancho." — ^*  As  to  the  management  of 
your  revenue,"  said  the  canon,  "  a  deputy  or 
steward  may  do  well,  friend:  but  the  lord 
himself  is  obliged  to  stir  in  the  administration 
of  justice,  to  which  there  is  not  only  an  honest 
sincere  intention  required,  but  a  judicious  head 
also,  to  distinguish  nicely,  conclude  justly,  and 
choose  wisely;  for  if  this  be  wanting  in  the 
principal,  all  will  be  wrong  in  the  medium, 
and  " "  I  do  not  understand  your  philo- 
sophy," quoth  Sancho;  *^  all  I  said,  and  I  will 
say  it  again,  is,  that  I  wish  I  had  as  good  an 
earldom  as  I  could  govern ;  for  I  have  as  great 
a  soul  as  another  man,  and  as  great  a  body  as 
most  men :  And  the  first  thing  I  would  do  in 
my  government,  I  would  have  nobody  to  con- 
trol me,  I  would  be  absolute;  and  who  but 
I :  now,  he  that  is  absolute,  can  do  what  he 
likes ;  he  that  can  do  what  he  likes,  can  take 
his  pleasure ;  he  that  can  take  his  pleasure,  can 
be  content ;  and  he  that  can  be  content,  has 


406  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

no  more  to  desire ;  so  the  matter's  over,  and 
come  what  will  come,  I  am  satisfied;  if  an 
island,  welcome ;  if  no  island,  &re  it  well ;  we 
shall  see  ourselves  in  no  worse  a  condition,  as 
one  blind  man  said  to  another/' — "  This  is  no 
ill  reasoning  of  yours,  Mend,''  said  the  canon, 
^^  though  there  is  much  more  to  be  said  on  this 
topic  of  earldoms,  than  you  imagine." — "  Un- 
doubtedly," said  Don  Quixote;  "but  I  suit 
my  actions  to  the  example  of  Amadis  de  Gaul, 
who  made  his  squire  Gandalin  earl  of  the  Firm- 
island  ;  which  is  a  fair  precedent  for  preferring 
Sancho  to  the  same  dignity  to  which  his  merit 
also  lays  an  unquestionable  claim."  The  canon 
stood  amazed  at  Don  Quixote's  methodical  and 
orderly  madness,  in  describing  the  adventure 
of  the  Enight  of  the  Lake,  and  the  impression 
made  on  him  by  the  fsibulous  conceits  of  the 
books  he  had  read;  as  likewise  at  Sancho's 
simplicity  in  so  eagerly  contending  for  his 
earldom,  which  made  the  whole  company  very 
good  sport. 

By  this  time  the  canon's  servants  had  brought 
the  provision,  and  spreading  a  carpet  on  the 
grass  under  the  shady  trees,  they  sat  down  to 
dinner;  when  presently  they  heard  the  tinkling 
of  a  little  bell  among  the  copses  close  by  them, 
and  immediately  afterwards  they  saw  bolt  out 


DON  QUIXOTE.  407 

of  the  thicket  a  very  pretty  she-goat,  speckled 
all  over  with  black,  white,  and  brown  spots, 
and  a  goatherd  running  after  it;  who,  in  his 
familiar  dialect,  called  to  it  to  stay  and  return 
to  the  fold ;  but  the  fugitive  ran  towards  the 
company,  frighted  and  panting,  and  stopt  close 
by  them,  as  if  it  had  begged  their  protection. 
The  goatherd  overtaking  it,  caught  it  by  the 
horns,  and  in  a  chiding  way,  as  if  the  goat 
understood  his  resentments,  *'Tou  little  wanton 
nanny,"  said  he,  **you  spotted  elf,  what  has 
made  you  trip  it  so  much  of  late  ?  what  wolf 
has  scared  you  thus,  hussy?  tell  me,  little  fool, 
what  is  the  matter  ?  But  the  cause  is  plain ; 
thou  art  a  female,  and  therefore  never  can'st 
be  quiet :  curse  on  thy  freakish  humours,  and 
all  theirs  whom  thou  so  much  resemblest! 
Turn  back,  my  love,  turn  back,  and  though 
thou  can^st  not  be  content  with  thy  fold,  yet 
there  thou  mayest  be  safe  among  the  rest  of 
thy  fellows;  for  if  thou,  that  shouldst  guide 
and  direct  the  flock,  lovest  wandering  thus, 
what  must  they  do,  what  will  become  of 
them?" 

The  goatherd^s  talk  to  his  goat  was  enter- 
taining enough  to  the  company,  especially  to 
the  canon,  who  calling  to  him,  "  Prythee, 
honest  fellow,"  said  he,  **have  a  little  patience 


408  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

and  let  your  goat  take  its  liberty  a  while ;  for 
since  it  is  a  female,  as  you  say,  she  will  follow 
her  natural  inclination  the  more  for  your  striv- 
ing to  confine  it ;  come  then,  and  take  a  bit, 
and  a  glass  of  wine  with  us,  you  may  be  better 
humoured  after  that."  He  then  reached  him 
the  leg  of  a  cold  rabbit,  and,  ordering  him  a 
glass  of  wine,  the  goatherd  drank  it  off,  and 
returning  thanks,  was  pacified.  ** Gentlemen," 
said  he,  **  I  would  not  have  you  think  me  a 
fool,  because  I  talk  so  seriously  to  this  sense- 
less animal,  for  my  words  bear  a  mysterious 
meaning.  I  am  indeed,  as  you  see,  rustical 
and  unpolished,  though  not  so  ignorant,  but 
that  I  converse  with  men  as  well  as  brutes." — 
**  That  is  no  miracle,"  said  the  curate,  "  for  I 
have  known  the  woods  breed  learned  men,  and 
simple  sheepcots  contain  philosophers." — **  At 
least,"  said  the  goatherd,  **  they  harbour  men 
that  have  some  knowledge  of  the  world  :  and 
to  make  good  this  truth,  if  I  thought  not  the 
offer  impertinent,  or  my  company  troublesome, 
you  should  hear  an  accident  which  but  too 
well  confirms  what  you  have  said." — "  For  my 
part,"  answered  Don  Quixote,  "  I  will  hear 
you  attentively,  because,  methinks,  your  com- 
ing has  something  in  it  that  looks  like  an 
adventure    of   knight-errantry;    and    I    dare 


DON  QUIXOTE.  409 

answer,  the  whole  company  will  not  so  much 
bring  their  parts  in  question,  as  to  refuse  to 
hear  a  story  so  pleasing,  surprising,  and  amus- 
ing, as  I  fancy  yours  will  prove.  Then  prythee 
friend  begin,  for  we  will  all  give  you  our  atten- 
tion."— **  You  must  excuse  me  for  one,"  said 
Sancho,  "I  must  have  a  word  or  two  in  private 
with  this  same  pasty  at  yon  little  brook ;  for 
I  design  to  fill  my  belly  for  to-morrow  and 
next  day ;  having  often  heard  my  master  Don 
Quixote  say,  that  whenever  a  knight-errant's 
squire  finds  good  belly-timber,  he  must  fall  to 
and  feed  till  his  sides  are  ready  to  burst,  be- 
cause they  may  happen  to  be  bewildered  in  a 
thick  wood  for  five  or  six  days  together;  so 
that  if  a  man  has  not  his  belly  full  beforehand, 
or  his  wallet  well  provided,  he  may  chance  to 
be  crows-meat  himself,  as  many  times  it  falls 
out." — **  You  are  in  the  right,  Sancho,"  said 
the  knight;  **but  I  have,  for  my  part,  satisfied 
my  bodily  appetite,  and  now  want  only  refresh- 
ment for  my  mind,  which  I  hope  this  honest 
fellow's  story  will  afford  me."  All  the  com- 
pany agreed  with  Don  Quixote :  the  goatherd 
then  stroking  his  pretty  goat  once  or  twice; 
*'  Lie  down,  thou  speckled  fool,"  said  he,  **  lie 
by  me  here ;  for  we  shall  have  time  enough  to 
return  home."     The  creature  seemed  to  under- 


gtamd  him,  ibr  aft  saan  as  ha  mamor  an  dawn, 
she  sGnsGched  fierwrff  qmedy  by  hs  scie.  iiod 
Iccked  ICO  in  bia  lace  as  if  atie  would  Let:  ^rm 
kzLow  diac  §he  Tiiniiftri  wiiac  he  wui:  and  then 
he  began  aLn&. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  411 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE      GOATHERD*  8      TALE. 

About  three  leagues  from  this  valley,  there  is  a 
village,  which,  though  small,  yet  is  one  of  the 
richest  hereabouts.  In  it  there  lived  a  farmer 
in  very  great  esteem;  and,  though  it  is 
common  for  the  rich  to  be  respected,  yet  was 
this  person  more  considered  for  his  virtue,  than 
for  the  wealth  he  possessed.  But  what  he 
accounted  himself  happiest  in,  was  a  daughter 
of  such  extraordinary  beauty,  prudence,  wit, 
and  virtue,  that  all  who  knew  or  beheld  her, 
could  not  but  admire  to  see  how  heaven  and 
nature  had  done  their  utmost  to  embellish  her. 
When  she  was  but  little  she  was  handsome, 
till  at  the  age  of  sixteen  she  was  most  com- 
pletely beautiful.  The  feme  of  her  beauty 
began  to  extend  to  the  neighbouring  villages ; 
— ^but  why  say  I  neighbouring  villages?  it 
extended  to  the  remotest  cities,  and  entered 
the  palaces  of  kings,  and  the  ears  of  all  manner 
of  persons,  who  from  all  parts  flocked  to  see 
her,  as  something  rare,  or  as  a  sort  of  prodigy. 


^c]^Bn 


j>iEt  r 


isr  jao.  or 

:ii4S»^  "vifr  jmrciis:  ^esciL  a:  mr  TiIjiA^  wlio 

TiuATtx  i*jiir:  la  i>^  jc  ^^  ^dui:  inni^.     Tli^  pot 

-^    ■iirntq'    ja     i    ^caaiL    iai£    n^Eii   him   in 

§afic«ii«L  -£!  ii&  -ttcrgnjar  :i£LCiiIii  deekre  in 

ar^or  n:  me  ^it  i» :  X'  cr^g  di^  jdSEiir  there- 

±n  :s    :iie  jfeetBff    issHifc  lie    ressolred    to 

^ei-naizia  ]>^inttra.  ±r  ww^wthk&iroiiecaned, 

truu  ance  we  w«e  eqasils  in  mR  things^  he  left 

ber  ttiurely  nee  to  cLooee  which  of  as  was  most 

agreeable  to  hoself.     An  ex^imple  worthy  oi 


DON  QUIXOTE.  413 

being  imitated  by  all  parents,  who  have  any 
regard  for  their  children.  I  don^t  mean  that 
they  should  be  allowed  to  choose  in  things 
mean  or  mischievous ;  but  only  that  proposing 
to  them  ever  those  things  which  are  good,  they 
should  be  allowed  in  them  to  gratify  their 
inclination. 

I  don't  know  how  Lcandra  approved  this 
proposal;  this  I  only  know,  that  her  father  put 
us  both  oflf,  with  the  excuse  of  his  daughter's 
being  too  young  to  be  yet  disposed  of;  and  that 
he  treated  us  both  in  such  general  terms,  as 
could  neither  well  please  nor  displease  us. 
My  rival's  name  is  Anselmo,  mine  Eugenio; 
for  it  is  necessary  you  should  know  the  names 
of  the  persons  concerned  in  this  tragedy,  the 
conclusion  of  which,  though  depending  yet, 
may  easily  be  perceived  likely  to  be  unfortunate. 
About  that  time  there  came  to  our  village  one 
Vincent  de  la  Rosa,  the  son  of  a  poor  labour- 
ing man  of  the  neighbourhood.  This  Vincent 
came  out  of  Italy,  having  been  a  soldier  there, 
and  in  other  foreign  parts.  When  he  was  but 
twelve  years  old,  a  captain,  that  happened  to 
pass  by  here,  with  his  company,  took  him  out 
of  this  country,  and  at  the  end  of  other  twelve 
years  he  returned  hither,  habited  like  a  soldier, 
all  gay  and  glorious,  in  a  thousand  various 


4U  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

colours,  bedecked  with  a  thousand  toys  of 
crystal,  and  chains  of  steel.  To-day  he  put 
on  one  piece  of  finery,  to-morrow  another; 
but  all  false,  counterfeit,  and  worthless.  The 
country  people,  who  by  nature  are  malicious, 
and  who  living  in  idleness  are  still  more 
inclined  to  malice,  observed  this  presently,  and 
counting  all  his  fine  things,  they  found  that 
indeed  he  had  but  three  suits  of  clothes,  which 
were  of  a  very  different  colour  with  the  stock- 
ings and  garters  belonging  to  them;  yet  did 
he  manage  them  with  so  many  tricks  and 
inventions,  that  if  one  had  not  counted  them, 
one  would  have  sworn  he  had  above  ten  suits, 
and  above  twenty  plumes  of  feathers. 

Let  it  not  seem  impertinent  that  I  mention 
this  particular  of  his  clothes  and  trinkets,  since 
so  much  of  the  story  depends  upon  it.  Seat- 
ing himself  upon  a  bench,  under  a  large 
spreading  poplar-tree,  which  grows  in  our 
street,  he  used  to  entertain  us  with  his  ex- 
ploits, while  we  stood  gaping  and  listening  at 
the  wonders  he  recounted :  there  was  not  that 
country,  as  he  said,  upon  the  face  of  the  earth, 
which  he  had  not  seen,  nor  battle  which  he 
had  not  been  engaged  in  ;  he  had  killed  more 
Moors,  for  his  own  share,  than  were  in  Morocco 
and  Tunis  together;    and  had  fought  more 


DON  QUIXOTE.  416 

duels  than  Gante,  Luna,  Diego,  Garcia  de 
Peredez,*  or  a  thousand  others  that  he  named, 
yet  in  all  of  them  had  the  better,  and  never 
got  a  scratch,  or  lost  a  drop  of  blood.  Then 
again  he  pretended  to  show  us  the  scars  of 
wounds  he  had  received,  which  though  they 
were  not  to  be  perceived,  yet  he  gave  us  to 
understand  they  were  so  many  musketnshots, 
which  he  had  got  in  several  skirmishes  and 
encounters.  In  short,  he  treated  all  his  equals 
with  an  unparalleled  arrogance;  and  even  to 
those  who  knew  the  meanness  of  his  birth,  he 
did  not  stick  to  affirm,  that  his  own  arm  was  his 
father,  his  actions  were  his  pedigree,  and  that 
except  as  to  his  being  a  soldier,  he  owed  no  part 
of  his  quality  to  the  king  himself,  and  that  in 
being  a  soldier,  he  was  as  good  as  the  king.^ 

Besides  these  assumed  accomplishments,  he 
was  a  piece  of  a  musician,  and  could  thrum  a 
guitar  a  little ;  but  what  his  excellency  chiefly 
lay  in  was  poetry;  and  so  fond  was  he  of  show- 
ing his  parts  that  way,  that  upon  every  trifling 
occasion,  he  was  sure  to  make  a  copy  of  verses 
a  league  and  a  half  long.  This  soldier  whom 
I  have  described,  this  Vincent  de  la  Rosa,  this 
hero,  this  gallant,  this  musician,  this  poet,  was 
often  seen   and  viewed    by  Leandra,  from  a 

*  Spaniards  famous  for  duelling. 
18m  Appendix,  Note  1,  Chapter  XXIV.,  Book  lY. 


416  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

window  of  her  house  which  looked  into  the 
street;  she  was  stmck  with  the  tinsel  of  his 
dress;  she  was  charmed  with  his  verses,  of 
which  he  took  care  to  disperse  a  great  many 
copies ;  her  ears  were  pleased  with  the  exploits 
he  related  of  himself;  and  in  short,  as  the 
devil  would  have  it,  she  fell  in  love  with  him, 
hefore  ever  he  had  the  confidence  to  make  his 
addresses  to  her ;  and,  as  in  all  affairs  of  love, 
that  is  the  most  easily  managed  where  the 
lady's  affection  is  pre-engaged ;  so  was  it  here 
no  hard  thing  for  Leandra  and  Vincent  to  have 
firequent  meetings  to  concert  their  matters; 
and  before  ever  any  one  of  her  many  suitors 
had  the  least  suspicion  of  her  inclination,  she 
had  gratified  it;  and  leaving  her  father's  house, 
for  she  had  no  mother,  had  run  away  with  this 
soldier,  who  came  off  with  greater  triumph  in 
this  enterprise,  than  in  any  of  the  rest  he  made 
his  boast  of. 

The  whole  village  was  surprised  at  this  acci- 
dent, as  was  every  one  that  heard  it.  I  was 
amazed,  Anselmo  distracted,  her  father  in  tears, 
her  relations  outrageous ;  justice  is  demanded ; 
a  party  with  oflScers  is  sent  out,  who  traverse 
the  roads,  search  every  wood,  and,  at  three  days 
end,  find  the  poor  fond  Leandra  in  a  cave  of 
one  of  the  mountains,  naked  to  her  shift,  and 


■  r:  .  '*  '« 

1 


; 


^*':st- 


DON  QUIXOTE.  417 

robbed  of  a  great  deal  of  money  and  jewels 
which  she  took  from  home.  They  bring  and 
present  her  to  her  father ;  upon  inquiry  made 
into  the  cause  of  her  misfortune,  she  confessed 
ingenuously,  that  Vincent  de  la  Rosa  had  de- 
ceived her^  and  upon  promise  of  marriage  had 
prevailed  with  her  to  leave  her  father's  house, 
with  the  assurance  of  carrying  her  to  the  richest 
and  most  delicious  city  of  the  world,  which  was 
Naples ;  that  she  foolishly  had  given  credit  to 
him,  and  robbing  her  father,  had  put  herself 
into  his  hands  the  first  night  she  was  missed ; 
that  he  carried  her  up  a  steep  wild  craggy 
mountain,  and  put  her  in  that  cave  where  she 
was  found.  In  fine,  she  said,  that  though  he 
had  rifled  her  of  all  she  had,  yet  he  had  never 
attempted  her  honour ;  but  leaving  her  in  that 
manner,  he  fled.  It  was  no  easy  matter  to 
make  any  of  us  entertain  a  good  opinion  of  the 
soldier's  continence ;  but  she  affirmed  it  with 
so  many  repeated  asseverations,  that  in  some 
measure  it  served  to  comfort  her  father  in  his 
affliction,  who  valued  nothing  so  much  as  his 
daughter's  reputation.  The  very  same  day 
that  Leandra  appeared  again,  she  also  dis- 
appeared from  us,  for  her  father  immediately 
clapped  her  up  in  a  monastery,  in  a  town  not 

far  oflF,  in  hopes  that  time  might  wear  away 
IT.  2d 


418  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

something  of  her  disgrace.  Those  who  were 
not  interested  in  Leandra,  excused  her  upon 
the  account  of  her  youth.  But  those  who  were 
acquainted  with  her  wit  and  sense,  did  not 
attribute  her  miscarriage  to  her  ignorance,  but 
to  the  levity  and  vanity  of  mind,  natural  to 
woman-kind. 

Since  the  confinement  of  Leandra,  Anselmo's 
eyes  could  never  meet  with  an  object  which 
could  give  him  either  ease  or  pleasure ;  I  too 
could  find  nothing  but  what  looked  sad  and 
gloomy  to  me  in  the  absence  of  Leandra.  Our 
melancholy  increased  as  our  patience  decreased. 
We  curst  a  thousand  times  the  soldier's  finery 
and  trinkets,  and  railed  at  the  father's  want  of 
precaution :  at  last  we  agreed,  Anselmo  and  I, 
to  leave  the  village,  and  to  retire  to  this  valley, 
where,  he  feeding  a  large  flock  of  sheep,  and  I 
as  large  a  herd  of  goats,  all  our  own,  we  pass 
our  time  under  the  trees,  giving  vent  to  our 
passions,  singing  in  consort  the  praises  or  re- 
proaches of  the  beauteous  Leandra,  or  else, 
sighing  alone,  make  our  complaints  to  heaven 
on  our  misfortune.  In  imitation  of  us,  a  great 
many  more  of  Leandra's  lovers  have  come 
hither  into  these  steep  and  craggy  mountains, 
and  are  alike  employed;  and  so  many  there 
are  of  them,  that  the  place  seems  to  be  turned 


DON  QUIXOTE.  419 

to  the  old  Arcadia  we  read  of.  On  the  top  of 
that  hill  there  is  such  a  number  of  shepherds 
and  their  cottages,  that  there  is  no  part  of  it  in 
which  is  not  to  be  heard  the  name  of  Leandra. 
This  man  curses  and  calls  her  wanton  and 
lascivious,  another  calls  her  light  and  fickle ; 
one  acquits  and  forgives  her,  another  arraigns 
and  condemns  her ;  one  celebrates  her  beauty, 
another  rails  at  her  ill  qualities ;  in  short,  all 
blame,  but  all  adore  her.  Nay,  so  far  does  this 
extravagance  prevail,  that  here  are  those  who 
complain  of  her  disdain  who  never  spoke  to  her ; 
and  others  who  are  jealous  of  favours  which  she 
never  granted  to  any ;  for,  as  I  intimated  before, 
her  inclination  was  not  known  before  her  dis- 
grace. There  is  not  a  hollow  place  of  a  rock, 
a  bank  of  a  brook,  or  a  shady  grove,  where 
there  is  not  some  or  other  of  these  amorous 
shepherds  telling  their  doleful  stories  to  the  air 
and  winds.  Echo  has  learnt  to  repeat  the  name 
of  Leandra,  Leandra  all  the  hills  resound,  the 
brooks  murmur  Leandra,  and  it  is  Leandra  that 
holds  us  all  enchanted,  hoping  without  hope, 
and  fearing  without  knowing  what  we  fear. 

Of  all  these  foolish  people,  the  person  who 
shows  the  least,  and  yet  has  the  most  sense, 
is  my  rival  Anselmo,  who,  forgetting  all 
other  causes  of  complaint,  complains  only  of 


hm;gaixBL  For  mj part  I  takt an tfgfarr i 
I  t:iimii:  ^bescK:.  I  shl^des*  sl  nirar.  widdi  is 
ZTj  MjaZL^&e  ill  t&cn^Ieaitcf  wQB&e&*sleTTtT, 
m&xaamer^  ^uar  brofasa  tg)«9  and  tbiii  deeeit- 
M  promws^  dier  isodaem  ciAaw  and  ^ae- 
gsni  oi  merf^  TfaiSr  gmtiffiMii^  wss  tbe 
fj/eeamA  ^A  tLoae  wocdi^  widch.  at  mj  coming 
LitLer^  I  addiHBHi  to  tida  goat;  fat  being  a 
tfa^  I  bate  ber.  tb^o^  die  ii  the  beat  of  my 
berd.  Thii  ii  dke  atorj  wbicb  I  promised  to  tell 
foa;  if  Toa  bare  tbongbt  it  too  kxi^  I  shall 
endearonr  to  reqnifie  your  patience  in  anything 
I  can  serre  Ton«  Hard  by  is  my  cottage,  where 
I  bare  some  good  fiesh  milk  and  excellent 
cheese,  with  serend  sorts  of  froits,  which  I  hope 
yoti  win  find  agreeable  both  to  the  sight  and 
taste. 


DON  QUIXOTE,  4tl 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

OP  THE  COMBAT  BETWEEN  DON  QUIXOTE  AND  THE 
GOAT-HERD  ;  WITH  THE  RARE  ADVENTURE  OP 
THE  PENITENTS,  WHICH  THE  KNIGHT  HAPPILY 
ACC0MPU8HED  WITH  THE  SWEAT  OP  HIS  BROWS. 

The  goat-herd's  story  was  mightily  liked  by  the 
whole  company,  especially  by  the  canon,  who 
particularly  minded  the  manner  of  his  relating 
it,  that  had  more  of  a  scholar  and  gentleman, 
than  of  a  rude  goat-herd;  which  made  him 
conclude  the  curate  had  reason  to  say,  that  even 
the  mountains  bred  scholars  and  men  of  sense. 
They  all  made  large  proflFers  of  their  friendship 
and  service  to  Eugenic,  but  Don  Quixote  ex- 
ceeded them  all;  and,  addressing  himself  to 
him,  "  Were  I,''  said  he,  "  at  this  time  in  a 
capacity  of  undertaking  any  adventure,  I  would 
certainly  begin  from  this  very  moment  to  serve 
you ;  I  would  soon  release  Leandra  out  of  this 
nunnery,  where  undoubtedly  she  is  detained 
against  her  will ;  and  in  spite  of  all  the  oppo- 
sition could  be  made  by  the  lady  abbess  and  all 
her  adherents,  I  would  return  her  to  your  hands, 


423  THE  ACHIEVElfEMTS  OF 

that  you  might  have  the  sole  disposal  of  her, 
so  far,  I  mean,  as  is  consistent  with  the  laws  of 
knighthood,  which  expressly  forbid  that  any 
man  shoold  offer  the  least  violence  to  a  damsd ; 
yet  (I  trust  in  heaven)  that  the  power  of  a 
friendly  magician  will  prevail  against  the  force 
of  a  malicious  enchanter ;  and  whenever  this 
shall  happen,  you  may  assure  yourself  of  my 
&vour  and  assistance,  to  which  I  am  obliged  by 
my  profession,  that  enjoins  me  to  relieve  the 
oppressed/' 

The  goat-herd,  who  till  then  had  not  taken 
the  least  notice  of  Don  Quixote  in  particular, 
now  looking  earnestly  on  him,  and  finding  his 
dismal  countenance  and  wretched  habit  were 
no  great  encouragement  for  him  to  expect  a 
performance  of  such  mighty  matters,  whispered 
the  barber,  who  sat  next  him :  "  Pray,  sir,"  said 
he,  "  who  is  this  man  that  talks  so  extrava- 
gantly ?  For  I  protest  I  never  saw  so  strange 
a  figure  in  all  my  life/' — "  Whom  can  you  ima- 
gine it  should  be,"  replied  the  barber,  "  but  the 
&mous  Don  Quixote  de  la  Mancha,  the  estab- 
Usher  of  justice,  the  avenger  of  injuries,  the 
protector  of  damsels,  the  terror  of  giants,  and 
the  invincible  gainer  of  battles  ?  " — "  The  ac- 
count you  give  of  this  person,"  returned  the 
goat-herd,  "is  much   like  what  we  read   in 


DON  QUIXOTE.  423 

romances  and  books  of  chivalry  of  those  doughty 
Dons,  who,  for  their  mighty  prowess  and 
achievements,  were  called  knights-errant ;  and 
therefore  I  dare  say  you  do  but  jest,  and  that 
this  gentleman's  brains  have  deserted  their 
quarters." 

"  Thou  art  an  impudent  insolent  varlet," 
cried  Don  Quixote,  "  it  is  thy  paper-skull  is 
full  of  empty  rooms ;  I  have  more  brains  than 
the  prostitute  thy  mother  had  about  her  when 
she  carried  thy  lump  of  nonsense  in  her  womb." 
— With  that,  snatching  up  a  loaf  that  was  near 
him,  he  struck  the  goat-herd  so  furious  a  blow 
with  it,  that  he  almost  levelled  his  nose  with 
his  face.  The  other,  not  accustomed  to  such 
salutations,  no  sooner  perceived  how  scurvily 
he  was  treated,  but  without  any  respect  to  the 
table-cloth,  napkins,  or  to  those  who  were 
eating,  he  leaped  furiously  on  Don  Quixote,  and 
grasping  him  by  the  throat  with  both  his  hands, 
had  certainly  strangled  him,  had  not  Sancho 
Panza  come  in  that  very  nick  of  time,  and 
gripping  him  fast  behind,  pulled  him  backwards 
on  the  table,  bruising  dishes,  breaking  glasses, 
spilling  and  overturning  all  that  lay  upon  it 
Don  Quixote  seeing  himself  freed,  fell  violently 
again  upon  the  goat-herd,  who,  all  besmeared 
with   blood,  and  trampled    to    pieces    under 


424  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

Sancho's  feet,  groped  here  and  therefor  some 
knife  or  fork  to  take  a  fatal  revenge;  hut  the 
canon  and  curate  took  care  to  prevent  his  pur- 
pose, and  in  the  meanwhile,  by  the  barber's  con- 
trivance, the  goat-herd  got  Don  Quixote  under 
him,  on  whom  he  let  fall  such  a  tempest  of  blows, 
as  caused  as  great  a  shower  of  blood  to  pour  from 
the  poor  knight's  face  as  had  streamed  from  his 
own.  The  canon  and  curate  were  ready  to 
burst  with  laughing,  the  officers  danced  and 
jumped  at  the  sport,  every  one  cried  halloo !  as 
men  used  to  do  when  two  dogs  are  snarling  or 
fighting;  Sancho  Panza  alone  was  vexed,  fretted 
himself  to  death,  and  raved  like  a  madman 
because  he  could  not  get  from  one  of  the 
canon's  serving  men,  who  kept  him  from  assist- 
ing his  master.  In  short,  all  were  exceedingly 
merry,  except  the  bloody  combatants,  who  had 
mauled  one  another  most  miserably,  when  on 
a  sudden  they  heard  the  sound  of  a  trumpet 
so  doleful,  that  it  made  them  turn  to  listen  to- 
wards that  part  from  whence  it  seemed  to  come  : 
but  he  who  was  most  troubled  at  this  dismal 
alarm,  was  Don  Quixote ;  therefore,  though  he 
lay  under  the  goat-herd,  full  sore  against  his 
will,  and  was  most  lamentably  bruised  and 
battered,  "  Friend  devil,"  cried  he  to  him,  "  for 
sure  nothing  less  could  have  so  much  valour 


DON  QUIXOTE.  426 

and  strength  as  to  subdue  my  forces,  let  us  have 
a  cessation  of  arms  but  for  a  single  hour ;  for 
the  dolorous  sound  of  that  trumpet  strikes  my 
soul  with  more  horror  than  thy  hard  fists  do 
my  ears  with  pain,  and  methinks  excite  me  to 
some  new  adventure." — ^With  that  the  goat- 
herd, who  was  as  weary  of  beating  as  of  being 
beaten,  immediately  gave  him  a  truce;  and  the 
knight  once  more  getting  on  his  feet,  directed 
his  then  not  hasty  steps  to  the  place  whence 
the  mournful  sound  seemed  to  come,  and  pre- 
sently saw  a  number  of  men  all  in  white,  like 
penitents,  descending  firom  a  rising  ground. 
The  real  matter  was  this :  the  people  had 
wanted  rain  for  a  whole  year  together,  where- 
fore they  appointed  rogations,  processions,  and 
disciplines  throughout  all  that  country,  to  im- 
plore heaven  to  open  its  treasury,  and  shower 
down  plenty  upon  them ;  and  to  this  end,  the 
inhabitants  of  a  village  near  that  place  came 
in  procession  to  a  devout  hermitage  built  on 
one  of  the  hills  which  surrounded  that  valley. 

Don  Quixote,  taking  notice  of  the  strange 
habits  of  the  penitents,  and  never  reminding 
himself  that  he  had  often  seen  the  like  before, 
fancied  immediately  it  was  some  new  adventure, 
and  he  alone  was  to  engage  in  it,  as  he  was 
obliged  by  the  laws  of  knight-errantry;  and 


426  THE  AGtilKVEMENTS  OF 

that  which  the  more  increased  his  frenzy,  was 
his  mistaking  an  image  which  they  carried  (all 
covered  with  black)  for  some  great  lady,  whom 
these  miscreant  and  discourteous  knights,  he 
thought,  were  carrying  away  against  her  will. 
As  soon  as  this  whimsy  took  him  in  the  head, 
he  moved  with  what  expedition  he  could  towards 
Rozinante,  who  was  feeding  up  and  down  upon 
the  plains,  and,  whipping  oflF  his  bridle  from  the 
pommel,  and  his  target  which  hung  hard  by, 
he  bridled  him  in  an  instant ;  then,  taking  his 
sword  from  Sancho,  he  got  in  a  trice  on  Rozi- 
nante's  back,  where,  bracing  his  target,  and 
addressing  himself  aloud  to  all  there  present, 
"  0  valorous  company,''  cried  he,  **  you  shall 
now  perceive  of  how  great  importance  it  is  to 
mankind,  that  such  illustrious  persons  as  those 
who  profess  the  order  of  knight-errantry  should 
exist  in  the  world ;  now,  I  say,  you  shall  see, 
by  my  freeing  that  noble  lady,  who  is  there 
basely  and  barbarously  carried  away  captive, 
that  knight-adventurers  ought  to  be  held  in  the 
highest  and  greatest  estimation." 

So  saying,  he  pushed  Rozinante  with  his 
heels  for  want  of  spurs ;  and,  forcing  him  to  a 
hand  gallop  (for  it  was  never  read  in  any  part 
of  this  true  history  that  Rozinante  did  ever  run 
ftiU  speed),  he  posted  to  encounter  the  peni- 


DON  QUIXOTE.  427 

tents,  in  spite  of  all  the  curate,  canon,  and 
barber  could  do  to  hinder  him;  much  less 
could  Sancho  Panza's  outcries  detain  him. 

"  Master !  Sir !  Don  Quixote !  "  bawled  out 
the  poor  squire,  **  whither  are  you  posting? 
are  you  bewitched?  does  the  devil  drive  and 
set  you  on,  thus  to  run  against  the  Church? 
ah,  wretch  that  I  am!  See,  sir!  that  is  a 
procession  of  penitents,  and  the  lady  they  carry 
is  the  image  of  the  immaculate  Virgin,  our 
blessed  Lady.  Take  heed  what  you  do,  for  at 
this  time  it  may  be  certainly  said  you  are  out 
of  your  wits ! "  But  Sancho  might  as  well 
have  kept  his  breath  for  another  use,  for  the 
knight  was  urged  with  so  vehement  a  desire 
to  encounter  the  white  men,  and  release  the 
mourning  lady,  that  he  heard  not  a  syllable  he 
said,  or  if  he  had,  he  would  not  have  turned 
back,  even  at  the  king's  express  command. 
At  last,  being  come  near  the  procession,  and 
stopping  Bozinante,  that  already  had  a  great 
desire  to  rest  a  little,  in  a  dismal  tone,  and 
with  a  hoarse  voice,  "  Ho ! ''  cried  he,  "  you 
there,  who  cover  your  faces,  perhaps  because 
you  are  ashamed  of  yourselves,  and  of  the 
crime  you  are  now  committing,  give  heed  and 
attention  to  what  I  have  to  say." 

The  first  who  stopped  at  this  alarm  were 


428  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 

those  who  carried  the  image ;  when  one  of  the 
four  priests,  that  sung  the  litanies,  seeing  the 
strange  figure  that  Don  Quixote  made,  and  the 
leanness  of  Bozinante,  with  other  circumstances 
which  he  observed  in  the  knight  sufficient  to 
have  forced  laughter,  presently  made  him  this 
answer,  "  Good  sir,  if  you  have  anything  to 
say  to  us  speak  it  quickly,  for  these  poor  men 
whom  you  see  are  very  much  tired ;  therefore 
we  neither  can,  nor  is  it  reasonable  we  should, 
stand  thus  in  pain,  to  hear  anything  that  can- 
not be  delivered  in  two  words." — *'I  will  say 
it  in  one,''  replied  Don  Quixote,  "  which  is 
this ;  I  charge  you  immediately  to  release  that 
beautiful  lady,  whose  tears  and  looks  full  of 
sorrow  evidently  show  you  carry  her  away  by 
violence,  and  have  done  her  some  unheard-of 
injury :  this  do,  or  I,  who  was  bom  to  punish 
such  outrages,  will  not  suflFer  you  to  advance 
one  step  with  her,  till  she  is  entirely  possessed 
of  that  liberty  she  so  earnestly  desires,  and  so 
justly  deserves."  This  last  speech  made  them 
all  conclude  that  the  knight  was  certainly  dis- 
tracted, and  caused  a  general  laughter;  but 
this  proved  like  oil  to  fire,  and  so  inflamed  Don 
Quixote,  that,  laying  his  hand  on  his  sword, 
without  more  words,  he  presently  assaulted 
those  who  carried  the  image.     At  the  same 


DON  QUIXOTE.  429 

time  one  of  them  quitting  his  post,  came  to 
encounter  our  hero  with  a  wooden  fork,  on 
which  he  supported  the  bier  whenever  they 
made  a  stand,  and  warding  with  it  a  weighty 
blow  which  Don  Quixote  designed  and  aimed 
at  him,  the  fork  was  cut  in  two ;  but  the  other, 
who  had  the  remaining  piece  in  his  hand, 
returned  the  knight  such  a  thwack  on  his  left 
shoulder,  that,  his  target  not  being  able  to 
resist  such  rustic  force,  the  poor  unfortunate 
Don  Quixote  was  struck  to  the  ground,  and 
miserably  bruised. 

Sancho  Panza,  who  had  followed  him  as  fiwt 
as  his  breath  and  legs  would  permit,  seeing 
him  fall,  cried  out  to  his  adversary  to  forbear 
striking  him,  urging  that  he  was  a  poor  en- 
chanted  knight,  and  one  who  in  his  whole  life 
had  never  done  any  man  harm.  But  it  was  not 
Sancho's  arguments  that  held  the  country 
fellow's  hands ;  the  only  motive  was,  that  he 
feared  he  had  killed  him,  since  he  could  not 
perceive  he  stirred  either  hand  or  foot ;  where- 
fore, tucking  his  coat  up  to  his  girdle,  with  all 
possible  expedition,  he  scoured  over  the  fields 
like  a  greyhound.  Meanwhile  Don  Quixote's 
companions  hastened  to  the  place  where  he 
lay,  when  those  of  the  procession  seeing  them 
come  running  towards  them,  attended  by  the 


:j:  430  THE  ACfflEVEMENTS  OP 

J  officers  of  the  holy  brotherhood   with    their 

I  cross-bows  along  with   them,  began  to  have 

I  apprehensions    of    some    disaster    from    the 

j  approaching  party ;  wherefore,  drawing  up  in 

j,  a  body  about  the  image,  the  disciplinants  lift- 

j  ing  up  their  hoods,  and  grasping  fast  their 

.  whips,  as  the   priests  did  their  tapers,  they 

expected  the  assault  with  the  greatest  bravery, 
resolving  to  defend  themselves,  and  ofifend 
their  enemy  as  long  and  as  much  as  possible^ 
But  providence  had  ordered  the  matter  much 
better  than  they  could  hope;  for  while  Sancho, 
who  had  thrown  himself  on  his  master's  body, 
was  lamenting  his  loss,  and  the  supposed  death 
of  so  noble  and  generous  a  lord,  in  the  most 
ridiculous  manner  that  ever  was  heard,  the 
curate  of  the  knight's  party  was  come  up  with 
the  other  who  came  in  the  procession,  and  was 
immediately  known  by  him,  so  that  their 
acquaintance  put  an  end  to  the  fears  which 
both  sides  were  in  of  an  engagement.  Don 
Quixote's  curate,  in  few  words,  acquainted  the 
other  with  the  knight's  circumstances ;  where- 
upon he,  and  the  whole  squadron  of  penitents, 
went  over  to  see  whether  the  unfortunate 
knight  were  living  or  dead,  and  heard  Sancho 
Panza,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  bewailing  over 
his  master ;  "  O  flower  of  knighthood,"  cried. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  431 

he,  "  that  with  one  single  perilous  knock  art 
come  to  an  untimely  end!  Thou  honour  of 
thy  family,  and  glory  of  all  La  Mancha! 
nay,  and  of  aU  the  varsal  world  beside,  which, 
now  it  has  lost  thee,  will  be  over-run  by  mis- 
creants and  outlaws,  who  will  no  longer  be 
afraid  to  be  mauled  for  their  misdeeds.  O 
bountiful  above  all  the  Alexanders  in  the 
world !  thou  who  hast  rewarded  me  but  for 
poor  eight  months'  service  with  the  best  island 
that  is  washed  by  salt  water  !  Thou  who  wert 
humble  to  the  proud,  and  haughty  to  the 
humble !  Thou  who  didst  undertake  perils, 
and  patiently  endure  affronts !  Thou  who 
wert  in  love,  nobody  knows  why!  True  patron 
of  good  men,  and  scourge  of  the  wicked,  sworn 
foe  to  all  reprobates !  and  to  say  all  at  once 
that  man  can  say,  thou  knight-errant !  " 

The  woeftd  accents  of  the  squire's  voice  at 
last  recalled  Don  Quixote  to  himself;  when, 
after  a  deep  sigh,  the  first  thing  he  thought  of 
was  his  absent  Dulcinea.  "  O  charming  Dul- 
cinea,"  cried  he,  *'the  wretch  that  lingers 
banished  from  thy  sight,  endures  far  greater 
miseries  than  this !  "  And  then  looking  on 
his  faithftd  squire,  "Good  Sancho,"  said  he, 
"help  me  once  more  into  the  enchanted  car; 
for  I  am  not  in  a  condition  to  press  the  back  of 


432  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OP 

-.  •  Rozinante ;  this  shoulder  is  all  broke  to  pieces. 

\  — "  With  all  my  heart,  my  good  lord/'  replied 

Sancho,  **and  pray  let  me  advise  you  to  go 

back  to  our  village  with  these  gentlemen,  who 

{  are  your  special  friends.      At  home  we  may 

* :  think  of  some  other  journey,  that  may  be  more 

profitable  and  honourable  than  this/' — "  With 
j  reason  hast  thou  spoken,  Sancho,"  replied  Don 

i  Quixote,  "  it  will  become  our  wisdom  to  be  in- 

{  active,  till  the  malevolent  aspects  of  the  planets, 

f  which  now  reign,  be  over."     This  grave  resolu- 

tion was  highly  commended  by  the  canon, 
curate,  and  barber,  who  had  been  sufficiently 
diverted  by  Sancho  Panza's  ridiculous  lamenta- 
tion. Don  Quixote  was  placed  in  the  waggon, 
as  before,  the  processioners  recovered  their 
former  order,  and  passed  on  about  their  business. 
The  goat-herd  took  his  leave  of  the  whole 
company.  The  curate  satisfied  the  officers  for 
their  attendance,  since  they  would  stir  no 
farther.  The  canon  desired  the  curate  to  send 
him  an  account  of  Don  Quixote's  condition 
fi*om  that  time  forward,  having  a  mind  to  know 
whether  his  fi-enzy  abated  or  increased ;  and 
then  took  his  leave,  to  continue  his  journey. 
Thus  the  curate,  the  barber,  Don  Quixote,  and 
Sancho  Panza,  were  left  together,  as  also  the 
good  Bozinante,  that  bore  all  these  passages  as 


DON  QUIXOTE.  433 

patiently  as  his  master.  The  waggoner  then 
yoked  his  oxen,  and  having  set  Don  Quixote 
on  a  trass  of  hay,  jogged  on  after  his  slow 
accustomed  pace,  that  way  the  curate  had 
directed.  In  six  days*  time  they  reached  the 
knight's  village.  It  was  about  noon  when  they 
entered  the  town ;  and  as  it  happened  to  be  on 
a  Sunday,  all  the  people  were  in  the  market- 
place, through  the  middle  of  which  Don 
Quixote's  car  must  of  necessity  pass.  Every- 
body was  curious  to  know  what  was  in  it ;  and 
the  people  were  strangely  surprised  when  they 
saw  and  knew  their  townsman.  While  they 
were  gaping  and  wondering,  a  little  boy  ran  to 
the  knight's  house,  and  gave  intelligence  to  the 
house-keeper  and  niece,  that  their  master  and 
uncle  was  returned,  and  very  lean,  pale,  and 
frightful  as  a  ghost,  stretched  out  at  length  on 
a  bundle  of  hay,  in  a  waggon,  and  drawn  along 
by  a  team  of  oxen. 

It  was  a  piteous  thing  to  hear  the  wailings 
of  those  two  poor  creatures ;  the  thumps,  too, 
which  they  gave  their  faces,  with  the  curses 
and  execrations  they  thundered  out  against  all 
books  of  chivalry,  were  almost  as  numerous  as 
their  sighs  and  tears ;  but  the  height  of  their 
lamenting  was  when  Don  Quixote  entered  the 

door.     Upon  the  noise  of  his  arrival,  Sancho 
u.  Sx 


434  THE  ACHI£y£M£NTS  OF 

Panza's  wife  made  haste  thither  to  inquire  after 
her  good-man,  who,  she  was  infonned^  went  a 
squiring  with  the  knight.  As  soon  as  eyer  she 
set  eyes  on  him,  the  question  she  asked  him 
was  this,  ^^  Is  the  ass  in  health  or  no  ?  "  Sancho 
answered,  he  was  come  back  in  better  health 
than  his  master.  "  Well,"  said  she,  "  heaven 
be  praised  for  the  good  news ;  but  hark  you, 
my  friend,"  continued  she,  "what  have  you 
got  by  this  new  squireship  ?  Have  you  brought 
me  home  ever  a  gown^  or  petticoat,  or  shoes  for 
my  children  ?  " — "  In  troth,  sweet  wife,"  replied 
Sancho,  "  I  have  brought  thee  none  of  those 
things;  I  am  loaded  with  better  things." — 
"Ay,"  said  his  wife,  "that's  well.  Pr'ythee 
let  me  see  some  of  them  fine  things,  for  I  vow 
I  have  a  hugeous  mind  to  see  them ;  the  sight 
of  them  will  comfort  my  poor  heart,  which  has 
been  like  to  burst  with  sorrow  and  grief  ever 
since  thou  went'st  away." — "I'll  show  them 
thee  when  we  come  home,"  returned  Sancho ; 
"  in  the  meantime  rest  satisfied ;  for  if  heaven 
see  good  that  we  should  once  again  go  abroad 
in  search  of  other  adventures,  within  a  little 
time  after,  at  my  return,  thou  shalt  find  me 
some  earl,  or  the  governor  of  some  island ;  ay, 
of  one  of  the  very  best  in  the  whole  world.'' — 

^See  Appendix,  Nota  1,  Qu^itor  XXV.,  Book  IV. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  436 

"  I  wish  with  aU  my  heart  this  may  come  to 
pass,"  replied  the  good-wife ;  **  for,  by  my  troth, 
husband,  we  want  it  sorely.  But  what  do  you 
mean  by  that  same  word  island  ?  for  believe 
me  I  don't  understand  it." — "  All  in  good  time, 
wife,"  said  Sancho ;  "  honey  is  not  made  for 
an  ass's  mouth :  I'll  tell  thee  what  it  is  here- 
after. Thou  wilt  be  amazed  to  hear  all  thy 
servants  and  vassals  never  speak  a  word  to  thee 
without  *  An't  please  you,  madam ; '  '  An't  like 
your  ladyship;'  and  *Your  Honour.'" — "What 
dost  thou  mean,  Sancho,  by  ladyship,  islands, 
and  vassals  ?  "  quoth  Joan  Panza,  for  so  she  was 
called,  though  her  husband  and  she  were 
nothing  akin,  only  it  is  a  custom  in  La  Mancha 
that  the  wives  are  there  called  by  their  hus- 
band's surnames.  "  Pr'ythee,  Joan,"  said  Sancho, 
"  do  not  trouble  thy  head  to  know  these  mat- 
ters all  at  once,  and  in  a  heap,  as  a  body  may 
say;  it  is  enough,  I  tell  thee  the  truth,  therefore 
hold  thy  tongue.  •  Yet,  by  the  way,  one  thing 
I  will  assure  thee,  that  nothing  in  the  varsal 
world  is  better  for  an  honest  man,  than  to  be 
squire  to  a  knight-errant,  while  he  is  hunting 
of  adventures.  It  is  true,  most  adventures  he 
goes  about  do  not  answer  a  man's  expectations 
so  much  as  he  could  wish ;   for  of  a  hundred 

^  Ca§$  la  booth  i^»  mw  up  thj  moath. 


4M  THE  ACHUVEMESTS  OP 

ihst  aie  met  widu  ninelj-iiine  are  w<mt  to  be 
crabbed  and  nnlnckj  <»es.  This  I  know  to 
my  cost :  I  myself  hare  got  wdl  kicked  and 
tossed  in  some  of  them,  and  soundly  dmbbed 
and  belaboured  in  others ;  yet,  fx  all  that,  it  is 
a  rare  qport  to  be  a  watching  fiH*  strange  chanceSy 
to  crossfbrests,  to  searoh, andbeat  npand  down  in 
woods,  to  sciamUe  OTer  rocks,  to  visit  castles,  and 
to  take  np  qnaitere  in  an  inn  at  pleasure,  and 
all  the  while  the  devil  a  cross  to  pay/' 

These  were  the  discomses  with  which  Sancho 
Panza  and  his  irife  Joan  entertained  one 
another,  while  the  honse-keeper  and  niece  un- 
dressed Don  Quixote,  and  put  him  into  his  bed, 
where  he  lay  looking  asquint  on  them,  but 
could  not  imagine  where  he  was.  The  curate 
charged  the  niece  to  be  very  careful  aud  tender 
of  her  uncle,  and  to  be  very  watchful,  lest  he 
should  make  another  sally;  telling  her  the 
trouble  and  charge  he  had  been  at  to  get  him 
home.  Here  the  women  began  their  outcries 
again :  here  the  books  of  knight-errantry  were 
again  execrated,  and  damned  to  the  bottomless 
pit.  Here  they  begged  those  cursed  bewitch- 
ing chimeras  and  lies  might  be  thrown  down 
into  the  very  centre,  to  the  hellish  father  of 
them;  for  they  were  still  almost  distracted 
with  the  fear  of  losing  their  master  and  undo 


DON  QUIXOTE.  487 

again,  so  soon  as  ever  he  recovered ;  which  in- 
deed fell  out  according  to  their  fear.  But 
though  the  author  of  this  history  has  been  very 
curious  and  diligent  in  his  inquiry  after  Don 
Quixote's  achievements  in  his  third  expedition 
in  quest  of  adventures,  yet  he  could  never  learn 
a  perfect  account  of  them,  at  least  from  any 
author  of  credit ;  feme  and  tradition  alone  have 
preserved  some  particulars  of  them  in  the 
memoirs  and  antiquities  of  La  Mancha;  as, 
that  after  the  knight's  third  sally,  he  was  pre- 
sent at  certain  famous  tilts  and  tournaments 
made  in  the  city  of  Saragosa,  where  he  met 
with  occasions  worthy  the  exercise  of  his  sense 
and  valour:  but  how  the  knight  died,  our 
author  neither  could,  nor  ever  should  have 
learned,  if,  by  good  fortune,  he  had  not  met 
with  an  ancient  physician,  who  had  a  leaden 
box  in  his  possession,  which,  as  he  averred, 
was  found  in  the  ruins  of  an  old  hermitage,  as 
it  was  re-building.  In  this  box  were  certain 
scrolls  of  parchment  written  in  Gothic  char- 
acters, but  containing  verses  in  the  Spanish 
tongue,  in  which  many  of  his  noble  acts  were 
sung,  and  Dulcinea  del  Toboso's  beauty 
celebrated,  Rozinante's  figure  described,  and 
Sancho  Panza's  fidelity  applauded.  They  like- 
wise   gave    an    account    of    Don    Quixote's 


438  THE  ACmEVEMENTS  OF 

sepulchre,  with  several  epitaphs  and  encomiums 
on  his  life  and  conversation.  Those  that  could 
be  thoroughly  read  and  transcribed,  are  here 
added  by  the  £edthful  author  of  this  new  and 
incomparable  history ;  desiring  no  other  recom- 
pense or  reward  of  the  readers,  for  all  his 
labour  and  pains,  in  searching  all  the  numerous 
and  old  records  of  La  Mancha  to  perfect  this 
matchless  piece,  but  that  they  will  be  pleased 
to  give  it  as  much  credit  as  judicious  men  use 
to  give  to  books  of  knight-errantry,  which  are 
now-a-days  so  generally  taking.  This  is  the 
utmost  of  his  ambition,  and  will  be  sufficient 
satisfaction  for  him,  and  likewise  encourage  him 
to  fiirnish  them  with  other  matter  of  entertain- 
ment, which,  though  possibly  not  altogether  so 
true  as  this,  yet  it  may  be  as  well  contrived 
and  diverting.  The  first  words  in  the  parch- 
ment found  in  the  leaden  box  are  these : — 

Monicongo^  Academic  of  AramgasiUa^  on  Don 
Quixote's  Monument. 

EPITAPH. 
Here  lies  a  doughty  knight, 

Who,  braised,  and  ill  in  plight^ 
Jogg'd  over  many  a  track 
On  Rozinante's  back. 

Close  by  him  Sancho's  laid ; 
Whereat  let  none  admire : 

He  was  a  clown,  'tis  said. 
But  ne'er  the  worse  a  squire. 


DON  QUIXOTE.  439 

PaniagiiadOy  Academic  of  AramgasiUa^  on  Thd- 
cinea  del  Toboso's  Monvment. 

EPITAPH. 

Here  Dulcinea  lies, 

Once  brawny,  plump,  and  lusty ; 
But  now  to  death  a  prize. 

And  somewhat  lean  and  musty. 
For  her  the  country-fry, 

like  Quixote,  long  stood  steady, 
Well  might  she  carry^  high; 

Far  less  has  made  a  lady. 

These  were  the  verses  that  could  be  read :  as 
for  the  rest,  the  characters  being  defaced,  and 
almost  eaten  away,  they  were  delivered  to  a 
university  student,  in  order  that  he  might  give 
us  his  conjectures  concerning  their  meaning. 
And  we  are  informed,  that  after  many  lucubra- 
tions, and  much  pains,  he  has  effected  the  work, 
and  intends  to  oblige  the  world  with  it,  giving 
us  at  the  same  time  some  hopes  of  Don  Quixote's 
third  sally. 

Par  gi  aliro  eaniera  eon  miglior  pUUro.* 


*  **  Another  hand  may  touch  a  better  string." 

—OrUtndo  FmioMo,  Canto  zxz. 


THB  VKD  OF  THE  FIRST  PART. 


NOTES  ON  DON   QUIXOTE. 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST. 

Note  1,  Ohap.  I  Page  15. 

Argamarilla  de  Alba,  village  in  the  priorate  of  San  Juan,  four 
leagaea  to  the  west  of  Manzanares,  where  the  author  was  im- 
prisoned, and  where  it  is  supposed  that  he  oonoeiyed  the  idea  of 
his  great  work.  The  geographical  position  agrees  with  the 
narratiYa  The  place  is  referred  to  in  the  last  chapter  of  the 
first  part 

Note  2,  Ohap.  i  Page  15. 

In  Spain,  as  in  the  other  parts  of  Europe,  the  country  gentle- 
men, when  called  on  to  discharge  military  duty,  used  the  lance, 
which  was  usually  deposited  upon  a  rack  in  the  hall  or  porch  of 
their  habitations. 

Note  3,  Ohap.  L  Page  15. 

"  Griefs  and  groans,"  original  "  duelos  y  quebrantos."  It  was 
usual  in  la  Mancha  when  any  of  the  flock  died  accidentally  to 
salt  and  retain  the  carcase  for  home  consumption,  breaking  up 
the  bones,  of  which  was  made  an  oUa ;  the  name  "  duelos  y 
quebrantos,"  according  to  Pellicer  being  significant  of  the  feelings 
of  the  owner  of  the  herd. 

This  class  of  oUtif  as  less  substantial  than  the  ordinary,  was 
allowed  on  Cast  days  when  flesh  was  forbidden — the  usage  existed 
to  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

Note  4,  Ohap.  L  Page  16. 

This  learned  and  eloquent  Castilian  composed  (or,  according  to 
the  title  page,  emended  and  edited  from  the  ancient  version  of 
Zerfea,  Queen  of  the  Arginee)  the  history  of  the  two  valiant 
knights,  Don  Florisel  de  Niquea,  and  the  brave  Anaxartes, 
printed  at  Saragossa  in  1584.  The  author  was  the  son  of 
Tristan  de  Sylva,  the  historian  of  Oharles  Y. 


442  NOTES  ON  DON  QUECOTE. 

Note  5,  Chap.  L  P^e  17. 

Geronimo  Feniandez,  '*  Histoiy  of  the  yaliant  and  invincible 
Prince,  Don  Belianis  of  Greece,  with  aooonnt  of  the  periloua 
adTentures  which  happened  from  hia  amooia  with  the  Prinoeaa 
Florisbella,  daughter  of  the  Saltan  of  Babylon.  Bnigoa^  1587." 
The  allnsiou  in  the  text  is  to  these  words  at  the  end  of  the 
original  Don  Belianis,  **  Snplir  70  con  fingimientoii  tan  estimada 
seria  aggraTio,"  Ac,  Ac 

Note  6,  Chap,  i  Page  1& 

Sigaenn — ^misprint  in  some  copies  Gigaenza,  following  too 
faithfully  Motteux,  ed.  Edin.  1822.  Cervantes  makes  ironical 
allusion  to  the  learning  of  the  curate  of  Argamaailla,  he  having 
graduated  at  one  of  the  minor  universities,  a  praotioe  conunon  at 
the  time  and  not  uncommon  at  present  This  is  confirmed  by 
Cristobal  Suarez,  author  of  the  "Amarilia,  Yalentia  1609.  In  ''£1 
Pasagero,"  p.  144,  the  professors  unanimously  cap  the  stadent 
with  the  words,  "aocipiamus  pecuniam  et  mittamus  •«**"»«  in 
patriam  suam."     (Pellicer  1,  6th  ed.  1797.) 

Note  7,  Chap.  L  Page  18. 

See  Southey*s  excellent  abridgments  of  the  adventorea  of 
these  knights.  The  "  knight  of  the  burning  sword."  Amadis  of 
Greece  was  so  called,  lus  breast  being  marked  with  a  sw<mi  red 
as  a  flftmmg  coal,  and  which  burned  as  such  until  the  sage 
Alquif6  cured  him  of  this  torment     (Clemencin.) 

Note  8,  Chap.  L  Page  19. 

Cid  Ruy  Diss.  This  celebrated  Castilian  flourished  at  the 
dose  of  the  XL  century.  Having  lost  the  fervour  of  King 
Alonzo  YI.,  he  was  deprived  of  lus  territories  and  was  followed 
into  exile  by  many  relatives  and  followers.  The  remainder  of 
lus  life  was  passed  in  fighting  against  the  Moors.  The  deeds  of 
the  Cid  are  mixed  up  with  exaggerations  and  popular  rumours. 
It  is,  however,  affirmed  that  he  conquered  Yalentia,  which  he 
retained  till  his  death.  After  this  the  Christians  evacuated  the 
city,  taking  with  them  the  riches,  wife,  daughters,  and  body  of 
the  Cid.     (Clemencin.) 

Note  9,  Chap.  L  Page  19. 

Bernardo  del  Carpio,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  heroes  of 
Spanish  chronicles  and  romance,  although  some  critics  have  placed 


NOTES  TO  VOLUBiE  FIRST.  443 

his  existence  in  doubt  Augustdn  Alonzo  of  Toledo  composed 
and  published  in  1585  a  poem  relating  his  exploits.  He  was 
said  to  be  the  natural  son  of  D.  Sancho  Diaz,  Count  of  SaldanSi 
and  of  Dona  Ximena,  sister  of  King  D.  Alonzo  the  Chaste.  To 
Bernardo  is  attributed  the  honour  and  renown  of  the  great 
victory  of  Eoncesvalles  which  barred  the  entrance  of  the  Pyrenees 
to  the  army  of  Charlemagne.  To  him  also  is  ascribed  the  death 
of  the  famous  Eoland.     (Clemendn.) 

Note  10,  Chap.  L  Page  19. 

Moigante,  with  other  two  fierce  giants,  Pasamonte  and 
Alabastro,  made  cruel  war  on  the  monks  of  an  abbey  situated  on 
the  pagan  frontier.  Orlando  killed  the  two  latter,  converted 
Morgante  to  Christianity,  and  afterwards  he  became  Orlando's 
companion  in  his  adventures.      See  Pulci,  "  Moigante  Maggiore." 

Notes  11-12,  Chap.  L  Page  19. 

Reinaldos  de  Montalban.  One  of  the  twelve  peers  of  France 
who  act  a  principal  part  in  the  pages  of  Ariosto  and  other  books 
of  entertainment  The  term  ^^allende"  of  the  original  means 
"  over  the  sea."  Amongst  the  Mohammetans  there  are  no  idols  ; 
on  the  contrary  all  images  are  prohibited,  as  amongst  the  Jews,  by 
the  laws  of  Moses.  The  four  caliphs  who  coined  money  stamped 
with  their  effigies  were  reputed  het^txlox  amongst  the  Mussulmans; 
notwithstanding,  in  the  romances  of  chivaliy  ^  idols  of  Mahomet 
are  mentioned.''     *'  Clemencin." 

Note  13,  Chap.  L  Page  20. 

Count  Galalon  de  Maganza,  by  whose  treacheiy  the  twelve 
peers  of  France  were  slain  at  Roncesvalles.  There  are  long 
accounts  of  him  in  many  books  of  chivalry,  markedly  so  in  the 
histories  of  Charlemagne  and  Moiganta 

Note  14,  Chap.  L,  Page  21. 

Original,  ''  aunque  tenia  mas  cuartos  que  un  real  y  mas  tachas 
que  el  caballo  de  Gonela,"  d^x  The  translator  has  made  a  mess 
of  this  passage.  Cervantes  says  that  although  Rocinante  "  had 
more  blemishes  than  there  are  cuartos  in  a  real,  and  more  defects 
than  Qonela's  horse,"  &c,  A  real  being  a  round  coin,  "stuck  out 
like  the  comers  of  a  Spanish  real"  is  a  fiilse  simile.  Pietro 
GU>nela  was  court  jester  to  a  Marquis  or  Duke  of  Ferrara  in  the 
XY.  century.     Mention   is   made  of  him  by  Pontano,  Poggio^ 


444  SOISS  OS  DOS  QCOmE^ 


mad  Imm  BtHBODeU,  vk» 

wrwigir  odicn,  ti^  leap  «f  1 

fioHi  ft  bftieoBjr,  b^  wUdi  ht 

JMui^  m  to  wkflve  haam,  iht  Doke  ■  «r 


BooitUiii,  ^e   wcO-knovm  koa*  ol   AWwW  tibs  Gnat. 
fidbMo,  the  tqtmEj  wbhiilwi  chu^pr  «f  ^e  CU,  1 
m  SfMoiiili  Ubd  fwelrj. 


Pcfdiei 

BM|XMe  il  eoate  *  qodr  < 
''AflKir  alift  poilo  lotto  ift  ] 
«<  y oglio  dtt  fl^is  dwl  Bio  cor  e  i 
«« D^  ]ft  iglioift  dci  Bo  OiJftteM 
**  Cbe  Mi  Albneeft  doMte  ftd  I 

BoiAKDO^  K  L  IflL  4t7. 

Koie  17,  CIhi{ii  L  Fuge  34. 

Speedies  of  this  kind  oocor  /nmm»  in  the  Knmimw ;  c^  in 
Peree/arett^  diopter  46,  the  title  ol  whidi  nmo  thos :  ''Cooiment 
le  roj  Peroetoeot  cnTOjm  deox  diermlien  priooonien  deren  1ft 
Bojne  d'Ang^eterre  lo  femme  A  lo  qool  on  do  ceux  dit,  U  me 
oooqidt  por  force  d'armes  ei  me  fit  jnicr  qoe  je  liendroje  en 
Tootre  priMn  do  par  \nj  qae  est  mon  Seigneur." — ^And  sgsin  in 
the  text,  ''  Qosnt  fl  eat  ce  dit  prent  son  empee  per  1ft  pojnte  et 
ssginooille  devant  1ft  Bojne  ei  dist  Dome  je  me  prasente  da 
mon  cher  seigneor  le  'Bay  d'Angieterre  rostre  prisonnier,  amti 
que  le  vauldrez  anUmner  wait  do  mort  on  do  Tie,"  Ac — ^Perhftpo 
the  nsme  CaraetiUamlfro^  maj  be  in  allnsinn  to  thsi  of  Oaitmeolo- 
ccm^  one  of  the  msnj  hoge  men,  who  figure  in  the  Merlin. 

Note  1,  Chi^  a  P^e  S& 

Csmpo  do  MoDtiel,  district  of  1ft  Msnciu^  oontsining  buuij 
nlkges.      The  capital,  Montiel,  stands  on  the  river  Jalmloti, 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  446 

which  flows  into  the  Goadiana.  There  Ring  Don  Pedro  of 
Castille  met  his  death  hj  the  hands  of  his  brother  Henry,  in 
the  year  1369. 

Note  2,  Chap,  ii  Page  31. 

The  announcement  by  sound  of  trumpet^  by  the  sentinel  on 
guard,  is  fiimiliar  to  all  readers  of  romance.  Dwarfe  appear  to 
have  often  been  placed  on  this  duty ;  sometimes  bells  were  used 
instead  of  trumpets.  For  this  see  *'  Florineo  de  Lucea,''  Book  5, 
chap.  6.  Amadis  de  Qrecia,  lisuarte,  Primaleon,  D.  Policisne  of 
Boethia  all  make  mention  of  dwarfs. 

Note  3,  Chap.  IL  Page  35. 

Our  hero  here  applies  to  himself  the  ancient  romance  of 
Lancelot  (''Romanoero  de  Amberes,  de  1555/  fol.  242),  which 
says:^* 

Nunca  fuera  caballero 
De  damas  tan  bien  aervido 
Como  fuera  Lanzarote, 
Cuando  de  Bretana  vino 
Que  duenas  cuidaban  d^ 
Donoellas  de  su  rocino. 

Note  1,  Chap.  iiL  Page  39. 

The  watching  of  the  armour  was  an  indispensable  preliminary 
to  the  assumption  of  knighthood.  The  details  of  the  ceremonies 
observed  on  such  occasions  are  to  be  found  in  innumerable 
passages  in  books  of  chivalry.  Cervantes  omits  the  religious  parts 
of  the  ceremony,  which  he  could  hardly  have  described  without 
incurring  the  charge  of  profiEuiity.  This  omission,  however,  is 
believed  to  have  lessened  the  esteem  in  which  chivalry  was 
held,  the  point  of  honour  being  held  as  strengthened  by  the 
ordinances  of  religion  held  so  sacred  by  all  good  Spaniards. 
Clemencin  has  a  long  note  on  this  passage,  citing  no  fewer 
than  fifteen  authorities,  but  though  vaJuable  to  the  student  of 
chivalric  literature,  it  is  unnecessary  to  the  understanding  of 
the  text 

Note  2,  Chap.  iiL  Page  39. 

These  were  all  places  noted  for  rogueries  and  disorderly  doings 
The  Perchelee  of  Malaga  form  a  sort  of  suburb  of  that  town,  where 


446  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

the  fish-market  is  held.  Don  Louis  Zapata,  in  treatiiig  of  the  great 
plague  which  raged  in  the  city  of  Malaga,  in  the  jear  1582,  aayB, 
"  it  was  supposed  to  have  been  brought  thither  bj  a  stranger,  who 
died  of  his  illness,  and  whose  foul  linen  was  forthwith  sold  to  some 
ofthoseof  ihePerchelea"  The  "Isles  of  Riaran"  are  not  to  be  found 
in  any  map ;  but  the  place  where  the  custom-house  stands,  still 
goes  bj  that  name.  See  Garter's  Journey  from  Gibraltar  to  Malaga, 
London,  1780.  It  would  appear  that  there  had  been  a  few  small 
islets  of  sand  close  to  the  shore,  some  of  which  had  shifted  their 
station,  while  the  space  between  others  of  them  and  the  mainland 
had  gradually  become  filled  up.  "  The  compass  of  Seville  "  was 
(or  is)  the  name  of  an  open  space  before  one  of  the  churches  of 
that  city,  the  scene  of  fain,  shows,  auctions,  Ac  The  ''  AjDOzuejo 
de  Segovia,"  translated  in  the  text  "  Quicksdlver-house,"  is  said  by 
Bowles  to  mean  nothing  but  a  certain  small  plaeey  or  square, — at 
once  the  Monmouth-Street  and  Exeter-Ghange  of  Segovia.  The 
"  Potro ''  of  Gordova — so  called  from  a  fountain,  the  water  of 
which  gushes  from  a  horse's  mouth — ^was  another  place  of  the 
same  spedea  They  had  all  become  proverbial  before  the  days  of 
Gervantes;  thus — "I  say  not  that  I  was  bom  in  the  Potro  of 
Gordova,  nor  refined  in  the  Quicksilver-hoase  of  Segovia,"  Ac — 
Bcjas,  282,  3. 

Note  3,  Ghap.  iiL  Page  41. 

An  instance  of  this  species  of  cure  may  be  found  in  Amadis  de 
Grecia.  "  Now  Amadis  felt  from  the  sword  such  heat,  that  it 
seemed  to  him  he  was  burning  with  living  flamea  But  forthwith 
there  appeared  a  cloud,  which  covered  both  him,  Uiganda,  and 
Lisuarte,  which  in  an  instant  opened,  and  they  perceived  them- 
selves to  be  surrounded  with  a  company  of  four-and-twenty 
damsels,  and  in  the  midst  of  them  was  that  honoured  old  Alquife, 
who  held  in  his  hand  a  large  glass  phial  of  water ;  with  which 
when  he  had  smitten  upon  the  helmet^  the  phial  broke,  and  the 
water  rushing  down  immediately,  there  passed  from  him  all  that 
burning  glow  of  the  sword.'' — P.  2.  c.  62. 

The  fair  Jewess  in  Ivanhoe,  has  her  medical  skill  in  common 
with  almost  all  the  damsels  of  romance ;  thus, 

''Bernardo  de  su  Elaga  fue  curado, 
Per  manos  de  la  ya  libra  Donzella.** — 

Garrido,  G  7.  7a 

"  Una  fanciulla  che  il  lor  oste  aveva, 
Medicava  Rinaldc' 

Puloi,  M.  M.  0.  20.  79.  &a  &a 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  447 

I  need  scarcely  refer  the  reader  to  the  story  of  the  pretty 
Beguine,  in  Tristram  Shandy,  for  the  best  account  of  this  species 
of  clinical  practica 

Note  4,  Chap.  iiL  Page  45. 

This  invocation  to  Dulcinea,  is  copied  almost  literatim  from 
one  in  Oliphante.  "  Ay,  soberana  Senora,"  Ac. — "  O,  sovereign 
lady,  grant  me  thy  ^ivour  in  this  battle.  Help  me,  fairest  lady, 
and  desert  me  not  utterly."  See  L.  2.  a  4. — ^The  ^cacy  of  this 
species  of  prayer  is  thus  noticed  in  Amadis  of  QauL  See  L.  2.  c. 
55. — *' Beltenebros  descended  against  the  giant,  and,  before  he 
came  close  to  him,  looking  towards  the  place  where  Miraflores  was, 
'  O,  my  Lady  Oriana,'  said  he,  '  never  do  I  begin  any  deed  of 
arms,  trusting  in  any  strength  of  mine  own,  whatsoever  it  may 
be,  but  in  thee  only ;  therefore,  oh  now,  my  dear  lady,  succour 
me,  seeing  how  great  is  the  necessity.*  And  with  this  it  seemed 
that  there  came  to  him  so  much  Vigour,  that  all  Fear  was  forth- 
with fiun  to  fly  away." 

Note  5,  Chap.  iiL  Page  45. 

The  technical  description,  in  the  civil  law,  of  "  the  madman  not 
to  be  punished,"  viz.  "  Absurda  et  tristia  sibi  dicens  atque  fingens,*' 
could  most  certainly  fit  no  one  more  exactly  than  the  guest  of 
whom  the  good  innkeeper  spoke  thus.  Li  the  tragical  story  of 
Lord  Ferrers,  (see  the  State  Trials,)  we  have  the  very  striking  ex- 
ample of  a  man  proceeding  deliberately  and  calmly  to  the  per- 
petration of  an  atrocious  murder,  under  the  belief,  that  the  plea  of 
hereditary  insanity  would  be  available  to  save  himself  from  the 
last  severity  of  the  law.  Hence,  the  obvious  propriety  of  limiting, 
as  narrowly  as  possible,  the  application  of  the  doctrine  laid  down 
by  the  innkeeper. 

Note  6,  Chap.  iiL  Page  48. 

The  practical  joke  seems  to  have  occurred  to  other  oonferrers  of 
knighthood,  besides  mine  host  of  the  castle. 

Thus,  "Franc  chevalier  donnes  moi  la  collee  de  chevaleria 
Certes  Passellion,  dit  Lionnel,  je  le  feray  voulontiers,  a  tant  il 
haulse  la  main  dextre  et  Tenfant  baisse  le  col,  et  le  chevalier  ferit 
dessus  campUmerU  en  disant  Certes,  Gentil  Passellion,  Chevalier 
Soyes.  Quand  Passellion  eut  receu  la  coll6e  que  luyJU  douMr 
le  col  par  ea  qrotnd&wr^'  Ac. — Perceforesty  V.  4.  C.  14. 

Queen  Elizabeth  is  introduced  in  Kenilworth,  as  giving  a  coiUe 
of  malicious  sincerity  on  a  similar  occasion. — ^See  Ducange  sab 
voce  Alapa  MUUaria. 


448  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

Note  1,  Chap.  iv.  Page  54. 

An  old  Spanish  proverb.  In  Europe  children  inherit  nobility 
from  their  parents.  In  China  they  say  that  parents  acquire  it 
from  the  acts  and  virtues  of  their  cMldren.  The  Chinese  act 
more  in  accordance  with  the  proverb  than  do  the  Europeans. 

Note  2,  Chap.  iv.  Page  58. 

''  The  peerless  Dulcinea  del  Toboso."  Don  Quixote  doubUesB 
takes  this  from  the  Amadis  of  Qaul,  who  applies  it  to  his  lady 
the  Sefiora  Oriana  (cap.  4),  and  other  knights-errant  extol  their 
ladies  with  this  epithet ;  but  Amadis  is  the  oldest  writer  and  the 
one  most  imitated  by  Don  Quixote. 

Note  1,  Chap.  v.  Page  63. 

Baldwin  and  the  Marquis  of  Mantua.  The  ancient  romance  of 
the  Marquis  of  Mantua,  which  contains  an  account  of  the 
treacherous  murder  of  Baldwin  by  the  infante  Carloto,  son  of  the 
Emperor  Charlemagne,  of  the  accusation  brought  by  ihe  Marquis 
of  Mantua  against  the  infante,  and  of  his  punishment.  The 
description  here  appears  to  be  taken  from  the  ''  Cronioa  general 
de  Espafia,"  written  in  the  thirteenth  century. 

Note  2,  Chap.  v.  Page  66. 

The  loves  of  the  Moor  Abindarraez,  and  of  the  beautiful 
Xarila,  were  a  ^vourite  subject  of  song  amongst  the  Moorish,  as 
well  as  the  Christian  minstrels  of  Spain ;  and  Montemayor  has 
introduced  them  into  his  celebrated  pastoral  called  Diana.  The 
tale  runs  briefly  thus  : — 

During  the  reign  of  King  Ferdinand  of  Arragon,  while  the 
Moorish  kingdom  of  Grenada  was  nodding  to  its  fall,  a  gaUant 
Spanish  knight,  Bodrigo  de  Narvaez,  was  named  constable  or 
governor  of  the  Castle  of  Alhora,  near  the  boundaries  of  the 
Moorish  territory.  As  he  was,  according  to  his  custom,  one  night 
making  a  reconnoissance  at  the  head  of  several  of  his  followers,  to 
prevent  a  surprise  from  the  enemy,  he  met  a  young  Moorish 
cavalier  splendidly  armed  and  accoutred,  who  for  some  time 
defended  himself  valiantly  against  the  superior  force  of  his 
enemies;  but  was  at  length  severely  wounded,  and  made  pri- 
soner. The  Castilian  endeavoured  to  comfort  his  noble  captive, 
and  treated  him  so  generously,  that  he  extracted  from  him  his 
story.  The  Moor  Abindarraez  had  been  bred  up  with  X^rifi^ 
daughter  of  the  Alcayde  of  Coyn,  under  the  belief  that  she  was 
his  sister,  until  he  learned  by  chance  that  he  was  not  of  her 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  449 

blood,  but  descended  from  the  renowned,  but  unfortunate  family 
of  the  Abenoerrages.  Fraternal  affection  then  gave  place  to  a 
stanonger  passion,  which  Xarifa  repaid  with  equal  warmtL  The 
meeting  of  the  lovers  could  only  be  by  night,  and  by  stealth  ;  for 
Abindarraez,  after  the  discovery  of  his  birth,  resided  no  longer  in 
her  father  s  castle.  Xarifa  had  assigned  her  lover  a  rendezvous 
upon  the  unfortunate  night  when  he  fell  into  the  power  of  Don 
Bodrigo,  and  he  waa  on  the  road  to  Coyn,  when  he  encountered 
the  Casdlian  knight  Don  Bodrigo  de  Narvaez  was  affected  by 
the  captive's  story ;  and  on  his  promise  to  return  within  three 
days,  and  surrender  himself  to  his  captor  at  the  Castle  of  Alhora, 
he  gave  him  liberty  to  keep  his  appointment  He  arrives  there 
in  safety,  and  Xarifa,  reunited  to  her  lover,  refuses  again  to  part 
with  him.  She  returns  with  him  to  the  castle  of  Don  Bodrigo, 
who,  charmed  with  their  mutual  love,  the  constancy  of  Xarifa, 
and  the  gallantry  and  faith  of  Abindarraez,  restores  them  to 
liberty,  and  obtains  the  consent  of  the  Alcayde  of  Coyn  to  their 
union.     There  are  many  ballads  on  this  romantic  story. 

Note  3,  Chap.  v.  Page  67. 

Who  the  twelve  peers  of  France  were,  every  body  knows.  It 
is  not  quite  so  well  known,  that  the  nine  worthies  in  the  language 
of  romance  (loe  nueve  de  la  fama)  were,  three  of  them  Hebrews, 
viz.  Joshua,  David,  and  Judas  Maccabeus ;  three  GentUes,  viz. 
Hector  of  Troy,  Alexander  of  Macedon,  and  Julius  Csesar ;  and 
three  Christians,  King  Arthur,  Charlemagne,  and  Qodfrey  of 
Bouillon. — See  Caaranza^  F.  255. 

Note  4,  Chap.  v.  Page  69. 

"  The  beautifid  Brandamante,  and  Aquilante,  and  Grifon,  and 
Malgesi,  encountered  then  those  four  fierce  giants,  who  stood  like 
four  towers  waiting  for  them,"  (fee. — Bspejo,  L.  II.  C.  9. 

Note  5,  Chap.  v.  Page  70. 

Don  Quixote  implores  the  aid  of  the  sage  XJiganda  that  she 
may  cure  him,  as  on  several  occasions  she  did  to  Amadis  of  Gaul 
and  other  persons  of  his  family.  The  same  services  were  rendered 
by  Belonia  to  Amadis  of  Greece,  Ipermea  to  Olivante,  and  the 
duefia  of  Fondovalle  to  other  cavaliers,  as  detailed  in  their 
respective  histories. 

Note  1,  Chap.  vL  Page  74. 

This  book  was  the  work  of  Garci  Ordonez  of  Montalvo,  editor 
of  the  Amadis,  who  pretended  that  it  had  been  written  in  Greek 
IL  2  r 


450  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

by  Elisaban,  and  brought  to  Spain  by  a  Hungarian  trader.  ThB 
rare  and  unknown  word  **  sergas  "  was  employed  by  Montalvo  to 
accredit  the  Greek  origin  of  his  book ;  in  Greek  ''  i^a  "  signifiea 
''  deeds,"  "  valour,"  the  same  as  the  Latin  wcnrd  **  gesta." 
Montalvo,  whose  knowledge  of  Greek  was  scanty,  wrote  inntead 
of  "  Eigas  "  "  Sergas.''     Printed  in  Alcala,  1588. 

Note  2,  Chap,  vi  Page  74. 

The  first  four  books  of  Amadis  of  Gaul  alone  are  considered  bj 
Cervantes  as  being  worthy  of  being  preserved  from  the  flames. 
The  other  twenty  books,  filled  with  the  exploits  of  the  Am^iliiy 
jbimily,  were  for  the  most  part  composed  originally,  not  in 
Spanif^  or  Portuguese,  (like  those  which  Cervantes  preserves,) 
but  by  French  imitators  of  very  inferior  genius.  Vicente  Plaodo, 
in  his  TlueUrwn  Anonymorum  et  Pseudonymortmi^  characterises 
the  whole  collection  as  ''  a  most  pernicious  library,  engendered  or 
composed  by  Spanish  fathers,  although  mightily  augmented  by  the 
French,"  p.  673,  §  2731.  Amadis  of  Greece  occupies  the  ninth 
book  of  the  collection.  He  was  the  son  of  Lisuarte  of  Greece^ 
who  was  the  son  of  Amadis  of  GauL  The  huge  folio  which 
Cervantes  places  in  his  hero's  library,  was  printed  at  lisbon  in 
1596.  The  title  runs  thus:  "Chronica  del  muy  valiente  y 
esforzado  Principe  y  Cavallero  de  la  ardienta  Espada  Atnili^  de 
Greda."  The  history  is  divided  into  two  parts,  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  second  there  is  a  notice,  that  "  Esta  Cronica  fue 
sacada  de  Grieco  en  Latin  y  de  Latin  en  Komance  s^^on  lo 
escrivio  el  gran  sabio  Alquife  en  las  Magicas."  The  whole  ends 
with  these  words  :  "  Aqui  haoe  fin  el  noveno  libro  de  Airny^is  de 
Gaula ;  que  es  la  chronica  del  cavalliero  de  la  ardiente  Espcula 
Amadifl  de  Grecia  hijo  de  Lisuarte  de  Grecia."  The  Queen 
Pintiquiniestra,  and  the  shepherd  Darinel,  are  both  of  them  per- 
sonages that  figure  in  the  Amadis  de  Greda.  The  former  is  a 
giantess  of  most  formidable  appearance. 

Note  3,  Chap.  vL  Page  75. 

The  "Garden  of  Flowers"  is  the  work  of  Antonio  de  Torquemada^ 
author  also  of  certain  "  Satirical  Dialogues,"  published  in 
Mondofiedo,  1553.  The  history  of  Olivante  was  printed  in 
Barcelona,  1564.  The  "  Garden  of  Flowers  "  is  a  series  of  the  most 
absurd  fictions,  phantoms,  visions,  enchanters,  and  such  like — the 
tendency  of  the  author's  genius  evidently  disposing  him  to  the 
composition  of  works  of  chivalry. 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIEST.  451 

Note  4,  Cliap.  vi  Page  75. 

Called  also  Felumarte.  The  work  of  Melchor  Ortega,  cavalier 
of  Ubeda.     Yalladolid,  1556. 

Note  5,  Chap,  vi  Page  76. 
Work  of  an  unknown  author.     Yalladolid,  1555. 

Note  6,  Chap.  vL  Page  76. 

The  Knight  of  the  Cross,  so  called  from  his  exploits,  waa 
Lepolemo,  son  of  the  Emperor  of  Germany.  This  history  is 
divided  into  two  parts,  and  is  the  work  of  Pedro  de  Lujan,  who 
attributes  to  it  an  Arabic  origin.  Printed  at  Seville  1534, 
Toledo  1543,  besides  which  there  are  other  editiona 

Note  7,  Chap,  vi  Page  76. 

This  work  is  in  four  parts  :  the  first  by  Diego  Ordonez  de 
Calahorra,  printed  in  1562  ;  the  second  by  Piedro  de  la  Sierra, 
Zaragoza,  1580  ;  the  two  last  by  the  licentiate  Marcos  Martinei, 
Zaragoza,  1603. 

Note  8,  Chap.  vL  Page  76. 

Turpin  has  become  the  type  of  fidsehood  and  lies.  Juan  Turpin 
or  Tilpin,  Archbishop  of  lUieims,  lived  in  the  time  of  Charle- 
magne. Two  centuries  after  appeared  under  his  name  a  history 
of  that  prince  in  two  books,  full  of  fables  and  falsehooda  Cer- 
vantes uses  the  epithet  verdadero  ironically  in  this  imitating 
Arioeta  FranoiBco  Gunido  de  Villena  and  Villaviciosa  allude  to 
Turpin  in  the  same  strain. 

Note  9,  Chap,  vi  Page  77. 

Jarvis  supposes,  from  the  style  of  the  conversation  here,  that 
Cervantes  had  no  great  relish  for  Ariosto.  But  Pellicer  very  justly 
laughs  at  Jarvis  for  this  remark.  The  curate's  contconpt  is 
evidently  not  of  Ariosto  (whose  "graces"  he  has  just  been 
praising),  but  of  the  poor  barber,  whom  he  does  not  think  cap- 
able of  reading,  or  at  least  of  relishing,  anything  so  beautiful  as 
the  Orlando  Furioso.  Don  C^eronimo  Ximenes  de  Urrea  is  the 
*'  good  captain,"  whose  Spanish  version  of  the  Orlando  Cervantes 
in  the  next  sentence  satirizes.  Don  Diego  de  Mendoza  is  equally 
severe  upon  this  gallant  translator.  **  He  hath  gained,"  quoth 
Mendoza,  "  not  only  ftune,  but,  what  is  much  better,  many  a  good 
dinner  by  translating  the  Orlando  Furioso ;  t .«.,  by  having  said. 


452  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

"  Gavd&eroB  for  cavaylieri^  armas  for  armef  amareM  for  amorC* 
He  adds,  "  Puez  de  esia  arte  yo  me  Aorta,  mae  libroB  que  hizo 
MatuzaUn."  But  perhapSy  after  all,  even  tliat  might  be  no  Tery 
laborious  undertaking. 

Note  10,  Cliap.  vL  Page  78. 

Bernardo  del  Carpia  The  work  of  Augustin  Alonzo,  published 
by  Pedro  Lopez  de  Haro,  1585.  4,  Toledo.  Pellioer  says  : — 
**  This  rare  book  is  preserved  in  the  large  library  of  Senor  Cerda. 
The  title  runs,  '  Historia  de  las  Hazanas  y  Heches  del  inuencible 
cavallero  Bernardo  del  Carpia' " 

Note  11,  Chap,  vi  Page  78. 

**  Libro  dell  ftunoso  Caballero  Palmerin  de  Oliva  que  por  el 
mundo  grandes  hechos  en  armas  hizo,  sin  saber  ouyo  hijo  faere.** 
Toledo  1580  in  folio.  This  work  is  supposed  to  be  by  a  Portu- 
guese lady,  and  written  about  the  dose  of  the  fifteenth  centory. 
The  other  history  of  "  Palmerin  de  Inglaterra,"  of  which  the 
author  immediately  speaks,  is  attributed  to  Don  Juan  IL  of 
Portugal,  who  lived  from  1455  to  1495.  The  Castilian  transla- 
tion has  been  lost,  from  which  was  said  to  be  taken  the  French 
version  of  Jacques  Vicent,  and  tlus  doubtless  was  the  book  found 
in  the  Don's  library.  Of  Palmerin  de  Oliva  the  original  is  lost — 
only  the  translation  remains. 

Note  12,  Chap,  vi  Page  79. 

''There  appeared  a  castle  as  beautiful  and  as  rich  as  ever 
mortal  beheld.  It  was  so  large  that  with  ease  one  might  imagine 
two  thousand  knights  to  be  its  garrison,  and  it  was  drawn  along 
by  forty  elephants  of  incredible  hugenesa  From  this  castle 
there  came  forth  nine  knights,  each  one  having  painted  on  his 
shield  the  image  of  Fame,  by  which  device  they  signified  that 
they  were  the  Knights  of  Fame." — Belianiif  1,  iiL  c.  19. 

Note  13,  Chap.  vL  Page  80. 

The  hero  of  this  fine  old  romance  (for  Cervantes  is  far  too 
severe  on  its  merits)  derives  his  name  partly  from  his  father, 
partly  from  his  mother ;  the  former  being  "  Lord  of  the  Seignioxy 
of  Tirania,  on  the  borders  of  England,"  the  latter,  Blanca,  daughter 
of  the  Duke  of  Brittany.  The  common  opinion  is,  that  this 
romance  was  originally  composed  in  the  Valencian  dialect  about 
the  year  1460.  The  Dons  Kyrie-eleison,  (La  Lord  have  mercy 
upon  U8f)  and  Thomas  of  Montalban,  the  Knight  Fonseoa,  Seo,, 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  453 

are  personages  who  appear  in  the  story  of  Tirant  lo  Bkmek.  The 
most  interesting  of  them  all,  are  the  empress  and  her  lover,  the 
gentleman-usher  Hippolyta  To  please  her  swain,  the  empress 
sings  to  him  on  one  occasion,  "Tin  romance  de  Tristan  oo  se 
planya  de  la  lancada  del  Eej  March" — ''  A  Song  of  Tristram,  in 
which  he  laments  oyer  a  blow  he  had  reoeiyed  from  the  lance  of 
King  Mark."  This  song  is  represented  to  have  excessively 
moved  the  tender-hearted  gentleman-usher ;  insomuch,  that ''  Ab 
la  dol^or  del  cant  destillaren  dels  seiv  ^^  vives  lagremes." — 
(Gap.  264.)  The  first  edition  of  Tirant  was  published  at  Valencia 
in  1490.  A  Castillian  version  appeared  at  Valladolid  in  1511; 
and  from  this  was  executed  the  Italian  translation  of  Lelio 
Manfredi,  which  was  printed  at  Venice  in  1538.  DeiriarUe,  a 
few  lines  lower  in  the  text,  is  a  misprint  for  Tirante,  which 
seems  to  have  passed  from  edition  to  edition,  ever  since  Don 
Quixote  was  first  published. 

Note  14,  Chap,  vi  Page  82. 

Cervantes  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware,  that  the  Diana, 
wno  gives  name  to  the  celebrated  performance  of  Jorge  de  Monte- 
mayor,  was  a  real  personage.  Pellicer,  however,  has  collected 
abundant  evidence  that  such  was  the  fact;  inier  aUa,  he  dtes 
from  a  MS.,  in  the  Boyal  Library  at  Madrid,  a  passage  which  I 
shall  translate  literatim,  because  the  story  it  tells  is  in  itself 
interesting.  [The  writer  is  the  same  Father  Sapolveda,  with 
whose  printed  works  all  are  acquainted.]  ''  When  the  sovereigns, 
Don  Philip  IIL  and  Donna  Margarita,  were  on  their  way  back 
from  Portugal  in  1602,  they  halted  for  a  night  in  the  city  of 
Valencia,  and  their  host  there  was  the  Marquis  de  las  Navas, 
and  they  were  also  entertained  by  that  ftunous  woman,  Diana, 
whom  George  de  Montemayor  so  greatly  commends  and  celebrates 
in  his  history  and  verses ;  for,  though  very  old,  this  Diana  is  still 
alive,  and  they  say,  whoever  visits  her  may  discover  plainly,  that 
in  her  youth  she  must  have  been  exceedingly  beautiful.  She  is 
the  most  wealthy  and  rich  person  in  the  town.  But  it  was  on 
account  of  her  being  so  fiunous,  and  of  the  praises  of  Geoige  de 
Montemayor,  that  the  sovereigns  and  all  their  court  repaired  to 
the  house  of  this  woman,  being  desirous  to  see  her  as  a  thing 
worthy  of  wonder  and  of  admiration.  And,  indeed,  she  is  a  very 
sensible  and  well-spoken  woman."  Lope  de  Vega  also  alludes  to 
the  real  Diana  in  his  Daroiea,  p.  52. 

Montemayor  himself  was  not  distinguished  by  his  writings 
alone ;  for  he  was  both  a  great  musidan  and  a  gallant  soldier. 
His  Diana  was  the  most  popular  work  of  its  day,  and  gave  rise 


454  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

to  as  many  Dianas^  as  Lord  Byron's  Harold,  ia  our  own  time» 
has  to  CkUdes.  Gil  Polo,  whom  Cervantes  rather  commendfl» 
wrote  a  professed  continiiation  of  the  original  perfonnanoe  ol 
Montemajor,  which  has  been  reprinted  in  Madrid  so  lately  as 
1778.  M.  Florian  ventures,  in  spite  of  the  authority  of  Cervantea, 
to  express  a  great  contempt  for  Gil  Polo;  hut  Peilioer,  more 
likely  to  be  a  good  judge,  talks  of  him  as  "  Insigne  Poeta  Valen- 
dano."  The  second  Diana,  that  of  Alonzo  Peres,  a  physidan  ol 
Salamanca,  (the  Salmantino  of  the  text)  was  published  at  Alcala 
in  1564.  For  very  elegant  abatracts  of  all  these  pastorals^  see 
Mr  Dunlop's  Hiitoty  of  Fiction. 

Note  15,  Chap.  vL  Page  82. 

The  true  name  of  this  author  was  Antonio  de  lo  Frassa  He 
was  a  native  of  Uaguer,  a  town  in  Sardinia,  but  wrote  good 
Castillian.  His  work,  entitled  ''Los  diez  libroe  de  Fortnna 
d'Amor,  donde  hallaran  los  honestos  y  apadbles  amores  del  pastor 
Frexano  et  de  la  hermosa  pastora  Fortuna,"  was  published  at 
Barcelona  by  one  Pedro  Malo,  in  1573.  It  is  a  pastoral  written 
partly  in  prose  partly  in  verse,  like  its  prototype  (the  Diana.) 
There  is  every  reason  for  thinking  that  Cervantes  by  no  means 
intended  to  identify  himself  with  the  curate  as  to  the  opinicm 
expressed  concerning  this  work.  Nevertheless,  entirely  on  the 
strength  of  such  an  idea,  an  edition  of  these  wretched  ''dies 
libroB  de  fortuna"  was  actually  printed  in  London,  not  a  great 
many  years  ago,  under  the  auspices  of  Pineda,  the  lexicographer 
— of  course,  without  the  smaUest  success.  The  other  pastoral 
productions  mentioned  in  the  text  are  all  utterly  contemptible, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Shepherd  of  FUiday  which  Lope  de 
Vega  praises  in  his  Dorotea,  (p.  52)  asserting,  that  its  author 
also,  like  Montemayor,  had  been  inspired  by  the  charms  of  a  real 
mistress.  This  book  appeared  in  1582.  It  was  written  by  Lttis 
Galvez  de  Montalvo,  who  is  designed  as  "  Criado  de  Don  Enrique 
de  Mendoza  y  Aragon,  nieto  de  los  Duques  del  Infantado." 

Note  16,  Chap,  vi  Page  83. 

This  is  a  collection  of  the  same  class  with  the  SylwBj  DdicioBj 
^.,  formed  by  Don  Pedro  Padilla;  a  gentleman,  who^  after 
spending  an  active  life  in  military  service,  assumed  in  his  latter 
days  the  garb  of  a  Carmelite  Friar,  and  died  in  that  sanctified, 
and,  as  he  probably  thought,  all-atoning  garb,  at  Madrid,  1595. 
Gayton,  in  his  "  Festive  Notes,"  talks  boldly  of  this  book,  as  if 
it  had  been  a  dictionary,  and  as  if  he  had  himself  turned  over  its 


NOTES  TO  VOLU^fE  FIRST.  456 

leaves.      He  had  evidently  not  imagined  there  could  be  any 
Thesauri  except  of  the  same  class  with  his  Stephanus. 

Note  17,  Chap.  vL  Page  83. 

"  The  Concionero,  o  Coleocion  de  varias  poesias"  of  this  author, 
was  first  published  by  Droy,  in  Madrid,  in  1586,  in  quarto. 

Note  18,  Chap,  vi  Page  84. — See  life  of  Cervantes. 

Note  19,  Chap,  vi  Page  85. 

"  The  Tears  of  Angelica."  This  is  not  the  title;  it  is  "  Prim- 
era  parte  de  la  Angelica,  poem  in  1 2  cantos  by  Luis  Barahona  de 
Soto,"  native  of  Lucena,  and  physician  in  Archidoua,  where  he 
died  in  1595.  On  this  occasion,  as  in  many  others,  Cervantes  is 
prodigal  of  pndse,  rare  defect  of  a  poet,  especially  speaking  of 
one  who  was  poor  and  neglected. 

Note  1,  Chap.  viL  Page  86. 

The  Carolea  is  a  poem  treating  of  the  victories  of  Charles  Y., 
printed  in  Valencia  in  1560.  Its  author  was  Geronimo  de  iScm 
PedrOf  or  Sempere.  The  Lean  de  Espdna  is  a  poem  in  twenty- 
nine  cantos,  treating  of  the  martial  glories  of  the  Leoneze.  It 
was  written  by  Pedro  de  la  Yecilla,  and  published  at  Salamanca 
in  1586.  Pdlicer  contends,  that  Cervantes  is  wrong  in  attribut- 
ing **  the  deeds  of  the  Emperor"  to  Don  Lewis  d'Avila ;  and  is 
at  great  pains  to  convince  us  that  he  must  have  meant  Don 
Lewis  Zapata.  Avila  was  author  of  the  Guerra  de  Almania,  and 
therefore  entitled  to  be  talked  of  as  having  celebrated  ''  the  deeds 
of  the  Emperor;"  but  Zapata's  work,  on  the  other  hand,  bore 
the  very  title  of  "  Hechos  del  Emperador."  The  same  person 
published  a  long  poem  on  the  same  subject,  the  Corh  Famoeo ; 
of  which  he  himself  relates  that  it  cost  him  4000  maravedis  to 
print  it,  and  that  he  had  no  return  whatever,  but  what  he  calls 
the  "  iJongamiento  de  mi  voluntad" — a  species  of  profit  with 
which  Don  Lewis  Zapata  professes  himself  to  have  been  by  no 
means  satisfied. 

Note  2,  Chapi  viL  Page  90. 
This  personage  figures  in  many  terrible  scenes  of  the  Belianis. 

Note  1,  Chap.  viiL  Page  100. 

This  incident  occurred  at  the  battle  of  Jerez  against  the  Moors 
during  the  reign  of  King  Don   Fernando  el  Santo,  and  is  de- 


45S  Siyas  09  uos  Qcixats. 


TbcK  Bo^x  wcrecf  i—rnhniri!.  fimiiilifri  wx&  ^mb  to  keep 
ott  ^e  4iBBL  T&s  ipedei  «£  BMk,  ^e  hkck,  krge^  mad  maple 
droi.  c&e  enooMMi  ne  «£  ^e  safai,  wiA  ^e  aeeiiiBDt  cf  \ming 

Inmaf  ^e  Don  Ike  idem  tkat  Ane  fina  wtere  enckuitan  wko 
hod  earned  cff  waamt  feuMJiw^  waA  wm  be  bed  rad  o£  in  ks 
hookK     (Hf  wiriw  ) 

Fofte  4,  CkH^  tiiL  F^  109. 

Tbe  BatMjum  and  tlfecir  kngaa^  mn  npemtedlj  tke  object  q{ 
CerTBiitee'  wit  Thm  ako  k  the  caae  in  ^he  fuoe  cf  tke  **  Vis- 
caino  fingido,**  and  in  ^e  cumedj  of  tiie  *  Ctxan  Suhana*  tiie 
captire  Mandrigil,  to  eacape  death,  ofien  tiie  Oadi  to  teadi  an 
elephant  to  speak,  and  being  asked  in  which  language  his  leaaona 
were  to  be,  replied  in  Biacajan.  Lope  de  Vega^  wishing  to 
ridknle  the  Latin  mode  of  speaking  coining  into  fudiion  in  his 
time,  compares  it  with  the  Spanish  of  the  Biacayana  in  a  sonnet 
in  which  Boecan  and  Garalaao  speak  on  arriTing  at  an  inn. 
Howerer,  this  is  all  rery  wdl  as  a  jok&  From  the  Bishop  of 
Mondonedo,  D.  Antonio  de  GueTarm  to  D.  Fdix  Samani^^  the 
pTOTinoes  known  bj  the  common  name  of  Biacaj  have  produced 
aathors  reckoned  justly  amongst  the  masters  of  the  *'idioiiim 
Castellana"     (Clemencin,  abridged.) 

Note  5,  Ch^  yiiL  F^  109. 

In  the  original  "  Ahora  lo  veredes,  dijo  Agrages."  A  form  of 
threat  very  common  at  that  tune  in  Spain.  Agrages  was  nephew 
of  Qaeen  Elizabeth,  mother  of  A  madia  of  Qaul,  in  whose  history 
frequent  mention  is  made  of  his  deeds. 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  467 

Note  1,  Cliap  i  Book  ii.  Page  116. 

In  the  original, ''  Morisco  Aljamiada"  Aljamia  (from  A^ama, 
a/rorUieTf)  was  a  term  applied  hj  the  pure  Arabs  to  denote  the 
cormpted  language  of  the  Moors  long  settled  in  Spain.  In  one  of 
the  old  ballads,  a  Moor,  who  oommunicates  to  the  Cid  a  certain 
plot  that  is  going  on  against  him,  is  styled  "  Moro  Latinada" 
How  much  the  two  languages  must  have  been  mingled  in  the  elder 
times,  may  easily  be  imagined,  when  we  remember  that  there  are 
still  extant  several  papal  rescripts  directed  against  the  use  of  the 
Arabic  language  by  the  Spanish  Christians ;  that,  in  spite  of  all 
these,  it  was  found  necessaiy,  after  some  space,  to  translate  the 
common  devotional  books  of  the  Christian  rdigion  into  Arabic  for 
their  use ;  and  that,  at  Cordova,  the  Gothic  laws  rendered  into 
Arabic,  were  appealed  to  in  the  courts  of  justice  whenever  the 
parties  were  Christians. — (See  Murphy's  Hoars  in  SpcUn^  and 
Boutebweok's  Getehichte  der  Spanisehes  LUeratwr.)  Cervantes 
adheres  closely  to  the  romances  which  he  designs  to  satirize  in  all 
this  fiction  about  the  discovery  and  translation  of  the  history  of 
his  Don.  The  Amadis  de  Qatd,  the  Belianis,  ^,  kc^  are  all  re- 
presented as  having  been  originaUy  composed  in  the  Greek  tongue 
by  "  the  Saga  Alquife,"  Friston,  Artemidorus,  Lirgandeus,  and  the 
like  learned  personages.  The  origin  of  all  romantic  adventures 
was,  in  the  eye  of  Cervantes'  contemporaries,  Moorish,  and  there- 
fore he  takes  a  Moor  in  place  of  a  Greek.  The  Spanish  com- 
mentators, finally,  have  discovered  that  Cid  Hamet  Ben  Engdiy  is, 
after  all,  no  more  than  an  Arabian  version  of  the  name  of  Cer- 
vantes himself.  Oidf  as  all  the  world  knows,  means  lord  or  signior. 
ffamet  is  a  common  Moorish  prefix.  £en  Engeli  signifies  the  mm 
of  a  stag,  which,  being  expressed  in  Spanish,  is  hijo  M  eiervo, 
cervcU,  or  cervanteno.  It  is  said  in  p.  1 1 8,  that  this  Morisco  trans- 
lated the  whole  of  Ben  Engeli's  MS.  in  less  than  six  weeks ;  but 
this  is  nothing  to  Shelton,  the  first  English  translator  of  Cer- 
vantes, who  says,  in  his  pre&ce  that  he  finished  his  version  in 
forty  successive  day& 

Note  1,  Chap,  ii  Book  iL  Page  124. 

The  holy  brotherhood.  La  Santa  Hermandare,  was  a  most 
severe  tribunal,  established  by  the  sovereigns  Don  Fernanda  and 
Dona  Isabel  in  1476,  to  pursue,  judge  and  punish  all  offences 
committed  outside  of  towns.  This  still  existed  with  some  noted 
changes  in  the  time  of  Cervantes.  Sancho's  idea  of  taking  refuge 
in  a  church  is  quite  in  keeping  with  his  rustic  timid  character, 
and  contrasts  well  with  the  cavalier  fan-faronades  of  his  master. 


458  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

Note  2,  Chap,  ii  Book  ii  Page  125. 

In  the  prophet  Jeremiah  the  Jews  are  frequentJj  threatened 
that  they  would  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Chaldeans.  Apparently 
this  is  referred  to.     (Clemendn). 

Note  3,  Chap,  ii  Book  ii  Page  126. 

The  history  of  this  balsam  is  found  in  the  Tolgate  of  the 
Emperor  Charlemagne,  published  in  Cartillian,  by  Nicolas  de 
Piamonte,  (Historia  de  Carlo  Magno,  c.  viiL  and  ziL).  Fierabras, 
angelice,  Strongarm,  was  a  giant,  king  of  Alexandria,  son  of  the 
admiral  Balan,  conqueror  of  Rome  and  of  Jerusalem — a  pagan 
or  Saracen ;  a  great  enemy  of  Oliver,  of  whom  he  receiTed 
mortal  wounds,  of  which  he  was  immediately  cured,  drinking  of 
the  balsam,  which  he  carried  in  two  little  barrels,  which  by 
force  of  arms  he  had  gained  in  Jerusalem.  This  balsam  was 
said  to  be  that  which  was  used  by  Joseph  of  Arimathea  after  the 
descent  of  our  Saviour  from  the  cross.  Oliver  having  managed 
to  get  possession  of  the  baiTels,  threw  them  into  a  rapid  river, 
overcame  Fierabras,  who  afterwards  received  baptism,  and  died  a 
Christian. 

Note  4,  Chap.  iL  Book  iL  Page  128. 

Of  this  story  I  have  already  said  something.  The  vow  of  the 
Marquis  runs  thus  in  the  ballad : — 

Jon  per  dice  verdadero 
De  nunca  peynar  mis  Canas 
Ni  las  mis  barbas  cortare 
Ni  renevar  me  Calzarc,  &c.  &c. 
Ni  los  barbas  mi  tocare, 
De  no  vestir  otrasropas, 
Ni  renovar  mi  calzare, 
Ni  las  annas  mi  quitare ; 
Sine  fuera  par  nn  hora  ; 
De  no  comer  en  mantele, 
Ni  a  mesa  mi  assentare 
Hasta  matar  a  Don  Carloto,  &c. 

Alcala,  1606. 

See  a  preceding  note  on  the  story  of  Baldwin,  dba     Sylva  de 
Romances,  F.  38. 

Note  5,  Chap.  iL  Book  iL  Page  129. 
For  all  these  I  refer  the  reader  to  Boiardo  and  Arioeta 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  459 

Note  1,  Chap,  iii.,  Book  iL,  Page  136. 

Don  Antonio  de  Capmani,  in  his  "Teatro  de  la  elocuencia 
espanola,"  quotes  this  beautiful  disoourse  of  the  Don.  Cervantes 
appears  to  have  taken  as  his  model  here  Virgil  in  the  1st  Ceorgics, 
and  Ovid  in  the  1st  book  of  the  Metamorphosea  The  resemblanoe 
to  Tasso's  Aminta^  ''  O  bell'  eta»"  is  but  slight. 

Note  1,  Chap,  iv.,  Book  iL,  Page  146. 

Cervantes  here  has  in  his  eye  that  passage  in  Aristotle's 
Politicks,  where  the  story  is  told;  of  a  Cretan  sage,  who,  being 
reproached  with  the  unproductiveness  of  his  philosophical  pursuits, 
answered,  he  could,  if  he  chose,  draw  an  abundant  revenue  from 
his  science;  and,  accordingly,  did  soon  realize  a  fortune,  in 
consequence  of  arranging  his  crops,  &c.y  so  as  to  suit  the  weather 
he  foresaw. 

Note  2,  Chap,  iv.,  Book  ii,  Page  147. 

These  plai/s  were  of  the  same  nature  with  our  own  myaieries^ 
foimded,  namely,  upon  subjects  taken  from  holy  writ.  Such 
performances  were  usual  all  over  Europe  at  this  time  on  Corpus 
Christi  day,  and  several  other  festivals  of  the  churcL 

Note  1,  Chap,  v..  Book  ii,  Page  157. 

It  is  supposed  that  the  superstition  alluded  to  in  the  text  had, 
in  reality,  gone  so  far,  as  to  have  influence  at  least  on  the  Wdch 
legislators ;  for  in  the  laws  of  Hoel  the  Good,  we  find  a  heavy 
fine  appointed  to  be  paid  by  every  person  who  kills  a  raven 
(Leges  Hoeli  Boni,  Londini,  1730,  p.  334.),  and  I  do  not  think 
any  origin  of  such  a  law  could  be  pointed  out  either  more  rational 
or  more  probable,  than  the  prevalence  of  this  reverential  feeling 
towards  Arthur.  The  inscription  on  the  tombstone  of  Arthur 
was  (according  to  the  monkish  chronicles,  too  often  rivals  of  the 
romancers) 

niejacet  Artkwnu  Rex  quondam  Rexque  FtUunu. 

Note  2,  Chap,  v.,  Book  ii,  Page  161. 

Of  such  elevations,  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  notice 
several  instances.  They  are  as  plenty  as  black-berries  in  the 
romances.  Reynaldo  de  Montalban  became  Emperor  of  Trebizond 
(according  to  the  Sylva  de  Komances,  p.  76.)  In  Esplandian,  a 
177,  we  are  told,  that  "  El  emperador  casando  a  su  hija  Leonorina 
con  Esplandian  les  renuncio  todo  su  imperia"  Bernard  del 
Carpio  "se  casa  con  Olympia  haziendole  Bey  de  Irlanda" 
(Espinosa,  canto   33.)     Palmerin   d'Oliva   became  Emperor  of 


460  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

CoDstontiiiopl&     TiniittlieWliitebecuiie''FHiicqieyGnu'del 
Imperio  de  Greda,"  kc^  kc^  kc 

Note  3,  Chftp.  T.,  Book  iL,  Page  161. 

The  nine  leproech  was  once  made  to  Tirant  the  WhHa :  Bia 
answer  was,  ^El  que  a  miiehos  aure  no  aiire  a  ningona'' — ^Lflx  iu. 
cap.  28. 

Note  1,  Chi^.  i..  Book  iii,  Page  194. 

Hie  most  complete  code  of  duelling  is  to  be  foond  in  Maifiet's 
treatise,  DtUa  Seienxa  CwvatUre$ca.  Most  minute  rules  are  theie 
laid  down  concerning  more  improbable  contingencies  than  thai 
aUuded  to  in  the  text  InmdU  are  dassed  and  sabdiridedy  ss 
accoratelj  as  crimes  against  life  and  property  hsre  erer  been  in 
statnte-books ;  and  the  proper  quofrUwm  oi  rerenge  to  be  eiracted 
in  every  supposable  case,  is  laid  down  with  aU  the  gravity  ol  a 
Nnma.  E.  G,,  when  yon  are  insulted  by  a  lame  man,  yoa  most 
tie  up  your  leg  before  yoa  take  the  field  against  him,  Ac,  Ac. 

Note  1,  Ohap.  iL,  Book  iii,  Page  202. 
lo  son  nutrito  sotto  11  Santo  impero 
Del  magnanimo  Artos  real  pio, 
£  da  lui  fatto  errante  eavalisro, 
Yo  C0roando  awenture  hor  qnind  hor  qnindL 

Gtbohx,  It,  SL  76. 

Note  2,  Chap.  iL,  Book  iii,  Page  205. 

Cervantes  probably  means  to  insinuate,  that  the  muleteer  was 
himself  a  Moor,  one  of  the  many  who  made  outward  profession  of 
Christianity,  after  Mahometanism  became  a  crime  in  Spain ;  which, 
as  all  the  world  knows,  happened  in  Cervantes's  own  day,  to  the 
great  injury  of  the  commerce  and  agriculture  of  the  Spanish 
dominions.  Before  their  total  expulsion,  it  would  seem  the 
Moriscos  were  very  much  employed  as  carriers  and  muleteers. 
For,  says  the  author  of  certain  "  Discourses  on  the  Provision  of 
the  Court ''  (never  published,  but  quoted  by  Pellicer,  and  com- 
posed in  1616),  "By  the  expulsion  of  the  Moors,  Spain  lost  about 
four  or  five  thousand  carriers,  who  were  of  infinite  advantage  in 
transporting  all  kinds  of  merdiandise.  Between  1608  and  1616, 
the  charge  of  carriage  from  Seville  to  Madrid  has  been  more  than 
tripled.  In  Tiemblo  (a  little  town  fourteen  leagues  from  Madrid) 
I  remember  eighteen  carriers,  and  now  there  is  not  ona  There 
used  to  be  not  less  than  five-and-twenty  at  Talamea  (torty-^a^txt 
leagues  from  Madrid),  and  now  there  is  only  one  in  the  whole 
place." 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  461 

Note  1,  Chap.  iiL,  Book  m.,  Page  220. 

The  fair  Kosaliaiia,  in  Belianis  of  Greece,  uBee  these  words : 
"  Acabad  de  matar  aquelloe  maloe  gigantes,  por  que  en  el  entre- 
tanto  que  alguuo  deloB  fuere  Tivo  no  scran  desheohos  los  encanta- 
mentos  de  este  castillo." — L.  3.  c.  9. 

Note  2,  Chap.  iiL,  Book  iiL,  Page  225. 

Don  Quixote  could  hardly  have  read  in  the  Morgante  Maggiore 
of  Puld,  canto  21,  in  which  he  introduces  Orlando  suffering  from 
the  want  of  money  to  pay  his  host^  who  wished  him  at  least  to 
leaye  his  horse  in  pledge. 

Note  1,  Chap,  iv.,  Book  ill,  Page  235. 

The  ancients  called  Taprobana,  not  Trapobana,  the  island  of 
Ceylon.  Garamantas,  a  people  of  the  interior  of  Africa.  Being 
widely  separated  from  India,  little  was  mutually  known  of  each 
other.  Hence  room  for  idle  rumours  and  such  incidents  as  abound 
in  books  of  chivalry. 

Note  1,  Chap,  v.,  Book  ill,  Page  260. 

''Caballero  de  la  triste  figura,"  is  translated  by  Shelton, 
"  Knight  of  the  ill-favoured  face ;  **  but  Smollett's  "  Knight  of 
the  Sorrowful  Countenance,''  expresses  fiir  better  than  either  of 
these  the  sense  of  Cervantes.  At  a  certain  chivalric  spectacle 
given  by  Queen  Mary  of  Hungary,  the  Count  de  Aremberg 
jousted  under  the  title  of  "  Knight  of  the  Griphon,"  with  Don 
Juan  de  Saavedra,  who  was  arrayed  in  sable  armour,  and  styled 
"  the  Sorrowful  Knight." 

Note  2,  Chap,  v..  Book  iiL,  Page  261. 
According  to  the  *'  Romancero  del  Cid  ''  (num.  21),  the  chair 
was  that  of  the  King  of  France.     The  occurrence  took  place  in 
Rome  in  the  Church  of  St  Peter,  but  not  in  presence  of  the  Pope. 

Note  1,  Chap.  vL,  Book  iiL,  Page  274. 

The  substance  of  this  tale  is  to  be  found  in  the  **  Oenti  novelle 
antiche'*  of  Franoesoo  Sansvoino — ^Yenetia,  1575.  This  was 
taken  from  a  Provenzal  fabliau  of  the  thirteenth  oentury,  which, 
again,  is  a  translation  from  the  Latin  of  Pedro  Alfonso,  a  con- 
verted Jew,  physician  to  King  Don  Alfonso,  who  flourished  about 
the  year  1100. 


462  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE, 

Note  1,  Chap.  viiL,  Book  iii.  Page  298. 

The  reader  of  romance  does  not  need  to  be  told  how  £aithfally 
Don  Quixote,  in  reply  to  this  saying  of  his  squire,  has  abridged 
the  main  story  of  many  a  ponderous  folio.  The  imaginary  career 
of  glory  which  he  unfolds  before  the  eyes  of  Sancho  is  paralleled 
almost  ad  literatim  in  the  romance  of  Sir  Degore,  so  admirably 
analysed  by  Mr  Ellis.  The  conclusion  of  Belianis  is  almost 
exactly  the  same  sort  of  adventure. 

Note  1,  Chap,  viii.,  Book  iii,  Page  320. 

Motteux  translates  "  buen  hombre  "  "  notorious  rogue.*'  Pasa- 
monte  is  the  name  of  a  giant  in  PulcL  A  rather  well-known 
person  who  flourished  during  the  reign  of  Philip  II.,  1575, 
Alonso  Sanchez  de  Pasamonte,  and  from  whose  influence  Cervantes 
may  have  suffered  in  la  Mancha,  may,  according  to  Clemencin,  be 
the  reason  of  introducing  his  name  into  the  text 

Note  2,  Chap.  viiL,  Book  iii.  Page  321. 

About  the  most  popular  book  in  Spain  at  the  time  when 
CeiTantes  wrote,  was  the  Life  of  Lazarillo  de  Tormes,  a  work  of 
very  extraordinary  genius,  written  at  a  very  early  period  of  his 
career,  by  the  great  Spanish  historian,  poet,  soldier,  and  states- 
man, Don  Diego  de  Mendoza.  It  was  the  first  comic  romance 
that  had  appeared  in  the  modem  world,  or  at  least  the  first  that 
had  ever  made  any  noise  in  the  world.  The  species  of  tricks  and 
adventures  in  which  Lazarillo  is  engaged  had  indeed  been  long  in 
great  favour  among  the  Spaniards,  but  Mendoza  first  embalmed 
such  materials  in  the  elegancies  of  diction,  and  adorned  them 
with  the  interests  of  an  artificial  narrative.  The  contrast  his 
shrewd  and  himiorous  representation  of  himian  life  aflbrds  to  the 
pompous  romance  of  chivalry,  which  then  formed  almost  the  sole 
reading  of  the  Spaniards,  is  such,  that  no  one  can  be  surprised 
with  the  great  success  of  this  first  eflbrt  of  Mendoza's  genius. 
Lazarillo  de  Tormes  was  immediately  translated  into  Italian  and 
French,  and  both  abroad  and  at  home  gave  birth  to  ionumerable 
imitations.  The  best  of  all  these  is,  without  doubt,  the  History 
of  Guzman  d'  Alfarache,  commonly  called  the  Spanish  Bogue, 
which  made  its  appearance  a  few  years  before  the  publication  of 
Don  Quixote.  Like  its  prototype,  this  book  became  exceedingly 
popular  all  over  Europe ;  and  there  soon  appeared  (among  many 
others)  an  excellent  version  of  it  in  English,  which  oughts  without 
doubt,  to  be  reprinted  in  its  original  shape.  From  these  books 
Le  Sage  derived  a  great  many  of  the  best  stories  with  which  wa 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  463 

liave  all  been  made  so  ^iniiliar  by  hia  Gil  Bias  and  Bachelor  of 
Salamanca.  Indeed,  in  Le  Sage's  own  abridgment  of  Guzman  d' 
Al&rache,  many  of  the  best  stories  in  the  whole  book  are  omitted, 
for  no  other  reason  but  that  Le  Sage  had  already  appropriated 
them  in  his  Gil  Bias.  Mendoza's  rich  and  beautiful  style,  how- 
ever, gives  a  charm  to  his  Lazarillo  which  the  dry  and  caustic 
Aleman  (the  author  of  Guzman)  ooidd  never  rival — Mendoza 
composed  poems  of  many  sorts,  satires,  lyrics,  epistles,  sonnets, 
pastorals,  and  ballads ;  but,  next  to  his  Lazarillo  de  Tormes,  which 
he  wrote  before  he  left  college  at  Salamanca,  his  most  celebrated 
work  is  his  History  of  the  War  of  Granada,  which  he  composed 
towards  the  decline  of  his  life,  and  which  was  not  suffered  to  be 
printed  until  thirty  years  after  his  death,  in  consequence  of  the 
hardihood  of  some  of  the  opinions  expressed  in  it  With  the 
exceptions  of  Machiavelli  and  Guicciardini,  there  is  perhaps  no 
modem  writer  who  has  produced  any  thing  so  nearly  approaching 
to  the  pure  and  classical  character  of  the  great  historical  monu- 
ments left  us  by  the  Greeks  and  Bomans. — The  life  of  Mendoza 
himself  was  a  very  extraordinary  ona  He  owed  hia  rise  to  letters, 
and  he  never  ceased  to  cultivate  them  during  the  whole  of  a  very 
long  life ;  and  yet  he  was  engaged  continually  in  public  business, 
and  even  bore  the  first  part  in  many  of  the  most  important 
transactions  of  his  time.  He  was  taken  from  college  by  Charles 
Y.  soon  after  he  had  published  hia  Lazarillo  de  Tormes,  and  sent 
ambassador  to  Venice,  where  he  greatly  distrnguished  himself  in 
the  management  of  several  very  difficult  intrigues.  He  afterwards 
represented  the  person  of  the  same  monarch  at  the  Council  of 
Trent,  and  still  later  at  the  Court  of  Boma  In  the  Italian  wars 
of  those  days  he  acquired  the  character  of  a  skilful  and  decided 
commander.  He  was  governor  of  Sienna;  and  from  thence,  it 
may  almost  be  said  he  administered  the  whole  affairs  of  Italy 
during  a  period  of  six  years.  After  harmony  was  restored 
between  the  Papal  See  and  his  own  prince,  Mendoza  was  appointed 
to  the  high  office  of  gonfalonier  of  the  church,  and  in  that  capacity 
was  commander-in-chief  of  all  the  ecclesiastical  forces.  He  retired 
to  Spain  on  the  accession  of  Philip  II.,  who  does  not  appear  to 
have  treated  him  with  the  same  confidence  as  hia  father,  inasmuch 
as,  for  the  most  part,  the  rest  of  hia  life  was  passed  in  comparative 
privacy  and  literary  leisure.  Nevertheless,  he  accompanied 
Philip  into  France,  and  was  present  at  the  great  battle  of  St 
Quintin,  in  1557.  Nor  had  old  age  any  power  to  check  the 
fervour  of  hia  spirit,  if  we  may  put  faith  in  some  of  the  anecdotes 
commonly  recorded  of  him :  for  example,  we  are  told,  that  **  long 
after  hia  hairs  were  grey,"  he  quarrelled  with  a  nobleman  who 


464  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

was  hia  rival  in  some  amoafy  and  coming  to  hi^  words  one  daj 
in  the  presence-chamber  of  Phflip,  expressed  himself  with  ao 
much  scorn,  that  his  adversary  laid  his  hand  on  his  poniard. 
Mendoza,  observing  this,  seized  the  man,  who  was  &r  younger 
than  himself  and  flung  him  forionsly  over  the  baloony,  into  the 
street. — ^Altogether,  the  career  of  Mendoza  was  like  that  of 
Cervantes  himself,  a  striking  example,  not  only  of  the  versatility 
of  genius,  but  of  the  benefit  which  literature,  in  many  of  its 
finest  walks,  may  derive  from  being  cultivated  by  the  active  and 
energetic  spirits  of  the  world. 

Note  1,  Chap,  xi.  Book  iiL,  Page  371. 

Madasima  was  the  real  name  of  this  lady.  Ozell,  in  his  note 
at  p.  3,  considers  abad  (abbot)  as  a  mere  blunder  by  Sancho  for 
Elizabftd ;  but  Elizabad,  of  whom  something  has  been  said  already, 
seems  to  have  been  a  priest  as  well  as  a  doctor,  for  Amadis  says 
to  him  (Book  L  a  38),  ''  Azora  os  ruego  Maestro  que  digays  de 
Manana  i 


Note  2,  Chap.  xL,  Book  iii,  Page  377. 

*'  BeltenebroB  "  is  a  compound  of  *'  bello  "  and  "  tenebroao  " — 
fair  and  gloomy ;  or,  as  Clemendn  puts  it,  "  hermoao  y  triste  " — 
sad  and  fiur. 

Note  3,  Chap,  xi.  Book  iii.  Page  377. 

The  beautiful  passage  referred  to  occurs  in  the  23rd  canto  of 
the  Orlando  Furioso,  and  it  is  from  the  adventure  there  narrated 
that  the  whole  poem  of  Ariosto  takes  its  title.  Orlando  has 
discovered  love-knots  and  inscriptions  carved  upon  the  trees 
about  the  fountain,  and  is  at  last  convinced,  that  they  have  been 
executed,  not  only  by  the  hand  of  Medoro,  but  by  that  of 
Angelica  hersell  It  is  then  that  the  poet  comes  to  what  he 
promises  at  the  outset  of  his  whole  performance : — 

"  Dire  d'Orlando, 

Cosa  non  detta  in  prosa  mai  ne  in  rima, 
Che  per  amor  venne  in  furore,  e  matto 
D^uorn  che  si  saggio  era  stimato  prima." 

Canto  L,9L 

Note  4,  Chap,  xi.  Book  iii,  Page  378. 

These  are  not  three  different  names,  one  only  pronounced  in 
different  way&  The  Latin  history  of  Turpin  names  him  Rolamdo^ 
anagram  of  Orlando  and  of  Roldano,  In  chapter  first  of  the 
second  part  these  names  are  repeated  in  almost  the  same  wordiL 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  FIRST.  465 

Note  5,  Chap.  xL,  Book  iiL,  Page  384. 

The  Hip6gri/0f  progeny  of  a  griffin  and  a  mare,  occupies  an 
important  place  in  Arioeto.  (Orlando  Furioflo,  cant.  4,  est  18.) 
ArioBto  compares  the  swiftness  of  the  Hipdprifo  to  that  of  the 
eagla  Don  Quixote  thinks  that  of  Bocinante  much  superior,  of 
which  he  ought  to  have  been  a  good  judge.  '^  FronUno"  a 
celebrated  bay  horse,  belonged  to  Sacripante,  and  figures  largely 
in  the  poetry  of  Boyardo  and  Ariosta 

Note  1,  Chap,  xii,  Book  iiL,  Page  414. 

So,  according  to  Pulci  in  the  Morgante  Maggiore,  was  in  the 
days  of  knight-errantry  the  Archbishop  Turpin,  and  in  more 
modem  times  may  be  cited  the  ArchbiBhop  of  Burdos,  who,  as 
admiral  or  general  of  the  forces  of  Louis  XIII.,  fought  a  naval 
action  in  1638  with  D.  Lope  de  Hozes,  general  of  the  Spanish 
forces.  (Beal  Biblioteca,  est.  H.,  cod.  71. — Pellicer,)  Many 
other  examples  could  be  given,  but  this  is  not  the  explajiation  of 
what  Sancho  says,  who  speaks  not  of  vxurrior  arMn$hopif  but  of 
knighl-errani  archbishops,  who  went  about  with  their  squires  in 
search  of  adventures  ;  this  is  the  ridiculous  idea  presented  to  his 
readers  by  Cervantes.  The  warrior  archbishop  was  a  fact^  and 
according  to  the  time,  not  in  the  least  ridiculous. 

Note  1,  Chap.  xiiL,  Book  iii,  Page  419. 

King  Wamba,  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Visigoths,  reigned  in  Spain 
from  672  to  680,  and  was  distinguished  by  valour  and  other 
virtues.  The  expression  is  used  in  general  to  signify  an  epoch 
very  ancient,  and  therefore  old-fashioned. 

Note  2,  Chap.  xiiL,  Book  iii..  Page  430. 

GcUalon^  the  traitor  of  Boncesvalles,  has  already  been  men- 
tioned. According  to  Turpin,  the  Emperor,  in  punishment  of  his 
treachery,  had  him  torn  to  pieces  by  four  horses.  "  0  BeUido 
trmdor.'*  King  Sancho,  besieging  his  sister  Urraca  in  Zamora, 
was  ojQTered  by  Bcllido  Dolfos,  who  had  come  out  of  that  city,  an 
entrance  into  it  by  a  secret  passage.  Wishing  to  examine  this 
himself^  the  king  incautiously  went,  accompanied  only  by  Bellido, 
who  stabbed  him  with  a  da^gger,  and  then,  mounting  his  horse, 
returned  to  Zamora.  The  "  Bomancero  del  Cid*'  has  several 
romances  upon  this  subject. 

Cotmt  Julian  was  governor  of  Ceuta  for  the  Gothic  kings  of  Spain 
in  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century,  when,  the  Mfihometans 
IL  2q 


T^JMT 


'Mf^rrS    ^     ^-njZTMK    SCnDfTL 


j^-Hietr:    "trrnn^  ^jam*r  r  J-uae*  ~ 


^  "Sfcfcn  r,.  *  4» 


^  ^ 


4iK^  ,iwjiifti<»rt    «.  lfMSf»4  jnlimrj  jBuiaL      ^ 
'  >v*r  Sfm^jm^  40t  ^^ntrfut  ut  ■'.-mama^ '  wad,  ^  r 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND,  467 

Note  1,  Chap.  iL,  Book  iv.,  Page  34. 

Sancho  is  correct  in  saying  that  many  names  are  taken  from 
the  place  of  birth;  this  has  been  the  origin  of  that  of  many 
illusions  families,  such  as  los  Cardobaa  and  las  ToUdos,  Many 
families  deduce  their  name  from  some  feat  performed,  others 
from  some  personal  feature,  even  from  personal  defects ;  but  the 
most  common  in  Castille  was  the  adoption  of  the  paternal  titla 
This  usage  descended  from  the  Greeks  and  Bomans — Fernandez 
is  Femandi  JiUue ;  Sanchez^  Sanctii  JUitu ;  Ximenez,  Simonee 
aiitu  ;  this  last  was  the  name  of  Judas,  according  to  the  Gospel. 

Note  2,  Chap,  il,  Book  iv.,  Page  36. 

It  is  evident  that  Cervantes  here  seeks  to  cure,  by  holding  up 
to  ridicule,  the  antiquated  phraseology  of  the  books  of  chivalry,  as 
he  has  done  on  many  other  occasions.  For  example  of  this  style 
see  "  Belianie  di  Grecian"  lib.  iiL,  Cap.  33,  drc.,  dbc. 

Note  3,  Chap,  ii.  Book  iv..  Page  38. 

It  did  not  always  happen  that  knights-errant  refused  to  allow 
ladies  to  kiss  their  hands.  A  lady,  disguised,  having  forcibly 
kissed  the  hands  of  Amadis  of  Gaul,  obtained  from  him  promise  of 
a  boon,  which  proved  to  be  the  release  of  her  husband  Arculaus, 
mortal  enemy  of  Amadis,  who  had  confined  him  in  an  iron  cage. 
Amadis,  although  deceived,  kept  his  word,  releasing  the  captive 
— so  religiously  observed  was  the  word  of  a  cavalier. 

Note  4,  Chap,  ii.,  Book  iv.,  Page  38. 
*'  La  su  spada  e  Taltre  arme, 
Vidi  un  cavalier  oortese  e  pic 
Che  le  ando  raccogliendo  da  ogni  parte. 
E  poi  de  tutte  quelle  un*  ArbosoeUo 
Fe,  a  gui»a  di  Ttofeo,  pomposo  e  belle.** 

Ariosto,  CanJto  3L 

Note  5,  Chap,  ii,  Book  iv..  Page  42. 

The  original  is  "  e/  cabcUlo  Pegaeoy  o  sohre  la  zebra  6  al/ana," 
Motteux  translates  as  if  zebra  and  alfana  were  two  distinct 
animals,  which  is  not  the  case — only  two  appellations  of  the  same 
animal,  equivalent  to  ''  ass  or  donkey.'*  The  alfana  was  a  mare 
of  extraordinary  size,  used  by  giants  and  others  of  this  class. 
The  zebra  is  a  well-known  animal  of  great  swiftness.  A  rugged, 
mountainous  district  to  the  south-west  of  AlcaU,  at  the  foot  of 
which  the  river  Henares  flows  northwards.     On  it  is  situated  a 


468  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

hermitage,  called  after  S.  Joan  del  Yiso.    The  ancient  Complatam 
is  believed  to  have  had  its  site  in  a  neighbouiing  plain. 

Note  1,  Chap.  iiL,  Book  iv^  Page  50. 

In  the  days  of  Cervantes  the  clergy,  as  may  be  seen  by  the 
portraits  of  his  time,  wore  mustaches  and  the  pear-shaped  beard 
on  the  chin — in  Spanish  "perilla."  This  latter  has  only  dis- 
appeared of  late  years ;  the  mustache  has  long  been  worn  only 
by  the  militaiy. 

Note  2,  Chap.  iiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  53. 

Dorothea  here  rather  takes  liberties  with  the  Don.  The  left 
shoulder  cannot  be  on  the  right  side  ;  but  she  says  this  purposely 
to  further  carry  on  the  joke.  By  this  vulgar  incident  Cervantes 
wishes  to  throw  ridicule  on  the  many  fabulous  stories  of  the 
marks  with  which  so  many  knight-errants  were  said  to  have  been 
bom.  Quotations  are  numerous;  Mariana^  lib.  xiiL,  cap.  9; 
Amadis  de  Gaidoy  cap  66 ;  BeUamt,  liK  iiL,  cap  24,  Ac^  Stc 
(See  Clemencin,  iL,  457,  ed.  1833). 

Note  3,  Chap,  ix..  Book  iiL,  Page  64. 

It  is  not  easy  to  say  in  what  consisted  the  differenoe  in  the 
time  of  Cervantes  between  the  dress  worn  by  the  gipsies  and  that 
worn  by  the  peasantry  of  AndaJuzia.  A  certain  profusion  of 
ornaments,  buttons,  and  ribbons,  the  sash  round  the  waist,  the 
curl  behind  the  ear,  have  from  ancient  times  been  characteristic 
features,  and  of  these  traces  still  remain. 

Note  1,  Chap,  iv..  Book  iv.,  Page  79. 

The  reader  will  not  be  displeased  with  seeing  some  picturesque 
notices  of  the  costume  of  Spain,  France,  and  Italy,  which  occur 
in  the  old  English  novel  of  "  The  Unfortunate  Traveller,  or  Life 
of  Jack  Wilton,"  published  in  1594,  by  the  celebrated  Thomas 
Nashe. 

"  What  is  there  in  France  to  be  learned  more  than  in  England, 
but  falsehood  in  friendship,  perfect  slovenry,  and  to  love  no  man 
but  for  my  pleasure  ?  I  have  known  some  that  have  continued 
there  by  the  space  of  half  a  dozen  years,  and  when  they  came  home, 
they  have  hid  a  little  weerish  lean  face  under  a  broad  French  hat> 
kept  a  terrible  coil  with  the  dust  in  the  street  in  their  long  cloaks 
of  grey  paper,  and  spoken  English  strangely.  Nought  else  have 
they  profited  by  their  travel,  but  to  distinguish  the  true  Bordeaux 
grape,  and  know  a  cup  of  neat  Gascoigne  wine  from  wine  of 
Orleans;  yea,  and  peradventure  this  also,  to  esteem  of  the  p— z 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND.  469 

as  a  pimple,  to  wear  a  velvet  patch  on  their  face,  and  walk  melan- 
choly with  their  arms  folded. 

"  From  Spain  what  bringeth  onr  traveller  )  A  skull-crowned 
hat  of  the  fieishion  of  an  old  deep  porringer ;  a  diminutive  alder- 
man's ruff  with  short  strings,  like  the  droppings  of  a  mai^nose; 
a  doee-bellied  doublet  coming  down  with  a  peak  behind,  as  far  as 
the  crupper,  and  cut  off  before  by  the  breast-bone,  like  a  parti  et  or 
neckei-cher;  a  wide  pair  of  gascoynes,  which,  ungathered,  would 
make  a  couple  of  women's  riding-kirtles ;  huge  hangers,  that  have 
half  a  cow-hide  in  them  ;  a  rapier  that  is  lineally  descended  from 
half-a-dozen  dukes  at  the  least ;  let  his  doak  be  as  long  or  as  short 
as  you  will ;  if  long,  it  is  faced  with  Turkey  grogran  ravelled  ; 
if  short,  it  hath  a  cape  like  a  calf's  tongue,  and  is  not  so  deep  in 
his  whole  length,  nor  so  much  cloth  in  it,  I  will  justify,  as  only  the 
standing  cape  of  a  Dutchman's  cloak.  I  have  not  yet  touched  all, 
for  he  hath  in  either  shoe  as  much  taffaty  for  his  tyings,  as  would 
serve  for  an  ancient ;  which  serveth  him  (if  you  would  have  the 
mystery  of  it)  of  the  own  accord  for  a  shoe-rag.  If  you  talk  with 
him,  he  makes  a  dish-cloth  of  his  own  country,  in  comparison  of 
Spain ;  but  if  you  urge  him  particularly  wherein  it  exceeds,  he 
can  give  no  instance,  but  in  Spain  they  have  better  bread  than 
any  we  have ;  when  (poor  hungry  slaves  !)  they  may  crumble  it 
into  water  well  enough,  and  make  misons  with  it,  for  they  have 
not  a  good  morsel  of  meat,  except  it  be  salt  pilchers,  to  eat  with 
it,  all  the  year  long ;  and,  which  is  more,  they  are  poor  beggars, 
and  lie  in  foul  straw  every  night 

"  Italy,  the  paradise  of  the  earth,  and  the  epicure's  heaven,  how 
doth  it  form  our  young  master  1  It  makes  him  to  kiss  his  hand 
like  an  ape,  cringe  his  neck  like  a  starveling,  and  play  at  Hey-fosM- 
rep(i88<ome-alo/l,  when  he  salutes  a  man ;  from  thence  he  brings 
the  art  of  atheism,  the  art  of  epicurizing,  the  art  of  whoring,  the 
art  of  poisoning,  the  art  of  sodomitry ;  the  only  probable  good 
thing  they  have  to  keep  us  from  utterly  condemning  it,  is,  that  it 
maketh  a  man  an  excellent  courtier,  a  curious  carpet  knight ; 
which  is,  by  inter])retation,  a  fine  close  letcher,  a  glorious  hypocrite; 
it  is  now  a  privy  note  amongst  the  better  soi-t  of  men,  when  they 
would  set  a  singular  mark  or  brand  on  a  notorious  villain,  to  say 
he  hath  been  in  Italy." 

Note  1,  Chap,  v.,  Book  iv.,  Page  89. 

The  adventures  of  Cirongillio  were  celebrated  in  a  folio,  by  Ber- 
nardo de  Vargaa  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  other ;  but  I 
should  have  mentioned,  when  doing  so,  an  anecdote  of  Dr  Samuel 
Johnson,  told  by   Boswell,  on  the  authority   of  Bishop  Percy. 


1^  mtrBsi  ysi  mr  jt .  mriiL 


Simt2. 


Snut :.  ^Zima.  -n^  3mk.  jr^  2bK  Z3L 


ftfHB.  JtmiM  ii  JOESBiiL      daft  nj 

jiM^<^^  is^  ^dui:  aiaftfKr  'sf  «.  cmevst,  w^uc  sdm^  «b.  8fa»  R^  < 
Ifisite  I,  Ckatf^  ra^  BmIc  xr^  FSifge  140. 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND,  471 

Ciego  h&  de  aer  fiel  enamorado 
No  ae  dice  en  ae  lei  que  sea  discreto 
De  cuatro  esei  dioen  que  est^  armado 
/Sabio,  iSblo,  i^olicito  y  iSecreto. 
Sabio  en  servir  y  nunca  descuiado 
Solo  en  amar  y  ft  otra  alma  no  sujeto 
SolicUo  en  buscar  aua  desenganos 
Secreto  en  bub  f avorea  y  en  bub  danos. 

Lxns  Barnhova. 
de  Soto  la  Angelica,  Granada,  1586,  printed  in  quarto. 

Note  1,  Ohap.  viii,  Book  iv.,  Page  164. 

The  hint  of  this  adventure  seems  evidently  to  be  taken  from 
one  of  the  best  stories  in  the  Golden  Ass  of  Apuleius,  which  I 
shall  quote  from  Mr  Dunlop's  abstract 

"  One  night,  while  supping  at  the  house  of  Byrrhena,  Apuleius 
was  informed  that  the  following  day  being  the  festival  of  Momus, 
he  ought  to  honour  that  divinity  by  some  merry  invention. 

''  Betuming  home  somewhat  intoxicated,  he  perceived  through 
the  dusk  three  large  figures  attacking  the  door  of  Milo  with  much 
fury.  Suspecting  them  to  be  robbers,  who  intended  to  break  in, 
he  ran  his  sword  through  them  in  succession,  and,  leaving  them  as 
dead,  escaped  into  the  house.  Next  morning  he  is  arrested  on 
account  of  the  triple  homicide,  and  is  broiight  to  trial  in  a  crowded 
and  open  court.  The  accuser  is  called  by  a  herald.  An  old  man, 
who  acted  in  this  capacity,  pronounced  an  harangue,  of  which  the 
duration  was  limited  by  a  clepsydra,  as  the  old  sermons  were 
measured  by  hour  glasses.  Two  women  in  deep  mourning  were  in- 
troduced ;  one  lamented  the  death  of  her  husband,  the  other  of 
her  son,  and  both  called  loudly  for  vengeance  on  the  murderer. 
Apuleius  was  found  guilty  of  the  death  of  three  citizens ;  but 
previous  to  his  execution  it  was  resolved  he  should  be  put  to  the 
torture,  to  force  a  discovery  of  his  accomplices,  and  the  necessary 
preparations  were  accordingly  completed.  What  had  chiefly  as- 
tonished Apuleius  during  this  scene,  was,  that  the  whole  court, 
and  among  others,  his  host  Milo,  were  all  the  while  convulsed 
with  laughter.  One  of  the  women  in  mourning  now  demanded 
that  the  dead  bodies,  which  were  in  court,  should  be  uncovered, 
in  order  that,  the  compassion  of  the  judges  being  excited,  the  tor- 
tures might  be  increased.  The  demand  was  complied  with,  and 
the  task  assigned  to  Apuleius  himself.  The  risibility  of  the  audi- 
ence is  now  accounted  for,  as  he  sees,  to  his  utter  astonishment, 
three  immense  leather  bottles,  which,  on  the  preceding  night,  he 
had  mistaken  for  robbers.  The  imaginary  criminal  is  then  dismissed, 


472  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

after  being  informed  that  tliis  mock  tnal  was  in  honoiir  of  the 
god  Momna 

^  On  returning  home  the  matter  was  more  foUy  explained  bj 
Fotis,  who  informs  Apuleius  that  she  had  been  emjdojed  bj  her 
mistress  to  procure  the  heir  of  a  young  BoBOtian,  of  whom  she  was 
enamoured,  in  order  to  prepare  a  charm  which  would  hring 
him  to  her  house  :  that  having  &iled  in  obtaining  this  ingredient| 
and  fearing  the  resentment  of  her  mistress,  she  had  brought  her 
some  goats'  hair,  which  fell  from  the  scissors  of  a  bottle«bearer. 
These  hairs  being  burned  by  the  sorceress,  with  the  usual  incanta- 
tions, had  (instead  of  leading  the  Boeotian  to  her  house)  given 
animation  to  the  skins  to  which  they  formerly  adhered,  and  which 
being  then  in  the  form  of  bottles,  appeared,  in  their  desire  of 
entrance,  to  assault  the  door  of  Mila" 

Cervantes,  in  many  parts  of  his  work,  shows  himsrif  to  have 
been  an  attentive  reader  of  this  old  Latin  romance ;  but  Le  Sage 
(that  boldest  of  borrowers)  owes  to  it  by  far  the  most  picturesque 
and  splendid  passage  of  his  Gil  Bias,  viz.,  the  whole  description  of 
the  habitation  of  the  robbers — the  revelry  of  these  banditti — the 
old  woman  that  attends  on  them — the  arrival  of  the  new  troop 
during  the  entertainment — ^the  captivity  and  escape  of  the  young 
lady,  Ac,  Ac 

Note  2,  Chap.  viiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  167. 

Sancho,  everjoyed,  heaps  up  similes.  The  ''giant  in  pickle ** 
is  an  allusion  to  the  fate  of  the  slaughtered  animal  cured  for 
home  use — therefore  applicable  to  an  enemy  conquered  and  slain. 
'*  Here  are  the  bulls "  is  a  Spanish  proverb  denoting  absolute 
certainty,  whence  Sancho  infers  that  his  countship  is  as  sure  as 
everything  that  is  prepared  in  the  mould,  ready  for  casting. 

Note  3,  Chap.  viiL,  Book  iv..  Page  168. 

The  original,  ''por  los  huesos  de  mi  padre  y  por  el  si^o 
de  mi  madre"  may  be  thus  translated,  ''by  the  bones  of  my 
father  and  by  the  (eternal)  life  of  my  mother."  The  inn- 
keeper's two  oaths  are  taken  from  Guzman  de  Alfarache,  part  iL 
lib.  2,  cap.  9.  Here  we  have  the  innkeeper  swearing  by  the 
manes  of  his  ancestors  like  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  "  Iliad." 

Note  4,  Chap,  viii..  Book  iv.,  Page  176. 

Cervantes  here  commits  an  anachronism.  The  Great  Captain 
Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Cordoba  died  in  1515.  M.  de  Lautreo 
does  not  appear  in  the  war  against  Naples  till  the  year  1527. 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND.  473 

Note  5,  Chap.  viiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  176. 

Don  Fernando  Alvarez  de  Toledo,  named  the  Gran  Duque 
de  Alba,  one  of  the  most  oel^ebrated  captains  of  his  time, 
famous  for  his  deeds  of  bravery  in  Italy,  Hungary,  Germany 
and  Flanders,  was  son  of  D.  Garcia,  first  bom  of  the  house 
of  Alba,  who  died  gloriously  in  the  first  of  these  unlucky 
days  of  Gelves,  1510.  D.  Fernando  added  the  crown  of  Portu- 
gal to  that  of  Castillo  in  1580,  as  his  ancestor,  D.  Fabrique 
had  that  of  Navarre  in  1512.  The  words  used  a  few  lines  above 
by  the  captive  fix  the  date  of  the  narrativa  The  Duke  entered 
flanders  in  1567  :  according  to  this  the  captive  tells  his  story  in 
1589;  but  this  date  does  not  correspond  with  what  Cervantes 
relates  afterwards,  which  is  not  matter  of  surprise  seeing  the  ex- 
treme negligence  displayed  by  the  author  in  the  composition  of 
his  immortal  work. 

Note  1,  Chap.  xiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  218. 

A  native  of  Guadalajara,  captain  of  the  company  in  which 
Cervantes  served  in  the  battle  of  Lepanto.  Cervantes  perpetu- 
ates in  Don  Quixote  the  name  of  his  captain  who  distinguished 
himself  in  the  battle,  taking,  according  to  P.  Fernando  de  Pecha^ 
the  royal  standaixi  of  Egypt  (Histaria  de  Guadalajara^  BiJblioteca 
Real,  est  G.  cod.  92,  p.  77.) 

Note  2,  Chap.  xiL,  Book  iv,  Page  222. 

Ferdinand  de  Toledo,  third  Duke  of  Alva,  first  distinguished 
himself  at  the  battle  of  Pavia,  being  then  under  twenty  years  of 
age.  Charles  Y.  was,  from  the  beginning,  sensible  of  his  great 
merits ;  for,  says  Brantome,  he  came  with  him  to  France,  when  he 
was  on  his  way  to  chastise  those  of  Ghent,  in  1549,  on  which 
occasion,  in  presenting  him  to  a  great  lady  of  the  French  courts  he 
used  these  expressions :  ''  Madame  voila  le  Due  d*Albe  que  j'aime 
beaucoup  :  il  est  d'une  noble  et  valeureuse  race :  (la  Maison  de 
Toledo :)  il  est  encore  jeune  mais  il  sera  un  jour  bon  honmie  de 
guerre  :  je  Tavancerai  suivant  ses  merites.  Je  voudrai  bien  qu'il 
fut  un  peu  moins  froid  et  reserv6;  mais  tel  est  le  charactere  de  noB 
Espagnols.  Yos  Fran9oiB  sent  plus  vifs  et  efiront^ :  par  exemple 
Peloux — (this  was  a  Frenchman,  who  had  gone  over  to  the  Eknperor 
with  the  Duke  de  Bom-bon,  and  become  very  useful  to  Charles  Y., 
in  many  mean  enough  capacities) — Peloux  va  et  vient  sans  cesse 
et  veut  entrer  partout  Je  voudrai  que  le  Due  d'Albe  fut  un  peu 
de  oe  caractere."     It  was  only  in  the  presence  of  Charles  Y.,  how- 


474  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

ever,  that  Alva*8  modesty  was  remarkable ;  he  was  the  proadesti 
as  well  as  the  yainest  of  men, — ^harsh  and  crael; — ^but  withal 
brave  as  a  lion,  and  a  most  skilful  general  In  1567,  Philip  sent 
him  as  govemor  to  the  Low  Countries,  and  it  was  at  this  time 
that  our  captive  Yiedma  is  represented  to  have  joined  him.  He 
ruled  these  countries,  for  twelve  years,  with  a  rod  of  iron ;  the 
first  step  he  took  was  to  arrest  and  behead  the  Counts  of  Egmont 
and  Horn,  who  had  revolted  against  Philip,  or  rather  against 
Margaret  of  Austria,  his  sister,  who  preceded  Alva  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Low  Countries.  A  captain,  named  Salines,  was  sent 
to  arrest  Egmont — "  What  me  f*  said  the  Count,  sternly,  "  tne  t 
captain — take  from  me  this  sword  that  has  so  well  served  the 
king  I''  But  immediately  softening  his  tone,  he  added,  **  Since 
the  king  wishes  to  take  it,  here  it  is,  captain." — (There  is  a  fine 
tragedy  on  Egmont's  story,  by  Goetha) — ^The  Prince  of  Orange, 
Nassau,  however,  escaped,  and  carried  on  a  bloody  war  with  Alva, 
the  result  of  which  was,  in  effect,  the  freedom  of  the  United  Pro- 
vinces. Philip,  ever  jealous,  recalled  Alva  after  a  time,  and  on 
some  ridiculous  pretext,  banished  him  to  his  country  seat,  which 
he  did  not  leave  till  his  services  were  called  for  in  Portugal,  of 
which  kingdom  he  completed  the  conquest  for  his  tyrannical  sov^ 
reign.  He  was  as  cruel  in  Portugal  as  he  had  been  in  the 
Netherlands,  and  died  there  in  1582,  in  the  seventy-fourth  year  of 
his  aga  It  was  Alva  that  first  placed  musketeers  among  the  pike- 
men,  of  which  the  infantry  then  consisted ;  and,  at  first,  this  novelty 
produced  an  astonishing  effect : — every  one  fled  when  Alva's  stem 
voice  gave  the  word,  "  Salgan,  Salgan,  los  Mosqueteros  1 " — He 
was  distinguished  by  the  highest  excellence  in  every  warlike  exer- 
cise ;  insomuch,  that  when  the  French  and  Spanish  courts  met 
at  Bayonne,  in  1 565,  not  even  the  famous  Constable  Anne  de  Mont- 
morenci  ventured  to  joust  with  him. 

Note  3,  Chap.  xiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  223. 

It  was  he  who  took  the  royal  standard  of  Egypt  at  the  battle 
of  Lepanta 

Note  4,  Chap,  xii,  Book  iv..  Page  223. 
This  prince  was  one  of  the  most  famous  personages 
of  his  time.  A  natural  son  of  Carlos  Y.,  by  a  German 
lady,  he  was  bom  at  Eatisbon  in  1545.  Brought  secretly  into 
Spain  by  his  father's  orders,  and  with  the  cogniiance  of  Luis 
Quijada,  Senor  of  Yillagarcia  de  Campos,  he  was  educated  incog- 
nito, going  on  foot  to  school  with  other  village  boy&  After  the 
Emperor's  death  he  was  sent  for  by  his  brother,  King  D.    Fdipe 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND,  475 

U.,  who  then  revealed  to  him  the  secret  of  hia  birtL  He  was 
sent  to  Aloala  to  study,  where  he  was  pupil  of  Ambrosio  de 
Morales.  The  king's  wish  was  that  his  brother  should  enter  the 
church,  but  his  penchant  for  a  military  career  was  so  decided, 
that  he  received  a  command,  and  afterwards  undertook  the  pacifi- 
cation of  the  kingdom  of  Granada,  whence  the  Moors  had  been 
expelled.  Having  accomplished  this,  he  was  appointed  General 
of  the  Christian  League  against  the  Turks,  and  gained  the  cele- 
brated battle  of  Lepanto.  Afterwards  he  conquered  Tunis  in 
1573,  and  finally,  having  spent  the  year  1576  as  governor  of 
Flanders,  died  there  near  Namur,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-three. 
The  freqiient  differences  that  he  had  with  the  king,  his  brother, 
embittered  his  life.  Afler  Lepanto  he  was  ofiered  the  crown  of 
Greece :  the  Pope  proposed  to  King  Felipe  to  establish  a  kingdom 
on  the  coast  of  Africa,  of  which  his  brother  should  have  the  crown : 
he  applied  in  vain  as  a  recompense  for  his  services  to  the  honors  of 
an  Infcmte  de  Bapcma :  the  Irish,  discontented  with  Queen  Eliza- 
beth, wished  to  proclaim  him  king  of  Ireland :  Don  Juan  wished 
to  marry  Queen  Elizabeth  herself — to  all  these  the  king  refused 
his  consent.  Juan  de  Escobedo,  secretary  of  Don  Juan,  and  who 
warmly  seconded  all  the  views  of  his  chief,  was  assassinated  at  the 
instigation  of  the  fiimous  Ant6nio  Perez,  supposed  by  authority  of 
the  king.  FinaUy  the  victor  of  Lepanto  died  without  making  a 
wiU,  having  nothing  to  leave,  and  not  without  suspicion  of  having 
been  poisoned. 

Note  5,  Chap.  xiL,  Book  iv..  Page  224. 

In  the  original  Uehalif  in  Turkish  Aluch,  in  Moorish  Fkhe^ 
\s  the  equivalent  for  renegade,  XJchali  was  a  Calabrian  by  birth, 
bom  of  poor  parents  at  Licastelli  in  1508.  He  was  made  captive 
when  young,  and  after  several  years  at  the  oars,  received  his 
liberty  by  becoming  a  renegad&  He  distinguished  himself  greatly 
in  the  Turkish  service ;  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Lepanto, 
where  he  commanded,  with  skill  and  bravery,  the  left  wing  of  the 
Ottoman  squadron.  Appointed  General  of  ihe  Turkish  armies,  he 
reconquered  Tunis  in  the  year  1574,  and  afterwards  made  other 
campaigns  in  the  Mediterranean  and  Black  Seas,  holding  the 
supreme  command  of  the  marine  until  his  death.  He  built  a 
magnificent  palace  in  the  vicinity  of  Constantinople;  died  in  1580, 
supposed  to  have  been  poisoned. 

Note  6,  Chap.  xiL,  Book  iv..  Page  225. 

Arroyo  says,  that  Don  Juan  of  Austria  bade  the  pilots  steer 
for  Navarino,  on  the  night  of  the  16th  September  1572,  but  that 


476  NOTES  ON  DON  QinXOTE. 

ihey,  from  unskilfulness  of  the  coast,  made  for  an  island  called 
Prodano,  some  three  leagues  off  that  harbour,  bj  means  of  which 
blunder  the  Algerine  had  time  to  draw  out  all  his  vessels,  and 
place  them  under  protection  of  the  batteries  of  Modon. — 
Ibid,  p.  90. 

Note  7,  Chap,  xii,  Book  iv.,  Page  226. 

Marquis  de  Santa  Cruz,  celebrated  general,  and  well  known 
for  his  braveiy.  He  assisted  in  the  conquest  of  Portugal ;  died  at 
Lisbon  in  1588,  while  preparing  for  the  conquest  of  England  by 
the  then  named  **  Invincible  Armada.'' 

Note  8,  Chap,  xii.,  Book  iv.,  Page  226. 

Haradin,  sumamed  Barbarossa,  was  the  most  famous  corsair 
of  those  days.    He  became  tyrant  of  Algiers  in  1534. 

Note  9,  Chap,  xii..  Book  iv.,  Page  227. 

Muley  Haniida,  and  Muley  Hamet  or  Mahomet,  were  the  two 
sons  of  Muley  Hacan,  King  of  Tunis.  Muley  Hamida,  the  elder, 
burnt  out  his  father's  eyes  with  hot  iron,  and  took  possession  of 
his  throne.  The  younger  brother  fled  from  the  cruelty  of  the 
elder,  and  retired  into  Sicily.  The  Turks  had  driven  Hamida  from 
Tunis,  but  he  had  fortified  himself  in  Goleta,  and  was  in  hopes 
soon  to  recover  his  empire,  at  the  time  when  Don  Juan  of  Austria 
landed  in  Barbary.  The  Turks  were  expelled  in  their  turn  from 
Tunis ;  the  exiled  Muley  Hamet  was  brought  fi'om  Sicily,  and 
established  as  King  of  Tunis,  tributary  to  Pliilip  II.  of  Spain. 
The  atrocious  Hamida  was  given  up  to  Don  Carlos  of  Arragon, 
Viceroy  of  Sicily,  who  conducted  him  to  Naples,  where  one  of  his 
sons  who  accompanied  him  underwent  a  very  sudden  and  prudent 
conversion  from  the  errors  of  Mahometamsm.  He  was  baptised 
by  the  name  of  Don  Carlos  de  Austria,  his  godfather  and  godmother 
being  Don  Juan  of  Austria  himself,  and  Donna  Yiolante  de 
Moscoso.  The  father  died  of  grief  and  rage  on  being  informed  of 
his  son's  apostacy. 

Note  10,  Chap,  xii,  Book  iv.,  Page  227. 

See,  for  a  fuller  accoimt  of  all  these  transactions,  Watson's 
"History  of  PhiUp  IL,"  Vol  I.,  p.  283,  Ac. 

Note  11,  Chap,  xii..  Book  iv.,  Page  231. 
The  A  nHftliiRiftn  family  of  Aguilar  had  derived  great  honour 
from  producing,  in  the  preceding  age,  those  two  distinguished 
warriors,  Gonsalvo  and  Alonzo  de  Aguilar.     It  was  on  the  death 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND.  477 

of  the  latter  that  some  Spanish  minstrel  composed  the  famous 
ballad  (so  elegantly  translated  hj  Bishop  Percy)  of  Bio  vercUy  Rio 
verde. 

Note  2,  Chap.  xiiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  235. 

Hassan  Aga  s  stoiy  is  told  exactly  as  here  in  Haedo's  Hittoria 
de  Argdy  p,  89. 

Note  1,  Chap.  xiiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  236. 

The  following  carious  account  of  Christian  slavery  in  Algiers 
is  translated  from  the  preliminaiy  confession  of  a  renegade,  who 
was  reconciled  to  the  bosom  of  the  church  by  the  Spanish 
Inquisition  in  1639.  Pellicer,  from  whom  I  take  it,  had  seen 
the  MS.  itself  in  the  Boyal  Library  at  Madrid  (see  YoL  IX.,  p. 
17). 

"  The  Christians  haye  four  churches  where  they  hear  mass,  and 
in  my  time  there  were  twelve  priests  who  said  mass  every  day. 
In  the  greatest  church,  which  is  in  the  bagnio  of  the  king,  there 
were  five  priests,  sent  thither  by  his  holiness.  Every  day  a 
collection  is  made,  and  the  captives  give  what  they  can  for  the 
buying  of  wax  and  ornaments,  besides  a  real  and  a  half  to  each 
priest,  and  another  every  time  they  partake  of  the  eucharist  The 
Christians  are  very  humble,  particularly  the  priests,  whom  the 
boys  always  pursue  in  the  streets  with  stones  and  other  impurities. 
There  are  at  this  moment  200  Christian  slaves  in  that  city,  who 
are  treated  most  miserably,  both  men  and  women,  receiving 
nothing  more  than  a  single  loaf  of  bread  eveiy  day — but  especially, 
they  are  cruelly  used  by  the  Tagarinos,  which  are  they  that  have 
beeoi  driven  out  of  Spain.  These  make  them  labour  without  re- 
mission, being  loaded  with  irons,  and  the  strongest  they  carry  with 
them  to  row  in  their  galleys. 

''  The  women  of  the  Moors  never  enter  into  their  mosques,  from 
the  towers  of  which,  at  noontide,  there  is  a  banner  displayed,  and 
voices  are  heard  from  one  to  another  calling  to  prayer.  Their 
worship  is  silent,  and  of  gesticulation,  there  being  little  said,  but 
an  infinity  of  prostrations  and  uprisings.  They  eat  off  cakes  of 
bread  laid  on  the  ground,  without  any  service  of  covers.  Their 
women  wear  trousers  down  to  the  feet,  which  is  by  no  means  a 
lascivious  dress,  although  they  themselves  are  so  more  than  can 

be  imagined The  boys  in  their  schools  write  with  reeds 

on  the  sand,  rubbing  it  smooth  from  time  to  time,  so  that  it  serves 
for  a  long  while.     The  merchants  do  the  same,  keeping  their 

accounts  very  accurately In   lawsuits  they  expend 

little,  by  reason  of  their  speedy  decisions ;  hence  the  abimdanoe 
of  wealth  among  the  Moors." 


478  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

One  of  Cervantes*  most  agreeable  comedies  is  entitled,  "  Loe 
Banos  de  Argel  ;**  and  in  it  very  nearly  the  same  characters  and 
adventures  are  described  as  occur  here  in  the  story  of  the  Captain 
de  Yiedma.  The  converted  Moorish  girl,  the  renegade,  &c.y  play 
exactly  the  same  parts. 

Note  3,  Chap,  xiii.,  Book  iv.,  Page  237. 
Viz.,  Cervantes  himself  (see  Life.) 

Note  4,  Chap.  xiiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  243. 

Lda  is,  in  Arabic,  equivalent  to  Our  Lady.  There  is  a  great  deal 
said  concerning  the  Virgin  Mary  in  the  Koran,  so  that  Zorayda 
might  have  known  about  her  even  before  the  old  slave  instructed 
her.  Cervantes  might  almost  be  suspected  of  satire  in  represent- 
ing the  name  of  the  Virgin  as  the  pflu*t  of  the  old  slave's  lessons 
which  had  made  the  deepest  impression  on  the  young  lady's 
mind  ;  but  his  8panish  commentators  are  all  very  valiant  in  de- 
fending his  Catholicism  from  the  slightest  imputation. 

Note  1,  Chap,  xiv.,  Book  iv.,  Page  279. 

There  is  in  Depping's  collection  a  Spanish  ballad,  which  I  shall 
translate,  on  account  of  the  resemblimce  which,  in  several  par- 
ticulars, it  bears  to  the  story  of  these  Christian  captives.  The 
idea  of  the  gardener's  disguise  occurs  so  often  in  the  stories  of 
escapes  f i*om  Barbary,  that  I  take  it  for  granted  there  had  been 
some  real  story  on  which  its  adoption  was  founded. 

Draout. 

0  swiftly,  very  swiftly,  they  up  the  straits  have  gone, 
O  swiftly  flies  the  corsair,  and  swift  the  cross  comes  on, 
The  cross  upon  yon  banner,  that  streams  to  the  breeze. 
It  is  the  sigD  of  victory,  the  cross  of  the  Maltese. 

''Bow,  row,  my  slaves,"  quoth  Dragut,  "the  knights,  the  knights  are 

near, 
Row,  row,  my  slaves,  row  swiftly,  the  star-light  is  too  clear, 
The  stars  they  are  too  bright,  and  he  that  means  us  well. 
He  harms  us  when  he  trims  his  light — ^yon  Moorish  sentineL* 

There  came  a  wreath  of  smoke  from  out  a  culverine, 
The  corsair's  poop  it  broke,  and  it  sunk  in  the  brine  ; 
Stout  Dragut  swims  ashore,  but  many  a  one  goes  down  ; 
Down  goes  the  fettered  Christian  with  the  servant  of  Mahoun. 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND.  479 

But  one  of  Dragut's  captives,  a  happy  man  is  he, 
The  Christian  sailors  see  him  struggling  in  the  sea, 
They  hear  the  captive  praying  in  the  Christian  tongue. 
And  a  rope  from  their  galley  they  down  to  him  have  flung. 

It  was  a  Spanish  knight,  who  had  long  been  in  Algiers, 
From  ladies  high  descended,  and  noble  cavaliers. 
But  forced,  for  a  season,  a  false  Moor's  slave  to  be. 
Upon  the  shore  his  gardener,  and  his  galley-slave  on  the  sea. 

But  now  his  heart  is  dancing,  he  sees  the  Spanish  land, 
And  all  his  friends  advancing  to  meet  him  on  the  strand — 
His  heart  was  full  of  gladness,  but  his  eyes  they  ran  o*er, 
For  he  wept  as  he  stepped  upon  the  Christian  shore. 

Note  1,  Chap,  xv.,  Book  iv.,  Page  293. 

Maamorra^  the  word  used  in  the  original,  is  of  Arabic  origin. 
The  caatle-dungeon  of  our  own  ancestors  probably  derived  its 
name  of  Massiemore  from  the  same  source. 

Note  2,  Chap,  xvi.  Book  ix.,  Page  310. 

Thus  :  "  Juan  Quixada  vio  la  ra  rica  y  adventurosa  espada  y 
tiro  d^Ua,  mas  no  le  approvecho  que  arrancar  la  pudiesse,  y  dixo 
de  mas  valor  ha  de  ser  que  yo  U  que  eeta  averUura  aeabara;  cierie 
para  mi  no  estava  gaardadcL" — Calvete,  194,  5.  See  also  the 
account  of  the  futile  attempts  to  draw  from  the  stone  in  which  it 
was  enchanted  the  famous  sword  of  Merlin. — Ellis's  EomanceSy 
vol.  L 

Note  3,  Chap,  xvi.  Book  iv.,  Page  314. 

In  the  old  romance  of  Yirgilius  we  are  told  that  the  great 
poet,  being  in  love  with  a  woman  still  more  deeply  skilled  than 
himself  in  the  arts  of  necromancy,  sustained  at  her  hands  usage 
very  similar  to  that  of  the  poor  Don  in  the  text  She  enchanted 
him  into  a  box,  and  hung  him  up  for  a  day  and  night  on  the 
outside  of  tJie  tower  in  which  he  lived,  to  the  vision  of  all  Borne. 
A  Spanish  author,  Alonzo  Martinez  de  Toledo,  tells  a  more 
authentic  story  of  the  same  sort  of  adventure,  in  his  book  entitled, 
"  Corvacho,  o  libro  de  los  vicios  de  malas  mugeres,"  part  L,  cap. 
18.  While  one  Don  Bernard  de  Cabrera,  in  the  time  of  King 
Pedro  of  Arragon,  was  lying  in  prison,  in  expectation  of  being 
tried  for  some  state  offence  of  which  he  had  been  guilty,  a  lady, 
to  whom  he  had  offered  some  disagreeable  attentions,  entered 
into  a  plot  against  him  with  the  officers  of  the  law,  and  with  the 
jailor  under  whose  care  he  was  placed.      She  made  him  believe 


480  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

that  she  had  oonoerted  measures  for  his  escape,  and  invited  him 
to  descend  from  the  window  of  his  prison  bj  means  of  a  rope 
which  she  had  cunningly  conveyed  to  him.  The  prisoner  did  so 
at  midnight^  but  ere  he  had  reached  the  ground,  the  jailor  arrested 
his  progress  from  above ;  and  '*  next  morning/'  says  my  author, 
"  all  the  people  of  the  town  and  the  neighbourhood,  his  friends  and 
his  enemies,  beheld  him,  and  they  came  from  all  parts  to  look  upon 
him  hanging  there  in  mid-air,  in  his  shirt,  like  VirgiL"  The 
author  adds,  that  he  had  himself  conversed  with  several  old  people 
who  remembered  witnessing  in  their  youth  this  strange  display, 
and  of  course  concludes  with  a  veiy  sdemn  moral  concerning  the 
vidousness  of  the  feminine  gender. 

Note  1,  Chap.  xviiL,  Book  iv..  Page  331. 

The  barber  says  in  the  original,  "  tengo  mas  de  viente  anos 
carta  deexamen;"  which  shows  that  in  Spain,  as  with  ourselves, 
the  barber  was,  in  the  old  time,  entitled  to  consider  himself  as 
belonging  to  ''  the  three  black  graces." 

Note  2,  Chap.  zviiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  332. 

See  Captain  Grose  on  Ancient  Armour.  It  may  be  sufficient 
to  mention  here  that  the  morion  was  a  low  iron  cap,  worn  by 
infantry  alone.  By  the  helmet  the  barber  means  the  common 
open  casque  of  the  horseman.  The  close  helmet  is  the  complete 
head-piece,  disused  in  European  warfare  long  before  the  days  of 
Cervantes.  This,  in  its  perfect  form,  has  in  front  two  moveable 
parts,  which  may  at  pleasure  either  be  lifted  up  or  down,  viz., 
the  vizor  to  look  through,  and  the  bever,  which  opened  to  admit 
sustenance — whence  its  name,  literally  interpreted,  the  drinking- 
piece. 

Note  3,  Chap,  xviii.  Book  iv..  Page  338. 

See  ArioBto,  Orlando  Furioso,  Canto  27,  stanza  78,  et  sequitur. 

Note  4,  Chap.  xviiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  343. 

The  taxes  referred  to  in  the  original  are:  1st,  Fecho.  Tax  paid 
by  those  who  do  not  belong  to  the  nobility.  2nd,  Alcabala.  Excise, 
a  duty  paid  at  certain  rates  per  cent  on  all  saleable  commodities. 
3rd,  Chopin  de  la  Reina.  Tax  of  150  millions  maravedis, 
formerly  levied  in  Spain  on  occasion  of  the  king's  marriage.  4th, 
Moneda  forera.  Tax  formerly  paid  every  seven  years  in  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  sovereign's  authority ;  abolished  centuries  ago. 
5th,  Fortazgo.  Octroi  or  duty  on  goods  imported  from  without 
a  town  or  from  foreign  countrie& 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND.  481 

Note  1,  Chap,  xix,  Book  iv.,  Page  355. 

Don  Quixote  must  have  often,  in  his  books  of  chivalry,  read  of 
this  and  other  kinds  of  conveyances.  Examples  are  numerous, 
see  Clemencin,  iii.  357,  ed.  dt. 

Note  1,  Chap,  xx.,  Book  iv.,  Page  358. 

Don  Quixote  is  very  oblivious  here,  for  a  great  part  of  the 
history  of  Launcelot  du  Lac  consists  in  the  misfortunes  which 
befell  him  in  consequence  of  a  journey  performed  in  this  mean 
species  of  conveyance.  See  the  Morte  Arthur— or  Mr  Ellis  s 
Specimens,  Vol.  I.  The  following  paragraphs  may  perhaps  be 
sufficient. 

"The  knight,  almost  frantic  with  rage,  proceeded  on  foot 
with  as  much  speed  as  his  heavy  armour  would  permit,  and 
at  length  overtook  a  cart  driven  by  a  very  deformed  dwarf; 
who,  on  being  questioned  concerning  the  route  of  the  fugitives, 
professed  to  have  seen  them,  and  promised,  if  the  hero  would 
mount  his  cart,  that  he  would  soon  put  him  into  the  proper 
road. 

"  It  seems  that  carts  were  at  this  time  extremely  scarce.  One 
was  thought  sufficient  for  a  moderate  town ;  because  they  were 
only  used  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  filth,  or  of  conveying 
criminals  to  the  place  of  execution.  Lancelot  was  perhaps 
ignorant  of  this,  or  perhaps  indifferent  about  the  mode  of  con- 
veyance, provided  he  had  a  chance  of  overtaking  his  mistress : 
he  therefore  placed  himself  as  commodiously  as  he  could  in  this 
uncouth  equipage,  and  only  lamented  that,  after  much  jolting, 
he  made  little  progresa  In  the  meantime,  the  road  which 
Gawain  followed  had  insensibly  led  him  into  that  of  Lancelot 
He  met  the  dwarf ;  to  whom,  without  noticing  his  friend,  he 
put  the  same  questions,  and  received  the  same  answer;  but 
being  on  horseback,  he,  of  course,  declined  the  proposition; 
and,  having  then  recognised  the  other  knight,  strongly,  but 
ineffectually,  represented  to  him  the  indecorum  of  such  a  mode  of 
travelling. 

''At  night-fall  they  arrived  at  a  castle,  the^ady  of  which 
immediately  came  out  at  the  head  of  her  damseb  to  welcome  Sir 
Gawain,  but  was  with  difficulty  induced  to  admit  within  her 
walls  his  companion,  whom  she  supposed  to  be  a  criminal,  or  at 
least  a  prisoner.  At  supper.  Sir  Lancelot  was  on  the  point  of 
being  consigned  to  the  kitchen,  and  only  admitted  to  the  lady's 
table  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  Sir  Qawain.  But  no  entreaties 
could  persuade  the  damHAlg  to  prepare  a  bed  for  the  reputed 
n.  2h 


482  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

felon.     He  seized  the  fiist  which  he  found  unoccupied,  and  slept 
quietly  till  morning. 

'^llie  windows  of  the  castle  commanded  an  extensive  view 
of  the  country  :  and  Lancelot,  having  observed  at  some  distance 
on  the  plain  a  procession  accompanying  a  lady  in  a  veil,  in  whom 
he  recognised  a  likeness  to  the  fair  Guenever,  suddenly  fell  down 
in  a  swoon ;  an  accident  very  usual  with  amorous  flights,  but 
always  productive  of  wonder  and  curiosity  in  the  by-standers. 
The  lady  of  the  castle  imputed  it  to  shame  and  vexation  at  the 
recollection  of  the  disgraceful  cart ;  but  Gawain,  on  his  friend  s 
recovery,  thought  his  suspicion  very  probable,  and  became  equally 
eager  to  depart  Their  fair  hostess  supplied  Lancelot  with  a 
horse  and  spear,"  &c 

Note  2,  Chap,  xx.,  Book  iv.,  Page  364. 

"  Las  Sumulas  de  Dr  Gaspar  Cardillo  de  Yillapanda" — ^This 
work  was  used  as  a  text-book  in  the  University  of  Alcala.  The 
author  makes  a  considerable  figure  in  the  histories  of  the  Council 
of  Trent. 

Note  3,  Chap,  xx.,  Book  iv.,  Page  367. 

The  translation  of  this  passage  ought  to  be  simply,  "  In  an 
evil  hour  wert  thou  impr^nated  with  these  promises — in  an  evil 
hour  did  this  island  come  into  thy  noddle."  But  Bouterweck 
well  remarks,  that  a  great  deal  of  the  humour  of  all  this  story  of 
the  Island  evaporates  in  every  translation.  Don  Quixote  never 
uses  the  common  word  Idoj  but  always  the  old  majestic  Latin 
InauUty  as  preserved  in  the  original  romances  and  chronicles. 
Sancho  also  uses  this  high-sounding  word,  and  the  barber  taunts 
him  by  re-echoing  it  in  the  text.  Indeed,  it  is  evident  enough 
from  the  sequel  that  Sancho  never  has  the  least  notion  what  an 
insula  is. 

Note  4,  Chap,  xx..  Book  iv.,  Page  369. 

So  called,  as  being  invented  by  this  colony  of  Greeks,  inhabi- 
tants of  Miletus,  city  of  Ionia,  who  delighted  in  light  pleasures 
and  pastimes.  These  fables  were  devoid  of  instruction,  and  so  far 
differed  from  the  &bles  of  Esop  and  other  writers  of  his  class. 
Miletus  was  the  county  of  Aspasia,  who  was  first  mistress,  after- 
wards wife,  of  Pericles. 

Note  5,  Chap,  xx..  Book  iv..  Page  370. 

Prester  John  of  India  is  a  proverbial  personage,  whose  name 
is  in  every  one's  mouth,  yet  no  one  knows  exactly  who  he  was, 


NOTES  TO  VOLUME  SECOND.  483 

when  ho  was,  or  where  he  was.  In  the  middle  ages  he  was  be- 
lieved to  a  Christian  prince  who  reigned  somewhere  in  Eastern 
Tartarj,  on  the  borders  of  Cathay.  Marco  Polo,  a  famous  Vene- 
tian traveller  of  the  thirteenth  century,  visited  the  East,  where, 
as  he  himself  relates,  he  remained  for  six  and  twenty  years.  On 
his  return,  being  made  prisoner  in  the  war  with  Grenoa  in  1298, 
he  caused  the  history  of  his  travels  and  wanderings  to  be  written 
by  his  fellow  prisoner,  Micer  Eust£quio  de  Pisa.  This  has  been 
fi*equently  translated,  amongst  others  by  the  Geographical  Society 
of  Paris. 

Note  1,  Chap.  xxL,  Book  iv.,  Page  376. 

1.  La  laabela,  la  FUiSy  and  la  Alexandra  were  compositions 
of  Lupercio  Leonardo  y  Argensola.  D.  Juan  Lopez  Sedano 
published  la  Isabela  and  la  Alexandra  in  the  Pamaso  Espanol, 
vol.  vi.,  thinking  &vourably  of  these.  La  FilU  has  been  lost, 
and  not  yet  discovered.  2.  La  Ingratitud  Vengada,  comedy  of 
Lope  de  Vega  (P.  xiv.,  1620).  3.  La  Numancia,  comedy,  or 
rather  tragedy,  by  Cervantes  himself,  published  with  the  Vtage  del 
PamaeOf  1784.  4.  M  Mercader  Amante^  by  Gaspar  de  Avila 
of  Valencia,  where  it  was  published  in  1616.  5.  La  Enemigu 
Favorable^  by  Francisco  Tarregu,  Canon  of  Valencia. 

Note  1,  Chap.  xxiL,  Book  iv.,  Page  392. 

Cervantes  gives  here  a  list  of  celebrated  and  well-known  char- 
acters, several  of  whom  have  been  already  mentioned.  The 
Spanish  scholar  is  referred  to  Clemencin,  iii.  442,  and  to  Pellioery 
iiL  229. 

Note  2,  Chap.  xxiL,  Book  iv..  Page  396. 

This  is  the  name  given  to  a  sacred  vessel  supposed  to  have  been 
used  by  Joseph  of  Arimathea  to  receive  the  precious  blood  of  our 
Saviour  on  the  descent  from  the  cross,  and  when  He  was  laid  in 
the  sepulchre.  The  work  which  is  mentioned  here  is  an  ancient 
Italian  composition,  a  translation  of  which  was  published  in 
Seville  in  1500,  under  the  title  of  Merlin  y  demanda  del  Santo 
Qricd.  (See  Pellicer,  iiL  232  ;  Clemencin,  iii  453  ;  also  Dun- 
lop,  "  History  of  Fiction,"  i.  222.) 

Note  3,  Chap,  xxii.,  Book  iv..  Page  396. 

This  knight,  called  by  Cervantes  Lusitano,  being  of  Portuguese 
descent,  though  bom  in  Castillo,  was  governor  of  Alcali  la  Real, 
and  served  in  the  first  guard  of  D.  Juan  IL     In  the  year  1433, 


484  NOTES  ON  DON  QUIXOTE. 

during  an  expedition,  he  fought  in  Arras  with  Micer  Pierres  da 
Breoemonte,  lord  of  Chami,  a  cavalier  of  the  house  of  Philip  the 
€k>od,  Duke  of  Burgundy.  The  combat  took  place  in  preftence 
of  that  prince,  who  bestowed  special  honours  on  John  of  Merlo, 
presenting  him  with  a  piece  of  plate.  From  Arras  he  went  to 
B&le,  where  at  that  time  the  celebrated  council,  which  is  named 
after  that  city,  was  being  held,  and  there  maintained  the  combat 
against  Mosen  Eurique  de  Remestan.  The  encounter  was  on 
foot ;  the  magistrates  of  the  city  were  the  umpires,  who  pro- 
nounced in  &vour  of  the  Gastillian.  He  was  killed  in  an  en- 
gagement between  Arjona  and  Andujar  in  the  year  1443. 

Note  1,  Chap,  xxiv.,  Book  iv.,  Page  415. 

Cervantes  here  ridicules  the  saying,  common  in  his  time  in 
Spain,  where  so  much  vanity  as  to  points  of  descent  existed, — 
Un  hidalgo  no  debe  d  otro  que  d  Dios^  y  al  Rei  nada.  So  said 
the  starving  squire  whom  Lazarillo  de  Tormes  served  in  Toledo. 

Note  1,  Chap,  xxv.,  Book  iv.,  Page  434. 

The  original  Saboycma  was  a  part  of  female  dress  introduced 
into  Spain  from  Savoy.  According  to  Salvi  it  was  a  sort  of  over- 
skirt  open  in  fix)nt  (Nuevo  diccionario  de  la  Lengua  Castellana, 
Paris  1852,  3rd  ed.,  p.  968).  Bias  de  Aytona,  published  in  Cuenca 
1603,  several  eoplcu  ;  amongst  others,  a  song  upon  la  sahoyanOy  of 
which  the  following  lines  form  part : — 

^  Comprame  una  saboyana 

Marido,  as!  os  guarde  Dies  : 
Comprame  una  saboyana 
Pues  las  otras  tienen  dos 
Quando  me  pare  4  la  puerta 
Omi  pongo  4  mi  ventana 
Mas  me  querria  ver  muerta 
Que  verme  sin  aaboyaiia,"  ^. 


