Three years ago, we started sharing scientific content
in favor or compatible with a totally new worldview
analytic idealism.
A growing community of scientists worldwide
started sharing their work and insights on our platform and our sometimes tough,
but always scientifically rigorous videos attracted a growing audience.
And now it's time to celebrate.
Welcome all of you to Essentia’s YouTube channel.
And I'm really, really happy that we hit 10K subscribers.
And I think we did so quite organically.
Bernardo.
I mean, I joined Essentia now for three months, like officially
like full time, but freelance before and it's been mostly
I think, your work of just publishing essays, setting up YouTube
and somehow drawing the world towards our platform.
And it's great, right, that we already have 10,000 people hitting that
subscribe button and interested in our content.
Fantastic.
And it happened very quickly after you joined.
And it will keep on going and it's inevitable.
It will keep on going.
Okay, we're going to discuss that inevitability of our growth later in this video.
And this video is really for you guys, because I think I feel a bit sloppy
so far that we haven't been responding as we have could to all the questions
you guys have been posting in the comment section to our videos.
And so I made a selection
and I already asked, also asked you guys to send in questions.
And I have a lot of them here on paper.
I will ask those to Bernardo and it will range from, are bacteria conscious?’
can we, let the universe learn through our experience of it?
what about solipsism?
Is it something bad or maybe inevitable, also?
Stuff like that.
So that's coming up in this video, I think...
first, Bernardo, what's nice also is that people know you as the philosopher
and a computer scientist, and you've built a website of your own.
And you've written, I think now dozen, ten books or?
it's getting to a dozen now.
Exactly.
And you are lauded all over the internet as leading
the renaissance in analytic idealism.
So that's what people know you for.
And now, of course, you're also the director of the Essentia Foundation
to just set things clear,
how do those two overlap and where are they distinct?
Those two roles?
Yeah, they are distinct.
at Essentia Foundation, I'm not promoting my own work.
the idea of Essentia is to give a voice
to scholars, scientists, philosophers, journalists,
who are coming to this idea
that the essence of nature is mental.
It is a form of, delocalized consciousness,
so to say, a field of subjectivity,
and that is much bigger
than the little work of Bernardo Kastrup.
So the Essentia Foundation has a much bigger scope.
I sort... of as an entity, I sort of disappear in that.
I'm a cog in the machine, if you know what I mean.
and then there is my personal writing, which is on the same topic.
but today it takes a backseat.
And in my life, - How does that make you feel?
it makes me feel great.
I never really
I don't know if I ever said that in public when you know this,
because we know each other, but,
I'm not entirely comfortable with the focus being on myself.
I know,
and I do what I do because it's it's part of the game.
Yeah, but in the ideal world, I take a backseat to the idealism evolution.
That's good for you guys.
You know, it took me some effort to get you here on the spot because,
many of you know Bernardo sitting.
I mean, you do zoom interviews, like, all week, but that's, like,
really in your role of being interviewed as an expert, and I,
I know that you felt somewhat
uncomfortable, sort of, because you say the roles are distinct, right?
I'm the director of Essentia Foundation.
I do not want to promote my own work.
So I think that's just fair to be really clear about that.
Also in videos like these that you are here, the director of the Essentia...
Foundation, at the same time, we see that a lot of you guys
watching this, do send in question asked towards you, but I think it's just,
fair to see
you then as an expert on idealism in a broader sense.
Right.
And, also good to just give a little,
update on where I am.
To me, idealism feels like the best working hypothesis at the moment.
Right?
So I think my position within the foundation is also to do, to seek and,
but I do it from,
a belief that I will find truth in, in this direction and not materialism.
But I try to stay open, but it's it gets harder
because you end up in a rabbit hole. So,
but anyways,
to one of the first questions, we already discussed this before filming.
and you mentioned it actually here that that, to the I asked you
I'd like to ask Bernardo about his daimon, and if he's getting any peace
since his release of another book and having his great website.
And so your work for Essentia
Yeah. So but you already answered that one, right?
You feel more peace?
I, I feel relieved,
and I felt
at the turn of the year that this year I had to write two books.
It was very clear to me that towards the end of last year
that my holiday from the daimon was sort of over,
and the first one,
I just uploaded it for the copy editor yesterday night, so.
Well, actually, today, very early in the morning.
so I feel, I feel greatly relieved
that, one of the two is in the bag, but, yeah, we are almost in September.
That means I'm running behind schedule and, Yeah.
So I have to write the second one.
And how does that work?
You say the daimon sort of.
Towards the end of last year,
summoned you to do this, but honest work.
I mean, is there a knock on the door, or is it in your dreams?
I mean, the daimon as as an individualized figure is a metaphor.
Yeah.
It's not like some somebody appears in front of me.
but it is a very good metaphor,
because the daimon is a part of your mind that you don't identify with.
It's like it's not you.
You think it's thoughts, you feel it's feelings,
but you don't identify with it,
because it doesn't care about your rhetorical agenda.
It doesn't care about your state.
It doesn't care about your finances.
it doesn't care about about your your your bucket list, your dreams, your goals.
It doesn't it doesn't give a damn
It's, It's a force of nature.
It's impersonal. It's doing something through you.
so the way I
relate to it is as a mental force within me.
But that's not Bernardo Kastrup.
now, some people can identify with the daimon and they become
completely egoless or completely impossible
because they still need to know to which mouth to bring the fork.
but largely egoless.
I'm I'm not an enlightened being, so I still identify with the ego
and therefore I, I talk about this other part of my mind
that seems so impersonal, that has a plan that I don't understand.
I refer to it as a sort of a separate entity
because it's easy morally for me to deal with it that way.
okay.
It's to take distance from it and say, okay, that's not me.
It's sort of a coping mechanism.
It's a coping mechanism.
But, I mean, how does it relate to the term demon like really?
Because that what it sort of rings to me is that, that how does it
and the demon that prosecutes you and just sort of
the word daimon, was the origin of the word demon.
Yeah.
But the demon is not morally committed
like a demon is, or like an angel is.
The daimon is neutral.
It's it's, the origin of the word is a sort of a
in in
modern psychology, which begun in the late 19th century,
the daimon refers to a sort of semi independent
psychic complex,
sort of dissociated part of your mind.
And it's not really fully personalized.
It's sort of a fluidic, impersonal energy
flow, a form of
dispositions and feelings and goals,
that you register in your mind, but that you don't identify with.
when that daimon becomes morally committed, then you can talk of a demon
or of an angel, or, you know, it can talk of possession.
you know, an exorcism and this kind of thing.
But the daimon is it has no moral commitment.
in the same way that the storm has no moral commitment,
a storm can irrigate the fields
and make sure that your crops don't die and feed the whole village.
But it can also destroy your house.
Yeah, flood your house, or lightning can strike your house or you.
Yeah.
And these forces of nature, storms, volcanoes, tsunamis,
they are not morally committed.
They are morally neutral.
They're just neutral nature doing what he does.
And that's the daimon. That's the will of nature.
And I guess we'll get back to this
when we discuss, also free will in the will of the universe.
a second one, something totally different
from *username* asking you question for Bernardo.
It would be interesting to hear you describe how your model of analytical
idealism handles the Schrodinger Cat scenario.
I try sort of imagining what you would answer
to this one, but I'm going to give it to you.
Okay.
So, briefly describe the scenario.
Yeah. Very briefly.
Okay. Yeah.
So the scenario is the following.
According to quantum mechanics, things only attain
defined physical existence.
upon measurement. Yeah.
Before you make a measurement, you cannot speak of a defined,
localized physical existence or defined physical properties
such as position, speed, direction of movement,
spin, mass and charge and all these other stuff.
When you, when you make a measurement, do these physical properties become defined?
Yeah.
Before you make the measurement,
you can only speak of a superposition of different possibilities.
A wave of probabilities, so to say, but not of a defined physical existence.
Yeah.
So if there is a cat in a box
and, and there is an apparatus inside the box
that breaks a vial of poison
depending on whether a certain atom decays or not.
And that, that decays, that is a quantum event.
Yeah.
It's not a deterministic event as far as I know.
Random event.
Yeah, yeah.
Then random meaning we don't know how it unfolds.
So we call it random. Yeah.
But depending on whether it happens or not
the vial of of poison gets broken or not.
And therefore the cat lives or the cat dies.
Yeah, exactly.
But if that is in a sealed box, before we look at the box
and measure whether the cat is alive or dead,
we don't know whether the cat is alive or dead. Yep.
So the cat is in a superposition.
The cat is both both alive.
And dead. That's the idea. Yeah. Now,
this final part
of how this scenario is described, I think is nonsensical.
The cat is not alive and dead
the indeterminacy of nature before a measurement,
speaks of our inability
to know to know what state nature is in.
Before we make an observation.
Yeah, it's not a statement that nature itself in
some some kind of true ontic superposition of all possibilities.
And the cat is alive and dead.
so I would dispute that, but it's funny that.
Sorry to interrupt, but it's funny that, I think in an interview
with Roger Penrose, he said to me that Schrodinger himself
intended this whole thought experiment to show sort of the craziness,
if you would take it this way.
Right.
So, and but then in popular culture, we all see the thought experiment
as saying that the cat literally is dead and alive,
and that that is the implication of quantum theory,
and that has been popularized by the self appointed spokespeople of science,
usually people who don't do in science just talk about it.
Yeah, that's the cat is alive and dead
or that particles are both waves and particles.
Oh no, no, no, forget about, about all this.
These statements go too far.
the data doesn't allow us to make these statements.
We have to be more cautious.
But in any case, what we do know is that every time we look,
we see physical nature, physical between quote.
colloquially physical nature.
In other words, the contents of perception - Yeah this table.
Yeah.
Every time we look, we see nature in an defined state.
Yeah.
And we are conscious and our looking is a conscious process.
Yeah.
So what we do know is that when conscious beings experience the world around them.
Yeah.
That world is in a defined state. Yeah.
And not in a superposition. Yeah.
Under analytical idealism.
All living beings are conscious, including bacteria.
Right.
Nice that I'm happy to hear,
and so he's a cat.
So the cat inside the box is experiencing whether the vial of poison
was broken or not, whether the atom radioactive atom decayed or didn't decay.
Yeah.
So what is inside the box is not in a superposition,
but we from the outside are not aware of that.
Yeah. Now the question gets trickier.
If there is no cat inside the box, but there is a chemical
that reacts with the poison and changes color.
It can be pink or it can be blue depending on whether the vial.
Of course because...
Chemical is not conscious, so it doesn't know - it's made of consciousness.
But it's not a dissociated, localized form of consciousness
that has an internal dashboard of perception.
In other words, that doesn't have its own physical world,
that that has its own physical world.
And the chemical is not that the chemical does not have a dashboard.
So the chemical has no physical world,
because the physical world is what appears on the screen of perception.
And now you could ask, is the chemical pink or blue?
Before you make
before you open the box and you look and now you have to say,
and theoretically, it's in a superposition.
Yeah. What does this superposition means?
It means that all we can say about it
is a is to assign a probability to it being pink or being blue.
Yeah, but we cannot speak of its definite state
because pinkness and blueness appear on the screen of perception.
And until there is a screen of perception
to know what's going on, there is no pinkness and no blueness.
you see, but the cat does have a screen of perception,
so the cat is either dead or alive, and we just don't know.
Now whether the chemical is pink or blue only becomes a reality.
when something perceives it.
Because pinkness and blueness are contents of perception,
and you cannot speak of pinkness and blueness before you open the box.
So if you would reformulate the experiment, this way, you would agree
that that's what you're saying, that that then I would agree
that there is a seemingly fundamental limit
to our ability to predict or know
unmeasured states of non-living nature.
Okay, here's a question from fine as Frog.
Yeah, I guess yeah.
That's good.
to what extent can we know mind at large?
To what extent can the dissociative boundary be made transparent?
And I'm summarizing.
It's a it's a large question and fine as a frog then says,
it seems like, the inner traditions
such as religion and philosophy,
are a way towards knowing this mind at large.
And then we have, of course, the outer science as in this question.
So and the question then is also how can this sort of inner knowing
and that religion's and, traditions like that describe
and our scientific method somehow be bridged?
But that's sort of a secondary question.
But the first one,
can we know mind at large?
Bernardo
I'll give several answers. The are complementary.
One is everything, you know, everything you can possibly know
is mind at large, because there's nothing but this universal subjectivity.
Now, there's another way to define mind at large as the activity
of universal consciousness that is outside your particular outer.
can we know that?
Yes. Every time you look around and you see the world around you,
that's how the activity of mind at large presents itself to you
on your internal dashboard screen of perception.
So there is a sense in which everything you can
possibly know is mind is large.
but of course, what the questioner is hinting at is,
can you know the mental activity outside you
from a first person point of view, as opposed to a second
or third person point of view?
To a limited extent probably.
I think for as long as we are alive,
we are dissociated from the rest of the activity of of
universal consciousness or mind at large, because that's what life is.
Life is what the dissociation looks like.
But no process in nature is absolutely perfect.
When it stops raining, the ground doesn't dry immediately.
Yeah, when something catches fire, the fire doesn't consume everything
that is combustible.
No process in nature is absolutely perfect
and stands to reason that neither is dissociation.
So we are not completely dissociated from the activity of mind at large.
From a first person perspective, something must trickle in.
Something must percolate through,
and we call it intuition.
We call it,
psychic abilities and near-death experiences.
well, near-death experience, the dissociation is being impaired.
Right.
So that's close.
As close as we can get, you think, to experiencing mind at large, then,
I think if you stop your heart and brain metabolism stops,
you're impairing the dissociation and stuff will come through both ways.
Yeah.
if you take psychedelics, which impair brain activity,
they reduce brain activity.
Yeah. You you make it a dissociative boundary.
Yeah.
Permeable porous. Yeah.
but can you do that on the natch
with meditation alone or spiritual practice
according to the world's great traditions? Yes.
I can't as a person.
but I am. I'm humble enough. - Have you tried?
I mean, you always say you don't have a gift for meditation.
No, no, no, I am very hard headed. This is.
Yeah.
It's hard.
Hard like stone.
I need a lot of stuff to get off my baseline of consciousness.
Yeah.
You know, I may need, chemicals, psychedelics, mind machine
or an audio machine, and, or
I may need to wake up in the right mood.
I can't do it on the natural like that very strong dissociation area.
Very, very.
My mind is very folded in upon itself.
I'm very metacognitive.
Yeah.
which is good for certain things, like writing philosophy and then.
Yeah, analytic philosophy and analytic ideas.
It's perfect in computer engineering. But that's it.
It's it's sometimes also you sense, I can imagine coming and coming from it
to it from this analytical, perspective and your strong mind
that you can also long for the more direct experience.
Right? Oh, I do, yeah.
Is that sort of a form of suffering for you in the sense
that you can get there with your head,
but you see these other people who just live it.
I don't suffer anymore because I don't I mean, the grass is always greener
at the neighbors, and that's a universal human experience.
And I am not an exception.
But, I've come to a point in my life where I accept myself and my limitations.
I know that there are certain things that are not in the cards for me.
Yeah, and I'm perfectly okay with it today.
But when I was younger, yeah, I struggled.
no, Bernardo Kastrup
is not the person Bernardo Kastrup wanted to be.
yeah.
but now that I know him, not Bernardo Kastrup.
yeah. I'm perfectly okay. Yeah.
All right.
Yeah, I sort of recognize it when I was more,
you know, I was brought up Christian.
My dad was a minister,
so I know what you wanted to experience that direct religious experience.
And I could just not get there somehow
And I tried all techniques that the religion I was in sort of gave you.
You're not just going to large events and singing pop songs
about Jesus and trying to just get there, you know, and and it didn't work for me.
So I know that sort of pain and also only through,
psychedelic substances that I sort of first got there.
But, what also, I found interesting to sort of translate
a bit to people who might be more in a panpsychist camp.
And I know you critique that a lot, but everything you say I could let's say
that everything has consciousness, but more in a panpsychist way.
So let's say you're consciousness particles in this table
and it's a different, more lower level of consciousness than ours.
But it is conscious what we then are saying.
Could it be that that that experiencing that mind at large is
then just wanting to experience being all matter in the universe at once?
So you know what I'm trying to get at?
Because I think people can relate to that.
Panpsychism can.
Perhaps if you look at the linguistic origin of the word
pan psych ism, psychism is mentation.
Yeah.
And pan is everywhere. Everywhere.
Yeah. So mentation everywhere.
If you interpreted it in this very generic way, then.
Then I am a panpsychist.
Yeah. Because I don't think that everything has mind.
I think everything is mind, and therefore mind literally is everywhere.
Yeah, but what we in the culture normally referred to
as panpsychism is something that attributes to this mind
the the structure of subatomic particles.
so mind is itself fragmented into little centers of awareness
zillions countless of them distributed across space and time.
that is what I think is nonsensical.
Matter is not conscious.
Matter is a appearance in consciousness of conscious activity.
Yeah, yeah, it's a presentation of consciousness to itself.
Yeah.
from across the dissociative boundary.
but can you now feel this?
I mean, it's it's I know you now for three years, and I know this intellectually.
And it does it starts to sink in that I'm starting to sort of really feel okay.
I'm looking here at the universe.
Yeah. Thinking,
and and that presents itself to me as Bernardo sitting here.
Right. It's the mentation of the universe. I'm sort of.
But it's just, the abstraction of it, you know?
But I do find it a better position than materialists.
Okay.
And, I say some things if it if it helps,
panpsychism is
based on attributing to nature
a structure that exists only in language.
when we, when we speak of things like this is a fist, it's a thing.
No, we think there is a fist in nature because we have a word for this.
Yeah, yeah, we made a model, a mental model of word.
Yeah.
We refer to it with and give a label to it.
And we think it's a thing.
Yeah.
You know, you have to ask yourself, is my fist conscious?
That's what panpsychist does. but of course, where is the fist
disappeared violated the law of conservation of energy, right.
Yeah. Yeah. Right. The fist disappeared.
and the same you can say the same about everything
we notice for matter right at the summit.
I mean that this is just quantum theory. We know that.
Then the matter, it disappears in a sense, and we get sort of the quantum
where we have a fields. And that's the thing.
what disappears are the particles.
But particles are not things.
Particles are ripples in the field.
Yeah. That the ripple changes shape.
Doesn't,
break any law of conservation.
But if you call a certain shape of the ripple one particle
and another shape another particle, then particles decay in in
such a way, the first particle disappears and the other one pops out of nothing.
But that's a wrong understanding of what's going on.
There are no particles.
Particles are just a metaphor for particular patterns of excitations of
quantum field.
But to help you go down this line of thought
before we go to particles, let's talk about this chair.
Is this chair conscious?
Okay.
Is there a chair to begin with?
That's the question you have to ask before you ask is the thing conscious?
You have to ask is there the thing because this is and this is leather.
Yeah, yeah.
What if I cut the seams and remove the leather?
Where is the chair, is the chair now...
Conscious. Yeah, but there is no chair now.
And now is the metal conscious.
But okay.
These are two soldered pieces of metal. What if I,
cut them and break them in 2
Yeah. Now, are both pieces. Yeah.
conscious? Yeah.
And or what's the original one?
The only one that was conscious. Yeah.
Is is the Amazon River conscious?
But where does the river end and the Atlantic Ocean begin?
So we replace
the structure of reality with the structure of language,
which is what leads us to ask stupid questions like, is the apple conscious?
Is my thermostat conscious?
Now the panpsychism understands this.
So the panpsychism says, okay, now we have to divide everything
as far as we can until we cannot keep on dividing them.
Yeah.
Not only the ladder out of the mattress so we go but one molecule from the other,
and then take the molecules apart and then take the atoms apart
and then take the subatomic particles apart.
And then you end up with the elementary subatomic particles
like quarks, gluons, electrons and bosons and all this stuff.
Yeah. Right.
And they think that you cannot go further.
And now they say the electrons are conscious.
Yeah.
And I can't play my trick anymore because you can't divide the electron.
But that too is a vast misunderstanding of physics for the past
eight years at least, if not the hundred, we have known
that there are no particles
in the same sense that there is no ripple separate from the lake that ripples.
You cannot fish a ripple out of the lake.
Yeah, there's nothing to the ripple but the lake in the same exactly
the same sense.
There is nothing to a particle but to the underlying quantum field.
Yeah.
And being excited. - But do they then play sort of a dualist game.
Also, you think in panpsychism that you want
to attribute sort of the quality of, of awareness of consciousness to matter.
So you play a dualist game also, right, because you want to hold up,
hold to materialism,
but then you see the problem of consciousness
and you just say, oh, there must be this consciousness particle.
But it seems to me like a dualism in a sense.
We have the in, in, in our culture, especially scientific culture,
we have this delusion that since the enlightenment, science has made steady
forward progress, monotonic progress, that every step on the way,
although ultimately wrong, was a step forward, helped us see something.
Yeah, progress helped us progress.
Now, Thomas Kuhn has already destroyed this naive view.
In 1963, with the third Division... Structure of Scientific Revolutions
Scientific Revolutions.
that's not how things go.
But our mentation sort of requires
begs us to validate even our mistakes, to to give ourselves
this reassuring, comforting notion that we are making monotonic progress.
We are always taking steps forward.
So physicalism is obviously wrong.
But but it was a step forward.
And now we take the next step.
We just say consciousness is in all matter.
The problem is that this contradicts physics.
It contradicts the very evolution that we are trying to hold on to.
And let me make this alive to you, Hans.
And let me list
a couple of things that that we know are facts.
And it would be magic if we think of particles as marbles,
as opposed to ripples. Yeah, yeah. On a field,
particle decay would be magical.
Te Higgs boson decays, can decay to a number of things.
One of the possibilities is it decays into two muons or heavy electrons.
but the Higgs boson is not made of muons.
There aren't two muons in a Higgs boson.
How can it decay into two muons?
Because then the Higgs boson disappears
into nothing and two moons appear out of nothing.
That's magical.
Yeah, well, that's not what happens.
The Higgs boson is an excitation of the Higgs field.
That excitation can decay just like a ripple can decay,
and ripple can become less tall.
It can lose energy.
It can go through through an obstacle and break into other ripples
with different frequency.
It gets other physical properties, now the muons
are the names we give to the ripples with other physical properties.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I don't know. Example,
what people call the quantum foam
particles popping in and out of existence spontaneously.
That would be magical if particles were marbles,
because now you have things, marbles popping into existence
out of nothing and disappearing into nothing without a trace.
Well, that's not what's happening.
What's happening is the underlying quantum field are self excited,
and they form ripples, and those ripples decay back into nothing.
But nothing appears or disappears because the ripple is not a thing.
The ripple is a is a behavior of the lake.
Yeah. When the ripple disappears, nothing disappears.
The lake stopped doing something
Yeah, I stopped doing the fist
Did the fist disappeared?
Nothing. Disappeared.
Something that I was doing before.
Now I'm no longer doing.
Yeah, the same for this quantum foam
The underlying quantum fields do some things, and other times
they stop doing them.
Yeah, we call that particles appearing and disappearing.
But there are no particles. There are only ripples.
I could go on and.
Oh, yeah, I know, I know, I like it, but I think for me, if you want to just
make it really like a basic message to me, it's just like saying that
in idealism we just say that that ocean is consciousness, right?
The ocean is the mind at large.
You can agree with that on that. Yeah.
But I mean, assuming that we will eventually unify,
our 17 quantum fields
that we need to go into in grand unification theory.
Yeah.
Then I would say the resulting field is a model of this field of subjectivity.
That is the ground our lives. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
And then I can sort of following that helps me also people have now lost it.
That somehow to me is that all we really know is that we are conscious
and that sort of hit me when I first met you, when we did a documentary on,
artificial intelligence.
Being able to we become conscious or not, that,
you said no one has ever seen an electron, right?
It's just within consciousness.
We built these models, and then reality appears to us as if there is an electron.
And that stuck with me.
So now it feels like just a very same basic position to say, all I know
is that I have consciousness, that and then all else is abstraction, right?
In a sense, or, or model making.
Yeah. Convenient fiction. Yeah.
we can detect single electrons.
we can detect single photons
Yeah. It hits a photomultiplier.
We amplify that signal electronically, and we get something on a computer screen.
In fact, we can even see single photons under the right conditions
when the light is very low.
but the
photon that we refer to is a theoretical entity.
It's a model of the experience of seeing the output of a photomultiplier.
Yeah, yeah.
Or of seeing a little thing blink in your retina.
Yeah. And certain light conditions.
And all of science is based
on these theoretical entities that are convenient fictions.
The world or nature behaves as though these fictions were true until it doesn’t
And then we replace the convenient fictions with other ones.
For instance, Newton proposed
the convenient fiction that there is an invisible force called gravity, pulling
celestial bodies to one another invisibly
and at a distance, and instantly.
And it took the French about half a century to stop
laughing of this mystical idea of these invisible forces
pulling things towards one another.
but we know how that ended.
And yet, in the early 20th century, Einstein showed
that there is no such force.
There is no such invisible force at all.
It's the equally invisible fabric of space time
bending and twisting that leads to the effect we call gravity.
Yeah, and guess what?
Loop quantum gravity is unraveling that. there will be another convenient
fiction now.
So the history of science is the history of the evolution
of convenient fictions, accounts, models of experience.
Yeah, but what really, really is there no.
The givens of nature.
pre-theoretical givens are experiences.
Okay, that's what we really know.
But so also this apply to your own model then. Right.
That you say it's convenient.
Can you say it
on your own model to your own model as well as being a convenient fiction?
Of course. Yeah.
Because the moment I use the word consciousness, I am objectifying
what is purely subjective.
Yeah, exactly. I am making it a thing.
And I go further.
I talk about this universal field of subjectivity that is spatially unbound.
Yeah, I'm giving it extension because I know that people can only think
in terms of extension
In other words, in terms of things that have a size in space
or a duration in time.
Yeah, yeah, but subjectivity has no extinction.
No, no.
How many centimeters is your thought have?
Yeah.
How many yards does your emotion have.
Yeah.
So of course I'm
talking in terms of convenience fictions because otherwise I can't communicate.
Yeah, yeah.
But what is ultimately modeled has no extension.
It's not a field. It's not even a thing.
It's that within which experiences arise.
For this one comes from Sarah's first,
* Username*
Bernardo, I love your work and your theory.
I have a question, though
you have argued that consciousness does not depend on matter or bodies or brains
by in part, reciting numerous studies that show cognition
and consciousness are not always correlated to brain or activity.
So, consciousness cognition doesn't need a brain, right?
Brains are just what show up on our dashboards.
We discuss that extensively.
So why then, do you posit that metacognition is dependent on brains,
specifically human brains or possibly some other biologically evolutionary object?
So if I had to sort of phrase this question, it's about your relation,
the relationship between your theory and biology,
and that you play such an emphasis on, biology.
Yeah.
First, I think important to define metacognition.
What are we talking about?
So cognition
is the ability to perceive, to feel, to cognize things.
To know things. Yeah.
Metacognition is our ability
to turn the contents of our own mind
into objects of knowing
is to know that we know
is to know that we experience,
is to think about our own thoughts.
Yeah, to ponder our own emotions.
Metacognition is what happens when the mind sort of turns in upon itself.
Yeah. To investigate.
Evaluate its own contents, its own activities.
Yeah.
People,
there is a nice cat joining in
It's alive
But, she refers to to metacognition, the necessity of brains for metacognition.
When we formulate things this way, our brains needed for metacognition,
we are thinking dualistic terms, almost materialistic terms, as
if the brains, the brain were the means for a certain configuration of mind,
and that the cognitive configuration might.
I'll try to frame it in a different way
that is more consistent with what I'm trying to put forward.
Matter.
Oh, matter is always the dashboard
representation of mental activity,
and therefore also a dashboard
representation of certain configurations of mentation.
Yeah.
Metacognition is a configuration of mental activity.
Yeah.
What that configuration looks like
when observed from the outside from across a dissociative boundary.
is a human brain.
Yeah.
A human brain is what metacognition
looks like as observed from across a dissociative boundary.
Yeah. And that's why the two come hand-in-hand.
One is the image of the other.
One is not the means or the generator
or the origin of the other one is simply what the other looks like.
Check
Yeah, I get this. So that. But then,
that's the only form of meta
cognition we know of from a first person perspective.
Like we, we experience metacognition, either feeling a sense
of how it is to sit here with you, right form of metacognition.
And I know that if I look in a mirror that looks like hans and it has brain,
and you also have that,
so I also apply that to you and I do not apply it to this, table,
which I don't have a first person access to.
But theoretically, I mean, would it be possible
that other forms of configurations in our universe are metacognitive
that we know of that don't know.
So the sun.
The moon, we don't know. Yeah. Oh,
there are infinite things we cannot disprove,
right?
I cannot disprove the Flying Spaghetti Monster.
It may be hiding in the higher dimension, moving the planets around the sun
with its invisible noodly appendages that I cannot disprove.
if you lose your shoes tomorrow, you cannot disprove that
aliens came to your house and stole it and went away and never left us.
Right? So the game is never,
whether we can
disprove something because there are a great many
totally nonsensical things that we cannot disprove.
I cannot disprove that there is a teapot right now in the orbit of Saturn.
I know, but you're exaggerating now a bit, because what I want to get to is sort of
do you agree that there can be metacognition on other levels?
Then I cannot disprove it.
Yeah, but the question is, do we have good reasons
to think that that might be the case? Yeah.
That's the only thing you think.
You think we don’t? I think we don't.
And I'll tell you why.
we know we are metacognitive.
Yeah. We know we evolved. Yeah.
We know that there are other living beings
on this planet that have smaller brains, or maybe not nervous system at all.
And their behavior doesn't betray metacognition.
Yeah.
When you're metacognitive, you start doing the thing called culture
and civilization, you know, and and elephants
still haven't done that, and neither did whales.. Yeah.
Right.
So there is excellent reason to believe that metacognition
is the apex of the evolutionary line and that bacteria are not metacognition.
Yeah.
And neither are neither our stars that sort of precede
if you get there I'll get there.
We wanna get to the stars.
If metacognition were woven into the very foundation
of fabric of reality in mind at large itself, bacteria would have it.
Yeah, but it doesn't seem to be the case.
It seems that it took 4 billion years of bloody evolution
with a lot of pain and death for a thing.
An entity in nature to arise whose behavior betrays metacognition.
Here.
Here are we with our civilization that our wars, our technology.
so I don't think
we have any good reason at all to think that metacognition,
metacognition is built into the very field of subjectivity.
It's a configuration of it that evolves over time at great cost.
Now stars are stars.
Meta cognisant
the first question is, are stars even dissociated actors?
Do they have a private inner life of their own?
I don't think we have good reasons to think they have,
because they're completely different from the one instance
of private inner life that we know, which is metabolism
metabolizing creatures seem to have private in their life.
My cats betray that they have their behavior.
betrays private in their life, similar to ours.
And if you look at their physiology on their microscope, it's identical to ours.
Protein folding, mitosis and all that good stuff that metabolism does.
You can find that in amoeba.
So I would think that nature has given us reason
to think that living beings have private in their life.
Yeah. A star looks nothing like a living being.
The argument for the star being conscious.
I think it comes from Rupert Sheldrake, I respect it.
Yeah, he's working on that.
Yeah, he he compares the the patterns of electromagnetic field activity
in the star to those in our brain, and they say they're equally complex.
This is not nonsensical.
But I personally consider it a stretch.
Yeah, but to answer Sara here, it is very important to make
the distinction that it is not our brains that lead to metacognition, but it's,
how it looks like to us, the universe in our universe.
And yeah, in that sense, I can follow you that it is sort of
most likely that it looks like that metabolizing.
Yeah.
You see, people always,
even when they are idealists, they tend to think in materialism.
I just do that.
Yeah. Yeah.
It's just it's the brain needed for metacognition.
That's not the right question to ask.
The right question to ask is what does metacognition look like?
Yeah, yeah.
This one, this is a question from Green Sleeves 7165.
And I really like it.
it's not clear how the gains of the harvest
can be banked if universal in if universal
consciousness outside of life is not capable of metacognition.
And with the gains of harvest.
this, Greensleeves
is referring to our personal experience, our metacognition.
How can that sort of contribute to universal consciousness?
Can be banked, stored in a universe?
Can a universe learn from our experience, Bernardo?
Yeah. So.
So where this comes from is the notion that,
if we are dissociative segments of this one field of subjectivity, nature,
when we die, our private mental contents, our learnings,
our experience, our insights, our memories, they don't disappear.
They're become reintegrated into this broader field.
Yeah. Because death is the end of the dissociation.
Yeah. Check. Life is what dissociation looks like.
Then death is the end of the dissociation,
and therefore the contents of our private inner lives are contributed
to the whole of nature, because the dissociative boundary that disappears.
Now, if
mind that large out there is not meta conscious,
how can we contribute to that?
That yeah, that's the question.
Now when we speak of meta conscious, we are speaking of the capacity
to form metacognitive insights.
it's the capacity to generate metacognitive insight.
Yeah, I don't think mind at large beyond living beings has that capacity
to generate its own metacognitive insight like these insights of self-awareness.
Yeah.
That we get into throughout life, especially if we suffer.
but when we die,
those insights, we already have them.
They are already committed to memory. Yeah, yeah.
Because we as dissociated authors, we do have that capacity.
Yeah.
So we have formed those insights throughout life.
Yeah. And we die.
We contribute the insights to the rest of nature.
Yeah.
Nature doesn't need to have the capacity to generate new ones.
because it's already getting the metacognitive insights
from us, from the dissociation process itself started itself.
Yeah. So for instance,
you don't have a
furnace at home, so you don't have the capability to melt
metal and create a wedding ring, right?
You know. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You don't have the capability to kind of do it to, to
forge and create a wedding ring in your home.
Your home doesn't have that capability.
Yeah, but you can go to a shop and buy it now and you still wear a wedding ring.
Yeah.
So the fact that you don't have the capability there doesn't mean
that when the thing is gifted to you, that it has no value.
Yeah.
We gift the metacognitive insights.
We give the ring to nature.
Now, nature without us doesn't have the capability to make it,
but it doesn't need to. It's already getting it.
And then it can. It can sort of because that's not metacognition.
It can enjoy or have, pleasure in sort of receiving that ring.
It will have the full insight, the full experience of it.
What it will not be able to do is regenerate in the next one.
Yeah.
Or to reflect on that,
could it somehow because that's the
learning process of the universe that this is sort of just me.
What I find beautiful in idealism is that I think my my experience of my life,
whether suffering or pleasure, just the conscious
experience of my life does contribute to a learning, learning process.
But this is maybe a word I want to.
I want to ask you if that correct, if the universe can learn
through my personal experience that that is sort of then stored
and cannot metacognitive reflect on it, but can it learn from it somehow?
What you learned is what it will know.
it will then know that,
yeah, that's where the metaphor of the ring breaks.
what it's getting from you is not a thing.
It's a direct first person insight. Yeah.
for instance,
when you dream, you you have certain thoughts in your dream.
Yeah.
and a dream is a dissociative state you identify only with your dream avatar.
Not with the rest of your.
Of the dream.
The houses, the other people, the trees, the cars.
And yet all of that is actually you.
Yeah, but during the dream, you are dissociated.
So you think you're owning your dream avatar and you have thoughts?
Yeah. During the. Yeah.
Now you wake up, your dream avatar is dead.
Yeah. The dissociation ended.
Your dream avatar is dead. Yeah. It's gone. It's toast.
Yeah, right.
but you still remember the dream?
Yeah, yeah. From the avatars point of view.
Yeah. So what's the avatar knew?
You now know because. Yeah.
Because you are alone.
Yeah. Same thing with death.
Yeah, but I guess I'm not sure.
But I guess my question then is if if the dreamers of the universe dreaming
all of this can somehow influence, take this knowledge into a new dream
that sort of builds on it, like, like say, okay, I didn't know
this was like a nightmare.
I'm referring to just a tragedy... What else is it doing? Check.
But yeah, so but it has a will to sort of progress
this sort of dreaming or, or think, okay, this was a nightmare,
sort of this just to the tragedy where instead of the human history,
Second World War or the Holocaust, stuff like that, could the universe
sort of bank that experience and see sort of the, the sheer
that it was like a pure nightmare and somehow think of it
when we got to dream this differently next time.
The line of thought you went through this is a metacognitive line of thought.
You I mean, you're sort of separating yourself as subject from your experiences,
evaluating them, passing value, judgment on them.
This was good.
This was not good.
I want this or I don't want this next time.
This is all metacognitive stuff. And,
in the mind of nature, I think the game is instinctive.
There is a will, but it's what Schopenhauer called the blind will.
In other words, a non metacognitive will.
It's the spontaneous will of a kid.
a spontaneous will of an animal.
it's not pondered
and it remains that it cannot evolve into metacognition.
it can.
I see no reason why it couldn't.
But we are talking here not only about the geological timescales.
We are talking about cosmic timescales.
Yeah, yeah.
In other words, from our point of view as living beings, it's not changing.
You and I are not.
Now, we.
We're not going to see your conscious universe.
To have metacognition
I'll go it.
That's already nice. I can live with that.
If you say in theory, it's possible I like that.
I mean, it's just a beautiful idea. I think,
I think that's where it's leading to.
Yeah. Outside of time.
It has already happened.
Yeah. So.
So the universe then knows not metacognitively.
But it it knows what we give it sort of our metacognitive experience of our lives.
So it can then know that.
But interesting is that, what the mechanism of that process is.
We know how it looks like because that's us dying
and just our matter sort of dissolving into dust.
And we know that physically, chemically.
But in idealism, what's the mechanism you think?
Why do you refer to it as a mechanism?
What are you alluding to when you use the word
it more like more like more dummy.
It's it's just my thoughts, are stored in a sort of cosmic.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Okay, then memory is there.
Are they here when we die?
They just, the universe can be sort of.
They are uploaded to the universe in computer metaphor.
So where can we find it? In the physical world? Yeah. Exactly.
Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because if memories are in our neurons when we die, those memories
need to go to the universe.
Where is it? What is it? Yeah.
Are we going to do that configuration. Yeah. Right.
Okay I'm going to upload that.
So without computers are we going to upload it. Yeah. Yeah.
So the key premise of your question is that memories are to be found.
This physical traces in a in a brain.
that's the key premise.
Yeah.
Because if they can, if there is a perceivable physical correlate of memory.
In other words, if memories look like something in the physical brain,
then memories should look like something in nature at large.
If nature inherits our memories.
Yeah, yeah yeah yeah.
So but let's review this key premise.
We have been trying to find physical
correlates of memory in our brain for over 100 years now.
A lot of money has been invested,
and so far it has led nowhere.
No one, despite headlines saying that, there was a headline a few years ago,
scientists have found how memories are stored in the brain
that was the headline of a press
release issued by a major university.
I forgot the name. I forgot which one.
And you go. You read the scientific paper.
What they did was the following people were instrumented with electrodes,
needles going into their brain to measure the activity of individual neurons.
They were asked to watch a movie and then activity was measured.
Yeah.
Then they took the TV away, and then the same people
were asked to remember the movie in their mind's eye.
Yeah. And they mentioned the brain activity.
Yeah.
Lo and behold, the two patterns of the brain activity were more or less the same.
Yeah. And that's it.
That's the study? Yeah.
Does it say anything about memory?
Not at all. No.
Because the question is, how does the brain know
which neurons to reactivate during recall?
Where is that information stored?
The paper said nothing about it.
Speculation is rampant.
There are people who say memories are inter-neuronal processes.
No man, taking place across many neurons.
Others say it's intra neuron.
it's a sort of, interplay between the cytoplasm and the nucleus of the neuron.
Others say it's within.
yeah. microtubules.
Yeah. There's Penrose and Hameroff. Yeah. Right.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah.
Quantum processes in microtubules tubules.
It's all over the place.
Yeah. Now, what does experimentation tell us?
there are experiments with
rat brains being cut down to 90%, 90% off.
And the rats still remember things.
What they have been trained.
But these are old experiments.
There is a more recent one, 2013.
they trained planarians, little flatworms, which have a small brain in their head.
They trained planner area to navigate a complex environment to find food.
Took took weeks, but the planner learned how to find food.
Navigating that complex, irregular environment.
Nonlinearity is unique in that if you cut off a part of their body,
they grow it again. Yeah. Even their head.
Yeah.
So they decapitated the trained planarian.
waited several days for a new head to pop.
They put the planarian in the same environment.
Lo and behold the planarian
remembers exactly how to find food
How do you account for that?
Under analytic idealism,
matter is an image of mental processes.
It's what mental processes look like.
Matter is not the cause of mental processes.
Yeah.
Now what's the difference in implications between that and materialism.
Under the materialism matter is the cause of mental processes.
Yeah.
So there cannot be
anything about mental processes that you cannot trace back to matter.
Yeah.
Those matters because if you take away the cost,
you take away the brain of the worm and it's gone.
Whatever you find in mental processes, you have to be able to trace
back to material arrangements. Yeah.
Because on the materialism
there is nothing to mental processes but material, right?
Yeah.
Under idealism matter is an image.
Not because images are not complete.
You my body is an image of my mental inner life.
You can't see my back.
You can't see what's under my T-shirt.
You can't see what is under my skin.
There's a whole lot of things that you can't see.
Because images are not necessarily complete.
Images don't necessarily tell everything there is to be told about the phenomena.
They are images of
memory doesn't
seem to be part of that image.
now our
mental activity presents itself
to us in its present state.
But memories don't seem to to be part of that image of a that appearance
in, in physicality, in materiality
under quote, colloquially meant
which under analytic idealism is perfectly okay.
Images do not need to be complete, images can be partial and,
evidence indicates
that you can't find memories in brain activity.
Yeah. Which is perfectly okay.
Not everything needs to have, an expression in the image of the phenomenon.
The image doesn't need to be complete.
Yeah, exactly.
Could it be, like, a totally different image under, idealism?
That sort of.
Those memories have a different image in nature that we not know yet.
if memories do not have,
a a physical correlate.
In other words, all of our mental activity memories
don't seem to show up in what all that activity looks like.
Exactly.
Only the recall. Yes.
When you access the memory and you see the brain, see that
Yeah, but the memory itself doesn't seem to be part of the image.
Yeah.
If memory is not presented physically,
in the case of living human beings,
it stands to reason that it probably doesn't
present itself physically when it comes to the memories of nature.
there is something about the temporal aspect of memory
that's it doesn't percolate through to the appearance.
Yeah. To the image
the recall. Yes.
but the
information itself doesn't seem to have a physical correlate.
Certainly not in planarians
Yeah. And also not in rats, same experimental.
I know and I know it's just again image talking
because that's sort of our disclaimer any time
We now use sort of physical examples.
They're images of right. They're not the thing in itself.
But could those memories, because people are interested in psychic
abilities, people accessing, thoughts of other people knowing stuff,
could it be that memory somehow physically is represented in a form
we do not yet know of in a field or electromagnetic fields?
A lot of people work on this or think about this.
It's just psy and we don't like it most by scientists.
But yeah, we have good data on memory access.
We know what is needed for memory access.
Yeah, okay.
For instance, something goes wrong with your hypothalamus.
Yeah.
Memory access becomes difficult or impossible.
Yeah.
So access to memory has physical correlate.
Yeah.
But the information that is accessed doesn't seem to have
And why am I saying that?
Well, the planarian experiment of 2013,
many experiments done with the dissection of rats brains
over many years before phenomena like terminal lucidity,
in which patients of Alzheimer's and other forms of dementia
during their life, they forget everything.
Everything,
just to remember everything and be completely lucid hours before dying.
That's strange though.
So this is a known phenomenon.
Yeah.
You can people can look it up.
It's called terminal lucidity.
there is a strong
suggestion that, there is no physical correlate
of the information itself that is accessed
fthrough recall.
we like to think of memory
according to the favorite technological metaphor of the day.
So in our case, because we have computers, I don't have flash drive sticks
that we can put in a computer and, you know, see our photos.
Again, we like to think of memory as physical trace is encoding information.
Yeah.
Somewhere in the brain.
Yeah, yeah.
But it doesn't seem to hold any water.
because terminal lucidity, planarian
You remember in the training
after they had their cut off in their in their nervous system is in their heads.
Yeah. It's not distributed across the body.
Yeah.
of experiments with rats brains and our inability
to find memories in the brain.
After having tried for 100 years.
So memories don't seem to have a physical correlate.
And this makes sense. Hans if you think about it.
All that
we can see in the physical, colloquially physical world around us,
all that we can measure are present states.
Even the light that we see
with our telescopes that was emitted millions of years ago.
And in every star we see, we see it a past event, right?
Yeah, yeah.
But the photons that hit the lens
and the sensor of the telescope, those photons are present
states of nature.
And that's what we are seeing.
We are seeing a present state that, oh, the photons were emitted
millions of years ago.
So they correlate with a past state.
Okay.
But what is being seen is a present state.
What is physically measurable is always a present state.
And yet the past and the future are as integral to nature as the present.
We know that from Einstein's blocked universe
and the latest developments in quantum gravity, past and future are real.
But we can't.
We can see them. They have no physical correlate.
Can it can can can we make a measurement of the charge of a of a past state.
But so if you say like it's present, if we measure it,
then if we recall a memory it somehow is present again.
But just philosophically, what are we saying then?
Are we really bring the past into presence again or
the metaphor of memory as present
state stored somewhere has failed
It's not sustainable.
people still believe because they need funding for their research programs.
So they still insist on that.
but that program has failed.
so memories are not present.
States.
So what are they?
They are a mental form of direct access to past states
that have no
physical correlates, because no past state has a physical correlate.
Whatever physical state, you can measure are present states.
They may have been set up in the past, but they didn't persist in the present.
really past states
that didn't persist have no physical correlate.
Where is the past?
Can you give it to me? Hand me.
The past, hand me the future.
You can't.
And so memories
in alignment with this notion, seem
to be simply past state, and therefore they have no physical correlates.
When you recall, you're literally reaching back in time.
because mind can do that.
And like, how can mine to do that?
It's a miracle. No, it's no miracle.
The block universe tells us that as far as causality is concerned,
as far as any parameter that we associate with existence is concerned,
the past exists and future exists.
It's one block universe with the present is just a slice of that
long loaf of bread.
Yeah, this all exists simultaneously, right?
Well, it all exists outside of time
To say simultaneously is to say that it happens at the same time.
but that's not what I'm saying at that time.
But, this one is, is but just one step back.
So you are saying it's,
to recall the
past is to it's a past state, you say.
And only present states can be sort of, physical
perception and causality
is a slit on this big loaf of bread.
That is the block universe.
And that slit is imposed by our biology
because it's the way we organize our data about the world and not become
completely overwhelmed and therefore unable to maintain, a form of coherence.
Yeah.
there is this metaphor of Alan Watts that explains this perfectly.
Imagine that you're sitting in front of a wooden fence.
and you can't see the other side,
except for a little slit that remains open between the wooden panels.
There is a slit? Yeah.
And you can see just through that slit.
Yeah.
And then on the other side, a cat walks along.
So through the slit, you see first the cat's head
and then our little moment later you see the cat tail.
Yeah.
And every time the cat walks by,
you first see the head and then you see the tail.
Yeah.
If you didn't know better, you would say the head causes the tail.
Yeah. The head is the cause of the tail.
every time the head to head is perceived, shortly thereafter I perceive the tail.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
This is what causality is, is when you can't see the whole pattern
because you'd be cognitively overwhelmed when you can't see the cat.
you can only see a slit through that big loaf.
That is the block universe. Yeah.
When the head is perceived and then the tail,
we say the head causes a tail.
That's what causality is.
Causality is this slit like partial view of the states of nature.
And they all exist outside time. Yeah.
And it can our whole life story if we say the cat
is our whole life story, in a sense, it's that sort of
there is only the tapestry of existence.
But because we scan that tapestry through a slit,
the regularities of the tapestry that exist outside time all at once,
which is a contradiction all at once, already presuppose time.
But bear with me.
Yeah, that's that I can work with, I think,
because then it becomes understandable a bit.
Yeah.
So we scan the tapestry of existence through a slit.
And what follows we call,
the, the effect in what comes before we call the cause.
But there is only the tapestry with its intrinsic patterns and regularities.
Yeah. Memory
because no processing nature is perfect, so neither is ours.
Our slit
We are not always limited to this slit
Yeah. no process in nature is perfect.
So we can remember.
We can see before the slit
or no through dimension of extension that is outside.
the slit
We call it memory.
Yeah.
For memory to be accessed, there is something about present states
that need to be the case for you
to be able to access a past state, and those are the
memory pathways part of it looks like the hypothalamus.
Yeah.
And whatever other present set of state is necessary for
your mind is literally that I really that's stuck with me.
You said like a couple of minutes ago.
Your mind is literally traveling back. Yeah.
And that's not reliable because every time you travel back,
you build a new past
because eventually you are remembering
something that remembers itself becomes part of the past.
So when you suppose this is your first memory.
Yeah. It's here.
And then now you are a little bit further ahead.
Yeah. And from here you remember that. Yeah.
That experience of your memory now becomes a state.
Yes actually. Yeah.
And now you're here and you're trying to remember this state that was here
that you wind up remembering a past recall.
And then you remember you also distort it
with your current circumstances as you color your memories.
Yeah. So that's why memory is not reliable.
Because what are you remembering.
Are you remembering the original state or are you remembering the previous state
of remembering plus everything around it?
But the mind is a mind traveling machine, and an image of it is that it's.
Yeah,
it would the mind would be time,
a time traveling machine, if there really were such a thing as time.
But time
is a cognitive mechanism.
is something made up by the human.
Kant and Schopenhauer already put this forward, in the late 18th century.
I mean, this is old, as an idea.
Time and space are dimensions of cognition.
They are. They are our cognitive.
way as dissociated alters of mind at large, great
to organize our experience about the world.
That's what that's what time and space are.
So the mind is not traveling in time
because time only exists in us, its not out there
We are not traveling in a dimension out there, we are just
trickging the limitations that we impose on ourselves
because it's easier to survive if you organize your cognition
in such a way that you can take small bites of what there is to know.
Otherwise you would be overwhelmed and you wouldn't
react to environmental challenges or opportunities.
Right?
I'm not gonna sort of act as if I fully understand everything you say, but
it's just for me, like great stuff to dive into for all of you also
And I and I think some of you are further
a lot further me so you can follow -physics is getting here.
Yeah. That's dope.
Quantum gravity and other grand unification theories that turn time
into a a relative thing, not a fundamental.
Exactly.
Spacetime.
Yeah, that's that's sort of a trend right now. Right.
It's also you're Donald Hoffman saying space time is dead or is doomed.
Yeah, yeah. Oh it is.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, it's not doomed in the sense that we experience it, but it's not fundamental.
It's not it's not that it's not.
There is existence. Yeah.
Everything else is how access to existence is managed.
Yeah. Yeah.
So there is no scaffolding of spacetime altogether.
Very interesting.
Like just like stupid materialist question because you,
you work at CERN sort of having to sort of,
digest enormous amounts of data coming out of those accelerators.
Right?
You build it like how many terabytes that you said it was terabytes per second.
Yeah, exactly. But we don't store everything.
Yeah, but if you had to, if I'd say, okay, Bernardo,
I want memory stored in the brain.
We know the human brain is it possible from our birth of, like, four year olds?
I mean, when does it starts from memory?
Could it be done in a sense physically?
If if we are looking for, a processes that sort of could account for it?
I know you don't believe it, but, I mean, is it possible
what exactly? - storing all our memories?
I mean, sort of the sense perception coming in, if the brain were such
were a computer could it sort of, process all that data
and store it somehow in our brains as, as as a hard drive?
I mean, physically, I don't think that’s how memories work.
I don't I know you don't, but I mean, if if you are like a hard core materialist
is still looking for memory in the brain, is it even possible within the
laws of physics we know of like, yeah, it's it's a could
this function as a carbon hard drive storing all the terabytes.
Yeah. From four year old to now.
It is it is not physically impossible incoherent
or in physically impossible to say that there is
enough state
holding capacity.
I mean the anatomy and physiology of our brain, okay.
To, to maintain states that correlate with everything you have experienced.
Okay.
we don't have high resolution experience.
We only seen high resolution about our thumb nail extended in front of us.
The area of our nail
is what we see in high resolution.
Everything else is completely blurry.
We think we see high resolution because our eyes are always scanning.
Yeah.
So we build this map through memory
that gives us a high resolution image of what's around us.
But that's an illusion.
We see very little in high resolution.
Yeah, yeah, hearing sounds doesn't take much information at all.
so there is too much data to store.
so it is not physically impossible that at a microscopic level,
even at an atomic or subatomic level, it's not impossible.
I cannot say that it's impossible for the brain, given
its size and internal structure, to store the information of a lifetime.
No, it's not impossible. Okay.
But to try to find.
Then where does it store? And then we never find it.
And in fact, memory is still there.
Even after you cut off the.
Sorry, it's stored elsewhere.
And then I guess also like a popular science or a popular culture
question then of course, is, phenomena like precognition people.
I mean, there are a lot of accounts.
It's just sort of
not popular, and scientists don't want to burn their hands at it.
But, people knowing that tomorrow a plane will crash and they have,
like, vivid sort of, memories of what will happen, which is traumatic for them.
And then it happens. And they knew.
Right. And,
we don't have to say here
that that's phenomena that that these cases are true or not.
But I mean, this, mechanism you are describing could account for that, right?
Obviously, access to past states
is much easier than access to future systems.
Why that is so why is this asymmetry?
I don't know,
to be pretentious, I mean to say that
I can account for all of nature,
I the opinions I have I hold because of evidence,
not because I have a neat explanation of the why.
Yeah.
I cannot tell you why we have privileged access to the past and not the future.
I know that that is so. Yeah.
but I don't. I can't tell you why.
having said that,
it's if it is possible for us to access past states,
then there should be no fundamental reason why we can't access future states.
And in the history of culture, there is plenty of testimony that that is possible.
It is unreliable, just as memories are unreliable.
Yeah, yeah.
it's not something you can bet on.
Yeah.
but sometimes it happens with overwhelming power.
And it would be also silly to dismiss those accounts.
Yeah.
I have never had an, precognitive experience.
so I might.
I cant tell you out of.
Yeah.
Personal insight that that happens,
but, I'm not arrogant to the point of thinking that
because I didn't have it, then everybody else is deluded.
No, I know, yeah, I I'm old enough not to be this stupid.
but I like it because under idealism.
And it's just a phenomenon that could be scientifically studied.
Right.
And that already that openness to me is like a large benefit of this paradigm.
well, it has been scientifically studied, and the results are confounding.
Yeah, yeah.
precognition has been studied under strict laboratory conditions,
and there is an effect. It is small,
but there is an effect, and it's usually associated with feeling.
An experiment has been done
several times, and the result is pretty reliable by now in my opinion.
Yeah. There are just people who are professional debunkers.
So they try to debunk or whatever.
Yeah, yeah, because that's what they do.
But the experiment is you are being shown pictures.
Yeah.
Some of these pictures are very emotionally distressing.
like I saw a video the other day of a soldier
stepping on a mine and he's like just. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So these are very emotionally
strong emotion evoking images.
Yeah.
and volunteers are asked
to sit and watch the images that are shown to them.
Yeah.
and they are instrumented, with, EEG cap.
Yeah, to measure their brain activity.
And it turns out that, a measurable interval
before an emotionally disturbing picture or video is shown,
the brain activity associated with that emotion is already visible
Right. So it happens before you see.
Yeah, yeah.
The image and this can be very accurately measured.
And the effect is small,
but it's not dismissible that there is an effect.
It's a little bit I mean I want to get to the limits.
No other way around.
Yeah I forgot the study, but I also,
and there's also one where people are after they've given a test like this.
I forgot this.
The exact setup, but after they've given a set of images
like that, they're primed afterwards. Right.
There are these psychological studies where you prime people,
so you first prime them, for instance, that they have no free will,
and then you let them do like a simple game
and where they can cheat and and so on. More people cheat, but only.
Yeah, because they did that sort of as an immoral effect to tell people.
So you prime them.
But this study, prime people like very stupid
those first you have to do like a test and you get the it's done right.
The studies done is finished,
and then you prime them with like something afterwards.
And they measured an effect.
Yeah, that's the same thing. Right.
Because then some of the mind access that priming that happened after the test.
Yeah. And then symmetric causation.
Yeah. Yeah yeah. Retro causation. Yeah. Yeah.
Which, which is not incoherent because it
causation is.
That's the tapestry again. Right.
Yeah. It's that again.
Really cool.
If you see the whole pattern. Yeah.
Then there's no causation. Yeah. Let's see.
we are a lot of questions still.
Let's see if you can speed up a bit.
Bernardo, Michael Barker 6460.
And, it's a long drawn, a long question
that sort of touched me in a sense, because it's a personal story he had a
high dose psychedelic trip.
And afterwards, started to really understand Schopenhauer, Hegel,
and, thinking about the formless void
willing the world into existence.
A concept by concept.
I'm not quoting the whole question. It's a bit too long.
And then he moves on that he saw some deep truth in the Genesis
story in the Bible.
and somehow,
the universe sort of dividing itself,
sort of falling out of Eden and our longing back for Eden and
then asks, how do
we rid ourselves of that experience of the serpent or Satan, our sin?
How do we get back to the innocent garden or heaven where a serpent isn't allowed
and we feel at peace?
Can we build our way back to God with more complicated things and ideas?
So it's really reflect it's a very large story question,
but it touched me in a sense, because also my background and and I know you
and not literally, but you do
see truth in biblical, origin stories.
So yeah, just from analytic idealism in your thinking,
how do you reflect on the Genesis story
and the fall into sin,
and our longing back to Paradise?
You know how I interpreted it?
I think the fall is the fall into metacognition.
It's when Adam and Eve realized that they were naked.
although they were already experiencing their nakedness before it was going on.
Going along?
Yeah, yeah, but then when they fell in, they took a bite
from the fruit of the tree of Knowledge.
that's what the tree was called. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Then they knew that they were naked.
In other words, it's it's the fall into metacognition and suffering.
Psychological suffering begins with metacognition.
Yeah. Animals don't suffer.
animals are in the present.
You know, if it if a vet has to amputate a leg of your cat,
your cat
comes back home and he's still springing around.
No, no trauma.
Well, there may be trauma
related to the experience of the injury that led to the next.
The next time he sees the vet, he might sort of.
Yeah, yeah,
but he's not lying around thinking, oh, now I have only three legs, you know,
The other cats have four legs
Oh my life will never be the same again.
No no no they don't have that.
They cat just goes on, goes on living. Yeah.
because it's not engaging in metacognition
It's not turning into its own situation,
into a content.
Of pondering.
Yeah.
And and and.
You know, in the Bible,
when the,
the snake tells Eve about, you know, what would happen
if you were to take a bite from the fruit of the tree of knowledge?
The snake says,
and then you will be like, God.
Yeah.
And and what does that mean?
Well, what is the key
capacity that God has?
it's to create words. Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
Right. That's that's true.
That's a decree of creation.
So by taking a bite, on the fruit of the tree of knowledge,
you become metacognizant and you become like God.
In other words, you can create world, you can create alternate
realities, inner worlds.
That's the only world.
These are the only worlds we have, you know, through our thinking and thoughts.
Yes. Metacognition. We create. Yeah, yeah.
So if we lose an arm, we are stuck into a world
of our own creation in which we could have had both arms.
and that's why we suffer.
Yeah.
Because instead of being in the world like this.
Yeah, we are trying to be in the other world that we are creating
in which we have both arms.
But the serpent was
then lying in your thinking, saying that then you can be like God.
You can create.
But God is not metacognitive, metacognitive, right in your thinking? -correct.
God's creation is a spontaneous creation.
Yeah, but a creature can only create through metacognition.
you have to create an alternative world because you're already part of the first.
So to create now you have to create an alternative.
Yeah.
And metacognition is, is essential for creating alternatives.
Yeah. Otherwise you are in the present.
You are in reality in this creation.
That's what's going on.
And if you're not in pain right now, that's it.
but metacognition allows you
to access worlds in your own mind,
that you then compare to this world, and you feel bad about it.
Yeah, yeah.
Now it can go both ways.
It can create fantastic worlds that drive you forward.
Yeah.
You want to bring that dream into this world?
Yeah. Which I mean, culture.
Yeah.
We call it vision. Yeah.
People who.
Yeah. Visionaries. Yeah. They create those worlds.
But people who are
regretful
create alternative pasts that they compare to the real past.
And that comparison isn't favorable and it crushes them.
Yeah.
you know, a world in which if I were a cat and I had four legs
all the lives you could have lived in what could have been
if I hadn't lost my leg. Yeah, Yeah, yeah.
And so I think.
But you don't apply moral morality in the, in the literal sense
in those biblical stories, right.
Because from my background, of course, god meant to,
for us to stay in Eden and this shouldn't have happened.
And then. Yeah, that's why we were punished.
The metacognition was a punishment from God.
Whereas I now think, no, it just is what it is.
It just happened. It's just nature.
It just or even think it had to happen somehow.
God links throughout the Bible.
Who put the snake in the garden?
Exactly. Yeah. It's fallen.
I mean, Satan was like a fallen angel, right? Who?
Not only that, you know,
if you don't want your kids to do something, what do you do?
You say, don't do that.
And that's exactly what your kids are going to go and do.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So when God tells Adam and Eve you can do anything except
take a bite of that fruit from that tree that they put *bang* in the middle
and make it accessible to you.
Yeah, yeah.
That you shall not to do.
Wink, wink. Yeah.
Let's go, let's go.
Let's hit the button and start the show.
Because that's it.
Let's start the show.
And, and then we long back and we long back that there's also
the thought I had personally that I sort of thought like
this is like a deep poetic thought that I just think reading like quantum
theory, thinking also about this Genesis story is like, oh, also to me,
like thinking about knowledge. The tree of knowledge.
And then in quantum theory that of course, it's a theory
about what we can know about the world.
And it was like Eve, but saved me...
Is this complete nonsense?
I'm saying now.
But as if Eve did a measurement, it was like from everything possible
to pick something.
And then we came in this state, this fallen state, sort of the
which is my
am I on something or is this like nonsense?
And. No, no, I don't think it's nonsense.
And no, I said
there are more religious passages in which
there are uncanny similarities with quantum mechanics.
Saint Augustine is pretty good at this.
And his description of angels.
it's like you're reading physics.
Seriously? Yeah.
That was this is his famous book, The City of God or what's it?
Yeah, I don't remember that. Augustine.
I think it's Augustine that at that... maybe im wrong
Okay. I'm not I'm not ready to look it up. Yeah.
There are statements like God did not only create the world.
Creation is a continuous process.
God has to continuously create the world.
And if he stops doing it for a moment, the word the world disappears
for a moment.
Well, that's quantum physics and observation.
If you don't observe, there's nothing there.
So you know. Exactly.
So there are uncanny things in religious literature,
but you have to have the eyes to see because you interpret it literally.
You just flatten it, it becomes a caricature.
It becomes silly,
which is, of course, what the atheist do.
That's the way.
Yeah, exactly.
They and they can shake hands with fundamentalists.
oh. It's the same thing, but you're doing the same thing,
you’re doing the same thing.
And ever since we've met and I've read your book
“More than allegory”, it really opened my eyes
to reading the Bible in this more, deeper sense.
And and then there's just profound stuff in it.
Yeah. Oh, not only the Bible.
I mean, the way Christianity evolved into the fourth century.
The idea of the Trinity. Yeah.
Cynical ones would say they just stole it from, Hinduism, which has a trinity.
Oh, check.
I didn't even know. Okay. Yeah, Hinduism has a Trinity.
It has the Godhead, which is Brahman, and it has the Trinity, Vishnu, Krishna.
Now Vishnu, Brahma.
Oh, I'm sorry, I'm drawing a blank. But,
even in the later, dogmas of the fathers of the church,
there is amazing stuff how one can be three at once.
That's deep. And why three?
Why not five?
Why not two?
And there is deep psychological relevance to that.
Jung has done an enormous study
on this in different books like Aion
it's a book by Jung In which explores this.
So there is a lot of depth in religious, literature.
if you have the eyes to see, there's a lot there.
It's just great.
And we should go into stuff like that deeper into.
Just get back to this question from,
Michael to just finish it, because there's also
this question, that longing back, you want to be one back to Paradise.
And that's sort of in Christian thinking.
A lot of Christian thinking does sort of see the world has fallen
and we want back to Paradise or a new world.
How do you think about that then?
Is it even possible or to lose metacognition?
And is that a good stay? Do you want to be there?
Do you personally want to be there?
No, no, no.
And I think a lot of what the West makes of Eastern non-duality,
is this attempt to get rid of...
Metaconsciousness, get rid of metacognition.
Yeah, yeah.
Through meditation even just. Yeah, yeah, just stop it.
Just be here now.
Be here now.
Don't think about possible futures.
And don't think about the past.
Be here now.
It's a return to a kind of animal state.
It's a return to Paradise.
and people want that because they want to stop suffering.
Above all.
which is.
And I don't say this pejoratively.
It's just the correct word.
It's a very egoistic, thing to try.
Yeah. Because you are suffering.
Then you make your life about you.
And therefore the goal is to stop suffering because you find it unpleasant.
Yeah. Never mind what nature's trying to do through you.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's about you.
It's not that you try to stop suffering and the going to go
got to go to go back to the garden.
Well obviously God set up the situation
that led to the fall because there was nobody else who could have set that up.
Yeah. Right.
So he was winking to himself and trying to help himself.
Yeah.
and I think that's what we are doing. And
it is a form of sacrifice.
and it's not heroic.
It's not even noble because it's not like we were given a choice.
We were just born, and we suffer life’s though
Yeah.
But that somehow does a service to nature,
through metacognitive eyes, through our metacognitive device.
Nature can regard itself from a perspective that would otherwise
be completely impossible. Yeah, yeah.
You have to leave Paradise in order to know that Paradise exists.
Yeah.
Otherwise, you don't even know that you're naked
and you are naked, but you don't even know that.
Yeah. So do you even know that you're happy?
You don't.
Right?
You wouldn't know. We didn't know that you were naked.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, exactly. Yeah yeah yeah, yeah.
So being exiled from the garden,
in a sense, brings the garden into existence.
That's so deep. That's really deep.
Never thought of it like that. That's really deep.
And and it's just the incarnation of Christ
that then just brings the longing back to the father in a sense also then.
But it's like the prodigal son, you come back,
but with a different perspective.
Yeah, with a deeper perspective. Yeah.
You returned, but you returned a level higher in the spiral.
Yeah.
You are in the same place if you project down to the two dimensions.
Yeah. But in the third one you're higher.
You have new eyes. So.
And there was a feast, I mean, a banquet, right.
In the story of the prodigal son.
Yeah, yeah. Yes.
And the older brother, sort of like why he stayed.
He stayed in Paradise. He did not. Yeah.
That's. And and look,
Christianity is
I mean, I have enormous respect for eastern traditions.
Yeah.
when I was younger, I even tried to fancy myself
as being part of that somehow, because I thought that was superior.
Now I don't think it's superior or inferior.
I think the question is just senseless.
They are just they are just different things.
But the Christian tradition
has a depth.
That I find amazing, for instance.
And that's the New Testament stuff in the Old Testament.
There is a prefiguring of that in the book of job.
job was a sacrifice.
Job was sacrificed,
but not as explicitly as Jesus was sacrificed.
Yeah by God.
I mean, yeah, yeah, Satan, comeing with that sort of challenge.
Yeah. You can challenge. Arguably. Yeah.
job's suffered more than Jesus if you just.
Yeah. If you read this story. It's true. It's true.
This is like.
Oh, yeah. But this is also
this is blasphemy stuff.
I mean, Christian people watching like, this is this guy saying that job suffered
more than Christ.
But I mean, if you just read, if we read the facts of the story.
Oh, he did, but then, of course, the the suffering that sort of theologians
attribute to Christ is that he suffered from being apart from God.
Right? That some.
But that's a construct in a sense,
if you interpret
it psychologically as an I, as an idealist, that's my tendency
because I think everything is psychological.
So I try to interpret that psychologically job with a mirror
in front of a job, a job with a mirror in front of God.
Yeah. God had,
remember when job finally meets God?
Yeah, yeah.
God goes on a tirade - Yeah.
I am a force behind the storms
Who do you think you are? Yeah.
And that whole tirade,
what he's saying is I am powerful, but I don't know what I'm doing.
I am a force of nature.
I am instinctive, yeah.
No, I don't even know what I'm doing.
I don't weigh the consequences of what I'm doing.
I'm just doing this. Yeah, yeah.
I'm not metacognitive.
I'm all powerful, but I'm not metacognitive.
The way Jung put it, he said
God was.
Omniscient, but couldn't consult
his omniscient on demand.
Which I thought is a brilliant way of putting that.
And job was the mirror.
Job came back to God and showed him
all of your spontaneous power.
This is what it's leading to.
A righteous human being is now suffering.
Yeah, for no good reason. Yeah.
And that was the first confrontation between the lack of metacognition of God
and the consequences of that. Yeah.
And that was appreciation of the incarnation because Jesus suffered.
Jesus was a sacrifice, but he was God.
God entered his own creation and suffered like job.
Yeah, yeah.
So now God understood what the consequences were.
Yeah.
Through a first person perspective, not a second person perspective of Job.
Now, God himself was in that cross nailed to the cross.
And I find that incredibly, incredibly profound
because it's when the notion of sacrifice enters Western culture
and I consider it a profound, notion.
Life is sacrificial.
not in a heroic or, you know, in a way that you can make a film of
that's not that's not real, that that's illusion.
It's sacrificial in, in a deeper, real pungent way,
in the sense that your life's not about you.
My life's not about me.
In the same way that the blossom of my apple tree,
the life of the blossom, is not about the blossom.
The blossom has to die for the apple to grow
and for another apple tree to be produced.
Yeah.
If the blossom would make its life about itself, nature would grind to a halt.
Nothing would progress.
Yeah, our lives are not about ourselves.
Have never been, will never be.
And suffering arises from our insistence in making our lives
about ourselves and putting on
us the responsibility for being happy, which invariably fails.
Of course it does.
It's never been about you.
How can you possibly expect that you get something that presupposes a falsehood?
and only
in Christian tradition is this idea of a sacrificial life.
Yeah.
Built into the tradition very explicitly.
Yeah. Other traditions emphasize other truths.
Yeah.
That may be the Christian tradition doesn't.
But this notion of understanding that your life is not about you,
which was part of Christianity, of the theory of Christianity,
not the way the church employed it,
because the priests made the life of everybody about them.
but forget the institution.
Just look at the philosophy, the the idea of the spiritual behind
that this notion of a sacrificial life
is, is incredibly rich and important.
Then we've lost it. And it.
Yeah, I know the moment when we met, when I filmed you for a documentary
for Dutch television,
when we filmed in the Dom in Köln, which had sort of a deep meaning to you,
and you saw the what's it again called the crucifix there.
Yeah. Three kings, the shrine of the three Kings.
Yeah.
Above the shrine of the Three Kings.
And, you told me.
And this is also in your book, ‘modern allegory’,
that we all nailed to the cross of space and time.
Right? We are all nailed to the cross. Yeah.
And it sort of dawn to me the depth of that, that you are,
we are all in sort of that.
Christ position and then and I think the Gospel of Thomas,
these are like apocryphal what you said in English apocryphal, apocryphal writings.
Right. This stuff, everything that got banned, like
in the fourth century came a bit late, but the.
Exactly we we found it, luckily. But,
I think Christ Jesus says, in the Gospel of Thomas,
if you would know how to suffer, you wouldn't suffer as much as you suffer.
And I think that's what you are referring to, right?
If you can see the sacrificial,
purpose of your life and just sort of live it,
there's there's suffering, there's going to be suffering,
but there's more suffering if you think about it, and all these alternative lives
you could have that without suffering.
we amplify the suffering. Yeah, exactly.
You know how we amplify it? By convincing ourselves that we shouldn't be suffering?
Yeah, yeah, it’s the thought that I shouldn't be having this
Yeah. Yeah, I think this.
Yeah, that's what destroys you.
I had that when I got tinnitus for the second time, worsened my tinnitus a lot.
And I thought of suicide.
Yeah. twice very concretely.
You know, somebody like me, I know exactly how to bring my life to an end.
Oh, shit.
Quickly and painlessly, with what is in this house.
I know you mean that. Oh, man.
Yeah, for half an hour, I plan,
because I just think you're right.
I couldn't live with a dentist's drill.
Two of them inside my head. So if 1 or 2.
But what I realized is that the brunt of that
suffering was the narrative.
If I hadn't been as stupid as to remove
that siren from my wall myself,
I wouldn't be in this position. Yeah.
I didn't need to be in this position.
Yeah, that's what got to be.
That's what caused it, right?
You had an alarm bell ringing and you remove that which you shouldn't have done.
And then it went off like louder and you got er damaged.
Yeah.
The security I have the security system in the house
and several components, cameras, infrared, all the stuff.
But there is an enormous siren. Yeah.
there is supposed to be so loud that
whoever is trying to steal something just leaves.
Does ear damage.
Yeah.
And I, the technician came, replaced, renewed everything,
but forgot to remove the old sirene and I thought would just pull it out.
Yeah, but those things that have a safety mechanism, if you pull it out
and they off, they go off and it went off just like this distance from my head.
Yeah. Instant damage. Yeah.
But but in that half hour of distress when you were like, really seriously
considering to end your life, you realized this is a narrative.
And I know. - No, I wish this story was so romantic.
Wasn't. No, it wasn't that.
No, I just didn't have the guts.
I didn't have or, you know,
I think the
more realistic way to say is I didn't have the guts.
I was a coward
because I had decided at that moment that I didn't want this to go forward.
You know, there is a danger to being an idealist that,
the notion of annihilation is off the table.
So although you value life more because of that,
if life becomes unbearable, it's easier to pull the plug
because you're exchanging an unbearable known
for an unknown.
Now, it could be worse, but probably it's better.
you know what I mean? Yeah.
And that's the calculation. Yeah, yeah.
and at that moment I thought, that's the correct calculation,
but I didn't have the guts.
Yeah.
the realization that,
the brunt of that suffering was meta
Suffering, that if I would just surrender and open up to the noise
and accept it as a fact and understand that
my life is not about me has never been, and it will never be.
The fact that I am suffering
doesn't change the calculation of the worth of my life.
because it's not about my happiness. Yeah.
So even if it becomes impossible for me to be happy because I have
two dentist drills inside my head constantly, it's not about it.
It's not about my have
my having fun, my being happy, my being comfortable.
That's not what it's about.
Yeah.
And understanding this know eliminates the meta suffering.
and gives
yeah a level of peace that I didn't know
existed.
that voice in your head
telling you everything you've done wrong.
Everything you regret it. Just
that it did that for you that moment on broader in your life.
You just quit with that.
Yeah.
And today I look back and the tinnitus episode
was key to the storyline of my life.
if I if that hadn't happened, I wouldn't be leading the Essentia foundation today.
That's beautiful. Yeah. Oh, no.
And forget the potential beauty of it.
It's a raw fact.
You know how Essentia’s Foundation, took place?
It was on this very table in which we are.
I was sitting over there, Fred Matser matter was sitting where you are sitting.
He came to visit me when I was in the know, in the throes of despair.
And, he had
been asking me to leave my professional life.
I used to work ASML in the high tech world.
Almost 25 years and I didn't want to leave.
It was my comfort zone.
Everybody knew me and I was good at what I did.
I owned very well, and for five years Fred was saying, you shouldn't be doing this.
He had much more clarity about
the direction of my life than I did, its usually possible.
Because when you are immersed in it, you don't see. Yeah.
And it's somebody who has the eyes to see and is outside.
You can see that. So he saw that five years earlier.
And for five years I was telling him not yet, not yet
And then I was sitting there in the throes of despair,
and then he asked me,
I'm going to ask you the same question again,
now that you think you are completely incapacitated,
because I had just shared with him
the fact that I didn't think I could do my work anymore
because I couldn't concentrate, I couldn't sleep,
and my work was very intellectual.
And then he said, now that you are,
your defenses are weakened.
I was completely vulnerable.
Yeah, completely, completely vulnerable, he said.
Given this, I believe you can be extraordinarily
productive still, and I will bet on you,
if you quit your career and you join me,
we will create this foundation and I will make this bet on you.
Are you willing to do that?
And he looked at me in the eye, you know, as Fred can do now.
I can use these eyes. Yeah, yeah.
And then I was the tinnitus had disarmed me so completely
that I just looked at Claudia who was sitting next to me,
because, you know,
it was a decision that would affect her life as well.
Financial
And it's not the same like I used to have. Yeah.
You know, I don't have big bonuses and, you know, and and a lot of stuff is gone.
I looked at her. Are you okay with it?
And then she said, yes, I am okay with it.
And then I told Fred on the spot, yes, let's do this.
Had the accident not happened?
Yeah. Had I,
if I didn't have tinnitus,
I would be still armed
defending my comfort zone and there would be no essentia foundation.
But that's something you figure out only later.
So today I still have the tinitus and its damage and it's never going to go away.
Yeah, but, there are several days, many days
in which I don't even think about it.
I only remember it. That's good to hear it.
I hear it as I'm talking to you.
Yeah, we're talking about it.
Yeah, yeah.
But I it fades away even though the volume is still loud.
I don't think about it. And it
doesn't set the tone of my life anymore.
It has become
insignificant for my mental inner life,
even though the sound is still there.
It's a very annoying sound.
it's like the sound it makes you contort your facial muscles
like nails on a blackboard.
And in the first six months, I had a lot of facial and.
cramps because of it.
Yeah.
Just because I say consciously.
Yeah. Doing this day and night.
and I had tongue cramps.
And do you now sleep well?
I sleep wonderfully, okay.
But, the tinnitus is the last thing I hear before I fall asleep,
and it's the first thing I hear when I wake up.
Yeah, but I sleep wonderfully.
And I don't have cramps anymore.
Yeah.
Tongue cramps, man, is one of the worst things I've ever had.
You can have those, tongue cramps.
Well, I never read about it, but I have had.
You have had it now. Yeah. Yeah.
It it's horribly painful and it's not away.
It's right on. Yeah.
But I don't have it anymore I don't, I don't have the muscle spasms.
anymore. tinnitus still there. It's my friend now.
It's my new silence.
You look so.
You look happy. You know, that's just right.
I am very much in peace.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, Bernardo as we are now. Sort of.
We have to say, this is a long video for you guys, but there are timestamps.
So just go back and forth what you like and don't like and let us know that,
two more things we have a cake,
10K subscriber cake waiting for us, want to celebrate.
Eat that cake with you.
but before we do that, I mean, what are your now?
Your,
What are you proud of now?
A census now, three years up.
Think, is it two years?
Yeah, a little more than three years.
Yeah.
It's officially was founded in
July 2020.
but we became public only in January 2021.
But we have existed for over three years now.
Yeah, a proud I have lost my capacity to feel proud.
Doesn't happen anymore.
And this is not humble bragging, as they call it.
No it's no
it's it in
it doesn't happen anymore.
Okay. Check.
And, has the field shifted in a sense.
Do you see sort of a momentum in society, academia and in the network?
We're in?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah. In these two years.
Oh, absolutely. Yeah. Well,
we live too short lives to
experience how fast and how profound some shifts are,
because we only have a slight window to witness that.
But in the ebb and flow of cultural history, we are at an inflection point.
Two things will mark the next two decades
a shift to idealism, even if it doesn't go under this name.
Yeah, there is an enormous effort to redefine the words, matter
and physicality in order to bring idealism under those two words.
Yeah, yeah, there's a sense in that in which that would be a cop out.
Yeah.
just a classic. Kuhn. Right.
This is like paradigm.
What happens when paradigms are starting to break down
and people redefine words and that is pretty dramatic?
Yeah.
I had a private conversation with a very famous physicist whose name
I will not mention, but we were discussing,
you know, the new developments, you know,
in grand unification theories, loop quantum gravity and all that,
and the understanding that reality is actually a pattern
that can be mathematically described and it exists
outside time, and everything else is a projection of that.
Yeah. Into extension
and, and I was making the claim that,
the only way a mathematical pattern
can have ontological existence, is in the mind.
Yeah, because that's where
cognitive associations create mathematics.
That's the only mathematics we know of is in mind. Right.
So yeah.
And this person said, no, shouldn't do that.
It should be only math.
And then I asked, but what is then the ontological essence of pure math?
Pure abstraction. Yeah.
And then he said, why can't we just call it physical?
and for him, this was just a just part
of a very significant statement of a much broader conversation that we were having.
at two in the morning.
for me, I stopped when I heard that,
it dawned on me, this is how this can unfold.
Now, we will the culture may redefined
redefine the words matter and physical in such a way
that it will have absolutely nothing to do with what the words mean today.
Yeah.
in order to be able to say no physical physicalism is still true,
except that it means something completely different.
You make it, unfalsifiable by word redefinition.
Yeah. Yeah.
so that can play out as well. But,
that will be a bit of a hard one to swallow, right?
For someone like you just means decades of work and thinking.
And then too long as no know, I'm.
I'm not married even to my name, let alone two words you will use.
So long as the understanding is there.
I don't care about the words.
My problem with this word redefinition is that I think it creates confusion.
It delays the actual understanding.
It causes us to hold on to baggage that should be discarded.
Yeah, because it makes no sense anymore psychologically.
Carry that along because you are using the same word. Yeah.
So I think it's unhelpful.
But I'm not out.
I'm ultimately married to the to the word if, if God would appear in front of me
and say we will use the same word, but everybody will understand
what it will then mean.
And I would say, no problem.
And Bernardo is matter
and then nobody would remember my name.
I don't give a damn about that.
That has disappeared from my life.
But this is this will be a one shift with new words or the old words.
This will be one shift before 2050.
Yeah, the other shift.
I don't know whether you want to.
Oh, yeah, I want to hear it. Yeah.
Now I want to hear it
The other shift will be about non-human.
Non-human intelligence.
that would be the other coin that would drop
in the collective psyche of the culture.
And that would be a vast it will be.
It will be perceived as a vast change,
before people understand that it's what has been going on, how long?
We just didn't talk about it before.
And what are we talking about then?
Men are non non-human intelligence. Your not talking about a.i.
No no no non-human biological intelligence.
Yeah yeah yeah
that would be the next coin
Not UFO alien stuff?
Yeah.
Oh that stuff. Oh that stuff. Yeah.
That is a great cliffhanger.
That's a great cliffhanger.
No more on that.
yeah.
There's a question, actually.
I think it was a question coming to you
or I know this one might have been directed to me, a video on psychedelics
where we refer to the psychedelic experience as a model collapse.
And I because as a filmmaker, I did a documentary on bacteria.
It still has to come out.
I was fascinated myself with sort of how bacteria
are a dissociation in a sense, you could say, because they created
a boundary, chemically speaking, fighting off entropy.
And it kickstarted life on our planet.
And, then the yellow and the yellow shuttle asked
me, since life is dissociation in universal consciousness, do
bacteria and viruses have inner life or the sense of being
if no,
then how can the substrate universal mind have the sense of being?
And if yes, is the sense of rock bottom being more close
or akin to simple beings like single cells?
So first you, Bernardo, I have my own thoughts on
bacteria and consciousness, but what are your thoughts?
There is a significant difference between viruses and bacteria,
or archaea or fungi.
Yeah, they're all single celled organisms.
but they're very different from viruses.
viral virologists usually refer to viruses as virus particles.
they are more mineral, they don't metabolize.
Yeah. That's the key difference.
Yeah. Bacteria metabolizes.
Yeah.
Archaea metabolize.
Viruses do not metabolize.
in order to reproduce, they need to hijack the metabolism of another organism.
Otherwise they, they cannot reproduce.
I, I recognize that there is a gray area
in between sophisticated viruses and very simple archaea, or prokaryotes.
Yeah.
but I tend to think that,
viruses, do not have they are not what dissociation looks like.
They do not have private mental inner life.
Yeah.
they may reflect a configuration in the mentation of nature
that is getting close to spinning off, an alter
Yeah. So getting close to that. But it's not there yet.
Yeah, because I think what an alter there looks like is metabolism.
Yeah. And viruses don't metabolize.
Yeah.
Do bacteria have any inner life. You bet.
Actually if you have, you know, a simple microscope at home
and you watch a paramecium swimming in dirty water,
it's very difficult to not conclude that that thing has mental inner life.
Yeah, it runs away from danger.
Yeah. Looks for food. Yeah.
And then sometimes it moves in a way that you can see.
Yeah. It's cautious.
Yeah. It's being careful. Yeah.
sometimes it darts straight for food and then it gorges.
Just absorbs that food. You know, it's a source of oxygen.
It will go to its oxygen away from acid.
Yeah.
So even simple life forms and capable of having fun and enjoying.
Did you know sort of the bacterial bacteria have a language, right?
They communicate with each other through molecule secretion.
And then there's a sort of a threshold level where they will start doing
stuff together. And this is called quorum sensing.
So this sense how large their group is to start doing stuff.
So I think in some, jellyfish to light up sort of bioluminescence
to do that process.
It's triggered in some cases by bacteria.
And they do so when they hit a threshold lever and they communicate,
just through molecule secretion.
Oh, absolutely. I mean, that's that's cool.
To make it more relatable to people.
Have you ever watched the spider weaving its web?
It's amazing.
It first climbs through several different branches to watch this space.
And it's processing.
It's planning, it might detecting where it's going to put
the foundation threads to hold the web in place.
and then it starts weaving.
I mean, the brain of that thing.
To see that you need a microscope.
Yeah.
And obviously has inner life, I have no problem
at all extrapolating that down to archaea, even simpler.
But inner life, like feelings or like inner life, like simple inner life.
Yeah, but there is something it is like to be a bacterium or an Archeaon.
There is something it is like to be them. Yeah.
They have private conscious inner life even though very, very simple.
Yeah.
And instinctive in a sense because I think Nick Lane, the biologist,
who has written much about this,
says that they, they sort of make they kind of have states
that sort of are stressed or they know I'm in a good state, you know, bacteria.
I know that.
And this is bye bye model building by just,
I mean but what I like about it is that when you and I will get,
I will share this on our channel later, it's still sort of under, copyright
or we wait for when the documentary releases.
But we made a model of
a molecular landscape of a bacterium, a single bacterium.
It's just crazy.
You know, there are 4 million proteins in one bacterium.
And we visualize through animation, 150,000, which took like a render time
of months to just render through Molecular Maya the motion of these things.
And this is Brownian movement. Movement. Right.
So the slow down, slow down time, it's like just a construct in film.
But slow down to nanoseconds to just show the movement of these proteins.
But what it did with me is that, you see,
it's like when you said, like, computation,
this is just just water it tubes like, filled with water empty.
Right.
And then but only because it's in a microchip and we don't understand it.
It becomes magic.
And then and when seeing sort of the mechanism of a bacterium
like this, we visualize it accurately, as accurately as possible.
Then you then for me it was like, this cannot be it.
This is us, you know, but it's just these particles.
I saw the model of it, you know, we
I don't know how to explain it to you, but do you understand what I tried
to convey?
That's sort of I got down to sort of the simplest form
of life, and I just could not see how consciousness could be caused by it.
Oh no it can’t
You know what I mean? Because I saw the tubes.
I saw the computation, and I saw our model of the bacterium
is that we know we have these proteins, we know how they interact,
and we know what the bacterium then does.
But when you then visualize and you see it in front of your eyes,
and then to think it, it generates consciousness.
That’s totally logical
I could not wrap my mind around it, but somehow,
because of our brain, it's so complex, then we can start believing it.
But I think also for idealism... behind the bullshit, behind complexity.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
And we give it legitimacy because it's hidden behind complexity.
Yeah.
And then if you open the doors and you see the bullshit, then it's just bullshit.
You go down to the cell level, you go down,
down, down, down, down, down to your cells,
you know, your mitochondria and you see the machinery of it
because it's just our models of what's happening.
It's machines, you know, molecular machine.
And then it's just it becomes evident that it's impossible
that that can create consciousness, or at least to me, that's - no I can't
there are still puzzling things.
Even if you bring down this machine model all the way down,
there are still puzzling things.
The model you made, for instance, doesn't use first principles,
doesn't use the basic laws of quantum field theory.
No, because otherwise you cannot compute even one protein.
Stand still.
And yeah, let alone millions, you know, bacteria.
So we are already making enormous simplifications to do even that.
Yeah, yeah.
True true true. Yeah.
So then even then there are things that a real life
bacterium does, like protein folding that, and it does that in like two seconds.
Yeah.
It takes our computers days
to figure out how that protein will fold.
We don't know how that mechanism does that.
Yeah.
Which suggests that there is
if that mechanism is simply an appearance of consciousness,
then there are capabilities inherent in consciousness
that we cannot capture in computational models.
We just cannot do it anywhere near fast enough.
Yeah.
In order to be as fast as - and self-replication, of course,
of the cells that's that's also that it's it's crazy.
That's that's more computable.
Do you think. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.
When you have one DNA strand divide from the other
and then used as a template to copy new ones.
So you have mitosis.
That's better computable.
But when you go to really sub molecular levels
and becomes difficult -what's happens there. Yeah.
The computability of that is not clear.
You know, we may not we may never have the computational power
on this planet to, to,
to model one, one,
bacterium from first principles all the way.
yeah.
Because it's an explosion of exponential complexity.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And yet nature does it just like like that. Yeah.
And we still don't have a clue of how the first bacterium.
I mean, Bruce Damer is working on this, you know, that's advancement in the work.
It's him and his team is an advancedment
But he still calls it like a leap.
It's just it's like a gap.
It's it's enormous gap.
The first protocells to bacterium.
It's still for him also it's still he made it more plausible
with the idea of communities such that when,
when one of those protocells dies, the state
that it represents is not lost because it's sort of preserving the community.
and that solves a key problem, because the key problem of abiogenesis is,
even if by chance you get all
the complexity of a full bacterium, which is already unbelievable enough,
but you get all this complexity, but you miss the ability to reproduce,
then that will eventually die and all that state is lost.
Now you have to start from scratch. Yeah. And that's the key problem.
And Bruce's and his colleagues, how do you
the idea of communities is that the community preserves the state.
So you get more time to get it more sophisticated, more,
Is that through gene swapping, no that that's already when a bacterium is.
No. I would have to reread it.
I think we're off..
But, yeah, but to get back to sort of the more
philosophical question here, would it be,
more close to,
rock bottom of being like, very pure form of conscious.
If you say like it presents itself to us, the dissociation process as metabolism.
And this is the most simple form of metabolism.
So it's the most it's the most simple form of disassociation.
Yeah. Of alterness and it's yeah.
Alter very little mental contents within the disassociation
but already metacognitive -no
So where do you then draw that line.
I mean when does that start.
You don't have like a threshold in your theory or thinking,
but humans clearly are metacognitive Yeah.
There is some evidence that a pachyderms, some pachyderms can be metacognitive
elephants, pigs perhaps, or maybe cetaceans, whales, dolphins,
some mollusks, octopuses.
but even then, their degree of meta consciousness is nowhere near ours.
Yeah.
When you become really meta conscious, you unplug from instinct.
You are no longer connected to the web of instinct that makes everything balanced.
Yeah, you are exiled from the garden.
Yeah.
And you, by that, you mean more concretely that, you wouldn't sort of,
take your part in normal life anymore, right?
Or like where animals sort of their stress still, so sort of.
Well, yeah.
The means that your choice is, are no longer spontaneous choices.
You know, your choices are now deliberate.
You deliberate your choices.
Should I do this?
Should I do that?
You now recognize yourself as a subject
in some way, separate
from the rest of the world, and you begin to ponder in those terms,
I am a subject, and then there is the rest of the world.
They are not me.
The moment that that that split happens,
you are exiled from Paradise.
And, And your choices are no longer no longer instinctual choices.
They are now deliberate and they aim to maximize
some objective cost function of your ego self.
Yeah, yeah.
we start thinking it
through instead of just acting.
Yeah.
Because animals instinct always presents them with one
clear, unambiguous option for every situation.
they don't hesitate.
Yeah. Yeah, right. Yeah. Animals act.
And there's this. Funny.
This makes me think of a funny anecdote.
My favorite filmmakers, Werner Herzog, and he has this documentary
going to the science community on the North Pole or whatever.
And then at the beginning of the film,
he says that sort of that he has his own questions,
and he says he shows like, there's this painting of a, a monkey riding a goat.
And then it says,
I asked myself why, monkeys didn't start domesticating other animals
to chase and find the bad guys, to fight the bad guys.
And it makes me think of that because that's like what we do, right?
Sort of.
We start building models and deliberately thinking good, bad
and setting up systems and judgments, and there's no lie.
in that sort of cannot sleep at night because -there's no spontaneity.
Know, because he killed another animal.
Or other animals thinking what you do is so wrong.
Yeah, it's. Yeah.
Great.
Yeah.
I think, you know, nature is as spontaneous as an archaeon in the sense that it
what it does, it's always spontaneous, and there is always one clear choice.
There is no deliberation, there's no hesitation.
How do we know that the laws of physics don't fail?
nature behaves in very regular, predictable ways.
Yeah. And it doesn't hesitate. Yeah.
If you if you if I'm holding my phone and I'm about to drop it
when I open my hand, the phone doesn't hesitate.
Yeah. That's a yeah.
The phone doesn't hang in there thinking yeah.
Should i fall? - I'm suffering I'm suffering.
Here they go.
Oh the phone just falls.
So yeah on that basis and I mean I'm
half joking but the example is real.
And yeah phones don't hesitate when they release they fall, stuff falls
You know, electromagnetic fields
pop up when you pass current through a wire.
They don't hesitate.
It doesn't take them a while to think, should we come up and.
No, no, they are there.
Yeah. Nature is spontaneous.
Like an Archeaon. Like a bacteria. Yeah, yeah.
Instinct provides one answer for every question.
It's unambiguous.
And then it just happens without hesitation.
So does nature have a sense of being?
Yes, but not the metacognitive one. Yeah.
I don't think nature is sitting there thinking I am.
No, no, it's just a human thing and it just just does its stuff.
Yeah.
There's this funny, funny thing thinking about bacteria, but it's a bit
sort of thinking, you know, along another line is that if you think about,
dualistically and good and bad and stuff like that,
I mean, those bacteria are fighting like a world war
right now on our on the surface of our skin,
you know, and it's just colonies fighting to colonize our gut and
pathogens and everything is happening, but it's all contributing
to this larger system.
Me sitting here and I'm feeling just fine, you know, and just
that somehow helps me also looking at human
suffering in a sense, if you could identify being
if you say sort of when I let go of those metacognitive thoughts about suffering
and it makes me suffer less, it's also identifying with a larger whole
you are part of, right? In a sense.
And when I mean, if, if bacteria would be
could have the conscious could consciously think,
but I'm contributing to this larger system that I cannot see, but I'm part of it.
And the suffering would be less
Perhaps the bacteria knows that instinctively,
because it's not
foundering, it's operating according to instinct.
And the instinct is this.
But you understand what I'm trying to convey.
Yeah, yeah, I think the ideal state would be one in which we are metaconscious,
because the price we pay for metaconsciousness is egotism.
Yeah, because we recognize ourselves as individual subjects.
And that helps a lot, because now we can ponder things.
We can reflect about the great questions of life.
We can inspect the contents of our own minds and gain insight about ourselves.
All of that is made possible by a recognition of ourselves
as individual subjects.
If you don't recognize yourself as distinct from what else is going on,
there is no and you cannot ponder the great questions of life.
You are like a leaf on a tsunami.
You go for the right. Yeah.
And the
only way you can stick your head out of this, the tsunami, and take account
of what's happening is through metaconsciousness, metacognition.
but that leads to egotism, because now you recognize yourself
as an individual, distinct from the rest.
And that leads to wars and all the crap.
the ideal state would be one where there is a metaconsciousness,
but there is also the understanding that our lives are not about us,
have never been, will never be, cannot ever be.
because that harmonizes
us back with with the rest of nature.
We are not separate from nature, and we are something nature's doing.
And we are not just watching
the Watcher, is doing,
of what is being watched, come again
The watcher is a behavior, a doing.
Yeah. Of what is being watched. Yeah.
and understanding that is the end.
The egotism but preserving
metacognition and, and
this race is what defines whether our
this race between increasing metacognition but also the understanding
that life is sacrificial and it's not about us
who wins this race determines
whether our civilization comes to an end or not.
if egotism
grows out of hand with the understanding that,
yeah, Christianity originally tried to bring about.
Yeah, we will kill each other in a nuclear war.
Yeah.
but if that understanding, which is a metacognitive understanding,
the understanding that your life is not about you.
Yeah, is a completely metacognitive understanding
that understanding wins the race.
We survive.
We have a civilization. Yeah.
So the planet survives anyways. Yeah.
Even after we destroy it to give it a million years
That's the beauty of God, Bernardo I think that's the beauty.
I think that's what we need to.
That's can be our little contribution, right?
From the essentia foundation. That is what it's about.
Because that's what idealism can offer you.
Sort of that insight.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah.
And but notice the magnitude of the challenge
the entire
industry and philosophy
of self-help in the West
is completely based on the notion that your life's about you,
and you should take the reins of your life.
Yeah. You should take control of your life. Yeah.
And if you do that, you can do anything.
Yeah, yeah.
it's the foundation of the Western sense of well-being in the 21st century.
There is a resurgence of stoicism, right?
That sort of does
want people to recognize that, don't worry.
What you cannot have influence over and and stuff like that.
But to me, that's instrumental in a sense. Right?
It's not sort of if it goes you, it goes beyond the mark.
Because to recognize that your life is not about you is not to say
that your life is meaningless.
Yeah, the blossom of the apple tree,
it's life is not about it.
It's about the apple.
But without the blossom, there is no apple and there is no next apple tree.
Yeah.
So the fact that our lives are not about us
does not entail or imply that our lives are meaningless.
I happen to think they're extremely meaningful.
Yeah, precisely because they are not about us.
Precisely because they and about something much bigger than us.
And stoicism fails to recognize this latter part.
But life is meaningful.
Stoicism is like throwing your arms up and whatever it is, let me see.
Now, see what I'll.
But I'll comment on videos like that later on.
You see like popular channels,
sort of like coming up with these stories that it's all meaningless.
But that's,
but isn't that beautiful?
Because now you can give...
But you know what I mean.
You know that
that's sort of a popular cultural narrative to then sort of see the meaning.
And that's for me also, it's a surface understanding, but like existentialism,
like the French philosophers after The Second War, it's stuff like I liked it
when I, when I left Christianity as sort of a ‘’doekje voor het bloeden”
We say in Dutch you know what that expression means, right?
It's just sort of like
it's just to reduce your pain.
Because of the metaphysical. Yeah.
A band-aid for your metaphysical loss.
But when you then sort of when I sort of got familiar with idealism I saw
It's just like a placebo or it's a what is it?
Not even a placebo.
It's say, yeah, and people are handed lemon.
They try to make lemonade.
Yeah.
You know, it's it's a very human, but it's unnecessary.
Yeah.
No, you can have oranges. You don't need the lemons.
And we kind of have to conclude this video.
We can have our 10K subscriber cake which I brought along but I, it’s frozen.
And we had to postpone this video because I had a flu last week.
So it's sort of it's not in its best shape but let's try it out.
Yeah I get the cake.
Yeah.
So here we are, the 10K subscriber cake I don't know if it's.
Can we see it Max okay okay cool.
Yeah. Like I said that's been a week in the freezer.
Sort of ten K, but it isn't right anyway that you should say ten, 10,400 already.
So thanks so much for subscribing to our channel.
And, by doing videos like these, we just hope to grow it
and comment and ask us questions and make suggestions for future videos.
And Bernardo and I am now going to eat this ten K subscriber cake.
I thought you would have brought, Limburg Vlaai.
Would you like that better?
They put on prints
Yeah, vlaai is more Dutch. This is like more normal.
this is American. Yeah, this is American.
Cake to wrap this very long conversation with Bernardo. up.
I just want to say, really, thanks for helping us grow this channel
for the last couple of years. And we are just
looking very much
forward to growing the channel, with your help,
to give us all the feedback that you think is useful for us.
Suggestions, questions.
We will do this more regularly.
Right, Bernardo.
so just thanks.
And, yeah.
Are we going to eat it a ten times as big a cake?
Yeah. In a year time.
I say that's 100,100 times.
If I can order a bigger cake than ten times a big.
Okay. That's said here. Thank you.