- One thing that I'm really proud of,
and I'd like to say to you in front of a camera,
and maybe it's the only thing
that I'm really proud of in my life,
is that all these conductors were my friends.
(upbeat, happy music)
- When he showed an early interest in music,
his father discouraged him.
When asked about this later, his father said,
"How could I know he'd turn out to be Leonard Bernstein."
(audience laughing)
Conductor of major orchestras,
composer of Broadway musicals and symphonies,
lecturer, teacher, pianist,
shameless romantic,
and Renaissance man of the musical theater.
And it is his gift for making music accessible to all of us
that has lodged him in our hearts forever.
(audience applauding)
♪ It's a hell of a town ♪
(audience applauding)
- In the spring of that first season at Curtis,
I read in the paper that Koussevitzky was opening a
school called Tanglewood at the Berkshire Music Center
(gibberish) and applications would be considered.
So I armed myself with these letters
from Roy Harris, Aaron Copland, William Schuman,
you know, the same old three letters
and I went to Boston and had an interview with Koussevitzky.
And that's when I first met him,
was in the green room of Symphony Hall.
He was so grand and I was so shaking.
And he said, "Oh, you studied with Fritz Reiner.
"Very interesting."
Then he read the letters
and he said, "You know Aaron.
"Vonderful composer, vonderful."
I said, by mistake, "Vonderful", I agreed,
which I thought would eliminate me forever,
but it didn't register.
He suddenly said, "But of course I accept you in my class."
I didn't have to play the piano or do anything.
Just on the basis of letters and, I don't know personal,
'cause we obviously loved each other on sight.
And so it was, we became,
he became by father instantly.
And so I went to Tanglewood that summer of 1940
and every week
the student who conducted class
had to play something with the student orchestra.
It was a regular weekly thing.
And I had just arrived there,
this is the first week.
And my assignment turned out to be
The Randall Thompson Second Symphony,
all of it, not just a movement.
Usually you had a movement or something
'cause there was so many people in the class.
No, the whole Second Symphony,
"because of course he is your teacher in Curtis."
He was sort of favoring that piece at the moment.
So that was the first piece I ever conducted
under Koussevitzky at Tanglewood.
And it took a lot of doing.
I'd never conducted an orchestra anywhere before
and this was before a public and rehearsed
and became a concert and so on.
It was the first time I ever did such thing
and it was in the first week.
And Randall was there
and it wasn't easy.
And I remember particularly when we got to the scaretto,
which is in seven in four time.
And it was a little tricky.
It's not really,
but then it seemed tricky, in those days.
That was, after all, 41 years ago (chuckling).
And I remember sitting in bushes, hiding in bushes,
studying the score all day so I wouldn't be disturbed
by friends or people walking by,
learning this piece with all my might.
And then coming to rehearse it
with Koussevitzky sitting there
because he was the conducting teacher.
And he'd observed the rehearsal,
then we'd have a private session,
everyone in the class did.
But it was obvious from the beginning that we were the,
the relationship.
We loved each other and until the day he died.
He died in my arms.
It was an incredible relationship.
In '51, so we had 11 years.
- Um-hmm.
I think it's a lovely touch that later
on you recorded that symphony with the Philharmonic.
- I love it still. - Wonderful piece.
- But it was a huge thing to do
for your first student concert.
Everybody else had somebody like the second movement
of the New World Symphony or the finale
of something or other, Seventh Beethoven,
but I had the whole Randall Thompson.
And when it came to the scaretto, which was in seven,
Koussevitzky was sitting there in this great cape
on the stage of The Shed
and I was trying to get them
through to teach them (mimicking instrumental).
The whole thing is in that, it doesn't change.
But once you learn one seven four,
I've learned them all.
But in trying to teach them that pattern,
I remember Koussevitzky getting up and saying,
"No, kinder, you see,
"what Leonardzhka trying to tell you is"
(mimicking instrumental)
missing the whole point of the syncopation.
- Yes.
- You understand it is three plus four
(mimicking instrumental)
And it's not (mimicking instrumental)
at all, it's (mimicking instrumental).
I didn't say anything
and it made it very much harder
for me to teach them the syncopation-
- Of course. - Which was the whole point
of the little jazzy thing in the scaretto.
But I got over that.
That was one thing Kousse couldn't teach me.
I could teach him about jazz. - American syncopation.
- And years later when,
not so many years later, eight years later,
when he conducted the premiere of my "Age of Anxiety"
and I was at the piano,
he had terrible trouble with the jazz movement,
the mask, he couldn't beat it.
And I had to have special sessions with him
at the piano and show him. - Um-hmm.
- I was, again, teaching him, see, about that.
And he said, "Leonardzhka, this very difficult.
"You know why, it is not symphonical music.
"It is a jazz.
"It is not for symphony.
"Why you not write different scaretto.
" Make different scaretto."
I said, "It's too late.
"This is the piece.
"And it's all bound up with the rest."
And I said, "It's not really hard."
We went through for hours and he finally got it
and he said, "You know, Leonardzhka,
"it is a jazz but it is a noble jazz."
(laughing)
And that, for somehow and some reason
he had convinced himself that he could now conduct it
because it was noble. - With dignity.
- So we went through (mimicking instrumental)
as though he were conducting,
God knows what, a Beethoven, "Missa Solemnis".
And it was quite wonderful.
Thus, the premier of "Age of Anxiety" happened.
Now going back, I was his student for a summer
I shall never forget,
I mean, the first summer with Koussevitzky,
the first summer of Tanglewood.
- [Interviewer] Tanglewood.
- Then I went back to Reiner
for a second year in Philadelphia
because it was a two-year course, got my diploma.
I studied there with Renee Longy,
score reading, great lady,
Randall Thompson, orchestration,
except we spent most of our time
doing London Times crossword puzzles
'cause it turned out we were both fanatics about that.
And he kept millions of them in his bottom desk drawer.
And I would come in with my orchestration exercise.
He'd look at me and say, "Great, okay."
(interviewer laughing)
And out would come the puzzle
and we'd sit and do that for an hour
and just had the best time.
We got to be very good friends.
And Reiner and I got to be very good friends,
strangely enough.
- That's something special. - That's really something.
I mean, not good friends
that we went out and had a drink together
or nothing like that.
But enough so that a certain other member of the class,
a boy from Hartford, Connecticut,
bought a gun and ammunition with every intention
of shooting Reiner and me.
And the only way we,
he just went ape, he went out of his mind
because he thought Reiner favored me
and disfavored him.
Walter Hendl went through the same thing, by the way.
He almost died of a nervous breakdown
because it was so difficult, what Reiner asked us
to do and to know.
When this boy from Hartford,
whose name I won't mention because he's around
and he teaches,
being crazy, made the crazy mistake
of announcing his plan to Randall Thompson.
He said, I'm going to do this.
I want you to know I'm going to do this today.
And he showed the gun and the bullets, which he had bought.
And I came in for my orchestration class that morning
and Randall stuck me in the bathroom and said,
"Lock the door and don't come out 'til I tell you."
What?
'Cause he had been in before. - Yes.
- I was sitting there in Randall's bathroom
(laughing)
for one hour without knowing why.
I don't think I've told this story to anybody.
- I've never heard it. - Anyway.
He finally said, he said, "Okay, you can come out now.
"He's gone."
I said, "Who's gone."
He said, "It's taken care of."
Apparently the police and ambulance had come
and taken him to Hartford.
Everything was saved, including Reiner's life,
my life, and Randall's life,
'cause he said, then I'm gonna shoot you
after I get them,
because the whole school is corrupt
and it's all about Leonard Bernstein.
So they managed to get him to a hospital and into care.
And today he's teaching in a university,
I won't even tell you which.
It was like that with Reiner, some people cracked.
And there were people who quit.
Lukas Foss was in the class, he was marvelous.
Walter Hendl, Max Goberman.
- Oh yeah. - Oh, we had a wonderful,
Israel Rocklin.
Where is he now?
Is he in Texas?
- He was in Fort Worth but he left.
He went to London and I don't think he's there now.
I'm not sure.
- I haven't heard his name,
- He married a wealthy woman.
- Ah, well, that's a good solution.
- He doesn't have to work.
- We had a pretty wonderful class, Walter Hendl.
But I had a drink one day with Walter
when the day was done and he was crying.
He said, "I don't know what to do.
"I can't stand it."
And I said, "I know.
"I can't stand it either but you just have to do it.
"You have to suffer this man's standards
"because that's what we're learning."
He gave us the Ninth Symphony to learn, for example,
the finale because oh, he was very crazy
about rich native.
So we started with "Carmen" rich native,
"Don Giovanni" rich native (singing in Italian).
We had to do that, we had to do "Carmen",
we had to do all kinds of rich native.
And then finally the great rich native of Beethoven.
(singing in German)
and we had to learn the whole thing.
And where we came in,
when the famous tune begins (mimicking instrumental)
and the variations of it,
it was one where the great pursuit of the gatos.
(mimicking instrumental)
And he stopped everyone in the class and he said,
"What's the bassoon playing?"
I wanna hear the whole arigato.
And that's when everybody, that's when Walter cracked.
He said, "How can he expect us to know that?"
It's hard, I thought it was just about the rich natives
but we have to know that too?
Well, you have to know that.
"You have to know that too."
And it was a very melodramatic year.
- [Interviewer] It sounds it.
- Anyway we skip
and then I go back next summer,
the second summer with Koussevitzky '41, fabulous summer.
And now I am with a diploma from two schools,
Curtis...
Oh, I did I mention Isabella Vengerova, my piano teacher?
- [Interviewer] I was gonna ask about her.
She was in Philadelphia. - She was one of the greatest.
She was at Curtis.
I knew I left out the most important thing.
What a lady.
- [Interviewer] You worked with her while
you were working with Reiner at Curtis?
- Because of the committee that had to pass
on who would study with Serkin did not admit me.
And she was on that committee and she said, I'll take him.
The other people in the committee said,
no, you can't, your schedule is filled.
She said, "I'll take him anyway."
I learned all this years later,
I didn't know what was going on.
- [Interviewer] Yeah, sure.
- They wouldn't let me study with Serkin
because, why, I don't know.
Those ladies, Mrs. Braun
and the friends of Madame Bach.
- Bach, yeah.
Anyway, I'm very happy I studied with Vengerova,
as she raised hell with me
and she made me listen to what I was doing at the piano,
which nobody had ever made me do.
She said, you wouldn't dream of letting
your orchestra play the way you just played.
Do you realize what you just did?
If that were an orchestra,
you would stop immediately and correct it.
Banging the left hand like that
and not letting the other line come out.
How dare you?
Who you think you are?
You have to listen when you play.
She was a tyrant
and she taught me to listen.
And that affected me as a conductor.
- [Interviewer] Yes, of course.
- I didn't study Mozart with her,
I studied Beethoven sonatas, Scriabin sonatas.
I don't know Schumann sonatas, Schott Mein sonatas.
The first year was hell with her.
I was so shaking and frightened
every time I'd come for a lesson that I could barely play.
And the second year I realized
that she was a great lady
and that she loved me enough to be tyrannical
and make it serious.
But she wasn't just being brutal,
she was being,
she was taking it seriously.
And then we became very, very close and loving friends.
She was one of the great people in my life I mourn.
- Were there European conductors?
Not for instance, counting Mitropoulos, Koussevitzky,
and Reiner.
But I mean European conductors who stayed in Europe,
who also had an effect on you or some influence?
- Well, you asked about those who influenced-
- Yes. - Me most.
All right, now those are my teaching conductors,
so to speak, in my student days.
And once I became a conductor,
the Assistant Conductor of the Philharmonic, I was 25,
It wasn't until then that I met Toscanini
because Toscanini, whom I had adored,
but only in certain works, on the radio
but I'd never met him because he
and Koussavietsky hated each other.
And I was sure he'd never want to meet me anyway
because I was a Koussavietsky disciple.
And he was sure I'd never want to meet him
because he was Koussavietsky's great opponent?
- Was it purely a rivalry? - And he used to listen
to my broadcasts, it turned out,
as I had listened to his for years, but I was a newcomer.
He had heard me on the radio
and he'd asked somebody to bring me out, finally,
he was very old by this time,
bring me out for a New Year's afternoon.
The New Years he always had people in.
And I came trembling.
Horowitz was there and a whole crowd.
And we loved each other.
We became very close friends.
And he was too old,
I mean, there was no time to make a relationship anymore.
But what I do remember,
I don't think I've ever told this either,
in the course of that year that followed
that New Year's meeting...
Oh, and every concert I heard of his,
since I'd met him, was bad.
For some reason he forgot,
and he was chastising himself
and backstage he would scream and groan
stupido Toscanini, bad (slapping).
And the more he did that, the more I loved him
because the humility of it is so moving.
And that's a thing you don't find very often.
And of all people, Toscanini. - Yeah.
- The synonym of conductor was Toscanini,
in those days, right? - Um-hmm.
- Still is, I guess. - Absolutely.
- Well, when this man and I got to know each other,
I had to find reasons to see him.
And he had to find reasons to see me.
Because we loved each other,
there was no real occasion.
And there was always
that Koussavietsky thing in the way.
He was never quite sure that I really admired him.
- Well, was that purely a rivalry?
Well, I mean, was it an intense professional jealousy
just between the two men
or was it a matter of perhaps
of public recognition and the degrees of each,
the way in which each man
got more or less recognition from the public?
Or anything else? - It was both.
- I don't know.
- I mean, 'cause Koussavietsky used to say,
"Oh, Toscanini, he's very good conductor
"for opera." (interviewer laughing)
- For opera, very good.
"Why he conduct Beethoven?" - And what did Toscanini say?
- "Why?
"Why he bother?"
- [Interviewer] Really?
- Then Toscanini used to sort
of spit and (spitting and mumbling).
(interviewer laughing)
He doesn't know the score.
If he no look at the score,
he no know what and play it
or something like that. - All right.
- He no know what a three, four-
- Yes, but they were both incredible.
- Incredible.
Just imagining this horrible rivalry.
- Yes. - It was very hard
to be friends with both.
But I was friends with almost every conductor then
and that was quite a source of pride for me.
George Szell was my dear friend.
Not many people can say George Szell was their dear friend.
- He was a great friend-
- We played four-hand music
and cried together at Schubert and Mozart.
We discovered each other in Chicago,
Ravinia, one summer when I was conducting
and he was there and we were in somebody's house,
we played four hands and we realized we were
in the presence of each other. - Yeah.
- And that lasted.
I was there when he died too.
- No, really? - And I went to Cleveland.
I didn't see him.
They wouldn't let me in the room.
I was there when Stravinsky died.
But there's another story.
Anyway,
I was about to conduct excerpts
from "Romeo and Juliet" with Bernoise
and so I was listening to peoples' records.
In those days, I used to listen to records and things
and see how other people did it.
Then I would study the score for the first time
and I made up some reasons to ask Toscanini
about a certain tempo he'd taken
that didn't seem to be baring those Metronome marks.
It was just an excuse to go see him.
I called, an appointment was made,
I went out to Riverdale, very exciting.
I was gonna see Toscanini again.
And I went there, we spent hours and hours together.
It was just amazing,
even before we've got to the point
of "Romeo and Juliet".
But finally we did 'cause there had
to be a justification for my being there.
And so I said, it says a dotted quarter equals 60
and it seems to me that you do it much faster,
idiot questions.
Who cares about Metronome marks?
- [Interviewer] True.
- And he said, I always make,
how dare you say I make...
He knew Metronoma.
It sounds like a variety of cancer.
- Um-hmm. - Metronoma.
He said, I have to get my score.
So he was a 83-year-old man or something like,
with the agility of a Puma,
he goes dashing up these staircases,
three flights, to the attic where he had all the scores.
And I'm, with my asthma, trying to follow him,
barely keeping up with this ancient man.
I was a young kid.
And I arrived huffing and puffing
and he was up there looking through scores
and he found it.
And he said, "It's true, it says 60."
And, "Where's my record?
"Oh, it's in the cellar."
And I don't know where it is
because it was a RCA broadcast or something,
an NBC broadcast.
So, no it must've been a public record,
otherwise how would I have heard it?
- [Interviewer] He recorded it?
- Yeah, but he couldn't find it.
Anyway, he said, "Look, I'll look for it.
"It's in the cellar.
"My records are all in the cellar
"and I have to look and find it,
"but I'll let you know."
It was very late by then.
There was no way of going through the cellar
and finding the record.
So we talked about a million other things
and finally, I went home.
I got home very late and I put on this record
to verify my complaint and it was not faster.
It was Mensch's record that was faster, much faster,
and I'd mixed up the two.
So I immediately sat down and wrote a letter.
Dear Maestro Toscanini,
I have made a terrible mistake.
It was not...
Then I just mailed it and posted it that night
at 1:00 in the morning, whatever it was.
Forgive me.
I wish I were dead.
I made a terrible mistake.
This crossed with a letter from him
that he had written the same night,
'cause he had gone down into the cellar,
saying, Caro Bernstein,
stupido Toscanini.
Of course you were right,
my tempo was all wrong.
It has nothing to do with venues.
I am a stupid old man,
I make stupid mistakes,
and this crossed with my letter saying,
it was, no.
I tell you it was the mix-up of all time
and there was no way of straightening it out,
it got to that point of complexity.
I couldn't call up and say, I got your letter-
- Don't read mine. - Don't read mine
or vice versa.
There was no way.
So it just all settled that way.
He apologized to me, I apologized to him
and until this day I don't know who was right or wrong.
All I know is that we had the most wonderful day together.
And then he got very sick after that
and then he did that famous concert
where he forgot the end of Meistersinger and that was that.
It was the end and
he wasn't seeable anymore.
So that was the next influence.
Then what could I say?
The next really great influence
was Szell. - Yes.
- Then of course I was assistant for Rudzinski,
who had a tremendous flair for conducting.
A really remarkable coloristic sense
but was not a great musician
and was also quite mad and paranoid and tried to kill me
and that's a whole other story
I won't even bother to tell you.
- [Interviewer] Terribly difficult man
- Because I was his assistant
and my name was in the paper every day and his wasn't.
It was a horrible story.
He suffered, suffered.
It was this first season in the Philharmonic
and I was as assistant,
imagine.
And Virgil was coming out with unbearable reviews
about, "with the possible exception of Beecham,
"Bernstein has the greatest command of rhythmic
understanding", and I don't know what he was writing.
And this man had to get up and read these things.
- The Beecham parallel is one I happen
to love because I knew Sir Thomas very well.
And I think it was a marvelous-
- We shared a dressing room in those years
at the Ballet Theater.
He was conducting
the "Romeo and Juliet" Delius music
that Tudor had put together
and I was conducting "Fancy Free".
And they usually occurred on the same program
so we'd share the same dressing room.
- [Interviewer] And the two of you would conduct
on the same program?
- That's how I made money.
That's how I made my living was conducting "Fancy Free",
otherwise (mumbling).
One thing that I'm really proud of,
and I'd like to say to you in front of a camera,
maybe it's the only thing that I'm really proud of
in my life, is that all these conductors were my friends.
All these conductors who hated one another,
who hated any other conductor.
Monteux was my dearest friend.
It started very badly on shipboard.
We found ourselves on the same boat crossing the Atlantic,
and we were invited to sit at the captain's table and
Doris Monteux was there and nobody would talk to me.
And finally, I turned to Doris Monteux one night and I said,
"What have I done?"
And she told me some kind of incredible story that she had
heard that so-and-so said da, da, da, da
and finally we cleared that up
and it was all a bunch of usual lies
and somebody trying to make trouble.
And the rest of the voyage, we became very,
very close friends. - Good.
And Pierre Monteux and I would sit on shipboard
screaming "Carmen" together,
and every French opera in the book, Faust,
and having the best time.
And Ravel "Sheherazade",
he'd take one part and I'd take the other
and he'd take the vocal part
and I'd be the cello
and I'd be the, he'd be the cello.
I don't know, we just had such a good time together.
What a wonderful man. - Marvelous.
- Bruno Walter was my closest friend.
We had Mahler in common.
I'd never even done Mahler,
but of course he was the one who got sick
when I made my, that crazy. - "The Rich Will Always
"Have to be Thankful"
- And the first time I ever met him was that day
when I went to his hotel room
and he was wrapped up in blankets
and he showed me a few things in "Don Quixote",
which I had to conduct that afternoon.
And he was so kind
and old and authentic. - Yes.
- And he had a lot to do with my having been able
to get through that program,
that there were no rehearsal and being 25-years-old
and never having given a public concert in my life.
And it was on the radio coast-to-coast
and the next morning I was on the front page
of the New York Times.
He had more than a little to do with that.
And then of course, after that, we became friends.
But again, it was, he was too old.
It was like with Toscanini,
there wasn't enough time left to make a relationship.
- But Szell, Bruno Walter, Monteux, Mensch.
And Mensch was exactly the opposite
kind of conductor from me. - Yes.
- Also he succeeded Koussevitzky,
which already put him on my shit list.
- [Interviewer] Sure.
- 'Cause who's gonna succeed,
who could succeed this man?
And he was what Koussevitzky referred
to as this frivolous Frenchman.
Now of course, what Koussevitzky had wanted was
for me to succeed him
and I kept saying, no, I don't want an orchestra.
He couldn't understand that.
He said, "They will offer you, you will take."
I said, "They will offer me and I won't take."
(interviewer laughing)
I wanted to write music,
I was writing a Broadway show,
I was writing a book.
I can't be enslaved to an orchestra.
I will conduct here and there.
"They will offer you, you will take."
And then what broke his heart is they didn't offer.
And they took instead, this frivolous Frenchman.
So the frivolous Frenchman came to Boston
and as part of everything, we became dear friends.
You know how? - No.
He called me up one day
and he said, "I was just driving in my car
"and had the radio on
"and I heard the 'Missa Solemnis'
"as I have never heard it in my life.
"And at the end, they said,
"that was you and the Philharmonic
"and it's that old record with Eileen Farrell."
And he said, "All my life,
"I have prayed that I could do the 'Missa Solemnis'
"the way I just heard it today in my car.
"I had to call you."
Talk about humility. - He was a truly generous.
Yes, yes. - Oh.
I couldn't believe it.
I was still a kid. - Love it.
- I mean, I was half his age.
I was 30 something, he was 60 something.
Those things just kill me.
We were very close,
but I can't say that his conducting influenced me-
- No. - If that's what
you're asking.
I don't know, what- - No, no.
I was just curious about your relationship as conductors.
- Well, de Sabata, we were very close too.
I can't think of a conductor I was not close to.
- [Interviewer] That was a great era of conductors too.
- Oh.
de Sabata, that old recording of Tosca with Carlos
is still- - One of the greatest things.
- There's nothing that could ever top it.
Nothing. - No, that's right.
One of the great achievements.
He was in Pittsburgh. - And I was lucky enough
to be able to work with Carlos myself.
- [Interviewer] Oh, I know.
You conducted at La Scala-
- Anyway, yes, he was in Pittsburgh for awhile
and they were crazy about him
and he was gonna take the orchestra and something,
he got sick. - Yes.
- And he had love problems.
Valentina and da da
but I shouldn't be saying in public.
(shhing), I didn't say that.
Anyway, wonderful man.
Really wonderful man.
- [Interviewer] Now how much of this time-
- Now, wait a minute.
One of the greatest influences,
and I've gotta tell you this story,
because this is a story among stories,
was Furtwangler.
Now obviously, I couldn't have known Furtwangler
because it was the whole Nazi period,
I was not in Europe.
There were some records of his around, not many.
But I had heard enough to know that this was way beyond.
- [Interviewer] All by itself.
- All by itself.
And I thought someday maybe I'll hear him.
And everybody kept saying he was a Nazi and forget it.
And he was in Germany through the whole thing,
he didn't leave.
He wasn't Jewish, there was no reason for him to leave.
But he saved many Jews- - He did.
- And he fought against the whole thing
that Karajan went with. - Of course.
- And Karajan was very much interested
in his own career.
He was a kid then, ambitious.
- [Interviewer] But Furtwängler saved
a lot of men in his orchestra.
- Oh, don't I know it. - And Mahler.
- Yeah.
Since I've been going to Vienna
and Germany all these years,
I know all the stories.
- [Interviewer] Yes.
- Bohm, who was a bigger Nazi than Karajan
as my dearest friend, the old bastard, I loved him.
Now Furtwangler I never met. - At this point-
- And this is the story.
I was conducting in Holland in the late '40s,
so a couple of years after the war ended.
Feelings were still pretty hot.
And I used to go every summer to conduct
the Residency Orchestra in Scheveningen,
which was the beach port of the Hague,
where everybody went to the courthouse
to swim and eat lobster
and have a herring- - Gorgeous, yeah.
- Dipped in onions.
And I fell in love with this place
and I went every June,
conducting in this old courthouse,
which had a great, huge hall, old oak, dark.
And this was the Hague Orchestra, not the Conservatoire.
- [Interviewer] No.
- And one of the summers I was asked to bring the concert,
this was '48 by now.
'48, '49, sorry, to bring the concert to Amsterdam
and play it in the Conservatoire.
I think it was a special thing,
it was like a Mahler symphony.
And Mahler was always very big in Holland
because of Mengelberg, who was his champion.
- [Interviewer] Yes.
- And I think it was Mahler's second too
and we were all invited, kit and caboodle, chorus,
everything, back to the offstage brass
to come to do it in Amsterdam
after our performance in Scheveningen.
And we did.
And I noticed on the poster
outside the Conservatoire it said,
Furtwangler conducting Brahm's First and somebody else.
And I said, I've got to go to that tonight.
It was a night before my concert.
And there was a picket line around the house
because they felt very strongly-
- [Interviewer] Dutch picketing Furtwangler?
- Dutch, yeah, not Jews. - No, no.
- Because they felt very strongly about it.
I don't have to tell you.
And it was all a whole...
It was Anne Frank in spades
and these Dutchmen walking around with these posters,
no Nazi conductors (grumbling).
Keep the Nazis out.
And I said, we had the same agent,
who was a man called Guy de Koos, K-O-O-S,
and he was known by his initial, G,
which is pronounced hey in Dutch.
So I said, Guy, I've got to hear this man.
He said, well, you can't go.
You can't walk through a picket line, especially, you-
- No, no. - Being Jewish.
And also your presence there
will just cause a terrible commotion.
I'll tell you what,
I can get you into a stage box through the backstage
where you won't be seen.
There are those boxes that are right on the stage
for the directors and so on
and you can watch there, which he did.
And I watched Brahm's First.
I watched this man conduct Brahm's First.
I've never seen anything like it,
never heard anything like it.
It was conducted at the Conservatoire orchestra that night.
I don't know,
how they knew where to play,
where the beat was.
They did and in an extraordinary way.
I've never heard Brahm's First like that.
I was in tears.
And I said to, Guy,
I've got to go back and just kneel to this man
or touch him to say that I met him.
To be able to tell my grandchildren that I...
He said, "You can't do that.
"The press will be there.
"It'll be all over Europe
"and it'd be embarrassing for him,
"embarrassing for you.
"The Dutch will make a big deal out of it.
"You can't meet him."
So, all right, I had to accept that.
The next night I conducted this whatever
and I found out only later
that he had done exactly the same thing
and was in that stage box for my,
but I found out years later- - No.
And that he had asked Guy de Koos
could he come backstage to meet me.
And Guy said no, the press,
you know, the same story.
We were not allowed to shake hands
with each other on two successive nights
because of public opinion.
Now when he died, which was- - '54.
- Five years later or something,
early fifties, '54, whatever it was,
his secretary sent me a page of his diary,
of his journals, a copy,
saying I thought you might be interested
to read this page.
It was dated something '48, June,
and it said, "Tonight, I heard the greatest conductor
"in the world.
"And I was prevented from meeting him."
This I found out only in the '50s,
after he died.
The greatest conductor in the world.
I mean, nobody's the greatest conductor in the world,
I don't care who he is.
But that he cared that much. - Yeah.
Furtwangler.
Anyway, you asked about influences, that's...
I could go on.
The latest, well, I mean,
should I tell you about Bohm,
who's the furthest, even further
from my kind of conducting than Mensch, let's say.
- [Interviewer] Yeah.
- I mean, he's a man who conducts like this
and when he does that, it's the climax.
- [Interviewer] Huge, yes.
- When I was in Munich making the
first act of Tristan, in January,
he was doing "Ein Fuhrer",
87-years-old at this time. - Yes, incredible.
- And I thought, when will I ever hear this man again?
So I went to the opera house to hear "Ein Fuhrer",
again, stage box.
And it took him five minutes to get
to his pult in the pit.
That's how slowly he walked, shaking.
- Yeah. - He wouldn't let
anybody help him.
He staggered somehow to it,
got up there and the cast was going mad.
Nobody could follow him, orchestra,
they followed the concert master, Marty Tavola,
who was singing. - Yes-
- Plus in the intermission,
he said, "We don't know what to do.
"We love this man but we can't follow him."
- No, No. - "He just doesn't
"show us anything."
He's so old and he shakes
and we don't know if it's a beat or not-
- Of course. - Or whether he's
just shaking.
So I went back to see him at the intermission,
'cause there is a certain something
that's wonderful, in spite of all that.
- [Interviewer] Oh, yes.
- Even with all that, and they're not together-
- No, it's still good.
- But there's an (speaking a foreign language) grace,
something, he just by being there,
he brings two "Ein Fuhrer" that nobody else can do
with "Ein Fuhrer", with a piece like that.
And it was really wonderful to hear.
So I went backstage to say so.
And he said, "Leonard Bernstein.
"I hear you do Tristan now in Munich, one act.
"You have so many rehearsals.
"I know everything I find out.
"You have so many rehearsals for one act,
"more than I ever had for the whole opera."
You know he possesses this opera.
He's very, very possessive of Tristan.
He wrote it, he read it.
- [Interview] Yeah, he sings all the roles.
- Right.
And he said, you know, I made Tristan
nine times last year and the other year seven times,
in the Bayreuth and Orange.
I never had more than two rehearsals.
"I hear you have how, I don't know how many."
I had actually 36 hours of rehearsal for one act.
That counts piano rehearsals, orchestra, everything, chorus.
But still it's 36 hours.
- [Interviewer] It's a big act too.
- But anyway, Bohm said,
"Well, you never conducted before Tristan?"
Oh no, I've conducted excerpts.
I've never done the whole opera.
"You never conducted Wagner?"
I don't know from Wagner.
I don't know about this cult,
I've never been to Bayreuth.
I've never conducted a Wagner opera.
I was a very latecomer to Wagner,
although I knew the obvious things
when I was a kid.
I played the Wagner Valkyries on the piano when I was 11
and "Elsa's Dream" and all that but no.
He said, well maybe, he was very
(speaking foreign language)
as they say- (interviewer laughing)
- In Austria.
He was very condescending. - Yeah, condescending.
- He said, "Well, maybe you'll get away with it.
"With so many rehearsals, one act,
"you'll get away with it."
He says, "Of course, you understand,
"I can't come to a performance
"because, you're my dear old friend,
"but I can't come to a performance.
"I will make only disturbance.
"Everybody will ask for my autograph and they will,
"I know it's on television.
"You don't want any disturbances."
He's 87-years-old. - Yes.
- And he knows he'll never conduct Tristan again.
He could barely get through "Ein Fuhrer".
"Ariadne" out and he'll never connect any of those again.
He's so feeble.
So he said, "Maybe, you understand,
"if I just come to a rehearsal for,
"and 20 minutes only because I get so tired.
"But I would like to hear,
"I'm interested to hear Baron Sidney Zoller.
"He didn't say he was interested
"to hear me conduct it." - I know.
- Baron Sidney Zoller.
"And maybe you do so many rehearsals.
"Good luck."
(speaking a foreign language)
(interviewer laughing)
"Fine, I'll do my best.
"I'm very worried about it too."
Anyway, I said, "Look, if can you come to rehearsal,
"we'll put the red carpet,
"we'll have trumpeters.
"Just tell when you come."
(coughing)
He didn't tell,
he just came and I wasn't aware of it.
(coughing)
And it wasn't even a very good rehearsal.
It was the first time I tried
to run the whole thing without a stop
and that's always, you know, sort of messy, hard.
(coughing)
That was the morning.
And there was a lunch period
and we were gonna do the same thing again in the afternoon,
second run through.
And at the end of this morning thing,
I was sitting, I was in the doldrums,
and I was sitting alone at the podium
trying to think about where we went wrong
and where it could be better.
And I see this man bounding down,
like a young goat,
in the aisle and came up to the stage, to the podium,
and it was called Karl Bohm.
Eyes ablaze, cheeks aflame, a young man.
And he had been there indeed for the whole rehearsal.
No training wheels.
93 and a half minutes it takes me for the first act.
And he said, Nuya Bernstein,
(speaking a foreign language).
That's the wrong word order.
He said- - I will translate.
- He said, (speaking a foreign language).
- Finally, Bernstein, for the first time in my life
I am hearing Tristan.
- And I fell right down.
- [Interviewer] He meant you kind of owned it.
- And I was sort of kneeling on the podium
because this man was way down there
and I was in this awful position
toward this great dying maestro.
And I was speechless.
I didn't know what to say, paralyzed (coughing).
All I could think of was that before the rehearsal,
John McClure, my sound man, had said to me,
"Please, Lenny, isn't there something
you can do about the prelude?
We're dying there in the control room, it's so slow.
It's 15 minutes, you take for the prelude.
Bohm does it in 10.
Now you know between 10 and 15 is a-
- [Interviewer] Sure, you shouldn't.
- And I said, look, you do your job and I'll do my job.
I do it slow.
I do what I think Wagner wrote.
So all I could think to say to Bohm,
this was in my head from John McClure, was
(speaking a foreign language)
Also the prelude?
You mean you even liked the prelude?
He said (speaking a foreign language)
- We Europeans don't dare
to play Wagner the way Wagner wrote it.
- That's an incredible thing to hear from this man.
Not Solti, not Karajan, not Kleiber, not me.
- Imagine, oh.
- Because we're afraid of boring the audience.
(speaking a foreign language).
And so we make it go
and we keep it together and keep it moving.
And I realize now that that's why we bore the audience.
That's the most boring thing in the world,
because, and that, I must say I heard Jimmy Levine do
at the Met in that tradition. - Tragic.
- And I had to run after the first act.
I couldn't stay in the place.
And I love Jimmy, he's my disciple and my baby
and he learned at my knee.
I couldn't sit in that hall,
'cause he learned just this.
Get rid of it as fast as possible,
not to bore the public.
And there's no firmer guarantee
of boring the public than that.
- You know, the model- - You don't make one event,
you don't make one thing come true,
come clear because you're too busy going on to the next.
- So you know the marking and the model edition
of the Tristan prelude constantly says
(speaking in a foreign language).
Don't hurry.
But that's largely ignored.
- Well, take the stop with the prelude.
(speaking in a foreign language)
Slow and longing, yearning,
(speaking in a foreign language)
- My shoulders- - Now, he writes,
(singing in a foreign language)
- It should take forever. - It should take forever.
And that chord
and then there are eight rests,
eight beats of rest at this tempo.
- [Interviewer] And you wait.
- No one I've ever heard
do them, wait that long.
No one.
I do and the audience thinks I've died.
Literally, they get very nervous
and there's kind of squirming
or they think I've forgotten the next phrases
or something was supposed to happen that didn't happen.
- You know, you and John McClure
had a marvelous predecessor.
There was the time when Karl Muck
was the conductor of the
Boston Symphony Orchestra and he was recording
the prelude to "Parsifal".
And of course these were the days of 78 RPMs
and his engineer, just like John McClure asked you,
Mr. Muck, couldn't you make that go a little faster
or at least don't take so long in the rests.
And Muck said, "But Wagner wrote the rests like that."
- Then you do the second phrase
and there is, you hear a sigh of relief, actually.
When I finally got to do it,
you could hear the audience say,
oh, thank God he didn't die.
And you do the second phrase
and then there's another long pause,
not quite so long as the first
and they begin to get the idea
and by the third phrase,
you've got them in this other time warped place.
I mean this other planet or you haven't.
If you haven't, then don't do the rest of the opera,
forget it. - Now I have a question.
- You see what I mean? - Yes.
Isn't there a direct relationship
between that and the end of the first act of Tristan?
After they've drunk the love potion,
in the end there is the same,
there are the same notes
and the same chords and the same rests.
At that point, as they stand there facing each other
without moving, that you set up in the prelude.
- Somebody timed the length of that chord,
the lead chord to Tristan. - The chord to Tristan.
- And when they drink. - Yes.
- And they just (playing piano and mimicking instrumental).
It's the whole orchestra,
then they're ready to drop side, except the winds,
the four winds.
(playing piano)
Now somebody timed that
in my performance, it was 25 seconds,
in which an oboe player has to blow (yelling),
all his might,
and diminish, diminish,
diminish,
and then hold it, penissimo,
and then diminish on the rest of the phrase.
- I want to ask you- - It's almost impossible.
- [Interviewer] Historically,
isn't there an extra consideration
in the fact that this chord (playing piano),
in the prelude, it's the first chord in the prelude-
- Right.
- [Interviewer] Has never before, in the history of music,
been heard in that way. - You-
- It's never been heard in that way,
in that context. - Exactly.
- But it's all through Beethoven.
- [Interviewer] Oh, it's been there, sure.
- You find it everywhere.
- [Interviewer] But not this way.
There isn't any name for that.
They don't know what to call that chord.
We just should last. - They'll find it.
I know what to call it.
- What do you call? - But everybody argues.
Everybody thinks he has his way of calling it.
- [Interviewer] Yeah, what do you call it?
- It doesn't matter. - It's just a Tristan chord.
- It's just a musicological argument.
- [Interviewer] Yeah, and of course,
I think the best name is the Tristan chord.
- I mean, obviously this G sharp-
(playing piano and overtalking)
- [Interviewer] Sure, yeah, yeah.
- Now this is the chord you have to name (playing chord)
- Yes, you can't. (playing chord)
- And it can be named in A minor (playing piano).
- [Interviewer] And the instinct to name it has changed.
That's one of the- - That's what my rival
musicologists would say and it doesn't matter.
- No, it doesn't matter. - It's just a matter of
nomenclature or orthography- - Yes, yes.
- Or whatever you want to call it.
- [Interviewer] And that doesn't, that isn't what matters.
- Anyway, we were talking about conductors
and their instruments. - And Bohm.
- Now Bohm has always had an influence on me in Mozart
because he is, for me, the Mozart player.
But that he's the possessor
and prime mover of Tristan and Isolde,
I should comment and say this,
just wiped me out.
But the thing that wiped me out the most
was that he was a young man.
He never stopped talking.
And he said, what's more,
he was giving me a lecture.
He said, the (speaking and a foreign language)
- [Interviewer] Yeah, exactly.
- Translate that one for your,
well, I mean he said the transitions-
- It means the transitions from tempo to tempo-
- Are so right,
that the tempos themselves have to be right,
no matter how slow or fast you play them.
- [Interviewer] Exactly, yeah.
- That was an incredible thing
to be told because that's the truth
of tempo relationships.
Then he came backstage,
he talked to all the singers for ages
and he was there for hours,
this young man- - Yes.
- And glowing.
And he asked me for my picture.
And I thought, I've got a fan
and I couldn't get rid of this.
All I knew was the mirror,
I don't care Tristan, Tristan,
I know it was beautiful
but that it, that I, through Wagner,
was able to rejuvenate- - Revitalize that-
- This man. - Think.
- And I had a letter from him you wouldn't believe.
- Yes, I must see it.
- Well, it's one of those stories.
(orchestral music)