m 


^^^^^^g{EE3^^^E=IEr{^E3 


Marine  Biological  Laboratory  Library 

Woods  Hole,  Mass. 


S3 


*/*^««'=s. 


Presented  r>y 

Dr.  Albert  Szent-Qyorgyi 


m 


S^^^^^^^^^B^^^S 


I 


Bioenergetics 


Bioenergetics 


ALBERT  SZENT-GYORGYI 

The    Institute    for   Muscle   Research 
at  the  Marine  Biological  Laboratory 

Woods  Hole,  Massachusetts 


ACADEMIC  PRESS  INC  •  NEW  YORK  *  1957 


Copyright  ©,  1957 

By 

Academic  Press  Inc. 

Ill  Fifth  Avenue 

New  York  3,  New  York 


All  Rights  Reserved 

no  part  of  this  book  may  be  reproduced  in 

any  form,  by  photostat,  microfilm,  or  any 

other    means,    without    written    permission 

from  the  publishers 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number: 

57-8382 


printed   in   the    united  STATES   OF   AMERICA 


Foreword 


There  is  but  one  safe  \\'ay  to  avoid  mistakes:  to  do  nothing  or, 
at  least,  to  avoid  doing  something  new.  This,  however,  in  itself, 
may  be  the  greatest  mistake  of  all.  The  selected,  who  are  able  to 
open  new  roads  to  science  without  erring,  are  very  few  and  the 
author,  certainly,  does  not  belong  to  them.  The  unknown  lends  an 
insecure  foothold  and  venturing  out  into  it,  one  can  hope  for  no 
more  than  that  the  possible  failure  will  be  a  honorable  one. 

One  of  the  most  characteristic  features  of  present-day  biochem- 
istry is  the  coexistence  of  highlights  with  darkness,  knowledge 
with  ignorance.  While  we  can  perform  reactions  that  amount  to  a 
"miracle"  and,  here  and  there,  even  improve  on  nature,  we  can- 
not answer  many  of  the  simplest  and  most  fundamental  questions. 
We  have,  for  instance,  detailed  information  about  the  structure  of 
the  protein  molecules  but  cannot  tell  why  nature  has  put  those 
atoms  together  in  that  highly  specific  way,  what  was  the  quality 
she  wanted  to  achieve  by  doing  so.  The  same  holds  true  for  nucleic 
acids  and  nucleoproteins.  We  know  most  hormones,  and  many  of 
them  we  can  build  ourselves  outside  of  the  living  body.  In  a  few 
cases  we  can  even  produce  more  active  agents  than  nature  did.  But 
how  hormones  act,  what  they  do  on  the  molecular  level,  we  do 
not  know;  we  have  not  gone  beyond  symptomatology  in  the  analy- 
sis of  their  action.  The  same  holds  true  for  most  of  our  drugs. 

The  same  duality  exists  also  in  our  knowledge  relating  to  the 
high-energy  bonds,  the  main  representative  of  which  is  the  high- 
energy  phosphate  bond  P — O — P,  "^^P."  Their  discovery  belongs, 
undoubtedly,  to  the  most  brilliant  achievements  of  modern  bio- 
chemistry. We  know  how,  at  the  expense  of  one  -^P,  another 


VI 


endergonic  bond  is  established.  We  know  how,  in  fermentation, 
the  bonds  in  hexose  or  triosephosphate  are  shifted  around  till  the 
P's  become  ^P's  which,  transferred  on  to  ADP,  can  support 
endergonic  syntheses.  We  have  an  astounding  knowledge  about 
the  processes  in  which  our  foodstuffs  are  used  to  build  our  body, 
erect  the  edifice  of  life,  construct  its  machinery;  but  how  energy  is 
moving  this  machine,  how  work,  tu,  is  done,  be  it  motion,  me- 
chanic, osmotic,  or  electric  work,  in  a  word,  how  energy  is  driving 
life,  we  do  not  know.  Dazzled  by  our  successes  we  even  forget  to 
ask. 

This  ''chiaroscuro,"'^  "dear-obscure,"  is  one  of  the  most  char- 
acteristic traits  of  current  biochemistry.  Such  a  schism  between  the 
known  and  unknown  suggests  that  some  basic  information  is  miss- 
ing. This  book  represents  a  guess  about  its  nature. 

There  is  one  reason  why  the  inquiry  into  this  duality  is  urgent 
and  imperative.  Corresponding  to  the  big  lacunas  in  our  under- 
standing there  are  equally  big  lacunas  in  medical  science.  Most 
human  suffering,  at  present,  is  caused  by  the  so-called  "degenera- 
tive diseases" — the  name  standing  for  "diseases  we  don't  under- 
stand and,  consequently,  can  do  nothing  about."  The  existence 
of  such  a  closed  group  of  diseases  also  points  towards  some  major 
gap  in  our  basic  knowledge.  Possibly,  all  these  gaps,  may  they 
relate  to  normal  function  or  to  disease,  have  one  common  denomi- 
nator, some  process  which,  hitherto,  eluded  detection.  Some  funda- 
mental fact,  if  not  a  whole  dimension,  is  missing  from  our  biologi- 
cal thinking. 

Shortcuts,  in  science,  mostly  turn  out  to  be  blind  alleys  and  the 
only  safe  approach  to  fundamental  questions  is  that  on  the  basic 
level.  Cures  for  disease  flow  out  of  progress  in  understanding  as 

*  "Chiaroscuro,"  in  painting  and  the  graphic  arts,  denotes  the  mixture  of 
highlights  and  darkness,  as  often  found,  for  instance,  in  Rembrandt's  etchings. 


Vll 


the  natural  fruits  of  knowledge.  This  will  be  the  leitmotif  of  this 
book  which  contains  an  attempt  to  identify  the  missing  link  in 
our  knowledge  and  open  alleys  to  its  approach. 


Woods  Hole,  Massachusetts 
July  19^6 


Albert  Szent-Gyorgyi 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

When  letting  this  book  go  my  thoughts  wander  gratefully  to  those  who 
supported  my  research  and  shared  its  risks,  in  the  first  place  to  my  associates. 
The  Commonwealth  Fund  gave  its  generous  help  explicitly  for  the  study  of 
energy  transmission  in  spite  of  my  warnings  that  they  might  be  supporting  a 
gamble.  Armour  and  Co.  were  my  most  generous  supporters  for  many  years 
and  so  were  the  Heart  Association,  the  Muscular  Dystrophy  Associations,  the 
Association  for  the  Aid  of  Crippled  Children,  who  all  greatly  helped  the 
development  of  the  views  presented  here  by  not  t>'ing  down  the  author's  mind 
by  strings  attached  to  their  grants.  Much  encouragement  has  been  given  lately 
by  the  National  Heart  Institute  through  its  Grant  H  2042,  and  by  the  National 
Science  Foundation  as  well  as  the  United  Cerebral  Palsy  Fund. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Dr.  William  Arnold  for  his  invaluable  help  in  shaping 
theory  and  experiment. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Dr.  Oscar  Hechter  for  the  patience  with  which  he 
listened  to  my  gradually  developing  ideas  and  criticized  this  book. 


Contents 


Foreword v 

Abbreviations x 

PART  I 

General  Considerations 

1.  The  Problem  Is  Stated 3 

2.  A  Theory  of  Energy  Transmission 7 

3.  The  Mobility  of  £*  and  Organization 10 

4.  Absorption,  Fluorescence,  and  Phosphorescence 18 

5.  Triplets    and    Water 25 

6.  Excitations  and  the  Biological  Matrix 32 

7.  Quenching  and  Quenchers 41 

8.  Miscellaneous    Observations 47 

PART  n 
Biological  Structures  and  Functions 

9.  A  Theory  of  Muscular  Contraction 59 

10.  The  ATP  Molecule 64 

11.  Riboflavine 74 

12.  Ions,  Glutathione,  Sugars,  and  Alcohols 80 

13.  On  Oxidative  Phosphorylation  and  Its  Uncoupling 90 

14.  Depolarization   of   the   Cell    Membrane 99 

PART  m 

On  Drugs,  Hormones,  and  Disease 

15.  General  Remarks  on  Drugs  and  Disease 107 

16.  On  Iodine  and  Chlorproraazine 112 

17.  On  Myotonia 120 

18.  On   the   Thymus 127 

19.  On  Oxidation,  Fermentation,  and  Cancer 133 

20.  Conclusion 138 


IX 


72018 


Abbreviations 


A  z=  Angstrom  =z  10"^  cm 
ADP  =  Adenosine  diphosphate 
ATP  =  Adenosine  triphosphate 
2,4  D  =z  2, 4-Dichlorophenoxy acetic  acid 
E*  z=z  Excitation  energy 
(£)  =  Bond  energy 
IDF  :=  Inosine  diphosphate 
MW  =  Molecular  Weight 
^P  r=  High-energy  phosphate  bond 
UV  =  Ultraviolet 
A  =  Wavelength 
n  =r  0.001  millimeter 
m/i,  =  Millimicron  —  lOA  z=  10"^  mm 


PART  I 

General  Considerations 


^'There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth, 
Horatio,  than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  philosophy/' 

(Hamlet) 


'^\OAl 


1.  The  Problem  Is  Stated 


The  problem  is:  how  does  energy  drive  life?  How  does  it  move 
the  living  machine?  This  is  one  of  the  most  basic  problems  of 
biology  and,  at  present,  there  is  no  answer  to  it.  So  it  is  possible 
that  the  "oscuro,"  alluded  to  in  the  Introduction,  is  due  to  our  in- 
ability to  answer  this  question. 

In  order  to  avoid  losing  ourselves  in  generalities,  we  have  to 
take  a  specific  example.  I  will  take  a  little  experiment  I  made  a 
few  years  ago.  In  this  experiment  I  took  a  strip  of  muscle  (I  chose 
the  musculus  psoas  of  the  rabbit),  put  it  into  clUuted  glycerol,  and 
kept  it  in  the  glycerol  for  a  few  days  in  the  refrigerator  and  for  a 
few  weeks  in  the  deep  freeze.  Then  I  suspended  it  in  0.1  Al  KG 
at  room  temperature,  added  a  little  Mg,  and  added  ATP  in  the 
same  concentration  as  the  muscle  contained  it  in  vivo.  The  muscle 
contracted  and  developed  the  same  tension  as  it  developed  maxi- 
mally in  the  living  animal.  If  we  identify  life  with  motion  we 
could  say:  the  muscle  came  to  life  again.  In  this  process  the  ATP 
was  split,  losing  its  terminal  phosphate  which  was  linked  to  it  by 
a  P — O — P.  Since  we  know  that  this  link  is  a  so-called  high-energy 
phosphate  bond,  -^P,  and  no  other  energy  donor  was  present,  it 
is  evident  that  the  energy  which  moved  the  muscle  was  the  energ)' 
of  this  '^P,  and  so  we  can  narrow  our  problem  down  and  ask  how 
did  the  energy  of  the  '^P  move  the  muscle? 

Progress  in  the  chemistry  of  muscle  made  it  possible  to  simplify 
tl^ie  problem  even  further.  I  showed  almost  two  decades  ago  that 
contraction  in  muscle  is,  essentially,  the  interaction  of  actomyosin 
(a  complex  formed  of  two  proteins,  actin  and  myosin)  with  ATP 
and  ions.  Of  the  two  proteins,  myosin  is  responsible  for  the  ele- 
mentary act  of  contraction  and  so  we  can  simplify  our  proposition 

3 


by  considering  myosin  instead  of  muscle,  and  ask  how  the  energy 
of  ^P  moves  myosin? 

We  know  from  the  studies  of  Edsall  and  Weber  that  the  myo- 
sin molecule  is  a  thin  filament.  So  without  knowing  any  more  de- 
tails about  it,  we  can  form  two  different  pictures  of  the  process  in 
which  the  energy  of  the  '^P  is  transferred  to  this  filament  and 
produces  contraction.  The  one  would  be  to  suppose  that  the  mole- 
cule carrying  this  ^P,  in  our  case  ATP,  enters  into  some  chemical 
reaction  with  the  myosin,  as  the  result  of  which  a  local  change  is 
produced  in  the  protein  which  leads  to  its  folding.  An  ATP- 
myosin  complex  would  have  to  be  formed  which  then  splits  up, 
leaving  behind  phosphate,  ADP,  and  the  altered  myosin.  Such  a 
reaction  finds  many  analogies  in  the  "group  transfer  reactions"  of 
the  intermediary  metabolism  and,  in  principle,  could  be  described 
with  symbols  of  classical  chemistry. 

The  alternative  picture  is  based  on  the  supposition  that  the  ATP 
molecule  does  not  enter  into  any  such  local  reaction,  but  the  bond 
energy  of  its  ^P's  becomes  released  in  a  more  active  and  mobile 
form  which  then  is  transferred  to  the  myosin  molecule,  moves 
through  it,  and  produces  in  its  vv'ake  changes  which,  somehow, 
lead  to  contraction  and  could  adequately  be  described  only  in  terms 
of  quantum  mechanics.  Compared  to  the  first,  this  picture  is  vague, 
has  no  analogies  in  intermediary  metabolism,  and  one  may  ask 
why  make  such  hazy  pictures  if  we  can  make  clear  ones  with  deep 
roots  in  existing  knowledge? 

The  inadequacy  of  the  earlier  classical  pictures  was  brought  out 
by  the  advances  made  in  the  chemistry  of  myosin.  The  more  we 
learn  about  myosin  the  less  we  understand  it,  which  suggests  that 
we  are  looking  at  it  in  the  wrong  way.  Continuing  some  studies 
made  by  Gergely,  Perry,  and  Mihalyi,  Andrew  Szent-Gyorgyi 
showed  the  myosin  molecule  to  be  built  of  two  kinds  of  subunits, 
"meromyosins"  which,  within  the  molecule,  stand  in  a  row  in 
series  (Lauffer  and  Andrew  Szent-Gyorgyi ) .  If  Laki  and  Caroll's 
value  of  the  molecular  weight  of  myosin  is  correct,  one  molecule  of 


myosin  contains  three  meromyosins,  while  if  Weber's  value  is 
correct,  it  contains  six.  Assuming  the  smaller  value  to  be  correct, 
the  myosin  molecule  would  look  something  like  Fig.  1 .  Of  the  two 
kinds  of  meromyosins  one  is  somewhat  plumper  and  sediments 
faster  and  has  been  called  H-meromyosin,  the  H  standing  for 
"heavy."  In  Fig.  1,  arbitrarily,  it  is  placed  into  the  middle.  The 


«• 


s 


i 


s 
< 

•m 
•m 


Fig  1 


a  b 

Fig  2 


Fig.  1.  Schematic  representation  of  a  myosin  molecule,  consisting  of 
one  H  and  two  L  meromyosins.  Sequence  of  meromyosins  arbitrary. 

Fig.  2.  a:  Schematic  representation  of  the  myosin  molecule  of  Fig.  1, 
as  consisting  of  protomyosins.  b:  Possible  rearrangement  of  protomyosins 
in  contraction. 


Other  two  are  more  slender  and  have  been  called  L-meromyosins, 
L  standing  for  "light,"  these  having  a  lower  sedimentation  con- 
stant. There  are  two  L's  for  every  H. 

What  makes  it  difficult  to  bring  this  discovery  into  agreement 
with  earlier  concepts  is  that  only  the  H  interacts  with  ATP,  re- 
leasing the  energy  of  its  '^P's,  while  there  is  every  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  the  L's  are  involved  in  contraction,  do  the  work,  and  use 
the  energy.  The  energy  would  have  to  get,  somehow,  from  the 
H's  to  the  L's  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  a  bond  energy  could 


do  this.  There  are  still  possibilities  for  bringing  this  structure  into 
line  with  our  earlier  concepts.  One  could  suppose,  e.g.,  the  ATP 
to  produce  some  local  change  on  the  H  which  would  make  the 
L's  fold  back  on  it,  producing  thus  a  shortening,  or  contraction.  So 
there  are  ways  out,  though  not  nice  or  good  ones. 

If  a  theory  is  good,  then  any  newer  knowledge  should  support 
it  and  contribute  to  clarification,  as  was  the  case  with  intermediary 
metabolism.  With  myosin  things  are  going  the  other  way.  Andrew 
Szent-Gyorgyi  and  Borbiro  showed  that  the  meromyosins  also  are 
built  of  subunits,  protomyosins.  The  protomyosins  are  of  equal 
size  and  rather  small.  Their  MW  is  about  4500  g,  which  means 
that  one  meromyosin  is  built  of  a  greater  number  of  them,  the  L 
of  about  20,  the  H  of  about  50.  These  protomyosins  are  held  to- 
gether by  secondar)'  forces  only,  such  as  H-bonds,  and  van  der 
Waal's  and  electrostatic  attractions.  If  we  call  a  molecule  a  struc- 
ture of  atoms  held  together  by  covalent  bonds,  then  the  myosin 
particle  is  no  molecule  at  all,  only  an  aggregate.  The  structure  is 
symbolized  in  a  very  crude  way  in  Fig.  2a.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how 
such  a  structure  could  fold;  it  seems  more  likely  that  contraction  is 
not  a  folding  at  all,  but  a  rearrangement  of  protomyosins  within 
the  particle,  which  rearrangement  leads  to  a  more  rounded,  short- 
ened form,  as  symbolized  in  Fig.  2b.  In  order  to  produce  such  a 
rearrangement,  many  weak  forces  must  be  disturbed  which  keep 
the  protomyosins  together.  It  is  impossible  to  see  how  a  bond  en- 
ergy, enclosed  in  a  ^P,  could  cause  such  a  disturbance,  especially 
if  that  ^P  is  far  away,  on  the  H-meromyosin. 

We  can  thus  sum  up  the  situation  by  saying  that  we  do  not 
know  how  muscle  contracts,  how  it  uses  bond  energy  to  produce 
work,  and  the  more  we  know  about  its  structure  the  less  we  under- 
stand its  function.  We  might  have  arrived  here  at  the  edge  of  the 
chasm  which  seems  to  extend  through  medicine  and  biology  and 
may  be  responsible  for  its  "chiaroscuro." 


2.  A  Theory  of  Energy  Transmission 


It  often  happens  that,  unconsciously,  our  thinking  becomes 
dominated  by  certain  pictures  which  we  have  met  too  often  to 
question  their  correctness.  In  my  opinion,  our  difficulty  in  ap- 
proaching the  problem  of  energy  transformation  in  muscle  is  due 
to  our  having  been  misled  by  the  formalism  of  our  thermodynamic 
bookkeeping.  When  making  up  the  energy  balance  sheets  of  re- 
actions we  usually  express  both  the  "potential  energy"  of  a  bond 
and  the  kinetic  forms  of  energy  in  calories  and  so,  unconsciously, 
accept  their  identity.  But  there  is  a  very  great  difference  between 
the  two,  at  least  in  their  biological  activity,  which  we  can  illustrate 
by  comparing  it  with  the  difference  between  sitting  on  top  of  an 
atomic  bomb  while  its  potential  is  a  potential,  its  bonds  are  bonds, 
and  its  energy  is  locked  up  inside  its  atoms,  and  then  trying  to 
remain  sitting  on  it  when  these  bonds  are  exchanging  their  poten- 
tial for  more  active,  kinetic  forms  of  energy.  Though  mechanics 
may  find  both  forms  of  energy  essentially  identical  we  will  sense 
a  very  considerable  difference  in  their  biological  activity.  The  situa- 
tion with  the  "energy"  of  the  -^P  is  analogous  to  that  of  the 
A-bomb.  While  its  energy  is  enclosed  in  the  bonds  of  the  molecule 
as  a  potential,  it  can  be  expected  to  have  no  outward  action  (except 
showing  a  little  extra  weight  which  we  could  find  if  our  balances 
were  more  sensitive ) .  This  bond  energy  may  be  transferred,  as 
such,  from  molecule  to  molecule  and  from  bond  to  bond  in  the 
group  transfer  reactions  of  our  intermediary  metabolism.  But  if 
this  potential  has  to  go  into  biological  action,  produce  work  or 
motion,  an  analogy  to  the  A-bomb,  it  might  be  exchanged  for 
more  active  and  mobile  forms  of  energy.  Such  active  and  mobile 
forms  of  energy,  on  the  molecular  level,  could  hardly  be  anything 

7 


8 

else  than  some  form  of  molecular  excitation,  be  it  electronic,  vi- 
brational, or  rotational.  So  what  we  biologists  can  safely  do  with- 
out getting  into  an  argument  with  statistical  mechanics  is  to  use 
different  symbols  for  bond  energies  which  are  linked  to  molecules 
and  have  no  outward  action,  and  excitation  energies  which  are 
mobile  and  may  interact  with  their  surroundings.  The  former  I 
will  denote  by  (£),  meaning  by  E  energy  and  symbolizing  by  the 
parentheses  that  this  energy  is  enclosed  within  a  molecule.  Excita- 
tional  energy  I  will  denote  £*.  So  I  can  formulate  our  problem 
by  asking  whether,  in  muscle  tlie  (£)  of  the  --^P  in  ATP  is  not 
exchanged  for  £*  when  it  has  to  go  into  biological  action  and  pro- 
duce contraction.^  Group  transfer  reactions  of  intermediary  metab- 
olism could  be  symbolized  by  writing: 

(En)  ^  (£3)  ^  (£2)  ^  (El)  where  (£„)  stands  for  the  en- 
ergy of  reserve  food  as  fat  and  carbohydrate  while  (Ex)  stands  for 
the  energy  of  the  substance  which  is  directly  fed  into  the  muscle 
machine,  in  our  case  ATP.  In  this  row  of  reactions  the  potential 
energy  is  transferred  from  bond  to  bond,  from  substance  to  sub- 
stance. Bond  creating  bond,  these  reactions  can  be  expressed  by 
symbols  of  classical  chemistry.  The  question  is  whether  our  inabil- 
ity to  understand  muscle  is  not  due  to  the  fact  that  what  happens 
further  belongs  to  a  different  group  of  reactions  which  can  no 
more  be  described  by  these  symbols,  in  which  (E)  is  turned  into 
E*?  This  duality  may  hold  for  all  reactions  in  which  work,  w  is 
produced,  be  it  mechanical,  osmotic,  or  electric  work,  etc.  While 
(£)  may  be  the  core  of  reactions  in  which  substances  are  synthe- 
tized  and  the  living  machinery  is  built,  E*  may  be  the  core  of  re- 
action in  which  this  machinery  is  driven  and  work  is  produced. 
This  could  explain  why  our  notions,  derived  from  intermediary 
metabolism,  did  not  lead  us  to  a  better  understanding  of  muscular 
contraction. 

When  supposing  a  transformation  of  [E)  into  £*  we  are  not 
lost  in  the  marshes  of  speculation,  for  the  reaction  on  which  all 
•life  is  built  is  essentially  such  a  transformation.  This  reaction  is 


photosynthesis,  in  which  the  solar  energy  enters  into  the  living 
world  to  drive  it.  In  this  reaction  the  radiation  is  captured  by  dyes, 
mostly  chlorophyll,  in  which  it  produces  an  electronic  excitation. 
This  E*  is  then  stabilized  in  the  form  of  (£).  Subsequently  (£) 
is  shifted  from  one  bond  or  molecule  to  another  until,  eventually, 
it  is  stored  away  in  the  form  of  the  (£)  of  carbohydrates  or  fats. 
The  process  of  photosynthesis  could  thus  be  symbolized  by: 

hv-^E*-^  (£0  ->  (£2)  ->  (£3)  ^  (£n) 

The  reverse  process  occurs  in  photoluminescence  when,  for  in- 
stance, the  firefly  emits  light: 

(£„)  -^  (£3)  ->  (£2)  ->  (£1)  -^E*  -^hv 

Looking  at  this  row  of  reactions  one  cannot  fail  to  notice  its 
identity  with  that  of  photosynthesis.  Only  the  order  is  reversed.  If 
we  look  upon  the  production  of  light  by  the  firefly  only  as  upon  an 
example  of  production  of  work,  w,  then  we  arrive  at  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  energetics  of  the  living  world  consist  of  only  two 
processes:  photosynthesis  and  its  reversal. 

In  muscle  £1,  which  is  directly  fed  into  the  contractile  mecha- 
nism, is  the  (£)  of  ATP,  and  the  recent  work  of  Arnon  and  his 
associates  indicates  that  ATP  plays  a  very  intimate  role  in  the  first 
steps  of  photosynthesis,  while  Strehler  and  Arnold,  and  Arnold 
and  Davidson  have  shown  photosynthesis  to  be  reversible. 

In  the  above  reactions  (£«)  ->  (£1)  is  what  is  called  "inter- 
mediary metabolism."  The  problem  to  be  dealt  with  in  this  book 
is  whether  (£1)  -»  £*  -^  w  does  not  represent  the  reaction  which 
drives  the  living  machine  and,  belonging  in  the  realm  of  quantum 
mechanics,  can  be  expressed  only  in  terms  of  the  latter. 

Such  a  question  cannot  be  answered  by  any  single  experiment. 
Only  the  accumulation  of  data  on  various  lines  can  make  such  a 
theory  acceptable.  If  correct,  this  theory  should  lead  us  to  a  better 
understanding  of  various  biological  structures  and  phenomena, 
should  open  new  views  and  suggest  new  experiments. 


3.  The  Mobility  of  E*  and  Organization 


No  form  of  energy  can  be  mobile  if  there  is  nothing  to  conduct 
it  So  if  we  are  looking  for  mobile  forms  of  energy  which  could 
take  part  in  biological  energy  transmissions  we  have  to  consider 
not  only  the  energy  itself,  but  also  the  mechanisms  which  have  to 
conduct  it.  In  this  chapter  I  will  review  instances  of  mobility  of 
energy  and  discuss  the  qualities  demanded  of  the  medium,  leaving 
open  the  question  of  which  of  these  mechanisms  play  a  role  in 
living  systems.  That  such  transmissions  do  occur  was  shown  by 
photosynthesis  in  which  many  chlorophyll  molecules  collaborate  in 
the  reduction  of  one  CO2  molecule  (Arnold  and  Meek) . 

CONJUGATED  SYSTEMS,  v  ELECTRONS,  AND  n,7r  TRANSITIONS 

If  a  molecule  contains  a  system  of  conjugated  double  bonds, 
then  it  also  has  w  electrons — which  are  no  longer  bound  to  any  ! 
single  atom  but  belong  to  the  conjugated  system  as  a  whole,  within  I 
which  they  have  a  more  or  less  free  mobility.  If  such  a  tt  electron 
accepts  energy  and  is  excited  to  a  higher  ir*  energy  level,  then  its 
E*  belongs  to  the  whole  conjugated  system  and  may  produce 
changes  at  any  of  its  points.  The  purine  in  ATP  has  such  an  ex-i 
tensive  conjugated  system,  and  so  have  pyrimidins,  isocyclic  aro- 
matic compounds,  or  carotenes  with  their  long  chain,  built  of 
isoprene  units. 

Biological  catalysts  and  cofactors  often  contain  N,  O,  or  S  atoms 
in  their  conjugated  system  or  linked  to  it.  These  atoms  have  their 
"nonbonded"  "lone  pair"  of  electrons  which  can  be  excited  to  the 
»•  levels  and  thus  contribute  to  the  pool  of  ir*  electrons.  Those 
so-called  n,ir  excitations  discovered  by  McMurry  and  Mulliken, 
have  specific  qualities:  their  lifetime  is  considerably  longer  than 

10 


11 

that  of  TT-JT*  excitations  and  their  absorption  is  shifted  towards  the 
shorter  wavelength  with  increasing  electropolarity  of  the  solvent, 
while  their  fluorescence  is  quenched  by  strong  acids.  The  hetero- 
polar  solvent,  with  its  H-bonding,  increases  the  dissociation 
energy  of  these  electrons  which  are  immobilized  by  the  protons  of 
the  strong  acid  altogether  (Kasha,  1950). 

COUPLED  OSCILLATORS 

If  two  systems,  capable  of  similar  oscillation,  are  coupled,  then 
they  make  "coupled  oscillators"  and  the  oscillations  will  tend  to 
pass  back  and  forth  between  the  two.  If,  for  instance,  two  penduli 
of  the  same  periodicity  are  suspended  on  the  same  wire  and  one 
of  them  is  put  into  action,  it  will  soon  stop  while  the  other  takes 
over  the  motion.  After  a  while  the  second  pendulum  will  pass 
back  the  motion  with  its  energy,  and  so  it  will  go  on. 

If  A  and  B  are  the  two  penduli  and  motion  is  *,  then 

A''+B-^A-\-B*-^A*-i-B-^A  +  B*  etc. 

The  point  about  this  simple  experiment  is  that  the  energy  com- 
municated to  the  one  of  the  two  oscillators  does  not  become; 
divided  between  the  two  and  thus  degraded  to  lower  values,  but! 
is  periodically  transmitted  in  its  entirety.  If  there  were  no  friction! 
and  this  transmission  of  energy  would  occur  without  loss,  motion 
could  go  back  and  forth  forever. 

The  various  atomic  groups  of  the  protein  are  capable  of  oscilla- 
tions, vibrations,  or  rotations  comparable  to  the  motion  of  the 
penduli.  If  two  such  groups  with  identical  frequency  are  coupled 
by,  say,  the  polypeptide  chain,  then  they  might  act  as  coupled 
oscillators.  It  is  not  impossible  that  all  such  groups  within  the 
same  protein  molecule  do  act  as  coupled  oscillators  and  so  the 
vibrational  energy  communicated  to  one  might  be  taken  over  by 
any  of  them,  the  whole  protein  molecule  forming  one  unique 
system  in  which  the  energy  communicated  to  it  belongs  to  the 
whole,  and  may  appear  at  any  point. 


12 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  COUPLING 


An  electronic  excitation  can  also  be  looked  upon  as  an  oscilla- 
tion. Two  molecules,  the  electrons  of  which  are  capable  of  a 
similar  excitation,  can  thus  act  as  coupled  oscillators.  In  this  case 
it  is  not  necessary  to  have  a  material  connection  between  the  two, 
for  the  electromagnetic  field  couples  them,  provided  their  mutual 
distance  is  not  too  great  (small  compared  to  the  corresponding 
wavelength ) . 

The  transmission  of  excitation  energies  between  molecules 
through  electromagnetic  coupling  is  not  a  mere  matter  of  specula- 
tion. It  is  one  of  the  basic  theories  by  which  classic  phenomena, 
such  as  the  "concentration  depolarization"  of  fluorescences  are  ex- 
plained. It  has  been  found,  as  a  general  rule,  that  if  a  dilute  (e.g., 
10"*  M)  solution  of  a  fluorescent  substance  is  cooled  to  low  tem- 
peratures to  form  a  solid  glass  in  which  the  single  molecules  have 
a  fixed  orientation,  then  the  fluorescent  light  given  off  by  this 
system  will  be  polarized  if  polarized  light  was  used  for  its  excita- 
tion. The  molecules  being  fixed  in  space,  they  will  not  change  the 
plane  of  polarization  in  the  interval  between  the  absorption  and 
the  emission  of  the  photon.  If,  however,  this  experiment  is  re- 
peated with  a  high  concentration  of  the  fluorescent  substance  (e.g., 
10"^  Af),  then  the  fluorescent  light  emitted  will  not  be  polarized. 
The  generally  accepted  explanation  is  this:  owing  to  the  high  con- 
centration, the  molecules  are  now  close  to  one  another;  being 
coupled  by  the  electromagnetic  field,  the  E*  is  passed  from  one  to 
the  other  before  it  is  shot  out  again  as  a  photon.  The  different 
molecules  visited  by  JB*  have  a  random  orientation,  thus  the  fixed 
relation  of  the  plane  of  the  primary  exciting  light  to  that  of  the 
fluorescent  light  will  no  longer  be  maintained  and  the  polariza- 
tion will  be  lost.  It  will  be  lost  if  the  statistical  distance  between 
molecules  is  smaller  than  the  distance  at  which  such  resonance 
transfer  of  excitation  is  possible.  Figure  3  shows  the  relation  of 
concentration  to  the  statistical  distance  between  molecules  in  any 


13 


solution.  By  determining  the  concentration  at  which  polarization  is 
lost,  the  distance  can  be  found  at  which  electromagnetic  inter- 
action is  possible.  This  critical  distance  may  even  exceed  100  A. 


o 

A 

200 


(80 


160 


140 


120 


»0  0 


80 


60 


40 


20 


M       10' 


10' 


-3 


^-2 


10" 


Fig.  3.  Relation  of  statistical  distance  between  molecules  and  molar 
concentration.  If  the  solution  contains  two  different  substances,  then  the 
statistical  distance  between  their  molecules  is  about  70%  of  the  values 
given  by  the  curve. 

which  corresponds  to  a  concentration  of  the  order  of  10"^  M.  The 
diameter  of  many  macromolecules  is  of  this  magnitude;  so  E*  can 
be  transmitted  between  atomic  groups  of  the  same  macromolecule 
or  of  neighboring  molecules  also  by  their  electrodynamic  coupling. 
One  point  we  must  mark  well  about  this  transmission:  no  photons 
are  involved.  It  is  not  that  the  first  molecule,  absorbing  the  light, 
emits  a  photon  again  which  then  is  absorbed  by  the  second  mole- 


14 

cule.  The  process  is  photon  free,  due  to  the  direct  electrodynamic 
coupling  of  the  two  molecules. 

Transfer  of  £*  through  electrodynamic  coupling  can  occur  not 
only  between  identical  molecules,  but  also  between  molecules  of 
different  substances.  The  situation  for  such  a  transfer  will  be  the 
most  favorable  if  there  is  a  wide  overlap  between  the  fluorescent 
spectrum  of  molecule  A  with  the  absorption  spectrum  of  molecule 
B,  which  has  to  take  £*  over.  Apart  from  the  "overlap  integral," 
the  lifetime  of  A*  and  the  wavelength  influence  the  result.  The 
distance  through  which  such  energy  transmission  can  take  place 
depends  on  these  factors. 

Such  an  energy  transfer  in  biological  systems  has  actually  been 
shown  to  exist.  Arnold  and  Oppenheimer  found  that  the  energy 
of  the  light  absorbed  in  green  algae  by  phycocyanin  is  transmitted  | 
through  such  electrodynamic  coupling  to  the  chlorophyll  with  a  | 
high  efficiency.  The  chlorophyll,  in  its  turn,  transmits  it  to  thej 
rest  of  the  photosynthetic  apparatus  which  builds  carbohydrate  •■ 
with  it,  transforming  E*  into  (E).  A  similar  energy  transfer  has 
also  been  found  by  Duysens  from  carotenoids  to  chlorophyll  b  in 
blue  and  red  alga  and  from  chlorophyll  b  to  a  in  the  green  alga 
Chlorella. 

ENERGY  BANDS.  THE  "CONTINUUM  THEORY'^ 

If  a  physical  system  has  a  great  regularity  in  the  arrangement  of 
its  atoms  (as  is  the  case  in  crystals,  or  might  be  the  case  in  pro- 
teins), then  the  atoms  disturb  one  another's  orbitals,  the  energy 
levels  of  which  may  fuse  into  a  common,  practically  continuous 
energy  band.  If  such  a  band  is  filled,  that  is,  contains  the  maximal 
number  of  electrons  allowed  {2n\i  n  is  the  number  of  atoms ) ,  then 
no  energy  can  be  transported  by  its  electrons.  If,  however,  the  band 
is  not  filled,  then  its  electrons  can  be  accelerated  in  a  definite 
direction  and  can  transport  energy.  This  is  how  metals  conduct 
electricity. 

If  a  substance  has  completely  filled  bands  and  above  them 


15 

empty  ones,  then  it  will  be  an  insulator,  a  dielectric.  However,  if 
the  distance  between  tlie  highest  filled  band  and  lowest  unfilled 
band  is  not  too  great,  then  electrons  may  be  raised  from  the  former 
into  the  latter  and  make  the  substance  conductant.  If  the  distance 
between  the  two  levels  is  small,  even  thermal  agitation  may  suffice 
to  produce  this  change,  in  which  case,  the  substance  is  a  "semicon- 
ductor." Absorbed  photons  may  do  likewise  leading  to  "photo- 
conductivity." I  have  pointed  out  earlier  (1946,  1947)  that  it  is 
possible  that  proteins  may  have  an  electronic  structure  analogous 
to  that  of  semiconductors.  Evans  and  Gergely  found  that  the 
hydrogen  bonds,  within  the  protein  molecule,  may  create  con- 
ditions which  could  lead  to  the  development  of  such  continuous 
bands,  though  their  results  were  not  quite  conclusive.  The  distance 
between  the  highest  filled  and  lowest  unfilled  band  was  found  to 
be  rather  great,  energies  of  the  order  of  100,000  calories  being 
needed  to  raise  an  electron  from  the  first  to  the  second. 

Experimental  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  semiconductor 
nature  of  biological  material  is  not  missing.  Eley,  Parfitt,  Perry, 
and  Taysum  found  semiconductivity  in  plasma  albumin,  fibrinogen, 
and  edestine.  The  gap  between  the  highest  filled  and  lowest  un- 
filled band  was  somewhat  smaller  than  calculated  by  Evans  and 
Gergely  and  water  was  found  to  decrease  the  energies  needed  to 
lift  electrons  over  it. 

W.  Arnold  (personal  communication)  showed  recently  that 
chloroplasts  can  "store  light,"  that  is,  conser^^e  the  energy  of  ab- 
sorbed photons,  which  energy  they  could  again  shoot  out  later  in 
the  form  of  light,  if  heated.  This  could  hardly  be  explained  any 
other  way  than  by  assuming  the  existence  of  energy  bands.  The 
electrons  raised  to  the  higher  band  seem  to  have  been  trapped 
there  in  "wells,"  from  which  they  can  be  chased  out  by  heat  agita- 
tion. The  differences  in  the  energy  of  the  bands  were  found  to  be 
still  lower  than  found  by  Eley  et  al.,  bringing  the  energies  needed 
for  raising  electrons  to  the  higher  empty  level  into  the  realm  of 
biological  possibilities. 


16 

Conduction  bands  need  not  end  at  the  confines  of  a  protein 
molecule.  If  the  contact  between  two  molecules  is  intimate  enough, 
the  bands  may  fuse,  thus  connecting  single  protein  molecules  into 
a  common  system. 

That  energy  can  move  through  protein  molecules  iff  an  experi- 
mental fact.  The  first  example  was  given  by  the  observations  of 
Bucher  and  Kaspers,  who  found  that  the  light  absorbed  by  the 
protein  in  myoglobin  caused  the  dissociation  of  the  CO  bound 
by  the  heme.  The  energy  of  the  photon  absorbed  by  the  protein 
had  to  travel  first  through  the  protein  molecule  and  then  through 
the  heme  to  reach  the  CO.  If  there  is  anything  to  limit  the  value 
of  this  observation,  this  is  the  possibility  that  the  energy  might 
have  traveled  through  the  protein  in  the  form  of  an  acoustic  wave 
and  not  as  electronic  excitation.  This  possibility  can  be  excluded 
by  Bannister's  discovery  that  the  light  absorbed  by  the  protein  of 
phycoq^anin  is  emitted  as  fluorescent  light  by  the  chromophore  of 
this  chromoprotein.  Equally  conclusive  are  the  experiments  of 
Shore  and  Pardee,  who  coupled  fluorescent  dyes  to  proteins  and 
found  photons  absorbed  by  the  protein  emitted  by  these  dyes  as 
fluorescent  light,  in  certain  cases  with  an  almost  100%  efficiency. 
These  authors  leave  open  the  question  of  the  mechanism  of  energy 
transfer  but  tend  to  ascribe  it  to  a  resonance  coupling  between  the 
absorbing  aromatic  amino  acids  of  the  protein  and  the  fluorescent 
dye.  In  this  case  it  would  not  be  the  protein  but  the  electromag- 
netic field  which  is  responsible  for  the  energy  transmission. 

As  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  I  will  leave  the  ques- 
tion open,  which   (if  any)   of  these  conductions  plays  a  role  in 
biology.  Possibilities  are  manifold.  So,  for  instance,  the  columns 
of  heterocyclic  purine  and  pyrimidine  bases  which,  according  to  ^ 
the  Watson  and  Crick  model,   forms  the  core  of  DNA   (and/ 
possibly  RNA),  may  conduct  energy  by  electrostatic  coupling  in; 
analogy  to  Sheibe's  dyes,  the  moieaiies  of  which  form  columns! 
and  conduct  £*.  I  have  found  earlier  (1955)  that  certain  proteins 
have  a  stronger  fluorescence  than  corresponds  to  the  additive 


17 

fluorescence  of  their  constituents,  showing  that  the  molecule,  as  a 
whole,  does  something  with  its  £*.  Such  systems  of  energy  con- 
duction may,  perhaps  also  explain  the  disproportionality  between 
the  quantity  of  certain  drugs  or  hormones  and  the  mass  of  the 
system  they  act  upon.  As  a  system  of  conducting  electric  wires  can 
he  rendered  inoperative  by  breaking  their  isolation  or  conduction 
at  one  point,  so  biological  systems  of  eneigy  conduction  could  be 
rendered  inoperative  if  disturbed  at  one  point,  similarly  to  Sheibe's 
dye  columns,  the  conduction  of  which  could  be  broken  by  single 
hydroquinone  molecules. 


4.  Absorption,  Fluorescence,  and  Phosphorescence^ 


Molecules  send  us  messages  through  photons,  be  it  through 
photons  they  absorb,  be  it  through  photons  they  emit.  This  chapter 
will  be  devoted  to  the  evaluation  and  decoding  of  some  of  these 
messages  in  relation  to  the  problem  of  biological  energy  transmis- 
sion. 

If  a  photon  hits  a  molecule  and  finds  no  electron  which  can  take 
up  its  energy,  then  it  passes  this  molecule  without  leaving  a  dis- 
turbance behind.  If  it  does  find  such  an  electron,  then  this  electron 
absorbs  the  photon  and  becomes  excited  to  a  higher  energy  level. 
In  order  to  transmit  £*  a  substance  must  be  able  to  accept  it.  The 
light  absorption  tells  us  what  energies  a  molecule  is  capable  of 
accepting. 

The  fate  that  the  E*  thus  communicated  to  a  molecule  in  vitro 
may  meet  varies  according  to  the  qualities  of  the  excited  electron 
and  the  molecule  which  contains  it.  Electrons  of  the  outer  shells 
of  the  molecules  belong  mostly  to  an  individual  atom  and  are 
bonded  to  its  nucleus.  If  such  a  bonded  electron  is  excited,  it  is 
likely  to  cause  the  nucleus  to  vibrate  around  its  equilibrium  posi- 
tion and  spend  its  E*  which,  eventually,  becomes  dissipated  as 
heat.  Evidently,  such  an  electron  would  be  unfit  to  act  as  an 
energy  transmitter. 

Molecules  containing  conjugated  double  bonds  have  nonbonded 
electrons  which  do  not  belong  to  single  atoms  but  to  the  whole 
conjugated  system.  These  v  electrons,  as  a  rule,  are  more  easily 

*The  student  interested  in  fluorescence  and  related  phenomena  will  find 
two  excellent  monographs  written  on  this  line  by  Forster  and  Pringsheim. 
The  present  knowledge  about  the  triplet  state  has  been  reviewed  lately  by 
Kasha  and  McGlynn. 

18 


19 

excitable  than  the  bonded  ones.  Not  being  strongly  bonded  to  any 
nucleus  in  particular,  they  are  also  less  likely  to  cause  nuclear 
vibrations.  However,  if  the  molecule  contains  any  weak  bonds 
which  can  be  broken  or  distorted  by  £*  (if  the  dissociation  energy 
is  lower  than  the  excitation  energy),  then  the  £*  communicated 
to  the  molecule  will  be  used  up  in  breaking  or  distorting  that  bond. 
Evidently,  such  molecules  would  be  equally  unfit  to  function  as 
transmitters  of  E*.  If  the  molecule  does  not  contain  such  weak 
spots  and  is  unable  to  dissipate  its  E*  (and  if  there  was  no  colli- 
sional  deactivation),  then  it  has  to  shoot  out  its  £*  as  a  photon, 
for  molecules  can  hold  E*  only  for  a  very  short  period  of  the 
order  of  10"*  to  10"^  seconds.  This  means  that  the  molecule  will 
be  fluorescent.  Fluorescence  thus  tells  us  that  the  molecule  is  ca- 
pable of  accepting  energy  and  does  not  dissipate  it.  These  are  two 
qualities  any  molecule  must  have  to  be  able  to  act  as  an  energy 
transmitter.  Thus,  fluorescence  becomes  a  most  important  indicator 
for  our  studies,  though  in  itself  it  may  have  no  direct  biological 
meaning,  fluorescent  light  not  being  different  from  any  other 
light.  Naturally,  the  biological  role  of  these  molecules  will  not  be 
to  emit  but  to  transmit  energy  and  so  in  their  natural  setting  they 
should  not  be  fluorescent  at  all  or  should  be  so  only  to  a  small  ex- 
tent (some  of  the  energy  being  spilled) .  For  example,  chlorophyll, 
the  most  important  energy  transmitter,  shows  a  very  poor  fluores- 
cence in  the  plant  while  it  displays  a  most  wonderful  one  in  ex- 
tracted condition. 

Naturally,  a  fluorescence  in  a  tissue  extract  does  not  necessarily 
mean  the  presence  of  an  energy  transmitter,  nor  does  the  absence 
of  fluorescence  necessarily  exclude  one.  The  fluorescence  may  be 
covered  up  by  other  substances  which  absorb  the  light  or  interfere 
with  excitation.  Fluorescence  may  also  be  absent  because  a  mole- 
cule acquires  the  structure  necessary  for  fluorescence  only  in  con- 
junction with  other  cell  constituents  such  as  metals  or  proteins. 

Organic  molecules,  fluorescent  in  solution,  may  belong  to  dif- 
ferent groups  of  substances  but  they  all  can  be  expected  to  have  a 


20 

system  of  conjugated  double  bonds.  One  of  the  major  group*  a 
made  up  of  aromatic  hydrocarbons,  which  have  no  charges  and  are 
unable  to  accept  or  give  off  protons.  Accordingly,  their  fluorescence 
is  independent  of  pH  and  redox  potential.  Their  absorption  lies 
mostly  in  the  UV. 

Another  important  group  of  fluorescent  substances  is  formed  by 
molecules  which  have  charges,  the  oscillations  of  which  partake  in 
excitation.  The  fluorescence  of  these  molecules  is  sensitive  to  pH 


(C2H5)2N  .,,,^^-^0.^^^^  N  (C2H5)2CI 

XOOH 

Fig.  4.  RJiodamin  B. 

and  redox  potential;  their  absorption  is  mostly  at  a  longer  wave- 
length, in  the  visible  part  of  the  spectrum.  Dyestuflts  belong  to 
this  group.  One  of  the  classic  members  of  this  group  is  the  dye 
rhodamin  B  (Fig.  4),  the  charge  of  which  oscillates  between  its 
two  nitrogens.  Rhodamin  has  an  absorption  band  in  the  UV  and 
one  in  the  visible  with  a  maximum  at  554  rrifi.  So  if  irradiated  by 
UV  it  will  absorb  this  light,  but  according  to  laws  of  spectroscopy, 
it  will  shoot  out  its  fluorescent  light  from  the  lower  absorption 
band.  This  is  symbolized  in  Fig.  5,  in  which  the  line  G  stands  for 
the  normal  or  ground  state  of  the  molecule.  The  arrow  G  -^  S2 
stands  for  the  excitation  of  the  molecule  by  the  UV  light.  The 
arrow  S2  ->  Si  stands  for  the  "internal  conversion"  in  which  the 
electron  gives  off  in  a  photon-free  process  its  excess  energy  and 
drops  to  the  energy  level  of  its  lower  absorption  band,  the  energy 
difference  being  dissipated  as  heat.  The  arrow  Si  ->  G  symbolizes 
the  shooting  out  of  the  energy  in  the  form  of  the  orange  fluores- 
cent light,  whereby  the  electron  drops  back  to  the  ground  level, 
joining  its  pair.  As  is  generally  known,  electrons,  as  a  rule,  occupy 
orbitals  in  pairs,  the  two  electrons  spinning  in  opposite  directions. 


21 


The  quantum  mechanical  selection  rules  allow  no  more  than  t^'o 
electrons  to  occupy  one  energy  level  and  this  only  if  the  two 
electrons  have  an  opposite  spin,  in  which  case  the  two  "coupled" 
spins  neutralize  one  another's  outward  electromagnetic  actions, 
making  the  molecule  diamagnetic. 


W 


// 


G 


Fig.  5.  Schematic  representation  of  an  electronic  excitation.  G:  ground 
level;  Si:  lowest  singlet  level,  S2:  next  higher  singlet  level;  Ti:  lowest 
triplet  level;  T2:  next  higher  triplet  level.  Vibrational  levels  are  omitted. 
Short  arrows  mark  forbidden  transitions. 

Such  fluorescence  as  that  of  rhodamin  can  most  conveniently  be 
observed  in  the  dark,  the  solution  being  illuminated  by  a  high 
pressure  mercury  lamp  armed  with  a  light  filter  which  allows  only 
near  UV  light  to  pass.  The  UV  excites  the  dye  but  does  not  inter- 
fere with  our  obser\^ation,  being  invisible  to  the  human  eye.  My 
observations  described  in  this  book  have  been  made  with  such  an 
illumination.  The  fluorescent  light  has  a  somewhat  longer  wave- 
length than  corresponds  to  the  absorption  spectrum,  some  of  the 
energy  being  lost  on  the  way.  So  while  the  absorption  maximum 
of  rhodamin  is  at  554  rcifi,  the  maximum  of  its  fluorescent  band  is 
at  578  nifi. 

Such  an  excitation,  in  which  the  electron  is  simply  raised  to  a 
higher  energy  level  and  then  drops  back  again,  is  called  a  "sing- 


22 

let  excitation"  in  reference  to  the  single  line  it  generates  in  tlie 
spectrum.  Howe\'er,  there  is  always  a  small  but  definite  chance 
that  the  excited  electron  may  reverse  its  spin,  which  then  becomes 
parallel  to  that  of  its  earlier  partner.  This  state  is  called  the 
"triplet  state"  with  regard  to  the  three  spectral  lines  into  which 
the  singlet  line  splits  up.  There  is  little  probability  that  this  will 
occur,  for  quantum  mechanical  selection  rules  forbid  electronic 
transitions  of  different  multiplicity,  that  is  transition  from  singlet 
to  triplet  and  vice  versa.  "Forbidden"  just  means  a  low  probability. 
But  once  this  transition  into  the  triplet  has  happened,  and  the 
excited  electron  has  reversed  its  spin,  it  cannot  drop  back  to  its 
original  level  to  join  its  earlier  partner  which  is  spinning  in  the 
same  direction.  The  excited  electron  is  thus  trapped  in  the  excited 
triplet  level  which,  as  a  rule,  has  somewhat  less  energy  than  the 
corresponding  singlet  level,  some  energy  being  lost  in  the  process. 
If  the  energ)'  difference  between  the  two  levels  is  small,  heat 
agitation  may  raise  the  electron  back  to  the  singlet  level  (Ti  ~>  Si, 
in  Fig.  5).  If  the  electron  hereby  reverses  its  spin  it  may  drop 
back  to  the  ground  level  emitting  its  excess  energy  as  delayed 
fluorescence.  What  mostly  happens,  eventually,  to  the  electron  in 
the  triplet  state  is  that  a  deactivating  heat  collision  dissipates  its 
excess  energy  and  so  the  electron  disappears  from  the  scene  with- 
out emitting  light.  The  chances  of  the  electron's  falling  back  from 
the  triplet  level  directly  to  the  singlet  level,  emitting  a  photon,  are 
very  small  and  so  a  light  emission,  which  corresponds  to  the  arrow 
Ti  -^  G  in  Fig.  5  is  a  rare  occurrence.  Such  a  light  emission 
which  corresponds  to  this  direct  triplet-singlet  transition,  dropping 
from  the  excited  triplet  to  the  ground  state  is  termed  now,  after 
the  pioneering  studies  of  G.  N.  Lewis  and  his  associates,  p/jos- 
phorescence,  to  distinguish  it  from  fluorescence  which  corresponds 
to  a  singlet-singlet  transition.  Equally  rare  will  be  the  opposite,  a 
direct  transition  from  the  ground  state  to  the  excited  triplet  (G  -> 
Ti  in  Fig.  5)  under  absorption  of  a  photon.  This  absorption  is 
termed  triplet  absorption. 


23 

The  electrons  going  into  the  triplet  will  have  important  con- 
sequences. Firstly:  the  lifetime  of  the  excitation  will  be  greatly 
lengthened,  as  a  rule  about  a  millionfold  (Becker  and  Kasha). 
The  molecule,  which  contains  the  "uncoupled"  electrons,  will  be 
paramagnetic  and  will  be  in  an  unbalanced,  more  reactive  state. 
In  many  ways  it  will  be  akin  to  a  free  radical. 

If  we  want  to  study  electrons  in  the  triplet  state  we  have  to  stabi- 
lize them,  protecting  them  as  far  as  possible  against  deactivating 
heat  collision.  This  can  be  done  by  enclosing  them  in  a  rigid  glass, 
such  as  Borax.  Cooling  will  help  to  some  extent  too,  decreasing 
heat  agitation.  We  can  combine  the  two  and  dissolve  the  substance 
in  question  in  a  solvent  such  as  glycerol  and  then  freeze  this  sol- 
vent by  strong  cooling  in  dry  ice  or  liquid  N2  to  a  rigid  "glass." 
By  doing  so  we  can  increase  the  number  of  electrons  present  in  the 
triplet  state.  The  more  electrons  in  this  state  the  greater  the 
chances  that  some  will  fall  back  directly  to  the  ground  state  emit- 
ting "phosphorescence."  To  show  that  the  light  actually  is  phos- 
phorescence and  not  fluorescence,  that  it  comes  from  a  triplet,  we 
can  observe  the  system  in  a  phosphoroscope.  This  is  an  instrument 
which  cuts  ofli  alternately  the  exciting  light  going  from  the  light 
source  to  the  phosphorescent  material  and  the  light  going  from 
the  phosphorescent  material  to  the  observer.  If  the  time  interval 
between  these  two  is  10"^  seconds,  then  light  which  the  observer 
sees  must  have  been  generated  by  an  excitation  which  lasted  10"^ 
seconds  or  more,  was  thus  phosphorescence.  Fluorescence  only 
lasts  10"*  seconds  or  so.  The  author  has  used  two  phosphoroscopes 
in  his  studies,  a  fast  one  with  a  time  constant  of  10"^  seconds  and 
a  slow  one  which  allowed  light  to  pass  only  if  coming  from  a 
"long-life-excitation"  lasting  0.1  second  or  more. 

There  is  one  more  point  about  the  triplet  state  which  might  be 
of  prime  import  to  biology,  and  this  is  that  the  probabilities  of 
the  singlet-triplet  transitions  can  be  modified,  are  thus  accessible 
to  regulatory  influences.  The  probabilities  of  a  singlet  turning  into 
a  triplet  can,  for  instance,  be  greatly  increased  by  the  presence  of 


24 

paramagnetic  molecules,  as  Oj,  or  of  heavy  atoms  with  a  high 
atomic  number,  as  iodide,  the  nucleus  of  which  can  create  an 
electromagnetic  disturbance  in  its  vicinity.  If  an  excited  electron 
enters  it,  it  may  reverse  its  spin.  A  beautiful  example  of  this  has 
been  given  by  Kasha  (1952),  who  showed  that  the  almost  pure 
singlet  spectrum  of  dichloronaphthalene  went  over  into  an  almost 
pure  triplet  spectrum  if  he  replaced  the  CI  by  the  heavier  iodine. 
But  what  is  even  more  important — it  was  not  necessary  to  intro- 
duce the  iodine  into  the  molecule  in  order  to  produce  this  change. 
It  was  sufficient  to  add  it  to  the  solution  in  the  form  of  ethyliodide. 
These  effects  seem  to  me  especially  fascinating  because  iodine  is 
contained  in  one  of  the  main  regulators  of  cellular  energetics, 
thyroxine  (and  related  compounds),  while  O2,  which  is  one  of  the 
very  few  molecules  paramagnetic  in  its  normal  state,  is  most  inti- 
mately involved  in  the  energetics  of  life. 

The  biological  energy  unit,  the  energy  of  the  ^P  is  of  the  order 
of  10  Calories,  which  corresponds  to  a  wavelength  of  2-3ft,  which 
is  to  say  that  a  photon  of  this  wavelength  has  the  same  energy  as  a 
'—P.  This  wavelength  corresponds  to  the  near  infrared.  It  is  thus 
this  spectral  region  which  will  have  the  greatest  direct  interest  for 
the  biologists.  It  also  has  an  interest  of  its  own.  It  is  here  that  pure 
electronic  and  vibrational  excitations  meet  and  transition  between 
the  two  is  the  easiest  (which  might  be  one  of  the  reasons  why  the 
biological  quant  is  located  here).  Similarly  to  other  borderlines 
this  spectral  region,  too,  is  a  no  man's  land,  lying  beyond  the 
domain  of  current  spectroscopy  and  on  this  side  of  the  professional 
infrared.  This  region  may  hold  surprises  even  for  the  physicists. 
Its  secrets  are  also  guarded  by  technical  difficulties,  as  the  lack  of 
good  detectors,  and  water  which  has  several  absorption  bands  in 
this  region. 


5.  Triplets  and  Water 


Electronic  excitations  gi\e  us  valuable  information  about  prop- 
erties and  reactions  of  molecules,  but  whether  these  excitations  are 
involved  in  biological  reactions  and  take  any  part  in  energy  trans- 
missions is  a  different  question.  There  are  reasons  to  doubt  it. 
Singlet  excitations  are  much  too  short-lived  to  allow  their  utiliza- 
tion or  regulation.  Moreover,  pure  electronic  excitation,  which 
corresponds  approximately  to  the  visible  part  of  the  spectrum,  de- 
mands energy  quanta  which,  as  a  rule,  are  too  high  to  be  available 
in  biological  systems.  The  longest  visible  wavelength  corresponds 
to  40  Calories  while  the  biological  energ}'  unit,  the  energy  of  the 
^P,  is  about  10  Calories. 

These  difficulties  are  not  present  in  the  case  of  triplets,  of  which 
the  lifetime  is  longer  and  the  energies  lower;  their  energy  levels 
may  lie  even  in  the  near  infrared.  However,  the  forbidden  nature, 
which  makes  the  singlet-triplet  transition  attractive,  seems  also  to 
make  it  useless  for  the  biologist.  An  excitation  which  has  a  small 
probability  of  occurring  can  be  of  no  use  to  the  cell.  So  we  are  left 
empty-handed. 

There  is  one  possible  hitch  in  this.  The  biological  solvent  is 
water,  not  borax  or  glycerol,  and  water  has  many  queer  and  unique 
properties,  such  as  its  strong  dipole  character.  The  reasons  why  the 
physicist  has  shunned  water  as  a  solvent  are  evident.  On  freezing, 
water  cracks,  becomes  inhomogeneous  and  unfit  for  optical  meas- 
urements. It  becomes  inhomogeneous  both  optically  and  chemi- 
cally, having  a  tendency  to  crystallize  out  and  leave  dissolved 
molecules  behind.  So  the  physicist  has  had  good  reason  not  to 
touch  water.  The  biologist,  however,  is  inseparably  linked  to  it. 

25 


26 

Life  originated  in  water,  is  thriving  in  water,  water  being  its  sol- 
vent and  medium.  It  is  the  matrix  of  life. 

So  before  discarding  electronic  excitation  as  the  means  of  bio- 
logical energy  transmissions,  we  have  to  have  a  look  at  water  and 
repeat  some  of  the  classical  experiments  in  this  medium,  how- 
ever unfit  it  may  be  for  physical  measurement.  If  we  cannot 
eliminate  its  shortcomings  we  can  diminish  them.  We  can,  for  in- 
stance, try  to  produce  possibly  eutectic  ice  which  includes  dis- 
solved substances,  by  cooling  our  solutions  rapidly,  using  thin- 
walled  test  tubes  of  a  small  diameter  dipping  them  suddenly  into 
a  cooling  mixture,  such  as  an  etliylene  glycol  monomethyl  ether 
with  dry  ice  suspended  in  it. 

We  can  start  our  experimentation  by  following  the  trail  of  the 
physicist  dissolving  various  fluorescent  dyes  and  other  fluorescent 
substances  first  in  glycerol.  Viewing  these  solutions  under  the  UV 
lamp,  armed  with  a  filter  which  allows  only  UV  to  pass,  we  can 
observe  their  fluorescence.  Cooling  these  test  tubes  in  our  dry  ice 
freezing  mixture  will  not  make  much  difference.  The  intensity  of 
the  fluorescence  may  somewhat  increase,  some  "delayed  fluores- 
cence" may  appear  but  the  color,  that  is  the  wavelength  of  the 
emitted  light,  as  a  rule,  remains  unchanged.  The  results  will  be 
the  same  if,  instead  of  the  glycerol,  we  use  a  10%  water)^  solution 
of  glycerol  or  2%  methanol. 

This  situation  will  change  dramatically  if  we  shift  to  pure  water 
as  solvent.  At  room  temperature  we  will  see  the  usual  fluorescence, 
but  on  freezing  we  will  find  the  light  emission  profoundly  altered: 
it  will  have  disappeared  or  changed  in  color.  This  is  illustrated 
by  Fig.  6,  which  is  a  colored  photograph  of  test  tubes,  containing 
fluorescent  dyestuffs,  illuminated  by  the  UV  lamp.  All  the  tubes 
contain  in  their  lower  half  the  dye  solution  in  frozen  state  (cooled 
in  dry  ice)  and  in  their  upper  half  the  solution  in  unfrozen, 
liquid  condition. 

The  first  tube  on  the  left  contained  a  10~*  Af  watery  rhodamin 
B  solution.  The  upper  half  of  the  test  tube  shows  the  well  known 


Fig.  6.  All  tubes  contain  watery  solutions  frozen  up  to  the  middle. 
From  left  to  right,  first:  0.0001  Ai  rhodamin  B.  Second:  rhodamin  B  and 
0.001  M  thiamin  HCI.  Third:  0.001  M  riboflavine  phosphate  sodium, 
no  Oi.  Fourth:  same  and  atmospheric  oxygen.  Fifth:  same  plus  0.001 
M  KI. 


27 

brilliant  orange  fluorescence  of  this  dye,  while  the  lower  frozen 
half  shows  practically  no  light  emission  at  all.  Ample  evidence 
will  be  supplied  later  to  show  that  this  change  is  not  due  to  the 
dye  molecules  having  become  inexcitable  nor  to  their  dissipating 
the  energy  of  their  singlet  excitation.  They  are  just  as  excitable  as 
before  (as  shown  by  the  almost  unchanged  color)  and  do  not 
dissipate  their  energy  (the  low  temperature  and  solid  state  also 
disfavors  such  dissipation).  The  change  is  due  to  the  excited 
electrons  going  into  the  "forbidden"  triplet  state.  The  peculiar 
conditions  prevailing  in  our  frozen  water  make  this  transition  not 
only  an  allowed  one  but  the  most  probable  one,  and  so  the  elec- 
trons go  into  it  wholesale. 

The  second  tube  from  the  left  in  Fig.  6  contained  the  same 
watery  rhodamin  solution  as  the  first  one,  with  the  difference  that 
at  the  side  of  the  dye  also  10~^  M  thiamine  hydrochloride  was  dis- 
solved in  it.  The  unfrozen  solution  in  the  upper  half  shows  the 
same  orange  fluorescence  as  before.  The  difl?erence  is  in  the  frozen 
part.  This  shows  an  intense  red  light  emission,  comparable  in  its 
intensity  to  the  fluorescence  of  the  unfrozen  solution.  The  light 
emission  is  red,  of  longer  wavelength  (and  lower  energy)  than 
the  orange  fluorescence.  In  the  fast  phosphoroscope  this  frozen 
part  of  the  tube  shows  luminescence  which  indicates  that  the 
emitted  red  light  comes  from  a  triplet  state  and  is  due  to  the  re- 
turn of  the  excited  electrons  from  their  excited  triplet  into  the 
ground  state.  So  water,  in  presence  of  thiamine,  makes  this  transi- 
tion possible  too,  promoting  the  transition  both  ways,  from  singlet 
to  triplet  and  from  the  triplet  to  the  ground  state. 

There  are  two  facts  emerging  from  this  experience:  that  water 
can  promote  the  singlet  ^  triplet  transitions  and  that  the  proba- 
bilities of  these  transitions  can  further  be  modified  by  added  sub- 
stances. Thus  the  transitions  are  accessible  to  regulatory  influences 
and  if  these  excitations  would  play  a  major  role  in  biology  they 
could  be  controlled  by  hormones,  modified  by  drugs,  or  might  be 
disturbed  under  pathological  circumstances,  giving  rise  to  disease. 


28 

The  red  phosphorescence  of  rhodamin  has  a  wavelength  which 
is  35  m/i  longer  than  that  of  its  fluorescence,  triplet  levels  being 
usually  somewhat  lower  than  singlet  levels.  As  has  been  sym- 
bolized in  Fig.  5,  in  the  unfrozen  state  the  rhodamin  gets  excited 
by  our  UV  to  its  higher  S2  level,  drops  in  its  "internal  conver- 
sion" to  Si,  and  from  here  to  G  emitting  its  excess  energy  as 
fluorescent  light.  What  happens  in  the  frozen  part  of  the  second 
tube  in  Fig.  5  is  that  the  electron  goes  from  S2  to  Ti  and  then 
returns  from  here  to  its  ground  state  G,  emitting  energy  in  the 
form  of  phosphorescent  light.  Whether  it  gets  from  S2  to  Ti  via 
Si  or  T2  can  be  left  an  open  question. 

On  closer  observation  this  second  tube  in  Fig.  6  with  the  rhoda- 
min-thiamine  mixture  is  found  to  have  three  zones,  a  fluorescent 
liquid  one  on  top,  a  phosphorescent  one  on  the  bottom,  and  a  zone 
which  separates  the  two  and  emits  no  light.  This  intermediar)' 
zone  has  an  intermediate  temperature.  We  can  observe  this  transi- 
tory nonluminous  phase  also  by  gradually  cooling  our  solution. 
On  cooling,  the  fluorescence  disappears  before  the  phosphorescent 
light  emission  appears.  Only  when  the  tube  reaches  a  low  tem- 
perature does  the  phosphorescent  light  emission  set  in.  It  becomes 
stronger  when  we  go  from  dry  ice  to  liquid  N2  which  is  about 
100°C  colder.  One  would  have  expected  radiation  to  become 
weaker  on  cooling  and  stronger  on  heating.  What  happens  is  the 
opposite,  showing  that  the  light  emission  was  not  dependent  on 
activation  energies. 

The  middle  tube  in  Fig.  6  contained  a  10"^  Al  solution  of  ribo- 
flavine- 5 '-phosphate.^  The  situation  is  analogous  to  that  found  in 
the  first  tube  with  rhodamin :  the  upper  part  shows  the  well  known 
brilliant  yellowish-green  fluorescence,  while  the  lower  frozen  part 
shows  no  light  emission  at  all.  In  this  tube  the  O2  was  expelled 

^  It  is  necessary  to  use  fresh  solutions.  The  riboflavine  is  light  sensitive  but 
even  stored  in  the  dark  refrigerator  it  loses  its  phosphorescence  without  di- 
minishing its  fluorescence.  The  former  seems  to  be  linked  to  subtle  qualities 
of  the  molecule. 


29 

prior  to  cooling  by  bubbling  through  N2.  If  the  cooling  is  effected 
in  the  presence  of  the  absorbed  atmospheric  oxygen,  the  result  is 
the  one  shown  in  the  next  tube  to  the  right.  The  O2  present  made 
no  difference  to  the  fluorescence  of  the  unfrozen  part,  but  made 
the  frozen  part  emit  an  orange  phosphorescence.  The  O2  rendered 
the  triplet  state  unstable,  making  it  emit  light,  "allowing"  the  ex- 
cited electrons  to  return  from  their  lower  triplet  state  to  the 
ground  state,  giving  off  their  excess  energy  in  the  form  of  photons. 

The  last  tube  on  the  right  contained  besides  riboflavine  the 
atmospheric  O2  and  10"^  M  potassium  iodide.  As  the  figure 
shows,  the  phosphorescence  was  completely  "quenched."  Transi- 
tions are  accessible  to  regulatory  influences  both  ways,  as  shown 
by  the  opposite  action  of  O2  and  I'.  If  the  one  labilized  the  triplet 
state  and  promoted  the  T  -^  G  transition,  the  other  abolished  it. 
Such  antagonistic  effects  can  be  produced  by  various  substances. 
Adrenaline,  for  instance,  wipes  out  the  weak  phosphorescence  of 
frozen  rhodamin  in  10"^  M  concentration  while  acetylcholine  pro- 
motes it  and  so  the  enhancing  effect  of  .0025  M  acetylcholine  can 
be  compensated  by  10"*  AI  adrenaline.  Adrenaline  quenches  the 
phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in  10"^  M  concentration. 

The  light  emission  of  a  watery  riboflavine  solution,  frozen  with- 
out the  previous  elimination  of  oxygen,  has  been  observed  previ- 
ously by  Dhere  and  Castelli,  and  interpreted  correctly  as  a  phos- 
phorescence. 

We  can  thus  sum  up  by  saying  that  water  has  brought  about  a 
profound  change  in  the  excitational  states  of  the  two  fluorescent 
substances  studied,  making  forbidden  transitions  into  probable 
ones,  and  the  question  arises  whether  the  behavior  of  rhodamin 
and  riboflavine  represent  some  general  rule  or  whether  we  have 
stumbled  here  on  two  substances  that  behave  peculiarly.  As  far  as 
my  experience  goes  we  are  faced  here  with  a  general  rule.  All 
fluorescent  substances  tested  showed  such  an  extraordinary  be- 
havior at  low  temperatures  in  water.  The  following  examples  may 
be  quoted:  on  freezing  of  its  watery  solution  in  dry  ice,  the  green- 


30 

yellow  fluorescence  of  acridine  orange  gives  place  to  an  orange 
phosphorescence.  The  same  happens  with  acridine  yellow.  As  we 
go  below  0°C  the  yellow  fluorescence  disappears  and  all  light 
emission  vanishes.  On  further  cooling  an  orange  light  emission 
appears  and  becomes  intense  around  — 50°C.  In  acridine  yellow 
this  light  emission  comes  from  a  long-lived  excitation  since  it  is 
very  intense  even  in  the  slow  moving  phosphoroscope.  If  the  test 
tube  is  held  in  the  light  of  the  UV  lamp  and  then  the  illumination 
is  suddenly  disconnected,  the  frozen  solution  shows  a  strong  after- 
glow lasting  for  a  second  or  more.*  Pyronine  B,  a  dye  related  to 
rhodamin  B,  which  shows  in  liquid  solution  an  orange-yellow 
fluorescence,  loses  (like  rhodamin)  all  light  emission  as  soon  as 
the  water  freezes.  No  light  emission  appears  even  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  dry  ice.  However,  if  1%  glucose  is  present,  below  — 40°C 
a  strong  red  light  emission  appears  which  comes  from  a  long- 
lasting  excitation  as  shown  by  the  strong  afterglow.  Acridine  red, 
eosin  Y,  tetrabromo  fluoresceine,  rose  bengal,  titan  yellow,  all 
show  similar  sudden  changes  in  their  fluorescent  light  emission  on 
freezing.  These  changes  are  not  limited  to  dyes.  A  saturated  watery 
solution  of  acridine,  which  has  a  blue  fluorescence  at  room  tem- 
perature, emits  a  strong  orange  phosphorescence  if  cooled  in  dry 
ice.  The  blue  fluorescence  of  folic  acid  disappears  on  freezing. 
Atebrin  (0.0005  M),  which  has  an  intense  yellowish-green  fluo- 
rescence in  water  shows,  in  the  frozen  state,  an  orange-green  light 
emission  which  can  be  shown  to  be  composed  of  a  yellow  fluores- 
cence and  a  red  phosphorescence  by  adding  1%  glucose  to  the 
solution  prior  to  freezing.  On  direct  observation  the  light  emission 
of  the  frozen  system  is  found  to  be  green-yellow,  while  in  the 
phosphoroscope  the  system  shows  an  intense  red  phosphorescence, 
coming  from  a  long-lived  excitation.  In  quinine  and  quinidine  the 
intense  blue  fluorescence  fades  out  on  freezing  to  give  room,  at 
lower  temperatures,  to  a  whitish-blue  phosphorescence.  "Whitish" 

'If  afterglow  had  to  be  observed,  or  if  the  light  emission  was  studied  in 
the  phosphoroscope,  no  light  filters  were  shunted  between  the  lamp  and  the 
material. 


31 

means  a  mixed  color,  the  yellow  component  of  which  can  be  in- 
tensified by  freezing  the  solution  of  the  alkaloid  in  the  presence 
of  10"^  M  potassium  iodide.  In  lysergic  acid  (10-*  M)  the  blue 
fluorescent  light  emission  of  the  watery  solution  assumes  a  pur- 
plish color  on  freezing  and  can  be  shown  to  contain,  at  the  side  of 
fluorescence,  a  strong  long-lived  phosphorescence  in  the  presence 
of  1%  glucose. 

Such  changes  are  not  limited  to  fluorescent  substances.  Isopenta- 
quine,  for  instance,  emits  under  the  UV  lamp  a  strong  orange 
light  if  frozen  in  dry  ice.  This  light  emission  is  composed  of  a  yel- 
low fluorescence  (which  can  be  greatly  increased  by  10%  glucose) 
and  a  red  phosphorescence  which  can  be  seen  in  the  fast  phos- 
phoroscope  and  can  be  somewhat  increased  by  10"^  M  glutathione. 
A  frozen  blue  tetrazolium  sends  out  orange-green  light,  composed 
of  a  green  fluorescence  and  a  red  phosphorescence  visible  in  the 
fast  phosphoroscope.  Chlorophyll  behaved  like  other  fluorescent 
dyes:  on  freezing  its  watery  solution  completely  lost  its  brilliant 
red  fluorescence.^ 

In  all  instances  the  light  emission,  observed  on  cooling,  had  a 
longer  wavelength  than  the  fluorescence  of  the  unfrozen  solutions. 
Phosphorescence,  as  a  rule,  has  a  longer  wavelength  than  the  cor- 
responding fluorescence.  Spectra  were  known  to  have  a  tendenq^ 
to  shift  towards  a  longer  wavelength  on  intense  cooling,  but  the 
fact  that  water  so  completely  and  dramatically  changes  the  situa- 
tion was,  to  my  knowledge,  not  known  or  appreciated. 

These  experiments  are  so  simple  that  they  ought  to  be  repeated 
by  everybody  interested  in  this  field.  They  should  be  repeated  even 
in  the  classroom.  They  demand  no  paraphernalia,  except  an  UV 
lamp  and  some  dry  ice.  Doing  an  experiment  is  different  from 
reading  about  it.  These  experiments  make  the  impression  of  a 
new,  colorful  world  opening  up  unexpectedly  and  promising  a 
deeper  insight  into  the  mechanisms  of  life  and  their  interaction 
with  their  matrix,  water. 

^  "Chlorophyll,   water  soluble"   of  Fisher  Scientific  Co.,  New  York  was 
used. 


6.  Excitations  and  the  Biological  Matrix 


The  first  question  that  needs  to  be  answered  in  connection  with 
the  experiments  described  in  the  previous  chapter  is  that  about  the 
role  of  water  which,  together  with  the  low  temperatures  employed, 
so  completely  changed  the  situation.  The  results  make  it  clear  that 
the  effect  of  water  and  cooling  was  not  additive  but  the  two  did 
something  specific  together.  Water,  in  itself,  does  nothing,  and 
cooling,  in  itself,  does  nothing,  for  at  room  temperature  the  situa- 
tion is  not  changed  by  using  water  as  a  solvent  instead  of  glycerol, 
while  cooling  does  not  change  the  situation  if  glycerol  or  a  10% 
watery  glycerol  is  used  as  a  solvent.  That  temperature,  as  such,  is 
ineffective  is  also  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  the  behavior  of  rho- 
damin  or  riboflavine  is  essentially  identical  whether  we  use  dry  ice 
or  liquid  N2  for  cooling,  though  there  is  more  than  100°C  differ- 
ence between  the  temperature  of  the  two.  So  evidently,  something 
new  and  specific  had  to  be  produced  by  the  introduction  of  water 
and  cooling.  This  could  hardly  be  anything  else  than  the  forma- 
tion of  ice.  That  this  is  actually  so  is  borne  out  by  the  temperature 
dependence  of  the  observed  phenomena.  We  must  distinguish  here 
between  two  reactions:  the  excited  molecule's  going  into  the  trip- 
let state  and  its  emitting  phosphorescent  light.  The  two  depend 
on  temperature  in  a  different  way.  A  rhodamin  solution,  for  in- 
stance, cooled  to  —  78°C  shows  a  v^eak  red  light  emission.  If  al- 
lowed to  warm  up  gradually,  the  light  emission  fades  out  around 
— 40°C.  From  —40°  upwards  there  is  no  phosphorescence  and 
'until  the  ice  does  not  melt  there  is  no  fluorescence  either.  There 
is  no  light  emission  at  all.  Fluorescence  sets  in  only  when  the  ice 
starts  to  melt.  Thus  the  triplet  is  stable  until  the  ice  does  not 
melt.  We  do  not  need  the  strong  and  rapid  cooling  in  our  ex- 

32 


33 

periment  to  produce  triplets.  Freezing  at  — 1°C  would  be  suffi- 
cient, only  such  slow  freezing  would  favor  the  formation  of  pure 
ice  which  leaves  the  dye  behind  in  a  small  volume  of  mother 
liquor.  The  deep  freezing  is  needed  to  have  the  dye  enclosed  in 
the  rapidly  forming  crystals,  but  once  this  has  happened  we  can 
maintain  the  triplet  state  even  at  the  melting  point.  The  same  is 
true  for  the  other  substances  studied,  such  as  acridine  orange, 
acridine,  quinidine,  and  riboflavine.  The  light  emission  fades  out 
in  these  substances  at  different  temperatures,  in  acridine  orange 
around  — 20°C,  in  riboflavine  around  — 3°C;  the  blue  emission 
of  pure  quinidine  and  the  yellow  emission  in  the  presence  of 
0.001  M  KI  fade  out  around  — 20°C.  So  the  real  color  of  the 
triplet  can  be  seen  best  closer  to  the  melting  point  where  the  ice 
is  optically  less  inhomogeneous. 

This  shows  clearly  what  is  important  for  the  triplet  state  is  not 
the  low  temperature  but  the  physical  state  of  water,  the  formation 
of  ice.  Ice  is  not  just  solidified  water.  As  is  generally  known,  mod- 
ern physics  puts  less  emphasis  on  the  idea  of  "solid"  and  "liquid" 
than  on  "regular"  and  "random,"  and  the  "solid  state"  owes  its 
specific  qualities  less  to  the  fact  that  its  particles  cannot  move 
relative  to  one  another  than  to  the  fact  that  they  can  form  regular 
structures,  crystal  lattices,  which  is  possible  only  if  the  relative 
position  of  particles  is  fixed  and  regularities  are  not  destroyed  by 
heat  agitation.  Glass,  which  is  rigid  and  does  not  flow  at  room 
temperature,  has  no  regularity  in  its  structure  and  so  is  looked 
upon  by  the  physicist  more  as  a  fluid  of  high  viscosity  than  a  solid. 
The  same  is  true  for  glycerol  frozen  to  a  rigid  "glass"  at  low  tem- 
perature, while  ice  is  a  real  solid  with  a  regular  hexagonal  crystal 
structure  though  it  readily  changes  its  shape  and  "flows,"  as  evi- 
denced by  the  motion  of  glaciers  and  as  Helmholz  showed.  The 
strong  dipole  character  of  the  water  molecules  may  endow  their 
crystals  with  specific  qualities  and  so  the  most  reasonable  assump- 
tion is  that  the  transition  of  our  excited  molecules  into  the  "for- 
bidden" triplet  state  comes  about  by  an  interaction  of  these  mole- 


34 

cules  and  their  excited  electrons  with  the  crystal  lattices  of  this 
queer  substance,  water. 

This  explains  why  there  was  no  striking  change  in  the  behavior 
of  our  fluorescent  substances  in  glycerol  on  cooling;  glycerol  may 
form  a  rigid  mass  at  low  temperatures  but  does  not  form  crystals. 
This  explains  also  why  an  admixture  of  10%  glycerol  or  2% 
methanol  to  the  water  deprived  it  of  its  specific  action  on  excita- 
tion: because  these  admixtures  destroyed  the  regularity  of  the 
water  crystals. 

When  considering  water  structures  we  enter  a  fantastic  and  fas- 
cinating world.  Bridgman,  in  his  studies  on  high  pressure,  could 
distinguish  between  half  a  score  of  different  ices.  But  we  need  not 
go  to  ice  to  find  structures  in  water.  Bernal  and  Fowler,  in  their 
classic  paper  showed  water  to  have  a  quartz-like  "crystalline"  struc- 
ture which  is  different  from  that  of  common  ice  which  is  tridymit- 
like.  Though  Bernal's  and  Fowler's  theory  has  somewhat  been 
modified  by  later  researchers,  its  essential  correctness  has  never 
been  questioned.  In  the  HgO  molecule  the  central  O  holds  the  two 
protons  on  one  side,  which  lends  a  strong  dipole  moment  to  the 
molecule.  The  orbitals  of  the  lone  pair  of  electrons  are  directed 
towards  the  other  side,  contributing  to  the  dipole  character 
(Pople).  The  two  protons  can  be  shared,  through  H-bonds,  with 
two  other  water  molecules,  while  the  lone  pair  of  electrons  may 
attract  two  protons  from  two  other  HsO's,  so  that  each  water  mole- 
cule can  link  up  with  four  others.  Since  the  four  orbitals  respon- 
sible for  these  links  point  in  nearly  tetrahedral  direction,  a  tetra- 
hedral  lattice  will  thus  be  formed.  If  water,  in  this  state,  is  still 
liquid  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  links  can  be  broken,  and,  as 
Pople  emphasized,  can  also  be  bent  easily.  Above  0°C,  heat  agi- 
tation does  not  allow  the  molecules  to  settle  down  to  permanent 
rigid  lattice  but  all  the  same  the  tendency  to  form  such  a  lattice 
is  there,  keeping  water  in  a  "quasi  crystalline"  condition.  Water 
seems  to  have  two  melting  points,  one  at  0°C,  the  point  at  which 
the  water  goes  from  a  rigid  crystal,  so  to  say,  into  a  liquid  one. 


35 

The  other  melting  point  is  between  30°  and  40°C,  at  which  tem- 
perature, under  influence  of  the  intense  heat  agitation,  the  crystal 
structure  fades  out  altogether   (Feates  and  Ives).  It  is  possible^ 
that  nature  stabilized  temperature  in  higher  isothermal  organisms 
around  37°C  to  allow  their  cells  to  build  crystalline  water  struc-j 
tures  of  their  own  choosing. 

The  situation  becomes  more  complex  still  if  we  consider  water 
structures  built  around  solid  surfaces.  The  tendency  of  building 
structure-ordered  layers  around  surfaces  reaching  deep  into  the 
fluid  phase  seems  to  be  a  general  tendency  of  liquids.  This  prob- 
lem is  also  of  first-rate  industrial  importance  with  regard  to  lubri- 
cation. Henniker  and  McBain  collected,  as  early  as  1947,  175 
references  to  such  layers  and  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
"deep-surface  orientation  is  the  normal  behavior  of  many  liquids. 
The  surface  zones  of  liquids  are  tens  and  hundreds  of  molecules 
deep,  rather  than  monomolecular,  as  commonly  assumed."  A  clear 
demonstration  of  such  surface  layers  of  water  was  given  more  re- 
cently by  Palmer,  Cunliffe,  and  Hugh  who  measured  the  dielectric 
properties  of  water  between  mica  plates  and  found  that  water 
behaved  around  the  mica  not  as  water  but  as  "liquid  ice"  showing 
the  frequency  dependence  of  the  dielectric  constant  of  ice.  These 
layers  of  ice  were  found  to  be  several  microns  deep. 

The  formation  of  such  water  structures  should  not  be  confused 
with  the  old  idea  of  "bound  water."  "Binding"  involves  rather 
the  idea  of  energy  than  that  of  structure.  "Binding"  means  a  cer- 
tain force,  energy  being  needed  to  remove  a  molecule  from  its  site. 
Such  "bound"  molecules,  having  their  dipole  forces  engaged,  are 
also  unfit  to  serve  as  solvents  for  other  molecules.  Such  a  binding 
is  especially  strong  around  free  charges,  as  those  of  ions.  The 
order  thus  produced  is  a  "short  range  order"  the  number  of  more 
firmly  held  layers  of  molecules  being  very  small,  1-2.  Contrary 
to  this  the  building  of  lattices  means  "long  range  order"  in  which 
the  single  molecules  collaborate  collectively. 

The  building  of  such  water  structures  is  not  necessarily  linked 


36 

to  such  sharp  phase- interfaces  as  those  of  water  and  mica.  Such 
structures  can,  and  probably  are  formed  around  any  dissolved 
molecule.  Frank  and  Evans  introduced  the  picturesque  expression 
of  "iceberg,"  trying  to  express  that  molecules,  dissolved  in  water 
are  surrounded  by  such  structures.  The  measurements  of  Frank 
and  Evans  show  that  not  only  electropolar  molecules,  but  also 
apolar  molecules  surround  themselves  with  such  icebergs.  As  de- 
scribed lately  in  an  attractive  article  by  Buswell  and  Rhodenbush, 
the  ice  formed  around  homoiopoiar  molecules  is  different  from 
common  hexagonal  ice,  having  a  very  loosely  packed  cubic  lattice 
structure,  their  formation  causing  thus  a  strong  expansion.  "This 
behaviour  (of  water)  was  called  to  the  attention  of  chemists  in  a 
dramatic  fashion  by  certain  surprising  natural  phenomena.  One 
was  the  fact  that  corn  sometimes  showed  frost  effects  when  the 
temperature  was  40°F,  well  above  freezing.  Another  was  the  dis- 
covery that  pipelines  carrying  natural  gas  often  became  clogged 
with  a  slushy  'snow,*  containing  water,  at  temperatures  as  high  as 
68  degrees  F."  The  formation  of  ice  above  the  freezing  point  is 
thus  not  a  theory.  It  is  crude  fact  which  causes  trouble  in  industry. 

We  can  thus  suppose  water  structures  to  be  built  around  dis- 
solved molecules,  structures  which  may  have  a  different  crystalline 
structure  according  to  the  polar  or  nonpolar  nature  of  the  atomic 
groups  on  that  molecule  and  the  mutual  distance  of  these  groups 
in  relation  to  the  lattice  constants  of  the  different  possible  water 
crystals.  It  is  believable  that  different  spacings  promote  different 
crystal  forms  or,  if  unfavorable,  inhibit  order  and  lattice  forma- 
tion. Possibilities  are  rich,  relations  complex. 

If  structures  or  molecules  are  surrounded  by  "icebergs"  then  we 
can  expect  that  the  dimensions  and  the  nature  of  the  icebergs  will 
decide  how  far  these  molecules  can  approach  one  another  and  also 
whether  a  dissolved  molecule  can  pass  a  pore  in  an  "ice-covered" 
membrane.  Two  "icebergs"  having  an  identical  ice  structure  might 
fuse,  allowing  a  close  approach,  while  the  opposite  may  hold  for 
ices  of  different  nature. 


37 

B.  Jacobson  has  studied  highly  polymer  deoxyribose  nucleic  acid 
and  found  that  its  behavior  could  be  explained  better  by  the  as- 
sumption of  "lattice  ordered  hydration  shells"  than  by  the  old  idea 
of  rotational  ellipsoids.  The  great  number  of  electropolar  groups 
and  free  charges  on  this  molecule  may  strongly  favor  the  forma- 
tion of  water  structures.  Also  the  fibrous  nature  favors  ice-forma- 
tion. A  globular  shape  disfavors  it,  so  that  it  seems  likely  that 
mobile  globular  protein  molecules  will  be  found  to  be  built  so  as 
to  avoid  formations  of  icebergs  which  would  interfere  with  mo- 
bility. Since  structural  proteins  are  fibrous  and  closely  packed,  it 
seems  likely  that  water,  between  them,  is  in  a  highly  ordered  state. 
Bernall  and  Fowler  introduced  the  idea  of  "structural  tempera- 
ture" which  they  defined  as  the  temperature  at  which  free  water 
would  have  the  same  degree  of  order  as  the  water  enclosed  in  the 
specific  system  under  discussion.  We  could  expect  this  "structural 
temperature"  to  be  rather  low  in  protoplasmic  formations.  The 
building  of  such  water  structures,  to  use  Jacobson's  words  (1955), 
"involves  a  change  in  physical  properties  of  the  whole  system 
qualitatively  similar  to  the  changes  obtained  in  the  properties  of 
pure  water  when  the  temperature  is  decreased."  All  this  put  to- 
gether means  that  water,  within  the  cell,  may  not  be  random  water 
but  "liquid  ice"  which  makes  it  possible  that  the  triplet  states,  ob- 
served on  frozen  water,  also  represent  the  most  probable  form  of 
excitation  in  tissues. 

No  attempts  have  been  made  yet  to  apply  our  knowledge  of 
water  structures  to  living  systems  or  to  demonstrate  triplet  excita- 
tions in  biological  processes.  There  are  sporadic  observations  which 
are  suggestive.  Gergely  (see  the  author,  1947,  p.  101)  observed 
that  acridine  orange,  dissolved  in  water,  showed  phosphorescence 
if  actomyosin  was  added  to  the  solution.  The  less  fibrous  myosin 
or  actin  were  less  active.  Gergely  applied  actomyosin  in  relatively 
low  concentration  and  so  we  can  expect  that  at  the  high  protein 
concentration  of  muscle  triplet  excitation  would  be  favored  still 
more.  I  found  that  a  fresh  frog  or  squid  muscle,  if  suspended  in 


38 

0.1  yVl  KG  and  stained  with  acridinc  orange  (10~^A[),  showed 
on  illumination  (at  room  temperature)  the  orange  phosphores- 
cence of  the  dye,  while  the  dye  seeping  out  of  the  muscle  into  the 
underlying  filter  paper  showed  the  usual  yellowish  green  fluores- 
cence. If  the  muscle  was  brought  into  contracture  by  freezing  and 
subsequent  thawing,  phosphorescence  disappeared  indicating  a 
collapse  of  the  water  structures.  The  great  quantity  of  liquid 
pressed  out  by  such  a  muscle  also  indicated  that  the  physical  state 
of  water  had  undergone  a  profound  change.  Using  0.1  Af  NaCl, 
as  suspension  fluid  instead  of  KG  disfavored  phosphorescence. 
As  will  be  shown  later  Na  disturbs  water  structure. 

The  study  of  water,  in  its  relation  to  biological  structures  and 
electronic  excitation  processes,  opens  a  fascinating  and  promising 
field  of  inquiry  which  may  lead  us  far  towards  the  understanding 
of  normal  and  pathological  processes.  In  fact,  these  water  struc- 
tures suggest  a  new  outlook  on  life  itself.  Hitherto,  water  was 
looked  upon,  more  or  less,  as  a  neutral  medium,  filling  the  space, 
between  the  structural  elements  within  the  cell.  In  the  outlook 
developed  in  this  chapter,  water  forms  one  single  unique  system 
with  structural  elements  in  which  electronic  excitations  become 
possible  which  are  highly  improbable  outside  it.  The  protoplasmic 
systems  which  generate  these  excitations  also  generate  the  watei 
structures  which  are  necessary  for  the  production,  and  possibly 
also  for  the  propagation  of  these  excitations.  Biological  functions 
may  actually  consist  of  the  building  and  destruction  of  water  struc- 
tures, water  being  part  and  parcel  of  the  living  machinery  and  not 
merely  its  medium,  the  water  structures  and  their  interactions  with 
electronic  excitations  being  intimately  connected  with  the  very 
essence  of  the  "living  state." 

One  of  the  most  basic  principles  of  biology  is  organization, 
which  means  that  two  things  put  together  in  a  specific  way  form  a 
new  unit,  a  system,  the  properties  of  which  are  not  additive  and 
cannot  be  described  in  terms  of  the  properties  of  the  constituents. 
As  points  may  be  connected  to  letters,  letters  to  words,  words  to 


39 

sentences,  etc.,  so  atoms  can  join  to  molecules,  molecules  to  or- 
ganelles, organelles  to  cells,  etc.,  every  level  of  organization  having 
a  new  meaning  of  its  own  and  offering  exciting  vistas  and  possi- 
bilities. Living  matter  seems  to  be  a  system  of  water  and  organic 
matter,  which  forms  one  single  inseparable  unit,  a  system,  as  the 
cogwheels  do  in  a  watch. 

Water  is  not  only  the  mater,  mother,  it  is  also  the  matrix  of  life, 
and  biology  may  have  been  unsuccessful  in  understanding  the:" 
most  basic  functions  because  it  focused  its  attention  only  on  the; 
particulate  matter,  separating  it  from  its  two  matrices,  water  and| 
the  electromagnetic  field. 

One  critical  remark  may  be  added  to  the  contents  of  the  last 
two  chapters:  there  is  no  conclusive  evidence  yet  available  to  prove 
that  the  long-lived  excitations,  observed  in  ice,  were  actually  trip- 
lets and  not  some  other  unexpected  forms  of  excitation.  Triplets 
are  not  the  only  known  long-lived  excitations,  as  witnessed  by  the 
luminous  ciphers  on  the  dial  of  a  wrist  watch.  The  delayed  light 
emissions,  in  this  case,  belong  to  the  so-called  "crystal  phosphors." 
In  crystals,  the  orbitals  of  single  atoms  and  molecules  may  fuse  to 
continuous  bands  and  if  electrons  are  excited  to  a  higher  energy 
band  they  may  be  trapped  there  and  drop  back  to  the  ground  level 
with  a  delay,  emitting  their  excess  energy  in  the  form  of  protons. 
Long-lived  excitations  are  also  given  by  the  so-called  "gelatin 
phosphors"  which  can  be  prepared  by  drying  a  fluorescent  dye  in 
the  presence  of  a  protein,  like  gelatin.  Should  the  long-lived  exci- 
tations, described  in  the  last  two  chapters,  turn  out  not  to  be  a 
triplet  excitation,  but  some  other  exceptional  form  of  E*  this 
would  alter  little  the  validity  of  the  essential  conclusion,  that 
within  water  structures  electronic  excitation  may  assume  an  un- 
usual long-lived  form  which  might  be  of  prime  import  for  bio- 
logical energy  transmissions. 

The  evidence  available  at  present  strongly  pleads  for  the  as- 
sumption that  the  observed  excitations  were  triplets  which  also 
strengthens  the  conclusion,  arrived  at  in  the  second  chapter  of  this 


40 

book,  that  the  blueprint  of  the  energetics  of  the  living  world  con- 
sists essentially  of  two  parts  only:  photosynthesis  and  its  reversal. 
Increasing  evidence  is  available  to  show  that  chlorophyll,  in  photo- 
synthesis, is  excited  by  light  to  a  triplet  state.  In  our  in  vhro  ex- 
periments chlorophyll  behaved  in  ice  in  the  same  way  as  other 
fluorescent  dyes,  going  thus,  in  all  probability,  into  the  triplet 
state  on  excitation.  So  triplets  seem  to  be  the  main  instruments  of 
energy  transmission  in  both,  photosynthesis  and  the  biological  ac- 
tions which  consume  energy,  which  brings  the  analogy  between 
the  two  processes  still  closer.  It  seems  likely  that  also  within  the 
chloroplasts  the  triplet  excitation  of  chlorophyll  is  made  possible 
and  stable  by  the  surrounding  water  structures.  This  interaction  oi\ 
triplets  and  water  may  also  open  the  way  to  the  understanding  of 
the  mechanism  by  which  the  £*  of  chlorophyll  is  used  to  decom- 
pose water  into  its  elements,  which  is  at  the  core  of  photosynthesis. 
As  will  be  shown  later,  triplet  excitations  in  ice  are  stabilized  by 
SH,  which  may  help  to  fit  Calvin's  thioctic  acid  into  the  picture. 

I  have  considered  here  only  changes  which  may  be  induced  in 
the  solvent,  water,  by  its  freezing,  but  changes  may  be  induced 
also  in  the  solute,  the  fluorescent  matter.  On  freezing,  for  instance, 
the  water  crystallizes  out,  which  m.ay  lead  to  increased  local  con- 
centrations of  the  solute  with  consequent  self-quenching  or  poly- 
merization which  may  profoundly  alter  excitational  states  and 
light  emissions.  These  possibilities  will  be  studied  later. 


7.  Quenching  and  Quenchers 


When  studying  a  biological  process,  we  mostly  try  to  preserve 
our  material  as  well  as  possible.  We  can  also  do  the  opposite  and 
induce  damage  by  poisons,  drawing  conclusions  from  the  consecu- 
tive changes  in  function.  In  an  analogous  fashion,  we  could  also 
try  to  find  poisons  for  £*. 

Light  emission,  be  it  fluorescence  or  phosphorescence,  indicates 
electronic  excitation  and  if  a  substance  quenches  it,  it  has  to  inter- 
fere with  the  underlying  £*.  If  this  E*  is  involved  in  a  biological 
process  then  the  quencher  should  poison  it.  So  highly  active  and 
specific  quenchers  could  help  us  in  our  study  and  the  question  is 
how  to  find  them? 

It  is  known  that  certain  atoms  or  atomic  combinations  have  a 
quenching  action.  Such  an  atom  is  the  iodine  and  to  a  lesser  de- 
gree the  bromine  atom.  SCN  and  NO3  are  also  known  as  quench- 
ers, suggesting  that  the  combination  of  atoms  with  nonbonded 
"lone"  pairs  of  electrons  make  quenchers;  O,  N,  and  S  are  such 
atoms.  The  activity  of  these  atoms  and  atom  combinations  declares 
itself  also  by  a  strong  absorption  in  the  UV. 

These  simple  quenchers  will  not  help  us  much,  partly  because 
their  activity  is  not  high  enough  and  partly  because  they  have  no 
specific  affinities  to  tissue  elements  which  could  support  a  specific 
action.  Such  a  specificity  demands  a  more  complex  chemical  struc- 
ture. In  our  search  for  quenchers  with  such  a  structure  we  can 
make  use  of  the  experience  that  the  mentioned  simple  atoms  or 
atomic  groups  usually  abolish  the  fluorescence  if  introduced  into 
a  more  complex  fluorescent  molecule.  They  make  the  molecule 
dissipate  its  energy.  Figuratively  speaking,  they  act  as  a  sink  for 
the  jE*.  The  molecule  may  be  able  to  dissipate  not  only  its  own 

41 


42 

£*,  but  may  also  be  able  to  take  over  that  of  other  molecules  and 
do  with  it  likewise.  In  this  case,  this  molecule  will  be  a  quenclier. 
In  this  way  we  can  hope  to  arrive  at  molecules  which  may  have  not 
only  the  desired  quenching  activity  but  may  have  also  selective 
affinities. 

To  quote  an  example:  benzene  is  known  to  be  weakly  fluores- 
cent but  if  NO2  is  introduced  into  its  molecule  the  resulting  nitro- 
benzene will  be  fluorescent  no  more,  though  it  is  even  more  easily 
excitable  than  the  benzene  itself,  as  witnessed  by  its  strong  ab- 
sorption in  the  UV  and  the  blue.  The  NO2,  as  a  "chromophore" 
group,  enables  the  molecule  to  pick  up  energy  still  easier  and  to 
act  with  its  conjugated  double  bond  system,  so  to  speak,  as  an 
antenna,  which  picks  up  energies  from  its  surroundings  by  electro- 
dynamic  coupling,  taking  E*  over  from  other  molecules,  acting 
thus  as  their  quencher,  while  the  NO2  dissipates  the  JE*  thus 
acquired. 

By  introducing  additional  NO2  groups  at  the  points  most  fit  for 
resonance,  or  by  introducing  electron  donor  groups,  as  OH,  or  by 
extending  the  resonating  system  by  adding  one  or  more  benzene 
rings  to  it,  we  can  further  improve  the  quenching  abilities  as  well 
as  the  specificity  of  our  molecule.  Such  ideas  lead  us  into  fascinat- 
ing fields  of  biology.  When  building  such  quenchers,  we  might  be 
following  the  same  route  which  nature  followed  when  she  intro- 
duced iodine  into  extensive  resonating  aromatic  structures  creating 
thyroxine  and  related  substances. 

These  considerations  also  lead  us  to  one  of  the  most  fascinating 
puzzles  of  contemporary  biochemistry:  2,4-dinitrophenol.  This 
substance  (Fig.  7a)  uncouples  oxidative  phosphorylation,  the 
transmission  of  the  energy  from  foodstuffs  to  ATP.  Mitochondria, 
in  its  presence,  go  on  oxidizing  foodstuflFs,  may  do  so  even  at  an 
increased  rate,  but  waste  the  energy  thus  liberated  as  heat.  This 
caused  dinitrophenol,  a  few  decades  ago,  to  become  a  most  fash- 
ionable drug  for  reducing  body  weight.  Unfortunately,  its  use  in 
medicine  had  to  be  discontinued  because  in  some  cases,  mysteri- 


43 

ously,  it  produced  cataract  and  most  people  prefer  being  fat  or 
hungry  to  being  blind. 

The  mechanism  of  the  action  of  dinitrophenol  is  the  more 
puzzling  because  it  acts  not  only  on  oxidative  phosphorylation,  but 
seems  to  act  wherever  energ}^  has  to  be  transmitted  and  put  to 
action.  It  inhibits  various  processes  involved  in  photosynthesis  and 
inhibits  the  "pumping  activity"  of  cell  membranes,  in  which  os- 
motic or  electric  work  is  done.  These  reactions  are  so  different 
that  it  was  impossible  to  bring  them  to  a  common  denominator 

OH 

N02  N02 

(a)  (6) 

Fig.  7.  a:  2,4-Dinitrophenol.  b:  2,4-Dinitro-l-naphthoI. 

in  terms  of  chemistry.  The  only  point  at  which  all  these  reactions 
agree  is  that  transmission  of  energy  is  involved,  in  one  way  or  an- 
other. This  makes  it  seem  likely  that  the  dinitrophenol  is  not  in- 
volved in  a  definite  chemical  reaction,  but  acts  rather  through 
some  physical  principle,  as  is  the  quenching  of  E*.  It  may  be 
interesting  to  note  in  this  connection  that  both  2,4-dinitrophenol 
and  2,4-dinitro-l-naphthol  (Fig.  7b)  have  in  the  near  infrared  a 
broad  region  of  absorption.  Dinitronaphthol  is,  essentially,  dini- 
trophenol with  an  extra  antenna  added  to  it. 

McLaughlin  and  the  author  measured  the  quenching  of  the 
fluorescence  of  the  aromatic  hydrocarbon,  chrysene,  by  a  number 
of  aromatic  nitro  derivatives  and  found  dinitrophenol  active  and 
dinitronaphthol  even  more  so.  Unfortunately,  their  methods  did 
not  allow  them  to  distinguish  between  true  quenching  and  the 
simple  competition  for  the  light  between  quenching  and  quencher. 
So  Karreman  and  Steele  repeated  these  measurements  with  more 
adequate  methods.  Their  results  showed  that  both  dinitrophenol 
and  dinitronaphthol  are  true  quenchers.  The  quenching  observed 


44 

could  not  be  accounted  for  by  deactivating  collisions  only  and  had 
to  be,  partly,  a  resonance  quenching  which  takes  place  without  a 
collision,  through  the  resonance  transfer  of  E*.  Fluorescence,  on 
the  whole,  is  rather  insensitive  to  quenchers,  which  can  easily  be 
explained  by  the  brevity  of  the  lifetime  of  the  singlet  excitation. 
But  fluorescence,  as  such,  is  of  little  direct  interest  for  our  prob- 
lem. If  E*  plays  a  role  in  biology  it  has  to  be  in  the  form  of  trip- 
lets, as  shown  in  the  previous  chapters.  I  found  triplets  most  sen- 
sitive to  quenchers,  some  of  v^hich  suppress  phosphorescence  in 

Fig.  8.  Phenothiazine. 

high  dilution.  The  insensitivity  of  fluorescence  can  be  used  with 
advantage  to  show  that  the  quenching  of  phosphorescence  ob- 
served was  a  "true  quenching"  and  the  light  emission  did  not 
simply  disappear  because  the  quencher  absorbed  the  exciting  light. 
If  this  were  the  case,  then  fluorescence  would  have  to  be  quenched 
as  well.  The  quenchers  to  be  described,  in  the  concentrations  ap- 
plied, did  not  diminish  fluorescence  appreciably  and  so  their 
quenching  had  to  be  a  "true"  one.  A  quenching  activity  can  have 
different  mechanisms  and  so  for  the  time  being  we'd  better  re- 
frain from  an  interpretation  of  the  mechanisms  involved  and  con- 
tent ourselves  with  the  fact  that  a  quenching,  that  is  a  suppression 
of  light  emission,  must  involve  an  interference  with  E*  and  an 
interference  with  JB*  must  mean  interference  with  biological  func- 
tion if  £*  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  it. 

One  of  the  strongest  inorganic  quenchers  is  SQSF"  which  sup- 
presses the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in  1 0"'*  M  concentration. 
The  atom  combination  SQSJ  plays  no  role  in  organic  chemistry. 
However,  the  closely  related  SC=CN  is  the  core  of  phenothiazine 
(Fig.  8),  in  which  it  is  a  center  of  an  extensive  system  of  con- 
jugated double  bonds.  Phenothiazine  itself  is  unsuitable  for  ex- 


45 

perimentation,  owing  to  its  insolubility  in  water.  Pyrrolazotc  (Fig. 
9a)  is  more  soluble.  The  phosphorescence  of  rhodamin,  acridine, 
and  riboflavine  phosphate  was  found  completely  quenched  by  this 
substance  in  3  X  10"*  M  concentration,  while  the  fluorescence  of 
the  unfrozen  solutions  remained  unchanged. 

That  this  activity  of  Pyrrolazote  is  actually  due  to  the  combina- 
tion of  the  S,  C,  and  N  present  can  be  shown  by  testing  2-amino- 
benzothiazole,  which  contains  the  same  atoms  but  in  a  different 


^O^N-J^^ 


NH, 


,^*^N^^Y 


I 

CH2 

I 

CH2 

I 

N 

a 

(a)  (6) 

Fig.  9.  a:  Pyrrolazotc.  b:  2-Aminoben20tiiiazole. 

cycle  and  separated  only  by  one  C  (Fig.  9b).  This  substance 
quenches  the  phosphorescence  of  acridine  in  0.005  Af  and  that  of 
riboflavine  in  10~^  Af  concentration. 

Pyrrolazote  is  not  known  to  have  any  specific  pharmacological 
activity,  which  indicates  that  it  lacks  a  specific  affinity  for  tissues 
or  cell  constituents.  Naturally,  if  it  interferes  with  E*  and  £*  is 
important  for  life,  then  it  should  kill  the  animal  if  it  reaches  the 
concentrations  in  which  it  interferes  with  £*,  and  vke  versa,  if  it 
kills  the  animal  by  interfering  with  £*,  then  it  should  quench 
also  in  vitro  in  the  concentrations  which  are  established  in  the  ani- 
mal by  a  lethal  dose.  The  experiment  showed  that  100  mg  injected 
in  mice  per  kilogram  of  body  weight  produced  no  symptoms,  while 
200  mg  killed  the  animals;  200  mg  per  kilogram  corresponds  to 
a  random  concentration  of  6.10"*  Af.  The  phosphorescence  of 
rhodamin  and  acridine  were  quenched  by  3.10"*  Af. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  far  the  pharmacological 


46 

activity  of  other  substances  containing  S,  C,  and  N  atoms  in  prox- 
imity is  actually  due  to  the  action  of  this  atom  combination  on  £*. 
Thiourea  and  thiouracil  contain 

S 

II 
N— C— N 

6-Mercaptopurine,  known  for  its  anticarcinogenic  activity,  has  no 
action  on  excitation  of  rhodamin  or  fluorescein,  but  completely 
quenches  the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in  a  6.10"'*  M  concen- 
tration, and  has  a  moderate  quenching  action  on  the  phosphores- 
cence of  acrid ine.  Its  action  shows  thus  a  certain  measure  of  speci- 
ficity. It  is  believable  that  a  mercaptopurine  molecule  built  into 
the  nucleic  acid  cuts  the  energy  transmission  along  the  column  of 
purine  and  pyrimidin  bases  which  forms  the  core  of  DNA  in  the 
Watson-Crick  model.  Such  an  action  would  be  analogous  to  the 
action  of  hydroquinone  which  cuts  the  energy  transmission  through 
Scheibe's  columns  of  isocyanine  dyes  (see  pp.  16,  17) . 

Another  atomic  group  known  to  abolish  fluorescence,  if  intro- 
duced into  the  molecule  of  fluorescent  substances,  is  the  N=N. 
Accordingly,  we  can  expect  to  find  strong  quenchers  among  azo 
compounds.  McLaughlin  and  the  author,  while  finding  diazoben- 
zene  a  poor  quencher,  found  aminoazotoluene  (toluazotoluidine) 
highly  active.  The  latter  substance,  as  well  as  butter  yellow  are 
difficult  to  evaluate,  owing  to  their  insolubility  in  water.  Both  seem 
to  quench  the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  but  were  inactive 
with  rhodamin. 


8.  Miscellaneous  Observations 

In  this  chapter  I  will  briefly  describe  a  few  observations  which 
seemed  not  to  be  without  interest  though  their  connection  with  the 
main  theme  of  this  book  was  not  evident  in  all. 

NARCOSIS 

Since  Overton  proposed  his  theory,  narcosis  has  occupied  many 
research  workers.  Most  of  them  came  up  with  a  new  theory  of 
their  own.  This  recurrent  production  of  theories  shows  that  none 
of  them  has  found  general  acceptance  and  we  still  do  not  know 
what  narcosis  is.  If  our  theory  of  £*  is  correct  then  it  can  be  ex- 
pected to  make  diverse  old  unsolved  problems  appear  in  a  new 
light  and  so  we  may  ask  whether  it  has  anything  to  suggest  about 
narcosis.'^ 

A  water}^  acrid  ine  orange  solution  (10~*  AI)  shows  under  the 
UV  lamp  a  greenish-yellow  fluorescence.  If  frozen,  the  place  of 
fluorescence  is  taken  by  a  very  weak  brownish  phosphorescence. 
Similarly  to  the  case  of  rhodamin,  this  phosphorescence  can  be  in- 
creased by  added  substances  to  a  vivid  red  light  emission.  No  long- 
lived  phosphorescence  can  be  observed  in  this  system  in  the  slow 
moving  phosphoroscope. 

If  instead  of  pure  water  we  dissolve  the  dye  in  a  saturated  watery 
solution  of  cortisone  we  not  only  find  the  weak  phosphorescence 
moderately  increased  but  find  its  lifetime  greatly  lengthened.  The 
test  tube  appears  strongly  luminescent  in  the  slow  moving  phos- 
phoroscope or  shows  a  strong  afterglow  if  its  illumination  is  sud- 
denly disconnected.  The  interaction  of  water  and  dye  has  thus  been 
modified  by  the  sterin  which  was  present  in  a  very  low  concentra- 
tion, cortisone  being  but  slightly  soluble  in  water  (6.5  X  'i-O'^  M). 
There  could  hardly  have  been  a  direct  interaction  between  dye  and 

47 


48 

sterin,  the  number  of  the  sterin  molecules  being  too  small  and  no 
specific  affinity  being  known  to  exist  between  sterin  and  the  dye. 
We  can  expect  the  sterin  molecules  to  build  water  structures  with  a 
cubic  lattice  around  themselves  and  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that 
the  long  life  of  the  excitation  is  due  to  the  interaction  of  the  ex- 
cited molecules  and  their  electrons  with  this  cortisone- water  system. 
Chloroform  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  water  (0.014  Af).  All 
the  same  if  %o  p^rt  of  a  saturated  watery  solution  is  added  to  the 
cortisone-dye  solution,  no  long-life  phosphorescence  will  be  ob- 
served on  freezing,  although  the  light  emission  remained  in- 
creased, in  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  narcotic.  It  is  reasonable  to 
assume  that  the  hydrophobic  steroid  attracted  the  chloroform 
molecules  which  modified  its  relation  to  water  and  modified 
with  it  the  water  structures  responsible  for  the  lengthening  of  the 
lifetime  of  the  excited  dye  molecules.  Since  the  concentration  of 
the  chloroform  in  our  system  was  very  low,  3.10"*  Al  or  less,  it  is 
conceivable  that  this  narcotic  inhibits  the  functions  of  the  central 
nervous  system  in  vivo  by  interfering  Vv'ith  the  interrelation  of 
lipids  and  water,  disturbing  herewith  £*  and,  possibly,  shortening 
the  lifetime  of  excitations.  The  total  abolition  of  the  long-life 
phosphorescence  is  the  extreme  of  an  action  in  this  direction.  Less 
drastic  actions  may  lead  to  subtler  changes  and  may  be  responsible 
for  the  great  variation  in  symptoms  produced  in  the  central  nerv- 
ous system  by  different  drugs.  In  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  book 
we  considered  only  direct  interactions  between  two  substances  A* 
and  B.  It  seems  likely  that  for  an  understanding  of  drug  actions  an 
indirect  interaction  will  also  have  to  be  considered  in  analog}'  with 
the  above  experiment  with  acridine  orange,  cortisone,  and  chloro- 
form, in  which  the  drug  did  not  seem  to  act  directly  on  the  dye, 
but  seemed  to  act  by  modifying  the  relations  of  a  third  substance 
to  water.  Naturally,  this  does  not  preclude  that  the  excited  mole- 
cules themselves  should  be  also  directly  influenced  by  a  narcotic, 
if  they  have  an  affinity  for  it.  Rhodamin  B  has  such  an  affinity,  as 
shown  by  the  fact  that  it  can  be  shaken  out  from  water  with  chloro- 


49 

form  as  a  colorless  anhydride.  If  one-tenth  part  of  a  saturated  watery 
solution  is  added  to  a  watery  rhodamin  solution  then,  on  subse- 
quent freezing  and  illumination  the  rhodamin  will  not  go  into  the 
triplet  and  show  its  usual  brilliant  orange  fluorescence.  That  this 
change  is  not  due  to  a  simple  direct  disturbance  of  the  water  by 
the  chloroform  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  a  saturation  with  ether 
has  no  such  effect  although  ether  is  considerably  more  soluble  in 
water  than  chloroform.  Ether  has  no  affinity  for  rhodamin  but 
will  readily  abolish  its  long-life  phosphorescence  if  Yoo  part  of  a 
saturated  watery  solution  is  added  to  the  acridine  orange — corti- 
sone system. 

ASCORBIC  ACID 

We  know  that  ascorbic  acid  is  indispensable  for  life  but  do  not 
know  why,  what  is  the  role  it  fulfills.  If  allowed  to  autooxidize  it 
turns  into  a  yellow  dye,  probably  dehydrogulonic  acid  (see  Schiff- 
man,  McLaughlin,  and  the  author).  Bivalent  metals  form  deeply 
colored  complexes  with  this  oxide. 

As  has  been  shown  before,  as  far  as  experience  goes,  all 
fluorescent  substances  in  frozen  water  go  into  the  triplet  state. 
This  seems  to  hold  also  for  this  oxidation  product  of  ascorbic  acid. 
If  a  methanol  solution  of  ascorbic  acid  is  neutralized  with  BaOH 
and  stored,  then  in  the  presence  of  air  a  yellow  precipitate  is 
formed  which  is  the  Ba  salt  of  the  oxide.  If  this  is  dissolved  in 
water  it  shows  no  fluorescence  in  the  visible.  Frozen,  it  shows  a 
strong  blue  phosphorescence  with  a  long  lifetime.  The  oxide  of 
ascorbic  acid  is  able  to  attach  itself  firmly  to  proteins  without  los- 
ing its  optical  reactivity.  It  seems  not  impossible  that  it  forms  such 
complexes  with  protoplasmic  proteins  also  in  vivo,  serving  as  pros- 
thetic group  for  the  proteins.  This  assumption  finds  support  in  the 
fact  that  the  two  organs  which  are  the  richest  in  ascorbic  acid,  the 
adrenal  medulla  and  lymph  glands,  both  contain  yellow  pigments. 
When  the  author  worked  two  decades  ago  along  this  line,  he  had 
the  impression  that  these  pigments  could  not  be  separated  f« 


50 

the  structural  proteins  and  were  not  all  carotenes.  Possibly,  the  dis- 
appearance of  ascorbic  acid  from  the  adrenal  cortex  in  increased 
functional  activity  is  due  to  the  formation  of  such  protein  com- 
plexes. In  any  case  a  closer  study  of  these  relations  seems  to  be 
indicated. 

LONG-LIFE  EXCITATION  IN  PROTEINS 

Frozen  animal  tissues,  in  the  absence  of  oxygen,  show  after 
illumination  with  the  UV  lamp  a  strong  and  long-lasting  after- 
glow. Pigments  interfere  with  the  observation  of  this  light  emis- 
sion which  is  thus  observable  only  in  organs  which  are  poor  in 
colored  matter.  If,  for  instance,  the  brain  of  a  guinea  pig  is  placed 
in  a  test  tube,  the  air  is  replaced  by  N2  and  the  tube  is  im- 
mersed in  the  dry  ice  freezing  mixture,  if  held  (after  tem- 
perature equilibrium  is  attained)  before  a  high  pressure  Hg  lamp 
for  a  second  it  is  found  to  emit  an  intense  bluish-white  light 
which  lasts  for  half  a  minute  or  so,  and  is  followed  by  a  weak  one 
lasting  for  some  time  more.  In  the  presence  of  air,  that  is  O2,  no 
such  phosphorescence  is  obtained,  nor  does  the  tissue  show  any 
such  emission  at  room  temperature  in  N2.  Other  organs  poor  in 
pigment,  such  as  muscle,  uterus,  intestine,  lung,  skin,  and  mam- 
mary cancer  (mice)  show  the  same  phenomenon.  The  emission  is 
not  visible  in  organs  which  are  rich  in  pigment,  as  are  kidney, 
liver,  or  dark  muscle  (heart).  This  long-lived  phosphorescence  is 
not  a  specific  property  of  tissues.  A  1%  serum  albumin  solution 
(serum  albumin  cryst..  Armour),  as  well  as  an  1%  ovalbumin  or 
gelatin  show  it  too,  though  in  the  latter  the  emission  is  of  shorter 
duration. 

This  long-lived  phosphorescence  was,  to  my  knowledge,  not 
described  before,  having  been  overlooked,  probably,  owing  to  the 
quenching  action  of  the  atmospheric  oxygen.  Debye  and  Edwards 
described  a  long-lived  phosphorescence  in  protein  solutions,  but 
note  that  this  phosphorescence,  which  they  observed  at  the  tem- 
perature of  liquid  N2,  is  very  sensitive  to  the  elevation  of  tempera- 


51 

ture  and  does  not  occur  at  the  temperature  of  dry  ice  (which  is 
about  100°C  higher  than  that  of  N2) .  Debye  and  Edwards  ascribe 
the  phosphorescence  to  the  ejection  of  an  electron  which  is  tempo- 
rarily caught  in  a  "hole,"  the  light  emission  being  due  to  the  elec- 
tron's return  to  its  original  ground  state. 

PERTURBATIONS 

A  watery  rhodamin  solution  has  a  reddish  color  as  compared 
with  the  orange  color  of  a  methanol  solution.  The  spectroscope 
shows  that  in  water  both  the  absorption  and  emission  spectrum  are 
shifted  by  50  m/x  towards  the  longer  wavelength.  Evidently,  this 
shift  is  connected  with  the  higher  dielectric  constant  of  water  and 
the  difference  between  the  two  solvents  would  be  still  bigger  if, 
instead  of  methanol  more  nonpolar  solvents  could  be  used.  This, 
unfortunately,  cannot  be  done  because  in  such  solvents  rhodamin 
forms  a  colorless  internal  lactone  and  the  lactone  formation  makes 
resonance  impossible  and  so  eliminates  the  color  (Lundgren  and 
Ninkley). 

What  lends  interest  to  this  observation  is  that  a  similar  shift 
towards  the  longer  wavelength  could  be  observed  if  to  the  methan- 
olic  solution  of  the  dye  were  added  small  amounts  of  various 
substances  known  to  have  a  strong  biological  activity.  One  can 
expect  energy  levels  in  biological  systems  to  be  tuned  rather  care- 
fully and  so  a  similar  shift  in  energy  levels  in  vivo  may  disturb  the 
good  working  order. 

A  number  of  various  substances  have  been  tested  by  McLaughlin 
(unpublished)  for  their  ability  to  shift  the  spectrum  of  a  methan- 
olic  rhodamin  solution  towards  the  longer  wavelength.  The  sub- 
stances have  been  applied  in  three  different  concentrations,  0.01, 
0.001,  and  0.0001  M.  The  results  are  summed  up  in  Table  I 
where  the  numbers  mark  the  shift  of  the  absorption  spectrum  to- 
wards the  longer  wavelength  in  A.  Since  acids  (1-4)  cause  a 
strong  shift,  all  acid  substances  have  been  used  as  neutral  sodium 
salts. 


52 


Table  I 

Shift  of  the  Specthum  of  Rhodamin  B  (Dissolved  in  Methanol) 

IN  A  Units  tow.\rds  the  Longer  Wavelength  on  Addition 

of  Various  Substances  at  0.01,  0.001, 

AND  0.0001  M  Concentration 


Substance 

Molar 

concentration 

0.01 

0.001 

0.0001 

1 

Acetic  acid 

72 

68 

52 

9 

Sodium  acetate 

0 

0 

0 

3 

Salicylic  acid 

72 

64 

4 

4 

Sodium  salicylate 

16 

0 

0 

5 

Sodium  picrate 

56 

56 

8 

6 

Phenol 

4 

0 

0 

7 

1  Naphthol 

8 

0 

0 

8 

/^-Chlorophenol 

0 

0 

0 

9 

o-Iodophenol 

0 

0 

0 

10 

o-,m-,  and  /'-Nitrophenol 

0 

0 

0 

11 

/'-Nitroaniline 

0 

0 

0 

12 

m-  and  /^-Dinitrobenzene 

0 

0 

0 

13 

/J-Diiodobenzene 

0 

0 

0 

14 

2-Amino-4-nitrophenol 

0 

0 

0 

15 

2,4-DinitroaniIine 

0 

0 

0 

16 

2,4-DinitroanisoIe 

0 

0 

0 

17 

2,4-Dinitrophenetole 

0 

0 

0 

18 

2,4-Dinitrophenol 

80 

80 

32 

19 

4,6-Dinitro-o-cresoI 

68 

60 

12 

20 

3,5-DinitrosaIicyIic  acid  sodium  salt 

4 

0 

0 

21 

2, 4-Dinitro-l -naphthol 

80 

72 

40 

22 

2,4-Dinitro-l-naphthol-7-sulfonic  acid  sodium  salt 

76 

65 

15 

23 

2,4-DichIorophenol 

0 

0 

0 

24 

2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid  Na 

48 

36 

8 

25 

2,4,5-TrichlorophenoI 

0 

0 

0 

26 

2,4,6-Trichlorophenol 

20 

0 

0 

27 

Pentachlorophenol 

60 

28 

4 

28 

2,4-Dichloro-l-naphthol 

0 

0 

0 

29 

DDT 

4 

0 

0 

30 

3,5-Diiodo-2-hydroxybenzoic 

acid  Na 

68 

64 

8 

31 

3,5-Diiodo-4-hydroxybenzoic 

acid  Na 

48 

32 

8 

32 

2,4,6-Triiodophenol 

28 

8 

0 

33 

Dicumarol 

— 

26 

34 

Potassium  Iodide 

0 

0 

0 

53 

The  table  shows  most  substances  to  be  inactive,  but  also  shows 
some  of  them  to  be  highly  active  and  to  cause  a  maximal  shift  in 
0.001  AI  concentration  and  still  be  active  in  0.0001  M.  Among 
the  most  active  ones  we  find  dinitrophenol  and  dinitronaphthol, 
both  of  which  uncouple  oxidative  phosphorylation.  That  the  two 
actions  might  actually  have  some  relation  to  one  another  is  sug- 
gested by  the  activity  of  dicumaroi  (33)  and  pentachlorophenol 
(27),  both  of  which  are  also  known  to  uncouple.  Owing  to  its 

O-CH2-COOH 
,C1 


a 

(a)  0>) 

Fig.  10,  a:  2,4-Dichlorophenol.  b:  2,4-DichIorophenoxyacetic  acid. 

insolubility,  dicumaroi  could  not  be  tested  in  a  higher  concentra- 
tion than  0.0001  Ai.  The  abolition  or  substitution  of  the  phenolic 
hydroxy  group,  which  is  essential  for  the  uncoupling  activity,  also 
deprived  the  molecule  of  its  action  on  rhodamin. 

A  point  worth  mentioning  is  the  great  difference  in  the  activity 
of  two  chemically  closely  related  substances,  2,4-dichlorophenol 
and  2, 4-dichlorophenoxy acetic  acid  (Fig.  10).  Both  substances 
are  highly  active  biologically,  but  their  activity  is  very  different, 
so  it  is  intriguing  to  find  them  different  also  in  this  simple  /"«  vitro 
experiment  ( see  Chapters  1 2  and  16).  In  the  present  experiment 
with  rhodamin,  a  tentative  explanation  for  the  differences  in  the 
activity  of  the  dichlorophenol  and  2-4  dichlorophenoxy acetic  acid 
(2,4D)  can  be  found  in  steric  relations.  If  the  rhodamin  molecule, 
as  well  as  the  two  chlorophenols  and  the  nitrophenols  are  built  of 
an  atomic  model,  it  is  found  that  the  active  nitrophenol  and  nitro- 
naphthol  can  easily  be  brought  into  a  position  in  which  the  phen- 
olic hydroxide  and  one  NO2  group  touch  the  two  resonating  N's 
of  the  dye.  The  same  holds  for  the  carboxylic  O"  and  one  CI  (4) 


54 

of  2,4D,  while  the  2,4-dichlorophenol  cannot  be  made  to  touch 
the  two  N's  of  rhodamin  with  its  OH  and  one  of  its  Cl's. 

The  activity  of  the  iodo-substituted  phenols  (30,  31)  should 
also  be  noted.  Here,  evidently,  the  activity  is  connected  with  the 
high  atomic  number  of  the  iodine  and  not  the  dipole  moment  of 
the  molecule,  since  the  corresponding  chloro  compounds,  though 
having  a  stronger  dipole  moment,  are  less  active.  A  heavier  chloro 
substitution,  as  in  pentachlorophenol  (27),  also  renders  the  mole- 
cule active,  which  deserves  mention  with  regard  to  the  insecticide 
action  of  substances  of  this  group. 

RHODAMIN  COMPLEXES 

During  these  experiments,  a  fascinating  reaction  of  rhodamin 
with  nitro-  and  chlorophenols  was  observed.  If  a  chloro-  or  nitro- 
phenol  is  added  to  an  acid  watery  solution  of  rhodamin,  a  striking 
change  takes  place;  the  fluorescence  which,  according  to  its  maxi- 
mum at  578  rcifx  was  orange,  disappears  and  the  solution  assumes 
the  appearance  of  strong  turbidity,  without  changing  color.  Look- 
ing, however,  at  the  light  source  through  the  solution,  the  latter 
appears  to  be  limpid  and  deep  blue.  The  change  is  due  to  the 
formation  of  an  insoluble  complex  in  colloidal  dispersion  which 
settles  slowly  to  the  bottom  of  the  test  tube  in  a  day  or  so.  R.  Steele 
(unpublished)  studied  this  compound — evidently  a  "molecular 
complex."  He  found  that  an  undissociated  phenolic  group  and  the 
presence  of  water  are  necessary  for  its  formation.  On  rendering 
the  solution  alkaline  or  dissolving  the  complex  in  anhydrous  sol- 
vents, such  as  methanol  or  acetone,  he  found  that  it  readily  dis- 
sociated. There  is  one  quality  which  may  lend  biological  interest 
to  this  reaction — its  sluggishness.  The  formation  of  the  complex, 
being  accompanied  by  a  decrease  and  a  shift  of  the  absorption 
maximum,  can  be  followed  in  the  spectroscope.  Figure  11  (bor- 
rowed from  Steele)  illustrates  this  point.  The  first  eight  curves 
went  through  an  isobestic  point,  showing  that  it  was  actually  the 
rate  of  the  formation  of  the  complex  and  not  its  sedimentation 
which  caused  the  gradual  change,  the  reaction  having  taken  hours 


55 


1.00 
0.90 

0.8  0 
0.70 
0.60 

0.50 
0.40 

0.30 


0.2  0 


0.10 


0.05 


f 

\ 

I 

\ 

1 

\ 

1 

' 

[ 

/-> 

/ 

\^. 

- 

/   / 

m 

k 

/    rS. 

% 

^\. 

^^ 

^ 

^^ 

V  L 

f^ 

vj 

/ 

\ 

460 


500 


550 


600 


750 


Fig.  11.  Reaction  bet\^'een  rhodamin  B  (1.8  X  10"^  Af)  and  2,4-dichlo- 
rophenol  (0.011  yVl)  at  pH  5-9  as  followed  in  the  spectroscope.  Abscissa: 
wavelength  in  m/^.  Ordinate:  extinction.  The  single  high  curve  in  the 
middle  is  rhodamin  alone.  (Dichlorophenol  alone  has  no  absorbency  at 
these  wavelengths.)  The  family  of  curves  has  been  obtained  by  measuring 
the  absorption  at  a  different  time  after  mixing  the  two  reagents.  The  top 
curve  on  the  right  was  taken  7  minutes  after  mixing.  The  following  lower 
ones  5,  10,  29,  59,  89,  120,  252,  and  312  minutes  later.  The  first  eight 
went  through  the  isobestic  point  on  the  left.  Only  the  two  last  curves 
were  slightly  deviating  from  this  point  (not  visible  in  the  curve),  indicat- 
ing that  at  this  point  sedimentation  began  to  influence  results  (but  not 
before) . 

for  its  completion.  What  may  make  this  sluggishness  interesting 
for  the  biologist  is  the  fact  that  thyroxine  or  triiodothyronine, 
which  forms  a  similar  complex  with  rhodamin,  showed  a  similar 
sluggishness.  The  biological  action  of  thyroxine  is  known  to  need 
24-48  hours  for  its  full  development,  and  may  reach  its  maximum 
on  the  tenth  day  after  ingestion. 


PART  II 


Biological  Structures  and  Functions 


"Research  is  to  see  what  everybody  has  seen 
and  think  tvhat  nobody  has  thought.^' 


9.  A  Theory  of  Muscular  Contraction 


In  the  present  part  of  this  book  I  propose  to  review  a  selected 
number  of  biological  structures  and  functions  in  order  to  see 
whether  we  could  understand  them  better  or,  at  least,  see  them  in 
a  new  light  by  looking  at  them  through  the  glasses  of  £*.  To  re- 
main faithful  to  my  traditions  I  will  start  with  muscle. 

Theories  of  muscular  contraction  are  available  on  the  market 
by  the  dozen.  The  author  himself  is  responsible  for  a  few  of  them. 
Most  of  these  theories  were  fatally  hurt  in  the  impact  between 
physics,  chemistry,  physiology,  and  electron  miscroscopy,  fitting 
only  the  requirements  of  the  science  of  their  author  but  being  in- 
compatible with  that  of  others.  The  situation  with  muscle  is  at 
present,  similar  to  that  of  the  holy  elephant  which  had  ninety-nine 
names,  the  real  one  being  the  hundredth,  known  only  to  the  ele- 
phant himself.  If  we  fail  to  understand  muscle  because  its  function 
involves  E*  then  our  experience  with  £*  should  fuse  spontane- 
ously with  older  knowledge  into  a  new  theory  of  contraction.  An 
important  place  has  to  be  given  in  this  theory  to  the  fact  that  the 
formation  of  the  water  structures,  which  the  nonpolar  groups  of 
a  protein  can  be  supposed  to  build  around  themselves,  goes  with  a 
strong  expansion,  the  formed  ice  having  a  cubic  lattice  and  a  very 
low  density.  Also  the  electropolar  groups  of  myosin  and  the  sub- 
stances, like  ATP,  bound  to  myosin,  may  take  their  share  in  build- 
ing up  water  structures. 

As  far  as  we  know,  the  elementary  act  of  contraction  is  per- 
formed by  the  myosin  "molecule"  which  is  built  of  a  greater  num- 
ber of  small  units,  "protomyosins"  which  are  held  together  not 
by  single  strong  covalent  bonds  but  by  a  greater  number  of  weaker 
ones  such  as  H-bonds,  or  van  der  Waals  or  electric  attractions. 

59 


60 

Unlike  covalent  bonds,  such  links  have  no  fixed  valency  angles. 
This  makes  the  whole  structure  comparable  to  a  string  of  beads, 
or  a  bundle  of  such  strings,  the  most  characteristic  feature  of  which 
is  pliability,  the  lack  of  resistance  to  deformation.  The  forces  be- 
tween protomyosins  can  be  expected  not  only  to  hold  these  parti- 
cles together,  but  also  to  tend  to  pull  them  together  from  the 
fibrous  form  into  a  more  compact,  rounded,  and  shortened  shape 
(Fig.  2).  If,  all  the  same,  we  find  the  myosin  particles  in  solution 
or  in  resting  muscle  stretched  out  to  a  straight  filament  there  must 
be  forces  which  counteract  the  mutual  attractions  which  tend  to 
shorten  the  particle.  The  problem  of  contraction  is  thus  not  what 
makes  the  particles  shorten  but  what  keeps  them  extended  when 
at  rest,  or  stretches  them  out  again  after  contraction? 

It  is  suggested  that  what  keeps  the  myosin  particle  extended, 
counteracting  the  forces  of  contraction,  are  the  expanding  water 
structures  which  the  particles  build  around  themselves,  while  con- 
traction is  due  to  the  collapse  of  these  water  structures  with  the 
consecutive  rearrangement  of  protomyosins  into  a  shortened  aggre- 
gate. The  latter  changes  would  have  to  be  brought  about  by  the 
energy  of  ATP.  In  order  to  effect  such  a  change  the  (£)  of  ATP 
would  have  to  be  transformed  into  the  more  mobile  £*  which 
can  interact  with  the  water  structures. 

The  theory  proposed  is,  in  its  simplest  form,  the  following:  the 
myosin  particle  is  kept  stretched  out  by  its  water  structures.  Con- 
traction is  induced  by  the  collapse  of  these  structures,  the  reestab- 
lishment  of  which  is  relaxation.^  The  question  is  how  far  is  this 
theory  in  agreement  with  known  facts  about  muscle  or  to  what 
extent  can  it  explain  them.'' 

Myosin,  in  a  watery  solution,  has  a  high  viscosity.  This  indicates 

^  The  fibrous  molecules  of  deoxyribose  nucleic  acid,  dissolved  in  water, 
are  known  to  shorten  by  30%  or  so  on  addition  of  salts,  Jacobson  found 
under  these  conditions  (using  NaCl)  that  the  water  structure  collapsed. 
Possibly,  the  collapse  of  these  structures  is  responsible  for  the  shortening, 
making  the  process  analogous  to  muscle  contraction,  as  supposed  by  the 
theory  presented  here. 


61 

that  its  particles  are  in  the  extended  fibrous  form.  No  ATP  is  thus 
needed  to  keep  them  in  this  form.  The  intimate  relations  of  acto- 
myosin  to  water  are  shown  by  the  strong  hydration  of  this  com- 
plex. In  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  prepare  solutions  of  actomyosin  which 
contain  less  than  97%  water.  The  high  viscosity  shows  the  parti- 
cles to  be  in  the  extended  fibrous  form.  What  ATP  does  to  this 
colloid  at  a  physiological  salt  concentration  is  to  deprive  its  parti- 
cles of  their  hydration  and  make  them  contract.  The  contracted  gel 
consists  of  "dry"  actomyosin  with  some  water  trapped  between  its 
particles. 

Heat  can  be  expected  to  destroy  the  water  structures  and  heat 
not  only  denatures  actomyosin  but  makes  it  contract  and  develop 
not  inconsiderable  tension,  as  shown  by  Varga.  Possibly,  alcohol 
denatures  also  by  destroying  the  water  structure  but  produces  no 
contraction  because,  eliminating  the  water  it  makes  the  system  too 
rigid.  The  denaturing  action  of  freezing  and  subsequent  thawing 
on  myosin  might  similarly  be  due  to  the  loss  of  hydrate  water,  the 
latter  being  transformed  into  the  hexagonal  ice  crystals. 

Ernst  has  discovered  that  muscle  decreases  its  volume  in  excita- 
tion. This  "volume  contraction"  follows  on  the  heels  of  excitation 
and  precedes  contraction.  Contraction  is  thus  secondary  to  a  change 
which  entails  volume  contraction.  This  volume  contraction  has 
never  found  a  satisfactory  explanation  which  could  enjoy  general 
acceptance.  Our  theory  demands  that  there  should  be  such  a 
volume  contraction  since  the  collapse  of  the  expanded  water  struc- 
tures around  the  myosin  particle  should  induce  such  a  volume 
change.  Both  the  cubic  and  hexagonal  water  structures  have  a 
lower  density  than  random  water. 

If  it  is  the  expanded  water  structures  which  keep  the  myosin 
particle  in  its  extended  state  then  it  follows  that  an  increase  of 
pressure  should  promote  contraction,  and  contraction  should  go 
hand  in  hand  with  a  decrease  of  the  molar  volume  of  myosin.  That 
this  is  actually  the  case  has  been  shown  by  D.  S.  Brown  who  also 
calculated  the  decrease  of  the  molar  volume  of  myosin  and  found 


62 

it  considerable.  The  contraction  of  muscle  exposed  to  high  pres- 
sures has  been  known  for  a  long  time  as  ""Ebbecke's  phenomenon." 

Bulky  ions,  such  as  I~,  SCN",  and  NOs",  which  do  not  fit  into 
the  water  lattices,  should  impede  the  formation  of  these  lattices 
and  thus  counteract  relaxation,  lengthening  the  "active  state"  of 
muscle,  and  thus  increase  twitch  tension.  That  this  is  the  case  has 
been  sho'^n  by  Chao  and  the  later  analyses  of  his  observations  by 
Kahn  and  Sandow,  Hill  and  Macpherson,  and  Ritchie.  The  action 
of  these  ions  was  found  to  depend  on  their  position  in  the 
"Hofmeister  series,"  that  is  on  their  atomic  radius.  Since  these 
ions  are  "quenchers,"  they  may  have  acted  also  by  interfering  with 
E*. 

Needless  to  say  that  the  function  of  muscle  is  not  merely  to 
contract,  but  to  contract  when  contraction  is  needed,  and  do  so  at 
milliseconds  notice,  and  relax  immediately  afterward  when  the 
job  is  done.  Accordingly,  we  find  in  muscle  at  the  side  of  myosin 
a  triggering  mechanism  in  which  actin  plays  a  prominent  role. 
According  to  the  experience  of  my  laboratory,  resting  muscle  con- 
tains no  actomyosin,  but  contains  actin  and  myosin  side  by  side, 
kept  apart  by  the  subtle  balance  of  attractive  and  repulsive  forces 
with  a  slight  predominance  of  repulsion.  These  repulsive  forces 
are  electric  and  the  ATP  (linked  to  myosin),  plays,  with  its  four 
negative  charges,  a  leading  role.  This  balance  of  forces  is  de- 
stroyed, for  an  instant  by  "excitation,"  whereupon  actin  and  myo- 
sin form  actomyosin.  In  the  actomyosin  thus  formed  the  terminal 
'-^P  of  ATP  becomes  split  and  its  energy  put  to  action.  Relaxation 
involves  the  rephosphorylation  of  the  ADP  into  ATP  which,  with 
its  four  charges  restored,  pushes  actin  and  myosin  apart  whereupon 
the  free  myosin  particles  rebuild  their  water  structures  and  stretch 
out  into  filaments  again,  thus  becoming  ready  for  a  new  contrac- 
tion. 

The  theory  outlined  also  finds  support  in  the  fact  that  no  fold- 
ing was  hitherto  revealed  in  contracting  actomyosin  filaments  by 
the  electron  microscope.  All  one  can  see  (as  shown  beautifully  in 


63 

the  pictures  taken  by  Spiro)  is  a  thickening.  At  higher  degrees  of 
contraction  the  X-ray  periodicities  disappear  while  regular  folding 
should  give  rise  to  new  lines. 

The  theory  proposed  may  be  right  or  wrong.  In  any  case  it 
shows  that  new  pictures  can  be  constructed  with  the  experience 
presented  in  this  book. 


10.  The  ATP  Molecule' 


Looking  at  the  conventional  structure  formula  of  ATP  (Fig. 
12),  one's  first  impression  is  that  of  great  complexity.  Nature  does 
not  indulge  in  luxuries,  so  one  may  wonder  why  the  cell  uses  such 
a  complex  molecule  if  a  P — O- — P  link  is  all  that  is  needed.  A 
much  simpler  inorganic  polyphosphate  should  do  just  as  well. 

The  molecule  has  two  ends:  a  phosphate-end  and  a  purine-end. 
The  phosphate-end  represents  the  energy  store,  (£);  one  may  ask 
whether  the  purine-end  may  not  represent  £*,  thus  providing  the 
molecule  with  the  essential  parts  needed  for  the  (£)  -^  E*  trans- 
formation. The  purine  contains  an  extensive  system  of  conjugated 
double  bonds  with  its  nonlocalized  tt  electrons  and  five  N-atoms, 
each  with  its  lone  pair  of  electrons.  As  will  be  discussed  later, 
under  conditions,  this  end  of  the  molecule  may  also  become 
strongly  fluorescent  and  thus  conform  to  our  demands  of  an  E* 
transmitter.  The  purine  may  thus  be  instrumental  in  transforming 
the  (E)  of  ^P  into  £*,  when  this  (E)  has  to  go  into  biological 
action  and  drive  the  living  machine.  The  whole  ATP  molecule 
could  thus  be  not  only  a  storage  battery  but  also  a  transformer. 

What  is  difficult  to  see  in  Fig.  12  is  how  the  energy  accepted 
by  the  purine-end  could  be  transmitted  to  the  phosphate-end,  and 
v/ce  versa,  since  the  two  are  separated  by  the  pentose,  which  has 
no  conjugated  double  bonds  and  no  tt  electrons. 

But  does  the  ATP  molecule  really  have  this  structure.^  Are  we 
not  misled  by  the  visual  impression  made  by  a  structural  formula, 

^  The  contents  of  this  chapter  were  presented  at  the  International  Enzyme 
Symposium,  Ford  Foundation,  Detroit,  November  1-3,  1955,  and  pubHshed 
in  "Enzymes:  Units  of  Biological  Structure  and  Function,"  Oliver  H.  Gaebler, 
Ed.,  Academic  Press,  New  York,  N.Y. 

64 


65 

the  correctness  of  which  we  fail  to  question  only  because  we  have 
seen  it  too  often?-  The  ATP  molecule  has  one  C — N,  one  C — C, 
and  one  C — O  link  (marked  in  Fig.  12  with  arrows),  which  allow 

NHp 
I 

N^^.,^    V  H     H  OH        OH         OH 

III  III 

^     ^ N-C-C-C-C-CHj-O-P-O-P-Q-P-OH 

^N  /        I       I         \         \         I!  II  II 

/        OH  OH        \  \      0  0  0 

Fig.   12.  ATP. 

a  free  rotation  so  that  the  molecule  has  a  limited  freedom  to 
change  its  shape  and  curl  up.  In  fact,  the  outstretched  linear  form 
of  the  molecule  in  Fig.  12  is  an  improbable  one  and  the  possibility 

"  Possibly,  chlorophyll  also  offers  an  example  for  such  an  influence  of 
visual  pictures  which  inhibit  our  thinking  in  certain  directions.  Relations  be- 
tween chlorophyll  and  carotenes  have  been  sought  for  a  long  time  without 
definite  results. 

The  Mg-porphyrin  part  of  chlorophyll  is  reproduced  in  Fig.  13a,  while 
the  chain  of  beta  carotene  is  shown  in  Fig.  l4a.  The  two  structures  seem  to 

II 

CH  *^,^3  CH3 


/\  /"\  /\  /\  /\  /\ 

CH  C^  C  C  C  —  CHt-CH,  CH, C  OCX 

^  \  I  I  /  3  3  ^  \  / 

C=N  N— G  X  C 

/  ^.    /  \  /  \ 

HO,  MQ  .CH  HC^  J:H 

C — N  N C  C  C 

I  II  \  \ 

C^        yC  .C — GH3  G  C^         ^C  — CH 

V  ^/  \g^  ^c 

I       I 

HG G«=0 

I 

COOGH3 


Fig.   13.  a:   Mg-porphyrin  part  of  chlorophyll  without  the  phytol  side 
chain,  b:   Same  as  "a"  with  Mg,  N's,  and  longer  side  chains  eliminated. 


3 


66 

is  open  that  by  rotation  and  the  consecutive  folding  the  phosphate- 
and  the  purine-end  of  the  molecule  may  approach  one  another. 
Naturally,  for  an  energy  transfer  to  take  place  between  the  two 
ends,  an  "approach"  is  not  enough,  since  the  E  of  the  '^P  which 
has  to  be  transferred  is  an  (£),  that  is,  a  bond  energy  which  has 
no  outward  action.  For  the  transference  of  (E)  there  must  be  a 
close  fit,  point  counter  point.  The  atoms  which  have  to  touch  one 


show  no  relation,  the  first  consisting  of  pyrrols,  coordinated  by  a  metal,  while 
the  latter  is  built  of  isoprenes.  However,  if  we  eliminate  the  Mg  with  the 
four  N's,  as  well  as  the  longer  side  chains  from  the  porphyrin,  we  are  left 
with  a  chain  (Fig.  13b)  which  is  almost  identical  with  the  chain  of  caro- 
tene, curled  up  (Fig.  I4b). 

If  these  relations  were  hitherto  not  considered,  this  is  probably  due  to  the 
fact  that  we  have  seen  the  structure  formula  of  pyrrol  too  often. 

CH 

< 

C  —  OH, 

y 

HC 
\ 

C-CH3 
HC 

> 

HC 

HC 

\CH 
/ 


CH3 

CH           C            CH 

HC            HC          HC          HC 

\                                 / 

CH3 C                           CH 

HC                                        C  — 

-H3C 

CH                         CH 

HC            C,          HC 
%     /\    / 

CH           CH 

H3C 

HX  —  C 

\ 


XH 


HC 


Fig.  14.  a:  Central  chain  of  carotene  without  the  ionone  rings,  b:  Same 
curled  up. 


67 

another  are  two  0~'s  of  the  dissociated  OH  groups  of  the  phos- 
phate chain,  and  two  N's  of  the  purine.  The  two  0"'s  are  those 
lying  on  either  side  of  the  terminal  ^P,  which  has  to  be  split  and 
give  up  its  (£),  while  the  two  N's  of  the  purine  would  be,  in  all 
probability,  the  N  of  the  NHo  group  at  position  6  (since  this  N 
seems  to  be  most  involved  in  the  reaction  occurring  in  muscle 
contraction) ,  and  its  second  neighbor  at  position  7. 

However,  free  rotation  does  not  mean  free  motion.  Such  a  C — C 
bond  does  not  permit  the  molecule  to  bend  in  any  way  it  pleases, 
for  the  valency  angles  have  to  be  kept  constant.  The  motion  is  not 
freer  than  that  of  the  relative  motion  of  two  wheels  mounted  on 
the  same  axis.  So  even  with  three  rotating  links  the  freedom  of  the 
ATP  molecule  is  a  very  limited  one  and,  statistically,  the  chances 
that  the  NH2  and  N7  would  be  able  to  meet  the  two  0"'s  and 
make  a  close  fit,  are  very  remote.  So  if  the  four  could  meet  and 
make  a  close  fit,  it  would  be  probable  that  this  is  not  mere  chance, 
but  has  a  functional  meaning  and  that  the  ATP  molecule  is  made 
that  way  and  does  not  happen  to  be  that  way.  Whether  such  a 
meeting  is  possible  can  be  decided  by  building  up  the  molecule  of 
an  atomic  model  which  keeps  account  of  atomic  radii  and  limita- 
tions of  freedom,  the  rigidity  and  small  flexibility  of  bond  angles. 
Such  a  model  is  the  Courtauld  atomic  model."  Figure  15  shows  an 
ATP  molecule  built  up  of  this  model,  in  its  conventional  linear 
form  corresponding  to  Fig.  12.  (The  molecule  is  here  in  its  dis- 
sociated form,  with  0"'s  instead  of  OH's  on  the  phosphates.) 

If  the  molecule  is  now  rotated  around  the  C — C,  C — N,  and 
C — O  bonds,  then  the  phosphate-end  can  be  folded  back  so  that 
the  O's  of  the  terminal  and  middle  phosphate  just  touch  the  N's 
mentioned.  This  situation  is  shown  in  Fig.  16.  If  some  sort  of  a 
link  is  formed  now  between  the  0~'s  and  N's,  then  the  P — O — P 
link,  which  has  to  be  broken  in  contraction  and  supply  the  energy 

'  Produced  by  Griffin  and  Tatlock,  London,  available  in  U.S.  through  the 
Anglo-American  Scientific  Import-Export  Co.,  185  Devonshire  Street,  Boston 
10,  Mass. 


68 


Fig.  15  {above).  ATP  of  Fig.  12  built  of  the  Courtauld  atomic  model. 
Fig.  16  {beloiv).  Same  as  Fig.  13,  folded. 


69 

for  it,  has  formed  a  ring  with  the  purine.  Naturally,  for  energy  to 
pass  from  the  phosphate  to  the  purine,  the  contact  would  have  to 
be  an  intimate  one.  H-bridges,  possibly,  formed  between  the  O's 
and  N's  might  do,  having  been  shown  by  Gergely  and  Evans  that 
H-bonding  can  establish  relations  in  w^hich  tt  orbitals  overlap.  It  is 
thus  possible  that  the  ATP  molecule,  activated  by  myosin,  connects 
its  two  ends,  thus  opening  the  way  for  an  energy'  transmission 
from  one  to  the  other. 

This,  however,  does  not  explain  the  role  of  the  bivalent  ions, 
Ca  and  Mg,  both  of  which  can  accelerate  the  ATP-ase  activity  of 
myosin.  The  possible  answer  to  this  problem  w^as  given  by  a 
chance  observation.  As  discussed  in  Chapter  4,  we  may  expect 
energy  transmitters  to  be  fluorescent.  Since  there  are  violent  shifts 
in  energ)'  during  contraction,  the  author  expected  to  find  in  muscle 
a  fluorescent  energy^  transmitter  in  high  concentration,  and  pre- 
pared alcoholic  extracts  of  muscle,  expecting  them  to  show  strong 
fluorescence  under  the  UV  lamp.  They  showed  none.  However,  if 
a  bivalent  metal,  as  Mg,  Ca,  or  Zn,  was  added  (as  chloride),  an 
intense  blue  fluorescence  appeared.  The  fluorescent  substance  was 
isolated,  identified  by  McLaughlin,  Schiffman,  and  the  author  and 
found  to  be  the  metal  complex  of  inosinediphosphate,  IDF,  the 
substance  produced  from  ATP  by  the  loss  of  its  terminal  phos- 
phate and  its  hydrolytic  deamination. 

The  probable  structure  of  the  metal  complex  is  elucidated  by 
the  close  analogy  of  inosine  and  oxyquinoline  (Fig.  17a  and  b). 
The  latter  is  known  to  form  with  Mg  in  alcoholic  solution  a  very 
stable,  strongly  fluorescent  chelate  ( Fig.  17b).  Evidently,  an 
analogous  chelate  w^as  formed  by  the  inosine  (Fig.  17a). 

Mg  and  Ca  are  known  to  form  very  stable,  coordinative  com- 
plexes with  polyphosphates,  so  the  possibility  is  given  that  the 
metals  form  with  their  four  coordinative  valencies  a  quadridentate 
chelate,  connecting  the  two  ends  of  the  ATP  moleaile.  This  struc- 
ture is  illustrated  by  Fig.  18.  The  model  in  Fig.  16,  shows  that 
there  is  just  enough  room  left  for  an  Mg  between  the  two  N's  and 


70 

r 

two  O's.  The  arrow  in  Fig.  17b  indicates  that  the  metal  attracts  an 
electron  from  the  quinolinol  (Leverenz).  The  same  can  be  ex- 
pected to  happen  also  in  the  complex  of  inosine,  and  if  the  metal 


I 


/ 


N 


Mg 
N 


I. 

Mg 
0^    I 


N 


\ 


N 


w 


a  b 

Fig.  17.  a:  Mg  complex  of  oxypurine.  b:  Mg  complex  of  oxyquinolinol. 


H 
HN 

V 


N= 


OH 
0 P-0 

\  \ 


\_j:i.::s^o\p=o 

\ 

0 


K.  H      H      H      H         -r-.   ^ 

^         I      I      I      I       /f^=o 
CH-C— C  — C— C— 0    OH 


I       I 

OH   OH 
—  0 — 


I 

H 


Fig,   18.  Possible  structure  of  Mg  complex  of  ATP   (interatomic  dis- 
tances are  arbitrary). 

forms  a  quadridentate  chelate  linking  up  also  with  the  phosphates, 
it  may  attract  electrons  also  from  the  latter.  The  metal  may  thus 
serve  as  a  bridge,  across  which  electrons  can  pass  from  phosphate 
to  purine.  So  the  Mg  actually  not  only  may  connect  the  two  ends 
of  a  molecule;  it  may  make  one  single,  unique  electronic  system 
of  the  phosphate  chain  and  the  purine  with  common  nonlocalized 


71 

electrons  which  could  transport  energy,  the  purine  having  its 
system  of  conjugated  double  bonds  and  the  phosphate  the  O's 
with  their  nonbonded  lone  pairs  of  electrons.  The  P — O — P, 
which  represents  the  (£),  could  merge  thus  with  the  adenine  in 
one  extensive  system  of  mobile  electrons. 

This  opens  the  possibility  that  when  such  a  double  chelate  is 
formed  and  the  metal  attracts  electrons  from  the  phosphates,  it 


V^v^ 


Fig.   19.  Mg  chelate  of  c-phenylenediamine  and  naphthoquinone. 


decreases  the  energy^  and  strength  of  the  P — O — P  bond,  which 
then  falls  prey  to  hydrolytic  splitting  while  its  energy  appears  in 
the  purine  ring  as  E* ,  completing  the  (E)  ->  £*  transformation. 

That  Mg  can  actually  facilitate  the  passage  of  electrons  from 
one  substance  to  another  with  which  this  metal  forms  complexes 
can  be  demonstrated  by  mixing  an  alcoholic  solution  of  1,2-naph- 
thoquinone  and  (9-phenylenediamine  (Fig.  19).  In  this  system  the 
quinone  oxidizes  the  diamine  very  slowdy,  electrons  passing  from 
the  latter  to  the  former.  This  reaction  is  greatly  speeded  up  by  Mg, 
in  analogy  to  the  ATP-ase  activity  of  myosin,  which  also  can  occur 
without  Mg,  but  is  greatly  accelerated  by  the  metal.  The  reaction 
between  quinone  and  diamine  is  indicated  by  the  darkening  of  the 
solution  (w^hich  can  readily  be  reverted  by  reducing  agents  such 
as  ascorbic  acid ) . 

One  attractive  feature  of  this  theory  of  ATP-ase  activity  is  that 
it  is  analogous  to  E.  L.  Smith's  theory  of  peptidase  activity. 


72 

A  serious  objection  may  be  raised  against  this  theory:  the  sta- 
bility constant  of  the  metal  chelate  of  Mg  and  the  adenine  or 
isonine,  in  water,  is  very  low;  the  energy  of  this  binding  is  not 
great  enough  to  hold  the  whole  quadridentate  chelate  together 
against  the  forces  of  heat  agitation.  The  Mg-phosphate  complex  is 
very  stable  so  that  we  can  expect  the  ATP  to  be  present  in  muscle 
as  a  Mg  complex,  there  being  twice  as  much  Mg  in  muscle  as  there 
is  ATP,  but  links  formed  by  Mg  with  the  adenine  or  purine  can 
be  expected  to  break  up  in  water.  Our  model  in  Fig.  16  only  says 
that  such  a  complex  can  be  formed,  not  that  it  is  formed.  However, 
we  have  to  remember  that  the  ATP,  when  undergoing  splitting  in 
muscle,  is  not  free  but  is  linked  to  the  protein,  myosin,  and  is 
"activated"   by  it.   We  do  not  know  what  "activation"   means. 
Probably  it  means  a  binding  of  the  substrate  with  its  consecutive 
deformation.  So  it  may  be  that  the  myosin  holds  the  ATP  molecule 
in  the  position  required  for  the  formation  of  this  bridge  between 
phosphate  and  purine  and  this  is  actually  what  we  mean  by  activa- 
tion. One  could  go  even  one  step  further  with  the  argument  and 
say  that  if  the  stability  constant  of  the  Mg-purine  complex  were 
high  enough  to  bring  the  two  ends  of  the  molecule  together  and 
make  the  energy  transmission  and  the  splitting  of  the  ~P  occur, 
then  this  reaction  would  be  of  no  use  to  the  muscle,  because  then 
the  ^P  would  be  split  and  its  energy  dissipated  senselessly.  It  is 
one  of  the  basic  principles  of  nature  not  to  use  spontaneous  reac- 
tions which  occur  by  themselves  and  cannot  be  kept  in  hand.  If 
the  energetics  of  the  cell  consisted  of  spontaneous  reactions,  the 
whole  mechanism  would  have  to  run  down  senselessly  as  a  watch 
does  if  released  from  its  regulators.  We  have  to  demand  from  any 
theory  of  the  ATP-ase  activity  that  it  should  make  the  splitting  of 
-^P  possible  only  in  ATP  molecules,  bound  and  activated  by  the 
myosin,  when  the  energy  of  the  ^P  can  be  transmitted  to  the 
protein  and  applied  usefully.  It  is  thus  just  the  low  stability  con- 
stant of  the  hypothetic  Mg-purine  complex  which  makes  the  pre- 
sented theory  acceptable. 

A  word  may  be  said  about  the  third  member  of  the  ATP  mole- 


73 

cule,  the  pentose  which  has  to  connect  the  adenine  and  the  phos- 
phates in  such  a  way  that  they  come  together  exactly  in  the  right 
position.  A  hexose  would  not  do.  But  this  may  not  be  all  there  is 
to  it.  Nature  often  kills  more  than  one  bird  with  the  same  stone. 
It  may  be  worth  noting  in  this  connection  that  the  United  States 
Patent  Office  has  granted  two  patents  for  the  hardening  of  gelatine 
by  pentose,  a  reaction  not  shared  by  hexose.^  This  suggests  that  the 
ribose  can  enter  into  an  intimate  reaction  with  the  protein  which 
may  very  well  play  an  important  role  in  the  "activation"  of  ATP. 

One  last  remark  may  be  made  about  Ca.  It  greatly  promotes 
the  "ATP-ase  activity"  without  promoting  contraction  or  analo- 
gous reactions,  such  as  "superprecipitation."  It  even  inhibits  them. 
One  tentative  explanation  which  may  be  given  for  this  behavior 
could  be  that  Ca,  similarly  to  Mg,  forms  chelates  and  weakens  the 
~P  but  is  unable  to  transmit  its  energy  to  the  purine,  owing  to  the 
great  differences  in  the  energy  terms  of  Ca  and  N.  Accordingly, 
Ca  is  also  unable  to  promote  the  oxidoreduction  between  1,2-naph- 
thoquinone  and  o-phenylenediamine. 

In  Chapter  12  we  will  return  once  more  to  a  possible  additional 
role  of  pentose. 

While  reading  the  proof  sheets  of  this  book  my  attention  was 
kindly  called  to  a  paper  of  B.  H.  Levendahl  and  T.  W.  James 
[B'wchJm.  et  Biophys.  Acta  21,  298,  1956).  Its  summary  may  be 
quoted  without  comment:  "The  rotatory  dispersion  of  adenine, 
adenosine,  AMP,  ADP,  and  ATP  have  been  determined.  The  data 
have  been  interpreted  to  show  that  the  ATP  molecule  is  folded 
back  on  itself  in  such  a  manner  that  bonding  is  permitted  between 
the  last  two  phosphate  groups  and  the  amino  group  of  adenine. 
This  stabilized  structure  is  then  proposed  as  necessary  for  the  ac- 
tion of  ATP.  Parallel  'ATP-like'  action  of  CTP  and  UTP  and 
other  triphosphonucleotides  could  be  explained  by  possession  of  a 
similar  configuration." 

*USA  Patent  No.  2,059,817  (Nov.  3,  1956)  and  Patent  No.  2,180335 
(Nov.  21,  1939),  the  first  granted  to  the  Eastman  Kodak  Co.,  Jersey  Cit>'. 
N.J.,  the  second  to  the  Agfa  Ansco  Corporation,  Binghamton,  N.Y. 


11.   Riboflavine 


As  is  generally  known,  the  function  of  riboflavine- 5  -phosphate 
(which  I  will  briefly  call  "riboflavine")  is  to  act  as  intermediary 
H-acceptor  in  the  oxidative  system,  accepting  H's  coming  from  the 
foodstuffs,  and  passing  on  electrons  to  the  cytochrome  system. 
This  function  is  in  accord  with  its  chemistry.  Accepting  H's  in 
pairs  and  giving  off  electrons  one  by  one,  it  must  be  able  to  form 
a  free  radical.  The  ability  to  do  so  can  readily  be  demonstrated  by 
reducing  it  in  a  strongly  acid  medium,  whereby  the  greenish-yel- 
low color  of  the  oxidized  form,  turns  into  the  red-brown  color  of 
the  free  radical. 

Naturally,  the  real  function  of  the  substance  is  not  merely  to 
serve  as  a  bridge  for  the  H's  or  electrons  to  pass  over,  but  to  con- 
vert the  energy,  released  in  its  oxido-reduction  into  ^P's,  and  our 
problem  here  is  to  find  out  whether  £*  is  involved  in  this  process. 
As  has  been  stated  earlier,  fluorescence  tells  us  that  the  molecule 
does  not  readily  dissipate  its  £*,  may  thus  act  as  an  energy  trans- 
mitter. All  fluorescent  molecules  were  also  found  to  be  able  to  go 
into  the  triplet  state  in  ice.  The  well  known  brilliant  greenish- 
yellow  fluorescence  of  riboflavine  may  thus  be  taken  as  an  encour- 
agement. 

The  structure  of  riboflavine  (Fig.  20)  has  close  analogies  with 
that  of  ATP.  We  found  the  structure  of  ATP  more  complex  than 
was  needed  for  its  alleged  function,  that  of  a  phosphate  carrier. 
Similarly,  the  structure  of  riboflavine  is  more  complex  than  would 
be  needed  for  an  intermediary  H-acceptor.  The  molecule  of  ATP 
is  built  of  three  parts :  it  has  phosphate  on  one  end,  a  heteroxyclic 
compound  with  an  extensive  system  of  conjugated  double  bonds 
on  the  other,  with  a  pentose  connecting  the  two.  Riboflavine  has 

74 


75 

an  analogous  structure  with  phosphate  at  one  end,  an  isoalloxazine 
instead  of  the  purine  at  the  other,  and  a  ribose  instead  of  a  ribo- 
furanose  in  the  middle.  Only  the  function  of  riboflavine  is,  in  a 
way,  the  opposite  of  that  of  ATP.  While  the  function  of  ATP  is 
to  spend  the  E  of  -^P's  wisely,  the  function  of  riboflavine  is  to 
invest  E  in  P's,  taking  part  in  oxidative  phosphorylation  and  stabi- 
lizing the  energy  released  in  this  form.  ATP  accepts  phosphates 
from  other  phosphate  acceptors   in   the  form  of  a  triphosphate 

OH 
H     H    H    H  I 

CH2-C-C-C-C-O-P-OH 
I  0     0    0     H  II 

I  H     H     H  0  R       1^ 


VO 


0  ^^       0 

(a)  (6) 

Fig.  20.  a:  Riboflavine-5, -phosphate,  oxidized,  b:  Same  reduced. 

chain,  then  breaking  down  this  chain,  converting  (as  we  sup- 
posed) its  (E)  into  an  £*  in  the  purine.  The  tentative  hypoth- 
esis thus  suggests  itself  that  riboflavine  might  do  the  same  in  the 
opposite  direction  and  fulfill  its  role  by  converting  the  £*  gener- 
ated by  its  oxido-reduction  in  its  alloxazine  into  ^P's  by  building 
up  a  triphosphate  chain  on  its  other  end,  the  phosphates  of  which 
it  then  passes  on  to  other  phosphate  acceptors,  keeping  but  one  for 
itself. 

As  to  the  mechanism  of  these  reactions  we  supposed  that  ATP 
connected  its  two  ends  (on  the  enzyme)  by  forming  a  coordinative 
metal  complex  between  the  active  groups  of  its  purine  and  the 
triphosphate  end.  So,  when  studying  ATP,  our  first  question  was 
whether  the  formation  of  such  a  complex  is  sterically  possible.  If 
there  is  the  supposed  analogy  between  ATP  and  riboflavine,  then 
we  might  ask  likewise  whether  the  opposite  process  is  sterically 
possible,  whether  the  alloxazine  could  bind  two  phosphates  as 
metal  complexes,  then  hitch  them  together  and  bind  them  to  its 


76 

own  phosphate  by  means  of  the  £*  generated  by  the  oxidoreduc- 
tion  in  its  alloxazine.  To  do  this  the  alloxazine  would  have  to  have 
three  active  groups  in  a  vicinal  position.  It  has  three  such  groups,  a 
C=0  at  position  2,  an  NH  at  3,  and  another,  C=0  at  4  (Fig. 
20)  and  so  the  question  is  whether  it  is  sterically  possible  to  bring 
the  hypothetic  triphosphate  formed  on  the  furanose  into  a  position 
in  which  one  0~  of  each  of  the  three  phosphates  touches  upon  one 
of  the  three  active  groups  of  the  alloxazine. 

The  answer  is  given  by  Fig.  21,  an  alloxazine-triphosphate  built 
up  of  the  Courtauld  atomic  model.  The  three  atoms  pointed  at  by 
the  single-headed  arrows  are  0"'s  of  the  three  phosphates  while 
the  three  double-headed  arrows  indicate  the  =0,  NH,  and  =0 
on  the  alloxazine.  These  are  in  close  touch.  If,  in  ATP,  the  sta- 
tistical chances  for  the  possibility  of  the  formation  of  a  complex 
were  remote,  they  are  still  more  distant  here  and  so  we  again  can 
say  that  the  structure  pleads  for  the  assumption  that  the  riboflavine 
does  not  happen  to  be  able  to  form  such  a  complex  but  is  made 
that  way.  We  can  also  add  that  any  change  on  the  riboflavine,  as 
the  replacement  of  ribose  witli  ribofuranose  or  a  different  location 
of  the  O's  and  NH  on  the  isoalloxazine,  would  make  the  forma- 
tion of  such  a  complex  impossible.  So  the  structure  of  the  ribo- 
flavine molecule  becomes  accessible  to  a  functional  interpretation. 
The  CH3  groups  at  6  and  7  may  act  as  electron  donors,  resonating 
with  the  CO's  and  NH.  For  this  function  we  could  expect  them  to 
be  located  on  the  opposite  end  of  the  molecule,  where  they  actually 
are. 

Once  the  formation  of  a  triphosphate  is  structurally  possible, 
the  question  arises  whether  this  is  possible  energetically.  The  spec- 
tral properties  of  riboflavine  give  us  a  lead.  The  riboflavine  has 
three  absorption  bands,  one  at  260,  one  at  375,  and  one  at  445 
vcifji.  So  if  the  molecule  is  excited  by  UV  its  electrons  are  raised  to 
one  of  the  UV  absorption  bands  and  then  drop  in  an  "internal 
conversion"  to  the  lowest  singlet  level  and  emit  from  here  the  well 
known  greenish-yellow  fluorescence  with  a  maximum  of  its  emis- 
sion band  at  540  m^M   (Si  ->  G  in  Fig.  5).  To  excite  electrons  to 


77 


V 

c 


o 

c 
u 


i» 

c 

> 

rt 

a: 

o 

-Q 

iH 

M-* 

^— ' 

o 

4-» 

C^ 

r- 

n. 

. 

;/5 

*-* 

O 

X 

r" 

a> 

_a 

-4^ 

•4-^ 

V, 

VJ 

C 

_o 

•*-> 

rt 

o 
a, 

c 

ITS 

>> 

a 

DC 

X 

, 

Lh 

^^ 

c 

r^4 

UL, 

<u 

2 

"o 

78 

this  540  m/A  level  64  calories  would  be  needed,  which  are  not 
likely  to  be  available.  As  has  been  shown  (Fig.  6),  in  water  the 
excited  riboflavine  goes  into  the  triplet,  the  emission  of  which  has 
its  maximum  at  605  m/x  which  corresponds  to  an  energy  of  47 
calories  which  is  somewhat  closer  to  biological  values  but  seems 
still  to  be  too  high.  However,  we  must  not  forget  that  riboflavine 
fulfills  its  role  in  the  cell  "activated"  by  the  protein  and  we  do 
not  know  how  far  its  energy  relations  are  altered  by  its  being 
linked  to  the  protein.  We  know  that  they  are  altered  because  the 
riboflavine  bound  to  its  protein  loses  its  fluorescence  (which  may 
mean  that  it  goes  into  the  triplet)  and  that  the  wavelength  of  its 
absorption  becomes  lengthened  by  20  m/x  (which  means  that  less 
energy  is  needed  for  its  excitation ) .  How  far  the  energies  needed 
for  the  triplet  excitation  are  altered  we  do  not  know.  It  is  possible 
that  they  are  lowered  more  considerably. 

To  return  once  more  to  the  experiment  in  Fig.  6,  the  riboflavine 
in  th  frozen  tube,  on  excitation,  went  quantitatively  into  the  triplet 
state.  Even  so  this  tube  did  not  change  color,  as  observed  in  day- 
light. This  indicates  that  it  absorbed  light  by  its  singlet  excitation 
and  if  a  triplet  was  formed  it  was  formed  through  a  transition 
from  the  singlet  into  the  triplet,  as  symbolized  by  the  arrow  Si  -^ 
Ti  in  Fig.  5.  The  tube  containing  KI  showed  a  strong  brownish 
tint  which  was  observable  even  better  if  the  tube  was  removed 
from  the  freezing  mixture  and  was  allowed  to  warm  up  to  some 
extent.^  This  suggests  that  the  iodide  made  a  direct  transition  into 
the  triplet  possible,  an  observation  which  is  interesting  for  the 
biologist  because  iodine,  in  the  form  of  thyroid  hormones,  is  one 
of  the  main  regulators  of  metabolism  and  its  action  on  E*  is  inde- 
pendent of  its  charge  or  binding.  Iodine  is  not  the  only  substance 
which  is  capable  of  this  action.  Serotonin  shows  this  action  con- 
siderably stronger.  Its  effect  is  noticeable  even  in  a  5.10'^  M  con- 
centration. There  are  tvv'o  circumstances  which  make  this  effect 

^  On  freezing,  first  the  peripheral  sheets  freeze  and  crack  up  making  it 
more  difficult  to  see  what  is  inside  the  tube.  On  warming  up  the  opposite 
happens. 


79 

remarkable.  The  one  is  that  serotonin  is  a  constituent  of  normal 
tissues,  has  a  strong  biological  activity,  and  various  pathological 
conditions  such  as  hypertension  or  schizophrenia  have  been  con- 
nected with  serotonin  (Woolley  and  Shaw).  The  other  circum- 
stance is  that  serotonin  is  an  indole  derivative  and  is  closely  related 
to  plant  hormones,  the  ones  affecting  growth.  The  derivatives  of 
indole  seem  to  be  among  the  most  powerful  instruments  of  living 
nature  and  so  their  action  mechanism  is  one  of  the  most  important 
problems  of  biochemistry.  The  discoloration  of  riboflavine  sug- 
gests that  they  can  promote  the  direct  transition  from  the  ground 
state  into  the  triplet.  Serotonin  seems  to  be  able  to  do  this  to  some 
extent  even  in  an  unfrozen  watery  solution,  in  the  absence  of 
structures;  10~^  AI  serotonin  added  to  a  solution  of  riboflavine 
induces  a  brown  tint  in  its  color.  The  spectroscope  indicates  that 
this  change  is  due  to  the  appearance  of  a  shoulder  in  the  absorp- 
tion spectrum  of  riboflavine  which  according  to  its  position  cor- 
responds to  the  triplet. 

Serotonin  is  not  the  only  substance  which  can  produce  such 
changes.  Lysergic  acid  acts  similarly,  though  more  weakly;  1- 
benzyl-2,5-dimethylbufotenine  and  l-benzyl-2,5-dimethylreotonine 
act  likewise.-  For  kindly  supplying  the  last  two  I  am  deeply  obliged 
to  Dr.  D.  W.  Wooley.  These  substances  seem  to  increase  the 
probability  of  a  direct  transition  from  the  ground  state  into  the 
triplet  and  also  to  increase  the  stability  of  this  triplet,  as  shown  by 
the  quenching  of  the  phosphorescent  light  emission  induced  by 
O2  in  frozen  riboflavine.  This  emission,  in  a  10~^  At  riboflavine 
solution  is  completely  quenched  by  2.10"^  M  serotonin  or  lysergic 
acid.  How  far  the  actions  on  £*  are  limited  to  riboflavine  or  how 
far  they  represent  a  general  ability  to  alter  the  probabilities  of 
singlet  triplet  transitions  in  favor  of  the  triplet,  remains  to  be 
shown  by  more  detailed  studies  which  these  substances  certainly 
deserve. 

^  The  similarity  of  action  was  surprising  since  Woolley  and  Shaw  found 
these  substances  to  be  antagonists  of  serotonine.  Lately  (1955),  however, 
Shaw  and  Woolley  found  also  similarities  in  biological  activity. 


12.   Ions,  Glutathione,  Sugars,  and  Alcohols 


While  a  single  experiment  might  suffice  to  disprove  the  theory 
of  E*  only  the  accumulating  mass  of  data  can  make  it  acceptable. 
It  could  gain  weight  by  making  old  problems  appear  in  a  new 
light  or  by  giving  tentative  answers  to  questions  which  have  yet 
found  no  satisfactory  answer  or  have  found  no  answer  at  all.  Such 
questions  can  be  asked  about  ions  and  glutathione. 

IONS 

The  main  intracellular  monovalent  cation  is  K^  while  Na+  is 
kept  out  as  far  as  possible  by  the  cell  and  one  of  the  simple  and 
basic  questions  of  general  biology  is:  why  is  this  so.'^  Buswell  and 
Rodenbush  state  that  the  K+  ions  fit  well  into  the  holes  of  the 
cubic  water  lattice,  formed  around  nonpolar  groups,  but  ions 
bigger  than  K+  do  not  do  so.  The  K"  ions  fit  also  into  the  lacunas 
of  a  defective  hexagonal  lattice.  Their  dimensions  are  very  similar 
to  those  of  the  water  molecules.  So  we  can  expect  K+  to  cause  no 
disturbance  in  the  crystalline  regularity  while  other  ions,  bigger 
than  K"^,  can  be  expected  to  do  so.  According  to  the  contents  of 
this  book  this  crystalline  regularity  is  of  prime  import  for  cell  life 
because  triplet  excitations  can  take  their  normal  course  only  in  an 
undisturbed  orderly  system. 

In  a  way,  Na"^  is  bigger  than  K+  because  its  nucleus  is  less 
screened  by  an  electron  shell,  leaving  outward  forces  unbalanced, 
which  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  bigger  hydrate  envelope.  So  we 
can  expect  Na^  to  cause  trouble,  and  if  this  is  so  then  excitation 
processes  could  not  run  undisturbed  in  its  presence  and  we  can 
understand  why  the  cell  keeps  the  Na"  out  as  far  as  possible,  mak- 
ing K+  its  main  intracellular  cation. 

80 


81 

In  phosphorescent  dyes  we  have  an  indicator  for  the  disturb- 
ance of  water  structures  and  our  problem  here  is  to  demonstrate 
with  their  help  that  Na  actually  causes  a  disturbance  which  would 
be  incompatible  with  life  if  £*  played  a  major  role  in  it  and 
were  dependent  on  order.  Different  dyes  have  a  different  sensi- 
tivit}'  to  disorder  which  declares  itself  in  the  length  of  the  life- 
time of  their  excitation.  A  longer  lifetime  indicates  a  greater 
stability  and  thus  a  smaller  sensitivity.  Riboflavine  has  a  short  life- 
time, of  the  order  of  10  "^  seconds,  and  is  thus  most  sensitive.  The 
lifetime  is  somewhat  longer  in  rhodamin  B,  and  the  longest  in 
acridine  orange. 

The  excitations,  on  the  whole,  are  less  sensitive  to  the  qualities 
of  the  anions  than  to  the  qualities  of  the  cations  present.  So  the 
behavior  of  rhodamin,  on  excitation,  depends  only  to  a  small 
extent  on  the  nature  of  the  anion  and  is  dominated  by  that  of  the 
cation  present.^ 

The  behavior  of  excited  rhodamin  in  the  presence  of  varied 
concentrations  of  NaCl,  KCl,  and  Cs  and  RbCl  is  shown  in  Fig. 
22.  The  ordinate  shows  the  intensity  of  phosphorescent  light  emis- 
sion in  an  arbitrary  scale,  as  observed  visually.  A  frozen  watery 
rhodamin  solution  (10"^  Ai)  shows  a  weak  light  emission  and  a 
disturbance  may  declare  itself  in  a  quenching  of  this  phospho- 
rescence or  in  its  increase. 

As  the  middle  curve  shows,  KCl,  up  to  the  limits  of  its  phy- 
siological concentrations  (0.16  Al),  causes  no  disturbance  and 
quenches  only  above  the  limits  of  physiological  concentrations.  At 
a  very  low  concentration,  below  10"-  Al.  a  slight  increase  in  light 
emission  is  seen  which  (as  judged  by  results  on  riboflavine) 
might  be  due  to  the  CI  anion.  In  contrast  to  this  Na"  causes  a 
strong  disturbance.  The  difference  between  Na"  and  K~  can  most 
convincingly  be  demonstrated  by  holding,  side  by  side  under  the 

^  The  difference  in  the  action  of  the  various  halogens  can  be  demonstrated 
in  more  sensitive  dyes  such  as  riboflavine,  v/hich  behaves  differently  in  tlie 
presence  of  KF,  KCl.  KBr,  and  KI. 


82 


UV  lamp,  three  test  tubes  with  a  frozen  rhodamin  solution,  one 
containing  at  the  side  of  the  dye  0.1  M  NaCl,  another  0.1  Af  KG. 
and  the  third  no  salt  at  all.  The  latter  two  will  show  hardly  any 
phosphorescence,  while  the  tube  with  NaCl  shows  an  intense  red 


c 
o 

I/) 
I/) 

E 


Nl  0.001 

Fig.  22.  Light  emission  of  a  frozen  aqueous  rhodamin  B  solution  (10^^ 
M)  in  the  presence  of  various  concentrations  of  NaCl,  KCl,  Rb,  and 
CsCl. 

The  abscissa  corresponds  to  the  weak  light  emission  of  the  control  tube 
with  no  salt,  so  the  curve's  going  below  it  means  quenching. 

glow  at  the  temperature  of  our  freezing  mixture.  It  is  very  impres- 
sive, indeed,  to  see  the  difference  of  the  two  so  closely  related  ions 
demonstrated  in  such  a  striking  fashion. 

The  hydrate  shell  of  Li^  is  still  bigger  than  that  of  Na+  and  so 
the  disorder  and  harm  caused  by  this  ion  have  to  be  still  graver. 
For  the  biologist  the  action  of  Li"  is  not  less  interesting  than  that 
of  Na",  having  been  discovered  by  Herbst  that  it  induces  mon- 
strosities in  developing  embryos  exposed  at  an  early  stage  for  a 
short  while  to  relatively  low  concentrations  of  Li+.  In  rhodamin 
the  graver  disorder  declares  itself  in  a  quenching  of  light  emis- 
sion. Since  the  light  emission  of  (salt-free)  rhodamin  is  rather 
weak  this  action  is  not  very  impressive.  For  the  demonstration  of 


83 

the  difference  between  Li^  and  Na+  we  better  use  a  less  sensitive 
dye,  such  as  acridine  orange.  If  LiCl,  NaCl,  and  KCl  are  added  in 
0.1  M  concentration  to  a  (O.IQ-^  M)  watery  solution  of  acridine 
orange  and  the  solutions  are  frozen  in  test  tubes  and  held  under 
the  UV  lamp,  the  first,  containing  LiCl,  will  show  an  intense  red 
glow  while  the  others  will  show  practically  no  light  emission. 
The  disturbance  caused  in  the  developing  embryo  could  thus  have  \ 
its  explanation  in  the  disturbance  of  the  water  structures  which 
may  be  instrumental  in  the  decoding  and  transmission  of  the  in- 
formation contained  in  genes. 

The  dimensions  of  the  ammonium  ion  are  similar  to  those  of 
K".  It  was  found,  accordingly,  that  NH4CI,  similarly  to  KCl, 
caused  no  disturbance  in  the  phosphorescent  behavior  of  rhodamin. 

GLUTATHIONE 

One  of  the  most  puzzling  cell  components  is  glutathione  which 
is  present  according  to  F.  G.  Hopkins  in  normal  tissues  in  as  high 
concentrations  as  one  mM.  Though  various  interesting  reactions 
of  glutathione  have  been  described  its  real  biological  meaning  is 
still  unknown.  It  is  assumed  that  it  acts  as  redox  buffer  keeping 
with  its  own  SH  groups  those  of  the  protein  in  reduced  condition. 
This,  however,  only  shifts  the  real  problem  instead  of  solving  it 
because  then  we  may  ask:  what  has  the  SH  to  do  in  proteins?  It 
certainly  plays  a  most  important  role  in  its  function.  Many 
enzymes  are  "SH-enzymes,"  the  intactness  of  the  SH  group  of 
which  is  indispensable  for  activity.  There  are  even  S-containing 
hormones  (oxytocin,  vasopressin,  insulin)  which  may  exert  their 
action  in  a  reduced  form.  So  we  are  faced  here  with  a  wider  prob- 
lem, that  of  the  biological  meaning  of  sulfur  in  general. 

Glutathione,  when  tested  for  its  influence  on  the  excitation  of 
rhodamin  in  the  ways  described  in  the  previous  pages,  yielded  no 
clue.  Added  to  the  solutions  of  this  dye  it  produced  the  same 
action  as  thiamine:  increased  phosphorescence,  an  action  which  is 
not  specific  and  is  mainly  a  function  of  molar  concentration. 


84 

One  of  the  parameters  of  excitation  which  may  have  a  major 
biological  importance  is  lifetime.  The  lifetime  of  rhodamin  is 
short,  of  the  order  of  10"--10~"  seconds.  A  greater  number  of  sub- 
stances have  been  tested  for  their  ability  to  prolong  this  lifetime, 
with  negative  results.  Only  two  substances  were  found  to  be  ca- 
pable of  extending  it  at  a  low  concentration  and  extending  it 
strongly  into  the  dimension  of  seconds:  these  are  glutathione  and 
pyridoxine.  Solutions  of  rhodamin  containing  0.01  AI  glutathione 
showed  a  strong  red  phosphorescence  in  the  slow  moving  phos- 
phoroscope  and  showed  an  afterglow  if  illumination  was  suddenly 
disconnected.  In  10  ^  M  concentration  the  effect  was  but  somewhat 
weaker.  Oo  had  only  a  moderate  quenching  effect  so  that  it  can  be 
expected  not  to  interfere  with  this  long  life  excitation  at  the  low 
Oo  concentrations  of  tissues. 

That  the  lengthening  of  lifetime  was  actually  due  to  the  SH 
group  could  be  shown  by  the  fact  that  glutathione  lost  activity  on 
oxidation  of  this  group  and  that  the  same  effect  was  produced  by 
cysteine  but  not  by  cystine.  There  was  only  one  difference  between 
the  action  of  cysteine  and  glutathione:  while  the  former  acted  in 
acid  solution  only  (dissolved  as  cystine  HCl)  and  was  inactive 
at  neutral  reaction,  glutathione  show^ed  the  opposite  pH  de- 
pendence, being  active  at  neutral  but  not  at  acid  reaction.  Cysteine 
ethyl  ester  was  found  to  be  inactive  indicating  that  the  action  of 
the  SH  group,  somehow,  depends  on  the  structure  of  the  whole 
molecule  involving  the  COOH  group  and  its  dissociation.  Pos- 
sibly nature  has  built  the  cysteine  into  a  tripeptide  and  produced 
glutathione  to  make  the  substance  more  soluble  and  to  enable  the 
SH  to  do  its  job  at  the  physiological  neutral  reaction. 

The  lifetime  of  triplet  excitations  varies  within  wide  limits. 
Rhodamin  has  a  short  one,  quinidine  and  acridine  orange  a  long 
one.  The  longer  the  lifetime  originally,  the  easier  it  is  prolonged 
into  the  0.1  or  1  second  dimension.  Accordingly  it  was  found  that 
while  this  effect  could  be  achieved  in  rhodamin  with  three  sub- 
stances only,  a  greater  number  of  kno\\n  or  unknown  cell  con- 


85 

stituents  had  the  same  effect  with  the  other  two  substances.  Tissue 
extracts  were  found  to  produce  a  long-lived  excitation  with  in 
quinidine  at  a  ver)-  high  dilution. 

There  is  one  conclusion  we  can  draw  from  this  for  our  later  ex- 
periments. When  studying  the  question  how  far  £*  is  involved  in 
biological  action  and  how  far  the  modifications  of  this  £*  can 
explain  drug  or  hormonal  action,  we  will  have  to  consider  also 
the  lifetime.  A  drug  action  may  very  well  consist  of  modifying 
the  lifetime  or  modifying  the  influence  of  another  agent,  such  as 
glutathione,  on  the  lifetime  of  an  excitation. 

SUGAR  AND  ALCOHOLS 

In  the  experiment  described  in  Chapter  5  the  phosphorescent 
light  emission  of  rhodamin  was  increased  by  thiamine.  In  the 
present  chapter  a  similar  effect  was  obtained  with  sodium.  We 
may  ask  whether  such  an  increased  light  emission  is  due  to  an  in- 
crease or  a  decrease  in  the  stability  of  the  triplet  state.'*  These  sub- 
stances may  have  caused  increased  light  emission  by  making  the 
triplet  less  stable  and  increasing  herewith  the  probability  of  a 
return  of  the  excited  electron  from  the  triplet  into  the  ground 
state  (Ti  -^  G  in  Fig.  5).  It  is  equally  possible  that  these  sub- 
stances might  have  increased  phosphorescence  by  rendering  the 
triplet  more  stable  allowing  a  saturation  of  the  triplet  level.  The 
greater  the  number  of  the  electrons  in  the  triplet  state,  the  greater 
the  probability  that  some  of  them  will  drop  back  under  light  emis- 
sion into  the  ground  state.  In  this  case  we  could  expect  that  the 
electrons  emit  their  photon  wdth  a  delay  and  give  signs  of  a  long- 
lived  excitation.  A  long-lived  excitation  may  declare  itself  in  an 
afterglow,  or  in  a  phosphorescence  observable  in  a  slowly  moving 
phosphoroscope.  The  rhodamin,  in  presence  of  thiamine  or  so- 
dium showed  no  such  afterglow  so  that  it  seems  likely  that  the 
increased  light  emission  was  due  in  this  case  to  i  reduced  stability, 
or  at  least  to  an  increased  probability  of  the  Ti  ^  G  transition. 

Several  instances  were  quoted  on  the  previous  pages  in  which 


86 

an  afterglow  was  produced  by  the  addition  of  1-2%  glucose  to 
the  watery  dye  solutions  previous  to  their  freezing.  Other  mono- 
and  disaccharides,  such  as  ribose,  galactose,  mannose,  fructose, 
saccharose,  or  maltose  acted  similarly,  while  high  polymers  such 
as  dextrin,  starch  (soluble  or  insoluble),  or  agar  had  no  such 
action.  A  tentative  explanation  is  suggested  by  a  simple  experi- 
ment: if  a  dye  solution  is  placed  in  a  test  tube  and  is  frozen  slowly 
(e.g.,  by  placing  it  in  the  deep  freeze  at  — 20°C),  a  sheet  of 
colorless  ice  is  formed  in  the  periphery  while  the  dye  is  concen- 
trated in  the  middle.  Evidently,  the  water  crystallized  out  leaving 
the  dye  behind.  If,  prior  to  freezing,  1-2%  sugar  is  added  to  the 
solution,  the  dye  is  found  more  or  less  homogeneously  distributed 
in  the  ice.  The  sugar,  so  to  say,  mediates  between  ice  and  dye, 
making  the  contact  between  the  two  more  intimate.  If  it  is  the 
water  structure  which  enables  the  dye  to  form  triplets,  then  the 
probability  and  stabilit}^  of  the  triplets  must  be  the  greater  the 
more  intimate  the  contact  between  dye  and  ice. 

The  sugar  molecules  can  be  expected  to  build  their  own  "ice- 
bergs." In  the  above  experiment  these  icebergs  must  have  fitted 
into  the  water  lattices  formed  on  freezing,  or  else  the  sugar  would 
have  also  been  eliminated  by  the  freezing  water.  This  system  of 
ice  and  sugar-icebergs  accommodated  the  dye  molecules  better  than 
pure  ice.  How^ever,  the  glucose  added  favored  not  only  phospho- 
rescence but  caused  also  a  strong  fluorescence  to  appear.  While  a 
pure  rhodamin  solution  shows  no  fluorescence  at  all,  in  presence 
of  1-2%  glucose  the  frozen  dye  shows  on  illumination,  at  the 
side  of  phosphorescence,  also  a  strong  orange  fluorescence,  which 
blends  with  the  red  phosphorescence  to  a  red-orange  glow.  The 
higher  the  sugar  concentration  the  stronger  the  fluorescence. 
While  in  the  presence  of  1%  glucose  the  emission  is  red-orange, 
in  the  presence  of  10%  glucose  it  appears  purely  orange  and  the 
strong  phosphorescent  component  can  be  seen  only  in  phosphoro- 
scope  which  does  not  allow  the  fluorescent  light  to  pass.  So  glucose 
seems  not  only  to  stabilize  the  triplet.  In  a  way  it  seems  to  render 


87 

it  also  more  unstable,  preventing  tiie  transition  of  singlets  into 
triplets  and  making  the  triplets  drop  back  more  easily  into  the 
ground  state. 

Such  action  of  sugars  may  have  its  biological  bearing.  Deoxy- 
ribose  nucleic  acid  consists  according  to  the  Watson  Crick  model 
of  a  column  of  heterocyclic  bases  surrounded  by  a  sheet  of  pentose 
and  phosphoric  acid.  If  the  bases  are  instrumental  in  conducting 
energy  then  the  water  structures  built  by  the  sugars  and  phosphates 
may  be  instrumental  in  transmitting  this  energy  to  the  outside  and 
transmitting  with  it  also  the  genetic  information  contained  in 
DNA.  Solutions  of  DNA  (as  well  as  those  of  RNA)  show  a 
fluorescence  in  the  visible,  which  turns  into  a  long-lived  phospho- 
rescence on  freezing.  None  of  the  components  of  nucleic  acid 
shows  such  phosphorescence  in  itself,  which  indicates  some  col- 
lective activity  in  relation  to  the  energy  communicated  to  the  sys- 
tem. A  long-lived  phosphorescence  in  dissolved  substances  is, 
without  the  addition  of  some  stabilizer,  such  as  glucose,  a  verj' 
rare  occurrence.  Evidently,  the  nucleic  acid  contains  both  compo- 
nents: the  phosphorescent  heterocyclic  bases,  and  a  pentose  (and 
possibly  also  phosphate)  as  stabilizer. 

The  weak,  short-lived  phosphorescence  of  a  frozen  acridine 
orange  solution  is  turned  into  a  strong  and  long-lived  one  also  by 
low  concentrations  (10"^  Af)  of  ATP.  This  reaction  is  due  to  two 
factors,  firstly  to  the  formation  of  a  stable  complex  between  ATP 
and  the  dye  which  readily  precipitates  if  the  reactants  are  present 
in  higher  concentration.  Adenosine  monophosphate  behaves  simi- 
larly though  the  phosphorescence  of  its  complex  was  weaker  than 
that  of  ATP.  Phosphorescence  was  found  to  be  absent  with  ade- 
nine, though  it  also  complexed  with  the  dye.  Evidently,  icebergs 
of  the  pentose  and  the  phosphate  were  responsible  for  the  stabili- 
zation of  £*  in  the  ATP-dye  complex,  which  icebergs  may  play  a 
major  role  also  in  muscular  contraction. 

It  is  not  enough  for  a  molecule  to  be  hydrophylous  and  build 
icebergs    in    order    to    produce    long-lived    excitations    in    dyes. 


88 

Whetlier  such  an  effect  will  be  produced  or  not  depends  evidently 
on  the  inner  structure  of  these  icebergs,  their  relation  to  the  bulk 
of  the  ice  and  their  relation  to  the  excited  molecules.  If  the  ice- 
bergs formed  around  a  substance  do  not  fit  into  the  structures  of 
water  then  the  final  result  will  be  a  disorder  which  will  interfere 
with  triplet  excitations.  Such  disorder  seems  to  be  created  by 
mono-  and  polyvalent  alcohols.  As  mentioned  before,  no  triplets 
are  formed  in  ice  containing  5-10%  glycerol.  Similar  is  the  effect 
of  monovalent  alcohols,  such  as  methanol  or  ethanol  which  in  2% 
concentration  completely  prevent  the  formation  of  triplets.  There 
is  a  remarkable  parallelism  between  the  action  of  these  alcohols 
on  triplet  excitations  and  their  biological  activity,  suggesting  that 
this  latter  may  be  due  to  their  interfering  with  E*.  Two  per  cent 
ethanol  temporarily  stops  most  of  the  manifestations  of  life  (Gad- 
dum);  it  completely  abolishes  triplet  excitations  in  vitro.  Rho- 
damin,  for  instance,  frozen  in  2%  alcohol,  shows  only  an  intense 
orange  fluorescence,  and  no  red  phosphorescence  whatsoever.  A 
0.2%  alcohol  concentration  in  our  body  juices  make  us  heavily 
drunk.  In  vitro  it  cuts  down  the  long  life  of  the  excitations  in 
acridine  yellow,  while  the  long-life  induced  in  acridine  orange  by 
cortisone  is  eliminated  even  by  0.06%  ethanol.  In  rhodamin  0.2% 
ethanol  turns  the  phosphorescence  partly  into  fluorescence.  Lower 
concentrations  of  alcohol  which  only  cheer  us  up  and  relieve  us 
of  our  inhibitions  increase  phosphorescence,  making  the  triplet 
state  less  stable.  Also  the  poisonous  action  of  methanol,  which 
cannot  be  due  solely  to  our  inability  to  oxidize  it,  is  reflected  in 
these  experiments.  The  long-lived  excitation  of  acridine  orange 
in  presence  of  glutathione,  which  is  fairly  insensitive  to  0.6% 
ethanol,  is  cut  down  by  mere  traces  of  methanol;  the  triplet  state 
of  chlorophyll  is  disturbed  by  ten  times  smaller  concentration  of 
methanol  than  ethanol.  Equally  sensitive  is  the  long-lived  excita- 
tion of  riboflavine,  stabilized  by  glucose. 

Results  of  the  attemps  to  lengthen  the  lifetime  of  excitation  are 
summed  up  in  Table  II  which  shows  two  points:  extension  of 


89 

lifetime  may  have  a  certain  specificity,  as  shown  by  the  example 
of  ATP.  Secondly:  while  sugars  produce  long  life  only  in  rela- 
tively high  concentration,  glutathione  and  ATP  produced  it  in  a 
hundred  times  lower  concentrations;  this  indicates  that  glucose 

Table  II 

LoNG-LiFE  Phosphorescence  in  the  Presence  of  Glucose, 

Glutathione,  and  ATP  in  Frozen  Solutions  of  Acridine 

Orange,  Rhodamin  B,  Riboflavine  and  Quinidine 

Glucose  (2%)      Glutathione  (0.002  Af)      ATP  (0.002  Af) 


Acridine  orange 

+ 

-h 

+ 

Rhodamin  B 

+ 

+ 

0 

Riboflavine 

+ 

+ 

0 

Quinidine  SO4 

-f- 

4- 

4- 

acts  by  some  general  physical  influence,  like  the  alteration  of  solu- 
bility, while  the  other  two  substances  act  by  means  of  some  more 
specific  mechanism. 

The  example  of  glucose  and  alcohol  suggests  that  substances 
can,  roughly,  be  divided  into  two  groups:  those  which  fit  well  into 
the  water  structure  and,  in  a  way,  increase  order,  and,  those  which 
do  the  opposite.  It  seems  likely  that  it  will  be  found  that  the  sub- 
stances which  play  a  major  role  in  cell  life  and  are  found  in  cells 
in  an  appreciable  concentration,  belong  to  the  first  group.  It  seems 
also  likely  that  substances  which  create  disorder  are  not  admitted 
into  the  cell  by  the  membrane  or  may  be  even  pushed  out  from 
the  ordered  intracellular  water,  suggesting  a  new  theory  of  perme-^ 
abilit)'.  Possibly,  substances  which  prolong  the  lifetime  of  the' 
excitation  of  another  substance,  mediating  between  this  substance 
and  water,  also  will  be  found  to  render  these  substances  more 
permeable. 


1 


13.  On  Oxidative  Phosphorylation  and 

Its  Uncoupling 


One  of  the  sites  of  most  intense  energy  transmission  in  the  cell 
is  the  mitochondrion  which  oxidizes  foodstuffs,  transferring  their 
oxidative  energy  to  ATP,  stabilizing  it  in  the  form  of  ^P,  and  so 
if  £*  is  involved  in  biological  energy  transmissions  then  we  can 
expect  it  to  have  a  hand  in  oxidative  phosphorylation.  We  could 
approach  this  problem  from  either  of  two  directions.  We  could 
ask  whether  substances  known  to  uncouple  oxidative  phosphoryla- 
tion have  a  special  action  on  £*  in  concentrations  in  which  they 
uncouple,  and  we  could  ask  whether  substances  known  to  act  on 
£*  do  uncouple  oxidative  phosphor)'lation.^ 

When  attacking  this  problem  we  will  have  to  go  back  for  an 
instant  to  the  experiment  with  riboflavine,  reproduced  in  Fig.  6. 
In  this  experiment  the  vitamin  was  found  to  go  on  excitation 
quantitatively  into  the  triplet  state  and  emit  no  light,  as  shown  by 
the  middle  tube  in  the  figure.  This  absence  of  luminosit)'  is  in 
agreement  with  rules  of  quantum  mechanics  which  impose  a  strict 
prohibition  on  the  radiative  transition  from  the  triplet  state  into 
the  ground  state.  All  the  same,  as  witnessed  by  the  next  tube  in 
the  same  figure,  in  the  presence  of  atmospheric  oxygen,  such  a 
transition  does  take  place  and  the  tube  emits  an  orange  phos- 
phorescence with  a  wavelength  of  570  m/x.  This  means  that  the  O2 
present  altered  transition  probabilities,  making  transitions  possible 
which  had  practically  no  probability  in  its  absence.  If  there  is 
oxidative  phosphorylation  there  is  also  O2  and  so  we  can  expect 
the  vitamin  to  take  part  in  this  process  in  a  perturbed  state  with 
an  altered  reactivity.  The  O2  thus  serves  not  only  as  a  final  elec- 

90 


91 

tron  acceptor  but  at  the  same  time  also  tunes  the  reactivity  of  this 
central  member  of  this  chain  enabling  it  to  perform  its  function. 

This  action  of  oxygen  has  rather  remarkable  features.  The  con- 
centration of  O2  in  the  atmosphere  is  low,  0.01  Af,  and  its  concen- 
tration in  the  water  must  be  considerably  lower,  owing  to  the  poor 
solubility  of  O2.  The  experiment  shows  that  while  bringing  the 
riboflavine  solution  prior  to  freezing  into  equilibrium  with  pure 
O2  does  not  increase  the  light  emission,  bringing  the  solution  into 
equilibrium  with  air,  diluted  with  10  volumes  of  N2,  does  not 
decrease  it.  The  action  is  maximal  throughout  this  wide  range  of 
concentrations  and  so  the  O2  can  be  expected  to  exert  a  maximal 
influence  even  at  the  low  tension  present  in  the  animal  tissues. 

Most  chemical  reactions  depend  on  the  concentration  of  the  re- 
action partners.  It  is  thus  unusual  to  find  the  action  of  O2  inde- 
pendent within  such  a  wide  range  of  its  molarity.  Since  the  concen- 
tration of  the  O2  present  in  the  solution,  in  balance  with  the 
diluted  air,  had  to  be  considerably  lower  than  10"^  Af,  the  concen- 
tration of  the  riboflavine  present,  we  can  exclude  a  direct  inter- 
action between  riboflavine  and  O2;  we  must  look  out  for  an  un- 
usual mechanism  of  action,  based  on  some  exceptional  quality  of 
O2  which  can  be  brought  into  a  direct  relation  with  the  triplet 
state.  O2  has  such  a  quality,  being  one  of  the  very  rare  substances 
which  are  paramagnetic  in  their  ground  state,  and  paramagnetic 
molecules  produce  a  magnetic  perturbation  of  the  electromagnetic 
field  which  is  known  to  be  able  to  alter  transition  probabilities 
between  singlet  and  triplet  excitations  of  electrons. 

This  explains  also  the  queer  dependence  on  (or  rather  inde- 
pendence of)  concentrations.  Until  the  concentration  of  the  O2  is 
high  enough  to  ensure  that  statistically  every  riboflavine  molecule 
comes  to  lie  within  the  action  radius  of  an  O2  molecule,  we  can 
expect  the  influence  to  be  maximal.  The  action  radius  of  the  O2 
could  be  calculated  from  the  concentration  at  which  it  ceases  to 
have  a  maximal  effect.  My  experiments  only  allow  me  to  state  that 
this  radius  must  be  a  rather  big  one,  of  the  order  of  100  A. 


92 

Summing  up,  we  can  state  that  aerobic  life  occurs  in  a  perturbed 
electromagnetic  field  and  that  this  perturbation  may  have  a  pro- 
found influence  on  the  course  of  reactions  taking  place  within  this 
field.  If  so,  then  there  is  a  new  possible  mechanism  for  drug  action 
which  we  have  to  consider:  drugs  may  act  also  by  eliminating,  in 
one  way  or  another,  the  influence  of  O2.  If  this  influence  of  O2  on 
the  riboflavine  is  an  important  one,  then  we  can  expect  that  sub- 
stances which  eliminate  this  influence  will  interfere  with  oxida- 
tive phosphorylation,  since  riboflavine  plays  an  important  role  in 
this  process.  So  when  studying  uncoupling  agents,  we  will  have  to 
look  out  for  changes  in  the  orange  phosphorescence  which  ribo- 
flavine owes  to  the  presence  of  O2.  We  can  also  turn  the  argument 
around  and  say  that  if  we  find  that  drugs  which  uncouple  oxidative 
phosphorylation  afifect  triplet  excitations  specifically,  then  this 
pleads  for  the  assumption  that  £*,  in  its  triplet  form,  plays  an 
important  role  in  energy  transmissions.  If  the  uncoupler  specifi- 
cally acts  on  riboflavine,  then  this  will  support  the  hypothesis  that 
riboflavine  is  involved  in  oxidative  phosphorylation  by  its  triplet 
excitation. 

IODIDE 

One  of  the  substances  which  strongly  quenches  the  phos- 
phorescence of  riboflavine  is  iodide.  It  quenches  completely  in 
10"^,  incompletely  in  10"*  Al  concentration.  Its  action  fades  out  on 
further  dilution.  This  suggests  an  action  radius  of  the  order  of  50 
A.  Accordingly,  iodide  should  inhibit  oxidative  phosphorylation  in 
small  concentrations.  This  point  was  tested  by  M.  Middlebrook 
and  the  author,  who  isolated  mitochondria  from  rat  liver  in  the 
usual  way,  and  measured  their  oxygen  uptake  and  phosphoryla- 
tion in  the  presence  of  beta  hydroxybut)Tate.  The  chloride  in  the 
suspension  fluid  was  replaced  to  varying  degrees  by  iodide.  The 
P/O  ratio  varied  in  the  various  experiments  between  2  and  2.6, 
the  average  being  2.2.  The  results  of  the  experiments  are  summed 
up  in  Fig.  23.  As  this  figure  shows,  oxidative  phosphorylation  was 


9^ 

uncoupled  completely  by  iodide  in  a  0.03  M  concentration,  while 
O2  uptake  remained  uninhibited.  Bromide  had  a  similar  action,  but 
corresponding  to  its  weaker  quenching  abilities  had  to  be  applied 
in  higher  concentration  to  produce  the  same  effect. 

These  results  are  at  variance  with  those  obtained  by  Klemperer, 
who  found  iodide  without  effect  on  oxidative  phosphorylation. 


^  100 


80 


c 
o 


60  - 


40  - 


20 


c 
.2 

3 

E 


-20 


- 

0 

/ 

/ 

0 

7°- 

.— .0- 

— 0— <X» 

- 

/ 

/ 

0 

- 

• 

0 

/ 

/ 

0 

-4D— 

0 

„c/ 

0 

1 

• 
0 

0 

1 

• 
• 

1 

• 
1 

• 

• 
1 

• 
1 

• 

CI  M  0.04 
I  M    0 


0.035 
0.005 


0.03 
0.01 


0.025 
0.015 


0.02 
0.02 


0.015 
0.025 


0.0 1 
0.03 


0.005 
0.035 


0 
0.04 


Fig.  23.  Effect  of  replacing  the  chloride  by  iodide  in  the  saline  on 
oxidative  phosphorylation  of  rat  liver  mitochondria,  expressed  in  %  of 
control  in  0.04  M  chloride.  Open  circles:  phosphorylation.  Full  circles: 
oxygen  uptake. 

His  technique  of  isolation  of  mitochondria  was  somewhat  differ- 
ent and  probably  superior  to  ours.  Possibly,  his  negative  results 
were  due  to  the  mitochondrial  membrane,  which  might  have  been 
preserved  better  in  his  experiments  and  might  have  kept  the 
iodide  out.  The  seats  of  oxidations  are,  apparently,  not  readily 
accessible  to  iodide.  This  may  explain  why  somewhat  higher  con- 
centrations of  iodide  had  to  be  used  to  arrest  phosphorylation 
than  was  expected. 

As  mentioned  earlier,  riboflavine  frozen  in  the  presence  of 
10"*  M  iodide  has  a  brownish  color  which  suggests  a  direct  transi- 


94 

tion  from  the  ground  state  into  the  triplet.  While  O2  seems  to 
make  the  triplet  unstable  and  promotes  tlie  transition  of  electrons 
from  the  triplet  into  the  ground  state,  iodide  seems  to  have  the 
opposite  effect,  making  the  triplet  stable,  abolishing  light  emis- 
sions and  increasing  the  probability  of  the  transition  G  -^  Ti  (Fig, 
5).  Iodide  acts  the  strongest  in  10"^  M.  At  higher  concentrations 
it  begins  to  acts  as  a  salt,  disturbing  the  water  structures,  rendering 
the  triplet  state  unstable. 

These  effects  of  iodine  are  independent  of  its  charge  or  binding. 
Bound  iodine,  as  that  in  3,5-diiodo-4-hydroxyben2oic  acid,  had 
the  same  effect  in  isomolar  concentrations.  It  abolished  the  light 
emission  and  changed  the  color.  Tliis  indicates  that  iodine  does 
not  produce  these  changes  by  a  direct  chemical  interaction  but  by 
electromagnetic  coupling. 

Thyroxine  and  triiodothyronine  were  found  to  act  as  they  were 
expected  to  act  being  compounds  of  iodine:  they  suppress  the  light 
emission  of  riboflavine  in  10'*  M  concentration  to  a  great  extent. 
Their  insolubility  renders  it  impossible  to  apply  them  in  higher 
concentration.  So  the  two  hormones  can  also  be  expected  to  un- 
couple oxidative  phosphorylation  in  mitochondria  in  10"^  to  10"* 
concentration,  which,  as  is  known  from  the  work  of  Lipmann  and 
Martius  and  their  associates,  they  actually  do. 

The  quenching  or  stabilizing  action  of  iodide  on  riboflavine  is 
not  specific.  Iodide  equally  suppresses  the  phosphorescent  light 
emission  of  rhodamin  B  solutions  (0.0001  M)  at  dry  ice  tem- 
perature in  10"*  M  concentration.  This  is  in  agreement  with  the 
assumption  that  iodide  owes  its  activity  to  its  being  a  rather  big, 
soft,  and  fat  ion,  by  which  is  meant  that  it  has  a  great  number  of 
electrons  which  are  capable  of  all  sorts  of  transitions  between 
energy  levels,  enabling  the  molecule  to  resonate  with  other  mole- 
cules. Excited  electrons  coming  close  to  its  nucleus  may  also 
reverse  their  spin,  owing  to  the  high  atomic  number  of  this  ele- 
ment and  the  correspondingly  high  positive  nuclear  charge. 

The  assumption  that  iodide  suppressed  the  phosphorescence  of 


95 

riboflavine  (and,  possibly,  also  suppressed  oxidative  phosphoryla- 
tion) by  stabilizing  the  triplet  could  be  supported  by  the  follow- 
ing experiment:  a  riboflavine  solution  was  frozen  in  the  presence 
of  0.1  M  NaCl.  Instead  of  the  usual  orange  phosphorescence  a 
yellowish-white  light  emission  was  obtained.  The  white  color  in- 
dicated the  mixed  nature  of  the  emission,  while  its  yellow  tint 
showed  that  fluorescence  reappeared.  That  this  actually  was  the 
case  could  be  shown  by  observing  the  frozen  tube  in  the  phos- 
phoroscope  which  cuts  out  fluorescence.  Here  the  system  showed 
a  strong  red  phosphorescence,  strong  as  compared  to  the  tube  with 
no  added  NaQ.  What  the  NaCl  did  was  thus  to  render  the  system 
unstable.  The  excited  electrons  of  riboflavine  could  no  longer  go  as 
readily  into  the  triplet  as  they  did  in  pure  ice,  and  if  they  did  so 
the  triplet  was  rather  unstable  so  that  more  electrons  did  emit  their 
energy  in  a  radiative  process  and  drop  back  to  their  ground  level. 
If  KI  is  added  in  10"^  M  concentration  in  addition  to  the  0.1  AI 
NaCl,  the  phosphorescent  emission  becomes  weaker  and  the 
fluorescence  disappears. 

2,4-DINITROPHENOL 

The  classic  uncoupler  is  2,4  dinitrophenol  as  shown  in  the 
studies  of  Loomis  and  Lipmann.  It  does  the  uncoupling  in  low 
concentration,  at  10"*  Af,  and  may  do  so  without  inhibiting  oxida- 
tion, which  may  even  be  increased.  It  is  this  action  which  made 
nitrophenol  into  a  reducing  agent  (used  for  reducing  body 
weight).  Its  medical  dose  is  100  mg,  which  means  a  random  con- 
centration of  10'^  Af  in  the  body  (60  kg  body  weight  and  1.2 
specific  weight).  But  even  smaller  single  doses,  such  as  25  mg, 
can  cause  a  rise  of  the  basal  metabolism  by  30%,  which  would 
mean  a  concentration  in  the  body  of  4  X  ^^'^  ^-  The  molecule  of 
dinitrophenol  is  simple,  has  no  characteristic  solubilities,  and  so 
we  can  suppose  it  to  have  no  specific  affinities  to  tissues  or  cell 
constituents  and  to  exert  its  pharmacological  action  at  its  random 
concentration.  So  if  we  want  to  support  the  idea  that  dinitrophenol 


96 

uncouples  oxidative  phosphorylation  by  interfering  with  £*,  then 
we  have  to  show  that  it  can  disturb  £*  at  these  concentrations,  at 
10'^  Ai.  and  do  something  even  in  a  4  X  10~^  A(  concentration. 
The  experiment  showed  that  the  phosphorescence  of  a  10~*  Al  ribo- 
flavine  solution  is  strongly  quenched  by  10~^  M  dinitrophenol  and 
4.10"®  still  had  a  marked  effect.  So  our  experiment  /"«  vitro  agrees 
with  the  assumption  that  the  oxidative  phosphorylation,  m  vivo, 
is  uncoupled  by  interfering  with  £*,  and  more  specifically,  inter- 
fering with  the  triplet  £*  of  the  riboflavine,  tuned  to  its  function 
by  the  O2  present. 

In  a  way,  the  quenching  action  of  dinitrophenol  on  the  phos- 
phorescence of  riboflavine  can  be  called  specific.  In  10"*  M  con- 
centration the  nitrophenol  did  not  appreciably  diminish  the  phos- 
phorescence of  other  substances,  such  as  acridine  or  atebrin,  nor 
that  of  rhodamin,  even  if  it  was  increased  by  thiamine.  In  higher 
concentrations  the  dinitrophenol  absorbs  light  appreciably  and  so 
the  decrease  in  phosphorescence  of  other  substances  in  its  presence 
could  be  ascribed  to  a  direct  absorption  of  the  exciting  light  by 
the  nitrophenol.  The  quenching  observed  in  this  case  is  not  a  "true 
quenching." 

2,4-DINITRONAPHTHOL 

This  substance  is  but  a  dinitrophenol  with  an  extra  antenna, 
another  benzene  ring  added  to  it.  Accordingly,  we  can  expect  it 
to  interfere  with  £*  somewhat  more  strongly  than  did  2,4-dini- 
trophenol. 

The  experiment  in  vitro  shows  that  2,4-dinitro-l-naphthol  sup- 
presses the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in  vitro  about  four 
times  more  strongly  than  does  the  corresponding  dinitrophenol, 
which  is  to  say  that  the  naphthol  can  be  applied  in  one- fourth  the 
concentration  and  produce  the  same  effect.  M.  Middlebrook  com- 
pared the  action  of  the  two  drugs  on  the  oxidative  phosphorylation 
of  rat  mitochondria.  Her  results  are  summed  up  in  Fig.  24.  As  can 
be  seen,  the  dinitronaphthol  inhibits  oxidative  phosphorylation 


97 

more  strongly  than  the  phenol,  arresting  it  at  a  lower  coficentra- 
tion.  But  the  curves  also  show  that  while  the  nitrophenol,  at  a 
low  concentration,  increases  the  oxygen  uptake,  the  reverse  effect 


150 


too 


o  50 

o 

5>P 


• 
e 

o 

0 

e 

o 

o 

*% 


•       • 


\ 

e 
e 

« 
• 

0 

« 

••      • 

• 

• 

0 


250 

DNN 

a 


500 


250 
DNP 

b 


500 


250 

OOP 

c 


500 


Fig,  24.  The  effect  of  dinitronaphthol  (a),  dinitrophenol  (b),  and 
dichlorophenol  (c)  on  O2  uptake  (open  circles)  and  oxidative  phospho- 
rylation (full  circle)  in  rat  liver  mitochondria. 


is  observed  with  the  naphthol,  which  moderately  decreases  oxida- 
tion. All  the  same,  the  inhibition  of  phosphorylation  could  not 
be  ascribed  to  the  lack  of  oxidation,  for  the  oxygen  uptake  still 
present  would  have  sufficed  to  maintain  phosphorylation  at  its 
original  level.  Dinitronaphthol  has  more  specific  solubilities  than 
dinitrophenol,  having  more  affinity  to  lipides  and  less  to  water.  So 
it  may  be  accumulated  by  certain  cell  constituents  and  have  biologi- 


98 

cal  eflfects  different  from  those  of  the  dinitrophenol  which  is  more 
water  soluble. 

2,4-DICHLOROPHENOL 

Clowes  and  Krahi  found  that  2,4-dichlorophenol  produces 
effects  in  Arbacia  eggs  similar  to  those  induced  by  2,4-dinitro- 
phenol,  which  is  to  say  that  both  produced  an  increased  oxygen 
uptake  in  a  low  concentration,  and  decreased  O2  uptake  at  a  higher 
one  with  a  complete  inhibition  of  cell  division.  This  suggests  an 
action  mechanism  similar  to  that  of  the  nitrophenols.  However, 
the  experiment  in  vHro  shows  that  while  the  dichlorophenol  has 
a  strong  quenching  action  on  the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine 
even  in  10"'  Af,  its  action  is  less  specific  and  it  affects  the  excita- 
tional  states  of  other  substances  as  well  on  which  the  nitrophenol 
had  no  appreciable  action.  So,  for  instance,  it  was  found  to  quench 
the  yellow  phosphorescence  of  acridine  (saturated  water  solution) 
in  a  lO"*  M  concentration.  The  dichlorophenol  can  thus  be  ex- 
pected to  suppress  oxidative  phosphorylation  but  can  also  be  ex- 
pected, at  the  same  time,  to  inhibit  other  processes.  The  experi- 
ments of  M.  Middlebrook  bore  out  this  expectation.  Her  results 
(Fig.  24)  showed  that  the  dichlorophenol,  similarly  to  the  dinitro- 
phenol, completely  inhibits  oxidative  phosphorylation  in  a  low 
concentration,  but  at  the  same  time  it  cuts  down  oxygen  uptake 
so  that  in  this  case  the  failure  of  phosphorylation  might  also  have 
been  secondary  to  the  failure  of  oxidation. 

Salicylic  acid  has  also  been  shown  recently  to  be  a  powerful 
metabolic  stimulant  (Alexander  and  Johnson)  and  to  uncouple 
oxidative  phosphor}4ation  in  a  5  X  1^"^  ^  concentration  (Smith 
and  Jeffrey).  One  gram,  the  medical  dose,  taken  by  an  adult  cor- 
responds to  a  random  concentration  of  10'*  Af.  Salicylic  acid 
quenches  the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in  a  10~'  Af  dilution. 


14.  Depolarization  of  the  Cell  Membrane 


The  cell  membrane  divides  the  world  in  two:  the  "inside"  and 
the  "outside."  It  receives  all  the  messages  coming  from  its  sur- 
roundings; with  its  specific  permeability  and  pumping  action  it 
decides  the  composition  of  the  intracellular  environment  on  which 
function  depends.  It  has  an  electric  gradient,  being  mostly  nega- 
tive inside  and  positive  outside,  and  is  thus  the  seat  of  an  electric 
double  layer  with  its  potential  energy,  which  it  spends  in  "excita- 
tion." To  build  up  this  potential  it  needs  energy  and  so  does  it  need 
energy  to  restore  this  potential  after  excitation.  It  needs  energy  to 
perform  its  pumping  action,  to  move  ions  or  molecules  against 
electric  or  concentration  gradients.  Last,  but  not  least,  it  needs 
energy  for  maintaining  its  structure  which,  like  all  living  struc- 
tures, is  from  a  physical  point  of  view  an  improbable  one. 

For  the  study  of  the  cell  membrane,  the  muscle  fiber  offers  a 
propitious  material,  because  the  function  of  muscle  is  contraction, 
a  function  which  entails  violent  changes  in  energy,  chemistry,  and 
shape,  and  can  thus  be  registered  by  means  of  crude  instruments 
and  observed  even  with  the  naked  eye.  These  macroscopic  changes, 
summed  up  as  "contraction,"  are  changes  in  the  physical  state  of 
the  actomyosin  system.  In  living  muscle  these  are  elicited  by 
the  collapse  of  the  normal  membrane  potential.  Whatever  the 
link  between  membrane  potential  and  actomyosin  may  be,  the  fact 
stands  that  the  contraction  of  actomyosin  indicates  in  the  intact 
muscle  the  collapse  of  the  membrane  potential,  making,  so  to  say, 
this  collapse  visible.  Ling  and  Gerard  found  that  the  resting  po- 
tential of  the  membrane  could  be  decreased  to  a  certain  critical 
value  without  eliciting  contraction.  In  the  muscles  studied  this 
potential  was  around  55  MV.  If  this  critical  potential  was  reached 

99 


100 

the  potential  collapsed  altogether  and  contraction  ensued.  This 
offers  a  good  opportunity  to  compare  different  drugs  for  their 
depolarizing  action,  for  the  ensuing  contraction  indicates  the  in- 
stant at  which  the  potential  was  decreased  to  55  MV  under  action 
of  the  drug  in  question,  the  muscle  giving  a  clear  "y^s"  or  "no" 
answer. 

If  jE*  is  involved  in  the  energization  of  the  membrane,  then 
drugs  which  interfere  with  E*  should  cause  contracture.  Hajdu 
and  the  author  observed  that  2,4-dinitrophenol  causes  contracture 
in  the  isolated  rat  diaphragm  muscle.  Simultaneously,  Barnes  and 
Duff,  in  England,  made  the  same  observation.  If  this  depolarizing 
action  of  the  2,4-dinitrophenol  was  due  to  its  interference  with 
£*,  then  it  could  be  expected  that  other  related  substances  which 
likewise  interfere  with  E*  will  have  the  same  effect  and  produce 
contracture  and  that  their  ability  to  do  so  will  be  proportional  to 
their  ability  to  interfere  with  £*;  the  latter  action  can  be  measured 
in  vitro. 

The  results  obtained  are  illustrated  by  Fig.  25  taken  from 
Hajdu  and  the  author's  paper.  It  shows  the  kymographic  record 
of  a  rat  diaphragm  muscle,  excited  electrically  at  two  different 
frequencies.  At  the  arrow,  2,4-dinitro-l-naphthol  was  added  to 
the  saline  bathing  the  muscle.  This  addition  had  no  immediate 
effect,  but,  as  the  lower  curve  shows,  after  a  while,  the  base  line 
started  to  rise  and  the  muscle  went  into  contracture,  the  force  of 
which,  evenutally,  reached  twitch  tension.  These  curves  give  a 
variety  of  information.  The  high  tension  reached  in  contracture 
indicates  that  there  was  still  plenty  of  ATP  available.  As  the  com- 
parison of  the  upper  and  lower  curves  shows,  the  contracture,  set- 
ting in  at  the  same  time,  was  independent  of  the  rate  of  stimula- 
tion. The  depolarization  leading  to  this  contracture  was  thus  inde- 
pendent of  the  rapid  depolarizations  induced  by  the  single  electric 
shocks.  Relaxation,  i.e.,  repolarization  after  these  shocks,  took 
place  with  a  normal  speed  even  after  the  contracture  began  to  set 
in.  The  energy  transmission  involved  in  the  rapid  repolarization 


101 


of  the  membrane  following  excitation  was  thus  not  affected  by 
the  dinitronaphthol.  (This  rapid  repolarization  can  be  slowed 
down  by  substances,  such  as  cyanide,  which  cut  out  the  whole 
energy  supply.)  The  dinitronaphthol  seems  to  have  acted  on  some 


Fig.  25.  Dinitrophenol  contracture  of  isolated  rat  diaphragm  muscle, 
a:  Nerve  stimulated  with  a  frequency  of  12  impulses  per  minute,  b:  Same 
with  one  stimulus  per  minute.  At  arrow  2.57  dinitronaphthol  were  added 
per  milliliter. 

slower  process,  interfering,  possibly,  with  the  energy  supply  which 
is  needed  for  the  maintenance  of  the  normal  structure  of  the  mem- 
brane or  its  pumping  action. 

Whatever  the  nature  of  the  action  of  the  dinitronaphthol  may 
be,  we  can  expect  that  it  acts  in  an  "all-or-none"  fashion,  that  is, 
produces  contracture  if  it  diminishes  the  potential  to  its  critical 
value,  or  produces  no  action  at  all.  The  experiment  showed  dini- 
tronaphthol to  be  inactive  in  a  concentration  of  1.25  /tg.  per  milli- 
liter, while  2.5  /j^g.  per  milliliter  produced  maximal  contracture. 


102 

Five  fig.  of  dinitrophenol  per  milliliter  was  inactive;  maximal  ac- 
tion was  produced  by  double  this  concentration;  2,7-dinitrophe- 
nanthrenequinone  and  2,6-dinitrothymol  gave  results  between  the 
two,  while  2,4,6-triiodophenol  was  found  to  be  half  as  active,  and 
3,5-dinitrosalicylic  acid  inactive. 

According  to  these  data,  the  dinitronaphthol  was  four  times 
more  active  than  dinitrophenol.  Comparison  of  their  action  on  the 
phosphorescent  emission  of  riboflavine  showed  that  the  same 
quenching  could  be  obtained  with  a  concentration  of  dinitro- 
naphthol one-fourth  as  great  as  that  of  dinitrophenol.  3,5-Dini- 
trosalicylic  acid  was  found  inactive  while  dinitrothymol  was  com- 
parable in  activity  to  dinitrophenol.  The  phenanthrenequinone  and 
triiodophenol  could  not  be  evaluated,  owing  to  their  extreme  in- 
solubility in  water.  Ten  fig.  of  dinitrophenol  per  milliliter  corre- 
sponds to  a  concentration  of  5  X  10"*  ^-  ^^  ^^  t>^^^  shown  in 
the  foregoing  chapter,  the  drug  can  strongly  quench  £*  in  this 
concentration,  but  its  action  fades  out  on  further  dilution. 

That  the  contractures  observed  were  actually  due  to  the  de- 
polarization of  the  membrane  was  demonstrated  by  Loewenstein 
and  the  author,  who  measured  the  resting  membrane  potential 
in  isolated  single  muscle  fibers  and  found  it  to  disappear  under 
the  action  of  dinitronaphthol,  reaching  the  critical  values  at  ap- 
proximately the  time  when  contracture  began. 

To  summarize  the  results,  we  can  thus  say  that  the  experiments 
supported  the  conclusion  that  nitrophenols  exert  their  biological 
action  by  interfering  with  E*,  and  that  E*  is  involved  in  maintain- 
ing the  polarized  state  of  the  membrane. 

The  action  of  dinitronaphthol  on  the  membrane  of  isolated 
muscle  agreed  with  the  symptoms  caused  by  this  drug  if  ingested 
parenterally  to  the  aninial.  If  2  to  3  mg  of  this  substance  (in  an 
oUy  solution)  are  injected  into  an  adult  mouse,  the  animal  shows 
no  symptoms  for  an  hour  or  so.  Then  it  suddenly  drops  dead.  A 
few  seconds  later,  all  its  muscles  are  found  in  violent  contracture. 
Death  occurs,  evidently,  when  the  membrane  potentials  reach  the 


103 

aitical  value  of  Ling  and  Gerard.  If  the  dose  given  was  insuffi- 
cient to  decrease  the  potential  to  this  value  the  animal  survives 
and  shows  no  symptom  whatsoever. 

According  to  our  assumptions  £*  is  involved  in  various  cellular 
activities;  so  the  symptoms  in  the  whole  animal,  caused  by  the  in- 
gestion of  toxic  doses  of  a  substance  such  as  an  aromatic  nitro 
compound  which  interferes  with  £*,  can  be  expected  to  depend 
on  the  question  to  which  tissue  or  cell  constitutent  the  drug  has 
the  greatest  affinity.  According  to  the  experience  quoted,  dinitro- 
naphthol  seems  to  have  a  special  affinity  for  the  cell  membrane. 
Dinitrophenol  seems  to  have  a  greater  affinity  for  mitochondria 
and  so  its  interference  with  cellular  metabolism  dominates  the 
picture.  Toxic  doses  may  kill  the  animal  in  hyperthermia,  while 
smaller  and  repeated  doses  produce  emaciation. 

Substitution  of  acidic  radicals  in  aromatic  compounds  is  knov.n 
to  interfere  with  biological  activity  while  leaving  optical  properties 
untouched.  Possibly,  the  acidic  radical  interferes  with  permeability, 
slowing  down  the  penetration  into  the  cell.  According,  it  was 
found  that  dinitronaphtholsulfonic  acid  caused  no  acute  symptoms 
in  the  animal  when  ingested  in  the  same  doses  as  the  free  nitro- 
naphthol,  and  caused  no  contracture  of  isolated  muscle  though  it 
quenched  the  phosphorescence  in  vitro  with  the  same  intensity  as 
dinitronaphthol.  All  the  same,  its  biological  activity  was  found  to 
be  proportional  to  its  in  vitro  action  on  £*,  and  equal  to  that  of 
free  dinitrophenol:  it  killed  the  animal  in  the  same  doses  but  did 
so  with  unspecific  symptoms  in  a  few  days  time,  following  a  wast- 
ing away  of  the  animal. 


PART  III 

On  Drugs,  Hormones,  and  Disease 


"God  made  the  little  fly, 
If  you  squash  it  it  will  die." 


15.  General  Remarks  on  Drugs  and  Disease 


What  characterizes  modern  medicine  as  compared  to  the  earlier 
empiricism  is  that  it  is  based  on  our  understanding  of  the  processes 
underlying  disease.  In  order  to  understand  a  disturbed  structure  or 
function,  we  have  to  understand  the  normal  one  first.  This  is  why- 
medicine  has  to  lag  one  step  behind  the  advances  in  basic  knowl- 
edge. To  compensate  for  this,  any  progress  in  basic  knowledge  can 
be  expected  to  bear  fruits  for  medicine  as  its  natural  consequence. 
But  conversely,  if  there  is  a  gap  in  basic  knowledge  there  must  be 
a  bottomless  pit  in  our  understanding  of  disease.  There  is  such  a 
pit  and  the  author  will  dive  into  it  in  the  hope  that  having  £*  in 
mind,  he  will  hit  bottom,  but  warns  the  reader  who  is  adverse  to 
speculation  not  to  follow  him.  Most  of  this  last  part  of  this  book 
will  be  pure  speculation. 

The  author's  research  has  always  been  dominated  by  the  idea 
that  there  is  but  one  living  matter  which  has  overgrown  this 
globe's  surface,  taking  on  different  shapes,  sizes,  colors,  and  com- 
plexities, adapting  itself  to  different  conditions.  In  spite  of  the 
great  variations  in  its  appearance  life  is  built  on  the  same  limited 
number  of  basic  principles,  wherever  and  in  whatever  form  we 
meet  it;  there  is  no  real  difference  between  "cabbages  and  kings." 
But  if  the  foundations  of  normal  life  are  simpler  tlian  its  appear- 
ances, then  the  same  may  be  true  also  for  disease,  and  a  great 
variety  of  symptoms  can  be  caused  by  disturbance  of  single  basic 
mechanisms,  and  the  way  in  which  disease  declares  itself  may  have 
no  direct  relation  to  the  underlying  cause.  Vitamin  Bi,  for  in- 
stance, is  a  coenzyme,  equally  important  for  all  cells,  animal  or 
vegetable,  but  all  the  same,  its  lack  in  higher  animals  causes  poly- 
neuritis. If  highly  unsaturated  fatty  acids  are  withheld  from  the 

107 


108 

diet  of  the  rat,  then  the  animal's  tail  drops  off  (Burr  and  Burr). 
It  would  be  erroneous  to  conclude  that  the  biological  function  of 
these  acids  is  to  keep  tails  in  place. 

The  disturbance  of  any  basic  function  must  lead  to  disease.  The 
generation  and  utilization  of  £*  is  such  a  basic  function,  the  dis- 
turbance of  which  may  declare  itself  in  a  variety  of  symptoms  or 
diseases.  The  last  part  of  this  book  will  be  devoted  to  an  attempt 
to  find  connections  between  E*  and  "degenerative  diseases."  Faith- 
ful to  my  traditions  I  will  choose  a  degenerative  disease  of  muscle 
for  example.  The  difficulties  of  this  proposition  are  twofold. 
Firstly,  the  physical  theory  of  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence  is 
still  in  its  infancy  and  so  the  biologist  has  no  really  firm  ground  to 
stand  on.  This  applies  especially  to  conditions  in  water.  Since  the 
triplets  formed  in  water  have  just  been  found,  and  the  water  struc- 
tures formed  around  nonpolar  substances  belong  to  the  latest 
achievements  of  science,  the  interaction  of  the  two  necessarily  be- 
longs to  the  blank  spaces  on  our  map  of  knowledge.  Secondly, 
even  if  we  could  understand  these  relations  we  could  not  state  how 
a  certain  change  should  declare  itself  in  biological  function,  how, 
for  instance,  the  shortening  or  lengthening  of  a  lifetime  or  a 
change  in  stability  of  an  £*  should  alter  cell  life.  So  in  our  first 
approach  we  will  have  to  content  ourselves  with  showing  that 
changes  in  £*  are  related  to  changes  in  function,  that  substances 
which  affect  £*  also  affect  function  and  that  drugs  which  affect 
function  affect  E* .  In  order  to  prove  that  a  drug  actually  could 
have  exerted  its  function  by  affecting  £*  we  will  have  to  show 
that  the  drug  is  capable  of  affecting  E*  in  vitro  in  the  same  con- 
centration as  it  exerts  its  action  in  vivo.  Unfortunately,  such  a  nar- 
row parallelism  can  be  expected  to  exist  only  with  drugs  which 
have  no  specific  affinities,  as  was  the  case  with  2,4-dinitrophenol. 
Drugs  with  more  specific  structures  and  affinities  can  be  expected 
to  be  accumulated  by  their  target  and  so  exert  their  biological  ac- 
tion at  a  higher  concentration  than  corresponds  to  their  random 
distribution.  The  higher  the  specificity,  the  greater  the  gap  will 


109 

have  to  be  between  the  in  vivo  and  in  vitro  action,  distribution 
being  random  in  vitro.  We  can  circumvent  this  difficulty  in  two 
ways.  If  a  drug  exerts  its  biological  action  by  acting  on  £*  then  it 
will  have  to  have  an  active  nucleus  (conjugated  double  bonds, 
NO2  or  SCN  groups,  iodine,  etc. ) ,  by  which  it  exerts  this  action. 
Our  drug  in  question,  if  it  acts  by  acting  on  £*,  will  have  to  pro- 
duce an  effect  on  £*  in  vitro  at  the  same  concentration  as  related 
compounds  which  have  no  specific  affinities,  lacking  the  specific 
structural  details  to  which  specific  affinity  is  due,  but  having  the 
same  active  nucleus.  To  quote  an  example:  if  thyroxine  owes  its 
biological  action  to  its  iodine,  then  we  can  expect  it  to  act  on  £* 
in  vitro  in  the  same  concentrations  as  does  free  iodide  or  other 
organic  compounds  of  iodine.  The  other  way  to  circumvent  this 
difficulty  would  be  to  look  out  for  the  less  specific  symptoms  of 
the  drug  in  question  (for  no  drug  action  is  entirely  specific) .  If  E* 
has  a  general  importance  for  cell  life  then  we  can  expect  any  drug 
acting  on  £*  to  affect  all  cells  to  some  extent.  To  produce  such 
unspecific  symptoms  with  a  specific  drug,  we  have  to  administer  it 
in  higher  doses  than  are  needed  to  produce  its  specific  action.  We 
can  expect  that  the  drug  will  affect  £*  also  in  vitro  in  the  concen- 
tration in  which  it  produced  its  unspecific  action  in  vivo.  To  illus- 
trate this  point:  chlorpromazine  (Chapter  16)  has  a  specific  effect 
on  certain  nerv'ous  centers  but  in  higher  doses  it  affects  the  whole 
basal  metabolism.  If  its  pharmacological  activity  is  due  to  its  action 
on  £*,  then  we  can  expect  it  to  affect  E*  in  vitro  in  the  same  con- 
centration as  it  affected  the  basal  metabolism  in  vivo. 

Unfortunately,  when  comparing  active  concentrations  in  vitro 
and  in  vivo,  we  will  also  have  difficulty  in  making  final  statements 
about  the  concentrations  in  our  test  tube  with  its  frozen  contents. 
Water  has  a  tendency  to  crystallize  out  in  pure  condition,  leaving 
dissolved  substances  behind  in  higher  concentration.  So,  however 
rapid  our  cooling  may  be,  there  is  always  a  chance  that  the  actual 
concentrations  were  higher  than  corresponds  to  a  random  distri- 
bution. 


110 

Before  closing  this  chapter  I  would  like  to  return  to  my  point 
of  departure:  the  apparent  independence  of  symptoms  and  the 
underlying  disturbance.  It  seems  natural  that  one  should  be 
inclined  to  connect  an  increased  function  with  an  improved  energy 
supply,  an  excess  of  £*,  and  a  decreased  function  with  the  oppo- 
site. However,  things  are  more  likely  to  be  the  other  way  round. 
To  use  a  crude  com.parison:  if  a  car  runs  too  fast  downhill,  this  is 
more  likely  to  be  due  to  faulty  brakes  than  to  an  improved  motor. 
Thermodynamically,  all  biological  reactions  are  "downhill"  reac- 
tions, that  is,  go  with  a  decrease  of  free  energy,  the  driving  force 
of  chemical  reactions  being  the  trend  of  any  systems  to  decrease 
their  free  energy.  It  is  possible  to  "enforce"  on  a  substance  an 
increased  free  energy  content,  make  it  go  "uphill,"  but  in  this  case 
another  substance  has  to  go  "downhill"  even  lower  to  pay  the 
bill.  Biological  reactions  which  have  to  be  fast  have  to  be  "down- 
hill," that  is  go  with  an  expenditure  of  free  energy,  "downhill" 
being  faster  than  "uphill."  So  if  the  contractile  matter  or  the  mem- 
branes of  the  muscle  fiber  spend  free  energy  in  function,  they  have 
to  be  reenergized  after  and  then  kept  in  the  high-energy-resting- 
state  to  be  ready  for  renewed  action.  The  slower  "uphill"  work  of 
reenergization  is  done  after  completed  action,  when  it  can  be  done 
at  ease,  as  the  recharging  of  an  accumulator.  The  active  state 
will  thus  be  mostly  the  low  energy  state,  the  energy  having  been 
spent  in  that  action.  So,  for  instance,  the  low  energy  state  in 
muscle  must  be  the  contracted  state,  energy  having  been  spent  to 
produce  work.  Similarly,  the  low  energy  state  of  the  membrane 
has  to  be  its  discharged  state.  An  impaired  energy  supply  and 
reenergetization  will  cause  the  systems  to  persist  in  the  active  state. 
So,  for  instance,  if  the  supply  of  energy  to  the  muscle  membrane 
is  impaired  the  fiber  will  have  difficulty  in  raising  the  membrane 
potential  above  the  critical  value  and  the  muscle  will  have  a  strong 
tendency  to  drop  back  into  the  contracted  state.  The  nervous  end 
plate  which  would  have  fired  but  once  in  case  of  a  normal  resting 
potential  may  fire  repeatedly,  producing  a  myotonic  behavior  in 


Ill 

case  of  a  poor  energy  supply  and  the  ensuing  low  membrane  po- 
tential. If  the  critical  potential  is  55  MV  and  the  resting  potential 
100  MV  then  the  end  plate  has  to  overcome  a  barrier  of  45  MV. 
Jerenik  and  Gerard  have  shown  that  the  lower  this  barrier,  the 
poorer  the  reenergization,  the  easier  the  end  plate  "fires."  So  we 
are  led  to  the  paradoxical  situation  that  an  impaired  energy  supply 
causes  increased  activity  and  an  increased  energy  supply  may  cause 
inactivity  making  barriers  too  high  to  be  overcome. 


16.  On  Iodine  and  Chlorpromazine 


The  list  of  drugs,  the  action  of  which  is  not  understood,  is  a 
long  one.  So  when  attempting  to  correlate  pharmacological  activity 
with  E*  we  can  hardly  do  more  than  to  pick  one  or  tT\'o  examples 
and  see  whether  £*  leads  us  to  a  better  understanding.  I  will  pick 
"something  old  and  something  new":  KI  and  chlorpromazine. 

KI 

When  I  was  a  medical  student,  iodine  in  the  form  of  KI  was 
fhe  universal  medicine.  Nobody  knew  what  it  did,  but  it  did  some- 
thing and  did  something  good.  We  students  used  to  sum  up  the 
situation  in  this  little  rhyme: 

"Wenn  Du  nicht  weisst  wo,  was,  warum, 
Gebe  dann  lodkalium." 

Freely  translated: 

If  ye  don't  know  where,  what,  and  why 
Prescribe  ye  then  K  and  I. 

Our  medical  predecessors,  possessing  very  few  and  crude  instru- 
ments only,  had  to  make  use  of  two  given  by  nature  (the  use  of 
which  has  since  gone  out  of  fashion) :  eyes  and  brains.  They  were 
keen  observers  and  the  universal  application  of  iodide  might  have 
been  not  without  foundation. 

Since  the  iodide  has  no  specific  solubilities  or  affinities,  we  can 
expect  it  to  act  on  £*  /«  vitro  at  the  concentration  which  it  reaches 
in  the  body  when  applied  in  therapeutic  doses,  provided  that  it 
owes  its  activity  to  an  action  on  £*.  The  single  medical  dose  of 
KI  is  1  gram,  which  in  an  adult  of  60  kg  makes  an  over-all  con- 

112 


113 

centration  of  2  X  ^0"^  -^^  So  our  question  is:  can  I"  affect  £*  in 
concentrations  of  the  order  of  10'*  M? 

It  has  been  shown  earlier  that  iodide  strongly  quenches  the 
phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in  10"*  M.  It  was  also  indicated  as 
probable  that  it  stabilized  the  triplet  of  this  vitamin  and  favored 
the  direct  triplet  excitation.  All  the  same,  its  action,  in  vivo,  can- 
not be  limited  to  riboflavine,  since  KI  is  not  known  to  affect  normal 
metabolism  and  the  effects  of  its  medication  (if  any)  are  more 
general.  The  experiment  shows  that  it  acts  on  the  £*  of  a  variety 
of  substances.  For  instance,  KI  strongly  quenches  the  yellow  phos- 
phorescence of  acridine  in  a  frozen  (saturated)  watery  solution  at 
10~*  M.  Its  action  on  quinidine  is  more  colorful,  quinidine  itself 
having  a  colorful  behavior.  As  mentioned  before  (Chapter  5), 
10"^  M  KI  greatly  favors  the  transitory  yellow  phosphorescence.  At 
the  temperature  of  dry  ice  10~*  M  renders  the  whitish  blue  phos- 
phorescence deep  blue.  At  this  concentration  it  can  also  lengthen 
the  lifetime,  making  the  excitation  into  a  long-lived  one,  especially 
if  the  solution  of  the  alkaloid  has  been  "washed  out"  with  pure 
N2.  In  the  fast  phosphoroscope  a  lengthening  of  the  lifetime,  that 
is  an  increased  luminosity,  is  still  noticeable  in  presence  of  10"^ 
yVlKI. 

KI  plays  no  major  role  as  a  therapeutic  agent  any  more.  What 
still  lends  interest  to  its  action  on  £*  is  the  fact  that  hormones  of 
the  thyroid  are  iodine  compounds  and  they  play  a  major  role  in 
the  regulation  of  the  normal  energy  household  of  our  body,  as  well 
as  in  pathological  processes.  Since  the  disturbances  caused  in  £* 
by  iodine  are  independent  of  the  charge  or  mode  of  binding  of 
this  atom,  we  can  also  expect  that  the  thyroid  hormones  will  be 
equally  capable  of  disturbing  £*  as  free  iodide  is  and  do  this  /"« 
vitro  in  the  same  concentration  as  the  equimolar  I'.  This  point  was 
tested  by  comparing  KI,  triiodothyronine,  and  thyroxine.  They 
were  found  to  have  a  very  similar  action.  Owing  to  their  insolu- 
bility the  hormones  could  not  be  applied  in  higher  concentrations, 
but  they  lengthened  lifetime  in   5  X  10*^  ^^-   Owing  to  their 


114 

specific  affinities,  in  the  animal  body  they  are  capable  of  produc- 
ing effects  at  a  lower  concentration,  being  accumulated  by  their 
target. 

CHLORPROMA2INE 

The  drug  chlorpromazine  has  a  most  colorful,  unique  action  in 
the  animal  body.  It  has  come  into  the  limelight  lately  as  one  of 
the  nuin  drugs  in  the  treatment  of  schizophrenia.  Needless  to  say, 

I 

CHo 

I 
CH2 

I 
CH2 

I 
N(CH3)2 

Fig.  26.  Chlorpromazine. 

if  the  drug  influences  schizophrenia,  then  it  must  influence  some 
process  involved  in  the  pathogenesis  of  this  disease  and  if  it  does 
act  by  interfering  with  E*  then,  evidently,  E*  must  be  involved  in 
one  way  or  another,  in  schizophrenia.  So  our  problem  here  is  to 
find  out  whether  chlorpromazine  does  act  on  £*,  whether  the  con- 
centrations in  which  it  produces  changes  in  E*  in  vitro  are  com- 
parable to  the  concentrations  in  which  it  exerts  a  drug  action  in 
vivo.  Chlorpromazine  (Fig.  26)  is  a  phenothiazine  and  a  member 
of  this  group  has  occupied  us  earlier  (pyrrolazote).  According  to 
what  has  been  said  before,  we  could  expect  that  in  chlorpromazine 
the  phenothiazine  ring  acts  on  E*  while  the  side  chain  tunes  the 
specific  biological  afl!inities. 

As  is  known  from  the  rapidly  growing  literature  on  chlorproma- 
zine, this  drug  produces  in  the  animal  symptoms  akin  to  hiberna- 
tion. In  order  to  be  able  to  compare  this  action  with  actions  on  £* 
in  vitro  the  basal  metabolic  rate  was  measured  in  mice  by  the 
author  and  S.  L.  Baird.  The  results,  which  have  no  pretense  of 


115 

originality,  are  summed  up  in  Table  III.^  As  the  table  shows,  tlie 
action  has  a  remarkable  feature:  while  the  action  of  other  drugs 
depends  on  their  concentration,  in  this  case  doses  varying  from  8.5 
to  140  mg  per  kilogram  had  approximately  the  same  effect,  de- 


*  CO3  production  was  measured  in  groups  of  Swiss  albino  mice,  each  group 
consisting  of  six  animals.  Three  animals  of  each  group  received  an  identical 
quantity  of  "thoraiine"  injected  subcutaneously.  The  other  three  served  as 
controls,  showing  the  normal  basal  metabolic  rate.  The  COi  production  was 
measured  individually  in  each  animal.  The  numbers  in  Table  III  are  the  aver- 
age values  of  the  three  identically  treated  mice. 

The  apparatus  used  for  the  determination  of  the  basal  metabolic  rate  was 
so  simple  and  worked  so  well  that  it  deserves  a  short  description.  Essentially, 
the  method  consisted  of  sucking  the  expired  air  through  a  known  amount  of 
baryta  and  measuring  the  time  needed  for  neutralization,  thymolphthalein 
being  used  as  indicator.  In  order  to  provide  an  intimate  contact  between 
baryta  and  air,  the  latter  was  passed  through  a  filter  disk  with  fine  pores 
(F  in  Fig.  27).  It  was  found  that  even  this  way  CO?  was  lost,  the  air  bubbles 


Fig.   27.  Apparatus  used  for  the  measurement  of  CO?  production  in 
mice.  For  explanation  see  text. 


116 

pressing  the  basal  metabolic  rate  by  about  one-half.  A  dose  of  8.5 
mg  had  roughly  the  same  effect  as  a  dose  16  times  bigger,  suggest- 
ing that  within  this  range  the  drug  suppresses  a  process  necessary 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  normal  metabolic  level  but  not  indis- 
pensable for  life.  Increasing  the  dose  further  killed  the  animals, 
suggesting  that  at  higher  concentrations  the  drug  attacked  another 
more  vitally  important  process.  Below  8.5  mg  per  kilogram  the 
action  began  to  fade  out  altogether.  Calculating  the  molar  over-all 
concentration  (taking  1.2  g  body  weight  equal  to  1  ml) :  0.0013 
M  killed  the  animal,  0.00073-0.000044  M  had  roughly  the  same 
strong  effect,  while  the  action  began  to  fade  out  around  0.00002 
M.  As  the  table  shows,  the  temperature  of  the  animals  dropped 
during  the  experiment  and  so  the  drop  in  basal  metabolic  rate 


being  too  large  and  passing  too  rapidly  through  the  liquid.  This  difficulty 
was  overcome  by  adding  5%  butyl  alcohol  to  the  baryta,  which  makes  the 
bubbles  smaller  and  makes  them  rise  to  the  surface  much  slower.  The  whole 
apparatus  consisted  of  six  units,  making  it  possible  to  measure  the  CO2  pro- 
duction of  six  mice  simultaneously.  Its  essentials  are  shown  in  Fig.  12,  in 
which  only  one  of  the  six  units  is  represented. 

The  experiment  was  performed  as  follows:  200  ml  of  5%  watery  «-buta- 
nol  solution  were  placed  into  the  glass  cylinder  (T),  about  60  cm  long  and 
6  cm  wide,  closed  on  both  ends  by  rubber  stoppers;  10  ml  of  0.2  M  baryta 
were  pipetted  into  the  container  B  with  a  few  drops  of  a  10%  alcoholic 
solution  of  the  indicator.  Then  the  animal  was  enclosed  in  a  small  cylindrical 
wire  cage,  weighed,  and  placed  with  its  cage  into  the  short  glass  tube  C, 
closed  on  both  ends  by  rubber  stoppers.  Air  was  sucked  through  this  con- 
tainer, liberated  of  its  CO:  in  a  soda  lime  tower  (SL).  The  air  was  led  from 
C  through  a  rubber  tube  and  through  the  stainless  steel  filter  disk  F  (A.  H. 
Thomas,  Philadelphia,  Catalogue  No.  5151  S).  This  filter  disk  was  mounted 
into  the  lower  rubber  stopper  in  such  a  way  that  air  could  pass  it  only 
through  its  upper  surface.  The  air  was  sucked  out  of  the  cylinder  T  with  a 
constant  negative  pressure  of  20  cm  Hg. 

The  air,  passing  through  the  filter,  formed  a  fine  foam  which  filled  tube  T 
to  about  its  middle.  The  rate  of  airflow  was  regulated  by  the  clamp-screw  R. 
After  everything  was  set,  the  baryta  was  allowed  to  run  into  T,  the  container 
B  rinsed.  The  measurement  began  with  the  running  in  of  the  baryta  and 
ended  with  the  complete  discoloration  of  the  solution,  the  interval  being 
measured  by  means  of  a  stopwatch. 


117 

could  have  been  the  consequence  of  the  decreased  temperature. 
This  does  not  invalidate  our  conclusions;  in  this  case  we  have  only 
to  suppose  that  the  drug  exerted  its  action  on  the  regulatory  mecha- 
nisms responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  the  body  temperature. 

The  chlorpromazine  molecule  has  rare  qualities,  as  far  as  its 
own  excitational  states,  its  own  £*'s  are  concerned.  If  frozen,  a 

Table  III 

Effect  of  Varying  Amounts  of  Thorazine  (Chlorpromazine)  on 

THE  Basal  Metabolic  Rate  and  Body  Temperature  of 

Swiss  Albino  Mice 

%  Decrease 

Thorazine  Milli-       Over-all  M          in  BMR  Body  temper-  Time  needed 

injected     grams     concentration      three  hours  ature  4  hours  for  complete 

(mg)       per  kg     in  the  animal    after  injection  after  injection  recovery 


10 

251 

0.0013 

-9% 

35X 

+ 

5 

140 

0.00073 

56% 

27^ 

48  hours 

2.5 

80 

0.00042 

65% 

25.5''C 

48  hours 

1.25 

34 

0.00018 

65% 

25.1*C 

24  hours 

0.63 

19 

0.00010 

71% 

24.7''C 

24  hours 

0.32 

8.5 

0.000044 

51% 

26.6''C 

12  hours 

0.16 

3.7 

0.000019 

16% 

34. 2^0 

6  hours 

10'^  M  solution  shows  a  strong  yellow  afterglow,  a  long-life  phos- 
phorescence which  lasts  for  about  a  second.  In  the  phosphoroscope 
this  phosphorescence  can  be  observed  even  in  0.00003  M,  thus  in 
the  whole  range  in  which  the  drug  exerts  a  strong  pharmacological 
action  (Column  3  in  Table  III).  The  atmospheric  O2  does  not 
abolish  this  phosphorescence — it  only  diminishes  it.  This  is  evi- 
dently the  reaction  of  the  phenothiazine  ring  because  pyrrolazote 
shows  it  too,  though  its  phosphorescence  is  more  sensitive  to  O2 
than  that  of  chlorpromazine.  Excitations  which  are  very  sensitive 
to  O2,  could  have  no  biological  function.  Such  a  long  life  phos- 
phorescence is  a  rare  quality. 

Chlorpromazine  is  capable  also  of  influencing  the  E*  of  other 


^f»     »^^f^A3^Yl2 


118 

molecules.-^  In  2  X  ^^'^  ^^  ^^  abolishes  the  phosphorescent  light 
emission  of  riboflavine.  In  2  X  10~*  M  it  abolishes  the  phosphores- 
cent light  emission  of  acridine  and  that  of  rhodamin  B,  also  if  the 
latter  is  increased  by  the  addition  of  substances  such  as  Ritaline  or 
thiamine.  So  it  is  capable  of  suppressing  phosphorescence  of  other 
substances  in  the  whole  range  of  concentrations  in  which  it  exerts 
pharmacological  activit)'.  In  a  higher  concentration,  as  0.0014,  it 
is  capable  of  quenching  the  phosphorescence  of  a  new  group  of 
substances,  to  which  quinidine  and  atebrin  belong,  and  it  is  pos- 
sible that  it  kills  the  animal  in  these  concentrations  because  it 
quenches  the  excitation  of  molecules  involved  in  processes  indis- 
pensable for  life.  Many  biological  catalysts  are  related  in  their 
structure  to  quinidine  and  atebrin. 

Another  remarkable  property  of  chlorpromazine  is  that  it  is 
capable  of  influencing  the  probabilities  of  the  triplet-singlet  tran- 
sitions of  other  molecules  in  presence  of  low  concentrations  of 
alcohol  which  cause  a  mixed  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence. 
In  acridine  (saturated  watery  solution  plus  0.125%  methanol)  it 
favored  the  blue  singlet.  Its  action  was  strong  at  0.00017  M  and 
still  noticeable  at  5  X  '^^'^  ^-  ^^  fluoresceine,  rhodamin,  and 
riboflavine  it  favored  the  triplet. 

All  this  shows  the  high  and  colorful  reactivity  of  chlorproma- 
zine  in  relation  to  £*  /«  vitro  in  concentrations  in  which  it  exerts 
its  pharmacological  action  /«  vivo.  Taking  into  account  that  its 
molecule  is  a  chemically  inert  one,  this  experience  strongly  sup- 
ports the  assumption  that  it  actually  exerts  its  influence  on  biologi- 
cal functions  by  interfering  with  £*.  If  it  influences  schizophrenic 
behavior  in  concentrations  smaller  than  those  that  affect  basic 
metabolism  this  may  be  due  either  to  its  accumulation  in  certain 
nervous  centers,  or  to  the  specific  sensitivity  of  those  centers  to 
alterations  of  £*. 

^  We  can  expect,  accordingly,  oxidative  phosphorylation  to  be  uncoupled 
by  chlorpromazine.  This  to  be  the  case  has  been  shown  lately  by  Berger. 
Strccker,  and  Waelsh. 


119 

The  two  examples  discussed,  KI  and  chlorpromazine,  were 
picked  at  random.  Their  strong  action  on  E*  and  the  similarity  of 
concentrations  in  which  these  drugs  acted  on  £*  /w  v/tro  and  ex- 
erted their  pharmacological  activity  m  vivo  encourages  an  exten- 
sion of  the  research  to  other  drugs;  this  may  lead  to  unexpected 
results,  such  as  actions  on  £*  where  no  such  were  expected.  This 
was  the  case  with  morphine,  novocaine,  and  salicylate  which  were 
found  to  quench  the  phosphorescence  of  rhodamin  strongly  in 
10-^  M.  Serpasil,  the  alkaloid  of  Ramcolfia  which  is  also  invoked 
in  the  treatment  of  schizophrenia  was  found  to  be  even  more  ac- 
tive. It  completely  quenched  the  phosphorescence  of  riboflavine  in 
10~*  M  and  suppressed  the  yellow  phosphorescence  of  quinidine 
in  10"^  M  concentration,  turning  the  light  emission  of  quinidine 
from  whitish-blue  to  deep  blue. 


17.  On  Myotonia 


What  makes  myotonia  fascinating  for  the  experimental  re- 
searcher is  the  fact  that  this  hereditary  degenerative  disease  of  man 
occurs  in  an  experimental  animal,  the  goat.  Owing  to  the  gener- 
osity of  Mr.  R.  Lombardi,  of  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  the  au- 
thor is  the  happy  owner  of  a  small  herd  of  such  animals  in  which 
myotonia  is  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  G.  L. 
Brown  and  Harvey  showed  that  this  myotonic  behavior  is  due  to 
the  repetitive  response  of  the  nervous  end  plates  of  muscle.  If  the 
nerve  is  excited  by  one  electric  shock,  then,  instead  of  producing 
one  wave  of  depolarization,  the  end  plate  fires  a  whole  train  of 
them.  Qjrresponding  to  this,  if  a  resting  myotonic  animal  wants 
to  make  a  sudden  movement  it  stiffens  up  for  a  while  and  will 
then  start  moving  slowly  with  a  spastic  gait.  In  graver  cases,  the 
animal  may  lose  its  balance  and  fall  and  will  be  unable  to  get  up 
for  a  while.  As  in  human  myotonia,  exercise  relieves  the  symptoms 
and  so  once  the  animal  starts  moving  it  quickly  shakes  off  its  symp- 
toms and  behaves  normally.  No  myotonic  behavior  can  be  elicited 
in  animals  which  find  themselves  in  vigorous  motion. 

Brown  devised  a  simple  method  by  which  the  gravity  of  the 
disease  can  be  measured  and  characterized  by  numbers,  without 
the  use  of  sophisticated  equipment  or  electronic  hardware.  The 
method  consists  of  hanging  up  the  animal  on  belts  just  off  the 
ground.  The  animal  is  kept  in  this  position  for  15  to  30  minutes, 
then  is  suddenly  dropped  to  the  ground.  Previously,  the  animal 
was  trained  to  run  to  a  certain  place,  say  a  corner  where  it  could 
find  food  and  shelter.  In  the  experiment  the  time  is  measured 
which  the  animal  needs  to  reach  this  place.  Myotonic  animals, 
under  the  influence  of  the  shock  of  the  sudden  fall,  stiffen  up  and 

120 


121 

need  more  time  to  reach  their  corner.  My  goats  needed  7  to  20 
seconds  instead  of  2  or  3.  Under  standard  conditions,  the  experi- 
ment yields  for  one  and  the  same  animal  surprisingly  reproducible 
results,  the  running  time  differing  on  various  days  by  no  more 
than  0  to  3  seconds. 

Another  circumstance  which  adds  to  the  attractions  of  myotonia 
is  that  the  symptoms  of  this  disease  can  faithfully  be  reproduced 
by  the  administration  of  a  drug,  2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid, 
commonly  called  2,4D.  Bucher  has  discovered  that  this  drug  pro- 
duces myotonic  symptoms  in  laboratory  animals  such  as  mice  and 
rats.  Eyzaguirre,  Folk,  Zierler,  and  Lilienthal  showed  that  the 
electric  behavior  of  muscle  in  2,4D  poisoning  is  similar  to  that  of 
myotonic  muscle,  single  electric  shocks  being  answered  by  the 
firing  of  a  train  of  waves  of  excitation.  This  possibility  of  repro- 
ducing a  degenerative  disease  by  means  of  a  drug  is  most  interest- 
ing. What  lends  additional  fascination  is  the  fact  that  2,4D  is 
also  known  as  a  powerful  growth  hormone  for  plants  and  is  widely 
used  as  a  weed  killer,  showing  the  basic  unity  of  the  principles  on 
which  the  animal  and  vegetable  world  are  built. 

When  trying  to  connect  myotonia  with  £*  one  could  start  with 
trying  to  show  that  2,4D  does  something  to  £*  and  does  it  in  the 
same  concentration  as  it  elicits  myotonic  symptoms  in  the  animal. 
Such  a  demonstration  would  bring  the  possibility  closer  that  hered- 
itary myotonia  also  is,  essentially,  a  disturbance  of  £*,  related  in 
its  nature  to  the  disturbance  caused  by  the  drug.  According  to  the 
earlier  workers  300  mg  of  2,4D  per  kilogram  ingested  parenterally 
to  rats  is  lethal,  while  200  mg  causes  grave  myotonic  symptoms. 
The  author  repeated  these  experiments  in  Swiss  albino  mice  and 
corroborated  them.  His  results  are  summed  up  in  Table  IV.  The 
table  also  shows  the  COi..  production.  The  methods  used  here  were 
the  same  as  the  ones  used  in  the  study  of  chlorpromazine.  As  can 
be  seen,  the  myotonic  symptoms  were  accompanied  by  a  drop  in 
the  basal  metabolic  rate  depressed  by  200  mg  to  about  one-third 
of  its  normal  value;  250  mg  per  kilogram  depressed  it  to  one- 


122 

quarter,  keeping  the  animal  for  days  in  a  comatous  condition  in 
which  signs  of  life  could  hardly  be  noticed.  The  drop  in  basal 
metabolic  rate  was  accompanied  by  a  steep  drop  in  body  tempera- 
ture to  22°C  or  so,  the  whole  condition  resembling  hibernation. 
The  drop  in  the  body  temperature  made  it  difficult  to  say  how  far 
the  low  basal  metabolic  rate  and  coma  were  due  directly  to  the 
action  of  the  drug.  The  gravity  of  the  symptoms  depended  to  a 

Table  IV 

Basal  Metabolic  Rate  and  Myotonic  Symptoms  in  2,4D 

Poisoning  in  Mice 


2,4D  injected 

CO2  produced  (mg  per 

Gravity  of 

(mg  per  kg) 

kg  mouse  per  minute) 

myotonic  symptoms 

300 



Lethal 

200 

38 

+  4-4- 

100 

56 

4- 

50 

80 

0 

25 

84 

0 

0 

97 

0 

great  extent  on  the  outside  temperature.  If  the  animals  were  kept 
warm  the  symptoms  accompanying  myotonia  were  less  severe  and 
so  the  myotonic  behavior  could  more  clearly  be  observed.  In  any 
case,  the  symptoms  indicated  that  the  action  of  the  drug  was  not 
limited  to  muscle,  and  that  the  drug  affected  some  basic  process 
which  is  common  to  all  cells,  as  is  energy  transmission.  The  table 
even  shows  that  the  drop  in  basal  metabolic  rate  (overlooked  by 
earlier  workers)  is  a  more  sensitive  indicator  of  the  drug  action 
than  the  myotonic  syndrome. 

Since  200  mg  per  kg  corresponds  to  a  random  concentration  of 
10"^  Ai  our  next  question  is  whether  2,4D  can  afiPect  £*  /'«  vitro 
in  10"^  Al  concentration.^ 

It  has  been  shown  in  Chapter  8  that  10"^  Al  concentration  of 
2,4D  shifts  the  absorption  spectrum  of  rhodamin  towards  the 
longer  wavelength.  It  introduced  thus  some  disturbance  in  the  en- 


123 

ergy  relations  of  that  system  which  declared  itself  in  the  decrease 
of  the  excitation  energy  of  the  dye.  Such  a  shift  in  energy  values 
may  very  well  cause  trouble  in  cells  where  energy  levels  can  be 
expected  to  be  tuned  carefully.  Such  a  lowering  of  excitation  en- 
ergies for  instance,  may  prevent  the  excited  molecule  from  going 
from  the  singlet  into  the  triplet  state,  the  energy  le\'el  of  which  is 
usually  somewhat  lower.  So  if  the  energy  of  the  singlet  excitation 
is  decreased,  the  energy  difference  between  the  two  states  may 
become  insufficient  to  allow  the  transition. 

We  have  found  2,4-dichlorophenol  to  be  a  strong  quencher  of 
various  excitations  and  so  it  was  surprising  to  find  2,4D  devoid  of 
this  action.  On  the  other  hand,  2,4D  showed  other  activities  not 
possessed  by  2,4-dichlorophenol.  One  of  these  consisted  of  de- 
creasing the  lifetime  of  triplet  excitation.  As  has  been  shown  be- 
fore, glutathione  prolongs  the  lifetime  of  rhodamin  from  10"^ 
seconds  into  the  dimension  of  seconds.  While  a  pure  rhodamin 
solution,  in  the  frozen  state,  showed  a  very  poor  phosphorescence 
in  the  phosphoroscope,  in  the  presence  of  0.01  M  glutathione  it 
showed  a  strong  phosphorescence  even  in  the  slow  moving  phos- 
phoroscope and  showed  a  strong  afterglow.  Addition  of  10"^  M 
2,4D  completely  abolished  this  long  life  phosphorescence.  In  its 
presence  the  tube  showed  even  in  the  fast  moving  phosphoroscope 
no  increased  phosphorescence;  2,4D  thus  completely  eliminates 
the  long  life  excitation  caused  by  0.01  M  glutathione  or  2%  glu- 
cose. Since  even  ten  times  less  2,4D  had  a  strong  effect,  the  change 
could  not  be  explained  by  an  interaction  of  2,4D  with  glutathione 
and  the  drug  must  have  acted  on  the  excitation,  decreasing  greatly 
the  stability  of  the  triplet  state.  If  such  states  are  important  for  the 
energy  supply  of  the  cell  because  of  their  long  lifetime  than  it  is 
easy  to  see  that  2,4D  has  to  cause  a  profound  disturbance  in  en- 
ergization. The  experiments  showed  that  2,4D  could  eliminate  the 
long-life  phosphorescence  even  in  lO"*  M  concentration;  2  X  10"* 
M  also  quenched  the  yellow  phosphorescence  of  quinidine. 

Another  additional  observation  also  indicated  a  labilization  of 


124 

the  triplet  state.  As  has  been  discussed  before,  the  fluorescent  light 
emission  of  rhodamin  is  of  an  orange  color  while  the  phosphores- 
cence is  red.  It  was  noticed  that  the  2,4D  changed  the  light  emis- 
sion from  red  to  orange  in  all  concentrations  in  which  it  reduced 
the  lifetime  of  the  excitation.  In  its  presence  the  rhodamin  mole- 
cule is  thus  unable  to  go  into  the  triplet  state,  or  is  able  to  do  so 
only  to  a  smaller  extent  than  in  its  absence.  The  2,4D  made  the 
triplet  state  an  improbable  one. 

Analogous  observ-ations  could  be  made  also  with  riboflavine, 
in  which  the  fluorescence  is  greenish-yellow,  the  phosphorescent 
emission  orange.  The  experiment  showed  that  10"*  Ai  2,4D  turned 
the  color  of  the  light  emission  of  a  frozen  0.0001  AI  riboflavine 
solution  from  orange  into  greenish-yellow,  which  color  change 
indicated  that  the  light  emission  came  to  a  great  extent  from  a 
singlet.  In  the  phosphoroscope  only  a  red-brown  phosphorescent 
light  emission  v/as  observ^ed  which  indicated  that  the  green  fluores- 
cence was  not  a  "delayed"  one,  did  not  occur  because  the  excita- 
tions were  turned  back  from  a  triplet  into  a  singlet,  but  occurred 
because  they  could  not  go  into  the  triplet.  In  these  tubes  the  phos- 
phorescence was  stronger  than  in  the  control  containing  riboflavine 
alone,  which  indicated  that  part  of  the  excitation  still  went  into 
the  triplet  but  this  triplet  state  was  rather  unstable. 

That  hereditary  myotonia  is,  in  some  way,  connected  with  a  de- 
fective energy  supply  was  also  suggested  by  the  observation  of 
Hajdu  and  the  author  that  2,4D-dinitro-l-naphthol,  which  is  a 
strong  "quencher"  of  jB*,  aggravates  the  symptoms  of  this  disease 
in  goats. 

There  are  observ-ations  to  indicate  that,  similarly  to  the  action 
of  2,4D,  the  disturbance  in  hereditary  myotonia  is  not  localized 
to  muscle,  but  is  of  a  more  general  character.  It  is  known,  for  in- 
stance, that  myotonic  goats  are  inclined  to  stillbirth.  I  also  lost  a 
goat  in  advanced  stages  of  pregnancy  without  any  apparent  reason : 
the  animal  simply  expired.  I  also  have  the  impression  that  my 
goats  become  smaller  from  generation  to  generation  though  no 


125 

records  have  been  kept  on  this.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  in 
man,  too,  myotonia  is  but  a  localized  expression  of  a  more  general- 
ized disturbance  affecting  some  basic  process  of  cell  life.  As  is 
generally  known,  myotonia  is  often  accompanied  by  cataract,  which 
almost  belongs  to  the  classical  symptoms  of  this  disease.  The  dis- 
turbance thus  strikes  even  such  a  relatively  inactive  organ  as  the 
lens.  It  is  worth  noting  in  this  connection  that  2,4-dinitronaphthol, 
which  does  disturb  the  energy  household,  also  causes  cataract;^ 
this  is  the  more  remarkable  since  the  lens,  as  I  have  shown,  con- 
tains strongly  fluorescent  proteins.  Buchthal  and  Clemensen,  as 
well  as  de  Jong,  found  in  dystrophic  forms  of  myotonia  that  the 
central  nervous  system  was  involved,  many  patients  showing  a 
certain  dullness  which  often  bordered  on  idiocy. 

Myotonia  is  a  rare  disease,  is  not  fatal,  and  has,  consequently, 
been  neglected  by  medical  research,  however  fascinating  it  may  be. 
What  may  lend  a  major  practical  importance  to  it  is  its  close  rela- 
tion to  myasthenia  gravis.  The  symptoms  of  the  two  diseases  are 
almost  identical,  only  the  sign  is  opposite:  what  is  positive  in  the 
one  is  negative  in  the  other.  The  two  are  mirror  images.  The  myo- 
tonic muscle  does  more  than  it  should,  the  myasthenic  less.  The 
myotonic  one  is  worst  when  starting  activity  and  symptoms  fade 
out  with  exercise,  while  the  myasthenic  muscle  does  best  after  rest 
and  tire  rapidly.  So  the  two  diseases  may  be  expressions  of  a  dis- 
turbance of  the  same  basic  process,  disturbed  in  the  two  cases  in 
opposite  direction. 

The  experiments  reported  in  this  chapter  leave  the  problem  of 

^  This  cataract  is  known  for  its  whimsical  character.  Sometimes  it  appeared 
after  a  light  medication  while  it  was  often  missing  after  a  prolonged  and 
heavy  one.  Personal  disposition  seems  to  decide.  In  collecting  bullocks'  lenses 
in  great  numbers  from  the  slaughterhouse,  I  found  most  of  them  colorless. 
A  small  number,  however,  about  2-3%,  were  yellow,  which  color  seemed  to 
be  due  to  the  oxidized  state  of  the  flavines  present.  This  color  may  indicate 
a  sluggishness  of  the  energy  household,  which  might  be  in  connection  with 
the  ease  by  which  cataract  is  contracted  under  influence  of  a  dinitrophenol 
medication. 


126 

molecular  mechanism  of  myotonia  unsolved.  It  supports  the  as- 
sumption that  energy  transmissions  may  be  disturbed  in  this  dis- 
ease, possibly  owing  to  labilization  of  the  triplet  state  and  the  con- 
secutive shortened  lifetime  of  triplet  excitations.  Such  an  effect 
may  be  due  to  the  shortage  of  stabilizing  agents  as  glutathione,  or 
to  the  presence  of  labilizing  agents,  analogous  to  2,4D.  In  any 
case,  the  experiments  quoted  need  to  be  extended  and  suggest  fur- 
ther experimentation.  They  suggest,  for  instance,  the  search  for 
substances  rendering  triplets  more  stable  and  transition  into  the 
triplet  state  more  probable.  There  are  substances  which  act  this 
way.  Some  of  them  have  been  mentioned  before:  iodide,  or  iodine 
in  its  organically  bound  form.  There  are  other  such  substances, 
even  among  normal  cell  constituents.  As  has  been  shown,  sero- 
tonine  is  one  of  them,  lysergic  acid  another.  Extensive  experimen- 
tal work  is  possible  on  these  lines  and  this  work  may  eventually 
lead  not  only  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  degenerative  dis- 
eases of  muscle  but  also  may  reveal  ways  of  curing  them.  Thoughts 
on  this  line  may  find  encouragement  also  in  the  experience  that 
amphetamin  and  ephedrine  were  found  to  produce  changes  in  the 
excitation  of  riboflavine  similar  to  those  produced  by  2,4D.  One 
of  these,  ephedrine,  is  known  to  have  a  beneficial  eflfect  on  myas- 
thenia, which  may  be  found  to  be  true  even  to  a  higher  degree  in 
other  drugs,  having  a  similar  but  stronger  action  in  £*. 

Symptoms  of  myotonia  can  be  relieved  in  man  by  quinidine.  It 
seems  worth  noting  that  S.  L.  Baird  (unpublished)  found  the 
drug  equally  active  in  myotonia,  induced  in  mice  by  2,4D.  It  may 
be  more  than  a  coincidence  that  while  2,4D  shortens  the  lifetime 
of  excitations,  quinidine  has  a  strong  tendency  to  undergo  a  long- 
lived  excitation  in  presence  of  a  great  variety  of  substances. 


18.  On  the  Thymus 


The  extirpation  of  the  thymus  often  benefits  myasthenic  pa- 
tients. There  has  to  be  thus  some  relation  between  this  disease  and 
the  gland  which  also  shows  signs  of  hyperfunction  in  successful 
operations.  If  myasthenia  is  connected  with  the  thymus  and  myo- 
tonia is  its  mirror  image,  then  there  might  also  be  some  relation 
between  this  gland  and  myotonia,  which  disease  may  be  connected 
with  a  hypo  function  of  the  thymus. 

There  is  a  curious  disproportionality  between  the  size  of  the 
thymus  and  the  "size"  of  our  knowledge  about  its  function.  If  it 
is  a  gland  of  internal  secretion  at  all,  then  in  early  childhood  it  is 
the  biggest  of  such  glands,  while  our  knowledge  about  its  function 
is  next  to  zero.  Somehow,  the  thymus  failed  to  excite  the  curiosity 
of  researchers.  Treatises  on  endrocrinology,  such  as  that  of  Pincus 
and  Thimann,  have  not  even  a  chapter  on  it.  This  lack  of  interest 
is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  the  thymus  can  be  extirpated  with- 
out harmful  effects.  If  it  is  not  taken  out,  nature  herself  eliminates 
it  by  letting  it  atrophy  in  adolescence.  If  we  can  live  without  it, 
then  its  function  cannot  be  very  important.  This  logic  is  impecca- 
ble. The  question  is  only  whether  nature  does  not  follow  a  logic  of 
her  own?  Histologically,  the  thymus  is  a  lymphoid  tissue,  part  of 
the  lymphatic  system,  together  with  the  spleen,  bone  marrow,  and 
lymph  glands,  though  it  has  some  peculiarities.  So  if  the  thymus  is 
a  gland  of  internal  secretion,  then  it  may  well  be  that  the  whole 
lymphatic  system  is  one,  although  it  has  other  functions  as  well. 
One  could  imagine  that  this  gland  produces  a  substance  involved 
in  the  process  of  building  the  body,  in  synthetizing  its  protein, 
which  substance  is  in  greater  demand  when  the  building  is  going 
on  most  actively,  in  early  childhood.  So  in  this  period  the  lym- 

127 


128 

phatic  system  may  become  supplemented  by  the  thymus.  In  ado- 
lescence, when  the  building  is  completed,  the  supplementary  gland 
retires.  This  could  also  explain  why  the  extirpation  of  the  thymus 
causes  no  trouble,  even  if  its  function  is  important — because  the 
rest  of  the  lymphatic  system  takes  over.  There  are  many  examples 
of  such  compensation.  So  our  logic  may  have  holes  and  it  may  just 
as  well  be  (for  all  we  know)  that  the  whole  lymphatic  system  is 
one  big  gland  of  internal  secretion,  may  be  even  the  biggest  and 
most  important  of  all,  a  possibility  which  has  hitherto  been  over- 
looked only  because  it  is  too  obvious. 

These  assumptions  might  also  explain  why  thymus  extirpation 
benefits  only  part  of  the  myasthenic  patients.  If  myasthenia  is  due 
to  the  dysfunction  of  lymphatic  tissue,  then  the  success  of  the 
thymus  extirpation  has  to  depend  on  the  question  how  far  this 
dysfunction  was  localized  to  the  thymus. 

Myasthenia  is  characterized  by  a  great  fatigability  of  muscles.  I 
was  often  impressed  by  the  great  fatigability  of  infants.  I  would 
almost  say  that  all  infants  are  myasthenics.  An  adult  dog  will  out- 
run almost  any  other  animal,  but  a  three-year-old  child  (which  has 
nearly  the  same  amount  of  muscle  for  body  weight)  tires  in  a  short 
walk  and  is  unable  to  lift  a  heavy  weight.  Nature  may  have  seen  to 
it  that  while  the  building  process  is  going  on,  it  should  proceed 
undisturbed  by  exaggerated  function.  Nature  often  kills  more  than 
one  bird  with  the  same  stone  and  it  is  possible  that  the  same  sub- 
stance which  is  involved  in  the  building  process  might  also  keep 
the  muscles  at  a  low  functional  level. 

The  tentative  assumption  that  the  thymus  (and,  possibly,  other 
parts  of  the  lymphatic  system)  produces  some  substance  involved 
in  protein  synthesis  finds  some  support  in  the  observations  of 
Gudernatsch  which,  a  few  decades,  ago,  focused  attention  for  a 
short  while  on  the  thymus.  Gudernatsch  found  that  tadpoles,  fed 
on  thymus  glands,  showed  a  retarded  metamorphosis  with  an  in- 
creased growth,  developing  into  giant  tadpoles.  Attempts  to  isolate 
the  active  substance  responsible  for  this  effect  failed  and  the  in- 


129 

terest  gradually  faded  out,  leaving  the  impression  that  the  thymus 
supplied  some  "nutritional  factor"  rather  than  a  growth  hormone. 
The  hormonal  theory  was  revived  more  recently  in  experiments  of 
Harms,  who  found  general  atrophy  in  salamander  larvae  after 
extirpation  of  the  thymus,  atrophy  which  could  be  prevented  by 
thymus  transplants.  Gudernatsch  also  showed  that  the  feeding  of 
thyroid  substance  had  an  action  opposite  to  that  of  the  thymus. 
While  the  latter  retarded  metamorphosis  and  promoted  growth, 
the  thyroid  promoted  metamorphosis  and  inhibited  growth.  While 
giant  tadpoles  were  produced  by  the  former,  dwarf  frogs  were 
produced  by  the  latter,  suggesting  some  sort  of  an  antagonism 
between  the  two. 

There  is  no  need  for  the  author  to  sum  up  the  literature  of  the 
subject,  this  having  been  ably  done  by  Gudernatsch  and  Hammar. 
One  could  almost  say  that  all  possibilities  have  been  expressed 
about  the  function  of  the  thymus,  the  integral  being  zero. 

Techniques  of  isolation  have  been  perfected  so  much  during  the 
last  decade  that,  as  a  rule,  the  isolation  of  a  substance,  in  itself, 
does  not  constitute  a  major  problem.  What  the  isolation  depends 
on  is  a  test  for  the  unknown  substance  which  allows  us  to  estimate 
its  quantity  in  different  fractions  in  the  course  of  manipulations. 
The  difficulty,  in  this  case,  is  that  we  have  to  find  a  test  for  some- 
thing that  has  to  be  found  by  that  test.  This  is  a  circle  which, 
somehow,  has  to  be  broken. 

The  author  made  an  abortive  attempt  in  this  direction  reasoning 
in  the  following  way:  small  quantities  of  biologically  active  normal 
constituents  of  the  body  usually  produce  effects  in  the  animal  only 
if  there  was  a  deficienc}^  before.  Vitamins,  for  instance,  produce 
striking  effects  only  in  an  avitaminostic  condition.  Should  myo- 
tonia be  due  to  a  lack  of  the  hypothetic  thymus  hormone,  then 
myotonic  goats  would  be  the  test  object  for  the  hormone  par 
excellence.  So  four  female  myotonic  goats  were  trained  according 
to  G.  L.  Brown  for  the  measurement  of  their  running  time.  Then 
they  received  daily  an  injection  of  a  thymus  extract  which  con- 


130 


Fig.  28.  Running  time  of  myotonic  goats.  Abscissa:  days.  Ordinate: 
running  time  in  seconds.  Arrows:  injection  of  thymus  extract.  Arrows 
with  circle:  injection  of  saline.  For  details  see  text 

tained  in  5  ml  the  extractive  matter  of  150  g  frozen  calf  thymus, 
which  contained  the  fraction  not  precipitated  isoelectrically,  was 
not  thrown  down  by  methanol  but  was  precipitated  by  an  excess 
of  acetone.^  The  results  of  this  experiment  are  reproduced  in  Fig. 
28.  The  external  conditions  were  not  favorable  and  so  the  normal 

^  Prep.  1.  16  Kg  of  frozen  calf  thymus  glands  were  minced,  suspended  in 
28  liters  of  water,  and  sent  through  a  colloid  mill.  After  the  addition  of 
4l4  ml  of  glacial  acetic  acid,  the  suspension  was  diluted  with  30  liters  of 
water.  The  undissolved  material  was  separated  on  a  Sharpies  centrifuge  and 


131 

running  times  were  not  as  constant  as  in  previous  work  with 
Hajdu.2 

The  results  seemed  positive  in  the  case  of  "Bent  Horn," 
"Shorty,"  and  "Spott}%"  three  young  goats,  about  15  months  old. 
The  result  was  negative  with  "Nanny,"  an  old  goat  which  be- 
longed to  the  original  flock  received  in  full  grown  condition  four 
years  earlier.  Figure  28  suggests  the  presence  of  an  active  substance 
in  our  extracts,  capable  of  alleviating  or  abolishing  the  symptoms 
of  myotonia.  The  extracts  had  no  acute  effect  and  developed  their 
action  gradually.  This  action  outlasted  the  injections  and  disap- 
peared gradually.  The  active  matter  present  thus  did  not  act  as 
drugs  do,  which  act  the  strongest  when  their  concentration  is  the 
highest. 

The  myotonic  goat  is  not  an  ideal  test  object.  The  size  and  smell 
of  the  animal  are  bigger  than  desired;  the  expense  and  labor  in- 
volved in  keeping  it  are  considerable.  The  measurements  are  time 
consuming.  So  the  final  isolation  of  the  active  agent,  if  any,  will 


the  clear  liquid  concentrated  in  vacuo  at  20-23 °C  in  two  steps  to  1.4  liter. 
The  fluid  was  stored  overnight  at  —  20°C,  on  thawing  the  precipitate  re- 
moved on  a  small  Sharpies  centrifuge.  Four  volumes  of  methanol  were  added, 
the  precipitate  separated,  the  fluid  stored  at  — 20°C,  and  the  newly  formed 
precipitate  separated  again.  The  fluid,  when  liberated  from  its  methanol 
content,  was  poisonous  to  mice,  probably  owing  to  its  potassium  content. 
Concentrated  sulphuric  acid  was  added  gradually  under  strong  mixing, 
whereupon  a  white  crystalline  precipitate  formed,  presumably  consisting  of 
K2SO4.  H2SO4  was  added  until  the  addition  of  10%  sulphuric  acid  caused  no 
appreciable  precipitate.  The  pH  at  this  state  was  about  5. 

The  solution  was  concentrated  in  vacuo  to  500  ml.  Two  liters  of  acetone 
were  added,  the  precipitate  separated,  and  shaken  out  with  acetone.  The 
supemates  were  rejected  and  the  semi-liquid  precipitate  redissolved  in  500 
ml  water.  This  fraction  was  injected  after  neutralization,  a  small  quantity  of 
penicillin  being  added  to  prevent  infection. 

'  On  the  first  three  days  of  the  treatment,  the  running  time  was  measured 
one  hour  before  and  one  hour  after  the  injection.  The  two  measurements 
showed  no  marked  difference  so  it  was  concluded  that  the  injections  had  no 
acute  effect  and  subsequently  the  running  times  were  measured  only  before 
the  injections. 


132 

have  to  await  the  development  of  a  simpler  test,  or  the  setting  up 
of  the  organization  needed  for  a  more  extensive  testing  on  goats. 

The  isolation  of  the  active  principle  of  the  thymus  is  the  more 
urgent  because  it  is  not  impossible  that  myotonia  and  muscular 
dystrophy  are  related  diseases  and  involve  the  hormonal  activity  of 
the  thymo-lymphatic  system. 

There  are  also  a  few  observations  to  suggest  that  the  thymus 
may  be,  in  some  way,  involved  in  the  production  of  nucleotides, 
and  thus  also  in  the  production  of  nucleic  acids  (which,  in  their 
turn,  are  involved  in  protein  synthesis).  The  extraordinar)'  wealth 
of  the  thymus  in  DNA  may  be  taken  as  an  indication  of  this.  My 
thymus  extracts  gave  only  one  reaction  not  given  by  analogous 
extracts  of  other  organs:  they  altered  the  light  emission  of  acridine 
orange  and  acridine  yellow  if  these  dyes  were  added  in  a  low 
concentration  (10"*  Ai),  and  gave  a  precipitate  if  these  dyes  were 
added  in  a  higher  concentration.  The  light  emission  (as  observed 
under  the  UV  lamp)  shifted  towards  the  red  in  the  case  of 
acridine  orange  and  was  quenched  in  the  case  of  acridine  yellow. 
Nucleic  acids  and  adenine  nucleotides  show  analogous  reactions 
and  the  behavior  of  my  thymus  extracts  could  be  explained  by 
their  extraordinary  wealth  in  nucleotides.  The  acridine-dye  com- 
plexes of  nucleic  substances  are  very  stable  and  so  it  was  not  sur- 
prising to  learn  that  Lewis  and  Goland  found  that  acridine  dyes, 
like  trypaflavine  caused  an  atrophy  of  the  thymus.  An  attempt 
seems  to  be  indicated  to  try  acridine  derivatives  as  therapeutic 
agents  in  cases  of  myasthenia  in  which  the  thymus  is  suspected  to 
be  the  culprit. 

The  promising  yellow  dye  which  I  isolated  earlier  from  thymus 
extracts  (1955)  turned  out  to  be  an  oxide  of  ascorbic  acid  which 
is  especially  abundant  in  this  gland. 


19.  On  Oxidation,  Fermentation,  and  Cancer 


Of  the  two  biological  energy-producing  mechanisms  no  thought 
was  given  in  this  book  to  fermentation  because  there  is  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  E*  is  involved  in  this  process  which  consists, 
essentially,  in  coupling  phosphate  to  carbohydrate  and  then  re- 
arranging the  H  and  O  atoms  within  the  molecule  in  such  a  way 
that  the  energies  inside  the  molecule  are  shifted  and  the  originally 
"low-energ)^"  P — O — P  becomes  a  ~P  which  is  then  transmitted 
to  other  molecules,  such  as  ATP,  and  aliments  biological  action. 
Fermentation,  essentially,  is  a  series  of  group  transfer  reactions 
which  belong  to  the  realm  of  classical  chemistry,  the  energies 
generated  being  bond  energies. 

Contrar)'  to  this,  biological  oxidation  is  the  utilization  of  the 
thermodynamic  potential  between  H  and  O  and  we  were  led  to 
suppose  that  in  this  process  £*  plays  a  role,  energy  being  liberated 
and  transferred  at  certain  points  in  the  form  of  electronic  excita- 
tion. We  were  also  led  to  suppose  that  this  electronic  excitation 
has  specific  forms  which  were  probable  only  within  the  water 
structures  which  the  protoplasm  generates  around  itself,  the  elec- 
trons forming  triplets.  We  have  also  seen  that  the  role  of  Oo,  in 
this  process,  is  not  limited  to  acting  as  the  final  electron  acceptor 
but  that  the  oxygen,  by  means  of  the  perturbations  of  the  electro- 
magnetic field,  greatly  influences  the  reactivity,  i.e.,  the  transition 
probabilities  of  one  of  the  central  members  of  the  oxidative  chain. 
Transition  probabilities  of  triplets  greatly  depend  on  the  perturba- 
tions of  the  electromagnetic  field  and  so  have  to  depend  on  the 
perturbations  caused  by  O2.  But  the  triplets  themselves  also  cause 
such  a  perturbation,  which  can  be  expected  to  influence  the  for- 
mation and  reactions  of  other  triplets.  Aerobic  cell  life  has  thus  as 

133 


134 

its  foundation  a  perturbed  electromagnetic  field,  the  perturbation 
of  which  might  be  one  of  the  most  important  parameters  in 
biology. 

This  brings  us  to  the  intriguing  interrelation  of  oxidation  and 
fermentation,  usually  summed  up  as  the  "Pasteur  effect."  By  this 
is  meant  a  certain  interdependence  of  the  two  processes,  the  classi- 
cal example  of  which  is  found  in  yeast.  Under  anaerobic  conditions 
yeast  lives  on  fermentation,  but  if  oxygen  is  admitted  it  shunts 
over  to  oxidation.  The  mechanism  of  this  "shunting  over"  has 
occupied  biochemistry  to  a  great  extent  and  many  theories  have 
been  proposed  for  its  explanation.  Our  considerations  offer  a  new, 
and  maybe  simpler  one.  If  O2,  by  its  mere  presence  alters  the  re- 
activity of  central  catalysts,  as  that  of  riboflavine,  and  makes  new 
electronic  transitions  possible,  then  it  might  seem  natural  that 
in  its  presence  chemical  events  should  take  a  new  course,  the  primm- 
ing action  being  done  by  the  magnetic  disturbance  caused  by  the 
paramagnetic  O2  molecule.  No  substance  other  than  riboflavine 
has  shown  a  similar  behavior  towards  oxygen.  This  behavior  is 
thus  specific  and  it  is  reasonable  to  think  that  it  has  its  biological 
meaning  and  is  not  accidental. 

Another  intriguing  interrelation  is  that  of  pathological  growth 
with  fermentation  and  oxidation.  As  is  known  from  the  classical 
studies  of  O.  Warburg,  cancer  cells  live  to  a  greater  extent  on 
fermentation  than  do  normal  cells,  and  Warburg  ascribes  a  pri- 
mary role  to  this  change  in  the  genesis  of  cancer.  If  oxidation  and 
fermentation  represent  merely  two  alternate  pathways  of  energy 
production  then  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  a  shift  in  the  balance  of 
the  two  processes  in  favor  of  fermentation  should  lead  to  path- 
ological groui:h. 

The  considerations  presented  in  this  book  offer  an  explanation. 
If  excitation  energies  play  a  major  role  in  biological  energy  trans- 
missions and  the  various  biological  processes  are  actually  driven 
by  the  energies  of  triplet  excitations  then  events  will  greatly  de- 
pend on  the  perturbation  of  the  electromagnetic  field;  this  pertur- 


135 

bation  is  started  up  by  oxygen  and  is  contributed  to  by  the  triplets 
formed  under  its  priming  action.  Aerobic  life  thus  means  quali- 
tatively a  different  type  of  life,  which  has  the  perturbed  electro- 
magnetic field  as  its  foundation  and  triplet  excitations  as  its  instru- 
ment. Warburg  has  repeatedly  emphasized  the  importance  of 
structure,  oxidation  being  bound  to  structure,  while  fermentation 
is  not.  We  could  also  use,  instead  of  "structure,"  the  words  "solid 
state,"  by  which  physics  means  an  orderly  state  with  periodicities. 
In  this  book  we  have  extended  this  idea  of  structure  and  order- 
liness beyond  protein  or  protein-lipin  complexes  into  the  water 
and  shown  that  the  two  structures  form  one  single  unique  system. 
It  seems  likely  that  only  structures  can  build  structures,  that  is  that 
only  the  structure  to  which  oxidation  is  bound  can  build  around 
itself  extensive  water  structures  which  complete  it.  The  water 
structures  thus  generated  play  then  a  basic  role  in  the  handling  of 
the  excited  electrons  and  can  thus  be  expected  to  play  also  a  funda- 
mental role  in  the  energy  transmissions  between  oxidation  and  the 
systems  which  are  driven  by  its  energy.  There  are  reasons  to  sup- 
pose (or  no  reasons  to  exclude)  that  there  are  more  direct  connec- 
tions between  oxidation  and  biological  functions  than  the  connec- 
tion over  ^P's,  and  it  seems  rather  likely  that  oxidative  energies 
need  not  necessarily  be  invested  into  '^P's  before  they  can  be  used 
by  the  cell  but  that  biological  systems  may  also  be  coupled  more 
directly  to  oxidation  and  use  its  excitation  energies.  The  immediate 
cessation  of  activity  in  the  central  nervous  system  on  removal  of 
oxygen  or  the  poisoning  of  its  activator  by  cyanide  plead  for  such 
direct  relations.  So  if  the  energy  of  triplet  excitation  is  used  also 
to  maintain  the  system  of  structures  which  generates  these  excita- 
tions, the  whole  system  has  to  collapse,  structures  must  disinte- 
grate in  a  vicious  circle  if  anything  goes  wrong. 

Fermentation  and  oxidation  thus  do  not  mean  merely  alternate 
pathways  of  energy  production.  They  mean  a  different  way  of 
living.  Fermentation,  to  which  the  cell  is  driven  under  anaerobic 
conditions,  is  based  on  group  transfer  reactions  which  demand  no 


136 

structures,  neither  structures  of  water  nor  of  solid  matter,  nor  a 
perturbed  electromagnetic  field.  The  other  way  of  living,  the 
aerobic  one,  demands  order,  both  order  of  the  solid  matter  and 
order  in  the  water,  and  has  a  perturbed  electromagnetic  field  for  its 
foundation.^  It  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  triplet  excitations, 
and  energy  transmissions  which  presuppose  an  orderly  structure, 
play  a  role  not  only  in  oxidation  but  also  in  the  most  varied  bio- 
logical functions  and  their  regulations,  and  thus  demand  not  only 
structure  and  order  but  also  a  perturbed  electromagnetic  field, 
which  is  established  by  oxidation  and  its  triplets  under  the  priming 
action  of  O2.  Cell  division  may  belong  to  these  functions,  its 
orderly  mytotic  way  being  linked  to  order,  structure,  and  what 
goes  with  it. 

Looking  at  cancer  and  its  relation  to  oxidation  and  fermentation 
from  this  angle,  things  may  seem  somewhat  clearer.  If  O2  is  with- 
held from  tissues  of  a  higher  organism  for  a  longer  period,  death 
follows.  If,  however,  O2  is  withheld  but  periodically,  as  in  the 
experiments  of  Cameron  and  Goldblatt,  and  restored  before  death 
ensues,  then  we  can  expect  not  only  that  the  oxidative  system  will 
become  disorganized  but  also  that  there  will  be  degeneration  of 
all  those  higher  functions  and  regulations  which  demand  structure 
and  a  perturbed  electromagnetic  field  for  their  function  and  ener- 

^  It  would  be  interesting  to  measure  the  magnetic  susceptibility  of  aerobic, 
living,  and  respiring  cells  and  compare  it  with  the  susceptibility  of  anaerobic, 
as  well  as  dead,  cells.  If  the  suggestions  contained  in  this  chapter  are  correct, 
the  first  should  be  found  slightly  paramagnetic,  beyond  the  paramagnetism 
induced  by  the  O2  present,  while  the  latter  should  be  diamagnetic.  A  shift  in 
the  latter  direction  should  be  found  in  cancer  cells. 

The  dielectric  constant  of  cancer  should  show  less  frequency  dependence 
than  that  of  normal  tissues,  cancer  having  a  lower  degree  of  organization 
and  with  it  also  less  water  structure. 

No  light  emission  was  produced  in  illuminated  anaerobic  frozen  ribo- 
flavine  solutions  by  placing  them  in  a  magnetic  field  of  about  20,000 
oersted.  So  it  is  not  a  simple  static  disturbance  of  the  field  which  causes 
the  emission  in  the  presence  of  oxygen  but  there  are  more  involved  inter- 
actions between  the  O2  molecule  and  the  excited  riboflavine. 


137 

gization.  The  cell  will  thus  revert  to  a  more  primitive  way  of  life 
with  its  lower  level  of  organization,  which  is  not  dependent  on 
ordered  structures,  which  also  lacks  the  subtle  regulations  and  has 
thus  (as  in  yeast)  unlimited  proliferation  as  one  of  its  charac- 
teristics, and  can  depend  for  its  energy  supply  only  on  fermenta- 
tion. 


20.  Conclusion 


After  having  been  submerged  in  details  through  nineteen 
chapters,  we  may  conclude  by  coming  to  the  surface  in  order  to 
look  around,  find  our  bearings,  and  ask  what  all  this  was  about. 

Going  back  to  our  point  of  departure,  to  the  "chiaroscuro,"  we 
should  see  its  outlines  somewhat  clearer  now.  Biochemistry  is  not 
an  independent  principle;  it  is  dependent  for  its  advance  on  prog- 
ress made  in  other  fields;  in  the  first  place  in  pure  chemistry.  There 
are  definitely  two  periods  discernible  in  the  history  of  this  science. 
The  first  was  heralded  by  Lucretius  and  Epicurus,  who  professed 
that  matter  was  built  of  small,  indivisible  units,  atoms.  What 
chemistry  has  done  in  the  subsequent  two  milleniums  has  been, 
essentially,  to  find  out  how  many  different  sorts  of  atoms  there  are 
— about  a  hundred — to  isolate  them,  name  them,  and  establish 
the  ways  and  forms  in  which  they  are  linked  together.  The  dif- 
ferent atoms  have  been  symbolized  by  letters,  their  links  by  dashes, 
so  that  by  means  of  letters  and  dashes  we  can  write  symbols  on 
paper  which  give  a  fairly  clear  picture  of  the  structure  of  complex 
molecules. 

Biochemistry,  following  in  the  footsteps  of  chemistry,  has  been 
wonderfully  successful  in  analyzing  structures  and  reactions  which 
could  be  described  in  these  terms  and  by  their  symbols,  by  letter- 
dash-letter  (as  P — O — P),  following  up  the  various  atoms  and 
bonds  in  their  way  through  the  maze  of  biological  reactions. 

The  second  step  of  the  history  of  chemistry  was  heralded  by 
Bohr  and  his  orbits  in  1913.  The  theory  came  of  age  in  1927  with 
Schrodinger's  wave  equation.  In  this  theory,  the  atom  is  no  more 
an  indivisible  unit,  but  a  cloud  of  electrons,  or  more  exactly,  a 
cloud   of   the   probabilit^'-densities   of   electrons-   Molecules   are 

138 


139 

dusters  of  such  clouds  of  phantastic  and  changing  shape.  A  great 
number  of  changes  can  occur  within  these  clouds  which  may  all  be 
covered  by  the  same  letter-dash-letter  symbol,  which  thus  is  in- 
adequate for  their  description.  Biological  phenomena,  possibly,  are 
to  a  great  extent  the  expression  of  such  subtler  changes  which  take 
place  in  dimensions  unknown  to  classical  chemistry.  They  belong 
to  the  realm  of  quantum  mechanics  and  can  be  described  only  in 
its  language. 

Biochemistry  has  taken  no  cognizance  of  this  progress  yet,  or 
has  done  so  only  to  a  small  extent,  sporadically,  and  is  still  a 
Lucretian  or  Epicurian  letter-dash-letter  science.  Accordingly,  it 
has  made  no  progress  in  the  analysis  of  the  reactions  which  cannot 
be  described  by  these  symbols.  Hence  the  "oscuro"  of  the 
"chiaroscuro." 

This  is  not  meant  as  a  reproach  to  the  biochemist.  The  author 
spent  half  a  year  at  the  Institute  for  Advanced  Studies,  at  Prince- 
ton, enjoying  this  wonderful  institution's  boundless  hospitality. 
He  did  so  in  order  to  be  able  to  rub  elbows  with  those  who  know 
most  about  electrons,  hoping  to  find  help  for  a  better  understand- 
ing of  biological  phenomena.  He  found  a  profound  and  sympa- 
thetic interest  in  biology.  However,  when  he  revealed  that  living 
systems  contain  more  than  two  electrons,  physicists  turned  their 
backs  on  him  in  terror,  mathematical  difficulties  becoming  insur- 
mountable. 

Lucretian  biochemistry  involves  the  assumption  that  no  inter- 
action can  take  place  between  molecules  without  their  touching  one 
another.  Support  is  given  in  this  book  to  the  idea  that  manifold 
interactions  can  take  place  without  such  bodily  contact,  either 
through  energy  bands  or  through  the  electromagnetic  field,  which 
thus  appears  with  water  and  its  structures  as  the  matrix  of  bio- 
logical reactions. 

In  accordance  with  the  basic  concepts  of  Lucretian  chemistry, 
biology  dealt  with  molecules  and  their  aggregates  as  isolated  units, 
separated  by  the  water  which  fills  the  space  between  them.  The 


140 

material  presented  in  this  book  pleads  for  the  assumption  that 
water  is  more  than  this:  it  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  living  matter 
itself.  One  of  the  main  functions  of  protoplasmic  structures  may 
be  to  generate  in  water  those  specific  structures  which  make  forms 
of  electronic  excitations  and  energy  transmissions  possible  which 
would  be  improbable  outside  these  structures.  The  solid  matter 
and  the  water  of  the  cell  form  together  that  unique  system  which 
has  the  queer  property  of  being  alive. 

I  have  no  doubts  that  the  coming  century  will  witness  a  pro- 
found revolution,  extension  of  biology,  the  establishment  of  a 
quantum  mechanical  biochemistry,  built  on  top  of  the  Lucretian 
one.  This  book  may  be  but  one  of  the  early  swallows  of  this 
spring. 

The  biologist,  venturing  into  this  new  field,  can  do  so  only  at 
the  danger  of  errors,  many  of  his  interpretations  being  found  at 
fault  later.  He  can  only  hope  that  through  the  door,  left  ajar, 
researchers  will  follow  him  who  are  more  qualified  to  deal  with 
quantum  mechanical  problems  and  find  him  at  fault  at  many 
points.  His  only  reward  will  be  the  fleeting  glance  he  could  throw 
at  a  future  biochemistry,  from  the  elevation  of  which  the  letter- 
dash-letter  symbols  will  look  like  skeletons  which  can  tell  us  no 
more  about  the  real  nature  of  life  than  the  fossil  bones  of  a  dino- 
saurus  can  tell  us  about  that  animal's  reflexes  or  sexual  relations. 

REFERENCES 

W.  D.  Alexander  and  K.  W.  M.  Johnson,  Nature  178,  259  (1956) . 

W.  Arnold  and  J.  B.  Davidson,  /.  Gen.  Physiol.  37,  611  (1954). 

W.  Arnold  and  E.  S.  Meek,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  60,  82  (1956). 

W.  Arnold  and  J.  R.  Oppenheimer,  /.  Cen.  Physiol.  33,  423  (1950). 

D.  I.  Arnon,  Science  122,  9  (1955). 

D.  I.  Arnon,  M.  B.  Allen,  and  F.  R.  Whatley,  Nature  174,  394  (1954). 

T.  T.  Bannister,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  49,  222  (1954). 

J.  M.  Barnes  and  J.  I.  Duff,  /.  Physiol.  {London)  124,  37  P  (1954). 
.1  R.   S.   Becker   and  M.   Kasha,   in   "The  Luminescence  of   Biological   Systems" 
S  (F.  H.  Johnson,  ed.),  p.  25.  AAAS,  Washington,  D.C.,  1955. 

M.  Berger,  H.  J.  Strecker,  and  H.  Waelsch,  Nature  }77,  1234  (1956). 
U.  D.  Bernal  and  R.  H.  Fowler,  /.  Chem.  Phys.  1,  515  (1933). 


141 

M.  Borbiro  and  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Biol.  Bull.  96,  162  (1949). 

P.  W.  Bridgman,  "The  Physics  of  High  Pressure."  G.  Bell  and  Sons,  London, 

1949. 
D.  S.  Brown,  personal  communication. 
G.  L.  Brown  and  A.  M.  Harvey,  BraJfi  62,  341  (1939). 
N.  L.  R.  Bucher,  Proc.  Soc.  Exptl.  Biol.  Med.  63,  204  (1941). 
T.  Bucher  and  J.  Kaspers,  Biochim.  et  Biophys.  Acta  1,  21   (1947). 

F.  Buchthal  and  S.  Clemmesen,  Acta  Psychiat.  Neurol.  U,  389  (1941). 

G.  O.  Burr  and  M.  M.  Burr.  /.  Biol.  Chem.  86,  587  (1930). 

A.  M.  Buswell  and  W.  H.  Rodenbush,  Set.  American  194,  No.  476  (1956). 
I.  Chao,  /.  Cellular  Comp.  Physiol.  6,  1  (1935). 

G.  H.  A.  Clowes  and  M.  E.  Krahl,  /.  Gen.  Physiol.  20,  145  (1936). 
L.  N.  M.  Duysens,  Transfer  of  Excitation  Energy  in  Photosynthesis.  Disserta- 
tion, Utrecht,  1952. 
C  T>hiti  and  V.  Castelli,  Compt.  rend.  206,  2003  (1938). 
P.  Debye  and  J.  O.  Edwards,  Science  116,  143  (1952). 

'.D.  D.  Eley,  G.  D.  Parfitt,  M.  J.  Perry,  and  D.  H.  Taysura,  Trans.  Faraday  Soc. 
\        49,  79  (1953). 

M.  G.  Evans  and  J.  Gergely,  Biochim.  et  Biophys.  Acta  3,  188  (1949). 
C.  Eyzaguirre,  C.  B.  P.  Folk,  K.  L.  Zierler,  and  J.  L.  Lilienthal,  Am.  J.  Physiol. 

155,  69  (1948). 
F.  S.  Feates  and  D.  J.  G.  Ives,  /.  Chcm.  Soc.  p.  2798  (1956). 
T.   Forster,    "Fluoreszenc  Organischer  Verbindungen."   Vandenhoeck  and  Rup- 

recht,  Gottingen.  1951. 
H.  S.  Frank  and  M.  W.  Evans,  /.  Chem.  Phys.  13,  507  ( 1945). 
J.  H.  Gaddum,  in  "Lectures  on  the  Scientific  Basis  of  Medicine,   1954-1955" 

(British  Postgraduate  Medical  Federation),  Vol.  4,  p.  238.  Athlone  Press. 

London,  1956. 
J.  Gergely,  Federation  Proc.  9,  176  (1950);  10,  188  (1951). 
J.  Gergely,  /.  Biol.  Chem.  200,  543  (1953). 
H.  Goldblatt  and  G.  Cameron,  /.  Exptl.  Med.  97,  525  (1953). 
F.    Gudernatsch,    Entwicklung    und    Wachstum,    in    "Handbuch    der    Inneren 

Sekretion"   (M.  Hirsch,  ed.),  Vol.  2,  p.  1493  (1929). 
F.  Gudernatsch,  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Symposia  Quant.  Biol.  2,  94  (1934). 
F.  Gudernatsch,  Med.  Record  146,  101  (1937). 

S.  Hajdu  and  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Am.  J.  Physiol.  168,  159,  171  (1952). 
S.  Hajdu  and  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Enzymologia  16,  392  (1954). 
J.  A.  Hammar,  Kgl.  Vetenskapsg  Soc.  Arsbok  p.  33  (1938). 
J.  W.  Harms,  Z.  Naturforsch.  7,  622  (1952);  8,  384  (1953). 
J.  C.  Henniker  and  J.  W.  McBain,  "The  Depth  of  a  Surface  Zone  of  a  Liquid." 

Technical    Report   N   6   ori    154    T.   O.    11,    Stanford   Research   Institute, 

Stanford,  Calif.  (1948). 
C.  Herbst,  Arch.  Entwicklungsmech.  Organ.  2,  455  (1895);  7,  424  (1900). 
C  Herbst,  M/tt.  Zool.  St.  Neapel  11,  193  (1936). 


142 

A.  V.  Hill  and  L.  Maqjherson,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  B143,  81  (1954). 
F.  G.  Hopkins,  Biochem  J.  15,  286  (1921). 

F.  G.  Hopkins,  /.  Biol.  Chem.  34,  269  (1929). 

B.  Jacobson,  Nature  ^  72,  666  (1953). 

B.  Jacobson,  /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  77,  2919  (1955). 

B.  Jacobson,  W.  A.  Anderson,  and  J.  T.  Anrold,  Naiure  173,  772  (1954). 
H.  P.  Jenerik  and  R.  W.  Gerard,  /.  Cellular  Comp.  Physiol.  42,  79  (1953). 

J.   G.  Y.   de  Jong,   Dystrophia  myotonica,  Papamyotonica  and  Myotonia  Con- 
genita, Dissertation,  Utrecht,  1955. 
A.  J.  Kahn  and  A.  Sandow,  Science  112,  647  (1950). 

G.  Karreman  and  R.  Steele,  paper  in  preparation. 

M.  Kasha,  Discussiorts  Faraday  Soc.  No.  9,  14  (1950). 

M.  Kasha.  /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  20,  71  (1952). 

M.  Kasha  and  S.  P.  McGlynn,  Anri.  Rev.  Phys.  Chem.  7  (1956),  in  press. 

H.  G.  Klemperer,  Biochem.  J.  60,  122,  128  (1955). 

M.  E.  Krahl  and  G.  H.  A.  Clowes,  /.  Gen.  Physiol.  20,  173  (1936). 

M.  E.  Krahl  and  G.  H.  A.  Clowes,  /.  Cellular  Comp.  Physiol.  11,  1,  21  (1938). 

K.  Laki  and  W.  R.  Caroll,  Nature  175,  389  (1955). 

M.  A.  Lauffer  and  A.  G.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  56,  542 

(1955). 
H.  W.  Levenrenz,  "Luminescence  of  Solids."  J.  Wiley  New  York,  1950. 
G.  N.  Lewis  and  M.  Kasha,  /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  66,  2100   (1944);  67,  944 

(1945). 
G.  N.  Lewis  and  M.  Calvin,  /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  67,  1232  (1945). 
M.  R.  Lewis  and  P.  P.  Goland,  Am.  J.  Med.  Sci.  215,  282  (1946). 
G.  Ling  and  R.  W.  Gerard,  /.  Cellular  Comp.  Physiol.  34,  413  (1949). 
F.  Lipmann  and  C.  D.  Du  Toit,  Science  113,  474  (1951). 
W.  F.  Loomis  and  F.  Lipmann,  /.  Biol.  Chem.  173,  807  (1948). 
W.  A.  Loewenstein  and  A.  Szent-Gy5rgyi,  /.  Cellular  Comp.  Physiol.  46,  345 

(1955). 
H.  L.  Lundgren  and  C.  H.  Ninkley,  /.  Polymer  Sci.  14,  139  (1945). 
J.  McLaughlin,  G.  SchifFman,  and  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Biochim.  et  Biophys.  Acta 

17,  160  (1955). 
J.  McLaughlin  and  G.  Schiifman,  in  press. 

J.  McLaughlin  and  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Enzymologia  16,  384  (1954). 
H.   L.  McMurray  and  R.  S.  Mulliken,  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.   (U.S.)   26,  312 

(1940). 

C.  Martius  and  B.  Hess,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  33,  486  (1951). 

C.  Martius,  Die  Wirkunsweise  des  Schilddrusenhormones.  Colloq.  Deut.  Ges. 

Physiol.  Chem.  Mosbach,  Baden  (1954). 
M.  Middlebrook,  Enzymologia  in  press. 
M.   Middlebrook   and   A.   Szent-Gyorgyi,   Biochim.   et  Biophys.  Acta   18,   407 

(1955). 
E.  Mihalyi,  /.  Biol.  Chem.  201,  197  (1953). 


143 

E.  Mihalyi  and  A.  G.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  /.  Bhl.  Chem.  20),  189,  211   (1953). 

L.  S.  Palmer,  A.  Cunliife,  and  J.  M.  Hugh,  Nature  170,  796  (1952). 

S.  V.  Perry,  Biochem.  ].  78,  251  (1951). 

J.  A.  Pople,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A202,  323  (1950);  A205,  163  (1951). 

P.   Pringsheim,    "Fluorescence  and   Phosphorescence."   Interscience,  New  York, 

1949. 
J.  M.  Ritchie,  /.  Physiol.  {London)  126,  155  (1954). 
E.  Shaw  and  D.  W.  Woolley,  Science  124,  121  (1956). 
G.  Scheibe,  Quoted  from  Forster. 
G.  SchifFman  and  J.  McLaughlin,  in  press. 
G.  Schiffman,  J.  McLaughlin,  and  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  in  press. 
V.  G.  Shore  and  A.  B.  Pardee,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  62,  355   (1956). 
E.  L.  Smith,  Advances  in  Enzymol.  12,  191  (1951). 
M.  J.  H.  Smith  and  S.  W.  Jeffrey,  Nature  178.  310  (1956). 
D.  Spiro,  Exptl.  Cellular  Research  10,  562  (1956). 
B.  L.  Strehler  and  W.  Arnold,  /.  Gen.  Physiol.  34,  809  (1951). 
A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Nature  157,  875  (1946). 
A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,   "The  Chemistry  of  Muscular  Contraction."  Academic  Press, 

New  York,  1947. 
A.  Szent-Gyorgyi.  Biol.  Bull.  96,  140  (1949). 
A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Biochim.  et  Biophys.  Acta  16,  169  (1955). 
A.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Ann.  N.  Y.  Acad.  Sci.  61,732(1955). 
A.  G.  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  31,  97  (1951). 
A.   G.   Szent-Gyorgyi  and  M.   Borbiro,  Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.   60,    180 

(1956). 
L.  Varga,  Enzymologia  14,  212  (1950). 
O.  Warburg,  Science  123,  307  (1956). 
J.  D.  Watson  and  F.  H.  Crick,  Nature  171,  737  (1953).  p 

!D.  W.  Woolley  and  E.  N.  Shaw,  /.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  7 A,  2948  (1952). 
D.  W.  Woolley  and  E.  N.  Shaw,  Science  124.  34  (1956). 


Nature  of  Life 


A  STUDY  ON  MUSCLE 


By  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi 


^■■\_;w    o 


1  pp.,  7  plates,  $3.00 


CONTENTS: 

Histological,  Molecular  and  Electronic  Structure  of  Muscle 

Myosin  and  Actin 

Actomyosin 
The  Muscle  Fibre. 


REVIEW: 

"The  study  of  muscle  metabolism  and  the  energy  transformations  dur- 
ing muscle  contraction  and  relaxation  come  closer  to  the  physiology  of  the 
basic  processes  of  living  matter  than  almost  any  other  studies  in  the  field 
of  physiology.  Truly  then  a  study  on  muscle  brings  us  close  to  the  prob- 
lem of  the  nature  of  life." 

— Archives  of  Physical  AUdicine 


ACADEMIC  PRESS  INC.,  PUBLISHERS 
111  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York  3,  New  York 


Chemistry  of  Muscular 
Contraction 

SECOND  EDITION,  REVISED  AND  ENLARGED 

By  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi 
1951,  162  pp..  55  illustrations,  $150 

The  first  edition  of  this  book  stirred  scientific  imagination,  was  the 
subject  of  heated  discussions,  and  opened  new  vistas  for  our  understanding 
of  muscular  contraction.  The  experimental  observations  published  in  1947 
are  now  the  generally  accepted  foundation  of  a  new  muscle  physiology. 
These  observations,  made  under  the  unfavorable  conditions  of  war  and 
political  persecution,  have  been  sifted  and  greatly  extended  by  the  author 
in  the  United  States.  They  are  now  incorporated  into  the  completely  re- 
written and  enlarged  edition,  featuring  entirely  new  lines  such  as  electron 
microscopy  and  thermodynamics.  Attempts  also  have  been  made  to  corre- 
late the  chemistry  and  function  of  muscle. 

The  driving  force  underlying  the  work  is  a  craving  to  understand  life, 
the  basic  plan  of  the  living  machine.  Using  muscle  a5  experimental  mate- 
rial. Professor  Szent-Gyorgyi  once  more  demonstrates  his  rare  gift  of  pre- 
senting intricate  problems  in  a  refreshingly  vigorous  style. 

CONTENTS: 

Introduction  Actin  and  Myosin  in  Muscle 

The  Structure  of  Muscle  Thermodynamics 

Whole  Muscle  Energetics  and  Mechanics 

The  Physical  Disintegration  of  xhe  Contraction  Cycle 

Muscle 

Smooth  Muscle  and  Heart  ^iuscl^ 
The  Chemical  Disintegration  of 

Muscle  "^^^^  Continuum  Theory 

Myosin  Water  and  Viruses 

Actin  Appendix 

Actomvosin  References, 


Chemical  Physiology  of 

Contraction  in  Body  and 

Heart  Muscle 

By  A.  Szent-Gyorgyi 
1953,  135  pp.,  29  figures,  3  plates,  $4.80 

Actin,  actomyosin,  its  reactions  with  ATP,  the  glycerinated  muscle  fiber 
— all  discoveries  of  the  author  and  his  associates — were  reported  in  the 
first  two  editions  of  "The  Chemistry  of  Muscular  Contraction."  These 
studies  have  now  been  extended  and  a  first  attempt  has  been  launched  to 
fit  actomyosin  into  the  cellular  entity'. 

CONTENTS: 

The  Molecular  Mechanism  A  Study  on  the  Heart 

OF  Motion:  Muscle  Fiber: 

Problems  of  Molecular  Engineering  Material  and  Methods. 

Myosin  and  Meromyosins  ^.      ^ 

Actin  The  Frog  Heart 

Actomyosin  The  Staircase 

The  Protofibril  The  Action  of  Serum 

^^^^""  Digitalis 

ATP,  ATP-ase.  CP,  and 

Relaxation  Adrenaline,  Acetyl  Cholme  (ACH), 

Elasticity  and  Plasticity  ^"^  ^^^^'  ^^^^^ 

Thermodynamics,  Isotonic  and  Uterine  Muscle 

Isometric  Registration  Comparative  Chemistry  of  Heart 
The  Contraction  Cycle  and   Body  Muscle 

Interpretations  : 

The  Membrane 

The  Window  Field  (WF) 

Biological  Action 

Considerations  about  Ions 

About  Adaptations  and  Regulations 

Parts  and  Connections. 


