if anybody's detecting any audio
problems or uh if there seem to be any
technical issues. Uh but if not, first
of all, welcome to the Yale Physics
Club. It's a pleasure to see you all uh
on Zoom anyway and someday soon in
person for sure.
Let me start by introducing myself. For
those of you who don't know me, my name
is Jack Harris. I'm a professor in the
physics department and I'll be the host
for today's physics club talk. Um, I've
chatted with our speaker and he has said
that in the course of his talk if you
have questions, let's just pretend we're
in person and you can interrupt uh as
you normally would. Uh, and it'll be my
job as moderator to try and shepherd us
to a timely conclusion. But at least uh
if you have questions, just feel free to
go ahead and ask them.
Um, boy, it's a giant pleasure to be
able to welcome Charles Brown back to
the physics department for this visit.
Um, Charles received his bachelor's
degree with honors from the University
of Minnesota and came to Yale to do his
PhD in 2013. I was fortunate to become
his PhD adviser and Charles worked in my
group on an unusual and very open-ended
research project whose goal was to
magnetically levitate large drops of
superfluid helium in vacuum and study
their fluid mechanics, their optical
cavity properties, their thermodynamics.
uh by 2019 Charles had succeeded at that
and defended his PhD thesis. At that
point he went uh to the University of
California at Berkeley where he joined
Dan Stamper Karn's group. There he has
been studying ultra cold atoms in
optical lises with a focus on the
topological properties and many body
effects in exotic band structures and
that's the work that he's going to be
presenting to us today. So welcome
Charles.
I will mute myself and please take it
away.
Awesome. Uh thank you Jack for the
introduction and uh thank you all for
inviting me to come and speak in the
business club today. Certainly very
excited to be here and tell you about
the work I've been doing. Uh let me
share my screen
PowerPoint.
I must say it's very fun to be visiting
under different circumstances.
Very nice.
There we go.
Okay.
Hide this.
Okay. Uh so yes, thank you again for the
invitation. Uh today I'm going to tell
you about uh the recent work we've done
in the optical lattice subgroup in the
Stanford Kern lab at at Berkeley. uh
where uh I've been looking at a probe of
band structure singularities using a
lattice trapped quantum gas. Okay. So uh
before I move on I wanted to acknowledge
the sources of funding. Um of course you
know this funding is important for us to
be able to actually do the work that we
do. Uh but also importantly I wanted to
acknowledge my experimental and
theoretical colleagues. uh in particular
uh these awesome uh grad students that I
work with Shiain Chong and Malta sports
and a grad student who recently
converted to postto before uh taking a
very nice industry job and of course my
my PI my postto advisor Dan Ser uh but
also um mention our theory collaborators
uh a grad student a posttock who's soon
taking a faculty job uh and Joel Moore
right so together we've uh done this
work together and produced something
that I think is very interesting and and
very important actually. And so I
mentioned that I'm going to tell you
about a probe of band structure
similarities with this lattice trap on
gas and as it turns out I like to think
of this as a quantum simulator. And so
I'm going to tell you about quantum
simulation, what it is um and what I
think we can do with it. Um, I would
then uh tell you about our ingredients
that make up our quantum simulator and
some some recent experiments where we've
used this quantum simulator to study
some topological properties of what
looks like graphing.
There we go. Okay. So, let me start by
saying what quantum simulation is. One
way to think of it is the mimicking of
quantum systems for the purpose of
understanding their um their states,
phases and dynamics. Um so I think in
general it's fair to to use an
expression like this of a Hamiltonian
that tells you something about the
energy of a system where that
Hamiltonian has three parts. It has a
kinetic energy, it has a potential
energy and it has some sort of
interaction. Um now sometimes this
Hamiltonian can take a very simple form.
Sometimes it could take a very
complicated form where you would be
interested in trying to use a simpler
quantum system that can realize a
Hamiltonian of choice um that sort of
you know retains the the salient
interesting properties of the the system
that you want to study described by this
Hamiltonian. Now, if you're going to do
quantum simulation to study some, you
know, maybe some toy model Hamiltonian
or something more complicated where
simulation is uh particularly useful,
you might do so using digital simulation
or analog simulation. At least I like to
uh divide them in this way. Uh so I
would say that digital simulation
requires a quantum computer device
something like um what Google or IBM has
or Honeywell or IonQ you know a trapped
ion system or a superconducting circuit
system like the nice systems that are
down the hill in the dean folkoff
groups. Um, in this sort of simulation,
you might initialize a state, you
perform some quantum algorithm on that
state, which really just means
performing a a series of transformations
on the cubits. Um, and then you perform
some measurement to uh get your result.
And that's in contrast to analog
simulation. We're using this uh these
different sort of physical systems to
for example
uh measure what is the ground state of a
Hamiltonian. for example. And so an
analog simulation system might look like
cold atoms and lises, which is what I'm
going to talk to you about today. But it
could also look like a chain of trapped
ions, or it could look like arrays of
optical tweezers filled with Rberg
atoms, which you can use through defined
cubits, or it could look like an all
photonic system.
Now, um I also like to think about uh
quantum simulators as uh being able to
address two problem types. At least
these two problem types are are quite
distinct in my mind. Um you can
categorize them as time dependent
problems or ground state problems. Um so
let's start with the time dependent
problem. Um maybe you're interested in
looking at problems related to
equilibration in thermalization where
for example in this experiment uh what's
plotted is the density versus time where
the experimenters um sort of shuffle all
their atoms to one side of the lattice
and watch how uh they diffuse and how
the site density fluctuates with time.
Or maybe you're interested in dynamical
phase transitions which could be sort of
fast quenches through a transition or
slow evolution through a transition.
Where in in this experiment um
experimenters use a super fluid and uh
evolve the superfluid through a phase
transition and see how uh exitations in
the form of quantized vortices appear as
they sweep across this phase transition.
Or you maybe want to look at kick
systems, flow systems, where you
introduce a um a a timed dependent
energy term in the in the uh Hamiltonian
that describes your system. And there's
a there's a wide, you know, array of
physics that you can address with with
this sort of system. Um now I also want
to talk about ground states. Um quantum
simulation I think is particularly
interesting for looking at ground states
of Hamiltonians. Um maybe you want to
look at quantum magnetism. Um for
example here this is an image of um an
anti-feromagnet from a quantum gas
microscope where you can really resolve
sight by sight um where you have
sightby-sight resolution of atoms in
your lattice. And so what you're seeing
in this picture here the blue and the
white are the alternating spin up and
spin down of this magnet. Or maybe you
want to look at quantum spin liquids.
Another very interesting um uh system to
look at state to look at uh where you
can sort of think of it as a a general
state that is a superposition of ordered
spin states but that uh in its superp
position sort of loses this long range
order even down to to zero color. Um
uh lastly but not least maybe you even
want to look at aspects of superconivity
um where you know for example the Hullet
group is starting to look at how super
connectivity might appear in these nice
onedimensional systems. Okay. Now um I
just told you about a lot of condensed
matter things uh condensed matter
physics that you might want to look at
using a quantum simulator. But I also
want to make the point that quantum
simulation is not just for condensed
matter. quantum simulation experiments
may provide insight on problems in
particle physics. Uh so here what I'm
showing you is an image um of what it
might look like to realize synthetic
gauge fields using atoms in a lattice.
So here um I have a lattice with atoms
at them. That's what you're seeing in
the square lice arrangement. Uh these
circles are your atoms. Uh you can see
in these square pett you have these
little red vectors coming out. That's
the effective magnetic field that you
can uh create by producing some sort of
uh phase change that atoms experience as
they move around this lattice. So why is
why would you want to make what looks
like a synthetic magnetic field? Uh well
that's because high energy physics tells
us that gauge fields are ubiquitous in
nature. For example, uh the gauge field
associated with electromagnetism is the
photon. With the strong force, it is the
gluons. With the weak force, it's the W
and Z particles. And so um you know
these sort of cold atom quantum quantum
simulators are interesting systems to
imagine trying to produce artificial
gauge fields which you might uh you
might achieve by doing a couple
different techniques uh where you can
shake your lattice in a particular way
or you can uh utilize the
um the the state manifold say associated
with the hyperfine structure to do laser
assisted tunneling. helps you realize a
synthetic gauge field. Um, now before I
move on, I wanted to sort of emphasize
that if you can make this process time
dependent, then you have dynamical gauge
fields. And that's particularly exciting
because then you're really moving into a
regime where maybe one day you could
test some some interesting properties of
of field theories that become relevant
for high energy systems.
Okay. Uh now while I think that's
incredibly interesting uh I have in in
recent years been focused on solid state
systems. Uh and so why do I want to
study uh solid state systems? Well
because there are many exciting
questions on um interesting physics such
as exotic super connectivity and
magnetism quantum hall effects or other
topological matter. Um so in trying to
sell you on this point I want to tell
you that you know an ultra cold atom
quantum simulator offers several
advantages that is controllable defects.
These are advantages relative to solid
state systems. Uh that is controllable
defects long lived quantum coherence the
ability to prepare many identical copies
and the the ability to study out of
equilibrium physics which we do a
particularly good job of in in my lab.
Okay. Okay. And so the the main point I
want to want you to take away from here
is that um I believe we can provide
great insight into the behavior of solid
materials that have crystallin lattice
structure. This uh image that I'm
showing you here is a defraction image
from our optical honeycomb lattice in
the lab. So in a way that's sort of
similar to how you know a
crystalallographer might defract say
X-rays from a solid crystal, we can
defract atoms. uh usually Bose Einstein
quantitates in my lab from an optical
lattice and learn about the physics of
the atoms in the lattice.
Okay. So um as I move forward I want to
tell you about the different parts of
our quantum simulator how we realize one
uh before I actually show you what it
looks like and then start to talk about
the physics that I've been exploring
with it recently. And in order to do so
first I need to tell you about a
crystallin lattice. Um, a definition of
a crystal lattice that I like is it's a
periodic set of points that has some set
of symmetries.
For instance, the square lice, it has
translation symmetry. What I mean by
that, well, you can define a unit cell,
say a box around this point, and I can
translate it up or down or to the right
or to the left, and I can completely
span this lattice. You'll also notice
that this lattice has a rotational
symmetry. I can rotate this lattice by
90 degrees and it produces the same
lice. There's another lattice, the
triangular lattice where again it has
translation symmetry and it has its own
set of rotational symmetries. Another
lattice is the cog lattice that's near
and dear to our hearts. Uh and it again
has a translation symmetry but it also
has a set of rotational symmetries. This
is not all the lises but just a a nice
selection that I think is is
representative. Now even though these
lises look different, what's common to
all of them them is that they have an
associated band structure which is the
allowable energy levels of particles
that are confined in that lattice. So
what I'm showing you here is just a
one-dimensional uh band structure
associate the the band structure
associated with a one-dimensional
lattice. And I'm plotting it for you in
two cases. uh one is when the
confinement when I'm where I'm
parameterizing it by this uh this uh
quantity vlac the confinement to the
lattice sites is zero so there's
essentially no lattice for the particles
whereas in this case it's non zero in
the case where there is zero confinement
to the lattice points you have the sort
of relationship that you expect to exist
between the energy of particles in the
lattice and their momentum and that is
just a quadratic relation like p ^2 over
2m right so all you see is series of uh
parabola. However, when you turn up the
confinement actually produce lice, what
you see is uh an appearance of bands
where the uh energy of the particles can
only be in this green band or in this
blue band or in this uh reddish pink
band but not in the white spaces in
between. Right? So this this is sort of
a an important point uh of of the
behavior of of crystals that they have
these band gaps. they can't have these
band gaps associated with different
properties.
Okay. And so um a solid's band structure
describes the allowable energy levels
for electrons in a crystal lice and more
specifically the band structure explains
material properties. For example,
electrical res resistivity and optical
absorption. Okay. Now uh it's a useful
tool to describe the states of particles
in these lises using these block wave
functions. And I I want to show this
here because when I get to talking about
the the the data, the experiments that
we've done, I'm really going to be
talking about uh locations in momentum
space associated with this lattice where
these wave functions start to behave
sort of funny where they become
illdefined. Okay, so these block wave
functions sigh they take this form.
there's some um some spatial function
multiplied by a phase term e to the i q
dot r where q is the quasi momentum.
This is the inlattice momentum and this
function u has this special property
that it has these periodic boundary
conditions where uh the function u of r
evaluated at some location uh plus uh a
lattice vector away. This lattice vector
is big r. it the the function has to be
equal to itself. Okay.
Now it turns out that not only does the
band structure uh not only is the band
structure important for describing the
material properties but so is the the
geometry and topology of the state space
where the wave functions live. And this
becomes important when you want to talk
about physics related to for example
quantum hall effects or orbital
magnetism or topological insulators
where now you're not only thinking about
block wave functions the size but you
want to start thinking about the berry
connection right this what I'm calling
amn here which is essentially the
expectation value of the the momentum
operator in in quasi momentum space
right but never nevertheless what you
want to be thinking about as well is the
berry connection. Okay.
And so uh now I just sort of want to uh
make a point about bzons versus firmians
because eventually what we do is we
produce a bzon sign condensate and we
put it into a lattice. Okay. So the
important point that I want to make here
regarding the difference between bzzons
and firmians is how they behave when you
trap them in a harmonic potential.
Right? So what I'm plotting for you here
uh is the uh the energy levels for a
quantum harmonic oscillator where the
quantized energy labels I'm labeling by
these ends n equals 0 through three. So
these horizontal lines are your energy
levels and what you find that's striking
is that even at zero temperature
absolute zero temperature bzons and
firmians behave quite differently. What
you see with bzons is that they're able
to stack up in the lowest energy level.
they're able to crowd on top of each
other. Whereas firmians are not able to
do that due to poly exclusion. So
firmians instead of crowding all in the
ground state of this harmonic oscillator
they stack themselves up up to the firm
up to the firm energy depending on how
many particles you have. Okay. But the
fact that Bzons do this uh this crowding
behavior in the lowest energy state this
allows us to make Bzon sign condensate.
So in my lab we use the bzonic isotope
rubidium 87 to make BECs bzon Einstein
condensates
and bzinstein condensates are incredibly
interesting uh still uh so let me tell
you a little bit about them the the de
brily wavelength describes the wavelike
behavior of matter generally I'm writing
an expression for the de brley
wavelength here and what I think is
important to point out is that the
debrley wavelength is inversely
proportional to both mass and
temperature, right? So the larger the
mass, the greater the temperature, the
the shorter the the broiler wavelength
and sort of the shorter distance over
which this matter uh will exhibit
wavelike properties that you associate
with being quantum mechanical. Okay. So
uh if you have a low mass object uh and
you get the temperature sufficiently low
then you can uh move your system into
this interesting regime where the volume
associated with the de brily wavelength
becomes larger than sort of volume per
atom. So this is my system volume. This
is the number of atoms. So when the de
brily volume is bigger than the volume
per uh per atom you sort of have this
situation where the wave functions of
your atoms start to overlap with each
other right this push you pushes you
into this quantum regime where now you
have this new state of matter that has
these interesting properties. Okay so um
you know the shinger equation is very
useful for talking about the evolution
of quantum systems. The shorter equation
has two parts kinetic energy and a
potential energy. Here I'm writing down
the time independent shorter equation
acting on this wave function side. This
gives you the energy. Okay. But to
describe a bzon sign condensate you need
to add one term that um that includes
interactions and particularly um it's
important to note that this term depends
on the density. So this size squared
tells you the density and so you see
that the density of the atoms in the BEC
it changes the evolution of this system
right so this is the sort of uh wave
function associated with these block
waves that I'll be talking about later
in the talk and I wanted to show an
image from our lab here's a picture of a
graidium 87 BC that's around 10 to 100
nanopel temperature okay and I I totally
skipped We're talking about this
picture. But uh when you when you move
into this regime where the royal volume
is uh fulfills this equality, you push
the the velocity distribution of your
atoms from one where you don't see
strong peaking at zero to one where you
as you cool you do see strong peaking at
zero velocity or zero momentum. This is
showing you the onset of Bose Einstein
condensation. Okay. So I've told you
about one part of our quantum simulator.
The atoms are bzin sign compensates. Let
me tell you about optical lises.
Um mathematically
you can produce a standing wave by
overlapping two counterpropagating waves
here the red and the blue which together
produce the black standing wave.
Experimentally I can do the same thing
with two lasers. My lasers are traveling
waves. And so if I look at some region
where they overlap in the middle, I look
at the time average electric field
intensity, I get this nice standing wave
pattern with the separation, that's half
of the wavelength. Now I have a
onedimensional lattice and I can load
atoms into this lattice. Okay. I can
also use multiple pairs of intersecting
beams to make either two-dimensional or
threedimensional lises. And that's how I
make an optical honeycomb lattice. I
take three different lasers with uh
electric field polarization that's in
plane and I have them overlap with each
other with a relative angle of 120
degrees. If I look at the potential
energy landscape in this intersection
region that the atoms experience, what
they see is a potential energy landscape
that looks like this where I've marked
the local potential energy minima uh
using these green circles and what you
see is a honeycomb lattice. Right? So
this honeycomb lattice, it has these two
unit vectors uh a23 and a12. And my unit
cell looks like a box around these two
points here for example. And so I can
take this box and I can uh copy it by
moving it by one of these lattice
vectors and I can span my whole
honeycomb lattice right and so uh this
arrangement allows us to create an ultra
cold analog of what's like graphine.
So let me tell you about why graphine is
interesting. But before I do that, let
me reiterate that a crystal's band
structure and the geometry and topology
of the state space determines its
properties. Here I have an image of
graphine. It's this single layer
hexagonal arrangement of carbon atoms.
Um and it's produced a lot of
interesting science and even you know
even with the the the Nobel Prize being
awarded for its initial discovery and
characterization in 2010 um this system
and stacks of graphine is still
producing a lot of interesting science.
Okay. The thing I wanted to point out
about graphine that's relevant to my
work in probes of band structure
singularity uh is a special point that
exists in momentum space associated with
the electrons in the graphine. Right?
That is the direct point. So let me
point your attention to here. This is
the band structure of graphine where at
this point labeled K in quantum momentum
I have a touching point here between two
bands. uh this point is referred to as a
direct point and it's special because uh
confined to it is a quant uh is a berry
flux and uh associate associated with a
berry phase that your say particle would
accumulate if you move the particle
around this point in this momentum space
and it's special because it's not a
dynamical phase. It doesn't depend on
how quickly you move your particle
around it. So long as you complete a
loop around this point, regardless of
the radius of that loop, you will pick
up a pi berry phase from the direct
point. It turns out that that pi berry
phase is associated with some very
interesting physics that appears um in
graphing. For example, climb tunneling
where you get this sort of resonant
tunneling, quantum tunneling of
electrons across uh huge potential
barriers that you wouldn't expect them
to be able to tunnel through or even the
half integer quantum hall effect where
people have seen in in graphine um uh
quantized conductance
uh which is the size of which is set by
plank's constant over the electron
charge squared. But instead of these
jumps being proportional to integer
multiples of that ratio of fundamental
contents, it's proportional proportional
to half integer multiples. Right? or
even uh you know sort of newer um
interesting systems built from graphine
twisted billayer graphine uh that I'm
depicting here where you can stack two
graphine sheets on top of each other you
know turn them by some angle and what
you see is this mo pattern the emergence
of this uh different structure longer
scale structure and people have seen a
lot of interesting physics here even the
emergence of super conductivity that
happens at this interface depending on
uh the the angle that you have these
sheets relative to each other. Okay, so
graphine is an incredibly interesting
material still. We're still learning a
lot from it. And I want to make the
point that my artificial graphine also
has direct points with interesting
topological properties.
Okay, so I've told you uh just about
everything I want to and to tell you
about how we we build our uh at least
the conceptual parts of how we build our
quantum simulator. We produce Bose
Einstein condensates using rubidium. We
produce optical lises um of various
geometries. Here I'm talking about the
hex the hexagon lattice and we uh load
our bzon stencil into this lattice and
do experiments to study various physics.
Okay. So to do this in practice we sort
of have two parts. You know all these
collab systems have sort of two parts.
One is what I would call a light
preparation table. The other part is a
science table. So, let me start with the
light preparation table. I'm not going
to say a ton about this because, you
know, as you can see, this is a pretty
densely uh populated optical table, but
this table has some uh some laser. Uh
this is sort of the main laser that goes
to some spectroscopy setup where I can
uh lock my laser to the the uh energy
difference between two states in the
ribidium that I can use to produce light
that allows me to cool uh and trap the
the ribidium atoms. I can take another
laser here. This is what you know it's a
jargony term. We call it a reprompt
laser where I use the I use this light
to, you know, put atoms that move out of
the two levels, the two energy levels
that I like to use to cool them. Uh, I
put them back into that manifold so I
can uh send resonant light, cycle them
between these two energy levels and
produce the the cooling and trapping
forces that I need. Okay, this is
essentially what this whole table is
for, producing cooling and trapping
light for a video. This other part is
the science table. This is where the
actual experiments happen. Uh right in
this region here. So after uh quite a
few steps where I start with a hot gas
of rubidium around 120 Celsius that
comes out of an oven. I send it down a
long tube where I can apply slowing
forces. I capture it in what's called a
magneto optical trap and do some initial
cooling down to um you know tens or so
micro kelvin. I eventually move them
over to this region here, the sort of um
in the center of this region here where
I do the last steps of uh evaporation
processes and I produce a Bose Einstein
condensate. Where's my mouse? There we
go. Right in this region here. Now, I
can also send uh my lattice beams in,
which I do from this direction, from
this direction, and from this direction,
right over top my uh my BC. And that's
how I load my atoms into the lattice.
Now, to do the imaging that I'm going to
show you later on, we do absorption
imaging. So, we have this vertical
optical table here. We send light down
from the top uh right onto the BC and in
the in the lattice. And essentially, we
cast a shadow down onto a camera uh down
here. Right? So, we're taking images of
the shadows created by these atoms.
Okay?
So let me actually get into the the
measurements that I want to talk about.
Uh what I'm showing you here is a
two-dimensional Berlin zone map. So this
is a useful map that you uh use to see
how the energy is related to the
inlattice momentum of your particles.
Right? It has these four regions that
I'm showing you which I've colorcoded
differently. uh this inner green
hexagon, the blue star, the the pink
hexagon, and this purple hexagon. Now,
uh again, this is a map of the different
brillan zones. This is the first brerin
zone, the blue is the second, red is the
third, purple is the fourth, and it's uh
you can connect it to the actual band
structure of our atoms in the lattice.
And so I'm making the connection that
this first brillain zone is somehow
associated with this lowest energy band
in this band structure that I've
calculated for you. The second brilland
zone has some connection to this second
energy band and so on. And so uh in this
talk in the rest of the talk I'm going
to tell you about two points two
interesting points. This point labeled K
where I have a direct point that is a
linear band touching point. That's what
LBTP is. And uh very specially I'm going
to tell you about this quadratic band
touching point that occurs at this point
labeled gamma. Okay. So before I move on
and tell you about how uh I've been
characterizing these uh band structure
uh singularities that is these quadratic
and linear band touching points. Let me
tell you about some work that other cold
atom systems have done on uh linear band
touching points.
Uh there's for example uh this work
that's come out from the slider the
Schneider block group and group uh where
they measure that quantized berry phase
that I mentioned to you that's
associated with the direct point where
they uh use interference techniques to
have their atoms take a loop around
these direct points say K or K prime and
they're able to see that after
undergoing a loop around the uh the
direct point their system um uh it
acquires a a phase jump of pi right so
this is that special behavior associated
with the direct point this is that that
quantized berry flux that's associated
with the direct point um another system
where they're actually able to tune
their system between looking like um
just graphine that has two equally deep
sites in unit cell to something like
hexagonal boron nitride where the two
sides of the unit cell are unequal. They
also see a uh phase evolution a
geometric phase evolution of pi
associated with the direct point when
they tune their system to look like
graphine and when they make their system
uh not look like graphine which means
when they uh investigate this point K
and there's no longer a linear band
touching point which means there's no
longer um a direct point they no longer
see this phase uh accumulation of pi
There are even other experiments where
they can do full state tomography,
right? They can reconstruct the quantum
states in amplitude and phase across the
brerin zone and even do things like mer
measure the berry curvature confined at
these k points. Right? So this is
showing uh confined uh barrier curvature
barrier flux at these direct points or
in this experiment uh measuring how when
you evolve your system through these
points you again pick up these pi
barrier phases. Okay. So basically what
has happened for the most part to date
is that cold atom experiments have used
interferometric techniques that involve
going around singularities and band
structures like physically looping
around them to study some properties of
the band structure. But what I have been
doing is something very different.
Instead of taking loops around them I
evolve my system through the
singularity. Right? Okay. So how do I do
that? uh well I can translate my lattice
in a way that is equivalent to having a
stationary lattice but evolving the
clausy momentum of my atoms in that
lattice so it's a it's a it's an issue
of reference frames even if I move my
lattice in the frame of the lattice it's
as though the atoms are moving right so
that's how I translate the in lattice
momentum of my atoms and I can do this
with a nice uh closed loop feedback
system. So I can give my lattice a
velocity that looks like this expression
here. This f12 and this f23 these are
experimentally controlled parameters.
These are knobs that I can turn. I can
make them time dependent. And these
vectors a12 and a23 these are the
lattice vectors that I use to span my
honeycomb lattice. And so since I can
make these coefficients f12 and f_sub_23
uh essentially uh arbitrarily time
dependent I can move my lattice in some
arbitrary
uh trajectory some arbitrary velocity in
two dimensions.
Now the quasi momentum of my atoms in
the frame of the lice is related to the
lattice velocity in this way. It's just
a pro proportionality constant minus the
single particle mass. Okay. So what this
means is that I can give my atoms in the
lattice frame an arbitrary uh momentum Q
in two dimensions.
Here is an example of me doing that in
the the sort of result. Um now I can I
can plug the block wave function into
the Hamiltonian that describes the
system and I can predict what defraction
should look like where I load my atoms
into the lattice. I show my lattice off.
I can take images of that tell me about
the the resulting momentum space
structure of the state. That's what
these images are. And when I use this
theory to predict what this defraction
image should look like when I don't uh
give the atoms any velocity um any
momentum then I see a defraction pattern
that looks like this with this nice uh
six-fold rotation symmetry. And when I
do the experiment and I take an actual
image of the lattice, I recover what I
expect. Now I can do something different
where I can give my atoms some quasible
momentum that is uh it happens to be
this. In this case, I picked it because
it shows that we do have good control
over our quas momentum. It's 1.33
times the distance from gamma to K.
That's what this QK is, right? So I can
get my atoms momentum that goes uh right
over to this point here. I can see what
I expect this defraction image to look
like from theory and I can go and
measure it and I see nice agreement
between this theory and this experiment.
So I just wanted to make the point that
we have good control over our our atoms
quas momentum. Okay. And this is
important because what I'm going to do
is send atoms along trajectories in this
momentum space.
Hey Charles.
Uh yeah. Um is the mass in that um
momentum equation a ribidium mass? A
ju just one not that number that are in
the well.
Yeah. So everything that I'm talking to
you about right now is single particle.
Great. Thanks.
Okay. Uh so let me get into the uh first
measurement.
Um here I am uh again I'm not sending my
atoms along trajectories that wrap
around one of these singularities here a
direct point. I'm sending the atoms
directly through the direct point. How
do I do that? Well, uh, let's look at
this zoom in here in in a uh, my atoms
start at gamma, which is in the center
of my brillow zone map in the center of
this green hexagon, and I evolve them
over to the direct point labeled K, and
I turn at some angle theta.
Now uh when I turn at that angle theta,
I take a special kind of image that
allows me to measure the proportion of
atoms that are in uh different energy
levels, say the lowest energy uh band of
the lattice or the second lowest etc.
And I do this sort of experiment for uh
various data that lie um I do this
experiment for various data where the
final point in this brillowan zone map
where I take images of my atoms they lie
on this circle. The circle has a radius
of 04 times the distance in momentum
space between gamma and the direct
point. Okay. So I do this sort of
experiment. I take these images that
allow me to uh understand what is the
proportion of different atoms in
different bands and I uh I overlay the
brerin zone on top of it. That's what's
happening in C here.
And I'm showing you what this looks like
for various angles. The equals 0, pi /
2, pi 3, pi over 2. So let's talk about
this first image.
Um I mentioned to you that this inner
hexagon is associated with the first
prolong. I can associate this with the
first band. And so when I compare how
many atoms I see here which is this is
most of the atoms in this image to say
how many are in the second brillin zone.
These triangles here
uh here and here. This is the second
brillin zone. Sorry. Uh this is the
third brillain zone. uh I know that most
of my atoms for a trajectory that uh
goes to the direct point and then comes
back they remain in the lowest energy
band. However, if I say uh evolve my
atoms from gamma to the direct point and
then I turn by 90 degrees. So that is
going along this trajectory and then
turning at 90 degrees. I see something
very different. I see that um the
proportion of atoms that remain in the
first the first band right which is the
atoms here is much more similar to the
proportion that lands in the that ends
up in the second band right and so again
I can do this sort of measurement for
various theta I can track how the
proportion of atoms changed um and I can
plot this and this is exactly what I'm
doing here in D right so again uh in the
green I'm plotting as a function of that
turn angle, the proportion of atoms that
remain in the ground band, the lowest
energy band of the lattice, that's the
green data. Uh versus the proportion of
atoms that um move into the the second
band. This is the second lowest energy
band. That's the blue data. And what I
see for these trajectories that make one
um one loop on this circle, I see uh the
atoms initially remaining entirely in
the first band. Uh essentially all of
the atoms leaving the first band going
to the second band and then the sort of
opposite happening again. Right? So I
make sort of one rotation between these
uh these bands as I go from 0 to 2 pi
around this circle. Okay. So, uh well,
why why is this? A nice way to think
about this is using a twoband model
where I can think of my system as a
pseudo spin pseudo spin 1/2 in uh a
pseudomagnetic field. Right? So, away
from the direct point, my pseudomagnetic
field appears to grow linearly. And in
this gauge that I've shown, it points
outwards. Okay. Now I can uh imagine
that what I've really done in this sort
of experiment is say move along this ray
from gamma over to the direct point and
turn at some angle. When I come along
this trajectory over into the direct
point I can think of that as spin down.
When I move through through the direct
point the effective or the the
pseudomagnetic field goes to zero. And
as soon as I move away from that zero,
soon as I move away from the direct
point, I now have a spin down in my
initial basis that is in a magnetic
field that has changed direction. And so
all of a sudden I'm in a sort of superp
position of spin up and spin down in the
new bases dependent on the magnetic
field that my system sees when I move
away from the direct point.
Okay. And so um it's important to note
that these population dynamics seeing
the atoms sort of switch between ground
band and excited band this is not a
dynamical effect. It's driven by the
barrier connection. Uh in particular
it's driven by the off diagonal elements
of the barrier connection. Right? So in
the typical cold atom experiments that I
showed you what they are investigating
is the diagonal elements of this berry
connection that I can write as a matrix.
that what has directly encoded into it
the berry face. However, what drives
these population dynamics is the off
diagonal elements uh associated with uh
a nonabelian state rotation. Okay. Now,
uh it's important to think about how
this is not an interferometric
measurement.
In fact, this is a measurement of
quantum distance. Right? So, I've
defined quantum distance here in this
way. what I'm calling quantum distance
is this uh quantity d^2 it's equal to
one minus the inner product of the the
the cell periodic parts of the block
wave function. So I I wrote down the
block wave function and I said that hey
it's equal to this u multiplied by some
e to the i q dot r uh the u that appears
in the block wave function that's that's
what this is right this is important
because uh this directly reveals the
this quantity called the quantum tensor
g and so I can write down a metric
tensor this gig in quasi momentum space
that looks very similar to say what a
relativist would write down and
specifying distance and spaceime. So I'm
just making this point because this
allows us to think about the distances
in this uh this Hilbert space where the
wave functions live and how it's
actually important for describing uh the
properties of raw materials. Let me give
a concrete example of this. It's been
recently shown that in these systems
that have flat energy bands that make uh
touching points with other bands where
the wave function is illdefined at that
point uh you can have land levels where
these landout levels which were
previously very degenerate become split
and the splitting is spaced by this
quantum distance parameter. Right? So
this is actually relevant for the
behavior of physical systems.
I'll make a quick point about this
before I move on to the really really
cool thing and that's the effective size
of these direct similarities. So I can
evolve my system say from gamma over to
uh another gamma point and I can either
move my atoms through the direct point
or I can move them uh through this
brillow zone through this momentum space
uh at various distances from the direct
point. Okay, what do I see when I
measure the proportion of atoms in
different bands? Well, it uh you know
depending on if I go through the direct
point or not, it depends on how fast I
do so. So, uh for trajectories that go
from gamma to this direct point to gamma
say um say here or here, I essentially
see no variation in the distribution of
atoms between the ground and excited
bands. However, if I say go from gamma
to m to gamma where there's a gap, then
I see that as I go along this evolution
um increasingly slowly say from the um
increasingly slowly so the the blue to
the pink I see that more of my atoms
remain in their initial band that is in
the ground band as I do this evolution
and this is what you would expect from
like land physics. Okay. Now I can set a
threshold say 0.5 this dotted line and I
can see um for trajectories that don't
touch the direct point how uh the like
when the population of atoms reach this
threshold as a function of time which is
what I'm plotting here right and so what
this suggests is that these direct
points have an effective size that
depends on how fast I'm evolving my
system uh through this through this
space. Why is that? Well, at some point
I can evolve my system quickly with
respect to a local band gap, right? And
at that point, the bands look
effectively degenerate, right? So, it's
as though the singularity where the
bands are degenerate has grown in size.
Okay, this is the last sort of bit of
science. I know I'm at 50 minutes. Uh,
so I will wrap this up quickly. Uh, not
this part, the next part, the conclusion
rather quickly. Um this is a really
special measurement. Why is this
special? Uh well this is special because
before now uh this sort of experiment
couldn't be done using an ultra cold
atom system. Why is that? Okay. Well,
I'm now investigating a different kind
of uh touching point. This is not a band
touching point where the dispersion is
linear that has associated with it a pi
barrier phase. This quadratic band
touching point has associated with it a
two pi berry face which uh in an
interferometric measurement you cannot
distinguish from zero. Right? So as it
turns out uh in the typical way of doing
these measurements with cold atoms you
wouldn't be able to distinguish a
topologically
non-trivial
uh band touching point from a
topologically trivial one. However, by
doing quantum distance measurements like
uh what I've done recently, you're able
to see is this quadratic band touching
point topologically interesting? Is
there s some sort of winding number that
u that characterizes this touching point
like there is clearly for the direct
point? Okay. So, how do we do this?
Well, we're able to load our atoms uh
directly into the third energy band.
Okay. And I'm happy to talk about how we
do that perhaps later if people want to
ask about that. But we can load our
atoms directly into the third energy
band. What I showed in this band
structure that I calculated is that the
third energy band and the fourth energy
band they have a quadratic band touching
point. So I can uh load the atoms into
this third band say in some region here
and I can involve them over to the
quadratic band touching point. That's
what I'm showing in this Berlin zone
map. Load them into the third band. I
move over to the quadratic band touching
point. And again I'm going to turn by
some angle theta. that's going to make
some full loop around the quadratic band
touching point. Again, I can think about
this as a pseudo spin in a
pseudomagnetic field with one very
important difference.
As I make a loop around uh that goes
through the the the quadratic band
touching point the effective magnetic
field or the pseudomagnetic field that
my that described my system it wraps
twice for one revolution around this
point that's the special difference here
and I can see that in my measurement if
I go and measure the proportion of atoms
say in the third band or fourth or the
fourth band as a function of the angle
that I uh exit the quadratic band
touching point. Instead of one
oscillation switching between the two
bands, I see that there are two
oscillations. That's what I'm tracing
with my mouse. So I see that atoms
initially in the third band. Uh they
move into the into the fourth band back
into the third band into the fourth band
back into the third band over the same
region 0 to 2 pi. uh for which I
measured only one such rotation by going
through the direct point. Okay. And so
what we've measured here in both cases
for the direct point and the quadratic
band touching point is a winding number.
There's a winding number of one. That's
one rotation around the direct point or
winding number of two here for the
quadratic band touching point. Okay.
And so I've gotten to my conclusion. I
know I'm at 53 minutes. Sorry for going
a little bit into the questions. uh but
I want to conclude with this point that
an ultra cold atom quantum simulator is
a very powerful tool that allows for
simulation of real materials or toy
Hamiltonians that are still very
interesting. Um crucially measurements
of quantum distance allow the
non-trivial topology of both the rack
points and quadratic band touching
points to be directly revealed.
And in these measurements we've observed
quantized winding numbers of one
associated with the direct point and uh
two using this new technique that you
know which could not have been done
before. Uh we see a winding number of
two around the quadratic band touching
point. Okay. Uh so there's there's lots
of future work to be done here. You know
uh in many ways we're a Kome lattis team
that cares about flat bands. It turns
out that I have a lot of laser power and
so that third that third energy band
that I showed you uh where we have a
quadratic band touching point I can make
that band very flat by cranking up my
laser and so this gives us access to
this question that we care about a lot
and that is uh where do bzons condense
in a flat band and this is something
that we're interested in looking at um
the sort of immediate next project that
we're considering is what happens if you
hold atoms at these singularities for
various times.
uh the an example of which is I'm
showing right here. So in this
experiment, what we've done is we've
evolved the atoms to the quadratic band
touching point between the third and
fourth bands and we've held them there
for a while. I can't say a whole lot
about what's happening here, but
certainly interesting. you can see that
the atoms are aligning with the edges of
the third brilliant cell. Okay. Um and
so I just want to just sort of uh with
this uh suggest that you know this was
the start of some uh interesting
topological investigation of uh these
singularities. But you know we can also
use this uh evolution through momentum
space to study things like squeezing as
it appears in these cold atom systems.
associated with the band structure which
I believe is related to what we're
seeing here in this uh image of atoms
that I took in the lab. Okay. And uh let
me make one one more quick point very
very quick. Uh I think this is very
interesting. Two-time Nobel laurate
Lionus Pauling on one particularly
cranky morning once said there's no such
thing as quasi crystals only quasi
scientists.
Um now uh despite that fact uh the
people had discovered specifically Dan
Checkman had discovered a five-fold
rotation symmetric quasi crystal right
this is a rotation symmetry that's not
allowed for periodic latises and this uh
result from this PRL from back in the
80s shows exactly this from this
aluminum maganesees alloy so what are
quasi crystals they are periodic but uh
they are aperiodic but ordered they have
no translation symmetry one thing that's
interesting interesting is that super
connectivity back in 2018 was uh shown
and it looks like that in these solid
state five-fold rotation uh symmetric
quasi crystals there's a maybe
interesting form of super conductivity
that would be interesting to study um
but I find it particularly interesting
to think about what happens
um to say firmians in the system in
terms of the the phase diagram that you
might be able to explore you don't have
well- definfined you don't have
translation symmetry So you don't have a
well- definfined firming surface. And so
I think that uh such a five-fold
rotation symmetric ultra cold atom quasi
crystal would be generally interesting
to study you know quantum physics of
quasi crystals how wave pack is diffused
in this quasi crystals this uh
particularly a unique type of exitation
called phasons that exist and generally
topology in quasi crystals. Okay thanks
for entertaining me going to the
questions I am all done. Thank you very
much.
Okay. Uh so let's thank Charles. Uh
and we uh definitely have time for
questions. So um I why don't we just
have people unmute uh and as long as we
can keep it orderly ask their questions
that way.
Okay. Even though he planted this
question, I'd like to know how he loads
directly into the third zone.
Yeah. So,
I can do so by translating a lattice
um that almost doesn't look like a
lattice. So, there's this idea of recoil
energy. This is important. And it's not
really until the depth of my lattice
exceeds the recoil energy that the atoms
really sense a lattice. So what I can do
is have a very shallow uh lattice like a
very shallow potential energy minimum. I
can translate it to some
quasi momentum that is
um
that is associated with the third
brillin zone such that when I finally
ramp up my lattice and I open up gaps my
atoms are adiabatically loaded into the
third band. So let me let me try to do
some stuff with my hands. Maybe that
would be helpful. uh for free particles
I have just a quadratic uh dispersion
right so imagine just one dimensional uh
onedimensional system with uh no lice
the energy versus momentum of my
particles just looks like a parabola
right and so I can mark where the first
brerin zone would be or the second
brillin zone would be where the third
brillin zone would be right imagine that
I move the momentum of my particles over
to the third brerin zone and then I ramp
up this system and open up gaps at the
brerland zone edges. Then uh the only
state that I can connect to is the state
uh in the third band that's associated
to the fact that I move my atoms
momentum all the way over to where the
third brilland zone is.
Great. Thanks. Other questions?
Jack, can I ask a question?
Yeah, of course. Anybody can ask a
question.
Hey, hey, Charles. Um, so nice talk. Um,
so you were mentioning quantum
simulation, but you didn't comment on on
interactions. So, every single single
part of physics. Can you actually say
first why interactions are negligible in
the physics that you studied? And what
would be interesting if you're taking
interactions into account?
Yeah. Um
so we do not have good control over the
interactions in our system. Um you know
it would be nice if we had we had this
nice uh these nice sketchbach
interactions right that are tunable with
magnetic field where we can actually
explore this. uh we go through we we
definitely go through at least for these
experiments we went through attempts to
minimize interaction effects because we
we didn't want to see that in this
experiment and we did so by trying to
use as shallow as shallow of lises as
possible such that in the individual
wells of the lattice uh you can sort of
decrease what the density of bzons want
to be um and by um
uh just starting off in the beginning of
the measurement with a BC that has a
smaller atom number, right? That's about
all we can do to decrease the
interactions. Um, now how do I know that
interactions don't play a big role? Uh,
well, it's because I don't see any
strong effect of gapping, for example,
uh, at the direct point, right? So I
would expect that if I had some
significant interactions then I would
open up a significant gap and I can
evolve my atoms through the rack point
more slowly and more slowly. Um and I I
let's see I can evolve my atoms through
the rack point at which case I would
expect to see atoms go from the ground
band to the excited band because of this
um this offdagonal element of the bar
connection I mentioned. But I go more
slowly and more slowly and more slowly
and I can never I never get to a
situation where I don't see that that
where I don't see the the state rotation
the flipping from ground to excited B.
If I had sufficiently strong
interactions I would open up a gap and
if there's a minimum gap then there's a
there's a sufficiently slow speed at
which I would be able to evolve my atoms
and not see any atoms go to the second
layer. And we've looked for it and we
just can't see it. Uh truth be told, I
think that there's probably some tiny
gap that comes from uh uh vector stark
shift, right? So there's a polarization
change that happens across the uh the A
and B sides of my unit cell. And for
that reason, I I know that technically
there has to be a small gap. It's just
really really small. So small that we
can't see it. And it's not important on
any relevant time scales of this
experiment.
I'm gonna uh
oh sorry can I just add one more thing
uh so you're asking about why it would
be interesting to study interactions uh
so I think that's particularly
interesting for the quadratic band
touching point so there's a bunch of
cool work that suggests that maybe
interactions would cause a quadratic
band touching point to break into
multiple direct points for example so if
you have some tunable interactions then
maybe you can see these interesting
topological transitions where a
quadratic band touching point say splits
into two direct points I would like to
look at
Um leet you're saying
yeah uh yeah it turns into discussion so
I'm not sure I'll just take you know
maybe 90 seconds
that's fine we started a few minutes
late so I think it's okay to to stick
around a few minutes past five
yeah so yeah this question about
interaction is actually very interesting
but I would think you know that um let's
start with just with with bos condensate
without all these additional uh problems
right so then basically you have a
certain spread in momentum space and the
stronger the interaction is the bigger
the spread of the in the momentum space.
You have shown this figure in the
beginning of this uh yellow thing on the
blue background, right? And the stronger
the interaction, the wider the momentum
spread of your of your both condensate
state, I would say, right?
So I think that uh you indeed don't want
strong interactions between because you
want a a nice momentum resolution. Y
um now as to the opening of the gap
because of interactions is less clear
because this gap is just a single
particle effect, right? It's an effect
of a of an atom in the field of lasers.
Um so it's not obvious to me that
actually you'll open a gap by
interactions.
Yeah, I'm I'm totally not suggesting
that is obvious, but we can uh we can
sort of look at
what looks like uh
Okay, so I realize it's sort of strange
to talk about band structure when you're
talking about interactive systems, but
we can just write out what the band
structure looks like when you consider
say the density of the BC and we do see
what looks like uh depending on the how
dense the BC is gaps open. So that's
where that comes from. I totally don't
think that it's obvious.
But but what is the widths? I mean
regardless BC or not BC. So what is the
widths of the momentum
uh um spread uh in in the in the state
you prepared that you that pass through
the direct point.
Yeah. So
compare to the to the to the brilliant
zone size.
Yeah. So it's about um so the this is
not suggested by the images that I
showed but the in units of H bar K the
spread is something like um like one or
two% of HK
narrow. Yeah.
Yeah. And they look bigger because you
know artifacts of the imaging that we
do. So that's why I look big on the
brillinsome maps that I showed, but in
actuality it's one to two% of H market.
And and after you scatter, the size is
the same. It's it's still 1% of of
brillian zone or
uh yeah, we don't we actually don't
really see that change.
I see. Okay.
Yeah.
Okay. So we're up on time, but I did see
one hand from Yorum. Yurum, is your
question sort of on the briefer side?
Yeah, I can be very brief. So
Okay. And then
in quantum simulation
usually the hop in the experiment you
can measure something that the theorist
cannot calculate if the system is very
big in their interaction.
So in your physics which is mostly
single electron physics is there
something challenging you can do that we
theorists cannot calculate
with the with the system that I
described today.
Yes. or or maybe with future systems.
Well, I think with the I mean I think if
I switched I I would suspect uh sort of
generically that if I used uh firmians
instead
then you know the the degree to which
properties can of this system can be
predicted
uh it becomes much much more difficult
to do so I I would I would think that
the best case for the use of a quantum
simulator uh although I think it's
important to do lots of stuff with bzons
and lises like this we're going to talk
about quantum simulation then I think
you should look at firmians. I think
that there's lots of stuff with firmians
and lises uh where experimentalists can
sort of help guide the sort of things
that the community including theorists
are are thinking about.
Right.
Anyway, say very nice talk. Thank you
very much for that.
So I think that's a good good place to
close the physics club here. Thank you
Charles for your talk. Just thank
Charles one more time and thanks
everyone for attending. I'll be closing
out the meeting, but uh look forward to
seeing you all in the near future.
Thank you very much,
Charles.
Thank you. Byebye.
See you tomorrow, Charles. Very nice
talk.