What do you think this microphone in
front of me is made out of?
&gt;&gt; I think it's made out of mental states,
mind states, and the matter that we
attribute to it is an extrinsic
appearance and an image of mental
states.
&gt;&gt; Okay, quite a quite a concise answer to
to what can be in this context quite a
complicated question and perhaps one
that's already raised a few eyebrows. I
think that if you ask the average person
on the street, "What is a microphone
made out of?" They might tell you it's
made out of, you know, metal. You ask
them what metal's made out of, and you
sort of keep going down until you get
to, it's made out of atoms. And you ask,
"What's an atom made out of?" Well, it's
made out of, you know, electrons. And
what's an electron made out of, and they
kind of begin to struggle a little bit.
And this is an idea that that I've been
interested in recently. And there's this
growing popularity in the suggestion
that once we get down to the foundation
of reality, we're talking about
something like consciousness or mind.
I've been talking about that in the
context of pansychism. Uh you have a a
few choice words for pansychism which
hopefully we can get into and we can
critique it. But I think they kind of
come from the same kind of starting
point which is that this assumption of
materialism that everything is kind of
made up of stuff like you know inert
atoms that bump into each other is
somehow mistaken bearing in mind that
probably the majority of people are
listen who are listening are
materialists I would assume. How do you
begin getting into a discussion about
what the world is really made of and
trying to argue that materialism is
false? Well, we need to get out some of
the uh false implications that people
usually derive if I say that the
microphone is made of mental state. I'm
not denying metal. I'm not denying what
appears to perception and measurement as
matter as atoms. These things are
empirically verified. We can measure
this stuff. There is something out there
that goes by the name of atom and metal
and aluminium and so forth. None of that
is denied. I'm not denying that there is
an external world beyond my mind. What
I'm saying is that these external world
beyond my mind just like my mind is also
made of mental states. And just as my
mental states appear to you as matter,
my brain, the atoms of my body, you
know, the very measurable, very physical
stuff. So the mental states that
constitute the external world appear to
me as matter. part of which is this
microphone made of mental states in
front of you. So we we have to avoid
this cultural culture induced um wrong
implications and false dichotomy and
start by saying what we are not denying
so people don't run away uh with an
assumption that is false and then
explain what we do mean. So the real
world so to speak is out there. You
know, some people think that if you
think that everything's made up of mind,
that kind of the microphone is like just
an idea in my head or that I've somehow
created it by my imagination. A bit like
a dream that I'm having right now. But
that's that's not what you're getting
at, right?
&gt;&gt; It's not what I'm saying. Uh what what
you are describing is either soypism or
a version of subjective idealism. Allah
Barkley who said uh to be is to be
perceived. So things exist only in so
far as they are perceived. I'm not
saying that. What I'm saying is that
yes, there is a world out there
independent of my mind. Um, a world that
does what it does and would still do it
even if I were not here to perceive it.
Even if there were nobody here to
perceive it. Uh, but that world too is
just just like me is made of mental
states. And when there is a perceiver,
those mental states appear to the
perceiver according to the qualities
that we describe as physicality like
extension, texture, temperature, weight,
and so forth. So what's wrong with
saying that? Okay, I agree that there's
a world outside of my own mental, you
know, perceptions, but that world is
just a physical world, and all there is
is physicality. things like mass,
charge, extension, texture, those kinds
of things. If you just add those up
together, you get a complete description
of everything in the world with the
exception maybe of, you know, conscious
states like in human beings. But this
microphone is is just made out of
physical material. What's what's wrong
with that?
&gt;&gt; Well, it leads to all kinds of insoluble
problems and um and significant um
implications that we don't need to deal
with if this story is not true. Let me
give you an example. Um if you say that
yes all this physical stuff that we
measure is the fundamental layer of
reality and there is nothing else that
it is beyond how it appears to me.
Basically we are saying then that the
numina are the phenomena. The thing in
itself is its appearance to observation.
If we say that we are saying that the
world is made of non-concious stuff
fundamentally non-concious because
consciousness is precisely the idea that
there is something it is like to be the
world beyond my own perception of it. Uh
there is another onlogical ground beyond
how things appear to me. There are there
is this thing as what something is in
and for itself. If we eliminate that,
then we have to reduce consciousness to
fundamentally unconscious stuff which
nobody has managed to do and I would
claim it has been proven to be even an
incoherent thing to try. It's it's wrong
in principle. It's like saying um how do
you reduce the number five to a marital
status something illogical uh uh like
this um it leads to also um
unfortunate psychological implications
uh the most important of which is that
um if consciousness is just some kind of
epiphenomenal if mentation is an
epiphenomenal fundamentally non-mental
stuff that ex that exists only so far as
the stuff I can measure about it um then
we are oddities in the universe. We
don't really belong here. We are a
peculiar accident uh that's coming to an
end. Our consciousness if it is an
epiphenomena of particular
configurations of matter when those
configurations cease to exist like when
my body decomposes and loses its
structural and dynamic integrity then my
consciousness ends and everything that
it is like to be me comes to an end and
therefore I'm already dead. I just don't
know it yet. everything is ultimately
for nothing. All of these implications
arise from this seemingly small step of
saying well if we are all acknowledging
that there is an external world it is
not a big deal to say then it is just
what it seems to be in other words it's
just what I can measure it's just what I
perceive and there is no inner world to
it there is no inner being to it seems
like a small step but it is it is a
gigantic not only logically and
empirically unjustified but a gigant
gigantic step as far as human psychology
and culture are concerned and it's
unfortunate.
&gt;&gt; Can you talk to me about the difference
between qualities and quantities and why
that's relevant here and what it says
about the materialist hypothesis?
&gt;&gt; Quantities are descriptions. If I take
this bottle of water and I put a tape
measure next to it and I and I say,
"Well, this is 45 cm long," that's a
description of my experience of seeing
the the water bottle. If you tell me
it's 45 cm, I I'll have an idea of what
to expect if I were to perceive it. If
you tell me it's 45 kilometers, then
I'll have a very different expectation
of what I would experience when I
perceived it. So quantities the entire
stuff that constitutes the the the
substance of science are descriptions.
Qualities are the thing described.
Qualities are the stuff that appears on
the screen of perception. The stuff we
are acquainted with before we take a
tape measure to it. I know that there
are qualities associated with this water
bottle. I feel its weight. I feel its
texture. I see the quality of its
colors. The the silver, the white, the
black, the patterns of pigment on it.
These are qualities. Qualities are
um experiential states. What it feels
like to perceive, to feel, to do, and so
forth. Quantities are descriptions of
what appears on the screen of
perception, which of course is eminently
qualitative. Everything on the screen of
perception is qualitative. colors,
textures, sounds, melodies, aromomas,
flavors, and so forth. All of it, all of
it is qualitative. Uh quantities are how
we describe the stuff that appears on
the screen of perception. Now, what is
cruel about our cultural situation is
that um even though we all start from
qualities, you know, 300,000 years ago
when homo sapiens took the first step,
well maybe a little longer than that, um
all we had were qualities. And then at
some point couple of hundred years ago
we started we we we discovered it was
very useful to describe these qualities
through quantities. And now we think all
there is are quantities and qualities
are somehow epiphenomena sort of a magic
trick conjured up by the meat inside
your skull. It's a peculiar cultural
evolution and if you really contemplate
it along its historical axis um it is
incredibly nonsense for future
generations will will have a good laugh
at us at our expense.
I have no doubt you you expound upon
this criticism in I mean two of your
books uh why materialism is baloney and
also analytic idealism in a nutshell.
analytic idealism is the name of your
worldview. Uh and and you you press this
point I think quite powerfully that that
once explained seems actually a little
bit obvious that yeah we sort of
describe the world in terms of
mathematical formulations it's its
weight its extension its length that
kind of stuff but the thing in itself
has to preede the evaluation and
description of and prediction about the
behaviors of the thing. the thing itself
has to exist in the first place. And
you've compared this before to going
like hiking in the mountains and using a
map and being like, you know, you
experience the mountains and you've
tried to describe very accurately the
the topography of of the mountain range
on this piece of paper which you call a
map. And then somehow people have begun
to think that instead of the map being,
you know, emergent of the of the of the
mountain, you had the mountain and then
you made the map out of it. That somehow
the mountain sort of mysteriously comes
out of the map and that the map is the
only thing we have
&gt;&gt; and that the mountain is just emergent
from this descriptive thing that we came
up with like what like 10 years ago. And
not only that, you're doing it while
you're stood on top of a mountain, you
know.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; And we are stood in the face of
perception. We experience things as
qualia as the philosophers call it. You
know, we experience colors and smells
and tastes. And it's a complete mystery
why it is that if I, you know, if I look
at a a blue light, it produces the
feeling of of seeing blue instead of the
feeling of tasting a hamburger or
something. And all we do is we just know
that well when that happens this
experience happens. We know that they
correlate. But the question we need to
answer is like why? Why do they come
together? And the materialist just sort
of doesn't have doesn't sort of move the
dial there at all. Like does materialism
have anything going for it?
&gt;&gt; I don't think materialism has anything
at all going for it. I think it is a
artifact of a sociopolitical dynamics
that um unfolded um a few hundred years
ago, 3 400 years ago. Um it it it it
doesn't do anything for us. It has zero
explanatory power because all we have as
far as pre theoretical data is concerned
are qualitative states. Well,
materialism doesn't explain a single
qualitative state. So, it doesn't
explain anything pre- theoretical. It
only explains its own assumptions in a
in a circular way. Contradicts empirical
evidence emerging from foundations of
physics from the neuroscience of
consciousness. Um it is uh circular. I
think it is logically inconsistent. It
it is incoherent with an overall model
uh of what's going on. Uh so no I don't
think it does anything for us. It's a
bad habit of thought that arose out of
social political motivations. you know
there the church was in Europe 4 500
years ago uh the most powerful
institution and and it would repress
anybody who threatened its its um power
and and it's it's a peculiar form of
power because here we have an
institution that dominated the European
continent for a thousand years and
didn't have an army except perhaps for
the couple of hundred years of the
Templars but they were an army meant to
to fight other people elsewhere not to
enforce the rule of the church. So that
power was entirely based on uh ideas,
expectations, theories, beliefs. Um and
uh it was important for early science to
carve out a space in society for it to
exist without being burned at the stake
like Bruno was in 1600. So it made sense
then as a social political move to say
well there is this other realm fees or
physics that is separate from uh from
psyche or soul mind consciousness spirit
whatever you want to call it the
original word Greek was psyche uh and
therefore if we do physics we are not
threatening the church and the church
doesn't burn us at the stake the problem
is that around the 19th century middle
of the 19th century we started actually
believing is um the founders of the
enlightenment didn't believe it. Um
Diddo was very cleareyed that
materialism didn't work. It was a tool
against the church church. But by the
time NE was running around writing, you
know, we actually believed that stuff.
Uh and to this day, uh it's changing,
but we we still believe this stuff that
it it just doesn't work. It doesn't do
anything. It just leads us to insoluble
problems and incoherences.
&gt;&gt; We'll get back to the show in just a
moment, but first, if you're a regular
viewer, you'll know that for some time
now, I've been recommending a way to
deal with a problem that pervades all of
our lives, and that's the problem of
bias. Particularly in news media and
particularly online, bias is something
that will just never go away. But
fortunately, there is a tool that we can
use to manage and navigate online bias,
and that's today's sponsor, Ground News.
Ground News aggregates thousands of
local and international news outlets all
in one place so you can compare
reporting across the political spectrum.
Try it out at ground.news/
alexoc. Take a look at this story about
ancient microbes waking up after being
frozen in Arctic perafrost for 40,000
years. Using ground news, I can see that
for whatever reason, right-leaning
sources just aren't reporting on this
story. You can see it's 29% left-leaning
and 71% in the center. So, if you only
tend to read right leaning news, you
could just miss this story altogether.
Ground News even has a dedicated blind
spot tab which specifically seeks out
stories that you would otherwise miss
based on the news that you normally
read. So, cut through the bias and help
get to the real story by going to
ground.news/exoc
or by scanning the QR code that's on
your screen. Use my link to get 40% off
their unlimited access Vantage plan. And
with that said, back to the show. I
think what you're saying is true. And I
also just want to clarify for people
listening. You know, we're kind of
talking about consciousness and mental
states. This isn't just a view that
materialism doesn't account for like
consciousness or like the brain and the
brain's production of, you know,
emotions and stuff. This is a view that
materialism doesn't explain anything
like not one thing whatsoever. Because
what materialism does is it describes
and my favorite example of this is Isaac
Newton himself who sort of realizes that
the same thing that causes you know like
an apple to fall to the ground is the
same thing that keeps planets in orbit
around each other. He realizes it's like
the same thing going on. ah this is sort
of universal force that we call gravity
and he perfectly you know mathematically
describes it inverse square law all of
this writes the principia mathematica
absolute brilliant work of undisputed
genius and in the scolium to the second
edition he writes explicitly
as for what this gravity thing is as for
like why it does this I've got abs I've
got no idea like who knows I don't know
why it's doing it all I'm doing is just
describing the relations between things
and so to say that materialism
doesn't explain anything, I think, isn't
to like insult it exactly. It's just to
point out a category mistake.
Materialism can't explain. It only ever
describes it describes quantities. It
describes extension. It describes
weight. It describes distance. It
describes all that kind of stuff,
behaviors. And but if you ask a
physicist, even a physicist, like what
actually is an electron? What actually
is, you know, a a quark made out of?
They'll only ever be able to tell you
what it does. they'll tell you something
about its charge or something about its
mass which is also determined uh defined
in terms of what it does. So we've got
this kind of problem here, right? That
this modern common scientific idea that
materialism will will save the world and
explain everything kind of doesn't
explain anything. So there's like a bit
of a a bit of like a problem like a gap
going on in our thinking.
&gt;&gt; I I I think I would disagree with you
when you said it's not a problem that
materialism doesn't explain anything. Um
um I have the the following idea. I know
some people don't agree with what I'm
about to say, but um to me it's
self-evident. Uh materialism is a
metaphysics. It's a statement about what
nature is and isn't. It's the statement
that nature is what we can measure and
it isn't fundamentally mental in any way
whatsoever. Whatever it is, it is not
mental. This is a metaphysical
statement. It's a statement about being
metaphysics that which stands behind
physics that which is as opposed to what
behaves. Um materialism is a
metaphysics. Science is in principle
metaphysically agnostic. You can do a
whole of science without having a single
metaphysical conclusion or assumption.
You don't need to know what things are.
You only need to describe how they
behave. In other words, science is the
activity of predicting what nature would
do next. Science cannot methodologically
speaking um make any statement about
what nature is. It's not equipped to do
so as a method. Science is an
observation of the regularities of
nature's behavior, the modeling of those
regularities and on the basis of this
model, the prediction of what nature
would do next. So science is perfectly
okay to not explain the what and the
wise in terms of what things are and why
they do what they do. That's not for
science. Science is about what will
happen next. What are we going to see
next? That's what the method the science
scientific method allows us to do. Um so
it's legitimate that science doesn't say
what things are. It doesn't need to. It
it it can't and it's there is that's not
what its value is all about. Its value
is about predicting behavior. But
materialism is not science. Materialism
is a metaphysics and as such it is a
statement about what things are. If that
statement is internally inconsistent,
incoherent, has no explanatory power and
defies empirical evidence, then it's
just bad bad metaphysics. We should have
another one.
Well, a few questions come to mind which
you know I I I think I I know the answer
to but I I'd love to hear what you think
about this. People will say
okay yeah sure science does make
predictions right like one of the great
things about science is that we now know
that if we lob an object at a particular
velocity we can predict exactly where
it's going to land and we can send
rockets to the moon and stuff. But the
reason we can make predictions is
because we've come up with theories,
right? Like the reason I can predict
that a rocket with this much thrust will
sort of, you know, reach the planet
Jupiter or whatever is because we've
developed a theory of, I don't know,
rocket propulsion or whatever and a
theory of gravity and a, you know, a
theory of how electricity works that
allows us to run the electronics and all
this kind of stuff. And those theories,
as well as predicting, you know, what's
going to happen, they also explain why
it's doing it, right? like the the
rocket is is is flying because of
gravity and and sort of the way that it
interacts with the thrust of the rocket.
You know, gravity pulls it down, the
thrust goes upwards. And that that's a
perfect explanation as to as to why the
rocket is lifting, right? Oh, science
can give you the wise of behavior in the
sense of elaborating on the causal
chains that have led to certain
behaviors and even predicting future
behaviors. Um but when we
think that science is making
metaphysical statements for instance the
world is made of atoms and atoms uh have
neutrons and protons and the nucleus and
electrons uh in the orbitals. Um we tend
to think that um it is intrinsic to the
scientific method to discover what
things actually are but it is not. The
entire history of science is the history
of the betterment of our convenient
fictions. Science does not need to pin
down what things are. It only needs to
come up with a convenient fiction that
is such that the world behaves as though
that convenient fiction were true. It
gives us a sort of a a handle on how to
think about things. But those convenient
fictions do not need to be true. Even if
they are false, they still have great
value. I give you two historical
examples. You're talking about Newton.
So Newton's convenient fiction was that
there was this invisible force that
acted at a distance without contact and
instantaneously pulling celestial bodies
to one another. The French couldn't take
this seriously for 50 years. They
thought it was some magical woo woo.
Instantaneous acting forces at a
distance without contact. What the hell
was that? So the force of gravity was a
convenient fiction. Whether it was true
or not doesn't matter. We put a man on
the moon using that convenient fiction.
It's a way to think about what's going
on. We imagine that there is this
magical force that acts at a distance.
Needless to say, Einstein came around
with general relativity and today we go
like there is no such a force. What
passes for gravity is just a curvature
of spacetime. Matter deforms spaceime
shift shifts the axis of time towards
the center of something and that becomes
your future. That's why you fall because
your future points to the center of the
earth. That's why you fall. Oh, that's a
new convenient fiction. The spa
spacetime is a fabric that bends and
twists that you can actually deform and
then comes around. Look quantum gravity.
Oh, there is a time gravity is is is
just sort of an emergent thing out of
microscopic abstract quantum patterns
and processes going on. So our
convenient fictions change all the time.
That's perfectly all right. Uh, the
world behaves as though convenient
fiction A were true until we measure
better and we look closer. Oh,
convenient fiction A is now not good
enough. We come up with convenient
fiction B. And then we evolve. We
measure more, more precision, more
measurements, more observations. Oh, B
is also not good enough. Convenient
fiction C. You can do the entirety of
science with convenient fictions. Atoms
are convenient fictions. We reduce atoms
to uh uh uh so-called uh um subatomic uh
particles uh and those subatomic
particles are reduced to the excitations
of quantum fields and we imagine that
there are 17 of them plus gravity. What
is a quantum field? Nobody can tell you
what it is because it's defined in terms
of how it behaves. In other words, it's
a convenient fiction. It helps us to
imagine the universe as a stack of 17
specially unbound quantum fields. Some
of which interact with others, some of
which hardly interact with anything
else. It it helps us think of things
this way. It doesn't mean that there is
a thing out there called a quantum
field. No, the world behaves as though
there were 17 quantum fields. Eventually
we will succeed in some grand
unification theory and there will be one
quantum field and even gravity will be
folded uh into that with some arcane
mathematics and acrobatics. We will get
to that and even then that will just be
the new uh uh convenient fiction. So
science is not in the business of
telling us what the world is. This is a
quite a fundamental misunderstanding of
what the scientific method is all about.
Science is in the business of telling us
what we will see next. And in the
process of doing that, it helps to come
up with a convenient fiction in terms of
which we can
think of a model that accounts for what
we will see next.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. I mean, people will want to say,
okay, I get what you're saying, like
science realistically only tells you
what things do. And fundamentally, yeah,
if you ask me to describe what a quantum
field is or what an electron is or
something, I I'll sort of tell you what
it does. But but like that's all there
is because, you know, I I look at a
microscope and I can I can observe an
atom. I can look around me and I can
observe a physical world. People sort of
imagine that we're the these sort of
conscious agents who sit inside of our
own heads and we've got these little
like windows, you know, our eyes and our
ears and little sort of sense perception
all over our skin and and what we're
essentially doing is just sort of like
letting in information, right? And
because you know if the world is mental,
you know, I I can't control the world
around me like I can control my own
thoughts. I can think happy things and
sad things, but the world outside of me,
it impresses itself upon me, right? And
when it does
it, it feels like I'm sort of, you know,
accepting some input data. So, aren't we
just kind of, you know, astronauts of
the material world just sort of flying
through and and having access to the
things around us like accurately
represented to our to our minds.
&gt;&gt; Well, clearly the world impinges itself
on us, right? That's what that's the
experience we call life and being in the
world. Um but the idea that what is out
there
consists only of how it appears to us
can be immediately contradicted by an
element of the world that um we are very
acquainted with and that's ourselves.
Um, imagine if an alien came here and uh
looked at you uh dressed in your black
t-shirt with his microphone in front of
you, nodding as you're nodding right now
or justiculating with your hands. And
the alien would say, "That's all there
is to Alex.
Alex is just the set of images that I
perceive. There is nothing more to the
reality of Alex than how Alex appears to
me. the gesticulation, the nodding, and
you know, the movements and the words
that come out of Alex's mouth and so on
and so forth. Well, you would know that
if you know anything ever, you would
know this that the aliens assertion is
untrue because behind
underlying and somehow imminent in what
the alien sees, there is the inner life
of Alex, which is the real Alex. It's
the numinal Alex as opposed to the
phenomenal Alex. It's the thing in
itself as opposed to how it appears to
external observation. And that is very
very very important for Alex that Alex
is not just a set of external
appearances that there is an inner life
there is an inner reality a numinal
reality to Alex. Now take the next step.
What is the appearance of Alec? You
know, Alex has a numinal reality, but
clearly Alex also has a phenomenal
reality. You look in the mirror and you
see it. What is that reality? Well, it's
made of the same kinds of atoms and
fields that constitute the rest of the
universe.
So at least in Alex's case,
atoms and fields, all the physical stuff
is what Alex's numinal world, Alex's
inner life looks like when Alex is
observed from the outside. At least in
that one case, matter is the extrinsic
appearance of inner mentation, inner
mental state. That's why there is this
correlation between inner experience and
brain states, right? and one is the
appearance of the other. Of course, they
correlate. Um, so unless you're prepared
to postulate some gratuitous completely
arbitrary discontinuiting nature, we
have then to at least be open to the
possibility that not only in Alex's
case, but in the rest of all other cases
in this universe, matter too is the
extrinsic appearance of some form of
qualitative inner reality. that is the
only reasonable
um null hypothesis here. In other words,
you need argument to defend some other
hypothesis because the the face value
situation is that my body is made of the
same atoms and force fields as the rest
of the universe. Clearly, my body is how
my mental inner life appears to outside
of observation. So the same should hold
to the rest uh um above the rest of the
universe. That doesn't mean that I'm
saying everything is conscious. I'm not
saying that. I'm saying that all matter
is the extrinsic appearance of inner
mental state.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Okay. So we'll we'll slow down a
little bit here. We'll try and sort of
pull this apart just to make sure
everybody's everybody's following along.
Um
there is a sort of sense in which there
is a me, right? Like this is why people
have been motivated to come up with like
mind body dualism and things like this
and and sort of debate it till the cow
come home because it feels like there is
this thing called me which is not quite
the same thing as like you know my my
hands or physical matter and the clothes
that I'm wearing and stuff. there's like
this me somewhere. But just for the
materialist as well, like there is some
sense in which I just am this collection
of atoms. You know, I just am the
collection of atoms that's in my brain
and my body. And it sounds like you want
to say that's kind of true, but in the
opposite direction where like the
materialist says you have a bunch of
matter and that just somehow is the same
thing as this conscious experience. If
I'm hearing you correctly, you're saying
you are just this conscious experience.
you are just this like mentality.
It's just that if you look at that from
the outside, it just looks like a brain.
It just looks like a person. And so it's
not that you have this brain activity
and it's mysteriously correlated with
experience. Why is this neuron firing
correlated with the experience of red?
You're also not saying that well the
brain activity just like is the
experience of red. It's that the brain
activity is what the experience of red
looks like from the outside. From the
inside it looks like red, but from the
outside it looks like a neuron firing.
Something like that.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly right. There is only ever
inner experience except that I can have
an inner experience that correlates with
your inner experience. And to me, your
inner experience appears as the body of
Alex with arms, legs, mouth, nose, and
the movements of Alex's body. So there
are only ever mental states. This is the
most parsimonious um hypothesis,
metaphysical hypothesis there can be. Of
course, we have been culturally
indoctrinated
into attributing intuitiveness to the
notion that there is this fundamental
separation between mental states and
physical states. Even though all we can
ever know by direct acquaintance when it
comes to physical states are the
qualities of physical states as they
appear on the screen of perception, the
stuff you see, hear, touch, taste,
smell, and so forth. Um I am not a
dualist. I think dualism has some
fundamental problems like the
interaction problem. If matter and mind
as are fundamentally different then they
shouldn't it shouldn't be possible for
them to interact because they pertain to
two completely disjoint ontological
domains right and dualism says that they
are fundamentally different but they do
interact. I see that as a contradiction
and even if it is in principle tenable I
think dualism is unnecessary. It's it's
it's um it's not parsimonious. It's
inflationary. We don't need another kind
of state beyond mental states to make
sense of the world. We just have to
understand that there are mental states
I have direct access to. Those are my
own. And mental states I only have
indirect access to mediated by the
screen of perception. But the contents
of my screen of perception are also
mental states that represent other
mental states out there to which I have
no direct access. This is enough. So I
wouldn't go down the avenue of dualism.
It may be
it it may be a more intuitive step
because of our religious history and so
forth. But uh I I don't think it's
ultimately helpful. I think we should
bite the bullet and sort of get our
thinking uh uh going in a in a coherent
line as opposed to sort of conceding too
much.
&gt;&gt; Well, you know, Dayart when he sort of
proposes his famous formulation of mind
body dualism, the idea that these are
like separate substances is motivated by
the thought that
these seem in principle to be separable.
Like I can imagine myself existing
without my body. I can just kind of
imagine being like this sort of
abstractly existing consciousness
personhood somewhere in the ether with
no hands, no no brain, no anything. I
can imagine that. I can also obviously
imagine like a body that's not conscious
like a corpse or something. So at least
conceptually these two things seem to be
distinct. And if they're distinct
concepts that gives us some good reason
to think that they are like distinct
things, even if they happen to sort of
overlap in a really serious way. So, I
got to say like that makes sense to me
as a thought, right? Like I feel like I
can imagine myself without a brain and
I'm a little bit confused as to whether
you would be able to imagine yourself
without a brain. So, I just wonder what
you thought about that.
&gt;&gt; Completely.
&gt;&gt; Totally. I can imagine that. So, it is
conceivable, but conceivability is is
not sufficient to to pronounce something
as a viable or plausible hypothesis. Um,
look, I will acknowledge this. There is
a lazy,
not rigorous
um incoherent line of thought according
to which this separation between mind
and matter makes sense.
I acknowledge that. But that's not what
we are talking about. We we are talking
about disciplined reasoning guided by
logic and empirical evidence. We we can
do better than just go with whatever
sounds more intuitive to our culturally
indoctrinated mindset, right? We can do
better than that. That's what philosophy
is all about. I think the the reason
that I asked that is because I mean you
say that you know a person or at least a
brain I'm not entirely clear on this um
is what like you know a mental state
looks like from the outside. And what
I'm saying is if you can imagine you
existing without a brain like in that
I'm not saying that's actually how the
world really is but just step into that
possible world for a moment where you
exist but you have no brain or or
physical body of any kind. What does
that look like in that possible world?
You know somebody who looks at you
without the brain if in the real world
the brain is just what you look like.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. That's why I was I was confused as
to whether you would be able to imagine
such a thing because you think that you
just are what a what a sort of brain
presents itself to other people.
&gt;&gt; Not only can we imagine it, we can
actually experience something very close
to it. If you put yourself in a in the
best sensory deprivation tank you can
buy, flotation tank. Um, and you go into
it and it's almost perfectly dark,
almost perfectly silent and you're
floating in high salinity water. So you
don't have the sense of touch either or
the or weight. You don't have any sense
of texture. There is no smell. There is
no flavor. You are essentially just your
endogenous inner life. There is no
perceptual stimulus triggering anything
in the screen of perception. So there is
no matter in that state. There is only
thought, emotion, imagination, fantasy,
intuition,
reasoning, abstraction. But there is no
extension. There is no salty or sweet.
There is no weight. There is no texture.
Um there is no color. There's no melody.
None of that. So that is what you're
asking for. You imagine yourself in a
world that is devoid of perception. Is
there anything left? Of course, it's
your entire inner life. It's the things
that matter most to you. Your memories,
your thoughts, your your opinions, your
views, your imagination, your dreams,
your fears, all of that is still there.
Now, if somebody else
&gt;&gt; were to enter that sensory deprivation
chamber with a a a a
night vision scope,
that inner life of yours would appear to
that person as a humanoid body floating
in salt water. Um so this is the most
parsimmonious and it's eminently
coherent. um hypothesis about what's
going on. There are only mental states
and of course there are boundaries how
those mental states sort of cohhere
together to form mental complexes. Um
this coherence uh of certain mental
states together to form complexes define
boundaries what is outside and inside
that mental complex. Now my body seems
to form the boundaries of a mental
complex I call Bernardo Castro because
if you stick a needle in my arm I feel
it. But if you stick a needle in the arm
of my chair I don't feel it. It's beyond
that boundary. The mechanism for for
boundary information. We have a very
good theory. It's a good starting point
for it and that's integrated information
theory. It tells us how mental states
will sort of link together to maximize
integrated information. And if you keep
on linking more and more and more,
actually you maximize information
integration by shedding off parts of
your empire. When the empire grows too
big, when the mental complex grows too
big, um um it for forms fault lines. You
integrate more information by separating
stuff from you. That stuff becomes the
external world which is not part of your
complex but impinges on your complex and
therefore appears to you as what we call
matter or physicality. There is a very
very parsimmonious empirically
consistent thought line that leads to
this. Now the argument against it well
but it's not intuitive to me. Well,
yeah. Okay. Sorry. Sorry that because
you know philosophy is about thinking
right, not thinking in a culturebound
manner. We know today very arrog we
think very arrogantly about our
ancestors as having being deluded about
a great many things. Let me give you an
example. Um hundreds of years ago there
was this theory called elovium. Alovium
was supposed to be an elastic invisible
completely transparent fluid that would
connect say um an amber bar to wheat
shaft
and uh shaft would be attracted to the
amber bar because ifium that elastic
invisible substance would pull the shaft
to the amber bar. So that was an
explanation for electromagnetic
attraction. Of course, it couldn't
explain electromagnetic repulsion. Uh
but this was a very very serious uh idea
completely coherent with the empirical
evidence that amber shafts attract uh
sorry amber rods attract uh shaft. Um
but that doesn't mean that because it
was intuitive to the people then that it
is the best convenient fiction to adopt
and let alone the best uh metaphysics to
adopt. Yeah. I think it's also worth
pointing out that like
basically every view that somebody can
encounter to explain consciousness will
have some kind of unintuitive element to
it. Like when when I speak to
materialist physicalists about
consciousness views like pansychism or
idealism of any kind, they say, you
know, I just I just sort of can't
imagine that like an electron is is like
a mental state or has consciousness or
something. And I'm like, "Yeah, but you
know how difficult it is also to imagine
that you've got a bunch of inert dead
matter and if you just like arrange it
in the right way, you just like get, you
know, the taste of Coca-Cola just by
like putting like bricks together, it
just it's like that's also extremely
unintuitive. We've just kind of
forgotten how unintuitive it is because
&gt;&gt; magic.
&gt;&gt; We just swallowed it wholesale, right?"
So, so I think it's it's fair to say
that intuition is is uh at best a
limited guide here. Um but there are
some questions which loom, right? Like I
find it really interesting the idea that
what what what we experience as the
physical world is just how mentality
appears from the outside, right? But
there is this strange problem of like
personhood, right? Like there's me and
there's you. And not only that, but it's
not like I'm looking at this sort of
singular like point. If you appeared to
me as like a point in space or even like
a little orb or something, but okay,
maybe that's just what Bernardo Castro
looks like from the outside, but I can
kind of look at my own hands and there's
a sense in which they're a part of me,
but a sense in which they're kind of
not. Like I feel like I could cut off my
hand and yeah, I'd feel it and it would
like hurt. So, it's kind of part of me
in that respect, but it's not a part of
me. that if you cut it off and got rid
of it, I'd feel like, you know, there's
there's less Alex O'Conor. There's less
of, you know, my physical body, but
there's not less of me in a way that I
feel like if you, you know, lobomized
half of my brain, there'd probably be
less of like my personality. It seems
like that's kind of important to my
person. It gets a little bit confusing
like where to sort of draw this boundary
in the same way like how we, you know,
you could say, well, because you can
feel it, it's in some sense a part of
you, but like I can feel my skin, right?
But of course over time my skin sheds
you know it becomes the dust in the air.
And if all of it's just kind of made up
of mentality like whose mentality is
that? Like is it a part of me? Is it not
a part of me? And
&gt;&gt; when it disappears like how many of me
are there? And am I all across the
univer? You know what I mean? Like how
do we begin sort of like approaching
this question on your
&gt;&gt; I think you you you're on to something
that is important. Um I can even make it
worse. We don't feel our appendix unless
it's infected, right?
&gt;&gt; What about what about your kidneys? Is
there something it is like to be your
kidneys? What about your liver?
&gt;&gt; Your left big toe. Um you can wiggle it,
but most of the times you're not
conscious of your left big toe from the
inside, right? Um
look to say that everything is made of
mental state is the beginning of the
journey. The next step in the journey is
to figure out how those mental states
arrange themselves in different mental
complexes. You can think of a complex as
a graph. You know, graph theory in math
where you have these vertices that are
connected by edges depending on how
information flows or how causality flows
between them. You can create a graph of
mental states that are sort of in in a
causal network. They influence one
another
&gt;&gt; causally. they can influence each
other's uh state. A graph of mental
states with a causal structure is what
we call a mental complex. Now this word
complex has been in psychology since the
19th century. Uh the all the stuff about
graph and information theory that's the
new stuff that I has brought into it.
But it's new instrumentation of a very
old well understood notion mental
complexes. Now the boundaries of this
complex are the boundaries um of um a
sort of innate sense of identity
because there is something it is like to
be a complex but there isn't anything it
is like to be individual mental states
in that complex for instance I have a
holistic experience of the monitor in
front of me of the feeling of my skin
touching the chair that is supporting me
the colors I see in front of me the the
the the the the smell in the air, the
texture of my clothes, all of that is
part of one complex. There is nothing it
is like for Bernardo to feel the texture
of my clothes and not be seen in you
right now. These states subsume together
into an integrated state. This is all
integrated information theory. Um
the temptation is to say that therefore
Bernardo and Alex are only one complex.
But there is no necessity here. Bernardo
and Alex are sets of complexes. The
complex that I identify with myself is
the ego complex. But there are obviously
many other complexes uh in this great
web that appears to the outside as my
body. So for you there are um the
memories we are not evoking, the
feelings we repress, the traumas we
forgot,
um the wishes we deny, you know, uh all
this stuff that psychology in the 19th
century would call the unconscious. It
is not unconscious. It's unconscious
from the perspective of the ego because
it's a different complex. The ego has no
direct access to the other complexes
that are going on within the great
collective that each one of us is. Uh
but each of those other complexes are
conscious from their own perspective.
There is something is like to be them.
So think of us as a sort of the
passengers in a bus and the ego complex
is the driver, the executive ego. It
controls the body, makes choices. But
there is a lot more going on in our
inner mental lives. some of which
sometimes appear in dreams, in your
roses, when you're depressed or in in
phases of great upheaval when we
realize, "Oh my god, I have been feeling
like this forever. I just didn't know."
Right? Um so your left big toe, your
liver, your kidneys, they are the
extrinsic appearance of appearances of
other complexes that your ego cannot
directly access. So they too appear to
the ego as matter or sometimes you can
directly access them because you've
touched your left big big toe but there
is this gray area in which information
integration is not complete as in a
single product.
So, like from the outside it looks like
a big toe. From the inside it feels like
a big toe, right? And
like I can I can make sense of that. You
you you've used the word ego a few times
there. And I I want to guess that the
way you're using the word ego is how
religious traditions and um philosophers
of all kinds might use the word like
self, which is not the same thing as
consciousness, right? Like there's this
sort of distinction between
consciousness which is just awareness of
any kind and then there's this thing
called the self or the ego which is this
like unity of conscious experience into
like an I and a me right and a lot of
religious traditions have taken this
kind of realization that everything is
made out of the same stuff that we're
all part of one big kind of mental field
and it's just like like localizations
ripples in the waves as it were and
that's all we are, but there's just one
big ocean. To say that realistically
this idea of the individuated self is an
illusion, doesn't exist or that there's
only one self and we're kind of all
participating in it. I don't know if you
use the word ego in the same way that
they're speaking about self, but what do
you think about that? And do you believe
in the in Bernardo Castro? Do you think
that like you exist? You know what I
mean?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; No. No, I don't. Um I don't believe in a
permanent personal self. I think the
evidence is overwhelming that it's not
there. What we call a personal self is a
narrative. It's an inner story that we
mistakenly identify um with. It's that
person who was born that day and is
married to that other person and does
this or that for a live and living in
this address. That's the narrative self.
What we call the personal self is a
narrative. The narrative self. Um some
psychologists would call it the the
adaptive self. It's a story in terms of
which we can act in the world and defend
ourselves psychologically.
The whole field of psychology called ego
defense mechanisms. It's how you defend
um against the the assault of the
monstrous world around us. How do you
defend your personal agency and even
your personal value? So the meaning that
we attribute to this persistent personal
self that is is not there at all. It's a
narrative that keeps changing. Um so I I
don't buy into that but I will buy into
what Jung Carl Jung the Swiss
psychiatrist called the self with
capital S because there is something
that is obviously there. where it
obviously exists. It's the only thing
that obviously exists and that is
subjectivity.
Uh subjectivity
uh uh philosopher Shani called it core
subjectivity.
Uh which is what's left when you get rid
of all the narratives about what we are.
uh it is the the that to which
experience is given
that which receives experience as the
subject of experience. Uh Galen Strawson
said wrote once that not even a sensible
Buddhist would deny that there is the
subject and that experience entails a
subject. Now we mistake what that
subject is. Is it personal? Is it uh
permanent? I think all of I think the
answer to both questions is no. But that
we mistake the characteristics we
attribute to sub to the subject doesn't
mean that the subject itself is not
there. It obviously is. It is the thing
that is theorizing about what the
subject is. It is the the the dative of
experience that to which experience is
given. So that self obviously exists. I
would go as far as to say that the most
parsimonious metaphysical hypothesis
that is still coherent and empirically
consistent today is that this core
subject this datative of experience is
the only thing that exists and the
myriad of different qualities of
experience are just different patterns
of excitation of the self. You can
imagine this self with big S as the
ultimate quantum field, the unified
field. It's that which spans the
entirety of nature. And the apparent
diversity of n natural states are
different patterns of excitation of this
oneself. Just like one guitar string can
produce many notes depending on how it's
excited. This one field of subjectivity
that nature is um can get excited in
many different ways producing this
combobulatingly
various patterns
practically infinite ones and yet it's
only one thing. This is the ultimate
reductive metaphysics. I I am a
reductionist by the way and I'm
unashamed extreme reductionist. I think
everything literally everything can be
reduced to one thing and that is the
non-personal self.
So I want to ask you a question that I
asked Philip Goff just last week. Um
which is like why are you not a Hindu?
You know like these these guys have been
saying for thousands of years that
there's this one great big self called
the the atman. And in many you know
Hindu traditions atman is the same thing
as Brahman which is like you know the
ultimate reality and that's kind of all
there is and all that exists and we all
kind of participate in it. like is there
is is there sort of something in that
view that's that's attractive to you?
Have you sort of ever ever tried being a
Hindu for a bit? I just I just wonder
hearing you talk like that, you know,
feels like I'm sort of reading the the
Apananishad or something.
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't know how much baggage
would come with the notion that I would
try to be a Hindu. I mean, I I I I think
what I just told you is frankly the only
plausible metaphysical hypothesis, but
there is more to being an Hindu than
arriving at this conclusion. and I just
shared with you and um I don't want to
commit to all the rest because I want to
know what all the rest is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, okay. So, we've got this sort
of, you know, great big great big self.
And I really like how you talk about,
you know, the the ripples in the wave,
right? It's very helpful way of thinking
about it. I interestingly, I was just
just the other day, I was having dinner
with with two people I I just met. One
of them is a is a psychiatrist, like
studying psychiatry. One of them's a
physicist. And I was talking to the
psychiatrist about consciousness and
about, you know, pansychism and idealism
and stuff. And I can't remember exactly
what I was saying, but I was saying
something a little bit about how
consciousness is sort of like localized
like activity of one big thing. And the
physicist, she sort of cropped up and
said, "Yeah, that's really interesting.
That's that's a bit like how we
physicists think of like electrons, you
know, like in the in the sort of in the
quantum wave field." And I was like,
"Well, well, isn't isn't that
interesting? Isn't Isn't that
interesting how you think about it in
the in the same way as how we're talking
about consciousness and it was quite a
funny moment because yeah there's
there's a lot of sense to be made about
this and you're imagining this sort of
great big wave this great big ocean and
there are ripples in the wave and and
you've spoken about how like a a
whirlpool or a ripple in a wave is not a
thing. You can't like pick it up and
take it out of the water. It is just the
water. It's still localized. You can you
can like point at it but it's like an
excitation of this of this ocean but
it's it's nothing new. It's nothing
separate from the ocean. But the thing
is like yeah, like a wave is like the
same thing as the water. It's made out
of the water, but there's like some kind
of reason why it forms a wave. You know,
oceans don't just like spontaneously
start moving around. You know, there's
gravitational factors, earthquakes,
wind, whatever. Right? If all that
exists is just this self, right? I can
imagine that if we just all experienced
reality all at once, all as one big
thing, and I was experiencing the
Andromeda galaxy and your thoughts and
my thoughts and somebody else's thoughts
all at the same time, then cool. But
we've got this individualiz
individualization, right? And even if we
describe it as well, okay, it's kind of
a bit of an illusion. It's all just like
excitations of one big field. Why? Like
why is there not just one big unit of
experience? Why do we get this sort of
localizing and excitement? Why do we get
electrons cropping up of the of the
quantum field theory? Why don't we just
have one big field? You know,
&gt;&gt; I I sense two questions here. One is how
can the field be selfexitable
without an external agency that causes
an excitation? Well, this is no
different for any for any metaphysics
you get because science has the very
same problem. And the way we solved it
in physics is to say the quantum fields
uh fluctuate. They have this spontaneous
fluctuations. They are self-exited.
That's why there is an universe. Uh
that's how the whole thing started.
There's nothing outside nature. And yet
here is nature doing a great many
things. Right? So it can only be through
selfexitation. So that question is
always there regardless of your
metaphysics. It cannot be used to
differentiate one metaphysics from the
other as one being more plausible or
not. Self-exitation is inevitable not
only for all metaphysics but for science
as well ultimately. Why there was a big
bang? Something had to fluctuate. The
big bang was a very big quantum
fluctuation. But quantum fluctuations
are happening all the time around us.
This is an empirical fact by the way. In
the vacuum virtual particles pop in and
out of existence all the time because of
this quantum foam that is always active
at the base of the universe. Now
&gt;&gt; be clear just to interrupt briefly when
you say that virtual particles pop in
and out of existence to help people
along here. Are you imagining whereas in
my head you know traditionally I think
of this big black space and it's like
bang there it is and whoosh there it's
gone.
&gt;&gt; You would probably rather picture this
as like a kind of still body of water
where there's a little ripple and then
the ripple goes away. Something like
that. Right.
&gt;&gt; Correct. Because if you don't imagine
things, that's why field quantum theory
requires fields. Because if you don't
postulate that particles are not things,
particles are just behaviors of the
field. They are something the field does
and and then stops doing. If you don't
understand things this way, then you
will you end up having to believe that
stuff pops in and out of existence for
no reason, which is I mean, if anything
is magical thinking, then this is it,
right? Nothing is more magical thinking
than that. That's why we say well there
are no particles. Particle we say
particles as a metaphor and and because
of historical reasons there are only
ripples on the lake. There is only ever
the lake. The ripples are something the
lake does and it may stop doing. So
nothing magically popped in and out of
existence. It's just that nature was
doing one thing and it stopped doing it.
That's quantum fluctuations. So that was
the first part of your question. Can
this feud of subjectivity be
self-exited? Well, obviously it is.
Regardless of your metaphysics, whatever
is out there is self excited because
there is nothing outside nature by the
very definition of nature. Um, the other
question
was about why there is a me separate
from you. Why is Bernardo capable of
accessing his own inner life but not
Alex's inner life and the other way
around presumably? Um well that's just
evolution. Look um
IIIT gives us the beginning of a theory
of how mental states join together to
form complexes or split apart because
splitting apart the formation of fault
lines leads to more integrated
information. It's the best theory. It's
a starting point but it's the best
starting point we have. Um given enough
time on the surface of this planet,
mental states were bound to join
together in complexes that found a way
to maintain themselves.
Now, why was that? Well, because once
there was a complex that could maintain
itself, that's the one that survived.
And the ones that couldn't maintain
themselves are gone. And eventually one
popped out that could spin out other
complexes
reprod reproduction.
&gt;&gt; I can see that
&gt;&gt; and here we are.
&gt;&gt; I kind of I kind of want to go a step
back though because like I'm interested
in this question of the excitation of
the field in terms of just like say a a
a particle, right? Just this one little
vibration, just this one excitation.
There there's this question of like, you
know, can something be selfexiting? you
know, maybe there's this ocean that can
produce its own waves, but there's this
question of like why like and it's I
understand if you want to say something
like look, we don't really know, but
that's not a problem for like my
metaphysics. That's just a problem for
metaphysics in general, right? And that
that's fine. But I just wonder if you
have an idea why because if I accept
your view that there is just this one
big mind, I would expect I think you
know it's hard to imagine what I would
expect if I was not a unified you know
agent but
&gt;&gt; I think I would expect that there would
just be sort of one big ball of
experience right but for some reason
&gt;&gt; it just like you know is it like that it
wants to can you even speak of desires
like in in this sense like trying to
think of like how to picture what's
actually happening. ing there in like
your language as it were.
&gt;&gt; I I I I get where you're going with it.
So I I will make a concession, but I
first I will give a few disclaimers if
if if you're okay with it. Um um
&gt;&gt; I am a naturalist.
I think nature does what it does because
it is what it is. And nature has its
archetypal
templates of behavior. Um and um
nature's unfolding is the natural
unfolding of these archetypal templates
of behavior. Nature does what it does
because it is what it is. That so
naturalist there is no external
intervention into nature from some kind
of individ individuated force standing
outside nature. That wouldn't be
naturalism. So I I'm a committed
naturalist. Um I also guard against
anthropomorphizing things because one
thing I have seen a lot amongst people
who sympathize with analytic idealism
and idealism in general is the
temptation to say well if the entire
universe is made of mental states just
like I am then it should behave and
think and and desire like I do. No. uh
our complexes evolved
um on the surface of a rock over 4
billion years because of a scarcity of
resources. The other mental states out
there didn't undergo that process. So
there is no reason to think that they
would be even remotely akin to ours. The
only similarity would be that whatever
their inner life is, it's also
qualitative, but it may not have
anything else related to how we feel
from from within. So having made these
two disclaimers, I will concede this.
With just about any other metaphysics,
certainly with physicalism, which is a
metaphysics, um you cannot speak of why.
There is no why. There is just the
mechanical unfolding of nature's
intrinsic regularities. Uh and you can
add a little bit of chance as the source
of auto excitation to kickstart the
process. Um but under idealism
if it is all one great field of
subjectivity then yes strictly strictly
speaking we can talk of a why. We can
talk of a felt impetus to action and we
can with a lot of caution imagine what
that felt impetus might have been like.
uh exploring the notion that u that
impetus was felt in a mind and I am also
a mind and although these are completely
in commensurable minds there is a point
of singularity that there is a point in
which these two things are one and the
same field of subjectivity so
with all these disclaimers that I just
made and um highlighting that what I'm
about to say is speculation and that
even if it completely wrong. It does not
in any way affect the plausibility of
analytic idealism. Analytic idealism
does not depend at all on what I'm about
to say. Um, and it is a a slight form of
anthropomorphization, but I will
entertain it.
What could have been the impetus to
action that kickstarted all this?
The only thing I can imagine, well,
there there are two things I can
imagine.
One is a irresistible desire to
self-nowledge.
What is it that is going on? What is it
that I am? Um, not articulated in this
way because I articulated it in a
self-reflective way. And self-reflection
is the result of 4 billion years of
painful blood evolution on this rock.
So, the mind of nature in its primordial
state is not going to self-reflect.
Otherwise, flies and amoeba would
self-reflect. And we have no empirical
reason to think that they do. Right? So
I am saying this out of my own
self-reflection. But one could imagine
that there is an instinctive felt not
articulated but felt impetus to
self-nowledge. That's one possibility.
Another possibility is a sheer solitude.
How
mindbreaking
sheer solitude um could be. But again,
this is poetic imagination. I I'm I'm
sort of going off to the races with
poetic imagination. This is no longer
analytic philosophy.
&gt;&gt; Of course. Um but of course the other
question that it sort of raises is
okay. So you're telling me that we all
kind of exist as the result of a kind of
mental activity of this great big
ultimate mind which is the ground of all
being and of all consciousness and in
whom we sort of get our existence and it
starts to sound a little bit
pantheistic. It starts to sound a little
bit like you're describing something
like the mind of God, right? Like when
when people say the world is created by
an intelligent sort of like a creative
intelligence, right, which in some sense
is like kind of non-physical but
produces the physical world and it's all
a bit of a mystery. So like, oh, okay.
Or we've we've now been led to this idea
that the universe crops up as the result
of one big mind. And do do you think
that it is fair to characterize that as
verging on a religious position?
Yes, I would be dishonest if I if I
didn't say yes to this. Um, only some
form of extreme prejudice would have to
stop one from acknowledging uh this. Um,
but um, look, I I don't know what people
mean when they say God. I think there
are 8 billion definitions of God out
there, right? One for each person. So if
I say well I acknowledge God I don't
know what I'm acknowledge in the minds
of the people who are listening to you.
I'll tell you this I don't think the god
that um
that I would imagine uh under analytic
idealism I don't think it is deliberate.
I don't think it had a plan. Um I don't
think it's passing moral judgment. Um I
don't think it is self-reflecting.
I think it is doing what it is doing
very spontaneous spontaneously. It's
simply unfolding its own mental
archetypes in a spontaneous
I'm tempted to use the word automatic
but that goes too far in in in a regular
predictable spontaneous manner. Yes, it
is mental stuff. Yes, it is omniscient
by definition. It's the sum total of
nature and its mental states. So it is
cent therefore it is omniient.
It is omnipresent because it's all there
is. And it's omnipotent in the sense
that everything that happens happens by
virtue of its unfolding its doing its
behavior. So you could say the universe
is God dancing. Um and um you could even
say um
I lost my train of thought. So I I I'll
give you that it comes close to
religious traditions and um um I would
be dishonest if I wouldn't acknowledge
that. But I guard against all the
baggage of attributions that people
might make and place on analytic
idealism because of this
acknowledgement. Uh I I'm not talking
about a god sitting in a throne and
deciding the fate of man in a capricious
deliberate uh way. I'm talking about a
spontaneous unfolding of natural
processes that happen to be mental in
nature.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. I mean people will be
interested in the sort of parallels
here, but I I think you're right. It's
also maybe not that interesting to get
into the details of that. It's just
worth sort of pointing out that that's
an avenue people can explore. But
speaking of
views that people think sort of border
on religious that come with a lot of
interesting metaphysical baggage. Um
I've talked a lot recently about the
view called pansychism that starts with
a similar assumption about the nature of
science and materialism that like it
doesn't explain what we need it to
explain. It it sort of materialism and
science they like describe the world.
They tell us like what an electron does,
but they don't tell us what an electron
is. And there's only one thing in the
universe that we experience for itself,
like the isness, and that is experience.
You know, we we experience experience
itself. And so, if we've got this sort
of ontological gap at the bottom of
physics that we don't know what stuff is
ultimately made out of, we know what it
does, but we don't know what it is. And
in our everyday experience, there's only
one thing that we know the isness of,
and that's consciousness, experience.
Why don't we take that isness and plug
up that ontological gap? And you get
this view of pansychism that there is a
real world out there. You know, there's
a there's really an AirPods case, right,
that I'm holding in my hand. It's it's
made up of stuff that I can touch. It's
just that if you really get to to grips
with what it is, it's made up of like
really rudimentary foundational
consciousness. Some people listening to
this podcast thus far might actually be
under the sort of apprehension that
that's kind of what you're saying. But
importantly, you're not a panist and
&gt;&gt; not what I'm saying.
&gt;&gt; You don't like it very much. So I just
hoping you could tell us why that's the
case and what the important differences
are.
&gt;&gt; So there are two important questions
about pansychism. I'll name them and
then uh I will elaborate a little more.
One is a distinction between property
and essence and the other one is where
are the boundaries of psychic complexes?
So there are at least two variations of
pensychism. One would say uh um qualia
states or phenomenal states or
experiential states um are something
that elementary subatomic particles have
just like they have mass they have spin
they have charge uh they have qualia
states that's the property uh uh idea
and the other is the essence idea sub
elementary subatomic particles are
qualia states and the other properties
are the external manifestation of the
inner essence which is qualitative. So
uh charge, mass, momentum and all that
spin are the manifestations of
qualitative inner essences.
Uh uh the latter is the only plausible
formulation of pensychism. The idea of
phenomenal states as properties just
doesn't work
unless you ask me to. I'm not even going
to spend time uh on that because the way
you prompted the question sort of
assumes that we're talking about essence
not property
&gt;&gt; right
&gt;&gt; and the second question is where are the
boundaries of psychic complexes because
to have qualia states means that there
is something it is like to be this
entity that has qualia states what are
the experiential boundaries of this
entity under pensychism it will be the
boundaries of elementary subatomic
particles
So there is something it is like to be
an electron. There is something is like
to be a mumm quark and so on. And these
tiny microscopic consciousnesses
they come together in our nervous system
in our brain. They combine their inner
lives to form the seemingly unitary
inner life that I consider to be myself
and that you consider to be yourself.
Now this combination is a problem. uh it
is as problematic as the hard problem of
consciousness. There doesn't seem to be
a coherent way to describe what this
combination consists of even in
principle.
Um,
but there are other problems with
pensychism that I think are so much more
definitive and severe that we don't even
need to have a discussion whether the
combination problem is real really
insoluble or not. We we don't even get
to that to that point. U pensychism or
to be more rigorous micro constitutive
pensism which is what I was describing.
Yeah, pansychism. Pansyism as as a word
is so broad it could even be idealism.
But we are talking about micro
constitutive penschism. Um it makes one
assumption
that is just physically incoherent. It
assumes something that is just not true.
And we have known that it's not true at
least since the 1940s with Richard Feman
and quantum electron dynamics arguably
since the late 20s. But I'm not going to
go there because it's polical. Um, and
that is that elementary subatomic
particles are discrete things
with defined physical boundaries
because that's the key assumption of the
panist. Uh my thoughts are separate from
yours because the little elementary
particles inside my head although they
touch touch each other and combine to
form my inner life they are physically
separate from the elementary subatomic
particles inside your skull and that's
why they don't combine with yours and
that's why I have access to my thoughts
but not to yours. So the whole thing
it's a sand castle built on top of this
assumption that elementary subatomic
particles are things
and have discrete spatial boundaries.
Neither of these statements is true.
They are demonstrabably and empirically
false in physics. There are no
elementary subatomic particles. When we
call them elementary, what we mean is
that they are not constituted of other
types of subatomic particles. A proton
is or a
any well never mind a proton is is made
of quarks. So a proton is not
elementary. A quark is elementary, but
that doesn't mean that the quark is
irreducible. It only means that there
aren't other particles inside the quark
as there are other particles inside the
proton and the neutron. Um
in physics and we have known this for at
least 80 years. Um there are no
particles. It's a metaphor for
identifiable patterns of excitation of
an underlying quantum field. There are
only quantum fields. And this is not
only theory. A great many things would
become unaccountable for and magical
without this notion. Let me give you at
least a couple of examples. Um particle
decay would become magical. You know
people say we found the Higs boson. We
did but we never measured the Higs boson
because it decays before it interacts
with a measurement surface. It decays
much too quickly to be measured
directly. What we measure are the
particles the hig bosom decays into.
Like it can decay into two muons, heavy
muons for instance. But it's not made of
two heavy muons. So you would have to
say under this notion that particles are
things with spatial boundaries. You
would have to say that the higs boson
magically disappears into nothingness
and two muons magically appear out of
nothingness. That's magical thinking.
That's not what's happening. What's
happening is that there is no Higs
bosom. There is an excitation of the
Higs field. That excitation decays. It's
like one big ripple decays into other
types of ripples just like ripples
actually do. Like waves decay into
ripples if you observe the ocean
carefully enough. So nothing magical is
happening. It's just that when we talk
about elementary subatomic particles,
it's a metaphor. a metaphor that is
perpetuated because it's so
operationally useful. Um Fman with
quantum electron dynamics was the first
one to understand well at least that we
know to understand it um that there are
no particles there are only fields and
yet he oper operationalized that in the
form of so-called fman diagrams which
draw a little particles as little points
and little arrows connecting them so we
can see the interactions. So that
perpetuated the operational usefulness
of the metaphor. But to think as the
pensist does that the metaphor is
actually literally true is is just a
basic like bachelor bachelor level
misunderstanding of what physics is
saying. There cannot be particles as
things. Look even
even inertia mass you know mass inertial
mass the the the stuff that things are
made of you know what is the key
characteristic of what we mean by stuff
it's inertial mass it's the fact that uh
if some if a train is moving it's very
hard to stop it and if a train is at
rest it's very hard to get it moving
that's inertial it's it's resistance to
changes in the mo in in the vector of
movement be it in speed or direction uh
the only way we explain mass and I'm not
going to be rigorous in what I'm about
to say and some physicists will say a
Bernardo come on but it's a guys it's a
podcast and I'm not talking to
physicists um the way the Higs boson
explains inertial mass is not because
it's a particle but because it is a
excitation of a field it is the Higs
field that provides the stickiness iness
that resists changes in movement
that can only be explained by the Higs
field. That's that's the mechanism of
inertia. So we wouldn't be able to to
explain mass to explain existence if
particles were little billard balls with
defined spatial boundaries. That's not
what they are. This is a an operational
metaphor that is useful. It's it's it
it's much simpler to write down a
fineman diagram than to solve the
equations of QFT. That's why we keep
talking about particles. There are no
particles. So the very fundamental
assumption of the pensy is untrue. There
are only fields probably only one but
right now we mathematically model 17 and
they are specially unbound. So if the
pen psychist wants to be consistent with
this approach of saying consciousness is
inherent to what is ontologically
irreducible
then you have to put consciousness in
the field and the field has no spatial
boundaries and therefore the pen
psychist cannot account for why your
thoughts are not accessible to me
because it's the same fields spanning
this spatial location here where I am
and yours they span the entirety of
nature. they are not bound. Uh so pensy
um sorry micro constitutive pensychism
is a non-starter because it's started
starter because it's predicated on a
very basic misunderstanding of physics.
Yeah. So we we can use the word
pansychism to describe micro
constitutive pansychism just because we
can just stipulate that that's what
we're talking about to to save time a
little bit here.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Um and it's an idea that that I've been
exploring a lot. My my listeners will
probably know that, but I' i've sort of
been thinking about how best to cash it
out. And I do sort of have this this
thought that like, well, you know, the
universe is made up of of smaller and
smaller stuff and maybe that really
small stuff is just consciousness. But
it does seem really weird that you can
take a bunch of little points and sort
of put them all together and get one big
thing. So like, well, maybe it's better
to think of one big thing rather than
lots and lots of little things, right?
But you've still got this like localized
excitation of the field, right? And I
suppose what I want to ask about is like
suppose I wanted to defend a version of
pansychism and it might just be that if
pansychism becomes defensible, it just
starts looking like analytic idealism. I
can understand that. But let's say, you
know,
in the same way that the physicist talks
about particles, even though what
they're really talking about is an
excitation in the field, they use the
word particles just to sort of, you
know, allow us to functionally do
science. The pansyus does the same thing
in talking about these fundamental units
of consciousness. What they're really
talking about is excitations in this
sort of big mental field. But like there
is still the excitation and what physics
calls a fundamental particle like an
electron or a quark. You know I'm
thinking that is in some way I wouldn't
know how to quite describe this but that
is whatever the like most rudimentary or
fundamental kind of vibration or
excitation of the quantum field that
could exist. That's kind of how I
imagine what saying something is a
fundamental particle means. It's just
for whatever reason it's just the most
fundamental kind of excitation that can
occur. Okay,
&gt;&gt; that's fair. It's the pixel of the
field. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so why can't the pans psychist
just say, "Yeah, okay. We're talking
about vibrations in a field." I just
think that the fundamental like unit of
consciousness is the most fundamental
kind of excitation of the field. The
field is not conscious. It's the
excitations that are consciousness. And
so those tiny little rudimentary
excitations are like the particles quote
unquote of pansychism. Um,
and so I am kind of talking about a a
field still. I'm using your language.
It's just like the physicist talks about
particles. I'm talking about particles,
but really it's just an excitation of a
field. Would that still be pansychism?
And if not, like why not?
&gt;&gt; No. Um,
words are important, right?
Otherwise, you know, you can say
physicalism is true because all physical
states are actually mental states. We
just call them physical. Well, that's
that's truth by word redefinition,
right? So, that's the point where you
can throw words away because they don't
mean anything anymore. So, assuming that
this word pansychism has differentiated
meaning, um then you would have to ask
yourself, what are we talking about? Are
we talking about a a pixel of experience
or are we talking about a defined
subject that is fundamentally separate
from other defined subjects? The latter
is what pensism would say. It's not only
a pixel in on the screen of unified
experience. There are lots of pixels in
the screen of my unified experience.
Right now I see yellows. I see whites,
blacks, greens, browns. um they they are
discernible but there is only one
subjectivity the one subjectivity that
is experiencing all this variety of
qualia states. The statement of
pensychism is not that an elementary
subatomic particle is a pixel on the
screen of experience but that it is a
subject separate from other subjects.
The moment you do that, then you are no
longer consistent with physics because
for there to be this multitude of
subjects, elementary subatomic particles
have to be a multitude of things. But
they're not things just like a ripple on
the lake is not a thing. You cannot fish
it out of the lake, put it under your
armpit and and and and go home with it.
The ripple is a doing of the lake. There
is only ever the lake. and and and
subatomic element subatomic particles in
physics. Quantum field theory, the best
scientific theory ever created by
mankind by orders of magnitude.
Elementary subatomic particles are
ripples on the lake. They are not
things. Therefore, you cannot associate
separate subjectivities to each one of
them because they're not there. Just
like the ripple is not there. There is
only ever the leg. So if words are to be
useful, we cannot massage them to a
point where they they no longer carry
any meaning. No. And I the reason I'm
saying that I had a discussion couple of
years ago the very famous physicist
whose name will remain unsaid. It was at
3:00 a.m. and it was via the internet.
And after wrestling with each other for
a long time
uh he said
you know what suppose it's all mental
states like you're saying and they are
really out there and they behave
according to regularities that we can
model theoretically why don't we just
call them physical states
and that point I threw the hat it's like
okay if that's how we are going to do
this you know redefining words to mean
what nobody else assumes them to mean
like I redefine physicality as mentation
and yeah then physicalism is true okay
but I mean we are just creating
confusion here right we should stick to
the meaning of words
&gt;&gt; yeah okay so this will help me out then
right like the pansyist thinks that
there's something it's like to be an
electron right
you don't think that
&gt;&gt; correct I do not think
&gt;&gt; but you think but you do think that the
electron as an excitation of the wave is
like what? Like made out of mentality. I
think people might be thinking, hold on,
if everything is like mental or mental
states, I think as you put it, isn't
kind of a definition of a mental state
that there's sort of something it's like
to experience that because a mental
state is a is a kind of experience. You
know what I mean?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But a kind of experience can be
merged in a sort of can be subsumed in a
broader field of experience. For
instance, I see many pixels right now,
but they all subsume into the unified
experience that I call my inner life,
Bernardo's inner life right now.
&gt;&gt; Um, let me give you a concrete.
Let's make it concrete. There is
something it is like to be
my ego complex. In other words, my def
mode network, a subset of my neuro my my
my my my neurons arranged in in a causal
structure that is active when I'm not
engaged in any particular task. So the
the the default mode network
um there is something it is like to be
my default mode network when I think
about it right now when I think of
myself of my inner experience right now.
So there is something it is like to be
those neurons in my head. But there is
nothing it is like to be one individual
neuron in the default mode network.
Right? Um at least there is nothing I
can access that tells me there is
something it is like to be a single
neuron in my head. There is only
something it is like to be the entirety
of my default mode network. What is a
neuron then? A neuron is a segment of
the image that my default mode network
appears to be from outside observation.
A segment of a unified image and that
segment is arbitrarily carved out by us.
There is no such a thing as a neuron.
Where is the boundary of a neuron? Is it
a synaptic cleft? Well, there isn't a
vacuum in the synaptic clft. It's all
filled with stuff. It's just that our
pattern recognition and our linguistic
dictionary give us a word for a subset
of that unified image that we call a
neuron and leads to the question, is
there something it is like to be a
neuron in and of itself? The answer is
no. Because there is no neuron. A neuron
is not a thing. It's like taking a
painting and arbitrarily carving out all
the pigment points that are roughly
yellow, putting a boundary around them
and saying that's a thing. Give a name
to it. X. Is there something that is
like to be X? No. Because there is no X.
It's an arbitrary carving out of an
image, right?
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, yeah, I I can see how that
works for like a neuron. Carry on. There
is nothing it's like to be this water
bel bottle I'm holding in my hand
because there is no bloody water bottle.
We think that things we have a word for
are actual things. We we project the
structure of our language onto the
onlogical structure of the word the
world. That's why we get all confused.
That's why the pensy has to answer
questions like if there is something is
like to be a table. Suppose I remove one
of the four legs. Does the leg that I
now removed acquire a consciousness of
its own separate from the rest of the
table? The answer is no. Because there's
no table. There is no table leg. There
is only the inanimate universe as a
whole. Mhm. Okay. So, I think I get what
you're saying. I don't know what you're
like I don't know if you can sort of
separate out your metaphysics of
objects, right? But there's luckily
we're in good company and that if I say
a phrase like myological nihilism,
there's a good chance that a fair few of
the people listening will actually know
what that means. But is that the kind of
view you're getting at that that there's
no sort of real distinction between like
material objects and we're just kind of
organizing stuff and putting like a
label on it. I think there are actual
distinctions in the world that have
physical correlates but they are not the
boundaries projected by our language. Uh
for instance an example I gave you
earlier if I stick a needle in my arm I
feel it. If I stick a needle in the arm
of my chair I don't feel it. That's an
ontological boundary right there. There
is a differentiation. In one case I feel
in the other one I don't. So I am I seem
to be a real thing and I have grounds
empirical grounds to say that I am a
separate thing because the
&gt;&gt; but you want to go further than that and
say not only like is you know the the
the arm of the chair not a part of me
but also when I stab the arm of the
chair the chair doesn't feel it. Now,
common sensically, of course, it
doesn't. But on this view, people might
be listening and going, "Well, well,
hold on a second. You know, if if we're
all just sort of exitations of a field,
&gt;&gt; why do I feel the stabbing of the the
arm?" But how do you know the chair
doesn't feel the stabbing of its arm?
&gt;&gt; There is no chair. The chair is an
arbitrarily carved out subset of a great
image, a great appearance, a great show
that we call the inanimate universe. Is
there something it is like to be the
inanimate universe as a whole? Yes. Does
that complex, the inanimate universe as
a whole, feel when I stick a needle in
the chair? Yes.
Is it pain? No. I would be uh uh
anthropomorphizing the mind of nature if
I did that. Is it significant? No. It's
a nothing. It's like you're registering
the flotation of one neurotransmitter
cell across one synaptic clft. I mean,
yes, it builds up to an experience that
you do register, but that specific
little thing is is negligible. It's
infinitasmally insignificant, right? So
yes, the the the picture is coherent.
Any action in nature is felt by
something by some complex. But the
boundaries across complexes are not the
boundaries between things that we call
things because we have distinct words
for them like the leg of a of a table as
opposed to the table as a whole or where
does the river end and the ocean begin.
So the distinction between inanimate
things is merely nominal. We do it for
convenience. You want to buy a thing
that allows you to move from A to B. We
call it a car and you go buy a car. But
a car is not a thing. Without gravity to
put it push it to the road, it wouldn't
run. Without air for combustion, it
wouldn't run. You know, without solar
radiation to grow the plants that became
petroleum and that have burned in the
internal combustion engine, it wouldn't
run. There is no car. There is only the
inanimate universe as a whole and living
beings within it. That's my view.
&gt;&gt; But I I really want to know
like where we're getting this
ontological distinction because believe
me, I'm I'm
I'm extremely comfortable with the idea
that chairs don't exist and that's
that's fine by me. Um
but it seems like if if the only thing
that exists is the quantum field or the
great mind and then there are
excitations
within that mind and that's it, right?
What I'm calling this chair, the
physical stuff that I call this chair is
just an excitation of the quantum field.
What I call my brain and my hands and
the way that they touch each other is
also just a vibration, an excitation of
the quantum field.
&gt;&gt; Correct?
&gt;&gt; But one of those vibrations, one of
those excitations is a thing and one of
them
&gt;&gt; is not
&gt;&gt; is not. And
&gt;&gt; like why? And how do we know that? You
know what I mean? Yes. Well, we know it
empirically. Uh um my ability to feel
ends on the surface of my skin. Uh and
then the surface of my retina. You know,
if a photon bounces off the wall behind
me, I don't register it. If it if hits
my retina, I do register it. So, it's
pretty empirical. In the case of living
beings, um what determines when an
excitation or a pattern of excitations
is a thing or is not? It's the the
boundary of the the complexes. Mental
states
form these causal structures that we
call complex sees and there is something
it is like to be a complex as a whole.
Where are the boundaries of the complex
sees? That's the question. If there is a
bounded complex, then that's a thing.
the appearance of it deserves the name
or the reference of being a thing
because it's bounded by the boundaries
of the psychic complex which determine
what it feels like to be that thing as
opposed to something else.
&gt;&gt; Um in psychiatry
this has been known for 200 years as
dissociation which is right
&gt;&gt; vastly empirically demonstrated thing
that happens to us all. Um um some
people have extreme forms of
dissociation like uh um dissociative
personality disorder used to be called
multiple personality disorder. Uh but we
don't need to go that far. When you fall
asleep and you dream you are
dissociated. You think you are your
dream avatar or in fact you are the
whole dream including the world in which
your dream avatar is moving. Um when we
wake up uh the dissociation ends. We
know then that we were both the dream
avatar and the rest of the dream. We
were doing the whole thing. So complexes
can split apart and join according to a
dynamics of integrated information which
has been mathematically formulated
already. Um and depending on how they
join and split boundaries
form or dissolve
&gt;&gt; and that's the play of association and
dissociation. This is known clinically.
It happens in mental space when it comes
to human mind. All we need is to
extrapolate it one layer of abstraction
higher and say it happens in the mind of
nature and that's what determines what
are things.
&gt;&gt; I I think I would be I wouldn't have
been surprised if when I said like you
know okay there are no chairs there's
just a bunch of stuff and we sort of put
a label on it and call it a chair. So
what about like what about you know
selves like minds and I wouldn't have
been surprised if you said something
like well you remember Alex how earlier
I said that you know the individuated
self is an illusion and that there's
only one self that we all kind of
participate in it's the same kind of
thing there's no chair there's no you
there's no me there is just the mind and
excitations
&gt;&gt; and so it's it's a little bit that's why
I'm like it's a little surprising to
hear you say actually no there are these
these sort of things which which seem to
sort of fulfill this role of the self
like there's there's me and there's the
limits of my experience and you're using
words like me and my and I
&gt;&gt; and I just wondered sort of how those go
together.
&gt;&gt; Well, the the personal me, the I is an
illusion but an illusion is not nothing.
&gt;&gt; An illusion is happening. It it could
have not happened conceivably. So we
have to account for the fact of the
illusion
&gt;&gt; and we account for that through this
notion of association and dissociation.
how integrated the dynamics of
integrated information form complexities
and dissolve complexities.
This is a crucial point to say that
something is an illusion means only that
it's not what it seems to be or that it
doesn't have fundamental existence. But
you still have to account for the
mechanism of the illusion. Why is this
illusion happen? How is it coming about?
An illusion is not nothing. It exists as
such as an illusion needs to be
accounted for. Can I say
&gt;&gt; Can I say then that that there are
things but things are illusions?
&gt;&gt; Correct.
&gt;&gt; Does that make sense?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Because because Okay, that makes a
bit more sense to me. And just to be
clear, are the only things which exist
the great big mind, the great big
quantum field,
and that exists. That is a thing and
it's not an illusion. The only other
things that exist like as things are
unified conscious agents, but those are
illusions. Is that like a is that like a
fair way of putting it all?
&gt;&gt; Yes. They're illusions um in the sense
that they are not fundamental. They are
reducible. Um in the sense that they are
not permanent. They are changing all the
time. Think about your 5-year-old self.
It's preposterous for you to think that
you were your 5-year-old self because
not a single atom in the body of your
5-year-old self has remained in yours
all this time. Some of them have left
and returned, but not a single one has
stayed there all along. Your thoughts
are different. Your emotions are
different. Your outlook is different.
Your appearance is completely different.
It's preposterous to say you're you were
your 5-year-old self. Unless
you want to be consistent, you say, "No,
I was my 5-year-old self." But by the
same token, then you have to say, "You
are me and I am you." By exactly the
same token. So either you were not your
5-year-old self
or the whole thing is an illusion. But
and and this is critical in science. The
illusions have to be accounted for.
You don't get a free ticket of
explanatory power by saying it's an
illusion. Therefore, I don't have to to
say anything about it. No, wait a
moment. Then you don't get that free
pass.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. So, so to be clear, there
are no there are no things other than
like unified like conscious agents like
it's not just that oh chairs aren't
things but maybe like you know planets
are or something. It's just like egos
and the great mind. Are those like the
only things that really exist? Well, I
cannot know with absolute certainty
because we are monkeys running around a
rock for only 300,000 years. So, what do
we know? Um, I don't think we have good
reason to entertain hypothesis like um
the moon has a consciousness of its own,
a private conscious inner life of its
own or um I don't think we have good
enough reasons to think even of a star
as having a private conscious inner life
of its own. There is someone I respect,
Rupert Chelrake, who thinks there are
good reasons for that and that has to do
with the patterns of electromagnetic
fields in the sun's corona which are
incredibly complex, more complex than
what's happening in our brain. But there
is an obvious difference in form and
function when you compare a brain to a
star. Right? So I wouldn't go that far.
I think we have excellent reasons to
think of all life as having conscious
inner life of its own. And in fact what
we call life or biology or metabolism
may be the appearance of the formation
of dissociated complexes in the mind of
nature. That may be what life is.
&gt;&gt; Now when when the mind of nature has
dissociative identity disorder and forms
altars. What does an altar look like?
Well, it looks like a biological
organism, a metabolizing organism. Just
like the alters in the mind of a patient
with dissociative identity disorder look
like something identifiable in an fMRI
scan um we don't need an fMRI tool
because we are inside the mind of nature
right we just need to look around to
find the other authors there is one
talking to me right now
&gt;&gt; um so I I would go this far I think we
have excellent reasons to think of all
life as having private conscious in
their life of its own but I don't think
we have good reasons to say the claim
about anything else because everything
else is so completely distinct from
life. That doesn't mean that I know for
certain that nothing else has a private
conscious inner life of its own. Maybe
the sun has. I don't know. I just don't
think we have good enough reasons to
entertain the hypothesis. Seriously.
&gt;&gt; So, I don't necessarily want you to
commit yourself to saying whether like
the sun does have that. But if it did,
it would then like become a thing in
your language. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Whereas right now you think it's it's
you know there is no sun in the way that
there is no chair. There's just sort of
&gt;&gt; it would become an illusory thing.
&gt;&gt; Sure. So just and also to be clear for
our listeners used the word like alter.
I'm not sure if we defined it earlier
but in like dissociative personality
disorders people who feel like they've
kind of got multiple personalities going
on in the brain those individual
personalities within the same person's
brain are called alters. You know
there's like you know one day I'm Jenny
the next day I'm Mark and you sort of
provide an analogy here that the
universe is like the big brain and we
are alters
of this universal sort of mind which is
experiencing a kind of extreme form of
dissociation between its own parts.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Without the connotation that it's
an illness. It's just something that can
happen in nature. So given enough time
it's bound to happen. Lo and behold it
did.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And that's how we end up as we
are. I think yeah, it's a lot to chew
on. And I mean, I think it's I think
it's it's fascinating. You know, you you
there's always a joke to be made
whenever I speak about consciousness
when I want to say something like, you
know, you've you've kind of blown my
mind. There's always a really boring
joke to be made about how you've like
blown your own mind or something. I'm
trying to work out what the best one is
here. But whatever it is, it's really
interesting and I I've been, you know,
looking at your work for for some time
now in preparation for this. I think
it's fascinating. I am intrigued to know
the extent to which people who are
interacting with your views for the
first time right now in this episode
think that this is a really interesting
line worth pursuing as I do or think
that we've both sort of lost our minds
as it were. Um there's another one. Um,
do you find that there is perhaps to
close then just on that thought, do you
find that there is a consistent and like
like understandable but most common like
misunderstanding that people have when
they listen to your lectures or read
your books that you might want to take
an opportunity to clear up that we maybe
haven't cleared up already.
&gt;&gt; To say that everything is mental is not
to say that everything is in your mind.
uh right um it it doesn't contradict the
existence of a world outside our minds.
The problem is that the physicalist
thinks that anything outside a personal
mind must be non-mental. Why? I mean if
you look to the horizon it's earth all
the way until the horizon you know there
is a world beyond the horizon. Do you
think it's something other than earth or
just more earth? So what I'm saying is
that beyond the boundaries of individual
dissociated minds it's just more mind
not your mind not a mind that follows
your wishes and obeys your imagination
and your morning affirmations and no
it's not you the illusurary illusory
dissociated you but it is mental it has
an inner perspective of its own and it
may unfold in a way that is very regular
very predictable very almost mechanical
because it's an instinctive mind, not a
mind that evolved over 4 billion years
to deliberate and plan so to conquer the
world.
I think it's helpful to remember that we
are we are in the universe. We are a
part of the universe. And in the way
that you want to speak of individuated
selves as just like excitations of a
great big field, like that might sound a
bit weird to a physicalist, but I think
the physicist needs to remember that
they think the same thing. They also
believe that the universe is just sort
of made up of particles, which modern
science tells us is just an excitation
of quantum field. And that consciousness
is just a product of the brain. and that
brains are just atoms which are just
excitations of the field which means
that all you are as a conscious agent is
an excitation of a great big field. Your
view is to say we know that there's
consciousness. We know that there's
mentality we're experiencing it right
now and since the best understanding of
what we are excitations of a great big
field that field is mental you know that
that's just what's going on.
&gt;&gt; The physicalist kind of goes the other
way. They start with the field and say
that there's this thing called a field
and somehow consciousness
&gt;&gt; fits into it or comes out of it. But but
it's actually not that that far away. It
almost feels like when I speak to
someone like you that you're taking
assumptions that are already agreed upon
by a physicist and just flipping them on
their head. Yes. Like mental activity is
just the same thing as as brain activity
because mental because brain activity is
just what it looks like from the
outside. Whereas they go the other way,
you know, mental activity comes from
comes from the brain. You're like, well,
actually, just the appearance of the
brain comes from the mental stuff. It's
almost like the same
desire for synthesis and monism and and
there's only one stuff that the universe
is made out of, but just, you know,
looking at it in a mirror. You know what
I mean?
&gt;&gt; Yes. I have thought about what you're
saying. Uh um there is a commonality of
values. Um I espouse rationalism,
determinism,
reductionism
and monism.
Um
physicalists however tend to think that
the only rationalist, reductionist,
deterministic and monistic alternative
on the table is physicalism.
That is a astounding
level of
lack of theoretical creativity and
philosophical blindness. Um, we do
espouse the same values, but I submit to
you that the only reason you think what
I'm saying is mindblowing and
physicalism is levelheaded is cultural
indoctrination. Physicalism is the most
magical, arbitrary, arbitrary,
gratuitities,
inflationary,
ridiculous metaphysical alternative on
the table. That physicalist physicalists
espouse the same values I espouse
doesn't mean that physicalism is
consistent with those values. It is not.
If you think it is, it's because you
haven't given it more serious thought.
You're just absorbing all this slob that
comes uh via the airways and has come
for over 200 years now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I'm I'm pretty convinced
now that you like materialism is is just
about as long as people understand
biaterialism,
you know, the way that we're
characterizing it in this conversation,
I I am pretty convinced that it is quite
ludicrous. Um I've been exploring like
pansychism as one solution to that. In
your book, you you discuss pansychism
under a chapter title uh something like
the solution is worse than the problem
or something. It's like, you know, we
you're actually making it worse. Let's
let's
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you don't explain anything. You
you just shove another thing in your
reduction base. In other words, you're
not accounting for anything. You're just
adding more brute facts in nature. It
doesn't have any explanatory power.
That's why I call it the solution is
worse than than the problem.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I've got I've got lots to
think about because, you know, I've been
attracted to views like pansychism. I
think mostly due to the motivation that
something like physicalism
can't work, at least as pertains to
consciousness, but probably to anything
at all. And I think, you know, your book
does this quite helpfully. you sort of
go vi it's like it's what like chapter
five or six when in your book analytical
idealism in a nutshell when you first
start talking about analytical idealism
because you have to follow this
trajectory
&gt;&gt; and got a lot to think about but I
definitely think
&gt;&gt; I mean when you said there you know the
only reason why you would see this view
as as as more sensible than than another
view the only reason you'd see
physicalism as sensible is because of
this sort of worldview that you
swallowed wholesale I I agree like I I I
personally for itself. I don't see it as
a particularly viable option. And for me
now, the task is trying to speak to
people like you and work out what the
most viable option is. And I can see why
so many people are attracted to what you
have to say. And if they are, especially
if they've listened to this and found it
interesting, but maybe raised too many
questions or didn't cover enough detail
or a bit of confusion going on, then
those books I mentioned will be linked
in the description. You've got a a
corpus of works, but I think those are
the two to point people to for these
these particular topic areas. But
Bernardo Castro, thank you for coming.
You've been one of the most requested
guests I've had since starting the show,
to be honest. And it's always a bit of a
catch 22 for me because I kind of need
to have read or seen enough of someone's
work to know if they're going to be like
right for for me and for the show. But
if they if I don't know if they're going
to be right for me in the show, it's a
lot of work to put in, you know, like.
But your your name came up so many so
many times, especially as I began to
start talking about consciousness. And I
can see why having now read some of your
work and spoken to you today. It's been
really interesting. So, thank you very
uh thank you very much for your time and
and all links will be in the
description.
&gt;&gt; It's been a pleasure. Thanks for having
me.
&gt;&gt; If you enjoyed that conversation, you
might like an episode I recorded a while
back with Philip Goff on pansychism. You
can watch it by clicking the link that's
on your screen. To support my work and
get early adree access to episodes,
subscribe to my Substack at
alexoconor.com.
Thanks for watching.