Hello everyone. Welcome back to
Undoctrinate Yourself. Today I'm sitting
down once again with the incredible Dr.
Jack Kruse. Um, he's been on the podcast
at least three times before. Maybe maybe
more at this point. I don't even I don't
even remember. But I'm excited to chat
with him today because today is
April 11th, 2026. And yesterday, Alex
Jones put out a tweet uh I guess taking
a clip. I actually haven't watched it
yet, but maybe you can enlighten me. But
I think it was a clip of you, Jack,
talking about the poll, the coming pole
flip that Becker had talked about back
in like the 80s and 90s as being a thing
that would be very disruptive to
technology and society and all the
things and and to health and to the next
great extinction event potentially as
well. And so, let's maybe talk about
that. Start by talking about that
because my DMs were like blowing up
yesterday. Um, and so I thought we could
begin there and then maybe get into some
current events and then maybe into some
science as well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, the guys came down, they
wanted to,
they're doing a documentary
on MK Ultra and they wanted to talk to
me about the boxes that I found in the
basement of Charity Hospital. But I told
them, I said, "Look, I have a Patreon
blog that covers
that whole event, what I found
um in there and we casually started to
talk about some of the information that
was in that box was tied to, you know, a
magnetic uh declination."
And they got really really interested
um in some of that stuff. And I and they
were like, "Could we talk about that?"
And I'm like, "Yeah, I mean, it's
probably not what you guys want to come
down here and talk about, but we can do
it." So I explained to them that it all
began in 1859
with the Carrington event. And prior to
that, the Earth's base magnetic field
was what it usually is, 15 out of Tesla
pretty much in most places. And um
then we started to talk about what has
happened from 1859 and what happened in
859 which was the Carrington event. I
began to explain to them what the global
heliocentric current is like. How the
sun communicates birectionally with the
planets. The sun is a cathode ray. The
planets are anodess. And when the sun
gets some information about the magnetic
dynamo,
um what it's paying attention to is the
wobble, the procession of the planet.
What usually happens
uh as a magnetic shield of a planet
begins to weaken uh it does get a slight
wobble from the stuff that's inside the
planet and the sun usually responds with
a coronal mass ejection directed at that
planet. The goal there is not to destroy
the planet. The goal there is actually
to stop the wobble. In other words, to
get the dynamo, the vortex inside the
planet to become operational.
Um, and then we started to talk about
what happened to Mars 4 billion years
ago. And I explained to them that the
largest volcano in the solar system is
on Mars. But the magnetic dynamo in Mars
has been dead for 4 billion years. And
if you look at the equator
of Mars, uh, Val Marinerys is there.
It's an electric scar that's larger than
the United States, uh, on the equator
where Mars got hit with a very large
CME. And what does large CME versus the
Carrington event really mean? It's
actually tied to the magnetic dynamo in
the planet. So, back four billion years
ago, this was obviously a huge problem
for Mars. It gets popped. And what do we
know about Mars? It's never recovered
from that event. It's a dead red desert.
There's no life on Mars. The only water
that's remaining is at the poles and
it's very small. Um, but the key thing
is there's no magnetic field. There's
also no ionosphere. It's been stripped.
Um, and I then I went to explain to some
of these guys that if you take a look at
our planet, we have places called Mars
on Earth. They're called deserts.
And deserts have a lower magnetic field.
And I explained to them that the dynamo
in the planet, you know, has been moving
for 4.6 billion years. But our dynamo
compared to a place like Mars has been
much more stable. uh that's why it's
actually supported life. And then I
started to point out some very
interesting
things that happened with the dynamo.
Like I've been talking about melanin and
heem
um evolution on the Patreon blogs, but
one of the things that was really
important for these guys to hear is that
um back in the GOE when life was
beginning in the first two domains, the
magnetic field on Earth was much weaker
than it is today. We we know that from
magnetic hysteresus from sediments, you
know, around the planet. And
then I pointed out to them probably the
key planetatory
uh study that we've known I' I've known
about this for about 30 years, but there
was never any paper out to prove the
linkage. A lot of people in the EMF
world were talking about how EMF links
with oxygen resonance, but I don't think
what people really understand is that
magnetic flux links directly to
oxygenation on a planet. Okay. So, the
link in physics that's now been made,
um, I put it out in on both my form and
also, uh, gave it to the guys
who interviewed me. Since the Camarine
explosion, the Earth has been
magnetically locked to oxygen. And this
should make sense to people who follow
my work. Why? Because magnetic is, I
should say, oxygen is paramagnetic. It's
the only paramagnetic gas on the
periodic table.
So the fact that the magnetic dynamo is
coupled to oxygen should be no surprise.
The big surprise on earth is that it was
not magically magnetically coupled in
the go. Why? Because there was no oxygen
on earth then. That's what the goe
stands for.
&gt;&gt; And he created the oxygen because of
these little cyanobacteria that made
DHA. And this is fundamentally why DHA
is also a liquid magnetic fat and it's
one that mammals really are linked to.
But when I told them that now physics
has this paper out that shows for 540
million years on Earth uh the magnetic
dynamo is completely coupled with
oxygenation. Now why is this important?
because all five extinction events are
also show a big- time coupling to this
issue. So anytime the magnetic dynamo
loses its flux, life wobbles. Just like
the planet wobbles, so does life. And it
turns out the things on the planet that
tend to survive uh these extinction
events all different uh are different uh
mechanisms that are tied into it. So,
for example, I spent a lot of time with
those guys, four and a half hours
actually, discussing the Perian
extinction, which was the biggest one on
the planet,
um, where 96%
of things died. And I explained to them
that that extinction is exactly the
opposite of the one that we're currently
in now. That
um, up in Siberia, where the magnetic
field today is really strong, it was
extremely weak. And these volcanoes
eventually opened up, egressed all of
their magma, uh, and that led to the
permy extinction. What happened there?
Oxygen levels in the oceans plummeted.
Meaning anything that was in the ocean
was wiped out. Only 4% of creatures made
it through. But as I told those guys and
I told Marty Ben yesterday,
uh, we're here talking today on the
podcast is proof that, you know, life
still found a way because without that,
we wouldn't get through it. So, the
thing that is kind of interesting now is
that
the latest USGS service just came out
and a lot of the data was tied to the
swarm data, which are three um,
satellites that are up in space. that
have showed something that no one
expected. Um, when I wrote my quilt
document in 2005,
uh, I was using the USGS data back then,
uh, of where the Earth's magnetic field
was,
and
I compared it to the 2026 data that just
came out. And when I tell you that the
change is substantial,
it's it's even worse than I thought was
possible. Why? Because Siberia
has now 335 nanotesla magnetic field.
Remember what I said earlier base all
over the earth is 50 nanot tesla. So
this is a radical increase. So when I
looked at the papers looked at some of
the space data from swarm
I started to do some calculations based
on this link in the physics data between
the magnetic dynamo and oxygen. And this
goes all the way back to 320 million
years ago. And the planet hasn't been
had that strong a magnetic field in a
long time. But you know what's
interesting? Guess what evolved 320
million years ago? You I should say
mammals. That was the first time they
evolved on the planet. Uh and the
magnetic field at that time became
extremely strong. We know that from
magnetic hysteresus.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So now we're in a situation
where there's parts of the earth that
have extremely low magnetic declination.
So for example,
for the last 50 years, everybody has
finally realized that the Carrington
event is tied to this whole thing. Why?
If you look at pictures like that I've
put out that NASA's put out, they show
uh the magnetic north pole from like
1590 all the way to today. And one of
the things that you notice is that the
magnetic north pole has left Canada and
is now in Siberia.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And the crazy part is just in the
last year it moved 20 kilometers
which when you look at the long history
of the earth this doesn't make any
sense. We don't have any data that says
the magnetic field can move that much.
Uh now remember we only go back about
125 years being able to measure this
stuff. So it's not like we have you know
a library of Alexandria to say hey this
is really anomalous but there this is
the data we do have. So you know people
have famously asked me and you are
actually one of them you know why have I
taken two world cruises in the last two
to three years. Well
something happened in May of 2024
that got my antenna up. And what was
that thing that happened? I was sitting
here in El Salvador and noticing that
there was a lot more earthquakes. So, I
started to look at some of the swarm
data and the swarm data showed something
that I didn't expect that the South
Atlantic anomaly uh was almost doubled
in size and it was being to fracture
into another piece and that piece was
headed towards the tip of Africa. And
when I thought about it, I said that
means the magnetic field in the southern
ocean is extremely weak. It means that
it's so weak that the vanation van Allen
radiation belts are coming closer to
Earth and that means more dutyium and
tridium are getting into the southern
ocean. And if you know anything about
biology, this is a really bad problem.
Why? Because the base chain of all life
is called DNA and RNA. And what controls
epigenetics is something called a methyl
group. Methyl group has three hydrogens.
If you get dutyium and tridium on methyl
groups, you basically change the
phenotype of all species of animals.
That's actually what all maja diseases
are. They're actually changes in the
duteration rate or tridium rate. Tridium
is really bad news and that's the one I
was worried about because on a lot of
podcasts I always tell people we don't
have to worry about tridium because our
magnetic shield gets rid of it. Well, it
turns out we got to worry about it now
because in the southern hemisphere it's
getting through
So why did I take the cruises? Pretty
simple. I was looking for evidence that
this problem was there. And what gave me
the impetus uh in May of 24 while I was
looking at the earthquakes happening
here in Guatemala and the volcanoes
blowing up. You can go back and look at
my tweets about this because they're
there. Um I said something must be going
on in the Southern Ocean. And um
literally the day after our biggest uh
eruption here in Guatemala, which is
about 120 mi from me, we had a 5.5
earthquake.
And uh then there was reports that the
northern aurora had come down to 18
north latitude and covered Puerto Rico.
&gt;&gt; I heard about And at the same time,
uh, the southern aurora came all the way
up to northern Brazil, which [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
blew my mind.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And I'm going, wait a minute, that puts
it around 121
south. I mean, that's above Lima, Peru.
I mean, that's that's equatorial tropic
areas. Like, that shouldn't happen. And
that is when I put my sleuth hat on. So,
what did I do? I went all over the world
looking for evidence of significant
magnetic declination. Why? Because our
government doesn't allow us to have this
data too frequently. We get it very
infrequently.
Uh the European Space Authorities, they
do a better job because they have these
swarm satellites. But during that time,
I was blocked from getting the
information. Uh I subsequently fixed
that problem because I have a couple of
friends in the know uh tied to both
DARPA and NASA and I said look I really
need to get this data and what did I do?
I went and looked at birds,
bees
um and one one other animal specifically
um a certain type of fish that were
magnetically sensitive. And my question
was,
were these animals dropping dead? Were
they having problems? Um, were there
evidence of fish dyes? Were any of the
fish dyes linked to baited decay in the
fish? And then I started to talk to the
people in the fishing community in
Australia. And that's when I found out
that over the last 10 years, their
fishing industry is no longer wild. It's
almost all farmed. Um, and they very
rarely see any wild fish because the
oceans are dead. And I was like, "Okay,
now now we're getting somewhere."
&gt;&gt; And like the mainstream narrative on
bees is that it's like pesticides and
EMF that we're creating that is causing
the issue. But would you say that it's
mostly
&gt;&gt; But guess what? that I mean that is all
true but here's what you don't
understand the base case like the 90%
reason it's happening is because the
magnetic field is collapsing
&gt;&gt; right
&gt;&gt; uh and when you understand that birds
you know navigate using cryptochrome in
their eye through the pectin occuli you
have to remember there's a couple of
really unique birds one is called the
godwit the other one is an albatross and
the godwit is the one that I just wrote
a blog about and I think people now are
beginning to understand why I did
because this is a bird that goes from
north to south and the godwit has a very
special pectin oculi uh tied to how it
handles some of the vortexes using
melanin and it leaves the Illutian
Islands and flies all the way across the
equator and goes down uh to New Zealand
and that's 11,000 kilometer flight. It
does it in 12 days and it never rests.
It never sleeps.
&gt;&gt; So, the reason I went to look for this
bird is because I wanted to see if there
was evidence that the Godwood bird
wasn't making it to New Zealand now that
this has been a problem because we know
the path of this bird and there is
record reports of Godwits dying in the
ocean.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
That is what I found when I left Peru
and went all the way to New Zealand and
then to Australia. Then my question was
uh about the fish. And the last question
was about the bees. I wanted to know
specifically what the effect in Peru uh
the South Pacific uh New Zealand and uh
Australia was about uh the bees and the
honey. And you know down in uh New
Zealand and Australia, it was very very
interesting. There was uh they're very
famous in New Zealand for using mucuna
honey and it's got a lot of healing
properties
and royal jelly and things like that.
One of the things that I found is the
South Pacific and the people on the
western coast of um Australia noticed
beehive collapse. um Australia it was
completely gone just like the fish but
New Zealand still had a spike and the
thing that I found was that the spike
most of the bees were doing really well
but on the southern island of New
Zealand. So I started to put this all
together and I started to realize in 24
that the data was substantially changed
changed way more than what I thought and
I was using things on the top of the
planet. So when I got home, I took
another trip and that trip, you know, I
told people on Twitter was to go uh see
Amaya Paribu on Surinam, but it really
wasn't. I wanted to go to the top of
South America to find out what was
happening on the top of the South
Atlantic anomaly. So, I left from Panama
and went all the way to Brazil on that
trip and I asked the same questions that
I asked in the southern Pacific Ocean
because now I was on top of the SAA
and I found that the information was
that birds were falling out of the sky
&gt;&gt; and dying
&gt;&gt; in Surinam, uh, British Guyana, uh,
parts of the Amazon rainforest. Um the
big one was in Aruba, Bonire and
Curisowl.
There was also issues there as well. And
I thought to myself, this is really
bizarre because the SAA is really really
low down on South America. I just
couldn't make it didn't make sense to me
kind of what I was finding. And then
about two weeks ago, the data came in
from USGS and the swarm data and it
shows that the South Atlantic anomaly is
now uh not only doubled in size, it's
almost three times the size of
continental Europe and it's beginning to
split. And the split has another wave
that's now hitting the southern coast of
Africa. Soon as I saw that, I started to
put my epidemiologic hat on and started
to look for evidence in us, the the
penultimate mammal. So, what did I know
would be the big effect in the human
system? Since mammals
all innovated in high magnetic
environments, that means that they're
very oxygen sensitive. We're the most
oxygen sensitive because we have this
thing called the brain that's only 2% of
our weight that takes 20% of our cardiac
output to generate vortexes. And the
magnetic vortex is a big deal. So in the
human GPS system, which we can talk
about, the X-axis is the sppheninoid
bone, the yaxis is the noticord, and the
z-axis that comes out is your heart.
It's out in space. And your heart acts
as a gravity well for heavy isotopes.
That's the reason why people have found
when they look that dutarium is 150
parts per million in our blood. And the
other thing you may not know through
evolutionary history cambrian to now
evolution went from one chamber hearts
and fish then went to two chamber hearts
and amphibians then went to four chamber
hearts in us. Why? What was the case? As
we got more complex, you vortex more
blood through through a chamber. And the
human heart is really interesting
because of the trabacula that are
present that really creates a big-time
vortex. And what does the vortex
designed to do to enter the circulatory
system and this pushes all the dutium
out to where the endothelium is? The
middle part which we call lammer flow in
biology is where all the H+ is and that
is the H+ that gets to mitochondria.
Why? Because mitochondria need oxygen.
Most of the red cells that are in there
are carrying that oxygen you know
paramagnetically and dropping it off.
But the key that people don't realize if
blood didn't vortex
and dutarium got in it would be a
problem. This is one of the fundamental
things that biology don't understand is
this is the reason why human adult uh
red blood cells do not have nuclei. If
it had nuclei, it would have
mitochondria. If it had mitochondria,
that the viscosity of the blood, the
dialectric constant of the blood would
fall to 78. We're designed to have a
very high dialectric. Why? Because that
creates vortexes. So, what are the three
vortexes that are important for humans?
ATPAS. Number one, we just talked about
the uh the delivery of oxygen. What's
the number that everybody should know at
this point if you've listened to
anything I've said? 9,000 revolutions
per second of H+. That's what the ATP
does. That creates a vortex. What's the
second vortex? This one I spent a lot of
time talking about over 10 years ago
with my members. I haven't talked too
much about it, but this is the vortex
that I'm real expert in because it's in
my organ, the brain. Uh, the brain
creates a vortex in the phalamus. How
does the vortex created? We have two
lateral ventricles, a third ventricle
that looks like a torpedo aqueduct, and
then the fourth ventricle that looks
like a wine decounter. So, if you've
ever drank wine, especially with me,
you'll know that I vortex the wine. Why
do I vortex the wine? People will tell
you in the wine business, "Oh, it opens
the wine." No, it's an isotopic
fractionation. Why? Because you're
pushing all the bad stuff out to get the
good stuff when you taste it. And what
happens is your lateral ventricles are
not part of the vortex system. And this
is one of the really key things that I
think people who are influencers and not
scientists have really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up in this
world.
They don't understand how you go from
vortexing in blood to vortexing in the
brain. And it turns out there's a a
organ in humans called the koid plexus
in the brain. And the koid plexus has
massive amounts of melanin in it kind of
like the pectin oculi in birds that do
the same thing. And what happens there
is you are fractionating
dutarium from the blood to knock it down
to increase the dialectric. That's what
the chord plexus job is. And the two
lateral ventricles act like fuel tanks
for lighter hydrogen. It goes through
the aperture into the third ventricle
where it it's located in the front of
the head right above the optic
and then it goes directly posterior
through the aqueduct into this fourth
ventricle chamber. Well, the aqueduct of
sylvvius is the key to the vortex. Why?
Because you have this huge third
ventricle, small fourth. What does it
do? It creates the ventur effect. The
venturi effect vortexes
CSF to further fractionate it. Okay, why
is this important? What sits on the
floor of the fourth ventricle? Remember
what my day job is, Alexis? I'm a brain
surgeon. I know a lot about neuro
anatomy. What sits right on the floor of
the fourth ventricle is the Vegas motor
triion. So you're designed to get H+
hitting that trigone because that is the
exhaust in the gut that links to the
stomach and the pancreas to get rid of
dutyium. Okay. What else is in the
fourth ventricle? That's important for
people to know. The fammen and magendi
is the center port that allows you to go
through the veagal motor triion but into
the spinal cord. But what's out lateral?
It's called the fammen of lushka and
luchka dumps out into the CP angle where
cranium 5 through 12 are. That's where
the dutarium designed to go. It goes on
the top of the the head and usually
exits at the arachnoid granulations. Do
we have a backup system to get rid of
duterum from the CP angle? We do. It's
called meccal's cave. Meccl cave is
where the trigeminal nerve sits. All
three branches are there. V1, V2, and
V3. So, how do we get this whole GPS
system to work? Well, it's pretty
simple. When you understand the sphenoid
bone is the X-axis, why is this phenoid
and what does it do? At the apex, the
big butterfly wing of it is embedded the
middle menal artery. Okay, that's a
branch of the external corateed. What
penetrates the sppheninoid bone in the
middle? the internal corateed artery.
What sits at the junction of the X and Y
axis, the Basler artery, those are all
the three arteries that fill your head.
Why do you have to know something about
the basler? The basler meets at a bone
called the occipital bone and the clus.
The clus is the remnant of the notoord
that's left in humans. Okay. So, this
tells you that the sppheninoid bone is
getting all this information about
dutarium right there. It also
uh has some other interesting things
associated with it. What the pituitary
gland sits in the captain's chair of the
sppheninoid bone. So, what else should
you know about this GPS system? It's
penetrated by two cranial nerves.
Cranial nerve two and cranial nerve
five. Cranial nerve 2 is all the light
information that I've talked about
adnauseium to everybody. But cranial
nerve 5 is actually allows the
mechanical and vibration sense of this
system that works with mech's cave. Why?
Because our face is designed to be
collapsed and it articulates when we
chew at the sppheninoid bone where
meccl's cave is to allow us to duterium
deplete. Why is this important? Because
it turns out if you go back in
evolutionary history and you know this
the two domains of life that started
this out are archa and bacteria. What's
the main difference between those two
between dutarium and bacteria? It's
pretty simple. Bacteria don't like
dutarium and archa can handle it. So
then you got to ask yourself okay we
have this endo symbiosis event where the
two are joined. So that means since we
are ukariots,
there has to be some archan remnants in
us. What are the archan remnants in us
that allowed us to shake, rattle, and
roll to get rid of dutarium? Well, it's
pretty simple. Archa have a different
cell membrane structure and a cell wall
structure that's rigid compared to
bacteria. So when they were in the
ancient GOE oceans, the waves would
knock the dutyium out of them. What's
the remnant in us? our our bones, our
facial structure. Where is the dutarium
kept? In the gravity well of the heart.
Why? That's why the heart muscle when
you unfold it looks like a helix. What's
the key though is what's inside the
ventricles and the atrium because it
vortexes the blood even more. Okay? So
you have you have almost like a jet
exhaust. That's how you should be
thinking in the heart. But the heart's
vortex keeps dutyium in the blood and
doesn't let it go to tissues that have
mitochondria.
In the brain, the key place they meet is
the corid plexus. But what's another
place that is open that nobody ever
talks about except probably me? We have
circumventricular organs that have no
bloodb brain barrier. So that is how the
theamic GPS system knows what the
isotopic load of the body is. And what
is it trying to do? It's trying to use
this GPS system, the three coordinates
to figure out how to coordinate things
in the body with circadian biology. So
when you understand that the phalamus
is where this ventricular vortex is in,
what's special about the phalamus? It's
where all sensory input for humans comes
in. Every single part with the exception
of one sense doesn't come directly in.
That one sense is all faction. Why?
Because that's part of the old paleo
cortex. We have a different program for
that. Um
but the phalamus is a huge array. What
else is unique about the phalamus?
Thalamus has humongous
uh cholesterol and DHA in it. Not as
much as the eye does, but the central
retinal pathway into the phalamus
has more DHA than any other part of the
body. So it tells you magnetic flux
between the eye and the phalamus is
huge. What else is important? The eye
gives 48% of the neurons uh that radiate
out in the optic radiations which
surround the ventricular system. Okay.
So, you're getting pretty good
information here that light and magnetic
flux are a big deal for the interior
part of the brain.
So, what does the GPS system in humans
specifically do? It connects us with the
earth, the sun and the moon.
That is how the system works. So when
the magnetic dynamo has a problem, how
is it coupled? How how is our bodies
coupling to it? Well, it turns out where
did DHA come from? Everybody knows
cyanobacteria in the oceans. That's when
oxygen came. That's when the great
oxygenation event happened. So what does
that tell you? Oxygen levels in water
changed. The oxygen levels in water then
changed the magnetic dynamo. That is the
reason why the dynamo got coupled at the
Cambrian explosion. Why? Because prior
to the Camryan explosion, there was no
oxygen in the ocean. And what did that
do? It changed the magnetic flux by
changing the isotopic fraction. And
guess what happens when the isotopic
fraction in water changes? the magnetic
dynamo reacts to it. Which is why I need
to pay attention to what was going on in
the southern ocean because what I just
laid out to you, this is called the
human legarian tells us how we work. So
after doing this big deep dive in this
whole
discussion that you know I'm having with
you to kind of educate you on why this
is important, I did the final thing. I
went and looked at humans in Brazil. I
went and looked at humans in Africa
where the SAA was and guess what I
found? They were all getting heart
disease and nerve degeneration.
So guess what? Bees, birds, fish, and
the penultimate mammals on the planet in
the southern hemisphere
are dying. And they're dying at record
rates. And it's not arguable anymore.
And when you understand what this means,
it means the gravity well of the earth,
its z-axis is failing. So what is the
big ticket that I did? You happen to
know. I'm wearing it right now. See what
does that say? Antarctica, South Pole.
So why' I go there? Everybody asked me.
I was looking for evidence that we were
emitting excessive radio frequency
light out of the southern pole. We know
it's not coming out of the northern
pole, but we know it could come out of
the southern pole if we have a magnetic
failure. So, what did we find? We found
that we have unbelievable degassing of
RF coming out of the bottom of the
planet. You know why that's a big
problem? Because RF radiation destroys
melanin. So that means whales, wed
seals, and penguins should be affected
down there. So what did I ask the
biologists that were on the cruise ship
with me? I asked them the same question
about fish, bees, and and uh birds, and
I got the same answer.
So, I knew by using all these physics
deductions, by using first principal
thinking, because our government's
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] lying to us, that the real story
on the planet
is that magnetic declination has
increased tremendously on Earth and it's
happened unbelievably over the last 50
years. But the proof, the external
proof,
I gave you the biology side, but the
real proof is how fast the magnetic
north pole ran from Canada to Siberia.
And what does this mean now? Because
I've explained the three vortexes in
biology. What's the vortex in the in the
planet you need to pay attention to? The
vortex in the planet right now is in
Siberia. It's uber strong. It's 335
nanotes. This is spinning all the light
light isotopes. Why should this make
sense to you? What do you know that's
happening at the same time all this has
been going on? All the water, the ice at
the poles melted. What do I always tell
people about water? The best water is at
the poles, right?
&gt;&gt; Because it's dutarium depleted and has a
different melting point.
&gt;&gt; So guess what? Now all that dutarium
depleted water is going in the Arctic
Ocean and that magnetic flux is creating
a massive vortex in Siberia.
So what is the midsuture line on planet
Earth just like a neurosurgeon would
think? That's called Iceland right down
the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.
Where's the block veagal exhaust?
it's happening in the South Atlantic
anomaly that mimics what's supposed to
happen in us and there's nothing coming
out. So when I realized how these things
are all connected in 2024,
I asked my geology friends, how ge how
geologically active is the Pacific ring
ring of fire? And what I found out,
there's this really big disconnect
between Panama and twothirds of Chile.
And these are all places that I went to,
but I just never said anything to
anybody because I wanted to make sure
before I had this right, I really had it
right. And the Pacific Ring of Fire
above Panama is kicking ass taking apes.
and below it at the southern tip of
South America like where Auay is uh uh
Tiara de Fuego
it's also doing well um but there's a
dead zone from probably I'd say maybe a
thousand kilometers south of Santiago
all the way up to Panama and it's
extends across all the way the whole top
of South America
And now the bleeding edge of the SAA is
in the Caribbean and it's affecting all
the way up until Puerto Rico. Puerto
Rico now stands at the western edge,
western northern edge. So this is no
longer a South Atlantic anomaly. The
anomaly is growing. So what does that
mean for people who you know are my
clients? You know that I have a duty to
tell people where I think the best place
to go is to keep the vortexes and you
running. But we already have pretty good
data that South America is not the place
to go. Okay. But now I can say with some
firmness that the Caribbean on top of
South America is a no-go zone. And I
believe most of the islands in the
Caribbean out deep in the Atlantic Ocean
like Puerto Rico, Turks and Cake House,
all that out not interested. It appears
uh the South American continent will
block the ring of fire. The best place
right now in the world to be is Siberia,
but unfortunately there is no UV light
there,
&gt;&gt; so you can't grow a lot of food. But
Iceland for the last 12 years has been
blowing its top like crazy. So believe
it or not, here's a doctor that's made
his living telling people the tropics
are where you want to go. But guess what
the ba best bailout right now is for
people in Northern Europe? It's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Iceland because the magnetic flux and
the sun is good enough for you not to
have a big problem there. Um, do I think
the east coast of Africa is in deep
trouble? Yes. I think this is a place I
would not be caught dead in over the
next 50 to 100 years. Why? Because I
believe all the sea life is going to die
all the way up the western coast all the
way to the beginnings of the Sahara
Desert. Uh, the real problem is at the
tip of Africa there's a thing called the
big iron blob. And for those people who
have listened to me, they probably
haven't done deep enough dives in
geology like I do, but my members know
about this blob because I've talked to
them about it. And this blob is a big
piece of iron that's blocking the SSA.
But once it gets around this, which is
going to happen probably this year,
guess what's right in its path?
Australia. And Australia, based on the
newest data, has some of the worst
magnetic metrics you've ever seen. And
that's the reason why the fish, the
birds, and the bees have been dying
there for 50 years. It's also the reason
why the Great Barrier Reef is in trouble
since 73. So, what are we seeing?
There's not a lot of land mass in the
Southern Ocean, but just about
everything in the Southern Ocean is
being taken out. So we have the reverse
effect of what happened in the perian
extinction and the exhaust in the perian
was Siberia. Now the magnetic intake the
jet engine is in Siberia.
So this is clearly an evidence of a pole
shift. And where this comes to Becker's
work is when he talked about polarity
shifts. Remember where he did it? He did
it when he was studying amputations in
salamanders and he found that in sleep
the DC electric current went away and he
that current of healing was gone and it
it was because of a magnetic polarity
shift shift in the brain. What does that
correlate to that I just explained to
you in a pretty decent and detailed way?
That's the position of the vortex going
north and south in the axis. What
controls that? Alexis, the appendma has
psyia that beat that controls which way
the vortex goes. What's the link there
between melanin and pomsy and the MITF
ampar system that controls all this?
Those are called tannocytes. Tanocytes
are loaded with melanin and they line
the human central nervous system,
ventricular cavity. And these cells
become really important because there
are magnetically sensitive cells. They
tell us when the vortex needs to go
certain ways. And you know, I famously
did a podcast, I shouldn't say it was a
podcast, it was a webinar probably 15
years ago and I told my members I was
taking an epidermid tumor out in the
brain. I was called by one of my staff
members in LSU
uh to do the case with him. And the
reason he asked me to do it is because I
was used to being an oral surgery
resident. So I was pretty good about
disarticulating the face and the skull
to get into places that are not easy to
get into in the brain. And we did a
transcosal approach went through the top
of the head, split the the corpus
colosum to get into the third ventricle
to remove the medial portion of the
tumor. And we started the case around
1:00 in the afternoon in New Orleans.
And because this was a private patient,
I gave the patient back to my uh my
mentor at that time who's supposedly
teaching me, which I chuckle at to this
day. Uh and he gets in the operating
microscope and starts to remove the
tumor. But when he's in there, I'm
looking on the resonant port and I'm,
you know, I'm I'm designed to be the six
other eyes that he can't see while he's
focused on doing what he's doing so that
he doesn't get into trouble. And I
noticed that the ventricular fluid was
going from the frontal pole to the
occipital pole. And I'm going, that's
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wild. And I I said to him, I
said, "Are you seeing what I'm seeing?"
And he goes, "What are you talking
about?" And I said, "Back out of the
scope for a minute." I said, 'Look at
the ventricular system. Because, you
know, we had the whole thing open.
You're seeing the whole top of the third
ventricle. I said, 'Look at it. It's
moving. There's waves going towards the
aqueduct.
And he and you know, he just thought,
"Yeah, okay." He could care less cuz he
wanted to get the tumor out. So, he goes
back to work and the sun sets. We're now
getting ready to close the case up and
I'm looking in the scope again. Now the
vortex is going the opposite way.
And I'm sitting there and I'm going I
said, "Will you look at this again? Now
it's going the opposite way." And he
gave me some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] reason that this
was tied to anesthesia or this and that.
I'm like, "Uhuh. No way." I said, "The
patient was asleep before when the
vortex was going the other way. This
wasn't anesthesia." And he just wasn't
interested. Of course, I got interested.
Then that's when I learned about
appendama cells and tannocytes and kind
of what they do and that they're big
time linked into this MITF ampar loop
that's tied to both circadian biology
and also leptin the leptin melanocorn
pathway. And I was like okay this begins
to make sense. And then I started to
realize
this ties directly to what Becker found
when he put the salamanders on the 2,00
g magnet that he was changing the
polarity the vortex in the amphibian
brain and that's why he was able to let
them go to sleep. And uh the reason I I
discuss all this with you is because you
need to understand that a magnetic
vortex is another way that mammals get
cheap energy for free. And it turns out
that we are the animals on the planet
that use the vortex probably more than
anybody else. I explained to you already
what happened in amphibians. They only
had two chambered hearts and fish only
have one chambered hearts. So, think
about what I said to you when I went in
the Southern Ocean. Should it be
surprising to you that fish died before
us? No. Because the vortex, if they only
have one chamber, they're heavily
reliant on that, if it gets taken away,
they're going to die first. Birds, who
are the other animal that got through
the last extinction event, their vortex
is very different. Their vortex starts
in the eye. Their pectin occuli looks
like a fish gill with all melaninations.
But what's their exhaust? They are truly
a jet engine. Their glucagon exhaust in
their gut work so fast. And this is this
will make you realize why I also scoff
at food gurus. Do you know that every
bird on earth is insulin resistant by
definition? Because they have to be.
because they are isotopically
deuterating themselves through the
glucagon pathway so that they can do
things that no other animal can do. And
they're flying to do this. They can
actually see the magnetic field. So,
they should be able to see where to go.
And remember, the KT event was not an
extinction that knocked the magnetic
field out. It was an exterior problem
that blocked us from the sun. The
magnetic field was still there. That's
the reason why birds survived. They were
able to use the magnetic field to go and
find where photosynthesis was still
working. Okay? Mammals survived because
they used their vortexes being
underground to create fat from light,
specifically blue light. Okay? Which was
dominant after the asteroid hit. But the
the magnetic field was not a big player
in the last extinction event.
It appears that what's going on now on
Earth, it's not a new phenomenon. I
don't want anybody think that it is
because this has happened at least 500
times in Earth's history. The key thing
that we will not know, but I do know
that everybody's following it is we
don't have a library of Alexandria to
know how severe this event really is
going on in the southern hemisphere. We
also don't understand how this ties into
coronal mass ejections. But if you look
at what governments are doing now, some
of the things that we are all scratching
our head begin to start to make some
sense now because you start going, "So
maybe that's the reason why this is
going on and they're not telling us
about this because if they told us,
you'd have 8 billion people on the
planet running to the places that are
the oasis that the swarm satellites are
telling us, hey, things are good here
now.
in your world, in my world, why is this
new data a big deal?
So, you probably have figured out from
the discussion we had about the link
between
540 million years ago magnetic
inclination and the sun that that's how
we sculpt hletypes.
Hllet types are paying attention to all
this. So, how should you be thinking
about a hletype? Now it's basically a
GPS system for the matrix in your body.
But it turns out the matrix in your head
or the GPS in your head has to
coordinate with that matrix and hletype
in you. What does a magnetic declination
event mean
given the way the human legarian is
constructed? It means hletites no longer
matter. How's that for a shock? So your
haplletype
can get you in trouble if you live in a
magnetically decline place. So this gets
back to the question you asked me
earlier. So is this why the B thing is a
big deal around pesticides and
non-native EMF cities? Yeah, because
guess what magnetic declination mimics?
It mimics glyphosate in the food supply.
It mimics uh non-native EMF's ability to
take dutyum out of your blood and put it
where mitochondria are. But is that
effect the big effect? No. It's the
facade of the bigger problem going on
inside the earth. Why is this the case?
We are seeing evidence of every maha
disease in places where the magnetic
field is failing now. Because now that
we have new data maps, we can now look
at zip codes and go, so that's the
reason why people were dying, you know,
from this here. So, for example, let's
take probably the most controversial
thing is COVID because that was the last
big effect. Uh, do we now understand why
people died the way they did? If you put
a magnet magnetic declination map over
where COVID debts happen, you're going
to be stunned how coincident they are.
They they match almost perfectly. So,
what's the game now? What is the real
game for true mitochondrial
uh biophysic people that are listening
carefully to what I'm telling you? Your
goal is to live in a place where
magnetic inclination is happening. And
if you think that latitudes
and tropics determine this, you're
wrong.
Okay? And I've known this was coming for
a long time. I just didn't know it was
going to change on a dime.
Because in the 20 years that I've been
teaching this science,
I I'll be the first one to admit this. I
didn't think in a million years
that Siberia would go from 15 anatel to
335 in 320 million years. It happened in
20 [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] years. There is nothing
precedented for that in the geologic
record, the physics record,
astrobiology,
nothing on Earth. We just don't know
what the slope of that line is. And it
turns out the slope of that line is now
asmmptoic.
So that means the way I teach has to be
adapted to this new data. So it turns
out we have something new called the
volcano protocol.
Turns out volcanoes are a really good
place to be. So to show people that I've
been paying attention this for 20 years
now I've told the members on my site. I
said, ' Do you understand the the choice
that I had to make five years ago? Was I
going to the Chickixaloo Crater in
Mexico or should I go to El Salvador?
And I will tell you what the the the
decision tree was for me. The decision
tree was the Chickixloo Crater was the
last sight of the last extinction event.
It's where the asteroid hit the planet.
What was the things that were pro for
this area for me? 30 kilometers of the
crust were blown off. That means we're
closer to the dynamo. Okay. The base of
the crater also has a volcano in it. The
Gulf of Mexico is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] teeming with
life. Okay, which also is unusual
because it is a tropical area. It should
be a desert for for life because it has
less oxygen in the water when it's warm.
But the exact opposite was there. But
then I kept looking what was going on in
the surface with the Mexican government,
the Mexican people. I didn't see things
going higher. One of the other things
that was a positive for Mexico, the
cenote system there, because where the
asteroid hit was made out of carst.
Carst normally dutarium depletes
rainwater. For 65 million years, the
rain came down in uh in this area of
Mexico. All the cenote system is dutier
and depleted. I'm like, this has got to
be the place. But the thing that stopped
me was the politics
and the people there were not thriving.
And I said,
there was an intuition in me. Just
stopped me. And I said, I just don't
know if this is the right place to go.
And then what magically happens? I go
and look to places relatively close
around there. And then I find the land
of volcanoes where they have more
volcanoes per kilometer square mile than
any other place on Earth. And that's
called El Salvador. And I see this guy B
Kelly and he's getting rid of his atomic
mass called MS-13.
He's giving Bitcoin to people. The
people there are all smiling. They they
look radically different than what's
going on in Mexico. So what do I decide
to do? Five years ago, my intuition
that magnetic inclination was higher in
El Salvador than Mexico, and I jumped.
And I'd be honest, I was not sure if I
was right. I can say to you today, that
was the best decision of my life. Why?
Because right now
things of higher latitude than the
Chixabaloo crater, remember Chickabaloo
is 20 north.
Puerto Rico is 18 north. Puerto Rico
is fast becoming um
how shall I say this calmly?
A dementia ward for humans.
And um it's a it's not a good place to
be. And it it does appear that the
continent of South America is going to
deflect
most of what's left towards Africa and
then towards Australia.
There's no evidence outside of
the southern northern Atlantic Ocean
that this is getting bigger. It looks
like it's going towards
Africa. This is going to have huge
impacts from both Africa, the southern
Indian Ocean, probably the tip of India.
Um, do I believe uh Australia all the
way out into the South China Sea is
going to be impacted? Yes. One of the
other things I found out from the swarm
data that stunned me, the best bailout
for Australia is Philippines and uh New
Zealand. the southern island. So what am
I telling you now? The southern island,
not the northern island that's got a
better latitude.
So Philippines I normally would not have
told people to go to. Why? Because it's
got too many people, too much non-native
EMF from all those people. But the
magnetic field that's there compared to
other places around is off the chain.
And remember, that's technically where
the Pacific rim uh of fire starts and
then goes up to Japan, comes through
Alaska, and goes all the way down. What
else did I find out about the map? I
found out that the southern and northern
islands of Japan, excellent. Not a bad
place to be. This is the most shocking
revelation.
The best place to be in North America is
the Illutian Islands in Alaska.
continental United States is absolutely
horrendous.
Uh the only state that may be okay is
Washington state because the Pacific Rim
is still volcanically active underneath
it. But when you go from Oregon all the
way down to Guatemala, you hit a dead
zone. It's it's almost like it's Mars
based on on the data. And that explains
the reason why California has no living
fish in their Pacific Ocean.
It's also concerning that western Mexico
is also used to be a fishing mecca.
I went there on my world cruise too uh
through the whole place. Talk to all the
fishermen.
Fish are when people from California
come down to go fishing. They normally
used to catch tuna all the time. Now
they catch fish like this big.
Most of the fishing is done further
south. Where is the fishing spectacular?
Guatemala, El Salvador, Costa Rica,
Nicaragua.
Then Panama slacks off. I do think
Panama slacks off because of the canal
traffic. But then it's a variable dead
zone from Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, all
the way in northern Chile until you get
past Santiago.
Like the Pacific Rim is the blocked
veagal exhaust for the planet and that
exhaust needs to open up
for things to go. So do I think
eventually what will happen to get the
magnetic dynamo back? The key sign will
be when we start to see huge eruptions
and earthquakes begin to happen in
Chile, in uh Peru,
in Ecuador. Why? Because that needs to
happen again. It may even happen in the
ocean. We may not see it. Um I guess the
other place I should talk about based on
the data that's important is Hawaii.
Normally, people would think Hawaii is a
great place. Believe it or not, the
magnetic declination that's happened on
the Big Island is pretty substantial.
Uh, the only place that's still pretty
active is Kilawea. Monaka and Monaloa
are dead. They're also encumbered big
time by military radar. So, as far as
I'm concerned, Hawaii is still a no-go.
There's other better choices in the
Southern Pacific if you're going to do
that. Uh but Hawaii is not part of the
volcano protocol. Um
and I think that explains
kind of what I've been doing the last 2,
three, four years. Then it should make
sense based on what I'm teaching people
because now we also know that RF is
pouring out of the southern hemisphere
because it's blocked. Why? because
that's the entropy dump of the earth
from the magnetic flux it's losing.
That's exactly what's happening. So,
this is just like a refrigerator. When
you put your hand in, your food's cold,
but you put your hand on the back of it
and hot stuff's coming out. The RF
that's being liberated is really heat.
It turns into heat and it's expelled
into space. What is the effect when that
happens in us? That's entropy dump that
happens in our brain. and the heat comes
off our head because we're frying our
mitochondria. And how do we know that's
the case? There's studies now out there
that I've posted on Twitter the last
couple days that show that RF radiation
makes incoherent melanin. Incoherent
melanin degrades into dopamine. Dopamine
then breaks down and what happens? It
leads to neurodeeneration.
And fundamentally, this is the reason
why everybody's addicted to things that
emit microwaves and RF. Why? because it
destroys your melanin, makes dopamine.
You think you get the dopamine hit, but
what continues to happen? This fire
burns in your body, you lose all your
melanin, and you're losing your magnetic
flux. You You become a fish, you become
an amphibian, you become a bee that
lives in the southern hemisphere. And
we're seeing this effect in different
parts of the planet. Non-native EMF is
an exacerbator to this effect.
bad light, not having UV and near
infrared light exacerbators to this
effect. Why? Because that's what drives
photo repair in mammals. The problem is,
and I know you're going to ask me this
question.
Does photo repair matter when magnetic
declination is in your area? The answer,
&gt;&gt; that's exactly what I was going to ask.
&gt;&gt; It doesn't. It doesn't matter. And what
matters the most is the magnetic flux.
And this is something from my 20 years
when I've done podcast, we always talk
about light, water, magnetism, but
nobody ever wants to talk about the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] magnetism.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Turns out now the magnetism is turning
out to be the biggest part of the story.
Why? Because we're living on a planet
where at least half of it has got a huge
magnetic stressor. And it's a stressor
that I never thought was going to be an
issue for probably 25 50,000 years.
I got bad news for you. It's an issue
for all of us right now. So, the single
most important thing in your life is
still the sunrise. What's the second
most important thing according to my
update that I'm giving you now? You
better live in an area that has magnetic
inclination,
not declination.
&gt;&gt; So, what percentage of like the disease
burden that we're currently facing do
you think is caused by man-made factors
versus this declination?
&gt;&gt; I think they're all just exacerbators.
Why? Because the data that I found of
life in the areas of magnetic
declination are off the charts. I mean
you just go look at cardiovascular
injuries in Brazil in the last 5 years
and you'll be stunned. I mean you'll be
truly stunned. Um it's really really
shocking. And then when you see the way
the map has changed in North America,
like we didn't spend much time talking
about this, but remember I told you I
was a big fan of Mexico, you know, 10
years ago, let me tell you, if you think
Mexico is bad, you should see the big
part of Mexico that is that is
absolutely worse,
it's almost Sahara Desert bad. And
remember, Mexico City's got a volcano on
it. But that volcano has no magnetic
power whatsoever. It's almost like it's
been zapped. The best place in Mexico is
still where the Chickixaloo Crater is,
but it's being impinged on now by the
SAA. And that is the reason why I think
Mexico's pilot lights been turned out.
Okay. The interesting thing is the pilot
light is turned on as soon as you get to
Guatemala. Like Guatemala hasn't a
volcano that's erupting right now. Um we
have more volcanoes here than any place
on Earth. Costa Rica's got uh volcanoes
that are erupting right now. Um
Nicaragua doesn't. Uh but Nicaragua
still on the map looks really good. Uh
there's no evidence of anything that's
dying there. Panama is the interesting
one.
To me, Panama, I think, is okay. Panama
doesn't have any active volcanoes, but I
think Panama is the country you're
asking about. Is that one affected more
by man-made stuff than anything else? My
belief right now, based on the data I
have, that's my answer. But when you ask
me the question,
how much of human disease burden do I
believe today in April of 26?
If you would have asked me the question
a year ago, I would have told you
70 80% by man-made EMF.
Today
10%.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; That's how big a deal this change is.
Why?
Because the change has been so
substantial. The change in bandwidth for
EMF hasn't been this substantial. You
know, we went from zero to 6G.
The last time that I looked at the
magnetic shield was at 05. And I've been
monitoring it, but I didn't have good
data because the data has been hidden by
governments. They they don't want us to
know this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And um when this data came out, I
was like, "Holy fuck." Like I could not
believe how bad it was. And like there
was clues. I don't want anybody to think
there wasn't clues when I started
tweeting two years ago about the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
earthquakes here and the eruptions here
and the weather changes in different
places. And then when the aurora hit
Puerto Rico and Brazil, I was just like,
"Wait a minute. that those those are
like two auroras almost coming together.
That that tells you the weakness in the
field has to be tremendous. And why is
this a big deal for like the people in
Brazil? This is the part that I think
people are going to be bothered the most
by
what happens in a place like Brazil now
is the vanel and belt comes down.
Dutyium and tridium are going in. What's
the problem with tridium? Because we've
never really talked about this.
&gt;&gt; It's radioactive, right? Well, not only
radioactive, but it's got two neutrons
and one proton.
&gt;&gt; Here's the thing. When it gets
incorporated into your methyl groups on
your DNA, you know what it emits? It
emits a beta particle. You're being
radiated from inside out. And here's the
other bad news. Why don't we have any
good data on this from other extinction
events? You know what the halflife of
tridium is?
&gt;&gt; 12.32 years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, guess what? will never will be able
to see the isotopic signature. So what
did I start doing two years ago? I
started looking for evidence of other
isotopes that could give me a clue. And
the best isotope that I find was oxygen
18. And this should make sense because
when the magnetic field gets weaker,
the heavier stuff is going to stay on
Earth, the lighter stuff is going to be
thrown off into space. So that means
oxygen 16, which is what most of us use,
will be there. And it turns out there's
a lot of rocks from the Peran extinction
that are still accessible and geologists
are sampling. And what are they finding?
The uh the oxide minerals in these rocks
are all oxygen 18. So
we now can say pretty clearly that the
environment in the perian was loaded
with dutarium and tridium. And the
interesting thing is that's precisely
what we're seeing in humans that get
sick now that they're duterrated. I
haven't seen anybody triated yet. I
haven't. But if it's going to happen,
&gt;&gt; how are you testing for it?
&gt;&gt; Well, radioactivity.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; I mean that that'd be the number one
thing like and I'll tell you the other
other thing I'm using and this should
make some sense to you. Remember we
talked about dialectric constant the
like your tap water is 78 and when you
go in the sun it goes up to 160. That
means what is it effectively a measure
of from physics? It's called electrical
resistivity. Okay, there's more
resistance in the water. But what does
it mean to people who listen to this
podcast? It means that you can carry
more light energy from the sun in water
in your system. And what does that mean?
It becomes less viscous. So if you think
about less viscous that's good for
vortexes. That's what mammals have. We
got three of them. So that is the reason
why viscosity is a big deal. So when
you're duterrated or triated you
basically have maple syrup for blood or
CSF. Okay. And that increases the
inertial problem in your head or in your
heart. So how what would be the best
test? Uh uh Alexis and I think when you
were at my house we talked about this. I
told you that I like thermography,
right?
&gt;&gt; Mhm. because you know that you're going
to get a weird signal on a thermogram if
the blood is too viscous. And what am I
seeing in some of my ladies with breast
cancer? What am I seeing in some of my
patients that have hydrophilis?
I'm seeing changes on their face that
the vortex changes like it looks like
they're getting no blood flow into their
head. And I want you to think about what
I said about the spphenoid bone being
the x- axis. That sppheninoid bone has
all three divisions of the artery that
feeds our brain, external, internal, and
basor artery. So when you see a white
spot in the middle of someone's face, it
tells you that their CSF ventricle is
like filled with
um concrete. And you know, a lot of
these patients get diagnosed with normal
pressure hydrophilis or they'll get
diagnosed with hydrophilis, but it turns
out that's not really what they have.
They're duterrated. And where the real
problem is, they're not able to clear
dutyium at Meccl's cave and they can't
keep it in their heart vortex because
the vortex doesn't have the gravity
well, doesn't have the power. It's like
your heart goes bad, it's a magnetic
stall. So that's the reason why people
that have like hydroavos have bad
hearts, they really need to get to
volcanoes. Why
we need to see if we can keep the dutium
in the blood and get it out of the
brain. So then one of the things that I
start telling people is I want them to
start chewing gum and I want them to
start chewing mastic gum. The reason for
that is when you masticate you're
putting pressure on the maxilla. You
know that the maxilla and the mandible
are pole electric. the piso electricity
gets sent to the petrus uh part of the
temporal bone but and also the junctions
in the sppheninoid that's where the
mech's cave is if we can knock that
stuff out there then we can start
getting the flow through the aqueduct of
sylvvius in other words what we're what
we're really saying is mitochondrial now
I've become a vortex
thermodynamic clinician why I am trying
to get them back uh to a state where I
can break their lattice. This is the
reason why dutarium depleted water now
is probably the greatest hack everybody
can use who lives in an environment
that's not good. For example, you're in
Jersey. Bad news. Jersey is not a really
good place to be because it's it's
failing big time too. So dutarium
depleted water for people that have
these problems is huge. Let me tell you
the other implication for this because
this will probably stun you.
Now, can I say with some definitive
proof behind me that I understand
hypothyroidism better? Yes, your brain
is shutting down thyroid because
with no magnetic vortex, if your
metabolic rate was high, you'd be
creating steam like Antarctica is
making,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Coming out your head. So, guess what?
&gt;&gt; It's adaptive.
&gt;&gt; You got it. You're you're frying your
circuits. So women who are out there
that have hypothyroidism, I I can tell
you for the last
I'd say last year, I've been telling
them stop taking their thyroid meds,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I want them not to do this. I want them
to do way more grounding. I want them to
do more cold thermogenesis. I want them
to begin to listen to loud music. I want
them to start pounding their chests. I
want them to start chewing gum. Like we
have to go back to the archan way of
removing dutyium when our lattice cannot
be defragged. And are there things now
out there that can defrag the lattice
differently? Yeah. Like Dutmium depleted
water is probably the safest, cheapest
one, but is there evidence out there
that the psychedelics can do it? Yes. Is
there evidence out there that cannabis
plays a role here, too? It Yes, there
is. There's good evidence for that, too.
But again, people that are
neurocognitively impaired,
these drugs are are going to have
different effects. Why? Because the
inertial pressures that they have both
in their heart and um their head is
different. Like let me give you I'll
give you a perfect example. This will
just show you how much I've been paying
attention to this because this just
happened actually yesterday on Twitter.
So, I have a lot of general surgery
friends that uh I stayed in contact with
for my residency. And one of the things
that they started telling me about 10
years ago is that they were starting to
see way more splenic um ruptures,
spontaneous at traumatic splenic
ruptures. And they kept asking me, "What
do you think this is from?" And I said,
"Well, I think I have an idea. The
spleen is where we take red blood cells
out every 120 days.
red blood cells swim in 150 parts to
dutarium. I said, could it be that if we
have more dutarium in the blood that the
blood is getting cycled out faster and
the spleens are getting bigger? And if
that's the case, you should be able to
do CT scans and see the spleen hanging
off the back wall of the um and it
should be sagging. So, don't you think
people started to do that? And they
said, "You're right. All these people
had spleens that were hanging alone."
Then I said to one of my general surgery
buddies in New Orleans, I said, "The the
way you should use the test that you
should use in the lab that links to this
is homocyine." Why? Homocyine
relies on methylation. So that if people
are heavily deuterated their homoyine
should go up their spleen should get
bigger
&gt;&gt; should also have an effect on their
kidneys and their lungs as well you know
and this is what like Max Gilhne and the
people that you talk to call [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
visceral fat it's not [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] visceral
fat it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dutyium it's dutarium
in the fat and then when you explain to
these retards that dutyium actually acts
on adiposytes to change them from brown
fat cells to white cells and dutarium
actually increases your white cell
adiposite mass you start to go this is
what's happening so I told them while
the spleen gets bigger they should also
have more intraabdominal fat and you
would think that the fat would take the
shock it won't then I told them
something really interesting I said the
people that should get more at traumatic
splenic rupture ures should be pregnant
women. And he just stopped. He goes,
"You're not going to believe this. Last
six months." He goes, "I've had three
women pregnant who had ruptured
spleens."
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And I said, "Well, this makes a lot of
sense because when a woman gets
pregnant, her hematocrit goes down. That
means her red mass goes down." But what
goes up? Her water in her blood. That's
to actually have the baby. And I said,
"She's going to be isotopically heavy.
The spleen's already going to be big.
The risk in her is going to be bigger."
And I said, I would also tell you, not
only were will her homocyine be up, but
you'll also notice that these women in
the third trimester when the baby gets
big, cuz the mom is spinning the duty
into the baby, you'll start to notice
that mom has problems with her heart
like rhythm changes. Doesn't mean she
has disease. It's because the vortex in
the heart can't handle the isotopic load
that's delivered to it.
&gt;&gt; And then the final part of this
pathophysiology that I was having with
the doctors that I teach
&gt;&gt; was oh I told them look at their uh
aorta look at their corateed even though
they're 30 and 40 years old they should
all have evidence of p a reason why
they'll have pad should be obvious to
you now. If you have isotopically thick
blood that's viscous, you're going to be
causing intimal damage. When you get
inimal damage, what happens? Apo B, LPA,
everything goes up because that's the
spackle the body puts there. But what
you should see in people that get the
ruptures, they'll have frank
calcifications in the central vessels
coming out of the heart. Alexis, every
single case that had a splenic rupture
had that.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
So when people tell me
that I don't know what I'm doing or I'm
a quack or I don't understand the
biohysics, I can promise you that I do
get it. I do understand it. But when you
talk to people who've been trained in
Rockefeller medicine, they don't learn
about isotopic fractionation. They have
no idea that melanin is designed to use
the nuclear magnetic moment to get rid
of dutium tridium. They have they most
of them have no idea that like in the
surface of your aorta and your corateed
arteries you have something called the
intimate. The intima is made out of
elastin and fibrillain. Do you know that
neural crest cells in the embryo follow
elastin and fibrillain to get to where
they need to be?
So just think about that. that the palm
sea that's supposed to be in your karate
is getting taken out not only by blue
light but also dutarium. What what is
really a p a
um um collection of calcium? It's
actually where melanin is dropping off
calcium at the scene of the crime. But
the scene of the crime is from the
isotopic injury that's happening in the
mitochondria. And I don't really think
people really understand that. And that
also explains why neurologic diseases
and heart diseases go together. Why?
Because what's the link? The gravity
well to the GPS axis. That's the CSF
axis. When you realize what the
connection is through the choride plexus
and what the choride plexus is
fundamentally doing, it's isotopically
fractionating dutyium to make CSF 120
110. Why? Because when it vortexes, it
doesn't have to be 50 or, you know, 20
like it is in the bottles that people
drink
&gt;&gt; because the aqueduct is pushing all the
dutium out to get rid of it out of
Lucka. So that the veagal motor triion
gets hit with nothing but H+
and think about the ladies that get uh
hyper emmesis during pregnancy. Now you
know why because the stuff that's being
laminer float is dutarium hitting their
veagal motor trigone. If you want to
know like why kids get enures, now you
know why. They came from a mother that
was heavily duterrated. The whole
surface part of their lateral, third,
and fourth ventricle is where all the
osmo receptors are for sodium. So these
kids are isotopically heavy. But we've
got doctors telling people, "Oh yeah,
your kid is just going through her
phase." No, it's a sign [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mom spun
a lot of dutarium into the baby and
they're they're usually living in bad
areas. I used to blame them, you know,
for using tech. And it turned out when I
blamed them on tech, turned out I was
mostly right, but I never really
realized that the land they were living
under was really bad. And I guess since
most of your people are going to be from
the United States, what's the worst
place in the in the United States to
live based on the new data? Any place in
the Midwest.
&gt;&gt; Like the isotopically worst area is
probably between Kansas and Texas. I
mean, that's where all the obesity and
the cancer is, too.
&gt;&gt; Well, the the number one place where
obesity is in the United States right
now, that's also changed. Alexis, you
know where it is?
&gt;&gt; I thought it's like somewhere in the
Midwest. I don't remember exactly.
&gt;&gt; Memphis and and Arkansas right now. And
I went when I got the USGS data, I went
to look at the NHANES data and I found
out exactly where the magnetic field has
dropped the most in the United States,
people have gotten the fattest.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; So, I mean, my TED talk that got banned
when I said that obesity is an
inflammatory brain condition, that was
that was spot on because that's what it
is. The the problem is the inflammation
is the deterior.
&gt;&gt; Right
now the question that I have for you is
do you think there's anything we're
doing on the planet that is accelerating
the declination of the magnetic field or
do you think this is a natural cycle
like harp or like CERN? Like do you
think there's any effect of these
&gt;&gt; big grab a hold of your chairs?
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; Since you're a PhD, what I'm about to
say to you is probably going to rock
your world.
What if I was to tell you and I've
already told you that non-native EMF
exacerbates the problem of the head.
What if I was to tell you that
shitcoinery and AI is a natural
evolution of not being able to think?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that makes perfect.
&gt;&gt; Why? Because
if you understand the thesis that's
being developed here, someday soon, next
100, 200, 300 years, people are going to
have to put a transcranial magnet behind
their occiput to stay awake.
&gt;&gt; Right. Right.
&gt;&gt; So, you understand that the people in
the big tech industry, whether they know
or not, I believe they know. Do you
understand now why AI may actually play
a role for the survival of humanity?
Why? Cuz we have to upload what we know
into the cloud that won't be affect by
this inertial drag of the vortex.
And does this make sense now why people
are taking more risk by gambling and
doing [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] coinery? Yeah. What did I
tell you before? Anytime the magnetic
field drops, oxygen drops. What does
that mean to melanin? Melanin goes to
dopamine. You're into low dopamine
behaviors. What is gambling? There you
go. So your answer to the question is
yes. There are things we're doing that
are exacerbating this. Do I think it'll
affect your n equals 1 more? Yes. Do I
think when you understand what I'm
saying here clearly
the answer becomes pretty obvious what
you need to do. Um, do I think that most
of the things that are being advocated
by influencers,
food gurus are really problematic? Yeah.
I mean, I would tell you this is the
main reason like anybody out there that
thinks taking peptides is going to make
these three vortex spin faster, you're
just a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I can't help
you. Uh, but here's the big thing. This
explains the reason why the Rockefeller
food pyramid is a real problem because
it added isotopes
&gt;&gt; you can't get rid of. This is the real
reason that jabs are a problem. Why? You
know that I posted that paper that
showed that every single manufactured
jab had between uh 50 and 55 extra atoms
in it that weren't declared on the
patent. So just imagine when you add
that then let's do another hard stop
instead of going conspiracy. Let's stay
in my world. Let me throw myself under
the bus. Why did I stop doing um
contrasted MRIs about 15 years ago?
Because I had an inclination that
gatalinium as a transmission metal
wasn't a good thing to put into the CSF.
Why? Because every time I did it, I saw
that my patients cognitively weren't the
same.
&gt;&gt; So I stopped doing it. Um, so I'm going
to tell you that most of the
radiologists that are out there and the
neurosurgeons, they don't know what I
just said, but I knew about it and I
started realizing it was a big effect.
Like there's holistic dentists out there
that are telling people to have their
pallets expanded and move for that. No,
you just need to chew [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mastic
gum. If you've got gird, you don't need
to kill the bacteria. It's the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
dutyium with the H pylori. Most people
don't even know that H. pylori
flourishes in dutarium. Why is the
dutarium in your gut? Because your
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] by carb uh exhaust in the beta
cells is washed out just like you know
the South Atlantic anomaly is blocked.
So the answer really is there. We all
have to become experts in isotopic
fractionation. And do I believe
that people can do a lot? Yes. because I
don't think a lot of these things are
going to matter. Here's the really bad
news. Um, you already know that I was
trending this way big time. It's why I
don't take any affiliate codes to red
light. Red light is absolutely
useless
for this. You need to use sun. There is
absolutely no question. Why? Because
what do we know about vortexing? We know
that UV and near infrared light create a
frequency called 0.66 electron volts
that ties directly back to the infrared
spectrum of the sun. That actually makes
the vortex work faster. What does that
correlate with? Correlates with a
dialectric constant of 160 in CSF and in
the blood. So that means it thins our
blood the most. If you run a test
utilizing anybody's red light panel
that's LED based, you will never change
the dialectric constant of their fluid.
Is that a study that needs to be done?
Yes. Because when people begin to
understand what I'm saying that the game
in town right now for mitochondri is we
have to make the vortex work and work
faster. And the problem is when you
begin to understand that the water
component stops the ATPAS from spinning
at 9,000 revolutions per second, you
begin to understand. Okay, so that's
what fibromyalgia is. Begin to
understand. So that might be what ALS
is. Like if you're asking neurons to
spin, I don't know, concrete, it can't
do it. So you can't work. How about sick
man syndrome? Same story. I I want you
to remember this. People forget this.
What is the second largest compartment
of water in the human body? Muscles.
So guess what? If the water in those
muscles are all duterated, do you
understand now why doing exercise may
actually harm people when you're asking
the actin and filament to go against
maple syrup?
&gt;&gt; Got it? So exercise even has to be
countered in this because normally
exercise is a good thing. It's a good
thing when the viscosity of your water
is not 78. This is another reason why
you see people who are physically fit
dropping dead after COVID because when
they're in the blue light gym, all their
water is like maple syrup and they don't
understand how this works. And then you
have to casually remind them, by the
way, your heart is also a muscle. And
it's supposed to be vortexing the maple
syrup. You know, when you make it kind
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] proof for people, I think they
begin to see it. Most of them don't like
it because it goes against what they've
been taught their whole life. But you
have to realize, why is this important?
This variable that we spent a lot of
time talking about, this is a variable
that none of us can control.
&gt;&gt; This is the earth doing this. Okay?
Meaning that we have to understand what
this means for the way we were built
when the magnetic flux was off the
charts 320 million years ago. I mean,
it's been good really all the way until
the Carrington event. The Carrington
event was when this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hit the fan.
And do I anticipate in the next several
hundred years that Earth will be hit by
another CME like that, maybe even
bigger, if the wobble due to the dynamo
gets any worse? Yeah. I mean, the worst
case scenario is look through a
telescope and take a look at Mars. It's
got a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] 3600 mile gash in it that
killed the planet and the whole
hemisphere on one top is missing 30
kilometers of rock. Like
Mars was destroyed. But what does that
tell me? Isotopically the dynamo there
four four billion years ago was probably
like concrete. And what was the sun
trying to do? Hit it to get it going.
And we know it worked at some point
because you can't have Olympic Mons on
Mars without having a huge volcano. I
It's the biggest volcano in the entire
solar system. We know that. So that
tells us the process broke. And I think
the the real takehome for people here if
they're truly understanding what I'm
saying. This vortex phenomenon did not
start off on Earth in the beginning in
the archan earth and great oxygenation
earth
remember oxygen wasn't available in the
beginning it went from 0% all the way up
to 35 and then back down to 21. It went
up to 35 in the carbonifpherous
period and the carbonifpherous period is
when all life be got gigantic. In fact,
that's how we got dinosaurs to be so
big. It's when we had insects the size
of 747s.
But what happened? That's when the
magnetic field was through the roof. And
then what happened? It came back down.
And it's been pretty stable for about 65
million years. Now,
the only other event that I can point to
for you and your listeners
is you know that I've told you the story
both personally and on the podcast about
Neanderthalss. This hopefully make you
understand the last champ event that's
spelled l champ happened 42,000 years
ago. That is the event that I think took
the Neanderthalss out. But it also took
the megapon out in North America. Why?
Um the same effect that we're talking
about now, magnetic declination.
Neanderthalss had 125 grams more brain
tissue than we do. But what really
happened? I think they wound up going
inside more light shrunk their brain.
But I think the magnetic declination
played a huge effect. Why? because when
they got above the 51st latitude, their
magnetic vortex in their brain made made
their brain
um how shall we say expensive and they
started to burn it up just like I told
you what's happening in Antarctica. And
I believe that's how we lost 125 grams.
What happens? We show up. We have more
dopamine than that cave shows up on the
inside because of the dopamine. And we
all think creativity is great. And
remember when I said to you, yeah,
creativity is kind of a sign of nerve
degeneration. And you know, when I said
it the first time publicly, people
questioned it. And then I showed them
the the melanin slide and I said, look
what it says. When you have
deoxxygenation,
you lose melanin, you lose brain cells.
And what happened between the anthals
and us? Just think about it. Brain got
smaller, water content went up, and the
melanin level went up on a relative
basis as we shrunk. What do I think the
key was for humans? The vortex became
faster. We got smaller, but our vortex
got faster. That's why we survived and
the the andols didn't. And that was at
the last big magnetic declination event.
That's called the last champ event. You
can guys can go look it up. There was
another minor one that happened about
11,000 years ago. That's the younger
dry. That also is a big hit. And what's
the link for me there? If you go on my
forum and you start reading some of the
stuff that I've posted since I've
reviewed this data, I'm trying to teach
my members um about how the brain reacts
to magnetic declination. So the animal
that I like to use is elephants compared
to rhinos because most of my patients
today are rhinos. They have thick skin
because it's loaded with dutarium and
their brains are shrinking. But they
forget that elephants have thin skin and
they have massive brains 22 pounds. And
what was the animal that was taken out
in last champ and then younger dest? The
woolly mammoth.
So there's a lesson there for all of us.
Now remember woolly mammoth and elephant
brains 22 lbs big huge. And why was the
brain so big? Because the trunk of the
woolly mammoth and elephant has a
100,000 muscles in it. So they needed a
big brain to do that. How did they they
do that? They were located when they
evolved. You know, at least the the
woolly mammoth and elephant we think
about 26 million years ago. 26 million
years ago is when the magnetic field was
very very strong.
And uh that allowed the elephant to
encphilize. This is another big lesson
in evolutionary biology I try to teach.
Why? Because what do rhinos, elephants,
gorillas, and humans all have in common?
They all grew up in the same
environment, but they all have different
outcomes in their brains.
Explain. And it turns out the
explanation is magnetic inclination.
It's a very interesting thing. And like
if you think about all the changes
between shrimps and gorillas and us, the
number one thing that I hope people are
taking away from this discussion, do you
understand now why we went bipedal?
Bipedal means the vortex runs faster
&gt;&gt; and that means that we can unfurl our
central nervous system bigger. That's
why we can talk. That's why we can do
things. Now I want you to think about
another evolutionary biology thing for
you as a scientist. I think this will
resonate. What connects the hindb brain
the floor of the fourth ventricle to the
bicarb system the vagus nerve it's
called the wanderer in Latin so just
remember it starts at the veagal motor
triion at the fourth ventricle
&gt;&gt; but it makes a pit stop where in your
voice box the recurrent lingial nerve so
when we talk what are we doing Alexis
&gt;&gt; vibrating
&gt;&gt; we're dutarium depleting
&gt;&gt; the x-axis phenoid bone
&gt;&gt; and knuckles cave so we're dutaring
depleting when we do that. Let me give
you another one. Look inside the mouth
of a gorilla and us. What do you'll
notice? They have predator teeth. Even
though they're herbivores, we have
herbivore teeth even though we're
predators. Why is that? To make chewing
less efficient so that we chew more to
stimulate Meccl's cave to get rid of
dutarium.
&gt;&gt; I'm thinking also like chanting and like
the eastern cultures related to
&gt;&gt; Mton Mes. You know where that story
goes? If you go on my website forum, you
will see that there's a a thread that's
developed not from me, from someone else
about why did hospitals have bells in
1880 through 1930 and why were they
removed? Those bells used to resonate at
20 to 40 hertz. Guess what 20 to 40
hertz does? Removes dutyium from the
brain.
&gt;&gt; Improves the vortex.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Again, this is all before quantum
mechanics and vortex thermodynamics is
known. But what did people back then
know? They knew who took those bells
out. The Rockefeller dynasty.
&gt;&gt; H
&gt;&gt; that was right around the the Flexner
report. And when you understand this is
the reason why I mean you know a little
bit more about me than most of the
people listening to this. Now you
understand why I like Metallica. Now you
understand why I like a tool because the
bass drum there actually is resonating
and vibrating.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Within us. Uh, when I go in the pool
back here, why do I stand right next to
the jet that comes out? Why do I have
the jets really high on my pools? Now,
you know the reason why. Um, like I've
known all these things for a really long
time. I don't really talk about them too
much. Why? Because this is usually the
stuff that I talk to my farm clients
about. You know, these are the people
that I'm taking care of one-on-one. The
the thing is when this new data comes
out, I think now this is really the base
case for most diseases and I think
people need to understand this because I
think the best hack for this is you need
to get to places where the magnetic
field is strong. That's really the core
message. But you also need to understand
over the next I don't know 500 years
that place is likely going to change
over time.
&gt;&gt; So you have to be fasile like I didn't
expect the change that happened in the
last 20 years and I'm just fortunate
that I went to one of the places that is
now the best. But why did I do that?
It's because I suspended my centralized
you know education
to understand that the biopysics
of how we really work is important
and I think that that has made a big
difference. I just
the difficult questions those guys that
came to interview me
that wound up selling some of the the
clips to Alex Jones,
they asked me some pretty tough
questions. You know, questions where,
well, what would you do based on this
new information? Yeah, those are big
deals. Why? Because they tie directly to
my kids and the way that I'm thinking
about it. I'm not really too worried
about me because if I die tomorrow, I
could care less. Um, but do I think
about the people down the road that are
getting absolutely no help from the
doctors at home who keep telling them
absolute [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know, am I
concerned about the doctors who do care
and you know, call me up and say, "Look,
you know, this is the six splenic
rupture rupture I've seen in the last
six months and, you know, in my
residency, I never saw this or from the
vascular surgeons, I'm seeing, you know,
Alzheimer dementia changes in people
that are 20 and 30 years old." Yeah. Th
those, let me tell you, those phone
calls that I get, and I get a lot of
them,
they're increasing. And what do I do
every time I talk to a doctor? I ask
them their zip code.
And I think that's what all of you guys
need to start doing, too. I think the
zip code and how people get sick is
actually something that should become a
quantum biology trait. And I think when
you start to see that people are doing
better in that world, or I'd even say
talking to veterinarians, I do the same
thing. I want to know where pets are
getting sicker.
&gt;&gt; Um, I want to know, you know, what's
happening in different parts of the
world. Why? Because I realize what's
going on inside the planet is being
resonated on top of the planet. And
since we are unfortunately the canaries
in the coal mine, so are birds, so are
bees, so are the fishes.
I think when you get this framework in
your head, I think that then you can
live out your life, you know, properly.
You can inform your kids properly. You
can teach them, you know, the science
because this science to me is absolutely
basic. It's not difficult to understand.
Um, people want to make it difficult to
understand. Like if you really want to,
you know, do all the mathematics and all
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that I had to go through to
understand this stuff. Yeah. You don't
need to know it like that. All you need
to know is what the human agrarian is
built and it's built around vortexing
blood CSF and the ATPAS. The entire
mammal cate is built around that. So are
birds and you have to remember there are
partners that made it through with us.
But what was the key factor
that joined us?
We are strongly yolked to magnetic
field. If the magnetic field goes,
birds and humans are the first up on the
list. Why?
&gt;&gt; Because we're built we're built for it.
&gt;&gt; Do you think there's any organisms that
are like evolving or adapting to the
decline in the magnetic field?
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I I got them listed on my
form. People have already asked me that
on my form, so I just listed it. I I
said, "Here's the animals that are going
to survive." Like, for example, sharks.
Sharks are also
uh like mammals.
Uh they have a a body called the body of
Lorenzi. Lorenzi is totally yolked to
the magnetic field. You know what the
advantage that sharks have over us?
They're down in the water. They can use
the weight of the water to dutarium and
deplete. The big issue is they won't be
able to eat anything on the top of the
water because everything in the top of
the water table if this gets much worse
will be duterrated and triated. Now they
could dive deep and get rid of it, but
you can't get rid of the radiation. The
radiation will probably kill them
before, but what what's going to happen?
All the animals that live deep in the
ocean will survive. That's why I said
this is the exact opposite of what's
happening or happened in the perian like
oxygenation
in the atmosphere and probably I'd say
the first mile of water on the oceans
will be absolutely radiated with tridium
and you cannot eat from that food chain
otherwise you'll die. Um but animals
deep in the water they will do fine.
they're not going to have a problem at
all. So, sephopods are going to be
another one that'll do really, really
well. You know, like the Greenland
shark, which we think is the oldest
animal on the planet, they just found
one that was like 40,000 years old. Um,
why? Because it lives in deep, deep
water. Uh, does this make some sense now
why Trump, you know, wants to go after
Greenland? It should. Why? Because
Greenland on the top of it may be the
ideal place to go fishing to feed a
population.
Um, so do I understand this now? I used
to think it was completely crazy until
when I saw the data that that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] uh
Siberia is now three 335 nanotas. So I I
just couldn't believe it. And you know,
here's like the things that flip things
around. This is why new data is
interesting. I if you would have talked
to me two, three years ago, I would have
said living in Norway on the top of it
was crazy. Now it's not so crazy. Now
you still will struggle to photo repair,
but your magnetic flux because you're a
mammal,
you'll be able to tolerate low UV for
longer period of time. The key is you
cannot eat any excess
uh heavy matter at all. You have to be
you have to really run low isotopic
fuels. And when you understand this,
then you begin to understand why the
carnivore diet, so many people are
getting a benefit from it because um
that's a diet that's isotopically light.
It's isotopically heavy.
&gt;&gt; Uh and you know, it brings into the the
idea of the leptin prescription. Like
people have always asked me why was the
leptin prescription built the way it
was. I mean, if you think and listen
carefully to the things you and I have
talked about, you realize that you
ground, you see the morning sunlight.
What's breakfast really? It's the
isotopic load that gets the vortex
working. And when you actually begin to
see it, you go, "Fuck, he's been telling
us this for 25 years, but we never
really understood where he was going
with it." Um, now you begin to see how
this fundamentally works. And obviously
the one thing that mammals really need,
especially us, and that's why I can't
get too crazy about pushing Finland,
Sweden, and Norway, is we really need to
keep the MITF APAR system going. That's
melanin. MITF is the precursor for
melanin. And in terms of how it it gets
translated from pomsy, you have to have
melanin in your central nervous system
to fractionate to make the vortex in
your brain. So that's the reason why I
think for humans
we're going to face and if I was to bet
I I put this on my form already the 51st
latitude is where
I think magnetic declination
is going to play a huge role and in the
southern hemisphere
18 18 south like you got to be tropical
already. That's how weak it is.
It's a big difference. It's a really,
really big difference. And I guess the
one thing we're fortunate about in this
event that there's not a lot of land
mass is in the Southern Ocean. There's
just Australia, the tip of Africa,
and a pretty good [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] chunk of South
America.
Um, some of the islands, the Pacific uh,
islands,
they're bad. Most of them are volcanic.
Some of them are pretty good, but some
of the ones you think not so great. Like
China, really bad news. Korea looks
pretty good. Philippines solid, but a
lot of the other countries there,
no. But I think people in old Europe,
I'm talking about Turkey, Prague,
uh, Russia, Russia should do fabulous.
I mean, they're they're next to the
strongest vortex in the world. Problem
is photosynthesis doesn't work in
Siberia.
So,
&gt;&gt; it's kind of, you know, it's kind of a
problem. And uh while you can fish
there,
I don't I don't think you can live there
because there won't be uh enough sun for
you to support your melanin system. Um
and I think uh obviously the use of
technology is now a steepened risk. Like
if you're in the southern hemisphere,
uh if you're a tech abuser, you will
decline into neurodeeneration and heart
disease faster.
Well, it makes so much sense why Russia
wants Ukraine back to grow their food.
&gt;&gt; Correct. Exactly. That's why I said when
I I tell you, uh, Alexis, when I've
talked to my network, like I just did a
podcast yesterday with Marty Bent, you
know, the Bitcoiner guys,
&gt;&gt; and this came up. Why? Because I'm going
to be talking about this in Prague in
June, but in a different way. I'm going
to be talking about the Bitcoin
legionarian and how it ties into this
story.
When I started the podcast, I told Marty
what's going on in the magnetic field
actually is playing a role in Bitcoin.
And I think hopefully people who've
listened to this whole podcast because
we've been talking for a while. They'll
begin to realize now why Bitcoin is
really important because
Bitcoin will allow you to get to these
places where the in and the magnetic
field is strong. Because this trend,
if we're being very clear because I'm
trying to be as transparent as I can
here. This trend is not going away. This
trend is getting bigger and faster.
That's what the 20 year experience from
when I wrote the quilt document to right
now has taught me. Like if I was in
Vegas betting that I would be having
this podcast with somebody like you
today and telling you that yeah, the
magnetic field in 20 years moved as fast
as it did in 320 million years of
evolution. I would have called myself a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] artist.
But it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] true. And because it's
true, we got to deal with the
consequences of that. And that means
that we have to adjust our template of
the advice that we deliver to people and
understand why we're adapting it. You
know, if you think this is fun for me to
have to talk about, it's not. It's
really not. And there's a lot of people
out there, especially my members,
because I have to do a Q&amp;A tomorrow. And
I can tell you because of the stuff that
I've put on the form, like when I tell
you that I've put close to 50 extra
blogs on the form for people that have
these diseases, like this is what you
need to do now. That's different.
Yeah, that's happening. Um, it's a big
deal. And for people who don't get it,
I'll tell you the flip side of that,
too. I'm blocking all the time. I don't
have time anymore to deal with [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
artists. Like, if you don't understand
that this is not Jack Kruse's opinion,
like I don't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] control the wizard
that controls the dynamo. Okay? I don't.
All I can do is report on the dynamo and
report what I found when I went on the
surface of the dynamo in the southern
hemisphere.
All of that information I I shared with
you is discoverable
by using search boxes. Now, the
interesting thing is when you do put a
search in, are the bees dying in
Australia? They'll always blame it on
something that isn't magnetic
declination. That should be clear to you
&gt;&gt; that they know because there's no way
the SEO search is going to, you know,
tell you the truth. Because if you did,
you'd probably go, "Okay, it's time to
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know, pack up the house,
sell it, and let's go. It's time to
&gt;&gt; assuming the powers that be do know
what's going on." What do you think
they're trying to do behind the scenes?
Do you think is there something with the
bunkers that's related to this story? Or
is there something else you think
they're trying to build or do
&gt;&gt; to buffer this?
&gt;&gt; You you think about the people who or
your clients, they're coming to you for
survival, too, right? Well, what do
governments do? They're planning for
their survival as well.
&gt;&gt; So, you have to realize, does it make
sense now why they're building bunkers
under the White House? Does it make
sense why some of the congressmen have
spent millions of dollars? Does it make
sense now why Zuckerberg and Jeff Bezos
have these big yachts going all over the
ocean? Now, I mean, for purposes, Alexis
happens to know that that's been one of
my plans for a really long time. She now
knows why I've been up to this because
I've known this is coming. The problem
is
I don't think people really understand
the science. Well, people will listen to
this and go this is like hyper
hyperbolic.
&gt;&gt; No, it's it's been going on for 167
years since 1859.
&gt;&gt; We are sampling it right now. It's not
like I think the world's going to end in
like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] five years. I think this is
probably decades or hundreds of years
off. But what am I saying to you? That
the future the change is going to be
rapid and the change is going to happen
likely more in the southern hemisphere
than the northern hemisphere. And do I
think the ultimate survival, like say if
this happens 25,000 years from now,
the survivors of this extinction event
will come from the northern hemisphere
where my bet is it's going to be where
magnetic flux is the strongest or where
animals can live deepest closest to the
magneettosphere. That is the reason why
I think governments are digging holes in
the ground because they know that. And
remember, they also know what happened
to Puerto Rico. If we get hit with a
huge CME, you want to be as far away
from the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] surface as possible if
you're running a government because
everything that has a wire or a battery
or a motor is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] useless.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, you got to put it under the ground.
Now, the good news for people listening
to this, because I know people are are
saying, "Well, you just said that about,
you know, my car. It won't work if we
get hit with the CIE. What about me?" In
1859,
Alexander Graanbell was working on the
telephone and he got burned and shocked
when the wires uh got hot and started a
fire. Did he die? The answer is no.
Humans and other animals do not die from
a coronal mass ejection as long as it's
not planet shattering like it was on
Mars,
&gt;&gt; right? Um, but if we get hit with an
X-class,
uh, I'm going to tell you personally, it
may be the best thing ever because it
acts like a defibrillator that a doctor
would use to restart your heart. It can
get the dynamo flowing good. We can get
some eruptions down in the Pacific Rim
in the Southern Hemisphere
&gt;&gt; and it'll take all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] tech
out.
&gt;&gt; That's See, that's where I was going.
See, that's the whipped cream and cherry
on top of this Sunday because I do
believe that happens. But, you know, to
answer your point where we went down
this track, this is the reason why
governments have to plan for this
because they now know it's much more
likely they're going to get hit with the
CME when the magnetic shield is down.
There's nothing they can do about it.
They have to protect for it. And then
this gives you the second issue. Is this
the re real reason why Neurolink's being
developed? because they now know that
everybody may need a neural link
somewhere down the road to run their
vortex in their head so they can be
conscious. Yeah, I hate to say it, but
this is the new version of the coclear
implant except a whole lot different.
It's going to be running a different
vortex, not the one that's in your
cookia. It's going to be running the one
in your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] phalamus. Um, and
ultimately,
do I think that's the case? I mean, just
so you guys know, if you go and do
homework on this and try to fact check
Uncle Jack, this is the reason why uh
Neuralink satellites and the swarm
satellites can't fly over the South
Atlantic anomaly. Why? Because the
Vanian radiation belts are literally
they're not even a 100,000 kilometers
above the surface now. And this is
loaded with [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dutium and tridium.
This destroys the satellite. Do you know
what? You know what NASA has to do when
they started to fly through this? They
have to turn the entire ship off, don't
use any computers, and then it's not
damaged.
&gt;&gt; And how did we find this out? In 1996,
Japan sent a satellite up to do X-ray uh
pictures of space, specifically stars.
They didn't know about the South
Atlantic anomaly. They lost a billion
dollar satellite when it flew through
the SAA.
&gt;&gt; Wow. So if people
don't really think that this is a big
deal, these are discoverable things that
you can find right now by doing your own
homework and realize that the story for
technology is way worse than it really
is for us. Uh when I say we're in an
extinction event, uh I don't say it
hyperbolically. And just so everybody's
clear, if you go look uh I think about
10 years ago, a lady named Elizabeth
Colberg uh wrote a book called the fifth
uh the the next extinction or the sixth
extinction. It's about this event and
she went all over the world kind of like
I've been doing asking the same
questions I've been asking and she came
to the conclusion because who was she
Colbert? She was a New York Times
reporter who quit after doing this and
writing the book. So you guys can go buy
her book that's old. You probably find
in Goodwill now and read what she wrote
10 years ago. Now the risks are even
higher because the data that we have is
better. We now have swarm satellites
that are actually monitoring the SAA
constantly and we know it's getting
bigger. Like this is not hyperbole. Now
is the part for you to sit down and
understand how this science impacts you,
your family, your disease. Uh I mean, if
you think about this, hypothyroidism now
is not something to fear. It's actually
telling you I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] live in a
magnetically decline area. And maybe
that's the reason I need to move, not
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] be on T3 and T4. Because if you
get on T3 and T4, it actually make your
cognition worse.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. How's that for a reversal? That's
the reason why new data for science is
really important to understand.
&gt;&gt; Do you think um the timing of this moon
mission is related to this story at all
or unrelated?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. No question about it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I wonder what do you think what
kind of data do you think they're
looking for up there?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think the number one thing is
they have to test Neurolink on
astronauts. If you want to know what it
means, why would you go to the moon and
Mars which have no magnetic field,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Well, that's the best place to test out
how humans will fare
&gt;&gt; in a complete failure. Let's say, let's
say we have a true peran extinction
event.
&gt;&gt; Uh they want to know, do we have to put
humans in Trident subs and put them on
the bottom of the ocean until the event
clears
or can we put everybody in a water- fil
pod?
uh put them in a state of suspended
animation like anesthesia and then put a
dural link into their posterior part of
their occipital lobe and when everything
the coast is clear defrag their lattice
with the neural link
&gt;&gt; that sounds like a movie I've seen
&gt;&gt; well it may be a movie but I mean right
now just think about the water lattice
in you the dialectric
in that kind of scenario like in in a
true
environment that's tidiating due
uterated, you're basically turning CSF
and blood into concrete.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So there's no damage to the human body
if you don't run the ATP aces,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; So what do you have to do? You have to
turn everything off. Kind of like what
we found out with the satellites. Like
when they go through, they're okay. Just
turn them off. And I think when you see
it from this view,
you can see that a lot of the things
that the conspiracy guys were moaning
and bitching about, maybe there's a
bigger purpose for them now. Maybe maybe
you just didn't understand the purpose.
And I think maybe you need to
&gt;&gt; and I think this really has big
implications for a lot of different
things. Like I'll give you another one
that I talked to Marty about that'll
probably stun you. Does it make sense
now why Israelis have gone to the tip of
Patagonia and lit it on fire? Well,
yeah, because they know they're going to
need a place for a lot of their people
to go. What better place than where the
South Atlantic anomalies is bad right in
the edge, but it looks like the tip is
spectacular because it's right next to
the humble current that's going to have
a huge amount of seafood. So, these will
be Zionists that actually have to eat
seafood and break all the Judea
traditions to survive.
Well, I mean, I guess if you're the
chosen people, you got to do what you
got to do.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it makes sense. And I think it's
very interesting to think about this
story then like overlay it onto our
geopolitics to see how behaviors are
actually making sense.
&gt;&gt; Yes. then you you'll begin to see the
world in a very different way and it
begins it begins to give a new shape you
know to the term that I coined four
years ago about tapering the Ponzi
scheme do you understand now why they
have um medically assisted suicide in
Canada like we haven't talked too much
about Canada has had the magnetic north
moving away from it I wouldn't be caught
dead living in Canada based on this new
data And think about the population in
Canada. They're basically already
comfortably numb. They're all low
dopamine people. You begin to understand
why. And why why would Canada really of
offer? Because they know that the people
there aren't going to survive anyway. So
they're dead weight. It's kind of like
Ebanese or Scrooge when the two guys
came to visit him and said, "Would you
like to donate for the poor and this and
that?" He goes, "No, we'll let them just
die and decrease the surplus
population."
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. Right. That's what that's
the depopulation agenda.
&gt;&gt; Well, I kind of think that when I look
at the medically assisted suicide story
in Canada now, not that I like it, but
do I understand it better than I did
before? Can I see COVID in a different
light now?
&gt;&gt; Do I understand what Rockefeller
Medicine is really doing? I do. Do I
understand what big pharma is really
doing? I do. But I still think they're
nefarious as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Why? Because if
they've known about this, which I'm I
think they do,
they're complicit in doing things
without giving people truly informed
consent.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And you know, that used to be the big
argument in vaccination, but I have to
tell you, now the argument comes down to
food. Um, I mean, just think about
supplements now. Think about like all
the things in the influencer world that
are being pushed on people. And you have
to remember these are all people that
melanin is being degraded to dopamine.
So, they all are nihilistic and have low
dopamine personalities. They're all
willing to take more risks. That also
totally fits with a a magnetic decline.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um risk-taking behavior will absolutely
absolutely be at the top of the
evolutionary chain all the way down. The
animals that will take the lowest risk
are going to be the ones at the bottom
of the ocean. They're going to be like,
"No, I'm good. I don't think I'm going
to have a problem."
&gt;&gt; You know, they're just going to live
their life the way they've been living
it for the last [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] 400 million
years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The problem we're not adapted for that
environment. That's the problem.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel like the individuals that
want to take the biggest risks have the
biggest issues also. I mean, if you're
content and happy, you don't need to
take a risk.
&gt;&gt; Well, and and I think if you think about
like the things that I've said for 20
years,
all the things that are buried in the
leptin melano pathway, the leptin
prescription and cold thermogenesis,
they are all dutarium depleting things.
when you actually get down to the brass
tax and and distill the message. Now, I
think people are beginning to understand
it way better because they get it. Now,
the question that people are going to be
asking me is how do you defrag a lattice
that's inertially locked?
&gt;&gt; That is a different ball game. like that
is that is a ball game that is new and
that means that we have to then think
about the archanarian
like I have a a threat on my form that I
think is pretty good. It talks about the
archanarian the bacterial
then the ukarotic ligrian. Turns out
that endo symbiosis lrarian, the parts
in us that we have to use that are truly
archan.
I'll explain it to you. Our bones
and our z-axis, the gravity well of the
heart, those are fundamentally archan.
Where is the battle of endo symbiosis
being waged in us every day? The inner
mitochondrial membrane. So what's the
number one effect on the inner
mitochondrial membrane of magnetic
declination?
NAD positive dropping. Why? Because the
H that's supposed to be there is now
duterrated.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So what does that effectively do to the
inner mitochondrial membrane, you know,
that Nick Lane famously said has a 30
million volt charge? Well, now it's only
20 million, maybe 15. So that means can
you run the most complex quantum machine
in a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] skull on half the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
electric charge? No. The answer is the
effect is going to be seen in the spin
rate of the fo head of the ATPAS.
Instead of going 9,000 revolutions per
second, it's going to be 7,000. And
basically we just described to you what
cognitive haze is all about. Like there
should be no more mystery anymore. But
&gt;&gt; so like neurodeeneration is kind of an
adaptive way to keep the individual
alive correct when they can't support it
bioenergetically.
&gt;&gt; Right? Because the problem is the water
that's in the brain is isotopically
heavy. I mean that's fundamentally
really what most cases of hydrophilis
that's what normal pressure hydrophilis
is. You don't think that this has huge
implications for my specific specialty.
And I think this is the reason why I was
able to figure this stuff out because
most of the diseases like I'll give you
another one that you probably haven't
thought about. We talked about Meccl's
cave. You should now understand what
trigeminal neuralgia is. You should also
understand since Luca gets dutarium out
in the CP angle. Okay, Jack is this the
reason why we get acoustic nuromomas
because acoustic nuromomas are acting
like a coconut does. It's filled with
dutarium depleted water. The answer is
yes. And why? It's supposed to go
through Meccl's cave, okay, to get back
out. Well, they can't because guess
what? The articulation in the facial
bones and the sppheninoid, we're not
doing that because all the fake food
that people are eating now is designed
to be swallowed up in your mouth, turned
straight to sugar. Right. Right.
&gt;&gt; You're not doing any chewing. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; People are not chewing, you know, uh,
animal bones and meat off of it like we
used to. That's what we're supposed to
do. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And when you actually think about it,
you start to go, Jesus, this makes so
much sense because everything begins to
fit. But you have to realize when I
started putting this all together and
wrote the leptin prescription, the cold
thermogenesis protocol, you have to
realize here I am a Rockefeller trained
doctor that realized in 18 months
everything I knew was wrong. And like
this podcast, I think people are
beginning to see why I said that because
this explains it, you know, crystal
clear. And what puts the whipped cream
on on top of this whole Sunday?
Light, water, and magnetism. And no one
really ever wanted to talk about the
magnetism because they couldn't figure
out where it fit in. Well, I got some
bad news for you. I think a lot of the
podcast I'll do probably from 2026 on is
going to be focusing on this issue
because the number one game for all of
us is how do we defrag the lattice?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's that's the answer and the simple
way is is we do it through duteron
depleted water because it's clear that
that works. But let me tell you just how
long ranging this effect is. If you know
about the evolution of of chimps and
monkeys to us, one of the most unusual
things that happens is in their
chromosome 24 7 million years ago, the
gorillas
telomeirs touch and you know telomeirs
are the end now. It shouldn't be that
way. So what do I think happened? When
the three tectonic plates in East Africa
went [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy, magnetic flux went
nuts.
The I think the gorillas got duterrated.
The two ends touched and then what
happens? that becomes chromosome 2 and
us. What makes chromosome 2 and us
really weird? We have an optical bridge
between pomsy edar
uh glucagon and bcl12a.
Why is this a big deal? This is the
reason why we don't have a lot of genes
difference between primates and humans.
The reason why is we put an optical
resonator
along chromosome 2 that describes the
vortex and the exhaust.
&gt;&gt; That's what all these genes do. So think
about it. What is pomsy? I think
everybody who listens to this will know
pomsy the big story is alpha msh. Now
there's other stories that are important
like act and and gamma and beta
endorphin, but that's not really the
game for this podcast. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; What does the EAR gene do? That controls
sweating all over our body. What do we
do with sweating? That's how we get rid
of dutarium back in the day. That was
one of the key ways we did it to make us
isotopically better because we had to be
better than the the gorillas and the
monkeys. Why? They ate a ton of fruit.
They ate a heavy duty laden diet, right?
They had 30 feet of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] extra colon
to do it through to get rid of it.
&gt;&gt; Then what's the the next one? The
glucagon gene. The glucagon gene in us
is extremely specialized because it
creates uh 2 lers of by carb in beta
cells. What happens there?
&gt;&gt; We we have a shortened gut by 30 ft. So
the vagus nerve innovates the stomach to
release acid. The acid in our stomach is
like a carnivore 1.5
pH. A gorilla is five. So when you begin
to realize, well, why do we have such a
low pH? Guess what the answer is? to get
rid of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dutarium because the
lower your pH is, you're spitting out
the dutarium in the stomach. What
happens between the stomach?
The kim breaks the the carbon nitrogen
bond of the meat and seafood were
designed to eat. The dutarium stays in
the stomach, gets spun through the um
the um what do you call it? The
messenteric plexus through the aorta
goes into the pancreas. The bicarb mixes
with that. The bicarb takes dutarium
out. Where's the kinetic isotope effect
in your turd? A Bristol stool number
four. That's why you don't need toilet
paper. So if you need toilet paper to
wipe your ass, guess what? You don't
have enough duterium going through your
bicarb system. What internvates the
stomach and the and the pancreas? The
vagus nerve. The same nerve we just
talked about. Then the last part of
chromosome 2 that people have not put
together is a regulatory unit called
BCL1A. What does it do? This scales
right back to Becker's work. This is
some of the stuff that I discussed with
Becker before he died. BLL1 11A changes
human adult RBC's to fetal RBC's
and that is how we regenerate. So when
you understand that that's there and
this links directly to what Becker found
and you remember last time I was on the
podcast with you I forget who we're on
with and I told you you had made this
mistake one pico ampmeir
one trillionth of a DC electric current
takes a red blood cell and makes it go
back in time to a fetal red blood cell
guess what controls that bcl1a
&gt;&gt; wow
&gt;&gt; and it's on chromosome 2 and that's why
photo repair UV and near infrared light
is linked with dutarium depletion you
cannot photo repair if you cannot dutum
deplete
that's the point so we are mammals that
are isotopically
designed to be light not heavy so let me
tell you how the big fractal of nature
because I think you'll find this
fascinating and this is also tied to a
tool song lateralis
The gravity well in the center of the
galaxy is duterrated and triviated.
That's what the black hole is. The
spiral alarm, the farther you go out,
the more dutarium depleted it becomes.
So guess what happened in evolutionary
time? 4.6 billion years ago, we were
more proximal to the gravity well than
we are today. Today the sun is further
out. So I have this slide I've been
showing to people. I said, look, here's
where the sun was 4.6 6 billion years
ago. Here where we are and we're further
out in the spiral along. The further we
go out from the gravity well, the more
life has to be isotopically
defragged. The closer that we're in, uh,
the more we're going to be locked up.
So, nature's telling us even through the
story of galaxies that isotopic
fractionation is the game of life. Like
you cannot be alive when you're close to
a gravity well. Meaning
there is a certain amount of distance
that has to be between you and this
otherwise your biology would have to
work in a nonvortex way.
&gt;&gt; Wow. And is that also related to like
the distance between the brain and the
heart?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. See, you're that that's why I said
it to you. I wanted to see if you were
thinking guess what you'll find out in
all mammals. What's the big difference
between gorillas and primates? They work
on all fours. We're upright.
&gt;&gt; And guess what else the difference? I
told you this. They have 30 pedals.
&gt;&gt; Oh,
&gt;&gt; they also have 30 ft of gut. So, their
vag nerve also is at a disadvantage.
What axis in the GPS system does the
vagus nerve run with. It runs with the
noticord, which is the Y-axis. Where
does the vagus nerve exit the head? It
exits the head not through the
sppheninoid bone because it can't. It
exits at the jugular framan and the
jugular framan. Why is that important?
What's at the base of the jugular
framan? Where the CP angles also kick
out dutarium to go back into the venus
system to get back to the gravity. Well,
how do you like that?
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And then where does the vagus go? It
travels down in the corateed sheath,
makes a bit stop in your voice box.
Remember, monkeys don't talk. We do.
That's also to help us defrag. And I
don't know if you saw the the study that
or the incident that happened in January
&gt;&gt; where the ISS guy had to be rescued
because in space he stopped speaking.
They went and got him.
&gt;&gt; The reason why I can tell you
&gt;&gt; his frame and a louch gun on the left
side was blocked.
&gt;&gt; He built dutarium up there. It went and
broke his ear and that's why he couldn't
talk.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And he's in Houston now and I know they
don't know what they're doing but the
way to fix him very simply is to put a
veagal nerve stimulator in him. You know
why? If you know anything about the
Vegas nerve, it runs differently on the
left and the right side. Brokers areas
on the left side of the brain. So his
recurrent lingial nerve just needs to be
stimulated. If he does that, his speech
will come back.
How do you like that? That that's what
biopysics
can get you. Like they thought he had a
stroke. I'm like, "No, this isn't a
stroke. He just went back in time. Why
in space? He went in a place that put
too much dutarium
&gt;&gt; in the wrong place. So he's got a
biologic atomism. He's going back in
evolutionary time. And you know when you
actually think about how the Vegas
travels, I'm going to tell you the other
big difference in primates and us is the
angle of inclination of our aqueduct is
more steep than theirs is. Why? The
venturi effect is faster. the angle of
inclination of the vagus coming out of
of the jugular frame and straight down.
It goes straight down the corateed tree.
It makes a pit stop on our larynx. The
left side goes around uh uh one uh
ligament and goes into the voice box.
The the right side goes straight to the
heart goes to the cardiac plexus. Now
you understand the heartbeat. What's the
point? The heartbeat also deter depletes
us. Okay. Distal to the heart. Where
does it go next? It goes through the
diaphragmatic
um hiatus. What does breathing do?
Another def frag place because it's
moving constantly up and down. And then
it gets into the gut. The first place it
goes in the gut is the lower esophageal
sphincter. What is the lower esophageal
sphincter famous for? The esophagus
moves paristalsis food down. Another
place for you to defract. You get to the
stomach. What does the stomach do? It
grinds the food up. It's moving around.
The vagus is there again. The whole
vagus nerve is an isotopic [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
factory
&gt;&gt; to get dutaterium to your beta cells.
Okay, the by carb flush. The two liters
of by carb you make a day.
&gt;&gt; And then when you look at the Vegas,
where where's its distal end? The distal
end is at the transverse misolon. So
that means it intervates all of your
small bowel. Why is that important?
Alexis, tell the audience what the small
bowel does to get your poop into your
colon.
&gt;&gt; Paris,
who the people that have gastroparesis?
Diabetics and who people
&gt;&gt; users,
&gt;&gt; right? GLP-1 drugs. So, what does that
tell you? These people are net isotopic
collectors.
Got it? That's the reason why their
faces are getting all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up and
their fat mass is getting screwed up and
they're shredding their muscle. It's
exactly what happens to astronauts in
space. When astronauts go to space, they
lose 20% of their muscle mass. And what
does NASA try to do? They give them
vascular machines to try to get them to
exercise. But that's stupid because all
the water in their muscles duterated.
They're actually burning their brains
when they're in space when they do that.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. That's why I said we have
everything backwards.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Everything is backwards when you
understand the biopysics of this system.
And where the Vegas finally stops is
where paristoalsis stops. Shocker. The
entire Vegas nerve is designed to do the
shake, rattle, and roll protocol, the
volcano protocol. But what's happening
on Earth and what's happening to our
patients right now is exactly the same.
their exhaust is blocked
and they're losing magnetic flux. And
where we see that in humans is at the
ATPAS, the heart gravity well, and the
vortex in the head.
&gt;&gt; It's incredible how the fractals come
together at every layer. And I'm
thinking like so if NASA is sending
these astronauts up, right, and they're
making these very like fatal errors with
regards to how they're managing their
biology up there, it makes me wonder
like how compartmentalized this
information is at the highest level.
Like if they're not using it for these
people,
&gt;&gt; you don't understand why. I mean, this
goes back to the story that we we've
talked about before about General
Groves. Where did this idea come from?
&gt;&gt; The siloing sil science got siloed at
the Manhattan Project. It's been siloed
ever since there. It's the greatest
mistake that the industrial military
complex has made. They think it's an
advantage, but it's really not. And if
you want to know the truth, I think this
is the reason why the industrial
military complex and I think the
criminals and big tech are not telling
us about the magnetic declination and
what it means. And that's why I think,
you know, the documentary that I did
with those guys for four and a half
hours, this podcast, the one that, you
know, I just did with Marty Ben, uh, the
one that I did with the two doctors from
Louisiana, probably the the ones that
I'll be doing from here on in.
You're going to hear me talk about the
implications of all this. Like, we
talked about some of them today. Like I
guarantee there's going to be people in
your network they're going to be like,
"Well, I don't need to talk to you about
hypothyroidism anymore cuz I'm good with
it." But really, what does it mean if
the person just says, "Well, I'm going
to stop my T3 and T4, but I'm not going
to move." Did they really get the
lesson?
&gt;&gt; Like, I'll give you an example. This is
a pretty harsh example,
but I think it's fair to share with you.
I just fired one of my long-term members
from Australia. Do you know why? I got
her and her husband to move here to
Atami five years ago. They just put
their house for sale and they're going
back to Australia.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no.
&gt;&gt; So, let me tell you what that means to
me. It means I gave you all this
information over 12 years
and you decided to throw it in the
garbage. So, do you need to be a member
of my tribe? No. because you're choosing
to go back, you know, as far as I'm
concerned, into, you know, a death pit.
So, if that's your choice, great. But I
do not want you discussing
anything with people that are interested
in getting better.
And that may be harsh, but hopefully
after this podcast,
you can understand why. Now, when
someone has a problem that I know how to
deal with and they go completely against
the grain that not only is it bad for
that person, but it's also bad for me.
I'm I cannot
try to save someone who's drowning
&gt;&gt; the fear that they're going to pull me
under with them.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Because this information needs to get
out and it needs to get out at record
levels. And then whatever you decide to
do, once you put this together and you
fact check Uncle Jack and you make sure
that I'm not bullshitting you, you go,
"Okay, I got the message loud and clear.
Okay, how do I make this actionable?
What am I going to do?" I think that to
me is going to be the real interesting
part. Why? the last three or four months
with my my personal uh clients who I
take care of that's been a big it's been
a big deal for them because now several
of them thought you know the issue was
you know 5G and 6G in their city you
know in Kansas and now they're finding
out no Kansas has got the biggest m
magnetic declination of any part of the
United States. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's a big deal.
&gt;&gt; Gives a whole new motivation to get out.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, it might motivate them,
um, Alexis, but the way people handle
this, like I think the the way the guys
sold the thing to Alex Jones,
they sensationalized it, and I think
it's the wrong way to do it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I think there's nothing scary about
this. Why? Because this has been going
on for 167 years. The real problem is
the science to explain it is also
published, but nobody's putting it
together and making sense with our
biology and then looking at animals that
we came through the last extinction
event with and go like why are they
doing bad? Like that's our canary in the
com. And that is information that all of
us really need to pay attention to. What
I'm saying to you is influencers and
retards on Twitter and people that are
out there, that's the noise. You need to
pay attention to the signal and like
doing a podcast like this. I felt it was
important to do this after the Alex
Jones thing because to be honest with
you, I just did that documentary thing
last weekend at Costa
&gt;&gt; Del Soul
&gt;&gt; and they those guys told me it was for a
documentary. Uh they weren't going to
use it anytime soon. So I thought, okay.
&gt;&gt; Oh wow. I'll let it I'll let it hang
loose. But now that it's come out the
way it's come out, I don't want people
to feel like, you know, this is like uh
you know, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the end of the world
happening two weeks from now. It's not.
&gt;&gt; It's something that's been going on. It
explains all the majes, explains why
people are acting like idiots in
politics. It explains a lot of different
things, but it also explains why
alipathic and functional medicine
doctors potentially can be harming you
when they don't even understand the
basics of how we work.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And I think that's why you see on
Twitter, I've gotten really aggressive
with some of the centralized docs, like
especially in the last two weeks. I
mean, I'm going and saying, "Let me
repair this tweet." And I put it down.
An influencer yesterday told people that
using aspirin was good. You should read
the tweet that I put out about aspirin.
I use aspirin and where' that idea come
from? Ray Peat like
&gt;&gt; using aspirin will make you go into
neurogen degeneration faster than you
can imagine when you're in a magnetic
decline.
&gt;&gt; Makes no sense at all. So it's that kind
of lowhanging fruit that we've got to
fight against. We we've got I know most
of the people that listen to podcasts,
they don't know the science as well as
we do. And they have to make uh
judgments, you know, is Mark Heyman
right or Jack Kruse, right?
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's the reason why I have to
show you why Mark Heyman's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
It's the reason I have to show you that
all the guys tied to CO were retards.
It's the reason I have to point out why
certain politicians are retards. Um
because technically your life may be
tethered to those decisions.
&gt;&gt; I think that's a good place to wrap it
up. Honestly, I I think there's a lot to
marinate on. I hopefully people really
enjoyed this and um well enjoyed maybe
not the word, but gave them really
something to chew on, so to speak. Pun
intended. Um
thank you so much for your time. This
was really really illuminating and I'm
going to post it today. So, I'll send
the links over when it's up. And um
yeah, thank you so much for your work
and everything you're doing to help
bring awareness um to people and
informed consent because that really
ends at the end of the day is the most
important thing.
&gt;&gt; Yep. I agree.
&gt;&gt; All right. Thank you so much. Have a
great one.
&gt;&gt; Take care.
&gt;&gt; Bye.