When most people hear the word NAD,
they'll think anti-aging buzzword. So
the question is why is NAD so important
to biology?
&gt;&gt; So converting fuel, building stuff, and
repairing stuff. Those are the buckets
in which NAD co-enzymes are critical.
&gt;&gt; So NAD levels do decline with age.
There's a lot of people that are taking
NAD boosting supplements. It was
initially my technology that turned into
the nicotenoid ribocide and NAD boosting
industry and we published a paper in
2020. We had kind of a shocking result.
&gt;&gt; How does NAD play a role in exercise
recovery?
&gt;&gt; Sports trainers and athletic programs
swear by this. It's well known that the
Patriots took Niagen for many years. Can
you please tell people the question I
know that's in their minds, which is why
can't I just supplement with NAD? Why do
I have to take this precursor?
&gt;&gt; The the thing that your listeners need
to know is that
&gt;&gt; Welcome back to the podcast everyone.
I'm very excited to be here with Dr.
Charles Brener who is a professor and
chair in the department of diabetes and
cancer metabolism at the city of hope.
But I think what Dr. Brener is probably
more well known for in not only in the
scientific community but in the comm
broader health community in general is
his contribution to understanding NAD
biology. He had discovered a precursor
for NAD nicotenomide ribocide which has
been made into a supplement. It's a a
NAD boosting supplement that a lot of
you are familiar with. We're going to
get into all that today. Um Dr. Brener
is very evidence-based and so I'm very
excited to have this conversation with
you today on all things NAD and we're
going to talk about what that is and why
it's important. So, thank you for
joining me on the show.
&gt;&gt; I'm really happy to be here.
&gt;&gt; Well, this is a perfect segue into what
I am very I think excited to talk about
with you and that really is you know NAD
levels with age, right? So,
&gt;&gt; NAD levels do decline with age. Now, can
you explain the leading theories why
that happens in humans? So, like what do
you think the strongest evidence is? Is
it, you know, diseases, lifestyle that,
you know, changes that happen as we get
older?
&gt;&gt; Why why is it that it, you know, can you
just talk a little bit about what your
thoughts on that? Well,
I'm not super comfortable accepting
every premise that you, you know, can
pull from from Instagram, right? And so,
so, um,
&gt;&gt; I didn't pull anything.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. No, I know.
&gt;&gt; But you're talking generally speaking,
&gt;&gt; right? Generally speaking, so when
people say NAD levels decline in age, I
don't think that there's evidence that
human blood NAD declines in in age. I
think that the likelihood that a number
of human tissue NAD pools decline or are
disturbed in age is incontrovertibly
true. But I think that the idea that
every human systems NAD declines in age
is probably overstated because I've seen
a lot of human blood NAD metaboloms and
essentially there's three types of data
that we get. We get normal people male
and female who have 20 microar
NAD plus calculated on a volutric basis
in their blood. You have people that
supplement that are maybe twice that and
you have people with mitochondrial
disease that are lower.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So we like we discovered in in in
collaboration with University of of
Helsinki a number of years ago that
people with mitochondrial disease that
were thought to primarily have muscle
mitochondrial myopathy right are walking
around with low blood NAD.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Right.
Generally we don't see people have low
blood NAD. We don't see older people
having low blood NAD, but when we've
looked at alcoholics, we see disturbed
NAD in their liver.
When um you have a population of people
that have noise induced hearing loss, I
would bet a fair amount of money that
their cocklear NAD is damaged. Okay. So,
we're talking about blood NAD versus
tissue NAD. Um, and I think the question
I'm generally asking you is a more
broader question, not blood NAD. I'm
talking about, you know, as humans age,
unfortunately, they become more
sedentary. They become more overweight,
more obese. They they have things like
diabetes and metabolic syndrome and all
these disease states that do occur with
age. Right. Right. So the question that
I'm I'm asking you is you know basically
like do is there evidence that some of
these these disease states and I guess
we'll get into this do play a role in
lowering NAD levels in the blood in
other organs. So, so the question
&gt;&gt; broad more broadly. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But even in the blood, I'm curious like
if someone if if you're saying I've got
normal people and we looked at them,
does that mean normal like they don't
have any diseases or does it mean they
don't have mitochondrial disease?
Because like does someone who's obese
have lower blood NAD levels than someone
who does not?
&gt;&gt; You know, clinical trials always have a,
you know, inclusion criterion, right?
So, um, the clinical trials that looked
at people that were simply older and
probably were not on, you know, 12
medications
saw largely normal blood NAD. Um so it
could be that if we look into people
that have a lot of diseasing conditions
and have polyfarm pharmacy we may see um
abnormally low blood NAD in in aging
people much more than than I than I than
I've seen. So that's a really um good
point. Um but um I think that um
inflammatory processes are probably at
work in many of the diseasing conditions
in which the NAD system is disturbed
&gt;&gt; in in in not just the blood but in
&gt;&gt; but in every organ. So, so one of one of
the things that that we found in 2020,
um, you know, so remember we all
remember where we were in March 2020,
right? So I was a I was a department um
head at University of Iowa and you know
I got an email from either the the dean
of the college of medicine or the
president of the university saying
everybody needs to to go home. tell the
people in your department that um we're
going to be teaching from home, we're
going to be learning from home and we're
not going to be going into the lab. The
exception is if you're doing something
related to corona viruses, you can stay
in the lab.
So, um, turns out fourth floor of the
BSB building where I was working was one
flight above Stanley Pearl Pearlman's
lab who was probably one of the five
most expert people on corona viruses in
the world and uh he had been working on
corona viruses when no one cared about
them and actually had given us samples
of um corona virus infected mice
and uh we had done NAD metabolomics on
it and we had kind of a shocking result.
So we were actually able to stay in the
lab and we published a paper in 2020 on
the effect of corona virus infection not
just on mouse liver but on human lung
samples that we're able to get from from
morgs from morgs and from like databases
where they had COVID infection. And just
to to to come back to the PARP question,
we found five different members of the
PARP super family that were
transcriptionally activated by uh corona
virus infection.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Yeah. So they're that were they
consuming the NAD?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You know what I think it is is
doublestranded RNA, right, is seen as an
invader by the innate immune system. So
um just to bring everybody up to the the
same speed um your your immune system
has two parts. One is your innate immune
system that can tell that doublestranded
RNA is a problem because the human body
just gen generally doesn't make
doublestranded RNA right and the human
body doesn't make endotoxin.
So cells don't have to wait for
antibodies to come along that are very
specific for doublestranded RNA or
endotoxin. They recognize doublest
stranded RNA and endotoxin as a foreign
invader and they do something immediate
early to um to respond. And it turns out
that one of the things that our cells
are programmed to do is turn on five
members of the PARP super family. So
that infection and turns out this is a
common response not just to COVID but to
a lot of things is that we turn on these
PARPs.
&gt;&gt; So you think that that may be something
that happens with you know respiratory
illness or
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. Um that brings me back to
this question you know and I do want to
talk about you know some of the drivers
of NAD loss. Maybe that's a better way
to put it. um you know what we're
talking when you're talking about
measuring NAD levels in the blood like
how much of that is really just
reflective of your diet like you know
like let's say you're you're getting a
lot of you know B3 nicotinic acid
whatever like you're getting a lot of
tryptophan um is there is there somewhat
of this like artifactual thing where
okay NAD levels look normal or elevated
because they're taking in the precursors
and we're measuring it like in blood
&gt;&gt; well when people you know when people
take substantive amounts of um NAD
precursor vitamins into the 300 mgram
plus you can see a substantive change in
people's
um circulating NAD metabolom
um um probably the foods that have the
most NAD precursors are the same foods
that have the most micronutrients of all
kinds. Right? People always talk about
liver, spinach, right? Spinach source of
iron and micronutrients.
Um liver a source of iron and
micronutrients. That's because they're
chalk full of mitochondria, right? And
chloroplast in the case of of plants
that contain all of these co-enzymes,
right? And the co-enzymes you you know
this the co-enzymes break down to
their soluble precursor form. So NAD
breaks down to NR nicotenomide nicotenic
acid goes back into cells. Cells
rebuilds the NAD stores. Co-enzyme A
breaks down to pantaththenate.
Pantaththnate gets into cells. Cells
make up their own pantaththenate.
So,
&gt;&gt; so then you know and this h how much do
you do you think measuring blood levels
of NAD really is indicative of what's
going on in the whole system and you
know perhaps there is more of an age
related decline in NAD in other tissues
that we're not able to see in the blood.
I think that there I think there are
very substantive age related declines in
NAD in tissues and disease and
conditiondriven
declines in NAD tissues and people are
not you know there's no reason for you
to volunteer a piece of your brain or
your liver to to measure that. Right.
&gt;&gt; What about animal studies? Do you think
&gt;&gt; animal studies we we have a lot of data
on that in in animals? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And and what have those shown? I mean,
are we seeing declines in the muscle and
the liver and the brain? Is that
something you think translates to
humans?
&gt;&gt; Um, I think it it probably translates to
humans. I think in the liver it's
related to inflammation and the
microbiome. It kind of varies from
university to university in terms of
where their mice are kept and what kind
of,
&gt;&gt; you know, um, microbiome there is in in
those facilities. But um for sure in a
lot of disease and conditions the NAD
system really comes under attack. So in
heart failure the NAD system comes under
attack in central and peripheral
neurodeeneration comes under attack. Sun
exposure it comes under attack.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So let's talk about some of this.
I mean, um, if we're talking about three
really common conditions in humans,
obesity, insulin resistance at the top,
right? We have chronic inflammation,
which is the driver of heart disease, of
Alzheimer's disease, right?
&gt;&gt; Um, chronic sleep deprivation.
&gt;&gt; Like of those three conditions,
&gt;&gt; how you kind of described a little bit
of the illness, but like how do those,
you know, conditions put stress on the
NAD system? So like obesity,
&gt;&gt; the inflam chronic inflammation and then
so we talked about you talked about
acute inflammation. I'm talking about
chronic
&gt;&gt; and then also sleep deprivation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I would say um we actually
have data from our lab for I think those
those three. So um from 2016, one of our
first mouse experiments was overfeeding
mice. We gave them a highfat diet. We
pushed them all the way into type 2
diabetes. their liver NAD system was
disturbed and the pH was the center of
that. So their ability to detoxify uh
reactive oxygen species was degraded by
being fat and being insulin uh
resistant. Um sleep deprivation.
&gt;&gt; So are they consuming more NAD? Is that
like the driver?
&gt;&gt; I think that they're facing a kind of
raw storm that is consuming NADPH is
churning NADPH.
&gt;&gt; So, it's not like they can't make the
NAD. It's that they're just they can't
get enough of it because of all the
&gt;&gt; and there could be more than one
mechanism, right? Okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And then um sleep
disturbance. Um, we know,
&gt;&gt; sorry, before you go to sleep, can I go
back to the obesity because you
mentioned the animal data? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What do we know from humans in terms of
like has there has there been any
research looking at obesity andor
metabolic syndrome? I'm kind of glum
gathering them in the same group here.
Um, do we know any is there any human
data that has looked at how that taxes
the NAD system?
&gt;&gt; There is to my knowledge. Um,
and to some I mean fat is an accessible
tissue
um people remove fat you know from
people that have more than they want and
so it is something that could be
determined in the atapost tissue. um
we'd be very interested in knowing
what's happening in the liver and I
think I know of a resource in Europe
where they have um liver from people
that were undergoing beriatric surgery.
So I think it'll be a good thing that we
can look into in the future.
&gt;&gt; Okay, great. So um you you were going to
mention sleep disturbance and chronic
inflammation and how both of these sort
of very common human conditions sort of
tax the NAD system,
&gt;&gt; right? So chronobiology first. So sleep,
I'm not sure a study has been done
exactly on sleep, but um for sure in
mice
um we've looked at, you know, young mice
that have really good um chrono
synchrony and older mice that are kind
of losing their synchrony and the NAD
system becomes disturbed. There's a lot
of time of day cues that go into NAD
synthesis and NAD dependent metabolic
processes. So I think that lack of sleep
or time zone disruption is um
essentially assured to disturb the NAD
system.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to circle back and go a
little more in depth than that because I
have some more questions on that.
&gt;&gt; Um and then what about the chronic
inflammation? I mean, and this is to me
it makes sense knowing what I know about
biology. And here's where I can really
claim some benefit in human which is
which is amazingly satisfying that um
we've not only have we shown that
inflammatory
stimuli
like corona viruses disturb the NAD
system but we've been able to show that
in human beings and randomized control
trials that nicotenomide ribos side at
like a gram a day type type doses is
anti-inflammatory.
So that's now a that's now a proven
fact. And um it was initially um you
know a result that came out of trials
where it was kind of like a topline
failure in the sense that the first
trial that reported that NR is
anti-inflammatory
set out to determine whether NR could
improve old men's grip strength in like
2 or 3 weeks. Well, it's kind of a dumb
trial, Rhonda. Okay. Because if you want
to get stronger, you have to exercise.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. Not take a pill.
&gt;&gt; So, so the the premise of the trial was
kind of unreasonable. It was the magical
thing.
&gt;&gt; There's no exercise involved in the
&gt;&gt; No, there's no exercise.
&gt;&gt; There needs to be exercise plus the NA.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. You do exercise as standard
of care and then you can see whether and
Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And we even have a um you know
like a review article saying exercise
should be the standard of care and then
you look for beneficial effects of NR
and other things beyond that. But um
what they did is they took older men and
they did muscle biopsies and it was
placeboc controlled crossover design
actually. So some had the NR first and
then they got placebo. Some had placebo
first and then they they got NR. and um
nobody's grip strength got better and
then they went to the secondary outcomes
and they found it was NR was strongly
anti-inflammatory
like greatly lowering IL6 IL 10 and
other markers of inflammation. In fact,
it was so strong that the people that
had the NR first followed by placebo
still had lower anti-inflammatory
results after 3 weeks on placebo. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But the effect was strongest right after
NR. Right. So then you worry a little
bit, right? Because and I had to learn
about clinical research because I'm a
bench guy, right? that started out with
enzymes and now has mice and so forth
and so on. And the thing that clinical
researchers will tell you is that your
pre-specified endpoint is the most
valuable thing, right? because because
their their criticism of this
anti-inflammatory result could be that
well you set out to test whether NR
would improve grip strength and then you
measured anti-inflammation
but for every 20 things that you measure
you might find one thing that achieves
this statistical significance at P.05.
So if you measure 100 things you might
find five positive results. it's maybe
not that interesting, right? So, you
have to worry when you get a result as a
as a non- primary endpoint, but by this
time there are eight trials showing
anti-inflammatory activity in in human
RCTs, including RCTs,
one that I just read the other day in
which that was the primary endpoint. The
patient population all had COPD, so
they're all very inflammatory.
They're looking at inflammatory markers
in sputum. So it's really disease re
relevant for this, you know, people with
a respiratory condition. NR lowers those
inflammatory markers. Placebo doesn't.
So we know as for a fact. So, so what
what I think it's doing is it's
rebuilding NAD in a system in which the
NAD systems come under attack,
rebuilding those supplies so that
uh free radical species can be
detoxified
and the anabolic processes and the
repair processes can can work better.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think you kind of answered, you
know, my question. And I was kind of
going to ask you, you know, with respect
to these these chronic conditions that
are very common in, you know, US and
also just a lot of developed countries,
you know, what if someone could change
only one aspect of their their lifestyle
within the next 2 to 3 months? Like what
would have the biggest bang for their
buck in terms of supporting their NAD?
And it really sounds like the thing
that's causing the inflammation, the
chronic inflammation,
um, might be a big driver. So if it's
obesity, you know, weight loss, right?
If it's the if it's the the um you know,
the sleep. So whether or not you're
we're talking about, like I said, we're
going to dive into this, but like if
you're if your circadian rhythms
disrupted, I mean, trying to fix fix
that or obviously supplementation, we're
going to get into that as well. And for
people wondering what NR is, again,
nicotine, my ribboside, we're going to
get into all that very very soon. Um
whether or not it's stress, stress
causes inflammation, right?
&gt;&gt; It could be drinking though. I mean, it
could be drinking, could be drug use,
&gt;&gt; right? A lot of things cause
inflammation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Um, and
&gt;&gt; and the thing is, the thing that's
important and I think that that's that's
good about about your show is that, you
know, there aren't oneizefits all
recommendations for people, right? So,
you know, I don't understand why someone
would tell large podcast audiences that
everybody should be fasting or doing
timerestricted feeding because then
you're going to get the people that have
the most OCD,
right? Um that have the most problematic
relationship with their food to worry
about time of day eating and counting
calories. and they may be perfectly
lean, right? So, I don't think that
everybody needs to be fasting, right?
But people with overweight actually now
have medical options that work, right?
And um including oral, you know, GLP-1
medications that in conjunction with
resistance training can really improve
people's health. So for people that have
overweight and obesity, that's probably,
you know, number one.
&gt;&gt; There's a lot of options now to lose
weight.
&gt;&gt; People that people that are are
drinking, JLP1 actually helps some of
those people. But um you know, people
that are drinking or are, you know,
sitting,
you know, in front of of a screen too
many hours a day and are not moving
their bodies. probably moving their
bodies more is is gonna be, you know,
important.
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. Um, I want to get back to
this this idea of why,
you know, the blood NAD isn't
necessarily indicative of your what's
going on your muscle and your brain. Um
and and specifically I want to get into
the you know let's say you're taking a
an NAD precursor supplement like a
nicotenomide ribocide
&gt;&gt; and you do see that as you mentioned
that you'll see the NAD levels go up
like very high in the blood.
What does that tell us about levels in
the brain? Can we assume I mean I don't
know that we can or can we assume that
the levels are going to go up in the
brain or in the muscle? Yeah, there are
there are imaging um experiments that
show that oral NAD precursors in
increase brain NAD. Um there are small
clinical studies that show that oral
nicotenomide riocide improves cerebral
blood flow in people with mild cognitive
impairment. So, you know, that's a
functional um measurement. So, I feel
pretty good about that. Does it improve
cognition or was not not looked at?
um people have tried you know to see so
there is a longco study um in which um
all of the people that are enrolled have
long co so they have complaints about
their executive function depression
their sleep quality
um their mood and um there was a recent
study I think in the last month or two
it's woo at all and I think it's Lancet
e clinical medicine or something like
that. I'm a co-author on the paper um
that shows that there's within group
improvements. So again, this is not
quite the gold standard of placeboc
controlled NR group is superior to the
placebo group at the end of the study.
But it's a um within group meaning when
people compared their baseline level of
executive function to their executive
function when they were on NR,
there's an improvement
&gt;&gt; that was not seen in the placebo group.
&gt;&gt; Did anyone look at whether or not that
improvement correlated with inflammatory
status? So baseline inflammatory status
being higher and that being
&gt;&gt; No, but that's a beautiful hypothesis
that um Dr. Guzman uh should should look
at. If you're listening to this, Dr.
Gooseman, make sure each of you look at
the the inflammatory status. Um, and
then, you know, because I would think,
you know, there's lots of evidence now
that you can even there's even, you
know, human trials where people are
injected with lipopolyaccharide, which
induces inflammation or or a saline
control, and you can affect mood, you
can depress the mood, you can depress
cognitive function because inflammation
affects brain function. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So I mean I I feel like it's a pretty I
would say I I would feel comfortable
speculating that if you have yeah if you
have someone with a you know high
inflammatory status baseline for
whatever reason alcoholism obesity
chronic sleep deprivation whatever it is
there's many many things that can get
you there right
&gt;&gt; that if you can you know either reduce
that inflammation obviously through
lifestyle and diet that would be ideal
and or if you take the nicotenomide riv
side, you know, to help replenish some
of that NAD to help with the
inflammation that you would affect, you
know, some of the functional outputs as
well.
&gt;&gt; So, how would I'm, you know, I and that
kind of gets to this thing, you know,
and a lot of people are taking there's a
lot of people that are taking NAD
boosting supplements
&gt;&gt; and what do you think for them like
should they go get their NAD blood
levels measured? Is there any sort of
you know functional test that they can
do to really know if it's working or is
it just kind of like a like like the
fitness improvements right let's say
they are working out and they take the
NAD like should they be measuring their
grip strength or their
&gt;&gt; you know okay so let me let me cover my
COI right here right
&gt;&gt; yes let's do that yeah so um so it was
initially my technology that turned into
the nicotoni ribocide and NAD boosting
industry so I'm chief scientific ific
adviser of Niogen which makes this
Niogen pill right I'm also chief
scientific adviser of NadMed which is an
ND testing company do I think there's a
use case for Niogen in people in healthy
aging yes on the basis of eight
randomized clinical trials showing
anti-inflammatory benefits in people
positive trial and peripheral artery
disease and some of these suggestively
positive trials like long co which which
we talked about um do I think that there
is a value of NAD testing in people
definitely in clinical trials right so
this company NADMED provides you know
kits and reagents for clinical trial
observations
um people some individual people buy the
kit kits do I think that there's a use
case for it no I don't
&gt;&gt; okay I'm kind of I'm kind of with you on
that I feel like it's probably known
that they're increasing it they're
they're um if they're if they're buying
um you know nicotenocide
um from niogen it's going to boost their
NAD like 6 to 8 hours after ingestion
their NAD is higher like do you do you
go to when if you take an aspirin do you
need to do a mass spec to see whether
you ingested an aspirin I I don't I
don't see the use case for that
&gt;&gt; um And there's probably some individual
variability right right there.
&gt;&gt; So, so but again in the context of a
clinical trial, right? If we've enrolled
50 people and we're trying to figure
out, you know, we had some responders
and some non-responders, right? Which is
kind of getting into the questions that
you're you're asking, did it correlate
with blah blah blah. So now you in the
context of a clinical trial, you want to
did it correlate with inflammatory
markers? Did it correlate with the way
their blood responded? Is there anything
unusual about the way their blood
responded? But I think that there's kind
of a lot of overw worrying and over
testing in of the worried well and I
don't think that that's very helpful.
&gt;&gt; Um, I agree. You have to choose your
battles otherwise you're going to drive
yourself nuts. Um, and like I said,
we're going to get a little bit more
into the NAD precursors. I kind of want
to wrap up this lifestyle diet,
lifestyle,
&gt;&gt; you know, factors that are supporting
NAD. We talked about that are consuming,
but I want to talk a little bit about
the supporting
&gt;&gt; systems for NAD. And for me, exercise is
always at the top of everything. So, I'd
love to start there.
&gt;&gt; Um, how how does exercise affect NAD?
And what type of exercise would be
better for increasing NAD? Would it be
aerobic? Would it be, you know, strength
training, resistance training, both? I
can come up with rationale for why I
think both would be either or.
&gt;&gt; But you know that the exercise that you
do is infinitely better than the
exercise that you plan to do or wish you
did. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Totally. So, anything's better than
nothing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and and we do have some clinical
evidence showing that exercise leads to
an increase in the gene expression of
NAD biosynthetic enzymes. So I recently
published that with a group in Germany
and I can't remember what kind of
exercise that they did but um yeah
there's there's evidence that people
that um exercise you're boosting a lot
of transcription pathways and gene
expression p pathways that are you know
I I hate the word rejuvenating but it's
that are associated with youth and
&gt;&gt; I mean mitochondrial biogenesis goes up
when you exercise that's a rejuvenating
I you you have to kind of there are
buzzwords that can you you kind of get
you know they're overplayed but
&gt;&gt; but it when it's true it's true right
&gt;&gt; it's true true
&gt;&gt; um does does mitochondrial biogenesis
play a role in some of the NAD increases
as well if you're making more
mitochondria is it like an adaptation
where the body's like we need more of
this you know NAD around so like this
like key transcription factor that
responds to the NAD system and then you
know you make more mitochondria, you
have better beta oxidation.
&gt;&gt; How does NAD play a role in exercise
recovery? Like recovering from and now I
mean like that that's part of the
repair, right?
you would imagine it helps. But
&gt;&gt; so yeah, the the um the sports trainers
and the heads of, you know, professional
football clubs and and college um
athletic programs that buy, you know,
Niogen by the tub swear by this. So
there's not a lot of rigorous placebo
control data on it, but there's train
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; An anecdot.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Um there's um you know, and there's
there's like photos of um two advisors
of NIA and myself and and Dr. Rudolph
Tanzy who's a professor at Harvard um
you know with Bill Bich when he was the
coach of the New England Patriots and
and the coach of of a 40-year-old Tom
Brady. So it's well known that the
Patriots um took Niagen for for many
years. I don't actually know whether
they're still taking it postbell check
but um it's in a lot of um training
rooms for the reason of recovery. Have
any of the exercise physiology
scientists become interested in in
looking at this?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that it's something that
really needs to be studied in, you know,
laboratory exercise physiology science
because you can do those kinds of
trials, right? Um, you can you can work
people really hard on a bicycle and you
know see whether you can work them as
hard the following day, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And al and not just recovery but
in performance. I mean you'd think if
you're taxing the NAD that you're
consuming more NAD, your muscles are
working harder and like you said your ad
the adaptation is that you're increasing
transcription. you're going to, you
know, whatever these genes or enzymes
important for making more NAD are going
to be increased. So, you're going to
make more NAD because your b because
your body knows I'm using more. I need
to like respond to that.
&gt;&gt; Um, it it would be interesting to know
if you supplemented with the precursor
if that also was beneficial. I would
assume
&gt;&gt; it would be, but it would be nice
synergistic, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it would be exactly it would be
nice for someone to actually prove that.
Um,
&gt;&gt; we talked a little bit about circadian
biology and being out of sync with your
circadian rhythm. I want to kind of get
to that, but before getting there, I
think something that even more people
are familiar with is like acute sleep
loss. Like you have, let's say you have
one night, you're out socializing later
than usual, you get to bed later, you
have to wake up at the same time, you
miss sleep, right?
&gt;&gt; How does that affect the NAD system?
&gt;&gt; Is it known? I'm not sure that we have
hard data on it because I don't I mean
the there probably are accessible mouse
experiments. I don't know how much you
would value them because you can do
things um you know with mice where you
um change the lighting around in the
room or give them food in weird times
per day. and you could potentially
measure changes in the NAD system, but
um it would be hard to enroll human
trials like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I guess there's no real it's not
there's not a lot of empirical data on
that. If I were to speculate on this and
I'm sure you would agree like at least
in this certainly with acute you do get
an increase in inflammatory SAS but I
would say more so with chronic sleep
deprivation. Let's say you have a new
mom or you know like who's just getting
constant fragmented sleep like we do
know that inflammatory you know the
inflammatory status is increased like
people have more inflammatory biomarkers
that are elevated
&gt;&gt; with chronic sleep loss.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I do want to tell you about
a new mom though
&gt;&gt; cuz I can tell you about um new mother
mice and and rats. Um we published this
I think in 2019.
Um so um we had this idea that if we had
really um overweight female mice
that um they'd be conferring like a
metabolic syndrome to their offspring.
But it was our first time trying to get
fat mice to be pregnant. Okay. And um so
we had mice that were on control diets
plus or minus nicotenomide ribocide and
we had mice that were on highfat diets
plus or minus nicotenomide ribocide. And
we simply didn't get enough fat mice to
be pregnant and go to term with their
baby mice in the fat group. But in the
control group, something interesting
happened, which is we had perfect
fertility. We had mice that were whose
whose moms were either supplemented with
NR or not. And we were able to follow
their offspring. And what we found is
that the offspring of supplemented
mothers
had better lean mass um at the time of
weaning that they were able to maintain
for their whole lives. They had um
faster uh mechanical physical
development. So their performance on
like a balance beam type thing was
better if the mom was supplemented. Um
they had lower fear and anxiety to the
degree to which you can test such things
in in mice. Um so they did better on a
Morris water maze and they even had
better adult hippocample neurogenesis if
the mom had been supplemented.
&gt;&gt; This is very interesting. I mean I think
for me in my brain two things are going
on here. One, we're talking about
fertility. I'm thinking mitochondrial
health. I'm thinking all this. And two,
I'm thinking if these if these pregnant
mice were taking nicotine ribbocide
throughout pregnancy, then I'm shifting
to gene regulation. So, did you guys
look at any of the
&gt;&gt; So, so the the weight at weaning of a
mouse is really important because the
more um you do calorie transfer from the
mom from lactation, right? then the more
um you know muscle and fat the baby has
and the kind of the better life course
it has.
&gt;&gt; So it turns out that the NR supplemented
new moms also had better weight
management, right? And it was simply
calorie transfer. They produced more
milk.
&gt;&gt; The NR supplemented moms produced more
milk than the non-supplemented moms. and
potentially it was higher in bioactives
as well. We don't actually know um we
don't have a full characterization of
the milk from the supplemented moms
versus the non supplemented moms. So
there may have been very specialized
fatty acids or altered microbiome.
There's a whole bunch of different
things it could be right. But it was
also more bulk calories. So
&gt;&gt; interesting. Yeah. um
histone deacetylases
epigenetics. I'm thinking are we is that
like a possibility as well in terms of
&gt;&gt; um yeah there could be a lot of
different things going on but one of the
things that we found is that a new
mother's liver not only is it
distributing protein fat and
carbohydrate to the mammorary system for
the mammorary biosynthetic lactation
yeah biosynthetic program
&gt;&gt; it's also distributing NAD precursors so
the mammory NAD
&gt;&gt; in NR our supplemented mothers was
greatly increased.
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; And actually the liver NAD system
declines in a non-supplemented mother.
The blood NAD metabolism increases and
it basically accumulates in the memory
in order to support the mammorary
biosynthetic program.
&gt;&gt; I we are going to talk about safety and
stuff. We're I'm jumping ahead of myself
but since we're on this topic.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Do you I mean with pregnancy it's
always like it's always my you know rule
that I like to sort of get off all the
like
dozens of supplements I'm taking and go
down to the essentials right that we
know is safe important
&gt;&gt; um is there any reason to believe that
taking nicenide ribocide during
pregnancy would not be safe or is that
something that
&gt;&gt; there's there's no data um and
&gt;&gt; aside from the animal study human data
&gt;&gt; there's no human data
Um however, you know, as soon as um our
group published this work, we got calls
from UC Davis and um the whole group in
Sacramento that works on human lactation
and model system lactation. So um Dr.
Garman and a number of other folks at at
UC Davis are some of the biggest experts
in lactation in the world and they
started um planning some large animal
trials as well as human trials. So one
of their ideas was that preeie moms of
preeis don't generally produce enough
milk because you know this very very
well is that you're the the things that
are happening in the new mom's body are
kind of in sync with baby development,
right? And so if baby for some reason
comes out really early, mom's mammorary
system is not generally ready to produce
a lot of milk and you have a a new very
small baby that has major nutritional
needs. So I believe that they have
planned a human lactation study with
moms of preeis and I think that there
are some other studies that are being
done or being planned at UC Davis.
&gt;&gt; Well, at least with the with the
lactation. That's interesting. I always
I mean it sounds like for like fertility
wise it's always you know it might not
be a bad idea to try the nicotenomide
ribocide. I do actually know some
fertility doctors that do recommend true
niogen by the way.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. for fertility.
&gt;&gt; We know that it's being done. Um, you
know, this is an this is an area where,
you know, it's a little bit like the
sports trainers being out um ahead of
randomized trials. Um the animal results
are so strong and that generally the
safety data are so you know uh
comforting that um there are a lot of
women that are you know presumably
taking 500 milligrams or a gram of
Niogen you know per day during pregnancy
or to get pregnant.
&gt;&gt; Would that be the the human equivalent
dose from from your animal study? Would
it be something like 500 millig?
&gt;&gt; The clinical doses are generally around
a gram a day.
&gt;&gt; A gram. So that would be like two true
ngen.
&gt;&gt; There's different
&gt;&gt; different. Okay. But yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um fascinating.
And I would like to kind of just circle
back to the the sleep because um you do
have some at least pre-clinical evidence
on disrupted circadian rhythms. Yeah.
There are many many people in the United
States who are shift workers. We rely
upon them. Thank you for all the work
you do. We've got nurses, doctors,
firemen, policemen. I mean, there's just
and and there's a ton of other shift
workers, right? They're doing a lot of
really important work to help our
society out
&gt;&gt; at the cost of their own health.
&gt;&gt; And um
&gt;&gt; you mentioned that that
being out of sync with your circadian
rhythm. So that could be shift work, it
could be traveling to another time zone,
right? Jet lag as we call it.
&gt;&gt; For those individuals that are, you
know, either under chronic, you know,
circadian misalignment with their their
work or if they're just experiencing it
because they're traveling in a different
time zone.
&gt;&gt; Um, what do you think would be some good
strategies to help them mitigate the
effects on NAD system? I mean, would
supplementation come in there or would
it be, you know, bright light exposure?
The things that we've heard of from, you
know, the chronobiologists, right?
&gt;&gt; Like melatonin, getting bright light
exposure, trying to timerestricted
eating if you're a shift worker, trying
to not eat all throughout the day, like
things like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I mean, this is something
that, you know, clinical and human
experience is very valuable, right? So
people that do it a lot that have
figured out a way to do it will tell you
that they set their w if they're going
to be taking an international trip,
which I'm taking on Monday. Um set your
um calendar to where you're going to be.
Think about trying to sleep when they're
sleeping.
um get bright sunlight at you know 6 or
7 a.m. their time. Um if you I think
this this is a potential use case for
for niogen. So um you know bright
sunlight um and you know potentially
nicotenoid ribocide at that morning
time. Um, so and in particularly if
you've been taking Niagen in in the
morning, um, you might have a weird day
that is only 14 hours or 40 hours
depending on which direction you're
going. And so you're going to have a
weird day that you have to get through
and then you you try to re reset with
sunlight and activity. you just brought
up a really interesting question in my
brain and that is and the next thing
we're getting into is the NAD
supplementation and all of that. But
before we get there, um you said you
were talking about taking nicotenomide
ribbide perhaps in the morning. Does the
timing of when you take it actually
matter? So let's say you you're you know
you're Okay, I have two questions.
That's one. the timing does the timing
matter because you did mention that that
you get this boost in your in your
circulation I don't know how many hours
after taking the supplement but also
let's say like let's say you are you
know a shift worker or you are changing
time zones and your NAD system is
disrupted lots of things are disrupted
but that's one of many things
&gt;&gt; you know is that is that really going to
is that going to affect your energy
levels like the NAD being down one would
presume it would you would feel lower
energy like cognitively and is that
something that you think could be
replenished through supplementation? I
know I'm asking you to speculate, which
is hard for you.
&gt;&gt; I know. Um
&gt;&gt; like I I try to be evidence-based here.
Um what I can tell you is that um NR is
doesn't feel like a stimulant. No.
&gt;&gt; Right. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um most people take it in the morning.
Um there's not a to me it's logical to
take it in the morning because um the
way your body gets micronutrients and
macronutrients is the same, right? Is
that we if if if you were eating, you
know, a plate of of of liver, you'd be
getting protein, fat, um a little bit of
carbohydrate, and micronutrient in the
same meal, right? the micronutrients are
going into your cells to rebuild
co-enzymes and the macronutrients are
going into your your liver and intestine
and breaking down and depending upon
co-enzymes for their conversion to ATP.
So to me waking up in the morning and
I'm on team breakfast. I'm not a
timerestricted guy. Um you know I take
niggen in the morning. I have coffee and
I and I and I work. Um
so it could well be valuable for shift
workers.
Um, presumably if somebody has night
shifts and let's say they start work at
11:00 p.m. and they wake up at 9:30 p.m.
then they're presumably having breakfast
at 1000 a.m. And I would
&gt;&gt; 10 p.m.
&gt;&gt; think or sorry 1000 p.m. So I think that
that person would probably have coffee
and naggen at that beginning of their
work cycle. To me that's
&gt;&gt; the most
&gt;&gt; logical way of doing it.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um let's get into this. I mean
hopefully by now everyone's convinced.
They know what NAD is. They're convinced
it's important at the very least for
energy, right? If not more repair,
regulating genes. Um I a lot of things,
right? But I think energy stands out to
a lot of people.
&gt;&gt; Uh can you please tell people and
explain to them the question I know
that's in their minds which is why can't
I just supplement with NAD? Why do I
have to take this precursor like
nicotenomide ribocide? So maybe you
could talk about
&gt;&gt; why that is and also maybe just touch on
nicotenomide ribocide versus
nicotenomide monucleotide. That's
another precursor.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So basically the the issue
is phosphates. So um you know compounds
with phosphates don't get into cells. Um
so the biggest piece of NAD that can get
into a cell is nicotenocide.
Um it gets into cells nicoten ribocide
kinase then phosphorolates it puts a
phosphate group on it. Then there's
another enzyme that comes along that
adds what's called an AM group to it.
And then it's a ducleotide that has two
phosphates on it. Um,
nicotinic acid does not have phosphates.
Nicotenomide does not have phosphates.
Both of them are considered NAD
precursor vitamins. Um, problem with
nicotinic acid is high doses of it cause
flushing. So, if you're trying to take
enough nicotinic acid to boost NAD,
you're probably going to feel kind of an
uncomfortable hot flash type experience.
Um, that said, um, there's some
cardiologists that recommend it for
lipid regulation and so it has a long,
you know, human experience. Nicotinomide
has been in the food supply for a long
time, usually pretty low dose. It's in
pro probably every multivitamin.
Um, we know it's really safe. We know
that it's cancer preventative, which is
a very good thing about this class of
molecules is that they were tested in
Australia, you know, where there's a
very high incidence of skin cancer,
right? so high that you can do a
prospective
um preventative clinical trial to see
whether nicotinomide supplementation
lowers the risk of skin cancer and it
does. Right. So nicotenomide is really
safe.
&gt;&gt; Do you think that has to do with DNA
damage repair?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And um so so
nicotenoid ribocide is probably the kind
of premium um NAD precursor in the sense
that the NR kinace pathway gets
upregulated in a lot of conditions of
metabolic stress. So in the failing
heart in a um damaged neuron
nicotenomide ribocide kynise one and two
genes get upregulated and so that's why
NR you know works in a lot of mouse
models in which nicotenomide doesn't
work like in the heart failure
experiments nicotenomide can't actually
boost the NAD in the failing heart
because in the failing heart it's
overexpressing a gene called NMRK2
nicotenomide ribosite kynes 2. So the
failing heart is sort of looking for the
whole nucleus
&gt;&gt; in order to boost its NAD system.
&gt;&gt; Um so it's not that it's necessarily
easier for nicotine
to get there.
&gt;&gt; Oh well you asked about NAD and NMN,
right?
&gt;&gt; Well yeah NAD so NAD is not even getting
in inside of cells essentially. You're
taking it orally. There's a there's a
funny thing where people started um
injecting, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Let's get to that. NAD NAD IV
drips.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so and then um have you ever
talked to anybody that has done it? Yes.
&gt;&gt; Did they tell you how painful it is?
&gt;&gt; No. They talked about how great they
felt and how they had energy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's a it's delivered over a
several hour period in which the people
experience an innate immune response
because the NAD can't get into cells.
Neither can NMN get into cells. So these
compounds break down into NR or
something smaller, right? So NAD is
breaking down into
probably breaks down into Nammen first
and then to NR
and then NR can get into cells
nicotenomide can get into cells
nicotinic acid.
&gt;&gt; So this is the mechanism for the NI NAD
drips that we're talking about. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Right. There's actually now
a niogen plus which is like a uh drip
grade nicotenoid ribocide which is not
painful but
&gt;&gt; that you can do in a drip that you
&gt;&gt; can do that in a drip. Um again the
clinical data behind oral niogen is much
more extensive than IV. That said, that
said, there are some, you know, mouse
experiments where intravenous NR goes
further into different tissues than oral
NR.
&gt;&gt; Why is that?
&gt;&gt; So the whole biodistribution,
you know, thing is that's
pharmaccoinetics.
&gt;&gt; You can get higher levels. potentially
can deliver more NR to the heart or to
other tissues through IV. So I think
that in the future we're going to have
more, you know, disease relevant data
from IV delivery. So I'm happy that
there is, you know, clinical grade
introvenous NR, but there's much more
data today in January of 2026 on oral
NR. We know it's safe. We know it boosts
NAD. IV is something that is kind of a,
you know, developing product and um but
it's now available to the clinical
research community as well.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, just for people that are
listening here to summarize because I
know that you can actually go online and
buy an NAD oral supplement. Um, that is
not going to work right.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's going to break down. I mean,
half of the molecular weight or 40 or
some percent of the molecular weight of
NAD is NR. So it's going to break down
into
um you know so it'll be digested and
deliver presumably deliver some small
fraction of the total molecular weight
as an NAD booster.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So it's not
&gt;&gt; NAD itself
you know I technically
uh NMN is you can argue whether it's a
precursor. It's sort of a precursor of
NR, which is a precursor to cellular
NAD. But again, NMN breaks down to NR
and then that gets into cells and
becomes NMN and NAD. Again,
&gt;&gt; I thought NR got broken down to NN.
&gt;&gt; Well, no, NR gets um phosphorolated gets
converted up to NMN. Okay. NMN has a
phosphate on it, but that so it's a it's
a funny thing like why as a chemist
would you put a phosphate on to NR to
produce NMN when NMN has to be degraded
down to NR in order to get into cells
but it's popular right it was
popularized by a number of researchers
and
um the question with NMN is whether you
can get um pure safety tested material
There are some reports that 17 out of 20
products labeled as NMN don't have NMN
in it or don't meet meet the label
claims.
&gt;&gt; Some people So some people that are
listening are familiar with both NR and
NMN. Some people this is the first time
they're like hearing about all this but
they do know about NAD.
&gt;&gt; Um you know when the I I know I know a
lot of people the way they think about
it is they think well NMN is one step
closer to producing NAD. That's
&gt;&gt; in the cell.
&gt;&gt; Yes, in the cell. That's a general like
idea that's that's kind of in a lot of
people's minds. So, why wouldn't I just
supplement with the closer
part of this process?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it doesn't work that way though.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Why doesn't it work that way?
&gt;&gt; Well, it doesn't work because the NMN
has a phosphate group that precludes its
transport into the cell. So in the 1980s
there were people that were developing
nucleotides
and bases as anti-cancer and antiviral
drugs. In fact three of them got a Nobel
Prize. Gertrude Dion and Hitchens and
someone else got a Nobel Prize. They
worked at um research park in North
Carolina. And um what they the idea is
that if you make something that
resembles a nucleotide
that it can go into cells and be
converted into a toxic nucleotide and it
can do things like block viral
replication. Like you've heard of ACT,
&gt;&gt; right? HIV drug. So act is a nucleioide
right.
So it's the you make nucleioide it gets
taken up into cells and then inside the
cell act gets converted into a
triphosphate
act triphosphate and then that is an
inhibitor reverse transcriptase. Right?
So nicotenomide ribocide is not toxic.
Um it's an NAD booster. So it's a direct
precursor of NAD. The NR can get into
cells.
&gt;&gt; It can get decorated with the phosphates
and converted into its final nucleotide
form. NMN can't because NMN already has
a phosphate. That phosphate has to be
put on inside of cells. So if someone
takes if someone is able to find a safe
pure form of NMN
um which you're if you're at a drug
company that is making and testing NMN
you could have access to that. Most of
us wouldn't have access to that but if
you could find a safe um form of NMN and
take it orally that NMN is being
converted back to NR before it gets into
cells.
&gt;&gt; Right? That was the long-winded way of
answering the question, which is
essentially that you actually it's being
converted back into NR. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So then why not just take the NR?
&gt;&gt; Well, um NR is the most, you know,
safety tested NAD booster on on the
market. So,
&gt;&gt; well, this is good. At least people have
an idea now. So,
I think um I want to get to some of
these health outcomes, but before we do
that, you mentioned something
interesting when you were talking about
some of these animal studies that kind
of piqued my curiosity here, which was
you said gut microbiome
&gt;&gt; and you were talking about different
strains of animals and how the gut
microbiome seem to possibly play a role
in NAD levels in different tissues
perhaps.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, how is that do they is the gut
bacteria in our guts playing a role in
the conversion of NR and amen into
&gt;&gt; brand new paper out of um Nestle in
Switzerland says that um the gut
microbiome plays a role in human
conversion of NR and NMN into NAD
in our tissues. I think that they got
part of the story right. I don't think
that they got all of it right because
it's very difficult to see NR in human
blood. Um we know that um it sort of
behaves like dark matter, you know. So
dark matter is stuff that um you can see
like gravitational effects of of matter
in cases where you can't see the matter
itself. So there's um once someone takes
or a mouse takes nicotenide riocide
orally, you can see effects in the
cardiac tissue. You're going to see
effects in the muscle. You can't always
see how it got there.
Because when you draw blood,
you're breaking half of 1% of the blood
cells
and you're releasing, you're
extracellularizing,
to use a technical term, you're
releasing enzymes that break down the NR
artifactually. So there are things that
are difficult to observe in clinical
testing.
So it's hard to see the effect of NR
getting into various tissues, but this
group um at Nestle showed that the um
microbiome is altered in a very useful
positive way by supplementing with NR.
And they suggested that there's some
conversion of NR into things like
nicotinic acid that could be beneficial
as well
&gt;&gt; for the gut bacteria. Interesting. So So
this was a human study.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that was a human study.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I'll have to look at that. So
talking now getting into some of these
you know conditions and and
supplementation right now we're talking
NAD you know precursors mostly and
nicotenomide ribocide NR is is a major
one that's used in animal studies as you
mentioned in clinical studies as well. I
think the you've made a pretty strong
statement with respect to the tried
andrue
function of at least something that we
can mostly expect if someone's going to
supplement with the right dose being 500
milligrams to 1,000 milligs of nicotine
riide
&gt;&gt; lowering inflammation particularly if
you have a higher inflammatory status
presumably to like start with. Um do you
think there's any other first of all is
there any data and if there's not any
data I would love to hear your
hypothesis and speculation on this which
is um
&gt;&gt; I know the immune system is a major
consumer of energy right I mean it's a
major consu if you're act if you're if
you're if you're if you're sick like
that is a huge you know obviously sink
for for NAD
&gt;&gt; do you think that supplementing with NR
are could help um with any other immune
related benefits like fighting off
infections, autoimmune disease like
having someone that's chronically having
an activated immune system. You
mentioned long co I don't know how much
of an autoimmune component there is to
that perhaps some but I'd love to know
your thoughts on um yeah on that. So
there are some human data showing that
um NR could be active in conditions in
which the inflammosome
is activated. Um there for sure there's
randomized control trials in in that
space. Um my idea after seeing the
innate immune response to corona virus
infection of these parts getting
transcribed is that it was going to
inhibit infection. So, I wanted to see a
clinical trial with people that were
still going into work during
um COVID, you know, work restrictions
like um nurses and people that are
roommates with delivery drivers and and
nurses to see whether in a placebo
control trial NR was lowering infection.
&gt;&gt; Right? Those trials to my knowledge were
not done when they could have been done.
Um there were trials including
successful phase 2 three trials that
showed NR in a cocktail of three other
over-the-counter
supplements lowered um time to um
recovery from from CO. So it it does
look like it has use cases in infectious
diseases and and inflammation,
&gt;&gt; which makes I mean it makes sense. I can
logically
&gt;&gt; understand why that would be. If you're
giving your cells the precursors they
need to have energy to fight off
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; you know, pathogens, then you would
imagine they would fight them better.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Or it wouldn't take as you'd lower the
the severity and or duration of the
illness.
&gt;&gt; But the thing I'm I'm even more excited
about is peripheral artery disease
because
&gt;&gt; let's talk about that. 10 or 15
Americans probably have peripheral
artery disease.
&gt;&gt; Can you describe what that is?
&gt;&gt; So, a lot of times they're former
smokers. Um, they have very limited
ability to do exercise. Um, they get
tired easily, stuff is painful for them.
Um, in extreme cases, they could um be
told that something has to be amputated.
Right? So this is a serious, you know,
condition, age related condition.
&gt;&gt; Wow. So is it like a like a pain
sensation like that they feel like it's
peripheral?
&gt;&gt; Fatigued. Um they can't um walk fast.
You do a clinical trial of these people,
a six-month clinical trial, and you
know, the end of the of clinical trial
at at at six months, they might walk,
you know, 8 m fewer than they did at the
beginning of the trial. So, they're
really in decline. And in uh Mcdermach,
McDermott at all, and I believe that
she's the top peripheral artery disease
clinical trialist in the country. She's
at Northwestern did a threearm clinical
trial placebo
versus nicotenomide ribocide versus NR
plus resveratrol
and found that the NR arm improved their
six-minute walk test and the placebo arm
as well as the NR plus resveratrol arm
degraded their six-minute walk test. So
the resveratrol not only was not helpful
but it actually blocked some of the
benefit of supplementing with. So yeah
that reserverrol thing as you as you
know well is just kind of science
fiction
&gt;&gt; but um but the NR result was really
quite striking and I believe it was N of
40 or 75 people per arm. it was like not
a super small trial and on the basis of
the positive results McDermad is doing a
much larger trial. So um this might be
one of the first real medical
indications
for niagen in an age related disease
population. That said, um if you want to
consider inflammaging,
&gt;&gt; you know, to be an underlying condition
in a lot of people's aging, then you
could say that eight randomized clinical
trials showing beneficial effects of NR
in lowering inflammation could be
broadly useful for for human aging.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, neurogenerative disease comes to
my mind as well, right? Right. I mean
this is something we know that
neuroinflammation is now known to be
play a very early causal role in
Alzheimer's disease. I mean the brain
you know having chronic inflammation in
the brain is is is not good. No
&gt;&gt; so it would be interesting
to know you know whether or not there
first of all if there's any biomarker I
mean obviously inflammation would be
something to look at but yeah you know
cognition improvements in people. It's
always harder when you have someone that
has Alzheimer's disease, right? You
know, so the the question is, you know,
it it always becomes, well, they're
already so broken, it's hard to fix
them. Like you if you and it goes with
anything like omega-3 supplements,
anything, right? Like
&gt;&gt; like it's always easier to help prevent
like like you don't want all the
inflammation to to get to the point
where you're like already in the disease
state, right?
&gt;&gt; So mild cognitive impairment might be
the disease population, right? And so
that's I think I'm I'm on at least one
paper on mild cognitive impairment where
nicotenoid ribocide is beginning to show
some you know important signs like
improving cerebral blood flow you know
in this population but you will like
ultimately to have you know functional
metrics of like
&gt;&gt; keeping your stuff together. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. I mean improving blood flow
&gt;&gt; most of the time if you have an increase
in blood flow you're going to see a
correlation with improved cognition.
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. I mean, you're getting
energy, you're getting glucose, you're
getting all the goodies to your brain,
right? Oxygen.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I mean, one would think that
would that would also play a role. I'm
al I'm also interested in asking you
about the liver
&gt;&gt; because I mean, the liver is obviously
the first
&gt;&gt; one of like one of the first places that
you know is going to see this these NAD
precursors like nicotenomide ribocide.
Um do you is there any evidence that
taking nicotenomide ribocide would have
a positive benefit on some liver
diseases?
&gt;&gt; There there is there is in fact there is
in fact human data on this.
&gt;&gt; Okay, let's hear about it.
&gt;&gt; Well, so again it's one of these things
that's a little bit frustrating for me
because um the primary endpoint was an
unreasonable endpoint in in this trial.
&gt;&gt; This is a story this is this is like the
story of every clinical trial like ever.
And look, the way I see it is like this
is how you often find things too well,
you know.
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. So some the first trial
can maybe teach you how to do the trial.
But the problem is that NR is so
remarkable in mice that you know I can
induce obesity and type 2 diabetes in a
in a mouse in a couple of months and I
can treat it in a couple months, right?
But um you can't then go to um 60 or
70year-old Danish men who are overw
weightight and type 2 diabetic and
insulin resistant and expect to see
weight loss and insulin sensitization in
13 weeks without
uh you know because it's not it's not
itself a weight loss drug right it's a
supplement So if you had
you know imposed caloric restriction or
if you had GLP-1
medication then you could see the uh NR
on top of that right so there was a
trial was done I think it was dollar up
at all 2018
and I'm a co-author on on the first
paper in which the hypothesis to be
tested was that NR was going to improve
weight loss and insulin insulin
sensitivity in 13 weeks as a monotherapy
&gt;&gt; in 70 year old 70-year-old Danish K.
Okay. And um that's a moonshot. So So
yeah, it's really a moonshot, right?
Because they last played hockey, you
know, four or five decades ago. Um they
smoke, they're
&gt;&gt; um they don't have a lot of physical
activity. And so in terms of the topline
results, it failed. But then we went in
and we looked at everything else, right?
&gt;&gt; And so we found that um it was about an
N of 20 I think in placebo and NR and
there was quite a big effect on hypatic
fat.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay. like a difference of
um something like 21% down to 11%
fat fat in the liver like 10 absolute
percent points.
&gt;&gt; Was this a subgroup analysis like did or
was this this was
&gt;&gt; no that's that's the NR group. Now the
problem and it it when you calculate a p
value it was p.13 which means it
probably worked. Yeah. Right. P.13 is
actually pretty darn close to P.05
&gt;&gt; when you do the way that the the math
works out. But the reason is
&gt;&gt; don't get me started on I I feel like
there's a lot Yeah. There's there's a
lot of arbitrary stuff going on there
too. Right. Anyway, but but the problem
is they weren't randomized for their
liver fat. And so there was a lot of
variability in the liver fat, which is
why even though um on an absolute basis
it was like 10fold better than placebo,
it didn't reach um statistical
significance on the liver fat. So I
think if we randomize people that all
had fatty liver disease and then also we
did some exercise plus minus NR could be
positive in
&gt;&gt; did you did you guys look within that
group um of within the NR group it all
just going back to this inflammation
thing because it seems like that's such
a powerful lever that NR is affecting
&gt;&gt; that like within the people that you
know obviously there's a lot of them
that have fat liver but like if they
also had that high inflammatory status
&gt;&gt; yeah no one had done the inflammatory
everything in 2018. It wasn't until
around 2019
&gt;&gt; that Alhassan and at all in another, you
know, topline failure trial showed, wow,
the inflammation is is much lower. So
now, you know, we can design better
trials. They should be randomized for
liver fat, right? probably they should
be on either GLP1 or exercise or
something to try to mobilize fat and
then see the beneficial effect of NR on
top of that.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean it's encouraging. It sounds
like there's a there's a nice signal
there to continue to study. Um, I think
to me it become it's a little bit for me
it's it's becoming clear the pattern
which is you know there's there is room
for improvement particularly in people
that are unhealthy whether that's
because they don't exercise a lot or
they're obese or um if you're making the
lifestyle changes that's the most
important thing right if you can add
this on in addition to that like you
said like weight loss giving give
expecting someone to take nicotine
ribicide and lose weight in 13 weeks is
&gt;&gt; I mean you have to do something in you
know in addition to that right
&gt;&gt; if that's especially if that's helping
with the energy and inflammation status
and things so um
&gt;&gt; if there's a healthy individual out
there right someone who's not overweight
or obese someone that is physically
active
&gt;&gt; um it and they do want to add a what
would you what would you say is the best
argument for adding I think I already
know your answer but I'm going to ask
you anyways the best argument for adding
a NAD precursor like nicotine ribocide
to their routine and the best argument
why they don't need to do that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think the best argument is
probably um workout recovery,
&gt;&gt; right? Because that it synergizes so
well, you know, with exercise that and
exercise makes everything else work
better.
&gt;&gt; Amazing. Okay.
&gt;&gt; And I think it's worth with a worth a
try. Well, full disclosure here. I have
been taking Triogen for about I mean
since August and I too a lot of other
things but um
&gt;&gt; my recovery is great.
&gt;&gt; That's why and I work out a lot.
&gt;&gt; Great.
&gt;&gt; So great recovery and then um I was
going to say inflammation as well but
because even a healthy individual
there's always you know maybe a little
bit of room for for recovery but I like
that I like that answer. I I'd love to
talk a little bit about you know dosing
a little deeper. I know we sort of
touched on it a little bit. You talked
about some of the clinical trials out
there
&gt;&gt; typically using 500 milligrams to 1,000
milligs.
&gt;&gt; 1,000. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. Or a thousand.
&gt;&gt; Is there an upper limit? I say this
because there's a lot of people that
like to go the extreme and so it's
really important to talk about like I
think I've seen even a 2,000 milligram
study out there for nictimide rigide. So
I'd love to know your thoughts like in
terms of you know obviously there
there's the evidence and we can talk you
know you can mention I don't know the
2,000 milligram a day what the end
points were but if if there's someone
like myself you know so I'm taking 1,000
milligrams a day of true ngen nicotine
my ribbocide does that seem like a
reasonable dose in your opinion I know
this
&gt;&gt; well so I'm not your doctor and I based
on the evidence of mice Um, and um, I I
think that um, you know, for for for
most people, you know, 500 milligrams to
1,000 milligrams is a is a substantive
amount of of NR to take. The safety and
the source of the NR is very important.
Um
this material has been safety tested up
to um 3 g per day in certain
populations. Um I don't think that
people should really um go beyond that.
You know I don't think and and also you
know in certain you know diseases and
conditions we always say ask your
doctor. um your doctor may or may not
have a background and and be able to um
address it, but if somebody has some
weird condition, you know, they could
potentially get a weird result, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, for sure. And I do want to get
into some more safety um precautions in
in a little bit.
When it comes to taking nicotenomide
ribocide, these NAD precursors, you
mentioned stacking it with rveratrol,
which is a type of polyphenol
that um it sort of negated some of the
bene benefits at least in peripheral
artery disease, right?
&gt;&gt; Um there are you can find some of these
NAD boosters with other combinations.
Teroselbean being one. I think the
rationale behind that was that it
increased the bioavailability or
something like that. that I remember
reading. Maybe you can maybe you can
correct me on that. But um it also
perhaps could potentially raise LDL. I
think terrace still at least to some
degree. I don't know that that matters
unless you're already someone that has
high LDL cholesterol because it wasn't
like a huge huge amount. But I'd love to
know your thoughts on um can they be
mixed like should they be
&gt;&gt; there's there's no use case for
resveratrol or terrace still in in in my
view um both of those compounds were
thought to be cert one activators
um I don't think that there's a evidence
basis for saying that cert one is a
longevity gene um terrace still and
resveratrol don't actually increase the
activity of certain one anyway and and
as you said terrace shows a dose
dependent increase in LDL cholesterol
which is generally not a good thing for
people.
&gt;&gt; So for people that are interested in
just boosting their NAD
&gt;&gt; this is no not necessary.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um good. So the safety issues that
I I kind of wanted to touch on um have
to do with a reason I stopped taking NAD
precursors many years ago when I had
started taking them.
&gt;&gt; So for let's start with the top safety
questions like what do you think are the
most safe important safety questions
right now when it comes to taking an NAD
precursor? Well, sourcing is probably
the biggest safety issue, right? Because
if the material is the same material
that has been clinically tested, then
you have some, you know, basis for
feeling that you can take it as a as a
human, right? Um, if it just has the
same chemical name, like if it's you
read some study about NMN being done in
a hospital in Boston or Tokyo or
something like that and then you go on
Amazon and you buy NN, you're probably
not using the same material that was
tested in that hospital, right? And
there's really no telling what's in it.
So I think that um the source is really
really important in terms of what people
are taking.
&gt;&gt; And just for people listening I mean
this is not specific to NAD precursors.
This is a systemic problem in
neutrauticals in the supplement
industry. There have now been many many
published studies showing that quite a
large large range of a variety of
supplements that you can pull off the
shelf at any store that most people shop
at or off the shelf of Amazon warehouse
shelf. Um oftent times don't contain
much of the active ingredient and even
more concerning often contain
contaminants that could be harmful to
ingest as well particularly if you're
ingesting large doses. And so my
recommendation always is to get
third-party tested uh supplement brands
that have been thirdparty tested that
you can look at the data NSF
certification which also is very
rigorous and they're testing for
potential contaminants as well um with
any supplement because it's it's really
a big problem in the entire industry. So
I think that is definitely a a good
thing to point out.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um let me ask you specifically
about a concern that I have had over the
years and this has to do with cancer
risk.
&gt;&gt; So obviously NAD is important for all of
our cells. Our cells need to make
energy. There's a variety of you know
other processes that you described that
are very important. Biosyn synthesis of
molecules.
&gt;&gt; These are also things that cells that
are mutated and potentially are
cancerous also like they need energy.
They need to build more cancer cells.
Right? tumor wants to grow.
And so I'd love to know your thoughts on
the role of taking an NAD precursor with
respect to cancer risk. Obviously,
someone already has cancer currently or
had previously had cancer in those
context as well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So um there's a hierarchy of
evidence right in which um large
randomized placebo control trials are
the the top of the of of the hierarchy
right and so we know from the Australian
nicotenomide trials that supplementing
with you know the classic NAD booster
nicotenomide um lowers cancer risk at
the population level. So it's not like
if if there was a signal that said that
higher NAD status would um cause more
you know small tumors to appear. You
would have seen that in you know the
clinical data. So that's we can be
grounded with that as kind of um you
know foundational information.
&gt;&gt; It's clearly not causing cancer.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Not causing cancer. Right. Um now
um there are things that you can do with
cell lines and in mice
um where um you know it looks like some
tumors could potentially be limited by
NAD supply. Um NAD is not really a fuel.
Like I said it's more the wiring of um
between the fuel and ATP production. So
I think at the population level it's not
really you know a risk. That said, um we
do say, you know, ask your doctor and if
you have a disease or condition, you
know, if there's some type of cancer
chemotherapy a person is undergoing,
um, you know, it could be
contraindicated potentially. And so I
don't have the knowledge to, you know,
to reassure every possible situation. Um
but overall the clinical data say that
NAD boosting is preventative for cancer
and that niggen is safe.
&gt;&gt; Did you see the study the animal study
that
gave mice that had I believe it was
pancreatic cancer they already had they
had pancreatic cancer and they gave them
nicotenomide monucleotide and it
accelerated tumor growth. Is that
ringing a bell? Um, no. But you know,
there are there are a lot of trials that
you can do, things that you can do in in
mice that are very prone to to cancer or
where you're injecting them with, you
know, a literally 10 to the 6th, you
know, MCF7 cells or something like that
where they're all going to get tumors.
And I just don't know how important
those are for the human condition. And
that's not the way you know human
cancers develop. We don't get injected
with a million MCF7 cells.
&gt;&gt; Good. So it sound I think that that
evidence with the nicotenomide that was
given to pe to people in Australia.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And it actually not only didn't increase
cancer risk, it lowered
&gt;&gt; lowers the risk risk of of melanoma.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Of uh I think it might have been
non-melanoma skin cancer like the most
common.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Got it. Um that's very reassuring
um particularly for me because I had
seen this this Japan I don't if it was
Japanese said it might have been out of
Japan um but it was definitely en given
orally no actually it was given by it
might have been injected
&gt;&gt; to mice with pancreatic cancer and it
accelerated cancer growth which isn't
too surprising I mean if you already
have a bunch of tumors and then you're
giving you know a bunch of whether it's
folate or NAD or something you might
expect um rapid cancer growth but who
knows
&gt;&gt; so I think I I think that's kind of what
shut me down for a little bit on on
taking the NAD precursors. I'm back to
taking them,
&gt;&gt; but um I guess it's always a concern if
you already if you actually have cancer,
you probably probably not going to want
to take a bunch of supplements in
general. Um anyway, so um I do want to
ask you, is that something that you kind
of agree on? Is that what you're kind of
getting at? What? Yeah, I think that,
you know, for the the general public,
you know, we're we're we think an R is
safe. Um there's a registry at FDA. So,
as you know, the F in FDA stands for
food. And um nutritional supplements are
in under the F in FDA. And so because
Nigen went through the process of being
a uh compound that is generally regarded
as safe and as a new dietary ingredient,
if there are any complaints or
observations or clinical trial
observations that are linked to NR,
there's a file on them, you know, that
we're aware of. And so far the safety
data look really good.
&gt;&gt; So if there were I'm going to ask you
this like final question. If a listener
does come up to you and say, "Dr.
Brener, I mean, do you think that it'd
be worthwhile, worth my my time to start
supplementing with nicotenomide
ribocide? Um, in addition to the other
healthy lifestyle factors and diet and
lifestyle factors that I'm adopting to
improve my health, like what would be
the most honest answer you would tell
them?" Yeah, I think that there's
there's use cases for people and I don't
I don't think that it's strictly age
related, right? Because, you know,
20-year-old football players that are in
a you know, collision sport on Sunday
and have to be back on the practice
field on Tuesday have a have a benefit
from from Niogen supplementation.
um people that are busy and people are
doing, you know, intense workout
schedules. Um people that um go into
crowded rooms where 5% of the people
might have the flu or 2% of the people
might have COVID infection. There's
probably a use case in not getting sick
all the time. So, I think it's, you
know, I'm I'm happy, I'm kind of proud
that we developed something that is
useful to to people and is safe and that
with future trials of peripheral artery
disease and potentially the fatty liver
trial that that we talked about
&gt;&gt; um fertility, you know, there could be
really multiple use cases for this
compound.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Wonderful. Well, thanks.
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much, Dr. Brener, for
joining me on this podcast. I know that
you're very active on X.
&gt;&gt; You want to tell people your your
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's Charles M. Brener. Um
people can ask me questions there. I do
my best to um to respond and reply.
&gt;&gt; Is there anywhere else you want to
direct people to that they can
&gt;&gt; Yeah, my my lab website is brenerlab.net
and so you can see what we're up to in
the laboratory.
&gt;&gt; Amazing. All right. Well, thank you for,
you know, this evidence-based discussion
on NAD, boosting NAD. Um, I it's it's
very, I think, informative and it's good
to have this out there because it
definitely is a a popular topic right
now.
&gt;&gt; Great. Thank you so much.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me today in this
fascinating conversation with Dr.
Charles Brener exploring the science of
NAD, aging, and inflammation. For those
who love to dive deeper, be sure to stay
tuned for an exclusive bonus segment at
the end of this episode. Dr. Brunner
shares the fascinating biochemical
journey behind his discovery of
nicotenomide ribocide, uncovering an NAD
pathway that was previously unknown to
science. You've obviously studied NAD
for decades.
&gt;&gt; So, can you tell me, you know, what were
some of the early observations in your
career that convinced you this is an
important molecule? this isn't just some
biochemistry, you know, metabolite. Like
this is like this is something to pay
attention to.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I can't get behind um
downgrading the interest of biochemical
metabolites because I'm that kind of
nerd, right? So, I really grew up as an
enzyologist
and I did my posttock and discovered a
super family of nucleotide binding
proteins. So, I was just really
interested in enzymes and proteins that
bind and interact with nucleotides. And
sometime around 2003,
I ran across an amino acid sequence that
really really interested me. And um
essentially it was um found in yeast and
it was found in human. and it clearly
had a so-called NAD synthetase domain.
This is not actually nicotenomide
ribocide or nicotenomide ribocide. This
is an enzyme that converts a a wacky
metabolite called nicotinic acid adine
ducleotide
NAD.
I didn't stutter. It's N A um converts N
A into NAD. It has an piece on it that
basically puts an amino group on
nicotinic acid adding ducleide to form
NAD, right? And the the interesting
thing to me was that all of the
ukareotic ones, the ones in yeast and
human and flies, etc., etc.,
had what was what I could see was a
glutaminase domain, an enzyme that will
take an am a vitam amino acid glutamine
and convert it to glutamate liberating
an ammonia group, a nitrogen group.
So that seems pretty obscure, but in
1958, I'm a I'm a kind of master of
knowing literature. 1958,
somebody named Jack Priest of Priest and
Handler fame had purified this enzyme
NAD synthetase from yeast and he showed
that it required glutamine and no one
had ever explained why the yeast and the
human NADases
needed or could use glutamine to provide
that ammonia group. So I thought given
the importance of NAD as the central
catalyst in metabolism, I really need to
work on this enzyme. And I loved that
enzyme um because it had two active
sites. It had the glutaminase active
site that interacts with this amino acid
and then it's liberating an ammonia
group and somehow it's shuttling the
ammonia group from one active site to
the other active site where it's going
to form NAD+.
And so I decided I was going to work on
that enzyme. And in the course of
working on that enzyme, I realized how
many people were drawing diagrams of NAD
synthetists. So folks at MIT, Harvard,
um, Washington University and and a lot
of places were drawing these cartoon
diagrams of how NAD is made.
So they had a pathway that came from
tryptophan
that went through this NAD synthetase
enzyme that I was working on. They had a
pathway through nicotinic acid niacin
that was discovered uh 1938
and they had a pathway from nicotinomide
and uh I realized that if I knocked out
the gene that I was working on in yeast
according to prediction there's no other
way to make NAD and I thought there
might be another way to make NAD through
a nucleioide nicotenoid ribocide and I
essentially set up the experiment to
test whether there might be an NR
pathway. So basically started working on
on an enzyme and ended up working on the
whole pathway because at the end of the
pathway is the central catalyst of
metabolism and I knew that view.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, when most people hear the
word NAD, they think of energy or
they'll think anti-aging buzzword. So
maybe you could explain to people in
sort of you know more simple
understandable terms like why is NAD
&gt;&gt; okay
&gt;&gt; so important to biology.
&gt;&gt; So my wife just dropped me off in an
electric vehicle right there's a big
battery in it and the battery has copper
wires going to the front drivetrain and
the rear drivetrain. This is a big um
Ford F-150 Lightning. They're they're
not a sponsor of the podcast as far as I
know, but um so two two drivetrains
front and back. There's windshield
wipers that run on electricity. There's
air conditioning and heating that runs
on electricity. So there's a lot of
copper wires going to a lot of different
places, right? And the um the the
battery is storing
uh high energy electrons and then copper
wires are distributing those high energy
electrons to all of the moving parts.
The the thing that your listeners need
to know or watchers need to know is that
high energy electrons run us as well.
They run living things as well. And the
wiring for the high energy electrons are
basically NAD co-enzymes. So NAD
co-enzymes NAD+
captures high energy electrons from our
food protein, fat and carbohydrate
and it collects those high energy
electrons as a hydide group. That's a
proton with two high energy electrons
forming NADH.
you're being very patient that because
you you learned this in first year of
college, right? Um but um NAD+ collects
the high energy electrons from food.
It's now NADH
and then it passes on those electrons
along things like the electron transfer
chain. And every time the high energy
electrons get passed on to a lower
energy carrier, right? Because things
flow downhill, water flows downhill,
right? You don't see waterfalls that go
up. You only see waterfalls that go
down. So when electrons get passed to
carriers at a lower energy state, work
can be done, right? So we can do things
like we can pump protons across
membranes and you can use the return of
those protons to drive ATP synthesis.
Right? So, so when you say your your
typical um listener thinks about NAD+
as energy, this is the way that that
that transaction works is that NAD+ is
taking
um high energy electrons from food.
Um, it's not. So, the the amazing thing
about biological fuel oxidation that's
different than if we were to we could
take my breakfast, right? And we could
light it with a match
and its calorie content would be
essentially what its calorie content is
for me in my body. But the the problem
is that when we light it on fire to
generate heat, the high energy electrons
go up in smoke, right? The water vapor
goes up in smoke, right? We can't we
don't have a way to um direct that
energy
into our muscle function, our memory
formation, and our heart beating and
pumping and all the other things that we
want to do, right? So the way living
things work is they couple all of the
energy transfers
to reactions that need to be run and we
don't let the high energy electrons go
up in smoke.
&gt;&gt; Well, so for everyone that was uh
following that hopefully definitely
important for energy. I think that you
get anything out of this.
&gt;&gt; But but do you want me to do a couple
more? Um you can or maybe you could talk
a little bit about you know what like
let's talk about maybe like the two mo
most important roles of NAD in the body.
Okay. What would you say?
&gt;&gt; But well first can I'd like to expand I
I I just called out two NAD co-enzymes.
Okay. NAD+ and NADH. Right.
So let's call out the other two which
are NADP++
and NADPH
which is which are really really
important for anabolism anabolism right
making stuff right so we like to say
that metabolism
is the set of processes by which we
convert everything that we eat into
everything that we are and everything
that we do and the maintenance of all of
the things that we are and and do,
right?
&gt;&gt; So, one of the really amazing things
that NAD co-enzymes can do is they can
um take the high energy electrons on
NAD, which is NADH, and get those high
energy electrons put onto NADP
forming NADPH. And then NADPH can
distribute those high energy or direct
those high energy electrons to do things
like form carboncarbon bonds, convert
riboucleotides into deoxy
ribboucleotides,
right? So then because we have to make
all of our own RNA, we have to make all
of our own DNA. We have to make all of
our own lipids. We have to make all of
our own proteins, right? We have to make
everything in all of our cells and we
have to repair all of those processes.
Right? So in in the biggest buckets that
I can describe to to not get into the
specificity initially, the biggest
buckets are converting fuel into ATP,
right? Um building stuff
and repairing stuff. Those are the three
biggest buckets in which NAD co-enzymes
are critical. I think that's a pretty
good explanation and hopefully um that
makes sense to people. I think you know
we're about to get into the NAD biology
and you've described it as this
rechargeable molecule. Um I think I
think that a lot of people have heard of
energy production, mitochondrial energy
production, DNA repair, gene regulation.
So you talked a little bit about this
mitochondrial energy production,
&gt;&gt; right? How does NAD play a role in the
repair process and also in the gene
regulation process? These are like some
other important aspects of NAD.
&gt;&gt; Well, um, repair is a really big bucket,
right? And so part of repair is
reynthesis,
right? So part of repair like if if if I
were to cut myself then um or I I don't
cut myself but if I were to but I
constantly get into cuts and and and
scrapes and um we all we all do and um
so we have to make make more lipids. We
have to make more nucleic acids and so
that depends on NADPH.
So that's an example where we take fuel
oxidation
and then we put the high energy
electrons onto NADP forming NADPH and we
can make more lipids. So you can make
more cell membranes and you can make
more nucleic acids and you can basically
make more cells. Um but in addition
because we live in an oxygen environment
um there's always reactive oxygen
species being made and the
detoxification
of react reactive oxygen species also
depends on entity pH
&gt;&gt; and what about so you know you're
talking about oxidation oxidation's also
formed as a byproduct of metabolism
right as well
&gt;&gt; and um you know a lot of these oxidation
products can damage mitochondria, which
have to be repaired, but they can also
damage our DNA. Y and as people that
have listened to this podcast before
know, DNA damage can be a precursor to
encogenic mutations that cause cancer,
particularly if they're double stranded
breaks, particularly if the double
stranded breaks occur in parts of the
genome that allow for an encogenic
mutation to occur.
&gt;&gt; So what about the role of NAD in
repairing DNA damage? So I think about
for example PARP. Yeah. So part one is
incredibly important. It's a huge NAD
consumer and this is the first time I
word used the word consumer this
morning. So in in in the N in the
classic NAD co-enzyme function high
energy electrons are being basically
transferred onto NAD forming NADH. NADH
can become can basically distribute
those electrons again which reoxidizes
it to NAD+. The same thing happens with
NADP+ and NADPH.
But when an enzyme, an NAD dependent
enzyme called PARP one sees DNA damage,
it basically gets excited if enzymes get
excited and um it actually starts
churning NAD and forming a polymer.
It's kind of a weird ribboucleic acid
polymer that consists of ADP ribos that
is polymerized. It can form a polyadp
ribos polymer um that is linked to
protein. It can form a poly ADP ribos
primer just in the nucleus.
And that's a signal that assembles a
bunch of DNA repair enzymes to localize
at a particular point and get that DNA
repaired. and and then there's a point
at which DNA repair sort of can't be
done and then some of these signaling
processes can essentially induce cell
death in order to eliminate the cell
because in a big organism like like us
with 37 trillion cells or however many
we have um we can it's better for us to
lose some cells than to try to repair
everything, Right. So, you already
described, you know, a a few very, very
important, you know, biological
processes in our bodies that I think
people can kind of gravitate to. We're
talking about energy production
&gt;&gt; is essential for everything.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You're talking about repairing, you
know, damage at the cellular level,
being able to like make new cells, but
also repairing damage to DNA and how
these very important enzymes that do
that consume NAD. we have other enzymes
that are involved in regulating our
genes, right? Making sure they're active
or not active and you know, so that's
another role of NAD. Do you want to
touch on that for a minute and then I
have another follow-up question?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So, so in in this in this um
area of NAD consuming enzymes, there's
PARPs. PARP one was kind of the first
one that was described, but there
another 15 or 16 members of the PARP
super family. Many of them don't
polymerize ADP ribos, but they modify
proteins with ADP ribos. So they they
they cut NAD and they add an ADP ribos
unit on something to do a signaling
reaction. Um there's enzymes called
certuins that use NAD.
Um they very often remove a small
modification on protein lysines. So
acetil modifications on lysines, asil
groups on lysines, suanil groups on
lysines. That's usually something to do
with enzyme regulation, gene regulation.
As you said, classically, there's a lot
of gene silencing that is done with with
uh this this reaction. Um there's also
things like ADP ribosyes.
There's a there's enzymes that can take
NAD and kick off the nicotenomide group
and then cyize the ADP ribos. And
usually what that is doing is releasing
calcium from an intracellular store like
the endopplasmic reticulum in order to
do some kind of a signaling reaction.
&gt;&gt; So the question is you know if all these
really important functions are NAD is
central to them.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Right.
What happens if there's a limiting
amount of NAD? Like how does the body
triage or does the body triage? Who gets
the NAD pool? How do we know if we're
able to make enough NAD? Like where
where like what's the bottleneck here?
So um you know the full systems analysis
of it is not fully understood right and
I'm not the type of person that is going
to claim to know things that are that
are not known. So what is generally
understood
which is easy to determine from gene
expression patterns is that certain
tissues like the liver can make NAD from
tryptophan
nicotenomide ribocide nicotenomide and
nicotinic acid. So any precursor
they can make NAD and they um there are
processes in the aging liver that
disturb that system. Alcoholism can
disturb that system. Over nutrition can
disturb that system. But it's actually a
fairly robust system. And and that liver
tends to be a very generous organ. it
actually distributes things for other
tissues.
But um the more concerning thing is in
cells like neurons right where if they
don't have a pathway to make NAD from
tryptophan
and they generally don't have a pathway
to make NAD from nicotinic acid then
what happens in a neuron that has high
bioenergetic requirements if it starts
losing expression of one or the other
pathways and you get a lot of, you know,
cell and tissue dysfunction in those
conditions. There's a lot of disease
processes that disturb the NAD system.
Well, this is