You're listening to Beyond Wellness
Radio, [music] bringing you the cutting
edge in health, biohacking, and sports
performance. Stay up tod date [music]
and listen anywhere and anytime on your
computer, tablet, or smartphone by
subscribing on iTunes. Catch your host,
Dr. [music] Justin Marajiani, as he
answers your burning health questions,
as well as interviews from worldrenowned
guest [music] experts. For more
BeyondWellness Radio, go to
beyondwwellelnessradio.com. [music]
Hey there, it's Dr. Justin Marajian
Johnny. Welcome to Beyond Wellness
Radio. Feel free and head over to
beyondwellelnessradio.com
where you can access our full podcast
transcriptions.
While you're there, you can also sign up
for our thyroid and female hormone video
series. This series goes into the root
cause of why your hormones are out of
balance. While you're there, you can
also schedule a functional medicine
consult with Dr. Justin, myself, where
we'll dig deeper into the root cause of
your health challenges. Feel free and
think of sharing this podcast with at
least one person. This podcast grows by
people sharing it. Sharing is caring. If
you can think of one person that can
benefit from this information, please
feel free and share it. If you're
enjoying the podcast, make sure you
subscribe on iTunes. You can also click
below the video or podcast where you'll
see the iTunes review button and leave
us a review. You can also sign up for
the newsletter at
beyondwwellelnessradio.com
where you'll get updates before anyone
else. Thank you so much and enjoy the
show. Hey there, it's Dr. Justin
Marajian Johnny. We are live here with
Dr. Jack Kruse, neurosurgeon again.
Really excited to be have Dr. Jack back
on the show again. Dr. Jack went to
dental school, then medical school, and
then a neurosurgical residency. The
guy's a modern-day renaissance man. Put
a lot of time and effort into get to
where he's at now. So, we're really
excited excited to have Dr. back on the
show.
&gt;&gt; Hey, what's going on?
&gt;&gt; It's not too much, man. You just got
back from a neurosurgery uh just a
little while ago, a trauma you
mentioned. So, I'm glad that we got a
better connection here and we're
connected again.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, we were just talking. Yeah. No
worries. I mean, you're in the trenches.
I love it. You're you're clinically
getting your hands dirty every day. You
were on call all last night, like you
mentioned, too. But before we got cut
off, I want to bring back a couple of
key topics you were mentioning. One was
the top functional medicine mistakes and
you were kind of echoing some of the EMF
stuff, some of the sunlight stuff. So,
I'm going to let you roll on that for a
few. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the the two biggies for me
in my opinion [clears throat] that we
have to have everybody um rethink their
positions on on their theories.
[clears throat] One is SNIPS and the
other one is probably adrenal fatigue.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I think adrenal fatigue, the number
one thing that we both need to agree on
is the the name should probably go by
the wayside because functionally it's a
&gt;&gt; it's a problem with the brain stem and
specifically the parventricular nucleus
&gt;&gt; and that nucleus is supposed to be
balanced by another nucleus called the
the veagal motor complex and that's
about six different nuclei in the brain
stem and basically that system runs the
par parasympathetic system and the
parametricular nucleus runs the
sympathetic system. And when we talk
about homeostasis or balance, those
systems are designed to be yolked uh
properly with the proper circadian
signals that are present in the
environment. The thing that people do
not realize is when you alter the
environment, it alters the response of
all these brain stem nuclei. And the key
way it happens is actually via the
mitochondria. And mitochondria
are, you know, these double layered
organels that deliver most of the energy
in the body. And when I say most of the
energy, I want to give people a really
good visual so they understand it.
[clears throat]
Uh, and I think we can compare it to
like plants because I think that's a a
good way to start. Um, when you think
about plants, plants are completely
connected to the Earth's magnetic field
and the canopy is into the sun 247. So
the reason they don't have to eat is
they're pulling all of their electrons
that are excited by photons uh in those
two ways and they're not designed to
move across the tectonic plate. So they
use a different system. Most people know
that system is called photosynthesis.
The uh interesting part of us since
we're animals more complex we move
across the tectonic plates and we're
move in and out of the canopy. That
means that we have to have backup
systems on us that plants don't have to
have. And what people functionally do
not realize is if they looked at a
chloroplast and they looked at a
mitochondria, they're exactly the same.
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; Meaning that they were both once
bacteria that the what we consider endo
symbions. In other words, we took them
and we changed their function to be uh
an energy producer. Now, what people
don't understand in animals is that on
average, and I'm giving you an average
human being, a 70 kilogram adult, needs
on average to make 85 kg of ATP per day.
So, I want you to think about that for a
minute. You have to make more ATP per
day than you weigh.
That is the function of a mitochondria.
But here's where it gets really
interesting. Food only provides onethird
of the amount of electrons to make ATP.
Well, guess what is is supposed to
provide the other two/3? Sunlight. And
how does that happen? It's a function of
a protein on the inner mitochondrial
membrane called uh cytochrome c oxidase
which I think most people know. And
cytochrome c oxidase is a hem protein
just like hemoglobin in our skin. uh and
what it does it absorbs best in what we
call the optical window and the optical
window goes from about 700 nmters to
1400 nmters specifically in the red and
near infrared range and what does it do
it makes the ATPAS spin much faster and
we create um several things from that
not only do we create ATP we create the
other twothirds of the ATP that food
don't provide us but the other key thing
is the faster the ATP PA spins, the
higher magnetic flux we create in the
cell. And that's where magnetic fields
come. And and most people who are both
in alipathic and functional medicine
don't functionally really understand how
the magnetic field is generated and how
it it's designed to alter as current
that comes across the inner
mitochondrial membrane in the form of
electrons and all food. In fact,
everything in the environment, okay,
everything is functionally comes down to
electrons. So, if you don't believe me,
most of your people listening to this,
and I know everybody who's a doctor
knows this. If you remember back to
basic chemistry in high school, they
said that just the change in electron
shell changes chemistry everywhere.
That's what veence chemistry is all
about.
&gt;&gt; So, electrons are really important. So,
talk about how do how do you affect or
how do you change or reduce the
oxidation of these electrons? Because
oxidation is is essentially a loss of
these electrons. That's what causes the
rusty nails up in the brain.
&gt;&gt; That that's too that's too far down the
path. You need to understand something
even more simple. How do we program
electrons? Here's here's the interesting
[clears throat] thing. Everything in the
world,
&gt;&gt; everything has electrons in it. Okay.
So, how do we program electrons
naturally? We do it by sunlight
frequencies. In other words, an electron
becomes excited and when it gets
excited, it goes up to this state. The
difference between this state and this
state is the redux potential. That's
what you just asked me. But you have to
realize what it cites the electron first
is the key. And the interesting thing if
you look at a mitochondria as it's laid
out, cytochrome one and cytochrome 5,
which is the ATPAS, that redux potential
is designed to go from about -400 all
the way to zero where oxygen is. So it's
the same effect. So what is life's real
goal? Life's real goal is it's figured
out how to take an electron after it's
been programmed as it falls to the
ground state to capture the light energy
that programs that electron. And that's
what makes a tomato's electron different
than a cucumber than a steak that you
just ate. And there is a frequency, a
Rosetta Stone frequency in everything in
our environment. And your mitochondria
pays attention to that. That's the
reason why I told you earlier that we're
designed to pay attention to the
environment and it's not in an
indogenous defect within us. The defect
is created because there's a
disconnection in the system in terms of
how it's able to connect with nature.
And the reason that's occurred for our
species is because we think all the
things that we come up with are really
great because we don't understand the
owner's manual. what's built into our
mitochondria and how it works.
&gt;&gt; So, how are we applying this with the
sunlight? Is there an optimal time of
day? What's exposure look like? What
part of the body is getting it? Are you
wearing the glasses all day long to
block out the blue light? How are you
applying this so you can get the the
maximal electron benefit in your life?
&gt;&gt; Well, Justin, you have a a pretty
interesting perspective already because
when we first started talking, I was
outside. You noticed I wasn't wearing
these, right? you asked me to come into
my office to do this because you would
get beta audio and I was kind of like
not terribly into that because
[laughter] I told you I was up all night
uh on trauma call and I just finished a
big spinal reconstruction so I've been
inside I missed the sunlight today so I
wanted the natural sunlight on me I
don't I don't want to be around any blue
light right now because of what I had to
do last night so what happened to me
[clears throat] last night u the blue
light that I was around from the
operating room and everything else took
my respiratory proteins and stretched
them out. And see, here's the
interesting thing. Those five
respiratory proteins, cytochrome one,
two, three, four, and the ATPAS, which
is cytochrome 5, the further they get
stretched out, the less electrons can
tunnel. Meaning the current drops
precipitously. And just so you know,
what is the linkage between that? And
this is very important for everybody to
understand. every one angstrom increase
decreases electron tunneling between
those by a factor of 10.
&gt;&gt; So anytime you're in blue light, for
example, I'll give you a a perfect one
for right now. Since we're talking on
Skype, you're on a computer monitor and
you have no protection on your thyroid
gland and you have no protection in your
eye. You are creating adrenal fatigue
and hypothyroidism as we speak. M and I
don't care how much medicine you try to
take to offset that. If you do that long
enough, it ain't going to work. And the
functional medicine paradigm says, "No,
if I replace this, I can get you back to
normal." And I'm going to tell you, epic
fail. Why?
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, this is good. I'm learning I'm
learning a lot of new things. I
typically do the blue light sunglasses
at night to to lower the cortisol and
raise the melatonin at night.
&gt;&gt; Let me tell you why that's a bad thing.
Let me tell you why it's a bad thing. Do
you know there's a thing in physics
where they talk about uh degrees Kelvin
and the color temperature? You know what
uh when the sun rises in the morning, do
you know what the Kelvin is when it
rises? It's 1,800 Kelvin. Right now,
what you're looking at is 5700 to 6,500
Kelvin. Now, here's where it's good
news. You asked me to call you at noon.
Noon Central Standard Time where we both
are. That's when solar light is at 5700
Kelvin. Do you know what it is around
5:00 in in our uh central standard time?
It's 18 I'm sorry 16,000 Kelvin. So
here's the point that I'm trying to make
to you. That change in Kelvin adapts
over the day. Your pituitary gland via
the hypothalamic pituitary axis. That's
the Rosetta frequencies that turn it on.
That's where circadian biology comes.
That's the reason why your testosterone
is supposed to be highest at 10:00 a.m.
But if you do what I had to do last
night or what you're doing right now,
you're ruining that. You're also ruining
your your thyroid because what people
don't realize, our thyroid is exposed.
&gt;&gt; Blue light penetrates all the way in to
the fat layer. That is actually where
the arterials are. That's actually a
problem. So when you're inside, I always
want people covered up because I don't
want that effect. Now, when you go
outside and you have this exposed,
that's a really good thing. Why? Because
42% of sunlight is near infrared. It's
infrared A. It's 42%. Do you know why?
This is what we talked about before.
Cytochrome C oxidase is a red light
chromophore, meaning that it works in
that window. And here's the biggest
issue. What's the biggest red light
chromophore that we have in our body?
Water. M
&gt;&gt; and that's the reason why cells are 99%
water by molecular uh size. And what's
what surrounds a mitochondria? It's
called aminos layer. That's spelled m i
n o. What surrounds the ATPA says it
spins? Water. Do you know there's very
few things thermodynamically in the
world that run with 100% efficiency? But
guess what we found in the last two
years? What the
&gt;&gt; ATPAS when it's surrounded by exclusion
zone water spins at 100% efficiency.
See that is the stuff that people need
to learn in functional medicine to
understand how to optimize people
because if you take someone say who's an
IT worker is 12 hours in the basement of
a hospital you know inputting data for
the hospital and they have you know
retinal tears their RP and their eyes
thicken they their glasses look like
Coke bottles and they have all these
[clears throat] different things like
adrenal fatigue hypothyroidism migraine
headaches. You cannot fix that person
with anything in your office until they
realize that they are suffering from a
light deficiency problem. And that's the
key because that's the levers that turn
on this anterior semiconductive circuit
that goes from your retina into your
pituitary and from your pituitary goes
right into your brain stem to turn all
these things on. And what controls them
is the frequencies of light that are in
there. See, we are beings of light. And
people do not realize this. This is this
is what the science of quantum biology
has been teaching us over the last
hundred years. But the problem is if you
don't read it, you don't realize what's
already been published. And when I talk
to people, people are really surprised
to find out that this stuff is actually
published. Like 10 years ago, I was
crazier than batshit. Now, you can go
out and buy books about this and read
about it and go, "Wow." Because I know
when I went to dental school and I went
to medical school, I never learned about
any of it. So, what does this all look
like from an application standpoint?
Because I'm in the trenches seeing about
50 or 60 patients a week. And I'm trying
to create diet and lifestyle
application, shift habits to make these
to make the person heal or help them uh
essentially bring their body into an
anabolic state. So, sunlight, walk me
through your routine. What does that
look like for you daily basis?
&gt;&gt; Let me let me just say this. If you
remember the equation I gave you before
about ATP for a day and food is only
one/3. Let me ask you a question just
for third grade math. Does it make more
sense to focus in on one/3 or the 2/3?
&gt;&gt; 2/3 of course. So you're focusing on the
&gt;&gt; two/3
&gt;&gt; the reducing the EMF and then getting
the sunlight getting the right exposure.
&gt;&gt; Well that's that's where the two/3s come
from. And and that's the point. The
point is it's kind of like Dave Ramsey,
you know, always go for where the, you
know, the best bang for the buck is. And
totally, I get very frustrated. You
know, my members know my position on
this. I don't think food is important as
everybody else does. But the one aspect
of food that's critically important is
DHA and it has to come from seafood and
it has to be you know ordered in the SN2
position because it has to be
paramagnetic to get into the central
nervous system and get into the
peripheral nervous system because guess
what that is the key chemical that
controls the semiconductive pathway
between the retina the SCN and the
leptin receptor and that's actually what
controls the central retinal pathway
that turns all the things on and off at
the appropriate times that a functional
medicine doctor wants and that an
alopathic doctor wants in fact that a
patient wants but they don't know this.
They don't know the level of complexity
uh that's present there and it's really
important that we begin to teach people
that. So for example the number one
thing I tell everybody the the best
healer in the world uh for anybody I
don't care what their disease is to make
like the sphinx every morning. What does
that mean? Well go Google a picture of
the sphinx. I want you to look in the
direction of the sun and I want all four
extremities grounded. Why? Because when
you're grounded, you have a complete
wireless connection. It's no different
than your coffee maker at home. Does it
work as well when it's not grounded? The
answer is no. The current is decreased.
What do you know about current? Basic
physics. Well, the slower the current,
the less the magnetic flux is. What did
we talk about before about that ATP? We
want that sucker spinning. We want it
kicking out as much ATP as it can
because the more it kicks out, the less
we eat. That's the real cause of
obesity. It's not what everybody else
believes. Oh, well, you're a fat slob.
Um, and you eat too much and you don't
exercise. Well, I got news for you. I
got pretty damn good data that I
actually ate more and exercised less and
and lost 150 pounds and, you know, I'm
12 years out now and I still have 130 of
those pounds off. Now, I'm looking at
your diet recommendations in your Epip
your Epipale RX book, which again, we'll
put links down below so people can
access that book, but you really talked
about people overemphasizing
macronutrients, and you want to bring it
back to the micronutrients, and you
really stress and emphasize the DHA for
the electron benefits that you
mentioned, but the bottom of your py
pyramid is primarily the shellfish, the
oysters, the crustaceans. You also
emphasize a lot about organ meats, too.
Now, those types of foods are going to
be are going to promote a lot of insulin
sensitivity, meaning they're going to
help with insulin resistance. Is that a
possible mechanism that helped help you
lose a lot of that weight, or are you
really putting it more on the sunlight
piece?
&gt;&gt; What what people don't understand in
functional medicine, actually in
medicine, that insulin is a solar
hormone.
&gt;&gt; In other words, you can eat
carbohydrates at a high level as long as
you live on the equator. And that's the
reason why the Messiah are able to do
what they do and why somebody in Chicago
can't do that. See, Chicago's at the
40th 42nd latitude. Well, what's the
power in sunlight? Are those electrons
as power or I should say the photons as
powered to do that? The answer is no.
And see, the reason why this is really
important for people to understand, we
are right now in a paradigm that is
wanting to blame food and and GMOs and
all this. And I agree that it's bad, but
it's not the key source. The key source
is the altered light frequencies that we
have built into our environment in ways
that we don't even see. Because
remember, our camera vision only allows
us to see the center part of the visible
spectrum. Guess what part we can't see?
UV and IR. Guess what the single most
important parts for regeneration in our
system? Purple and red light. Which is
the reason why you look behind me and
you see all the pictures. Take a look at
the picture on my wall.
&gt;&gt; That's the brain looking at the sun.
&gt;&gt; Okay, look at the colors of everything
in here. This is this is not
&gt;&gt; this is not just my opinion. These are
reminders when I come and do a podcast
with a guy like you here after what I
did last night. I need to go home and
get in the pool and do the things that I
need to do to offset how I killed myself
faster last night and have to recover.
Why? because I know how to recover. I
know the prescription to do it. The
prescription to do it is to get as naked
as possible in strong sunlight and and
get cool in the pool while this is going
on. Now, I happen to be fortunate. I
live at the 28th latitude right now. The
temperature out is about 90 degrees. You
know, even though it's April, uh it's a
beautiful sunny day. uh with my skin
type, I will be able to probably recover
most of my problem if I get about two to
three hours. Now, is there other ways of
doing it? You may know I build a device
with one of my co-invectors called the
quantlet. Well, a quallet even on its
best day can only replace about 10% of
the jewels or centimeters squared that
sunlight does. So, I always tell people
nothing can replace sunlight. But if you
happen to be, you know, say a
neurosurgeon that does 500 cases a year
and you rarely get outside, a quality is
probably a pretty damn good investment.
Or if you're an investment banker works
in, you know, New York City, you
probably need one of these. Why? Because
we can turn your radial artery into
another eye to deliver more light energy
in that optical window to do what? To
make that ATPA spin faster.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, let's talk about what your
kind of a day in the life of Dr. Jack Kruse is. So, forget the fact, right,
you're called in for trauma surgery last
night. So, if you have the ability to
wake up, how are you getting all four
extremities
&gt;&gt; grounded at the same time? Are you in
the water? Are you lying on your back?
What does that look like?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. For me, the simple thing is I go
outside and [clears throat] I have a a
place where it's grass right out my
front door and the sun comes up right
there. Most people are friends with me
on Facebook. I usually take the picture
of the sunrise and send it to people and
show them. I I never miss. I missed
today, which is kind of what pissed me
off. But um and I usually will squat
down, put my hands down. Sometimes I'll
sit uh Indian style with my hands down
and I make just like the Sphinx. And I
do that for about anywhere between five
and 15 minutes. Uh it's easier obviously
when I'm in different places like at the
beach or in Mexico. But that's been a
routine of mine probably for the last 12
years. And the reason that you want to
do that, you are resetting two light
signals in your body. The both the
vitamin D cycle and the vitamin A cycle.
And the vitamin A cycle happens to be
the most important cycle in the morning.
Vitamin D is not important because
remember no matter where you are, except
on the equator, you don't make any
vitamin D until UVB sunlight kicks in.
Well, even on the equator, it's not
present at uh at the A and dawn. The key
thing that's present there, the most
powerful part of light is usually uh UVA
or more infrared. Uh it takes about an
hour on the equator for it to show up.
Uh but where most of us live outside uh
the tropics um you don't make that until
a lot later. And people are surprised to
hear this. The key frequencies in the
morning um is blue light. And blue light
is good when it comes from the sun
because that's the switch that actually
tells the pituitary gland to make all
the hormones that are secreted,
&gt;&gt; right? We make all the hormones that are
secreted between 6 and 10:00. Here's the
interesting part of the story that
people don't realize. Do you know what
the off switch is for the pituitary
gland?
&gt;&gt; Melatonin,
&gt;&gt; UVA, and UVB light. When the sunlight
hits your skin, what happens? You
release nitric oxide. The arterials come
to the surface where
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Of course. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The friends are and guess what it does?
It turns off all your sextory hormones.
&gt;&gt; I want you to think about something. If
the first light you see every day is
your computer or your cell phone, and I
already told you that's 5700 Kelvin, are
you going to be able to turn on the
signal since it never sees 1800 and
gradually goes up to 5700? The answer is
no. You just told your brain that it's
the middle of the day. In other words,
you slept all day until it's noon. You
just created a mismatch. And you don't
even realize you created this mismatch.
And that's the reason why when people do
this for two to three weeks at a time,
when functional docs or alopathic docs
order, say all their melatonin,
cortisol, and their sexy hormones,
they're always flat. And you know,
people always talk about like an adrenal
fatigue that everybody's completely
crashed and low. But what you guys tell
people and what I tell people the
reasons why are radically different and
it completely is tied to light cycles
and that it can be it can only be fixed
until you understand the light cycles
and how this anterior visual pathway
works in the eye because the two major
ways that we get light in are through
the eye and through the skin. The
mechanisms are different and the
proteins that we use to do it are
radically different. But the ones that
we started off talking about this
morning, you know, with the the sunlight
as it rises is the vitamin A cycle. Why?
Because anytime blue light comes through
the eye that has low color temperature,
it separates retinol from [snorts] the
photo receptor. And that separation has
to then be recycled. The other thing
that happens that turns over DHA in two
loops of the retina. One's called the
short loop and one's called the long
loop. If the vitamin A cycle is right,
the short loop completely recycles DHA.
That means you don't need to eat a ton
of seafood. That's the reason why people
on the equator don't have a big need for
fish. And if you look at the fish that
are indogenous on the planet, they're
low DHA sources.
&gt;&gt; So, are you saying that if people were
is saying people were on the equator,
living on the equator, but they were
still eating a refined kind of junk food
diet? You're saying that they they they
would be able to sidestep obesity if the
EMF and the UV light was dialed in.
&gt;&gt; If they had strong light cycles, that's
the reason why we have in indigenous
peoples who live inside the tropics.
Like the perfect one to for you to to
learn about is the Messiah and also the
Hazda.
&gt;&gt; They're able to eat very high
carbohydrate diets. And the reason why
is because they live in a strong UV and
IR environment. The problem is all your
patients and my patients don't. They
never get there. And that's the reason
why we have the false precept
&gt;&gt; that carbohydrates are bad. They're not
bad. The environment that we're in makes
them appear bad. And that perception is
important.
&gt;&gt; So, how are you applying this with your
patients? Are you seeing these
functional medicine patients one-on-one?
What kind of clinical results are you
getting? You
&gt;&gt; I mean, that's part of the reason why I
came down to the Gulf South because, you
know, down here we're 50th and 50th uh
in just about everything. Everybody's a
train wreck. But the cool part is that
all the the uh how shall we say the
recipe for recovery is is built into
this environment. The problem is you got
to get them clicked in. And I'll give
you a perfect example where I am in the
Gulf South uh 100 years ago when it was
really hot. People would be outside on
their porch drinking mint jeulips and
and having cake and doing all these
things. What happened over the last
hundred years? Now, when it gets hot,
people come inside out of the sun into
air conditioning. Well, that means the
best time for you to be outside, they've
been brought inside. What has technology
done? Same thing. It's brought us out
from outside to inside. So, let's talk
about the flip side of that. What do
people in the south do when it's
December? Like, when it gets below 50,
people here look like they're dressed
for the Arctic. When in reality, what
should they be doing? This is the
perfect weather. Like if you ask
somebody who's from Chicago 50° in
December, they would be like two thumbs
up. They'd be I'm all in. And people
don't realize that your eyes and your
skin pay attention to that. And Justin,
talk about this. Me and you. I mean, you
have a shirt on. I have a shirt on. We
have clothes on. That's that's society's
beliefs that's been put on us. But let
me ask you a question. When you crawled
out the vagina, did you have any clothes
on?
&gt;&gt; Stop for a minute. And I want you to
think about Discovery Channel. Do you
know any animal that comes out of its
mother's vagina that has clothes on?
&gt;&gt; Of course not.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, let's think about this. When
me and you get together at some point,
we plant a tree. You put all the
nutrients in the water in the ground,
but I put a tarp over it. Will that tree
live or die?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely won't live.
&gt;&gt; So, guess what? The first species ever
created was 700,000 years ago when we
started to wear clothes.
&gt;&gt; Got it.
&gt;&gt; So, sunlight's incredibly important. You
you made that clear. I think you made
some good points on that. And and what
does that look like for you though from
an exposure time and how do you prevent
getting burned and getting all this
collagen deterioration from the excess?
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm not worried about that. That's
a bunch of horseshit. Okay. The bottom
line is I was looking to see where my
cell phone is, but I'll just tell you
there's an app called D Minder that Dr.
Robert Holique from Boston University
has built. you can get it down there and
what it does, it downloads your GPS
coordinates where you are and it tells
you precisely how much sunlight you're
getting and how much vitamin D you make.
So, the easiest way for the novice to
learn about their light environment is,
you know, to download this app and begin
to play with it and see how much vitamin
D you can make at your specific
location, at your altitude. Because what
people don't realize, the three
variables for vitamin D function are
latitude, altitude, and population
density. And population density is the
one that most people don't understand.
The more you live around other obedient
idiots, the more you get dehydrated
because they're all using non-native
devices. And the reason why this is an
important thing, and while you see me
here drinking my Green Mountain Valley
water, is the isomerization step of
vitamin D3 that occurs in your skin
requires you not to be dehydrated.
Otherwise, your cholesterol will be
really high and your eld and your
vitamin D3 conversion will be low. And
that pretty much describes just about
everybody with diabetes and metabolic
syndrome. In fact, I think the epidemic
uh in most patients with lipids is tied
to this factor. And anybody who then
says, well, giving them a statin makes
any sense. What does a statin do? It
actually increases the respiratory
protein distance. And we already talked
about why that's a bad idea. What is the
link between cytochrome 3 and cytochrome
1 for your listeners who don't know?
It's called co-enzyme Q10.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Co-enzyme Q10 fies electrons between
those cytochromes. So if you're
stretching them out, are you making
cytochrome C more happy to make more ATP
or less happy? It and see that's what
I'm saying. When you understand how the
system is is built, you begin to start
to go, "Yeah, why are we doing some of
this? This doesn't make any sense." But
the key factor, the reason why it we we
continue to miss both in functional
medicine, alipathic medicine, is because
we're focused on food and not on light.
And that's the key problem because of
that twothird one-ird thing. And I I
want to make one other point, Justin,
while we're here. This is very important
for those people who don't get the
science side. Let's let's give you
another analogy to understand it from
say a car. If you and I went out and
spent $250,000 and we bought a Ferrari,
we pulled our money together. Does it
make more sense to focusing on the the
fuel like should we put 87 in 90 or or
93 octane? Or does it make more sense to
make sure that me and you spend our
money tuning the engine up so it can go
220 mph all the time? See, that's the
difference between functional medicine
and a mitochondriac. And I'm a
mitochondriac. You guys focus in on
food. Dude, I don't even want to talk
about food. [clears throat] The only
time I want to talk about food is when
we're talking about electrons and
protons because the input in
mitochondria is called electron chain
transport. It's not called protein
transport. It's not called carbohydrate
transport. It's not called fat
transport. And until you come to my
level, I refuse to go to anyone else's
level because nature has built this into
us. It's there. We know about it, but we
ignore it. Why? Because the science is
too hard for some people. Well, I'm
sorry. It's our job to understand how
these things fit together. And until we
give people the truth, not a halftruth,
we're going to continue to struggle. And
I look at it like this. All everybody
who's a a practitioner, we're all in
this together. We all want to do the
right thing, but we all got to start
focusing in on like when you go to your
next functional medicine uh you know,
talk, I hope you get up at the
microphone and you say, "Hey, let's
think about this. How could this go in
there?" And you know, be a provocator.
Um
because they're not until people start
talking about these things, we're not
going to change anything, Justin. And to
be honest with you, that's why I do
podcasts. That's the reason why I like
to go out and talk to people because I
want them to understand a a am I crazy
or maybe do I have some interesting
perspectives that people haven't thought
about and then b I want to direct you to
things that are published and books that
are written that show you that hey maybe
this is something we haven't missed.
Maybe we've been stepping on this stone
at the six floor level instead of going
to the first floor level. Maybe that's
the reason why people still want to give
rodeiola to people with adrenal fatigue
because that's not going to work until
you fix their environment. And I always
tell functional guys,
&gt;&gt; rodeiola works because they have excited
electrons from the damn sun. That's the
only reason it works.
&gt;&gt; So if we create a checklist here, so the
patients, people listening have that
checklist to optimize their light
exposure. What does that look like? So
we get up, we see the sun rise, we get
all four extremities, we we do the
sphinx as you said, right? We dial that
in, we get what's the exposure amount
look like? And are we just trying to get
it in the morning? What does the rest of
the day look like? Can you go through
your daily routine with sunlight?
&gt;&gt; I I would go through my routine, but
remember my routi routine is based on my
N equals one. And and that's why I was
going to qualify for you. And as a
practitioner, you have to start to
realize that what you're going to
recommend to one person is not the other
because what what are the variables? a
what diseases they have, how bad are
their mitochondria, what's their
heteroplasmic rate, what what's what's
their hpotype look like? Yeah. What's
their job? Uh what do you what's the
goals? The there's a lot of different
variables, but for me, I'll give you a
perfect example. I know that my day job
as a neurosurgeon is my single biggest
risk. So, for example, days that I am in
surgery, I spend more time in the sun
than I would in days that I'm in clinic.
Anytime that I have a chance when I'm in
clinic to go outside, I tend to go
outside as much as I can. So, a lot of
people would call that coffee or smoke
breaks, I call it a sunbreak. Even if
you get five or 10 minutes at that time,
it's a help. Anytime you're out in
nature, it's a help. So, the answer is
try to do it. Um, anytime that you can
be connected, for example, all my
&gt;&gt; Are you worried about getting burned,
too, though? Like,
&gt;&gt; no, not and not me. And you can see that
I'm Irish and I have freckles. Um 10 12
years ago I would be out in the sun and
I'd get burned pretty quick. Uh but I
built up a solar callus. Why did I build
up a solar callus? Let me explain
something to you and you probably be
interested in this. There's two diseases
that you know very well. One is
psoriasis. The other one is type type
two diabetes. Do you know what's common
to both of those diseases? The skin
would get thicker.
&gt;&gt; Okay?
&gt;&gt; And you know why the skin gets thicker?
Because the skin is looking for more
sunlight. People who are diabetic
usually are designed to be in a strong
UV environment. That's the reason why
they eat carbohydrates. Carbohydrates
will naturally thicken your skin. Turns
out in psoriasis, the lack of UV light
thickens the basil level. That's the
reason why dermatologists use 312
nanometer light to shrink that level and
the plaques go away. That's what the
plaque is. It's thickened high turnover.
It's almost like a precancerous state.
In fact, if you look into the signs of
psoriasis, you'll see everybody who has
psoriasis, they'll tell you it's
premolignant state. You're you you have
risk factors for other cancers. Why is
that? Because you're not near the
regenerative light sources, which is UV
and and IR light. So, what's the answer?
You just asked me, go outside because
guess what? The outside is free.
&gt;&gt; How long does it take you to build up
that tolerance so you can get that
callous?
&gt;&gt; Took me about two or three years. But
did I know what I was doing when I
started? No. because all the variables
that I just told you, I didn't really
realize how important they are. Now I
do. Now, you know, I have a a K hlo type
uh my heteroplasm rate, I've got it
pretty dialed in because I've been a
biohacker for about 12 years. On
average, I would say in the wintertime,
I need about an hour and a half to two
hours. In the summertime, I usually go
three to five hours per day
&gt;&gt; in the sun. And you're doing no
sunscreen at all.
&gt;&gt; There's no freaking chance that I would
ever wear that.
&gt;&gt; And you're not burning at all either.
No. Well, if I get burned, if I get red,
I'm I have no problem. The next day I
come out and I look like uh I the the
way sun is designed to work, this is
this is probably a really good thing for
people to hear. You're designed to
absorb all the UV frequencies in your
melanin. So, my freckles hold the UV
light. That's where all the excited
electrons are. At night time is when you
offload those into your system. So you
would notice if you hung out with me for
3 or four hours, say now in New Orleans,
the next morning when you saw me, I
wouldn't be as pink. And why? Because
I've offloaded those things into my
cellular structure. See, the problem is
you have to think about your cells kind
of like a plant. When it's really
thirsty for water, that is going to be
delivered to the places that need it the
most. So think about your skin. Most
people have their arms exposed, but they
don't have their belly or their legs and
this and that and other things exposed.
So those parts of your body are starved,
absolutely starved for light. So if
you're smart, you start looking at,
okay, what do I always have covered all
the time? Those are the parts that I
need to keep uncovered and get out
there. And what you do is you slowly
build up your solar callus. And you do
this through what I call mitohacking.
You start to figure out empirically how
your system is optimized. It's no
different than looking at the dashboard
of your car and figure out, okay, look,
my temperature is too high. I need more
gas. I need to do this and that. The
thing is, we're not teaching people the
variables in alipathic medicine or in
functional medicine. And if you go to
one of my blogs, it's called the Redux
RX blog. I give you 30 different labs
that link directly to the redux and it
tells you how those things are linked to
the redux. So, you read this and you
start looking at your labs and you start
going, "Okay, I'm going to start doing
this. Let me see how these things go up
and down." And when people start to see
how it really goes and they start to
become what I would call more connected
with nature, in other words, you
reconnect with nature. See, you your
wireless relationship to the sun and
your complete connection to the earth
through your feet or through leather
suit sold shoes are this is something
you can't miss. And if you don't fix
this, I don't care what you or I do in
the clinic, it ain't going to work.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So, with the glasses, you're
wearing those glasses all day long. Is
that correct? Not just at night.
&gt;&gt; No, I'm I'm wearing those glasses
anytime I'm inside.
&gt;&gt; Inside
&gt;&gt; in this light that you're making me look
at. [laughter] You know that I didn't
have these on when we first started
talking.
&gt;&gt; No. No. You were out in the car and you
had the the sunroof open and you getting
good exposure. Totally.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. And that's the point. And the
thing is, one of the things in
functional medicine that I think they
could lead on because it's not talked
about enough is that we need to wear
protection for blue light during the day
when we're inside. We really do because
people don't understand that circadian
variation occurs. That's why I wanted
you to understand it goes from 1,800
Kelvin all the way to 16,000 Kelvin. the
computer screens are optimized most
computer screens between 5700 and 6,500
globally by the technology companies. So
the if you're working all day and say
for 10 hours or 12 hours seeing patients
that means that you're getting a
complete solar signal for noon the whole
day what do you think that does with
your central retinal pathway? What do
you think that does to your HBA access?
What do you think that does to your
brain stem? And then then you wonder why
the people that are coming into you are
zombies and they're trash. But the
problem is selling them pills and and
herbs aren't going to fix that problem.
That's like I have a saying that that I
get in trouble with with some of my
patients. It's like pissing in the wind.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Yeah. I totally understand what you're
saying. So just so I understand your
routine, right? One to two hours in the
winter, your three to five hours in the
summer. Correct. Like today, I can tell
you when I get done with you, it's going
to be a lot because we don't get
&gt;&gt; just because of what happened to me
yesterday, I will increase it. But I'm
going to use something called the
Fornier effect today. How am I going to
get more sunlight because it's already
one:00? I'm going to get in the pool and
stay in the pool and keep the top half
in the sun, but then I'm going to
reverse it where I'm going to put my
head in the water a lot and keep my top
part of the body out. The reason why is
I'm creating a bigger circuit so I can
move current more through my body. And
I'll do that this afternoon to offset
what I did last night because I know
last night I killed myself faster. And
that's why I tell people all the time
that health is the slowest form of death
we create.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So you're not worried about any
collagen degradation or any skin cancer
at all with the sun exposure. You feel
like you're doing it in a way where
you're not burning per se. You're
building up that solar
&gt;&gt; um was that the word? solar callus.
&gt;&gt; Solar callus the melanin exposure. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's it's just it's not only that,
it's also your skin thickness becomes
optimized. The thing the thing that it
becomes interesting, you need to realize
what your optimal amount of sunlight is
per day. And it's pretty easy to figure
out within four to six weeks. The real
problem that most people are going to
find if they live at the 42nd or the
50th latitude, they're going to realize
that that is a problem. Like for
example, that's the reason why people
have MS have a big problem. And the
reason why is they live at the wrong
latitude because their mitochondria are
not optimized for those that latitude
and it's magic when they go south. Well,
here's the problem. Telling people who
have MS like, you know, there's a
functional alopathic medicine doctor
who's pretty famous in Iowa State, you
know, Terry Walls. She tells everybody
find your mitochondria through eating
vegetables. And I just scoff at it. And
if she was so light, you know, she's got
her MS better because she's doing well.
Is she reverse yet? No, she's not. And
you know why? You know where Iowa is?
It's the 42nd latitude, my friend. You
want to get it better, guess what? Go
down to Plymouth. You want to do even
better, go down to Ecuador.
&gt;&gt; Now, how much of that has to do with
vitamin D as well? Because we know
there's a big correlation with the
vitamin D. So, if you are at the higher
latitude, what can you do? Can you
supplement vitamin D? What kind of
lights could you put in your house?
&gt;&gt; The question about supplementing
sunlight, I have a blog. It's called
Time 11. It's that the title of it says,
"Can you supplement sunlight?" The
answer is no. Because when you give
somebody a supplement, what did you just
do? You learned in in in school that we
are a series of negative and positive
feedback control. So when you design to
make something in the body and you take
an exogenous source, you completely
uncouple that system. You actually make
it worse.
&gt;&gt; But if someone's in that environment,
what can they do?
&gt;&gt; Change. Change the way you think about
it. You saying move, change, or
&gt;&gt; Well, move or go up to a higher
altitude. Like, for example, I have a
member who I'll share one of the things
he did. He lived in uh Seattle and he
knew that he had this big problem. He's
become a huge maker. He's got all the
gear. And what did he find? He found if
he went to Bend, Oregon, because it's at
a 5,000 foot elevation. But people don't
realize when you go above 5,000 ft, you
can naturally raise your vitamin D
levels even if you're at a high
latitude. That's the reason why the
Swiss uh do so well in the Swiss Alps
to but yet people in Finland and
Helsinki are have record rates of
autoimmunity, diabetes and obesity and
that's the reason why. Now the other
effect the big effect for the United
States is population density. So if you
happen to live in a very popular state,
I don't care if you're naked outside on
Rodeo Drive in Los Angeles, you're not
going to raise your vitamin D. And I
talk to functional docs all the time.
They're like, "Jack, you know what? I
can't understand these people live in
San Diego. They live in Los Angeles. And
I check their vitamin D and they're at
31. I put them on 20,000 a day with, you
know, 5 milligrams of K2. They come back
and they're at 38." He goes, "They just
don't understand why." I said, "It's
pretty simple. They're all dehydrated."
And the reason why, I said, "Check their
BU and crack ratios. Just do a regular
Chem7 and and invariably you'll see
they're over 15 to1." And I explain to
people the reason why the isomerization
step is blocked. It needs water to make
vitamin D. And people don't understand
this. So when I hear people default
straight to the vitamin D thing, it's
either because they have to make a
Mercedes payment or they're trying to
get people on a program. That's not the
answer. And the thing is, we're going to
make those people worse if we just throw
vitamin D down the gullet. Now, let me
get a flip front side. Since I'm a
surgeon, I'm trying to deal with these
issues on a much more acute basis. And
if I can raise somebody's redux
potential by utilizing these things
during that time frame, those are times
that I'll use it. But what do I always
make sure to tell the person? We're
going to do this in the peroperative
period, but then you're going to change
and if you don't, I'm not going to see
it anymore.
&gt;&gt; So, what kind of case studies do you
have? Do you have patients that you've
seen that you're do making these
clinical changes with adding these
different protocols and what kind of
clinical outcomes do you seeing? And
then also, what if people are doing
these things and they're not getting
better? What do you look for next?
&gt;&gt; Well, that's when you that's when you
have to become a biohacker. The
environment, in other words, there's
something in the environment that you're
you don't see. See, here's the the big
the big risk for most people. Non-native
EMF, see, your mitochondria is a sensor
that's connected to all the waveforms in
your environment. non-native AMF you
can't see, sense, taste, or touch, but
your mitochondria does because of that
oscillation that I told you earlier. So,
the key is that's when you have to start
to buy gear. For example, you know that
none of us can see uh uh X radiation and
none of us can see um radiation decay,
but if you had a geig counter, you could
see it. Well, there's things called the
trimeter. There's a thing called the
Gaus meter. That's when guys like my the
friend I told you about from Seattle,
you I teach people how to go out and
biohack their environment. When they do
that, then they find their problem
pretty damn fast and they're like,
"Whoa." I mean, I I've had people
literally did not even realize that
where their um their power source coming
into their house was right where they
sleep. And I said, "Okay, well, if
you're not going to change it, then what
you need to do is have the electrician
out to put a kill switch to kill it."
I'll give you if you if you got some
time, I got a great story of one of my
members in New York City. This this will
blow your mind.
&gt;&gt; I want to hear I'm going to grab my try
meter real quick. Hold on.
[cough]
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; So, this is the one you're referring to,
right? The tri field meter.
&gt;&gt; And how are you using this? How are you
applying it to to look at EMF sources?
&gt;&gt; That's only one thing that I'll use. I
use
&gt;&gt; the but one other big one is probably
the most important one especially for
&gt;&gt; the coming 5G explosion is going to be a
Cornet 88F
&gt;&gt; RF meter RF radiation is horrible almost
anything that uses uh pulse
electromagnetic frequency PMF you know
it's talking about health circles all
the time
&gt;&gt; oh yeah
&gt;&gt; I'm not a big fan of anything that uses
PEMF and
&gt;&gt; you don't like it huh
&gt;&gt; no it has to be understood I like it but
it has to be understood should. And most
people who are prescribing these things
don't really understand truly what
they're doing to people who have these
problems. So the easiest way to to
really understand your environment is
when you see these bad signals, you do
something about it. So one of my members
who happens to be a laser physicist, him
and his wife, they own a company that
installs fiber optics in the city of New
York. Okay. Three out of five burrows
they have the contract for. Verizon has
the other two. So, I have a thing on my
website called the EMF boot camp where
it teaches you basics of how to hack
your environment, you know, with these
devices. And I hired an electrical
engineer for everybody to learn. So, he
bought a house in Brooklyn and he tested
it and it tested pretty well for this
area. [snorts] So he bought it and he
lived there for two or three years and
he noticed about two I think it was two
and a half years he told me that six out
of eight of his neighbors came down with
cancer and he was like this is crazy of
wonder why this is happening. So he's
got two sons and you know I told you
that his him and his wife are both laser
physicists. They do a lot in fiber
optics.
The kids started playing around with his
Gaus meter and his Gaus meter measures
magnetic fields. The kids came in and
told
&gt;&gt; this person
&gt;&gt; that uh dad, you need to look at this.
And it was redlined. It was over 2,000
gals.
&gt;&gt; And he couldn't figure out why this was
happening. So him and his brother put
painters tape, you know that blue tape,
everywhere in the living room. The
center of the living room is where the
biggest field was coming. They traced it
up into the wall, up into the ceiling,
and they knocked the hole in the ceiling
to look. And it turns out the gas line
and the water line were there. They
followed it all the way up the street.
Now, I told you this guy's got a really
big company. So, he's got a construction
on. He follows it out with a snake
through the plumbing system all the way
to a tree and the tree is right outside
big maple tree like you have in New York
City. And what did he find? The roots of
the tree grew into the Con Edison lines.
And the reason he only saw the magnetic
field is the electric field was
dissipated by the ground.
So he had just an isolated magnetic
field and he knew exactly what the cause
was and he went to all the different
places on the block and found that the G
meter was off the charts in those places
as well. So here's the point. He tested
his environment. You can't assume that
how it is today is going to be how it is
next week. Especially when you have
those idiots outside your window putting
the new 5G cables in or putting Direct
TV on your neighbor's house or putting
the smart meter in your neighborhood.
And that's the mistake that most people
make. That's the biggest mistake that I
think that alipathic doctors and
functional medicine doctors don't
realize. They don't realize the number
one question they should ask soon as
somebody comes in. Tell me about your
environment. And when they tell me, I
want to know how they know. Do they have
these devices? Do they understand how to
use them? And do they need to be doing
it? I I tell people it's kind of like
your carbon monoxide sensor in your
house. You should go around with these
devices once a month in your environment
and never assume anything.
&gt;&gt; So what does that look like here? So we
get one of these meters, maybe a tri
field. What are the the key meters
everyone should have at home to test
these things?
&gt;&gt; Well, instead of wasting our time
talking about that, I would tell you
this guy that I told you in Seattle, his
name is Scott Compton. He wrote a guest
blog about his experience.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
In the sites there, I list all the
meters that everybody should consider.
It has Amazon links to all of them and
you can learn about them and pull them
up because I don't want people going out
and spending money on things that really
is a waste. I want them to start with
the simple things. So, for example, a
try meter is relatively cheap and the
coret meter, the RF meter is also pretty
cheap. I think those are the two
&gt;&gt; that people will start with. But then I
think you need to realize depending on
your environment, for example, if you
live in a city, you absolutely need a G
meter.
You absolutely have to have it. Uh and
if you live in a downtown area, there's
no question you need to have it. But
then there's other effects that And the
effects um in fact, I just wrote about
this. I wrote a ALS blog because the
upcoming NFL draft and I did it
&gt;&gt; uh because there's a couple of players
in this draft that have significant soft
tissue injuries. One of them is named
Marshon Latimore from Ohio State. He's
the best quarterback in the draft, but
he's missed two uh seasons at Ohio
State, but he's a black kid at the 42nd
latitude in Columbus.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And and see everybody, he's had surgery
to fix this. The kid's a phenomenal
player, but if I was the Chicago Bears,
if I was the New England Patriots, I
wouldn't draft this guy. Now, if I was
the Jacksonville Jaguars or say the San
Diego Chargers, he'd be much higher on
my list. Why? because I understand that
he needs to be in a much higher light
environment. Best place for him is
probably Miami. Now, does anybody in the
NFL understand this linkage? No. And why
do these players develop neuro
degeneration when they're 40, 50, and 60
years old? Guess what? The link is just
what I told you. Alter.
&gt;&gt; So, you're saying more melanin in the
skin is going to decrease the the UV
absorption essentially,
&gt;&gt; right? Where did black skin come from?
From the equator, my friend. It protects
you. That's that's the reason why when
you when you said to me earlier, you
know, shade is one way to do it, but how
did nature do it?
&gt;&gt; It made dark skin first. Why? Because
that's where we evolved. We evolved in
the East African rift. Okay? White guys
like me and you, we came much later when
we went to higher latitudes and that's
where SNIPS came from. That's where
heteroplasmic rates change. Remember,
there's an equatorial DNA, but there's
all these other DNAs for our
mitochondria that are altered based on
where we live and what is the key
driver.
&gt;&gt; And what test are you running for the um
for the SNIPS? Is that the 23 and me?
And what are you testing?
&gt;&gt; Well, the 23 and me is one thing you do,
but you there's now there's now SNIP
testing that you can order through Gova
and Okay. and some of the other
functional places to figure it out. But
the the key thing that I want to know is
I want I want to assess somebody's redux
potential almost as soon as they come
in. When I say redux potential, what am
I saying? I'm saying the amount of net
negative charge in the body. So, how
could somebody simply do that? If you
had a body voltage meter, you could tell
that way. I think there's an easier way.
I like looking at labs. That's why I
told you earlier when we talked, read my
redox RX. There's 30 different labs
there that tell you how they all link
into it. Are some of them simple,
Justin? Yeah. You know what one of the
simplest ones are? Next time you talk to
somebody, look at their teeth. Look at
the color of their teeth. If their teeth
are naturally white, that's a pretty
good sign their redux potential is good.
If their teeth are yellowed,
&gt;&gt; guess what? Their redux potential is not
as good as they think. And the reason
why is dentin and enamel, one is a both
of them are floor proteins. They fluores
when the body when the cells are
emitting specific frequencies of light.
Do I have a blog on that too? Remember
what you asked me, Jack? You used to be
an oral surgeon. See this stuff, every
place you look, you can find an answer,
but the problem is, and I always say
this, Justin, and I say this, it's
really important. Humans are really good
at seeing, but they suck at observation.
&gt;&gt; And and let me just tell you something.
What makes a really good doctor and what
makes a really good scientist is the
people that observe nature very
carefully and don't put their precepts,
their beliefs, their dogma on the
observations they see. And one of the
biggest problems I think I see in modern
science is that we have allowed dogma,
beliefs and paradigms to affect the way
we study things. For example, you know
how there's this big thing right now in
nutrition where there's a fight between
the low carb and the highfat people and
and all this nonsense. You know where
all of our ideas for ketosis came from?
For from metabolic ward studies that
were done in the 1940s and 50s that you
can read about many books. Let me ask
you a question, Justin. Where are
metabolic ward studies done?
&gt;&gt; Well, they're done in a hospital inside.
There's obviously going to be no
exposure either. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Under blue light. Okay. Now you open up
Albert Schwitzer's book or Western A
Price's book, you know, Western uh
diseases of civilization.
&gt;&gt; It's all in the environment
&gt;&gt; and guess what you see? You see these
guys that look like Adonis that are 70
years old. You know what the difference
is, my friend?
&gt;&gt; Natural environment.
&gt;&gt; They're in a natural environment and we
study zoo animals and we think that's
the same. And and it's that simple.
Remember when we talked earlier about
the tree? I said to you, would a tree
grow with a tarp over it? And you got it
immediately. Hopefully the people
listening to this got it. Well, what am
I saying to you? The beliefs that we
have in nutrition, I don't believe
anything that's published in nutrition
data. Why? Because it's never been
studied the right way. There's
&gt;&gt; So, how are you applying it? How how are
you eating? So, walk me through that. I
know you mentioned doesn't matter as
much. So, give me the rundown right now.
It's getting to be spring, summer, more
carbs now.
&gt;&gt; No. Yeah. And it's very simple.
&gt;&gt; What is breakfast?
&gt;&gt; What grows in your environment?
&gt;&gt; Eat what grows in your environment. It's
that's it.
Let me let me explain this to you
because this is important.
&gt;&gt; What what is the entire food web of this
planet built on my friend? It's called
photosynthesis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. The entire food web. So that means
that when you talk about food, you need
to understand light. So can you eat a
pineapple uh in Bangor, Maine right now?
The answer is yeah, you can. You go into
Whole Foods and get it. But what does
nature say about that? The answer is no.
You can't do that because it never
grows. Therefore, when you're the stupid
idiot that eats the pineapple at the
47th latitude even in May, you've
created a mismatch. You've created a gut
problem. You've created a mitochondrial
problem and you don't think it's a big
deal. Why? Because you don't understand
how photosynthesis links to those
electrons to the ground state and this
state. And what is your body designed to
do? Capture that. Well, if you do that,
your respiratory proteins are stretched
out. You can't capture that.
&gt;&gt; So, what does that look like for you?
So, you're saying lower carb, higher fat
with a more northern
&gt;&gt; I'm not saying that at all. I'm saying
your environment dictates what you eat.
&gt;&gt; So, let's go over a couple examples. Go
ahead. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; For example, I'm not uh in say in
December going to eat kumquats. I'm not
going to eat pineapple. I'm not going to
eat coconut. Now, I happen to live at a
latitude where those things are are
present. 28th latitude is most things
you can get. Um, so what I usually do in
the winter time, I'm just like the I'm
going to be uh keonic and I'm going to
drink more water and I'm going to be
more connected to cold and the light
environment around me. So, I'm going to
be pretty naked a a lot of the year
&gt;&gt; with my shoes off in the backyard when
it's like between 30 and 50 degrees
here. Now, what happens in the
summertime? The summertime I I will my
carbs increase all the way up to June
21st. Why? That's the summer equinox.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; When do they start to decline? From that
time. The time that I eat no carbs. The
only time I'll eat no carbs is for about
the two weeks before and after December
21st.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So, right now you're on a higher
carb cycling or you Okay, good. Higher
carb right now. And then fat. Is that
pretty high as well? Uh, I wouldn't say
pretty high because you don't need a ton
of fat in the summertime when you live
in the 28th latitude. Remember what I
told you before about the Messiah and
the Hazda.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Got it.
&gt;&gt; It's it's it's that's why I said the
paradigm that you believe in. And I'm
glad that when your non-verbal
communication talking to me is very
interesting because when I say something
to you, I know you're like, man, I don't
know if I'm buying it. That's that's the
belief system that you got. You have to
realize that when you understand what
I'm saying, this seasonal approach is
linked to photosynthesis and every place
on this planet is tied to that. Just
because humans have changed that system
doesn't mean we can do it. You know,
it's like we can do it, but should we do
it? That's the question we need to ask
people. And that's not the question that
most people do.
&gt;&gt; So, how do you tie in cold? How do you
tie in the cold thermogenesis with the
sun and with the the UV? Like how do you
package this all together?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'll try to make it as simple for
you as possible. The easiest way is to
understand what does coal do? It
condenses the respiratory proteins. So
that means it brings them closer
together. Anytime they come closer
together, it makes electron toning e
easier. So even if you have fewer
electrons or fewer higher powered
electrons, the fact that they're closer,
you're more energy efficient. So can you
be more energy efficient doing that?
Yes. And it turns out when you're energy
efficient closer together, that means
you release more free heat. When you
least release more free heat from your
mitochondria, what does that do to the
water around it? It heats it up. What
happens to water when it's heated? It
shrinks. That's how the respiratory
proteins come together. You don't water
and stick it in your fridge right now.
What will happen in two hours, right?
&gt;&gt; Explodes. Because water is different
than just about every liquid on this
planet. thermodynamically. It expands
when it cools and it shrinks when it's
heated. But we don't realize that that's
the huge reason mitochondria release
heat. And I want you to look at
something else, Justin. I want you to
think about this. What is the basic plan
for um photosynthesis? CO2 plus water
and sunlight makes sugars,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; You know what mitochondria does? It
reverses the equation. It takes glucose,
makes CO2, and makes water.
How do you like [clears throat] that?
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; Both of them are endo symbiot bacteria
that we have figured out. In other
words, this is the ying and this is the
yang.
&gt;&gt; So, a mitochondria can only work when
this is working right. So, let's go back
to your original question.
&gt;&gt; He said, "Tell me about your food." And
you wanted to jump straight to what
every functional doc does. And I said,
"I'm not letting you do it.
&gt;&gt; It's the biggest mistake y'all make
every time. And you need to understand
why my perspective is what it is. And
when you do, you start to go, hm. So,
for example, I'll give you another good
one. I don't know where you're located,
but just
&gt;&gt; I'm in Austin, Texas, so I'm at a nice
lower latitude.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You're you're you're close to me
as well.
&gt;&gt; Are you in Nashville or New Orleans?
&gt;&gt; I'm in New Orleans.
&gt;&gt; New Orleans. Okay. New Orleans.
&gt;&gt; Uh, so the the issue the issue is say if
you lived in Austin, but say you were a
computer programmer and you're inside
under the blue light all day. So, you
were giving yourself a chronic
summertime sigma, okay? And say you ate
carbohydrates probably 247. What do you
think the result would be? You're going
to get just about every disease on the
planet. But the problem is is that we
believe
&gt;&gt; that the food is what caused it. What we
don't realize is that the blue light is
what really caused all the changes and
it stretched out the respiratory
proteins because the mitochondria don't
work. So when you give somebody a
prescription who does that ketosis,
it helps them because what does ketosis
do? It shrinks things down a little bit
but not enough. And those people stay in
ketosis. Why is chronic ketosis a bad
thing to be in? Because you never get to
autophagy. In other words, you never get
to recycle your new mitochondria. See
the key thing with our bodies.
&gt;&gt; How about if you intermittent fast
though? If you combine some intermittent
fasting in there, couldn't you increase
the autoagas?
the key things to do. But what happens
like when when you follow like my leptin
reset, what you'll find is people who
have to eat like six times a day wind
wind up finding out within six weeks
they can eat three times a day. And then
eventually when you do it long enough,
you're only going to eat once a day. I
only eat once a day. That's it. And it's
usually at the four to 6:00 p.m. window.
Okay? Now, in the beginning when I
started all this, I didn't have to do I
had to do it differently. Why? Yeah,
&gt;&gt; because my Ferrari was a Nissan Sentra
blowing black smoke.
&gt;&gt; Got it.
&gt;&gt; See how the pieces fit together? They're
all dynamic. And you know, I think in
both of our paradigms, how we were
trained. So, we don't realize that it's
that dynamic. You know, we think it's
more static and I think it makes more
sense to our brain to think about it
that way because it's easier to
understand. But I don't buy that. And I
don't buy that now because I become a
mitochondriac. become that person that
is understanding nature through that
organel. And that organel was the key to
making me understand food differently
because I began to look at food in terms
of chlorophyll A and chlorophyll B in
terms of an excyon. What an excyon is,
how it's made and how food gets its
basic energy. Food is basically light
energy. It's no different than that. The
key to deciphering I think understand we
need the Rosetta code. That Rosetta code
is built into the latitude, altitude and
population density where we are. That's
that's actually how uh the food chain is
optimized for this planet. That's the
reason why people around the equator can
eat a much higher carbohydrate diet and
not get any problems with it. It's also
the reason why the Inowin diet prior to
1950 was highly ketoic because they were
never around UVA or UVB light except for
three to four months out of the year. So
most people don't even realize that
vitamin D foods there's only two. It's
the it's seafood and mushrooms. Well,
guess what? That's a big staple of the
Inuit diet. But to get the vitamin D you
need got to eat the eyeballs and you got
to eat the skin and the fish. Well, the
Inuits do that. That's the reason why
they're the indigenous people that did
well there. So, when you're eating at 4
PM, that 4M to 6 PM window, are you
still getting adequate calories during
that two hour time period? And tell us
what you're eating. Come on. What's the
&gt;&gt; I don't Well, I mean, think I'm trying
to think what I ate for dinner last
night. Um
Oh, I know what I had. I had uh I had
beets that were baked and I took the,
you know, the greens off the leaves.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. cut them up and and cooked them in
um uh butter with some some uh spices
like I think I put basil, oregano,
salt and pepper, and turmeric. And I had
sausages, pork sausages. Um and pork is
a a much bigger part of my diet this
time of the year because you need the
cyine content because of the sunlight.
And if you want [clears throat] to know
why, I'm not going to get into it. I got
a blog called Energy and Epigenetics 12.
Cyine is the rarest amino acid. It's the
one that glutathione is made out of.
&gt;&gt; Huge. Yep.
&gt;&gt; So, [clears throat] you have to know
that when you live in a strong solar
environment, you want to have a little
bit more sulfur in your diet. And it
turns out that sulfur, sulfated
cholesterol and sulfated vitamin D3 is
the key to high solar environments in
terms of skin thickness. You know, it
goes back to the solar callus that you
and I talked about. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know, in the past, all that stuff is
yolked together. And I've seen people do
vitamin or do uh sunlight UV exposure
and they've kind of like chronic um
hemocromattosis the elevated iron levels
very high feritin 3 400 levels and
they've seen their feritin levels drop.
Do you see that as well clinically?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean you can you can see a
variety of different things but here's
the funny thing if you really really pay
attention. [cough]
[clears throat] This is this to me is
one of the most interesting things
that's happened in the last two or three
years. Hospitals are now starting to
look at zip codes [snorts]
&gt;&gt; um in terms of diagnosis codes. So we in
medicine are now seeing some very
interesting trends develop. In other
words, certain diseases tend to show up
more in certain zip codes and no one in
epidemiology kind of knows why. And I
think I've kind of figured it out that
it has to do with that local
environment. The non-native EMF in
different environments is highly
variable. So when say you're using
feritin as you said before, you may find
one person from one part of town have a
very variable response compared to
somebody else and you're going to say,
"Oh, wait a minute. I'm at the 28th
latitude. It shouldn't be like this."
Well, I'll give you for example. I
happen to have a friend who lives in
Austin who lives around that Barton
Springs uh place and he just recently
moved somewhere else. His results have
been radically different in the new part
of Austin that he lives in. And I told
him, I gave him a couple ideas to what
to check out. And he wound up buying an
acoustter and he wound up uh buying a
flicker uh uh monitor. And he found out
that the lights in his new neighborhood
at nighttime had a much higher flicker
effect. And that was the cause of his
problem. So I said, "The simple thing is
when you go out at night, make sure most
of your skin's covered. Make sure your
eyes are protected." And you know,
flicker is really hard to protect
yourself from. I told him because you
moved from a low flipper environment to
a higher flickering one. And he found
out that Austin had just changed the
lights in the street in this
neighborhood like three months before he
moved there.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Interesting. And then what do
you think about UV and thyroid? Is there
any specific dose of UV? Good.
&gt;&gt; Hypo hypothyroidism is is absolutely a
deficiency.
&gt;&gt; How does it affect reverse T3 though and
RT3 and deactivation of the thyroid?
&gt;&gt; Reverse T3 is leptin resistance.
Remember what I told you about this
semiconducted circuit? the retina, SCN,
and leptin receptor. It's got to work
properly to turn this on. Once the
leptin receptor is properly turned on,
you don't make any reverse T3.
Everything goes to T3 because what is
T3? It's thermogenic. It makes and
releases heat from the mitochondria that
shrinks water. All all these things I
gave you already. It's all there. The
key thing is when this semiconductive
circuit's broken, that's what causes
this problem. And that's why reverse T3
goes up. And that's why leptin
resistance functionally is a light
mediated problem. Now, I've also heard
you talk about leptin resistance and
using hCG to modulate leptin resistance
as well.
&gt;&gt; You can and that that that is one of the
things I did a long time ago
&gt;&gt; before I realized the how the physics of
the organism truly works. And it I I
call that one of my you know seinal bio
hacks to figure out
&gt;&gt; why this worked because you know most
alopathic doctors and I'll be the first
one to be honest with I thought 15 years
ago that hCG was a bunch of horseshit
and then when I started to learn about
all these intricate brain circuits I
started to realize actually there there
is a role for this and it actually is
uncovering actually how this whole
system really works and the problem is I
think the practitioners at UJCG
don't realize that it's it's kind of
like using rodeiola for adrenal fatigue.
It works while you use it, but soon as
you take the stimulus away and don't
realize that you have to have the light
change with it, it's a it's an epic
failure. It's great for clinicians,
right? Keep selling to people because
it's like a it's what I call a wallet
bopsy or annuity. Um, but you cannot
sustain weight loss by using hCG until
you fix the light environment that the
patient's in.
&gt;&gt; So, you got to get the light and then
the EMF dialed in. That totally makes
sense. And then you mentioned some stuff
about the MFL a little bit earlier.
What's your take on this uh tce, the
traumatic chronic in andphopathy, the
Will Smith movie. Um what's your take on
that as a neurosurgeon? What do you see
coming into your clinic? And would you
let your kid play football?
&gt;&gt; Read Mike blog. It says all it's the
implications.
&gt;&gt; We'll link to it. What's the Reader
Digest version though?
&gt;&gt; Reader's digest version. Anything that
disrupts uh electron chain transport in
mitochondria is something you need to
stay away from. And what happens is
these kids start off when they're
younger. And you have to realize the
more damage they have when they're
younger, the worse it is when they get
older. Um in terms of what I let my kids
play, uh knowing what I know now,
no, I I wouldn't let them play soccer. I
wouldn't let him play hockey. I wouldn't
let them play football. Uh but I would
let them play like if they didn't play
when they were younger and they wanted
to play like uh say late in high school
or college. I personally think that's
the reason why if you [clears throat]
think about because you know we got the
NFL draft coming up next week. It's kind
of an interesting thing. I look at like
this kid from Washington University. I
want you to think about this is going to
be really interesting for you. You know
John Ross ran the fastest 40. He ran
422. But when he ran it,
when he ran it, he actually pulled up
lane. He pulled up a hip flexor and he
didn't run the second one. He was inside
the RCA dome in Indianapolis under a
xenon blue light that was not run by a
DC converter. It was run by the AC
current. So he was set up that the
flicker effect of those lights are
ridiculous.
But he still ran that time. That tells
you if you can run that fast, it tells
you your redux potential is good. But I
want you to think about where he
originally lived. He lived in Los
Angeles. He used to play on Snoop Dogg's
uh team when he was a young kid. And
Snoop Dogg said this kid was the fastest
kid ever. So, I want you to think now
when he went to Washington at the 45th
latitude, that's where he went to
University of Washington. He tore both
ACL's and they repaired them and
obviously he's doing pretty good. Um,
but if you're an NFL GM asking me the
question you just asked,
would you draft
John Ross knowing that he's going to
have a 10 or 15 year career? The answer
is no. I would not. But will he be good
the first five years of his career? The
answer is yes. If you happen to be the
Seattle Seahawks, the New England
Patriots, uh, the Green Bay Packers,
would I draft John Ross? The answer is
no because they play at a high latitude
light. fewer the Miami Dolphins, the
Tennessee Titans, the Houston Texans,
the San Diego Chargers. My answer would
be yes. Now, I'm gonna tell teach you
something why I just said that. When you
get off this podcast with me, I want you
to open up a Google box and look at the
top 20 rushers in the NFL history. You
know what you're going to notice about
19 out of 20 of them?
&gt;&gt; They're all south
&gt;&gt; in the southeast of the United States.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, everybody knows the most famous guy,
EMTT Smith. Smith. You know where he's
from?
&gt;&gt; He's from Florida. He went to the
University of Florida, so probably
Florida area. Where's he from?
Pensacola. Right on the Gulf of Mexico.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Gul of Mexico happens to be one of
the best places to grow up. Why? 600
miles from Pensacola. Do you know what's
in the bottom of the Gulf?
&gt;&gt; A hole about an asteroid hit 65 million
years ago. And do you know where where
you came from? You came from that change
because what wiped out there? Dinosaurs.
And what came? The age of what what was
different? mitochondria. See that?
You're back to the same story again. And
you didn't even realize it. The only guy
on the top 20 list that breaks the rules
is John Rigggins.
&gt;&gt; How about Jim Brown, though? Didn't he
play for the Browns? That's Cleveland.
&gt;&gt; Played for the Browns. But where was he
originally from?
&gt;&gt; And he went to Syracuse, too. So,
&gt;&gt; yeah, he went to Syracuse. But what time
did he was in college? Late 40s and
early 50s.
&gt;&gt; First round draft pick.
&gt;&gt; Let me ask you a question. Was there uh
Google then? Did you come in to do what
we're doing now or was he outside riding
his bike playing ball in the sun?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, he was from Georgia originally.
So, yeah.
&gt;&gt; There you go. See that? Pretty shocking.
&gt;&gt; He was north. He was up north for a good
15 years, though. So, that's still
pretty good.
&gt;&gt; He only played how long, my friend? Nine
years.
&gt;&gt; 10 years. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Think about it.
&gt;&gt; But for running back, that's pretty
good, though.
&gt;&gt; Well, was he smart to bail when he
bailed?
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Definitely smart.
&gt;&gt; Well, and here's the point that I'm
trying to make to you. We can have this
conversation.
&gt;&gt; [cough]
&gt;&gt; Most [clears throat] people who are
sports fans never even think about these
things. So for I'll give you another for
example. Um
I'm trying to give you a really
controversial one. Why don't we talk
about Junior Sea? You know he's comes
from
&gt;&gt; the middle of the Pacific Ocean. He
played in San Diego. He was probably
dominant dominant linebacker right of
his time. But when did he start going
south? when he left San Diego
&gt;&gt; Patriots
&gt;&gt; and and everybody knows what happened to
him right after that he wound up killing
himself and why is that the case where
do where do humans bury the
mitochondrial density my friend here and
their heart what is the other thing that
we know about NFL players their cardiac
longevity also isn't good see the thing
is the way mitochondria work is very
similar to a star those guys are really
good early in their career but they burn
out fast that's what we call a blue
straggler star yeah
&gt;&gt; what is what are the stars in the that
live the the longest. It's red giants.
&gt;&gt; Think [clears throat] about all the
things that we said earlier about
cytochrome c oxidase he proteins and red
light chronophores.
&gt;&gt; And what I we just say about blue light.
Blue makes you burn and live faster. It
speeds time up. Red slows time down. So
does purple. And the reason why purple
works is because purple electrons
actually get sliced by this deli slicer
in your mitochondria called the Q cycle.
And the Q cycle is run by co-enzyme Q10.
One of the biggest functions of the Q
cycle is to take a highly excited
electron and turn it into light
frequencies in the red range. So what
are we doing with purple light? We're
slowing it down and we're turning it
into red light for cytochrome C oxidase
which is the third uh the third uh
cytochrome. And what does that do? It
makes more ATP. We're back to the story
we started with. 2/3 versus one/3.
Right?
&gt;&gt; That's the reason why UV light isn't
toxic. That's the reason why
dermatologist and your question before
you asked it to me I think three times
about collagen might have scoffed at
you.
&gt;&gt; Now you know the reason why I scoffed at
you because
&gt;&gt; the reason that you've got this belief
the reason why dermatologists have this
belief because they don't understand how
light works. The physics of organisms
the physics of cells once you understand
it makes sense. And I'm going to share
something with you.
&gt;&gt; But you're also not getting burned
either. You you built up that
&gt;&gt; I don't care if I get burned, dude. I
don't care if I get burnt.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; I don't. I I could care less.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And here's the here's the uh
&gt;&gt; You have a nice thick solar callus now
though, so you built that thing up.
&gt;&gt; I know. But you know, like next week I'm
getting ready to go to Mexico, so that
the sun is already
probably like July, June and July strong
down there. So from that standpoint, I
don't really worry about it. Uh but I'm
not going to tell you if I would go on
the equator and stay out for 12 hours a
day. No, obviously I wouldn't do
something like that, but you once you do
this long enough, it becomes pretty
obvious and intuitive how long you need
to be out there and why you start to see
the improvements in your own redux
potential. But those labs I told you,
you don't have to be a doctor to figure
this out. You can actually look at them
yourself and and go through it
&gt;&gt; and say [cough and clears throat]
this makes sense. I mean, one of the
easiest things that I tell people, if
you're anemic, you need to get out in
the sun. And you know, how many times do
you hear about the B12 and the and the
D3 story from functional docs? They have
no idea anybody who's B12 deficient is
light deficient. They're solar
deficient. They're missing UV and IR
light. They're missing purple and red
light. And what's the first thing that
they do? They reach for the pill thing.
And I'm like that.
&gt;&gt; So if you were a vegetarian and not
eating, not consuming B12, if you were
just getting sunlight, would that be
enough to replete that macroetic anemia?
&gt;&gt; Probably not because No. And the reason
why I say that, it's kind of
interesting. Take a look at where
vegetarians tend to live. And the best
country to go for that is India. If you
draw a line in India, right through the
middle, below it is all the vegetarians
and above it is all the meat eaters.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What's the difference?
&gt;&gt; The light.
&gt;&gt; Why do vegetarians get way in India?
Because they're always in a strong light
cycle. [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; And guess what happens in the in the
north part up by the Himalayan
mountains? They're up at 29,000 ft. Why
are all the sherpas dark skinned? Now
you know the reason why. Because they're
getting more UV light even though
they're at a higher latitude because
their altitude is high. And what else is
a benefit? No people are there. Why?
Because the mountains are huge,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; See all the things we talk about when
you start thinking about it, you start
going, damn, I actually have never
thought about this. And I tell people
this all the time. Remember the terminal
electron acceptor for mitochondria is
oxygen. How do you make oxygen? UV light
hits ozone and you make O2. UV light
makes oxygen
and you don't even think about it. And
but you'll have this thing, oh well, I
can't go outside because UV light's bad
for me. Why? Because that got put in
your head by your mother, your doctor,
or somebody else. That's the reason why
you feel that way. And for me, strong UV
light usually means that you're going to
have pretty good O2. And anytime you
have O2, O2 is your terminal electron
acceptor. The redux potential is the key
to healthy living. the the more net
negative charge you have in your body,
the better off you do. So the fastest
way to develop net negative charge is
realizing that you have to have
electrons to be programmed by somebody.
And the more electrons that you can
contain, the better you are. That's the
reason why the density of of water at
the poles is much higher and colder
because there's more electrons in it.
that allows that's the reason why DHA
and and and the fish that have it tends
to swim in colder wa colder water. So if
you understand this basically you just
need to get your shoes off, take as much
clothes off as you're h you're happy
with or go to the these clothes that
they now make where you can get
penetration of UV and IR light. You
know, I think one of them is in the UK
called Kicki. That's what I use. um so
that you can actually be naked without
being naked when you're outside, no
matter where you are. And
[clears throat] this is fundamentally
why just about every research study you
read about vacation
uh tells you that you spend seven days
in a strong light environment that
everything gets better. Your depression,
your diet, your weight, and everybody
says, "Oh, it's just relaxation." No,
it's a lot more than just relaxation.
It's about balancing the the the veagal
motor system and the parventricular
nucleus through light assimilation
through the skin and the eye. And until
we get that story out, we're going to
keep making mistakes. My goal is not to
make those mistakes anymore.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. Well, I appreciate that, Dr.
Jack. And if you were stuck on a desert
island, what would be the one supplement
you could bring with you outside of the
sun?
&gt;&gt; Water.
&gt;&gt; Water. Okay. Well, I appreciate that.
Great info. Any last words here you want
to put out there for the listeners?
&gt;&gt; No, I just tell you that um keep your
mind open like a parachute. The thing is
there may be some things that you heard
here today that are very
counterintuitive to your beliefs and
your concepts. And remember beliefs and
paradigms all they are is precepts of
the truth. The truth is always a moving
target of approximations
and the truth is designed to evolve. So
what may be true today we may find out
tomorrow is not so true. Uh and the best
way for us to to find these things out
is to observe nature in her form. She
always morphs. You know the nature the
the the the environment that we had in
the United States in 1900 1930 is not
equivalent to 2017 anywhere. And if you
don't believe me, just go over to your
grandmother's house and ask her how many
people she knew that had had Alzheimer's
disease or Parkinson's disease when she
was six years old. See, these diseases
came out of nowhere. Same thing with
autism. Autism is a mitochondrial
disease. That's that's where it comes
from. It comes from the modern
environment that we built. And we're not
cognizant of it. And when you hear that
the first time, it shocks you. And it
shouldn't shock you. It's the reason why
in 1900 colon cancer was the 37th
leading cause of cancer and today it's
number two. Did did all of a sudden our
genes change in five generations to
allow that to occur? No, the answer is
not. What changed is the amount of
assimilation of that energy in
mitochondria is what changed the genome?
That's the key. There's two genomes in
us. The one that's the most important is
a mitochondrial one. Become a
mitochondria and you'll be be a lot
better person.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Jack, I appreciate it.
www.jackpruz.com.
&gt;&gt; All right, take care, man. You too,
Jack. J.
[music]
&gt;&gt; Got a question for Dr. J? Go to
beyondwwellelnessradio.com
and click the questions button, then
tune in to hear the answer. Also, if you
like the [music] show, click below to
review us on iTunes. For more
BeyondWellnessRa,
go to beyondwwellelnessradio.com.
[music]