♪ (dramatic Intro music) ♪
&gt;&gt; Good evening, welcome. My name is Roxanne Bogucka.
I am a librarian based at the Life- Science library and I am pleased
to bring you the first Science Study Break of the fall 2010 semester.
First, behold the legalese. Okay.
Without restriction. Throughout the universe. Those are the key words.
Alright.
Science Study Break tonight is brought to your by P-- for the Physics-Math-
Astronomy library. The librarian there is Molly Wright and it's in RLM.
So go visit the Physics- Math- Astronomy library.
But let's say you are working from home some evening and you want to use
some of the resources that are brought to you from the UT library
like for example, Institute of Physics things then you might go directly
to the Institute of Physics site. And do a search for something like
maybe... Neutrino.
Just happen occurred to me. And as you do that, maybe you would
find some thing that you want to look at and so if you decided
you want to see this article and click on the PDF link to it,
you will find that you are being asked for some money. Okay?
(audience laughs) Don't let this be you, okay?
Whenever you are off campus, always use the UT library website to get to
our resources. So if you went from our data bases by subject to the physics
databases and then you went there from the Institute of Physics Journals
you can look at the about link to see this resource describe and
then you can use the active link to enter Institute of Physics Journals.
This is what you will see when you are off campus. The screen that
prompts you for your EID and your password. But once you
enter that, you pass through to the Institute of Physics and notice
that this is a different URL here. It has easy.proxy.lib.utexas.
That authenticates you as part of the University of Texas community
so that when you do this search for this article, and you click on
the article now, you get to see this information about it.
Plus when you click on the full text pdf, you actually get the full
text and you didn't spend any money. So that's a good thing,
right? Everybody is okay with that? So the University of Texas Library
celebrating the life of the mind.
Now I want to tell you a little bit about Science Study Break.
We've been doing this for four years and tonight we have our first encore
presenter which Dr. Sacha Kopp from physics. He was with us last year
to do a wonderful presentation on Angels and Demons and tonight
we have the movie "2012," plus I think maybe some surprised other
that we will see about. But you can see that what we do in this program
is we look at television shows and we look at movies that are
in the science technology engineering, medicine arena and we ask researcher
to come in and discuss for us and with us the validity of what's presented
in these shows. Sometimes, it's scary and valid like one of the first shows
that we did was where we looked at a season of "24" that had to do
with bio-terror and (inaudible) came in and scares us all half to death
with how well they had researched that season of the show. Sometimes,
it's pretty laughable and we all get to poke fun and we all enjoy that too.
So tonight, we have Sacha Kopp who is gonna talk about "2012,"
a popular film and I would like to now tell you about him.
Dr. Kopp got his Bachelors, Masters and PhD at the University of Chicago
and he came to UT in 2000. He is the new Associate Dean of Curriculum
and Programs and has been active in science education for almost
as long as he has been active in elementary particle physics.
What? I don't know what happened there?
As a doctoral student, he helped develop a pilot program to retrain
science teachers in the Chicago public schools. As an assistant
professor at Syracuse University, he started a program which has
continued here at UT to recruit undergraduate teaching assistants
to assist in large lecture courses. He served as Associate Chair for
Undergraduate Affairs in the Physics Department and he's collaborated
with several faculty in the College of Natural Sciences to develop a new
center for inquiry in math and science which is devoted to promoting and
supporting these of inquiry based methods in science and math education.
And at the same time, he and his research team studied the physics
of neutrinos, run an experiment based at Fermi lab outside Chicago.
Please welcome Dr. Sasha Kopp. (applause)
&gt;&gt; Thank you all so much for coming out tonight. What a great crowd
to come to listen about neutrinos.
Roxanne has placed the first page of your quiz on your desk here.
The back side has the real hard part so I will ask you, no I am just
kidding. (laughter)
Fooled you!
There will be no quiz but you won't get ice cream from the physics circus
crowd unless you can answer a few key questions at the end of the lecture.
So Roxanne mentioned that last year I had fun giving a lecture here
at the series on the movie "Angels and Demons" and someone kind of
drop this one in my lab. I don't know why Ron Howard got interested
in the Large Hadron Collider but he was very interested in this book
by Dan Brown and so that featured the Large Hadron Collider in it and
it was perfect opportunity to pump the public for the exciting news
about the Large Hadron Collider and this year, some students of mine
actually came up to me and said, you know, if you thought that
Dan Brown book was bad, wait till you see this movie "2012."
And instantly I was just excited because again, I don't really view
these as science movies but rather excuses to give talks so there is
lots of good stuff in this movie. It's a fun movie to watch. But it is a
movie of science fiction and of course, like every piece of science fiction,
there is always a little bit of a true story behind some of the images
or the concepts that they bring out. It's mostly nonsense but it's fun
to then talk about what's the actual reality to what's going on.
So this is the movie "2012" and I don't know, has anyone seen
the movie? A few of us. Half? Okay. So not every has seen it.
Let me talk a little bit about first what it is because then we can
at least got on the same page.
So in this story, the earth is basically destroyed.
So there are some giant solar eruption and the solar eruption unleashes
this incredible burst of these particles called neutrinos. And these neutrinos
come whizzing throughout the universe and bury themselves
like little, I don't know, what do you call them? Termites. In the core
of the earth, and they heat up the core of the earth to such a degree
that it causes the core of the earth to melt, yes, and then actually causes
a huge volcanic activity, plate tectonic motion-- we're in a geology school
here so I can use that word. And there's floods and everything and
lots of computer simulations and everyone's dead. (audience laughs)
So I wanted to talk a little bit about the first part of this
because that's kind of the key crux of the story, you know
the eruption, the sun and how it unleashes all these neutrinos
but I thought what I'd first do is show a trailer from the movie
so let's see if I can get that to work.
Cool. I need to select audio-- where do I select audio. Okay, and I need to
do source...
I'm just going to try to find the audio here, sorry. How about if
I pause that-- how do I select the source of the audio? (inaudible talking off mic)
That's a good question.
I'll figure this out...no, I'm assuring them. You know what, I don't know
Keep going. No, it's not doing it. So maybe you're right, maybe I'm
going to do...
Oh, yeah, I think I did it. Oh yeah that did it. Let's try again.
Sorry about that. We'll...
(suspenseful music)
&gt;&gt; This mass suicide can compare to the Mayan calendar which predicts
the end of time to occur on the 21st of December, of this year... (tv sounds)
&gt;&gt; What are the odds. (sound of explosions)
&gt;&gt; Those neutrinos are loud. ♪ (intense music) ♪
&gt;&gt; I said that the government is building these ships.
&gt;&gt; So when do we let the people know? &gt;&gt; Our mission is to ensure the
continuity of our species. &gt;&gt; Isn't it also decided that people
have the right to fight for their lives?
♪ (intense music) ♪
&gt;&gt; No matter what happens, I want us to be together.
&gt;&gt; Find out the truth... (laughing from audience)
&gt;&gt; It's all a cover up, Man. (laughing from audience)
That's coming out a little dark on that side. Well, that picture
was probably one of the best pieces of computer simulation in the
whole movie-- they show this aircraft carrier coming and dumping
right on the White House as this huge tidal wave is overtaking the
East coast. So I forgot to mention the other sort of thematic piece of
this movie is that ostensibly the whole end of civilization was
predicted at least according to the movie tellers by the Mayan's, so
this date of December 21, 2012 is something that corresponds to
a prediction in their mythology and I'll talk about that a little bit too.
But what I found interesting as I was looking up a little bit about the facts
about the movie, is they encourage you to Google "2012" at the end of
the trailer, and in fact this is really great PR. They did an awful lot
of work setting up virtual think tanks and non-existent theology centers
and what have you, so they would be the first Google hits, that you came
up with when you Googled 2012. And it was incredible, because then they
told their own story of what this Mayan prediction was, and what is the science
of whatever, and now that's what are the top, I don't know, ten things
that you're going to find out about when you do in fact do this Google search
so that's just something to be mindful of as we start thinking of researching
for ourselves what's going to be presented to us in a movie.
So let's talk about the first part of this story which is the sun.
So ostensibly in this story, the sun has had some huge solar eruption--
I don't know what that means, and this solar eruption has unleashed
an ungodly number of neutrinos
at us, okay? So what are some important facts for us, as scientists about the sun?
Well the sun is a big plasma of gas, and it's rather heavy.
And that gravitational level of force that's inside the sun, is enough to
fuse atoms or nuclei, more importantly together. So in fact, the main
power source in the sun that is producing all the heat, the light
and other things like neutrinos is nuclear fusion. And actually
that story is a relative recent description of the sun. Up until
even the early part of the 20th century, scientists were really
wondering what is it that powers the sun. And there are some
very famous physicists of the 19th and early 20th centuries
calculating various scenarios-- what is the energy source in
the sun, and they all came up with lifetimes by which the sun
would extinguish itself of order a few thousand years. That's
very good if you believe in certain kinds of theology, but if you're asking
why is it the earth has been around for 4 billion years, and what's
providing heat, that was really hard to understand. So with the dawn
of nuclear physics in the 20s and 30s, this finally came to be understood.
And fusion it turns out to be very important to our story because
it produces lots of these particles called neutrinos. So there are
lots of fusion processes, fusion just is a generic term for "I will take
two things and fuse them together" and in doing so, the reason we
care about fusion as an energy source, it releases energy.
This energy can be in the form of heat, or it can be in the form
of other particles. And there are a lot of these reactions that
release neutrinos. I've listed just a few of them-- most of them
come from the fusion of the lightest elements, two protons
to make an isotope of hydrogen called Dueteron. It releases
one neutrino and then it produces the spectrum of neutrinos
that's rather intense. There are some other processes as well that make
contributions here-- you can take a proton, an electron-- two
protons and an electron and make again a Deuteron and
a neutrino. You can take Helium three and a proton and you
make Helium four. And so on. And all of these things release
neutrinos, in fact, so many neutrinos come at us from
the sun-- just our sun, there are about 10 trillion, hitting your body
at every second. Just from our sun. Now add up all the other stars
in the universe-- there are a lot of neutrinos passing through you.
Okay. Neutrinos are a big form of the energy release of any star
or any super nova. A lot of the phenomena we see out in the universe
are releasing neutrinos. They are also producing, if you noticed
in this little set of reactions I produced --it's listed here-- the heavier elements.
Some of the elements that we have left to us, are left over from literally
the big bang. We have protons and neutrons and they form slightly
heavier things. We get up to helium and lithium, left over from the
big bang, but the really heavy elements are formed in stars. And so we in fact
rely for a lot of the heavy minerals that we have on the left over star dust.
If you like. Things that come streaming at us, or streamed at us long ago, when
the earth was formed. But the big take away messages are, yes there
are a whole lot of neutrinos. In fact neutrinos were very instrumental
in confirming our picture of how the sun actually produces its energy.
There were a set of ideas of what the sun was relying on to produce energy
and there was a chemist, actually, not a physicist but a chemist back in
the 50s and 60s that developed a technique to actually detect
neutrinos from the sun. And this chemist went deep under ground in
a mine in South Dakota, had a large chlorine tank so bleach basically
and when a neutrino hits a chlorine atom or a nucleus actually
it produces argon. And it's specifically an isotope of argon that's radio active.
He was such a good chemist he could isolate single atoms of argon inside
of that giant tank. If you notice, that's him, that's Ray Davis, that's the tank. So it's
a rather big vessel that he's using to contain his big chlorine bath. And
he was good enough to be able to isolate individual argon atoms
and every time he saw one, he knew that a neutrino had interacted from
the sun. So he was counting up neutrinos to see that that would in fact explain
the level of power produced by the sun. And he got an answer
that was about right. For that he was actually awarded a Nobel Prize,
because that was big stuff to actually now confirm that we see neutrinos
from various celestial objects.
Well there are a lot of us that do neutrino experiments and it
turns out, not because we don't like the sunlight, we all go underground
to do it. Actually a few of us here at UT Austin are involved in an experiment
that is in Northern Minnesota. A place that's so far north-- it's about a few
...just a couple miles away from the Canadian border. It's only not
snowed in that area in August it turns out. But we're about
2,700 feet below ground. This is the protector that we built.
It's not a chlorine tank. You see here a person, again, standing next
to that, so that's about 25 feet tall. It's about 5,000 tons of steel
a very large neutrino detector compared to the original one
by Ray Davis. The world's deepest neutrino detector is actually
in Canada. It is about 7,000 feet below ground. And so that's
about as far as anyone has dared to go because that's
a lot of digging to get that far.
Let's see if I can get this work.
So why are we going underground? Well it's not that these are top secret
projects as we'll see in another clip, I'm going to play from the movie
you might tend to believe that neutrino projects are sort
of top secret work by the government and guys in black suits
but it's not so. Actually the reason we do this is that neutrinos are
actually very faintly interacting particles. It's very difficult to
see the signals from a neutrino in your detector. And particularly
if you're looking at a source of neutrinos like the sun, the sun is unleashing
on us a ton of other stuff. There are many other particles coming at us
from outer space. Protons and gamma rays and electrons. All this stuff leaves
signals and detectors and we need to find ways of shielding ourself from
that other stuff so that we're looking at just the neutrinos. So in fact
what we do is we go deep under ground. So some of the detectors
are a 1,000 or 2,000, 3,000 up to 7,000 feet below ground and
what that does it it tends to shield us from this flux of other stuff.
So on the vertical axis of this plot is a number of millions of
particles per square meter per year, hitting an average
detector, the deeper you go underground. So it lies on
a curve that gets lower and lower the deeper you go
underground. And that's the real reason we tend
to do this research in rather difficult circumstances. Because
it's difficult to build a 5,000 ton object when you have
to go down a shaft that's probably no bigger across
than this room. So it's kind of like building ships in a bottle.
Yes?
(inaudible audience question)
&gt;&gt; Oh that's a good question and I'll come back to this
a little bit further, later on. A neutrino on average could
go through a light year of lead before it would interact so
most neutrinos passing through you, this is the good part
of the story--don't interact at all. Most neutrinos passing
through the earth don't interact at all. They just keep on going.
So actually to see a neutrino in the detector or whatever apparatus
you're trying to build is a very rare event. You're counting, really
you're sampling a very small fraction of the neutrinos that
come at us. Okay? Good question. Thank you.
Alright, let's go back to the movie.
All movie theater hero-- in this case it's a physicist and who else
really? Our movie starts out with Adrian Helmsley who we are told
works for the Office of Science and Technology policy. He is using
neutrinos to track activity of the sun. And they make in this
uh, clip, rather unexpected discoveries so let me...
play a clip from the movie here.
Let's see if I can do it.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible talking)...on the phone why didn't you attend the conference?
&gt;&gt; I will show you Adrian sir. &gt;&gt; What's that mean? Stop
siring me.
(sound of going down a mine shaft)
&gt;&gt; They went down a mine shaft.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)...11,000 feet.
(inaudible talking)
&gt;&gt; How do you work in this heat?
&gt;&gt; You've come on a good day my friend. Sometimes it can
get to 120 degrees.
(inaudible) ...Quantum Physics of the university of (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Dr. Hemsley. &gt;&gt; So what are we looking at?
&gt;&gt; These neutrinos acting normally.
(inaudible) mass, no electric charge.
Possibly the mass goes undisturbed.
&gt;&gt; The message said they count government for the last solar eruptions.
&gt;&gt; That was last week.
But this happened two days ago.
(typing)
The previous set of eruptions in pure history are causing the highest neutrino
cam we ever recorded.
&gt;&gt; Oh, my God.
(laughter)
&gt;&gt; That does sound bad.
(laughter)
&gt;&gt; Well, what could that do?
Well it can, let's just talk about what actually happens with the sun.
So the sun actually does have big solar eruptions. The sun does this all the time.
In fact, the sun goes through a rather cycle-- a periodic cycle of these solar
eruptions. The pictures that I'm showing over here are two snapshots of the sun,
taken about 5.5 years apart. Turns out every 11 years, the sun is going through
a cycle. In one picture it looks rather smooth and uniform and the other it has
lots of blotches on it. Those are so called sun spots.
The sun is going through a lot of turbulence all the time, and this
turbulence seems to have a periodicity where every 11 years, it's going through
a period of large amounts of activity and that activity manifests itself in
real big fluid flow on the surface of the sun so called "coronal mass ejections"
You see huge flares that send off huge amounts of mass from the sun-- streaming
off into space and all kinds of stuff that could be quite catastrophic.
In fact, the biggest solar eruption in human history is not the one that took
place in 2012, but rather in 1859.
The story of that is pretty remarkable.
So in this particular solar storm back in the 1800s there was an early observation
just by looking up through a telescope and you could see gosh, the surface of
the sun looks pretty darn different today.
There are huge blotches on it or hug solar sun spots and a couple days later there
are a huge rain of particles hitting the surface of the Earth.
I don't know if any of you have been up North to see the Northern Lights.
Has anyone ever seen the Northern Lights? No.
Because we're in Texas and most of us have never seen the Northern Lights.
If you live up in let's say Northern Minnesota or Canada or above it would
not be unusual for you to see a rather dramatic light display at nighttime.
It would happen in the day as well but you see so much other light from the sun.
Where high energy particles are streaming up and get directed up toward the poles.
The North Pole and the South Pole by Earth's magnetic field. As these things
come crashing into the atmosphere, they cause the gases in the atmosphere to excite
and emit light. So if you see the Northern Lights, something serious is going on.
There's a rather substantial shower of particles happening.
Now, mostly that happens up in the North or way down South.
So if you live in the South Pole that doesn't really figure into most people's
terminology. But on this particular day, back in 1859, the Northern Lights-- the
so called Northern Lights were visible all throughout California, Colorado,
the Chicago area and down as far as Florida. Never before does this happen.
Even would have been in Texas.
So that was really quite a sign of a violent event.
Later by a couple of days those sun spots when from being a sort of dark black or
brown color to being bright white.
Today we would know that is a huge x-ray flare and a second display of
Northern Lights came about reaching down as far South as South America.
In fact it was so bright this display of light in the North sky it was said that
miners who were in Colorado woke up at 1 in the morning thinking it was time
for breakfast-- I mean it was really incredible. This was definitely a big
event.
The impacts of such a solar storm should it happen again are pretty big
because what happens when all these charged particles come streaming at us
projected by the sun, they carry their own magnetic field. Those of you that
have to take a physics class learn that a current from a moving collection of
charge has its own magnetic field.
It starts to alter the magnetic field put out by the Earth itself.
And that magnetic field from the Earth is meant to be a protective layer for us.
I don't know if it's meant to be but it is a protective layer for us.
It tends to steer stuff coming at us away from the surface of the Earth.
As that stream of particles gets stronger and stronger, now that weakens the
magnetic field of the Earth to the point where actually the magnetic field of the
Earth is exposed or broken down to the side facing the sun.
Now we are sort of twisting in the wind.
Today if such a thing happened we would worry about this because we have a lot
going on that wasn't around in the 1800s.
We have technology. For example, we have power lines out there and they carry
currents. Well, currents tend to get affected by magnetic fields passing by
them from all these charged particles. It's a predicted that if a solar storm
were to ever happen again we would have rather dramatic power outages across the
entire globe. To the extend that you would probably see huge electrical fires on
transformers and power lines all around the world.
That's a simulation not a-- that's Photoshop, okay. Not real life.
In fact this is a simulation of the number of power outages there
would be in the states if there was a magnetic storm as big as the one in 1921
which was only a 1/3 or a 1/4 of the size of the one in 1850s.
No one has even bothered to do a simulation for the one in 1850s
because that would pretty much be the entire country-- our country would be
blacked out.
The economic catastrophe would be pretty big if something like this happened
again. The other thing we would worry about is in today's society we float a lot
of stuff over the Earth out there and it's pretty exposed as well. We rely on this
stuff like GPS and communications. Basically everything that's electronics
flying over the Earth would be fried by such a solar storm.'
And even in more mild solar periods astronauts flying in the space shuttle
go into interior sections of the space shuttle to shield themselves against
the rather regular bombardment of the stuff that their exposed to when
the sun goes through an even modest solar flare. One of these things might
be a rather significant event.
Now the good news is if you're worried about 2012, the sun does this on a fairly
regular schedule and it's not that big.
In fact, 2012 if we look at the solar cycle should be a pretty quiet year.
This is a graph of sun spots versus year and we had a pretty big year in the
early 60s. We had a pretty big year in the early 80s, but 2012 no worries.
Maybe we should talk about those scary neutrinos.
So in the story, the neutrinos seem to be the real problem it's not the other
stuff coming at us from the sun but rather the neutrinos that are admitted
by the sun at least according to the story.
So I thought we'd focus on what happens with those bad neutrinos.
It's not gonna let me do that.
I'll show you.
&gt;&gt; It was the highest neutrino count ever recorded.
That's not what worries me. For the first time ever the neutrinos
are causing a physical reaction.
&gt;&gt; That's impossible.
(water pouring)
&gt;&gt; Ahhh that feels very good.
&gt;&gt; Please, follow me.
You won't believe this. (inaudible) this water pipe goes down
another 6,000 feet.
Looks like neutrinos coming from the sun. (inaudible)
(laughter)
They're heating up, last call.
(inaudible) will react like microwave sir.
♪ (suspenseful music) ♪
&gt;&gt; Boy that sounds really bad. (laughter)
Heating up the Earth's core. Okay.
Here again, there seems to be just a little bit of truth to the fiction in this
movie. You know they walked into this chamber and it had these bulbous things
all along the walls. There's this big tank they referenced that goes down another
6,000 feet which looked like it contained boiling water. Well there's almost just a
little bit of truth to what they were talking about. Almost.
Let me show you what a modern Neutrino detector looks like post Ray Davis from
the 1960s. This is the world's largest neutrino detector. It's located in Japan
and it's called the Super-Kamiokande detector. Kamioka is the name of a Mayan
in Japan so it's-- I forget what the nde tacked on means in Japanese but it's an
enormous volume it's about 50,000 tons of water that's equivalent to about one
Gulf oil spill a day...(laughter) but in Texas terminology.
It is surrounded by these bulbous objects. They are called photo-multiplier tubes and
when a scientist that is working on this experiment is looking for are flashes of
light when a neutrino from the sun or other source comes and interacts with
the water and creates the electromagnetic equivalent of a sonic boom so it's a
light boom and you see flash of light produced in this water from a neutrino
interaction. So the entire thing you can think of is a camera facing in looking at
this water target. It doesn't by any stretch go down 6,000 feet. That's
really darn deep. I think that's about the thickness of the oceanic crust so
that's a pretty significant tank that they referenced in the movie but this tank is
pretty darn big. This picture shows the tank in a fish-eye camera lens and
looking up it's just been started to fill with water. Those folks are in a pontoon
boat right there and graduate students cleaning the surface of those photo-
multiplier tubes. (laughter)
And they'll eventually fill that up. I guess the students just polish as they
go. It's about 70 meters tall. That's about the size of the RLM building
for those of you that are familiar with the North end of campus here.
That's one of the taller buildings here on campus.
That is a significant tank but by no stretch is it 6,000 feet.
And the little bulbs serve a very specific purpose.
The water never boils okay. It's not like the neutrinos make the whole thing warm.
The neutrinos' interaction is really such a small amount of energy in the water
we're looking for light, not boiling water.
This what you might see, a neutrino coming in from the sun would be an
invisible dotted line and all of a sudden it would produce this flash of light
and this light would propagate outwards and hit the walls of the tank.
You would see this rather dramatic display of a ring of light hitting the
walls and that's actual data from that experiment where they see different
types of neutrinos either electron type neutrino or (inaudible) type neutrinos
interacting in the water and you can see the pattern of light on the walls of the
tank.
This was an earlier experiment I just put it in there because it has a scuba diver
in it and I thought it'd be funny (laughter)
Actually, one of the things that was significant about our discoveries with
neutrinos from the sun is that there's not nearly enough so we don't really
worry about having to cause the Earth's core to heat. In fact, the
early experiments that we're looking for the so called electron-type
neutrinos coming from the sun failed to detect enough and when Ray Davis
first discovered this everyone thought he was wrong 'cause he's after all just a
chemist doing work in a physicist's field.
And he stuck to his guns for many years and this was really to his credit and I
think why he deserves the Nobel prize.
He was consistently coming up with results that said that there are only about a 1/3
amount of n neutrinos that you'd predict given the luminosity or the brightness
of the sun. In fact, that remains an observation that other scientists have
confirmed to this day. In fact, that's one of the key areas in particle
physics right now is why it is that those electron type neutrinos that
you would think leave the sun in a certain number don't appear on
Earth at the correct number.
I'll come back to that in a little while.
Well in the movie this becomes a big cover up because they decide the
Earth is gonna end. There's gonna be title waves and volcanoes and
we're going to try to brace ourselves by building ships to protect ourselves
and much of the story is most of humanity being wiped out with the
small exception of a few people chosen to live on protective ships or arks by
the governments of the world. I won't bother to play this clip because I think
we're running a little low on time.
This is Danny Glover and he plays the president in this movie.
One thing I have to say though is this guy who plays the physicist and works for
the OSTP, the office of science and technology policy-- he has the job I'd
love to have. He's this kind of swash buckler guy. He wears suits and dresses
pretty well. He's in these control rooms with pretty exotic panels you know
monitoring everything going on in the Earth.
You know a real guy who works for the OSTP is kind of like a technology diplomat
He tends to sign legal papers with other countries and on patent infringements
and advise the President on which form we should take, Beta or VHS.
So it tends to be a much more mundane job although it's an important job within the
government.
The other character in the movie is John Cusack and he plays your average
Joe that happens to find out about the government cover up by accident.
He's gone to Yellowstone where some of the scientists are doing there work
to find out where the early volcanoes are gonna erupt and he happens
to land upon Woody Harrelson. (laughter)
He's your ultimate conspiracy guy. He's living out there in the woods
and he's figured it all out and he knows what the governments of
the world are up to and he's got a little radio broadcast and I'm
gonna let him explain what's going on because he it explains it much
better than I can.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Thank you Bill what is your question?
&gt;&gt; I wanted to know, where is all this gonna start?
&gt;&gt; Well, something like this could only originate in Hollywood, Bill.
They got the Earth cracking under their asses already.
&gt;&gt; Our family believes in the gospel of the Lord Jesus. We have nothing
to fear, Charlie.
&gt;&gt; Good for you, Bill. Thanks for calling.
This is Charlie Frost reporting live from Yellowstone National Park...
soon to become the world's largest active volcano.
I'll be right back, folks.
&gt;&gt; Do you mind if I join you? I wanted to ask you something.
&gt;&gt; I only got a minute.
Hey. Pickle?
No. I was listening to the broadcast and I was wondering
what exactly is it that's gonna start in Hollywood?
&gt;&gt; It's the apocalypse. End of days.
The Judgment Day, the end of the world, my friend.
Christians called it the rapture, but the Mayans knew about it...
the Hopis, the I Ching... the Bible, kind of...
Beer? &gt;&gt; Yeah.
So look, I gotta eat. Why don't you download my blog. It's free.
Of course, we do appreciate donations.
&gt;&gt; In ancient times, the Mayan people were the first civilization to discover...
...that this planet had an expiration date.
According to their calendar in the year 2012, a cataclysmic event will unfold...
...caused by an alignment of the planets in our solar system...
that only happens every 640,000 years.
&gt;&gt; Oh, not again.
&gt;&gt; Pretty neat, huh? I did all the animation myself.
&gt;&gt; Just imagine the Earth as an orange.
&gt;&gt; You lure them in with humor. Then you make them think.
&gt;&gt; Our sun will begin to emit such extreme amounts of radiation...
&gt;&gt; Those little bastards are called neutrinos.
&gt;&gt; ...that the core of the Earth will melt. That's the inside part of the orange
leaving the crust of our planet free to shift.
In 1958, Professor Charles Hapgood named it Earth Crust Displacement.
Albert Einstein did support it. People, we'll get it all. The forces of Mother
Nature will be so devastating... It will bring an end to this world
on winter solstice, 12-21-12.
Always remember, folks, you heard it first from Charlie Frost.
&gt;&gt; You'd have to keep a thing like this under wraps.
&gt;&gt; I'll quit it there.
Yeah, so what he's got all figured out
In fact, according to him, the governments are all at this plot and the Mayans knew
it all along. I don't know how the Mayans predicted the plot part but they did
and they predicted that also the-- all this unleash of neutrinos were gonna
cause a rather severe tectonic motion of the Earth's plates and we're gonna
be all lost through the world's volcanoes and floods.
So here I wanna actually look at this notion of neutrinos causing heating of
the Earth's core because that's a pretty substantial thing.
There's one little detail that's very very wrong in this movie and we
already talked about it because we talked about neutrinos passing
through us all the time.
Yes, it's true the sun unleashes a lot of neutrinos.
Everyone of us has 10 trillion passing through us from just our sun.
When they do interact, scientists do enjoy watching the rather
dramatic displays in the detectors they built and the rather violent
collisions of neutrinos annihilating the nucleus of an atom.
There's just one little problem. It doesn't happen all that much.
Most of the neutrinos produced by the sun pass right through the Earth.
Okay, they are extremely weakly interacting.
This has to do with how forces connect particles together.
When most of us are looking at each other we are looking at
light and what is exchanged between us are the carrier particles of light
called photons. So there are photons dancing all throughout this room.
There are some bouncing off your skin into my eye. There are some bouncing
off my shirt into you.
And that's what we see. That's what allows us to communicate with one another via
the electromagnetic interaction.
The electromagnetic interaction responds to something called electric charge--
something neutrinos don't have.
Neutrinos are correctly said to be charge-less or neutral in the movie.
They don't have an electric charge so the only force that they are left with
experiencing is the weak force.
The carrier of the weak force is called the W particle, it's the analogy
of the photon and it weighs a lot. It weighs as much as a crypton
nucleus. For that neutrino to throw off one of these heavy W particles to
you actually violates the law of conservation of energy. It can't create
that thing and throw it over to you because it doesn't even have that much
energy to begin with. And so you say how does it allow itself to violate the law of
conservation of energy. Through one of the great things in quanta-mechanics...
well we allow that in physics but we just don't allow it for too long.
There's this thing called the Uncertainty Principle and you're allowed to violate
everything in quanta-mechanics. You can violate momentum conservation, you
can violate energy conservation. You can violate anger-momentum conservation.
You can only do it for a little while though.
It turns out this W particle is only allowed to travel a little while.
It's kinda like Cinderella and the glass slippers.
What that means is information exchanged between a neutrino and it's neighbor will
only go a short distance. The neutrino would have to get very close to something
in order to interact with it and that just doesn't happen.
In fact, the very fact that neutrinos interact so weakly makes them an
excellent tool for science, because when we look at the sun, we are
seeing the light from the sun and it's streaming at us. That light is
pretty much the stuff that's emitted from the very surface of the sun.
Any light or other forms of energy from deep inside the sun has to get
through the molasses of the rest of the sun to get out, but it doesn't.
It's trapped. If you want to see the interior core of the sun though,
you look at it with neutrinos because they're very penetrating.
In fact, this image here...this sort of white dot with the yellow corona around
it, is an image of the sun created with just using neutrinos. In a sense it's a
picture of the interior of the sun.
It doesn't look like it has a lot of detail right now, that's because the
camera doesn't have a lot of neutrinos hitting it or interacting in it.
But it is that experiment in Japan, actually taking a picture of the sun
using neutrinos. Well let's do some numbers. This is a math lecture so
we're gonna put some numbers together and ask could these neutrinos coming from the
sun actually heat up the core of the Earth?
Here's my best attempt.
The sun emits about 10 trillion neutrinos per square cm per second.
Each neutrino carries about 10^-13 joules of energy. And the Earth is big. It's got
an area of 10^18 square cm and so I tally up the total energy hitting the
Earth from neutrinos in any form 10^18 joules per second.
That's a lot of joules... you'd say, "Ooh pretty bad."
There's another part of this equation though. If you wanna ask, will it heat up
the core of the Earth?
Well you've got to heat it up? I take all that energy and I dump it into the mass
of the Earth. It turns out the mass of the Earth is awfully big too.
The mass of the Earth to go to approximation is about 10^27 grams.
You take 10^18 joules per second for one second burst and dump into the 10^27 grams
and the temperature rise of the Earth would be a mass of 10^-9 or one one
billionth of a degree Celsius. There's two problems with the movie.
Only two. (laughter)
One is that neutrinos just don't stop in the core of the Earth. They don't
travel in the Earth's crust and then selectively decide to stop in the core.
In fact, they wouldn't stop in the solar system. They would keep radiating out
for a light-year of lead or equivalent.
Even if they did, the energy produced by the sun is no where near enough in
neutrinos to heat up the core of the Earth or the entire Earth itself.
It's a temperature rise of less than a degree. Well a billion times the solar
output would be 1 degree Celsius. That's just not enough to get worried
about. So it sounds good but... not gonna happen.
Now there's this other quote in the movie that's actually kind of enticing. It talks
about what about this thing where neutrinos transmute into other nuclear
particles. Actually that's true. They don't transmit into microwaves though.
They transmit into other forms of neutrinos so there's another problem.
Yes if they changed into something else you could worry about that heating up
the core of the Earth, but it's more neutrinos so they're not gonna interact
in the core of the Earth either. (laughter)
And there are experiments that show that this happens.
There are experiments like those of Ray Davis that say we don't see the right
number of neutrinos from the sun hitting us at the Earth... our supposition is
that they changed a way from the type of neutrino that Davis was looking for in
his experiment to another type of neutrino.
There's an experiment that some of us at UT where we made a beam of neutrinos
using an accelerator and we deliberately aimed it down at the ground because the
Earth is fairly transparent to neutrinos.
The neutrinos go through the Earth 'cause the Earth is round. Remember that the
Earth is round. Neutrinos go through the Earth and come out in Northern Minnesota
in our beam. And so we placed a detector in Northern Minnesota to look for the
neutrinos launched back in Chicago where we have an accelerator to produce this
beam. Once again, not all the neutrinos arrived. It's not because they interacted
in the Earth, but because they changed into another flavor of neutrino that
we weren't looking for.
They disappeared into another flavor.
There have been further more experiments..
I have to show this quote.
Yeah, that's the one.
The one news station in the United States that carry a story about our
neutrino experiment said, "Physicists Lose Some Neutrinos, Gain Some
Information....Somewhere between Illinois and Minnesota the federal
government lost some neutrinos." (laughter)
It makes us sound like floppy disks from Los Alamos, doesn't it?
There have been further more experiments done that actually show that this-- when
you lose these neutrinos they go into something else, halfway through your
experiment they actually go back into other forms of neutrinos.
There's an experiment...the one in Canada that plotted the number of neutrinos of
the electron type vs the number of neutrinos in the other type and showed
that the sun's neutrinos although they all started out as electron neutrinos ended up
being other types of neutrinos. There's an experiment in Geneva, Switzerland
where the Large Hadron Collider's located.
They did this thing very similar to us. They had an accelerator over here that
aimed the neutrino beam down into the ground instead of going through
Madison, Wisconsin they go through nice places like Milan and Venice and they end
up in the Southern boot of Italy where they have their neutrino detector and
they found explicitly that what they see on the other side is another type of
neutrino not the one they sent in their beam.
We know that neutrinos to transmute to other types of particles, but those
other particles are neutrinos so they're not gonna heat up the core of the Earth
either.
Now let's talk a little bit about this Mayan prediction stuff because
that's important. I don't want you to get real worried about the end of days here.
Okay, in the movie it talks about that the Mayans made these predictions and that
there was gonna be a fairly significant event on December 21, 2012. I didn't show
the clip but the ultimate story turns out to be that all the planets will align and
this will cause some big instability in the sun and that's what's gonna cause
this big solar eruption so the grains of truth to this are that the Mayans like a
lot of other ancient peoples were excellent predictors of the trajectories
of the planets and the sky and they catalog many things. In fact, we all
know that they built their calendars around the motion of celestial objects.
They even built their temples around when you would observe the various
solstices and what you observe the planet Venus doing and so on.
That part is true, but it's not necessarily true that that's gonna cause
our big cataclysmic event in 2012.
In fact, some of the other things that people get very excited about in the
Mayan calendar are that it's organized into these epics called "B'ak'atuns"
and that one of these things goes through a complete cycle in 2012.
The Mayan calendar is organized in increments of 20. This is T-shirt that
you can buy on the Web. Sort of shows what December 21, 2012
would be on the calendar.
First digit there is the number of days. Second
digit represents the number of unials which is an increment about 20 days
about a month. The next digit over is one tun which is 18 unials which is
360 days. They fudged on the number 20 there so it came out to about one
year. The next digit over is called a K'atun and that's 20 tuns and that
turns out to be a certain number of days and then there's a thing called
a b'ak'atun which turns out to be 144,000 days.
The Mayan calendar is built in these increments of 20 and one of these
suckers is gonna end December 21, 2012.
This is described as the big apocryphal event because it is said that the Mayans
predict the end of the calendar on this date and we're in trouble.
There's a couple problems. One, I don't know that this is any different from
December 31, 1999 when we had lots of confusion and panic about the year 2000.
And second, scholars differ for whether the thirteenth B'ak'tun is supposed to end
in 2012 is actually a significant date 'cause that's not necessarily the end of
the Mayan calendar.
In fact, there are some hieroglyphs in Mayan ruins that have been discovered
which says that in fact there's supposed to be 20 b'ak'tuns because the calendar
is built in increments of 20. If that's true then the end of the Mayan
calendar isn't in 2012 anyway. It's in the year 4772.
There's another hieroglyph that's been discovered in the city of Coba.
This was once a major city in the Mayan period of 500s and 900s.
This actually gives more increments of 20 beyond the digits that I showed you.
In fact there were 20 units of 20 and that would mean that the age of the universe
according to the Mayan calendar was 4x10^28 which by the way is
3 quintillion times the age of our universe.
It's possible the Mayans had it wrong you know.
We should also look at this story about the solar system being in alignment and
throwing the sun into some instability.
I want you to look at the picture on the right that shows the locations of the
planets off the little star chart that you can get off the web.
Notice that Pluto is over there. I also call it a planet because I'm an old fart.
There's Neptune, there's Uranus, there's Saturn and Jupiter.
Picture on the right is the same thing on December 21, 2012.
It doesn't look all that different because it takes a long time for the
outer planets to go through one cycle so they're not gonna be anymore
in alignment today -- then than they are today.
Now you say, oh its the inner planets that really matter because they pull
the sun to the Earth all the more.
Well here's the inner planets today, and here's the inner planets in 2012.
They kind of look no more aligned than. In fact, I think they look more align
today so you should kind of really be worried. (laughter)
The other thing that sometimes gets talked about is a quote on quote
"Mayan Myth" is actually the invention of the new-age astrologer which is there's
this thing called planet X or Nibiru and that is the thing that's gonna throw
the sun into some instability.
Planet X fear has been around since I don't know-- time in memorial
This particular astrologer points to that little hieroglyph there which has
a number of stars in the upper panel or number of planets and this person
says well that represents Jupiter, Saturn, Pluto, Uranus, Neptune, Venus,
Mars, Earth, Moon, and Mercury and then the Planet X and there's only two little
problems with this.
Yes.
&gt;&gt; I was just curious. Is that Zacharias that you're talking about?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Very good. You've seen that?
&gt;&gt; The 12th planet? &gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I read that a long time ago.
&gt;&gt; There's a couple problems with Zacharias.
The Mayans didn't know about Uranus, Neptune, or Saturn-- well Saturn they
would have known because you can see that with your eyes.
So they couldn't have talked about this 10th planet or 12th planet because they
didn't know about planets 8 and 9 or 7 and 8 right so this hieroglyph doesn't
represent the existence of planet X in Mayan astronomy and furthermore
that's from the Ancient's culture in Babylonia not from Mayan.
The other thing I'll say is there are a lot of other planet X's out there and
we all hear about Pluto but Pluto is one of the series called Dwarf planets.
Which isn't even the biggest one. There's Eris out there and it doesn't have any
more likelihood of crashing into the Earth than Pluto does.
Let's recap where the movie is correct is that it's really true that a solar
eruption does occur periodically and these things can be fairly dramatic.
It does happen on a 11 year cycle.
It is true as said in the movie that neutrinos are used by scientists to
track the sun and in fact they're instrumental in understanding how
the sun even works so that's a pretty cool thing.
It is true that volcanoes and tectonic--
volcanoes and Earthquakes and all this would result as a result of plate tectonic
motion. We've lived with that for all of the four billion years and so that's not
news to us. It is true that the Mayan calendar is divided in such a way that
there is an increment that is gonna go through a roll-over in 2012
However, there is no such thing as a Mayan prediction of an apocalypse
in fact there's no clear indication that the Mayans even had an idea of a
apocalypse in there mythology that's very much a Judaic Christian thing.
There's no scenario that is proposed in the move about planetary alignments
that's even close to true. This whole thing about neutrinos causing the
heating of the core of the Earth -- we should just set aside as cool
science fiction.
I will leave you with one scary thought. (laughter)
There have been a number of interesting papers lately about radioactive decay loss
that are apparently changing due to neutrinos.
We all hear of exponential decay of radio- active elements and that half life a
nuclear element-- you lose one half of that element as it changes into something
else and goes through exponential decay.
People have noticed or plotted over time the following curiosity which is the
exponential lifetime of various isotopes tends to go through a little modulation.
In other words it's one microsecond one day and .9 microseconds the next day.
Actually it goes through a cycle that depends on where we are in Earth's
orbit around the sun. The Earth's orbit is slightly elliptical that we are getting
slightly closer to or slightly far away from the sun. Furthermore, this
exponential decay law goes through rather abrupt changes whenever there's
a solar flare.
It goes through an abrupt change a couple days before there's a solar flare.
And so it's thought that the neutrinos from the sun are actually messing with
us a little bit in the form of interacting with these kind of radioactive isotopes.
Okay, I just want to promote one last thing there is an even coming up that
I want you to know about.
There's open house in the physics department in September 28.
All of you had to take intro Physics know that you have to learn about
the acceleration due to gravity we are going to measure it that day
we are going to drop watermelons off the building and see if it really does
accelerate at 9.8 meters per second squared.
There is later in the semester gonna be a concert by the group Arc-attack here
on campus that's put on by the Physics department.
With one apology for me poo pooing on this movie for so long I just want to
show you that I'm in good company. Physicists tend to do this a lot...
Anyone ever see the TV show Big Bang Theory?
Yeah, okay.
A friend of mine is actually the science consultant for this TV
show. He sent me this clip.
&gt;&gt; If you don't have any other plans would you like to join us for Thai food and
a Superman movie marathon?
&gt;&gt; Marathon? Wow how many Superman movies are there?
&gt;&gt; You're kidding right?
&gt;&gt; I do like the one where Lois Lane falls from the helicopter and Superman
swooshes in and catches her. Which one is that?
&gt;&gt; (in unison) One.
&gt;&gt; You realize that scene was right for scientific inaccuracy?
&gt;&gt; Yes, I know men can't fly.
&gt;&gt; No, no let's assume that they can.
Lois Lane is falling and accelerating at 32 feet per second per second.
Superman swoops down to save her by reaching out two arms of steel.
Ms. Lane who is now traveling approximately 120 miles an hour
hits them and is immediately sliced into three equal pieces.
&gt;&gt; Unless Superman matches her speed and decelerates.
&gt;&gt; In what space sir? What space?
She's two feet above the ground. Frankly if he really loved her, he'd let her hit
the pavement, it'd be a merciful death.
(applause)
&gt;&gt; With that I'll thank you and thank you for tolerating my poo pooing on this
movie for the last hour. I'll take questions if you have them
&gt;&gt; Couple of house keeping notes here
Right outside the door there are recycling containers so if you
wouldn't mind taking your cans and bottles if you're leaving now
otherwise...you have time for questions?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'll take a few questions.
&gt;&gt; Questions ahoy!
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that was just straight Up made up, I don't think that exists.
&gt;&gt; It does. &gt;&gt; It does exist?
&gt;&gt; It's been disproved but it exists.
&gt;&gt; So, I mean, plate tectonic motion is a real thing, I mean it's why we
have five continents and not one big super continent, it doesn't happen
rapidly, the motion of continents happens over millions of years.
I don't know, you say hapgood is actually a real thing?
&gt;&gt; He actually wrote a book, the forward was by Einstein.
&gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; The theory has been disproven, it was
actually literately written in the 50s. &gt;&gt; Yeah, okay thank you for that.
So I'm wrong on this, there is a Hapgood.
The thing that often gets confused about sudden reorientations of things on the
surface of the earth, it is true that the magnetic poles move, so north
and south pole have been all over the place and that can change over relatively short
periods of time, but the motions of the continents are extremely slow.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So they made the case that the solar flares were going to amp up the number
of neutrinos, since that's a surface sort of activity, is there any connection
between solar flare activity (inaudible) and neutrino counts?
&gt;&gt; Actually it's true, that was the last thing I was trying to show you, that
people do see a connection with the neutrino flux, and these kind of things
like solar flares or coronal mass ejections, but again, we wouldn't
worry because there's just not that much energy in neutrinos.
Yes sir.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Yellowstone is...
I didn't hear the end of the sentence is all.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I was feeling like I was running over time, there is actually one little
kernel of truth here which is Yellowstone is a hotspot, a volcanic
hotspot, and it's one of several around the surface of the earth.
Hawaii itself has evidence of a hotspot.
There are places where a crust is relatively thin and there are these hot plumes
coming up through the mantle of the earth and as the earth's crust moves over it,
you see a string of volcanic activity as this crust slides on by.
The hotspot doesn't move but the crust has moved.
So in fact, the entire Hawaiian island chain and in fact another related chain
of islands that are now submerged stringing all the way up to Alaska
are evidence of a hotspot in the earth's motion over that, or the crust
motion over that hostpot. Yellowstone is another example, there's a string
of volcanoes you can trace that go back, I don't know, 16 million years
and indeed, one wonders why we haven't had one in a while, but not one that's gonna
cause the end of the earth, but certainly it is a source of volcanic activity.
Absolutely, thank you.
Other questions, or...
&gt;&gt; I heard something about the (inaudible) is that like, true?
&gt;&gt; I'm not a real expert here, but the magnetic field of the earth is caused
by the turbulent flow of the inner core of the earth, and that does adjust or
change in some ways, so the earth looks like a big bar magnet, and sometimes
it's tilted this way, and sometimes it's tilted that way. It doesn't have
to align with the spinning axis of the earth, in fact, it doesn't even now.
And it does move.
So we can see a northern lights here someday.
Oh, you got a cozy for asking questions? Okay.
Yes sir.
&gt;&gt; You said that there were many types of neutrinos.
&gt;&gt; Three.
&gt;&gt; Three, do they have different types of reactivity with matter?
&gt;&gt; They do but not in a way that would bother us.
The orders of magnitude difference from that which would bother us
and where they are is small.
So depending on the energy of the neutrino and the flavor of
neutrino, yes there is a slight change in how much they will
interact with other matter, but it's...
&gt;&gt; So which of the neutrinos is emitted by the sun the most?
&gt;&gt; It's the electron neutrino.
And the early experiments that
were looking for neutrinos from the sun were reasonably looking for
electron neutrinos, they failed to detect them.
So as this hypothesis of neutrinos transmuting into other things
evolved, people built other types of neutrino detectors that could see
the other two types of neutrinos, and then they were found.
So hence we're not worried about what it is that they're transmuting into,
it's not evil death rays or microwaves or anything like that, it's other types
of neutrinos.
&gt;&gt; It's just interesting because I'm in an astronomy class and this happened
(inaudible)
&gt;&gt; You probably would have learned about this because neutrinos figure very
prominently in astronomy, in fact, there are more neutrinos in the universe
than there are anything else.
And at one time, my field of particle physics was very preoccupied with neutrinos
because when we thought that they might have a mass that's a little bit
bigger than the mass of all the neutrinos added up, could have
been more than the mass of the rest of the universe.
In fact, my experiment and a couple others proved that that neutrino mass is still
pretty small, and so not significant on a universal scale.
You probably did hear about that in astronomy class as a result.
Yes.
&gt;&gt; Do neutrinos have (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Yes they do, they have a corresponding anti, all particles have a corresponding
antiparticle.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Yes, the experiment I'm working on is trying to right now measure
the difference in mass between the antiparticle and the particle.
and we're confused because we don't quite have the same number, so
either we goofed up or there's something cool. But mostly that's not expected
and all particles and antiparticles have the same mass.
Yeah, one last question maybe.
&gt;&gt; (inaudible)
&gt;&gt; Oh, you take a big blowtorch of protons and you throw it at
a target like a big piece of graphite, and it produces a shower of other
particles that aren't very interesting, but those other uninteresting particles
decay to neutrinos.
And so it produces this gas of neutrinos that goes bursting forward after we
shoot a proton beam at this target.
So we do that all the time.
Okay, with that, thank you all for coming out tonight and wish you a good night.
(applause)