[music playing]
NARRATOR: Reports of UFO sightings come from all corners
of the globe.
I was taken onboard a 200-foot diameter spacecraft in Mojave
Desert, and given--
I saw two great big road bright lights hanging oblique--
NARRATOR: Most believe these alien encounters are
a modern phenomenon.
But the fact is they have been reported for thousands
of years.
MICHAEL CREMO: Practically, every human civilization
have been in touch with extraterrestrial beings.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: In India, Israel.
DAVID CHILDRESS: The Mayans and the Aztecs.
The idea that there was one or more non-human groups inspiring
us is the truth.
NARRATOR: Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings.
But what if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape our history?
And if so, where did they come from?
And just who were the visitors?
[theme music]
Roswell, New Mexico.
This sleepy town in America's Southwest
was once best known for its large military air base.
But that changed in 1947 when a local rancher reported
that a spaceship crashed on his property.
Several weeks later, the US Army issued a press release
confirming the existence of an alien craft.
The next day, the military changed its story
and announced that what they had found was a weather balloon.
These conflicting reports sent shockwaves around the world,
and the name Roswell became a pop culture code word that
forever links extraterrestrial visitation with enduring
mystery.
NICK POPE: Speculation about why the Roswell crash would
be covered up is difficult to pin down.
Some people talk about this in terms of information
that would be shattering to our worldview.
STEVEN M. GREER: Almost everyone's
heard about the so-called Roswell event.
And one of the real implications of disclosure
is that some of our most cherished myths
about the origins of the human race,
and our history and archeology would fall apart.
GEORGE NOORY: Something happened at Roswell, New Mexico
a long time ago.
People want the truth.
I think there's something in the human being itself
that is striving, that is hungry for this knowledge
in order to answer questions about our own existence.
NARRATOR: Today, public opinion polls indicate more than half
the world's population believes aliens have either come here
in the past or are coming here now.
But what is it exactly that makes so many people believe?
JONATHAN YOUNG: I do think looking upward makes sense,
the universe is large.
There are things out there we do not understand.
There is probably intelligent life somewhere.
ROBERT BAUVAL: People tend to forget
that we're on a planet that's 4 and 1/2 billion years old.
The presence of our civilization in that vast scale of time,
I mean, if I click my finger, it wouldn't even
be fast enough to say this is the time of our civilization.
And to think that we're the only ones in this vast period
of time to me is absurd.
SARA SEAGER: Our galaxy, the Milky Way,
has over 100 billion stars.
And in our universe, we think there are more than 100 billion
galaxies.
So if every star had a planet with intelligent life,
how many alien civilizations would we have?
ERICH VON DANIKEN: If you take us as the crown of creation
or the top of evolution, we look at ourself
as the greatest, the biggest.
We say, how incredible, unique we are in the whole universe?
We forgot to learn modesty.
JENNIFER HELDMANN: Each step that we
take makes us a little bit less special.
We used to think that we were the center of the universe
as humans, and then we realized, oh well, that's not true.
But we're the center of the galaxy
and like, well, all right, so we're like 2/3 of the way
out in a spiral arm.
And then, well, at least our sun, you know, this, now,
the sun is actually in the middle
and the Earth goes around it, so Earth isn't even
the center of that system.
And so the more that we learn, we sort of, you know,
it's a very humbling science.
[rocket launching]
NARRATOR: When man first landed on the Moon,
our perspective on the universe changed forever.
Houston, the eagle has landed.
BUZZ ALDRIN: We aliens, who happened to go down
the ladder on July 20, 1969, we aliens were certainly
part of a magnificent race.
[rocket launching]
I just don't think people have a grasp for what energy
it takes to go from one star to another.
NARRATOR: This historic event raised the question--
if humans can successfully navigate in space
and explore other worlds, why couldn't
beings from other parts of the universe have done the same?
And might they have already come to Earth hundreds or perhaps
thousands of years ago?
ERICH VON DANIKEN: I think human past is more fantastic than we
all believe.
I have come to the idea that maybe extraterrestrials were
on this planet.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: Cahuachi, Peru.
2,000 years ago, this ancient settlement
served as the religious and cultural capital of the Nazca
people.
But sometime around 500 AD, the Nazca mysteriously
disappeared, leaving Cahuachi to fall into disarray.
1,400 years later in 1910, anthropologist Ales Hrdlicka
came to Cahuachi to study the ancient Nazca civilization.
During a dig, he unearthed some of the most
surprising and shocking artifacts he had ever seen.
[ominous music]
They were skulls with enormous, elongated craniums.
Where did they come from?
How did they get there?
And were they human?
DAVID CHILDRESS: In Peru, we find
this weird, elongated skulls.
And they're bizarre-looking.
I mean, and these people look like aliens.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: One may say, OK, aliens,
but another aspect that we have to consider
is that skull and cranial defamation, forming
elongated heads is a practice that's known throughout much
of the ancient world.
NARRATOR: In 1870, the process of skull deformation
was well-chronicled by a German botanist and explorer named
Georg Schweinfurth.
While exploring the African Congo,
he came in contact with a tribe called the Mangbetu.
They routinely performed a ritual of cranial binding that
allowed them to physically alter the shape of human skulls.
DAVID CHILDRESS: They took infant's skulls
and compressed them and bound them,
and they forced the cranium out and elongate it.
And in many cases, they doubled the size.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: And a big question
is, why was this being done?
It may have been a way to distinguish the elite perhaps
from the everyday people, made them a social stratification
type of issue.
something that also appeals to me
is that may have been a way to express physically and maybe
try to achieve physically greater levels of consciousness
or higher levels of mental ability.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: In my opinion,
they did this in order to mimic the gods.
And those gods were physical beings
because if they were just a figment of our ancestors'
imagination, I don't think that's a compelling enough
reason to expose your children to such a ritual
to achieve that type of look.
And in my opinion, these people were misinterpreted flesh
and blood space travelers.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: Some people have suggested
aliens had elongated skulls, and apparently, ancient peoples
are mimicking those skulls.
The old saying is that imitation is the sincerest form
of flattery.
NARRATOR: Although there have been many images that attempt
to depict what aliens might actually look like,
one in particular has come to dominate the public perception.
It, too, features an elongated cranium,
and is associated with an extraterrestrial race
that many refer to as the Grays.
NICK POPE: In terms of entities, one very common description
on the so-called Grays, 3 and 1/2, 4 feet tall,
essentially humanoid but a very spindly
with disproportionately large heads
and huge black almond-shaped eyes.
NARRATOR: But would someone in a primitive society
really want to replicate this look and deform their skull?
Some archeologists have a different perspective.
They point to artistic self-expression
as an explanation of these customs.
There are all kinds of people that either worship the body
or use the body as art, be it a tattoo or piercing of some sort
or tribes that put things in their ears
or in their lips to try to grow parts of their body.
Some societies we know practiced binding parts of the body--
feet or heads-- and try to make certain shapes,
and this was done for whatever reason we know today that this
isn't usually the most healthy thing to do.
But it doesn't mean people don't do it, that people are always
trying to change their body to make it look a certain way.
NARRATOR: Whatever the explanation
may be for these rituals, they are not just found
in Peru and the African Congo.
Skull deformation is a global phenomenon.
DAVID CHILDRESS: What's really strange
is that this is found all over the world.
And this is something that archeologists cannot easily
explain because for people on remote islands,
for people in South America or Malta or in Africa,
to suddenly independently do this cranial deformation like
this, seems incredible.
I mean, this is something that had to be learned,
something that was taught to them.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: We seem to have basic similarities as
if there was one civilization or at least one type of culture
that was influencing people around the world.
I find it more and more difficult to believe what I was
taught as an undergraduate that all these different cultures
just coincidentally came up with the same concepts
independently of each other.
[ominous music]
NARRATOR: Is it possible that individual societies
around the world were influenced by similar events?
And were they imitating real beings
who visited from other planets?
Some of the most compelling images of an elongated cranium
can be traced to ancient Egypt, and the depictions of one
of its most controversial pharaohs.
Could it be that he, too, was mimicking
the look of extraterrestrials?
Or is there an even more outrageous explanation?
Could he have been one of them?
[ominous music]
[music playing]
Egypt.
Long before the ancient Egyptians built the pyramids
or even settled along the Nile River,
they spoke of an era called Tepp Zeppi or the beginning of time.
According to legends, Tepp Zeppi was when sky gods descended
from the stars to Earth on flying boats,
and then turned mud and water into a new kingdom.
ROBERT BAUVAL: The word god, according
to the ancient Egyptians, is neteru.
It means a being that came from the cosmos.
They're very adamant about the fact
that their gods had descended from the stars.
They tell us that the God Osiris who ruled with his consort
and sister, the Goddess Isis, they were star gods.
And they identify that very clearly.
Osiris was identified as the constellation of Orion.
Isis was identified according to the star Sirius, brightest star
in the sky.
There's an interesting point about this,
is that within the constellation Orion is the so-called nursery
of stars.
The stars in our galaxy literally
were born in that zone.
And it's very peculiar that the ancient Egyptians insist
that the birth of star gods in this constellation,
they truly believed they were very adamant about this,
that their origins is in the sky.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: Something that we see around the world
with ancient civilizations is that they had
incredible knowledge of the stars, of the planets,
of the heavenly motions.
The average person in the ancient world
had way more knowledge of what's going
on in the skies than a lot of well-educated people today.
NARRATOR: As ancient Egypt grew into a great civilization,
its citizens believe their pharaohs were sons of Osiris
and thus, living gods.
Artwork and wall carvings depicted them
as perfect humans.
And while the people worship many different gods,
the pharaohs stood above them all.
This basic Egyptian religious belief
remained in force for nearly 1,000 years
until one pharaoh changed everything.
Who was this heretic?
His name was Akhenaten.
And in every surviving depiction,
he is shown with an elongated skull.
Who was he?
According to Egyptian mythology, he too
was descended from the gods who arrived on Earth
at the time of Tepp Zeppi.
But why do so many still believe he actually
came from the stars?
In 1352 BC, Akhenaten ascended to the throne
as the 10th pharaoh of the 18th dynasty.
Almost immediately, he instituted a series
of radical religious changes, including a ban on references
to multiple gods.
ROBERT BAUVAL: It's a rather strange thing
that he would want to do that with one sweep,
but he ordered all the iconography of previous gods
to be removed.
He only allowed one emblem, which was the sun emblem,
literally a sun disk with curious arms or rays pouring
down.
Why did he do this?
Because according to his writings and his poems that
were written about him later on, he
was visited by one of those beings that descended
from the sky who told Akhenaten, this is the way, I am your god.
NARRATOR: This sun god was known as Aten.
Akhenaten claimed to be a direct descendant of Aten.
ROBERT BAUVAL: Akhenaten, like any other pharaoh, regarded
himself to be divine.
He was a god.
Not only himself believed himself to be a god,
but the whole nation saw him as a god.
Now, the definition of god is that he was a descendant
from these celestial beings.
NARRATOR: During his fourth year as pharaoh,
Akhenaten ordered the construction of a new capital
city he called it Amarna, and dedicated it to the sun.
Akhenaten would spend the next 10 years here.
During which time, he instituted changes
in both art and culture, including how he himself would
be publicly depicted.
ROBERT R. CARGILL: In Egyptian iconography,
Egyptian pharaohs are depicted as these triangular-shaped
beings, these broad, strong shoulders and these very skinny
waist.
Now, we look at leaders today and we
know that most leaders don't have broad shoulders
and skinny waist.
But it was important to depict the Egyptian kings as having
broad shoulders and skinny waist,
the epitome of what a king ought to look like.
That's exactly the opposite with Akhenaten.
He shows himself perhaps as he really
is, a rather strange look.
He has very mystical look.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: If we take Akhenaten's statues,
for instance, literally, he was a very strange-looking
character.
Sort of combined, some people would say feminine aspects
with masculine aspects, may have had an elongated skull.
ROBERT R. CARGILL: The change in royal iconography of Akhenaten
showed him as he probably really was, with a misshapen head,
with a potbelly, with a sunken chest, as opposed
to the idealized iconography of traditional Egyptian artists
that show this big, strong pharaoh.
NARRATOR: Akhenaten's wife, Queen Nefertiti,
and their children, were also depicted
as having elongated skulls.
So why were Akhenaten's and Nefertiti's heads deformed?
Did they suffer from a genetic abnormality?
Or did they deliberately alter their shape?
Some believe there could be yet another explanation
behind their strange otherworldly appearance.
They look like they're different than other human
beings.
Is it possible that Akhenaten might have been
an extraterrestrial hybrid?
[ominous music]
ROBERT R. CARGILL: Ancient alien enthusiasts
look at pharaoh Akhenaten of Egypt
and say, ah, look at that long head.
That looks like an alien Gray, that
looks like some kind of something that's non-human
or some hybrid between something else and something human.
Must be evidence of alien interference,
alien reproduction with humans, something like that.
BETTY ANN BROWN: I've been to Egypt.
And one of the most stunning things
is about seeing the archeological remains
of ancient Egypt, is that one unique pharaoh Akhenaten.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: I mean, he's
got a very narrow, pointy face, high cheekbones,
and a very elongated cranium.
DAVID CHILDRESS: The idea that they were either looking
like extraterrestrials or perhaps
had extraterrestrial DNA in them is a credible idea.
NARRATOR: Akhenaten ruled for 17 years.
After his reign, Amarna was abandoned
and temples to the sun were destroyed.
Images of Akhenaten were deliberately defaced.
Ancient Egypt swiftly returned to its old ways,
worshipping many gods.
Was this a rejection of Akhenaten's
radical religious belief system?
Or a cover up of his alien identity?
There's been a lot of theories about why.
I mean, the most extreme is that he somehow
had some sort of extraterrestrial connection
if one accepts that conclusion, then it would explain why he
was literally put off the reign, and some say, put to death.
NARRATOR: Some Egyptologists believe Akhenaten was forced
to abdicate and flee from Egypt with a group
of his loyal followers.
In 1907, the actual body of Akhenaten
was discovered in Egypt's Valley of the Kings
by a British archeologist named Edward Ayrton.
After unearthing Akhenaten's mummified remains,
he was able to confirm that indeed the ancient Pharaoh's
skull was misshapen and elongated.
ROBERT R. CARGILL: Some scholars argue
that he suffered from some kind of physical abnormality.
He suffered from a disorder that caused his face
to appear to be long.
His head actually was longer.
I think with Akhenaten, we're dealing
with a physical deformation that wasn't corrected
by the royal artist.
They just depicted him as he was--
potbelly, sunken chest, long head.
NARRATOR: Akhenaten was succeeded
by his son, Tutankhamen, who became the most renowned
pharaoh of all time.
When his tomb was discovered in 1922 by Howard Carter,
Tutankhamen was also found to have an elongated skull.
Could he have inherited alien genes from his father?
Today, much of Akhenaten's life still remains a mystery.
Did he really change Egypt's entire belief system
because, as some suggest, he was a celestial being?
If that's true, might there be evidence of similar entities
coming to Earth?
Perhaps more clues can be found thousands of miles
away on the other side of the African continent.
[music playing]
Mali in Northwest Africa.
Deep in a remote valley live the Dogon people,
who are the descendants of a nomadic tribe that settled here
around 1,000 AD.
Just like Akhenaten's followers, the Dogon
had been forced to leave Egypt because
of religious persecution.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: The Dogon is laying a very long and ancient
tradition.
And in my opinion, maintain some of the ancient Egyptian
traditions and myths that have been carried
on right into the present age.
Parts of ancient Egypt may not have died.
They were carried on to this day among the Dogon.
NARRATOR: But what exactly are their beliefs?
Dogon mythology holds that the sky god, Amma, created
the first living creature known as Nommo.
The legend also says that shortly after his creation,
Nommo multiplied into several parts, one of which
rebelled against Amma.
Amma responded by destroying him and scattering his ashes
throughout the world.
PETER FIEBAG THROUGH INTERPRETER:
[non-english speech] According to the Dogon myths,
a god gave them this knowledge.
He descended from the sky in an ark surfing on fire
and landed in a storm.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: Still today, Dogon
celebrates a festival in the honor of Nommo
and that visitation that occurred in the remote past.
How do we know this?
For this festival, they have wooden masks
that date back to a very long time
ago when this festival began.
PETER FIEBAG THROUGH INTERPRETER:
[non-english speech] Dogon masks tell the mystic stories
of their ancestors.
This is a sculpture of the creator, they call him Amma.
He's embracing the universe.
This is how they pass on information from generation
to generation by stories carved in masks.
[non-english speech]
[ritual music]
NARRATOR: But could Nommo have been a real person?
Some see eerie similarities between the Dogon's legend
and the story of the mysterious pharaoh, Akhenaten.
Akhenaten believed he was directly descended from the sun
god, Aten.
Nommo was said to have been created by the sky deity, Amma.
Is it a coincidence that both cultures, although thousands
of miles apart, shared mythical tales of beings coming
from the skies, and both Nommo and Akhenaten were depicted
with elongated heads?
Is it possible that these legends
were based on real events?
PETER FIEBAG THROUGH INTERPRETER:
[non-english speech] The Dogon dwell in the central plateau
region of Bandiagara.
Their knowledge is centuries old and their priests
have been sharing it with chosen individuals only.
[non-english speech]
In the 1920s, French anthropologist Griaule
and ethnologist Dieterlen visited the tribe
and were invited to share their secrets.
[non-english speech]
NARRATOR: But one secret stood out.
The Dogon claimed that their god, Amma,
came from a specific star in the serious constellation,
the same place where the ancient Egyptians believed
their god, Osiris, was born.
This star which modern astronomers refer to as Sirius
B, the Dogon called Po-tolo.
But what baffles experts is that the star is so far from Earth,
it's impossible to see with the naked eye.
ROBERT BAUVAL: I was very intrigued by this, by the way.
I mean, the Dogons should not have known about the existence
of this star.
Sirius is the second nearest star from our solar system,
it's 8 light years away, in fact, it's
not even visible with standard telescopes.
It was first seen literally seen and photographed the 1970s.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: Modern science
has corroborated that Sirius B does indeed exist.
Problem is, the Dogon knew about this before modern science
corroborated it.
I mean, that's spooky.
NARRATOR: Measurements taken with the Hubble telescope
in 2003 have confirmed that Sirius B is what's
known as a white dwarf, were a partially burnt-out
with extremely dense mass.
Although it is smaller in size than Earth,
it's estimated to weigh eight times as much as our sun.
But how did the Dogon acquire this ancient knowledge
of astronomy that seems to be centuries
more advanced than that of modern science?
The mystery is how did this story get passed
on down generations if the story came from a time
before astronomers knew there was a companion star to Sirius,
which can't be seen with the human eye?
PETER FIEBAG THROUGH INTERPRETER:
This is the Dogon symbol for Sirius.
When you move it around, you can see an orbit around the center
marked by Sirius A. Sirius B circles around it,
so it is a circular system.
This sign is practically an astronomical model
that the Dogon could not have invented because only Sirius
A was visible.
Sirius B and C are invisible.
However, their description of the orbit is correct.
One assumption is that this god, Nommo,
who brought them this knowledge, could
have been an extraterrestrial intelligence.
NARRATOR: Since the early 20th century,
the tribe has been routinely studied and researched
by anthropologists.
This has led many modern historians
to claim that the Dogon must have learned about astronomy
from westerners.
ROBERT R. CARGILL: The Dogon mythology is so fluid
that when science confirms something that they might have
believed in antiquity, it might have just
been sheer coincidence.
Or it could have been a conflation, that
is they heard, because it's an oral culture
and because the mythology is so fluid,
they heard something that someone said about this star
in relation to another star, and they just grafted that
in to their mythology.
They grafted that into their religion.
And then when some reporter, some subsequent reporter
comes along and says, what do you believe?
They say, we've thought this for millions of years.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: When critics suggest
that this knowledge was given to them by modern ethnologists,
that's simply incorrect because we know that this story goes
back hundreds of years earlier than any modern ethnologist
ever went there.
PETER FIEBAG THROUGH INTERPRETER:
[non-english speech] If it were ever proven that all this
information is exactly correct, including the parts that are
still being studied by astronomers,
this would mean that the Earth had visitors from outer space
in prehistoric times.
[non-english speech]
ROBERT BAUVAL: Either they had it to that knowledge,
and the question is from where, from the previous civilization,
or from some sort of extraterrestrial civilization,
or its a coincidence.
In my view, it is not a coincidence.
NARRATOR: If the Dogon people really
possessed this advanced astronomical knowledge,
were their legends based on real events?
The ancient Egyptians and Dogon were far from alone
in their belief in gods or mystical beings that
came from the sky.
Is there an explanation for similar myths
shared by ancient cultures all around the world?
And what does that reveal as to who these visitors may be?
Perhaps the answer can be found, not in Northern Africa
but here in the rocks and canyons of the American
Southwest
[music playing]
30 miles south of Gallup, New Mexico,
lies the Pueblo of Zuni.
Sheltered from the desolate high plains,
this adobe city is home to the Zuni Indians,
one of the oldest indigenous tribes in North America.
They have inhabited this land for almost 2,000 years,
and have protected their secrets even longer.
[ominous music]
The Zuni are a very interesting culture in that
they're one of the few cultures that really have not opened up
to the rest of the world about their star knowledge
traditions.
Most of this type of information is very closely held
by the natives, and I really find it very intriguing
that this is the time period in history where now we're
starting to learn more and more about their star knowledge.
NARRATOR: Much of the Zuni people's history
is etched in the rocks in the New Mexico desert.
Tribal elder Clifford Mahooty and archeologist Dan Simplicio
have studied the Zuni secret history firsthand.
They've collected stories passed down through generations that
are rooted in the belief that the tribe's creators
and protectors are supernatural beings from the sky.
This one's kind of interesting here.
I would imagine it was created in the last century.
But upon this design, you can see the star figure.
Celestial images oftentimes are depicted in a lot
of our cultural petroglyphs.
And this is one of them where it depicts the star.
It could be the supernova of the Crab Nebula.
CLIFFORD MAHOOTY: Our Zuni mythology in the prayer system
and the ritualistic protocols talk about these people
that came over here and told us how to actually live
our lives as being sky people.
DAN SIMPLICIO: If you listen to a lot of religious chants
and songs and prayers, that's all they talk about.
They're talking about space, they're
talking about out there in the universe where they came
from so they depict it on that rock wall here.
But the actual meaning of it is somewhere more profound
and more complex than that.
NARRATOR: These drawings are thought to have been created
around 1,200 BC, yet they appear to depict modern space
travelers and their vehicles.
If you move back a little bit, you
can see another figure here.
It has a dome, has eyes, something coming down--
CLIFFORD MAHOOTY: And a nose--
Like a nose, sort of nose, but it kind of flares out.
CLIFFORD MAHOOTY: I think it was something
to do with the ancient, when they saw something they took
as much description of it to put it on there.
Of course, it's not going to be exactly what they saw
but that's as best as they can do for something that they saw.
DAVID CHILDRESS: With all petroglyphs and things
like that, I mean, they're up to interpretation.
Sometimes they're just doodlings of people.
But other times, they may well be actual descriptions
and depictions of some kind of god
from outer space, some ancient astronaut.
And when you go around say like the Zuni Pueblo, I mean,
that's what they'll tell you those petroglyphs are.
Even the Zunis themselves call them the spaceman.
DAN SIMPLICIO: This one seems to have two legs coming out
like that and it has a broad diamond-shaped body.
It probably with a greater head, chopped off here.
That's very different looking than humans are.
CLIFFORD MAHOOTY: Now, usually they're called the UFOs.
But in the Zuni way, we've always
been taught that they're the keepers of the upper world,
which means space.
They're the sky people, beings that
are of the extraterrestrial origin,
and this is still within our mythology
and our religious practices today.
NARRATOR: Like most Indian tribes,
the Zunis call these sky people Kachinas.
According to the Zuni's creation story.
The Kachina gods came down from the heavens
to lead the Zunis to Earth through a special portal.
CLIFFORD MAHOOTY: The Sipapu, that's
the entrance to the fourth world or the underworld,
and that's a representation of where the Kachinas come and go.
And so according to their mythologies,
the Zunis were brought forth into the world of light which
is where we are at today, by what I would interpret
as extraterrestrial beings from the universe.
[ritual music]
NARRATOR: Every year, the Zunis participate in a ceremony known
as the Shalako festival.
Dressed in traditional costumes to represent the Kachinas,
the Indians celebrate the arrival of the gods on Earth.
[ritual music]
DAVID CHILDRESS: This is a figurine of Kachina gods,
and these guys are awesome gods from the sky who came down.
They wear weird helmets.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: This one has a helmet as a head.
And if you look at the whole body of it,
it's as if it wears some type of a suit
This one here also has the helmet and the visor.
DAVID CHILDRESS: For the Pueblo Indians like the Zunis,
these are their sky gods that every year they
have special ceremonies, people put on these special costumes
and masks to re-enact the coming of the gods.
They really look like ancient astronauts.
[music playing]
BILL BIRNES: If you look at the poetry, and the legends,
and the stories from American Indian tribes in the Southwest,
they have the legend of the star people.
The star people came to Earth and seeded planet Earth,
and they came on flying ships.
If you speak to the elders, they will tell you that a lot of us
believe in the existence of extraterrestrials.
THOMAS O. MILLS: The Zunis don't have a written language.
The storyteller comes and he tells the young children how it
all happened, all of their songs that they
do in their ceremonies.
Tell the story over and over, and that's how they passed down
traditions, customs, beliefs.
They taught in the Indian way, they
use things they understand to explain things that they don't
understand.
DAN SIMPLICIO: I remember my grandparents
talking about a craft that flew and had actually crash-landed
on one of the bases East of here.
[crashes]
There's no interpretation of what an aircraft is,
so the closest thing that they could interpret as anything
capable of flying is a bird or our masked Kachina dancers.
CLIFFORD MAHOOTY: We're very, very superstitious people.
It's always been in the history of Zuni
that they've always been here even right here where we're
sitting right now, but you just don't see them.
They're in a different frequency.
And those are very, very sacred and those are very, very
secret.
They're out there somewhere.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: For those who believe that ancient astronaut came
to Earth thousands of years ago, prehistoric artwork
provides more clues in what they claim
is a growing body of evidence.
From wall carvings and statues in ancient Egypt,
to tribal traditions and exotic masks in West Africa,
to petroglyphs in the American Southwest--
all thousands of years old, they seem to account similar stories
of visitors from the skies.
Could the legends of alien beings visiting Earth thousands
of years ago have inspired more traditional beliefs?
[music playing]
Celestial beings coming down to Earth, gods descending
from the sky, can these events only
be found in the ancient legends of the Zuni?
Do similar accounts exist in other cultures
and other religions across the world?
And if so, what is the explanation?
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: We have to remind ourselves
that our ancestors were highly intelligent,
however, their technological frame of reference
was different than our technological frame
of reference.
So they didn't have the vocabulary
with which to describe or with which to name certain things
that they saw.
So what did they do?
They used words that they were familiar with in their time.
And so they try to describe whatever they witnessed
to the best of their abilities with their vocabulary.
NARRATOR: Ancient China also shared some of the same beliefs
that can be found in Egyptian, Native American, and Dogon
legends, that deities arrived from the stars.
According to Chinese mythology dating back to 3,000 BC,
when the god named Huangdi was born,
there was a radiance from the great star, Chi.
Huangdi would later emerge from the belly
of a fire-breathing dragon to become China's first emperor.
The origins of the Han Chinese people
start with a story of a great god looking down with empathy.
Here were people in poverty, in a beautiful, rich country.
The landscape, profound, but the people were suffering.
He took pity and decided to come down.
[music playing]
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: Huangdi arrived on planet Earth
in a flying dragon.
He had the power of flight.
Huangdi could be anywhere within minutes,
and he usually accomplished this by hopping on his dragon
and flying somewhere.
Now, this divine energy becomes human,
and is a great leader, the Yellow Emperor who
rules and unites the people, and there
is a period of great prosperity until his work is done.
NARRATOR: Huangdi brought order to the chaos,
creating China's first empire.
He is seen as a cultural hero, and is credited
with the invention of the compass, acupuncture,
and the standardization of Chinese writing.
One of his greatest legacies is the Great Wall of China.
JONATHAN YOUNG: When the land is prosperous,
he decides it's time to go.
And the great yellow dragon comes back,
and he gets back into the belly of the dragon
and flies off forever.
Now, were these dragons truly dragons in a biological nature?
Or were they misinterpreted types of machines?
Because as we all know, dragons are always
correlated with spewing fire and a lot of smoke.
Whenever we see a modern rocket take off,
there's all this smoke and sometimes the smoke is yellow
and sometimes it's red.
So it's very bizarre how we have these correlations
between the ancient times and modern times today.
Mythology is the effort to grasp
what we can't grasp, to understand what is beyond us.
In the Eastern teachings, the dragons very often
carry people, sometimes on their back,
sometimes inside their bellies.
So if we think of them as a poet's effort
to explain a vehicle that was strange to them,
well those sound like flying saucers.
So it might just be a problem of translation,
because after all, it's just a word.
It's trying to describe something that's
very difficult to grasp.
NARRATOR: 4,000 miles west of China,
another tale of celestial beings influencing civilization
can be found.
This time, in what is now modern day Iraq.
The Babylonian legend of Enuma Elish,
dates back to the 7th century BC.
The text was first discovered in 1849 by British archeologist
Sir Austen Henry Layard while searching
the ruins of the Library of Ashurbanipal in Nineveh.
The story tells of how the first humans were created
by an extraterrestrial race known as the Anunnaki.
[ominous music]
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: In the ancient texts of Sumeria,
we have descriptions of these beings descending from the sky
called the Anunnaki.
The term on Anunnaki means those who from the heavens came.
It says, word for word, that these beings descended
in flying vehicles from the sky.
And we can find not only descriptions of the Anunnaki,
but also depictions.
And we can see them in statues, in carvings,
so it's all very interesting to see that those beings looked
like modern day space travelers with weird suits.
Some of them wore wristwatches, they had boots on, and helmets,
and above all, wings, and they were always
described or depicted in floating above some,
quote unquote, regular people.
So the question is, who were the Anunnaki?
And according to the ancient astronaut hypothesis,
they were space travelers who visited
Earth in the remote past.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: Similar themes can be found
in the legends of Greek and Roman gods,
which also describe events that some interpret
as extraterrestrial contact.
Both cultures believed in powerful gods
who lived in the heavens and often came down to Earth
to interact with humans.
DAVID CHILDRESS: A well-known example
is Zeus, and the Greek gods, and they've come down
from the sky in Mount Olympus where they live
in some mountain, and they're bringing really
civilization and sciences to mankind.
But they have many human attributes
too where, yeah, they're attracted to human women,
they want to have sex and children with as many of them
as they can, and then they go back into the sky.
THOMAS E. BULLARD: These ideas of gods mating with humans
are very commonplace, like Zeus in Greek mythology.
He was always coming down and mating with mortals,
and producing demigods like Hercules or Helen
of Troy who were you exceptionally beautiful,
exceptionally powerful, unusually gifted in every way.
So in other words, you were creating a better race
in this sense.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: In the ancient as an opinion,
the whole pantheon of gods that we have in ancient Greece
consists of nothing else but flesh and blood
extraterrestrials who were misinterpreted
as being these divine creatures by our ancestors.
MICHAEL CREMO: There's a lot of evidence showing that we're not
alone in the cosmos, and that our human civilizations
on Earth have been interacting for long periods of time
with extraterrestrial intelligences.
NARRATOR: Belief in celestial beings interacting with humans
is a cornerstone in several major religions.
In fact, according to the Bible's Book of Genesis,
God created the first humans--
Adam and Eve.
The Bible also contains other passages
that describe strange interactions
between otherworldly beings and humans.
ROBERT R. CARGILL: People believe messengers of some sort
come down from the heavens.
You know, they came down and they had sex with humans.
And this is where we produce giant, people like Goliath.
So in a technical sense, they are alien.
They're gods or they're angels or some kind of superhuman
thing.
NARRATOR: Interpreting these Bible stories has also
led to a certain amount of debate and controversy.
While most see a single god directing and influencing
mankind's destiny, others argue that it is really a number
of gods that are responsible.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: In the Old Testament,
it says very clearly, let us make man in our image,
according to our likeness.
Now, grammatically speaking, that sentence
doesn't make sense because you have God
and then you have our image.
Well, theologians suggest that by "our", what they meant
is the Trinity, the Holy Trinity.
So basically, if you were to change the word god to gods,
then all of a sudden, the sentence makes sense.
And then the gods created man in our own image.
So you have this reference, let us create man in our image.
In several religious texts, specifically the Hebrew Bible
which Christians also accept, and in the Quran
which Muslims revere as holy, you have the reference
to god in the plural.
And it is incredibly interesting.
NARRATOR: But do all these religious scriptures that
tell similar stories really point to the possibility
that aliens have visited Earth throughout ancient history?
The fact is the story of creation in our own
Bible is the story of creation in cultures around the world.
The story of the flood, the evolution
of the human species, the development of language--
all of this points to, in fact, the Bible
says so, life on Earth came from contact
with an extraterrestrial life form.
That's in the Bible, that's in ancient cultures
around the world.
So I believe the theory of the ancient astronauts is true,
and I believe there's solid evidence there,
and I believe the harder you try to refute that evidence,
the more you wind up against a brick wall,
that ancient astronauts visited us, visited Earth thousands
upon thousands of years ago and seeded the very civilization we
have today.
NARRATOR: If the believers in the ancient astronaut theory
are correct, then just who were these visitors?
And might cutting edge astrophysics and biology
help us to uncover their identity?
[rocket launching]
On March 18, 1965, Russian cosmonaut, Alexei Leonov,
stepped outside the Voskhod 2 and became the first human
to walk in space.
He spent 12 minutes and 8 seconds outside his ship
before returning.
Leonov's survival depended upon a protective suit that
could keep him alive where there was
neither atmospheric pressure nor oxygen.
If we need space suits, would aliens traveling to Earth
require the same protection?
Is that what we're looking at in these ancient carvings
and drawings?
When critics ask, well, why would
ancient astronauts have to wear astronaut suits
that we're familiar with today?
The answer is very simple, can we go through space
without wearing a type of suit?
Of course not, we would die.
Because who says that whoever visited us in the remote past,
that they could breathe in the atmosphere of planet Earth?
So it's not far-fetched to suggest that they did, in fact,
wear some type of suit.
NARRATOR: Why might these images resemble modern astronauts?
If they are aliens, is it possible
they are similar to humans?
And could they have come from the planet just like Earth?
At the turn of the 20th century, a group
of British and German scientists considered this possibility.
They embraced a theory put forth by early Greek philosophers,
that all life in the universe began in one specific place.
This theory is called panspermia.
Panspermia is the theory that life formed in one place,
and then got spread around to other places.
In outer space, in the medium between stars,
we see molecules that are the building blocks of life.
So it's easy to get the building blocks of life
to another planet.
For example, if life formed on Mars,
it could have come here to Earth, contaminated Earth,
and then started life here.
NARRATOR: Roughly 3.6 billion years ago, Mars
was warm and wet, much like the conditions on Earth today.
Biologists believe that because Mars cooled more quickly
than other planets, life may have developed there first.
PAUL DAVIES: Mars is a better candidate for life
during the early part of the solar system
Mars rocks are coming here all the time
and these have been knocked off Mars by asteroid and comet
impacts.
And we know that they could convey any Martian
microorganisms to Earth.
NARRATOR: In August 1996, a team of scientists
made a stunning announcement.
A Martian meteorite found in Antarctica contained evidence
of fossilized life.
The 4-pound rock, designated ALH84001,
showed the presence of carbonate globules
excreted by microbes when they were alive on Mars
3.6 billion years ago.
Earth was no longer alone.
Life had existed elsewhere in the universe.
So this cross-contamination between Mars and Earth,
which 20 years ago was regarded as rather wild conjecture,
is now pretty much accepted by the astrobiology community.
NARRATOR: Astrobiologists studying the origin
and evolution of life in the universe
embrace the possibility that life on Earth
began in outer space.
Did modern day scientists finally prove
what ancient cultures have believed for centuries?
ROBERT BAUVAL: The common myth or idea
that the origins of humankind is from the stars.
It's widespread, ancient has had, the ancient Egyptians,
the Mayans, the Aztecs, the Indians, and so forth
is intriguing, and it's probably true.
And I mean it from an astrophysical point of view.
We do come from the stars.
It's a fact that life on Earth has
been seeded by the coming of a comet containing the life
matter.
I personally suspect there is life out there.
In fact, I believe that we have evidence, if nothing else,
microbial evidence for life extraterrestrially.
NARRATOR: But if life did land on Earth from outer space,
was it by accident?
Or might it have been sent here on purpose?
One mainstream scientist thought so.
British geneticist, Francis Crick,
is best known for his collaboration with James
Watson.
Together, they unraveled the structure of human DNA in 1953.
Less than 10 years later, they were awarded the Nobel Prize
for their groundbreaking work in genetics.
In the 1960s, Crick became a proponent of panspermia theory,
and took it to a whole new level with an idea he called directed
panspermia.
GRAHAM HANCOCK: Francis Crick hypothesized that somewhere
perhaps on the other side of the galaxy,
there had been a civilization of advanced intelligent beings.
And they had found that their planet was going
to be destroyed, perhaps a supernova
was going to go off in their vicinity,
and their planet would be sterilized of life.
And he asked himself, what would an intelligent civilization
do in that situation?
Well, first of all, they'd try to figure out
if they could get out of there.
If they could actually preserve their lives and the lives
of their descendants, perhaps crowd into spaceships
and fly across interstellar space
until they found a suitable planet to colonize.
[ominous music]
NARRATOR: But could it actually be true?
Could we really be the descendants
of an alien race that traveled here from another world?
NICK POPE: The ultimate implication
of some exo-biological theories is actually that we ourselves
are extraterrestrials, that life on Earth
arose because organic material was brought here
from elsewhere.
BILL BIRNES: What if we're the ones the descendants of those
who came from another planet?
We were created, we were brought here,
seeded planet Earth as a colony from some other planet.
So we are colonists of another race,
and that's why the aliens look like us.
ROBERT M. SCHOCH: In my opinion, it's
not unscientific to consider the possibility
of ancient astronauts, alien intervention.
We live in a huge universe.
Now, bacteria versus humanoids, one
may say that's a big difference.
But in some ways, it's not a big difference.
Where you have life, you have the ability for that life
to develop into what we consider civilization
or intelligent beings.
NARRATOR: Is it just a coincidence that modern science
and ancient alien theory have come to the same conclusion,
that life on Earth came from the stars?
And if it's possible that billions of years
ago, an extraterrestrial race spread out across space, how
would they survive in their new home?
Could they really be our missing link?
[music playing]
For thousands of years, mankind has
tried to depict alien beings who they believe
came from the skies.
Many of those creatures seem to share characteristics
with humans.
They often have two arms, two legs, fingers, and a head
just like we do.
Biologists refer to this basic body shape
as bilateral symmetry.
Bilateral symmetry is very simple.
You divide something down the middle into two parts,
and lateral means up and down, and the two sides
are an exact reflection of each other.
If you fold the thing in half, all the parts line up.
RUSSELL H. TUTTLE: But being bilaterally symmetric
allows you to be streamlined and to develop a head end so you
become cephalized, and that certainly happened
in vertebrates.
Virtually, the mouth at the end of something and then you
get progressive development, and that
seems to have led to many, many advances.
MICHAEL DENNIN: So when you look at it closely,
you can see a lot of advantages coming in.
Having the two arms and the two legs to work together really
give you great mobility and balance and speed.
Having eyes on two sides separated give really
improved vision in various ways.
Animals that are predominantly prey,
use their two eyes independently and get a huge field of view.
Animals that are predominantly hunters have more on the front
and get really good depth perception
which you need if you're going to land on the animal you're
hunting.
NARRATOR: If it is true that aliens resemble humans
in their physical characteristics,
might there also be genetic similarities?
Could we even be related?
In 2003, the US government announced that the Human Genome
Project had identified all of the nearly 25,000 genes
in the human body.
For the first time, scientists had a roadmap
to the genetic makeup of humans.
In 2006, genetic researchers at the University of California
at Santa Cruz discovered an area of the genome they called HAR1
that appears to be unique to humans.
Scientists believe the HAR1 gene plays a critical role
in the advanced development of the human brain,
and is a key element that sets us apart from other animals.
But where did it come from?
Did humans develop this distinct gene naturally
through evolution?
Or did it land here from another planet?
Francis Crick, the British scientist
who helped discover the structure of DNA,
believed that human genes could not have evolved by chance.
Crick didn't feel in that period of roughly 600 million
years from the formation of the planet down to the time
when the planet could first support
life there was enough time for DNA to evolve by accident.
It's an enormously complicated molecule.
Crick gave this analogy, you would
be more likely to assemble a fully functioning and flying
jumbo jet by passing a hurricane through a junkyard
than you would be to assemble the DNA molecule by chance
in any kind of primeval soup in 500 or 600 million years.
It's just not possible.
NARRATOR: But if this molecule could not
have evolved accidentally, how was it created?
Was it, as some believe, put there on purpose?
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: The question should not
be, do the extraterrestrials look like us
or what do the extraterrestrials look like?
But do we look like the extraterrestrials?
Because according to the ancient astronaut theory,
a long, long time ago, extraterrestrials
came here and through a targeted mutation of our genes,
we, quote unquote, became human.
PETER FIEBAG THROUGH INTERPRETER:
[non-english speech] Possibly, there's information in our DNA
about whether human evolution was manipulated or not.
[non-english speech]
The DNA is almost deciphered, yet we only understand 5%
of the information it carries.
[non-english speech]
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: Geneticists have determined
that it only takes about 5% to clone a human being.
And that 95% of that genetic material that we have
in our bodies is nothing more than what
they refer to as genetic junk.
Why is everything there?
And there's probably parts of the DNA that don't have
an obvious current function.
Maybe they're left over from something
that was used in the past, kind of like our appendix has left
over.
NARRATOR: Could this genetic junk hold the key
to the evolution of humans?
Some people suggest that decoding our DNA
entirely will unlock startling information about our origins.
But could it even prove that aliens played a role
in our development thousands of years ago?
GRAHAM HANCOCK: If you hypothetically
wanted to record an eternal message
that could be decoded by a creature that had eventually
evolved enough intelligence to decode it,
and the place to put that message would not
be on some monument or in some text which might be swept away,
but actually on the DNA of the creature itself.
It's recently been established that DNA is a recording medium
of almost limitless power.
It would be technically possible to record the entire knowledge
of a civilization on the DNA in our bodies.
All you need is a way to access that information.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: I think we have something,
the whole humanity in our genes.
Somewhere in our genes, it is coded that extraterrestrials
were here thousands of years ago.
NARRATOR: But the questions persist--
if aliens visited Earth tens of thousands of years ago,
how did they get here?
When we look to the past for the answers,
are we looking in the wrong place?
Should we actually look forward to our future?
[music playing]
Scientists agree that the best chances of finding alien life
will be on planets similar to ours.
And descriptions of extraterrestrials
seem to resemble humans in many ways.
Some ancient astronaut theorists draw a surprising conclusion
from these facts, suggesting that aliens might actually
be human.
NICK POPE: It is odd that many of the descriptions of aliens
are effectively humanoid, and this raises
an interesting possibility.
One idea that's been put forward is that these are not
extraterrestrials at all, but they are time travelers
from the future.
They could be us from 1,000, 2,000, 10,000 years from now.
Let's assume for a moment that 10,000 years from now
on this planet, if we all survive, that time travel was
created.
They've invented it just like the time machine of HG Wells
days, they can go back or they can go forward.
So let's assume 10,000 years from now,
we decide to come back to see us.
Maybe they have changed physically.
They look like the alien Grays or whoever they may be.
It could well be that ancient astronauts might not
be creatures from other planets at all
but time travelers from 2720 in a time machine.
NARRATOR: Time travel is an essential concept for science
fiction, but would it be possible for flesh and blood
humans to find a way to transport themselves
through time with current technology?
Would this enable us to cover the vast distances of space?
If I could travel close to the speed of light,
I could reach the year 3,000, say, and a couple of years.
I have to get very close to the speed of light for that,
but it's doable and we know that this isn't a theory.
This is real physics.
We can demonstrate these time moving effects.
So you can reach the future quicker by traveling close
to the speed of light.
NARRATOR: The concept of time travel
was first proposed by Albert Einstein in 1905
when he published his theory of special relativity.
Ancient astronaut theory says that astronauts visited us
a long time ago from somewhere else.
The technology involved in doing that, we would assume
would be similar to what we understand now.
I mean, we know special relativity
is the law of physics, it holds anywhere in the universe.
Ancient astronaut would come all the way here and travel
these large distances and not age that much
relative to their home planet.
Because if you're getting close enough to the speed of light,
you will have slowed down time enough that when you get back,
hundreds, thousands, or even millions of years
could have passed.
[rocket launching]
NARRATOR: One limitation to this method of travel is that
because a spacecraft has mass, it theoretically cannot reach
the exact speed of light.
The resulting reduction in velocity
would then dramatically increase the amount of time needed
to cross the vast universe.
GEORGE NOORY: While there's definitely many theories
about how extraterrestrials got here, how their propulsion
system got them to planet Earth, they're surely not coming here
the way we go out in the space.
They'd never get here.
They are finding different ways.
They have either developed a new form of propulsion
or they're able to travel through what I've always
believed wormholes throughout the universe that would
instantaneously put them here.
NARRATOR: The idea of wormholes was first proposed in 1935
by Albert Einstein and his long-time collaborator, Nathan
Rosen.
They began to explore the possibility that space and time
could literally be bent to create a time travel shortcut.
MICHAEL DENNIN: Wormholes have not been detected.
There are postulated structure in space that involve actually
taking, if you think of a sheet of paper, bending it in half,
and connecting the two pieces that you get together.
A wormhole is thought to do something like that.
Now, space gets warped and it connects between two
different parts of space.
You know, there's predictions about what they would look
like, there's theories about them,
but we haven't detected one yet.
You're not actually ever traveling faster
than the speed of light, you're just cutting corners.
You don't actually have to go light speed and travel
for light years to someplace.
You literally go there through a wormhole and through
hyperspace, and bang, you're there.
PAUL DAVIES: If you can have a wormhole in space,
then it can be turned in principle into a time machine.
And so travel back in time as well as forward in time
would then be possible.
The problem is, where do you get your wormhole?
It's not inconceivable that wormholes were made in the Big
Bang, craft out along with everything else,
there might be one out there in the universe we could harvest
and adapt to form a time machine.
MICHAEL DENNIN: If you end up discovering that you could make
wormholes, then that increases the range
that you can explore in space.
And that increases the likelihood
of having two civilizations at the same time
with the right technology to communicate with each other.
NARRATOR: While theoretically possible,
traveling through wormholes or at the speed of light
is currently impossible for us here on Earth.
[rocket launching]
Using modern propulsion methods, it would take 70,000 years
to reach the nearest star.
Fastest rockets are totally puny.
It's really pathetic, so we're talking
about 0.01% of the speed of light if you're lucky.
Any object that we can fly out of the solar system
is going to take tens of thousands of years
to reach the nearest star.
NARRATOR: Believe it or not, at 4.6 billion years old,
our solar system is one of the youngest in the universe.
But if civilizations exist in other galaxies,
is it possible that they are more advanced than those
on Earth?
And if so, could they be ahead of us in their ability
to travel through space and time?
DAVID CHILDRESS: For extraterrestrials to come here
through the vast reaches of space to our planet,
they clearly have to have technology that's
way in advance of what we have today.
To go from solar system to solar system,
rather than going warp speed like in Star Trek,
you're really going to travel as they do in Star Wars
where you're jumping through hyperspace, going
from a solar system to solar system is no time at all.
Just because we can't travel from star to star
does not mean another more advanced society
can't do it either.
I think that's the height of human arrogance
to say just because we can't do it,
another more advanced civilization
can't do it either.
So you know, we have to stop looking at us
that we are the pinnacle of creation because we're not.
NARRATOR: Celestial beings, visitors from the skies,
deities descending from the heavens to interact with man,
could these worldwide stories be the foundation
for the prevailing belief that something
greater than ourselves from beyond our world created
the universe as we know it?
[music playing]
Almost all of the great world faiths
are based on stories of celestial beings
who visit Earth.
Many millions of people accept these legends
as part of their core beliefs.
And from the earliest cave drawings, to images at Roswell,
we see artists' interpretations of extraterrestrials or gods
coming to our planet.
NICK POPE: In many traditions, there
is something coming from above, there is a stairway to heaven,
or there's a whirlwind, or angel descends.
Sometimes the encounter is quite dangerous,
as would be appropriate to something awesome and larger
and more powerful than we are.
Usually, it is memorable.
DAVID CHILDRESS: Many of the myths are much more specific,
and they really talk about gods physically coming to Earth,
landing, doing miracles, and showing the people how to live.
NARRATOR: If visitors did come from the stars,
is it possible that they actually changed
the way ancient people thought?
Did they provide an intellectual spark
to prehistoric civilizations?
Could that be the reason why so many different cultures could
build such large and lasting monuments?
GEORGE NOORY: It's almost as if primitive man woke up one
morning and went, hey, I've got this knowledge,
and I know how to make tools, and I'm going to go and build
all these things.
Nah, I don't think it happened that way.
I think others came down to this planet
and started teaching other people that we're beginning
to evolve.
But the one thing I truly do not believe
is that modern cavemen at the time
basically created all this knowledge out of thin air.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: All around the world,
we have concise descriptions in ancient texts
which say word for word that some beings came from the sky.
So it's as if this intellectual Big Bang or this Big Bang
of knowledge occurred in various periods of time.
And those various periods of time, most concisely,
always correlate with some type of description of gods
descending from the sky.
GRAHAM HANCOCK: I do think of that as a very significant
before and after moment in the human story,
and it is not a moment that is linked to physical evolution.
We've already got the hardware.
It's as though something happened to our software around
about that time.
And I think it's a very intriguing moment
in the human story.
NARRATOR: For supporters of ancient alien theory,
the verdict is already in.
They believe that aliens visited many of Earth's earliest
cultures thousands of years ago.
But is it possible?
Are extraterrestrials responsible
for the sacred creation myths of the first human civilizations?
Might they have tampered with our DNA?
Are humans themselves aliens from another planet
in the heavens, or even from another time?
While man continues to search for these answers,
the questions remain.
If they came here, what was their mission?
We call Earth home, but with perfect conditions for life,
could it be a beacon calling out to
other intelligent civilizations that may exist in the universe?
ROBERT R. CARGILL: I think there is life, simple life,
bacterial life, microbial life on other planets.
I think we're going to find that.
And who knows, maybe one day we'll find some other planet
that's capable of sustaining life,
that has evolved people over a long period of time that
are also looking up at the stars wondering,
is there anybody else out there?
Are we the only ones?
JENNIFER HELDMANN: What bigger question could we
ask about ourselves and our place in the universe?
You know, is there life elsewhere in the universe,
or are we it?
I mean, I think it's one of the most fascinating questions
and we're fortunate enough to live in a time
when we can address this question scientifically
and really try and get some answers.
GEORGE NOORY: You can then come up with a conclusion
that something, one, very strange
is happening on this planet, and two,
if it's coming from outside of this system,
then we're being visited by something that has
some intelligence behind it.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: In the end, the truth wins.
And we've seen this in history where scientific theories
or ideas that have been deemed impossible
turned out to be true.
And so it is my firm conviction that the same will count
for the ancient alien theory.