There's a whole fleet of them. Look on
the ASA. My gosh, they're all going
against the wind. The wind's 120 knots
from the west.
&gt;&gt; Is the US government covering up the
truth about alien contact?
&gt;&gt; And if so, why?
&gt;&gt; The government seems to be completely
unaccountable to the American public.
They rarely release anything that they
know or the findings. Move this thing.
It's rotating.
&gt;&gt; The fact that the US government has
investigated thousands and thousands of
reports leads me to think they know much
more than they let us believe.
Could the government have a secret
agenda? One known to only a select few
and perhaps dating back hundreds of
years. The government's program
continues to be deny, deny, deny.
Sometimes government finds it helpful to
sew seeds of disinformation and
misinformation to hide the facts about
these sorts of programs. Hillary Clinton
was basically saying, "You are going to
give me the information I need to
disclose the extraterrestrial presidents
or I'm going to fire every single one of
you." People want to know what the
government knows and they ought to know
what the government knows.
on December 16th, 2017,
the New York Times ran an explosive
story entitled Glowing Auras and Black
Money: The Pentagon's Mysterious UFO
Program. It was the first time the
American public learned of a top secret
US government project, the Advanced
Aerospace Threat Identification Program,
otherwise known as ATIP. The revelations
concerning the existence of the
Pentagon's ATIP program are
extraordinary.
It is the single biggest ever news in
the whole history of the UFO phenomenon.
It's not quite a spaceship and a hanger
smoking gun, but it's the closest we've
ever been. I assure you that nothing
like this has ever happened in the
history of this issue. This is a
milestone. This is a watershed.
&gt;&gt; The article reported that the program
had been run by a former Pentagon
official named Luis Alzando,
a senior career intelligence officer
with top security clearance and with
experience in everything from
microbiology and parasytology to the
study of global terrorism.
It was Alisando's job to investigate
reports of unidentified flying objects
and to measure what threat they could
pose to national security. ATIP received
his cases from from various different
channels. In some cases, reporting would
come up through Navy channels. In other
cases, it would come up through air
force channels. In other cases, it come
through the intelligence community. And
all roads led to to our office. uh
regarding the phenomena.
&gt;&gt; Alzando played a key role in the
government's top secret ATIP program
prior to his leaving the government in
2017.
Among the reasons given for his
departure was the bitterness he felt
that the research he was conducting
and the conclusions that he and his
colleagues were reaching were not being
taken seriously by other agencies within
the government.
Even Congress, to which ATIP owed its
funding, was hardpressed to give Alzando
so much as a hearing so that his
findings could be made part of the
public record.
Interestingly, just 2 months after
Alzando's exit from the government, the
New York Times broke the major story,
exposing the ATIP program and many of
the facts surrounding the government's
secret research into UFO activity.
When I read in the New York Times this
front page story that the the government
was running this semi secret program to
investigate well aerial phenomena which
is kind of a code word for UFOs.
Yeah. You know, I thought, my god, all
these years, you know, people who who
think that we're being visited were
claiming that the government was in fact
possessing some secret knowledge about
this. And sure enough, they did have
this secret investigation. For Luis
Alzando, the New York Times article
served as a vindication for the years
that his research went unrecognized and
his warnings unheeded. For if the UFO
activity being recorded was real, so too
was the possibility that it was being
caused by technologies that were not
only unknown, but of extraterrestrial
origin. Alzando, he resigned because he
felt the government considered this a
joke. I think that the fact that these
folks are out there trying to get the
answers that we're all seeking,
absolutely fantastic. And they're
getting to top government officials. And
some someday we're going to get the
answers from people like that. Not from
government, but from people like that.
Luckily for Luis Alzando, one of the
people who took him and his research
seriously was musician and UFO
researcher Tom Dong.
Tom Dong, who is most famous for uh his
uh being the lead in Blink 182.
I've known Tom for a while and he
spearheaded an initiative that's brought
together a number of scientists and
others to both continue to study the
phenomena on the outside in the private
sector and to raise funds to do that.
&gt;&gt; His enthusiasm, his passion has driven
things forward. A lot of people were
saying, "What does a rockstar know about
all this?" Let's not forget that
sometimes even people in government and
military and the intelligence community
get a little more starruck than they
should by celebrities.
Tom Dong was able to use this to
leverage, I guess, access where others
had tried and failed.
In October 2017,
Tom Dong announced the creation of his
To the Stars Academy of Arts and
Science, an organization devoted to the
study of UFOs and the possible existence
of extraterrestrial activity here on
Earth.
When Alisando left the Pentagon, he was
determined to bring ATIP's years of
investigation out of the shadows by
releasing several of the videos he had
collected. One of them featured this
incredible encounter taken by a fighter
jet in Florida in 2015,
now known as the gimbal video.
&gt;&gt; My gosh. And the wind's 120 knots west
thing, dude.
&gt;&gt; Look at that thing. It's rotating.
On December 18th, 2017,
Dong and Alzando revealed a second
shocking video, which was released
through the Washington Post.
This UFO had been tracked by the USS
Princeton for several days over the
Pacific Ocean, approximately 100 miles
southwest of San Diego.
On the screen, it also says the speed of
the F-18 is 250 knots, roughly about uh
280 mph.
This F-18 can't seem to get any closer
to this vehicle, whatever it is. Now,
the F-18 is one of the uh highest
technology fighter crafts on the planet.
and it can't catch this thing. When it
darts off screen to the left, it would
be going extremely fast. The G forces
would would turn a person inside it into
like tapioca pooting. I mean, they would
it would kill them.
In March 2018, a third Pentagon video
entitled Go Fast was released and
featured yet another unexplained aerial
encounter.
Oh my gosh, dude.
&gt;&gt; But perhaps the most shocking
information to come from Tom Dong and
his to the stars academy was Luis
Alzando's claim that Bigalow Aerospace
had modified its buildings for the
storage of strange metal alloys of
unknown origin, also known as meta
materials.
Now, ho, stop the press right there.
What are these metal alloys?
&gt;&gt; Luis Alzando has referred to these as
meta materials. The implication is that
they're they're not special magical
elements or anything, but they do seem
to be materials that have been studied.
According to Alzando, tests have been
run. The answer has come back. Whatever
these things were, they came from space.
There was also indications that there
were certain polymers that were uh
discovered at at at crash sites that
were unexplained and and were reviewed.
You know, for years and years, UFO
researchers had talked about crash
retrievalss of UFOs or that elements of
these objects had been recovered and
were being studied. And skeptics would
laugh at these claims. You know, how
ridiculous such conspiracy paranoid uh
fantasies were. Uh, well, guess what?
Now we have it confirmed.
&gt;&gt; What are these materials? Are they of
this Earth? Are they from an advanced
alien intelligence?
Were these metals actually taken from
crashed UFOs?
What are the sources for these kinds of
metals?
These are the kind of questions that we
need to learn the answers to if we're
going to get to the bottom of
understanding what the government knows
about UFOs.
Is it possible that the US military has
recovered crashed extraterrestrial
spacecraft and that wreckage from these
aircraft is currently being stored and
studied by a top secret team at Bigalow
Aerospace?
One of the really interesting things
about ATIP is how much information
hasn't been released. We hear things
that are coming. There's this report
that was written that we're supposed to
get to see at some point. Haven't seen
it yet. And then are there more videos?
We've seen, I think, three videos come
out that they've released. There has to
be more. They were doing this for like 5
years or maybe even a lot longer than
that. I bet you there's a lot more.
Other secret military programs that have
been going on for many, many decades.
And it's really just the tip of the
iceberg.
Was the US government's ATIP program the
only one to be investigating
extraterrestrial activity? And if so,
how was it started and why?
And was the government seriously
concerned that such activity was
happening? Or was the bigger concern
that the public would find out about it.
Washington DC
2007.
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of
Nevada summons Senator Daniel Inaway
from Hawaii and Alaska Senator Ted
Stevens to a secure room in the Capitol
building for a secret meeting. He
convinces them to lend their support to
fund a project researching UFO reports
in the interest of national security,
the Advanced Aviation Threat
Identification Program, or ATIP. Senator
Reid was successful in getting money uh
into the defense department budget uh to
create a small office to look at what
the government knew and to study some
more recent incidents that had occurred
and to delve into the background and to
try to explain what pilots who had
encountered strange aerial phenomena
couldn't explain.
Without any public debate, $22 million
is allocated for ATIP from a black money
budget that few people know about or can
monitor. Much of it, I think, was
classified. Much of it was unclassified,
but I think people didn't know uh about
the program.
I'm very glad that my friend Harry Reid
decided that he would pursue this and
sought money for it. Senator Stevens was
genuinely interested in the topic, but
none of them went out and discussed it.
&gt;&gt; When later asked about his support for
the program, Senator Reid said that he
was inspired by his friend, retired
former senator and astronaut John Glenn.
Glenn, the first American astronaut to
orbit the Earth, told Reed that he
thought that the federal government
should be looking seriously into UFOs.
But there are some who believe that
Reed's support owes less to John Glenn
than to his friendship with one of the
senator's largest campaign contributors.
Robert Bigalow, the founder of Bigalow
Aerospace.
Robert Bigalow owned a series of hotels
and he sold it and made a lot of money.
He decided then he wanted to get into
space exploration. He's fascinated by
extraterrestrials and UFOs.
&gt;&gt; NASA was providing insight as opposed to
oversight,
which is an important distinction there.
And his dear friend, Senator Harry Reid
of Nevada was convinced by Robert
Bigalow to get the government to spend
$22 million into this program to
investigate UFOs.
&gt;&gt; It's not a coincidence to my mind that
he was involved in the advanced
aerospace threat Identification Program.
He builds rockets and planes and who
knows what else. And he seems like a
perfectly logical person to have been
the point man in the private sector for
using the information that was gleaned
from that project, whatever it was, and
we don't know what a lot of it was
because it's classified.
At the time, the fact that much of
ATIP's research was outsourced to
Bigalow Aerospace made perfect sense.
First of all, the company already had a
staff of highly qualified aerospace
engineers.
And secondly, an outside company could
operate without the kind of public
scrutiny imposed on a government-based
agency. Bigo could operate in total
secrecy.
Private companies aren't held to the
Freedom of Information Act. private
companies can do whatever they want to
with their funding and you can't go then
and fill out a Freedom of Information
Act request. That's a way to keep things
more secretive.
But was the ATIP program's need for
secrecy merely designed to keep its UFO
findings independent of public scrutiny?
more. Was there a greater interest in
hiding not only what ATIP was finding,
but also what those in charge of the
program were looking for.
In May 2017,
Robert Bigalow was the subject of a
profile on CBS's 60 Minutes. The piece
focused on Bigalow's relationship to
NASA and his activities in creating life
support habitats for future astronauts.
During his interview, Bigalow revealed
to 60 Minutes that he was not only an
aerospace enthusiast, but a full-fledged
believer in extraterrestrials.
&gt;&gt; Do you believe in aliens?
&gt;&gt; I am absolutely convinced that's all
there is to it. Do you also believe that
UFOs have come to Earth?
&gt;&gt; There has been and is an existing
presence uh an ET presence and I spent
millions and millions I probably spent
more as an individual than anybody else
in the United States has ever spent on
this subject.
&gt;&gt; Is it risky for you to say, you know, in
public that you believe UFOs and aliens?
&gt;&gt; I don't care.
&gt;&gt; You don't worry that some people will
say, "Did you hear that guy? He sounds
like he's crazy."
&gt;&gt; I don't care.
&gt;&gt; Why not?
&gt;&gt; It's not going to make a difference. is
not going to change reality of what I
know.
&gt;&gt; Bob Bigalow, he said, "ETs are here.
They're right under your nose." And he
uses the word ET. He doesn't beat around
the bush.
Robert Bigalow became my hero. That I
don't give a damn really was for a lot
of people. It was for every billionaire
space jockey out there, whether it's
Elon Musk or Branson or Bezos. But guess
what? None of those people have ever
said to a reporter, you know, I'm pretty
sure there's extraterrestrials here.
Bigalow did. We must now go and ask the
head of Bigalow Aerospace, what does he
mean that aliens are under everyone's
noses?
This story really is begging for
somebody to go to Robert Bigalow and
say, "Can we now go and see your
warehouse?"
What a fantastic next step it would be
for the world.
Although funding for the ATIP program
was quietly ended in 2012, there are
those who believe that its focus on the
study of recent UFO activity and on the
study of extraterrestrial life are still
alive and well, although now further
hidden under a different agency name.
When the Pentagon grudgingly admitted
the existence of the ATIP program, they
did a clever thing and they said that
the funding had run out in 2012. The
implication was that the program was no
more. But with my knowledge of the way
in which these classified sensitive
programs are run, pulling the funding
plug is not the same as terminating the
project.
But while some version of the
government's ATIP program may still be
operating in secret, the same cannot be
said for some of the AY's former
employees. And there is one in
particular who is not only open to the
idea that aliens do exist, he has made
it his mission to communicate his
findings throughout the world.
When the New York Times story broke,
revealing the existence of the US
government's ultra topsecret ATIP
program, UFO experts and ancient
astronaut theorists had validation for
what they knew had been happening for
decades,
that the government has proof of
extraterrestrial visitation and that
they have been hiding it from the
public.
The investigations were denied during
the time of their happening. And it's
really curious that we're always told,
"No, these programs are not happening."
And then 20 years later, these documents
are being released to reveal the fact
that these investigations did happen. My
initial reaction to the information that
was released in December of 2017 was
that this has really been going on for
over 70 years.
Although the government's ATIP program
was established in 2007, it was by no
means the first top secret program
designed to investigate UFO activity in
the United States. The first was known
simply as Project Sign, and it was set
up within the US Air Force to
investigate unexplained aerial
phenomenon such as the event now known
as the Battle of Los Angeles.
What's called the Battle of LA is
actually one of the earliest unexplained
UFO mysteries in modern our modern era.
3 months after Pearl Harbor, it took
place on the early morning of February
25th, 1942.
An unknown object appeared over Los
Angeles and anti-aircraft guns opened
fire on it.
The anti-aircraft guns began barking
during a blackout ordered by the fourth
interceptor command at 2:25 a.m.
&gt;&gt; 1,430
artillery shells were fired at several
unknown objects.
Many eyewitnesses on the ground saw
this.
There was concern that the Japanese were
somehow involved, but there was no
Japanese aircraft carrier. no chance
that Japanese airplanes could have been
responsible for this. The Secretary of
the Navy said to the public, "It was
just war nerves. There was nothing out
there whatsoever."
&gt;&gt; Although the US Army Air Force
officially dismissed the objects seen in
the sky as weather balloons, they failed
to explain why so many weather balloons
would have been floating over Los
Angeles in the first place. In the years
following the Battle of Los Angeles,
numerous other UFO sightings were
reported, including the one widely
referred to as the Roswell incident, in
which an unidentified object referred to
in the press as a flying saucer
reportedly crashed on a ranch just
outside the town of Roswell, New Mexico
on July 4th, 1947.
Within 24 hours, the story changed and
they said, "We made a mistake. It's not
a flying disc. It's just debris from a
weather balloon." The Roswell incident
was probably a major contributor to the
establishment of what became known as
Project Sign just a couple of months
later.
By the time Project Sign was established
in 1948,
UFO sightings had become so frequent
they could no longer be ignored or
dismissed.
Given the fact that there was a cold war
escalating between the United States and
the Soviet Union, concerns that UFOs
might be spy satellites or foreignade
weapons gave some justification to the
increasing paranoia. Answers needed to
be found.
But just as the government's first
official UFO program was getting
started, it was suddenly and
mysteriously shut down.
There was a very big incident during the
summer of 1948 when a report went to the
Air Force Chief of Staff, General Huy
Vandenberg,
and it stated, "This is real. They're
here." And Vandenberg closed down
project sign. But why would the Air
Force Chief of Staff shut down a program
designed to study UFOs just after being
informed that UFOs were not only real,
but of genuine concern? There seems to
be a pattern of suppression over the
last 70 years when it comes to the UFO
subject. and all of these government
investigations into UFOs where they look
into it, then they say there's nothing
to it, then they look into it again,
then they're finding that there is
something to it, but they don't want to
say what it is.
For the next 4 years, UFO sightings
continued to be reported. So many in
fact that the government could no longer
dismiss them as hoaxes, weather
anomalies, or simply the product of mass
hysteria. By March 1952,
a number of high-ranking Air Force
generals became so frustrated with the
military's previous attempts to properly
investigate so-called flying saucers
that they launched a program that would
be the most serious and best funded to
date, Project Blue Book.
Under the command of Air Force Captain
Edward Repelt, this new top secret
agency would take UFOs and their
potential threat to national security
very seriously.
Project Blue Book produced a standard
form for people who wanted to report a
UFO. What did it look like? Was there a
sound? They even had a chart for people
to calculate the angle of elevation.
If UFOs are nothing to worry about, why
is the Air Force requesting so much
information about the true nature of
what the witnesses saw?
In January 1953,
after gathering hundreds of reported
sightings, photographs, and interviews,
Captain Repel and astronomer Dr. J. Alan
Heinneck prepared and presented their
best 23 cases to a CIA formed panel of
scientists led by Dr. HP Robertson.
The Robertson panel concluded that the
evidence could all be dismissed as
natural occurrences and was not worth
the effort of the government.
And it was the Robertson panel which was
the origin for a lot of the propaganda
that was put out in the media when it
came to UFOs. They wanted to publicly
ridicule the subject so that people
wouldn't want to be associated with it.
Basically killing all the public
interest in this field so that they
could continue to research these exotic
technologies behind the scenes.
In 1969,
Project Blue Book was finally shut down
on the grounds that there was no proof
the unidentified objects posed a
national security threat or were of
extraterrestrial origin.
But was that really the end of the story
or only the beginning?
In February 2018, Nick Pope, the former
director of defense security at the
British Ministry of Defense, traveled to
Washington DC to meet with Chase
Klitsky, a registered lobbyist for UFO
disclosure and a former program
developer for the US Department of
Defense.
Chase Klitsky has investigated numerous
US government secret studies into UFOs
and has examined many of the once
classified files pertaining to Project
Blue Book.
&gt;&gt; I've got this Project Blue Book file
from the FBI archives. And the first
page I want to really go over with you
is this one that indeed reads UFO fact
sheet. Okay. So this is basically a
summary of the position with regard to
project blue,
&gt;&gt; right? The official statement.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And so this says since the
termination of project blue book, no
evidence has been presented to indicate
that further investigation of UFOs by
the air force is warranted. Terminate
it. Well, was the program really
terminated? That's my question.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. And if it was, what took its
place?
&gt;&gt; Well, yes. The Air Force isn't suddenly
going to stop being interested in
uncorrelated targets in its airspace.
&gt;&gt; Right. Absolutely. And the second
document I really want you to weigh in
on doesn't make sense.
&gt;&gt; Wow. 12,618
sightings. That's a lot. And 701 of them
remained completely unidentified. That's
a staggering amount. These are the cases
that were properly investigated,
interviewed witnesses, uh, radar tapes
were looked at, and still no answers
found.
Wait a minute. Here, look. Here it is.
At the end of the program, the unknowns
drop. They go from 32 to 19 to three and
one. I smell a rat. They've cooked the
books.
can't pull the plug on the program if
you've still got a high number of
unknowns. So, they clearly push those
cases out of the unidentified column and
into the cases that are explained, at
least publicly. This is their way out.
Was Project Blue Book officially shut
down because it had simply found no
convincing evidence that UFOs were real?
more was it because the government had
come to the opposite conclusion that not
only were they real but of
extraterrestrial origin?
A truth that could be so potentially
disturbing it needed to be covered up
even deeper than before.
As far as UFO researchers and ancient
astronaut theorists are concerned, proof
that the US government has not only
known about extraterrestrial activity on
our planet, but has been systematically
covering it up for decades, first came
in the form of a single roll of 35 mm
film anonymously sent to a documentary
filmmaker by the name of Jamie Chandere
in 1984.
The film when developed showed images of
an eight-page memo allegedly written in
1952
by the first director of the CIA, Rosco
Hiller to President-elect Dwight
Eisenhower.
In it, Hillen Coder informs Eisenhower
of the existence of a top secret
government think tank that was
originally set up by President Harry S.
Truman in 1947.
It was referred to in the memo as MJ12,
initials, which stood for a far more
mysterious group of men known as the
Majestic 12. The authorization to
establish MJ12,
allegedly came from President Harry
Truman on September 24th, 1947.
This was actually one day after the
famous memo in which General Nathan
Twining wrote a three-page letter about
these flying saucers to another general
talking quite explicitly about their
characteristics, the fact that this was
real, not visionary or fictitious. No
one anywhere outside of this group is to
know anything about UFOs, ETSs, crash
retrievals, bodies, any of it.
That document identified the 12 people
who were MJ1 through MJ12.
The first one, MJ1, was Admiral Hiller
of the Navy. There were four military
people. There were four technical people
and then there were just general
government people. They were the kind of
people you'd expect to have been
involved in an important top secret
program.
While the authenticity of the MJ12
documents is still being debated, what
is known is that in 1954,
Eisenhower thought enough of the UFO
phenomenon to order that a new secret
military base be set up.
Located 83 mi northwest of Las Vegas,
Nevada, Area 51 would later become
infamous as the most top secret military
base in the world.
Area 51 is the secret base of all secret
bases. For a long time, it was the place
that we went to to study foreign
technology.
&gt;&gt; During the 1970s and 80s, TD Barnes
worked at the secret base, reverse
engineering captured enemy aircraft like
Russian MIG jets. What we considered
reverse engineering was was taking a
plane or a radar, taking it apart,
looking at the electronic, how they
built it. We were all bound by security
oaths. We could not talk.
&gt;&gt; But is it possible that in addition to
reverse engineering foreign fighter
jets, Area 51 employees were also
working on other out of thisorld
technologies.
To my mind, it's also clear that the US
government has had crashed
extraterrestrial technology and Area 51
would have been the perfect place to
reverse engineer and test that
particular information.
&gt;&gt; In order to ensure that the activities
at Area 51 and elsewhere were kept
hidden from the public, members of the
military and even officers were sworn to
secrecy. But luckily for UFO researchers
and ancient astronaut theorists, not
everyone involved was willing to keep
quiet.
Some became whistleblowers who risked
everything from public scorn to
imprisonment in order to let the public
learn the truth.
Washington State, June 24th, 1947.
Aviator and businessman Kenneth Arnold
witnesses nine fastmoving objects flying
in tandem near Mount Reneer.
He times them as they fly between two
mountain peaks and calculates their
speed to be between 1,200 and 1,700 mph
at least 600 mph faster than the fastest
aircraft in existence at the time.
Kenneth Arnold is the guy who actually
is credited with coining the term flying
saucer because what he saw were objects
that were flying at some distance from
his airplane that were sort of skipping
and jumping and wobbling and doing very
very unusual high-speed maneuvers. So
that's where the term flying saucer came
from.
Although the US Air Force formerly
categorized Kenneth Arnold's experience
as a mirage, other reported sightings
were not so easily dismissed, the public
was starting to demand answers.
&gt;&gt; Once the initial sighting happened by
Kenneth Arnold and the Roswell incident
took place,
there were sightings everywhere around
the United States. They were happening
all over the world.
In 1949,
retired Marine Corps pilot turned writer
Major Donald Kho was asked by True
Magazine to write an article on these
numerous sightings.
Although Kho was a skeptic, he spent the
next 8 months conducting his own
research by tapping into his contacts in
the Pentagon and the military.
Eventually, he came to a conclusion he
would have considered unthinkable.
Flying saucers were not only real, they
were of extraterrestrial origin.
&gt;&gt; Major Kho was one of the last real
military voices from the time of the
Truman administration going into the
Eisenhower administration who was
honestly trying to tell the truth.
&gt;&gt; Kho's article in True Magazine shook the
nation.
It was not only a solid piece of
journalism on the topic of UFOs,
but served as a stinging indictment of
the US military and the government's
determination to keep the public in the
dark.
&gt;&gt; That true magazine, it was historic
because it went to a heck of a lot of
people.
&gt;&gt; Then in 1958, Kho went on a program
called the Armstrong Circle Theater,
which was a live television program.
UFO, the enigma of the skies on the
Armstrong Circle Theater. Major, you've
seen our report on the Air Force
conclusions dealing with the current UFO
sightings.
&gt;&gt; Well, I was excited to hear that Kiho
was going to debate the Air Force.
&gt;&gt; And now, Mr. Edwards, I would like to
make a disclosure which something which
has never been revealed to the public.
Toward the end of the program, he broke
in and said uh to the effect, "I'm going
to say something that the public has
never heard before.
&gt;&gt; If the hearings are held, open hearings,
I feel it will prove beyond doubt that
the blank."
&gt;&gt; At that point, his sound was lost.
&gt;&gt; What was Major Kho saying, and who cut
him off?
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Major Kho.
It was later discovered that Air Force
officials had been stationed in the
control booth during the broadcast. And
there are many who still believe that
Kho's audio was deliberately cut in
order to keep him from revealing top
secret information concerning the
government's ongoing UFO investigations.
The Air Force was lying.
But why was the Air Force so concerned
about the American public hearing Major
Kho's statement? What did they have to
lose if they were forced to admit their
ongoing investigations into UFOs?
&gt;&gt; I wrote this down because I think it's
one of the most important historic
sentences and it comes from Major Kho
for the past
175 years. That would be 1772.
That would be before the founding of the
United States. The planet Earth has been
under systematic
close-range examination
by living observers from another planet.
This is nothing new. These cover-ups
have happened for thousands and
thousands of years. Throughout ancient
texts, there are references to what I
call misunderstood technology.
In modern times, you'll hear stories of
UFOs and spacecraft because now we have
the language to talk about technology.
Whereas in ancient times, they didn't
have any reference to that kind of
technology. So, they would have thought
this is something that's angelic or from
another dimension or godlike.
The fact that the US government has
investigated thousands and thousands of
reports leads me to think that they may
know much more than what they let us
believe.
Proof of the US government's complicity
in covering up extraterrestrial activity
does not only come in the form of leaked
documents and the contents of secret
files.
Sometimes the evidence comes from
credible firstirhand accounts, not from
whistleblowers, but from American
astronauts.
Everything that NASA does is supposedly
above board. Everything they do, they
should tell us about. We should know
about all of their launches and missions
and who all the astronauts are. They
themselves are not sharing all of the
information. Most of it is being kept
secret.
The Biconor Cosmo drrome. April 12th,
1961.
The Vastto 1 rocket achieves liftoff
and Soviet cosminaut Yuri Gaggger is
heralded as the first human in space.
The event serves as a wake-up call to
the United States and NASA whose project
Mercury program would over the next 2
years launch six of its own astronauts
into space. The space race to land a
human being on the moon was on and
mankind was now a space fairing species.
&gt;&gt; The achievement of putting the man in
space was almost a miracle. Nobody knows
what they might see or encounter out
there. extraterrestrial spacecraft or
even ETSs themselves.
&gt;&gt; Liftoff.
&gt;&gt; Although the first five Mercury missions
go off without incident.
&gt;&gt; Lift off 30 minutes after the hour.
&gt;&gt; During the sixth and final mission,
astronaut Gordon Cooper reports an
unusual encounter.
While aboard his spacecraft, he reports
a green glowing object quickly
approaching his capsule. The UFO is also
picked up by NASA's tracking station,
but by the time Cooper splashes down in
the Pacific Ocean. Reporters are told
that any questions about the incident
are strictly forbidden.
&gt;&gt; There's no question that NASA actually
has protocols in place for how
astronauts should deal with and report
or not report anomalies. Now, over the
years, there have been astronauts that
have kind of broken those protocols.
Gordon Cooper is one who talked a lot
about a UFO sighting he had on a Mercury
spacecraft, and that upset quite a few
people at NASA.
In June 1965,
2 years after Gordon Cooper's flight,
Gemini 4 astronaut James McDivet reports
seeing a metallic object flying in orbit
alongside his spacecraft. And once
again, the event is quickly covered up.
There have been many stories over the
years coming from astronauts of various
missions, from the Mercury missions,
from the Apollo missions, um, and even
from Soviet missions to space where
astronauts have come out and said that
they have seen these UFOs flying around,
that they've been followed, uh, that
they've seen unconventional aircraft on
some of their missions. There's a story
that Buzz Aldrin tells about Apollo 11
where the Apollo 11 spacecraft was
followed for many, many hours by an
object that was so strange that they
actually reported on it through their
private channels.
I'm looking out the window. They said,
"What's that?
There's an object that's moving with
respect to everything else. Jeez, it's
not supposed to be doing that. Wonder
how far away it is.
If it's a long ways away, it's going
mighty fast. If it's not too far away,
it uh maybe isn't going very fast.
Wonder what it is. Hey, Neil, look at
this. We look at it. Huh? What is that?
Probably the uh upper stage rocket.
Yeah, but didn't we just watch that
thing carefully
out in front of us, out the window,
light its engine, and go
Well, I guess that's not what we're
looking at cuz that's a long ways away.
What's the odds that it's from alien or
Russian or something else? But we were
not about to cancel the moon mission and
putt putt over there to find out which
one it was.
&gt;&gt; There's been many astronauts that have
come forward that have talked about
this. So, it seems like some of them
want to talk about it and others are
either afraid to talk about it or uh
they've been silenced for some reason.
One person involved with the early space
program who did not remain silent was
Joanne Donaldson, a young biomed
engineer at NASA.
In 1972,
during the Apollo 17 moon mission,
Donaldson's job was to monitor the
astronauts vital signs and to observe
their pre-flight and post-flight
recovery. Rod Evans was in charge of the
command module while Jean Cernin and
Harrison Smith were on the surface of
the moon. When the command module would
orbit the moon, part of the orbit would
take it behind the moon. What we call
lost the signal to mission control.
Day two, Ron came out from behind the
moon, reported into mission control, and
Jean comes up on the comm lake and says,
"Hey, Ron, you're not lonely up there
without us, are you?" And Ron reported
back says, "Nope, I got company."
Everybody was just kind of taken back as
like, you know, company. That itself
implies that there was something else up
there with him. Well, Metro Control's
first reaction was, "Guys, are you
joking?" And Ron says, "No, this is not
a joke.
&gt;&gt; There is an object flying in formation
with me up here circling the moon." When
Ron reported that the object was leaving
his orbit, he calculated that they had
been in formation with him for
approximately 5 to 5 and a half orbits
of the moon.
But as far as the public was concerned,
nothing out of the ordinary happened.
At the exact moment that astronaut Ron
Evans reported he was not alone, NASA
officials disconnected the public feed
from media outlets.
The following day, NASA ordered a
conference call for everyone involved in
the incident.
&gt;&gt; We were all told, "We're going to
continue on with the mission as if
nothing has happened and do not discuss
this anomaly with anyone outside of your
command."
After the Apollo 17 crew splashed down
in the Pacific Ocean, Joanne Donaldson
examined Evans as part of the
postmission recovery procedure.
Ron was sitting up on the side of his
funk and he goes, "Well, I'm reliving
what I saw was in orbit around the moon.
I don't think the Russians launched
something this big in orbit." I estimate
to say it was 40 45 ft long. It was
cigar shaped.
&gt;&gt; Now any cylindrical object like that is
not going to be something that we made.
So what was it? Clearly it was not one
of ours. We trust these astronauts to
report back on what they see. They're
essentially scientists that are
exploring space on our behalf. But a lot
of people are unaware of the fact that
many of our astronauts have spoken
openly about UFOs. Many of them were
fighter pilots before they became
astronauts and they have seen craft
flying as pilots. Could it be they've
been pulled aside and told this is all
you're allowed to say and no more
because NASA is trying to silence these
astronauts from telling the truth?
Another Apollo astronaut who openly
admitted his belief in extraterrestrial
contact was Edgar Mitchell, the lunar
module pilot for Apollo 14. In his later
years, he claimed many of his colleagues
had strange paranormal experiences
during their missions and frequently
declared that most UFO phenomena are
directly connected to extraterrestrial
activity.
I have had no firsthand personal
experience, but all the evidence from
the research people that I know from
both Europe and the United States have
investigated all the sightings for
dozens of years and it's pretty sure
it's all true.
I believe that the alien craft,
presuming they're the reality I think
they are and others think they are, have
been coming for a long, long time. As
the sixth person to walk on the moon,
Mitchell's opinions concerning UFOs and
their connection to extraterrestrial
encounters have been difficult to
dismiss.
But if other worldly entities have been
making contact with us, not only for
decades, but for centuries,
what is their goal?
July 20th, 1969.
&gt;&gt; Eagle, Houston. Everything's looking
good here. Over.
&gt;&gt; Millions of people around the world are
glued to their televisions to watch one
of the greatest achievements in human
history.
Astronaut Neil Armstrong is about to
become the first Earthborn
extraterrestrial
by stepping foot on the surface of the
moon.
That's one small step for man, one giant
leap for mankind.
&gt;&gt; Although Richard Nixon is the current
president of the United States, most
give credit to the man who held the
office six years earlier, John
Fitzgerald Kennedy.
Many years ago, the great British
explorer George Mallerie who was to die
on Mount Everest was asked why did he
want to climb it? He said, "Because it
is there." Well, space is there and
we're going to climb it.
&gt;&gt; But even as Neil Armstrong and fellow
astronaut Buzz Aldrin were still engaged
on their historic mission, Nixon and the
team at NASA now faced an even more
daunting challenge. what to do next.
The moon mission had gripped the
American consciousness as nothing
before. And even though a number of
return missions had been planned, there
was nothing on the launchpad that could
top landing a man on the moon as either
a national goal or effective political
propaganda.
To this end, in 1972,
as Nixon began planning his re-election
campaign, the space shuttle program was
announced. It was also during this same
time that the president's chief of
staff, HR Halddederman, proposed the
creation of a documentary film that
would depict Nixon as being fully
committed to the development of a number
of ambitious science-based programs.
to produce it. Haldman turned to
successful advertising executive turned
filmmaker Robert Enegger.
&gt;&gt; They knew that Bob had made promotional
films for the Department of Defense. So
he was contacted and asked if he would
come to a meeting in Los Angeles with
the committee to reelect the president.
And they said, "We need a media
consultant. We'd like somebody to come
on board and make a documentary that
would support Nixon. a documentary about
some perhaps secret project that the
government's been working on that uh can
be released or declassified. Well, they
were run around the country being shown
all sorts of secret projects. They went
to Wright Patterson and they were shown
very classified laser experiments. They
were shown dolphins being trained for
demolition work. They were shown dogs
being trained for various tasks. Then
they were taken to Norton Air Force Base
which at that time housed the Air Force
Film Depository. Paul Shardell was the
director of the depository. They were
taken into a building where these films
were kept. They were taken into what was
known as a clean room, meaning it was
free of any bugs, microphones, video
equipment, anything.
It was during his meeting at Nordon Air
Force Base that Robert Enegger learned
that Paul Charle had a different agenda
from that of the president and a
different film in mind than the one that
had been initially proposed.
&gt;&gt; And Charle said, "I'd like to ask you
this. How would you like to make a
documentary on UFOs?" And Bob Elenegger
was stunned. He told me at his home, he
said, "I didn't know anything about
UFOs." I was shocked. They said, "If we
would make the documentary,
we would be given 600 ft of 16 mm film
shot at Hollowman Air Force Base of a
UFO landing there."
&gt;&gt; For Robert Eman, it was an offer too
good to refuse. Believing he had the
full support of both the president and
the military, he set about to make the
US government's first official film on
the subject of UFOs.
He quickly recruited Rod Serling,
Burgess Meredith, and Jose Ferrer to
narrate the film. And the final
explosive scene was to show actual
footage of an alien encounter.
But when it came time to receive the
incredible footage he'd been promised,
Eman had the government's once open door
slammed in his face.
&gt;&gt; They had been promised really dramatic
footage said to be completely legit of a
UFO landing at Hollowman Air Force Base
in 1964,
which had alien beings come out some
like the day the Earth stood still.
Essentially
&gt;&gt; out came some kind of a ramp. Our
contingent of humans walked up, met
these two Ebans, extraterrestrial
biological entities, and that in this
doorway was a being unlike the Ebans,
and that it was holding a rod that had a
spiral that went around the rod, and
that this was used to communicate with
our team.
&gt;&gt; This was a film. They had four different
vantage points. They were shooting it.
One from the air, three on the ground,
and the craft landed, the aliens came
out, and they stored the craft. All this
was on film.
But on the day, Emman was to be given a
copy of the 16 mm footage from the Air
Force. The filmmaker received an
unexpected phone call.
&gt;&gt; It is one of those like out of a
Hollywood feature. It's supposed to be
coming. A courier is on the way. They
cannot believe it. It's really going to
happen. They're going to see all of this
film.
And then another phone call. We're
sorry. The approval has been rescended.
No film.
&gt;&gt; Colonel Coleman from the Pentagon said,
"The timing isn't right. We can't allow
you to use the film."
&gt;&gt; Bob Emman was crushed. He said, "Why?"
and he's found out that making a
documentary exposing UFOs as being
extraterrestrial
would not help the president, but
conceivably could harm them.
&gt;&gt; Ultimately, Robert Einer was forced to
complete his documentary without the
sensational footage he had been
promised.
It was a documentary called UFOs past,
present, future, and they also had a
book by the same name.
&gt;&gt; As written by Robert Enegger and
directed by Ray Rivas, the documentary
proved to be both popular and
influential.
Even without the smoking gun footage, it
caused a sensation and was later
credited as one of the inspirations
behind Steven Spielberg's 1977
blockbuster, Close Encounters of the
Third Kind.
The Robert Emmener disclosure effort is
what I call it. I said, "You know that
film, Bob? That's very strange. You
know, if it weren't for the location,
that's Close Encounters of the Third
Kind." And he said, "What? I didn't tell
you." And I said, "You didn't tell me
what I didn't tell you. I gave a copy to
Steven Spielberg." And I said, "No, you
didn't tell me that." So, the
documentary was done in 1975. Steven
Spielberg's Close Encounters of the
Third Kind came out in 1977.
And so when you see Close Encounters of
the Third Kind, it's the Hullman Air
Force Base story. Just change the
location. It's exactly what the story
was.
&gt;&gt; While the alleged alien UFO footage from
Hollowan Air Force Base has never
surfaced, many ancient astronaut
theorists believe it still exists under
lock and key.
What I am really truly expecting is that
somewhere from 2018 going forward in the
next decade that finally all of that
film is going to be released and that we
will finally enter the true history.
Did the US Air Force really have footage
of secret meetings between government
officials and extraterrestrials?
And if so, where is it now?
For decades, American presidents have
officially denied that they've received
any information that extraterrestrials
are visiting Earth. mud. Considering
that the US government has conducted at
least four major investigations into UFO
activity since the 1940s,
why has there been so much time and
taxpayer money devoted to studying
something that the government claims
isn't happening?
We don't know for an absolute fact what
kind of briefings presidents actually
receive when they come into office about
extraterrestrials, but we do have some
indications from some documents that do
exist. One of them being of the original
MJ12 presidential briefing for President
Eisenhower telling them all about the
crash at Roswell.
On November 2nd, 2005, a document
surfaced that was allegedly a transcript
made from a recorded presidential
briefing held at Camp David in March of
1981.
Present were President Ronald Reagan,
CIA Director William Casey, Secretary of
Defense Casper Weinberger, and a
mysterious person known only as the
caretaker.
According to the document, during the
meeting, the caretaker shared evidence
that aliens have been visiting the Earth
for thousands of years
and that modern American records of such
encounters officially began in 1947
following the Roswell incident.
Certainly, if you look at Ronald Reagan,
he's somebody who brought up aliens all
the time. To my mind, what Reagan is
communicating is, yes, Roswell happened.
Yes, it is significant. Yes, there are
aliens and we better get used to this
idea or figure out how to deal with
them.
&gt;&gt; I, William Jefferson Clinton.
&gt;&gt; But it was with the inauguration of
President Bill Clinton in January 1993
that many UFO researchers believed they
finally had an ally in the White House.
If the United States Air Force did
recover alien bodies, they didn't tell
me about it either, and I want to know.
So, when Bill Clinton gets into office,
he called in his presidential aid, Web
Hubble, and the first two things that he
asked for after he was president was who
killed JFK and are there aliens? Clinton
knew that there was something up about
aliens and UFOs that people were not
being told.
In his quest to shed light on the
government's secret UFO investigations,
President Clinton found an unlikely ally
in billionaire philanthropist Lawrence
S. Rockefeller, who used his influence
to push full disclosure about possible
extraterrestrial activities on Earth.
The way it started was Lawrence
Rockefeller who was one of the famous
Rockefeller brothers had been shown a
documentary on Roswell and was very very
interested. So the election was going on
at the time and he said whether Ross
Perau wins or George Bush wins or Bill
Clinton wins I'm going to the White
House and I'm going to get them to
disclose the UFO story.
In 1993,
Lawrence Rockefeller began inviting a
select group of UFO researchers and
ancient astronaut theorists to join him
for an important first meeting of what
would become known as the Rockefeller
Initiative.
&gt;&gt; In 1993,
I got a phone call saying, "Linda, we'd
like you to join a group of your peers
at Lawrence Rockefeller's ranch at
Jackson Hole." So we met. There were
people like Robert Bigalow, now the head
of Bigalow Aerospace, and there were
others that were authors in scientists.
One of the people who helped edit the
letter on UFO disclosure to the
president of the United States was
Hillary Clinton.
She was the first lady at the time.
Another person close to Bill Clinton,
who was an advocate for government
investigation of UFOs, was John Podesta,
who served as the president's assistant
in 1993
and became his deputy chief of staff in
1997.
&gt;&gt; I've uh had a long career uh trying to
fight against government secrecy and
create more openness. Right after I left
law school, I started working on that at
the Department of Justice. and at the
Senate Judiciary Committee. And then
when I worked for President Clinton in
the White House, I was one of the people
spearheading an initiative uh to
declassify
uh what turned out to be over a billion
pages of documents uh that were resident
at the National Archives. In President
Clinton's case, I think he was
interested in the phenomena. He had
worked with his then science adviser
Jack Gibbons to understand what was
going on.
&gt;&gt; This correspondent starts going back and
forth for three years. Rockefeller is
putting immense pressure on the White
House to disclose.
&gt;&gt; Lawrence Rockefeller requested that the
1947 Roswell incident be a starting
point in the government's disclosure.
&gt;&gt; They went out and they reinvestigated
Roswell. It came back and Bill Clinton
saw the final report in 1995.
&gt;&gt; President Clinton's one of the most
curious people I've ever met. I think he
wanted to know what the Air Force knew
and got a report back that in my view
was a little bit unsatisfying
&gt;&gt; and he was furious from what I was told.
&gt;&gt; The Rockefeller initiative was hoping
for a revelation but the US Air Force
stuck to its position that a crashed
weather balloon caused the Roswell
incident.
Clinton goes to Belfast, Northern
Ireland in November of 1995. He's
lighting the Christmas tree and that's
when he gives the famous speech. He said
he's gets a letter from Ryan which I
tried to recover in an FOIA. There is no
letter to Ryan. I think they just made
it up. He said, "Ryan, if you're out
there in the audience tonight, here's
the answer to your question."
&gt;&gt; No. As far as I know, an alien
spacecraft did not crash in Roswell, New
Mexico. And Ryan,
if the United States Air Force did
recover alien bodies, they didn't tell
me about it either, and I want to know.
That's why in 1997, the US Air Force
goes out and does a second Roswell
report, spends $20 million on because
the president was furious. According to
the revised report, the so-called alien
bodies that eyewitnesses claimed they
saw being pulled from the wreckage were
dismissed as being nothing more than
crash test dummies, which had been
tethered to parachutes being used in an
otherwise conventional test.
Dr. Given pressed uh first the Secretary
of Defense Les Aspen, then the Secretary
of the Air Force to take this matter
seriously, to do a review. The boxes
were missing. The documents were gone.
Nobody knew anything. Uh and uh you know
the the trail kind of went cold.
&gt;&gt; In 1996,
the Rockefeller Initiative was quietly
closed and its participants frustrated
that forces within the government still
refused to reveal the truth, went away
without the answers they'd hoped for.
The Rockefeller Initiative is considered
by some researchers to be the biggest
government UFO disclosure story of all
times.
&gt;&gt; The fact that it even existed, that it
was sanctioned in any way by the
government, that the report was accepted
by the White House and people in the
government, I think is very, very highly
significant. So, it's kind of a very
small incremental step forward in the
process of disclosure and moving us
towards the ultimate answers to the
questions that we're all asking.
Washington DC,
July 1996.
Political activist Steven Basset becomes
the first registered extraterrestrial
life and disclosure lobbyist in the
United States.
For years, he had been trying to
organize a hearing with members of
Congress to present evidence that the
government was hiding important
information from its people.
The extraterrestrial presence, if we're
formally acknowledged, could bring in an
age of reform where the human race could
get its act together because we're
running out of time.
As I got into the issue, what I learned
is just how dysfunctional the United
States government had become. It is the
vast expanse of secrecy and abuse of
secrecy and power that is lying at the
base of a great deal of our problems.
And so I had one simple fundamental
task. Formal acknowledge of the
extraterrestrial presence. Simple,
clean, and easy.
&gt;&gt; Gentlemen, if you could stand and repeat
after me. On April 29th, 2013,
Basset organized the citizen hearing on
disclosure in Washington DC.
&gt;&gt; The objective was to bring together the
most compelling evidence of
extraterrestrial visits to Earth and
convince former members of Congress to
take immediate action.
&gt;&gt; I had wanted to do it since 2001. bring
in 42 witnesses from 10 countries
to testify in the main ballroom of the
National Press Club before six former
members of the Congress. Five
Congresspersons, one senator, and they
testified for 30 hours over 5 days.
&gt;&gt; It was an amazing event mostly because
of the caliber of witnesses that were
brought in, the investigators,
researchers.
They don't want you to know that.
&gt;&gt; Witnesses included John Callahan, former
division chief of the accidents and
investigations branch of the FAA,
the former Canadian Minister of Defense
Paul Helier, retired Air Force Captain
Robert Salis, and many others who had
conducted extensive research into the
UFO phenomenon.
&gt;&gt; That we live in a cosmos teeming with
life. The fact that some other
civilizations are more advanced than we
are may be humbling, but that could be a
necessary step in our survival.
&gt;&gt; People are so afraid for their lives,
their families, because they have had to
sign non-disclosure agreements.
&gt;&gt; Witness from the UK, Nick Pope.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Um, you should all have a
printed out copy of my opening
statement, but I was one of the
witnesses and I have to say this was the
nearest that we've gotten since oh, way
back to the ' 70s and the '60s even to
proper congressional hearings on the UFO
mystery.
&gt;&gt; You did work for the Ministry of Defense
&gt;&gt; in the UK. Yeah. Yes.
&gt;&gt; I was asked about my experience within
the British government's UFO program and
one of the UK's most high-profile cases,
the Rendlessham Forest incident.
In December 1980, there were unexplained
reports of a glowing craft in the woods
of Royal Air Force Base Woodbridge.
Burn marks and broken branches were
later discovered. Some have called this
incident Britain's Roswell.
&gt;&gt; Even though I've left government, I
responded with I can neither confirm nor
deny. I don't think the committee liked
my neither confirm nor deny response and
they pushed me very hard on that.
&gt;&gt; Certainly, you've been involved since
you left.
&gt;&gt; Yes, sir. In a private capacity.
&gt;&gt; What's your opinion based on all that
stuff that you've had access to? Is
there an ET origin to what's obvious
sightings of real UFOs?
&gt;&gt; It is a a possibility.
&gt;&gt; But
&gt;&gt; you could tell by the faces they really
weren't quite sure what to think of this
yet. By Wednesday, we have them, you
know, standing up, pointing fingers,
saying, "We need to open those files."
&gt;&gt; It drove things forward. It took the UFO
phenomenon out of the fringe and into
the mainstream. Thousands of people
watched it online. We netcast it so that
members of Congress and their staff who
are too timid to come down and watch it
there or members of the press that were
afraid that they might be seen watching
it could watch it in the comfort of
their offices.
&gt;&gt; Sometime this year we may just enter a
new world. Thank you so much.
Based on the hearings, four of the six
former members of Congress pledged their
support to hold a world conference in
conjunction with the United Nations to
address the disclosure of all knowledge
of extraterrestrial contact with this
planet.
Then on August 15th, 2013,
less than 4 months after the citizen
hearing on disclosure, the United States
government made a shocking admission.
After decades of denying its existence,
they finally admitted that a secret base
known as Area 51 did exist.
Did the citizen hearing undisclosure
force the US government to act?
While the government acknowledge the
existence of Area 51, it still has not
been revealed just what it is currently
being used for.
And since that disclosure, the perimeter
around the base has been extended and
security heightened.
&gt;&gt; Area 51 has to be more security now
because you got so many other concerns.
We didn't have computers to worry about,
internet, all that sort of thing that
you got today. So, it's a brand new ball
game at Forest Security.
While many considered the government's
admission of the existence of Area 51 to
be a bombshell, an even bigger
disclosure was still to come. The
declassification of millions of top
secret CIA documents.
Bethesda, Maryland. November 2014.
Steven Basset, executive director of the
Paradigm Research Group, launches an
initiative directed to influence Hillary
Clinton.
Based on Clinton's work with Lawrence
Rockefeller in the 1990s, Basset
believes she could be an ally in getting
the government to declassify its UFO
files.
That political initiative was was was
begun by sending a full copy of the 30
hours of testimony to every member of
Congress addressing the Rockefeller
initiative naming names. Secretary
Clinton, President Clinton, John
Podesta, George Stephanopoulos, etc.,
etc. That testimony created a very
significant dilemma for the Clinton
campaign team. cannot bring
&gt;&gt; the political initiative forces the
Clinton campaign team which included
Barack Obama. He was on the team to
speak to the issue.
&gt;&gt; Are we ready to go win an election?
&gt;&gt; Clinton's campaign chairman John Podesta
is well known for his interest in UFO
and extraterrestrial encounters. And
according to him, so is she.
Secretary Clinton uh likewise was so
kind of interested in the topic and uh
during the course of the campaign said
that if elected she would have ordered a
more thorough declassification review.
&gt;&gt; She was very open. She did not skirt the
issue. She talked about it very openly.
Many believe that had Clinton won, there
would have been a seismic shift from the
government's long-held policy of secrecy
concerning UFO investigations to a new
policy of full disclosure.
the system of regulation that creates
our secrecy system. What's top secret,
what's confidential, these lower levels
of classification, that's regulated and
has been uh since the Truman
administration by executive order of the
president. President sets forward the
general rules of classification. And
some presidents have been more
forthcoming, wanted less secrecy. Some
have tightened the reigns and wanted
more secrecy.
It makes a difference.
&gt;&gt; The CIA and the Pentagon, they were
worried about Hillary Clinton, Secretary
Clinton, all the statements she was
making, winning the presidency, and
going to the Pentagon and basically
saying, "You are going to give me the
information I need to disclose the
extraterrestrial presence or I'm going
to fire every single one of you."
As this year of 2016 went forward, we
all expected that this headline that
we've been waiting for that is going to
break the protocol, break the policy of
denial, was going to happen. John
Podesta was trying to get ready to open
up that we're not alone in the universe.
All of that crashed
when a different person became president
of the United States.
November 8th, 2016,
Donald Trump was elected as America's
next president. There would be no
disclosure of the secret UFO files.
&gt;&gt; I've had a number of members of
Congress, members of the US Senate, say
to me, "Keep going at this. I'm really
interested in it, but I can't say
anything about it."
But as a longtime adviser to President
Barack Obama, John Podesta still had an
ally in the White House, one who would
remain there for another 2 months.
January 17th, 2017,
in Barack Obama's last days as
president, the CIA posts on its website
nearly 13 million pages of agency
documents, many of which pertain to
UFOs.
It was a very, very big deal and people
were excited.
All of these things were efforts I
believe to to educate people and to move
us in a direction that we can accept as
a society
that extraterrestrials are here and have
been here for thousands of years.
Investigator Chase Klinsky and author
Nick Pope have been searching for proof
that the US government has been hiding
its interactions with extraterrestrials.
Now they hope to find new evidence among
the millions of recently declassified
pages.
Well, there's such a lot to go through.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; It comes back to the old saying, the
best place to hide a book is in a
library. And there are all sorts of gems
in here, I'm sure. But um how would we
ever know? We've got to go through it
literally page by page, line by line,
&gt;&gt; right? So, taking a look at this report,
December 1960,
this has come from Detroit, and it's a
sighting of unidentified objects in the
sky like a disc, it says, which again is
something I'm sure you've come across in
in various reports, as have I.
&gt;&gt; Yes, many.
&gt;&gt; And yet, it has these redactions on it.
And again, the question arises, why? If
this subject is so unclassified and
unimportant, why all these redactions?
&gt;&gt; And this next document.
&gt;&gt; Oh, wow. That's crazy,
&gt;&gt; right? Why even bother? Only information
is
the date.
&gt;&gt; 13 million documents. If there really
was a smoking gun in there, it would be
almost impossible to find.
So far, the CIA archive has revealed
thousands of reports of sightings of
unexplained aircraft.
One report said that of 1500 official
accounts of UFOs since 1947,
an incredible 20% remain unexplained.
But was the release of the CIA online
archive another step towards disclosure
or a way to bury the truth?
When the Pentagon's classified study
into UFOs, the advanced aerial threat
identification program was uncovered
later in 2017, journalists and
researchers rushed to file Freedom of
Information Act requests.
Will these files finally explain what
the government knows?
11 months after the CIA's archive is
released to the public in 2017,
the New York Times story reveals the
Department of Defense's ATIP, or
Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification
Program.
&gt;&gt; Oh my god.
&gt;&gt; As soon as the story breaks, journalists
and researchers start filing Freedom of
Information Act requests known as FOYA.
There have now been 1,500
to 2,000 FOAS on this program, $22
million program. And the government at
this point is saying, "Program? What
program?" They're playing the same old
game. We didn't release those films, but
they're under so much pressure. If this
keeps up for even four or five or six
more months, I do not imagine how
disclosure cannot take place. Much of
what was undertaken and reviewed still
remains in the dark in in a classified
form at the Department of Defense. I
would hope that they would declassify
and release as much as possible.
&gt;&gt; Good afternoon.
&gt;&gt; When this story broke in the New York
Times,
&gt;&gt; Jordan,
&gt;&gt; guy the name of Jordan Fabian from The
Hill, he asked Sarah Sanders the $64,000
question. Um, does the president believe
in the existence of UFOs and would he be
interested in restoring funding for that
program?
&gt;&gt; Somehow that question hasn't come up in
our back and forth over the last couple
days, but I will uh check into that and
be happy to circle back. Jennifer,
&gt;&gt; as far as I know, she has never come
back around because you can't. The
president has to stay out of it. They
want the community to force the issue.
They want us to force the issue and that
is why they moved it to Bob Bigalow
who's a contractor in Las Vegas. It's
private industry that will do the
disclosure.
History is about to happen at a level
that's almost incalculable,
extraordinary, unprecedented. It makes
something like the Roman Empire look
trivial.
So just think about that. The
announcement of the extraterrestrial
presence, worldwide engagement, open
contacts with multiple civilizations.
&gt;&gt; The revelations about ATIP may be clues
that there's an agenda here.
This may be government trying to slowly
drip feed this information out to the
public in such a way that there won't be
out andout panic.
It may be a way of slowly but surely
acclimatizing
people to the reality of this
phenomenon.
The fact that the New York Times
published a Pentagon story is
extraordinary
and nobody really cared. So to me that
means that while we are all talking
about that we may be connected to
extraterrestrials
that this knowledge is within us. It's
hardwired so that hey if they're coming
it won't be panic because we come from
them. I do think that the world is ready
for this knowledge and I think that it
would be the most revolutionary story in
the history of mankind.
Has the time finally come when not only
the United States government, but
nations around the world will reveal
what UFO researchers and ancient
astronaut theorists have long suspected
that extraterrestrial visitation of our
planet is not only real, but has been
happening for thousands of years. There
are many who believe the answer is a
profound yes and that the truth will
lead to a greater understanding not only
of mankind's past but of its future. A
future that will see humans as the
torchbearers of a new generation
and as the extraterrestrial visitors of
planets and galaxies far beyond our own.
In the most remote place on Earth,
recent discoveries have left scientists
stunned. Something is going on there.
And the question is, what?
&gt;&gt; There were shock waves in 2018 when we
realized that radiation was coming from
the South Pole. After thousands of
years, hidden by thick ice and protected
by deadly temperatures, the truth about
Antarctica may finally be revealed. This
is a legitimate satellite image of a
very large hole in the mountain range.
What secret lies beneath the Earth's
most unexplored continent? Here we have
a huge underground world beneath
Antarctica.
And what will we find out about
mankind's true origins?
&gt;&gt; Buried underneath the ice in Antarctica
could well be the greatest reveal in all
of human history.
There is a doorway in the universe.
Beyond it is the promise of truth.
It demands we question everything we
have ever been taught. The evidence is
all around us. The future is right
before our eyes. We are not alone. We
have never been alone.
Ross Island, Antarctica.
This volcanic land mass at the bottom of
the world is the site of one of the
greatest mysteries of modern physics. It
is here that in May of 2018, NASA
scientists working on the Antarctic
impulsive transient antenna, otherwise
known as Anita, detected an anomaly that
defies the laws of physics. Cosmic rays
which normally rain down on Earth from
space were instead erupting out of the
ground.
&gt;&gt; Among physicists, there were shock waves
in 2018 when we realized that a strange
form of radiation was coming from the
South Pole. We physicists said, "What
kind of particle could this be? This is
new. You would expect high energy
neutrinons to be raining down from the
sky but not coming up from the earth.
But that's exactly what they found.
So the fact that cosmic rays were
measured coming out of the earth begs
the question, how is such a thing
possible? Antarctica to this day remains
one of the last unexplored geographical
regions of our planet. It is still one
of the greatest mysteries with which we
are faced today.
Antarctica is a land of extremes.
Nearly 98% of the ground is covered by
an ice sheet up to 3 mi thick.
A mountain as towering as Japan's Mount
Fuji at 12,400 ft would not even break
the surface.
Temperatures regularly fall below -50° F
with winds of up to 200 mph.
During its peak season, it is home to
only 4,000 scientists and military
personnel.
Antarctica is the last frontier. It
holds our imagination.
Old maps that here be monsters. The last
remaining territory on the planet that
could have such a designation is
Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; Although it was discovered nearly 250
years ago, scientists have more
questions than answers when it comes to
this frozen continent.
Due to the sheer depth of the ice
covering its land mass, the surface of
Antarctica is unable to be seen with the
naked eye. And ancient astronaut
theorists propose that it is not just
the geology that is hidden from us.
They suggest there is far more human and
perhaps nonhuman activity happening in
Antarctica than we've been told.
Something seems to be going on on this
mysterious continent at the South Pole.
And it has been theorized by a number of
people that Antarctica is some kind of
alien base.
Rumors of extraterrestrial activity in
Antarctica have circulated for years.
And now at long last, military personnel
who have been stationed on the frozen
continent are willing to speak to these
claims.
Scottsdale, Arizona. February 2019.
Investigative journalist Linda Molton
How arrives to conduct an interview with
a former Navy flight engineer who has
come forward with information about
strange events he witnessed during his
time in Antarctica.
This is where one of the most important
whistleblowers in my career lives and he
has decided that he is willing to work
with me to tell the truth about what
happened with him in Antarctica.
This is the kind of breakthrough I have
been hoping that people with real solid
military information would start coming
forward and we would start learning the
facts and the truth in spite of
government policies of denial.
&gt;&gt; I knew things that I I felt needed to be
put out in the mainstream.
Brian, as he prefers to be called,
requested that his face and voice be
obscured to protect his identity.
His unit was based on the southern tip
of Ross Island at the US McMurto
station, the main logistics hub that
services nearly all of the scientific
outposts on the continent.
&gt;&gt; Brian, when did you get into the Navy
and what how did you get to Antarctica?
I enlisted in July of 1976.
In order to go to Antarctica, you have
to volunteer. It's not a uh duty station
where you are ordered to go. I was able
to get orders to um Antarctic
Development Squadron 6, which is
referred to as VXE-6.
&gt;&gt; And its mission would be described as
what? family.
&gt;&gt; The mission basically was supplying to
out camps, science parties from McMmero
station to South Pole, back and forth.
&gt;&gt; Talk about sort of the route and what
you guys began to see on a repeated
basis.
&gt;&gt; During our 9596 season, my crew was
doing a lot of back and forth to boat.
Mainly it was cargo resupply, personnel
exchanges.
That season, prior to us doing missions,
we were told by some of our officers
that if we saw something flying that we
weren't supposed to say anything.
&gt;&gt; Oh, so you knew that people had were
already warning about, but you had not
seen,
&gt;&gt; right? So somewhere around December, uh,
we were flying a mission from McMurto
and my load master in the back, he gets
on the intercom in the ICS and he says,
"Hey, there's something off to the left
here kind of shimmering." So I went up
to the flight deck and I'm looking out
the big windows and I see these little
discshaped objects. There was probably
four or five of them and they were at
first when I first saw them, they were
just stationary over one mount peak.
And then all of a sudden, I'm looking at
them and one of them takes off by itself
and flies at incredible speed to the
next mountaintop and stops. And then
another one in the group takes off and
heads toward where the first one went.
&gt;&gt; What did the pilot say?
&gt;&gt; That was kind of funny. My pilot gets on
the intercom and he kind of jokingly
goes, "Well, all I can tell you is
they're not ours." Not ours? What are
you talking about?
&gt;&gt; And it kept happening. Yes, it happened
at least two other times.
&gt;&gt; Brian feels that it is really important
that the world know that there is
something that is going on in
Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible that Brian's sighting of
unidentified flying objects may be
somehow connected to the discovery that
cosmic rays are emanating from the
frozen continent?
As far as ancient astronaut theorists
are concerned, Antarctica is not only
hiding secrets about current
extraterrestrial activities.
They believe there is much more to be
learned by examining incredible new
discoveries
deep underground.
In the 21st century, satellite
photography has allowed anyone with an
internet connection to access images of
Antarctica.
In 2016, a striking image was discovered
of a seemingly man-made entrance carved
into an Antarctic mountain range.
This is a legitimate satellite image of
a very large proportionate hole in the
ground or the mountain range. This looks
intelligently designed to suit a
specific craft that flies through this
particular opening. Similarly, in 2018,
internet researchers released the
coordinates for what they describe as a
UFO crash landed on the Antarctic island
of South Georgia.
The photographs are really compelling
because this is not somebody making
believe something is there. You can
actually see the skid marks. It actually
looks as though an object is moving
along that ice. But the thing that so
intrigued people looking at those images
were that the skid marks were straight.
Some ancient astronaut theorists have
noted that the shape of the alleged
craft is very similar to a mysterious
celestial object that was detected
entering our solar system in October
2017
called Umuam. The object was initially
identified as an asteroid, but its
shape, trajectory, and acceleration were
so unexpected that the chair of
Harvard's astronomy department, Avi Lo,
suggested that Amuama might be an alien
probe.
It's a very curious image of this large
oblong tubular-shaped craft that seems
to have crashed into the ice and then
skidded along.
And it really looks like this
interstellar asteroid MUA MUA that could
easily be a spacecraft.
The actual craft itself is right around
50 yards uh in length. This is the wider
view of this object that quite possibly
came in at an angle, ricocheted off of
the base of this mountain, and that's
what gave it the momentum to skid
several thousands of feet. You can
definitely see the mountain. There's
some disturbance here where this track
leads back to from this unidentified
object.
This very well could be a crash landing
based off of what we're seeing at the
bottom of the mountain. Yeah.
Is it possible that online researchers
using satellite technology actually
located the crashed remnants of an
extraterrestrial vehicle and the opening
to an underground alien base? Ancient
astronaut theorists say yes and point to
shocking disclosures from those on the
ground that validate these claims.
When investigative journalist Linda
Molton How interviewed a former Navy
flight engineer going by the name of
Brian in 2019,
he revealed a very curious no-fly zone
he came upon during his service in
Antarctica.
According to Brian, sometime around
October 1985,
an emergency call had come into McMurdo
dispatch.
They got a medevac call and it was from
the Davis camp which was Australia on
the far side of East Antarctica. It was
a real emergency and they had a long
flight.
A scientist at Davis camp was gravely
injured by a boiler explosion and needed
immediate medical attention,
including a fuel pit stop at the South
Pole. Brian's evacuation crew was 6
hours away from the critically injured
patient, but they had standing orders to
avoid flying over a so-called air
sampling station that was on the most
direct route.
&gt;&gt; So, we were given orders to deviate. I
believe it was 30 mi deviation away from
the air sampling station. The officers
on board suggesting that we fly straight
over the air sampling station and not
deviate and that would save us 30
minutes. It was a nofly zone.
&gt;&gt; It was a no-fly zone for that specific
region um around the pole.
&gt;&gt; But where the air sampling station was
supposed to be, the crew faced something
none of them had ever seen.
&gt;&gt; There was this giant indentation that
looked like a hole in the ice that
looked like a snow ramp that went down
into it. The polar plateau at South Pole
is completely flat. There are no holes
there. Now there's this big large hole
in the ice that stood out like a sore
thumb. It should not have been there.
&gt;&gt; Brian estimated the hole to be at least
300 ft in diameter, the size of a
football field. Confounded by what they
had seen, the crew continued on their
route to Davis. They picked up the
injured scientist and headed back to the
McMmero station.
As we were getting back and basically
taking the same route, we were called
back and told, "You must deviate from
your course that you took from Pole to
Davis, you've got to deviate 30° to do
this." We weren't given an explanation,
but we complied with the request and on
the way back, the patient died from his
burns.
&gt;&gt; When the aircraft landed at McMmero
station, the entire crew was escorted to
the senior commander's office. there.
They were ordered to never speak of the
restricted area they had flown over.
&gt;&gt; Immediately after, I thought to myself,
what was it we weren't supposed to see?
All we saw was a a hole in the in the
ice.
&gt;&gt; If the hole was in fact a natural
feature,
why did the crews fly over elicit such
attention from high rank officials?
There's been a lot of talk about
underground bases in Antarctica, and
certain satellite photos show mountain
areas that have unusual caverns in them,
literal windows that are the shape of a
flying saucer.
Is it possible that secret, perhaps
extraterrestrial bases are hidden
beneath the ice on Antarctica?
Curiously, the idea of habitable space
beneath the ice has been recently backed
up by mainstream science.
Mount Arabus, Ross Island, Antarctica,
2017.
Researchers from the Australian National
University discovered the existence of
vast ice caverns directly adjacent to
this active volcano.
Due to their location, these glacial
caves under the ice offer something
incredibly unique on the otherwise
frigid continent. Large heated spaces
with temperatures warm enough to sustain
life. Australian scientists were able to
find enormous caverns that were hollowed
out, that were places where you could
actually have life flourish. that they
were able to determine that some of
these caverns were thermally heated to a
barmy 70 72 degrees
&gt;&gt; 72°
in Antarctica.
Mount Arabus is just one of more than 90
volcanoes on Antarctica.
Modern technology has enabled scientists
to discover additional caverns near
these features and some are reportedly
as large as the entire island of
Manhattan.
Here we have a huge apparently
underground world beneath Antarctica
and this could be used by
extraterrestrials
as these readymade bases that are
underground and are hidden.
Could these naturally heated caverns and
tunnels really be inhabited by
extraterrestrials?
The ideas of both passageways deep under
the Antarctic ice sheets and also an
alien presence on the icy continent are
not new. Some say they trace back to the
beginning of World War II and a secret
Nazi expedition.
Hamburgg, Germany. December 1938.
On the brink of World War II, Adolf
Hitler is secretly searching for ancient
relics that he believes could hold
incredible powers.
As part of this effort, on December
17th, he sends the German freighter MS
Schwabanand on a top secret mission to
establish a permanent base on
Antarctica.
But why is Hitler sacrificing crucial
resources and personnel for a mission to
Antarctica when he is simultaneously
preparing to go to war?
The Tulis society was very important in
understanding what happened in Nazi
Germany. They actually believed that
there were mystics who could communicate
with beings
who claimed to be extraterrestrial in
origin.
Hitler's Nazi party got information
through these psychic mediums who told
them that in Antarctica there is this
ancient civilization or bases where they
could find advanced technologies.
The Nazis found some of these caverns
beneath the ice and some of them can be
reached by submarines. Apparently,
&gt;&gt; the story goes the German Navy were able
to find passages under the Antarctic ice
sheets to these enormous caverns.
And so they were then able to establish
these bases under the Antarctic ice
sheet.
Does the recent discovery of
interconnected caverns beneath the ice
of Antarctica validate rumors about the
Nazis that many mainstream historians
had deemed a complete fantasy?
And if so, might the Nazis have
discovered something truly incredible on
the frozen continent?
One theory is that the Germans
discovered when they were exploring the
South Pole that there was actually
another presence at the South Pole that
was not human.
And together with that presence, the
Germans established a base on
Antarctica.
After the Nazis were defeated in 1945,
the United States and the Soviet Union
recruited the top Nazi scientists,
many who later embarked on their own
secret missions to Antarctica.
Is it possible that these two emerging
world powers had knowledge that the
Nazis did in fact come into contact with
extraterrestrials at the South Pole?
August 26th, 1946,
a US scientific expedition called
Operation High Jump departs for the
South Pole. It is led by esteemed naval
officer and explorer Admiral Richard
Bird.
Admiral Richard Bird was a very
important admiral in the United States
Navy. He graduated the United States
Naval Academy at Annapolis. He fought in
World War I and after the war he became
an explorer.
&gt;&gt; In 1926,
Bird made worldwide headlines when he
and Navy Chief Aviation pilot Floyd
Bennett became the first people to ever
fly over the North Pole.
For their efforts, both men received the
Congressional Medal of Honor. Later,
when Bird at the age of 41 made the
first solo flight over the South Pole,
he became the youngest person ever
promoted to the rank of admiral in the
history of the United States Navy.
In 1946,
Bird oversaw Operation High Jump, the
largest Antarctic expedition to date.
The massive military convoy included 13
ships, 33 aircraft, and 4,700 troops.
The US Navy sent down a flotilla of
ships under command of Admiral Bird, and
they came back after about 9 months in
Antarctica.
Apparently, they actually fought a
battle in Antarctica, probably between
uh remnants of the Third Reich and
perhaps extraterrestrials as well. There
were stories of craft coming up out of
the water and attacking them.
Flying sources dealt a very heavy defeat
to Bird's Operation High Jump. He gave a
report in March of 1947 that said a new
enemy had been discovered that could fly
from pole to pole in an instant.
Is it possible that this incredible
story of a naval battle with
extraterrestrials
and encounters with craft capable of
flying from the South to the North Pole
in an instant could actually be true.
In 2018, more than 70 years after Bird's
astounding claim, a satellite image
captured what appeared to be a condensed
water trail from an aircraft or contrail
that could only have been produced by
something traveling at incredibly high
speeds.
It extended the entire length of the
Earth longitudinally from the North Pole
to the South Pole, which is 12,000 m.
The maximum length of time that a
contrail can maintain its shape is 30
minutes, but most dissipate in less than
15.
Only a craft capable of traveling faster
than 50,000 mph or 10 times the speed of
the fastest aircraft in existence today
could leave a contrail that would
stretch the entire length of the Earth
without breaking up.
It's a seeming impossibility because it
meant that some object was able to
traverse the entire planet from pole to
pole in a matter of minutes before the
contrail disappeared.
Whatever created that was going beyond
Mach 10. Mach 10 is over 78,000 m hour.
This was probably going much much faster
than that. So, whatever it was was
something that more than likely we've
never seen before.
After sharing the image online, Michael
Bradberry received replies of confirmed
sightings and even photographic
corroboration looking up at what
appeared to be the same incredible
contrail from below. people had seen
from below on the ground looking up the
same thing. When I saw this, I thought
of Admiral Bird and what he said.
Admiral Bird did tell us that we had a
very good chance of being invaded by a
very fastmoving object that would be
able to travel from pole to pole at a
very incredible speed.
Is it possible that Admiral Bird and the
US Navy really did encounter alien
technology in Antarctica? Technology
that was first discovered by the Nazis
at the start of World War II? And could
they even be developing it with
extraterrestrials still living there
today, hidden beneath the ice?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest further evidence of a
long-standing alien presence in
Antarctica can be found by investigating
a controversial theory.
Istanbul, Turkey.
Locked away in the archives at the Top
Capa Palace Museum is a piece of gazelle
skin with a fragment of an intricately
drawn world map on it.
This highly accurate representation of
the globe is the work of an Ottoman
cgrapher, Admiral Perry Ree, and dates
back to 1513 AD.
Incredibly, the map depicts Antarctica,
which was not officially discovered
until 260 years later by British
explorer Captain James Cook.
And even more startling, it depicts the
continent as it would look without any
ice.
Peri race claimed that the map that he
had was a finished product of other maps
that he collected and all of this
information from the other maps was
transferred into this one pure race map.
What's so fascinating about this map is
that it shows Antarctica without the
ice.
The question that naturally arises is,
well, who made these maps? If they show
the Antarctic coastline prior to being
under the ice, Pir Re was able to get
access to ancient records. And we're not
clear exactly where they were, but
possibly the Vatican. Uh the Vatican
Library has extensive ancient records.
And I would imagine that Admiral Perry
Reyes had access to some of these maps.
So this supports that Antarctica was
known to the ancient world prior to it
being in its present location under 2
milesi of ice.
It shows the actual land mass of
Antarctica exactly as it is under ice.
And so you have to ask the question, how
was that done? You have two options.
These maps were gleaned from people who
had access to radar technology. And if
that is the case, then one has to argue
it is extraterrestrials because who else
would have satellite technology a
thousand or 2,000 years ago?
Another
option is what if this map was drawn
during a time when the Antarctic was not
under ice, implying that Antarctica was
not at the South Pole at the time when
that mat was drawn.
The main proponent of this theory was
Charles Hapgood, a history professor at
Springfield College in Massachusetts
when he first heard about the paradox of
the Perry Ree map. In his 1958 book,
Earth's Shifting Crust, Hapkot argued
that Antarctica was ice-free prior to a
catastrophic crustal displacement that
occurred at the end of the last ice age,
approximately 12,000 years ago.
Hatgood's idea of crustal displacement
was that in the relatively recent past,
Antarctica was in a much more temperate
zone and that it just shifted and moved
very suddenly into the frozen area.
Mainstream scientists agree that
continents do drift and that Antarctica
was once in a warmer latitude, but they
insist it took millions of years to
reach the South Pole.
Hap good said it took days, even hours.
Hap good was saying that the thin crust
of the earth is able to slip forward on
the mantle and this causes huge
cataclysmic changes. There are tidal
waves, earthquakes and suddenly land
masses that aren't at say the north pole
or the south pole find themselves there.
If Hapg Good's theory is correct, could
an ancient alien civilization that once
flourished in a warm Antarctica have
been destroyed by a catastrophe?
And if so, is evidence finally coming to
life in the form of mysterious
structures emerging from the ice.
During her conversation with former Navy
flight engineer Brian, investigative
journalist Linda Molton How learned of a
strange incident that occurred in
November 1995
after he had dropped off a team of
scientists at a new research site in
Marie Birdland.
&gt;&gt; Three maybe four weeks into them being
out there, McMmero lost communication.
They had missed a couple of their
communication windows that they were
supposed to make a call every day.
Our crew was told to go out and find out
if everything was okay at the camp. So,
we went out and we orbited the camp and
there was no sign of anybody,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; So, we landed and our navigator got out
and he went out to try and find the the
camp manager. He comes back and says
there's nobody here.
So we got orders to fly back to McMmero.
So we closed up the airplane, took off,
came back to McMurdo.
The scientists remained missing for more
than a week. An impossible amount of
time to survive out in the harsh
Antarctic conditions without shelter or
food.
Yet one week later, McMmero Dispatch was
stunned when they received radio
communication from the team. Somehow
they had all returned to their camp
unharmed.
Brian's squadron was once again given
orders to pick them up.
&gt;&gt; We landed, opened the back end of the
aircraft up. And the people, they didn't
even grab their gear. They just ran up
to the back of the airplane and jumped
in. And basically, we had to go out and
get their gear and put it in the
airplane for them because they weren't
going to get out of the aircraft.
What were you seeing on their faces of
these scientists running into the C130?
&gt;&gt; They look scared. I mean, I can't say it
any plainer than that. They look scared.
These people aren't talking to us.
They're not saying anything. And I even
asked one of the guys, "Hey, where were
you guys, you know, for the whole week?"
And he just looked at me and he had this
blank stare in his face and he looked
right at my face and and didn't say a
word. Not anything in
&gt;&gt; Would you say based on your military
life and work, were these people in
shock?
&gt;&gt; Yes, that's a that's a very good
explanation that they were in shock.
Somebody that had just experienced
something that terrified them from what
I can visualize, the look they had. Yes,
they were in shock.
Curiously, as the aircraft taxied into
the runway at McMmero station, they were
met with a special transport vehicle.
The scientists were immediately flown on
a private flight back to Christ Church,
New Zealand.
Brian and his team were never given any
explanation for why the scientists had
gone missing or why they were flown out
of Antarctica in such a hurry.
What was the scuttlebutt where you guys
ate around this whole operation of the
scientists, the hole, the silver discs?
What was the scuttlebutt
&gt;&gt; in town? People were talking about maybe
they were abducted by aliens or
something like that. Kind of started off
as a joke. There were scientists that
were saying that they had run into some
um entities at Marie Birdland and that's
why they went missing.
&gt;&gt; Right.
If Brian's accounts are true and there
is in fact an extraterrestrial presence
in Antarctica today, could it have been
there for hundreds or even thousands of
years?
In July 2018, Linda Moldenhow
interviewed another whistleblower who
offered to provide her with classified
information regarding Antarctica on the
condition that she not reveal his
identity. Her source, a retired Navy
Seal, who she identifies as Spartan 1,
provided her with details of an ancient
structure he claims to have visited
during his time at the South Pole.
&gt;&gt; At that time, my rank was first
lieutenant, commander, naval special
operations.
We were inbound the southeast coast of
Antarctica. We were dispatched for
unofficially was a research
reconnaissance mission. Officially, it
was to find a certain individual, obtain
any information, and bring it back.
&gt;&gt; What was the date?
&gt;&gt; August 2003.
&gt;&gt; According to Spartan 1, when he and his
team reached their destination, they
encountered a large octagonal structure
protruding from the ice.
Cautiously, they proceeded to enter it.
&gt;&gt; The very top of the first structure that
we entered, there was almost 18 ft
poking from the ice. The rest of it was
hidden under the ice.
Each door was the same. Uh anywhere from
18 ft thick to around 30 ft thick. And
even though these doors were that thick
and that heavy, you could take one
finger and push them and they would
open. There was no resistance
whatsoever.
The outside temperature was at least 40°
below zero. Once you stepped inside
these structures, the temperature was an
abant 68 to 72°.
&gt;&gt; What about the ceilings, hallways,
floors?
It was lighted from the inside, but we
could not find the source of light. It
was a lime green in color. The walls
were lined with what I call
hieroglyphics,
but nothing of hieroglyphics that I've
ever seen in my life.
Could there really be mysterious
structures buried at the South Pole?
structures built by an advanced
extraterrestrial civilization in our
remote past.
With all of the recently reported UFO
activity on the continent, is it
possible that whoever or whatever was
behind the construction is still around
today?
Perhaps further clues can be found
hidden in plain sight in the Holy Bible.
The Bible's book of Genesis
in chapter 6 verse 9 begins the story of
Noah and the flood
in which God sends a great deluge to rid
the earth of sinners and start a new.
Different versions of this same story
exist in nearly every ancient tradition
around the world.
Going back 5,000 years, we have sacred
texts that tell us there was an
anti-dolubian civilization.
There was a great flood and that there
were survivors.
The Mesopotamians speak of this in the
Epic of Gilgamesh. The Egyptians speak
of this in the Edfu creation text. Plato
learned from the Egyptians that there
was once a civilization called Atlantis
that existed 9,000 years before his
time.
Plato wrote about the lost continent of
Atlantis. In two of his dialogues, Tmus
and Cretus around 360 BC.
Historians and researchers have long
debated whether this pre flood
civilization was purely mythological or
actually existed.
Arguments have been made suggesting
remnants of Plato's destroyed
civilization
could be found at the South Pole.
I think what happened in Antarctica was
that approximately 13,000 years ago that
flourishing civilization
that originally came from space
and establishing its presence in
Antarctica was flash frozen.
We actually have ancient evidence of
this in the form of Plato's dialogues
where he talks about the last days of
Atlantis that basically is informing us
that Atlantis was an extraterrestrial
colony that had established itself on
Earth and that after a pole shift
Atlantis was moved under the ice where
the South Pole currently is.
scientific anomalies, radar and
satellite images, eyewitness accounts.
As more and more pieces of the puzzle
start to come together, might we soon be
able to solve the mystery of the
Antarctic continent? And if so, just
what might we discover?
Modern whistleblowers still argue that
there is more about Antarctica that is
being covered up than we think.
their entire bases down there, entire
civilizations, that the world's
governments are working with aliens.
They know about the buried artifacts.
They know about the ancient
civilizations down there, and they know
about the extraterrestrial civilizations
that continue to operate in Antarctica
at the very moment.
&gt;&gt; It's totally possible that Antarctica
contains an extraterrestrial home base
on Earth. It's a totally isolated part
of the planet. It's completely
uninhabited or was until recently. It's
ideal.
Buried underneath the vice in Antarctica
could well be stone temple
constructions. There could be biological
material, remains of beings that lived
there and could still be there. It could
be the greatest reveal in all of human
history.
Are we getting glimpses of Earth's true
history buried deep under the ice sheets
of Antarctica?
And if so, will we soon be confronted
with proof of an extraterrestrial
presence at the South Pole?
Perhaps when the icy curtain is finally
lifted and we are ready to learn the
truth, we will find ourselves face to
face with our alien ancestors.
Giant volcanic rock walls rise up from
the sea. We consider the sheer scale of
the Nanod construction site. It's
mindboggling.
&gt;&gt; Just how were these massive structures
built and why?
Ancient astronaut theorists Giorgio
Suculos and David Chilris embark on an
incredible journey to these remote ruins
in search of answers. Wow, look at this.
250
million tons of bassalt just piled up
and in artificial islands.
Will they solve the mystery of one of
the world's most baffling sites?
&gt;&gt; You should be getting close to the wall.
So, as soon as you get close to those
stones, it disconnects.
&gt;&gt; That's so strange.
&gt;&gt; The more you know, the more mysterious
it gets.
&gt;&gt; There is a doorway in the universe.
Beyond it is the promise of truth.
It demands we question everything we
have ever been taught. The evidence is
all around us.
The future is right before our eyes. We
are not alone. We have never been alone.
The Pacific Ocean. January 1836.
The British cutter Lantern arrives at
the shores of the Micronesian island of
Pompei.
It is one of the first European
expeditions to reach this remote
landmass, which is located roughly 2500
m northeast of Australia.
The ship surgeon, identified only as Dr.
Campbell, writes about a megalithic site
that stands off Pompei's southeastern
shore.
He speculates that the massive
structures are as old as the Egyptian
pyramids and must have been the work of
great men.
It is one of the earliest accounts of
what will later be known as Nan Madal.
&gt;&gt; Nanal is this amazing construction. It's
it's a full-on city.
When pilots during World War II would
fly over that part of the Pacific, they
would look out their windows and they
would see what essentially was described
as the Venice of the Pacific. So that
became one of its nicknames.
&gt;&gt; Today, much of Nan Madal is hidden
beneath dense vegetation, making it
appear as though the edge of Pompei
extends further out into the ocean. But
in reality, it is an 11 square mile
complex consisting of more than 100
man-made islands standing at top a
submerged coral reef.
Archaeologists estimate that to
construct the site, the builders used
250 million tons of bassalt,
a black rock that forms when bassalt
lava from a volcano cools and becomes
solid.
Some of the bassalt logs and blocks
weigh upwards of 50 tons.
Nanmadal is this mysterious island in
the middle of nowhere.
You have at least 600 miles in every
direction where there is absolutely
nothing.
And so to find this incredible
megalithic structure there, you have to
wonder why that place existed in the
first place. When we consider the sheer
scale of the Nan Modal construction
site, it's mindboggling.
Why would they need this scale of
construction on a tiny island in the
middle of nowhere?
It is a complete mystery who exactly
constructed it and when.
&gt;&gt; Historians have attributed the
megalithic construction to the Sautalur
dynasty.
The empire ruled over non-madal for
approximately 500 years from 1100 to
1628 AD. But speculation that they were
the builders of non-Madal has been the
subject of controversy as many believe
that an accurate dating of the
structures is virtually impossible to
determine. It's difficult really to put
dates on Nanmidol.
Currently mainstream archaeologists are
giving the city a date of about 1100 AD
and they're coming up with that date by
dating some of the coral rubble that's
there.
What I think of there is that this is
the date of the last repair work on this
amazing city and that the city itself
was actually built much earlier than
that. The thing is they left no records.
They left no literature, no history, no
art, nothing that says that they had
these advanced technologies or concepts
like mathematics that would enable them
to build such an archaeological wonder.
So it leaves this great mystery of who
actually constructed Nan Madal and why.
&gt;&gt; Baltimore, Maryland, September 16th,
2019.
A team of scientists backed by the US
Department of State Ambassadors Fund for
Cultural Preservation completes a
six-month project to conduct the first
LAR survey of this world heritage site.
LAR utilizes laser wave pulses to create
a 3D representation of an area and
allows unprecedented access to otherwise
impenetrable locations.
This recent LAR survey at Tenwin Island
and Nan Madal indicates that there was
an specially designed irrigation system
that could support people on this
relatively small island adjacent to
Panipe and then Namadol is built there
too. So who then would have built such a
sophisticated
irrigation system which no one knew
about until this recent LAR survey and
it doesn't seem that the the so-called
builders the sautilairs were the
builders of this while the study
continues to credit the construction of
non-Madal to the saddle many researchers
suggest that the oral history of the
people of Pompei contradicts this notion
this recent LAR survey is sensational
because the big mystery about Nanmadal
was always where did the people get
their food from or their water and
according to the local population and it
had to be boated in but if you now look
at this new LAR survey which suggests
that there is an artificial irrigation
system on Tenwin well they've could have
collected the water right there and this
leads me to think that the sod lures
appropriated whatever was at Teenwin
Island and Nadal. Does the LAR survey
prove that the conventional theories
crediting the Sautalurs as the creators
of non-Madal are wrong? But if so, who
built Non-Madal and why?
September 2019.
Intrigued by the results of the recent
lidar survey, ancient astronaut
theorists Giorgio Sucilos and David
Childress embark on a journey to the
remote island of Pompei. They are hoping
to find evidence that could shed new
light on what has become a centuries old
mystery.
&gt;&gt; Here we are.
&gt;&gt; It's exciting.
&gt;&gt; This expedition is the first for
Giorgio, but David's fifth visit to the
megalithic site.
&gt;&gt; All right, Lou.
&gt;&gt; Hi, guys. This is our God. How are you,
Gus? Good to see you.
&gt;&gt; At Mangrove Bay on the island's north
shore, Giorgio and David meet up with
Micronia's National Historic
Preservation Officer, Gus Kohler.
&gt;&gt; So, ready to go?
&gt;&gt; Let's get going. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; From here, they will travel by boat to
Nan Madal.
&gt;&gt; Nan Madall is one of the last ancient
mysteries that I have yet to see, and
it's been 30 years since I've wanted to
come here, and I cannot wait to see what
awaits us. And what better guide than
David Childress
&gt;&gt; Nadal is the eighth wonder of the world.
It's one of the most amazing megalithic
sites that I've ever seen. But it's very
little known. The archaeologists who
come here,
&gt;&gt; what do they say?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. What they how do they say it was
made? Nanbad,
&gt;&gt; every everyone has their own theory.
&gt;&gt; If you imagine if you carry it, uh you
know, it's it's a very uneven terrain.
You've got mountains, you've got
valleys, you've got very rugged.
&gt;&gt; Very rugged.
&gt;&gt; And then the the question of putting it
on or having it hung underneath a boat.
&gt;&gt; I mean, we we've tried to carry locks,
small ones on rafts, try to imitate our
It's just impossible. They can't do it
&gt;&gt; really. So, you have actually tried
&gt;&gt; we've tried to do it the way that
mainstream archaeology suggests and it
didn't quite work.
&gt;&gt; Um, not with the rafts that we had.
According to mainstream scholars, bamboo
rafts transported the blocks used in the
construction of non-Madal. But Gus Kler
does not agree. As far as he's
concerned, this method has repeatedly
been tested and has failed even when the
smallest of bassalt columns are used.
One of the most recent attempts was made
for a television documentary in 1995.
After several attempts, they were unable
to demonstrate how this would be done,
even with smaller blocks weighing only
one ton.
After a 90-minute boat ride, David and
Giorgio get their first look at the
massive basalt walls of Nan Madal. All
right, so here we go. Here's the massive
seaw wall here, but it's just huge. Look
at these giant stones and how they're
piled up here.
&gt;&gt; But it is incredible.
&gt;&gt; It's huge.
&gt;&gt; It's just 250
million tons of bassalt just piled up
and into giant walls and and artificial
islands. It It boggles the mind. It's
just it's so incredible.
&gt;&gt; I mean, some of these blocks are just
massive. Massive.
&gt;&gt; Huge.
The first time I laid eyes on Nan Madal,
I thought it was prehistoric.
This place potentially is thousands of
years older than what mainstream
archaeology suggests.
Nanodol astounds you when you see it.
But most archaeologists really don't
want to open this Pandora's box of what
is there on this island because it's not
easily explained by mainstream
archaeology.
Rafino Mauricio, the director of the
Federal States of Micronesia, Office of
National Archives, is among many who
believe that the secret to Namadol's
origins may not be a terrestrial one.
The existence of Nadal itself continues
to puzzle people because it welcomes all
kinds of possibilities including
possibilities of people from the outer
space influencing what was built here.
&gt;&gt; People from outer space.
It is a question that Giorgio and David
are determined to answer. And as the
first step in their investigation, they
are eager to make a closer examination
of the site and investigate the details
of its baffling construction.
&gt;&gt; So here we're just on the edge of Tamwin
Island. Amazing.
After docking on Pompei's Teenwan
Island, ancient astronaut theorists
Giorgio Suculos and David Shilddress
are now approaching the ancient ruins of
Nonmodal by land.
With them is Micronia's National
Historic Preservation Officer, Gus
Kohler.
&gt;&gt; Okay, we're going to make a left up
there.
&gt;&gt; A left up here. Okay,
&gt;&gt; this is it, huh? Okay,
&gt;&gt; this is it.
to get an expert opinion on the
construction of this staggering
megalithic complex.
&gt;&gt; Let's do it. Follow me.
&gt;&gt; They have enlisted UCLA professor of
structural engineering Dr. Henry Burton.
&gt;&gt; I'm a structural engineer. So, I think
about how to design things to make sure
that they move through structures in a
way that they're in that they're stable.
You
&gt;&gt; okay back there?
&gt;&gt; So, my role is to bring a modern
perspective on the structures that we're
seeing here in Micronesia.
Wow, look at this. Amazing.
&gt;&gt; That's amazing.
&gt;&gt; I mean, look at some of those.
&gt;&gt; I know. But I mean, look at that guy.
&gt;&gt; So, here's this huge wall here full of
prismatic bassalt.
&gt;&gt; How would you build that then today?
&gt;&gt; Well, you you'd certainly need cranes. I
can tell you that. um even for some of
these smaller blocks you're talking
about on the order of tens of tons.
&gt;&gt; So, how would you build this if you
didn't have any cranes?
Well, that I can't I can't um Yeah, I
can't think of any way that you'd be
able to build this
&gt;&gt; because one would argue perhaps this was
done with some sort of scaffolding, but
wouldn't you need really strong trees
and they don't really have strong trees
here to build that type of scaffolding?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a mystery to me.
I can't imagine how it could be built
without grains.
&gt;&gt; So Gus, what is your tradition of how
they built these walls?
&gt;&gt; Well, according to our oral history,
these rocks came from the north. We're
in the Saudis, this area of the Saudis.
And in fact, the recent studies has been
able to collaborate that 40% of these
rocks actually came from the north.
&gt;&gt; And that is distance-wise how long? How
far?
&gt;&gt; Up to 20 m.
&gt;&gt; 20 m. Okay. Just imagine moving that
boulder right there. How many people
would it take to move that? What kind of
a boat would you have that you could put
that boulder on?
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, you you'd be talking about
a barge, right? So, um there are barges
that hold up to uh hundreds of tons.
They have hundreds of tons in terms of
of capacity. So, that's what you're
talking about. You're talking about
basically shipping barges.
&gt;&gt; Giant shipping barge.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Like what we have today?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; The idea that people actually drag these
things across a rugged terrain or on
rafts is absolutely preposterous in my
opinion. The bottom line is that it is
an impossibility to move 250
million tons of bassalt from one side of
the island to the other without modern
technology, without modern machinery.
As a heavy rain suddenly sets in, the
team makes its way through the ancient
site and towards a remarkable feature in
one of the bassalt walls.
&gt;&gt; So, the weather here changes every 30
seconds.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Welcome to Bonvi.
&gt;&gt; For structural engineer Henry Burton,
just as impressive as the size of the
stones used to construct non-Madal is
the engineering knowledge the ancient
builders must have had.
&gt;&gt; So what's interesting about this is if
you look at the doorway in any modern
building and you open up the walls,
you'll find a beam directly over the
doorway. And why this type of beam is
important is because it supports all of
the load that's above it. It's called a
lintel, right? So that's actually a
structural element that's used in
design. This is interesting because this
is actually in bending, right? It's
subtle, but this is actually a bending
action that you're seeing here. And and
it becomes a little bit more interesting
when you have to do the design.
&gt;&gt; What type of mathematics or physics is
involved here?
&gt;&gt; Well, there there are several things you
have to think about. So first you'd have
to think about the load that's being
placed on this, right? Then you would
have to consider the structural
mechanics. So, you'd have to consider
the cross-sectional properties of this
thing. You would have to consider the
material properties. Now, if we're
talking about sort of what governs the
bending shape of this thing, then
there's some actual calculus involved in
in in understanding that.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Burton said that in order to
calculate these stress levels, he would
need advanced mathematics such as
calculus. And that is a pretty tall
order because even archaeologists would
have to admit that calculus did not
exist in the 11th00 AD.
Calculus for all intents and purposes
was not invented until the 17th century
AD.
&gt;&gt; So gentlemen, we're going to cross.
&gt;&gt; All right, let's do it.
Although no inscriptions of any kind
exist on the stone structures, in 1907,
excavations were performed in areas
believed to be ceremonial temples and
tombs.
&gt;&gt; So this is the central part of Nandoas,
the ceremonial center.
&gt;&gt; This is unreal.
&gt;&gt; Right up front you'll see a tomb.
Isn't this great? Guess this is
something else, isn't it?
Wow.
This is extraordinary.
&gt;&gt; So, this area is the main ceremonial
center of Nanadul. This is where they
perform all the rituals.
&gt;&gt; And then this was some type of a tomb at
some point.
&gt;&gt; They said it was a burial tomb of some
of the chiefs.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; But they're not really sure that it was
a tomb. Are they do they
&gt;&gt; It was excavated during the German time.
&gt;&gt; And And what did they discover? Did they
discover bones?
&gt;&gt; Nobody knows for sure because the the
guy who did the excavation died the very
next day
&gt;&gt; and then later some of the excavated
material from here was put on a ship and
that ship sank in the Marshall Islands
and everything was lost.
&gt;&gt; So the excavator died and the ship sank.
So is this similar to like the curse of
the pharaohs? Because also in ancient
Egypt they were saying that if you
excavate something you'll have a curse
and you die and some people have died.
&gt;&gt; Well in trying to explain is that the
local people believe that it was because
he disturbed this area.
&gt;&gt; Although Pompei is home to 34,000
people.
Non-Madal is completely uninhabited and
has been for centuries. Among the
reasons is that the native islanders
believe this ancient site is cursed.
&gt;&gt; There's all kinds of taboos about
visiting this place. Like it's got
ghosts there.
&gt;&gt; The local islanders believe that the
city of Nanodal is cursed and they
believe that if they spend the night
there, they'll die. The islanders say
that at night there are lights that move
around in the city.
&gt;&gt; Even today, few locals also come here
today. I mean it's sacred place. It's
taboo because they believe this area.
This whole place invested either good or
bad spirits but it's got spirits roaming
this area. An unexplainable death after
the opening of a sacred tomb.
All evidence gathered from the site
mysteriously lost at sea.
Could Nambad Doll be home to something
that mankind is not yet meant to
discover?
Man, oh man. Look how tall that is.
While visiting the ancient site of Nan
Madal, ancient astronaut theorists
Giorgio Sucilos and David Chilris along
with their guide Gus Kohler and
structural engineer Dr. Henry Burton
have traveled to the site of Nandawas,
the royal mortuary said to belong to
Nanmadal's original builders.
&gt;&gt; This is supposed to be the biggest stone
here at
&gt;&gt; this cornerstone right here.
&gt;&gt; This thing, it's it's supposed to be the
biggest of all the stones here.
&gt;&gt; Henry, do you think you can calculate
the weight of this?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we can certainly estimate it. Um,
I have a measuring tape. We can estimate
the volume and we know the density. So
that can give us the mass.
&gt;&gt; All right, let's do that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So this is about 4 m.
&gt;&gt; All right. Here's the the far corner
here.
&gt;&gt; Using the dimensions and the density of
one of the bassalt stone blocks. Dr.
Burton calculates its weight.
&gt;&gt; 250. 2 m 50.
&gt;&gt; All right. So based on the measurements,
you're looking at a weight of about 54
tons.
&gt;&gt; 54 tons. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So 50 tons, give or take. And you have
one, two, three, four of those monoliths
essentially stacked on top of each other
&gt;&gt; at a height of 40 ft.
&gt;&gt; So Gus, what is then the oral history of
moving this stone on the island?
&gt;&gt; Well, according to the legends, uh the
stones were flown up here. Rocks were
brought from the north and they were
flown up here
&gt;&gt; for generations. The people of Pompei
have told the story that Nan Madal was
constructed by strange visitors through
a process of levitation.
It is this legend that is suggested to
ancient astronaut theorists that
non-madal is not only an ancient
megalithic structure. It is also an
extraterrestrial one. Well, we have in
the oral traditions
story about two brothers, Olopa and
Oloa. They managed to construct what you
know today as Nanmad.
According to oral histories, the stones
flew to the Nanmad area. How did they
fly there? We don't know.
&gt;&gt; The two brothers who started Nanadol,
according to Bonen legend, were
foreigners. They were not from here. So
we don't know where they were from.
&gt;&gt; According to legend, the twin sorcerers
who created Nan Madal were of giant
proportions.
Much like the legends of Easter Island,
where it is said that giants magically
floated the stone moai statues into
place.
Similar stories involving levitation are
associated with numerous other
megalithic sites
like Stonehenge in England, the Great
Pyramid in Giza, Egypt, the Ushmal
pyramid in the Yucatan Peninsula and
Pumapunku in Bolivia.
There are other stories around the world
that say the exact same thing. how
gigantic stones were moved into place as
if by magic. And you have to ask
yourself, is there a connection? Did all
of our ancestors receive the same
knowledge from the extraterrestrials?
And the answer to that is a resounding
yes.
&gt;&gt; We've done scientific studies and 40% of
the rocks that comprise this site here
came from the north. So it does kind of
collaborate our oral legend that it came
from the north. The other 60%
&gt;&gt; they don't know. I think they don't know
where it came from and but it's it's not
from here, right?
&gt;&gt; Nobody's been able to source that.
&gt;&gt; So yes, 60% of the stones they don't
know where they came from.
&gt;&gt; That's incredible that the 60% is
essentially still a mystery. Yes. Huh.
For decades, mainstream archaeologists
have been frustrated by their failure to
identify the source for much of the
bassalt used in the construction of
non-Madal. But recently, a growing
number of scientists have become
convinced that it came from a volcanic
outcropping located 25 mi northeast of
Non-Madal called Quisen Malik. The
unusual formation extends over 400 ft
into the air. And incredibly, the rock
used to construct non-Madal appears to
have been extracted from the least
accessible part of the mountain, the
very top. But how? According to the oral
history of Pompei, the basel was taken
by what the natives referred to as a
giant bird. There's one story that says
that at some point there were these
giant roosters that lived on top of that
mountain and this rooster took these
bassel blocks and flew them over to
Nanmadal.
Now monster roosters do not exist. So my
mind always goes to misunderstood
technology machines that were provided
by the extraterrestrials.
I believe that the islanders are correct
when they say all those stones were
flown through the air
because I can't see how it was done in
any other way.
As far as ancient astronaut theorists
are concerned, the local legends along
with hard evidence that bassalt appears
to have been excavated from the top of
Pisen Malik add credence to the idea
that advanced alien technology was used
in the construction of non-madal.
And to help prove their theory, Giorgio
Sucilos and David Chilris along with
structural engineer Dr. Henry Burton
traveled 25 mi across the island to
visit the nearest bassalt quarry.
&gt;&gt; Man, look at this.
&gt;&gt; Wow, what a quarry.
&gt;&gt; So, how does one free the bassalt from
from this wall?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, it would it would certainly
require some specialized tools, some
type of excavator, some type of drill
tip. And once you start taking rocks
off, depending on how much room you have
to drive things up, um, depending on the
size of the blocks, you might need a
crane to sort of move things around. You
would need some type of machinery to be
able to do that today.
&gt;&gt; How did people from at least a thousand
years ago remove these blocks from this
quarry?
&gt;&gt; They had to somehow pry these columns
out of the cliff and, you know, remove
them so that they would be Yeah.
standalone piece of prismatic bassalt
and then and then move it millions of
tons of it. I would think that yeah,
there was very much a a special survey
done of this island looking for material
that could be used to build and I would
say that an aerial survey would
accomplish all of that.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. Or any type of you know
advanced uh radar technology that in my
opinion existed with the
extraterrestrials at the time.
For Giorgio and David, the more they
learn about non-madal, from the weight
of the bassalt columns to the distance
they had to be transported to the tools
that would be needed to quarry the rock,
the more difficult it becomes to explain
how all of this could have been
accomplished without the help of
advanced extraterrestrial technology.
Nevertheless, according to the oral
history of Pompei, the most compelling
evidence cannot be found by examining
the megalithic structures themselves,
but what lies beneath them.
In search of further clues to help solve
the mystery of Nan Madal, David
Childress and Georgio Suculos meet up
once again with historical preservation
officer Gus Kohler.
&gt;&gt; You guys ready for a trip?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Gus has provided access and underwater
drones so they can get an additional
perspective on the ruins of non-Madal.
With their drone operator, Ross Conklin,
David and Georgio, head out towards an
area where it has been reported that
there are a number of incredible
structures that lie hidden under the
water.
Structures that some believe are part of
an incredibly ancient submerged city
called Kaneso.
According to oral history, Nan Madal is
supposedly built above uh Canes
&gt;&gt; and it's deep under the water. The it's
it's another city.
&gt;&gt; It's another city.
&gt;&gt; It's different than Nan Madal. It's it's
a second city. Could it be that the
coral reef itself is is that city and
the corals grown over it?
&gt;&gt; It's very possible.
&gt;&gt; After a short trip across the shoreline,
the team arrives at their destination.
So when you were scuba diving here about
30 years ago, you saw bassalt columns
encrusted in coral.
&gt;&gt; That's what we think. We we think
they're bassalt column. We we don't
know.
&gt;&gt; So wouldn't that correlate with an
extreme age if you have columns, you
know, encrusted in in
&gt;&gt; it would have been I mean it's about 80
ft deep or so and it would mean that
ocean levels were 80 ft lower than they
are today whenever they built that.
Right. And that would mean that we're
talking 12,000 years ago at least,
&gt;&gt; like the last ice age.
&gt;&gt; So, yeah, that this city would be 12,000
years old or older.
&gt;&gt; 12,000 years old. Is it possible that
extraterrestrials were not only
responsible for constructing the
incredible non-Madal complex but also an
earlier structure that is now beneath
the water and that they are still
accessing to this day?
In many ancient texts, there can be
found accounts of a great flood wiping
out a previous civilization of humans,
such as in the Samrian epic of
Gilgamesh, the Egyptian Edu creation
texts, the Vadic texts of India, and the
Bible's book of Genesis. Today, more and
more scientific evidence is emerging to
suggest that such a cataclysm may
actually have happened around the end of
the last ice age. 12,000 years ago when
sea levels were 400 ft lower. Is it
possible that Nan Madal was built that
long ago by a now forgotten pre flood
civilization? The builders of Dan Madal
were a very advanced civilization. So
whether these people originated on the
island or as tradition states they came
from other areas. It may have been an
inheritance from the lost city that was
actually underwater that Nambad Doll was
built upon.
The team prepares to launch an
underwater drone. This will be the first
time that the ruins have ever been
explored in this way.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, Gus, I'm going to ask you
for a hand with this cable just to
wrangle it.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Watch mode. Boom.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, you just kind of drop it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. There it is. All right.
&gt;&gt; All right. Now, we're moving.
Cool.
&gt;&gt; A little bit of an image.
&gt;&gt; Oo. Yeah, look at that.
&gt;&gt; Open ocean. Open ocean.
We should be getting close to the wall.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Cool.
&gt;&gt; So, let me drop down.
And there we start to see the wall
again.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
Now, it's disconnected there for a
second. and connected.
&gt;&gt; Curiously, the image being relayed by
the drone continues to cut out every
time it starts to get close to what
appears to be an underwater wall of
bassalt columns.
&gt;&gt; It keeps disconnecting.
&gt;&gt; Uhhuh.
&gt;&gt; The drone Ross is using tested perfectly
just one day earlier and in an area that
was also rich in bassalt. So, he is
genuinely baffled as to why it is now
malfunctioning.
&gt;&gt; I think what we should do is reel this
one back in. I have another underwater
drone. We'll give that one a try and
we'll just go straight to that wall.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Fingers crossed.
While exploring a vast underwater
complex submerged beneath the ancient
ruins of Non-Madal,
ancient astronaut theorists Georgio
Suculos and David Chilris along with
historic preservation officer Gus Kohler
and drone operator Ross Conklin have
just experienced a mysterious setback.
The submersible drone they deployed
suddenly stopped working. Fortunately,
Ross came prepared with a backup.
All right, so I'm heading right for that
corner over there.
&gt;&gt; Okay, disconnected.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Okay, disconnected. Wow.
&gt;&gt; So, as soon as you get close to those
stones,
&gt;&gt; Unbelievable.
&gt;&gt; It disconnects. Yeah. So, I'm just right
below the surface. And as soon as I try
and drop,
&gt;&gt; this is now our second one now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Now, it's doing it to both.
&gt;&gt; That's so strange.
&gt;&gt; Curiously, the second drone has also
malfunctioned. Could the stone materials
have something to do with it? Both
underwater drones worked on the north
side of the island the day before. And
then we came to the area of Nan Madal
and outside only a few feet away from
Nan Madal those machines no longer
worked. It's as if something or someone
was interfering with the devices. So
it's very strange to think that maybe
somehow those bassalt blocks have been
magnetized. And if that is the case,
what were they exposed to that they are
now apparently magnetized as some people
have suggested?
People see lights in this city at night.
They see lights moving around and it and
that may be because the whole city's
magnetic and it's some kind of
electromagnetic, you know, phenomenon
that's coming from the rocks themselves,
&gt;&gt; right? Oceanic bassalt like that found
at non-madal is ferromagnetic meaning
that when exposed to a magnetic charge
it becomes magnetically charged itself.
Rocks really have three basic effects on
magnetic fields. They either have no
effect. So the magnetic field stays kind
of straight. They can effectively repel
magnetic fields or attract them.
Volcanic rock enhances the magnetic
field.
The natives say that the stones all flew
across the island. And if that was the
case, then some magnetic energy was put
onto the stones, levitated them, they
put them into place, and that energy is
still there in a residual manner. And
that is why the drones wouldn't work
there because there's still this energy
that was used to levitate the stones. If
they flew these stones through the air,
if they're using some anti-gravity
technology, they would then be
magnetized.
&gt;&gt; Clearly, it has something to do with the
structure. It's highly unlikely that two
pieces of equipment are malfunctioning
all at the same time.
If the legend of non-Madal is true and
it was constructed by other worldly
visitors using levitation technology,
what was it built for?
Why would anybody have to create
artificial land or islands back in the
day? Especially with a sizable island
right here,
&gt;&gt; right here. But think of Venice in
Italy. It's a port city. It has canals.
It's very much for boats. To me, it's a
giant naval base here for huge ships.
And those those ships were coming out of
Southeast Asia into the vast Pacific and
they would meet here and then they would
go on to other islands and then to
Mexico and to Colombia and Peru
but then also its airships and high
technology,
&gt;&gt; right?
I don't think that naval traffic and
airship traffic are necessarily uh
exclusive of each other. And it would
seem that you know it's a combination of
both. They were using it as a stepping
stone going out to other Pacific islands
where other megaliths and pyramids and
things were built.
&gt;&gt; Was non-Madala a port for an advanced
pre flood civilization?
As far as David Childress is concerned,
it was not only a port, but one with an
extraordinary origin. And he believes
the most important evidence to support
his theory can be found by examining the
bassalt stone used to build the massive
complex.
For more than three decades, ancient
astronaut theorist David Chilris has
been studying non-Madal.
Over the years, he has entertained
dozens of theories as to how it was
constructed and why. Based on what he
has learned over the course of his
latest investigation, he is now more
convinced than ever that it was built
either by or with the help from
extraterrestrial visitors. He is also
convinced that the complex was built
with bassalt rock because of its
electromagnetic properties. Properties
that would make it possible to levitate
the large megaton stones into place.
Nanodol is built out of millions and
millions of tons of bassalt which is
magnetic. And perhaps this is something
that extraterrestrials can manipulate,
use for themselves even. that it could
possibly help power their spaceships and
things.
Madal for sure had to have been built
when the worldwide water levels were
much much lower.
And that according to science was
between 11 and 20,000 years ago. So
right there we have physical evidence of
a site that in my opinion was built in
prehistory.
When you find evidence deep under the
water potentially goes back tens of
thousands of years in a very important
part of the Pacific it does raise the
question is there a much earlier epoch
to Nadal than people realize.
So the incredible site of Nadal looks
like it was part of a great culture that
existed throughout the Pacific and
probably beyond. We find evidence of
similar construction at Gunnan Padang
which potentially goes back 20,000
years. We find similar basel columns at
sites in ancient Mexico and these
builders may have been influencing the
pyramid constructions in ancient Mexico.
All these indicators of an ancient lost
civilization in the Pacific.
There's no doubt in my mind that the
engineering knowledge for Nan Madal came
from the extraterrestrials. I have seen
megalithic structures around the world,
but this one is one of the few that
absolutely defies a logic. I would
categorize Nanmadal in the same category
like the great pyramid of Egypt and also
Puma Punku. And you have to ask
yourself, is there a connection? And the
answer to that is a resounding yes.
Do the incredible megalithic
constructions at Nan Madal provide
evidence that mankind has only begun to
scratch the surface of an alien presence
on planet Earth. One that dates back
tens of thousands of years.
As far as ancient astronaut theorists
are concerned, the answer is a profound
yes. And they are also convinced that
further investigations will not only
prove that extraterrestrials have
revealed themselves to humanity at
different times throughout history, but
that we are about to be visited by these
same alien visitors
again.