Being a neurosurgeon in the United
States, I was very acutely aware of how
the United States was falling apart. I
finally sat down and started to read the
white paper. I started to immediately
draw parallels to the things that I was
teaching Dorsy and Rick Rubin about at
that time where I said, "Jesus Christ,
Bitcoin is a lot like circadian
biology." When I post these provocative
tweets on Twitter, I'm not doing this
just to be an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm actually
doing it to educate people. This is the
reason why I want you to come to places
like this and maybe relocate to a place
like this because this is an arc. It's
an arc for animals who do their thinking
cuz Bitcoin isn't the most valuable
asset. We're seeing Bitcoin infiltrate
Wall Street in many, many ways. You
don't quite see it that way. Suit
coiners are not your friend. They never
will be. I don't think Bitcoiners know
how nefarious the people in charge
really are. The wrench attack that I
worry about, it's not going to be the
things that we normally talk about. This
is going to have long lasting effects to
my kids, your kids, and their kids that
are coming.
&gt;&gt; Argie,
&gt;&gt; Dr. Jack Kruse. Uh, round two. Welcome.
Glad that you finally came to my side of
the pond.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I say welcome, but really
I'm in your uh I'm in your backyard.
It's uh this is your home now. And uh
you've been here for how long?
&gt;&gt; 5 years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When I say here, we're in El
Salvador in Alzante at the Bitcoin Beach
Studio. Mike's been uh gracious enough
to offer the studio for us to have this
chat. And it's my honor to host you once
again. Um I've been people have been
telling me to come here for a long time.
It's not my first time, but it's been 3
years in between. I'm very glad that I
was talked into coming to
&gt;&gt; Tell us why.
&gt;&gt; Tell us why I'm happy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, tell us why you're happy to be
back in El Salvador for three years. In
other words, what was former Archie 3
years ago?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Now, to current Archie, what is Archie
beginning to appreciate more? Well,
there there are a number of things
actually. Um,
okay, let let's let's talk about that.
we sort of alluded to it um pre-podcast
is like just the contrast. I'm I'm I'm a
city boy through and through, but having
grown up in Australia um I had very easy
access to nature, sports, outdoors, all
the rest of that. But a London lifestyle
doesn't really uh lend itself to all of
those things that I grew up with. And so
the first thing is is the sunlight. And
I know you're a massive proponent of
exposure to sunlight and in particular
morning sunlight, but just coming here,
I'll I'll just tell people at home what
I'm doing in El Salvador, how I'm
actually living. I've been here for 10
days now, and I'm finding that waking up
really early is effortless. And and
that's not a jet lag either. The first 3
4 days, I could describe that to jet
lag. But it's it's well and truly into
day 10. And I'm waking up anywhere
between like 5 and and 6 6:30 and it's
almost immediately up and outside. Um
and I just put on a pair of shorts for
the beach barefoot. I walk down to the
beach cuz I'm staying right right on the
on the beach side. And um
&gt;&gt; can't do that in London.
&gt;&gt; You can't do that in London. And it
feels so natural. So there's no when you
step out there's no temperature change
that gives you a bit of a chill that you
need to warm up to, you need to adjust
to. There's just a nice calm air. Um
there's a bit of warmth that makes you
feel like this is exactly how you should
be walking barefoot. It feels good
without a t-shirt or a top on. And
within, you know, 20 m I'm on the beach.
I've got sand under my feet and I'm
walking down towards um I guess where
where the surfers sort of congregate and
I might just sit around a little bit
wait for the sunrise. So the first time
we had a chat I think uh you know you
said you should everybody should catch a
sunrise or at the very least catch the
early morning sun before it's too high
in the sky to get and you'll speak more
about exactly why that is. And I said to
you not everybody can Dr. the cruise and
you said, "Well, you can if you want
to." And it's true. Now, for some
reason, and I I hope that you'll be able
to explain it to me, it feels effortless
waking up in the morning. But not only
that, when I wake up in London, and I
had this in in Australia also, but I was
living a different lifestyle
nutritionally back then. When I wake up
in London, I feel like I need to warm up
to get the day started. I just feel
whereas over here, I've got the energy
to have a workout first thing. So, when
I go down to the beach, I might, you
know, roll the arms over and do a little
bit of swaying and stretching, but I'm
jogging on the beach. Um, I warm up and
then I'll do something pretty intense,
whether it's, you know, 40, 50, 60,
well, not 60, 50 push-ups and then 40
and then 30. That's what I did this
morning. Uh, and in between that, I
might do a run or a sprint up and down
the beach to the point where like I'm
puffed out. You know, it's pretty
intense. It's not the most intense, but
it's pretty intense for the morning. I
wouldn't I wouldn't be ready to do that
in London. I I can't remember the last
time I worked out in the London in the
morning in London or even felt like I
could. All my workouts are in the mid to
late afternoons cuz that's when I feel
like I've done enough of what I need to
do nutritionally, hydration, everything
else to be ready for that. And so just
that alone I'm finding gets my day
started in a way that's just completely
at odds with how I live in London. So I
want to there's so much more but I want
to throw that over to you and perhaps
you can break down what is exactly
happening to me. Why do I feel so good
and have the energy to do that in the
morning without consciously taking any
steps to facilitate that? Looking for a
secure trusted way to buy, sell, and
hold Bitcoin? Gemini has been leading
the way since 2014.
Founded by the Winklebos twins to be a
security first, fully regulated Bitcoin
platform. With Gemini, your Bitcoin is
protected with enterprisegrade security.
Backed by insurance and type 2
certifications for both Sock 1 and Sock
2. Whether you're new to Bitcoin or a
longtime hodler, Gemini gives you the
tools to stack SATs and build
generational wealth your way. From
simple one-tap buys to advanced charts
and trading features, it's all here.
Buy, sell, and hold securely. That's
Gemini. Gemini, Bitcoin with confidence.
Probably the the number one thing is
obviously most people are going to think
I'm going to tell you it's the power of
the sun, but it's really not. Probably
the biggest effect here since you're on
the beach, especially a black sand
beach, is the effect of grounding
that's present here. So, if you remember
a couple days ago when you were at my
house on the deck and I told you the
story about a coffee maker, two-prong
verse three-prongong. So, your coffee
maker in
uh London, your existence in London is
more like a two-prong coffee. It's not
as energy efficient. When you have that
third prong, you're grounded. You're
much more energy efficient. So when
you're energy efficient, do you think
you need more time to get up to speed to
do the things like you feel like you
have to do in London? The answer is no.
Now there's a lot of other effects. One
other effect is less polarized light,
which probably falls into your next
question about your default switch that
you engaged in right before I came in
the room by closing your eyes.
You don't realize that that is really
effective. it actually default stating
your brain um especially in a place like
this because people are not aware of the
effect of polarized light around them.
Just so we're clear for the audience,
all the light that's in here is
polarized. All artificial light is
polarized. Even fire to a degree is
polarized.
Sunlight is unpolarized. So when you
close your eyelids and you open them up,
what did you just do? It's it's just
like putting, you know, Windex on your
glass eye. Oh, I can see again. So, to
understand how powerful and effective
this is to make it a real world example
for the people at home listening, you
know that tennis players and baseball
players, they don't wear polarized
lenses. The reason why if they did, it
changes their perception in their brain.
So that when they have to use a racket
to hit a ball or a ball from a pitcher
coming for baseball, their depth
perception would be off. Therefore, they
would not make solid contact. So, that's
why those professionals don't wear it.
So, let's do a hard stop because that is
a hardcore law of physics. It's called
the electroeak
uh theory. It's called parity violation.
Um most people don't understand it at
all. But you have to ask yourself the
question, if that's a fact, and we know
it's a fact for baseball players and
tennis players, what happens if we live
in an environment like London, 52nd
latitude, where all the light is
polarized around us all the time? Is our
perception of reality accurate or not?
So, when I came in to the podcast studio
and I found Archie leaning back with his
eyes closed for three or four minutes,
resetting his default state, even though
you're in an artificial environment, I
mean, outside the doors right over here
is that unpolarized light that you've
been spending way more time in than not.
And the other thing I will tell you
about polarized light that's important
is you know you always hear like the
functional medicine people or the
alipathic people talk about rest and
digest and don't feel stress. Polarized
light fundamentally also stresses us. It
turns on the autonomic nerve system. We
walk out that door turns it off. So you
need to realize that when you're in an
environment that actually allows you to
thrive instead of survive which is what
London is. It should make eminent sense
to you why you feel like, hey, I'm ready
to kick ass and take names in the
morning because that is the way it's
designed to work. And the most important
part of the story, which I hope you get,
we can drag you to the ark here in El
Salvador, is the more time you spend in
the light, the better it is for you,
especially as you age. Why? Because you
need more sunlight as you age than less,
not the other way around. And for
parents that have sick children, uh, or
parents that have children that are not
thriving at home, bringing your child to
a place like this allows them to get
better faster. Why is that the case?
These are little creatures that don't
have myelin in their brain. That's the
fat that's around the nerves. So that
means they're more sensitive to the
sunlight. They're also more sensitive to
this crap. So if you give them like a
digital babysitter, you're actually
harming them. But if you bring them on a
two-eek vacation to El Salvador to go
play in Alzante on the beach, on the
black sand beach in the sun and let them
run around and just be kids, you'll be
shocked at how better behaved your
children are that they're not
complaining of the things that they
complained at home. Everybody usually
blames on, oh, we're less stressed
because we're on vacation. And I'm going
to tell you, you're less stressed
because you're around the light that you
evolved to.
&gt;&gt; That's the key. They've known that about
lighting and the behavior of uh
students. Well, we've known about it a
long time, but it's been it's been um
brought to scale by governments. I mean,
not to get too conspiratorial because I
know you're going to have to put this on
social media at some point, but this is
the basis of what I found in those box
that I talked to you about at Charity
Hospital. this this is the mechanism
uh called parity violation is what MK
Ultra really takes advantage of.
&gt;&gt; So when you understand that many other
things in centralized society also take
advantage of it uh for varying degrees
like for example even here in El
Salvador I'd like to tell you that that
they don't but they'll put LED lights
over tables when you eat so that you
actually order more food. In the states,
we have point of service, uh, which is
usually like an iPad that you see people
walk around with. Underneath the table,
they have an RF device. Why do they use
this? Like, if you ask the questions of
the food science people because they
know when they use this, people order
more food. Like, this trend has been
going on in the United States cuz, you
know, everybody likes to blame, oh well,
the food quality in Europe is better
than is the United States. I'm not going
to argue that point. I I think it's
true. But is that the big effect of why
portion sizes and people in the United
States eat more? No. The reason why is
because we bathe in in RF microwave
radiation. And we've been doing it
longer as a country than you have,
longer than the people in El Salvador.
And when you realize that this really
goes back, you know, to when Tesla
innovated the power grid and the power
grid was brought, you know, first to
Paris and then eventually New York. Uh
the original power grid in New York was
DC. DC is actually better than AC. But
the problem is uh from a centralized uh
standpoint, you can make more money when
use AC power grid for power
distribution. So Tesla's way of doing
business supplanted Edison.
And ironically, you'll love this story.
The electric power wars, which was
called the wars back in that time. Guess
who is a key part of that? It was JP
Morgan. JP Morgan bet the house on
Edison, lost, and then set up uh the
market so that he could steal the
patents of Tesla from Westinghouse. And
that's actually how we have the flip,
you know, to the AC power grid. And when
you understand that anytime we plug
something in, like we were using the
analogy before about the coffee pot,
whether it's twoprong or threep prong,
and this surprises people when I tell
them this, if you have the appropriate
instrumentation, anytime you plug in to
a wall access, do you know that EMF is
emitted back to you? And it's it's
you'll be very surprised to know this
that if you have sophisticated
equipment, sometimes it's X-ray,
sometimes it's RF, sometimes it's
microwave. It depends on the circuit,
the load on the circuit, and what you're
plugging into it. So, like when I post
these provocative tweets, you know, on
Twitter, I'm not doing this just to be
an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm actually doing it to
educate people, to let you know that the
more times you plug in your life, you're
inviting more polarized light in your
environment. Which is why you had the
fundamental
cool thing at least from my perspective.
Jack, we got to talk about when I close
my eyes. Why is this a huge reset?
You're able to reset here or achieve
because you can't reset in London. You
are swimming in polarized light there. I
know that when you were finished here,
you open that door and you go outside,
you just plugged back into the power
source that you're designed to be
plugged into. And that's the reason why
you're able to get your brain, it's EEG,
all the squiggly lines in there, back to
the situation where your autonomic
nervous system gets some peace. The
phalamus that controls all your sensory
relays in in the world also pays
attention to the Schuman resonance. You
can do that with polarized light. The
light that's in here, it doesn't help.
Which is why, you know, I'm wearing my
glasses. is I I did a podcast in this
very room about I don't know right
before Bitcoin uh Historicico
and um I didn't wear my glasses that day
and I have to tell you I didn't like it.
I didn't like the effect. I knew it was
bad. So I said to Shantel before we came
I need to bring my glasses today. Why?
Because when you do a podcast you want
to feel sharp. When I was here last time
I didn't feel as sharp but I had never
been in this new studio. I'd been in the
old one, so I didn't think it would be
as big a problem, but it was. And the
reason I I point this out to you is
I realize that my brain can't be as
sharp when you're interviewing me and
talking to me. And you know, when we
have this short time together for an
hour, an hour and a half, we want to
bring the goods to the audience so they
get the effect. I like it because here
you are now in our country. uh seeing
the power of unpolarized light and
you're kind of amazed
and I hope that you and actually the
audience begin to realize this is the
reason why I want you, you know, to come
to places like this and maybe relocate
to a place like this. Why? Because this
is an arc. It's an arc for animals who
do their thinking. And when someone can
put time back in your bank account, then
you begin to realize just how powerful
the story about Bitcoin is. Cuz Bitcoin
isn't the most valuable asset. It's
time. And when you have time, then you
begin to realize truly you have the
perception truly
why you need to own Bitcoin. And I think
I almost hate to say this, but I think
it's one of the reason why maxis
struggle with their friends and their
families because they don't realize
they're talking to people that live in
polarized light. So, it's harder to
orange pill those people. I think it's
much more easy to orange pill people
when you can get them out on the beach,
you know, with a banana smoothie
walking around Elzante, you know, with
no shoes on. I really truly believe
that. M I think it's the um you know
Bitcoiners and we're we're into our beef
and our and our uh and nutrition as
well. But I really do think hopefully
over the next few years that we are um
better informed and adjusted to uh the
light environment that we live in as
well.
&gt;&gt; I would hope Bitcoiners would be
informed after what we just went through
you know in the last 5 years globally. I
mean, if that wasn't a wakeup call to
everybody that we all need to ask better
questions of the supposed centralized
experts in biology, I don't think um I
actually don't I wouldn't call you a
Bitcoin maxi.
&gt;&gt; Well, the thing is there's so many
things to unravel and detangle like
everything is fugazi, right? And the
thing that people have become have come
to terms with first has been the
nutrition, right? And so that's
something that a lot of
&gt;&gt; But you realize do you realize they I'm
going to interrupt you, but I want to
make sure I want to make this point for
the audience. Do you realize why people
do that? Because that is where their
understanding is. Well, let's do a hard
stop for a minute. What is proximal to
the food web? The sun. Photosynthesis
controls it all. So when I say that to
you, you shouldn't be stunned. And then
you go, okay, what you just said about
polarized and unpolarized light, how
does that affect food? Well, we know
&gt;&gt; we know that food that's grown under
fake light doesn't have as many
biofotons in it.
&gt;&gt; That's exactly the point I want to make
is light is absolutely fundamental, but
it hasn't been top of mind like
nutrition has been because we, you know,
well, I don't really know why, but on
that topic, I noticed that you're
wearing some conspicuously beautiful
glasses. Can you tell us about that? The
specs of the glasses and what people
should be looking for to acquire those
and and why? Uh these are blue blocking
glasses. They have two effects. Uh they
help block polarized light and they also
help block the frequencies that are not
good for your brain. So what are the
ones that are not good for your brain?
Anything that affects melatonin levels
affects your sleep. So obviously we all
want to sleep because I I think it's not
controversial even to non-scientists to
tell you if your melatonin levels
destroyed you can't sleep well. If you
can't sleep well, you can't regenerate.
What's the ultimate goal? You want to
protect your brain because your brain is
houses something called the
supercosmatic nucleus, which is the
clock that runs everything in your body.
That's where circadian biology comes in.
That's how important light is. So that's
what the glasses fundamentally do.
There's a lot of different glasses out
there from a lot of different glass
company just like anything else. You
know, like you have Charles Hawinson
trying to sell you a shitcoin. There's a
lot of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] coiners that are in the
glass world. So, you need to understand
what those issues are. Now, I don't have
any problem telling people who I use and
why I use it. But, do I fact check all
my glasses with spectroscopes, with
light to make sure they do the things
that I'm telling you that they do? The
answer is I do that. But there's many
people out there that have glasses that
don't do all those things or they try to
give you this propaganda [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] story
that oh well my glasses do this and this
is why they're better so you should use
them. And I can tell you there's a lot
of companies out there that are fiat
farming from Bitcoiners to try to take
money so they can buy Bitcoin and
they're not actually doing things to
help you. M.
&gt;&gt; So for me, I look at those kind of
people pretty nefariously because I look
at us as the orange family. If we're
Bitcoiners, even if I don't like you,
and you know, I've said this to you
multiple times on this trip already, it
doesn't mean that I don't want to see
you succeed. It means that I want to
make sure that your eyes, your brain is
protected so that when you're at the
table and we're talking about Bitcoin,
that your perception is based in reality
and you're a good thinker. you're a good
critical thinker.
&gt;&gt; Even if I don't like what comes out of
your mouth,
&gt;&gt; I I think we need a lot of smart people
around here. The last thing we need is a
bunch of Bitcoin maxis who think like
shitcoiners. So that's what the bad
glasses,
you know, can do cuz they allow
polarized light and blue light to get
in. As long as you protect your retina
when you're in an environment. I don't
wear these glasses unless I'm in an
environment that I know is going to be,
how shall we say, suboptimal from a
lighting perspective. And, you know, at
home, I don't I don't wear them at all.
I don't need them at my house. You know,
you've been to my house or you've seen
it. So, we we touched on uh you know,
the morning energy. There's the other
experience that I've had which is really
interesting and that's um the point of
hydration. I'm in a much warmer climate.
I'm sweating more and I'm drinking not
quite as much. In London, I'm
perpetually bloated from drinking so
much water and I feel like if I don't
drink the water, I'll feel dehydrated.
Whereas, I don't feel that way here. I
don't feel dehydrated. My stomach is
flat, but I feel well hydrated. My
muscles aren't cramping. I am taking
slightly more electrolytes here than
usual, but given the amount of sweating
that I'm doing, not just through my
workouts, but during the course of the
day, sunbathing and the like, why is my
why is the bloating not happening? And
why do I feel hydrated where otherwise
I'd probably expect to be dehydrated
given the conditions? This one's an easy
question for me to answer, but it
requires the audience to know a little
bit of physics. So, I'm going to tell
you what the physics are. When you're in
the sun, you have this wire on your
mitochondria called the inner
mitochondrial membrane. It's got way
stations in it. They're called
cytochromes. The fourth cytochrome is
the key one. It's called cytochrome
coxidase. When near infrared light and
UV interact in your body, that means
through your eye or your skin, that
signal is sent to cytochrome coxidase.
Through the process of metabolism, what
is the side effect that you make? Water.
So sunlight allows you to make more
water. Okay, flip it around now. Let's
go to the 52nd latitude in London. I
already told you about polarized light.
The number one polarized light that we
all live under is blue light. Doesn't
mean it's the only one, but that's the
major one. There's RF, microwaves, and
everything else that come from devices.
What happens there? It inactivates
cytochrome coxidase. So it cannot make
water which is why you feel thirsty in
those places. So what do you do? You
drink more water to offset it. Why is
this important for you to understand?
Water is a Faraday cage. Everybody in
Bitcoin knows about Faraday bags for
your phone when you go to one of David
Bailey's events. But what you don't
realize is that for your body to protect
you from non-native EMF on the outside,
water is your best protection scheme.
Okay? So if your your body has a
built-in way of making it from the
terrestrial EMF, which is sun, but it
has no way to make water from the other
parts of the spectrum. So when you live
in those other parts of the spectrum,
you have to drink the water. Now the
water that's in your your cup there
isn't equivalent to the water that a
mitochondria makes. The water a
mitochondria makes is called duterine
depleted. What is that? It's a isotope
of hydrogen that's heavy compared to
normal hydrogen which is called
proteium. It's lower and if you know
anything about Einstein's rules E= MC²
anything that has higher mass is less
energy efficient. So why does the
mitochondria favor dutarium depleted
water? Because it's more energy
efficient. So that's the reason why uh
you're having this experience here. your
brain through this pathway that you know
I've made kind of famous called the
leptin melano pathway. It is for want of
a better term an energy accountant
that's in these pathways in your eye.
The thirst center happens to be in this
pathway.
&gt;&gt; So what happens when you're in polarized
light? You destroy melanin cause it to
decline. Leptin is not a good energy
accountant. Therefore you become more
thirsty and you drink. What's another
effect of light that's tied to the
story? Because there's others. I want to
make sure you get all of them. Anytime
someone is light stressed, that means
you see light that you're not designed
to have, you get a release of a
posterior pituitary hormone called
vasopressin. Vasopressin makes you pee.
So, what's the most common time that
you've probably experienced and
everybody else has experienced? When you
go out to El Tonkco and drink at night,
you drink too much, you get a hangover,
you're peeing out a lot of water. That's
because of the effect of vasopressin. So
when you get dehydrated, part of
dehydration, part of a hangover is a an
acute circadian misal just like jet lag
is because it's tied to the light stress
and also the dehydration effect uh that
occurs from this vasopressor release. So
there's many reasons when you're at the
52nd latitude you feel like, hey, I need
to drink some more water. That's not
uncommon. here in El Salvador, you'll
drink less water. And then if you talk
to the locals, one of the things that
you'll talk to them about, they tend not
to drink as much water. They tend to
drink more coconut water than regular
water. Not just because it's also
available, but for them, it's also much
more replenishing. Why? Because coconut
water specifically has more dutyium in
it. And dutyium in your blood protects
you from the sun. Remember where we use
determent physics? You know that it's
used in nuclear reactors. That's what
heavy water is to protect yourselves
from the gamma radiation. Okay? In fact,
if you go and try to buy heavy water in
some, you know, places in Europe, you
could have the authorities there next to
you because they think you're making a
nuclear reactor. But it turns out here
in El Salvador, the local people are
kind of doing low energy nuclear physics
when they drink coconut water when they
get dehydrated. So that doesn't happen
usually, you know, to foreigners that
come here
until you've been here a while and you
begin to realize, wow, I really don't
need to drink as much water. And then
when I do get thirsty, if I have some
coconut water, my thirst is quenched
like this because what are you doing?
You're turning off all the places where
you lost your free water, your metabolic
water that's made it cytochrome oxidase.
Can you just reconcile these uh two
differences? Your body makes dutium
depleted water which is good for you,
but then the locals drink coconut water
which is dut dutium rich.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Explain that.
&gt;&gt; That's photosynthesis. Now, see, we're
back to that story. Remember, coconuts
are tied to the photosynthetic story.
&gt;&gt; So, what part of the coconut is really
good for humans to eat? It's the meat.
The meat is dutarium depleted.
&gt;&gt; Okay?
&gt;&gt; So, it's saturated fat. Saturated fat
has a lot of H+. That's the lightest
form of hydrogen. But the water in a
coconut is very laden with dutarium.
Okay. Therein lies the difference. So
what is nature trying to tell us where
she puts the light hydrogen and where
she puts the heavy hydrogen?
You as a mammal need to understand
that mix and usually it's pretty easy.
So I'll give you another one that people
usually screw up. The the reason why
Salvadorenos do a good job. Many people
will say it's because coconuts grow
pretty much everywhere here. But it's
not the case. is actually available,
bioavailable
because the sun creates it. And when
they drink it, you're drinking the
exhaust fumes that help you. Isn't that
the same story that happens in
photosynthesis? Remember, plants take
sunlight and water, charge, separate the
water, and turn it into what? Oxygen.
That's our fuel. What do we breathe out?
CO2.
CO2 and water.
What do plants need? They need that
water. So in other words, what I just
told you is photosynthesis and
mitochondrial respiration are like a
spider on a mirror. They're mirror
images of each other. So that our
exhaust is their fuel and vice versa.
That's how it works. So in our world,
one of the things that happens with a
lot of u Bitcoiners, especially if
they're doing carnivore, they like to
eat eggs. If you're truly doing
carnivore right, or you're doing paleo
right, you should take the white of the
eggs and throw it out and just eat the
yolk. Why the yolk is dutarium depleted?
The white part is the dutarium rich. But
what do most of the people in California
and London do? Oh, can I have a egg
white omelette? When you see somebody at
a high latitude do that, you know that
they don't know anything
about the truth in terms of evolution.
But see here, coconut water for
salvadorenos makes sense. Why? Because
it's quantum coherent. These are fruits
that grow here and there's a need for
them them here. Is are is coconut water
needed in London? Like if you were to
say to me, "Well, Jack, what if I bring
coconut water at, you know, I don't
know, Herods and and drink it, would
that quench my thirst?" I guarantee you
there's going to be somebody listening
to this that say, "Why didn't Archie ask
that question?" Coconuts don't grow at
the 52nd latitude. Therefore, they're an
impossibility. Now, we know that our
human frontal lobes have figured out how
to solve for X there. But the question
you ask then is should I be drinking
that. The answer is you're not because
the sun there never is as strong as it
is here. So, you can offset the effect
of dutyium when you're in the tropics.
You cannot do it at high latitudes,
which is why you always hear me tell you
that the carnivore diet really is a
wintertime
diet for high latitude people. That's
where it makes sense. Does the carnivore
diet make sense for the people that are
down here? No. Cuz they have UV light
present all the time and the UV light
turns off their drive to want to eat a
ton of food. So what instead do they do?
They eat what nature provides them.
That's going to be some animals, some
papaya, some watermelon, some luchi
nuts, some cashews, the things that grow
here, you know, in El Salvador. Dr.
Chris, how do cultures perfect their
diets without randomized control trials?
&gt;&gt; Pretty simple. It's it's photosynthesis.
Wherever you are, what grows there,
that's what you get.
&gt;&gt; You know, and then
&gt;&gt; it's tongue and cheek, but
&gt;&gt; I know. I know. I know. But the thing
is, you say it's tongue and cheek, but I
guarantee you there's people that are
listening to this podcast that actually
need to hear that.
&gt;&gt; Why? Because they don't realize they're
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] coiners for diet and exercise.
&gt;&gt; Because they actually believe the
nonsense that you hear from Brian
Johnson. It's crazy talk. And when you
really understand the physics behind it,
you go, "Well, that should make
intuitive sense that if it doesn't grow
there, you can't get it." Like, you
know, a rhinoceros can't go out and buy
a Big Mac.
So, that's why they don't eat it. But
the thing is, there should be no
coconuts in London, but yet, you know,
there are.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And there in lies the difference. So you
the question really when people pose
this to me isn't can we you can do
anything you want as a human should you
that's the question and I just ask
people wherever they live locally the
way to solve for X for this problem is
just go talk to a farmer at a farmers
market and say to them you know tell me
what's growing in October in London tell
me what's growing in in January tell me
what's growing in June and you know you
write it down put it in a little book
and when you go shopping those are the
things you buy and you you're not going
to make any mistakes.
&gt;&gt; So true. I've lost all sense of which
foods are seasonal now because they're
just constantly available through, you
know, the supply chain. Um, sunlight,
earthing,
water,
&gt;&gt; light, water, and magnetism.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I know that's your thing, but
I'm I'm relating it to my experience
again. The final piece of the puzzle.
Why do I feel so good when I go into the
ocean?
&gt;&gt; Well, number one, grounding. Massive
grounding effect. Plus, you're in a
Faraday cage. Um, the amount of energy
in water is off the chain. Um, it's our
primordial
um condition, meaning humans. Most
people don't realize that humans, you
know, there's a theory out there called
the aquatic ape theory. I don't ascribe
to the theory 100%. But what I do
ascribe to is that when we did evolve 2
to six million years ago, water was a
big part of our story. And I will tell
you, human babies are designed to be
born in the water and then float to the
surface. That's why all mammals have a
mamalian dive reflex. There's not a
mammal on this planet that doesn't have
it. And that's
&gt;&gt; what is that? What is the
&gt;&gt; That's the the nirvana album cover.
&gt;&gt; Gotcha.
&gt;&gt; So when you see the baby in the water,
the baby doesn't take a big breath in.
It floats and uses its fat to come to
the surface. And then when it gets to
the surface, the sun hits it. then it
knows to take a deep breath. And that
dive reflex is in every single mammal.
And you know when something in biology
is always or never, that's when you
should pay attention because nature is
whispering in your ear, this is a big
story.
&gt;&gt; And this is one of the big stories. So
the interesting reason why water is big
for us. I just told you the story about
CCO where we basically brought the sea
inside of our cells. Okay, here's
another interesting water story. Your
brain, you know, I'm a neurosurgeon.
Your brain is completely surrounded by
water. It's called CSF. It's an ultra
filtrate from your blood, but it's 99%
water. Then the rest is some interesting
nutrients. If your brain can't work well
when you're missing that water around
your brain or corlary, if you have too
much water on the brain, your brain
doesn't work as well. So, what is it
telling you? It's one of those classic
U-shaped curves that are present
everywhere. Red light has a U-shaped
curve. Alcohol has a U-shaped curve,
meaning the effect is great when it's
the dose is small, but if the dose gets
too big, it can be toxic. So when you
understand the water story, when we go
in water, um, we work better. It's
called Carno's theorem. We're more
thermally efficient. Now, you know, if
you took that phone you just looked at
and threw it in the ocean out here, the
phone wouldn't work. But the difference
is that is a siliconbased
uh semiconductive device.
You and I are carbon based. We work
better when our semiconductors are
hydrated. So this is the reason why we
brought them in. Now is is this where
Silicon Valley is now? No. Because
Silicon does not operate waters. But the
topologic effect of water on our
semiconductors make us have the
abilities that we have. And water
spending a lot of time in like surfing.
I mean, you know, El Salvador is
everybody's out there surfing. The
surfers are getting huge benefits.
&gt;&gt; Taking that up as a sport is probably
one of the best ways to become
optimized. Doing things on the beach
like swimming,
paddle boarding, even boating. I would
tell you there's huge effects of being
out on the water. The water was critical
to human evolution. I believe it's one
of the most critical things that's
present for us today for us to get
better. But this is also the reason why
like this place that Mike bought is now
worth 6 10x what he did when he bought
it four four years ago because to get
closer to the water is more valuable.
Well, you have to ask yourself this
question. What I just said is true in El
Salvador, but it's true in London. You
go to Clactton on the Sea and the prices
go through the roof. Why does it cost
more to live by the sea? Because all
cultures for 5,000 years have realized
being close to the water provides huge
biologic benefits. We can even see that
at the 28th latitude, you know, in
Africa. Why did they build Giza? Why did
they build Cairo in Alexandria where
they built it? Because back in those
days, 2,500 years ago, the Nile River
used to flood the whole area. So, it
really wasn't a desert at that time.
Now, it's it's changed. It's radically
different. You know, where you're
originally from, the original peoples,
there's famous rivers, the Euphrates and
Tigress River. Why did you know
civilization
begin there? Water was the big answer.
So, water is a huge factor not only for
human life, but also for human health.
And I tell, you know, Bitcoiners that
when you're buying a Citadel, you'd be
very, very wise to really look into
making sure that you've got good water
supply, you know, to your house, be
close to water so that you can utilize
it for you and your family for whether
it be fishing, whether it be water
sports, or whether it just be swimming.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. it. This is one of the things that
I believe even if you pay more for your
citadel, you are actually putting time
back in the bank account of your family.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When I mean the thing I I notice
about people on on the beach in the
water is that they have an intuitive
sense of how to enjoy the water and you
know regardless of um you know what what
kind of age and life stage one is at,
it's an active form of enjoying. So if
you're a citizen with mo your mobility
is impaired, just the ability to, you
know, to lift your legs over the water
or the waves as they come crashing,
that's an active form of enjoyment of
that water. If you're a young kid
splashing about, that's an appropriate
active way of enjoying the water. And
everyone just just has just takes to it.
And I can't help but notice, you know,
the therapeutic benefits that I've
noticed in myself. It just adds so much
to your day to be able to do that.
Yesterday was the first time I took a
proper swim. I'd gone gone into the
water a few times, just sort of waist
deep, but I took a proper swim yesterday
and it was incredible. I just felt so
refreshed, relieved in a way that I
hadn't quite yet. And uh I think I'll be
doing that every every morning and and
afternoon, the sunset as well.
&gt;&gt; I will tell you too in this is specific
for El Salvador. If you want to have
even um a more how shall we say
spiritual
experience with water, two things I
would tell you to do. First thing is you
go to Ilipango Soyopango or Quatt Pekka.
Go in the calderas that have lakes in
them. The effect there is even greater
than what would be at the beach. Then if
you you really have to be uh out on the
tiles for this one, but my son is there
right now. So part of El Salvador called
Metapan. It's up at Elrafino, which is
the three countries,
&gt;&gt; Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador.
There's two volcanoes up there about
8,000 feet. My son is on it right now.
&gt;&gt; They have water that comes out of the
top of the volcanoes, falls 1,000 ft
down on your head into volcanic pools.
It's all duty depleted water. So, you're
able to get the lenard effect. That's
falling water making net negative ions
that you breathe in like a breathing
treatment. Plus, you're in water. You
know, when you went swimming here in the
Pacific Ocean, that water is 85
Fahrenheit. The water that my son is in
right now, it's about 50° Fahrenheit.
It's like the Pacific Ocean in Los
Angeles. It's cold. Really cold. Huge
benefits to having that.
&gt;&gt; Tell us about Tell us about that because
I've been I've been resistant to um
consistent full body sort of cold
exposure. I haven't taken to the trend
like I know a lot of people have
particularly some in this space. Um I
might sort of finish off you know lower
half of the body with with a cold shower
occasionally. It does feel refreshing
but like I I don't want I don't want
like a surge of adrenaline or cortisol
through my butt. I do my best to avoid
that cuz I get enough of it in in other
ways. But what is the benefit
of doing the equivalent of a cold plunge
or finishing off with a cold proper cold
shower? It's
&gt;&gt; the same benefit you got from closing
your eyes when I walked in here today.
It's a default reset. So I'll explain
something to you because again this is
physics unfortunately.
There's something in physics called the
cury point. It has to do with magnets.
Okay? When you drop temperature down
magnets become more efficient. What else
becomes more efficient in terms of
electricity? Semiconductors work better
in cold. So, if we took your phone and
we put it on the hood of the
Mercedes-Benz out in the front that's
black, you get a temperature warning. We
come in here and put it inside the
freezer, it will work right away. Well,
I told you that we use semiconductive
current in us. So, the benefit of you
going in cold water, even if it's a
short period of time or a longer period
of time,
&gt;&gt; you become more thermally efficient. In
other words, you set your electronic
state for the proteins in you and the
water that surrounds them because the
water that surrounds you is also a
semiconductor. In other words, you
become much more likely to conduct a
semiconductive current which means that
you do better. So that's the main reason
that you want to do it. Now I will tell
you in different people the effect is
different. I'm going to tell you all
mammals it's beneficial, but humans are
a special case. Um, and I'll explain to
you how we found this out. If you have
an uncoupled mitochondrial hoype, which
you're kind of close because you're
originally from Turkey,
&gt;&gt; Turkey, Middle East,
&gt;&gt; right? Middle East. So, you're you're
probably not as uncoupled as I am. My
people are from the 59th latitude. So,
I'm very uncoupled. So, when I go in
cold water, I get a huge benefit. My
mitochondria not only make more water,
they release more red light, but they
also make a ton of water. That light
actually allows me to tan the insides of
my body. So, I'm turning on the the
system that controls melanin inside of
me.
&gt;&gt; That's another benefit. Now, people who
are from equatorial Africa who have L01,
2 and 3, these are predominantly people
have dark skin. in country you're living
in now, those are the bush people. Okay?
But in Africa, like Nairobi, one degree
north, 8,000 ft up, these are the guys
that beat everybody in the world in
endurance sports. Why? Because they are
extremely thermally efficient. But the
interesting thing is they don't get the
huge benefit out of the cold. How did we
find that out? In the Korean War in the
United States, when they put people up
on the peninsula, you know that North
Korea is pretty high latitude. because
it's pretty cold. The US military found
that black soldiers got frostbite faster
than white soldiers and they couldn't
figure out the reason why. It's because
they're not thermally able to handle
because the amount of melanin that they
have on their exteriors. So, I will tell
you that people like from El Salvador
who we call moronitos, not chalitos.
Chelitos are like the people that are
more from like um Spanish Inquisition
kind of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; They can tolerate. They're usually very
uncoupled. But the people that have
darker skin here in El Salvador, they're
tied more to the Mayan people.
&gt;&gt; Mayan people very melanated. Not as
melanated as people from Equator Africa.
So this is the reason why if I take um a
moronito from El Salvador and take them
up to Chilip Pango where it's 37
Fahrenheit, there's snow on the ground
in El Salvador up there. They can't
tolerate it. They're like this to them
feels crazy. One of my employees is
married to uh um Amoranito and she
famously goes to Guatemala City to see
his sister for Christmas every year.
She hates going because even though the
temperature goes to like 40 or 50
degrees in Guatemala City, she hates it.
She can't handle it. So, she's not built
to tolerate the cold. Now, what's the
beautiful part of this? People that tend
to be heavily melanated tend to be
always either at altitude where there's
EMF or where it's warm. Very rarely are
they heavily melanated. There's
exceptions. Those exceptions are like
the original Eskimo.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I feel a yearning for heat like in
sauna for example and to sweat
something. But the idea of uh
going into a cold plunge and I've heard
someone you know like Huberman saying
actually the more you feel like you
don't want a cold plunge, the more
you'll benefit
&gt;&gt; from that. It it's usually true. I mean,
where my son is right now, Metapen, he's
there's a thing that uh the Mayan people
created that's really interesting. If
you ever have a chance to do this, I
would tell you to look into it. It's
called a teascal.
&gt;&gt; And what the teascal does, my friend who
owns this place up in Menipan, took the
water from that volcano that I told you
comes down, piped it into this big huge
cold pool that's surrounded all with
volcanic rock. So, this water is really
cold. Then he heats that water up with
cypress trees from the mountain. The
steam makes a steam room and then the
water goes through the pipes and makes a
hot tub. So you're able to go from the
cold to the hot to the steam room and
you get the benefit. The interesting
thing about this, you would think the
people in Russia or the people in
Scandinavia would have come up with this
idea. It was the Mayan people that came
up with the idea. So they realized that
cold was a benefit for them. But what
did they do? They married it to
infrared. So I'm going to tell you, I
agree. This is one of the few times I'll
probably agree with you on anything that
if you persist, you will get a benefit.
But it's also true that people that tend
to have more melanin cannot do as much
cold as people are uncoupled. like
you're probably partially coupled cuz
you're 33rd 34 latitude. That means you
will have a benefit, but your benefit
wouldn't be like mine. Like when I go in
the cold water, for me it doesn't bother
me at all. I feel great and I can stay
in a long time.
&gt;&gt; Uh but that's a function of me coming
from the 59th latitude. Um cold has
never bothered me. And do I function
well in the cold? Yeah, I will tell you
I do really well. But the flip side is,
can we sculpt our uncoupled hletype? I
told you I'm here now. I even made a
joke with you a couple days ago. I said,
"Look at my skin compared to yours."
&gt;&gt; Have I been able to resculpt my
mitochondria so that I'm more coupled
than I used to be?
&gt;&gt; The answer is yes. And the reason for
that is going in cold water doesn't
allow me to make as much water. And I
told you as you get older, you need more
water, especially if you have a Ferrari
engine that you want to keep in tip-top
shape. So for me, I've made a decision
that the power of the sun as I age is
more important for me than doing cold.
Doesn't mean that I don't like cold. I
mean, you saw my pool at the house. That
pool is about 15 to 20° less than the
pools that are present here. And it's
built that way to keep that water
constantly cool. It's also dutyium
depleted water straight from the
volcano. So it's not like I'm not able
to recapitulate
&gt;&gt; kind of what my son is getting up, you
know, and Gian Carlos place in Bernate,
you know, in the teascal. But I would
tell you it would be beneficial for a
guy like you who doesn't feel you can
get the benefit of that to go to a place
that has a teascal and then for a
weekend you do it and then see what
happens because I guarantee you with you
getting in the warm doing the sauna and
then doing the cold you may see like a
radical break breakthrough where you say
this is shocking. I'm I'm really having
a big effect. And I'll tell you the
people that I send to do that more often
than anything else are people that have
peripheral neuropathy. Like whether it
be from diabetes or say they got it from
some idiocratic drug reaction where
their hands, their feet tingle. Uh some
people have uh an interesting phenomenon
um where their their fingers get white
when they get cold. Believe it or not,
when you use a teascal and you get them
trained, they can actually get rid of
that. M
&gt;&gt; um another thing that happens it's
called Reos phenomenon. Reos phenomenon
is also much more common when people eat
seed oils and you know people always
think in in paleo and carnivore world
that seed oils are bad. They're not bad
if you're actually using light and cold
to mitigate the effect. Why? Because
believe it or not, dutarium and seed
oils is actually how mammals change
their coat. That's how we get a winter
coat versus a summer coat. And it turns
out when you have the right light, seed
oils effectively aren't bad. And there's
a, you know, a lot of mixed messaging,
you know, in the nutrition data where
there's people out there that say, "Oh,
it's it's bad." And then other people
say it's good. What they don't realize
there's no light controls. That's the
reason why you get the mismatches. But
it turns out for mammals that are out,
they don't get the mi mix. Their coats
change when the light changes. And what
drives that process is their thyroid
gland through their eye because that's
connected through the eye clock. And T3
hormones control what's going on in your
neurons. That has a lot to do with the
sensation that you have there. So when
you can give people this stimulus back
that they've missed from the polarized
light, you can actually make Reo's
phenomena go away in a couple weeks. Can
you make people who have peripheral
neuropathy get off the drugs that
they're on? Yeah, it just usually
requires them to come to a place like
this that's got a teascal and I can show
them. You can do it in Mexico too around
the cenote systems they have any place
there's a big Mayan culture teascals are
a big part of the story but I can tell
you in our country in El Salvador
Bernate.sv SV. It's got two teascals.
And when I tell you these telescals are
built the way the Mayans would build
them. Everything is outside by itself,
its own building. And it's powered by
the volcano
and photosynthesis.
It's spectacular. Dr. Kruse, uh, you've
been living in El Salvador longer than
many Bitcoiners. In fact, probably all
Bitcoiners almost. Um, and you're a big
propon you're a big proponent of it. You
love it. you call it the ark. Um tell us
what made you move here. How long have
you been here uh first of all and what
made you come here? And um give us your
impressions of the transformation so far
cuz this is my second visit and I can
clearly see the progress that's been
made. That's you know fantastic. It's
exactly what I wanted to to observe. So
give us your impressions of that as
well. I think the the first thing that
gave it to me is being a neurosurgeon in
the United States, I was very acutely
aware of how the United States was
falling apart. My diagnosis always went
back to the money. And remember, my
focus initially was on biology. So, it
was about centralized healthcare.
And when you tell your colleagues or
your patients that centralized
healthcare is fundamentally broken
because of the Cantalon effect of big
pharma, you know, people argue with you.
Um, but I think that's been taken away
by the last 5 years when people have
seen what's happened. But the reason I
came to El Salvador is because I had
this dissatisfaction already on the
biology side. And I got word through my
network from private bankers that I know
on the fiat side that something big was
getting ready to happen in El Salvador,
you know, with Jack Mers and Boulli. And
I was here probably 2 3 weeks before
Bitcoin Day occurred here because I had
an inkling it was going to happen. When
I came here, I had uh my son and six of
my private VIP members. And why did we
come here? We came here for number one
reason. I wanted to find out what it was
like for the people living here locally
under oppression and tyranny. But I also
knew that B Kelly was going to be the
first president that was going to give
freedom back to people who hadn't had it
for about 50 years. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And how was that going to fly? Um, when
I came here, and most people don't know
this, Elzante at that time, this place
was infiltrated with MS-13.
Now, did I tell my VIP members that or
my son or actually Shantel, she was
here. She was chicken to go, but at the
last minute, she threw my best friend
out and she said, "No, I'm going to go."
She goes, "If you think it's important,
I think we should go." And when she was
here,
I told her, I said, "Look, there's a lot
of bad mojo here, but the mojo is
getting ready to be changed."
And I knew that when Bitcoin came onto
the scene here, and I make this point to
a lot of people, and I don't think they
really listened to me.
Blly gave the people Bitcoin before he
put the bad ombres in jail.
and giving Bitcoin back. This was an
insurance policy in case American money
crashed and burned during the COVID
epic. Why? Most people famously know
that the United States at that time
spent $6 trillion. Okay, in that time
frame for for want of a better term, the
results of that in terms of human
capital, we lost 2 million people. The
number now is probably three million
people. So you've got to ask yourself,
was the effect of spending $6 trillion
really worth it? Obviously I think the
retrospect scope and doing the morbidity
and mortality on the case it wasn't. But
interestingly here in El Salvador that
changed. B Kelly actually was very very
open very early much before the people
in the states were of listening to some
of the things that I was talking about
instead of locking Alzant up and Elzante
was destroyed like where all of the
mayor is right now you we are literally
a block or two away it was concrete
pillars
um and I famously said on that visit
this would be a great place for a
seafood restaurant I told a group of
Bitcoiners in clubhouse room and my
members was in a Q&amp;A that this place
would rebound hard
once things got right. And
very very soon after my first visit
here, Boulli started giving little bags
out of Ivormectin, vitamin D, magnesium.
In other words, he didn't say, "Well,
you need to follow everything the WHO
and Fouchi says. We're going to do this
a little bit differently because they
have a smaller country. that time there
was no vaccine. He started to let people
go out of the house. That was a change.
He was one of the first leaders that
allowed that to change and he took a
risk by doing that because remember he's
a new president. The presidents here
have a really bad rep and he allowed
people to have freedom. So that was two
freedom,
how shall we say beacons that I saw
Bitcoin and that. And then obviously
when the exception regime came in, the
people in the media, the western media
and even the people here in El Salvador
misread the tea leaves when he famously
walked in with the military and arrested
the attorney general, got rid of the bad
uh judges. He famously told Trump in
2023, "If you want your country back,
you have to get rid of the criminals
protecting the criminals."
And
everybody screamed dictator. I looked at
it and I'm like, "That's kind of what
George Washington did to the British in
1774.
They were the criminals at that time."
And I said, "You know what? You need to
be careful with this guy. Let's watch
him and see what he does." Next thing
you know, then he uses surveillance
technology to actually capture all the
MS-13 utilizing cell phone data
and arrest them all. Puts them off the
street. I remember being here the day
the probably the most famous event that
started the exception regime. The gangs
killed, I think, 11 or 12 people in one
day to try to make a point to Blly,
don't mess with us because we'll make
this really nasty for you. And Blly
said, "Hold my beer." And he he doubled,
tripled, quadrupled down literally
within two or three months.
Like, when I tell you crime
fell off a cliff here.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And then when the police
got the trust back of the people because
the people here didn't trust the police
because the police were corrupt.
Um they were working with the gangs many
times. The police actually started to
arrest all the people that previously
they would let out. They couldn't be let
out anymore because the judges were
taken out. The judges were the ones that
led the criminals back on the street to
terrorize the local people. So, I
started to ask the local people here in
Alzante,
you know, tell me about what's the
difference in your life and the this was
the funny part of the story for me. Um,
in the United States, we embrace Bitcoin
because of inflation. Here, the
inflation was the gangs. The gangs were
taking $300 away from the local people.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So, when the guys go to jail, they got
to keep $300. It was like they got a
raise. They got a 30% raise because most
of them make about $1,000 a month. And
you know, we laugh about $300. For them,
this was life and death. So, that was
the third beacon that I got. And then
two to three months after that, I just
started to look at the people's faces.
And I happen to live in an area what I
told you that most of Belly's, how shall
we say, adversaries live in arena. And
they would talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] at the country club
about Boulli, but I noticed that they
were all were pretty happy with how much
money they were making. Why? Because it
turned out when you put the criminals in
jail, it was actually good for the
economy.
And then more crazy things started
happen. Then people like Archie and my
members and my family. Everybody starts
coming to El Salvador and people are
coming to the murder capital to see
what's going on because they hear it's
kind of safe now. It's safer than the
United States. And then more people
came. More people came. I mean, when
when I came here 5 years ago, you had to
pay $12
to buy a visa if you're from the States.
B Kelly ended that about, I think, 18
months ago. And just so you know, that
$12 adds up when you consider how many
American visitors are here. And what is
he telling you now?
We could use your money, but we would
rather have a border so you can see what
we're doing. That's the fourth baller
move. And then when you see how he's
cleaning up different things, you know,
I know there's people in El Salvador
that would like things to happen faster.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. But
I have famously said on multiple
podcasts, in my opinion as an American,
as a foreigner looking in,
he is George Washington on steroids for
his people. And he has the duty to
return the sovereignty back to the
people of this country who quite frankly
their own presidents have stolen from
them. So they shouldn't trust any
politician. They've had it far worse
than Americans have and now they've got
it far better than Americans have. They
don't make the kind of money we make,
but right now the president and his
administration are trying to create a
middle class here so that when you see
all these beautiful towers going up
everywhere that they can afford to
participate in their country renewal and
we all know that the process is messy. I
mean in my country, you know, when we
think about what happened in 1800
to 1900, that was an ugly process for
many, many Americans, you know, and did
crazy things happen. Yeah, we bought the
Louisiana purchase. We couldn't afford
it when we did it. Everybody thought
Thomas Jefferson was crazy. Turned out
it's the best buy we ever made. You
know, when you look back on it and think
that river gave us access to both sides
of the country and allowed the country
to become what it became, that's why
people now in America make the money
they make. Well, I don't know what El
Salvador's Louisiana purchase is going
to be, but I believe that Bitcoin Day
is on the same order of them having the
Louisiana purchase or buying Alaska for
a song and a dance or buying Manhattan
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; from the Dutch from a song and a dance.
And I think me as a foreigner, you as a
foreigner, when we're in their country,
we can talk about it, but remember, they
should be allowed to dictate their
sovereignty the way they see fit. And I
have an interesting view on this because
I feel like I've been sitting on their
beach getting the benefits of what's
going on while I watch Rome burn across
the Gulf of Mexico.
Because people in America
when I came here, they thought I was
crazy. They told me I was going to get
my arms cut off, my head cut off. I
haven't felt unsafe in this country one
day in my life. But I can tell you when
I went back to New Orleans for
Christmas,
I didn't feel safe at all.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; In fact, when I went to New York, I
didn't feel safe. Um,
I will tell you, I probably should say
this because I think a lot of people
give me criticism about me as an
American to say this. I love my country.
I hate my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] government.
And I will tell you when it comes to El
Salvador, I love their country and I
love their government. And if you want
to know why I'm here
for 5 years
is because I feel more at place here.
Because I think there's more freedom
here. because of what's actively being
done. And I think the people of El
Salvador
are really wonderful. Why? Because they
remind me of the people that you and I
sampled in Prague, the former communist
place that understands what communism
and fascism is, and they're not going
back. The people in El Salvador, like I
guarantee they'd like Blly to do this,
that, and the other thing, but they're
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] happy. It's palpable on the
street, on the beaches, in the
restaurants. Uh Dr. Kruse, tell us a
little bit about your impressions of the
Salvadoran people because um they've
absolutely blown me away with their
kindness. They're awesome. Universal
kindness, by the way, not just like a
few instances. Well, not only they kind,
but I will tell you the other thing,
hard hard workers. the um people here
have been through the ringer. But I will
tell you there is a big difference in my
view as a doctor of the people here and
the people in the states. The people
here constantly are grounded. They're in
the sun. I remember coming to Alzante
literally we're couple blocks away from
where this happened when I met Mama Rosa
the first time. She's living in a
galvanized shack. you know, dirt on the
floor. And you know, people in the
Western world come here and and I'm
going, they're doing it right. They're
at the beach. Yeah. They're eating
Doritos.
Not a great thing, but they're actually
selling Doritos to Gringo for Bitcoin.
I'm going,
this is a money winner. This is going to
be a really good thing for the people
here. And now to see that the people
that have galvanized shacks and dirt
floors
and you know open wires behind them now
their piece of property is worth a
million dollars. I have to tell you
I think that's karma you know coming to
them for putting up with the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they
had to put up for for 50 years.
But I think the reason they're happy
is because they can make a little boogie
board out of Kancasta wood and go in the
water. They can go to the beach every
day and take their shoes off. They can
climb up a coconut tree with a machete
and when they're thirsty, they don't
have to drink the Coca-Cola. Now, they
like Coca-Cola too much, but the
coconuts are here. Uh they like to sit
around and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] They like to have
dinner together. Like one of the things
that I love about myself with the raino
friends,
they will sit at a table and have a
proper conversation about what happened
in the day. That doesn't happen too much
in the United States anymore. This is
what they do. Right across the table
from each other.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I think it's because their dopamine
level, their melatonin level, their
melanin levels are optimized. And that's
truly why they're happy people. Would
they like their life to be better? Yes.
But I think they have found how to be
happy and pursue happiness and freedom
without a closet full of Louis Vuitton
bags or
fancy schmancy things they can buy from
Seaman.
They were able to be happy under the
worst circumstances.
and they're willing to work for a better
future.
How could you not want people like that
for your neighbor? Bitcoin's been a big
part of El Salvador's resurgence. What
What does Bitcoin mean to you? Because I
know you've been a Bitcoiner for a long
time, much longer than people realize
actually. Um, can you tell us about the
story of how you got into it? because uh
you if if you you told me the other day,
I'm not sure if you want to share it
publicly, but I think I think people
would be interested in it and um we can
perhaps um talk about how Bitcoin has
progressed till then and the current
state of Bitcoin from there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean um one of my good friends
uh people know used to own Twitter and
he's a big decentralized guy. Most
people know through the retrospectcope
that he's Bitcoin only. He doesn't do
shitcoins. He owned Square. Now it's
changed its name, but he's still Bitcoin
only. So he's like, "Look, you help me
with decentralized medicine. Can I help
you with decentralized money?" And of
course, you know, Jack Kruse back in the
day was arrogant. You can't tell me
anything. Da da da da da. And then I
finally sat down and started to read the
white paper. And the thing that struck
me the most about the white paper isn't
what usually strikes most Bitcoiners out
of the eight uh sites, three were about
timestamping. And I was like, "Oh,
that's interesting." And I said, "That's
kind of like circadian biology." So when
I looked into it further, I started to
immediately draw parallels to the things
that I was teaching Dorsy and Rick Rubin
about at that time, which was
timestamping in yourselves with light
and dark and temperature. And I said,
"Is the hash rate kind of like the
metabolic rate in the body?" And you
know, I was coming up with all these
like analogies and I was like,
I had a a come to Jesus moment in 2013
where I said, "Jesus Christ, Bitcoin
is a lot like circadian biology. So that
means health and wealth are
fundamentally linked." And I started to
develop that thesis. When I developed
that thesis, then I got I I became very
less arrogant and I realized what a fool
that I was that I didn't partake in this
earlier cuz I had a chance
to be in pretty early. But it was
because of my own arrogance that I
didn't listen to somebody who I should
have trusted. Why? He trusted me with
his health. So did I return the favor to
him? No, I didn't. I mean, I I think you
show value to your mentors by how you
listen to them. So, I will tell you that
the acronym that Maxis talk about, you
get Bitcoin at the price you deserve, is
absolutely
axiomatically true
&gt;&gt; and I can smile about it now.
&gt;&gt; But I will tell you that everybody gets
their college tuition when it comes to
Bitcoin. And you do have a duty to tell
people, you know, the story. Like when I
met Jack um at the Miami event um at the
Bitcoin conference and he came to meet
all my VIPs and Shantel and my son, we
talked
um for a while and at the end of the
talk I said to him, "Tell me what you
need me to do for you." And he goes, "I
don't need you to do anything except
keep decentralizing the world." He goes,
"You're doing it in biology." is now
teach the Bitcoiners what they need to
do. They need to merge decentralized
health and wealth. And I'm telling you,
that's what we've been doing. I think
since that time, and will I persist?
Will I continue to have the the Twitter
arguments with people? I mean, look,
even today, I had some Twitter arguments
with people about different things that
are tied to what's going on in El
Salvador. No. Uh, do I think those
things are important? Yeah. Because if
one person's out there and it changes
their mind, hey, El Salvador is a good
place to go. And hey, look at that. It's
legal tender here with American money.
Maybe I could, you know, make a go at
this. That's all that matters. You know,
you have to
put yourself out there and you can't be
afraid of rejection.
Um,
there's a lot of people that I've talked
to that are not interested in
mitochondrial medicine. They're not
interested in Bitcoin, but that doesn't
stop me from sitting down and have a cup
of coffee with them in the central
historical district next to the new
library. It It's not going to stop me
from telling them my story about El
Salvador.
I think it's reasonable to share that
with people. I think it's much more
effective when you do it oneon-one with
somebody
so they can see the passion that's in
you.
um the disgust with yourself that you
didn't make the right decision right off
the bat. You can't get upset. This is
what I would tell you about that story.
It's never a mistake if you learn a
lesson from the mistake.
&gt;&gt; I I feel that in my bones actually. It's
been my whole life.
&gt;&gt; I think it should be all of our lives.
But you know, you have to realize it's
not just a Bitcoin story. Sometimes it's
the story like I told you in my house.
We need to draw you to a place like
this. Why? Because this podcast is going
to be important for the millions of
Bitcoiners that are not born yet. You
were already a very successful person
before you bought Bitcoin.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So, what has Bitcoin given you?
&gt;&gt; The ability to put my middle finger up
to centralized medicine, say, "Come get
me."
&gt;&gt; I I said this to Shantel after you
visited my house. The difference between
me and Mary Taly Bowen who's a doctor
here in the states or Doc Malik who's a
doc in the UK
um they're facing huge resistance like
Doc Malik can't practice in the UK
anymore because of this outspoken thing.
I did a podcast with him believe it or
not about Bitcoin four years ago. He
wasn't into Bitcoin then. I told him you
need to be in Bitcoin so that you can
get on Twitter and tell people the
truth. I said, "Because it's going to
come a day. The people in the UK,
they're going to take your license
away." Archie, that's exactly what
happened. So, I'll tell you what
happened to me tied to Blly. Blly
administration saw my tweets four and
five years ago and go, "How does this
guy get away saying the things that he's
saying on Twitter, but nobody shuts him
down?" Now, the main reason was Jack
Dorsey was my friend and he owned
Twitter. There was no chance I was
getting shut down. But that was enough
that Bke Kelly sent his people to come
talk to me. And then I gave them a talk
in Plymazada
about the top 20 things that El Salvador
could do to decentralize their country
further. A lot of those things were tied
to the things that were going on with
the WHO and Fouchi at that time.
Many of those changes were implemented
by El Salvador.
So I would tell you what has Bitcoin
done for me?
It's made me difficult for the paradigm
in power to deal with. Why? Because the
normal things that they do to Bitcoin is
like debank them. They can't do that to
me.
They can't shut me up by taking my
license away because it also doesn't
matter.
They can't stop me from practicing. Why?
Because the things that get you to stop
practicing like lawsuits and thing, I
don't have any of those.
Now, am I ory? Am I a carin about stuff
like that? Yeah. Are there things that
I've done uh in centralized medicine the
last five years that probably could get
me in trouble? But I did it in such a
way that Bitcoin was my shield.
And that's what many of the other
doctors haven't done. So for me, Bitcoin
was a big lifeline. It allowed me to do
things
on the freedom side to fight a battle
and wage a war that I knew was going to
be important for guys like you. Why?
I don't want people to make bad
decisions. Like if you make a good
decision to buy 100 Bitcoin and then
turn around and get two or three jabs,
it's over.
That's what we have to stop. And
to be able to say what I just said to
you, if I didn't have Bitcoin
four years ago, 5 years ago,
could have never happened. H Bitcoin's
come a long way just in the time that
I've been in Bitcoin, which is five
years, just over five years. Bitcoin
archive is five years officially. And uh
I I first bought Bitcoin, I think it was
in October 2020, couple of months after
Sailor made his announcement as well.
And so we've seen all of the things that
we were talking about.
We can call it a cycle. Last cycle,
2020, 2021, 2022. It's going to happen
Wall Street. Bitcoin is going to take
over Wall Street. The ETF launched most
successful ETF launch in the history of
United States finance.
Wildly successful. We're seeing all the
banks now one after the other like
dominoes saying either going to um
recommend Bitcoin through their uh
investment advisers,
one even going as high as 4% allocation
after starting at 1%. Um they're going
to enable their customers to buy Bitcoin
through their internet banking and all
these sorts of things. Bitcoin trading
facilities are being set up through
their brokerage services. We're seeing
Bitcoin infiltrate Wall Street in many,
many ways, but you don't quite see it
that way. You look at it as more like
Wall Street is in infiltrating
Bitcoin. Tell us a little bit about what
you see and what you think some of the
things that we should be cautious about
right now.
&gt;&gt; Suit coiners are not your friend.
They never will be. Now, do we like to
have adversaries in Bitcoin? Do we need
them from game theory? Yes. But just
remember something. Inviting the suit
corners, inviting the politicians to the
party. Some people may think it's a
necessary evil. I don't.
They will try to centralize Bitcoin.
They will try to convince you of some of
the things that you just said. Let us
custo your Bitcoin so we can give you
leverage so we can give you
financialization and securitization
of your Bitcoin. Never allow a Scoin or
a politician to get you to that level.
You self custody your Bitcoin. When
Michael Sailor tells you that he thinks
it's a good idea, it might be a good
idea for Michael Sailor because he may
have a side deal with the Treasury
Department.
It's not a good idea for plebs. I'm a
pleb. You're a pleb. And the ethos of
Bitcoin for me has never changed. I
don't care if the banks and the
politicians get in. They need Bitcoin
more than Bitcoin needs them. Don't ever
forget that. They are
the double double agent spies for the
banks. The bankers are our enemy. Never
forget that. We just saw it in the news
when Brian Armstrong comes out, who most
Bitcoiners can't stand, and actually
tells the truth
that this bill that's out is an absolute
devastation. It's a a kiss for the
bankers because of the leverage on
stable coins. You need to understand
what the goal is here. They can't beat
Bitcoin. So, they are going to try their
best to centralize it. And there's going
to be partners. People who right now
Bitcoiners look as our friends like the
people in Tether. They're not our
friends either. Are they a necessary
evil through the evolution? I I said to
Archie the other day on my deck, I'm
going to use the analogy here again.
Where we are in Bitcoin is where a tree
is at a seed stage. When you are a seed,
the act of germination is devastating to
the seed.
But when you sit on my deck and look at
a tree that's fully formed 50 years
later and go, you know, maybe that
devastation wasn't so bad, you know,
because now there's tropical birds in
the tree, there's nests, there's fruit
going on the tree.
So down the road, the story you're being
sold may be good, but right now we're at
the seed stage. And the seed stage
requires you to self-custody your
Bitcoin. Do not put your Bitcoin at
risk. Do not listen to the grifters. Do
not listen to the suitcoiners. Do not
listen to the treasury companies.
Listen to what's in that white paper.
Listen to the ethos that's in
Bitcoiners.
Okay? That's all you have to do. Own it.
Keep buying it as much as you can.
And then make sure that you build your
citadel wherever it is and stay in
communication
with other Bitcoin maxis, other orange
people. Uh I said this to Marty Ben on
his podcast and I'm saying it to you.
All of us are citizens of a Bitcoin
country when we own SATs.
So I feel that you and I are connected
just like Marty and I are connected or
Larry Leard and I are connected or me
and Max are connected. We have a duty to
the plebs. Those are the people that are
in our country
to watch out for them. I have this
saying about the circle of six. You have
six friends that are tight with you.
Those are the 12 eyes. Protect your
back.
That's what I'm saying to you right now.
when you have this podcast and we talk
about it and I know you know when you
and I had the first podcast
you heard I was pretty spicy about those
people back then I said I don't trust
them
&gt;&gt; at all
&gt;&gt; and we went back and forth about it. Now
here we are eight months later and it
turned out a lot of the things I warned
you about turned out to be true. So what
am I saying to you? I don't want to pat
on the back. What I want is I want
Archie's eyes open. So when you're
talking to a suit coiner, when you're
talking to the shitcoiners, when you're
talking to the propagandists, the guys
that have the Luna tattoos on their arm,
make sure you remember who you're
talking to. I think some things are
easier to forget than uh than than that.
And I don't think anyone's going to let
poor old Mike uh forget about that one.
Look, if you're stupid enough to put a
Ponzi scheme as a tattoo on your arm,
you are capable of atrocities.
&gt;&gt; And I think that's the message I'm
trying to give you, that I know that
people can redeem themselves. You know,
I worry about all the Bitcoiners out
there that did the right thing, but took
a jab
&gt;&gt; and now their lives can end, and now
they're going to get a GBM or this and
that, and then I got to worry about
their kids. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Like some of the stuff that we talked
about in the beginning of this podcast,
&gt;&gt; I feel passionate about that because
that's going to put time back in those
kids bank account.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; They need to learn and Archie, you have
to teach them
&gt;&gt; just like the rest of the podcast
actively have to teach them
what the downsides of the souers are,
what it really means to be a Bitcoin
Massie, why self-custody is important
through history. You know, we've seen it
in the fiat side. They go into Beverly
Hills to do an FBI case and they wind up
taking everybody's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Well, that's
kind of how the government works. They
have they own violence.
Look at the samurai guys. Everybody was
just on Twitter the other day. Oh,
great. They didn't they took his money,
but they didn't sell it like they said.
They just stole the guy's money and put
him in jail. We should be ming hell
about that. We shouldn't be going, "Oh,
I'm glad they put it on the treasury." I
I actually saw some Bitcoin say that on
Twitter. Those people aren't our
friends. They're morons. I find um
the lack of reaction
in response to the Samurai case by the
Bitcoin community, the muted reaction.
Now, people might say, "You've got a big
account. Why don't you lead the charge?"
I don't regard myself as an opinion
leader or a leader in the community at
all in any way. Right? There are some
things that I find I try to represent
what the community feels most strongly
about. I lend support to that thing, but
I don't consider myself an opinion
leader. I don't consider myself a leader
in the community. What I do is I think I
lend support to a lot of the things that
the community actually cares about. So
even with this podcast,
it's having people like you and having
the privilege of listening to you give
us, you know, your mind uh on various
topics. It's more like a platform to air
different points of view as well. But
why do you think that Bitcoiners were
just so
I don't know indifferent seemingly?
&gt;&gt; Apathetic is the word.
&gt;&gt; Apathetic. They certainly were. Is it
because well they were a bunch of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] previously in various you know
Twitter disputes or whatnot. people
really that that petty that when it
comes to principles of freedom that
they're willing to let people go to jail
and not defend them because of various
personal disputes on Twitter. I mean, it
just seems to me like
&gt;&gt; I think it's not even just the samurai.
Think about what happened with Roger
Ver, Bitcoin Jesus.
&gt;&gt; I mean, I don't like Roger Ver, but I
think what they did to him was not
right. And I look at it like this. The
reason I think the apathy is there is
they're all afraid that it could be
them. Like I've said this, Archie, on
other podcasts, I'm going to say it to
you.
You don't realize you and I doing this
podcast together in this place.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; We have targets on our back.
&gt;&gt; They're watching us. Someday down the
road, you're going to be Michael Sailor.
I'm going to be Michael Sailor. I'm
going to be Jack Mullers. I'm going to
be Jack Dorsey.
we are going to be
really toxic for the paradigm. And the
problem is I think some Bitcoiners are
starting to wake up to that reality. I
know I when I said it to Marty Bent,
he's had a lot of discussion with Matt
Odell
where it's definitely coming. We've been
playing minor league ball for 15 years.
We're now getting ready to go in the
major leagues. So when we see one of our
teammates go down,
the thought crosses our mind.
Are we dealing with our own mortality
here?
And I personally think that's where the
apathy comes from. Like if I keep my
mouth shut and I don't do
podcast or don't say what I want to say,
maybe they won't come after me like they
came after Kowani or why why they came
after Roger.
I still look at it like this.
as a community, if we're serious about
what we want Bitcoin to become, even if
you dislike the person and don't like
the way they carried out business,
you still have a duty. It's part of the
plan. Remember, we don't scale without
those people. Even if the the
discussions they have are distasteful,
I believe in what the founding fathers
put in our documents that everybody
should be able to say whatever they
want. That includes even if it's crazy
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] coming out of Bitcoiners's mouths.
Um,
sometimes
order comes from chaos. I know it always
happens in biology, but I have a funny
feeling it's also going to happen in
Bitcoin. And that's the reason why
um I was pretty adamant to support Roger
even though I don't like Roger. You know
I've told about you told you about one
of your countrymen of your competitors
McCormack. I don't like him either
because I think he made a bad decision
to take the jab. I like the stuff that
he feels about Bitcoin. But he as a guy
that's got a big podcast,
he's resonating a message that I don't
jive with. Why? because I believe that
time is more valuable than Bitcoin. He
valued Bitcoin more than time. I don't
want that message to get out to the
millions of Bitcoin babies that are
coming that are going to listen to your
podcast in the next 20, 30 years. And I
want you to understand why I'm saying
it. You know, I I want people not to
think I'm a be being a dick about saying
this. I want you to understand there's
some logic to what I'm saying. You may
you still may not like it.
It's the same way when Bitcoiners come
out and say, "I'm struggling with my
fertility." Instead of throwing them
under the bus, I want to help them
because guess what? Those are the people
that we need to have more babies. We
don't need, you know, the pedophiles
that Pam Bondi is backing up through the
Epstein list to have babies. We don't We
definitely don't want that. So why would
you know I talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you know a
couple of Bitcoiners that are out there
struggling with you know their
fertility? No, those are the people that
we should act to help out. If we can do
something to help them
ultimately that's good for us. It's kind
of the discussion that we had under that
tree that we talked about the other day
in my house. Some dude planted that tree
50, 60 years ago so you and I could sit
under it. We never said thank you to him
at all.
He dealt with that struggle. He never
got the benefit of it. And I think in a
weird kind of way, some of the things
that you and I are talking about right
now are the same kinds of things.
There's going to ears that listen to
this that aren't even born yet. Think
about how powerful that is.
Um, there may be something that we said
today that really resonates with
somebody in Turkey or Australia or the
UK and they say, you know, that's that
was pretty provocative. Got me thinking.
And you never you never know, you may
meet them at a meeting and they may come
up to you and say, hey, you know, when
you talked to Archie that time, you know
what you said about this that the other.
Dude, that's what makes the clock tick.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, when you can help your
fellow man
and you're not getting [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] paid back
for it,
that's something to celebrate, dude. So,
when you tell me that you just have a
podcast and you do this, I tell you
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I think that's total [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You're doing way more than you
think. This is like NBC, CBS, Fox News
for Bitcoin. I've told my good friend
Max, I told you this. Max needs to get
back in the game.
&gt;&gt; I'm trying to get him. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And Max Max is
he's got important things to bring to
the table
because he's already got most of the
cycles of the people that are in the
same thing. He was on Wall Street. He
knows the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that these people are
capable of.
&gt;&gt; He knows the banking ethos.
I I would tell you to this day, I don't
think Bitcoiners know how nefarious the
people in charge really are. They're
trying to taper the Ponzi scheme by
killing us. Now, that's actually on the
table for them. I mean, when you have
Brian Armstrong coming out and reading
that 248 page report and put a tweet out
saying
the bankers are writing the regulations
that they want. And dude, you know, he's
on their team. That says something.
Like, I don't like him, but I sure like
what he did about that bill that it was
kind of like Archie coming in here and
closing his eyes and hitting a default
switch and Brian Armstrong realizing,
"Fuck, I I need to speak up because this
is wrong."
&gt;&gt; Dude, that kind of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that gets my
respect. Like when you're a salmon, you
swim upstream and you say something
that's unpopular to a group of people,
not only because you believe it, but
because you believe the message needs to
be shared. Bro, that's powerful. That's
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Bitcoin. That's what freedom is.
That's what freedom of speech is.
That's what life uh liberty and the
pursuit of happiness is all about. So,
pardon me
if I look at it a little bit differently
than you do. I think what you do is
really important.
&gt;&gt; No, I I think we do look at it in
exactly the same way, but perhaps I
didn't make it clear what what what I
meant. I I just meant that I'm not
injecting myself into the conversation
as a persona or personality. What I try
to do is uh give voice to the
community's concerns and values. So I'm
not trying to become you know a champion
of the community as such. I I would hope
that this podcast will will turn out to
be something quite significant otherwise
I wouldn't be doing it but so I agree
with you. Um where to from here Dr. Kruse
where do you so one of the things is
this suitcoiner thing is a really
interesting phenomenon because on the
one hand I think it's inevitable and
that it was always going to be part of
the Bitcoin journey. Um number two I
think you know your cold stack should be
without compromise in exactly the way
you've described you know self storage
um self- custody I should say cold
storage no compromise but you know many
people don't have 100% allocation to
Bitcoin and they do and and this rising
developing Bitcoin finance ecosystem for
want of a better phrase is something
that's going to be done Anyway, is it
not the right of every Bitcoiner, if
they choose, to make some kind of
allocation to participate in that
economy in some way that they feel is in
proportion to the risk they're willing
to take, so long as they do not confuse
it with
holding real Bitcoin in self-custody.
&gt;&gt; I think so. But I would take it a step
further. Realize what I said this to you
earlier.
Everybody needs to go by Sunzu's book,
The Art of War. To understand the enemy,
you must become the enemy. You have to
understand how the bankers think.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; What is the goal of the Sue Coiners and
the Treasury companies
to centralize Bitcoin? How do you do
that best through the node network?
We cannot let
that network become compromised ever. So
there's the number go up crowd. And the
other big change that's going to happen
evolutionarywise.
I think everybody who's a Bitcoiner
needs to run a node and the node needs
to be adversarial to the dominant
paradigm. We just lived through this
with the the core vers debate. Uh we
found out that some of the most trusted
core developers gave us really bad
advice. They need to be punished for it.
They need to be held accountable for it.
Not that I'm telling you to string them
up like I want to string up Fouchy and
and you know, Dezac,
but accountable enough that I believe
that Adam back
and and Loop need to go on a stage and
have real conversation in front of real
Bitcoiners. explain. And and do I think
that both of them have enough Bitcoin
that the people that did get their
Bitcoin taken away?
I'd like to see their peers
put pressure on them to make those
people whole again based on what they
said. If you're really a true Bitcoiner
and you truly believe the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that
you sold to people, well, the mother in
Kansas City who lost 08 Bitcoin, I'd
like to see Adam back make her whole.
I'd like to see Jameson Loop do
something nice for that grocery clerk in
Maine who lost.37 Bitcoin
because they trusted their advice.
That to me that's paying it forward. Now
would it also show us that these guys
really believe their own [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
and they just made a mistake? Maybe. But
they have to regain our trust. Remember
what proof of work means.
Trust. If we're in this together, let's
do it right. And I know on the other
side of the equation, are there issues
with knots? Yeah, I know there are
that's not the point here. The point is
is this battle
through the nodes and through core and
through knots got really really nasty.
The nastiness isn't what I'm upset
about. People really lost their money
over this. That's not cool.
And you have a duty if you're a core
developer. You have a duty if you're
just a developer
to tell people the truth and let them
know that this is what I believe right
now. But things can come down the pike.
Why? The bankers on the other side, I
can tell you that they are going to do
everything in their power
to try to centralize nodes and they're
going to try to do it in the United
States because that's their best hope.
Well, I think we've already seen that
starting with the hash the the hash rate
is essentially centralized in the United
States,
&gt;&gt; right? But you also have to realize that
when there's guys out there that point
out some of the things like I pointed
out to you on my deck,
&gt;&gt; that when you hear the story through Fox
News that Israel is going to drop a
bomb, you know, uh, in Iran to go after
nuclear stuff, that happens and then
magically the hash rate drops 11% the
day the bomb is dropped. Maybe you found
out the real reason they dropped the
bomb is because they knew a regime they
don't like was mining Bitcoin with oil
that they had in the ground.
Well, here's the funny thing about that.
Is Israel really our friend? Is the
United States government our friend who
both supported that? Remember, we need
adversaries
in mining. Like I'm going to tell you,
if you're a Bitcoin maxi, whoever was
mining that Bitcoin in Iran, we need
those people. The same people that had
600,000 Bitcoin stolen in Venezuela,
they were using their oil, whether
they're good or bad guys or not. I got
news that was keeping the Guardians that
we know are inside the gate in
Washington DC at bay.
&gt;&gt; So my point is you need to have a little
bit more of a global view. It's not just
really about numbers go up. We need to
think about what Satoshi really built
here.
And the wrench attack that I worry about
is it's not going to be the things that
we normally talk about. I think it's
going to come through try to control
Rails through the network. That's really
what I see the game of the suit coiners
and also the treasury companies. I have
a huge problem with that. And do I think
that we need to break that monopoly up,
you know, before it gets too late. We
already should have learned that lesson
with Standard Oil. JP Morgan and Andrew
Carnegie and I don't think we did. Why?
Because it metastasized back then into
big pharma. Big pharma now is uh the
result of the trust blow up that is now
being used against us. And what I'm
asking Bitcoiners to really understand
is what's going on in the nodes, what's
going on in politics right now in
Bitcoin. This is going to have long
lasting effects to my kids, your kids,
and their kids that are coming. And I
think that's why podcasts like this will
be important
because much like you see people today
posting on Twitter pictures of the
Warberg brothers and JP Morgan meeting
at Jackal Island, we have pictures that
verify that 100 years from now, people
are going to want to know about what
happened in 2025 and 2026,
not filtered through some AI [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
bubble that the government's going to
support.
&gt;&gt; That's why this stuff's important. This
is the kind of stuff that goes in the
Library of Alexandria for Bitcoin and
say, "Well, this is what was going on
and that's why it was important."
And I think when people see it from that
lever,
we've got to tear our idols down in
Bitcoin. I don't like what I saw happen
in 2025.
And I know if I was running a Bitcoin
meeting, I don't think I would invite
many idols. And if I did, I would tell
the idols, you are up, and it's going to
be a real debate.
You're going to have to own what you
said and what you did and why you said
it and what you did. Uh, one of the
things that Bitcoiners used to be really
good at, they would eat their own when
their own needed to be eaten. It's
really funny. the suit corners and the
treasury guys haven't faced that. But I
can tell you those Treasury guys lost
people a lot of money in this last
cycle. That's not hyperbole.
&gt;&gt; Well, there's one particularly notable
example that's down is it 99%.
&gt;&gt; Correct. So, and without really
executing any kind of playbook.
&gt;&gt; Correct. So, I think those are the kind
of things.
&gt;&gt; How do you recover from something like
that? Well, I mean, I think it's the
same way
&gt;&gt; the lady I told you from Maine's got to
recover. How's she going to get back her
point8 bitcoin?
And I think that's what we have to do.
Like if I can tell you as a physician,
if I told you told the patient to do
something
and it led to a bad outcome,
there is a system in place
that holds me to task about that.
That system doesn't exist in Bitcoin.
The only way it exists is if we see to
it. We've got to stop making these guys
famous. Stop paying their plane flights.
Stop spending, you know, $12,000 on
whale tickets to go spend some time in
the back talking the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Adam back.
Especially when he makes bad [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
tweets and gives people bad ideas.
where I'd pay $12,000 to add them back
is put them in front of me and let's
have an Eminem conference and let's talk
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] real talk. That's a different
kind of situation. Why? Because that's
good for the community. That's where
steel sharpens steel
so that these things don't happen again.
So that you don't get high off your own
back.
That's really, really important because
little people who may never be able to
recover
their 0.8 Bitcoin, it's done.
And we need to realize those people,
they could have a baby that could be the
second version of Satoshi Nakamoto.
And we need to think about things like
that. Dr. Jack Kruse, thank you so much
uh for joining us again. We've we've
just hit 2 hours right now. Didn't feel
like it. I I feel like I could go for
another hour, but I'm worried about
Chantel over there and testing her
patience cuz we could talk for another 4
hours actually, you and I. But
um that was fantastic. Um tell people
where they can find you cuz you're on
Twitter.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm on Twitter. I'm on social
media. I'm just about everywhere. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; same handle. A lot of scammers. Dr. Jack Kruse. And if people are interested in uh
your medical writings, you you have a
newsletter of the Substack.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I have I don't have
Substack. I have Patreon, but I have a
book you can find on Amazon. I've got a
forum that's free, jackcruz.com/formums.
And then if you really want to get my
opinion on anything, you put in a Google
box or a Yandex box, use the Russian
box, put your disease and my name in it,
and you'll find out what I've said about
it. And then if you want to do more,
sign up for Patreon. Do the same thing.
Put your disease in the search box and
you'll pop up a blog where I've written
about it because I've written a lot in
25 years about decentralized medicine.