[MUSIC PLAYING]
&gt;&gt; I'm Jonathan Young.
I'm a psychologist and founding curator of the Joseph Campbell
Archive.
My area of study is the mythic imagination,
both in ancient cultures and contemporary times.
I had been studying the connection
between psychological experience and the mythological texts
for some time.
My teacher was Rollo May, who is well known in this area.
And a friend was bringing Joseph Campbell
to Santa Barbara, where I lived, to present workshops
and asked me to help.
And once I got into conversation with Joseph Campbell,
it changed everything.
Joseph Campbell gave me a religious sense of life back.
He showed how the old stories and the modern imagination,
movies, whatever we look at, has patterns.
He taught what you might call a picture language,
how to understand the symbols of everyday life
as representing something beyond themselves,
as alluding to invisible worlds.
Whether we think of that as spiritual or psychological
isn't as important as that we have
some kind of openness to it, that we know
more than we know that we know.
I am attracted to the poets, the writers, and the artists.
And Joseph Campbell thought they would
be able to see the future.
They were the best guides to what has not yet happened,
what others do not yet see.
Is America a great country because of political leaders
like Lincoln?
Sure, but actually, our consciousness, our personality,
is more shaped by Mark Twain and Emily Dickinson
and the great painters and the great dramatists, Eugene
O'Neill.
They will give us the inner life that
will be necessary to become who we might be able to become.
One thing studying myth will do is
make us aware that nothing is entirely new,
that any experience we have been facing
is something that has happened to others
and they have struggled with and they have left clues.
So, mythology helps us get through everyday challenges.
We can see the guidance that has been left to us from those
who came this way before.
And it is interpreted primarily through imagery.
A picture carries thousand words,
and if we can study what the pictures in old stories,
dreams, movies, culture at any time,
what the images are telling us, we can understand things
on deeper levels.
Joseph Campbell had a best selling book
in 1949 called "The Hero with 1,000 Faces."
That is to say stories are similar over time
and in different cultures.
And there is one main story, the mono myth,
that is told again and again.
It's essentially a journey story, a quest.
When you diagram the hero's journey,
it's customarily depicted as a circle.
You start at the top.
A calling takes you away from the ordinary,
and there is a descent.
You cross a threshold into a place you have not been before.
There are companions, allies, mentors, and opponents.
There are ordeals.
There is a good deal of suffering.
At the bottom, the nadir, the dark night of the soul--
it gets really hard.
There is a death and rebirth experience.
The redemption is the rising up the other side of the circle.
And there are several lessons to be learned on the way back.
Finally, a return threshold crossing
when you re-enter the place you left,
but you are changed forever.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When there are difficult times, it
might be a vocational moment.
It could be that trouble is calling us to a change.
If we don't have trouble, there is no reason to learn anything.
We can stay in our comfort zone.
But when things get difficult, we
might have to stretch and find new ways of looking at things.
So what Joseph Campbell referred to as "the calling"
is usually bad news.
Something goes wrong.
In a person's life, it's a divorce or a financial setback
or an illness.
In a collective, a community life,
it's a natural disaster or a political shift
or a financial crisis of some kind.
Something happens that makes us start again.
And we have to go looking for new answers.
So that is possibly what we have in difficult times, a calling
to go, learn something new.
It could be that these moments--
and there is upheaval in so many ways in the world
right now-- it could be that this is a turning
point, a calling, that we are being drawn over a threshold
into a new way of looking at things.
That would be a positive reading of contemporary events.
In the Old Testament, Samuel was a boy that was given up to God.
That is, his mother wanted him to be a priest.
To study the priesthood, you went to the temple
and studied with the high priest.
And so this boy was a servant, but also
a student of the priest.
One night, Samuel heard his name, Samuel.
So he ran in to ask what the old man needed.
And this old man said, I didn't call you.
Go back to bed.
The voice comes again, Samuel.
And the boy goes in.
What is it?
Oh, no, I didn't call you.
Go to bed.
The third time-- these things always seem to happen
in threes--
Samuel.
And he comes in, and I'm imagining
the old priest is still awake from the last time.
But he said, I see that you are hearing your name,
but I am not calling you.
God is calling you.
Go pray.
This is vocation.
This is the calling, the thing that pulls us away
from the familiar and and pulls us into development,
into becoming what we might be.
So there is a leaving.
In the story, he leaves his mother.
In our lives, we leave the crib.
We leave the maternal.
We leave the goddess, the original, divine oneness
that we experienced as infants.
Collectively, well, in history, there
were times when the sacred saturated community
life, everybody believed, and everything was sacred.
And we came to a more instrumental, practical,
technological way of thinking about things.
And that is progress.
But something was lost.
So we go off into new learning, and we find powers,
and we gain access to mysteries, and we survive this.
We come back wiser for our trouble, older and wiser,
and we make a new life for ourselves
and for the community.
And then there is the question of what was lost, what it cost.
And we need to revisit how we have lost balance at times
and need to regain that.
There is the call to adventure.
And there are great historical figures.
Joan of Arc heard voices and went out and changed history.
Florence Nightingale was touched.
Her heart was moved by the suffering on the battlefield,
and she proceeded to invent the discipline of nursing,
and many lives were saved.
Rosa Parks wanted to sit down on a bus
and changed history in her area in her time.
Marie Curie was a scientist.
She was interested in new things,
and her discoveries, which cost her her life,
have given us things of great value.
So we have many examples of those
who heard something that had not yet happened and brought it
into being.
This is how history is changed.
The word "adventure" sounds bold,
and the quest is very demanding.
It requires a great deal of courage.
There is much warrior language that
is used, but very seldom are these journeys about going off
to war.
There may be fighting with our demons
or struggling to free ourselves from old thinking.
But boldness of one kind or another,
whether it is physical strength or, more often, moral courage,
that is, the ability to stand up to the criticism of others,
the doubts of others and our own doubts in order
to step into the new, that is the warrior stance, which
we often use masculine language for.
But it's not at all unique to men.
We both need this, as we both need
the tender and the creative, the poetic, the delicate, what
we often associate with women.
But yes, at times of crisis, we need
to take the stance, the seeker's stance, that I must go,
I must find what needs to be known.
We tend to cling to our innocence, which
is a kind of ignorance, really.
It is sort of lovely, but it's very limited.
So when faced with a big adventure, a new learning
experience, we often have reluctance.
Joseph Campbell did not criticize
the seeker for hesitation.
He thought that was actually an important stage
in the overall success of the quest.
It's preparatory.
Its dress rehearsal.
It's a pilot study if you're doing science.
These are important moments.
In history collectively, we seem to learn the same lessons
again and again.
The call comes again.
Again we blow it.
We set up international peace making bodies
and then don't fund them.
I mean, we have these mistakes that seem to reappear.
And they often have to do with an attachment
to innocence, an attachment to an old way of looking
at something and a mistrust of the possibility
that we could do things an entirely new way that we might
be able to cooperate with others.
Often the shift of thinking, it has
to do with developmental psychology.
Simple thinking is very black and white.
There's us and them.
There is male and female.
There's night and day.
There's good and bad.
There are the good guys and the bad guys.
That kind of thinking is very limited.
It sounds-- mm.
It kind of sounds coherent, but if you look closely,
things in reality are seldom that tidy.
And the advance, the big leap forward,
is to find a way to bridge what seems opposite.
In international affairs, that's the work of peacekeepers.
In our personal lives, it's to get over ways we seem divided--
we seem to have an angel on one shoulder,
a devil on the other--
to get all of our energies cooperating and pulling
together in the same story.
In the Star Wars movie "The Force Awakens,"
there is a junk collector.
She's very good at treasure-finding.
That is, she's taking equipment off of old wrecked space ships
and things.
And something happens where she gets
involved in a bold action that is far beyond her station.
There is a moment in that story where a mentor figure,
Maz Kanata--
I think I'm saying it right--
shows her some things in the basement.
She does not want to know them.
It is frightening when our destiny is obvious,
because it seems larger than we can handle.
It will involve integration.
If a person has identified with the delicate and sensitive,
it will find it will require discovering the bold.
If a person has been bold their whole life,
they might have to go find their poetic side,
because we will need all of our energies
to accomplish the task.
In the initiatory adventure, there are terrifying moments.
You will cross a threshold or through a portal
or a doorway of some kind.
And there will be what is in the story is called a threshold
guardian.
This is a monster of some kind who
is telling you to turn back.
In "The Odyssey," it was a great, towering figure
with one eye that was ready to eat you alive.
So, if we make progress through history,
it will always be a dicey business.
There will be a very risky experience, at least
from time to time.
There will be great wars.
So much of the challenge of human history
has to do with crowding.
The shift from the matriarchal to the patriarchal
probably had to do with increased population.
It's easy to get along if there's
a lot of space between us.
As we start sharing resources and they become more scarce,
water and things like that, then we
begin setting up boundaries and fighting over them.
So, the big challenge coming up is, again, increased crowding.
How will we live well together if we
were packed in in big cities that go on forever?
All good stories have allies, lots of them.
Tom Sawyer has Huckleberry Finn.
The Little Women are a group.
It seems like our lives are solitary adventures,
that a hero's journey refers to one seeker or traveler.
But in fact, these things are done in groups.
The stories of the Knights of the Roundtable
are groups of knights going out to solve problems and be
of service.
So we need to be good team players.
And we will find them at moments of difficulty, that is,
when you're studying for a final.
That's when you make your best friend for life in college
or high school because it's a shared crisis and you have
a shared enemy, the teacher.
So we rise together, and we work well together.
The fantasy of individual identity
is a huge problem to overcome.
The innermost cave is our own fear,
that is, individually the things that go bump in the night
deep inside of each of us.
Collectively, the innermost cave would be the unknown,
and we are constantly facing the unknown,
and it seems like history is speeding up,
so we're facing it more often.
And we need to be wise as we let go of old ideas
and trusting that new possibilities will
emerge that are every bit as good and probably better.
The real challenge is control.
The real challenge is being able to let
go of what we know how to do and our smugness and our attachment
to it and our arrogance, that it is the best idea ever thought
of, and realize there is always going to be something better.
Finally, things fall apart.
It is a death experience.
It is the death of old ideas.
It is the death of how we have been looking at ourselves
individually and collectively.
Jonah ends up in the belly of the great fish.
Little Red Riding is in the belly of the wolf.
That is, the belly of the beast is being devoured by change,
being devoured by our fears.
And it would seem in a rational story that's the end, that's
a tragic end to the story.
You've just died.
But these are magical stories, or at least they
are maps that point us past what we have known how to control.
So we have the potential of rebirth.
We might come back from this end point
and have a whole new story to live out.
And hopefully, we will learn from our previous arrogance
and our previous mistakes so that we
don't head straight into death again,
that perhaps we can set out things
that will work a little better.
To people who have always seen things a certain way,
that one group is better than another group or things are
done a certain way, it feels terrible
when these ideas are shaken.
But they really must go.
We are very slowly and begrudgingly
moving a little more toward equality.
We don't have as many kings and queens on the planet.
We have democracies run by regular people,
and we see ourselves close to equal.
And yet there is an old hierarchy
that dies hard that is not going away very quickly.
And every now and then, there's a step back,
where people will try to reconstitute
very old ideas that weren't very good even in their time.
So, progress is always two steps forward and one step back.
And the fact that there is a reversal does not
mean the whole story is over.
It's just a temporary setback.
It is death-like, though.
The people that have had privilege
and have to lose some of it feel like they're being cheated.
In fact, they've been cheating all along,
so the change is toward fairness.
But it doesn't feel like that to the person that
is losing some advantage.
The metaphor of death might involve real death.
That is, there might be illness or wars or injury of some kind.
But it really represents something dying.
It's a view.
It's a belief system.
It's a certain perspective.
And it's for the best.
It doesn't feel like that, but later, you
see that it makes space.
The dying make space for something to be born,
something better.
There is a moment of empowerment in the mythic journey.
It is something that the individual experiences
and we experience in teams and communities as well.
It is often pictured as receiving a special weapon
or tool, a sword or a new technology.
It really represents a new skill,
that is, a new knowledge, some kind of wisdom,
some kind of understanding that will allow
us to build what is called for.
And so once we have the weapon-- let's call it a sword
for symbolic reasons--
we are able to slice.
That's what a sword does.
It cuts it cuts away the old.
It cuts away the problem.
A cut is a way of describing discernment.
When you cut this away from that,
you make very difficult, subtle decisions and choices.
And we have big choices to make, both personally
and collectively in our times.
So gaining a new technology, a new knowledge,
is what will help us invent the future.
We think of technology as we generally experience it now,
our new devices, our new connections,
our new ways of communicating and moving around.
They are our new swords for our time
with which we can either fight with each other
or build something that works better
than anything we've had before.
On a personal level, the sword is usually additional skills.
So you go to school and learn how to do something.
And that allows you to hold a different job
and make a different contribution
and make some money and build a family,
do the things that need to be done.
So, learning is at the core of the entire hero model.
It's learning, which is to say changing.
And learning is a very frustrating experience.
Some people love school, and some people just
wonder why anybody would go there.
It's so painful.
Of course it's painful.
It's a sustained experience of feeling stupid.
And if you don't feel stupid at school,
you're not doing it right, because you're not
pushing hard enough.
If you read the harder books and the harder books,
finally you've got a book, and you open it up,
and it just says on the page, you are so stupid,
which is to say that's how it feels.
And that means I'm pushing myself, I'm challenging,
and I'm reaching for my capacity.
We want to become as well learned as we can be,
as well developed as we are capable of.
And that is some struggle.
That has certainly got a lot of doubt in it.
We're going to be afraid.
You cannot do this without fear.
You're going to stumble in your own dark places.
You're going to struggle with your own demons,
all in claiming the sword, the sword of effectiveness,
of ability utility would be the word, the ability
to cause something to happen in the world for the better.
In "The Lord of the Rings," relatively early
in the adventure, the mentor Gandalf
holds back to fight a monster who would kill the whole team.
But he is quite a warrior, as well as being a wise, old man.
And he allows all of his friends and colleagues
to get through the dangerous place
there while he fights the fire monster and loses-- well,
I guess mutually kill each other.
They both die.
And we, because we are identifying
with Frodo and the others on the team,
we go on without our leader, without our teacher,
without the wisdom of the previous generation.
We have great doubts whether we know enough
because the challenges are great.
Later in the story, Gandalf returns.
It's a bit of a mystery how he survived and came back.
And one little change, his beard is now white.
His hair is now white.
And he explains, I am no longer Gandalf the Gray.
I am now Gandalf the White, which
is to say everyone changes, even the leaders and teachers.
Everyone in a transformative journey will be changing.
And the change from gray to white
is kind of a purification.
But it is also a gaining of wisdom.
And that is what is at play in these stories.
If we survive, we should be wiser for our trouble.
The defeat is horrible.
It feels like death and is usually
described as a death and rebirth experience.
Following that, you have resurrection,
redemption, return.
These are slow and painful steps.
But you realize you're still alive
and that you have gained something
for your trouble, usually symbolized
as a sword, which is you have new tools, new ways
of thinking, new kinds of effectiveness
to use in the journey ahead.
And you begin to take steps and realize you're strong.
You are stronger for your trouble.
You make new allies.
You begin gaining steam here.
And there are new problems to be solved.
The journey back is every bit as long and taxing as the journey
to the depths.
The whole thing is quite an ordeal.
But we are gaining something.
And there is no other way to change.
Change is an insulting, grueling experience.
But if we want to maximize our potentials
there is no other thing to do.
As we realize we are still alive,
we begin to return to the game.
We return to the place of action, the battlefield,
if you take that metaphor, the laboratory if you're
doing research.
We get back to our work.
But it's not the same person--
same face, same name.
Others may not notice any change.
And the change may be subtle.
It might simply be increased confidence.
It might be increased hope or belief
that the project is worth doing.
But we do better at it.
And people look back and say, couldn't I
have done this without all of that ordeal?
Probably not.
There is no other way to get away
from the past and its limitations
and into the new potentialities.
I was the founding curator of the Marija Gimbutas papers.
She was the leading scholar on the goddess.
And her theory is that some 3,000 years
before the common era, there was a shift, that there
was a matriarchal system socially
and a goddess tradition religiously
that was the dominant way of seeing things.
Things changed.
The male gods came.
Certain more masculine ideas gained dominance.
The feminine did not go away.
It just didn't have the leading edge anymore.
It was still very strong and present
and a little bit underground.
There is a notion that perhaps at some point
it will shift back.
Saying it in Hegelian terms, the feminine would be the thesis,
the masculine would be the antithesis,
and the synthesis would be an integration
of the two, not a return to the feminine,
but the best of both working together
in a kind of partnership culture.
A popular writer Ryan Eisler wrote
"The Chalice and the Blade," a retelling
of Gimbutas' theories.
And is an interesting perspective on history.
We don't have good data.
The evidence for the shifts 3,000 years
before the common era is a little sketchy.
But whether it's good history or just a notion
doesn't in the end matter.
It describes a loss of certain values,
that they were underplayed and need to come back into balance.
And that we know to be true.
What we sometimes call the feminine
is probably all of the internal values, the value
of subjectivity, of emotionality, creativity,
the poetic things, the things of beauty and tenderness.
They get trampled during times of ambition.
And this is not unique to men.
Any ambitious person is going to push themselves,
and they're going to be rough and probably
accomplish some things, win, be achieving some things.
And then at some point, probably after we've arrived somewhere,
we might wonder, what have I missed?
What else is there for me?
And we go back to some of the things we set aside
because they weren't convenient or efficient
or didn't seem like they would help us toward our goals
and begin to bring them back into our definition
of ourselves.
This is a stage of integration.
It's not that we shift values and take a different side.
It's more that we try for the holistic perspective.
During a time of great growth, a nation
might be very instrumental, very productive, a lot of energy
put into factories and technology.
And then after we pollute the air a little too much,
we might say, weren't there some other things
we liked, walking in the woods, enjoying a lake that
wasn't too polluted?
We might go back to trusting nature and beauty
and the poetic side of things collectively and find
some balance, not that we tear the factories down,
but we build a park next to them.
If we survive the ordeals, if we return from the deathlike
moment, we have something for our trouble,
sometimes called the boon or the reward or the elixir--
a good word, the elixir, a healing potion.
And it's symbolized in some stories
as a vial of magical medicine.
But it is the wisdom.
It is the new way of looking at things
that will allow us to solve problems
that seemed intractable.
This is what we get.
And there isn't any other way to get it.
It involves a radical and disheveling learning process.
The elixir is not the private property
of an individual seeker or a group.
If some group stumbles on some great idea,
they may hold the copyright for a little while.
But ultimately, it needs to be shared.
And the point is collective.
The point of the entire initiatory adventure
is that we all gain in the new idea, the new elixir that
can help.
In the large sense collectively, if we
are able to come to the elixir, a new philosophy
of living, what we will gain is something like peace.
We will find an ability to put up with people
who are different from us.
We will find an ability on a personal level
to put up with the parts of ourselves
we've never gotten along with very well.
This is enormously important in psychological work
on a personal level.
So if we find the elixir, it will be shared.
It can be hoarded temporarily, but it will come out.
And the advantage is everyone benefits,
and we are all better off.
Apparently we need to learn the same lessons over and over
again.
We are partly bold, brave, smart adventurers and partly
silly fools that shoot ourselves in the foot.
OK, we need to be humble, and perhaps we are fools so
that we will stay humble.
There is great arrogance if great power is gained,
and we have to recover from that.
So, foolishness allows us to laugh at ourselves.
And that's a sense of fun and play.
We need that.
We can get overly serious and take ourselves too seriously.
We need the generosity of the fool,
the entertainer, the clown who just wants to make people
happy, even though they themselves might be a bit sad.
We need all of that in ourselves.
So, yes, we need strong heroes, and we need wonderful fools.
One of the great advantages of studying the heroic journey
is that it is a quest model.
It's not a one right answer.
It suggests we need different answers
for different stages of the adventure,
that we will learn different things and change.
It as a model involving change.
It says, you don't know enough, not now.
You need to go learn some more things
and that you can see about where you
are in the progression of the story.
And you can realize this is not the end.
I may be in the belly of the whale right now,
but in all those old stories I read, you get out of that.
You live on.
The best part comes later.
This is enormously important for people who are discouraged.
This is not the end of the story.
It is time to pick up ourselves and press on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]