Forum on Public Policy 


Creative Minds: The Search for the Reconciling Principles of Science, the 
Humanities, Arts and Religion 

Richard England, Professor of Music, Adjunct Graduate Professor of Counseling, Freed- 
Hardeman University 

Abstract 

Since before the time of writers such as Plato in his Republic and T imaeus; Martianus Capella in The Marriage of 
Mercury and Philology, Boethius in De institutione musica; Kepler in The Harmony of the Universe ; and many oth- 
ers, there have been attempts to reconcile the various disciplines in the sciences, arts, humanities, and religion within 
specific principles. These efforts have continued among the various representatives in each discipline. C. P. Snow’s 
texts. The Two Cultures and subsequent The Two Cultures: A Second Look, are examples of a distinguished physic- 
ist discussing the conflicting ideologies that can occur, and the potential impact on what constitutes quality educa- 
tion, rational thinking, and societal priorities in general. The purpose of the proposed paper is to suggest that there 
are common aesthetic principles within the context of belief systems that unify disciplines, and have implications for 
cultural and societal development. Observations will also be made about the outcomes that may occur and have im- 
pact on each of the broadly defined disciplines. 

Introduction 

The desire to find unifying principles, both within and among disciplines of study, has been a 
quest, frustration, and fascination among academics for centuries. The almost obsessive desire to 
bring together diverse segments of study into one all encompassing frame of reference has led to 
some of the more phenomenal speculations, regardless of discipline, that have brought to the fo- 
refront the strengths and weaknesses of academic speculation. It becomes obvious that for some 
the need to find the similarities across disciplines is actually the need to find resolution to com- 
plex questionable ideas and ideals that come under such scrutiny as to call into question the va- 
lidity of any argument associated with the basic underlying principles that serve as an impetus 
for the venture. 

The search for unifying principles also addresses a very basic element in human nature-the 
need to understand the why and what of existence. It is that central purpose that drives the desire 
to “make sense of it all.” Such is especially true when circumstances exist that raise serious ques- 
tions about any purpose beyond the immediate intellectual, emotional, and physical push for self- 
satisfaction, that resolution has been found. This is the point where the innate creative nature of 
the human intellect becomes most fascinating. The creative mind allows the development of 
plausible explanations for inexplicable occurrences that defy immediate understanding. Fre- 
quently these are spurred by the traumatic events that raise the questions of life and death, good 
and evil, right and wrong, sane and insane, and the list could continue. These events get to the 


1 



Creative Minds 


2 


core of the beliefs held by an individual, groups, cultures, and entire societies. These are the 
events that may very well stir or inspire the desire for serious, in-depth study and self- 
examination to determine if an explanation for the event can be found. The event itself may at 
the moment of occurrence seem insignificant in a much broader pattern or series of events, but it 
becomes the pivotal point, the catalyst, that stimulates the intellect to find a reason or reasons 
that transcend the event. Ultimately, it is the simple yet complex question of “Why did this hap- 
pen?” that drives the creative mind to greater levels of understanding-or misunderstanding, de- 
pending on the interpreter of the results. 

The focus then becomes on the individual interpreting the events that occur. How events are 
interpreted determines how varied events are unified into one frame of reference. “For Pythago- 
ras and his followers, numbers were the key to the universe, and music was inseparable from 
numbers. . . Claudius Ptolemy (fl. 127-48 C.E.), the leading astronomer of antiquity, was also an 
important writer on music. Mathematical laws and proportions were considered the underpin- 
nings of both musical intervals and the heavenly bodies, and certain planets, their distances from 
each other, and their movements were believed to correspond to particular notes, intervals, and 
scales in music. Plato gave this idea poetic form in his myth of the ‘harmony of the spheres,’ the 
unheard music produced by the revolutions of the planets. This notion was invoked by writers 
throughout the Middle Ages and later, including Shakespeare in The Tempest and Milton in Pa- 
radise Lost , and underlay the work of Johannes Kepler (1571-1630), the founder of modem as- 
tronomy” (Burkholder 2010, 13). 

The philosopher Boethius in 524, while imprisoned and awaiting execution, worked to un- 
derstand the series of events that led to his demise in what became the text The Consolation of 
Philosophy. Concerning various grades of cognition he wrote “...that every man believes that all 
things he knows come to his knowledge solely through their own nature and through a force in- 
herent in them. But the opposite is true. For everything which is known is comprehended not ac- 
cording to its own force but rather according to the faculty of those who comprehend it” (57). 
The attempts then at reconciliation of events in a unified pattern depend on the experiences of the 
individual that include not only life experiences, but the thoughtful and insightful experiences 
that go with learning. 

It is this process of attempts at reconciliation of events that leads to the need to bring all 
things into focus within a unifying principle. That broad unifying principle becomes the frame- 



Forum on Public Policy 


work then for the interpretation of all events-physical, emotional, psychological, and spiritual- 
and the means whereby the individual may find the stable equilibrium to continue to “make 
sense” of their world. These experiences provide the framework for judgments to be made about 
how events are interpreted. The judgments reflect not only the individual’s comprehension of 
events, but also the limitations of comprehension. Leonardo DaVinci expressed the dilemma of 
experiences and judgment stating, “Experience is not at fault; it is only our judgment that is in 
error in promising itself from experience things which are not within her power” (2002, 64). 

The inability to find a sense of equilibrium brings the instability that causes varying levels of 
turmoil to exist whether as an individual, sub-group, society, or culture. This turmoil of thought 
can result in the inward disparity of strongly held ideals and principles, which in turn may influ- 
ence a much broader spectrum of principles. Depending on how this turmoil is resolved, the re- 
sult may be growth to a higher level of thinking, or disintegration of the individual. Again, de- 
pending largely on the sphere of influence, the outcome of the inner turmoil can have enormous- 
ly positive or negative effects. Therefore, there is the need for some sense of resolution that un- 
derstands a unifying or underlying principle or principles that serves as the basis for the interpre- 
tation of all disciplines and spheres of learning. 

When a significant schism in the differing ideologies occurs the conflicts can escalate to 
blind adherence to a respective ideal regardless of the consequence. Ideological conflicts in an 
economic system can lead to economic decline, or extreme levels of wealth verses extreme levels 
of poverty. Conflicts in an education system can lead to adherence to a trust in standardization at 
the expense of intellectual freedom. Extreme conflicts in social and religious systems can even- 
tually lead to war. Various disciplines influence the ideology and methodology used to approach 
both opportunities and problems. Eventually, it is that pivotal point in time when a decision is 
made that the sum of ideological principles is revealed. (England 2008) 

Belief: Reason, Faith, Behavior, and Consequence 

Central to any concept of unification among disciplines, avenues of thought, reason, or any other 
diverse observations is the core belief that guides the interpretation of events. The core belief 
system serves as the basis for any interpretation of new, or old, perceptions of events. The belief 
system, however strong it may be, is in a constant state of flux that may be interpreted as either 


3 



Creative Minds 


4 


growth or degradation into a fixed perspective void of the ability to accept alternative explana- 
tions for events. 

The series of interactions that guide the belief system can be overly simplified into four 
components of reason, faith, behavior, and consequence. These four components constantly inte- 
ract with each other around the core system of belief, influencing the other and either reinforc- 
ing, or not reinforcing, existing patterns of thought. Quite simply, reason leads to a form of faith 
that motivates behavior which produces the consequence that leads to a reexamination of the rea- 
son. This cycle revolves around the belief system. Disciplines are interpreted within this context. 
Should a clash of beliefs occur, it will either challenge or reinforce how disciplines and patterns 
of thought are interpreted. 

When religious beliefs are introduced as a third component, or third culture, there is a further 
dimension that can potentially add additional conflicts to the individual seeking some form of 
reconciliation among various disciplines. This is especially true when religion is considered 
within the broader definition of Webster’s “any object of conscientious regard and pursuit” 
(1527). In a presentation in the Oxford Union debating chamber (2009) about the influence of 
Darwinism and purpose of science, Dr. Richard Dawkins stated his perceived difficulties be- 
tween Darwinian evolutionary biologists and those that would advocate any form of religious 
faith stating, “A true understanding of Darwinian evolution is deeply corrosive to religious 
faith.” 

As an example of a self-explained internal clash of beliefs the “former” atheist Antony Flew 
discussed why he changed his position on the existence of God in the text There Is A God: How 
the World’s Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind (2007). During a debate with Dr. Thomas 
B. Warren (1976), Dr. Flew would emphatically state that “I know there is no God ... A system 
of belief in God contains the same sort of contradiction as unmarried husbands or round 
squares,” and a series of other statements that Dr. Flew used to describe “the fervency of my 
atheist convictions” (68). Years later, as a result of a self-described journey that led to a different 
position that was described corresponding to the position of George Wald he would state “The 
Nobel Prize -winning physiologist George Wald once famously argued that ‘we chose to believe 
the impossible: that life arose spontaneously by chance.’ In later years, he concluded that a 
preexisting mind, which he posits as the matrix of physical reality, composed a physical universe 
that breeds life. . .This, too, is my conclusion. The only satisfactory explanation for the origin of 



Forum on Public Policy 


such ‘end-directed, self-replicating’ life as we see on earth is an infinitely intelligent Mind” 
(131-132). 

To illustrate the conflict that can occur when two conflicting belief systems are considered, 
held by two different individuals, an example is drawn from Dr. Richard Dawkins in the text The 
God Delusion (2006) Dr. Dawkins commented about Dr. Flew’s new direction by reflecting on 
the “over-publicized tergiversation of the philosopher Antony Flew, who announced in his old 
age that he had been converted to belief in some sort of deity (triggering a frenzy of eager repe- 
tition all around the Internet). . . One can’t help wondering whether Flew realizes that he is being 
used” (106). Whether agreeing with Dr. Flew or Dr. Dawkins, ultimately, the behaviors and ac- 
tions of an individual or groups of individuals eventually reveal the deep core beliefs, or the evi- 
dence of profound hypocrisy. 

There is also a difficulty encountered by many who extend their core beliefs to disciplines 
that extend beyond a familiar frame of reference. This stretch of basic beliefs at times provides 
unique insights into the thought processes of those strongly intertwined within a system that al- 
lows little space for other explanations of phenomena. The result can be an interesting sequence 
of thoughts revealed that provide insight into the source of conflicts for beliefs and how a core 
belief can guide the interpretation of multiple areas of thought, regardless of the discipline ex- 
amined. As example of this interesting phenomena is the speculation of J. F. Derry (2009) in 
Bravo Emma! Music in the Life and Work of Charles Darwin. In the article Dr. Derry, of the In- 
stitute of Evolutionary Biology at the University of Edinburgh, suggests a relationship between 
the piano playing of Emma Darwin (who studied for a time with Frederic Chopin) for her hus- 
band Charles and that it perhaps had a profound influence on his theories set forth in Origin of 
Species (1859). Dr. Derry indicates regarding Charles Darwin “A self-confessed lack of musical- 
ity did not prevent music from influencing his work. He clearly considered musicality an inhe- 
rited trait, suggesting that his daughter Annie showed her mother’s aptitude for the piano. He 
even wove this argument into the Origin as he attempted to grapple with the elusive mechanism 
of inheritance” (2009, 37). The concepts of musical ability as an inherited trait are further dis- 
cussed within the context of Dr. Derry’s article, but the despondency of Charles Darwin over the 
death of his daughter Annie at the age of ten is not presented for consideration. Speculation over 
why such an important element would not be presented could not fail to consider that such a fact 


5 



Creative Minds 


6 


did not fit within the context of the purpose of the article-to show a relationship between the 
musical influences on Charles Darwin and his views on evolutionary biology. 

Conflicts within an individual about conflicting ideas that call into question basic core beliefs 
and push the need for alternative explanations that go beyond a comfort level in the ideas can 
lead to a sense of insecurity. Just as secure psychological attachment becomes important in phys- 
ical growth (Bowlby 1969, 1973, 1980, 1988), so can attachment to a belief become important in 
interpreting the world. “The element of trust is key to attachment” (England 2004, 110). Con- 
flicting ideas can trouble the secure base used to bring understanding about various disciplines. 
The absence of this sense of stability increases the probability, though not the inevitability, of 
internal turmoil. As a result, those ideas and principles that do not conform to an individual’s 
pre-existing mode of thinking are frequently considered nonsensical or irrelevant. The result may 
be not only an internal conflict with an individual, but a conflict within and among varied discip- 
lines. 

Charles Darwin recognized the difficulties that ensue when introducing new ideas that cul- 
minate in a different way to view phenomena. In the “Recapitulation and Conclusions” to Origin 
of Species he writes, “Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this vo- 
lume under the form of an abstract, I by no means expect to convince experienced naturalists 
whose minds are stocked with a multitude of facts all viewed, during a long course of years, 
from a point of view directly opposite to mine” (453). His theories imposed a belief system that 
he recognized would come into conflict with other established beliefs. The problem presented 
with conflict, regardless of the discipline is that old question, “So, who do you believe?” For 
many it largely depends on how an individual arrives at the set of conclusions that brings cohe- 
rence, and a sense of internal equilibrium, that allows for the acceptance or rejection of the ideas. 

A pragmatic, rigorous, logical approach required in the sciences is designed to lead to the 
inevitable conclusion, even if there is an acceptable margin of error. As an example, psychologi- 
cal testing relies heavily on statistical analysis. A subjective analysis void of statistical proof is 
usually discarded as nothing more than unsubstantiated opinion. The rigors of this scientific 
process have led to great innovations and improvements in technology, medicine, transportation, 
and the quality of life in general for a vast number of people. The same scientific process also 
leads to discarding those elements that are deemed unsubstantiated or otherwise cannot be prov- 
en by accepted methods of research. The end result may very well be the opinion that objective 



Forum on Public Policy 


truth has been achieved through a process that may, or may not, be that objective, depending on 
the individual, or individuals, perpetuating the idea. The potential conflict of ideas may become 
intensely personal as evidenced by the statement, “I want to conclude with a rather idiosyncratic 
approach to the matter of science and ethics: ethical treatment of scientific truth itself. I want to 
suggest that objective truth sometimes needs the same kind of protection as the libel laws now 
give to individuals” (Dawkins 2003, 36). 

In contrast to the pragmatism associated with many disciplines in science the arts rely 
heavily on the elements derived from human emotion, intuition, and feelings that are translated 
into literature, poetry, visual art, stage productions, or music. While there is an order to the 
process, and perhaps some standardization in the presentation, the underlying motivation is the 
human desire for expression. Therefore, there is frequently a desire to appeal more to the senses 
than to logic. The end result is at times the artist and musician are considered more illogical than 
logical, and more non-conformist than conformist. (England 2008). The problem of reconciling 
the arts and sciences is further compounded for many when religion is considered within the 
same parameters as an element that is neither pragmatic nor intuitive, but rather an ambiguously 
defined sense of something greater. 

First consider that there is a pragmatic approach to the basis of scientific inquiry that fo- 
cuses primarily on the absolute. Through the rigors of study in scientific disciplines there is the 
attempt to determine what is “true” versus what is “untrue” based on the assumptions of fact. By 
assumptions of fact, there is the frequent ambiguous determination of what indeed is fact, and 
thereby true, from a logical, provable perspective. The problem is that what is determined to be 
“fact” may actually be more of an assumption than fact. For example, school age children have 
been taught for decades that the farthest planet in the solar system was Pluto. Students were pre- 
sented this information as fact from the time of elementary school throughout their education. 
Even the famed astronomer, Carl Sagan, in a debate about the origin and nature of the universe 
spoke of the fact of “nine planets” when presenting the absolutes known by science (Sagan 
1966). Yet, not long ago a group of scientists came to the conclusion that Pluto was technically 
not a planet (Inman 2006). The fact of Pluto as a planet then becomes something questionable as 
opposed to the absolute presented in previous textbooks, and by eminent astronomers. 

Centuries ago there was the assumption that the earth was flat and that anyone who disa- 
greed with that “fact” was not only unlearned, but a heretic. The fact was, however, that the earth 

7 



Creative Minds 


8 


was not flat. It was then presented that the earth was round as opposed to flat, and therefore there 
was the new “fact” presented as the new “truth.” The problem is that the earth is not precisely 
rounded, but rather slightly flattened at the poles due to the turning of the earth on its axis. Fur- 
ther, recent studies by scientists indicate that there are changes in the earth’s shape due to climate 
changes (Gutro 2005). Therefore, the “fact” that the earth is round is actually not exactly true. 
Though the earth is more round than flat, neither represents an absolute truth. 

The point at which anyone makes a decision reveals the sum of education, training, philos- 
ophy, idealism, and practical experience that led to the decision. An individual who is hungry 
desires something to eat. Because of personal taste, religion, health or other reasons this same 
individual refuses to eat certain foods. Due to the lack of food available the decision must be 
made either to eat whatever is available, regardless of belief, or starve. Individuals in Port Au 
Prince, Haiti eat mud mixed with lard and salt to keep from starving. More affluent individuals 
may argue that eating mud is bad for one’s health. For those who are starving, eating mud be- 
comes a viable, though not necessarily desirable, alternative to starvation. The decision to eat 
mud therefore becomes more of a decision of whether to live or die versus adhere to a particular 
standard for good health. The background, education, and experiences all work together to lead 
to the decision that eating mud is better than the alternative (England 2008). 

The conclusion is that the belief system utilized forms the basis for the interpretation of 
any discipline. It is the interaction among the four elements of reason, faith, behavior, and con- 
sequence and each of these elements with the core beliefs that guide the interpretation of events. 
The “two cultures” described by C. P. Snow represent more the conflict between ideologies than 
disciplines (England 2008). With the added dimension of religious thought, regardless of the de- 
finition of religion, there are additional dimensions of spiritual and aesthetic qualities that be- 
come a part of the creative process. Therefore, the reconciling principles among science, the hu- 
manities, arts and religion depend on the creativity of the core beliefs used by the individual 
seeking the commonality in diversity, or the diversity in commonality, to provide justification for 
a personal conclusion. 

Diversity and Reconciliation 

Reconciling diverse disciplines presents the greatest challenge when ideas are either considered 
or rejected because of the enormous conflict generated within the core belief system. Alternative 



Forum on Public Policy 


explanations or possibilities, especially those that challenge the personal and collective belief 
system of a particular society, culture, sub-group or individual are frequently simply dismissed 
as being superstitions or the ramblings of the unenlightened. To illustrate this basic concept, De- 
loria and Wildcat (2001) describe the difficulties faced by Native Americans in a Western cen- 
tered education system stating “In most introductory courses their culture and traditions are de- 
rided as mere remnants of a superstitious, stone-age mentality that could not understand or dis- 
tinguish between the simplest of propositions that come before them. Nothing could be further 
from the truth. Western science traditionally represents the consensus of the established scientists 
who almost always reject new ideas out of hand and spend their time gathering evidence to bol- 
ster outmoded paradigms... most all of Western science is reductionist in nature and seeks to 
force natural experience and knowledge into predetermined categories that ultimately fail to de- 
scribe or explain anything” (3-4). 

The dilemma resolving conflicts between science and religion was discussed at Princeton 
Theological Seminary in 1939 by Dr. Albert Einstein (1982) in describing his views of know- 
ledge and belief. He commented that “It is true the convictions can best be supported with expe- 
rience and clear thinking.” But further commented that “The scientific method can teach us noth- 
ing else beyond how facts are related to, and conditioned by, each other... Objective knowledge 
provides us with powerful instruments for the achievements of certain ends, but the ultimate goal 
itself and the longing to reach it must come from another source.... The knowledge of truth as 
such is wonderful, but it is so little capable of acting as a guide that it cannot prove even the jus- 
tification and the value of the aspiration toward that very knowledge of truth. Here we face, 
therefore the limits of the purely rational conception of our existence” (41-42). 

The perceptions about the purpose for existence become central to reconciling how the var- 
ious disciplines in the arts, sciences, humanities, and religion fit together in form, if such is the 
conclusion. J. W. N. Sullivan in his text Beethoven: His Spiritual Development (1927) explored 
the problems faced by the great composer in attempting to understand why as a musician he was 
losing what he considered to be his most important of senses-his hearing. He cites a letter by 
Beethoven written in 1801. “Your Beethoven is most unhappy, and at strife with nature and 
Creator. I have often cursed the latter for exposing his creatures to the merest accident, so that 
often the most beautiful buds are broken or destroyed thereby. Only think that my noblest facul- 
ty, my hearing, has greatly deteriorated” (68). The despondency and difficulty in making sense 

9 



Creative Minds 


10 


of his deafness went to the extent that Beethoven would write in the famous Heiligenstadt Tes- 
tament “but little more and I would have put an end to my life-only art it was that withheld me” 
(74). Sullivan observes that “Beethoven’s greatest music has meaning in the sense that it is not a 
mere pattern of sounds, but possesses a spiritual content; nevertheless, it does not in any sense 
express a philosophy. It expresses certain primary experiences as organized in the mind of this 
particular artist” (172). 

Johannes Kepler explored the possibilities of unifying mathematics, physics, astronomy, 
music, and religion in Harmonies of the World: Book V (1618). In the section entitled “In The 
Ratios Of The Planetary Movements Which Are Apparent As It Were To Spectators At The Sun, 
Have Been Expressed The Pitches Of The System, Or Notes Of The Musical Scale, And The 
Modes Of Song (Genera Cantus), The Major And The Minor” Kepler summarizes a discussion 
of celestial movements and corresponding tones stating, “Accordingly you won’t wonder any 
more that a very excellent order of sounds or pitches in a musical system or scale has been set up 
by men, since you see that they are doing nothing else in this business except to play the apes of 
God the Creator and to act out, as it were, a certain drama of the ordination of the celestial 
movements” (34). In the introduction to the 2002 edition of Kepler’s work, physicist Dr. Ste- 
phen Hawking discusses the difficulties faced by science when alternative explanations have 
been provided throughout history, with a special focus on Nicolaus Copernicus and his influence 
on Kepler. Hawking observed that “Modern scientists have out-Copernicused Copernicus by 
seeking an account of the universe in which Man (in the old pre-politically correct sense) played 
no role. Although this approach has succeeded in finding objective impersonal laws that govern 
the universe, it has not (so far at least) explained why the universe is the way it is rather than be- 
ing one of the many other possible universes that would also be consistent with the laws... we 
wouldn’t be asking questions about the nature of the universe if the universe hadn’t contained 
stars, planets and stable chemical compounds, among other prerequisites of (intelligent?) life as 
we know it” (x). 

The question that is logically posed after the above brief overview of ideas, that is very 
legitimately raised, is “What is the unifying principle?” The obvious answer is that the unifying 
principle is the core belief, or beliefs, held by an individual. It is the individual, and collection of 
individuals, each having their unique set of personal beliefs, that form the sub-groups, societies, 
and cultures that reflect the sum of how all elements of the human experience are perceived. The 



Forum on Public Policy 


early orientation of the individual toward a system of beliefs may either be reinforced as time 
progresses, modified, or completely rejected depending on the interpretation of life’s events. 

Conclusion 

A person who grows up in a household listening to the art songs of Franz Schubert, the keyboard 
inventions of Johann Sebastian Bach, the nocturnes of Chopin, and symphonies of Beethoven 
may believe that everyone else listens to the same type of music. The same person is surrounded 
by books written by Hemingway, Chaucer, Twain, Bronte, and a host of other authors, as well as 
books about history, art, science, politics, and religion. Elementary chemistry experiments are 
encouraged as is the exploration of nature. Such an environment becomes the frame of reference 
for interpreting life events. Another individual deprived of a similar set of circumstances, as well 
as many basic needs such as food, shelter, and clothing, interprets life experiences from a very 
different perspective. Should these two individuals meet and trade environments, the ability to 
reconcile the unusual existence of the other would be dependent on the assimilation of the new 
learning experiences into the existing frame of reference in order to “make sense” of these ex- 
tremes. The same occurs when searching for the reconciling principles of the arts, humanities, 
science, and religion. The frame of reference will either encourage or discourage the assimilation 
of the new concepts and ultimately will find some form of acceptance or rejection. The sum of 
these interactions and experiences then result in what some may see as growth, and others as di- 
gression. 

Conversely to the desire for understanding broader possibilities can be the unwillingness to 
consider, or even listen, to a different approach when determining how various disciplines can be 
reconciled within a reasonable framework. As recently stated with a presumptuous interruption 
by a moderator of a forum during a collegiate discussion of reconciling principles when faced 
with unsettling elements of the presentation, “You’ve gone from the highway to the railway — 
and we are not going down that path.” So it is at times when passion and zeal for preconceived 
ideas fail to consider the alternative explanation that the “path less taken” becomes the path 
never taken. 

Perhaps the best question to close this overview was raised by an adopted four year old 
child posed to the adoptive father while driving down the road, watching the summer landscape 
go by through the window. The question raised by the four year old was, “Is heaven real because 

11 



Creative Minds 


12 


we imagine it, or do we imagine it because it is real?” The answer would not only depend on 
who you ask, but more importantly, how you define heaven. 


References 

Boethius. 1957. The Consolation of Philosophy. (Edited and abridged by James J. Buchanan). 
New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing. 

Bowlby, John. 1969. Attachment and Loss: Volume 1: Attachment. New York: Basic Books. 

Bowlby, John. 1973. Attachment and Loss: Volume 2: Separation. New York: Basic Books. 

Bowlby, John. 1980. Attachment and Loss: Volume 3: Loss, Sadness and Depression. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Bowlby, John. 1988. A Secure Base: Parent-Child Attachment and Health Human Development. 
New York: Basic Books. 

Burkholder, J. Peter, Grout, Donald., Palisca, Claude. 2010. A History of Western Music: Eighth 
Edition. New York: W.W. Norton. 

Darwin, Charles. 1972. The Origin of Species. (Edited by J. W. Burrow). Baltimore: Penguin 
Books. 

DaVinci, Leonardo. 2002 The Notebooks of Leonardo DaVinci: Arranged, Translated, and with 
an Introduction by Edward MacCurdy. Old Saybrook: Konecky and Konecky. 

Dawkins, Richard. 1995. . River Out of Eden: A Darwinian View of Life. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Dawkins, Richard. 2003. A Devil ’s Chaplain: Reflections on Hope, Lies, Science, and Love. New 
York: Houghton Mifflin (First Mariner Books edition 2004). 

Dawkins, Richard. 2006. The God Delusion. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 

Dawkins, Richard. 2009. Speech given in the Oxford Union debating chamber as part of the Ox- 
ford Round Table, July 27, 2009. 

Deloria, Vine, and Wildcat, Daniel. 2001. Power and Place: Indian Education in America. Gol- 
den, Colorado: American Indian Graduate Center and Fulcrum Resources. 

Derry, J. 2009. “Bravo Emma! Music in the Life and Work of Charles Darwin.” Endeavour , Vo- 
lume 33, Number 1. 

Einstein Albert. 1982. Ideas and Opinions. New York: Crown Publishers. 

England, Richard and Barbara. England 2008. “Kurt Huber and Carl Orff: Two Conflicting Ide- 
ologies” Forum on Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 4. 

England, Richard. 2004. “Rethinking the Assessment of Maladaptive Behavior” in Administer- 
ing Special Education: In Pursuit of Dignity and Autonomy. London: Elsevier. 

Flew, Antony. 2007. There Is A God: How the World’s Most Notorious Atheist Changed His 
Mind. New York: Harper Collins. 

Gutro, Rob., Bagiro, Margaret. 2005. “Most Changes in Earth’s Shape Due to Climate Changes” 
January, www.nasa.gov/vision/earth/lookingatearth/earthshape . 

Inman, Mason. “Pluto Not A Planet, Astronomers Rule” for National Geographic News. August 
24,2006. 

Kepler, Johannes. 2002. Harmonies of the World: Book Five (Edited, with commentary by Ste- 
phen Hawking). Philadelphia: Running Press. 

Patten, Donald., editor 1975. Symposium on Creation V. Michigan: Baker House Books. 


Forum on Public Policy 


Robertson, David. 2007. The Dawkins Letters: Challenging Atheist Myths. Great Britain: Chris- 
tian Focus Publications. 

Snow, C.P. 1964. The Two Cultures: And A Second Look: An Expanded Version of the Two Cul- 
tures and the Scientific Revolution. London: Cambridge University Press. 

Sullivan, J. W. N. 1960. Beethoven: His Spiritual Development. New York: Random House. 

Warren, Thomas, and Flew, Antony. 1977. The Warren-Flew Debate on the Existence of God. 
Tennessee: National Christian Press. 

Webster, Noah. 1983. Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary, Deluxe Second Edition: 
Based on the Broad Foundations Laid Down By Noah Webster. New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 

Published by the Forum on Public Policy 

Copyright © The Forum on Public Policy. All Rights Reserved. 2009. 


13 



