Don't mind me, I'm just a smooth-brained
at least apparently to the
eminent, the incredibly intelligent, the
all-knowing, all-powerful Dr. Jack
Kruse. Now, you might ask, "Where did
that come from?" Well, let's dig into
this a little bit. So, I put out a
little bit of a poll the other day. It
was asking, you know, a simple question,
"What do you feel is the most important
determinant of health?" And I listed
about five options in no particular
order. They were nutrition, sleep,
activity, exercise, stress, and
circadian biology, or so-called light.
Now, many people had different opinions
on this. Most people agreed that these
all seem to make have an impact on your
health. And I And I think I think they
all do. I think they're all very
important. You can argue about the
relative importance, but they're all
greatly important in my view. But, not
according to perhaps Dr. Jack Kruse, who
basically said this was something put
out by a or a tweet,
specifically. To which I, you know,
politely
uh responded said, you know, "Do you
think these other things are irrelevant
and it's all about light?" And I also
inquired about his thoughts on obesity
and light. Does light negate the effects
of obesity? He then went on to respond
saying, "You are a smooth-brained
orthopod." You know, like an insult
because I was an orthopedic surgeon,
which by the way is one of the most
challenging, difficult, and highly
competitive specialties you can get
into, even more so than neurosurgery.
Orthopedics, you have to be incredibly,
incredibly successful, smart, you know,
hard-working, so on and so forth, to get
in orthopedics if you're in medical
school. Any medical student can tell you
that. So, aside from that, um so, he
goes on, you know, "You're a
smooth-brained, idiotic orthopedic
surgeon." Essentially, and then he lists
some sort of kind of garbled,
gobbledygook kind of uh answer you might
expect from perhaps a uh I don't know, a
politician on on LSD or something like
that. You know, it's sort of this
highly philosophical, basically
nonsense. Okay, so then again I I
inquired. I said, "Why are you, you
know, what appears to be about 50-60 lb
overweight? You've got a sort of big
amount of belly fat. Do you feel that
light negates any negative consequences
of that?" And, you know, to be honest,
pretty much every single bit of
scientific data would support that
having excess potential, particularly
central adiposity, is an absolute
disaster for your health. There's I I
don't see you can find any literature
that would support where that is a good
thing. Now, his response to that, I
mean, not directly to me, but
to other people that have asked about
that over the years because, you know,
he doesn't appear to be in shape at all.
He He appears to be, you know, a kind of
an older guy. He's probably To be
honest, he's probably about my age. I'm
almost 60. I think we're about similar
age, probably within a few years.
And, you know, obviously
I I feel that I'm in pretty decent
shape, you know, physically at least,
and and hopefully mentally.
Uh but, you know, he appears not to be
so. But, he he explains that away by
saying that, you know, you can have a
lot of excess fat as long as it's, you
know,
uh leptin sensitive and light will have
an impact on this. And this is all
purely conjecture, speculative on his
part, probably just deflecting, or
rationalizing why he probably can't stop
eating junk food, or whatever he does
that keeps him basically obese. Anyway,
that is kind of the the background here.
And I will tell you that
even if he is right, you know, even if
he says, "Well, I can be I can be obese
and I can just have the light and it's
going to, you know, protect me and give
me greater longevity." And I will say
that, you know, certainly we do know
that light, you know, particularly
latitude is an independent risk factor
for longevity. Those people that live at
the, you know, more equatorial latitudes
tend to, when all other things are
equalized, tend to live a little bit
longer. And there may be some
confounders within that like, you know,
warmer weather, more activity, on and on
and on, you can imagine. But, even if
he's correct about some of these things,
and if he wants to change the mindset of
of many people, which I hope to do. I
hope that people will listen to me, uh
and and hopefully improve their health
by by some of the things I've been
helping with, and and many of you have,
and certainly I appreciate the comments,
you know, acknowledging that. But, if
you put yourself out there as a health
specialist, a longevity specialist, a
whatever specialist where people are
going to take health advice from you,
then you should at least appear to be
healthy. Maybe that seems a little bit
biased, but if you want to be taken
seriously, you know, and not dismissed,
then why not? You know, why not just
present yourself as someone who's
physically fit if you can? And if you
can't get there, then you have to ask
why. What is wrong that is preventing me
from achieving
at least the appearance of health. And I
know people will say, "Well, it's not
all about looks, it's what's on the
inside." But, I got to tell you, a lot
of it's about looks, right? People that
can function at high level, high
capacity, they're in shape, they're
physically fit, are by and large
healthier than those people that aren't.
That's just the way it is. Obviously, I
was basically minding my own business,
and all of a sudden I get this "You're a
smooth-brained retard" out of nowhere.
And I've never interacted with this guy
before. I've been, you know, kind of
tangentially aware of some of his work
over the years. And I do appreciate uh
and I think he has helped to
uh share some of the knowledge of of the
benefits of circadian biology and and
among others. He's not the only guy out
there talking about this stuff. And
certainly over the last many, many
years, I've also acknowledged that
that's an important thing. But, I think
these other things are, too. So, there
you go. Let me know what you guys think
in the comments. You know, what's the
most important thing to you? Is it
light? Is it nutrition? Is it exercise?
Is it sleep? You know, on and on. All
right, let's see what you guys got to
think. And what do you think about this?
Am I off base by responding as I did? Um
I'd love to hear what you guys think.
Take care now.