I'm Dr. John Kruse and today I'm going to
be talking about how do we boost
neurotransmitters.
So the take-home message is that there's
a couple different approaches to making
more neurotransmitter. You could take
more, make more of it, or you could
ensure that what you already have lasts
for a longer period of time. And I'll
get into some of the details of why some
of these approaches are simpler or
easier or more likely to succeed in the
brain. All of this is embedded in the
context of why would you want to make
more neurotransmitters.
So there's a sort of ongoing for 50 plus
years idea that many of our mental
health conditions are due to deficits or
deficiencies in a neurotransmitter and
simply creating more will remedy that
situation. And for certain neurologic
conditions, so example for Parkinsonism,
we know that a destruction and damage to
dopamine neurons in the substantial
is responsible directly for many
of the movement disorders and other
problems associated with that condition.
And boosting dopamine. Although it
doesn't change the underlying process,
it kills the substantionigra cells can
help
symptomatically and slow progression of
the condition. But more often when we're
boosting neurotransmitters, we're
probably not just having an immediate
effect on elevating levels, but more
often that boosting the
neurotransmitters is serving as a signal
to the brain. Says, "Hey, brain, make
some new proteins. Change how nerve
cells talk to each other. change how
strongly the connections are wired to
each other. And these are slower
indirect results of messing boosting
with neurotransmitter levels. If you
needed more dopamine, you'd think that
you could just eat foods that were rich
in dopamine and you'd get more dopamine
in your brain in the important areas.
The difficulty with this is that most
neurotransmitters, whether they're
proteins or neuropeptides such as
neuropeptide Y or oxytocin, digested
into their constituent amino acids.
Even smaller molecules like dopamine,
serotonin are broken down in the
digestive system to smaller pieces. you
create chemical soup that can help build
back those neurotransmitters, but they
can be made into hundreds of other
substances as well. So just eating more
of a certain neurotransmitter
is very unlikely to boost
neurotransmitter levels. Second piece
related to this is that maybe then I
could just take precursor molecule. So
the example would be tryptophan is an
amino acid. It's important for making
serotonin. There's actually just two
chemical modifications. Tryptophan goes
into five hydroxyryptophan and then five
hydroxy tryptophan is converted into
five hydroxypamine.
That's another name for serotonin. So
maybe I could just eat more turkey, get
more tryptophan, and that would produce
more serotonin. And in some cases that
works, but in other cases it doesn't.
One big reason again is the digestion or
we more specifically call it catabolism.
So molecules are broken down into
smaller molecules. There's something in
particular called the first pass effect.
The first pass effect is not a football
term. It's not an online dating
phenomena. Substances that are absorbed
by your digestive system go into the
portal vein which a big vein that goes
directly to the liver. And in the liver
there are high concentrations of
chemicals, enzymes that break down other
molecules, neutralize other molecules.
So because of this first pass effect, if
you inject a certain chemical into your
blood, so for example, if you inject
dopamine into your body, right into your
bloodstream, more of it circulating and
available. Then if you swallow dopamine,
again, it's not just that it's broken
down in the digestive system and
digested. It's that it's going to the
liver where there are enzymes that break
it down readily. Skin patches are
another way to get blood or get a drug
into the blood system. Few other
factors, say you get your precursor
molecule into your bloodstream, it's
circulating then, and we'll sort of
ignore the fact that there are nerves in
the body as well. We're focusing on the
brain here. how to get into the brain.
There's something called the bloodb
brain barrier. And the bloodb brain
barrier prevents the simple passage of
most larger molecules, special
transporters to get certain amino acids
and other chemicals into the brain that
are essential for the brain. But again,
just providing more of a precursor in
the general body circulation does not
guarantee that you'll have a higher
concentration of that in the brain. And
then even after you pass the bloodb
brain barrier and get to the cells that
are making whatever neurotransmitter,
there's one last big cat and that is
related to what's called the rate
limiting step. And I'm going to jump
back and use an analogy. So say you have
a Tesla factory and you're trying to
turn out more and more cars, but there's
a slowdown on the assembly line. And the
biggest barrier to making new cars is
that it takes a long time to screw on
one little widget on your left door
frame. And you think, ah, you know, the
chassis, the battery pack on the bottom,
both of those are essential precursors
for making cars. I'll just ship more
battery packs into the factory or I'll
just ship more chassis into the factory.
If that isn't related to the rate
limiting step, all you'll do is have a
back pile or stockpile of more chassis
or more battery packs. Yes, they are
absolutely essential for making the car.
Yes, they are important precursors, but
they're not tied to the rate limiting
steps. You might hire more widget screw
or honors or you might design a system
that makes a more simpler widget that
can be fixed more readily. That's the
only way if that is the rate limiting
step that you're going to improve
things. So very often when we give
people precursors, the supply of
tryptophan is not the rate limiting step
in that person's brain for making more
serotonin. Then pushing in more
tryptophan does not make the assembly
line move faster. Just piles up the
basic ingredients. There are certain
circumstances this can work and be
effective, but it's why in general food
isn't usually powerful medicine. Despite
lots of the claims of superfoods, many
of these ingredients get broken down in
your body and reduced to simpler
molecules step aside or go around for
making more of a neurotransmitter is you
could take a substance that actually
imitates a neurotransmitter. And one of
the best examples is nicotine. So
nicotine is not a normal chemical that's
found in the body. It's a chemical made
in plants, particularly tobacco related
plants. The nicotine binds to the
acetylcholine receptors and acts like
acetylcholine at that subset of
receptors. So that's a situation where
you don't need to boost acetylcholine
levels, but you can boost the effects of
acetylcholine by taking an analog
something that binds to that receptor
such as nicotine. Two other ways, and
these are the ways most commonly used by
our drugs to boost neurotransmitter
levels in neurotransmission. We have one
neuron here, the end of its axons.
There's little vesicles, little
containers, membrane bound containers
containing the neurotransmitters. When
the signal gets from the cell to release
their neurotransmitters, the vesicles
migrate to the synaptic clft. They fuse
with the synaptic cleft membrane. They
release their contents. Those
neurotransmitter molecules then diffuse
in the small difference distance between
the sending and receiving
neurotransmitter.
So it's a very small space. Then they
bind to receptors on the receiving end
and then they have an action there on
the receiving cell. If that was all that
would happen, then you'd have an ongoing
signal that would just be going on and
on and on and on which wouldn't provide
information. So the body needs ways to
turn off the signal. So one is that
neurotransmitters once they bind to the
receiving receptors
are actually diffusing on and off of
that. And some of it depends on how
tightly they're bond, their
concentration, what else is going on in
the syninnapse. But they're diffusing on
and off. And some of them will diffuse
back to their sending receptor. And
there are re-uptake molecules here,
transporters that pull them back into
the first cell. And that's one way to
end the signal. Another way is that
there are degradative enzymes mostly
within the cells but some in the
synaptic space as well that break down
the neurotransmitter. So if it's broken
down then it can't keep binding to the
receiving receptor. So a serotonin
reuptake inhibitor it's not creating
more serotonin. It's not boosting level
of serotonin. What it's doing is
allowing that same amount of serotonin
to last longer and therefore give a more
strong signal to the receiving cell.
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors like
Prozac, Paxels, Olaf, Plexopro. We have
older drugs that aren't called reuptake
inhibitors like the tricyclic and
highdepressants which were essentially
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors. And the other way I
mentioned is you can stop the breakdown.
You can stop the catabolism. So we have
drugs that are called monoamine oxidase
inhibitors. Monoamines include simple
amine molecules like the
neurotransmitters dopamine, serotonin
and norepinephrine.
Those are usually again broken down by
monoamine oxidase. If you give a
monoamine oxidase inhibitor, it prevents
that breakdown and allows the monoamine
to last longer.
We have drugs that are acetylcholine
eststerase inhibitors that prevent the
breakdown of acetylcholine. So allow
acetylcholine to last longer. Another
important breakdown molecule
particularly for
dopamine and norepinephrine is coomt or
catakolamine methyl transferase and
there are several approved parkinsonian
drugs that are coomt inhibitors. Other
ways of boosting neurotransmitters in
the brain depends on that there's a
differential distribution for some
molecules or some drugs between the
brain which is highly fat soluble and
the body which is more water soluble and
I have a recent video on this coeny
which is a new schizophrenia drug uses
two different drugs xanomalene which is
a muscerine
which is part of the acetyloline system
agonist. So, it activates acetylcholine.
If it did that strongly in the body and
in the brain, you'd have lots of
digestive system problems and side
effects. So, this is a drug that
combines xenomalene, which is a drug
that gets very well penetrating into the
brain versus tropeium chloride. And
tropeium chloride actually works exactly
the opposite. It's a muscerinic blocking
drug. So you think if I'm taking the two
together I'd get nothing going on but
again because of their physical
properties tropeium is mostly acting in
the body and the xanomelene is acting
mostly in the brain. So it's this
differential effect based on their
physical properties.
So in the body the hope is if there's
any xanomelene that's overactivating the
acetylcholine system the tropeium can
block that because it's blocker but the
tropeium is not getting into the brain
very well so it's not blocking that
muscerinic agonist that acetylcholine
receptor agonism activation in the
brain. even more complicated story on
that. It's using drugs that are blocking
degradation of the drug in your
periphery in your general body. And
there's a very wellestablished treatment
for
Parkinson's disease using carbodopa and
leodopa
to essentially boost brain levels of
dopamine. Dopamine itself does not get
across the bloodb brain barrier very
well. So again, just feeding someone
dopamine or even injecting dopamine
isn't going to allow
dopamine to enter the brain very well.
So leodopa though crosses the bloodb
brain very easily and enters the brain
and then is converted into dopamine.
However, leodopa just floating around in
your body is also broken down by
different enzymes pretty quickly and
then degrades and then you don't get
make any dopamine out of it. So there is
a separate drug called carbodopa.
It blocks an enzyme called alamino
decaroxilase
which is found in the body. So elamino
decaroxilase is a drug that deactivates
or breaks down L-dopa in the rest of the
body. But if you give carbodopa, the
L-dopa that's floating around in the
body isn't being broken down. It's still
present. It's allowed to be present
enough concentration that it again
crosses the bloodb brain barrier, goes
into the brain and can be converted into
dopamine for many of our mental health
conditions. It's not clear even though
we've been focusing for years on drugs
that are boosting things why that would
help or if it does help or again more
often it's probably not the direct
elevating levels of the signal cuz if it
worked that quickly symptoms would
improve quickly. Actually, many ADHD
medications do have simple direct
effect. So, boosting dopamine or
norepinephrine
does seem to have some direct immediate
effect at alleviating ADHD symptoms.
many of our slower acting
anti-depressants, slower acting
anti-anxiety agents. It's more an
indirect effect of messing with
neurotransmitter levels that seems to
have any benefits.