The world desperately needs Christian
influencers to engage courageously in
bold conversations.
Truthful conversations,
gospel conversations,
inviting conversations,
conversations to find and share God's
wisdom. Wisdom that reveals how to live,
how to pray, how to learn. The world
needs bold, Christc centered influencers
who will speak.
&gt;&gt; I'd like to welcome you to tonight's
wisdom conversation, America at 250,
Christianity and the American
experience. Uh let us open in prayer.
Our creator, we thank you for creating
us in your image, giving value to each
human being regardless of color or class
or sex. Our redeemer, we thank you for
the forgiveness you offer to us through
Jesus and his death on the cross and for
the new life you supply through his
resurrection.
Supreme judge of the world, we cry out
to you for justice and for the day when
you will wipe away our tears and make
all things right. Through it all, we
rely on your divine providence to work
your will in the world and in our own
hearts. And tonight we ask that you
would open our hearts to hear how
Christians can be salt and light in our
culture as we seek the welfare of our
nation. In Jesus holy and exalted name
we pray. Amen.
My name is John West. Uh I recently had
the good fortune of being appointed
Cornerstone Distinguished Scholar of
American Government and Christian Civic
Engagement. Um not sure who came up with
that exalted title. I don't feel that
I'm worthy of it, but I'm thankful for
it. Uh I'm also vice president of a
think tank uh called Discovery Institute
which is pleased to be a co-sponsor of
tonight's event and looks forward to
partnering with Cornerstone to help
advance its mission in the years ahead.
The great English writer GK Chesterton
once wrote, "America is the only nation
in the world that is founded on a creed.
That creed is set forth with dogmatic
and theological lucidity in the
Declaration of Independence.
Whether your family has been in America
for 200 years or 20, the great ideas
expressed by the declaration that all
men are created equal, that they are
endowed by their creator, not
government, with certain unalenable
rights, and that governments derive
their just powers from the consent of
the governed. These ideas have given
hope to all Americans indeed to many
people around the world. Yet, as Abraham
Lincoln pointed out, founding a nation
is one thing. Perpetuating it is
another. That's why I'm so excited by
what's happening here at Cornerstone.
Under the leadership of Cornerstone's
president, Dr. Marino Rano, Cornerstone
is making a commitment to equip a new
generation of Christians to be active
citizens in America's public square. As
part of that commitment, the
universities university is launching a
new core program in Christian worldview
that includes a threecore sequence for
every student to train them in what it
means to be a Christian and a citizen in
America. Cornerstone students will now
be studying America's key founding
documents as well as the writings of
leading Christians and and also studying
their experiences in the public square
from America's founding to today.
They'll also study the Christian roots
of ideas such as human equality, liberty
under law, limited government, and
God-given unalable rights. Cornerstone's
curriculum will not paper over the
controversies or injustices of the past,
but it will highlight the wisdom of
America's foundational principles and
highlight the example of those,
especially Christians, who have stood
for truth with grace throughout our
history. This new course sequence is
absolutely unique in my view, and it
would not have happened without the
visionary leadership of Dr. Dr. Marino
Rano, who has a heart for raising up
Christian leaders trained in biblical
principles who will bless our nation.
Dr. Marino has a passion for the future
of America and for the positive role
Christians can play in our public
square. That passion is enriched by his
training as a scholar in political
philosophy and by his record of
leadership in higher education, which
you can read more about uh in the
program. As part of his vision to make
Cornerstone a national center for
equipping Christian leaders of the
future, Dr. Marino Rio has spearheaded
this program of wisdom conversations
like this one that bring leading
national voices to Cornerstone to engage
both the students and the community.
With that, let's give a warm welcome to
Cornerstone's president, Dr. Trousan
Marino Rano.
Well, good evening everyone. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for being here this
evening for today tonight's wisdom
conversations. Thank you for spending
their evening with us.
I want to thank so many who made this
event possible. All of our wonderful
staff throughout and faculty. Would you
please join me in thanking the
university's team, staff and faculty. We
could not have done it without them and
they're all throughout. So, thank you.
Thank you for them being here. I also
want to ask and and and just give a
great shot of gratitude to our board of
trustees,
men and women committed to the Lord who
govern this institution. I work with
them together and they're here this
evening. Would you trustees if you're
here, would you please stand so we can
honor you and thank you for the great
your work you do.
It's a team effort. Thank you ladies and
gentlemen for being here. To the great
Cornerstone University students who are
here, thank you for being here.
Cornerstone students, let's give them a
round of applause. Cornerstone students
throughout. Thank you. Thank you for
being here as well.
We have a great evening. Thank you for
joining us. I have the privilege of
having two what I call my intellectual
heroes here this evening. I shared with
them backstage that years and years ago
as a graduate student as a young faculty
member when I encountered their works
they had such a profound impact and I
thought to myself then I want to meet
them I want to bring them to our
university wherever I end and here we
are many years later I was able and with
the support of so many of our sponsors
and board and to bring them here to this
university I'm so grateful they are here
an incredible incredible list of
accomplishments you will see in the
program I consider them to be really
America's leaving public intellectuals
both committed to Jesus Christ and both
committed to ideas and both committed to
truth and the rigorous disciplined
pursuit of truth and conversations and
both have a profound and beautiful more
than just friendship but brotherhood as
you will see in the program our first
distinguished guest is Dr. Cornell West
and Dr. Colonel West holds a Dietrich
Bonhaofer chair at Union Theological
Seminary. An incredible author,
incredible just list of accomplishments.
I have read some a number of his works.
One of my favorite ones is his memoir.
If you've ever seen read that, I would
encourage you to read that. Brother
West, Living and Loving. Thank you,
Brother West, for that. We have Dr.
Robbie George here.
Dr. George has uh currently Jose
McCormick chair of juristprudence at
Princeton University and is the director
of the James Madison program for
American ideals and institutions at
Princeton. Incredible list of
accomplishments as well. A tremendous
banjo player as well.
But but amidst all the incredible works
they have written and authored, I think
one of the most important ones is the
one they just recently worked on and
published together called Truth Matters.
If you have not a chance to acquire that
and read that, I would encourage you to.
It's a profound and beautiful book that
speaks to the importance of how do we
have beautiful conversations in the
pursuit of truth even where there are
significant differences and how do we
model that? Ladies and gentlemen, as we
think about America at 250 and at 85
85th year here at Cornerstone, I can't
think of a more important conversation
to have
for the sake and future of our country
than that one. How do we have great
conversations together amidst all of our
differences? Would you please join me,
ladies and gentlemen, in welcoming to
the stage Dr. Cornell West and Dr.
Robbie George.
Well, thank you both for joining us this
evening. Uh we've been all looking
forward to being here. So, thank you for
coming and joining us and spending your
evening with us. I want to ask you to
first to to share about your beautiful
brotherhood, a friendship that you both
have, how it started and why it's so
important to model for us and how we can
learn that about that and even do in our
own lives.
&gt;&gt; Well, Mr. President, first let me just
say, I know I speak on behalf of Brother
Cornell as well as myself, what an honor
it is to be at a university that is
committed to the integration of faith
and learning. Some people think, I have
no idea why, but it's come to be fairly
widely held that faith is one thing,
reason or intellect or learning is
something else. And then and if these
things are not in conflict with each
other, at least they're in a certain
tension with each other. You have to
make a kind of a choice. Shall I be a
person of reason and intellect or a
person of faith? And of course that's
utterly misguided.
What we need is not to solve the alleged
conflict of faith and reason, but to
understand that faith and reason work
together in the pursuit of truth. We
need an integration of faith and reason.
I had an occasion to quote just a few
minutes ago in a little gathering. the
opening line to the great encyclical
letter of Pope John Paul II called faith
and reason pesio where he says that
faith and reason are like the two wings
on which the human spirit ascend to
contemplation of the truth. You know a
bird if it has a wounded wing. It's down
on the ground. It's trying to get up
into the air. It flaps that one good
wing as hard as it can trying to get up
in the air. But what happens? It just
goes around in a circle on the ground.
It really does take both of those wings
to get up into the air. And that's true
with faith and reason as well. If we're
really dedicated to truth, we're really
about the business of truth seeeking,
then we understand faith and reason as
being not only in harmony but in
cooperation with each other. So it's
just such a privilege to be a university
that understands that and is committed
uh to and then I want to thank of course
you Mr. president, German boss, uh
everyone who helped to make our visit uh
uh possible. It's such a blessing to be
here with my dear brother Cornell uh in
your company and so we appreciate that
very very much. Well, how did this all
begin? This great brotherhood between my
dear friend Cornell and myself. How did
it all begin? Well, back in the u 19 the
late 1980s, brother Cornell came to
Princeton. He had been at Union
Theological Seminary I think at Yale as
who will at that point. Uh I was already
on the faculty but I was just a little
junior assistant professor and Cornell
was already the great Cornell West. So
uh I was really pleased uh to meet him
but we didn't get to know each other
very well from many years later. We were
in the same traveled in the same circles
because after all we're interested in
the same ideas interested in the same
thinkers and figures from from history
going all the way back into antiquity.
the great philosophers of of Greece and
Rome and so forth. Uh we were in
questions of justice, of morality, of
virtue, of right and wrong. So we were
in some faculty seminars together and I
always appreciated uh Professor West's
contributions to those seminars. They
seemed to be to me to be profoundly
morally serious, although he was always
wrong, you know. So I but I appreciated
that he got the questions right. I
remember he was, you know, that's that's
half the battle, getting the questions
right. No, but I admired Brother
Cornell, but it wasn't really until
2005, and at this point we were both
senior professors and installed in our
endowed chairs and so forth, when a
student who was a student in both of our
classes, a young man named Andrew
Pearlmutter, um came along to my office
during office hours and uh he said,
"Professor George, could I speak with
you?" And I said, "Well, yes,
absolutely. Be delighted." He said,
'Well, you know, I'm in Professor West's
class and I'm in uh your class and um
I've been in touch with Professor West
because we're starting a new student
magazine at Princeton called The Green
Light. And as part of each issue, a
feature in each issue of the magazine,
it's going to be a magazine of arts and
culture and literature and politics, a
kind of local New Yorker magazine. As
part of each issue, as a as a feature,
we're going to have one professor
interviewing another professor for here
on campus. And we've asked Professor
Cornell West if he would be the
interviewer. And uh he said that he
would be. And so we asked him, well, who
would you like to interview? And uh he
said he'd like to interview you,
Professor George. So I was I'm here to
ask whether you'd be willing to be
interviewed by Professor West for the
for the first issue of the magazine. And
of course, I was very flattered. And uh
so I said um Andrew, who I should point
out was a religion major, brilliant kid,
you know, class validictorian, 1560
SATs. I said, Andrew,
I'd like you to send a message back to
Professor West. I'd like you to tell
Professor West that Professor George
says, "But it is I who should be seeking
baptism from you."
To which to which the young man
responded, religion major responded,
"Huh?
And I said, "You just tell him that."
And he said, "Okay, I'll tell him that.
But but are you willing to do it?" And I
said, "Well, of course I'm will. I'm
flattered. I'm honored. The great
Cornell West wants to interview me.
Could interview any of these Nobel Prize
winners in our physics department or our
math department or any of these great
figures." And so I was really flattered.
Uh so the day came for the interview and
it was going to be in my office and up
came Andrew and up came Cornell. Uh had
a photographer with him. The guy must
have flashed about 2 thou snapped about
2,000 pictures over the time we were
together. And uh I remember Andrew had
one of these the the some of the my
generation will remember these. Remember
cassette tape recorders? He had one of
those old cassette tape recorders had a
half hour on one side, half hour on the
other side. So he uh he put that tape
recorder on my desk and he pushed the
button. He said go. Well, we launched
into it and this was not an interview.
This was a rockom,
you know, debate discussion. We're
talking about every issue. And of
course, after a half hour, that tape
clicks off and Andrew jumps up and he
waves his he said, "Stop, stop, don't
say anything." And he flipped that tape
over and he clicked and he said, "Go."
And so we launched into it again and we
started about 2:00 and of course at 3:00
roughly that second side of the tape
clipped, clicked off, but it was it was
too late cuz now we were in it so deep,
so hot and heavy, we couldn't stop.
Finally, I looked down at my watch. It's
6:00. We've been going for four hours.
Yeah. I said, "Brother Cornell, this has
been such a wonderful conversation. You
know, we really need to get to know each
other better. Let's have lunch. Let's
get together. I've got to go now because
my wife's going to have dinner, but but
we really should continue this
conversation." He said, "Oh, Brother
Robbie, yes, we should definitely
consider this conversation. It's been
wonderful." I said, "Well, walk me down
to my car and park down here on uh
William Street near the Princeton
University Press." So I said, "Sure." So
we walked down and you know, we got the
the bait going up and going again. And
so we got to my car and then I stand
there for 45 minutes, my hand on the
latch, and we continue going. Finally, I
said, "Brother Cornell, my wife's going
to call the police and report a missing
person."
You know, just a couple of days later,
the senior faculty got a note from the
dean of the college saying, "We need
more of you senior people to um teach
freshman seminars. We pride ourselves at
Princeton of being an undergraduate
oriented institution." And we tell
students when we're trying to recruit
them and trying to you know get them to
come to us rather than Harvard or Yale
or Cornerstone that uh that you know if
they come to Princeton you won't be
taught by graduates. So you'll be taught
by prof even our most distinguished
famous senior professors teach freshmen.
Said the only problem is it's not true.
So we need some of you to make it true.
We need you to volunteer. Well, the
light bulb went off over my head and uh
I thought, gosh, wouldn't it be
wonderful if Brother Cornell and I could
just continue that conversation we had
with 16 or 18 of these brilliant
Princeton freshmen. So, I got in touch
with Cornell and he said, "Brother
Robert, that'd be a wonderful let's do
that. Let's propose a freshman seminar."
So, uh we put our heads together and we
cooked up the idea of doing a great
books. We we we called the seminar
adventures of ideas. recalling the title
of a book of a great philosopher Alfred
North Whitehead, Harvard philosopher in
the 1920s and 30s that both Cornell and
I admired. And we decided we'd we'd
start with the ancient Greeks and then
we go all the way forward to the to the
present with one book a week. Cornell
would choose half of them and I'd choose
half of them. Books that were important
in our own intellectual and spiritual
odysseies and important to us. No
secondary sources. You didn't want the
kids learning about what other people
thought Plato said or what other people
thought St. Augustine said. We wanted
them to wrestle with Plato and with St.
Augustine with the actual texts. Uh, and
we do one book a week and carry on
through the semester. And we did
Sophocles Antiggony and Plato's Gorgas
and St. Augustine's Confessions all the
way up to Martin Luther King's letter
from Dormingham jail. That was the last
uh the last reading. And it was just a
wonderful experience, most blessed
experience I'd had my entire academic
career. kitchen with this brother is
just something else because he's such a
man of inspiration and integrity and
insight and uh so I was looking forward
to every Wednesday because we seminar
would meet on Wednesday evenings. We'd
have dinner before the seminar together.
We'd get the conversation going and then
we go over with the with the youngsters
and go for three hours in the uh in the
conversation and that's how it all
began. And we kept doing that. We kept
teaching until he decided to abandon me
and go off to Harvard. Uh and then we
couldn't teach together anymore because
we're in different places. Although he
took his first leave and came back and
we taught the seminar again at uh at
Princeton. But then once we weren't
teaching together regularly, we decided,
well, you know, we'll take the show on
the road. And next thing we knew, we
were we were not only you teaching
together and lecturing together, but
writing together and singing together
and praying together. And we got to know
each other's families and his daughter
Zetune was a brilliant student, a
Princeton undergraduate now doing her
PhD at Princeton in um in German
literature became a niece to me. She
calls me Uncle Robbie. Uh my kids very
close at Cornell. We had each others. I
didn't his his dad was gone long before
I got to know Cornell but I knew his
beloved mother Irene Wester was a
magisterial
uh figure an educator herself of
enormous distinction he got to know my
uh beloved uh parents so it's just been
an enormous blessing and that is how it
all began
that's true
you can see how blessed we are
absolutely but I do want to begin by
saying It's it's a joy to be in this
place.
It's Cornerstone University.
Never been here before. I had a chance
to meet you on the Zoom. No, brother.
And you got a very, very lovely spirit,
commitment. Met your beloved wife,
Sister Ellen. I met the bosses making a
move all the way from Florida on their
way back after serving this grand
institution. Brother Cole, who is now
the leader, he's sitting right in front
of distinguished professor Lee Jun, too.
Look at both of you brothers. Both of
y'all stand together. Stand together.
Both of them stand together. Yes. Yes.
There you go. My god. My god. My god.
I'm also told that the uh the one and
only Jeff Nelson may have made his way.
You know, he's the son-in-law of the
great Russell Kurt who lives right down
the road. I don't know, brother Jeff.
It's
&gt;&gt; Stand up. Stand up, my brother. Stand
up. Never met you, but it's good to see
you at a distance. Oh, yes. He's keeping
alive the great legacy.
&gt;&gt; I think Tutor's here, too. the
regeneration of spirit and character,
engaging in high quality soul craft,
choosing to be certain kinds of human
beings for those who still have the
audacity to call ourselves Christian,
&gt;&gt; to really want to see Jesus more clearly
and love Jesus more dearly and follow
Jesus more nearly in such grim and dim
times.
these precious young students,
quai young, not so young,
older folk like me, cuz I'm a perennial
student, you see, trying to continually
link what it means to follow Jesus with
the life of the mind and the context in
which we find ourselves, the
circumstances and conditions that we
have nothing to do about choosing when
we arrived. D. But here we are. What has
God really called us to do?
What I love about my dear brother Robbie
is he says what he means and he means
what he says.
That's what Ashford and Simpson used to
call the real thing.
Even when he's wrong,
he's not posing and posturing.
See, we live in a culture that is so
preoccupied with stimulation and
titilation and addiction and distraction
that people will pose and pause to do
anything to get over. So, you don't
really know who they are.
Well, I come from a great tradition of a
black folk who years ago in the face of
overwhelming hatred for 400 years,
chronic systemic still dish out love
warriors every generation.
Teach the world how to love
in the face of deep hatred.
And it's not a function of skin
pigmentation.
It's a function of choosing, deciding,
having commitment and conviction. And
for many of us, it has everything to do
with falling in love with a Palestinian
Jew named Jesus.
No one of us having monopoly on on truth
or beauty or goodness on the holy.
But many of us deciding to be faithful
unto death,
of being in the world but not of it and
against the grain.
And part of uh what brother brought
brother brother Robbie and I all the way
to do. We were just recently in
Ritzville in the prison with our dear
brother was
state prison in Arkansas
&gt;&gt; right outside of little rush experience.
&gt;&gt; We spoke in a Episcopal church. We spent
a little time with high church but I'm
Baptist so you know pray for me.
I know this institution was founded by
my fellow Baptists.
&gt;&gt; That's a beautiful thing. We Baptists
are not known for creating
institutions of higher living with
longevity
passed on to one generation to the next.
We got a lot of spirited witness. That's
a beautiful thing.
But usually it's other denominations.
Cornerstone University 85 years 1941 in
the middle of World War II
having a vision through blood sweat and
tears passing it on from one generation
to the next no matter how big no matter
how small and it's never a question of
quantity of popularity
was a question of integrity
it's a question of quality
and the uh Um to be able to be here and
be in conversation
is is very humbling you know wisdom
Sophia philosophy pho Sophia love of
wisdom
interesting goes back to Socrates
nobody
like him intellectual integrity
willing to live and die for serious
questioning
and Yet in the end, what?
Socrates never sheds the tear. Nobody
ever saw him cry.
Here comes the legacy of Jerusalem.
Jesus weeps.
What is the difference between
intellectual integrity with no tears
and weeping tied to a love with a
covenant with a living and loving God
that is willing to engage in
conversation of the life of the mind but
always beginning and ending with that
love manifest at that blood at the
bottom of that cross.
So the interplay between
rational engagement,
inquiry, argument, relentless
questioning and interrogation, Socrates.
But then here comes Cornerstone
University
tied to Jesus.
So we got to outsocratize Socrates
cuz anybody who's never cried, never
loved anybody.
You may have loved wisdom, may have
loved principle, you may have loved
abstract ideals, but you never loved
anybody. It's going to be a whole lot of
crying tomorrow in Chicago for Jesse
Jackson senior.
How come? Because for many of us, we
could feel his love.
And that's true for any funeral that you
would attend
if you felt loved.
And part of our challenge these days is
to bring together some of the riches of
Socrates going back to Athens or Cicero
going back to Rome
or Amos and Esther and Jeremiah
and Jesus. Yes, indeed. going back to
Jerusalem,
but then coming to the United States 250
years.
Good God Almighty.
Jefferson, Washington, Monroe, Frederick
Douglas, Harriet Tubman, Sojour of
Truth,
all intertwined.
critical reflection.
Tears tried to deep compassion.
Love at its deepest level.
And the tradition that produced me
simply says justice is what love looks
like in public just like tenderness is
what love feels like in private.
And brother Robbie and I have been on
this socratic train on the love train.
Jesus sits at the mint at the center of
that's one of the major common ground.
Is that fair? Absolutely. It is the
number one very much so. Now he's a
Catholic brother. So he he prayed on
even though we already praying for you
but he's a
he's my dear Catholic brother and that
Catholic tradition is as rich and as
deep as it comes as we Protestants come
from.
There's no Luther. There's no knocks.
&gt;&gt; There's no Swiggly without the Catholic
backdrop of the Pascows and others, you
see. But at the same time, we got to
deal, you know, with a world that is so
overwhelmed by organized greed and
weaponized hatred and routinized
indifference to the suffering of the
weak and vulnerable and unbelievably
overwhelmed by just cruelty. But that's
not new. That's the history of the
species. That's who we are at our worst.
And the question is, Cornerstone,
Princeton, Union Seminary, will we be
able to shape and mold the hearts and
minds of young people to accent the best
in the face of all of that greed and
hatred? Lastly, recognizing
Exactly.
No, cuz the music is not ornamental or
decorative. It's constitutive of who we
are.
But recognizing that the greed and the
hatred that we're talking about
resides in us
as well as in others
tied to institutions and structures that
shape us. And so we ought to try to
minimize as much as possible
name calling and fingerpointing.
Yeah. He said, I've been known to call
folk gangsters
because I've got so much gangster in me
&gt;&gt; and I've been working on it for 65
years.
&gt;&gt; I was nothing but a gangster before I
met Jesus. And now I'm a redeemed sinner
wrestling with my gangster proclivity.
That's why we have to die every day.
Yeah, they see. But at that human level,
getting beneath all the talk about
labels and categories and race and
gender and class and region and nation,
at that human level, how then do we
revel in each other's humanity? I revel
in my dear brother's humanity. That's
why I love him. That's why I respect
him.
That's I love his mother and father.
Even though they pass, he love my sin.
So that's deeper than friendship. That's
the brotherhood that we're talking
about. And I'm sure many of you have
similar kinds of connection. We just
need to see much more of it in in
American society.
In the last two months, I've had two
conversations with community leaders who
come to me. They did not know each
other. They came to me separately and
they said, "We are praying for a revival
&gt;&gt; in this country. We're praying for
revival in Michigan."
and we're praying that Cornerstone
University is a part of that.
That made me it's humbling to hear that
and made me pause.
&gt;&gt; I want to ask you both because you both
have touched on just profound questions
of the spirit and the importance of
Jesus
for our each other, for this country,
for the future. But I want to ask you to
comment on that on revival, the need for
it. How could it how could it take off?
You both are men of ideas. You studied
American history, different backgrounds,
but the importance of revival, true
heartchanging,
mind transforming, lifealtering revival
and the need that we have for that our
country.
Well, the need for revival follows, it
seems to me, entirely straightforwardly,
from the demonstrable fact that we
cannot do it ourselves.
We cannot do it on our own.
We are too deeply damaged. We are
damaged goods. We Christians call that
original sin. It's that line between
good and evil that isn't between this
group and that group. But as the great
Alexander Senson said, runs right
through every human heart. That's where
the line between good and evil is.
That's right. Right through every human
heart. Uh Cornell was actually at the
graduation at Harvard in 1978 when Szen
Nitson gave his great speech.
&gt;&gt; Uh I was there as a student. And I was
it wasn't my graduation year, but I was
outside the walls. Cornell was inside,
but I could hear it over the loudspeaker
with the with the translation and and he
was calling Americans. That that was a
tough speech on us. He didn't just
condemn the Soviet gangsters that had
exiled him and had persecuted him. He he
loved America. He was grateful for being
in this place, but he realized there was
a lot that was broken here that we had
abandoned many of our founding
principles. you know, we're failing to
live up to them as in a certain way. We
always have, you know, always struggling
to get there. But what we know as a
matter of demonstrable fact is given the
depth of our fallen, given the depth of
our problems, given the messes we human
beings get ourselves into in every
society, we can't fix it ourselves. What
the call for revival is about, what the
need for revival is about is grace. It
is only with God's help, allowing
ourselves to be his instrument.
surrendering to him. No longer thinking,
I'm in charge of fixing everything.
God's in charge of fixing everything. I
just need to be his instrument. I just
need to serve him and his purposes. So,
it's grace. When we call for revival, we
are acknowledging our dependency upon
the grace of God. Sometimes we say there
but for the grace of God I or by the
grace of God let it happen. That's not
just a saying. That's literally the
situation, the condition of human
beings, frail, fallen, fallible
creatures that we are. It's a need for
God's grace. So yes, we should be
praying for revival every day. And what
that prayer is is a prayer for the grace
of God and all that follows for
ourselves from that. But you know, it's
true. I think historically it's no
accident my dear brother that when the
worst of the American project
the experiment in democracy
uh and the empire he said be our
precious indigenous brothers and sisters
with their land and so on
uh when the best of America steps
forward and Americans actually look at
the best of who they are it usually has
to do with a wave of Americans who
decide to opt for integrity, honesty,
decency, courage, and commitment and
humility.
And it becomes so convincing that other
Americans want to follow. It becomes
contagious.
Yeah. In the same way on the other side,
decadence and decay and decrepitude
become contagious
and it grows.
You see, push aside the 10th
commandment, the 11th commandment. Thou
shalt not get caught.
Oh, that's the one I need to follow cuz
everybody else has pushed the 10 aside
and everybody's just trying to get over.
or survival of the slickest
rather than the survival of those who
are willing to empty themselves and
serve others and surrender.
That's a very very rich notion.
Surrender to something grander than
oneself.
That means that your ego's got to get
constrained.
Boy, that's that's a major end and
that's a perennial process. And it cuts
beneath race, beneath gender, beneath
nation and region. It is a human thing.
And these these revivals and awakenings,
they're they're unpredictable. As
brother Robbie said, there's no control.
The first awakening, the second
awakening. Uh um and you want to have
leaders of the same kind of spiritual
quality
who are not sending signs and signals
that in order to really be acceptable
invisible is to be well adjusted to
injustice.
Well adapted to indifference rather than
committed to a love that makes you look
foolish in the eyes of the world.
Irasma says what? That's a compliment.
It's called folly
because folly in this world is a deeper
form of spiritual wisdom in the eyes of
God. That's what that cross in many ways
is all about.
that unarmed truth and unconditional
love that gets smashed by the major
powers and forces in this world. And
they think they have triumphed. But here
comes the blood.
And here comes long Saturday and the
weight. Then here comes surprise by joy
on Sunday morning.
as the Christian narrative and promise
and it is the greatest one for me
cuz it's not a question of what others
are doing. It's what what one has
decided in one's own heart, mind and
soul saying this is the way I'm going.
I'm following Jesus. I'm going to love
my way through the darkness. That's what
I plan to do. That's what it means to
find a voice. Now, of course, the anthem
of black folk is what? Lift every voice.
It's not lift every echo. If you going
to decide what you do by listening to
the echoes of the silos,
then you'll never find out who you are.
You end up imitating the imitator or
wearing a mask. And one of the wonderful
things about being a follower of Jesus
is Jesus wants to know who are you
really? Where do you stand in relation
to me? And your voice is like your
fingerprint.
Don't look around
and have somebody else speaking for you.
You got to be able to stand up in the
name of a love, in the name of a wisdom
that you are accountable for.
You know, I think we often forget to our
detriment. We forget just how radical
Jesus's message is.
&gt;&gt; Just how radical Christianity is.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. You know, think of most
places, most times, and most history.
What was considered great?
Was it compassion, kindness, humility,
love, self-sacrifice?
No.
power, domination, exploitation. What do
we call Alexander?
Alexander the Great.
Why did people consider Alexander great?
Because he conquered and he dominated
and he killed and he enslaved and he
exploited. And the fact that he was
capable of doing that, being on that end
of the power dynamic, not on the losing
end, that made him great. And from a
certain perspective,
the antithesis of a Christian
perspective,
&gt;&gt; that's what greatness consists in, being
able to work your will over other
people. And then along comes
Christianity,
developing that great insight from the
Hebrew scripture. Long comes
Christianity and says, "That's not
great.
That's evil.
What does greatness consist in?
Humility,
sacrifice,
living for others, serving,
serving other people.
The Alexanders of the world, that
doesn't seem great at all. That seems
surviile.
You're a nobody. Who would actually want
that? who would actually ballerize that.
But that of course is what the Christian
message is. Thank God today for all our
faults and failings.
Nobody today considers Alexander the
Great, we still use that that label, no
one considers him great. And whether
you're left or right, the vast
overwhelming majority of people that at
least in the United States of America,
you know, the vast majority of people
today are not going to say or at least
admit that they think greatness consists
in conquest, domination, exploitation,
murder, enslavement.
They're going to at least pay lip
service to the Christian message that
no, that's actually wicked. That's not
greatness. Greatness does consist in
humility, self-sacrifice, serving
others, what we sometimes call the
Christian uh virtues.
Now, I think it's important to ask
ourselves,
how do we maintain that? Because it
slips away. Too often we just pay lip
service to it.
But what we really in practice live for
is if not domination and conquest,
what we in fact live for is wealth,
power, influence, status, prestige,
celebrity,
what brother Cornell a minute ago called
stimulation and titilation, you know,
and what does that put into the shade
if we're living that way? It puts into
the shade the things that really matter.
Faith, family, friendship, knowledge,
beauty, integrity, decency, honor,
compassion.
Uh Cornell and I say to our students,
you know, there are some things that
matter
and it's it's perfectly okay to seek
them. It's perfectly perfectly okay to
pay attention to them and want them. But
they're things that though they matter
at the end of the day don't matter all
that much. Wealth, power, status,
influence. It what at least our students
things may be different here at
Cornerstone. It would be nice. But at
least the students I teach are really
fixated at this moment in their lives,
in their careers, on their CBS
and their futures
and wealth and status and influence and
power and being close to power and
celebrity and and so forth.
And we say, well, those things matter.
They're not bad. You can do good things
with them. If you have a lot of money,
you can build businesses, create jobs
for people, provide people with goods
and services they need. in one. If you
make a lot of money, you can become a
philanthropist. You can you can support
Cornerstone University, which it
shouldn't be doing to be a man extra
must. You know, there are lots of good
things you can do. Same with influence.
Same with power. You can do good things,
but those things
are not things that are good in
themselves. They're good as means to
other ends, not as ends in themselves.
And if we get focused on them too much,
we lose sight. We lose track of the
things that really matter. Those things
I mentioned a moment ago, faith and
family and friendship and knowledge and
beauty and integrity and honor. The
things that are desirable not merely as
means to other ends, but the things that
we want or should want for their own
sakes.
the things that are really constitutive
of our fulfillment and flourishing as
human beings. David Brooks has a
wonderful way he puts this. He says
that, you know, wealth and power and
status and influence and prestige, those
are the CV virtues. Th those are what
you want on your CV because they're
going to help you to get get ahead. And
it's not wrong, especially for students
here. It's not wrong to want those
things. It's not wrong.
But we have to keep them in proper
order.
What you should really care about are
not the CV virtues, but the tombstone
virtues.
&gt;&gt; What's it going to say on your
tombstone? Is it going to say Suma
Kumlada,
Goldman Sachs?
No. No. It's going to say, if we're
lucky,
loving husband or wife,
loyal friend,
faithful Christian believer. Those are
the tombstone virtures and those are the
things that really matter. That's why
Cornell echoes the ancient Greeks when
he says we have to lead our lives
from the perspective of our deaths.
It's in recognition of our own mortality
that we're much more likely to get our
values straight when we realize life is
short. If you're really lucky, it's 90,
95, 100. But that's
just a moment in the whole history of
the universe. Life is short. What are
you going to do with it? What are you
going to treat as ultimately important?
Is it wealth and power and influence and
status and prestige? Or is it faith and
family and friendship and honor and
integrity and knowledge and beauty? And
I think that's not just a message for
young people. That's a message for all
of us. That's the Christian message. And
and one of the things that keep in mind
is it all if I just jump in like
&gt;&gt; praise men is that um that when you
think of 250 years ago
where you get a small group of folk
who
think they have to throw off the British
Empire. That's Jefferson's language. a
long train of abuses and usurbations
that reduce a people to desperatism such
that it is not just their right but
their duty to throw off that government.
Right now, of course, you got indigenous
people's land already taken. You've got
precious Africans who've been enslaved
and so forth, but they also are
providing some possibility
of a major moment of interruption
of the dominant forces in the history of
the species that go all the way back to
Cain and Abel,
which is a history of organized greed
and hatred, domination, exploitation,
and degradation. That is who we are at
our worst.
That I like to always remind folk in any
crowd I come to. We are a wretched folk
too often.
But thank God that does not have to be
the last word.
But if you miss out on the wretchedness,
you're going to be naive and thinking
how good you are.
Innocence. James Baldwin says,
"Innocence itself is already the crime
because you're in denial."
And if you're in denial about somebody
else's suffering and only concerned
about your own comfort and convenience,
then sooner or later those chickens will
come home to roost.
You're going to reap what you sow. So
here you get these folk in the United
States in 1776 77 1776 that say we are
the anti-hobsian
experiment.
Hobs had argued in a Leviathan life is
poor and nasty.
We're driven solely by self-perception.
We're psychological egoists and the only
government possible is going to be an
authoritarian one if not totalitarian
because you're dealing with such
lowgrade stuff called human nature.
That's Hobs's great formulation in the
middle of the English civil war in 1651.
Now here comes Francis Hutcherson and
others who have their different views
about this with benevolence and
integrity. and Jefferson and others say,
"We read that history. We know how
wretched human beings have been, but
let's provide some moment of
interruption that can push back this
greed, push back this hatred, push back
this indifference, and maybe create a
social experiment
in which persons can aspire
to be better than their worst."
Now that's that's that's that that's a
beautiful
notion. It is.
Now you can imagine, you know, folk from
different perspectives. You from the
plantation, they looking what you going
to do for us? Well, we can't get to you
two. Oh, how long it going to take to
get to us? Well, it's going to be
another hundred years. Oh, shucks.
Or the women, how long is it going to
take us to vote? 1920. Oh my god, that's
a long time.
But the process is set in place
of creating this moment of interruption
that you could call democracy or you
could call it rights and liberty or
order and liberty. There a lot of
different ways of describing it but at
its deepest level it is a spiritual and
moral attempt to accent the best of who
we are as persons.
And the wisest, the John Adams and
others, what did they say? They said
there's a good chance it won't last
&gt;&gt; because you can put all the beautiful
words you want on paper, but if you
don't provide institutions, families,
churches,
synagogues,
mosque, little leagues,
ballet companies,
civic institutions that generate civic
virtue, character formation,
soul whole craft at its deepest level.
Then all those words, those pretty words
on paper just sounding brass and
tinkling symbol. They're empty. They're
vacuous because the people themselves
have given up on trying to be the best
of themselves. They've opted to be
hobbsy and ego is wealth, power,
position, and they could talk about this
grand experiment as much as they want.
Jefferson understood that. Madison
understood that. His teacher, the only
Christian
clergy who signed the Declaration of
Independence. And let us never forget
when they signed that Declaration of
Independence, what were they doing? They
were signing their death warrants.
That was the language used. Anybody who
signed that knew there's a good chance
they'd be hunted down and killed. That's
why they respected John Hancock so much
cuz he said, "I want to write it so big
that the king will not be able to
confuse me with anybody else."
And if you look at those 56 tick
signatures closely, some of them signed
it like a doctor signs your orders.
You can't really make out their names in
&gt;&gt; because if you got to hunt them down,
they'll start at John Hancock's house
and they don't know who John McGillicuy
is over here.
But we laugh to keep from crying because
if they had not pulled it off, they
would have been executed systematically
like so many courageous voices at this
very moment in different countries all
around the world going back to 1776.
We have to keep that in mind. So when we
make this fusion of the relation of
Christianity and all of its various
forms and varieties,
it could be priestly, prophetic, quai
prophetic and so forth and so on and its
relation to this moment of interruption.
And how long would this moment of
interruption last?
Most democracies do not succeed because
the citizens become so seduced by the
worst of who we are. Plato's argument,
every democracy is going to be driven by
unruly passion and pervasive ignorance
that will always lead to a worse tyrant
than they were opposing. That's Plato.
One of the reason why we love Plato is
that even when he's wrong, he's a
challenge.
And he still might be right.
We have to wrestle with his challenge.
And of course, democracy killed his
mentor Socrates. So democracy was not a
positive word for him as it is for for
many of us. That's true.
&gt;&gt; George Washington in his farewell
address speaks about the importance of
unity as a safeguard for liberty. But he
also says very early in the farewell
address that you will encounter as a
young country great forces.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; To try to convince you that it's better
to be not united than united and you
have to counteract those continually. I
want to ask you both to comment on that
now in 2026
when there's such intense conversations
that maybe disunityity is better than
unity.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, before I wrestle with that,
uh, Cornell, I I had heard that our dear
sister, our friend Tutor Dixon is here.
Is Tutor here? Is Tutor Dixon here?
&gt;&gt; I think she came and left early. She
came and left early. She children.
So, unity and disunityity.
Uh,
well, look, um,
Cornell's teacher, the great Harvard
philosopher, Jean RWS,
&gt;&gt; begins his great project, the most
influential project in political
philosophy of the 20th century. I I I've
made much of my career as being a critic
of the project, but I would great
respect great respect great respect for
Professor RS because he begins with the
right question
and that question is how do we deal with
the fact he calls it the fact of
reasonable pluralism. How do we deal
with the fact, and he's right, it is a
fact that if you have freedom,
if you allow basic freedom of
conscience, if you allow religious
freedom, if you allow people to think
for themselves,
then it is natural and to be expected
that people will not all agree
and their disagreement will extend not
only to the minor, relatively trivial or
superficial things of life. The
disagreement will embrace the big
important questions. The questions of
meaning and value of human nature, the
human good, human dignity, human
destiny.
Now, given that you're going to get that
disagreement
if you allow freedom,
how do you stop the disagreement from
tearing the country apart, undermining
the regime supporting the freedom
itself? That's a real challenge. draws
his right to ask the question, much as
I've criticized his answer to the
question, we get into that if people are
interested, it's the right question.
And if we're going to defend Republican
government, as I think we should,
we have to reckon with the reality that
Cornell just pointed to, and that is
when the American founders launched this
experiment in self-government, in
Republican government, they did it
knowing that all previous republics had
failed, had collapsed. And when they
collapsed, very often they had collapsed
into the worst forms of tyranny, worse
than what they began with.
Now, how do you do it?
Now, one possibility would be to say,
okay,
let's have a constitution that basically
consists of a bill of rights and then
let's empower some elite, maybe we'll
call them judges to enforce that bill of
rights against the government and we'll
protect liberty that way. Our founders
considered that and rejected it. They
rejected it because they were worried
that those
paper guarantees would be just that,
mere parchment guarantees.
They said, "We need a deeper,
more reliable, more solid protection of
liberty." What was that?
constitutional structural constraints,
limitations on power, taking into
account seriously the fallenness, the
wretchedness of human nature.
Madison learned this from his great
Presbyterian teacher John Witherspoon,
the very one Cornell just mentioned.
Given our wretchedness, nobody can be
trusted with unchecked, unaccountable
power. And no groups of people can be
that's trusted with unchecked
unaccountable power. That's where we got
our system for example of checks and
balance. We we call in our civics
classes the systems of checks and
balance. Those misonsonian constraints.
We divide power on the one hand between
a national government of delegated and
enumerated and therefore strictly
limited powers
if that government would only stay
within them and states as governments of
general jurisdiction exercising police
powers protect public health, safety and
morals. And then even within the
national government, we do something
that the parliamentary systems of Europe
do not do. And that is divide power
between an executive, a legislative, and
a judicial branch with with each limited
and accountable. Each limited by the
powers of the other. Now, the framers
were not foolish idealists. They
realized there are going to be boundary
cases and there going to be there's
going to be competition. Then there will
be that, you know, the judiciary will
try to grab a little power from the
legislature and the legislature will try
to grab a little power from the
judiciary and the executive will try to
grab power from everybody. And you know,
they they were aware of that and they
tried to put some principles into our
constitution to protect against that.
And then to try to add a belt to the
suspenders, they did add a bill of a
bill of rights and and in short order,
the judiciary claimed the authority to
enforce that uh that bill of rights. I
think the solution to the unity and
disunityity problem which is basically
rolls us back to reasonable pluralism.
Basically what do you do about that is
fidelity to our constitution. The
problem is not our constit some people
think we need a new constitution. Some
people think our constitution is 18th
century document made for a different
world. We need something more like a
British parliamentary system where we
unite the power of the executive and the
legislative and indeed even the even the
judicial. Um that our fundamental
problem is which our constitution is out
of date. I don't believe it. I think
we've got a great constitution. I think
they had the right idea to deal with the
problem of unity and disunityity. Deal
with the fact of reasonable pluralism.
Our problem is not our constitution. Our
problem is lack of fidelity to our
constitution by actors across the board.
executives who do usurp the power of the
legislative. Courts that do too often
legislate from the bench, a legislative
branch that too often abdicates its
authority to the judiciary on the one
hand and to the executive um on the
other hand. And as Cornell pointed out,
I'm just riffing on him now.
It's those precautions, those structural
constraints on power.
my my political theor
and and Mr. president here know where
I'm going with this. Read the Federalist
Papers. Those structural constraints on
power by the founders's own reckoning in
their own words were merely auxiliary
precautions.
Secondary precautions.
What is the primary protection of
Republican government of liberty of
unity?
It's not governmental structures. It's
the non-governmental institutions of
civil society that carry the lion share
of the load when it comes to the
formation of citizens.
It's mom and dad and grandma and grandpa
and auntie and uncle and coach and
teacher and pastor.
It's the family. It's the church. It's
the little league. It's the ballet. It's
the library. What Edmund Burke, the
great Edmund Burke called the little
platoon of civil society.
what the greatest commentator on
American democracy in all of history,
that foreign visitor in the 1830s named
Alexis Dtoqueville
pointed to
when he asked the question, "What makes
American democracy work? What makes a
democracy in America work?" He goes
right to those institutions of civil
society
that do the formation
of civic virtue. And I would add,
especially on this disunityity point,
the formation of civic friendship.
If those institutions don't teach us to
honor people with whom we disagree, not
to treat them as enemies to be
destroyed, if they fail to do it, no one
else will do it. And we'll end up where
we are very close to being today.
Could end up where we were in 1860.
And today we're very much like where we
were in 1800.
Treating each other not as civic friends
when we disagree, but as enemies to be
destroyed. And there's the threat to
Republican government.
&gt;&gt; Oh, that's real. That's real.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
You know, I I would just add just a
little small footnote.
And here our dear brother Russell Kirk
would agree with Martin Luther King Jr.
that in the end if we neglect the
spiritual and the moral dimension
of who we are as persons and a people
then even the best fidelity to the
constitution
still too abstract.
It's not fleshified and concretized on
the ground and how you treat people.
We see when I was coming along in
vacation bible school in Shiloh Baptist
Church and I was told by really reverend
Willie P. Cook he said little Cornell if
the kingdom of God is within you then
everywhere you go you ought to leave a
little heaven behind.
Now you see that comes from the genius
of Christianity
that argues that if we don't cultivate
the courage to love
not just calculating the consequences
but believing that intrinsically
loving one's way through life is still
desirable even if you don't end up
winning in the world's success.
That's nothing to play with. That's a
way of life. That's a mode of being.
And once you miss out on that, then the
very notion of moral and spiritual
greatness. I mean somewhere I read here
or she is greatest among you will be
your servant. That's spiritual
greatness. That's moral greatness.
That's different than Gingus call and
Napoleon and
Alexander great
&gt;&gt; and all the others.
But if Jesus said it, I I always want to
get the edge of my seat.
Jesus said to be a servant to the least
of things.
That's not just empty words.
I've decided to follow him.
Which means you you you you doing that
one because you believe it is the
richest way of being, not just for the
reward of the heavens, but because in
this cold, cruel, sin sick world is
still the desirable way of being. And
then without that as the backdrop of a
democracy,
your democracy is going to slide down
the slippery slope of wholesale
commodification where everybody's for
sale, everything is for sale. Is all
about buying and selling and ending up
overlooking human dignity and human
sanctity. Now, brother Wesy, I think
he's my banella cousin.
Where is he? There's my brother. My
brother Wes started off with what I day.
I said that's a sanctity and a dignity
that God gives each and every one of us
made in the image and likeness of a
loving and
living and almighty God.
And the world can't take it because the
world didn't
give it.
So every person you see is an image of
that God
and it has to be attempted to lived out.
We all fall on our faces. As Samuel
Beckett says, we try again, fail again,
fail better. Try again, fail again, fail
better. And I mean he's secular, but so
many of these secular figures are really
just laps
Christians and laps Lutheran like Hegel
and Nieti and laps Presbyterians because
they falling back on the spiritual
tradition. They just secularizing in
different language.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Justice, justice, justice.
any justice as only justice soon
degenerates into something less than
justice. That's right on nebo. Meaning
what? All the talk about justice in the
world is just a lifestyle and a market
strategy if it's not grounded in a love
or mercy. Love and mercy is deeper than
justice.
But you can appropriate the love and
justice, push out the religious and
spiritual dimensions and think you're
just talking about justice. Justice. No,
it's too thin. It's not going to last.
You need that rich deep stuff. Don't
transform the blood at the cross into
Kool-Aid.
&gt;&gt; That little thin stuff you you dip into
and want to get a blessing rather than
be transformed and want to be a
blessing.
That's the kind of revival that one
needs to be able to not just talk about
but try to enact as the empire itself
undergoes increasing decay, decline,
decrepitness and unbelievable
emptiness. But the good news is there's
always a cloud of witnesses. That's one
right we here in Cornerstone. Carter
Stone has his false and his horables,
but you got some Jesus loving folk.
And anybody talking about loving Jesus,
you say, "Oo, they're really audacious,
aren't they? They really want to follow
Jesus." My God,
that's a beautiful thing.
You know, I think it's very important
for our fellow citizens to understand
that we are living off the capital
of Christian morality.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; we're living off the capital and we're
depleting the capital and not I'm
talking about us culturally. We're
depleting the capital and not replacing
the capital. And you know, running a
university, what happens when you
deplete the capital? You don't deplete
the capital. You know that that's right.
That's exa that's exactly right. So, you
know, we're we're we're gone along.
We're, you know, we're we're not in a
situation where where, you know, people
are saying, "Yeah, Alexander the Great
was real or great." But we don't have a
very good you know once we have
sacrificed or given up our our Christian
basic understanding of the IMO day that
dignity and sanctity that Cornell was
talking about the that the the principle
the profound inherent and equal dignity
of each and every member of the human
family no matter how poor no matter how
weak no matter how disabled no matter
how distracted or or or addicted or
downtrodden you you are once we once we
give that up then the belief
that greatness doesn't lie in conquest
and domination
is going to have very short lifespan.
What will come back
first informally and then sure shoot
informally is the belief that to really
be somebody to really be great you
dominate and conquer other people. So,
it's up to us as Christians called to be
salt and light in in the world to
start building up that capital again.
That's what revival is all about. It's
building up that that capital again. And
we do that not simply by precept,
although precept is important. Teaching
and preaching is important. You have to
use words.
But even more important is example.
Teaching by example. People seeing other
people beginning with mom and dad and
grandma and grandpa and auntie and uncle
and teacher and coach and librarian and
pastor himself
setting the example of what it means to
lead a Christian life. That's that
combination of precept and example is I
think how it is that we're to be called
on we're called on uh to be salt and
light to the uh to the world. And you
know when these great things happen,
they usually don't happen top down. They
happen bottom up. What does scripture
tell us? The stone that was rejected
has become the cornerstone.
The it comes from where the last place
on earth you would have thought a few
Galilean fishermen who next thing you
know the world is transformed not from
the top down but from the from the
bottom up. I'm very grateful you both
brought up John RS. Oh, there you go.
&gt;&gt; Because he was lingering in the back of
my mind. That's interesting. And in his
book political liberalism you both very
familiar with it. But he he he mentions
there that there was a question that
tortured him throughout his life was
whether democracy could coexist with
comprehensive doctrines. Right.
&gt;&gt; Could democracy coexist in short with
Christianity? That's right.
&gt;&gt; You both have eloquently and I'm I'm so
grateful for that championed in life and
word the importance and beauty of Jesus.
And yet there are voices in democracy
that say no that that's the last thing
we need for democracy. We would say it's
what we need the most. So please talk
with us about that.
&gt;&gt; Well, two quick things. One, let me just
say a word about brother John Ross cuz
he was my dear dear brother. He was my
teacher. He was chairman of the
philosophy department when I was in
college there at Harvard. I used to
spend time with him in his in his living
room. And uh RS grew up wanting to be an
Episcopal priest,
the greatest liberal political theorist
who lost his Christian faith in World
War II.
He was just overwhelmed by the evil, the
cruelty, the bulbarity, the atrocities
of World War II.
But he decided in his secular form first
with Kant and then later on with some
engagements with Hegel but first
especially with Kant he decided he said
the best way to be a force for good is
to access the primacy
of morality and liberty
in a society that was more and more
obsessed with just money and power.
There's something to me that's still
salutary about that. That's John RS and
it took him 20 years to write the book
and he didn't turn down for tenure so
much for tenure now the first book the
theory of justice theory of just later
the political but then political
liberalism later on but especially the
text that that he's lecturing us to and
I think RS's example is is a grand one
because he's thoroughly convinced that
he thought there was fewer and fewer
spaces for morality and liberty
You see, and he understood that
democracy without liberty is just forms
with democratic desperatism as as as the
dto would put it, right? And yet he felt
he felt that he had to make his own
distinctive contribution as to how he
keep that alive. Uh but he was falling
back in some ways on his own shapings in
Baltimore City, which was Christianity
that he was deeply deeply shaped. When
you see Ros, you would look at him and
say, "There goes an Episcopal priest,
&gt;&gt; but he's really a philosophy professor,
deeply secular, but his history is still
at work in his work and his witness of
the text that it that that that he put
forward. Uh, and so I I think Rose in
some ways, and I know you've been
wrestling with Rose for for for a long
time in a critical way, is kind of the
last major figure committed to the
priority of morality and liberty that
that gains visibility in the academy
when it comes to political philosophy.
There's other figures of the ill
Strausses and Edric Voglans and others
who are important, uh, Tom Nagels and
others, but I just wanted to throw that
that in. I'm glad that that you did
mention um John Rose there.
I hold my second point. My first point
is so long.
&gt;&gt; No, no, you you want Well, yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh so, so for folks in the audience who
haven't had the opportunity to uh read
Professor RS or learn about him, as I
said, he was the most important, most
influential political philosopher of the
second half of the 20th century and
really into the first decade of the of
the 21st century. magisterial figure and
again although as I say I made much of
my career as a critic of RS uh he's a
person I deeply honor and respect and
from whom I learned an enormous amount
even while uh disagreeing. Now let me
give people a sense uh for those who
haven't read RS of of RWS's genius. What
made him the towering figure that he
was? He confronted the right question.
That question of the fact of reasonable
pluralism. How do we keep disagreement
from tearing us apart
given that if we allow freedom, we're
going to get disagreement?
So he says, "Well, let's do a thought
experiment.
I want you to think of yourself
as being in what he called the original
position
where you're behind what he called a
veil of ignorance. And in that original
position, behind the veil, you don't
know anything about yourself that makes
you different from anybody else. You
don't know your height, your weight. You
don't know whether you're male, female,
black, white, Latino, Asian. You don't
know if you're religious or secular. or
if you're rel you don't know if you're
Christian or Jewish or Muslim.
And very importantly for roles, you
don't know what your conception of the
human good is, of human flourishing, of
human well-being.
And yet in that original position behind
the veil of ignorance,
it's your job to choose principles of
justice that you will then have to live
with, live under when you come out from
behind the veil of ignorance to enter in
society governed by those principles of
justice that you selected and find out
who you are. that you're 5 foot n that
you're male, that your mother's of
Italian heritage and your father's of
Syrian heritage, that you're Catholic or
Protestant, whatever you are, you you
have a certain conception of the sorry
moral beliefs, um beliefs about personal
morality, beliefs about political
morality. Now, what principles would you
choose? And those principles will be
principles of justice because
we should conceive justice as fairness.
Justice RS's conception of justice is
justice as fairness.
Now given all that,
Wall says you would select principles of
justice that prevented
public action, including our action as
citizens in the public square
that drew on controversial conceptions
of religion
or of what makes for or detracts from a
valuable and morally worthy way of life.
Rolls gave it a a label. He called that
anti-perfectionism. You would choose
anti-perfectionist
principles out of your sense of fairness
because justice is fairness. Now, some
of you are students who here who've done
the core curriculum or in doing the core
curriculum and you've read a little of
the philosophy of the great thinkers of
antiquity such as Plato, you know, the
Cornell mentioned. You're immediately
thinking, well, wait a minute, that's a
conception of justice. Justice is
fairness.
But that's not the only conception of
justice.
So I've heard other people like Plato
say, "No, justice is giving each his
due." Now everybody's due fairness, but
that's only part of the picture. Justice
is not entirely reducible to fairness.
But RWS doesn't allow for that. He's
working with the conception of justice
as fairness. And that's going to exclude
action including in our role as citizens
based on what he calls our comprehensive
views. That's why the president
introduced that term a moment ago. What
does he mean by comprehensive views?
Your views of religion, your views of
the human good. So what's the net
effect?
&gt;&gt; It's to drive those views from the
public sphere into the purely private
domain in the sphere of the home, the
church or mosque or temple or synagogue.
you know, it's what you do around the
dinner table before you have your meal
or at bedtime on your knees or what you
do on Sunday at the at the church. But
it's now not playing the role in our
public life. So given that what he calls
liberal political liberalism conception
of justice
now what do you do about the great
champions of justice in our history
begin the list with Martin Luther King
Jr.
When Martin Luther King Jr. comes into
the public square does he leave his
religion behind in the church
or at home? No, he comes fully clothed
as the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr.,
son of Martin Luther King, senior
Baptist minister. He pleads for the end
of segregation and Jim Crow in the name
of what? The universal brotherhood of
man under universal fatherhood of God.
It's fullblown religious stuff.
It's not laying aside a particular
conception of the human good, of human
nature, the human human dignity, human
destiny. It's drawing on that Christian
vision as your source and inspiration
for overcoming the injustices, bringing
the nation to its founding principles,
finally getting the nation to live up to
that pledge that the other brother west
quoted to us from the Declaration of
Independence that all men are created
equal and endowed by their creator with
certain unalienable rights. So RWS is in
a struggle here. He needs to somehow not
excommunicate Martin Luther King from
the American project, but at the same
time he wants to keep religion out of
the public domain, the domain of public
affairs and restrict it to the private.
And you can probably get a sense of
where my critique comes abolution.
&gt;&gt; But in saying just a quick defense of
roles even on the overall project is
problematic. And here he's really
similar to Thomas Jefferson. You see,
uh, when Thomas Jefferson founded
University of Virginia, he was the first
university in the history of this
country that was founded no longer
around a religious
belief.
Why? Because the worst of we Christians
has been the accommodation of
Christianity to some of the vicious
forms of domination. Ross lost his
religious faith in part because he's in
Germany and he sees 85% of these
Christians following a gangster named
Hitler.
He says, "Where's the Jesus in this?"
Well, there's Dietri Bonhoffer over
there, but he's in the sale, so you
won't be able to interact with him too
much.
And the confessing church was a little
small confessing church. And even the
confessing church was much more
concerned about purifying themselves
than being in solidarity with the Jewish
folk who were going under. That's why
Bonhoffer used to begin every
lecture that he gave in the in his
seminary underground. He start with a
negro spiritual because he was deeply
shaped by Abisinian Baptist Church and
Adam Clayton Pow senior who was his
pastor when he was at Union Seminary
where I teach. He was the only vanilla
brother in the chocolate church.
But the gospel for everybody,
&gt;&gt; right? But RS says all of these German
Christians accommodating themselves to
organized greed and hatred.
These Christians, they they accommodate
themselves of slavery. They accommodate
themselves to Jim Crow. How many
Christian voices critical of lynching in
the 1890s and so forth and so on. And
when he sees that, he says, "We better
keep those folk out of the public
square." But that's dangerous, too.
That's dangerous, too. No, their voices
ought to be heard. You just have to be
able to engage in various forms of soul
craft to convince them that hating and
revenge is less desirable than love and
justice. And if you're unable to do
that, then you're going to have an
authoritarian and democracy is going to
be gone anyway.
So that Ross has his reasons as did
Thomas Jefferson, right? The reason why
you want separation of church and state
is why? Well, you got to watch some of
those churches. Now,
the Lord, they doing some things to
Jesus.
Sometimes you wonder whether Jesus would
be able to get in their churches
if they bragging if they bringing in
some of the least of the deeds in there.
I'm not talking about cornerstone. I
know everybody here pure and pristine
and free and spy rico, but I'm talking
about some Christians somewhere down the
line.
They have not got the Jesus memo in
terms of the Jesus we talking about.
&gt;&gt; You see what I mean? And there's where
Ross does catch himself. Now, who did
Ross have on his wall in his office? Ah,
&gt;&gt; this is interesting. I tell Robbie about
this all the time. I spend a lot of time
in there. He got a Lincoln up there. He
was one of the world's experts on
Abraham Lincoln, he never wrote a word
on Abraham Lincoln.
How come? Cuz like Thomas Hobbes,
Lincoln was obsessed with what? How do
you deal with war
and the war of all against all and egos
bouncing up against one another? Massive
disorder,
massive
anarchy in the narrow sense of no
possibilities of order whatsoever.
And without order, you can't have any
kind of soul craft or character
formation cuz everybody's looking behind
their back. It's all paranoia.
Sounds very similar these days, US
culture. And without paranoia, what
happens? No bonds of trust. Without
bonds of trust, what happens? No civic
dialogue
because nobody trust each other.
&gt;&gt; Do want to be open enough to say what
they mean and mean what they say.
They'll just say something in order to
get by or to be part of the in crowd.
I just want to say something in part of
my in crowd because I don't want to be
viewed as marginal.
Now, that means it's almost I never say
impossible in terms of God as Jesus, but
it looks as almost nearly impossibly a
follower of Jesus like that. And then
you got some folk go as far as to
convince themselves
that they following Jesus and they on
Pontious Pilot's payroll.
Now, that's really stretching it there,
isn't it? Jesus Christ,
Lord. But we human beings, we some
wretched creatures and think we can get
away with it. But thank God there's
always a cloud of witnesses that try to
make themselves and others accountable
in a loving way.
Check yourself.
You're too close to Pontious Pilate.
You're becoming idolatrous. You're
worshiping something that's wrong. That
golden calf is seducing you.
You given up the golden rule for the
golden calf.
He who has the golden rules, do unto
others as you have others do unto you.
Push that aside. That's too hard.
Yes, it's supposed to be hard
to be a follower of Jesus. But the joy
that flows from that difficulty with the
grace that is made available to you so
that you receive a help so that you can
choose the way of helping others.
See that to me puts smile on my face. I
mean that's shout materia in terms of
what it means to follow Jesus.
&gt;&gt; Oh yes definitely. And the great what
your your account of RS there Cornell
reminds me of that statement that Gandhi
made Mahatma Gandhi who said uh to to
the western audience he said uh
&gt;&gt; I like your Christ. I'm not so sure
about your Christians. Yeah.
in in the great in chapter 11 of
Hebrews, this great chapter that
sometimes we call the the hall of faith.
Chapter 11, what we're told Abraham and
Sarah and all these things of witnesses.
&gt;&gt; Yes. There there's a a a a very
important in scripture in the middle of
that verses where we're told that God
was preparing for Abraham a city
and a nation that was not here.
that Abram had left
because he wanted that polus
in that patria in the Greek that was not
here. It was heavenly.
And so I want to ask you to both to
comment on the importance of realizing
that as Christians, we're really
pilgrims.
&gt;&gt; Oh, we're pilgrims.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah. Hey, how do we journey
as pilgrims with the things that God
does give to us here?
&gt;&gt; Country
John Bunan's pilgrim.
&gt;&gt; That's right.
&gt;&gt; Progress on the on the airplane.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This world is not our home.
&gt;&gt; I think it's St. Is it Howard was it
Stanley who says that we're resident
aliens?
&gt;&gt; Resident aliens. Christians are resident
aliens. on the other I mean you know
this is a this is a complex thing
because uh yes this world is not our
home yes we're resident aliens but on
the other hand we are called there's no
question about this to be the very best
of good citizens
right especially in a country whose
principles are good and sound we hold
these truths to be self-evident that all
men are created equal that they're
endowed by their creator with certain
unalienable rights and among these the
life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness.
What are our founders saying there?
Basically, they're saying the human
being is made in the image and likeness
of God. It's a bear of profound,
inherent, and equal dignity. In a
country whose principles are sound, as
poor as we are at living up to our
principle, but in a country whose
principles are sound, seems to me that
we Christians are called to be loyal,
good citizens who constantly work for
the country to honor its principles.
Now, of course, the trouble is when you
get very far from the most obvious
applications of the principles, then you
fall into reasonable disputes. There's
that Rausian
fact of reasonable pluralism that that
fact of reasonable disagreement. Uh you
get very far from those principles to
down the road to trying to apply them.
We will fall into disagreements among
reasonable people of what the
implications of the principle actually
are.
&gt;&gt; Very much so.
&gt;&gt; And that's just the human condition
because we're all fallible. We're all
frail. We're all we are all fallen.
We're going to get some things wrong.
Every single one of us, right? Every
single one of us in every single one of
us out there. And if if there's an
exception, you can stand up, raise your
hand. All of us know that even right
now, we have some beliefs in our head
that aren't true. Right? We have some
false beliefs in our head. Is there
anybody out there who only has true
beliefs in your head? No. We all know we
have some false belief. What's the
problem? Problem is we don't know which
ones they are. Right? If we knew which
ones they were, we'd swap them out for
true beliefs. Who wants to run around
with false beliefs in your head?
So now, what do we do? Well, there I
think the answer is we've got to remain
open to challenge from our fellow
citizens. We need a regime of civil
discourse, debate, disagreement.
We need to engage each other when we
disagree, not as enemies, but in a truth
seeking spirit, as friends, cooperating
in the pursuit of truth, both knowing or
all knowing that we could be the ones
who are wrong. And again, not just about
the minor, trivial, superficial things,
but even about the big the big
questions.
So yes, this world is not our home, but
we're called on to be the very best of
good citizens. And doing that, we have
to call the country constantly to its
very good, solid founding principles
rooted in that great biblical insight
from Genesis 1, manade in the image of
God, inherent dignity. But we know we're
going to fall into debate with our
fellow citizens. And then the question
is, how do we conduct the debate?
treating each other as enemies to be
destroyed or as civic friends, partners
despite our disagreement in the pursuit
of truth where we're willing to listen
in a spirit of humility, in a
truth-seeking spirit. Not just politely
sit and let the other guy talk. I mean,
genuinely engage
knowing that I could be the one who
turns out to be wrong and I got to be
willing to change my mind if I am with
our fellow citizens. I think that's the
best that we can do in this veil of
tears.
No, I think he's right. I think he's
right. I um I think for example of the
role of the arts of of music and
literature and poetry,
uh which has some overlap. I mean, Job
is one of the great works of world
poetry, the history of the species in
Hebrew scripture.
And it's no accident that it's wrestling
with precisely this problem of evil,
problem of catastrophe. How do you
reconcile an allloving god with so much
social misery in the world? Uh and in
the end there is this surrender. This is
this acknowledgement of a mystery. There
there's acknowledgment that no one of us
either in control have a monopoly on
truth have a monopoly on the explanation
or interpretation of the world. We're
all cracked vessels
as WH says it's trying to love our
crooked neighbor with our crooked
hearts,
but we're called to do. And bearing
witness is not a matter of having the
overall explanation. We just don't know.
The great TS Elliott says what? We got
hints and guesses and revelation.
Paul says we see through dot dot dot
child
darkly. That's that humility that Robbie
is talking about here. No doubt. But I I
I do think the other side of this thing
though is that um we've got to be of
courage and not be discouraged.
That's that to me is a crucial thing.
&gt;&gt; Hopeful.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. In no way optimistic. See that to
me is a childless and juvenile thing.
Take that to the yellow brick road in
Disneyland and Disney World.
There's no accident at Disneyland at
Disney World. Say what? Nobody's ever
died on our property.
What does that mean? There's no life
where there's no death. There's just a
lot of fun. And I took my kids too for
stimulation and ventilation. That's
fine. That's fine. That's fine. But in
the end,
we Christians, we human beings who are
wrestling with what it means to be human
must learn how to die in order to learn
how to live. And there's no rebirth
without death. That's what baptism is
all about. And the reason why we're
pilgrims is precisely because we're
waiting for a return in which an
abundant life will be more manifest and
enacted in the deathlike world in which
we live.
That that's not that's not just
highulutin for formulation. These are
lives to be lived in this way. Uh and
and therefore there's a tragic
dimension. is a comic dimension and
that's why literature and poetry and
music is very important. The blues is
what is tragic comic.
&gt;&gt; Nobody loves me but my mama and she
might be driving too.
That's BB King. He's the king of the
blues. And that's the B side of the
thrill is gone but we won't get into
that right now.
Shakespeare, Hamlet, the greatest
literary character in the history of the
modern world emerging out of Europe.
What is it about Hamlet? He's the most
intellectually sophisticated character
that's ever been put
pin the paper. But he suffers from what?
The genius of Shakespeare in some ways
like the genius of Christianity. Hamlet
suffers from the underdeveloped capacity
to love.
And when you dry up the sources
of people who muster the courage to have
the capacity to love, you're going to
end up with Dante's inferno.
You're going to have hell on earth.
And that's in part what we've always
had. That was what Bunan understood was
Christian in the vanity affair writing
it in the prison 12 years released and
taken back to jail for what? All you
have to do Mr. abun you say you will not
preach Jesus Christ take me back to the
prison
but I got something to say with grace
abounding I got something to say
pilgrim's progress why because even in
this world of Kier's veil of tears that
there is a way in which we can cultivate
the capacity to love neighbor truth
beauty other enemy see we don't like to
talk about love enemy me too much.
&gt;&gt; I I think we need to take that seriously
cuz I try to love my enemy, but pray for
me. God
is
&gt;&gt; and I have something Cornell and I have
something that we can share with our
Cornerstone family here tonight that is
so hopeful and encourager. You know, a
few years ago, Cornell was was there
facing them at what was called the Unite
the Right Val U rally at the University
of Virginia in Charlottesville or at
Charlottesville, Virginia, where the
university is. And of course, what
Cornell was facing there were these
clansmen and neo-Nazis who were, you
know, there to rally what they regarded
as uh as as the right. It was a very
ugly scene, one that we thought we'd
been done with years ago in America and
never expected to to see again. Cornell
can tell you the wonderful story there
of his uh confrontation with uh one of
those neo-Nazis guys riding Cornell's
base and the guy says to Cornell, "I
recognize you. You're the guy who calls
everybody brother.
I hate that you calling everybody
brother. Why do you call everybody
brother?" And Cornell says, "Well,
brother,
it's bec
because I have the right to love
everybody. I have learned to love even a
gangster like you. I'm a gangster myself
who's been redeemed by Jesus." That's
right. I got to love you gangsters
whether you love it like like me or or
not. Uh, but the really hopeful,
encouraging news is that we both read
today a beautiful piece by one of those
Nazis at the Charlottesville rally
who as a result of his reading Jeff will
appreciate this. the writings of the
great Christian uh early 20th century
Christian thinker GK Chesterton. Gilbert
Gil great the great Chester was
converted to Christianity abandoned his
hatred came to understand the dignity of
people irrespective of race, ethnicity
and was basically transformed. and he
tells his own personal story
&gt;&gt; and it was just such an encouragement.
So the brother Lorenzo, that's his name,
brother. And I remember his face when he
they were making that charge against us.
It was just 18 of us thinking this
little light of mine, we going to let it
shine. We about to get crushed. What?
This little light of mine, we going to
make it. And they had their guns and
ammunition and had their mask on and so
forth. that was uh there in
Charlottesville. But again, it was just
of saying that Jesus frees us up, which
means we don't have to ask for anybody's
permission as to who we love. We are
told to love our neighbor and be a
neighbor.
Period.
Love enemy. That is a radical freedom in
the love. Radical radical love in the
freedom. And um and that that's that's a
beautiful thing.
&gt;&gt; Oh, tell them what the music that was
being
&gt;&gt; Oh, that was fascinating. So, you walk
by the park
and these spiritually sick white
brothers,
they playing Mottown,
Stevie Wonder.
I said only in America.
But there's something about that too
because and this is not true just for
black folk. It's true for for any human
being who digs deep in the dark corners
of their own soul and transmutes their
suffering into a sound that touches the
souls of others. And that's what Stevie
Wonder does. He's one of the greatest
love warriors of his generation. And so
even when you hate the people who are
producing it, the product itself is so
human, so deep, so spiritual that it
still affects you
because nobody has full control over
their own lives or products. It could be
impact you having on somebody on the
job, but they cussing you out at
lunchtime and going home and thinking,
"Oh, but that's such a Christian sister.
Oh my god, that Christian brother, I
can't stand it. Always trying to act
like he's obsessed with Jesus, but they
wrestling and wrestling and wrestling
and wrestling. You don't know what kind
of impact you're having on their lives
for sure.
&gt;&gt; It's not in your control.
&gt;&gt; That's what Elliott means when he said,
"Ours is in the trying. The rest is not
our business."
&gt;&gt; You all remember that line in four
quartets?
It's part of his Christian genius. Even
though it's politics, of course, I'm
going to have to pray and struggle with
that, brother. But he's got the insights
that are deep and and and and it has so
much to do with this capacity to love.
There's no doubt about it.
&gt;&gt; As when you when you spoke of blues art
music, a story, I just remember this and
it's a funny anecdote, but I'll never
forget it. I will confess this openly. I
was years ago playing the Rolling Stones
in my living room. a little Mc Jagger
and the song came on, you can't always
get what you want.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I remember.
&gt;&gt; And my six-year-old son walked in and he
heard that. He said, "Papa, that is
true.
&gt;&gt; I'll let her feel."
&gt;&gt; And and I looked at him and said, "Son,
go back to do your homework."
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. No. Got something to say. Got
something to say. to bring up the music
and and now you you outed me as a
bluegrass banjo player. I just I just
want to assure Robbie is a serious banjo
serious.
&gt;&gt; You know, I I came by my bluegrass banjo
picking. Honestly, I was born and
brought up in the hills of West
Virginia. That's where banos are issued
to little boys at birth. So, that's how
I came by then. Banjo playing.
As we close the evening, brother George
and brother was my my brothers. I would
like to ask you to share your heart with
this audience and the students here
about the future of this country and and
just share your heart with them as we
think about where we are, where we could
be, where we need to be. Closing words.
&gt;&gt; I'm no Cassandra here and tell you I I
don't I don't know exactly what the
future looks like. That for me is um
always a um the question that comes
after the first issue which is I know
what I'm going to be doing in the face
of the future.
I know what I plan to try to bear
witness to with a humility and a
tenacity. I know that I'm never going to
be
pessimistic
by trumping or truncating any hope
because I'm a prisoner of hope. That's
part of the Christian promise.
But Christian hope is not reducible to
secular optimism. They're not the same
thing. But in terms of the future,
this in the Lord's hands and I don't
know.
But the memory of the spiritual and
moral great ones and the efforts, the
blood, sweat and tears of sustaining the
families and institutions and all the
various products that have been passed
on to us and we trying to pass it on to
the younger generation to pour all the
love and integrity and honesty that's
been poured into me by Irene and Clifton
as mom and dad and for me to pour it
into others. I know I'm going to do
that. But that's really all I can say.
The future's always incomplete. It's
always open-ended.
It's always u unfinished. But you just
don't know. You don't know. Will the a
grimness and dimness and outright
fascism take over this country and other
countries around the world. Depends on
how much love and courage we have.
That's a factor. If we give in, we cave
in. We sell out.
become resigned
then there's a good chance that the
worst could come forward but it's always
an open
or open door and as I said before I do
believe that uh the language of
possibility and impossibility
is always
uh
a language that has no
definitess to it. Let me put it that
way. We just don't know. We bear witness
to the best of our abilities at the
moment.
You know, contemporary secularism
has um embraced
an idea and it it bleeds into the
Christian mentality today as well.
It's embraced an idea that Markx Karl
Marx picked up from his principal
influence which was Hegel GWF Hegel
and that is the idea that there is a
kind of set of laws of history
that propel history forward. that
history has a kind of determined
predetermined course sometimes takes the
form of the idea of an inevitability of
progress
a kind of arc of history that might be
long but it bends toward just I think
Martin Luther King once said that man
going back to Park or TJ Parker exactly
&gt;&gt; um
now this idea as it's developed by marks
is really proposed
as a replacement
for the idea of God as a judge.
What replaces that idea for Markx and
for secularists, whether they're
Marxists or not, who'd picked up the
idea from Markx. Um, what replaces it uh
is the idea that history will be the
judge. So, you probably heard people
say, "Well, you you you better change
your mind about that. You better change
your view about that because you're
putting yourself on the wrong side of
history." And a lot of people have come
to believe that there is a right and
wrong side of history. that history does
function as a as a judge and that you
should try to choose your beliefs and
choose your actions and choose your
commitments guessing where history is
going to go because you want to be on
the right side of history. But for we
Christian, we know history doesn't have
sides.
History is not a judge. History is a set
of contingent impersonal
events.
It's going to go one way or the other
depending on choices that human be not
exclusively but in part significant part
on choices that human beings made and
those human beings include you and me
and everybody else. History is not our
judge. God is our judge. We shouldn't be
asking we're going to be on the right
side of history. Should be asking are we
going to be on the right side of truth,
God's truth. Truth does have a right and
wrong side. You want to be on the right
side of truth, not on the right side of
history. You don't know. History could
go in very bad direction because it
isn't predetermined. That's I think the
point Cornell was trying to make there's
openended, right? It's going to depend
on what we we do for the better or for
worse. And that's why Cornell and I
entitled our new book, Truth Matters. We
think truth really matters. That there's
no inevitability.
We need to put ourselves on the right
side of truth. Now, we can't just say,
"Okay, good. I'm going to affirm truth
all the time." Not that easy. Quite the
contrary, it's very hard.
The best we can do is to form ourselves
to be this is for you students, you
cornerstone students. This is a plea
from me to you. And I think Cornell
joins me.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. There's our plea.
form yourselves to be determined truth
seekers
and courageous truth seekers. Now, both
of those are critically important.
If if you're not a determined truth
seeker, you're just going to be an
idologue. You're just going to be a
dogmatist.
You're just going to go going to go
along with the tribe or the crowd or the
group or what's popular or what's in.
No, you got to be a determined truth
seeker. That means you're going to have
to be open to challenge, to argument,
respecting other people enough to listen
to them, not to assume that everything
in your head is is true. And then you're
going to have to be a courageous truth
speaker. And that's even harder. Cuz
sometimes when you speak the truth, you
find the truth is really unpopular.
Maybe with the great mass people, maybe
with the elite, maybe with the powerful,
those who can make a big difference as
to your future and your career. and
you're going to be very tempted to go
quiet or even to go along
because you lack the courage to speak
the truth
even though you know the truth have a
pretty good idea of what it is. So what
you're engaged in your students now here
at cornerstone is a process of formation
forming yourselves to be determined
truth seekers and courageous truth
speakers. Now what about the faculty? We
have a message for you to your vocation
is to help the young men and women
entrusted by their families to your
charge to your care to form themselves
to be determined truth seekers and
courageous truth speakers. And again you
do that in two ways. One by precept by
what you teach. That's important. Can't
be dispensed with no permission slips
not to teach the right stuff.
But even more important is by the
example you set that true
&gt;&gt; for your students. You want them to be
determined truth seekers and courageous
truth speakers. The very best thing you
can do is to model for them what it
means to be a determined truth seeker
and a courageous truth speaker. And my
prayer, Mr. president is for Cornerstone
University
to be the champion
that models for the larger academic
world
as the stone on which that becomes the
cornerstone to model for the world an
institution determined to form young men
and women to be determined truth seekers
and courageous truth speakers. To me
that is the mission of this university
just as it is the vocation of the
faculty and it's the very reason
students should be here and not
someplace else.
Professor George from Mr. West. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Please
join me in thanking our speakers,
Professor George and Professor West for
a wonderful evening.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. You want to look good.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you so much. It was
wonderful. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you, Robbie. Thank you. Thank you. We'll
be we'll be
&gt;&gt; I want to ask Elijah Plume to come. Our
student body president who will be
closing us this evening. Elijah, come
on.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for being here. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you much.
&gt;&gt; Amazing wasn't my brother.
&gt;&gt; Amaz.
&gt;&gt; You want a hug, too?
&gt;&gt; Pleasure. Yeah. Thank you so much.
&gt;&gt; Can we thank them one more time, guys?
That was just amazing.
I hope you all enjoyed tonight's wisdom
conversations. My name is Elijah Plume.
I serve as a student here, but I serve
as the student body president. It's just
a great opportunity. Uh wisdom
conversations is just a wonderful
opportunity at Cornerstone.
It's an opportunity to hear great
thinkers in different perspectives that
we've never heard before. What a
blessing it is to have this opportunity.
Yeah.
As a college student, one of the best
lessons I ever learned was to never let
an opportunity go by.
This opportunity known as wisdom
conversations serves as a pillar of
truth in this world of lies that we can
live in. Yes, a great reminder for you
all that the greatest opportunity that
we were ever given was to serve Jesus
Christ.
These people you hear standing or these
people you see here standing before you
are people that want to live like that
and have lived like that. So take after
them. But during last fall's wisdom
conversations, I left you with one piece
of advice. It was do not let tomorrow's
busyness let you forget yesterday's
wisdom. But I'll leave you with
something new.
&gt;&gt; Use yesterday's wisdom for today's
opportunity because tomorrow is not
promised.
Write that down. Write that down.
I'd like to thank you guys all for
coming here today. Um, I would like to
encourage you to all to continue to come
to Cornerstone events such as the CU
Leadership Forum and the Wisdom
Conversations coming this fall. And I
would like to give a special thanks to
our evening sponsors whose names are on
the back of your guys' programs. Will
you guys all please pray with me?
Dear Lord, just thank you for this day.
Thank you for all these speakers and
thank you that we all got here safely.
Please just continue to be with us and
bless this time that we have for you.
Lord, help us serve you in every way,
shape, and form. Lord, thank you for
your love and thank you for your
forgiveness, Lord. Amen.
&gt;&gt; Amen.