See that's the interesting thing about
the viral vector of cancer when you
actually understand truly what Sarah
Stewart is saying is that when you
recapture the ability to control both
apoptosis and autophagy for example what
you had mentioned that Asprey brought to
your table was about red light red light
controls autophagy that's not really the
big defect
In cancer, it's more apoptosis. Remember
I told you it's UV light? Well, what do
mitochondria make? What what's the real
antidote for your sun? UV light because
tryptophan is the the base amino acid
that's made from melatonin. It has an
absorption spectrum between 200 and 400
nmters.
That is what's created in a
mitochondria. When mitochondrial
metabolism, which is what Seaff Freed is
trying to explain to you, works. The key
is what light is made from mitochondrial
metabolism in your son. Prior to him
being cured, it likely wasn't enough UV
light. So, it goes back to the story
that I told you about with Uburn about
the onion skin. What you need, you need
UV light to control mitosis and cells.
And that's where the story comes in.
That's why guys like Sigfree, guys like
Asprey, I have problems with them. Why?
because they're selling halftruths to
people, not the whole story. And what
people need to understand is that
biopysics controls the box cars in
biochemistry. And the biopix physics
that we're talking about here is really
light. It's electromagnetism.
And I want you to understand what the
whole purpose of the lac was in the work
that these ladies were doing is they
were increasing the intercolation rate.
Your son is growing up in an environment
where that radiation ain't going away.
So your question to me was, what does he
need to focus in on? He needs to focus
in on redux. Well, redux power is tied
to how much UV light and how much
infrared a light he gets. Now I want you
to do a hard stop and think about what
the oncologist, the pediatricians, and
all the doctors tell you about the sun.
You understand why he'll continue to
always be at risk? Because if he doesn't
understand the story of melanin, vitamin
D, melatonin, the control of apoptosis,
and mitochondrial biology, like I just
gave you five layers to this onion.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; You will never get the appropriate
answer to help him. And he needs to
realize that he has to run his life so
his redux pay stays high because what
does that mean effectively? It means
that his heteroplasm rate will stay low
in the kidney where the tumor eventually
was. Why? Because your assumption, if
you're following along this story I'm
giving you, is that the heteroplasm rate
in your son's kidneys were much higher
than you even knew, probably above 70%
when he was born. So that's a huge
effect. So that means the amount of UV
light that he gets probably from his
clavicles to his butt. That's where your
kidneys are back here. He needs to be
constantly tan there. So wearing a shirt
for him probably not a smart thing. And
he always wants to have a good tan
because that's the thing that's going to
keep this cancer likely at bay.