The ancient Sumerian tablets describe
the stories of the gods, their
adventures, deeds, and battles leading
to the creation of the heavens, [music]
the earth, and humanity. Many of these
stories are interpreted to be describing
planets and the formation of the early
solar system. And in many ways, the
theories appear to add up. However, as
the tablet stories continue on, they are
read in a different way, as if these
gods were not deities at all, but
physical beings who came to the earth
and were involved in human history.
When we're looking into the stories and
interpretations of the Sumerian tablets,
there comes a point when we have to
change our perspective as to the nature
of who or what these gods were. For so
long now, we've been observing the
interpretations where these deities are
essentially a storytelling method to
explain the creation of our solar system
in the form of planets. The electric
universe and the Nibira [music] theory
covers a few different possibilities
about how these events could have
transpired.
However, as we look to the continuation
of these stories, we begin to see the
interpretations change. Looking at the
Anuma Illish and a wide number of other
Sumerian tablet stories, we see these
gods interpreted as if they were actual
physical beings who are believed to have
played a part in the creation of
humanity. This is one of the many
reasons that interpreting the tablets
are strange and why historians may often
choose to perceive the entire thing as a
series of metaphors instead. In the main
interpretation that came from Sitchin,
he believed that these beings came from
the planet Nibiru. However, other
scholars who also interpret these gods
as beings sometimes forego the
conversation of Nibiru entirely and
suggest instead that they simply came
from somewhere else, such as the
Plleades, which are written about quite
commonly [music] in the tablets. Keep
this in mind as we move forward because
while we'll be focusing on the general
interpretations here, there are tons of
variations and ideas about how this
could have played out. Going back to the
Anuma Elish, it ends with Enki or Ia
creating humanity because Marduk
commissioned it. So in other Sumerian
stories we find a similar description
except it [music] is Enlil in the place
of Marduk because Marduk replaced Enlil
in the Babylonian version. Enlil and
Marduk are very similar though they are
both considered the supreme leaders of
the Anunnaki. The only main difference
is that Marduk is Enki's son and Enlil
is Enki's half brother. But herein we
find perhaps one of the biggest
criticisms of Sitchin's work. Sometimes
I or Enki appears as a planet and other
times he seems to be a flesh and blood
deity. It can be very confusing and it's
up to all of us to explore the
possibilities. [music] Now I suppose it
doesn't really matter if we're looking
at the entire story as an allegory, but
observing it as actual historical events
can definitely cause confusion in this
regard. So for the sake of telling the
story, we'll be using the name Ia to
express the planet and Anki to describe
the physical being. Just be aware that
if you look these up online, you will
find many places where their names
overlap with each other in the
mythologies.
To that end, most of the deities you'll
find have multiple names anyways. Enki
is also known as Enkig, Nidimud, and
Ninsuku throughout the various tellings.
And as we previously described, he was
the god of water, mischief, crafts,
wisdom, and creation. Enlil his brother
on the other hand was known as Elil
[music] and Nunamir and he was the
Sumerian god of the air and was more
powerful than any other elemental deity
eventually being worshiped as the king
of the gods. [music] He was also the son
of Anu and together the three of them
formed a triad which governed the
heavens, earth and underworld or
alternatively the [music] universe, sky
and atmosphere and the earth itself.
After Anu, Enlil was the most powerful
of the Mesopotamian gods, keeper of the
tablet of destinies, [music]
which contained the fates of both gods
and humans. But in [music] that case,
who was Anu? And what were the Anunnaki?
That's a great question. But before we
can answer it, we're going to have to
look at another question first. So,
let's do the time warp again and return
to that burning question from so long
ago. Who are the Nephilim?
As we had discussed, the Bible speaks of
these people or beings called the
Nephilim. There's a lot of debate today
as to who and what these beings were.
Looking back to the original Hebrew
translation, we see the word Nephilim
directly translates to the fallen ones.
Today, many believe this to mean that
they were fallen angels, which seems to
be what was depicted in the 2014 film
Noah. Sitchin, on the other hand,
believed the translation was a bit
different. He read fallen ones to mean
those who came down and that they didn't
fall but landed here in some kind of
spaceship. To him, the Nephilim were the
people of the fiery rockets. Of course,
this is one of those translations that
doesn't seem to often hold up well to
scrutiny, but it's interesting given the
context of these stories nonetheless. We
should note that in his writings,
Sitchin commonly used the name Nephilim
in tandem with the Anunnaki, also
written sometimes as Anuna. But
personally, I'm not certain that this is
the best use of these titles. You see,
the Anunnaki are believed to have been
the descendants of Anu, the Skyfather,
and the two most prominent leaders of
this group are Enki and Enlil. Beyond
that, there's a lot of inconsistency
between how many Anunnaki there were and
what roles they fulfilled. For example,
in the Enuma Alish, there's only a small
handful of gods who are introduced.
Tiiamat, Enki, Marduk, you know the
group. But then out of nowhere, Marduk
places 600 gods on the earth and 300 in
the heavens. And no explanation is ever
given about who these gods were or where
they came from. Later on in our own
history, the ancient Hittites identified
the Anunnaki as the oldest generation of
gods who were overthrown and banished to
the underworld by the younger gods,
which is curiously what is described in
the Anuma Alish itself and reflects the
stories of the old Titan gods in Greece
being overthrown by a younger pantheon.
In the Bible, we see the following
passage. The Nephilim were on the earth
in those days and also afterward when
the sons of God came into the daughters
of men and they bore children to them.
Those were the mighty men who were of
old, men of renown. Well, they better
have been courtly and romantic because
if that line is implying anything else,
I don't like it.
The Bible describes that they were the
offspring of the sons of God and the
daughters of men. Essentially making the
Nephilim be a little bit more like
demigods, a hybridized species born of
the gods, who would have been the
Anunnaki and humans together. It's
theorized this could be where demigods
in general came from, such as Hercules,
who is the son of the god Zeus, and the
mortal woman named Alchemi. The result
of this made Hercules fully human, yet
who had the gift of the tremendous
strength of a god. Of course, depending
on who you're speaking with, the concept
of Nephilim could just come from a
mistransation of the Bible and the
Anunnaki being simply an ancient
Mesopotamian archetype. For the sake of
the story, I will be telling the tale
from the perspective that the Anunnaki
are physical beings. But as always, feel
free to interpret this however you like,
and please share your thoughts in the
comments below as to what you believe
these Anunnaki were.
This story begins several hundred
thousand years ago and starts in the
midst of a drama involving the Anunnaki,
the planet Nibiru, and our Earth.
Sitchin wrote that he believed that the
planet Nibiru was inhabited with life at
one point in its history. He wrote that
the dominant species on the planet were
bipeedal in stature and had evolved
conscious minds. They were the Anunnaki.
These beings were said to be much bigger
than we are today, with the women being
about 10 to 12 ft and the men being 14
to 16 ft tall, which you might recall
relates with the various levels of
consciousness we explored way back in
Spirit Science 11 and 12. The Anunnaki
were not immortal, but they had
exceptionally long lifetimes compared to
what we're used to. Sitchin's
translations estimated their lifespan to
be somewhere between 360,000 and 500,000
Earth years. However, another scholar,
Lawrence Gardner, suggested the Anunnaki
only had lifespans of 50,000 years. The
Anunnaki have been described in several
different ways. Most commonly, they are
depicted as tall, bearded men, and
sometimes there are women and children
depicted as well. However, they
sometimes are interpreted to have been
crocodilelike in nature or with
reptilian features. If you're familiar
with a lot of new age ideas, you might
have heard of the idea of reptilians,
which are said to be bipedal lizard
creatures and are usually the
antagonists in the human story. However,
just as there are reptile humanoid
statues from ancient Sumer, so too are
the Anunnaki, also depicted as
bird-like, which Sitchin believed was
simply their space helmets. Either way,
both of these depictions of the Anunnaki
as reptiles or birds are scarce, with
the tall bearded men version being the
most prominent. I do believe that
regardless of what these beings look
like, it's the bearded image of these
so-called deities that gave us our
common Christian image today. God as an
older gentleman with a long beard. To
that end, even Sitchin fought the idea
that the Anunnaki were reptilian beings,
and this was because he wanted his
theory to fit with the Bible. To him,
the gods could not be in the form of the
biblical serpent. Nevertheless, these
different depictions have given rise to
a lot of online debate about what these
beings could look like, if they're even
literal physical beings to begin with.
Many proponents of the reptilian theory
suggest that these beings are actually
shape shifters as well and can change
their form at will, which is why there
are different depictions of them
throughout history. This adds an
entirely new dimension to the discussion
[music] and gives rise to the popular
conspiracy theory that they could even
be living among us today in secret. At
any rate, for the focus of this series,
we're going to keep to the depiction of
the Anunnaki as these bearded humanoids,
and we'll come back around to the
alternate depictions sometime later on.
One of the most important Sumerian gods
is the skyfather named Anu. A number of
Sumerian texts discuss Anu, but not all
agree to every aspect of his existence,
such as where he came from or what he
actually is. Despite the fact that we
previously observed Anu as Uranus, on an
allegorical level, Anu could simply be
the way that the Sumerians personified
the sky. And therefore, the Anunnaki are
those who came from the sky and outer
space. The name Anu is the root word of
Anunnaki, which is sometimes translated
as offspring of Anu or princely
offspring. This is why Sitchin believed
that they were the species that came
from above and beyond our planet. Anu
was the heavenly father and those who
descended from the sky were his
children. Once again, we see
descriptions of God today as passed down
throughout history. In Christianity, God
is called the heavenly father, the
origins of which we find with Anu, the
ancient Sumerian god of the sky.
According to Sitchin's translations and
theories on the subject, the Anunnaki
were technologically advanced beings
living on the planet Nibiru. Let me also
be clear that in Sitchin's book, The
Lost Book of Enki, he puts forth a
potential version of this ancient past
drama, which is really epic, but also
very elaborate and long. Honestly, this
book would make a great Hollywood movie.
Just saying. Actually, in a way, it kind
of already has. And I just want to take
a moment to give a huge shout out to the
band and team behind Messengers of the
Wind, an animated rock opera that you
can watch right now on YouTube. The
whole thing is seriously amazing and I
just had to give it some mad props right
here and now. As for today's exploration
of this theory, we're just going to be
going over the essentials. Otherwise, we
could literally be here for a week.
Sometime around 450,000 years ago, long
after the event between Nibiru and the
planet Tiiamat, the Anunnaki began
having a problem with their planet. As
we discussed earlier, this planet had a
very strange orbit which took it far
away from the sun for long periods of
time. Sitchin interpreted from the
tablets that the planet had a lot of
internal heat which kept things alive in
the long distances of space. [music]
However, over time and with the cooling
of the planet and potentially even the
widening out of its rather sharp orbit,
Nibiru grew colder and colder during its
long voyages away from the sun and the
planet was slowly becoming less
habitable. Sitchin suggested that the
Anunnaki scientists decided [music] on a
solution that would strengthen their
atmosphere and hold heat in for
significantly longer periods of time,
making it possible to survive in the far
[music] reaches of space. The Anunnaki
decided that they would gather large
amounts of gold and pulverize it into a
fine powder and release [music] it into
their atmosphere, essentially creating a
heat container for their planet. Believe
it or not, our scientists [music] have
considered the exact same thing. Putting
light reflecting particles into our
stratosphere to help fix the ozone layer
and cool our everwarming planet. And so,
[music] in their attempt to solve their
problem, they began looking for large
quantities of gold in our solar system.
as their planet didn't have the large
quantities they needed to coat an entire
atmosphere with gold.
The Anunnaki had the capacity of space
travel, though Sitchin believed that at
the time they weren't much further
advanced than we are right now since
they didn't seem to have the ability to
travel to other solar systems in their
search. They scanned all of the planets
in our solar system until they found
what they were looking for, large
deposits of gold right here on Earth.
As the story goes, when Nibiru first
came into our solar system, the Anunnaki
would deploy a team of workers to
Earth's orbit with one singular purpose,
to mine gold. In the process of doing
this, they also established a way
station on Mars, which would help in
shuttling the gold back to Nibiru once
it was mined. Sitchin also believed that
they had during this time built the face
on Mars as a monument to an Anunnaki who
had died there after playing a pivotal
role in finding the gold which was going
to save their planet. To lightly touch
on the subject of the face on Mars, when
you investigate this yourself, you'll
find two prominent stories. One is the
official response from NASA which says
that it's just a natural rock formation
which due to the way the light was
hitting it at the time of the photograph
created this image of a face. But
ultimately, it's just an illusion.
Generally, those who question this
perspective are often subject to
ridicule. And so, of course, we have to
go there. It wouldn't be spirit science
if we didn't. On the other side of the
spectrum, you'll find ex-NASA scientists
and astronauts, retired US Army command
sergeants, and a university physics
professor along with a number of ancient
astronaut and conspiracy theorists who
put forth that the face along with a set
of nearby mountainous structures that
look an awful lot like pyramids are the
remnants of an ancient civilization."
Now, please know that I fully understand
this is a huge claim and one that we
don't take lightly. So, please allow me
a moment to share with you what we've
come up with while investigating this
whole thing.
In a lecture given in 2009, Bob Dean, a
retired command sergeant major, said the
following. Ladies and gentlemen, my
government, NASA, NASA, which many of us
in the United States say stands for
never a straight answer, [laughter]
proceeded to [clears throat] erase
40 rolls of film
of the Apollo program.
the flight to the moon, the flight
around the moon, the landings on the
moon, the walking guys here and there,
they erased, for Christ's sake, 40 rolls
of film of those events. Now, we're
talking about several thousand
individual frames that were taken
that the so-called authorities
determined you did not have a right to
see.
Oh, they were disruptive. Uh, socially
unacceptable, politically unacceptable.
I I become furious. I'm a retired
command sergeant major. I was never
famous for having a lot of issues.
&gt;&gt; Now, another man named Brian Olirri, who
was a NASA astronaut and a close friend
of Carl Sean for many years, expressed
in an interview with Project Camelot
that a huge rift was created in their
friendship over the face on Mars. Carl
and I debated this and it was very
disappointing to me because not only was
Carl wrong, he also fudged data. He he
he published a a a picture of the face
in Parade magazine, a popular article
saying that the face is just a natural
formation, but he doctorred the picture
to make it not look like a face. [music]
And I began to realize just directly
from a scientific point of view, not
only hearsay, that this man was
colluding with NASA that there there
might be more to this than before. And
then when I started studying things like
MJ12 and other organizations that were
covering up the UFO phenomenon, Carl was
on a committee with a number of notable
people. [music] There was a report
issued by the Brookings Institution in
1961.
And that's about when I knew Carl during
those years, the 60s mostly is when I
worked closely with him that he he and
this other group said, "Well, if any
ETSs ever showed up on the earth, it has
to be covered up. That's the only way
we're going to be able to manage this
because if we can't, it would be too
much of a culture shock." So their
recommendation to the government in 1961
was to cover up the UFO phenomenon. And
I think in a way that provided it a
justification for the ongoing cover up
uh way back in ' 61 was to keep things
secret.
&gt;&gt; But Bob and Brian aren't alone in their
claims. We also find very accomplished
scientists and mechanical engineers who
were involved with NASA who basically
share the same story. We'll share some
links in the author comments so that you
can read up on all of these responses to
Sidonia and the face on Mars. And with
that, it's about time we return to our
story. Now in the Anuma Alish it says
that Marduk placed 300 Anunnaki in the
heavens and 600 on the earth or the
netherworld depending on the translation
and all of these Anunnaki were led by 12
leaders. Sigin believed that this was
attempting to describe that there were
600 worker Anunnaki who came to earth to
dig the gold who were led by 12
supervisors or bosses. The 300 gods in
the heavens were believed [music] to be
another 300 Anunnaki who stayed in orbit
on their mother ship above the surface
of the planet. [music] similar to how we
have the International Space Station in
orbit today. To begin their mission, the
Anunnaki first went to the Middle East.
Sitchin believed it to be in the area of
present-day Iraq where in 7 days they
established Aridu. Eridu is commonly
believed to be the oldest Sumerian site
across all of Mesopotamia. And is it
possible that this is where the 7 days
of creation come from in Genesis? Either
way, it was here that they established
their headquarters for the gold.
However, they went to mine a specific
valley in Southeast Africa where the
largest natural deposit of gold was
known to be. Of the 12 supervisors,
Enlil was the leader of the whole
operation, and Enki was second in
command. The Anunnaki carved deep into
the earth and dug large quantities of
gold. Then, every 3600 years when planet
Nibiru came around, they would shuttle
the gold to their home world and
returned to digging while Nibiru
traveled its orbit again. Now, according
to Sitchin and supporting theorists,
they dug for a very long time. About
100,000 to 150,000 years before the
rebellion took place. Somewhere between
300,000 and 200,000 years ago, the
Anunnaki workers rebelled against their
bosses. They did not want to keep
digging in the mines. One can easily
imagine them saying, "We've been digging
gold for 150,000 years, and we're tired
of it. We're done." The rebellion
presented a problem for the supervisors
and something had to be done. This is
where Enlil and Enki come into the story
in a very prominent way. If you recall
in the original Sumerian story, we had
two versions of the conception of
humans. In one, it was Namu's idea and
in the other Enlil told Namu the idea
who gave it to Enki. So, as our story
goes, during the time of the rebellion,
Anki's mother communicated with Anki
while he slept, sending him a vision,
saying, "Oh, my son, arise from thy bed,
from thy slumber, work what is wise.
Fashion servants for the gods." Due to
the variations, it's not clear about
where the true origins of this vision
come from. But nevertheless, Anki
awakens from this vision-filled slumber
and suggests [music] creation of
servants for the gods.
According to the story, Anki himself
creates human beings out of a mixture of
clay and the blood of the slain Kingu.
This is another time where we have two
different interpretations converging on
each other because earlier we saw how
Kingu was interpreted to be the moon.
But now Kingu seems to be a being with
flesh and blood. For it is with Kingu's
DNA that provides the necessary
ingredients for human genetics. What is
Kingu really? Looking at the rest of
this description, we see a few more
possible interpretations. To some, the
term clay doesn't mean like physical
clay, but earthly matter, including
pre-existing life. And many believe that
this line actually means that humans
were created in a synthesis [music] of
Anunnaki DNA and the DNA of the highest
form of primitive life available on the
earth. This then would suggest that
humans weren't necessarily created, but
came from a modification of an earlier
hominid species, which was most likely
either homo erectus or homohygenis.
For years, we've been struggling to find
the missing link between our species,
Homo sapiens, and our [music]
predecessors. And this search is still
taking place today. Perhaps this is our
missing link. What's especially
interesting about this is the timeline
because we currently understand that
Homo sapiens emerged roughly 2 to
300,000 years ago, which is said to be
right about when the Anunnaki rebellion
took place. Throughout the tablets,
genetics and the transformation of the
human being are recurring themes. in the
flower of life books which originally
put a lot of different pieces together
in these stories. Druo puts forth
another piece of information that is
very intriguing. He describes that in
order to create a new species you need
both a father species and a mother
species just like in order to create a
child you need a mother and a father.
Dumalo said that the Anunnaki were our
mother species because they did the
actual birthing and that our father
species were actually the Syrians or at
least a species from the star system
Sirius. So to be very clear, these
beings came from Sirius, not Syria,
which is one of the closest stars to us
and the brightest star in the sky. Well,
not counting the sun. Okay, second
brightest. Now, while the Anunnaki were
primarily a third-dimensional species,
the Syrians were fourthdimensional and
so were able to come to our planet in a
way that was probably like tessering
from a wrinkle in time. In a stunning
ritual, he described that these beings
traveled here interdimensionally and
entered directly into the womb of the
halls of Amenti and before the flower of
life, the sacred heart of all
consciousness on the planet. Because
they understood everything was light and
energy, in their fourth dimension, they
created 32 rose quartz slabs [music] and
then laid down upon them and entered
into a long meditation, conceiving a new
consciousness. Then Enki on the third
dimension created a laboratory human
egg, a genetic fusion of Anunnaki DNA
and the DNA of the previous homminid
species and put them into Anunnaki women
who were volunteering to do this. The
new seeds of consciousness created by
the Syrians then entered into the eggs
and impregnated the women who nurtured
them for what probably felt like 9
months or so and bore them as children.
Now, let's be clear that this part about
the Syrians is not found in the Sumerian
tablets themselves. And so, it's not
grounded in any ancient writing, but
it's a very compelling idea nonetheless,
especially because of its implications
that the Anunnaki developed our bodies,
but not our souls. And I mean, who
knows? Maybe they were the bird people.
Then again, it might all just be a fun
idea and nothing more. Because just as
much as the Syrians could be said to be
our father species, it could also be
said that Homo erectus was our father
species. the seed that was nurtured into
something new. Ultimately, after all was
said and done, the tablets write that
the Anunnaki had created an entirely new
species of life on planet Earth, [music]
and that species was us.
The legends in the ancient tablets are
very clear that the Anunnaki created
humans to support and serve the gods and
help maintain all of creation. A lot of
questions still remain, though. What
happened once we were created? And how
did we earn our freedom?
The plan for the Anunnaki was to create
a more advanced race than Earth had at
the time to use for the purpose of
mining gold and performing other
laborious tasks. This, according to
these interpretations of the ancient
Sumerian records, was our original
purpose as a species, a slave race to
mine [music] gold. Sitchin believed that
the Anunnaki's original intention was to
use us to mine all of the gold that they
needed and then destroy our race and
leave the planet once they had no more
use for us. What's amazing about this
interpretation is that there are some
incredible discoveries we've made in
recent years that lend some merit to the
story. As we previously discussed, we
have [music] first the timeline itself.
The sudden emergence of Homo sapiens 2
to 300,000 years ago is a huge piece in
the puzzle. What caused this dramatic
jump in evolution from homo erectus or
homohyensis at this time frame? Today,
archaeologists still have a difficult
time explaining it. I don't want to
outright suggest that it was explicitly
the Anunnaki. Maybe it was a big cosmic
monolith from 2001, a space odyssey.
That'd be pretty cool. Then again, the
tablets say it was Anki. So, let's go
with that for now. Now, [music] here's
where we have something very curious.
And if you haven't heard it before,
brace yourself because it's pretty
amazing. [music] Right in the area where
the Sumerian records state that we mined
gold, archaeologists [music] have found
what may actually be gold mines. And
these ancient ruins are believed by some
to date back as far as 200,000 years.
Stay open while we go through this
because there's a lot of mystery here
and even more debate around the nature
of these ruins. So, we'll do our best to
cover all sides of the argument.
Archaeologists, anthropologists, and
historians don't really have an answer
about how these colossal sites could
exist back from 200,000 years ago, which
is why many still debate that they're
only 25,000 years old or somewhere
between those numbers.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; The general consensus in the mainstream
world is that they're just early human
settlements, not gold mines. However,
even if this is true, even if these
sites are not ancient gold mines, the
magnitude of these ruins, even dating
them at their most recent date, throws a
huge wrench in our modern preconceptions
about the origins of agriculture and
civilization. With historian Professor
Peter Dus and archaeologist Dr. Alex
Schuman putting forth that they are a
clear indication of an ancient
technological and agricultural
innovation long before the colonial era.
Along with these amazing insights, we
also have the discovery of what is now
called Adam's calendar, which is a
curious arrangement of ancient blocks
aligned perfectly with the movements of
the sun, solstesses, and equinoxes.
Today, these sites are known as the Bone
Ruins, named after the Bone people who
trace back to the early 16th century.
Despite clear evidence that these ruins
date back thousands upon thousands of
years prior, the ruins themselves today
are generally neglected by the
government and heritage institutions and
are getting damaged over time. But some
have been saved thanks to the
initiatives of private owners. These
ruins are a giant complex of circular
structures connected by channels and
suspended in an expansive web of
agricultural terraces. If we assume
these were dwellings, some suggest it
could have held an absolutely massive
population, which is unimaginable to
think something like this could exist so
long ago. But now, here's where things
get even more interesting. Extensive
electronic measurements that took place
of these ruins in 2011 have shown that
the circular stone ruins are actually
energy generating devices using the
natural sounds that emanate from the
earth to create strong electromagnetic
fields as a result of sound
amplification.
The shapes of these circular ruins are
specific and unique because each circle
represents the simatic pattern of the
sound energy as it appears on the
surface of the earth at that point. And
just briefly in case you're unfamiliar
with it, simatics is a word derived from
the Greek ka meaning wave and takimatica
meaning matters pertaining to waves. The
study of simatics was pioneered by a
Swiss medical doctor and natural
scientist [music]
named Hans Jenny. He was able to create
a physical representation of vibration
or how sound manifests into form through
the medium of various materials. This
fascinating work offers profound
insights [music] into both the physical
sciences and esoteric philosophies and
illustrates the very principles which
inspired the ancient Greek philosophers.
These simatic images are truly all
inspiring, not only for their visual
beauty in portraying the inherent
responsiveness of matter to sound,
[music] but also because they inspire a
deep recognition that we too are
intrinsically connected to the same
complex vibrational matrix of reality.
As we explored way back in Spirit
Science 7, the particles that make up
the entire universe move in these very
same geometric wavelike patterns. So we
can see that at every level of reality,
the essence of simatics [music]
is present.
Now let us pretend that these really are
ancient gold mines as many people today
believe they are. It would appear then
that with a deep understanding of the
phenomenon of simatics that the Anunnaki
were able to mine gold or perhaps move
it around using the frequencies of the
earth and thus their gold mines were
designed [music] very specifically to
resonate with the sounds of the planet
allowing them to do their work more
easily. We know today [music] that sound
levitation is fully a thing and may even
be a great key to flying vehicles one
day. So, is it possible that these sites
are the ancient remnant of sound
levitation and like uses on an
absolutely massive scale? Some sites,
such as this one, are even more unique,
having seemed to be constructed to very
precise fi ratios. I know that so far
we've been drawing all of these miners
with pickaxes, and we're going to
continue to. But please know that this
is for the ease of telling the story for
us today. To these ancient miners,
they'd probably think pickaxes were a
fairly limited and primitive technology.
Regarding these ruins, the man
responsible for leading the research on
the electromagnetic fields of these
sites is Michael Telinger, who wrote the
following about his experience there. I
have measured these spectacular energies
and electromagnetic waves and therefore
do not hesitate to make these claims.
The fact that these circles are all
connected by the stone channels makes it
very clear to any scientist who works
with electricity or energy that the
stone circle complex is a giant energy
generating grid that was most likely
used in the mining and processing of
gold on a scale unimaginable to us
today. From Michael's work, he suggests
that there was a civilization living at
the tip of South Africa, mining gold for
nearly 200,000 years. a civilization
which at some point completely and
suddenly vanished from the radar. Now,
[music] for those of us today who don't
believe these stories are true, we must
ask the question, what in the blazes
were ancient primitive humans doing with
all of that gold? What did we use it
for? Keep in mind, the general consensus
is that at this stage in human
evolution, we were purely hunter
gatherers. It was not until after 9,500
B.CE. that the eight so-called founder
crops of agriculture appear and these
ruins are dated significantly older than
this. We know today that gold is a very
soft metal and not really something that
we could use like other metals. [music]
Certainly not if we were so primitive as
most of the world's historians agree
that we were. Critics often put forth
against Michael Telinger [music] and his
claims that these sites could not
possibly be gold mines because there is
no ancient artifact that we know of
today made of gold that exists before
4,600 B.CE.
Then again, if the Anunnaki were
shipping the gold off to their planet or
wherever, it would make sense that
humans wouldn't be crafting things
[music] out of it anyways. It is most
certainly an extremely unique puzzle,
made even more amazing by the fact that
Sitchin wrote the Anunnaki were mining
gold in Southeast Africa way back in
1976, long before the discovery of these
sites truly came to light. For all of
the people who claimed that Sitchin
didn't even know how to read the tablets
and all of his interpretations are
wrong, I pose the question, how is this
even possible? Now, I know what you
might be thinking. Michael Telinger read
a Sitchin book, went to Africa, and then
claimed some old ruins that he found
were gold mines. And you know what?
Maybe he really was looking for them.
However, if we consider that he is
correct and that the energetic and
simatic readings of the site truly do
indicate that they were gold mines, then
it really does call us to re-evaluate
everything we think we know about human
origins.
The back and forth between historians
and archaeologists on this and even
naming the ruins after the Bone people
reminds me of exactly the same thing
that happened around the age of the
Sphinx. Today, Egyptologists stand
definitively behind the idea that the
Sphinx was built around 2500 BC by the
Pharaoh Cafrey, despite significant
archaeological evidence, such as the
weathering patterns on the Sphinx, that
prove it is significantly older, at
least 12,000, if not 35,000 years old.
The way that skeptics treat Sitchin and
his work, you'd think he was just
throwing darts at a map, and wherever
they landed was wherever he pegged the
story to take place. But if those ruins
truly are the remnants of gold mines,
then we have [music] to ask the
question, was Sitchin actually able to
read the tablets better than everyone
else in recent history? Today, most
historians believe that the Sumerian
tablets don't speak of gold mines at all
[music] and that Sitchin essentially
just made it all up. In the 12th planet,
Sitchin explains his reasoning, which
actually has to do [music] with Absu,
also written as Abzu. If you recall,
Absu is regarded as the aquifers under
Mesopotamia. and Sitchin translated him
to actually mean the son. But after Enki
took the throne, Absu became a location
rather than a deity. [music] Sitchin
writes, "The Sumerian term Abzu, which
scholars have accepted to [music] mean
watery deep, requires a fresh and
critical analysis. Literally, the term
meant primeval deep source, not
necessarily of waters. According to
Sumerian grammatical rules, either of
two syllables of any term could precede
the other without changing the word's
meaning with the result that abu and
zuab meant the same thing. The latter
spelling of the Sumerian term enables
identification of its parallel in the
Seemitic languages. For za ab has always
meant and still means precious metal,
specifically gold in Hebrew and its
sister languages. The Sumerian
pictograph for Abzu was that of an
excavation deep into the earth mounted
by a shaft. Thus, Ia was not the lord of
an indefinite watery deep, but the god
in charge of the exploitation of earth's
minerals.
This is a very curious correlation
considering that gold is often called
the royal metal, sacred in ancient times
and is the metal most commonly
associated with the sun in ancient
alchemy and very often related with
solar deities. So we see Absu firstly
written as the sun and then a physical
metal commonly identified as the metal
of the sun and sun gods. Lousy. But you
know what? Our discoveries don't end
there. Let's now shift the conversation
for a moment to explore one more curious
relationship between what we know today
about human history and the story from
these tablets. There is a colloquial
mitochondrial Eve theory that scientists
[music] first presented in the early
1980s. By 1987, a publication by
scientists Khan, Stone King, and Wilson
revealed that the matrinal source of our
common DNA lineage dates back between
140 and 200,000 years ago. To be clear,
the original nomenclature for this
finding was lucky [music] mother. But
when a publication in science titled the
unmasking of mitochondrial Eve was
released to the world, the name Eve
stuck in the minds of the masses. Just
to make sure there's an understanding of
these results, they refer to a common
matrineal mitochondrial line, a common
root for all humans. What's so
interesting here and why this research
has relevance to this part of the story
is that the first collective person
happened to come from the same exact
time frame and valley that humans were
mining gold in. The latest research on
this from 2013 serves only to create an
even more robust data set to support the
original date and region of
mitochondrial Eve. Isn't it so
remarkable that the original theory and
still prevalent out of Africa theory of
human origin just so happens to point to
the same valley where the Sumerian
records say that it all started?
Coincidence?
You decide.
Let's now bring ourselves back to the
story. sometime around 2 to 300,000
years ago when Enki created humanity. If
you are knowledgeable of Greek
mythology, this part of the story sounds
very familiar to Prometheus, the ancient
Titan who created humanity out of clay.
Like Prometheus, Anki stands up for the
human race when in conflict with the
gods, most of all Enlil. From a more
scientific perspective, the tablets seem
to depict Anki as a geneticist who used
some form of advanced technology to
clone and create this new kind of human.
There's even tablet images that depict a
pattern that looks an awful lot like a
DNA strand. Despite Enki's work, Enlil
was still in charge of the operation and
would command Anki to modify the genome
as he required. Sigin explains that the
combination of earthly clay mixed with
divine blood to create the prototype of
man is firmly established by the
Mesopotamian texts. We also see this
reflected in Genesis 2 where Elohim
fashioned Adam from the clay of the soil
and he blew in his nostrils the breath
of life and Adam turned into a living
being with a soul. The Hebrew term
commonly translated as soul here is
nephesh. that elusive spirit that
animates a body and seemingly abandons
it when the physical form dies.
Interestingly, the term adama, after
which the name Adam was coined,
originally meant not just any earth or
soil, but specifically dark red soil.
The Hebrew name for the color red is
also Adam, which stems from the word for
blood. This name atom employed a
Sumerian linguistic play of double
meanings. The atom could mean several
things. one of the earth, one made of
dark red soil, and especially the one
made of blood. The Sumerian texts also
speak of attempts to craft a perfect
primitive worker, which along the way
resulted in deformed humans created by
Enki and the mother goddess Ninhersog,
which you might remember from her other
name in the Babylonian story, Damkina.
Essentially, in an attempt to perfectly
match the genome of their human
prototypes with the Anunnaki, there were
some mistakes that were made along the
way through a process of trial and
error. Ninhersog also has another name
called Ninma. And in one particular
ancient story called Ankia Ninma
describes a bunch of awkward failures.
In the story, Ninma produces a man who
could not bend his outstretched weak
hands. One who could not close his eyes,
one with both feet broken, one who was
just an idiot, a man who could not hold
back his urine, a woman who could not
bear children, and a being who had no
sex organs at all. With each new failed
attempt at a proper functioning human,
Anki finds a place for them in society,
often as servants for the king.
Sigin theorized that the story recalls
the first phase of the existence of the
hybrid man, a being in likeness and
image of the gods, but incomplete
[music]
in some ways, including sexually lacking
in quote unquote knowing. [music]
However, they were still useful to the
Anunnaki's plan as servants in some way,
shape, and form. According to this
theory, for many thousands of years,
Anki continually cloned and created new
protohumans who would grow up to become
minors. However, [music] these beings
were sterile. They could not reproduce.
During the [music] period in which they
grew into adults, these first humans
were placed in an area where they could
be contained and not leave. Sitchin
believed that it was only when they grew
up enough to be useful to the Anunnaki
that they were transported to the mining
area in Africa. I will also [music]
fully acknowledge that there's some
discrepancy in this idea though because
the story of Anki and Ninma specifically
says Ninma took clay from the top of the
obsu in her hand and she fashioned from
it first a man who could not bend his
outstretched weak hands. The use of the
location absu here though suggests that
the creation of humanity actually took
place in Africa which also aligns better
with the mitochondrial Eve discovery
that we looked at earlier.
Perhaps then it's just the other way
around and that after fashioning these
servants, they were found useful to the
Anunnaki in other ways than mining and
were transported to Mesopotamia to help
work in and maintain Eridu or other
locations nearby. Either way, it's
believed that the location where these
slaves worked in Mesopotamia was a place
called Eden, which is the root word for
the biblical garden of Eden. There's a
few ideas about this translation,
though. Today, most modern scholars
translate the Sumerian term Eden as step
or plane, suggesting it refers to a
large field. I guess Sitchin, on the
other hand, translated Eden to mean home
or abode of the righteous ones. At any
rate, it's what happened in this
location where things get intense. A
dispute was growing betw twixed the
gods. You see, Enlil is often described
as the oppressor of humanity. A bit of a
patriarchal overlord who commanded the
slaves. Enlil is said not to really care
about humanity, though. He just wants to
mine gold, destroy humanity, and go
home. The tablets even say that he
orchestrates a massive flood to wipe out
humanity, a subject that we'll get to
shortly. Anki, on the other hand, is
described as humanity's champion. Anki
cares about humanity and sees them a bit
like his children. And while they've
been producing all of these sterile
slave humans to mine gold and till the
fields and all that stuff, in secret, he
has been continually refining and
developing the human genome to produce
the perfect human, one who is capable of
reproduction and living as its own
sovereign species.
This story says that Enki finally
discovers the perfect genetic pairing
and that a real human is achieved. On
the subject of the creation of the first
humans and this land of Eden, there are
two Sumerian myths I'd love to share
with you. The first being Anki and
Ninhersog and the second being the
Atraasis.
Now the story of Anki and Ninhersog is a
bit long. So we're just going to
summarize the essence of it here.
Basically in the story there is a
paradise land called Dilmoon. The story
begins with what you might call not safe
for work content. [music] So I'm just
going to gloss over that for now and say
that eventually Anki eats eight unique
plants in this sacred paradise land.
Unfortunately, the goddess Ninhersog
[music]
considers this act to be a terrible sin.
In a way, these are a bit like forbidden
plants, and so she causes eight of
Enki's body parts, including one of his
ribs, to suffer. Soon, [music] he is on
the brink of death. Enlil, along with a
magical talking fox, who I'm imagining
was just adorable, takes up Anki's cause
and persuades Ninhersog to relent.
Ninhersog returns to Enki and asks him
eight times, "My brother, what part of
you hurts you?" And he responds with the
various parts of his body that hurts. As
Ninhers heals his body, eight different
deities emerge in the healing process.
And the one who emerges in the healing
of his rib is the goddess Ninti, whose
name means both lady of the rib and lady
who makes life. As you can tell, there
are tremendous parallels to this story
of Eve being created from Adam's rib in
Genesis 2, as this [music] is its likely
origin. Further, Eve in Hebrew is ha and
is most commonly believed to mean living
one or source of life. [music] What I
find especially interesting about this
is that in the Sumerian story, the
characters on who Adam and Eve are based
on are both deities. While the name Adam
comes from Adamu, the character seems to
be based on Enki and Eve's [music] name
relating to life and being born of
Adam's rib fully links her with Ninti.
Now the second story I mentioned, the
Atraasis essentially begins as the Anuma
Elish ends [music] with the need for
servants for the gods. Instead of Kingu,
however, an Anunnaki named Wei Lu, also
Luela, volunteers [music] to be killed
for the use of his blood. And his flesh,
blood, and intelligence are kneaded into
clay by the mother goddess, Ninhersog.
With this mixture, she creates seven
male and seven female human beings all
at the same time. These 14 new creatures
are exceptionally [music]
fertile and soon there are hundreds and
then thousands of people on the earth
all doing the work which once occupied
the Anunnaki workers. The story goes on
to say that the humans grow very noisy
and even obnoxious and disturb Enlil to
the point that he [music] decides to
destroy them all.
Huh? Didn't Absu and Tiamat have the
same challenge with their kids? I guess
history truly is doomed to repeat itself
unless we can learn from our past
mistakes.
Anyways, the significant part of this
story is that it says that they produced
the men and women at the same [music]
time. It's important to note this
because for thousands of years, we've
been taught by the religious
institutions of the world that the man
came first and [music] that seems to
pervade through our patriarchal society
in a rather uncomfortable way. I hope
that today as we become more aware of
these older stories, we might come to
have a deeper understanding within us
that we truly are all equal and the
patriarchy can fade away into a society
that respects and honors all sexes
equally. Returning to the main story, we
saw Anki and Ninhersog have been toying
with the genetics until they could
create a perfect being, one who could
reproduce and think for themselves. The
moment they did, it marked a huge
turning point for everything because the
success of this experiment changes the
human genome to enlighten mankind. But
as mentioned before, this was the
beginning of a huge problem because Enil
did not want humanity to become a
sovereign species of their own. He had
plans to make little robot people to
work for him and then he was going to
just outright destroy them all.
When he found out what Enki had done, he
was furious and exiled the humans from
the Anunnaki settlements. Now, as a side
tangent, here's something I think you're
really going to enjoy. In the first
episode of Ancient Civilizations on
Gaia, Greg Braden explains something
that is positively mind-blowing. A very
relevant discovery found within our own
DNA. Check this out.
&gt;&gt; Shedding new light on these creation
stories is with the mystery of human
chromosome number two. Human chromosome
number two uh is the largest second
largest chromosome in the human body. It
it forms about 8% of the DNA in every
cell. And what makes it such a mystery
is that it appears to be the result of
an ancient fusion of preexisting
chromosomes
from primates
that have been fused in a very precise
way. and the fusion site has been
modified and stabilized so that human
chromosome number two is is optimized
for us today. This has happened in a way
that cannot be explained by evolution as
we know it today. Now, why is this
important? Human chromosome number two
contains the genes that largely set us
apart from all other forms of life.
[music] the cortex of the human brain
that gives us the ability for things
like logic, empathy, sympathy,
compassion, the ability to consciously
trigger
conscious states of [music] self-healing
within our bodies. These are possible
because of what has happened with human
chromosome number two.
&gt;&gt; Could chromosome number two be the work
of a master geneticist, otherwise known
as Enki from the Sumerian text?
With this revelation, the tablets give
us a significantly different perspective
of the Garden of Eden story and our
origins. Now, at this time, I have to
encourage you to really, really practice
looking at this openly without judgment
or fear because there are deep, deep
roots within our psyche from generations
of institutional Judaism and
Christianity that have essentially
indoctrinated us into believing a very
specific ideology.
For example, the serpent in the Garden
of Eden is said to be Satan. Generally,
if you suggest an alternate
interpretation to this, people naturally
assume you must be evil yourself. So,
with that as a disclaimer, we get to see
that the myths on which the Garden of
Eden story were based actually suggests
that the character who eventually was
written to be the snake was really
freeing us from our captivity. It was
due to Enki's modification that we
tasted a form of knowledge that we were
not previously capable of comprehending,
thinking for ourselves, becoming
self-aware and capable of doing anything
because we were no longer running on the
Anunnaki programs, but our own unique
consciousness.
However, this also came at a price. We
were capable of doing anything,
including experiencing within us both
good and evil. We had tasted from the
fruit of knowledge of good and evil.
Perhaps this is why the snake was
written to be Satan in the creation of
the Old Testament because they had
stories of paradise and gods from their
ancient history and the authors
naturally assumed that the exile from
the Garden of Eden was a punishment. In
a way, it was because we had to learn to
fend for ourselves from now on. But
ultimately, that would bring us to over
the next thousands of years evolve our
consciousness higher and higher and
become the beings that we are today. The
beautiful thing is we are still growing
and one day we will evolve to the point
where we will know and understand that
we are all connected and we will travel
and explore the universe and [music]
experience a life almost unimaginable to
us today.
Now there's one more fun thing about all
of this that I wish to share with you.
Genesis 3:8 says, "Then the man and his
wife heard the sound of the Lord God as
he was walking in the garden in the cool
of the day, and they hid from the Lord
God among the trees of the garden. But
the Lord God called to the man, "Where
are you?" He answered, [music] "I heard
you in the garden, and I was afraid
because I was naked, so I hid." And he
said, "Who told you that you were naked?
Have you eaten from the tree that I
commanded you not to eat from?" Okay,
let's break this down. First, God is
walking through the garden. He's
walking, implying he has a physical
body. In this classic scene, God is
walking through the garden calling for
Adam and Eve. He doesn't know where they
are. He's God, but he doesn't know where
Adam and Eve are.
He calls for them and they come. He
doesn't know that they ate the fruit
until he sees them trying to hide
themselves [music] because they are
ashamed. It is only then that he
realizes what they've done. Now, is it
just me, or is it a little curious that
a being considered an omnipotent creator
deity would both have a body, misplace
his creations, and then not know what
they've been up to while he was out? On
top of that, the name used for God in
the original Hebrew [music] Bible is
Elohim. And this is a word which is not
actually singular, but plural. It gives
support to the idea that the God the
Bible is describing was not a singular
being but a race of beings or at least
multiple physical beings. And as we saw
earlier, when Enlil found out what Enki
had done, he was furious. But regardless
of what Enlil had commanded, human
beings were created. And this set them
on a path. Humanity stepped into a new
beginning free of slavery and into a
journey of self-discovery.
What's more amazing is that all of this
was inscribed in the Sumerian tablets
over 2,000 years before the Bible was
ever written down.
When discussing the story of the history
of humanity, this is the part where
there is a bit of a break in the chain,
making it very difficult to discern the
truth. Keep this in mind for this
chapter specifically because the ancient
accounts are very fragmented and their
meanings are not always agreed upon. You
see, most stories in the Sumerian
tablets document the creation of
humanity and then usually are fragmented
until the story of the flood. The flood
is a huge discussion of its own and one
that we're going to be exploring very
soon. However, there is a big mystery of
what happened in the middle. In order to
make sense of it, we have to look to a
few different sources. It's definitely
one of those subjects that I really
encourage keeping an open mind about
because there are several different key
versions and stories about what happened
from James [music] Church's account of
Moo to the book of Enoch to Plato's
account of Atlantis which may have even
come from ancient Egypt. Along with
that, we will also touch upon the
emerald tablets of th and other myths
and legends from around the world and of
course Drumalo's account from his books,
The Ancient Secret of the Flower of
Life, which as we mentioned before did
an amazing job of putting a complete
story together only a few decades ago.
According to Drumalo's version, from the
time of Adam and Eve, our race developed
in two strains. [music] one that could
live free from enslavement, although
they were still monitored, and the
others that were destined for a life of
slavery. After the first humans were
born, they moved away from Eden to
another part of Africa or Eurasia, where
they were allowed to grow and develop
their consciousness. Eventually, there
was a consciousness shift and these
early humans migrated to a place that
was very isolated from the rest of the
world. The place that we [music] moved
to was called Moo. Though commonly
today, it's known by the name Lemuria.
When you begin to research Lamria, you
find some interesting things. The
original theory for Lamria was that it
actually was an island or a [music]
stretch of islands located in the Indian
Ocean, connecting Madagascar to India.
The name Lamria actually came about from
a 19th century controversy over Darwin's
origin of species. Defenders of his
theory had trouble explaining how a
certain species, specifically lemurs,
became distributed in Madagascar and
India, but not in Africa or the Middle
East, connecting the land masses. It
became suggested that at one point a
landbridge existed in the Indian Ocean
which they named after the lemurs they
were studying. Thus the name Lamria came
to be. The concept of Lamria was quite
popular for a while before losing
relevance due to the evolution of
continental drift theory where the
continents existed [music] together as
pangia. The name Lamria was then later
applied in modern spiritual circles to
the legends of Moo which is sometimes
also called Pacifica.
Anyway, so what is Moo? Well, the legend
of Moo first began [music] in the
writings of Augustus Leongion after his
investigations of the Mayan ruins in the
Yucatan. His work with translating parts
of the Popul Vu led him to believe that
Moo was associated with the lost
continent of [music] Atlantis and wrote
about it as such. However, Moo as a lost
continent in the Pacific began with a
man named James [music] Church, who met
with Plongion and his wife in 1885 after
their 12-year excursion in the Yucatan.
The hypotheses are featured in a series
of books written by Church Ward between
1926 and 1933. He claimed that when he
was a young man serving as a soldier in
India, a highranking temple priest
showed him an ancient set of clay
tablets that only two others could read.
James said that he convinced the priests
to teach him the ancient language and
that upon reading them he learned that
they came from a [music] place where man
first appeared. Moo. James gave a vivid
account of an ancient advanced
civilization, the Nolls, who flourished
sometime between 50,000 and 12,000 years
ago. Moo was said to have 64 million
inhabitants and seven major cities with
colonies established throughout the
other continents. the entire population
was separated into 10 tribes and
followed one government and one
spirituality. He said that the continent
was located in the Pacific Ocean and was
5,000 mi east to west and 3,000 mi from
north to south. He also stated that it
had massive plains, vast rivers, rolling
hills, large bays, and estuaries, and
that eventually it was obliterated in
almost a single night after a series of
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
After Musank, its inhabitants would
become [music] the founders of the great
civilizations of Egypt, Central America,
India, and others, and was the source of
the world's ancient megalithic
architecture.
According to James, the king of Moo was
named Rah, and he said this was related
to the Egyptian god Rah as well as the
Rapanoui word for the son, Rah.
Looking to the Bible, James also made a
note that Moses had trained by the
Nicole Brotherhood in Egypt and he
believed that the Assyrians mistransated
the Garden of Eden story, suggesting
that it should have been in the Pacific
Ocean.
Today, most archaeologists insist that
the legends of Moo are pure pseudo
archaeology. End of story. But what I
find interesting about this is that at
the very least, there's some evidence
that appears to support the idea. Let's
begin with the geography. Now, the
legends of Moo suggest that it was a
massive continent in the Pacific Ocean.
And there are a few accounts as to what
this place looked like. While James
suggested it was a long continent with
rolling hills and many rivers,
Drumflow's account in the Flower of Life
book suggested it was not a single
island, but a stretch of islands of
varying sizes, a massive archipelago
[music] ranging from the area around
Hawaii through Polynia and all the way
to Easter Island. In floor maps of the
Pacific Ocean, you can see the stretch
of mountainous bodies underwater which
could have had both massive islands as
well as supporting many little islands
as well were it at the surface of the
ocean. There are several other ancient
discoveries which could potentially be
physical evidence of Moo. From Japan's
underwater site at Yonauni to the
cryptic petroglyphs on Hawaii and that's
not to mention Easter Island. We know
today that many of the remarkable
features of Easter Island, such as the
legendary Easter Island heads, which
were recently discovered [music] to have
traces of full bodies, were only built
in the last thousand years. But Easter
Island also has an ancient written text
in a language called Rango Rango.
Although it's unclear as to whether or
not this is writing or protoriting. If
it is in fact a full writing system, it
could be one of the only surviving cases
of an independent invention of an
alphabet ever in [music] history. These
surviving tablets are a huge mystery for
us today as the language has still not
been deciphered.
When we put these findings together, it
seems to indicate higher levels of
advancement in ancient cultures than we
currently understand, [music] which is
made even more interesting because of
the remote location seemingly in the
middle of nowhere. Looking to the
Rapanui people of Easter Island, we
actually find a similar story to the
legends of Moo. In one of their creation
myths, we find a story of a great and
beautiful continent that they called
Hea. One night, the king of Hea received
a message in a dream that his land would
sink. And sure enough, this vision came
to pass. Thanks to the king and his
dream, however, the people were guided
to a new land, which was Easter Island.
And there they survived the
disappearance of their homeland.
Historical and scientific investigations
on the people of Easter Island suggest
that Polynesians from the Marcesus
Islands traveled from the west to their
new home, but the date is unknown with
estimates for their arrival ranging
anywhere between 300 to 1200 AD, perhaps
even further back given the lack of
evidence. This seems to show that the
myth of Easter Island has more
historical truth to it than mere fable.
They did in fact migrate to Easter
Island, and one wonders what other parts
of the myth may also prove to be true.
Stepping back to the history of the
people of Moo in the ancient secret of
the flower of life, Drumflow described
that the descendants of Adam and Eve
were taken by Enki to Moo, although he
used the name Lenura so that they could
safely grow and develop their
consciousness on their own without
interference from the slave miners or
the Anunnaki who were still mining
Africa for its gold and inhabiting their
cities and temples across the Middle
East. There are a few different theories
regarding the timeline of Moo. Some
theories place Moo's existence from
about 75,000 years ago to 30,000 years
ago. And it was at that time that it
sank and Atlantis rose. Others believe
that Lamria and [music] Atlantis existed
at the same time, which is what we find
in James Church's version of the story.
In Dumalo's telling on Moo, humans
evolved to a very high level of
consciousness where we became capable of
doing things that would seem almost
impossible to us today. Supposedly, we
experienced a reality where matter was
less dense and more permeable to our
thoughts and feelings, and so we were
able to levitate, move through solid
objects and other amazing feats. In a
way, we were kind of like young deities.
He also wrote that on this continent,
the first mystery school was created. It
was founded by two people who discovered
the gift of immortality, who then
[music] taught this ability to
approximately a thousand others before
the time came when Moo sank. This event
is described as [music] a terrifying
cataclysm which we find two predominant
versions for depending on [music] the
timeline. James Church suggested that
the main mineral of the land mass of Moo
was granite and was honeycombed with
huge shallow chambers and cavities
filled with [music] explosive gases. And
due to volcanic activity underneath the
continent, it released tremendous
explosions causing the continent [music]
to sink. As with most legends of a lost
civilization, the stories all describe
that Moo or Lemura, for one reason or
another, sank beneath the waves, leaving
no remnant of it behind, and the
survivors made their way to new homes.
And one common theory about where they
went, was a new continent called
Atlantis.
Sort of a fun side note here, do you
remember way back in the original human
history movie where we started by
saying, [music] "Well, this this story
spans back hundreds of thousands of
years into our past. It talks about
Tiiamat and Neberu, the Nephilim,
seeding the human race, Adam and Eve,
and the children of Lamria. This portion
of the story is really interesting,
[music] but not the most crucial to
know. We're not going to be covering
this at this time. We are, however,
going to be picking up the story at the
end of Lamria and discussing the events
of Atlantis up to present day. Well,
guess what? We're here. I'm so happy to
at long last bring some context to the
beginning of that particular story.
However, there's still more to cover
that we previously hadn't. And for those
who haven't seen the original human
history movie yet, we'll make sure to
cover the basics as well so that you
won't be left out. Though, you can
always go watch that one right after
this is done. It was at this point that
another mass migration occurred where
the children of Moo found a new home and
they [music] called it Atlantis. So,
Atlantis, the best place to start here
is with the origins of this myth. The
first account of Atlantis actually came
from Plato in his writings called Tmus
and Critius from about 360 BC. He
discussed an ancient kingdom called
Atlantis located on an island in the
Atlantic Ocean somewhere beyond the
pillars of Hercules in the modern-day
straits of Gibralar.
Today, the modern consensus around the
story is that Atlantis is purely
fictitious, a parable used for
educational purposes or to glorify
Athens in the eyes of Plato. [music] And
while most people believe this, there
are those who suggest otherwise. [music]
&gt;&gt; It's rather interesting that Plato, who
is the earliest surviving source for the
story of Atlantis, [music] uh tells us
that he got it from his relative Solon,
who in turn got it from the ancient
Egyptians and that they spoke of a time
9,000 years before the time of Solon.
That's 9,600 BC or 11,600
years before the present. Academics
think that Plato made it all up. But if
Plato made it all up, it's extraordinary
that he chose that date in that time
around 12,000 years ago [music] because
that was absolutely at the peak of the
meltdown of the last ice age when there
was indeed global flooding. The story of
Atlantis tells the tale of a maturing
humanity who had developed a
civilization on a large island often
believed to be in the Atlantic Ocean. In
the Flower of Life books, Dumalo shares
this image of Atlantis, a rough
generalization of what it might have
looked like. We also find this diagram
inside the book of the Emerald Tablets,
of which we'll be looking at shortly.
But with that said, it's been widely
theorized that if there is an ancient
lost civilization, it's most likely
hidden somewhere under the ice in
Antarctica.
In a Nova special called Antarctica:
Secrets Beneath the Ice, geologists
discover multiple places in Antarctica
which had the remains of old mosses and
plant tissues in what they described as
pristine condition from a time when
Antarctica was still warm and abundant
with life. There are even pieces of
trees that have been found, all of which
have been preserved under perafrost
rather than becoming fossilized. The
geologists in this video describe that
the bits of nature are not from millions
of years ago, but relatively recent
history. This is a landmark and paradigm
shattering discovery. [music]
Because even today, if you do some
research, you'll find that the general
consensus is [music] that Antarctica was
last ice free 3.5 million years ago. And
the remnants that were just discovered
there prove that number wrong entirely.
This dramatically changes our
perspective of the history of our world.
Fragments of nature are found under a
layer of volcanic ash, suggesting that a
huge volcano or cataclysm of some kind,
[music] maybe a comet hitting the Earth,
caused a dramatic shift that we're now
seeing the remnants of today. Further,
[music] I'd like to take a moment to
discuss with you the legendary Piri Ree
map. An old map drawn by Admiral and
cgrapher Piri Ree in Constantinople in
1513, which describes with remarkable
geographical detail the seismic profile
of certain portions of Antarctica. Ree
used information gathered from many
explorers at the time. But what's
amazing about this map is that Ree could
not have acquired his information about
Antarctica from any contemporary
explorers [music]
because this continent remained
undiscovered until nearly 300 years
after the map was drawn. But what's
perhaps even more anomalous about this
whole thing is that the map depicts what
Antarctica looks like under icefree
conditions. The last time that that area
would have been free of ice, would have
been at least 6,000 BC, which was a
whole millennium before the Sumerian
civilization really began to emerge into
the culture we know today. A note on the
southernmost section of the map reads,
"And in this country, it seems that
there are white-haired monsters in this
shape and also six-horned oxen. The
Portuguese infidels have written it in
their maps." Interestingly, the
Portuguese provided information on this
southernmost region in Reese's map
according to the notes on it. Now, Pyre
himself left notes that his map was
drawn from pre-existing information and
maps. However, he himself did not
venture any suggestions as to the
identity of the cgraphers who produced
these earlier maps. In 1963, however,
Professor Hapgood proposed a novel and
thoughtprovoking solution to the
problem. He argued that some of the
source maps the admiral had made use of.
In particular, the ones that were said
to date back to the 4th [music] century
BC had themselves been based on even
older sources, which in turn had been
based on sources originating in the
furthest of antiquity. There was, he
asserted, irrefutable evidence that the
Earth had been comprehensively mapped
before 4,000 BC by a hitherto unknown
and undiscovered civilization, which had
achieved a high level of technological
advancement. The Pirre anomaly and the
mysteries of Antarctica are described
with significant detail in Graham
Hancock's book, Fingerprints of the
Gods, [music] and we highly recommend
giving it a read along with his
follow-up book, Magicians of the Gods.
Now, before we move on, there's just a
few more interesting things that I have
to share with you about Antarctica. The
first is a particularly curious
accidental leak of information that
supports this idea that something is
going on down there. And it actually
comes from Fitbit. You see, recently
Fitbit published a world heat map with
Strava to show where people are commonly
wearing their Fitbits. Now, I suppose
most people do not disable their
location services because this published
map at first showed a number of curious
formations under the ice in Antarctica,
including a large ring and some other
underground bases.
Since this was initially published, the
government or whoever has forced Fitbit
to remove these images from their public
heat map, but you can still find a few
YouTube videos of people pointing them
out. Oh, hey, like this one. Finally, in
the last several years, photos that were
taken using Google Earth were
publicized, causing more than a few
heads to [music] turn. Here is one that
shows a rather curious formation that is
clearly not natural to the environment.
And here is one that looks more than a
little bit like a pyramid. Many were
quick to suggest that this was a remnant
of some Atlantean civilization. But many
critics were quick to put forth that it
was just a four-sided mountain and that
pyramid-shaped peaks are very common,
such as the Matterhorn in the Alps and
Mount Bullen Stinder in Iceland as
notable examples. And while there's no
question that these are mighty
mountains, this one in Antarctica is
significantly cleaner, there's just no
comparison really, it's much less rigid
than any of the examples the skeptics
give to try and debunk it. But look, it
might just be a convenient mountain. We
don't claim to know either way, but it's
interesting to look at and ponder.
Wouldn't you agree? Now, along with all
of these ancient discoveries and the
revelation of our distant past, there's
also the conversation of the rich hat
structure, [music] sometimes called the
eye of the Sahara or heart of feathers
in Arabic, which is commonly believed by
many today to be a remnant of Atlantis.
There's actually some pretty strange
coincidences about it that have led many
people today to assume the connection.
You see, in his writings, Plato
explained that the central city of
Atlantis was sectioned into three rings,
each with a large moat of water between
them. And this is what draws many people
to believe the Richhat structure to
actually be Atlantan remnants. For as we
look at it from space, it really does
appear almost exactly like Plato's
account. But there's a little bit more
to the theory than just looking similar.
In a nutshell, according to Plato, the
first king of Atlantis was known as
Atlas, who divided his kingdom among his
brothers and eventually created the vast
empire that occupied much of the known
world. But get this, according to the
legends of the Berber people, who today
live in Northwest Africa, they also have
a mythical founder king who, you guessed
it, was also called Atlas. Granted,
there's not much to suggest they are the
same person, and even Atlas of Moritania
is partly folklore, but according to
reconstructed maps based on Heroditus'
writings a while before Plato, some say
he placed Atlantis in the same region,
right below the Atlas Mountains in
Morocco.
Now, it's worth pointing out that C14
dating places the eye of the Sahara
between 400 and 40 million years old.
So, it's way older than anything we've
come across so far. And current research
suggests that it's just one of those
weird geological changes brought about
by the separation of pangia. [music] But
what if it actually was an even older
remnant of Atlantis? If we look back to
Plato's account, [music] he actually
gives us some pretty good descriptions
of what the environment and surroundings
of Atlantis looked like.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; He tells us that the islands were larger
than ancient Libya and Asia Minor
combined, although this may be speaking
to its power level and that the
Egyptians described Atlantis as an
island consisting mostly of mountains in
the north and a huge plane in the south.
[music]
He also says that the Atlanteanss dug a
great canal to the sea and alongside the
bridges carved tunnels into the rings of
rock so that ships could pass into the
city. Now, if we look at the rich
structure, we can see that it has an
opening canal-shaped shaft to the south,
which matches Atlantis's description of
connecting to the sea. Further, a 2011
study seemed to indicate that carbonate
within the brea bits of sedimentary rock
were created by low temperature
hydrothermal waters. The eye also has
mountains to the north, again just like
Plato said, which potentially have
evidence of ancient rivers around them,
as well as being situated on a huge open
plane. Really, the surrounding mountain
shapes and steep drops are uncanny
resemblances to the description. What's
more, [music] geologically, the
surrounding area is apparently full of
red, black, and white colored stones,
which Atlantis was said to have a lot
of. Archaeologically speaking, the rich
hat has huge amounts of archon and
pre-archchean artifacts present along
the northwest of the outer ring. It
really is a mystery how these early
stone age artifacts got here, as neither
recognizable miden deposits nor man-made
structures have been recognized, but the
current theory suggests that the area
was either used for only short-term
hunting and stone tool manufacturing, or
the artifacts got diffused and moved
there by different glacial cycles.
Interestingly though, back in 2007, a
number of unfossilized whale bones were
found throughout Moritania in the area
surrounding the Richhat structure along
with numerous assortments of shells,
indicating that at some point in recent
geological history, the area was lower
and closer to sea level.
Finally, even the scientific explanation
of the rich hat that it was formed by
the molten rock pushing its way to the
surface and then collapsing going
through multiple periods of being forced
up and down [music] seems strangely
reminiscent of Plato saying that
Atlantis was destroyed by earthquakes.
All this said, it is just a theory. For
if this really was Atlantis, it pushes
our dating back from 13,000 years to
over 40 million and [music] calls into
question the other ideas concerning
Antarctica and even North America. But
it's still very interesting to think
about nonetheless.
Now, let's return to the story because
[music] there are several more accounts
of Atlantis that we have to consider.
One is the original story we first
shared in the hidden human history movie
regarding the Martians and the fall of
consciousness. [music] Then we have
another version that comes from the book
of Enoch, an ancient text that accounts
for some specific events that took place
before the flood as well. We also see
the Emerald Tablets [music] and what is
written there about the fall of
Atlantis. Because we've already made a
movie about the Atlantis Martian story,
we'll just cover it briefly here. And
for the sake of the story and the
visualization of it, for now, we're just
going to show Atlantis as we have so far
as a continent of its own. But keep in
mind that this is kind of a placeholder
as Atlantis is a great mystery. [music]
Even the name Atlantis comes from later
writings about this land. And if we were
to go back in time and discover that it
was real, [music] it most likely was not
called Atlantis in their own language.
Who knows? Did the continent really
sink? Was it Antarctica? Maybe instead
of sinking, it flooded over and then
froze underneath miles of ice. Or did it
simply never exist at all?
Well, if it did, here's a breakdown of
one of the more popular stories about
the legends of Atlantis.
Essentially, the Atlanteanss were more
mature and evolved since their time on
Moo and were very connected with each
other and nature. But things changed
dramatically for the Atlanteanss when a
different species from another world
came to our planet. The story suggests
that they were beings from Mars who were
said to be responsible for destroying
the atmosphere on the planet, causing it
to become the red lifeless rock that we
know it to be today. These beings had
taken a path of separation in the
evolution of their species, a path
called the Lucifer experiment, which
involves disconnecting themselves from
each other and nature and having [music]
no inner love or compassion whatsoever.
The story says that these Martians made
a home for themselves on Atlantis and
slowly began to affect the consciousness
of the Atlantanss [music] by introducing
their technologies and affecting the way
that the Atlanteanss perceived reality.
As a [music] result, the Atlantanss
began to become more disconnected from
nature and each other, which allowed the
Martians to easily take over.
Eventually, a comet was said to have hit
[music] the planet right in the area
where the Martians home was on Atlantis.
The Martians were furious and so they
built a technology called a synthetic
maraba and they were going to use it to
get [music] revenge. This technology
however did not work properly and
emitted a shock wave of energy on their
home and ultimately created a
dimensional terror. This caused a
tremendous catastrophe for all of the
life on Atlantis [music] and the beings
living there became very sick with
consciousness and energy from other
dimensions being pulled into their
world. The result of this was a huge
fall in consciousness [music] which
coincided with a global pole shift, a
geomagnetic reversal. A massive shift
took place. Say for a few spiritual
masters, all of humanity fell to a lower
state of consciousness [music] as low as
you can go and still survive. In the
process of this, their memories were
erased just as a magnet can wipe the
information on a hard drive. Now, this
may seem far-fetched, but it isn't
impossible. One particular study
provides good evidence that humans can
perceive the magnetic field around them
even as weak as the earth's itself. A
follow-up study found that the mechanism
behind this are magnetized particles in
the brain. Researchers concluded that
for such an ability to exist, it must
have had some evolutionary purpose.
Interestingly, some studies have even
indicated that two major geomagnetic
shifts may have had an impact, not only
on our evolution in the past, but also
had a role in extinction events ranging
from the early quartinary period to the
early holosene. This study found that a
large global geomagnetic reversal event
called the Lashamp event 44,000 years
ago and another unnamed event 13,000
years ago both coincided with mammal
extinctions which were impacted by a
weakening of the Earth's magnetic field
leading to higher ultraviolet radiation.
This may not only coincide with the
sinking of Atlantis but also the
theorized timeline of the sinking of
moon. Further, by comparing branches in
the human family tree and linking them
with the magnetic field information
found in sediments and archomagnetic
data, they found that there was possibly
a long-term role for ultraviolet
radiation and the magnetic field in
human evolution. That said, the concept
of memory eraser could have various
meanings. In one sense, it could be a
global magnetic effect wiping human
memories. But it could also relate to
the destruction of all of our technology
and most of civilization and being
reduced to a level of consciousness
where we had to start over
technologically from scratch with no
records and very little evidence of any
ancient civilization.
This entire story is said to have
happened 13,000 years ago [music] at the
point when Earth went through a huge
shift pertaining to its polar ice caps
when a massive amount of ice sheets
began to melt, flooding the world with
water and potentially helping to usher
in the hollow scene, the epoch of time
we are in today after the end of the
last [music] ice age. After this shift,
small pockets of humans slowly began to
develop and discover life all over again
from square one. And the few spiritual
masters who kept their memories began to
support us as we became capable of
comprehending their stories. They may
have tried to explain the history of the
world, but the fallen humans couldn't
comprehend it. And so the stories were
masked in the legends of the gods so
that humanity could come to make sense
of who they were and where they came
from. These quote unquote gods seated
civilizations around the world from
ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt to India
and all the way to themes in Meso
America. Of course, it may be more
logical to presume that it was Enki or
the other Anunnaki who helped seed
civilization once more, at least in
ancient Sumer, or perhaps a combination
of the two. Ultimately, this is the
point at which a lot of this entire
story would have been passed down to the
Sumerians. Earlier on, we explored the
possibility that the stories of the gods
were an encoded message handed [music]
down to the Sumerians and Babylonians by
these beings who had a much higher
understanding than the early humans did.
If this story is true, then this is how
the Sumerians would have come to have
knowledge of the origins of the solar
system from previous higher beings who
shared it with them. But is it truly
possible that this is how it all
happened? Now, in this story, it was
said that the goal for us as a species
was to return to our original higher
consciousness in as short of a time as
possible. And the time that was
forecasted for us to finally begin
remembering who we are and what our
place in the cosmos is is this point in
time right now. Which is why this
conversation is more important than
ever. For it would seem as though we are
at a huge turning point for our species
and actively shifting into a higher
consciousness more and more each day.
Interestingly, this shift in energy is
currently being mirrored by the Schuman
resonance in our Earth's magnetic
fields. The electromagnetic resonance
being generated by lightning discharge
in a part of the upper atmosphere known
as the ionosphere has been increasing
recently to coincide with our frequency
shift. This means that our magnetic
field is actually changing to coincide
with our evolution which I find just to
be amazing. This is a very exciting time
in our evolution. As with research teams
like the Global Coherence Initiative and
HeartMath, some very interesting
research is being done on the
interconnection between humanity and
Earth's magnetic fields and energetic
systems, giving us insights into our own
frequency changes as and when they
happen. Anyway, back to Atlantis. As I
was saying, there's a few other versions
of how the story could have transpired.
We're going to now briefly look at these
other two accounts of Atlantis from
ancient times. First, let us begin with
the Emerald Tablets of Thlantan. [music]
These are said to be 12 ancient tablets
which are under the care of a secret
society in Egypt who have vowed to
protect the sacred wisdom inscribed upon
them. The tablets are said to have been
written by Th who presided on Atlantis
before the fall and whose Atlantean name
was Chicotet Arleac Vomalites. The
tablets were supposedly translated by a
man named Dr. Doral. Of course, these
tablets are believed by many to be a
hoax, for no modern picture of them
actually exists, and they're not on
display in any museum. Critics of this
work point out that Doral seemed to
write these tablets based on [music] the
occult theosophist society and other
spiritual teachings and channelings
along with a few ideas thrown in found
within HP Lovecraft stories. And those
connections do seem to be valid. Yet,
even if the tablets themselves are not
truly authentic, [music] it would seem
as though they are predominantly based
upon a number of wisdom teachings. Dorel
also provided a rich account of
Atlantean culture which could have been
channeled. But of course, it's unclear
if any of it is grounded [music] in
truth. For myself, I found a great deal
of inspiration and wisdom by reading
these passages, [music] and they can be
excellent tools for exploring the inner
mysteries and contemplating the
universe. Spirit Mysteries recently
[music] published a new edition of the
Emerald Tablets made to be easily
legible to the modern reader. For the
original publication is like, "Hark now
and hear ye and thou thine own inner
flame shall be lit." It can be a bit
hard to follow, so you'll find links in
the comments to go [music] and get a
free download today. The Emerald Tablets
describe a number of different things
from wisdom teachings to ancient
history. In a nutshell, Thc describes
the beauty and majesty of Atlantis, a
bright and vibrant home for the people
who lived there. He goes on to describe
the degeneration of the hearts of the
Atlantanss, which led to their downfall
and [music] the great cataclysm. He said
that Atlantis fell because there were
those who were too proud of their
knowledge and [music] dared to enter the
halls of Amenti in order to get greater
knowledge. Kind of a lust for power
moment that created the cataclysm. This
could be referring to the Martians
building the synthetic maraba with
forbidden powers. He also said that the
few who survived did so by using a
spaceship which today is buried beneath
the Sphinx. This is a concept we
explored much more thoroughly in the
original human history movie. Throughout
the Emerald Tablets, he also describes a
great deal of wisdom which we can use to
evolve our consciousness. We highly
recommend you go and read these passages
for yourself if you haven't. For now
though, let's stay on the subject of
history because we have one more account
of this pre flood [music] period of time
to look at. Now, the book of Enoch is
one of the most ancient religious texts
we have available to us today with
influence extending into the New
Testament [music] even despite it not
being considered biblical canon. The
text appears to date back to about
[music] 300 to 200 B.CE. So, we must
establish that it is younger than the
Sumerian texts. The Book of Enoch
describes a story from the perspective
of Enoch, who was the great-grandfather
of Noah, who lived for 365 years up
until the great flood wiped out most of
humanity. The story details accounts of
the Nephilim and the Watchers. As we
previously discussed, the Nephilim are
described as the children of the
Anunnaki and human women together. Since
the book of Enoch describes that the
Nephilim were the offspring of the
Watchers and human women, we can easily
link the Watchers to being the [music]
same as the Anunnaki. It's for this
reason the book of Enoch is so valuable
to us in deciphering our past because it
provides one of the few clear links
between [music] the ancient Sumerian
tablets and the stories we find in the
Bible today. But because this book
concerns itself so heavily with the
events of the Nephilim and the Anunnaki
or the Watchers, you can probably
imagine why they decided to omit this
from the biblical cannon. Some believe
that these [music] giants may have been
the reason for the great flood as they
were seen to be unnatural and harmful to
the human race. In the book of Enoch, it
describes that these Nephilim, known
also as giants, multiply in numbers and
grow to the point that humanity can no
longer provide enough resources for
themselves. With food shortages, the
giants then [music] began consuming
humans and other animals. The Book of
Enoch also tells us that many of the
Watchers such [music] as Aazel
specifically were responsible for
teaching humans the art of warfare and
how to construct weapons and other
harmful devices. And for the sake of
correlation, this is also reflected in
the Emerald Tablets speaking to the
degeneration of the human consciousness.
Now, the events of this book are rather
long, and we're not going to get into
all the details right now, but the story
essentially culminates in the great
flood wiping out humanity with only a
few surviving humans, which is where
Noah and the ark come in. As for Enoch
himself, he is taken into heaven by God
in a fiery chariot, [music] which is
believed in some circles to actually be
describing a spaceship that took him
away to live somewhere else, maybe on
another planet. Now, as we bring this
segment to a close, there is one more
theory out there pertaining to our
original story that I must share.
According to Sitchin, [music] you know
how Marduk was related to a planet in
the earlier stories? Well, in later
Sumerian tellings, he also seems to act
with [music] very personal and humanlike
characteristics. And Sitchin believed
that the name Marduk used to describe a
planet in some texts was also used to
describe a specific being just like
Anki. He believed that Marduk was
stationed on Mars at one point, but
[music] came to Earth to invoke his
authority and rulership over the world.
This may even correlate to the Martian
[music] theory we covered before. This
might be just a fanciful long shot, but
is it possible that all of these stories
connect [music] and Atlantis fell
because the Martians were actually a
specific group of Anunnaki led by Marduk
who came to the [music] earth and bred
with human women, creating deformed
people and caused certain groups of
humans to pursue dark magic, effectively
changing the evolution of humanity,
leading to [music] this great cataclysm
and fallen consciousness. Could it be?
Obviously, [music] all of this is just
an idea. We cannot say definitively
heads or tails what happened, but the
connections here are definitely fun to
explore nonetheless. How about you? What
do you think happened? Make sure to let
us know in the comments of this [music]
video. Now, this story is not over yet.
We still have at least one more massive
anomaly we have to look at. The point in
history when all of these stories line
up with each other, the great flood.
Speaking of stories of ancient floods,
most of us are undoubtedly familiar with
the legend of Noah's ark. A story in the
Bible which describes how at one point
an ark was built by Yahweh's chosen
person who in the Bible is known as
Noah. However, the character of Noah was
most definitely inspired by, based on,
or perhaps even translated from a much
older tradition of flood myths that had
been in circulation for thousands of
years before the writings of Genesis. If
we look to older writings, we find very
similar stories written about in at
least three different versions from the
Mesopotamians alone. These older Noah
are known as Zeasudra, Utnap Pishtim,
and Atraas respectively. Each being a
part of their own story, expanding upon
one another and giving us a fuller
picture of the whole narrative. In the
19th century, a seriologist, George
Smith, translated the first Babylonian
account of the great flood, which
sparked great interest in the topic, as
many believed at the time that the text
acted as external proof of the events of
Genesis. Consequently, countless other
so-called flood myths were unearthed
[music] and eventually translated. The
most well-known of the flood myths of
Mesopotamia are found in a few sources.
the Acadian Atraas epic from 1800 BC,
the Aridu Genesis and the Sumerian king
lists featuring Zeasudra as the last
human king before the deluge. And
finally, the epic of Gilgamesh around
700 BC featuring Utnapishtim, which is
largely regarded as being the closest in
structure to our story of Noah in
Genesis. Now, each tale is slightly
different given that each writer wanted
to emphasize different aspects of the
stories, but the overall narrative is
mostly the same. [music] In the epic of
Zeosudra, we begin with the creation of
the world and humans, but the middle
section is unfortunately lost with the
final fragment [music] telling us that
the gods have decided to destroy the
world. In this version, we don't know
why the flood is being sent, but Anki
proceeds to warn Zasudra to build an ark
to help survive the deluge. In the later
epic of Gilgamesh, we learn that the
Anuna Enlil sent the storms because
humans had become too noisy, which could
be speaking to humanity growing out of
control. [music] In this rendition of
the tale, the Noah character Utnapishtim
is then tasked by Anki to abandon his
worldly possessions and create a giant
ship to be called a preserver of life.
It's very interesting then to see how
much earlier established myths and even
gods were incorporated into the
narrative of the Old Testament under the
guise of Yahweh or Adonai.
In each of the ancient tellings, the
arkbuilder was tasked with bringing his
wife, family, and relatives along with
the craftsmen of his village, baby
animals, and grains because a great
flood was coming and would wipe out all
of the life that was not on the ship.
What's particularly interesting to us
concerning this flood myth is that a
great deal of historical and geological
information shows us that this was an
actual event which possibly took place
between roughly 13,000 and 8,000 years
ago when the ice caps rapidly began to
melt and flood the earth, wiping out a
great deal of life and drastically
changing the landscape. We can actually
see this in our history today. Even a
quote from Live Science states, "About
13,000 years ago, more than 3/4s of the
large ice age animals, including woolly
mammoths, mastadons, saber-tooth tigers,
and giant bears, died out. Scientists
have debated for years over the cause of
the extinction, with both of the major
hypotheses, human over hunting and
climate change, being insufficient to
account for the mega die-off. That said,
there is still considerable debate over
when a deluge event occurred.
Excavations in Iraq have revealed
evidence of localized flooding at
Churupak and various other Sumerian
cities. A lot of other Sumerian cities
display evidence of flooding on a large
scale, but they are all from different
periods. Modern consensus argues that
flooding in the wake of the last glacial
maximum are what inspired the ancient
flood myths around the world with the
geography of Mesopotamia being
drastically changed by the filling of
the Persian Gulf after sea waters rose
following the last glacial period. Some
authors have even postulated that
stories of a great cataclysm were
ancient cultures ways of explaining the
early Bronze Age collapsed and
transitioned to more urbanized societies
around 2900 BC. If these texts and
stories are to be believed, this was
potentially the event which wiped out
all of the slave humans who up till this
point, according to Sitchin, had still
been mining gold or slaving away at
other tasks which the Anunnaki
commanded. It was during this shift that
the Anunnaki retreated from their
earthly settlements, with Enki's last
act being to support humanity and help
us to survive the flood and shift in
consciousness so that we could resettle
and begin inhabiting the Earth. this
time without being isolated to any
particular area, free to roam and
inhabit the earth as we desired. It is
believed that about 6,000 years [music]
later, they delivered information and
wisdom of their existence to humanity
through a messenger, seeding ancient
Sumer with knowledge of their species
and human origins.
Curiously, the legend of a massive flood
is actually not exclusive to Middle
Eastern mythologies, but in fact is
written about all over the world in
countless different ideologies and
cultures. [music] In China, we see a
story of a great flood that supposedly
lasted for two generations, wiping out
everyone save for those who moved to
live in the mountains. In Central and
South America, there are a number of
ancient myths of floods wiping out
almost all of the people, save for a
scarce few who repopulate the earth. And
as we looked at, there are even several
stories across Mesopotamia, which all
share a similar common thread. We
actually don't have enough time in this
singular video to explore all of the
flood myths of the world because we
would probably be here for hours just on
that one topic alone. Generally, in most
of the flood stories, it is the gods or
a specific god who brings the flood to
wipe out humanity either to start over
or because we have displeased them
somehow. For those interested in really
diving into the various accounts,
however, Graham Hancock has explored the
world flood myths to an exceptional
detail in his book, Fingerprints of the
Gods, which again we highly recommend
reading. And speaking to this, there is
an even more prevalent theory that
brings all of these stories together and
describes similar global events in
history when the ice caps melted and the
water rose tremendously, wiping out all
or most of life. Geologists agree that
by 8000 BC the great Wisconsin and worm
ice caps had retreated. The ice age was
over. It has been postulated that the
deluge myth in North America may be
based on a sudden rise in sea levels
caused by the rapid draining of
prehistoric lake Agassiz at the end
[music] of the last ice age about 8,400
years ago. However, the 7,000 years
prior to that date had [music] witnessed
climactic and geological turbulence on a
scale that was almost unimaginable. The
few scattered traces of surviving humans
must have led lives of constant terror
and confusion with periods of time
filled with violent floods and climatic
changes. [music]
The bulk of the animal extinctions took
place between 11,000 and 9,000 BC when
there were violent and unexplained
fluctuations of climate which geologist
John Imry has called a climatic
revolution. Now, there is a very
interesting theory about exactly how
this whole thing took place and what it
means for us today. To share this
theory, [music] we've borrowed a clip
from our friends at Gaia from one of our
favorite series, Ancient Civilizations,
featuring Graham Hancock, Greg Braden,
and a ton of other experts, as they
helped to decipher the clues of the
ancient past. What's especially
remarkable about this theory is that it
aligns very well with the story of
Atlantis [music] and an absolutely
massive shift of ages.
&gt;&gt; Let's first of all uh consider the world
during the Ice Age. Everybody's heard of
the Ice Age. What was the ice age? Um
the the last ice age set in about
125,000 years ago and it saw the buildup
of giant ice caps primarily on top of
North America and on top of Northern
Europe. Exactly why the ice age happened
is still a subject that scientists argue
about. Uh but it's not in dispute that
an ice cap [music] 2 mi deep sat on top
of North America and a huge area of
northern Europe that same 2m deep deep
ice cap. It reaches its maximum extent
about 21,000 years [music] ago. The
temperatures are are warming almost
actually to to modern levels um and and
the ice is beginning to disappear.
And then suddenly, 12,800 years ago,
really suddenly, literally overnight,
everything changes and the earth is
plunged back into a massive deep freeze.
This is a time of of huge extinction of
species are are wiped out. The new
evidence that is providing coherent
sense to this is called the younger dry
impact hypothesis and it has been uh put
forward uh by a group a large group of
mainstream credentialed scientists and
what they've said is that they have
found evidence which suggests the earth
was [music] hit by several fragments of
a comet. For a long time, the comet was
out there. It was probably [music] a
very spectacular visual presence. Uh,
but it wasn't hitting the Earth. But
12,800 [music] years ago, by which time
that comet had begun to fragment, had
broken up into lots of fragments. And
[music] the estimates are that four of
those fragments,
four large fragments hit the North
American ice cap. It's literally beyond
imagination. That instant of impact
would have created so much heat um that
it would have melted large areas of the
North American [music] ice cap and sent
the water flooding south. Then within a
matter of of days or weeks of that
release of water, the freezing
temperature has begun and there's no
more release of water. The world the
world goes dry at that point and into a
very deep dark frozen period accompanied
by animal extinctions. The younger dry
lasts for 1,200 years. It lasts from
12,800 years ago to 11,600
years ago.
And then something else really weird
happens. The Earth's been in a deep
freeze. Suddenly, 11,600 years ago, you
get a second massive pulse of meltwater
into the world ocean. One very strong
suggestion is that um the uh earth
intersected again with the debris stream
of the same comet
uh and that there were further impacts
11,600 years ago. But those impacts were
not on us. Those impacts were entirely
oceanic.
You get big comet impacts in an ocean
and what you're going to get as well as
extraordinary tidal waves. What you're
going to get is a massive amount of
water vapor thrown up into the upper
atmosphere
and that water vapor creates a
greenhouse effect which causes accounts
for [music] the very radical warming of
the earth. It has to be rather
intriguing that that's the exact date
11,600 years ago that Gobeclete is
founded.
And it has to be even more intriguing
that 11,600 years ago is the exact date
that [music] Plato gives us for the
destruction and disappearance beneath
the flood of the ocean of the lost
civilization of Atlantis.
This hypothesis is further backed up by
an independent study featuring over 20
authors which finds evidence for meteor
or comet impacts on four different
continents, North America, South
America, Europe, and Western Asia from
about 12,800 years ago in the form of
nanodiamonds, spherules, and melt glass
consistent with meteor impact. Randall
Carlson is a PhD who incorporated the
dating of Gobeclet with geological
evidence which suggests global flooding.
He [music] wrote that if an impact
actually hit and there was a cataclysm,
you could easily see how an effect of
that magnitude would destabilize the
earth for perhaps a thousand years or
so. It's after this window of time that
the younger giant geological records
shows an abrupt change in climate that
we date goly.
But you see, this is not where the
expedition ends in the search for
answers about the great flood. As Graham
Hancock has also put forward even more
information in his most recent book,
America Before, his new work focused on
various kinds of evidence from the
Americas, mostly from the moundbuilding
cultures of the Mississippi River Valley
and exploring the sacred geometry of the
Amazonia, bringing to light some
connections that seem to indicate that
the occupation of the Americas was much
earlier than is currently thought and
even appears to share some common
concepts in ideology to that of the
ancient Egyptians. Now, before we go any
further, we should point out that the
occupation and colonization of the
Americas is a hugely controversial topic
and has been described as one of the
most agitated, fierce, and fruitless
debates in modern archaeology. In fact,
there are sites such as the Bluefish
Caves and the Old Crow Flats, which
demonstrate human habitation in the
Americas thousands of years before
previously thought, and thus were met
with fierce [music] scrutiny. So, it's
no surprise that Hancock's work is often
met with instant rejection. Now, Graham
theorizes that a precursor civilization,
which he argues were found in the
Americas, were wiped out by global
flooding, and the survivors of which
helped to seed later mythological
stories. This idea is made even more
interesting by the evidence of dramatic
sea level rises during or just before
the younger Gas. In a nutshell, around
12,900 years ago, the world was warming
up from the last glacial maximum and
becoming increasingly habitable when a
comet entered our atmosphere and broke
into several major fragments, many of
which impacted the North American ice
sheets. The tremendous impact of this
comet hitting the Earth would have
caused a few key things to happen.
First, we would have seen a large amount
of freshwater flooding into the lower
coastal lands and entering the oceans,
disrupting the natural ocean currents
and raising the sea levels. Second, we
would have a tremendous amount of steam
shooting into the atmosphere along with
smoke from any fragments that didn't
land in ice and starting fires upon
impact. All of this together would block
out the sun for a very long time and
this causes a sudden drop in Earth's
temperatures. This is exactly what we
see happen by climate graphs of that
time period. This rapid drop followed by
a thousand years later the rising of
Earth's climate. To date, no scientific
or geological hypothesis comes close to
answering the mystery of what caused the
spike closer than the comet impact
[music] hypothesis.
Graham even suggested that if this were
to have happened, it's possible that
parts of the giant ice sheets, these
massive glaciers, could have broken off
from the main mass and slid across the
Earth slowly. If this was to happen, it
would have destroyed anything that had
it slid over, ultimately leaving us with
no record or even ruin of any
civilization that might have been there
before.
Now, this is where things get very
interesting because while things line up
very well with the impact hypothesis,
there's also evidence that in the last
thousand years leading up to this event,
we also see a sudden shift in sea levels
caused by something called meltwater
pulses, where sea levels could rise up
to 25 m over the course of about 400
years. This long, slow, and gradual
event would have definitely brought
people more inland for sure, but it
would have taken some time to happen.
The key difference here is that with the
younger Gus ice sheet, we are seeing a
sudden drop of temperatures in a very
short amount of time. In [music]
contrast, seriously, today we are
worried about a climate change of only a
few degrees. But based on data from the
Greenland ice sheet, the younger driest
period dropped about 4 to 10° in the
space of a few decades. There are
alternative theories. However, the
presence of the nano diamonds and impact
[music] sites really seem to indicate
that the comet is the most likely
outcome. Other theories include ideas
such as the Earth being hit by a solar
flare, causing the ice sheets to begin
melting, which still disrupted the ocean
currents and subsequently cause the
temperatures to drop as a result. And
along with this, there's another theory
that suggests mega meltwater avalanches
that could be generated on the surface
of a continental ice sheet and produce
fastmoving waves of water nearly 100
meters high, traveling at 900 km an
hour, crashing into the world and
destroying everything in its path.
Again, these are all theories, so make
sure you do your own research if you
really want to go down that rabbit hole.
Ultimately, all of these ideas along
with all of the data that we have from
the Younger Gus period suggests that
there was massive flooding and
definitely would have been experienced
by humans living at that time as
catastrophic. Now, since research into
all of this is still ongoing, there are
still many mysteries to be revealed
about this event. Naturally, with sea
levels rising, the lower coastal lands
are the first to be submerged, and
anyone living and hunting there would
have been submerged with it, similar to
how Doggerland was submerged around
6,200 BC in Europe. Any humans who
survived such cataclysmic events would
have had it ingrained in their cultural
memory that would have been passed
through oral tradition into later
civilizations.
If this event really happened, it most
certainly would have contributed to the
mass extinction events that we see in
history. and in extent paved the way for
the host of flood myths on every
continent.
And the last thing I'd like to speak on
concerning the younger dest.
Generally speaking, the younger destact
is believed to have taken place about
12,800 years ago, which returning to
this chart shows us when we see the
sudden and sharp drop in global climate.
However, there is very little
conversation about what this other spike
is known geologically as the bowling all
alarod period, which takes place just
before It's true that when we look at
the last thousand years before the
younger dus, we see phenomenal climate
changes as well. But there is very
little evidence about what caused it.
And most theories about how this could
have been caused are problematic or
inconclusive. The standing theory at the
moment is that warm ocean currents deep
in the North Atlantic abruptly released
into the colder water above it, warming
the waters and causing ice sheets to
break off from the glaciers. While this
is the prevalent theory, many others
simply remark that it's just climate
change, which seems to be another way of
saying, "Well, we don't quite know for
sure." Yet, if this is just a result of
natural climate cycles, then that
certainly brings about a much different
perspective on climate change today. So,
that said, we have a few ideas about
this on our own because to us, this
looks like a connected event. It looks
like the Earth may have been going
through some natural warming on its own,
but that something caused temperatures
to spike up and then suddenly drop. This
may indicate that the comet impact is a
little bit older than believed. That the
first spike was actually the comet
impact and then the drop was the result
of enough melt water flooding the oceans
for so long that it disrupted the ocean
currents and we see the temperatures go
down. As we discussed, another
possibility is that the first spike was
the solar flare that we explored
previously, which may have triggered a
radical lifting of the Earth's
temperatures, causing the ice to melt,
flooding the oceans and disrupting the
currents. If this is true, then perhaps
a comet is not necessary in the
equation. However, it's worth mentioning
that the nano diamonds seem to indicate
there was a comet in Earth's recent
history. It's possible that there are
other causes of such a spike, too. If we
look to ancient India, we find stories
of the Austra or the Brahmastra super
weapons. However, before we can explore
and discuss these super weapons or where
they fit into our ancient past, we must
[music] return to the subject of Gobecé.
This site is compelling archaeological
evidence that now dates human
civilization back to nearly 12,000 years
ago, around roughly 9,000 B.CE. What
puzzles archaeologists and historians
alike was the previous assumption that
stratified and complex civilizations did
not emerge until around the time of
Sumer about 7,000 years ago. Until then,
all we have evidence of in the timeline
are semi-nomeatic pastoralists who would
follow hunted game around seasonally,
perhaps occasionally using tools.
[music] Instances of monumental
architecture are extremely rare, even
though we have cases such as Cahokia in
the Mississippi River Valley and a
supposed city of hunter gatherers. The
general consensus is a distinct lack of
the social organization required to
build and maintain complex ritual sites.
Even more interestingly, the timeline
arguably lines up with a certain theory
about the date of the construction of
the Sphinx in ancient Egypt. Robert
Shock is responsible for identifying
what he believes are wear patterns on
the Sphinx that he has labeled as water
erosion. But there were no great storms
in ancient Egypt 4 or 5,000 years ago.
But if you go back 12,000 years ago,
there was heavy rainfall in that region
where in the hollow scene the region was
much greener and wetter than it is now.
Now the Sphinx erosion theory was met
with great skepticism. Dr. Zahi Hawas,
head of the Egyptian Board of
Antiquities, said at the time, "Of
course, it is not possible for one
reason. No single artifact, no single
inscription or pottery or anything has
been found until now in any place to
predate the Egyptian civilization more
than 5,000 years ago. This was a common
belief back then since the earliest
signs of megalithic construction were
only 5,000 years old. But the discovery
and dating of Gobeclet proves that
structures were being built around
12,000 years ago in one form or another.
While a lot of work has been done to try
and disprove the Sphinx water [music]
theory, such as limestone analysis and
contextual orientation, what if there
really was something even more ancient
about the Sphinx? The Sphinx has
fascinated people since Cleopatra times.
There are inscriptions from as far back
as toic Egypt of excavations unearthing
the Sphinx [music] in the search for
hidden passages. And even today, the
mystery of the Sphinx persists. We have
no idea what it is, what it's for, and
there is nothing we have found that's
like the Sphinx [music] at Giza. Who
built it? Why, how? Mainstream academics
believe it was built in the time of
Cafrey based on the likeness of the head
and similarity of the temple of the
Sphinx. But other anomalies persist. The
most basic mystery regarding the Sphinx
is how it's missing from the Egyptian
records. Egyptians loved to write
hieroglyphs. We have writings talking
about the purchasing of materials and
construction of pyramids. Divorce
records. There's even a record about how
one day there was a woman disgruntled by
a piece of bread who tried to fight the
traitor. Seriously, meticulous records,
including records for all of the
temples. Yet no records exist from
ancient Egypt about the building of the
Sphinx. They just don't exist. Not a
single word about it in the written
records. One thing we do know from an
inscription on the ancient Egyptian
artifact, the dream spellar, is that the
pharaoh Cafrey, who today many believe
built the Sphinx, claims that he himself
discovered the Sphinx buried in the sand
and had his temple built around it. Not
only that, but the sphinx also lines up
with the sun for the spring equinox. And
the constellation housing the sun circa
5,000 years ago is Taurus. But 9,000 BC
or 11,000 years ago, we see Leo in the
sky, [music] which may be another clue
as to when the Sphinx was actually
built. Despite the discovery of Gobecé,
Robert Shock's erosion hypothesis, and
the constellation alignment, not to
mention with the Sphinx's construction
missing from the records, many modern
scientists remain skeptical and critical
of these arguments. While we will admit
if it was just one anomaly, maybe it
would seem like a pretty crazy idea. But
when you put all of the anomalies
together, they do seem to add up.
All of the evidence we have explored was
known about before Gobeclet was
discovered. But most scientists argued
that it was preposterous since no other
megalithic sites were made this far
back. But thanks to the discovery of
Gobeclet, the idea that the Sphinx is
older than we thought is starting to be
thought about more often. The
construction of Gobeclet would then be
attributed to survivors of the
catastrophe who passed on their advanced
knowledge to human tribes set back from
the massive natural disaster. This is
especially made curious by the legendary
carvings of the handbags of the gods.
You see, all over the world, we find
these images of gods holding what looks
like a bag. And there is a carving from
Gobeclete featured on pillar 43 known as
the vulture pillar dating nearly to
9,000 B.CE which shows a similar handbag
like image. It has left many to ponder
their connection and some even believe
that the handbag is a sign of the gods
bestowing the seeds of knowledge of
civilization to humanity. What's more
amazing is that Gobeclet is located at
the south of Turkey inside of the
fertile crescent, the place where
agriculture is believed to have been
invented 10,000 years ago. Could those
handbags be a clue to bridging the gap
between a lost civilization and the
world we have today? Gobecity raises a
lot of questions to the established
history and archaeology of the time. The
great extinction, evidence of flooding,
great climate change, and structures way
ahead of their time all seem to be
pointing to a single earthshaking event
around 12,000 years ago. And its time of
origin lines up with many significant
events and mysteries present in our
timeline so far. For many scholars, the
uncovering of this 12,000-year-old
structure corroborated theories and
hypotheses that were once considered
fringe or conspiratorial.
Now when we're looking at the story of
our ancient past and the stories of old,
there's one more area that must be
explored and it must be done with
caution. The Hindu scriptures. Now the
most famous in new age circles is the
Bavad Gita which is a huge topic all on
its own. It's over 700 verses long and
is just a small part of the enormous
Mahabarata epic. It's actually only part
of book six of the epic which has over
18 books. yet is an aspect of this
particular conversation about ancient
civilizations that a lot of people talk
about today. The Bhagavad Gita is set in
the frame of a conversation between one
of the Pandava princes, a guy named
Arjuna and his guide, the god Krishna.
As it opens, it covers something known
as the Dharma Yuda, [music] which
translates roughly as the righteous war
from Sanskrit. The story begins with
Arjuna, who is afraid of what the coming
war will do to his people and afraid of
how much suffering it will cause. He
wonders if he should renounce and seeks
Krishna's council who shows up and says,
"Don't worry, kid. You're the best
around." And then whose discourse
constitutes the majority of the story.
The conversations cover a broad range of
spiritual topics, touching upon ethical
dilemmas and philosophical issues that
go far beyond the war Arjuna faces and
into profound spiritual teachings.
Krishna is basically described as the
first motivational speaker in human
history. From scholarly points of view,
the nature and meaning of the text has
[music] been strongly debated with most
researchers and translators arguing that
it constitutes allegory or metaphorical
tales to illustrate philosophical
concepts. Some scholars have also argued
that it portrays varying relations
between the personal soul, the atman,
and the universal soul Brahman and the
Advite Vidanta school arguing that the
core tenant is speaking to non-dualism
that all souls are part of the same
whole.
Alternatively, some schools see dualism
as the primary lesson or that the souls
of all of the characters are both
different and the same allinone.
So, if you haven't guessed, academic
study of this text is very complex, and
there's quite a lot of debate and
confusion around the true meaning of the
text. For the most part, the setting of
the Gita in a battlefield has been
interpreted as an allegory for the
ethical and moral struggles of human
life. However, there are some who
believe that the story itself is
actually describing an actual account of
a real life war in history and of course
real life weapons. This view of the
Mahabarata as a literal event is
something purported by many ancient
astronaut theorists and as we personally
dove into the subject, we found it to be
a little bit sketchy. There were a lot
of claims such as ancient nuclear weapon
radiation and other quotes from the Gita
supporting the theory that then didn't
actually exist. The whole thing is
likely just a consequence of really bad
translations, misunderstandings of the
original text, and maybe even a little
bit of deception for the sake of content
creation. So, for anyone who wants to
get the full story on the claims about
this, we'll share a special blog post in
the comments below all about it.
However, there are a few aspects of this
which is interesting to explore due to
mythological similarities to the stories
we've been exploring so far. It's just
important to know that there doesn't
appear to be much in the way of
historical or physical evidence for
these events.
One of the most curious aspects of the
Hindu mythologies was the brahmastra
created by the god Brahma which is
described as an iron bolt through which
all the individuals in the race of the
Brishnes and the Andakas became consumed
into ashes. A fierce iron bolt that
looked like a gigantic messenger of
death. Interestingly, once King Ugrasa
witnessed what the weapon could do, he
took the decision to reduce it to a fine
powder to protect the future generations
to avoid temptation. I don't know about
you, but this almost sounds like a
description of the thunderbolts theory
of the massive column of lightning that
descended from one planet and crashed
down to the earth. The only main
difference here is that the story seems
to indicate it was a purposeful weapon
and [music] not a discharge from a
planet. The other synchronicity from the
Hindu texts includes the presence of
something called vimmanas, which are
said to be flying palaces or chariots
that are very common in a number of
stories. The mythology here raises
interesting questions due to its
similarities to other tales from around
the world. Could the stories of the
Anunnaki and their ships be related in
some way to the flying chariots of the
Hindu gods? It's not actually as crazy
as it sounds that early Indis River
Valley civilization and Mesopotamia had
cultural links stretching as far back as
9,000 to 6,500 BC. Indirect contact
seems to have occurred as the
consequence of the Neolithic Revolution
and the spread of agriculture after
9,000 B.CE. The prehistoric agriculture
of South Asia is thought to have
combined local resources like cattle
with farming resources from the near
east as a first step. Around 8,000 B.CE.
At the site of Mgar in Pakistan around
7,000 B.CE. full sets of Neareastern
agricultural products can be found.
Stuff like wheat and barley as well as
goats, sheep, and cattle. Later on,
trade kind of exploded between the two
regions with stuff like clove heads from
the Malucas being found at Tel Ashara.
different kinds of shells and beads
being found at various sites around 2500
B.CE. And of course, lavishly decorated
cylinder seals depicting mythological
scenes or animals. The bottom line is
with trade happening pretty consistently
until the Indis civilization collapsed,
it's almost common sense to acknowledge
that cultural ideas and mythologies also
got exchanged. In this, [music] even the
real mythologies themselves are
fascinating and have tons of curious
connections throughout without needing
to elaborate on them. If there's any
grain of truth to these stories at all,
then it adds credence to the idea that
at one point perhaps there were advanced
civilizations with incredible
technologies in our ancient [music]
past. Now, looking at our story
regarding the fall of Atlantis and the
influence of these other beings in the
Mesopotamian accounts, it appears that
countless cultures have been influenced
by these Neareastern schools of thought
from the Persians to the Greeks. And
even much later, it appears as though
the Judeo-Christian religions all seem
to stem from each other like branches of
a tree. But what about the people across
the rest of the world? In this
historical theory, it suggests that
there were still civilizations existing
elsewhere on the earth at the time of
the fall. Because when the inhabitants
of Moo left their home, not all of them
went to Atlantis. Some moved to the
continents we call the Americas and
others went to Asia.
This would make sense considering Moo
would have been directly between those
two in the Pacific Ocean. With this
idea, we see this theory begin to
explain how different spiritualities
developed in different regions of the
world. The Lamrians who did not migrate
to Atlantis would not have had the same
experiences that the Atlanteanss did
with the fall. And if the stories are
true, neither would they have become
more leftbrain thinkers. And so after
the fall, their spiritualities would
have developed based on their
environments and any supportive
influence from those who made it through
with their memories intact. When we
observe the world's religions today,
there are really three main forms that
we can identify. Firstly, we have the
western faiths which are generally the
Abrahamic ones, Judaism, Christianity,
and Islam, but which relate with the
Greek, Persian, and Egyptian mystery
schools from thousands of years prior.
Next we have the eastern spiritualities
like Daoism, Buddhism, Shinto and so on
which are more to do with connecting
with the spirit of nature or going deep
within yourself to cultivate inner peace
and stillness. Generally these paths are
less seen as religions but ways of life
and traditions to create harmony in
one's life. The last faith group are the
indigenous spiritualities which are
usually shamanic and animistic in nature
and are often developed around
connecting with the spirit of the planet
and nature in an intimate relationship
to aid in spiritual, emotional and even
physical healing. Now, we understand
that there is an incredibly massive
number of spiritualities on this planet
and I'm not trying to oversimplify or
generalize the diversity here for so
many of these faiths are unique unto
themselves and beautiful in what they
are and represent. Nevertheless, we can
see this pattern of location and
influence across time in how these
different faith groups emerged, bringing
us to where we are today. It would make
sense that the Sumerian mythologies and
subsequent Abrahamic faiths are
concerned with the stories of the gods
from the past so much, especially if
there were enlightened beings who
provided them with these stories in the
first place.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; However, one of the earliest groups to
suggest this independent racist theory
were the Theosophist Society of Madame
Helena Blavatzky in the late 1800s. In
her work, The Secret Doctrine, she
proposes a theory that five to six
different root races spread out across
the globe and settled in different
regions as the Earth changed throughout
history. Of course, much of their
information was apparently gleaned
through astroclairvoyance and
channeling, as well as discussing the
older works of the Platonic
philosophers. So take what is said here
on your own merit. According to
Blovatzky's writings, there will be
seven root races assembled for our Earth
and each root race is divided into seven
subraces, but only five root races have
appeared so far with the sixth being
expected to emerge in the 28th century.
Francis Bacon, whom theosophy considers
to be the legendary count of St.
Germaine, in his work the new Atlantis,
describes a potential future
civilization which lives on a land
called Ben Salem. Following their work,
the first race were known as the
Polarians. These were beings composed
entirely of etheric matter and had no
physical bodies. They were some of the
oldest beings to inhabit our planet and
lived during the early stages of our
world when it was still cooling on the
legendary Mount Meu from Eastern
mythologies. The second race lived in
what is often called Hyperoreia by the
Greeks and Romans. In modern day, this
is suggested to be the Northern
Territories such as Greenland, Iceland,
Canada, and Scandinavia.
Due to their climate, this race
developed different skin tones and a
focus around surviving in the cold
weather. The third and fourth races were
the Lamrians and the Atlanteanss that we
have spoken about already. The fifth
race were the Aryans. This was the
current epoch that Bllovzky believed us
to be in, which in her opinion were
descended from and the result of the
spread of Lamrians and Atlanteanss after
the sinking of their home. However, the
concept of Aryans were distorted and
diluted by Hitler and his whole Aryan
race thing. But it's interesting
nonetheless to visualize the history of
the world in this way, almost as if
descending from a higher frequency into
this postmodern world we live in. We
found all of this to be an interesting
exploration of the history of humanity
and one that bridges quite well in the
exploring of the epochs of time and the
fall of Atlantis, bringing us to today.
All of this really goes to show that
these world religions are fundamentally
connected with each other and a part of
a much bigger story. Spiritual value can
often be found in any faith if we look
for it. And it's not appropriate to
claim that only one religion or
spirituality is specifically better or
worse than another. Well, unless its
core tenants are like, you know, hurt
others, take advantage of people, or
kill people you don't like.
Rather, today we simply must learn that
we are all connected, all a part of the
same family, and that we shouldn't
demonize each other for our various
beliefs, but hold a space of love and
compassion for each other and what we
believe, even if we disagree.
Ultimately, this is a story about a
young species who is struggling to find
itself. We are learning the nature about
who we are and recognizing that there
might be a lot more to our origins than
what we have been led to believe so far.
And as fate would have it, there was an
event that took place in history that
dramatically changed the course of our
history and shaped our world to be what
it is today.
If you want to continue this journey,