Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


447 


Fleischner Lecture 


Biokinetic Impacts on Structure and Imaging of the Lung: 
The Concept of Biologically Closed Electric Circuits 


Bjorn E. W. Nordenstroém' 


> 


The corona complex of the lung is a collection of radiographic 
features surrounding a pulmonary mass. Each of its 12 compo- 
nents may be explained by a recently described subset of biolog- 
ically closed electric circuits, the vascular-interstitial closed elec- 
tric circuit (VICC) system. This system is activated both by normal 
metabolism of tissue and by local degrading processes, such as 
spontaneous necrosis or hemorrhage, that lead to local electro- 
chemical polarization of a lesion in relation to surrounding non- 


Received September 7, 1984; accepted after revision April 17, 1985 


injured tissue. lons, cells, and water are transported electrically 
in the VICC system, leading to the development of the corona 
complex. The VICC system is conceived to exist with the walls of 
arteries and veins functioning as insulators around the electrically 
conducting medium of blood, the plasma. Blood vessels therefore 
connect electrically the injured and noninjured tissues. At the 
capillary level, electric junctions connect plasma and interstitial 
fluid, which functions as an electrical conductor comparable to 
blood plasma. The interstitial fluid therefore completes the circuit. 
The VICC system can be regarded as an additional circulatory 
system for selective electrogenic transports, coupled directly to 
the mechanical circulation of blood and lymph. The injury potential 
represents an important energetic factor in the activation of the 
VICC system. It is a slowly fluctuating, attenuating, electrochem- 
ical potential inducing ebb and flow of time-dependent anionic 
and cationic transports. The corona structures are special effects 
of the healing of injured tissue. The 12 radiologic signs of the 
corona complex have each been produced experimentally in vitro 
in animals and in vivo in humans during electrochemical treatment 
of cancers. The “A” zone is characterized radiographically by 
radiolucency around an electrically polarizing focal lesion. Pe- 
ripheral to the A zone, a “B” zone is seen as a radiopaque region. 
The A and B zones are predominantly the result of an electroos- 
motic outflow of water from a lesion during its electropositive 
phase. At the interface between the A and B zones, small arches 
sometimes form an arcade. This configuration develops when the 
polarizing lesion has small protrusions at its surface. As a result 
of electrical edge enhancement, various elements of the intersti- 
tial tissue are transformed into radiating fibrous structures. They 
grow out at right angles to the surface of the lesion and serve as 
supporting columns for the arches. When necrotic material from 
a tumor is evacuated through a bronchus, ensuing collapse of 
the tumor will displace those radiating structures already pro- 
duced. They then present as irregular elongated opacities termed 
lamellae. Experimental production of A and B zones, the radiating 


Presented at the annual meeting of the Fleischner Society, Santa Fe, NM, June 1984. 
* Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Karolinska Hospital, P.O. Box 60 500, S-104 01 Stockholm, Sweden. 


AJR 145:447-467, September 1985 0361-803X/85/1453-0447 © American Roentgen Ray Society 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


448 NORDENSTROM 


structures, and arches and arcades is presented. Circumferential 
structures are described as partly caused by perifocal emphy- 
sema due to dystrophic changes in the lung parenchyma by 
microthromboses of vessels around a lesion. Perifocal edema, 
caused by an electroosmotic inflow of water to the mass during 
its electronegative phase, may also contribute to a circular dis- 
placement of structures. Interlobular edema develops when the 
degrading process is electropositive and water accumulates by 
stasis peripheral to the tumor. Retraction of fibrous tissue is 
demonstrated experimentally as an effect of local dehydration by 
electroosmosis, leading to shrinkage of hydrophilic elastic fibrous 
tissue. This mechanism also produces a structural change, re- 
traction pocket of the pleura, which was found to be equivalent 
to the retraction of skin and so-called skin thickening adjacent to 
breast cancers. Calcifications in tissue represent an internal 
modification of polarizing masses. By applying a fluctuating po- 
tential to normal human fat tissue specimens, typical microcalci- 
fications have been produced. Pathologic tissue calcifications, 
developed after injury, may not be regarded as a disease per se 
but as a part of the healing process. 


The process of radiologic diagnosis often is initially descrip- 
tive, followed by anatomic and functional correlations. Insight 
into the diagnostic and prognostic meaning of radiologic 
observations is, however, suboptimal until the underlying 
biologic mechanisms for their development are understood. | 
describe the corona structures of the lung, which together 
may be called the corona complex. Studies of their pathogen- 
esis have led to a new biophysical concept capable of explain- 
ing their origin, the vascular-interstitial closed electric circuit 
(VICC) system. 

In a paper 15 years ago [1], | described some structural 
elements seen around cancers of the lung. The radiographic 
appearance of these peritumoral features in many respects 
resembles the corona of the sun. | therefore tentatively called 
the constellation of these structures the corona maligna. The 
incidence of coronalike structures around lung cancers has 
been roughly 30% in my experience with 7000 cases but, as 
| later found, they are not specific for cancers. They can also 
be seen around benign tumors and granulomas. Therefore, 
the term corona maligna should no longer be used. A new 
term, corona radiata, appeared later in the literature. How- 
ever, corona radiata is already an accepted term for the 
projection fibers between the cortex and the base of the 
brain. It is also sometimes used for structures in the ovary. 
To avoid confusion, this term should be abandoned for lung 
lesions. Furthermore, corona radiata refers to radiating struc- 
tures, which represent only one of several radiographically 
observable corona structures. All of the corona structures, 
however, can be tied to a common biokinetic mechanism for 
their development. The constellation of the various corona 
structures may be called the corona complex [2]. 

The corona structures are observed around various lesions 
in the lung, but also in modified form in other organs (e.g., 
brain, liver, and breast). The 12 corona structures are the “A” 
zone, “B” zone, radiating structures, arches and arcades, 
lamellae, circumferential structures, narrowing of vessels, per- 
ifocal emphysema, perifocal edema, interlobular edema, fi- 
brous tissue including retraction pockets and retraction 


AJR:145, September 1985 


edema, and calcifications. They develop under the influence 
of dynamically changing electrokinetic forces in a newly de- 
fined biokinetic transport mechanism called the vascular in- 
terstitial closed electric circuit (VICC) [2, pp. 122-172]. The 
VICC is activated under physiologic conditions by metabolic 
polarization among various tissues and by tissue injury (focal 
necrosis, bleeding, infection) in cancers, benign neoplasms, 
and granulomas. Variation in tissue injury explains the ap- 
pearance of corona structures around some but not all le- 
sions. The dynamic changes in activation of the VICC system 
lead to the time-dependent appearance of structural elements 
(i.e., several may appear nonsimultaneously). Structuring 
within the corona complex is influenced also by molecular, 
hydrostatic, and mechanical forces [2, pp. 75-78, 93-111]. 

In spite of the disparate radiologic appearances of the 
individual corona structures, they are largely dependent on 
an activated VICC. The general structure and function of this 
biokinetic system will be surveyed before each of the individ- 
ual corona structures is described. 


The Vascular-interstitial Closed Electric Circuit 


The circulation of blood provides transport of materials to 
various tissues in a mechanical manner. At the level of the 
capillaries, the materials enter tissue Selectively by filtration, 
diffusion, and differences in colloid osmotic pressures over 
the capillary membranes. The VICC is involved in selective, 
electrogenous transports between blood and tissue. It there- 
fore represents an additional circulatory system, coupled 
directly to the circulation of blood and lymph. The activation 
and construction of the VICC system are conceived as fol- 
lows: 


Activation of the VICC System 


Local anabolic or catabolic processes produce electro- 
chemical (i.e., physicochemical) polarization of tissue. For 
example, a person senses a working muscle as tired because 
lactic acid accumulates in it; that is, a metabolic, electrochem- 
ical gradient is produced in the muscle in relation to surround- 
ing tissues. The process of degradation in an injured tissue 
releases catabolic energy, which is identified by an electro- 
chemical injury potential when measured in relation to sur- 
rounding noninjured tissue. 

The presence of an electric injury potential was demonstra- 
ted in various pulmonary lesions in 107 patients by the use 
of electrodes inserted by modified techniques for percuta- 
neous needle biopsy [2, pp. 46-48; 3]. A profile of electric 
potential was traced through the lesions and surrounding 
tissues and measured in relation to a grounded subcutaneous 
reference electrode. When needle biopsy revealed nondi- 
agnostic necrotic material in the lesion, a reproducible electric 
potential difference usually could be demonstrated between 
the lesion and surrounding lung tissue. However, the electric 
potential of individual lesions varied from electropositive to 
zero to electronegative in relation to the surrounding tissue. 
Moreover, the electric potential of a lesion did not correlate 
with its histopathologic appearance. The reproducible electro- 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


A 
Out ant In ant Out ant In ant 
——p —> —> —> 


Fig. 1.—Electrical potentials in human lung tumors. A, Electropositive com- 
plexes (C) in squamous cell carcinoma in relation to surrounding lung (L) in 74- 
year-old man. Exp = exposure markings at cineradiography for correlation of 
position of electrode tip and tracing of electric potential. B, Electronegative 
complexes in metastatic melanosarcoma in right upper lobe of 57-year-old 
woman. “In ant” signifies electrode entering tumor surface; “out ant,” electrode 
leaving tumor surface. (Reprinted from [2].) 


positive tissue profile of a necrotizing squamous cell carci- 
noma of the right lung in relation to the surrounding lung is 
shown in figure 1A. Figure 1B shows small, reproducible 
electronegative complexes of a necrotizing melanosarcoma. 

In an attempt to explain the potential differences of lesions 
in relation to surrounding tissue, in vitro studies were per- 
formed of the electromechanical behavior of spontaneously 
degrading blood [2, pp. 69-78]. These studies may be sum- 
marized as follows: 

Normal human blood was transferred under meticulous 
sterile conditions to a collodium bag suspended in 1 L of 
circulating Ringer solution. Then, pH electrodes were placed 
in the blood, and nonpolarizable Ag/AgC! electrodes in KCI 
bridges were immersed in the blood and the Ringer solution. 
A 2-cm layer of liquid paraffin was poured over the blood and 
the Ringer solution to prevent access of atmospheric oxygen 
and CO: to the blood. 

The electric potential of the spontaneous hypoxic degra- 
dation of the blood was then followed in various experiments 
for 3-6 weeks. The results revealed that the hypoxic degra- 
dation of blood is a continuous, spontaneously oscillating 
process. Electropositive and electronegative phases alter- 
nate. The amplitudes of these phases attenuate as time 
passes. 

Thus, a lesion that develops internal necrosis or contains 
degrading blood must show various time-related phases of 
shift of polarity and magnitude of potential differences. This 
concept of the fluctuating potential of injured tissue is essen- 
tial for the electrogenous transports within the VICC system 
in the process of healing. No tissue can be expected to heal 
if supplied with only one type of ions. The fluctuating injury 
potential secures to the injury an ebb and flow, which both 
supplies and removes anionic and cationic material over the 
VICC system. Curiously enough, the injury itself seems 
thereby to deliver the necessary transport energy for its own 
healing. When the fluctuating energy potential has leveled 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 449 


Selective 
\ transports 


I Insulating vascular walls 


x over VICC Conducting blood plasma 
<. 5 D 
ae ge I insulating tissue matrix 
ae Sf i er, Conducting interstitial fluid 
fe 19% K Z> Hl Capillary walis 
va a x Ve i (open pores) 


we. W Redox sites 
ILL Contracted capitlaries (closed 
pores) and surfaces of thrombus 


gf Fn? Th 


Potential difference 


Fig. 2.—Principle of activation and construction of vascular-interstitial closed 
electric circuit (VICC). Differences in metabolic activity of various tissues and 
organs as well as of any injured tissue in relation to noninjured tissue give rise 
to electrochemical potential differences. These are spontaneously leveled by 
ionic transports in VICC system because blood vessels function as relatively 
insulated conducting cables. Over capillaries, permeable for water and electro- 
lytes, an electric junction exists to conducting interstitial tissue fluid, which 
Closes circuit. Necessary electron transfers in circuit are localized to capillary 
membranes, which close their “leaking pores” in certain regions under influence 
of electric field. Endogenous currents of VICC system are predominantly 
responsible for development of corona structures, which represent a special 
case of healing of injured tissue. (Reprinted from [2].) 


out, the injury should be healed. The sequential development 
of the corona structures results from the fluctuations of the 
injury potential. 

The driving electromotive force of the VICC system in tissue 
injury is twofold: (1) A so-called diffusion potential arises in 
the degrading tissue by the differential speeds of diffusion, 
convection, and recombination of liberated ions. Data already 
exist for the development of a change in diffusion potential 
during coagulation of blood. Thus, Jordan [4] found that the 
sequential steps in the process led to an overall potential 
change of as much as 1.5 V. (2) The hypoxia of the degrading 
tissue leads to a redox potential difference between the 
degrading tissue and surrounding well oxygenated tissue. 
The redox potential for O2 is 0.82 V. The electromotive force 
for the activation of the VICC is therefore a sum of the 
continuously variable diffusion potentials of the degrading 
tissue and the redox potential differences between the hy- 
poxic degrading tissue and the oxygenated surrounding non- 
injured tissue. 

The electrochemical potential difference between a focus 
of necrosis or bleeding inside a lesion and the surrounding 
noninjured tissue resembles the conditions of an ordinary 
flashlight battery. To get an effect out of such a system, it is 
necessary to create a closed circuit between the two poles. 
In vivo, this circuit is created by the VICC. 


Construction of the VICC System 


Electric resistivity (a material constant) of the walls of 
arteries and veins was found in several ways to be at least 
150-200 times higher than that of the plasma, the conductive 
medium of blood. To the blood vessels therefore can be 
ascribed a newly appreciated and important function: They 
are capable of serving as electrically conducting, relatively 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


450 NORDENSTROM AJR:145, September 1985 


5 


Fig. 3.—Squamous cell carcinoma in right upper lobe surrounded by 3-15-mm-wide radiolucent “A” zone (A) separating tumor from superolateral, 2-3-cm-wide 
radiopaque “B” zone (B). (Reprinted from [2].) 

Fig. 4.—Poorly differentiated small-cell carcinoma surrounded by 5-mm-wide “A” zone (A). “B” zone (B) is seen as irregular infiltration lateral to tumor. B zone is 
always separated from tumor surface by A zone. (Reprinted from [2].) 

Fig. 5.—Hamartoma in right lung surrounded by 5-10-mm-wide A zone. (Reprinted from [2].) 

Fig. 6.—Silicotic granuloma surrounded by 1-2-cm-wide A zone. Edge of tumor is serrated, and irregular radiating structures extend to pleura. (Reprinted from 


[2].) 


insulated cables. These cables connect injured with nonin- as conductive as plasma, can be regarded as the “internal” 
jured tissue (fig. 2) at the level of the capillaries, where an communication of our “biologic battery.” The differences of 
electric junction exists over the capillary membranes and electric potential between the injured and noninjured tissue 
between the endothelial cells to the interstitial fluid. This fluid, regions can now be leveled by ionic transports over the VICC 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 451 


Fig. 7.—A, Tuberculous granuloma surrounded by A zone and granular radiating structures. B, 2 years later, pneumothorax was induced during needle biopsy. 
Note persistent A zone despite partial collapse of lung. C, After 2 more years, radiolucent A zone is even more apparent when lung is normally expanded. (Reprinted 


from [2].) 


system. This new circulatory system meets the need of 
tissues for selective electrogenic mass transports. The con- 
struction of the VICC is, however, considerably more compli- 
cated than appears from this description. For instance, it 
contains identifiable switching mechanisms and necessary 
electrode-equivalent sites for electron transfer at the level of 
the capillaries. Information on these issues is given in the 
Original description [2, pp. 134-151]. 

The activation of the VICC by tissue necrosis and/or de- 
grading blood in cancers, benign tumors, or granuloma is 
likely to be the major common factor for the development of 
corona structures. These radiologically visible structural ele- 
ments can be produced experimentally by in vivo activations 
of the VICC. Many histologic and chemical modifications in 
tissues also can be identified and tied to activation of the 
VICC. From a general biologic standpoint, it is therefore 
important to study the corona complex: it represents a spe- 
cific case of injury reaction and can unveil essential events in 
the process of healing. 


The Radiologic Appearance of the Corona Structures 


The corona structures vary widely in extent of development 
and time of their appearance. To quantitate them radiograph- 
ically is as difficult as to quantitate emphysema radiographi- 
cally. Examples will be given to illustrate their development 
largely as a result of catabolic activation of the VICC system. 


The A Zone 


The A zone is characterized by a “halo” or radiolucent area 
around all or a portion of a radiopaque mass. Its width ranges 
from 2 mm to 8 cm and may vary in different parts of the 
zone. The inner border of the A zone is limited by the surface 
of the tumor. The outer border of the A zone may be well 
defined against a denser B zone. In figure 3, a squamous cell 
carcinoma of the right upper lobe is surrounded by a 3-mm- 


wide A zone and a B zone about 2-3 cm wide. The outer 
border of the A zone may be ill defined, as is seen around the 
small-cell carcinoma shown in figure 4. 

The A zone may also appear around benign tumors. This 
is illustrated in figure 5, where a 5-10-mm-wide A zone 
surrounds a hamartoma. 

Granulomas may also show A zones. Thus, the silicotic 
granuloma shown in figure 6 is surrounded by an A zone 1- 
2 cm wide. When an A zone extends over time, a more 
permanent A zone develops as perifocal emphysema. An 
example may be seen around the tuberculous granuloma of 
figure 7A, which was followed radiographically and by needle 
biopsies over 8 years. Initially it showed a faint A zone and 
radiating “granular” structures in the nearby lung parenchyma 
as well as an arcuate displacement of a vessel cranial to the 
lesion. A pneumothorax developed in connection with a 
needle biopsy of the lesion. Despite the partial collapse of the 
lung, the A zone persisted around the tuberculoma (fig. 7B). 
Two years later, the reexpanded lung showed a well devel- 
oped A zone. 


The B Zone 


This structural element represents a region of increased 
radiopacity peripheral to the A zone. Its opacity is greater not 
only than that of the A zone but also than that of normal lung 
(figs. 3 and 4). For peripherally situated lesions, the B zone 
often extends from the periphery of the A zone to the pleura. 
When a small amount of air is injected into the pleural space, 
the B zone disappears completely, a characteristic finding 


(fig. 8). 


Radiating Structures 


These linear structures emerge from the surface of the 
lesion. They may be short and thin and give the surface of 
the lesion a “hairy” appearance. They may also be coarse and 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


452 NORDENSTROM 


sometimes extend several centimeters into the lung paren- 
chyma (fig. 9). Characteristically, the surface of the associated 
lesion is irregular. The radiating structures depart at approxi- 
mately right angles to this surface, a finding particularly ap- 
parent in lesions in the vicinity of the pleura (fig. 10). In this 
example, a metastatic adenocarcinoma shows fine radiating 
structures more or less perpendicular to the surface of the 
tumor. If these structures represented lymphatic growth, they 
should have taken a convergent course toward the hilum. 
The radiating structures grow more or less straight through 
the various tissue elements of the lung and are radiographi- 
cally apparent by summation as continuous “lines.” A lesion 
with a smooth surface does not show any radiating struc- 
tures. Histologically the radiating structures consist mainly of 
fibrous material. Near a malignant tumor they may enclose 
islands of cancer cells and vessels. 


Arches and Arcades 


These structures develop at the interface between an A 
and a B zone and have been observed only in the presence 
of radiating structures. The appearance of the arches in the 
radiographs varies with the projection. The A/B zone interface 
in figure 11 presents small arches, each 1-2 mm in diameter, 
in a left anterior oblique projection. As a group, these arches 
form a row or arcade. 

Another example of small arches forming an arcade is 
shown in figure 12. This adenocarcinoma of the lung showed 
central necrosis, small hairlike radiating structures, lamellae, 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 8. Squamous cell carcinoma. A, 
B zone (arrows) adjacent to pleura; A 
zone between tumor and B zone. B, B 
zone disappears when air is injected into 
pleural space. (Arrows in B indicate vis- 
ceral pleura.) (Reprinted from [2].) 


and a radiolucent A zone. The faint B zone is evident periph- 
eral to the 1-2-cm-wide A zone. Close inspection of the 
superolateral interface between the A and B zones suggests 
a 2-cm-long arcade consisting of 1-2-mm-wide arches. 

To facilitate understanding of how the VICC system func- 
tions, | interrupt the description of the remaining corona 
structures in order to examine the intregrated action of the 
electrical forces of the system with molecular (chemical con- 
centration) and volume-pressure forces in the development of 
the structural elements so far described. 


Mechanism of Development of the A and B Zones, Radiating 
Structures, and Arches and Arcades 


These structures were the first radiographically observed 
structural elements of the corona complex. They were pro- 
duced experimentally in vitro and in vivo in dogs on the basis 
of structuring of material within a closed electric circuit. The 
underlying mechanism for their development is shown by the 
in vitro experiment illustrated in figure 13. 

A small aluminum ball with small, irregular protrusions on 
its surface was connected to a cable and glued to the bottom 
of a glass jar. Thin aluminum foil was glued to the inner wall 
of the jar and also connected to a second cable. Liquid paraffin 
was poured up to the equator of the ball. After short-circuiting 
of the two cables (to exclude any electric field gradient in the 
liquid paraffin), semolina grains (particles of dielectric, “non- 
charged” material) were scattered as evenly as possible over 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 453 


Ca 


11 


Fig. 9.—Metastatic breast carcinoma with numerous long, coarse, radiating structures perpendicular to surface of tumor. No preformed channels in lung, such 
as lymphatics, have this orientation. (Reprinted from [2].) 


Fig. 10.—Metastatic adenocarcinoma adjacent to pleura. Fine structures radiate more or less perpendicularly to surface of tumor. No preformed channels in the 
lung have such a course. (Reprinted from [2].) 


Fig. 11.—Squamous cell carcinoma of left upper lobe. Small arches form an arcade (arrows) at interface between A and B zones. (Reprinted from [2].) 


Fig. 12.—Adenocarcinoma with internal necrosis, hairlike radiating structures, a radiolucent A zone, and small arches forming an arcade (arrows). (Reprinted 
from [2].) 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


454 NORDENSTROM 


the surface of the liquid. As a collection, they contracted 
spontaneously on the surface of the liquid by their internal 
molecular concentration forces, forming what may be re- 
garded as an A and a B zone (fig. 13A). When an electric 
potential (1.5 kV) was applied between the ball and the 
periphery, the grains started to move, as shown by the motion 
blur during a 5-sec photographic time exposure (fig. 13B). 
Competition between electric field and concentration forces 
then produced a new structuring of the grains (fig. 13C). A 
new equilibrium eventually ensued (fig. 13D). Furthermore, 
the phenomenon of electrical edge enhancement caused ra- 
diating structures to develop opposite the protrusions of the 
surface of the ball. At the interface between the A and B 
zones (fig. 13D), small arches can be seen to form an arcade. 
Each radiating structure supports the junction of two adjoining 
arches. This in vitro experiment was performed to illustrate 
the interaction between electrostatic and molecular forces. In 
vivo, ionic and nonionic (dielectrophoretic) transports can take 
place in tissue fluids at low voltages. The analogous structur- 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 13.—In vitro production of A and 
B zones, radiating structures, and small 
arches forming an arcade. An aluminum 
ball with small, irregular protrusions on its 
surface was glued to inside bottom of jar 
(seen from above; transilluminated from 
below). Ball and aluminum foil lining jar 
were each connected by cables to DC 
potential generator. Liquid paraffin was 
poured into jar up to equator of ball. A, 
Short-circuiting of terminals. Dielectric 
semolina grains sifted onto the liquid sur- 
face are structured as A and B zones 
between aluminum terminals. B, 5-sec ex- 
posure during application of 1.5 kV poten- 
tial. Semolina grains have started to move 
in electric field. Ten seconds later (C), 
grains are arranged in radiating structures 
around ball with preference for surface 
protrusions. D, 10 sec after C, grain 
movements have stopped, showing ra- 
diating structures, a halo or A zone, a 
higher concentration of grains or B zone 
outside halo, and small arches forming an 
arcade at interface between A and B 
zones. Note that two arches are sup- 
ported at each junction by one radiating 
structure. (Reprinted from [2].) 


ing described for lung masses has its origin in a similar balance 
of electrostatic and molecular forces. 

Electric transport of nonionic material is called dielectropho- 
resis. The electric transport of water (a dielectric material) is 
known as electroosmosis. This process has several mecha- 
nisms [2, p. 82], but the net transport can be illustrated as 
follows: 

A U-shaped glass tube is partly packed with cotton and 
partly filled with water (fig. 14). When a potential difference is 
applied between two platinum electrodes, water will move 
from the electropositive to the electronegative side. This 
electroosmotic transport evidently is balanced by the hydro- 
Static pressure difference between the two fluid levels. Pre- 
requisites for this water transport are narrow “capillaries” 
provided with fixed surface charges and a closed electric 
circuit powered over the electrodes. The packed cotton, 
which forms “capitlaries” among the fibers, contains a surplus 
of fixed electronegative charges. Under these circumstances, 
water moves from the electropositive to the electronegative 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


side of the system. In vivo, the interstitial spaces of any tissue 
will behave like the cotton because the surfaces of all body 
cells are lined with a surplus of fixed electronegative charges 
[5]. Electroosmotic transports of water producing A and B 
zones occur regularly in vivo in patients undergoing percuta- 
neous electrochemical treatment of cancer [2, p. 302]. 

Such an in vivo experiment is illustrated in figure 15. The 
positions of a platinum anode (+) and a platinum cathode (—) 
before treatment are shown in figure 15A. After delivery of 
250 C at 10 V electrode potential, cavities were formed by 
gas production around the electrodes (anodic O; and Cl; and 
cathodic H2). A radiopaque halo (B zone) is seen in the lung 
parenchyma around the former site of the cathode. The B 
zone is caused by excessive electroosmotic inflow of tissue 
water (fig. 15B). The local edema spontaneously resorbed a 
few hours after the conclusion of the 2-hr treatment. 

Consider now the situation of a mass in the periphery of 
the lung (fig. 16). The mass presents an electropositive phase 
(i.e., an early phase of internal necrosis) in relation to sur- 
rounding lung tissue. Consider also that some of the interlob- 
ular spaces between the mass and the pleura are mechani- 
cally blocked by the tumor. On activation of the VICC system, 
a closed-circuit electroosmotic transport of water will take 
place from the tumor, leaving a hydropenic radiolucent zone 
(A zone) between the tumor and the hydropic radiopaque 
zone (B zone), which contains excess tissue water. The 
position of the interface between the zones will then be 
determined by the equilibrium between the electroosmotic 
force and the counteracting elevation of the turgor pressure 
by the tissue edema resulting from the blocked interlobular 
spaces. 

Whenever a tumor has surface protrusions, radiating struc- 
tures will develop by edge enhancement of the electric field. 
Dielectric material in the tissue fluid will arrange itself along 
“field lines” and subsequently be transformed into scar tissue. 
At the interface between the A and B zones, a small arch 
bridges each adjacent pair of radiating structures, which also 
serve to stabilize the arches. The convexity of these arches 
is always directed away from the tumor. 

| now return to the description of the corona structures, 
keeping in mind that the VICC system and molecular- and 
volume-pressure forces all interact in the development of the 
remaining eight structures. Additional integrated mechanisms 
also are involved. 


Lamellae 


Linear structures sometimes appear to cross a lesion. 
Figure 17A shows such a lesion with at least two “lines.” 
When the patient is examined in various projections, it is 
usually possible to show that these lines are superimposed 
linear structures in the surrounding tissue (fig. 17B). 

The development of the linear structures is conceived to 
take place in three stages, as illustrated in figure 18. A cancer 
(stage 0) undergoes internal necrosis and develops radiating 
Structures, as described previously (stage 1). The necrotic 
content may evacuate into a bronchus and be replaced by air 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 455 


Electro- | 
osmotic 


Cotton wool 


Fig. 14.—Electric transport of water. Cotton wool is 
packed into lower part of U-shaped glass tube, which is 
partly filled with water. Two clean platinum electrodes are 
immersed. When an electric potential difference is applied 
between electrodes, water moves in “capillaries” of cotton 
fibers from electropositive to electronegative side of sys- 
tem, creating equilibrium between opposing electroosmotic 
and hydrostatic forces. (Reprinted from [2].) 


(stage 2). On reocclusion of the bronchus (e.g., by tumor 
growth), air is resorbed, leading to collapse of part of the 
tumor surface. Displacement of previously developed radiat- 
ing structures will then take place, leading to the radiographic 
appearance of linear structures (stage 3), which in certain 
projections appear to cross the tumor. These modified ra- 
diating structures are called lamellae. 


Circumferential Structures 


In the lung, vessels often can be seen to take a circumfer- 
ential course at a distance from a lesion, peripheral to an A 
zone. Circular displacement of structures can be detected 
readily by computed tomography (CT). Thus, in figure 19A 
the radiolucent A zone is barely recognizable in the region 
medial to a large squamous Cell carcinoma. In the correspond- 
ing CT scan (fig.19B), circular displacement of vascular struc- 
tures medial to an A zone is easily seen. 

By CT it is possible to demonstrate a lower attenuation for 
x-rays in the lung parenchyma of the A zone inside the 
displaced vessels as compared with the attenuation in sur- 
rounding lung parenchyma. A plain radiograph of a pulmonary 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


456 NORDENSTROM 


Potential 
difference 


interlobular 


Arches forming 
an arcade 


Protruding edges, 
electric field 
enhancement, 
structuring 
x 


Hydropenic zone 
(Hygroscopic 
retraction of fibrous 
material) 
Hydropic zone 


Viscera x Diffuse border 


Fig. 16.—Diagrammatic representation of water distribution around tumor. 
Tumor that develops internal necrosis will liberate catabolic energy, activating 
VICC channels between tumor and surrounding tissue. Radiating structures 
follow electrical field lines and are therefore unrelated to preformed tissue 
channels. Tumor produces stasis of tissue fluid by blocking of interiobular 
channels. This fluid is moved by electroosmosis from electropositive tumor 
surface toward electronegative lung tissue, which leads to development of 
radiolucent hydropenic A zone and a radiopaque hydropic B zone. Small arches 
will develop at interface between zones. (Reprinted from [2].) 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 15.—Metastatic fibroliposarcoma 
of right lung. A, Anode (+) in tumor and 
cathode (—) in lung parenchyma before 
percutaneous electrochemical treatment 
with 250 C of direct current at 10 V. B, 
Immediately after treatment, cavities are 
present at site of each electrode; a gas 
cavity is seen in tumor, and electroos- 
motic edema surrounds cavity at former 
site of cathode. (Reprinted from [2].) 


metastasis from a malignant melanoma does not clearly dem- 
onstrate any perifocal radiolucency (fig. 20A). The corre- 
sponding CT scan, however, shows the circular displacement 
of vessels and an A zone of 24 H lower mean attenuation 
than the mean attenuation of the surrounding lung paren- 
chyma (fig. 20B). 


Narrowing of Vessels 


Small vascular branches from a circularly displaced vessel 
often show a pronounced tapering in their caliber in the A 
zone. Such tapering of vessels is seen around a poorly 
differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (fig. 21). One vessel 
behind the tumor is probably circularly displaced. A small 
vessel running perpendicularly toward the A zone seems to 
be blocked. Such vascular obstruction can also be seen 
around granulomas and benign tumors. Around the hamar- 
toma shown in figure 22, the A zone is 1-5 mm wide. A 
branch vessel appears to be blocked at the border of the A 
zone. Histologically, narrowing of vessels was found to be 
caused by thrombosis of small vessels [2, p. 176]. 


Perifocal Emphysema 


Emphysema developing around a polarizing process may 
also contribute to the lowering of the attenuation values within 
an A zone. Emphysema is properly defined as a loss of 
structured tissue components. In vivo microscopy of the 
mesentery of dogs revealed that multiple segmental contrac- 
tions develop acutely in small vessels when they are exposed 
to electric fields (2, pp. 135-247]. Microthromboses develop 
in the anodic field. Chronic obstruction of small vessels can 
be expected to lead to permanent regressive changes of the 
lung parenchyma in the A zone and consequently to the 
development of true perifocal emphysema. The chronic proc- 
ess of the tuberculous granuloma shown in figure 7 may have 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 17.—Moderately well differen- 
tiated squamous Cell cavitary carcinoma, 
presenting lamellae. These linear opaci- 
ties appear to cross each other over tu- 
mor in posteroanterior projection (A, ar- 
rows). In slight left posterior oblique pro- 
jection (B), lameliae are projected at sur- 
face of tumor. (Reprinted from [2].) 


Fig. 18.—Proposed principle of for- 
mation of lamellae. Stage 0: Pulmonary 
mass develops around bronchus. Stage 
1: Eccentric local necrosis develops in 
tumor, and tissue degradation leads to 
development of radiating fibrous struc- 
tures perpendicular to tumor surface. 
Stage 2: Necrotic debris leaves tumor via 
bronchus and is replaced by air. Stage 3: 
Bronchus becomes blocked, leading to 
resorption of air in tumor cavity. Asym- 
metric collapse of tumor tissue will pro- 
duce local conglomeration of radiating 
structures in surrounding lung tissue. La- 
mellae developed in this way may appear 
to cross tumor in certain projections. (Re- 
printed from [2].) 


Fig. 19.—Circular displacement of 
vessels around squamous cell carcinoma 
of right lower lobe. A, Barely visible ra- 
diolucent zone medial to tumor (arrows). 
B, Transverse CT scan at level of center 
of tumor. Large pulmonary vessels medial 
to tumor seem to avoid its surface. Ra- 
diolucent zone here appears clearly inter- 
posed between vessels and mass. (Re- 
printed from [2].) 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 457 


Stage 0 


deve lopment 
of bronchial 
tumor 


bronchus 


Stage 3 


reocclusion of bronchus 
and resorption of air 
leading to asymmetric 
tumor collapse and 
formation of lamellae 


Stage 1 


development 
of internal 
necrosis 
and 

radiating 
structures 


stage 4 


evacuation 
of debris 
and inlet 
of air 


ki 


lamellae (90° projection) 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


458 NORDENSTROM 


T ; 


developed its A zone in this manner. Like an emphysematous 
bulla, this perifocal emphysema did not collapse even in the 
presence of a fairly large pneumothorax. For the radiologic 
identification of perifocal emphysema, regressive tissue 
changes of this sort must be demonstrated. 


Perifocal Edema 


This condition is a common finding at certain stages of 
development of malignancies and inflammatory lesions in the 
lung as well as in other organs (e.g., brain and breast). It is 
characterized by absence of a sharp borderline between the 
lesion and the surrounding tissue. Around breast cancers the 
perifocal opacity has been demonstrated both qualitatively 
and quantitatively to be caused predominantly by tissue water 
[2, pp. 216-231]. When measured, the electric potential in 
such cancers was electronegative in relation to surrounding 
tissue, a situation in which tissue water will move electroos- 
motically from surrounding normal tissue toward the tumor 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 20.—Metastasis from malignant 
melanoma. In radiograph (A), only a faint 
A zone is suggested. In CT scan (B), 
vessels are circularly displaced around A 
zone of lower mean attenuation (24 H) 
than surrounding lung parenchyma. (Re- 
printed from (2].) 


Fig. 21.—Poorly differentiated squa- 
mous cell carcinoma in right lower lobe 
(lateral view). Lung tissue around tumor 
shows absence of vessels, while visible 
vessels at edge of A zone are narrow 
(short black arrow), displaced (white ar- 
row), or even blocked (/ong black arrow). 
(Reprinted from [2].) 


Fig. 22.—Hamartoma in right lung with 
narrow A zone surrounding tumor. A pul- 
monary vessel (arrow) appears not to 
transverse A zone. (Reprinted from [2].) 


and its periphery. This corresponds to the accumulation of 
tissue water induced around the cathode shown in figure 15B. 
The turgor pressure will then increase in the previously de- 
veloped A zone around the cancer and enhance the circular 
displacement of vessels (and other tissue elements) and 
contribute to narrowing of vessels by compression. In fact, in 
a dog's lung, an applied electronegative field led to complete 
suspension of the circulation in pencilwide vessels due to 
inflow of tissue water [2, p. 193]. The development of perifocal 
edema during an electronegative phase of a lesion and of an 
A zone during an electropositive phase reflects the time- 
dependent variations of polarity of the fluctuating potential of 
the degrading tissue in the tumor. 


Interlobular Edema 


Interlobular edema is characterized by visible interlobular 
spaces that are wider at their pleural than at their proximal 
extensions in the lung. This appearance makes it possible to 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 23.—Carcinoma in right upper 
lobe (lateral view). A, Tumor produces 
atelectasis (X). Water is moved from tu- 
mor surface, leading to development of 
hydropenic A zone (A) and hydropic B 
zone (B). At their interface, electroosmotic 
pressure and counteracting edema bal- 
ance each other. Linear structure (single 
arrow) represents fluid-filled interlobular 
space. B, Fluid in interlobular space is 
retained by capillary force even after in- 
jection of small amount of air (two arrows) 
into pleural space. B-zone water has dis- 
appeared into opened pleural space, but 
atelectasis remains. (Reprinted from [2].) 


distinguish these “radiating” structures from the fibrous ra- 
diating structures previously described. 

The interlobular edema may at a first glance seem indistin- 
guishable from the so-called Kerley lines that develop as a 
result of acute or chronic stasis in the pulmonary circulation. 
The actual lines, however, characteristically result from sev- 
eral locally interacting factors within the mechanisms behind 
the corona complex. They develop during the electropositive 
phase of a degrading process. Water is transported electroos- 
motically from the lesion toward the pleura, producing a 
hydropenic A zone and a hydropic B zone (fig. 23A). From 
the B zone in this example, an inward tapered linear structure 
can also be seen. This structure represents a fluid-filled 
widened interlobular space. When a minimal amount of air 
was injected into the pleural space, the B zone disappeared. 
The interlobular fluid collection is still present. Why has tissue 
water moved from the tumor to form the B zone while fluid 
remains in the interlobular space within the hydropenic A 
zone? The physical explanation is that the electroosmotic 
force is effective only when the “capillarity” of the interstitial 
spaces is characterized by narrow channels. The interlobular 
space is too wide for effective electroosmosis; instead, local 
turgor pressure by stasis is the dominant mechanism for focal 
edema. Hence, a fluid-filled widened interlobular space is seen 
within the hydropenic A zone as in figure 23A. 


Fibrous Tissue 


| again temporarily interrupt the description of the individual 
corona structures and turn to a remarkable effect of an 
activated VICC system: the production of fibrous tissue. 

Transformation of normal tissue into fibrous scar tissue by 
direct current. When any tissue that can develop scar tissue 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 459 


is exposed to weak electric current for a sufficient period, 
fibrous tissue will develop. Current flowing from a smooth 
surface will lead to the development of a fibrous membrane 
parallel to the surface. Current flowing from protruding edges 
will lead to the development of linear fibrous structures. Their 
endogenous counterparts are the radiating fibrous structures. 
Part of the underlying mechanism was illustrated in figure 13, 
where the gross morphologic arrangement of radiating struc- 
tures was shown to take place by the mechanism of electrical 
edge enhancement. In tissue, a multitude of modifications of 
cells also takes place under the influence of electric current. 
Here, | deal specifically with the development of fibrosis. 

In vivo fibrous transformation of normal rat lung by unidi- 
rectional flow of direct current. Both lower lobes of a normal 
rat were resected. One control lobe was immediately fixed in 
formaldehyde whereas the other lobe was wrapped under 
nonsterile conditions in a thin polyethylene foil. Flat platinum 
electrodes were inserted into the open ends of this electro- 
phoretic chamber. Soft-tissue radiographs were obtained of 
the specimen before and after electrophoretic treatment of 
the specimen (fig. 24). The current generator was constructed 
to operate either with constant current or constant electrode 
potential. The application of 10 „A of constant direct current 
required initially 0.8 V. Because of electroosmotic dehydra- 
tion, daily application of a few drops of saline solution to the 
anodic electrode was necessary to keep the voltage below 2 
V. The experiment was continued for 21 days. The specimen 
then showed lower cathodic (—) than anodic (+) density (fig. 
24). Specimens treated in this way do not show bacteriologic 
decomposition, an effect interpreted as a bacteriostatic effect 
of the current. 

After fixation in formaldehyde, the two specimens were 
sectioned and stained with hematoxylin-eosin and van Gieson 
stain. The control specimen showed normal lung tissue, 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


460 NORDENSTROM 


lOp A Constant current 
/7.3 Coulomb 


2 $ e aa tale cate a 
| ee 
/ a 
et ££ Be 
Hour —— Day Yg at 
C 


Fig. 24.—Induction of fibrosis in vitro. Right lower lobe of rat lung was 
wrapped in polyethylene foil to form electrophoretic chamber about 25 mm 
long with platinum electrodes at open ends. Soft-tissue radiographs before (A) 
and after (B) application of C, direct current (10 „A, 0.8-2 V) for 21 days. 


whereas extensive tissue and cell transformations were pres- 
ent throughout the electrophoretically treated “dead” lung 
lobe. In the cathodic (—) half of the treated specimen, very 
few cellular elements were preserved. The tissue was less 
dense than in the anodic (+) half. It contained birefringent 
tissue elements, as in collagenous fibrous tissue, and no- 
where were any fibroblasts seen (fig. 24D). The anodic half 
of the specimen showed a compact fibrous tissue with many 
fibroblastlike cells of slightly varying size and shape (fig. 24E). 
These changes also were produced in later experiments at 
currents below 1 „A. The histologic staining of the specimens 
indicated that collagenous fibrous tissue was produced pre- 
dominantly in the cathodic field while the elastic type of fibrous 
tissue was produced predominantly in the anodic field. 

In vitro production of radiating fibrous structures. In vitro 
demonstration of the outgrowth of radiating fibrous structures 
in a lung specimen depleted of air is difficult. However, it is 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Cathodic (—) half is less radiopaque than the anodic (+) half. Histologic speci- 
mens: Cathodic part (D) contains fibrous tissue without any cell-like structures; 
anodic part (E) contains fibrous tissue and many fibroblastlike cells. (H and E 
stain.) 


informative to show that the same type of cathodic and anodic 
fibrous tissue that was produced in vitro in the rat lung can 
be produced also in vitro as radiating structures in fat tissue. 
Normal human fat specimens obtained at herniorrhaphy or 
at mastectomy were used. A soft-tissue radiograph of a 
normal piece of human breast fat is shown in figure 25 in an 
electrophoretic chamber between two platinum electrodes 
provided with small protrusions. These are intended to pro- 
duce electrical edge enhancement. The fat specimen contains 
some minor fibrous tissue elements before the application of 
current. After application of current (25 C at 10 V), new coarse 
radiating structures can be seen in the cathodic part as well 
as some more-irregular newly formed structures and many 
small “dots” in the anodic part of the specimen (fig. 25). 
Histologic examination of the specimen (fixed in formalde- 
hyde, sliced and stained with van Gieson stain) shows a 
meshlike fibrous material without any cell-like structures in 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 25.—Induction of fibrosis in human fat tissue in vitro. Human breast fat 
in plastic chamber between two platinum electrodes with surface protrusions. 
A, Soft-tissue radiograph before electrophoresis. Virtually no fibrous tissue in 
parts of specimen adjacent to electrodes. B, After 10 days’ application of 25 C 
at 10 V, radiating structures are produced owing to field enhancement at some 


the cathodic half of the specimen (fig. 25). In the anodic half 
(fig. 25), irregular fibrous material is seen with numerous cell- 
like elements having the appearance of fibroblasts. On the 
whole, the types of cathodic and anodic fibrous tissues found 
in the treated human breast-fat specimen were similar to 
these in the treated rat lung lobe. Recent short-interval studies 
on the development of cathodic fibrous tissue in fat have 
revealed continuous thickening of fat cell membranes while 
nuclei and cytoplasm dissolve [2, pp. 236-240]. The anodic 
fibrous tissue seems to develop predominantly in the intersti- 
tial spaces and from cytoplasmic material. The fibroblastlike 
cells in the anodic tissue appear to consist of residual nuclei 
and cytoplasm from normal tissue cells. 

Pure cathodic and anodic fibrous tissue cannot be expected 
to be found in normal scar tissue, because endogenously 
developed scar tissue (as well as the radiating fibrous struc- 
tures around cancers) results from the fluctuating injury po- 
tential. Therefore, scar tissues in vivo contain a mixture of 
cathodic and anodic fibrosis (i.e., nonhygroscopic, collage- 
nous, and hygroscopic elastic fibrous material). 

In vivo production of radiating fibrous structures in human 
lung. Artificial activation of the VICC system in vivo is possible 
from an external source of direct current over implanted 
electrodes. Large amounts of energy can be supplied to the 


` 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 461 


R ey wS 7 
"g £ z * a "Z 
ar, fr” ‘4 = v= Dj 
à D a Stat i- 
A SE a Kar f m E 4 ~ f oo 
a 
ee ‘gull “ash hut g” 
gi eds = > * ta a 
: A il iF. { yi . - x 
PF- ir -a f i P 
, e 4 - ” f i f ‘? a 
e, ee Pury 
. 4 "a ‘eee SN t - “iy . 


of electrode protrusions. Note macroscopic differences between cathodic (—) 
and anodic (+) fibrous tissue as well as many small “dots” in anodic part of 
specimen. Histologic specimens: C, Meshlike cathodic fibrous radiating struc- 
tures; D, dense, irregular anodic fibrous tissue, containing many fibroblastlike 
cells. (van Gieson stain.) (Reprinted from (2].) 


system, thus injuring the tissue and initiating an injury polari- 
zation potential [2, pp. 281-317]. When the application of 
external current is interrupted, the energy of the induced 
injury polarization starts the spontaneous repair of tissue. 
During this process radiating structures have been observed 
to develop. 

Electrochemical treatment of a cancer provides an example. 
An adenocarcinoma of the ovary in a 66-year-old woman was 
partly excised, then treated locally with 4000 rad (40 Gy). 
Four years later, a 25 x 17 x 17-mm tumor appeared in the 
left lung. Needle biopsy confirmed the presence of an aden- 
ocarcinoma. Because the patient had coronary atherosclero- 
sis, atrial fibrillation, and two myocardial infarctions, surgical 
resection was rejected. Instead, the cancer was treated elec- 
trochemically under local anesthesia over percutaneously ap- 
plied platinum electrodes (figs. 26A and 26B) with 180 C at 
10-15 V. The tumor was made anodic. Figure 26C shows 
the tumor before treatment. After 2 months, tiny radiating 
structures had appeared around the tumor as well as around 
a density above it, corresponding to the former position of 
the cathode (fig. 26D). Subsequently the tumor and the cath- 
odic infiltrations decreased in size, still showing radiating 
structures (fig. 26E). Five years after treatment, only a minimal 
scar remained at the tumor site (fig. 26F). 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


462 NORDENSTROM 


E 


Fig. 26.—Production of fibrous radiating structures in vivo. Direct-current 
treatment of metastatic ovarian carcinoma in lingula of 66-year-old woman. 
Anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) views show percutaneously inserted platinum 
electrodes in tumor (anode) and in lung tissue above tumor (cathode). An 
angiographic catheter is positioned in pulmonary artery. Radiographs before 


Retraction of Fibrous Tissue 


A variety of factors are involved in retraction of tissue. 
Within an A zone, deterioration of the vascular supply may 
lead to true perifocal emphysema and the circular displace- 
ment of vessels. The surrounding normal tissue retracts from 
the now more compliant emphysematous region. A reversible 
type of tissue retraction is produced by tissue containing 
hygroscopic, fibrous, elastic tissue. Depending upon the 
water content, this tissue will either shrink or enlarge. The 
mechanism is involved in the development of “retraction pock- 
ets” in the lung with local accumulation of fluid in the adjacent 
pleural space. 

Let us excise a piece of fibrous radiating scar tissue from 
the periphery of a breast cancer and divide it into two parts. 
Each is refrigerated overnight, one part soaked in saline 
solution and the other air-dried. Microscopic sections are then 
prepared. The soaked material shows straight birefringent 


AJR:145, September 1985 


(C) and 30 days after (D) treatment with 180 C at 10-15 V show fibrous 
radiating structures around tumor and around former site of cathode. E, 60 
days after treatment, tumor is smaller but radiating structures are still evident. 
F, After 450 days. Only a small focus of scar tissue remains at tumor site. 
Minimal fibrosis is present at former site of cathode. (A-E reprinted from [2]}.) 


collagenous fibers (fig. 27A). The birefringent fibers in the 
dried material are undulating owing to shrinkage of the elastic 
hygroscopic fibers between the birefringent fibers (fig. 27B). 

A pulmonary lesion near the surface of the lung may pro- 
duce what pathologists often call a “naveling” of the pleura. 
A small adenocarcinoma close to the chest wall is shown in 
figure 28A. Its surface is slightly irregular, with a fibrous strand 
suggested between the tumor and a tent-shaped pleural 
density. After operative resection, the radiograph of the in- 
flated specimen revealed multiple small radiating structures 
at the surface of the tumor (fig. 28B). Some of these struc- 
tures were attached to the visceral pleura, which shows 
naveling. The pleural tent-shaped density evidently was 
caused by in vivo collection of fluid in a retracted part of the 
visceral pleura. 

The pathogenesis of this condition may be described as 
follows: A pulmonary lesion with an irregularly protruding 
surface, located near the pleura, may develop radiating fibrous 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


A 


Fig. 27.—Modification of fibrous tissue by alteration of water content. Two 
specimens of fibrous tissue from breast cancer, after overnight refrigeration. 
One specimen was soaked in saline solution, the other exposed to air. After 
cutting and staining with hematoxylin-eosin, the soaked material (A) shows 


Fig. 28.—A, Pleural retraction pocket 
(arrows) adjacent to small adenocarci- 
noma in left upper lobe. B, Postmortem 
radiograph of lung, distended by negative 
extemal pressure, shows numerous 
small, radiating fibrous structures around 
tumor. One of these structures reaches 
pleura, which is retracted to a funnel (filled 
with pleural fluid in vivo). (Reprinted from 
[2}.) 


A 


structures as described previously. Some of these extending 
structures may attach to the visceral pleura. During an elec- 
tropositive phase of polarization of the tumor (by internal 
injury), a hydropenic zone will develop around the tumor. The 
hygroscopic fibrous elements of already developing radiating 
structures will then shrink and produce naveling of the pleura. 
This naveling is here called a retraction pocket. An analogous 
mechanism applies in the breast to the development of so- 
called skin retraction and skin thickening in the vicinity of a 
breast cancer. Quantitative analyses of relative fat-water 
content in the tissues have supported this concept [2, pp. 
228-232]. 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 463 


straight birefringent collagenous fibers; the dried material (B) shows undulating 
birefringent collagenous fibers. Undulations follow retraction of elastic, hydro- 
philic fibrous material between collagen fibers. (Reprinted from [2].) 


Differential diagnosis between a B zone, thickened pleura, 
and a retraction pocket can be obtained by the injection of a 
small amount of air into the pleural space (fig. 29). These 
considerations are of practical importance because not all 


pleural reactions adjacent to cancers mean malignant involve- 
ment of the pleura. 


Calcifications 


Pathologic calcifications in human tissues consist of hy- 
droxyapatite. This compound is a mixture of calcium, phos- 
phate, carbonate, magnesium, variable amounts of water, 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


464 NORDENSTROM 


B-zone 


and “impurities” (e.g., protein). Apatite precipitates in any 
tissue after various kinds of injuries. By applying the principle 
of the fluctuating injury potential (2, pp. 69-73] and its acti- 
vation of the VICC system, it is possible to give a general 
tentative explanation of the biokinetic events associated with 
Calcification of tissue. 

Microcalcifications in a specimen of adipose tissue from a 
human breast can be produced experimentally in vitro (figs. 
30A and 30B). As a result of the flow of current through a 
tissue specimen, small radiopaque “dots” develop in the an- 
odic part. Histologically, these dots correspond to bushlike, 
partly birefringent, structured material on the inside walls of 
fat cells (fig. 30C). These “bushes” do not contain chemically 
detectable calcium, an understandable phenomenon in that 
they have developed in the acidic environment of the electro- 
positive (anodic) part of the specimen. However, the bushes 
represent a matrix, which seems to be a necessary prereq- 
uisite for the precipitation of calcium. 

After the direct-current treatment of fat specimens resulted 
in the development of radiographically visible anodic “dots,” 
the polarity was reversed, thereby simulating the events of a 
“fluctuating injury potential.” Subsequent histologic analyses 
then revealed multiple foci of microcalcifications, which 
showed typical staining for calcium by hematoxylin-eosin (figs. 
30D and 30E) and alizarin, which is specific for calcium ions. 

In vivo induction of calcium accumulation in a human lung 
metastasis. The low-density tumor shown in figure 31A rep- 
resents a cytologically verified metastatic melanosarcoma in 
the left lung of a 32-year-old woman. This tumor was electro- 
coagulated by diathermy over an active electrode perfused 
by saline solution [2, pp. 273-281]. The temperature meas- 
ured at the periphery of the tumor rose to 50°-60°C after 
about 8 min. Two months after the treatment, the tumor 
appeared more radiopaque than adjacent ribs (fig. 31B). This 


Thickened pleura Retraction pocket 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 29.—Schematic guide to differ- 
ential diagnosis of B zone (A), thickened 
pleura (C), and pleural retraction pocket 
(E): With injection of small quantity of air 
into pleural space, B zone disapears (B); 
pleural thickening (D) and retraction 
pocket (F) remain. (Modified from (2].) 


finding could be interpreted only as the result of accumulation 
of calcium in the injured tissue. Six months after treatment, 
the tumor had diminished considerably and showed a calcium- 
dense area only in its central region (fig. 31C). 

Clinical observations of electrochemical treatment of can- 
cers of the lung as well as the production of microcalcifications 
in in vitro experiments indicate that calcifications in tissue 
need not necessarily be regarded as a disease per se. In my 
opinion, many so-called pathologic calcifications in previously 
injured tissue represent a process that can be regarded 
pathogenetically as equivalent to the development of scar 
tissue. This process behind injury-induced tissue calcifications 
may therefore be termed calcinosis reparativa, to indicate its 
close relation to the events of healing. 


Comment 


The role of the VICC system is described here mainly in 
terms of the development of radiographically visible structures 
in spontaneously degrading pulmonary lesions. From obser- 
vations detailed elsewhere, analogous correlations exist con- 
cerning endogenous transformations of tissue in degrading 
breast cancers [2, pp. 203-268]. It is suggested that an 
activated VICC system also leads to many other physiologic 
and pathophysiologic events. 

For example, an energetically acceptable explanation for 
chemotaxis [2, pp. 191-192] is now possible in terms of 
endogenous electrophoretic transport of charged materials. 
White blood cells, which are electronegatively charged, were 
shown to accumulate massively around an electropositively 
polarized tissue region [2, pp. 187-191]. In this sense, leu- 
kotaxis may be explained as endogenous in vivo electropho- 
resis of white blood cells. 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


Fig. 30.—Creation of microcalcifications in normal breast fat in vitro. A, Soft- 
tissue radiograph of electrophoretic chamber containing fat specimen before 
application of direct current. B, After 25 C at 10 V (26 days), small “dots” are 
seen in lower part of anodic field (arrow). C, Photomicrograph (hematoxylin- 
eosin) of “dots,” bushlike structures that developed on inner membrane of fat 
cells. At this stage, these anodic matrices contain no calcium. Flow of current 


“Local” chemical reactions will be modified, insofar as they 
occur within superimposed VICC-mediated electrochemical 
gradients among various metabolically polarizing tissue re- 
gions. The VICC system can thereby be expected to play an 
important role in maintaining homeostasis. 

Physiologic modulations by the VICC system may also be 
turned into unphysiologic activations, however, leading to 
pathologic transformations of cells. Thus, hybridization of red 
blood cells and fat cells into monstrous cell-like units have 
been produced experimentally [2, pp. 183-186]. An unphy- 
siologic, long-term, unidirectional activation of the VICC sys- 
tem may therefore represent a hitherto unrecognized mech- 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED 


ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 465 


was then reversed, simulating endogenous fluctuation of an injury potential: 
previously anodic “dots” (matrices) then calcified. Subsequent histologic spec- 
imen (D) shows scattered microcaicifications in previously radiographically 
normal, noncaicified tissue. (E, Detail of microcalcification.) (H and E stain.) (A- 
C reprinted from (2].) 


anism for the induction of neoplasms by the various electro- 
chemically tissue-polarizing agents among carcinogens [2, p. 
327]. 

On the other hand, it is possible to induce dramatic changes 
of the ionic microenvironment of various cancers when the 
VICC system is acutely overstimulated via implanted elec- 
trodes from an external source of direct current. This process 
already has led to apparently permanent (now of 6 years’ 
duration) regression of a number of seemingly uncontrollable 
cancers [2, pp. 269-317]. 

It seems justified to suggest that the VICC system may 
represent an important mechanism to consider in future at- 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


466 NORDENSTROM 


Fig. 31.—Induction of calcification in metastatic melanosarcoma by electro- 
coagulation. A, Original low radiographic opacity. B, 60 days after treatment, 
tumor appears even more opaque than surrounding ribs. C, 180 days after 


tempts at explaining various functional and morphologic bio- 
logic phenomena that are now poorly understood. Further 
investigation of the construction and function of the VICC 
system also seems justified, as it may offer new possibilities 
for influencing the healing of various disorders of tissues and 
Cells. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


I thank John H. M. Austin for help in preparing the English text and 
Kerstin Ersson for help in manuscript preparation. 


REFERENCES 


1. Nordenstr6m BEW. New trends and techniques in roentgen 
diagnosis of bronchial carcinoma. in: Simon M, Potchen EJ, Le 
May M, eds. Frontiers of pulmonary radiology. New York: Grune 
& Stratton, 1969:380-404 

2. Nordenstrom BEW. Biologically closed electric circuits: clinical, 
experimental and theoretical evidence for an additional circula- 
tory system. Stockholm: Nordic Medical Publications, 1983 
(available through Nordic Medical Publications, Grev Turegatan 


AJR:145, September 1985 


treatment, tumor has diminished considerably. Increased radiopacity probably 
represents inflow of calcium into injured tumor tissue. D, Temperature meas- 
ured at tumor during electrocoagulation. (Reprinted from [2].) 


2, S-114 35 Stockholm, Sweden) 

3. Nordenstr6m BEW. Electric potentials in pulmonary lesions. Acta 
Radiol [Diagn] (Stockh) 1971;11:1-16 

4. Jordan J. In: Pilla AA, ed. Proceedings of a workshop in bioelec- 
trochemistry, Princeton, New Jersey, October 10-14, 1971. 
Washington DC: National Science Foundation; and Yardley, PA: 
ESB, Inc. Technology Center, 1971: 103-122 

5. Weiss L, Zeigei R. Cell surface negativity and the binding of 
positively charged particles. J Cell Physiol 1971;77 : 179-186 


Editor’s Note 


Several aspects of the publication of this lecture are uncon- 
ventional and require explanation. The work is unique in more 
than its intriguing content. Unlike the multiauthor contributions 
that dominate today’s literature, every aspect of this offering 
is solely from one man, Professor Nordenstrom. Having 
worked without collaborators for over a decade, he alone is 
responsible for the original concepts, the experiments, the 
analysis, and the text. Although employing modern terms and 
instruments, his performance has been in the tradition of the 


Downloaded from www.ajronline.org by 67.211.55.41 on 05/21/15 from IP address 67.211.55.41. Copyright ARRS. For personal use only; all rights reserved 


AJR:145, September 1985 


pioneer scientist: complete and isolated immersion in the 
research. There can be no doubt as to whom the ingenious 
experiments and ground-breaking conceptions should be 
credited. 

The manner of publication of this work is also unique. Only 
two papers on the subject have been offered in the public 
domain. Rather, the entirety of the effort has been laid out in 
great detail in a recently published volume [2]. Although 
Professor Nordenstrom has spoken about some of the ma- 
terial at international gatherings, the bulk of it has not been 
available in print for others to contemplate and assess. Ac- 
cordingly, there has been little correlative investigation in other 
laboratories. Few, if any, of the experiments have been repli- 
cated; as a result, the concepts, though plausible, have not 
had the advantage of independent supportive investigation 
elsewhere. Reviews of the work by other scientists familiar 
with the concepts and techniques have not yet been possible. 
Thus, the lecture is offered to our readers without the con- 
ventional external assessment. 

This seems justified on the basis of the solid science in 
Professor Nordenstrom’s many preceding contributions to 
radiology. Further, the relevance to diagnostic images is very 
pertinent as details of these are conventionally explained 
exclusively on a histopathologic basis. Many of the concepts 
presented will be unfamiliar to radiologists, and more than 
one reading may be required for a comfortable grasp of the 


BIOLOGICALLY CLOSED ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 467 


numerous interrelated ideas that offer seemingly plausible 
explanations for many pathologic and radiologic phenomena. 
Some may object that this largely theoretical work has no 
place in a journal which carries predominantly practical clinical 
information. Yet, how can the regression of lung tumors as a 
consequence of electrical treatment be other than clinical and 
practical, at least to the individuals concerned? 

It is too early to offer final judgment of this work. At the 
very least it is imaginative, experimentally ingenious, and 
provocative. Professor Nordenstrém has raised many tanta- 
lizing questions. Space limitations prevent full exposition, 
which might answer some of them, but even so, other ques- 
tions would still remain. Clearly the work calls for similar 
investigations elsewhere; it is hoped that this publication will 
encourage such efforts. Professor Nordenstrém’s book con- 
tains a wealth of experimental details for those who may be 
so stimulated. Like this paper, it is phrased with some dog- 
matism and certainty; nevertheless, it is a collection of many 
intriguing hypotheses that warrant serious examination. Pos- 
sibly these new concepts are our first realization of an impor- 
tant physicochemical system that heretofore has been over- 
looked. If so, Professor Nordenstrom would take his place 
with other notable Swedish scientists who have so greatly 
advanced our understanding of electrophysiology and 
biophysics. MMF 


