I've got an email from a lot of you
lately saying, "Can we do a show just
off the news? Can one show not be in the
grim march of events?" So, here it is.
How do you intro Brian Eno
[Music]
has a claim as much as anyone does to
have invented the genre of ambient
music.
&gt;&gt; So there's no narrative quality to the
music. It just sort of starts, stays
pretty much in one place and then ends.
&gt;&gt; He certainly coined the term, built out
the philosophy. sort of has eaten a lot
of the music we now listen to, but also
he's just done so many other things.
He's produced seminal albums by you too.
&gt;&gt; The talking heads
&gt;&gt; glory Anderson
Coldplay.
[Music]
Hell, Eno composed the sound that plays
when you boot up Windows 95.
Do you remember that one? A lot of sound
we just take for granted. A lot of the
way sound is now made. Eno helped bring
that into existence. A lot of his work
on creating generative systems that make
music can be seen as a forerunner to
much of today's AI systems.
Anino is more than just a sonic
technician or tinkerer. He's this
wonderful thinker and philosopher of art
and just being a human being.
&gt;&gt; At least I personally am not interested
in the idea of art being a sort of
existential challenge to you.
&gt;&gt; And he's got this really delightful new
book out, what art does, an unfinished
theory, as well as a new album with Bey
Wolf called Liinal.
I wanted to talk to him about all of it
or at least as much of it as I could. As
always, my email escline shown
times.com.
[Music]
Brianino, welcome to the show.
&gt;&gt; Hello, Ezra. Nice to meet you.
&gt;&gt; So, your new book is called What Art
Does. And I guess tell me, what does art
do?
Well, perhaps I should tell you first
why I thought that question needed
answering. Because um in education in
England, and in fact, I think probably
in most parts of the world, the budgets
that always get cut are the arts budgets
because there are apparently more
important things that we should be
teaching people. Science, engineering,
financial, technology, that kind of
thing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You should be making short trades.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Are you really alive if you can't short
a stock?
&gt;&gt; But I've always thought that art is
actually one of the most important
things that humans do with their time.
You know, in my book, there's a long
list of things that I consider could
come under the headline of art. And it
includes, of course, obvious things like
symphonies and photographs and
paintings, but it includes cardigans and
jewelry and makeup and tattoos and all
the things that humans do that they
don't have to do. None of those things
have survival benefits in the obvious
sense. They're things we do to do
something in our mind, to change our
mind in some way. So, what does art do?
Why do we like it? I have this phrase in
the book that um children learn through
play and adults play through art. And I
think that's really what it does. But
when we look at children and we watch
them playing,
we don't think, "Oh, they're just
wasting their time. They should do
something more serious." We realize that
when children play, they're learning.
their understanding about materials,
about social relationships, about their
own bodies, their own minds, about where
they live, all of those things that are
very important to understand.
And they do that infallibly and with a
huge appetite. That's what children like
doing. And we understand, all of us
understand that that's the way they
learn things.
And then round about the age of 11, we
suddenly forget that idea and we think
people have got to start working to
learn. Um, but I think people carry on
playing. But what they do is they call
what they then do, they call it art. Art
is grown up play. It's a way of
imagining things and imagining what they
would feel like and imagining how they
connect to other things that we know
about. and then feeding that knowledge
back into our lives and into our uh
relationships.
&gt;&gt; I want to zoom in on a word you use
there which is feel. One of the central
arguments of the book is that art is a
way we explore or attune to our
feelings.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I guess that raises another
question. Uh you you say and I agree
with this that feelings have a bad
reputation.
So to you what do feelings do and why do
they matter?
Yes. So, they have a bad reputation
because they're very hard to quantify
and measure. And of course, science
wants things that are easily comparable
and easily describable in in some kind
of language of quantity and measure. Um,
feelings because they're subjective are
very difficult to do that with. However,
the first response we have to most
things is a feeling response.
Particularly if they're unfamiliar
things, what's the first thing that
happens when you meet somebody? You kind
of form an impression of them quite
quickly. You think, "He looks like a
decent person. He looks quite friendly.
He doesn't look hostile. I think I could
get on with him." Or, "She looks pretty
interesting and I think I'm in love with
her." The feelings form very quickly
actually um and they form without really
much valition on our part and they are
in fact our first antenna, our first
judgment of a situation, our first sense
of whether it's dangerous or friendly or
useful or useless is made on the basis
of feelings. And then after that we
backfill with other information we find
and we sometimes find that our feelings
the quick response were were incorrect.
But surprisingly often we find that they
were actually exactly on the money. I
knew that as soon as I saw her. One
thing that I was thinking about while
you were talking is
a a way I think to say
what our modern relationship is here is
that we think feelings lie and we think
facts don't. And I've come to believe
that's a a very
&gt;&gt; uh simplistic way to think about both
feelings and and facts.
&gt;&gt; But what I am doing to to make form into
content here while you talk,
&gt;&gt; I have this whole list of questions and
in a rational, coherent, factual way, I
know what the next question should be.
&gt;&gt; What I'm actually doing is watching a
feeling that is moving around in my
chest while you speak.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And there's a moment when I know
that you said something that's the next
place we should go and it's not the
thing on my sheet of paper,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; It's this whole thing I'm doing right
now in a way. And maybe it's wrong.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; But no great interviews
are logical. Like they just aren't like
we're working in a medium that does not
work that way. Conversation does not
work logically.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I do think we've degraded
our relationship, our attunement to what
we feel. Yes.
&gt;&gt; And that's actually a mistake. So I
understood one argument you're making
about art which which feels true to me
is that it's a way of practicing our
attunement to our feelings.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I I think that opens something
interesting here. One thing in the book
that connected for me was you quote a
musician friend of yours John Hassel who
you says asks the question what is it
that I really like and says being able
to answer that is the most important
question. Why?
&gt;&gt; So, we're being told probably about 10
or 12,000 times a day what we ought to
like, what other people like, what some
people would prefer that we liked. Um,
in we're told that in the form of
advertising, in the form of political
messages, in the form of all of the
things that try to persuade us to think
or believe one thing rather than
another. Um, it's the biggest industry
in the western world actually.
persuasion. Um, and it's very easy in
that sea of that flood actually of that
tsunami of um, suggestions about what we
ought to like to forget what we actually
do like. So I think what he's doing
there, he's suggesting that the deepest
feelings we have are actually the most
reliable things that we know about. One
of the things that happens when you're
looking at art or listening to art,
something connects to you and you think,
"That's what I really like. That's what
really moves me." And I think when that
happens, you should pay attention to
that. You should you should think, why
do I really like that? What does that
mean that I like that thing? What what
does that connect me to that's so
important to me? Um, and we frequently
don't do that because the distraction
rate is so high. There are so many
things to think about all the time.
&gt;&gt; I think this question of what is it that
I really like and trying to pay
attention to your response to different
pieces of art is interesting because it
it gets it a mystery to me about being
human, which is why
things that are
legendarily beautiful works leave me
completely cold
&gt;&gt; even as they have inspired thousands of
books. and uh and comiums from others
and then I'll hear something or I'll see
something and my soul will leap into my
throat. I I've been obsessed this year
with an album by an artist named Drum.
And the album is called Undertangled
Silence. And this one song, Wax Cap, I
just keep listening to and listening to
when I give my headphones to somebody
else,
they quite rarely have the experience I
am having with that song.
&gt;&gt; Right? it in a way that makes me feel
lonier
but also a little bit more unique.
&gt;&gt; So you're an artist but you're also an
artist who both yourself creates and
helps others create things for mass
consumption.
And so how do you think about that
difference of attunement in different
people? How some people can hear
something and it is their favorite thing
ever.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And others will put that same thing on.
&gt;&gt; Yes. and they hear nothing but noise.
&gt;&gt; I I think the answer to that is that of
course when we look at any piece of art,
we're not looking just at that piece of
art. We're looking at this piece of art
in terms of our own personal history.
So, it's like you're hearing the latest
sentence in a conversation you've been
having for your whole life. I I wrote
this little story once about somebody
finding,
you know, in some post-apocalyptic time
finding an art museum and the whole
place is wrecked, but there's lots of
pictures still around. And they find one
picture that obviously hasn't been
finished, which is just a white canvas,
which of course in fact is Malovich's
white on white. So it's it has no
meaning to that person who doesn't share
its history.
Part of the value of any piece of work
and the power of it is how it sits in
the cultural conversation in general and
in your cultural conversation in
particular. So, you know, a little
difference that is very significant to
you may be meaningless to somebody else.
For instance, I've always had a rather
blind spot for Shakespeare.
No English person is ever supposed to
admit that, but Shakespeare's never
thrilled me. Um, and I find I find it
hard to read and quite unrewarding. Um,
so when a critic, a writer picks out a
Shakespeare sentence and talks about its
significance, they do that because they
know the rest of the Shakespeare cannon
and they know where it sits in there and
what value it therefore has. It doesn't
mean anything to me because I don't know
any of those things and I don't care
about them in that case either. Well,
let me offer a cliched
uh concern, which is that this is a way
that art fails. I think when people
think of art now, they don't first think
of music or food on a plate or the way a
building looks. They think of something
you see in a museum.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And I go to a fair number of of
shows or try to and am often left cold
in part because it feels like there is
so much cultural conversation going on.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And I'll read the little placard on the
wall next to a piece by an artist
working at the peak of their powers who
is being venerated as one of the great
artists of our age. And
&gt;&gt; this little placard is telling me that,
you know, what a meditation this is on
identity and borders. And I'm looking
I'm like, is it though?
And one of the um one of the ways art if
you'll locks people out is by by
demanding so much literacy in a cultural
conversation.
Well, one of the problems that fine art
faces is the problem of its own
irrelevance to most people's lives. You
know, nobody buys a 2 million pound or a
20 million pound painting just cuz they
like it. they they buy it because
there's a good chance they'll be able to
sell it again at a profit or it secures
them a sort of social status that is um
not easily obtainable otherwise. So you
have to make it seem very important. You
have to pretend that it isn't just an
object of commerce. It's an attempt to
build something up by by repackaging it
in this kind of crust of usually
incomprehensible
language. I think some of the worst
writing in the world is writing about
art, about fine art. And it ought to be
much simpler. As you said, the one of
the reasons you like it is because it
doesn't translate into words. It doesn't
turn into sentences. it hits you in some
other place, some other part of your
mind.
&gt;&gt; You did an album in the last couple
years with uh Fred again, who I think is
you've been a mentor to and who's
another artist who I really love. And
there's a song on that album that became
big. And I remember the first time I
heard it. Uh the song is called Come On.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I've probably listened to it. It was
one of my top listened songs that whole
year. I want to play a little piece of
it. I want to ask you about it.
Please make me.
[Music]
&gt;&gt; So, we've been talking about feelings
&gt;&gt; and the thing that happened to me when I
listened to that song and every single
time I've listened to it since,
including in that moment, is something
about the way you've distorted that
sample. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; is incredibly physical for me.
&gt;&gt; There's something I think it's because I
don't really know why that works, but I
think it's something to do with the
sense of a of near incoherence of the
voice. It's like somebody trying to say
something and it come
it's it's broken, you know, it doesn't
come out clearly and straightforwardly.
So there's a sort of either a reticence
or a feeling of
the machine doesn't work any longer. The
machine that is me speaking isn't quite
working. It's defective in some way.
&gt;&gt; But the way you describe it there is
almost frightening where to me it's
extraordinarily comforting. It's a
feeling
&gt;&gt; I almost never have. I I mean it's
there's very little I can put on that
gives me the exact feeling of that song
and nor would I be able to describe the
feeling. Yes.
&gt;&gt; But it it is much more like a it's not
jarring for me. It's like a caress.
&gt;&gt; If you had to name the emotion that that
song has, what would you call it? I
mean, for me, it's there's something
melancholy and like a nostalgia for
a different future or something. A
nostalgia for a future that didn't
happen. It's which isn't sad, but it's
it's a to me it's a it's a very moving
song actually. Um I find it enormous I
love hearing you say that because I have
such a different experience. I find it
enormously comforting
&gt;&gt; that song.
&gt;&gt; That's that's lovely.
&gt;&gt; And that there's something
Yeah. very physical. It's like having a
blanket pulled over you.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
And I even find that I mean I I find
this interaction so interesting. I had
Jeff Tweety on this um show years ago uh
from Wilco and we were talking about the
song his impossible Germany and I was
asking about the lyrics of it because
I've always found it to be such a
beautiful song about the dislocations of
travel.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
Impossible Germany
[Music]
Japan
wherever you go wherever you land.
&gt;&gt; And that is not what he was doing with
that song at all. It was like a
misremembered line from a murder novel
as I remember his description. And just
the idea that you can create something
that it's not just that it's evoking
such feelings in in me or others, but
that the feelings are so different than
even the ones it gives you.
&gt;&gt; Yes. When you're making something, it
starts to come alive when you start to
have feelings that you didn't expect
from it. You know, do you start out with
something? You think, well, I'm going to
make this that, the other, and as it
starts to form, it starts to change. it
starts to become something that you
hadn't imagined. And you can either say,
"Okay, I don't want that." Which is what
a lot of people do. They shut that down
and try to get back to what they're
supposed to be doing. But I don't do
that. And I think a lot of artists don't
do that. They we say, "Oh, I wonder
where it's going. I wonder where it's
taking me." And you just carry on then
and think
there's a certain point you reach.
Either way, you can't make it any
better.
you notice that what you're adding is
starting to subtract rather than to add
or you've hit the deadline, you had to
stop.
This is often a lot of the best things
I've made have been because I hit the
deadline and I couldn't spend any longer
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them up. Sorry,
&gt;&gt; you're you're you're fine. There's a um
I think this gets at another interesting
distinction. So, I think we've been
talking about the exposure to pieces of
art here, if I'm going to try to define
it more tightly,
&gt;&gt; and the way that they create a space to
be attentive to feelings arising in you
that you might not have expected.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Then once you have discovered that it
gives you that feeling,
it can become a tool to reevoke it.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I put on that song, Come on. to feel a
certain way.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Uh I put on, you know, your your series
of ambient albums uh because I actually
know how they will make me feel and I'm
trying to shift my emotional landscape
in that direction at a certain moment.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I I always think this is really
interesting, this difference between art
as something you pay attention to or
music is maybe something you pay
attention to and then music as something
you use to change the way you pay
attention to everything else.
&gt;&gt; That's a very nice distinction. I wish
I'd thought of that myself.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's very built on things you've
written. So, but I'd be curious to hear
how you think about that.
I think when you're when you're working
as an artist, you're always world
building, you're creating a world. It
might be a huge world like uh you know
George Orwell's 1984. That's a whole
world completely thought out. And when
you go when you read that book, you
decide to live in that world for a time
and you decide to experience the
feelings of living in a world like that.
Because the wonderful thing about art is
that it isn't dangerous. You can live in
that terrible totalitarian world and
then you can shut the book and go and
put on uh a Fred again song or whatever
else you want to do. Um I'm always sort
of trying to find something that
that suddenly makes me think, oh,
there's a different kind of world. I've
never been in a world like that before.
If if we go back to the idea of adults
playing, I think that's what we're
doing. Pretending, imagining situations
and then sort of figuring out the
mechanics of them by imagining them is
the clue to everything that makes humans
such a powerful and probably dangerous
species. So even if you thought art was
not valuable for anything else at all,
you would have to say that this process
of giving our minds a way of imagining
futures and im in and virtually living
in them. Actually living in them in our
imagination must be a very important
thing for human beings. I hear this so
often from from artists and and in books
I've read about art.
this cultivation
of humanity, right? This cultivation of
different futures. I know you're doing a
lot of work on on on Gaza and I've been
doing a lot of podcasts on on this topic
and and as part of that work, I was
reading a book by Philipe Sans who will
by the time this comes out have been on
the show and this is a book about the
Holocaust and the development of the
idea of genocide. And one of the central
characters this book tracks is a man
named Hans Franc.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Who is under Hitler, the uh governor of
Poland. And the worst things in history
happen under Hans Franc.
&gt;&gt; And a point Sans makes about him that is
very very very present in his biography
is how cultured a man he was.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; A beautiful classical pianist. Somebody
who much more so than most people does
really did care. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; about art, about literature, about
music, about paintings that he got it
&gt;&gt; and at the same time was so much more
capable of inhumity
and callousness. And so some part of me
rebelss on this. I often hear novelists
and others as if it is an equation with
a single output. If you expose yourself
to more of these worlds, more Beethoven,
more Bach, you will become a more
civilized person.
&gt;&gt; And yet, so much of the most univilized
civilizations
uh or parts of our civilizations have
been driven by people who were
enormously cultured. In fact, that was
part of what they believed made them so
superior to everybody else.
&gt;&gt; Yes. No, you're absolutely right. And in
saying that, it helps us use our minds
in that way. I'm not saying necessarily
for good things. It just makes our minds
better at imagining, but they can just
as easily be imagining terrible things.
You know, one of the great art
collectors of the 20th century was um
Himmler
had a huge collection which he'd stolen
mostly from Dutch and low countries
Jews, French Jews. um and he was
apparently very uh very learned in that
area. But to to your point, the ability
of something to make a mind work better
isn't the same as the ability of
something to make a mind work to good
ends. That's a different problem. That's
a that's a problem of morality,
spirituality, something like that.
Um, I'm not going to stay on this topic
for very long because I want this to be
a somewhat lighter conversation than
this, but after reading uh Sans's book,
um, I started reading a biography of
Martin Buber, the great Jewish
theologian and and one of the great
humanists of the 20th century.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And it it was again so strange. Hansf
Franc loved Bach and Booer loved Bach
and says that much of who he is as an
adult is formed in sitting in
concerts listening to the contradictions
inside box music.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And that two people, two souls can I
mean far from our like is is come on
melancholic or comforting, right? that
that it can that these works of art can
take people in such different
directions. I'm not blaming Bach for um
anything that Hans Frank did, but it it
just speaks to something very very
complex in like the feeling
&gt;&gt; faculties and what we bring to them,
right?
&gt;&gt; We we sort of we've been told somehow
that art is this very important thing
that is good for you.
&gt;&gt; Uh and I think it is, but I don't think
it's good for you in that way. I don't
think it necessarily improves you in any
moral dimension whatsoever. I think it's
quite possible that um as some people
now insist, Picasso was a bit of a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; He was more than a bit of a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm I'm going light on him.
&gt;&gt; I mean, a remarkable artist, but uh a
complicated person to say the least.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's funny that we
expect that it would be otherwise really
because it's because we've we've sort of
imputed a moral dimension to art. And
all I'm saying is that no, I think it's
much more biologically functional than
than we think it is. I don't think it's
such a spiritual moral business being an
artist.
In today's super competitive business
environment, the edge goes to those who
push harder, move faster, and level up
every tool in their arsenal. T-Mobile
knows all about that. They're now the
best network according to the experts at
UCLA Speed Test. And they're using that
network to launch SuperMobile, the first
and only business plan to combine
intelligent performance, built-in
security, and seamless satellite
coverage. That's your business
supercharged. Learn more at
supermobile.com. Seamless coverage with
compatible device in most outdoor areas
in the US where you can see the sky.
best network based on analysis by UCL
speed test intelligence data at 1 age
2025.
&gt;&gt; I've always found this very interesting.
You you read the um Roberto Blano book,
The Savage Detectives.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Uh it's a beautiful fiction book. Um and
one of the reasons I love it is it's
because it's about a personality that I
have always been fascinated by and do
not myself have, which is the
personality that would give everything
anything to create art. In this case,
young poets.
&gt;&gt; There are people I mean you you know
them. I've known some of them who for
them art is everything.
&gt;&gt; They put their whole souls, their whole
lives into projects that most people
would walk by if they were hung on a
wall or playing in a store and not give
a second thought to. And then I know
other people
&gt;&gt; who see no role or understand no role
for for art in their life. What to you
differentiates those people? the people
for whom art becomes everything the most
important thing uh even in society
cannot give a damn about what they are
creating
&gt;&gt; and the people whom see feel no
resonance to it
&gt;&gt; yeah have you ever heard of place in
Switzerland loan called the muse dear
brut
&gt;&gt; it's it's the museum it's the I think
the greatest museum of outsider art in
the world so these are people who none
of whom were called artists in their
lifetime. A lot of them were in mental
institutions and they had nothing much
else to do and they painted for their
whole lives. Some of them did it
completely in secret. Nobody even knew
until they died that they had been
working as artists for their whole life.
And my
kind of feeling about that is that if
you if you can invent a world that you
prefer to live in, which is sort of what
those artists were doing, then why not
stay in it? You know, if if the rest of
the world is awkward and you don't fit
into it, it's got lots of sharp corners
and you can make this world where
suddenly
you you're sort of in control of it.
you've you've decided the terms of that
world. And I think I think a lot of
what's happening when artists are
working is that they're trying to make
the world they would prefer to be in.
Now that sometimes gets dismissed as
escapism, but I I don't think it is. And
anyway, I don't think there's anything
wrong with escapism. It's sometimes a
really good idea to escape and to get
out of things and think about them from
a distance rather than from being in the
center of them. Um but this is another
of the misconceptions about art that a
that it ought to be
difficult to do and I think there are
many people who I would call artists who
never experience any difficulty with
what they're doing. It's just what they
do. People who make beautiful cakes for
example um or who love doing one of my
daughters loves doing um masipan
decorations on cakes and they're
beautiful the things she makes. Um, but
I'm sure she wouldn't call that being an
artist, but I can't see what the
difference is. You know, why why is that
not being an artist? Um, so that's one
of the other art world things that in
order to make it valuable to justify the
high prices, we've got to think of some
way of kind of making it seem abnormal,
making it seem like something that only
abnormal humans can do. What are you
doing with art? Uh when I think of your
uh library,
it's not all creating a world that you
would like to live in. What is you've
sort of given all these legible
motivations for other people. Is your
motivation as legible to yourself?
At best, what I'm doing is
thinking
um as I often do, I often start
something by thinking I I wish there was
a piece of music like this. whatever
this means in my mind. For instance, one
of my best known records is Music for
Airports. And that came from a very
direct experience like that of sitting
in a a newly built airport in Germany
near Cologne. And everything about the
airport was dazzlingly beautiful. It was
lovely structure and they had terrible
German disco music
playing really loud through the whole PA
system in the airport.
And I just thought nobody's thought
about this issue of what kind of music
would belong in this place. You know, we
use music in public all the time, but
does anybody actually sit down and think
seriously what would be the best kind of
music to have in this important place
where people are arriving, leaving,
going on to important new phases in
their lives or going back to loved ones
or whatever. It ought to be something a
bit more.
So anyway, a bit more. I I started think
what what should it be more of?
So I started thinking and trying to make
a kind of music that I thought would
make the airport experience feel
important and special.
[Music]
&gt;&gt; And there were quite a lot of technical
considerations
like obviously it mustn't interfere with
communication. Um people must be able to
talk over it. um it mustn't keep
stopping and starting. Um it must not
matter if it gets interrupted. So it
should be a sort of continuum that you
won't feel like you've missed something
if there's an interruption. So on and so
on. So that was a that was a very
conscious
act of making a making a work of art.
But most of what I do isn't really
motivated by such high high sounding
ideas. Most of the time I'm fiddling
around and something starts to happen.
Something
intrigues me or some feeling starts to
happen. I think I like that feeling. How
can I make how can I bring that forward?
How how can I make more of it? And I
often don't know why I'm doing that or
how it will end up. Um, I have an
archive of about 11,000 unfinished
pieces of music. Um, and what I do
occasionally is pull one of those out
and suddenly I haven't seen it for 15
years maybe.
&gt;&gt; 11,000 unfinished pieces of music.
That's
&gt;&gt; Yeah, some of them some of them are very
short.
&gt;&gt; Let let me hold you on Music for Airarts
for a minute. um one of
&gt;&gt; my favorite albums and the second song
on that album 21 uh the tracks are not
so the tracks are not so evocatively
named given how evocative they are
&gt;&gt; is like a very important piece of music
to me so I want to play a couple seconds
of Yeah.
[Music]
What does it sound like to you when you
were saying that you wanted music that
matched what you felt that experience
should be? It should be more something
to one on there. What is it more of to
you?
&gt;&gt; I think it's more contemplative. So I
think it makes you
relax into the situation that you're in,
whatever that happens to be, presumably
in an airport in this case. Um,
rather than tries to pretend that you're
not in that place. So my nightmarish for
form of music is getting on an airplane
and hearing a piece of music coming like
this because they haven't got the
machine to work properly. And and the
you have two thoughts then. You have a
thought they're playing music because
they want to stop us thinking about the
possibility we might crash. And
secondly, they can't even get the bloody
player to work properly. So, we're going
to crash. Um,
you know, you can use music as a mask,
which is what is normally done in public
situations, as a way of
covering up the noise, or you can use
music that invites the noise to be to
sound like it's part of it. So, with
with all of that kind of music, what I
call ambient music,
I don't want there to be an edge to the
music. I want it to so that you don't
know whether some of the things you're
hearing are in the world around you or
are part of the music. So I want it not
to have a sharp boundary. I want it to
sort of fade out into the rest of the
world's noises around you. I always
think about that as being on an album
called Music for Airports.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
because that both is very discordant and
then as I thought about it more exactly
correct that is to me one of the holiest
pieces of music I have ever heard. That
piece of music just feels holy.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And in a way I guess it's something true
about airports
which is that this is a place where
human beings go to fly.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Where they are forced into I mean I feel
this when I get on planes a
confrontation with their own mortality.
&gt;&gt; Yep. There's never a time when a plane
when I am in a plane that is having
turbulence during takeoff or I don't
think to myself in a way I usually do
not think in my day I could die.
&gt;&gt; Yes,
&gt;&gt; there are all these people. They're
going to places that are in many cases
incredibly important to them. And the
the airport is this like extraordinary
combination of a place that is so benol
lines and you're taking off your shoes
and you know you're waiting in line for
food that is mediocre at best and you
know you're late and your plane is late
and you're annoyed. And then also the
absolute most remarkable place that a
human being can possibly find
themselves. something that for most of
human history was completely
unimaginable.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And that 21 to me on an album called
Music for Airports is such a perfect
song because it's more true about the
airport than my experience of the
airport is.
&gt;&gt; That's a nice way of putting it. Yeah.
So, I wanted to make flying feel like a
more spiritual experience is what if I
had to put it into a sentence with a
controversial word in it. Um, and by
that I mean I I was used to be very
frightened of flying and of course I had
to do it at that time in my career. I
don't do it much anymore, but um and I
thought, well, what about if you could
make a kind of music that made you less
worried about the idea of dying? What
about if you could make a piece of music
that made your life seem less the center
of your attention? if you could see
yourself as just being one atom in a
universe of complicated molecules, um
would that make things feel better? So,
so in a way it was a it was intended to
take the
stress off yourself. Um not by
pretending you weren't flying. So, let's
make it just sound like a disco or a or
a you know a nightclub or something like
that, which is what most of the music
tries to do. Let's not do that. Let's
say we're having an unusual experience
and let's experience it as a beautiful
experience.
&gt;&gt; One of the things in in that album,
Music Parts, your liner notes are very
famous and I know you've been asked
about it a million times, so I don't
want to stay here too long, but you do
talk about wanting that music to
cultivate different modes of attention.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And that's been very influential. this
idea that music is a cultivator of
different forms of attention, not all of
them an attention that is spent on the
music.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; I guess in the years since then, the
decades since then, how do you think the
relationship between music and attention
has changed?
Like, do you see it as a success of what
you were trying to do? Do you see it as
a nightmarish world that you
accidentally summon into existence? What
is your what is your relationship to it?
Well, I think what's happened is that
it's changed in both directions. So, I
think people are ready to accord music a
level of attention that they never have
done in the past. Um, for instance, when
you go to these extremely long concerts,
sometimes 10 hours long, where you
basically listening to three sign tones
for a very long time, that's a level of
attention that really people never
thought of giving. until at least the
middle of the 20th century and later. So
there's that. And then on the other
hand, you have Tik Tok where or or very
short pieces of music like that. Um
which are of course right at the other
end of the scale. But I think in culture
this is a this is a general rule that
every single uh standard,
every single metric has increased in
both directions. We now have extremely
long pieces of music and extremely short
ones. We have extremely loud bands and
very very very quiet ones. Um so we've
it's as if we've taken every dimension
in which music can exist and tried to
expand it and say what would happen at
the edges now let's make a new edge. But
but I also was thinking about that in
terms of the movement towards music that
what it is doing is saying we're going
to cultivate this form of attention or
feeling for you. So the rise of the
Spotify, but they're on every um
streaming network now. The playlists
that are well here's your happy beats
playlist. Here's your beast mode at the
gym playlist for when you really need to
be pumped up. But here's your melancholy
rainy day playlist. you're studying at a
coffee shop, which is different, of
course, than studying at the library
playlist. Here's your ambient playlist,
your ambient essentials, but here's your
&gt;&gt; and and now we're we're seeing this move
into these playlists being in some ways
generated, right? I don't know how much
of it is happening now, but clearly
we're moving towards AI generating a
bunch of these
&gt;&gt; songs at functionally no cost,
mass-roduced mood altering music. Music
is Xanax, music is aderall, music as
&gt;&gt; um music as mood alteration.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And done not as a relationship between
the artist and the listener, but as a
like you hire the music to perform a
service
&gt;&gt; and to do so quite unobtrusively.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Some of that music is good, some of it
is bad obviously, but how do you feel
about that?
Well, you're right. In your previous
question, you asked, did I feel any
responsibility for that? And I do
actually. Um, I mean, I was very excited
about the idea of generative music. In
fact, a lot of I think I I invented the
phrase, I believe. Um, and I was very
excited by the idea of making a music
like a seed. You know, a seed is
something that has a genetic message in
it and every manifestation of it will be
a little bit different depending on
where you plant it and what time of year
it grew and so on and so on. So I
thought, wouldn't it be nice if you had
music like that? So I mean there's a
very simple example of that. Windchimes.
A windchime is a simple enough machine.
So you have, let's say you've got five
chimes. Um each one is a particular
pitch. It's not going to change. It's
only that pitch. But how and when they
strike depends on the wind. So it's sort
of semi- random. So you can't really say
that you composed that particular
performance. Though you can say that I
built the system from which that
performance emanated. You know, a
windchime is basically a simple piece of
generative music. And and so it shifts
and I know you've talked a bit about
almost wishing you could sell people not
the um the the album but the system
behind it. It it shifts the artistic act
into the creation of the conditions.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; That will create the artistic product.
&gt;&gt; Yes, that's right. So so two things
become po important. What what is the
structure of rules if you like? What are
what are the possibilities that the
system has? What are the limitations
that it has? and what are the materials
you put into it. So, if you make a
windchime out of glass, for instance, or
out of bamboo rods or out of uh metal,
they're all going to be slightly
different results, but each one is a is
a kind of package of possibilities.
You're not specifically saying which
possibilities you want to happen, but
you're conditioning which group of
possibilities can happen.
Um, and I I thought that was a sort of a
nice area for music to be in because if
you think about it,
up until the turn of the 20th century,
you could never have the same musical
experience twice. There was no way that
you could precisely repeat a musical
experience. As soon as records came
along, you could do that. You could hear
exactly the same performance of exactly
the same song over and over and over and
over. Um, and that became how most of us
listened to music. You know, most of the
music that unless we happen to be born
into a musical family or a church group
or something like that, most of the
music we heard was repetition. Um, so
what I thought was, well, I wonder if
you could use the technology of
repetition to make music that constantly
changes.
And
my first clue to that was when I first
got hold of a tape recorder. I had
wanted a tape recorder my whole
childhood. I just thought the idea of
being able to catch a piece of sound and
make it physical was most magical thing
I could think of actually. Um and and I
had this obsession with you could play
it backwards and I just wanted to hear
what things would be like if they were
played backwards.
discovering that first of all you can
capture sound and make it physical
that was something new for the 20th
century but then I thought if you can
make it physical can't you also make it
mutate in certain ways can't you make it
so the physical medium for instance is
not reliable it it will play slightly
differently each time and so my first
experiments in that direction were I had
a collection of broken tape tape
recorders,
uh, which I just got from junk shops,
you know, or thrift stores, as you might
say, and I would try to break them a
little bit more, but so that they would
still play things. So, a tape playing
through it would change into something
else, you know, it would have a lot of
distortion or it would run unevenly like
this, you know. Um,
yeah. So I think that became an
obsession to try to make to try to make
a recorded music that somehow changed
every time. Um I finally achieved it in
the 1990s
and I'm still doing it now.
&gt;&gt; You draw this distinction when working
with generative systems where you say
you don't want to be an architect, you
want to be a gardener. What's the
difference?
So the conception of an architect is
somebody who thinks about an end result
in great detail. You know the
archetypist Frank Lloyd Wright who
designed everything down to the
teaspoons in in his houses. And so the
whole thing kind of pre-exists in the
architect's mind and then is bought into
being by builders. Um, what a gardener
does is put some seeds in the soil and
then watches how they develop. Oh, these
ones over here are doing better than
those ones over there, so next year I'll
plant them differently. Um, but you know
that if you're making a garden, you're
making something that you're only
starting something. So, one of Stuart
Brown's books, it's called How Buildings
Learn. It's a great book. And in that,
he says, "You never finish a building,
you only start it." And and I think
that's what I kind of mean by generative
music. You start the piece, but it
finishes itself. It carries on finishing
itself for the rest of time. But so you
you upgrade this idea of generative
music and now we have launched into this
world of generative AI.
the way you were using the term
generative
and the way
what it is describing when we're saying
now generative AI which are things like
chat GPT and and and all these um large
language models
is it the same word for you right are
the two generatives equal
&gt;&gt; I think they're the same I think they
mean the same thing now of course as as
a set of techniques mine is much much
much crudder and simpler and much more
analog than than the techniques that are
generally being used in LLMs. Um, so
and of course the other big difference
is that mine are not owned by mad
billionaires. And I I think that's an
important difference. In fact, with all
the discussion about AI, this to me the
single most important question is who
should be in control of it? And we've
seen in this century
what happens when billionaires control
new technologies. Social media I'm
talking about and we've seen that they
you get completely unpredicted and quite
disastrous results sometimes. You know,
the the collapse of democracy in most of
our countries, I think, is very
traceable to social media and to the
kind of misunderstanding that that
underwrote it that um oh, let's make
this amazing new medium where everyone
can communicate with each other. Oh, but
let's make the underlying algorithm that
we've got to make a lot of money from
doing it. You know, in a way, the big
mistake was when the the algorithm
became maximize engagement, which means
maximize profits, of course. Um, if
maximize engagement is what you're going
for, then you end up with what we have
now, an internet that flourishes on
anger and
nastiness in some ways. Um, I'm not
saying, of course, that everything like
that is a is like that on the internet,
but what what seems to have happened in
the race for profits, we've managed to
sidestep the friction that normally
comes with things being born into the
world. Friction is very important.
Friction gives you a little time to see
what's happening. It makes something
ease into your life more slowly so you
can start to correct it as it's easing
in. I always say it's like we've
invented an amazing new type of car that
can travel at 750 mph, but we haven't
put any brakes in it, you know, because
brakes slow down the profits basically.
Well, so there's this question of who
controls it, then also as you get at
there, this question of who profits from
it. One of the things I find very
morally complicated to think about with
generative AI is that it is generative
and the seed of it and more than the
seed of it, the substance of it is the
sum total of knowledge
&gt;&gt; that human beings have made in a way
that is legible to the crawling software
developed by the AI companies.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you can see that it's really
about that because in fact these
companies are are mostly neck andneck
with each other for how good their
systems are.
&gt;&gt; Uh it's not like one of them came up
with like an algorithm that no other
human being could could come up with.
They're they're sort of going back and
forth
&gt;&gt; because they have the same training data
which is us.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And so on one level that's like
everything else is scientists are coming
up with new scientific discoveries built
on every scientific discovery before
them. You have a lovely uh bit in your
book about all the human genius over how
many years that goes into getting you to
work in the morning.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; There's nothing new about creations just
being a marginal step forward built on
the on the shoulders of us all. And yet
I can never escape
this feeling with the AI systems that
there is something about the scale of
the use here
&gt;&gt; that should change who profits from it
and and how the fact that they have
absorbed everything I have ever written
for the internet and fed it into their
machine. I kind of think somebody should
send me a royalty check. You know, it's
not it doesn't have to be a big one and
it maybe shouldn't go to me. It should
go to society.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. But something about it feels I
don't want to call it theft. It isn't
theft. But nor is it
&gt;&gt; just like a standing on the like there's
something here that feels like it needs
new ways of thinking about it because
you know just for a couple of these
companies to profit off of the
transformation of everything we've all
ever done. This this is the question I'm
asking myself. Should it be that um we
automatically have a system that says
this is a social good? all this
knowledge. It's it's a socially produced
good and therefore it should its usage
should reward society. Um that's quite
hard to meter. Of course it's hard to
put a meter on it. Um I think it has to
be written into the whole machinery
itself so that nobody has to make a
decision. for example, it wouldn't be a
bad idea if everything that was
generated
um in that way
50% of of all the profits from it
immediately go back to society in some
way. It would be saying we're not
claiming to be the geniuses here. We're
claiming to be the people who know how
to corral it all, how to put it
together, how to make it available to
you. And but thank you for all the stuff
you've written, Ezra and Brian and
everybody else. and uh with your
permission we'll redistribute this to
society. It it's so obvious to me that
that should be the way. But of course
that that is not the American way at
all. That sounds like socialism of some
kind or at least taxation. I that seems
true to me too. I mean at the moment
these companies are not making such big
profits that even doing something like
that would be that meaningful to the
treasury. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh they're sucking in much more venture
capital than they are producing revenue.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; In general, but in the future, if it is
what they think it will be, you know, if
it is what they're promising their
venture capitalists it will be.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I mean, I guess you just solve that
through the tax system, but but it seems
like you need a way of thinking about it
that's a little bit clearer than the
ways we have. And it's funny, if you go
into the writings of a lot of them, Sam
Alman and and and and others from a
couple of years ago, they're talking
about this, like this is a thing they
imagine. I mean, Alman has, you know,
ideas for what's functionally like a
universal basic wealth grant coming out
of taxing the AI companies. But I'm sort
of with you on this. I I think it
deserves a different conceptual category
that is not merely the category of
taxation,
&gt;&gt; that is more something of sharing.
Right. It is not confiscatory taxation.
It is a reflection of the nature
&gt;&gt; of these systems.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And sort of my view of them is they
actually should be able to crawl the sum
total of human knowledge that is, you
know, at least that people are willing
to make accessible to them.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; But that part of that is that there's a
contract between those companies and the
rest of us that we both know what we're
doing here
&gt;&gt; and we're in this together.
Yes. Yes. In especially if you're trying
to inspire confidence in them, you you
you want people to willingly participate
in them rather than having it forced
upon them. Um I don't do you know this
word that I came up with years ago which
is senius.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So that that was an attempt to try
to understand that I had been studying
the early 20th century painting in
Russia.
There was a 20
year period when there were amazing
amount of innovation going on you know
suprematism constructivism ranism all
these different isms appearing
and I discovered that the scene was very
complex it wasn't just that there were a
few brilliant artists like Kandinsky and
Rodchenko and Tatlin and so on
turned out that some of the very
important people were the collectors who
would specifically target certain
artists and say, "I want to keep this
person alive. I want I'm going to
support this person." Or they would go
to Paris and buy pictures that they
brought back to St. Petersburg and
Moscow to show to painters there and
say, "Look, this is what's going on in
Paris now." Um, and then there were the
people who ran the salons who would
invite artists to meet up with each
other and talk to and so on and so on.
And as you read about it, you find that
there were so many people. the cafe
owner, the cafe that everybody used to
hang out in, who was quite conscious
that they had a part to play in the
scene and they would let people not pay
for their meals and so on. Um, and put
put it on the tab. Um,
and so I thought there was a whole scene
here that was fertile, that was
operational. There was a whole support
system. And so I had got sick anyway of
hearing this word genius being used all
the time because it never seemed to me
like it was just one person who was
doing everything. Uh so I came up with
this word senior which is scene with an
IUS on the end. And that seemed to me to
much better understand the ecology of
systems like that. And I think that's
what it is. It's an ecosystem. And we
still don't understand ecosystems.
It's it's still not intuitive to most of
us to understand how a thing like an
ecosystem works. How there are lots and
lots of nodes and they're collected in
very complicated ways and if you move
one of the nodes to a different place
everything else in the system has to
shift. I mean we anyone who's become
interested in the environment has
started to become aware of how complex
natural systems are. But human society
is a natural system as well. And the and
the society of knowledge that we all
share is a natural system.
This is a way in which and I'm not an
anti- AI person. I use JBD a lot. I'm
fascinated. I feel a sense of both. I I
do feel some fear, but I feel a
tremendous amount of wonder around these
technologies. I I I find
&gt;&gt; watching it formulate a response that in
some ways reads more human than the
responses most humans give me to most
things.
It it it does it it it generates a a
form of awe in me. One thing that
frightens me as somebody who came up on
the internet and understands I think
fairly well how knowledge production
works on the internet is they are
breaking the fundamental social contract
of the internet
&gt;&gt; which is you even take something like
Google. The value of Google is that
there is so much that other people have
created that is valuable and Google
connects you to it. Yes,
&gt;&gt; but it does connect you to it. And now
GPT or anthropic or whomever inhales the
internet
and it's all right there and I never go
to the underlying sites.
&gt;&gt; And the creation of all this data which
was incentivized by ways people were
able to monetize and not just monetize
but have their work discovered. That was
for many of us on the internet. When I
started a blog with no ever intent of a
job or a profit from it, I was a college
student.
&gt;&gt; Just the idea that anybody would ever
find their way to me and read something
I did and care about it was such a
tremendous incentive to create.
&gt;&gt; But but there is something very
problematic about this. A huge amount of
the internet and the intellectual
commons we are now built on
&gt;&gt; is traffic moving around the internet,
people moving around the internet and
then the advertising that comes from
that the whatever that comes from that
keeping that whole ecosystem healthy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And these these AI systems by nature you
go to the system
&gt;&gt; and then for most people it stops there.
Even Google search is trying to become
more like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. the whole thing they're built on,
they're going to destroy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Or at least substantially degrade.
&gt;&gt; Yes, that's that's right. When when I
was a kid and I I liked watercolor
painting a lot, and I used to notice
that after a day of painting, the water
that I was dipping my brush into, which
was of course a mixture of all the
colors I touched that day, was always
the same color. Actually, I called it
munchge. M u n g e. Mong is sort of
purpley brownie
horrible color basically and when
whenever I've tried creating things on
chat GPT I haven't done that much of it
actually but
I work very hard to get my prompts right
and to filter what I'm saying to it and
to trying to urge sort of edge it into
something interesting but the color of
munchge covers all of it. It's it's so
overdigested
and of course it's it's quoting things
it's using things on the basis of how
frequently they have appeared. I don't
know whether you've ever tried making
anything let's say artistic using chat
GPT or any of the other programs. Um
it's it has a very interesting
progression when you're doing it. the
first thing you make, you think, "Bloody
hell, that's pretty amazing."
Um, and then after half an hour or so,
you think, "I'm so bored." Um, and I
remember that thing that Samuel Johnson
said about something. I can't remember
what it was about now, but he said,
"It's a little bit like watching an
animal walk on a dog walk on its hind
legs. You're not interested in how it
walks, but just that it can. You know,
you you're sort of impressed by the fact
that it can do something that is really
quite like a human being, but then you
find out that it's like a quite dull
human being.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And and it kind of doesn't get more
exciting unless you can trick it into
some sort of aberration.
Um which is what I've been trying to do.
I I've been amazed on the one hand at
how good it is, but then I also have the
exact experience. I love your uh
description of it as munge. Um, and I
think it goes back to something we were
talking about at the beginning of this
conversation, which is the information
and possibility that is encoded in
factual knowledge
and then the more amorphous forms of
intelligence and intuition that are
encoded in feelings.
So
I have uh experimented a lot with using
different forms of AI as help in this
show and they are helpful for things
that are very specific
but they are never helpful for the
actual work of creating the conversation
and and what's absent in the output
is I think what we're talking about. I
could not give you a description of how
this conversation is structured. It is
just structured
&gt;&gt; by me having
intuitive reactions to what is happening
with it and then moving with those
reactions.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And chachi is structured as a
probabilistic output.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Of what the entire internet would have
done.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And so it it's not even that it always
lacks surprise, but it always has a very
visible internal logic.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And then over time that internal logic
becomes overpoweringly annoying.
some people who work on at these
companies said, "Oh, I I keep my diary
in it and that's very interesting.
&gt;&gt; You should try that." So, without giving
too much personal information, I did
that.
&gt;&gt; And the first couple responses,
I was amazed at how psychologically
insightful they were, how supportive
they were. I mean, it was better than
what human beings in my life gave me.
And then on response 9 10 11 12 15 20 it
was the same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] feelings. It was
the same glazing and sick of fancy and
the same kinds of insights.
&gt;&gt; And I think it's one of these things
that you couldn't look at the response
and say there's anything wrong with it.
&gt;&gt; But there is something human beings are
attuned to.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. in the way we do not travel a
perfectly logical or well ststructured
path. We're not supposed to. It's not
how our intelligence works. And it is
funny. We you do begin to feel the
divergence there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's it's not even what we like
actually. You know, as as humans, we we
like a certain amount of predictability,
but only a certain amount. We don't want
it exactly the same each time. So, you
know, we we rely on our interest being
taken by a deviation we didn't expect.
Um, the sick fancy is the thing that
really drives me mad when it says, "Good
question, Brian. That's a really good
question."
&gt;&gt; That's not just an insight, that's a
revelation.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; That's not an X, it's a Y formulation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, so you first of all, if you're
going to do work with AI at all, you
have to start, as my friend Danny Hillis
says, you have to start off by saying,
"Please don't flatter me."
In today's super competitive business
environment, the edge goes to those who
push harder, move faster, and level up
every tool in their arsenal. T-Mobile
knows all about that. They're now the
best network according to the experts at
UCLA Speed Test. And they're using that
network to launch SuperMobile, the first
and only business plan to combine
intelligent performance, built-in
security, and seamless satellite
coverage. That's your business
supercharged. Learn more at
supermobile.com. Seamless coverage with
compatible device in most outdoor areas
in the US where you can see the sky.
Best network based on analysis by UCLA
speed test intelligence data at 1H25.
&gt;&gt; You've done so much of your work in in
collaboration, but also in collaboration
with machines. I mean it is something
you are known for.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; So to you what makes you good at
creating healthy collaborations between
humans and and technologies and and what
for you typifies a healthy collaboration
as opposed to an outsourcing a an an
unhealthy form of of the diminishment of
the human beings behind it.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So,
so I have a a few mental tricks that I
use which I think are just part
naturally part of me. One of them when
I'm faced with a piece of technology
which can do something, I immediately
don't want to know about what it can do.
I want to know what it can do that the
makers didn't imagine it would ever be
used to do. And with the type of
technology that I work with, musical
technology, that's that's a very rich
open territory. And it's rich and open
because not that many people explore it.
You know, they have something that says
this will make your mixers sound louder
and they use it to make mixers sound
louder. Well, you know, I don't blame
them. That's what it says on the box.
But but you can you will also find out
that that can do something else that
nobody had ever thought of doing with
music before.
&gt;&gt; So give me an example of when you did
this with a piece of technology.
&gt;&gt; Well, um I discovered
that if I connected two tape recorders
together, put one tape through one and
coming out through the other so that the
playback head is separated by several
feet from the record head, you get a
very late echo.
[Music]
And then you can build up those, you can
work on top of those. I mean, I
discovered this in the 60s. So did Terry
Riley and a few other people. I think it
just happened. I had two tape recorders
for a while. So I could try this out and
then I could build up these huge
sort of orchestras of music um live on
my own. Um now there's a whole there are
many people who do that brilliantly with
little tiny looper pedals, little tiny
boxes. Um Reggie Watts is a brilliant
exponent of it for example. Um so so
that was an example of using something
that was meant to do a particular job.
record something and play it back later
on. So, build something uh new in real
time. Uh another example could be when I
first started playing with tape records,
as I said earlier, I used to try to
exploit the faults that they had cuz I
all the tape records I had were cheap.
They came out of junk shops and one of
them had a a bent spindle
and it would make everything go like
this because
and I thought, "Oh, that could be really
nice if you had a piano like that." So I
called that butterfly echo. And um that
was on the first Roxy Music album. We
had a butterfly echo piano. Um so I
think that's to do with technology to do
with people. The first thing I think
about when I look at a band I think okay
there so there are let's say five people
in that band
how many possible duets is that how many
possible trios how many possible
quartets
um how many solos five obviously and how
many everybody who won. Now it very
often happens that that space has not
been explored properly by the band.
People haven't thought what about if
only three of us play in this and uh
then another another slightly different
configuration of three play. So it's a
very simple thing but it suddenly
unlocks a a set of possibilities that
probably hadn't been explored before.
You know what happens if we only have
vocalist drums and bass,
none of the other instruments that
usually fill in the harmonic information
in between.
There are lots of tricks like that, but
they're sort of ways of looking at the
system as it stands and thinking what
hasn't been done yet with this system.
What what might excite people? You see,
I think that the main music grows out of
excitement.
And if you aren't feeling excitement,
then you try to create it in some way.
If if the situation isn't turning you
on, then you try to change it until it
does turn you on. Because when you're
excited, you are at your most alert. I
think this this is what and when you're
at your most alert, you're most likely
to spot
the little thing that is going to turn
into the big thing.
One thing that makes me think about that
feels relevant in both directions is
I think it's often a very important
question where the agency resides in
something. So I think we always say we
use social media,
&gt;&gt; but no, social media uses us.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And over time, if you watch anybody on
it for long enough, you you watch them
become the social media that's using
them, right? They they they begin to bow
to its incentives, to its habits, to its
form.
&gt;&gt; What you were just saying, I thought was
so interesting about the set of
possibilities in a band, right?
Initially, it's a bunch of musicians
playing in a band. Eventually, the band
through its habits, through what's
expected of it, is playing the
musicians.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And I think this is very true with
technologies.
&gt;&gt; You know, when you talk about you
discovering or Terry Riley discovering
what you can do with two tape recorders,
you are playing the tape recorders.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I think this is probably not always
true, but when you think about a lot of
the the digital possibilities people
have had, you know, in the last couple
decades like Ableton and and other
things, it's still people playing the
synthesizer, playing the music library.
I think the fear that a lot of us have
about generative AI is that we're not
going to be playing it. It's going to be
playing us often because we prefer it to
play us, right? When a kid, you know,
you can use AI to help you
&gt;&gt; write a better essay, but a lot of
people just want the AI to write the
essay, right?
&gt;&gt; The whole essay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And and I think that that space between
are you playing the technology or is the
technology playing you?
&gt;&gt; Is a very tricky one. And I think that's
one of my more dystopic versions of of
our AI future, my kids future in AI is a
world in which they've given up a lot of
their own agency because it seems a
little bit ridiculous to to take it. Um
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; and that could always have been true. I
mean, there's a million technologies
that I hand like I don't I'm happy I
have Google Maps. I'm have a bad sense
of direction and I'm not trying to make
it better. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; But there is some line
where you know you are acting upon the
world versus the world is just acting
through you that I think is going to be
very hard to police.
&gt;&gt; Yes. I think what bothers me, which
which is exactly part of what you're
saying,
is the possibility of not making a
mistake at all, of making things that
always come with this sort of
professional finished gloss of what a
real what a real pop song looks like or
what a real picture looks like. And I
think that's lethal. I have a friend, an
architect friend called Rem Koulhas.
He's a Dutch architect and he uses this
phrase the the premature sheen. So when
in his architectural practice when they
first got computers and computers were
first good enough to do proper
renderings of things. He said everything
looked amazing at first. You know you
could construct a building in half an
hour in the computer and you'd have this
amazing looking thing. And he said but
it didn't help us make good buildings.
it help us make things that looked like
they might be good buildings. But he
said in the end we went back and I I
went to visit him one day when they were
working on a a big new complex for some
place in Texas and what they were using
were matchboxes and pens and
packets of tissues. um it was completely
analog and there was no sense at all
that this had any relationship to what
the final product would be in terms of
how it looked. So it meant that what you
were thinking about was how does it
work? What's it like to be what do we
want it to be like to be in that place?
You started asking the important
questions again, not not what kind of
facing should we have on the building or
what kind of color should the stone be.
And when I see people fiddling around
with um synthesizers, this has always
been a problem with synthesizers that
they always come with a bank of sounds
readyade for people who don't want to
learn how to program them, which it
turns out is most people. I I remember
talking to Yamaha once who had just who
produced the most successful synthesizer
of all time which was the DX7
and I
said um you know you should really make
these a little bit easier to program.
And they they said well we don't bother
because nobody tries to change them
anyway. We get we often get them back
for repair and nobody has ever tried.
You can we can tell if somebody's tried
to change the programming and nobody's
ever done it. They've just used the
presets and that seems to me a kind of
mental laziness that I I really don't
think fits well with making new things.
I
&gt;&gt; I think that's strange a little bit
inspiring as a as a as a principal.
You've worked corresponded. known so
many just fascinating people and people
admire that I want to see if you'd be up
for me just reading a few names not a
lightning round you can you can answer
at whatever length you would like but
you just tell me sort of you know
something inspiration an insight
something that that you took from that
person if you'd be up for it
&gt;&gt; sure yes
&gt;&gt; let me start just the composer John Cage
cage I think the thing that really
impressed me about Cage was not his
music which I didn't particularly care
for after of the 1940s. Um, but his idea
that being a composer was a kind of a
practice in the sense of a a religious
or a spiritual or a philosophical
practice. And I thought that's the kind
of artist I want to be. I I want to have
a practice. I want there to be
resonances into other parts of my
thinking. I don't want it to just be
something that I do on the weekends and
then forget about. So Cage Cage with his
book Silence was very important for me.
That came along at just the right time
for me.
&gt;&gt; David Bowie,
&gt;&gt; uh, one of the most
committed artists I've ever worked with
in the sense that he
he really thought about what he was
doing. Um,
just to tell you a short story. Um, I
remember being in the studio with him
doing he was doing a vocal on one of the
songs. I can't remember the song, but so
he he does the vocal and he comes back
into the control room and said,
listening back to he says, "It's a bit
lumberjack, isn't it?" And I knew
exactly what he meant. And he said, "I
think the guy should sound a little bit
more nervous, like he's working in an
office." and he hasn't been there very
long and doesn't quite know how you're
supposed to behave in the office. Then
he goes back out and does this other
vocal and suddenly you hear the the
transition from this confident,
strong, hairy, macho guy to somebody
who's a little bit timid and has kind of
doesn't quite know whether he should be
saying the things he's saying. Um, and
seeing him fine-tune that was was very
impressive. Steve Reich.
&gt;&gt; Well, Steve Reich was a very important
part of my listening because he made a
piece called It's Going to Rain that
opened a door for me.
And the door it opened was not just to
do with the way in which he made it
which was itself very impressive. Um
using an absolute minimum of material 8
seconds of material I think it was that
piece works
by making your brain behave in a certain
way. So I suddenly thought then, oh, the
composer isn't just Steve Reich. It's
Steve Reich and my brain that's making
this composition what it is. And that
thought never left me that you actually
are engaging the the technology of the
listener's brain to complete the piece.
They're not passive.
&gt;&gt; Listening to his music completely
changed my relationship with music. I
think it it it's like powerwashing your
own mind.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
like to really sit through it. It It's
as psychedelic as any um as I think any
drug out there. It really does. It It's
so rhythmic and it forces
&gt;&gt; your brain to adjust to it in a way that
feels like when you come out the other
end of it.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Some sort of reprogramming has happened.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. Certainly that that definitely
happened with me. I I can definitely say
from the moment I heard It's Going to
Rain, music was a different thing. Lori
Anderson.
&gt;&gt; Oh, such a sweet friend. Um,
probably the hardest working artist I
know. She absolutely never stops and she
is always working on half a dozen
projects in 10 different parts of the
world. Um,
and I think she's the only person I know
who can
fly all night,
not sleep, come straight into a meeting,
and be absolutely there. She's she's
remarkably lowmaintenance person. She's
she's always there uh and always sharp.
and Stuart Brand.
&gt;&gt; Well, these these all these people
you're naming are people who had a huge
impact on me. Um Stuart
was in the army during I guess it was
the time of Korea or just afterwards.
Yes, just after Korea, I guess he was in
the army and I I don't think he was ever
ashamed of being in the army. He I think
he enjoyed it. Um and he left the army
and became a hippie. became one of the
sort of foundational hippies around
Timothy Liry and Ken Keezy and that
group of people. And he's always been a
very big thinker and a very long-term
thinker. And one of his earliest
thoughts was
if people on Earth could see a picture
of the Earth from the moon, it would
change our consciousness of the Earth. a
thought he had sitting on a roof while
on acid if I remember the story
correctly.
&gt;&gt; Yes, that's absolutely true. Yes. Um
acid does produce good b good results in
some people not not in me unfortunately.
Um so so Stuart sort of gave birth to
this idea I think that if we could show
the world from the outside if we
realized
what this tiny what an amazing
extraordinary unique gift it was this
tiny little planet teeming with life
swimming around in a dead universe as
far as we know. We still don't know that
there's any other life in the universe,
which is phenomenal if you think about
it. We still don't know. We might be the
only life in the universe. I I think
about that nearly every day. I think
it's the most sobering thought. I think
uh that should be shouted from the
rooftops every day. That's my my version
of seeing the whole earth from space is
getting people to understand that we
might be the only life.
It might all be on this one place and
bloody hell, shouldn't we look after it
a bit better then? Those those things
make me constantly think and constantly
be sort of grateful for the fact that
I'm alive. Um I remember reading this
comment from a New York taxi driver. He
was driving the taxi and he says he
turns to the customer. says, "Oh, life.
I'm so glad I got in.
I just love that. The idea that it's
like a an amazing show at a theater and
you managed to get a ticket to see it.
Um I I appreciate that kind of
gratitude."
&gt;&gt; That is lovely. And then always our
final question, what are three books
you'd recommend to the audience?
&gt;&gt; Okay, so this was a very hard question.
Three is not very many books and I
thought quite hard about them. So one of
the books it's called printing and the
mind of man. It was the catalog really
of an exhibition that was at the British
Museum in 1963 and it was about the
history of printing but actually the
book is about the most important books
in the western cannon and the impact
that they had when they were released.
um starts with the Goodutenberg Bible,
but it's such a fascinating book because
you really start to understand where the
big fundamental ideas that made Western
culture. It doesn't have any Arabic
books or any Indian books or any Chinese
books. So, it's it's really about the
last 500 years in Western culture. And
it's probably the most fascinating book
about intellectual history that that
I've ever read. And it's a very
beautiful book because it was put
together by a great printer
um who used lots of beautiful types and
so on. It's a wonderful book. So the
second book I think I'm going to suggest
is a book by the architect Christopher
Alexander called a pattern language.
And it's really a book about habitat,
about what makes spaces welcoming and
fruitful
or hostile and barren. Um, and it's the
most beautiful book. Uh so it talks
about things at the biggest scale
possible, you know, countrywide,
nationwide scale down to the scale of
the molding of a banister or something
like that and tries to understand why
some of those things work and why they
don't. And it's it's such a lovely book
to read. over over the course of my
life, I've bought I would say 60 copies
of that book now because I I always give
it to anyone who is about to renovate a
house or about to build a house. So
that's that's my second one. It's a
great read and you would love it. My
third one is um Naples 44 by Norman
Lewis. Norman Lewis was a British
intelligence officer who was sent to
Naples when the uh Germans had been
beaten out of there and he was sent
there to find out whether there were
nent fascist groups still working in
Naples
and he kept a diary and this is the most
fabulous diary you'll ever read. It's
just both hilariously funny, deeply
moving, and totally confusing. And that
you realize that Naples was like another
planet. It's like reading sci-fi, some
of it. The strangeness of that that
little world of Naples with its
intertwining of deep religiosity,
deep criminality,
deep love of the senses,
incredible attention to food,
weird decaying aristocracies all woven
in with crooks and priests and so on. So
there's three books. And I just want to
suggest one other thing which is a
subscription to the London Review of
Books.
Probably the best intellectual reading
in the English language. I I think it's
it's amazing. Comes out every two weeks
and it's
if you're if you're interested in books,
the London Review of Books for me beats
the New York Review of Books or the
Times Literary Supplement or any of
those things. Well, let me let me try to
do this because I've loved these
recommendations so much and I didn't
offer this to you before, so maybe it's
too hard given all that'll flood into
your mind, but how about three albums?
Three albums that have influenced you
that that they sort of form part of your
base layers.
&gt;&gt; Okay, I can respond to that. One that
really made a huge impression on me was
a a folkways record called the rural
folk blues. And they were sort of
semifield recordings. Some of them were
actually records that had been made, but
they all dated from the 20s, 30s, and
40s. Um, and they were black American
music.
[Music]
I'll make you happy in the morning
as any woman can be.
&gt;&gt; Now, I'd been listening to a lot of
black American music because of where I
grew up in in Suffukk, which had a lot
of American air bases, but it was it was
pop music, doo-op and stuff like that. I
loved it. When I heard those recordings,
I thought, "Okay, this is the soil that
that stuff grew out of." And I loved it.
It was such such rich soil.
Um, I think the second one that I have
to name because it still remains as one
of the most moving records to me is the
Velvet Underground's third album
which had the song Pale Blue Eyes.
&gt;&gt; Linger on
your pale blue eyes.
beautifully
controversial in many ways because in
fact I think it was probably without
that record I wouldn't have been a pop
musician. I don't I don't know what I
would have done. I've probably been an
art teacher or something. But that
record made me think this is something I
could do. And I think it made a lot of
other people think that. I know so many
musicians who say that was the record
that really
made things happen for me. Um, now I've
got to do number three. That means I
only got one choice left. This is very
difficult.
[Music]
See, so much of the music that has
really affected me is religious music,
which is funny because I'm sort of an
atheist. Um, but the the thing about
religious music, I think that is so
special is that it's made by people. And
it's made by people for other reasons
than I want to pull a chick. I want to
make a lot of money or I want to dance.
Now, all of those things are fine. I
have no problem with them. But the
majority of popular music comes out of
those kinds of feelings. I think
&gt;&gt; I am very moved by the old conception of
beauty that when we recognize beauty, it
is recognizing in nearness to God.
&gt;&gt; That's Yep. Well, I I'd take that. Yeah.
Even an atheist like me would say it
depends how big the word God is for you
and if it's big enough, I can
accommodate ideas like that. Um, so I'm
going to choose a gospel record
and it's a strange one. It's the
consolers. The consolers were a couple,
Sullivan and Iola Pew, P U Gh.
Um, you know, I asked myself the
question after going to this museum I
mentioned in Loausanne, the Museum of
Outsider Art. I thought, what's outsider
music? I wondered.
And then I thought, well actually the
whole of pop music is really outsider of
music in that it didn't come out ofmies
or institutions. It's just people doing
stuff together. Um and I I think as
outsider artists, the consolers Sullivan
and I stand absolutely unmatched.
[Music]
[Applause]
Lord.
&gt;&gt; Oh yes,
&gt;&gt; he is bringing me down.
&gt;&gt; Brian, you know, truly what a pleasure.
Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much. It's lovely to talk
to you, Ezra.
[Music]