Hey everyone, Dr. Brandon Crawford here.
This is the second time I've had Dr.
Jack Cruz on the longevity formula, and
here's what I've learned. I have
absolutely no idea where our
conversations are going to go. So, this
time, I just hit record immediately when
you popped on. What started as a
discussion about his 2 and 1/2 month
world cruise turned into something I
never saw coming. We're talking about
Australia's health crisis, why Bitcoin
might be the most important prescription
I could give you, and how non-verbal
autistic children are communicating in
ways that'll blow your mind. Fair
warning, Uncle Jack does not hold back.
He's going to challenge everything you
think you know about health, money, and
protecting your family. Some of you will
love this, some of you will hate it, but
I guarantee you, you will not forget it.
Let's get into it.
[music]
&gt;&gt; Welcome to the longevity formula with
Dr. Brandon Crawford. Let's explore the
new era of wellness.
&gt;&gt; But probably the biggest take-home is
Australia is really sick.
&gt;&gt; Really, really sick. And most of them
don't know how sick they really are.
&gt;&gt; Where all did you go?
&gt;&gt; Well, I went all over the world. I was a
world cruise for two two and a half
months and I went to North America,
South America, all the Pacific Islands,
Australia, up to Asia, Asia, back to
North America, North America, back down
to South America, Central America, then
back to Miami, and then back here.
&gt;&gt; Man,
that's awesome.
&gt;&gt; And it was it was a lot of cultures. We
visited a lot of places that had
different experiences, you know, through
co
&gt;&gt; I didn't realize I didn't realize kind
of what was going to happen, but I had a
lot of people sit down with me because a
lot of the people didn't know who I was.
There was one person on the cruise who
did know who I was, but she had the
biggest tan of anybody on the boat. She
was actually Australian,
but she said to me, she goes, she goes,
"Do you see my countrymen? how sick they
are. She's the one that actually said it
to me. And then we actually had some
very interesting things happen like
people sat down with us and we went out
to dinner with them and you know hearing
about the turbo cancers.
&gt;&gt; This person this person had you know a
turbo cancer and then hearing what the
treatment plan you know came up with in
Australia. It was just shocking. And
some of the basic stuff that you think
that,
you know, a centralized doctor would
tell a patient with this type of
problem,
not nothing. And, you know, when we're
on the boat, she was able to go to, you
know, the library and get on the
internet and look this stuff up. And she
goes, "I can't believe this shit's
actually in the literature and they're
not telling me that." And I said, "The
reason why is they're hoping you die."
&gt;&gt; Wow. I mean to kill you off it's kind of
like you're getting rid of the Library
of Alexandria of all the things that
Ralph Bareric and Fouchy and the
Department of Defense did you know and
this message was
how shall we say inconvenient and then
it got even more interesting because
when I started chatting like at the the
bars on the boat and people started to
overhear the conversations we're having
especially when we started talking about
the crown boy the people in Australia
the people in the UK because there was a
lot of Brits on this boat. They're
beginning to wake up to what's going on.
And you know, while we were out there,
this was when the the deal that Trump
started to negotiate with Australia
about the rare earth elements,
&gt;&gt; right? people people from Australia and
and Britain thought that this was, you
know, tied to the Chinese problem
because, you know, Australia and Britain
have a China problem, too. But I
explained to them, I said, "That's not,
you guys are missing the point. The
point is Trump is going directly after,
you know, the the royal family and the
crown and all the imperialism and
colonialism because that's where this
comes from. They've used politics and
banking to try to keep, you know, the
colonization,
imperialism going after the
revolutionary war. and and by keeping
the politics of Australia down. Like a
lot of people don't know that in 1975
there was a there was a prime minister
from Australia that was going to
nationalize
mining in Australia and he was literally
taken out by the royal family overnight.
Why? Because very few people know this.
in their foundational documents,
the royal family can come and appoint
somebody else and completely remove the
whole government in Australia as part of
the Commonwealth. And they did that in
75. And I was talking about that on the
cruise and the Brits knew it and they
didn't understand how it linked to
today, you know, because this is now 50
years later. [gasps] And I said, "Well,
just remember if the British Empire can
control the resources, you know, and
what has Australia done this whole time?
They've dug dug dug and sold to who
where Britain wants them to sell,
&gt;&gt; right?"
&gt;&gt; Well, now you have an American president
coming direct into a Commonwealth
country saying, "We're going to do our
deal with you, and it's going to be
mutual for both." Meaning, we don't want
you to just dig it out of the ground. We
want we want to help you build something
not only in Australia and we're willing
to build the chips in Australia if you
give us another supply line, but what
the effect is is this was Trump and
Trump's organization telling them
they're going after the British Empire.
And what also happened on this trip,
which really blew people's minds, this
is when Trump went in and basically told
Carney and told the people in Australia,
I don't know if you I should say
some of the the Australian deputies that
are tied to this British story. He
actually showed up to America and told
Trump that he didn't really like him and
Trump said, "You know what? I don't
really care what you think, I'm going to
go straight to the point." And I tried
to explain to people that do you
understand now why Trump met with Carney
in Canada before all this? And I said,
do you understand now why all the CFR
and globalists are running to the city
of London to meet with the king and the
current Labor Prime Minister Stormer
who's a Fabian.
I said, "What's happening right now? I
don't think you realize who the deep
state really is." the deep state is the
Fabians that are in the UK. And I said,
when they cut this cord,
not only you unleashing the United
States, but you're also unleashing the
Commonwealth countries. And what we
found on this trip is that Canada has
decided to stay with the crown. But
guess what? The prime minister of
Australia
through CO, they've gotten such a big
punch in the mouth that they realize
that they were lied to. And now they're
much more open to some of the things
that are coming out of Trump's mouth.
Most people know who follow me. I'm not
really a big fan of Trump, but is he
trying to do certain things to help
America? Yes, this is one of them. I
want him to do a little bit more on the
biology side,
&gt;&gt; but I don't think that's going to happen
because of Bondi and and Susie Wilds
because let's face it, both of them have
huge ties to big pharma. both of them
are part of the Amber program that's
being placed around, you know, Bobby
Kennedy. So, I don't have any illusions
about that. But you remember when you're
on this ship that's sinking, which is
the United States, especially from
healthcare, any wins that you can get
are wins that you take. And he's moving
and doing things because I ultimately
think the only fix for American
medicine, centralized American medicine,
is Bitcoin. I don't think there's any
chance to fix on the science side. The
science is completely polluted.
Peerreview is is owned also by the
Royals, you know, through the Maxwell's
family. That's who controls peer review.
And you have to realize we've got people
that Kevin McCann are fighting right now
who are trying to get, you know, papers
retracted. I don't know if you saw what
just happened recently cuz I know you're
a clinician and you're probably not
paying attention to all this, but
Kevin's paper that definitively shows
the contamination in the jabs is now on
the the Bitcoin blockchain. He actually
just put it on there last week. So now
it's there for all of humanity.
&gt;&gt; Even though
&gt;&gt; what is that? So
&gt;&gt; it's a paper that he and Jessica Rose
wrote.
&gt;&gt; Okay. about the contamination in all the
jabs and how serious the problem is. The
Maxwell clan from the UK, which controls
peer review, kept this out from being
published. Why? Because they keep
talking [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about it and they're
threatening journals to put it out
there. So, what did Kevin do while he's
still fighting, you know, the the battle
to get it published because it's in
preprint? He put it on the Bitcoin
blockchain. So now everybody in humanity
can literally go back and find this
paper no matter what they do.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And I I think this was a baller move
because Kevin believes kind of what I
believe that when you fix the money, you
fix the world. And I know people like
you, Brandon, you as a clinician who are
taking care of kids with autism,
you don't really understand that link
yet of how fixing the money fixes the
world, fixes the problems that you see
walking into your clinic every day. I
can tell you 20 years ago, I didn't
understand it either. But now it's
crystal clear. This is the only way to
fix it because you have to have money
that the government and these bankers
and the globalists, the World Economic
Forum, the Council of Foreign Relations,
they can no longer control us with,
&gt;&gt; right? And until we get down that path,
and it seems pretty clear to me that
while Trump may be not able to move the
needle in certain ways, this is one way
he's able to move the needle because I
don't think the globalists are smart
enough to realize really what's going
on. Because if you take control back of
the money away from the bankers, which
is what Americans and, you know, people
all over the world have been doing every
time they buy Bitcoin,
&gt;&gt; Yeah. you're eventually gonna, you know,
topple, you know, the the kingdom that
they've built up for 500 years. So, I
would tell you from this viewpoint and
this cruise that I took, Bitcoin was the
Trojan horse that the people in Davos
should have never let through the gate.
And now that it's where it's at, they
can't do anything about it. It's now
going to take effect. And what they have
to do is they have to convince people
like you and Vanessa that you want to
stay in fiat and you never want to go
the other way around. And once you
realize truly that the fix for most of
our problems, political, economics,
sovereignty, everything really ties to
the money failing, same thing is true of
war. I mean, you just saw what happened
in Gaza with Israel. It's really hard to
fight wars when you have money that you
can't debase. And you know, you turned
CNBC on now and you did it every time
that I was on the cruise and you keep
hearing the pundits there now talking
about the debasement trade which is
basically buying gold and Bitcoin and
not buying stocks and you hear Trump
screaming, you know, at, you know, pal
about, [snorts] you know, dropping rates
and why they're not dropping rates, but
they're dropping them everywhere else
that's compliant with the people in the
in the city of London. you begin to
start to see truly what's really going
on behind the wizard's curtain, right?
&gt;&gt; And let's just say all those different
things that I just described to you
happened on this world adventure. And it
happened with a lot of different people
that didn't have their eyes open and
didn't see these connections, but
literally the current events were going
on
&gt;&gt; while this was going on, while I was in
those places.
And I had the opportunity to sit down
with people and tell them what was
really going on and showed them like
Twitter in the United States. So I
people in Australia was stunned to find
out that they couldn't read the things
on there. They couldn't follow me. And I
said, "Do you realize your government's
doing that?" Like none of them knew
about the new digital ID laws that were
on the boat because it was being blocked
from social media on that side.
&gt;&gt; But my Twitter was right there for them
to look at. and they're scrolling
through my phone and they're going,
"Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it's really happening and
they're not even telling us what's going
to happen." So, from that standpoint, it
was quite interesting. And then, you
know, the good side is going to places
like Peru and seeing people who are
actively,
you know, running towards Bitcoin and
changing their country. When we were
there, we saw Bolivia, which is one of
their neighbors, go from a left-wing
communist country to pretty much free
market capitalism. It happened on the
trip. And what's that effect? It's the
effect that you're seeing from LA. Same
part of the trip. When we were there, we
started to hear that there's noise out
of Chile that they're going to do the
same thing because they like what's
happening in in South America. And South
America isn't going to do the digital
ID. So, guess what? This these are all
big information things for people to
understand in North America because guys
like you are in the middle of the United
States. You have no idea what's going on
in these other countries cuz you're not
there,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; You you have no idea how things are
changing. Like when I was in Venezuela,
cuz I was there, too. I saw all the the
ships that are off the coast. I saw a
lot of this stuff that's going on down
there. Got to talk to people from
Venezuela.
Okay. the borders open between those
three islands, Aruba, Bonire, and
Curous. I was on those islands for a
period of time. Got to talk to those
people about what's going on inside.
Also got to see my Twitter feed there,
to see this stuff going on. So,
it's really nice when you have the
opportunity to actually share this kind
of message with people who governments
are blocking them from the truth. And
when people understand how big the
censorship is, let's be very clear in
the United States. I don't care if
you're left or right. There's one thing
I can tell you about left or right.
They're coming for your privacy. Both
sides are coming for your privacy. And
Bitcoin is the only tool that I know
that restores your privacy. So when you
understand that, you listen to this
podcast, you probably tuned in and
thought, "Hey, we're going to talk about
some cool medicine here." You probably
didn't realize that Bitcoin is probably
the number one prescription that you
need to fix most of the problems that we
have in centralized medicine. I've
realized that for a long time, but I can
tell you this 2 and 1/2 month trip
around the world actually has made me
double, triple, and quadruple down
because of the experience I just told
you. The experiences that me and Shantel
had on this trip were nothing short of
putting Windex on our glass eyes.
&gt;&gt; Wow. So, I mean, it doesn't surprise me
the things you're saying, right? So,
just a little bit of my history, right?
So, I retired. We talked a little bit
about my Costa Rica stint, right? So,
there was a time when I retired. I was
actually a day trader at that point in
time. So, I was I was pretty decent. I
was able to make a living with the
amount of money I had. Did everything
well, but then because of market
manipulation, I lost a ton of money and
I did everything right. Right.
&gt;&gt; Be clear that audience on market
manipulation is economic censorship.
&gt;&gt; Just so everybody's clear about that.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. It was a Nvidia trade.
&gt;&gt; Theft if you really think about
[laughter] it. True. And like I said, I
I had done everything right and but
because of market manipulation, it had
to do with Nvidia, I lost a crap ton of
money. And I decided I was like, there's
no way I can do this. This I did
everything right and I still lost
massively. So, I do hold Bitcoin, right?
I don't actively trade it, but I do hold
it. Now, I don't live my life with it,
right? And that's one thing maybe you
could help us understand. What does it
mean?
&gt;&gt; I do.
&gt;&gt; I do. Remember, I live in a country
where Bitcoin and American dollars are
are legal tender.
&gt;&gt; And if you really want to learn and
understand truly how powerful Bitcoin
is, you just need to come down and see
the circular economy that President Blly
allows his people to operate in. And
when you see it for yourself, you look
to your left and look to your right and
go, what am I doing? And that's the
that's the part of the equation here
that was really beneficial to me because
I went to parts of the world that I
never would have went to. Like if I sat
down and told you what happened in Maria
and Tahiti and Easter Island to talk to
the Pacific Islanders, their eyes were
absolutely shell shocked. You know, I
actually showed a guy in Tahiti actually
how to sell his pearls directly to
Bitcoiners. He had no idea that he could
do a transaction this way to avoid the
French tax authorities and I showed him
how to do it and we we did it. That's
how cool this trip was. Like when I tell
you
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When I tell you that that powers
in, you know, the story you just told
people about Costa Rica and day trading
in artificial intelligence stock Nvidia,
you know, and it ties to, you know, the
semiconductors that we just talked about
in Australia. you begin to realize that
everything is connected. Why? Because
this is a guy whose family owns their
own oyster farms and they have the best
Tahesian pearls out there. And he's
like, "Look, I'd really like to do this
deal with you." He goes, "But I'll get
crushed in French taxes, you know, cuz
remember the French still own them and
they're still a colony." And I said,
"Okay." I said, "Are you open? Do you
have an open mind? Can I show you a
different way of doing things?" I said,
"Do you have a couple cell phones?" He
goes, "Yeah." I said, "Okay, I want you
to download this wallet. Download that
wallet." And then we did the whole deal
after I told them this is how the
transaction would happen. I said, "Now,
to show you, cuz we were talking about a
large sum of money,
uh, I said, I'm going to do it with $1
to prove to you that it can happen less
than one nancond." So, we did it. We set
it up and he looked at me and he goes,
"Why am I not doing my whole business
like this?" I said, "Just so you know,
you no longer have to pay taxes to the
French government."
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; I said, "There's no way for them
to do this." And he looked at me and
he's like, "Dude, this is unbelievable."
So, Brandon, what I'm telling you is,
when you're in Costa Rica, you didn't
have Uncle Jack fall in your lap to
explain to you how you can still win.
So, what did I do on this trip? I went
and showed a bunch of people who are
ignorant about what you and I are
talking about right now and they were so
curious that they jumped all in. And
when I tell you that Shantel and I
changed bartenders on cruise ships, we
changed servers and restaurants. We
changed Tahesian pearl farmers,
security people at ports. Like when I
tell you the mirror, janitors
at restaurants, like the stories I could
tell you, CEO executives with turbo
cancer who were told the wrong things. I
mean,
the stories that I amassed
over these two months, these are the
stories that I think would resonate with
people like on social media, probably
doing webinars. Why? Because I don't
think you know. When I say you, I'm
talking to the audience. You truly know
what it's like and what other people are
facing in other parts of the country, in
other parts of the world. And when you
see just how much they're being shielded
by the governments and by the
technocracy and how we can unc
cover that, just like I said, pull the
curtain back from the wizard. Then guess
what? We have an opportunity to get a
lot of savages all over the world to
begin to understand that we need the
money that you have in the bank is not
your money. It's the bank's money.
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; And I tested somebody who didn't believe
this on the boat. And I'll tell you
exactly who it was. Is a British
national and he called his daughter up
and told his daughter cuz she had power
of attorney on her his account. I said,
"Tell her to go take £5,000 out of the
bank right now because Stormer had just
signed a new law." So, she went the next
morning and she was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] blocked and
taking the money out. He goes, "I left
two months ago from England and was able
to do that. She in fact took the money
out. Now she can't do it."
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; So, guess what? Did he learn something
while he was away? Yeah. And the thing
is, I told him, I said, "I need you to
go back and tell most of your people."
When this story was going on, there was
a family from Scotland that was there
listening to all this, and they were
talking about their pensions. They had
no idea. This is a shocking thing, they
had no idea that two years ago, the Bank
of England almost went belly up and lost
their pensions. So, I had to go back on
my Twitter feed and show them that I was
in fact right. He says, "We're not
allowed to search that." They were on
their phone, Scottish phones, but
connecting through foreign internet.
They were not able to find the same
thing, but yet I was showing them that
this is fact was true. They had no
earthly idea they came this close to
losing their pensions,
&gt;&gt; man.
&gt;&gt; And I said, "Do you realize that you
just voted for the guy who did that to
you?" And he goes, "Well, how would I
know?" I said, "Do you understand how
the game is played now? All they have to
do is shield you from the right
information." I said, "That's
censorship. If you want to understand
how they perform time and value theft,
it's through removing your privacy. It's
through taking away the truth. And what
is AI? The company that you were so big
into,
AI is the biggest scam you could ever
imagine. Why? Because it's going to
allow them to erase the truth and you're
going to believe what they tell you. And
Nvidia is the one that makes it happen.
I truly believe you there. I truly
believe you. And it's it makes me sick
watching all these providers start to
adopt AI to think for them. Now, I mean,
I get it. Technology can think faster
and can, you know, do things that maybe
I didn't think through as a provider,
but I mean, that's going to create a
bunch of ignorant doctors, even more
ignorant.
&gt;&gt; Well, we already
&gt;&gt; we have a bunch of ignorant doctors
already that don't even know how
ignorant they really are.
&gt;&gt; That's true.
&gt;&gt; They all are affected by the Dunning
Krueger effect. But, you know, there's a
lot of people out there that also have
ignorance. I mean, it happened today on
my Twitter feed with a couple of
Bitcoins. It happened with a doctor
who's, you know, a carnivore doctor. You
know, they wear their technology like
it's jewelry and think there's no risk
to it. And then you know because they
have beautiful bodies they take a
picture and then all of a sudden they go
through this tragedy where they can't
have children and they don't understand
how you can look like Adonis and you
know lose your fertility and ficcundity
and you try to explain to them that diet
can't fix this but the reason why it's
happening is through the light and then
you have to get into a fight with a
smooth brain orthopedic surgeon you know
who thinks he knows what he's talking
about when he really doesn't.
And you know the problem is I don't get
involved
having those kind of discussions like I
don't do podcasts
with people who I know don't know the
science because it's fruitless you know
it makes for a waste of time. It it
makes much more sense to talk to people
who have an open mind. That's why I said
the the the trip for me was really eye
opening because I realized that the
potential audience for me is even bigger
than what I thought because there's a
lot of curious people out there. But you
know what? They're not getting the
information through because of how they
sample, you know, those informations.
And I think people are beginning to
realize that they're going to have to
start using VPNs. are going to have to
start accessing things from outside
their country because they don't realize
how bad it's being filtered. And you
know, the last two people I talked to,
this was really eye opening, was a
couple that was on their honeymoon in
Aruba from Brazil. Boy, what they had to
tell us about what was going on in
Brazil. And then at the end of it, they
said, "Look, most of the young people in
Brazil voted for these leftist
communists." I said, "It's only been
leftist and communist now for about a
year and a half and everybody wants them
gone." And I I pointed out to him, I
said, "Did you see what just happened in
Bolivia?" They didn't even know what
happened in Bolivia because guess what?
People in Brazil were blocking that
regime change. They also didn't know
what was going on in Venezuela, which I
thought was, you know, these are their
countries that it's not even, you know,
close to my country. But when I showed
them, you know, my Twitter feed and
showed them the things that were
discoverable, it just it stunned them.
And I explained to him, I said, "Look,
Elon Musk is doing you a favor. He's not
our he's not a a guy that I'm a big fan
of either, but I've got to give him
credit where credit's due. He's still
allowing us to get trickles of
information through that are true. I
think Peter Teal eventually will take
that away from us and turn, you know,
Elon into a useful idiot just like they
did with Lee Harvey Oswald somewhere
down the road. But for right now, the
people that are awake, I want you to
realize like Brandon, you and Vanessa
may not be able to go travel to Europe
literally in a couple months unless you
sign up for the digital ID.
Why would you ever go to Europe if
you've got to give your sovereignty away
just to visit a country? But guess what?
That's the laws that just changed in the
UK, Canada, and Australia. That
effectively is happening. If you try to
go to those countries now, you will get,
especially if you do it by boat, they
will send you a piece of paper that says
you will have to forfeit this
information in order to go to these
countries. So, you know, I pointed out
to Bitcoiners, I said, do you think
you're going to be able to go to some of
these Bitcoin meetings, you know, in
certain parts of the world? The answer
is no. I said, you may still be able to
go to Prague. Why? Because they used to
be communist. They're not going to sign
up for this. But guess what? Just as I
told the world in other podcasts, not
yours last year to be a speaker at
Prague in Bitcoin Prague, I had to fly
from Panama
to pro to Turkey to get to that part of
Europe without being accosted by the
people in customs that are tied to the
UK to tie to old Europe. So you got to
realize that's already happening. If you
would have seen on this cruise, what
changed? We went to three places. I'm
not going to tell you who they were.
I was asked to fill out documents in
order to get off the boat.
And this was after being on the boat
because the laws had changed.
&gt;&gt; Oh my gosh. Wow.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And I said, "There's no way that
I'm going to do this." In fact, one of
the places wanted our passport and I
said, "That ain't going to happen." And
then that's when the boat said, "Well,
if you don't s surrender your passport,
you can't get off the boat." I said, "No
problem."
&gt;&gt; So, so what's the solution here? And how
do we I mean, clearly we're
&gt;&gt; listen to me. Bitcoin.
&gt;&gt; So, let's walk through that gold and
silver you have, it's time for you to go
all in, my friend. Understand that when
you do that, every time you buy a
Satoshi, you're voting against Star.
You're voting against Carney. You're
voting against Camala. You're voting
against Bondi. You're voting against
Susie Wilds. You're voting against all
the rhinos in Congress. You're voting
against Maxine Black. You're voting
against Chuck Schumer. You're voting
against Pelosi. You're voting against
all the people that are insider trading
and stealing our wealth right now.
&gt;&gt; Well, I definitely like the fact of
voting against them, everyone that you
said. So, yes. [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, but you have to realize
that they want the system to stay intact
because they have benefited from it. I
mean, I'll give you a perfect example.
Since I know you're a day trader, you
probably you may not have put this
current events together, but I think
you'll love the irony. Do you know that
the day two days ago on CNBC investment
bank just downgraded Birkshshire Hathway
the same day the same place upgraded
Micro Strategy.
&gt;&gt; Think about what that means.
&gt;&gt; They just downgraded fiat money and they
upgraded Bitcoin and they put on CNBC
and Bloomberg. But guess what? Most of
the people in your audience and maybe
Vanessa's family, they don't know. They
don't know what that just meant. That is
a screaming
validation of everything that Jack Cruz
has just told you in the beginning of
this podcast,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; You know what? People only see what they
can filter through through what they
know. And if you don't understand the
basics, like they're telling you the end
is coming. And the problem is if you
don't get it, like you can't take your
gold, Brand Brandon, and go buy a Big
Mac in the UK with it.
&gt;&gt; No,
&gt;&gt; it's impossible. But guess what you can
do? You can do it when everybody's got a
cell phone and you're doing it with
Bitcoin. Because I got news to you, when
I was in Venezuela, we were able to make
transactions with people using Bitcoin
cuz they told us, "We need Bitcoin
because our money doesn't work here."
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Same thing was true in Costa Rica.
I was in Costa Rica, too. And that's not
that far from here.
&gt;&gt; So, in America, right? So, if I put all
my money in in Bitcoin, do I I know a
lot of places now we can, you know, use
the app and whatnot to to purchase
things, but do you still need to keep
just a normal bank account open to
transfer as needed? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You you can do it that way. But
what I would tell you specifically since
you're a little bit more faster with
this than probably your audience, look
at some of the videos out that Jack
Mers, he's the CEO of Strike. He was the
guy that actually helped Bu Kelly write
the legal tender law for Bitcoin in El
Salvador. He lives in Chicago. He
announced earlier this year he's
completely off the fiat standard. He
lives on Bitcoin alone. He's figured out
actually how to live off Bitcoin in the
United States fully with no problem. Is
it hard to do? Yes. But is it doable?
Yes. So, the point I try to make to you,
instead of you doing it the way Jack's
doing it, just keep the amount of money
in fiat that you need to pay your
monthly bills, but everything else
should be yoloed into the the best asset
that's out there, which is not a
Picasso, it's not gold, it's not silver,
it's Bitcoin. And if you do that in
three, four, five, six years, remember
Brandon, you now have people that you
used to actively follow, JP Morgan,
Chase, all the rock and rach banks now
telling you that we want in. Who who the
biggest scammers out there? Lutnik, the
commerce secretary and think for Black
Rockck. What are they telling you? Buy
Bitcoin. Why? Because they know it's the
solution. The problem is they've also
told you they want to steal your
Bitcoin. That's what the Treasury
Secretary of the United States said that
and Lutnik and Frink are actively
setting things up so that you'll put
your Bitcoin in a bank, then you'll get
rug pulled. Remember what I told you
about the $5,000?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Same thing will happen if you put your
Bitcoin there. The key thing with
Bitcoin is you always keep it in the
wallet like you said the treasure or you
know a cold card or something like that
because self-custody means not only do
you have sovereignty but you also have
privacy. In other words, you don't you
don't give any of that to the government
at all. You just
&gt;&gt; How's Coinbase?
&gt;&gt; Coinbase is not safe. Brian Armstrong is
also one of our enemies. But for right
now, he's selling us Bitcoin. So we
continue to use it. As soon as you buy
your Bitcoin, you pull it off and put it
in your hard wallet. Then guess what?
Brian Armstrong doesn't affect you.
Coinbase, what they do is no big deal.
Why? Because what eventually could the
government do? Guys like Bessant, guys
like Trump, they could rug pill Coinbase
and take all your money. That's the big
risk right now for Michael Sailor, you
know, and and you have to understand
that people think this can't happen.
Well, remember FDR rugpilled gold in
1933.
&gt;&gt; Yes, he did. why executive order 6102
exists. But you know the idiots that are
out there today don't think that this
could ever happen to the United States
when it's already happened before. And
when they closed the gold window in 71,
effectively that was an admission of
political counterfeiting. It was also an
admission that we're we defaulted on our
money. We're effectively broke that day.
But people in America think, well, we're
still going. I mean, we we we're still
going. Why? Because they keep printing
money. They keep debasing your money
further.
&gt;&gt; And people don't understand this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; They've never had an opportunity where
they actually see their money go up in
value instead of down in value. And when
you buy Bitcoin, that's exactly what
happens.
&gt;&gt; So, you've answered one of my questions.
I was going to ask you if you think the
the current connection with Tylenol and
acetaminophen to autism is more of a
scapegoat and what your thoughts on that
were. But I think you [laughter] just
answered that.
&gt;&gt; Of course, it's a scapegoat. But is what
Bobby was able to tell you true? Yeah.
But anybody who had, you know, three
neurons with no spy in them could figure
that out. I mean, freak. The company
told us it was linked to it. But the
bottom line is the vaccines are still a
problem. But yeah, if you add it with
something that reduces your redux,
hello. I mean, we could all figure that
out. But you know, the problem is
they're looking for a story to sell to
people who are morons, people who are
like the food gurus, people who think
that you can fix this problem through
diet. You can't. You cannot. And when
you understand that, that makes up 90
95% of the American public. Maybe not
that high anymore because I think CO has
woken up. Maybe 25%. Those 25% are
people that were the that were in Maha
when I started Maja, not the people that
are in there now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And probably the Bitcoiners. But I would
tell you, even in the Bitcoin community,
we've got a lot of pe people struggling
with the Dunning Krueger effect cuz
guess what? They took the job to travel.
And it turns out some of them it's been
a catastrophic mistake cuz they're dying
now. They're having problems.
&gt;&gt; Uh I met several of them on this cruise.
They actually came to me with me at
secure locations to say, "Tell me what I
need to do." But how do I deal with this
GBM? How do I deal with this brain
cancer? How do I deal with this Sears
autoimmune issue I have? You know, the
same problem that Jordan Peterson has.
Cuz they're not getting answers back
home.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know, they're not. It's just not
happening. And it's not going to happen
because the people that built this whole
system, they're not going to tell you
the truth. And not only that, they can
control what truth leaks out. That's the
reason why Kevin and Jessica had to put
this paper on the Bitcoin blockchain so
that a guy like you or someone like
Vanessa who's recording this whole thing
will be able to go and find out, oh
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this really is true that they are
all contaminated and it has huge
mitochondrial effects. It causes
brownouts in different systems. That's
why we're getting all these different
diseases. Yeah. I mean, that's the truth
that we need out and Bitcoin is the
final common pathway that does it.
That's the truth.
&gt;&gt; Well, I will say going back to some of
your initial comments about, you know,
Australia is really sick. I I I have
been able to work with patients from all
over the world. I've actually traveled,
you know, to various places like the UK,
the Middle East, Australia, various
places in between. And I will say some
of the worst cases of autism that I've
ever seen were in fact in the UK, the
Middle East, and Australia.
I mean, I can confirm that. So, is what
you're saying and what I just said
connected here? I mean, is that
&gt;&gt; absolutely
&gt;&gt; they all have they all have bad light?
They also are very compliant with
Western doctrine. And right now, Western
doctrine is 72 jabs for a child, you
know, the first year of life. So, think
about it. Just remember our government
is still advocating three COVID shots in
the first year of life.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's insane.
&gt;&gt; Just think about that. Think about how
that is.
&gt;&gt; I will say the I think the worst forms
of autism that I've personally seen
actually have come out of the Middle
East.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I agree.
&gt;&gt; Well, you got to remember the Middle
East, even though they have good sun,
they have terrible magnetism, really bad
water, but what do they do to their
people? They cover them with sheets, you
know, because of the religion. So even
if they were out to try to fix this
problem, do you have any hope of doing
that? The answer is no. And they don't
realize it. The other thing is not just
autism. The second fastest group of
diabetics in the world, the first one is
in India
&gt;&gt; where all the tech places are in
Bangalore. Guess what? Number two is
Saudi Arabia.
&gt;&gt; Doesn't surprise me.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I know it's rampant in Egypt. I know
that much. It's it's terrible there.
&gt;&gt; Well, Egypt's right next to Saudi
Arabia, so no shock,
&gt;&gt; right? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, when so when
I was going to Dubai, I mean, one thing
that just made me sick, I mean,
physically ill. I'm not talking about
like me like, "No, this is terrible. I'm
talking like physically ill." Is all of
the power lines. They're just freaking
everywhere. I mean, it's like an
electromagnetic.
&gt;&gt; Well, you got to remember they're
building they're building cities in the
middle of a desert that shouldn't have
it. So, you've got to bring everything
in. So, you know, people think, "Oh,
this is amazing engineering." I look at
it and go, how dumb can you really be? I
mean, I just saw something today that
Saudi Arabia is talking about putting a
a soccer stadium on top of a building in
Saudi Arabia. And I'm going, how dumb do
you have to be to think this is a good
idea? And it's kind of like, you know,
Elon Musk goal of going to Mars. Yeah,
can we do it? But the question we got to
ask ourselves, should we? Like, life
didn't evolve on Mars. It evolved on
Earth. And there's a reason there's no
life on Mars because it has no magnetic
field. Okay? It has no way to protect
you from solar radiation. There's very
little water on it. So why in the hell
does anybody want to sign up to go
there? And believe it or not, on this
trip that I made, one of the reasons I
went, there was an astronaut on this
trip who actually been up in space and
actually gave a couple of talks and oh,
was the discussions between him and I
kind of interesting. Yeah, I even wrote
about it on my Patreon blog. Put his
picture in there. He's a Canadian
astronaut. And
I made a point to highlight the idiocy
of the things that he was standing for
because I wanted people to understand.
And the people that were on this boat,
remember, they were all Commonwealth
people. And when I showed them the
reality, they they were just like,
"Here, we thought this was good stuff
and you are pointing out these issues."
And I just showed them. I said, "Look,
here's all the the sites in the
bibliography." I even got up and asked
him point blank questions. I said, "You
told us you're in space and you've got
permanent methylation changes and
changes in your eyes." And this guy is a
medical doctor as well, just so we're
clear. He had no earthly idea
how his time and space was linked to
these problems. And I even pointed out
to him, I said, you know, we have two
identical twins from Arizona who did the
same thing you did, and they have the
same problems you have.
&gt;&gt; I said, and you don't think there's any
link, huh?
&gt;&gt; What have you heard of? So, so I'm
friends with Andrea Aino, and he's
creating a company that's going to send
UFC fighters into space. Have you seen
this? And they're going to have these
fights.
space and they're going to record them.
&gt;&gt; It's a great way to kill these guys. I
can tell you that.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Well, think about the
non-native EMF that they're being
exposed to and then they're also
&gt;&gt; and brain trauma TBI from each other.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Exactly. I mean, that's going
to be
&gt;&gt; I guess it's the ultimate gladiator
games, right? I And I guess a failing
&gt;&gt; world economy needs circus maximus to
keep a lot of the idiots happy. But I
have to just tell you when I hear stuff
like this, you kind of wonder sometime,
are people really this asleep? And I
have to tell you, this trip I took, I
saw it. There's not I'd say if I was to
break it down, I'd say 75 to 80% of
people were asleep. The 20 to 25% they
weren't asleep. They still believed
nonsense, but they were curious enough
to sit down and talk to me. And I had
quite a big following just about
everywhere I went, I can tell you. And I
thought I was gonna have a vacation. It
turned out I worked more on this
vacation than I ever did.
&gt;&gt; And I didn't plan on that. But, you
know, I made a lot of new friends. And I
think the message will resonate, you
know, going forward. But you know what I
found in my time in Europe in Prague and
what I found on this world vacation. I
may have to write about it sometime, but
I'm going to tell you the
the implications of of this I think have
lit a fuse in me that we need to be more
forceful.
We have to light fires. When people are
wrong,
people say you're burning bridges. I'm
like, "No, I'm lighting the way for
other people to follow." Because there's
people like, "You just saw Peter A on 60
Minutes telling people V2 maxes are good
under blue light." I'm like, "Dude, do
you understand a V2 max is affected by
blue light because you're changing the
oxidation state of iron? You're making
them pseudohypoxic. You're raising their
blood sugar and insulin. So, is the V2
maxer getting accurate, but 60 Minutes
doesn't care about that?"
&gt;&gt; No. Let's talk about Peter Aia. He
charges people $250,000 a year and he
advocated for the co jab and tells
people statins are a good thing for
longevity and he's supposed to be a
longevity expert. So let me just tell
you when you're longevity experts who
get put on media owned by the bankers
because let's face it the Rockefeller
banks, the Rothschild banks own all the
media companies. You begin to see how
these things are all related and
connected together. They want to keep
people sick and asleep. And not only do
they own the retards, but they also own
the experts. And they are feeding you
nonsense that will push you right into
the saucers grinder.
&gt;&gt; I totally believe that. So, and I see
that every day. So, I work with a lot of
young families and they're going to be,
you know, they're going to be listening
to this and they're going to be freaking
out, right? Maybe they already have.
&gt;&gt; They should be freaking out.
&gt;&gt; Why did you freak out about reality?
&gt;&gt; I know, but it, you know, it's it's
&gt;&gt; it's why because you just woke up to it.
You just got Windex sprayed on your
glass eye. I mean,
&gt;&gt; I don't know how you I don't know how
you could not be freaked out after
living through CO.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's true.
&gt;&gt; Come on. This what we're talking about
right now, this is like this is like a a
Disney cartoon. [laughter]
So, so besides
buying Bitcoin, besides going in that
direction, what else can they be doing
to ensure the health of and safety of
their family and their next generations?
&gt;&gt; Well, I I tell people that your children
are humanity's blockchain. They are the
artificial intelligence. Why? They're
part daddy, part mommy. They're not 100%
like either one of you. So, they are a
new creature on the planet.
That's the real artificial intelligence.
And I think when you have that idea that
longevity is tied to ficcundity,
to fertility,
you begin to understand that the stuff
that I talk about is incredibly
important. So that means if you want
your coconuts to last the next 50 to 100
years, you've got to put them on a farm
where coconuts grow well. So the idea of
a citadel, meaning a place for a young
family to thrive and do well, to grow
your own food, to have a well and have
your own water, to make sure that you
have sun above your head and not chew
engineering from Rathon going on, to not
have the cell phone companies, you know,
changing things. I just did a I saw a
patient this morning who actually lives
in one of the wealthiest places in
California, Malibu, and she's displaced
from the Palisades fires. She's renting
a place and she's concerned, well,
what's going to happen to my 9-year-old
when they rebuild all this and they turn
it into a smart city? I said, "What it
means is that you probably need to hire
a building biologist because when they
start building this stuff, you're going
to see the readings that you do now are
not going to be what the readings are
later." That's the idea behind a
Citadel. So
realize being away from cities if you're
a young family is smart. Maybe having
jobs where you have to commute or you
can do TA connections much smarter. If
it means you have to take less money,
smart. But that means you have to put
more money into Bitcoin to make off the
offset. Do I think you need to live
smaller? Do I think you need to be
smarter? Do I think you need to
disconnect from the matrix? Yes. And I
mean that literally and figuratively
when I say it. I think your family, your
children are the single most important
thing you need to do. And you need to
put them in front of you. Like if you
don't believe some of the stuff you and
I are talking about, look at them. And I
mean, Brandon, you have an ideal. You
could probably speak to this more
eloquently than I can because you take
care of all these kids that are
destroyed. And there's nothing that
destroys a family quicker, a mom and
dad, than when you have a handicapped
child, whatever the handicap is. Even
Even though remember like people like
Sergey Brin are trying to normalize
autism. They're trying to tell you it's
no big deal. That's not true. It is a
huge handicap for families and families
should put their foot down and say, "I
don't want to have a child that's
handicapped. I want to be able to have
sex with my wife, have babies that are
normal, that grow like normal coconuts
grow on a tree." And we can't do that
anymore in a lot of cities. And the
proof is what Bobby Kennedy told us
before, you know, he was captured.
What's the big issue? It's now one and
in and 16 male bursts in Southern
California. In parts of New Jersey, it's
even worse. You know, where some other
people live be 1 in 44. Realize that the
zip code determines the chance of you
having these handicapped kids. Well,
guess what? Know those numbers. Do not
build your citadel in that area just
because grandma and grandfather are
putting you on a guilt trip. You know,
maybe you need to start thinking about
that differently. And you know, if
Brandon sold that 20% of gold and silver
is maybe he could live off the grid
somewhere else that he can't do right
now because now he's got money that's
going this way. Or, you know, you see my
my landscape right there, Will, behind
me. You know where he's walking? He's
walking on something I couldn't afford
to buy in the United States, but I could
build it here in El Salvador because of
Bitcoin. It's a teak deck that's 4,000
square feet that goes all the way around
my house so that I can always get in the
sun.
&gt;&gt; That's awesome.
&gt;&gt; Do you understand what I'm saying? That
I can't do that in the United States,
but I can do it here.
&gt;&gt; So, you've mentioned buying Bitcoin,
etc. I'm just curious. I'm just throw
this out there. How much more room does
it have to run? Like, what do you think
it's going to go up to
&gt;&gt; right now? the total assets in the
United States, I should say in the
world, maybe 800 trillion dollars.
Bitcoin is going to eat up 600 trillion
of them in the next probably
30 years.
&gt;&gt; Okay?
&gt;&gt; So, there's a a lot of
&gt;&gt; Let me just tell you something. If you
own one Bitcoin today, you will be able
to take care of your ancestors for 10
generations.
&gt;&gt; Jeez.
&gt;&gt; How's that? And and I got to be honest
with you, my math may be bad there. I
I'm gonna I'll flip this around. Robert
Breedlove, who you know I did a big
four-part podcast with.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I watched.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. He did a pretty amazing tweet the
other day. I'll share with you because I
think you'll like this.
&gt;&gt; He was sitting down with Peter
McCormack, who's one of the Bitcoiners
that also took the jab, whose life is at
risk. Robert's got his own risks right
now that are pretty public, especially
today on on Twitter. But he did the
math. He said the United States
government spent $6 trillion on CO He
did all the math and said we basically
live 80 years. We work about 50 of those
years. He did all the math. He said
basically we killed or we destroyed
2 million lives with $6 trillion. So I
want you to think about that math for a
minute. at 2 million
humans. That was the cost of CO. That
was the time theft, the value theft that
the Department of Defense and
centralized medicine did. Cuz everybody
[clears throat] likes to blame big
farmer, but I told you the last time I
was on with you that people don't
realize big pharma were the drug dealers
in this game. The Department of Defense
are who distributed the jab to them.
They're the Colombian drug cartel. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And when you understand that, that
means that the people that you keep
voting for, okay, the Department of
Defense, those are all the idiots that
are in Congress that are protecting
them, they cost [clears throat] us $2
million lives and they spent $6 trillion
erasing them. [clears throat]
So, I'm going to remind you today on
October 28th, 2025,
I'm timestamping this.
25,000 children a month are being loaded
with the same boweapon.
It's not stopped since President Trump
has taken office.
And because the Department of Defense,
the intelligence agencies, Susie Wilds,
Pam Bondi, Cash Patel won't let Bobby
Kennedy do what needs to be done. Won't
allow the information that Kevin McCirin
and Jessica Rose just put on the Bitcoin
blockchain. Do you understand the people
that have the scientific background are
screaming at all of you to stop putting
the criminals in charge,
&gt;&gt; right? and they put the answer on the
Bitcoin blockchain so that when you do
wake up and realize that [snorts] your
diet or your V2 max aren't fixing this
autism problem that you'll read the damn
paper eventually and begin to wake up.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; That
that is why this circle of life that you
you and I are talking about. I know that
you didn't come into this podcast
thinking we were going to go down there,
but sometimes podcasts
need to resonate with the things that
are really going on in our life right
now so that the curious in your audience
do start to see it and do start to
understand it. I hope some of the young
mothers and young fathers that listen to
this are offended by what I said. I hope
they're mad that I'm burning their
bridges down. I hope they're mad that
I'm going to force them to leave St.
Louis, Los Angeles, New Jersey. Why?
Because they're actively allowing child
abuse to occur to their own family
&gt;&gt; because they're putting him in schools
that are mandating this vaccine
schedule. If you have a child right now
and you're fortunate not to have a
fertility or fundity problem and you
turn your kids over for eight to 10
hours a day to a government institution
that forces them to have vaccines, you
are no better than Ralph Barrick or
Anthony Fouchy. I hope that offends you.
I really do because that's what you're
doing and you need to know what you're
doing,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; You need to take that money out that you
have, protect your children at all
costs. all cost. No matter what the
experts tell you, no matter what Peter
Adia or Sean Baker tell you on social
media, you do what's right for your
family and you seek experts that try to
tell you the truth. I I don't have any
illusions. I know that some of the
things that I've probably told you will
be proven untrue 20 or 30 years from
now, but I can tell you this about me.
Well, after I'm dead, people will know
that I always fought for the truth.
always and I always told you really what
I thought and why I thought it but I can
tell you right now you have no friends
in centralized medicine you have no
friends in Washington DC you have the
illusion of freedom you have the
illusion of privacy and you have one
thing left a lodidial title and it's
only found in Bitcoin and I I I think
you need to dig deep and understand how
that issue links to the autism issue
links to the issue in politics, links to
the issue in economics because I I want
to see families build a citadel, be able
to grow their own food again, drink
their own water, provide good sunlight
so that their little coconuts can grow
and continue to grow 5 6 7 8 14
generations. I would like no better than
14 generations now, my grandchild to be
talking to Brandon Crawford's grandchild
who's doing this podcast that can say,
"Look, our grandfathers told us this."
And we were lucky that our families were
the ones that listen. We weren't the
ones listening to the idiots asking for
a meat diet, working out in a gym, or
getting a V2 max on 60 minutes,
&gt;&gt; right? You can't advocate for things
that are halftruths. Why? Because when
you're in the battle of your life,
you're in the battle of time. You have
no time for the superfluous. You have no
time for a halftruth. You have to go
allin for the A. Not the B, not the C,
not the D. Why? Because your children's
life depend on it.
&gt;&gt; I agree. Well, I think it's becoming
more and more obvious and evident for
people to really uncover. I mean even
just recently there was you know Dell
Victory released an inconvenient study
right and so that was
&gt;&gt; talking about the Henry Ford health
system study that has not been published
showing that the unvaccinated population
has a much much less occurrence of any
kind of chronic health disease. Right?
&gt;&gt; But do you understand that's the reason
why Kevin and Jessica did what they did
to put it on the blockchain. In other
words, Dell hasn't realized yet that
just because you uncover the truth,
that's good enough. You have to link the
truth to something that is the Library
of Alexandria that will never be taken
away. Don't you find it a little
amazing, Brandon, that they didn't put
this in JP Morgan's blockchain. They
didn't put it in a Rockefeller Bank's
blockchain. They put it on Bitcoin's
blockchain. Right?
&gt;&gt; And remember, it's a scientific paper,
my friend.
So people who don't understand this
&gt;&gt; don't understand why I'm criticizing
Dell right now. I look that story with
Henry Ford. I've known about it for
quite some time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But guess what? Knowing the truth isn't
good enough. You have to do something
with it.
&gt;&gt; And I'm going to interview him on
Friday. Do you want Is there anything I
should ask him? Yeah, you should ask him
about why Kevin and Jessica did what
they did and why he hasn't done I mean
the one good thing about him he's
disassociated himself really from a lot
of stuff with Bobby but you remember he
was really tight with Bobby just like I
thought I had a good relationship with
Bobby but when you find out that people
are part of the evil empire you have a
duty not only just to be matter in hell
and do projects like she's doing but you
have to make sure that that project,
that Henry Ford
paper and that those facts
stay true. Put it on the blockchain.
&gt;&gt; Got it.
&gt;&gt; Seeing a movie isn't good enough.
&gt;&gt; Cuz guess what? Most of the people that
need to see this after they kill,
however many they're going to kill, the
only way people are going to wake up is
when they see four billion people less
on the planet. Then they're going to
say, "What caused this?" And guess what?
It's going to be sitting on the
blockchain from 2025 because Kevin and
Jessica put it there.
&gt;&gt; So, how do you access that? Just I mean,
I don't understand how to go and access
information. It's in the open
timestamps. Like, if you go and
understand how to do homework on the
blockchain, you can find it. And the
simplest way to do it to be honest with
you, just follow Kevin McCirin on
Twitter and ask him that question. In
fact, I would tell you you should
probably have Kevin McCirin on your
podcast,
&gt;&gt; okay?
&gt;&gt; To discuss this very issue. I would also
tell you it would be beneficial for you
to also have Jessica Rose on. Why?
Because these are two patriots that are
fighting for every parent of a child
that you've seen the last five years of
your career. These two, they're fighting
for the truth. They're doing something
about it and they're putting their
careers at risk. Jessica is really
putting her career at risk as a PhD
because she doesn't have anything to
fall back on. You know why Kevin can do
it? Cuz he's a Bitcoiner. Why do I Why
can I get away what I do? Do you think
anybody in a hospital can hurt Uncle
Jack at this point? Nope. Do you think
anybody can hurt Kevin McCaran at this
point? Nope. Why? We got the freedom
message 8 to 10 years ago.
We haven't been involved in your fiat
reindeer gains with Nvidia. No, we were
smart enough to go with money you can't
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with.
&gt;&gt; And guess what? When you have money you
can't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with, it doesn't matter what
the boards say to you. It doesn't matter
what medicine tries to do to clip your
Achilles tendon. You know what I say to
them? [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. And I keep doing what I
do. That is the power of what Bitcoin
allows one to do. And I guarantee you
there's a lot of young families out
there that would like to tell their
bosses the same thing when they say you
have to take a jab or you have to come
back to work. Wouldn't it be nice to
have the ability to say, "I don't need
your bullshit." Well, guess what?
There's a lot of people that got into
Bitcoin in 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, [clears throat]
and 19 that can do that. And what am I
telling you right now in 25? Right now,
you'll be able to have that protection
three or four years from now if you
listen to the wisdom in this podcast.
&gt;&gt; That's awesome. Yeah, I'm going to I'm
going to hedge a little bit more into
that Bitcoin fund I've got. That's for
sure. Start transitioning into it more.
Well, I just think you as a a guy that's
involved, especially in the vaccine
injury story and the fact that you've
got this Nvidia in your back pocket, I
think you would love talking to Kevin. I
think you would love talking to Jessica.
And I think to be honest with you, the
young families that you're trying to
produce this content for. It's not just
about helping on the biologist side. You
got to help them on this side because
guess what? They need to be able to
know, hey, I need to put my kid in a
ward off school. I need to homeschool
him because I can't do that. Well, that
costs money. And right now, money is
failing. So, guess what? You need to
have money that's growing because then
you can do it. Then you're not taking
your most prized coconut and putting him
into public school where they're getting
radiated with Wi-Fi for 8 hours and
they're getting told they need 72 jabs
between zero and 6 years old. I mean,
you would think that this is common
sense, but I got to be honest with you.
Parents make this mistake all the time.
They say, "Well, what am I supposed to
do?" Well, Brandon, that's why this
podcast is important. There is another
path to sanity and it starts through
sovereignty and privacy. It starts
through decentralized medicine. That's
really what we're talking about today.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. I did I did have another
topic I really wanted to pick your brain
on if you don't mind because I started
working with a little kiddo named
Grayson. He's a non-verbal autistic kid.
He uses rapid prompting method to spell
and he can very like very effectively
communicate. And I don't know if you're
familiar with the telepathy tapes and
how these kiddos go to quote the hill,
right? It's like this metaphysical place
where they can communicate. And
&gt;&gt; Grayson has been able to blow my mind
with the things that he knows. He's even
dropped into a dream of mine. Like
literally, he's told me things that
there's no way that he would know,
should know.
&gt;&gt; How in the hell is this happening?
&gt;&gt; What is going on?
&gt;&gt; Well, let's let's keep it first. We'll
we'll do a step-wise fashion. I'll get
you there. You know that people who have
ALS do kind of the same thing through a
computer interface. They're able to
communicate using that.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, I told a pretty famous story, I
think two or three times on podcast. I
think the last time I told the story is
through to Breedlove where when I was a
neurosurgeon, this was a long time ago,
a kid died at a drive-thru at McDonald's
and his family donated his organs, and
then a lady shows up to my practice
three or four years later who was on a
carnivore diet, never ate French fries,
and she had this huge draw for French
fries. And it turned out she had the
kid's heart. and she was at my desk or
she said my front office pounding the
girls wanting to talk to me because she
knew that I was the neurosurgeon that
got the family to donate the organs and
she just wanted to talk to me. She
didn't know any of the background. So
when this happened to me, I sat down and
heard this story and I was stunned. I
said, "How would a lady
know this?" Remember, there's no
computer interface there. She was
blocked from all the records through the
organ donation situation, but yet the
details that she had were pretty
accurate.
So that happened, I'm going to say 2004
or 2005. Then I'll take you to the next
step. In 2009, a guy, you know, Luke
Montineier
&gt;&gt; had a good friend named Jax Benaviste,
who thought that he found a way for
information, electromagnetic information
travel through water. The people at
nature ostracized him, ruined his
career. He committed suicide and this
always killed Montin because they were
good friends. So Montin decided to take
Benifist's science, take it to the next
level. So what did he do? He took some
DNA, denatured it in water, made the
water as pure as you can.
Took all the DNA part particles out. How
did he prove that? He did it with PCR,
the stuff that you know we had to deal
with through CO, but he did it the right
way, the way Carrie Mullis would tell
you to do it. He made sure that the
water is completely pure. Then he hooked
a wire up to the water, sent it over the
internet to two different countries far
away, and then recapitulated the DNA in
Italy and in France. And this has been
recapitulated several times.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; So what did he do? He published this in
2009 in Nature magazine. Now, he was
doing it to try to tell people in
centralized science that this is
possible. Like quantum biology is for
real and you killed my friend over it.
That's really what his message was. Now,
let's fast forward to, you know, co
times. He Montinier told people when you
took the jab, if you took three jabs,
you should do a HIV test because you'll
find out you'll be HIV positive.
Literally,
&gt;&gt; he's killed
right after he m mentions this on French
TV. Okay, why? Because remember who he
was? He won the Nobel Prize for HIV. He
knew that Barrett and the DoD had put a
a special protein called GP41
on there because of the nature
experiment he did at Jack Spennist. He
knew that the signature would be found
on PCR testing if you looked for it
because of electromagnetic induction. So
now we go back to the original story
that you asked me about.
Why are you so amazed at this, Brandon,
when you can sit wherever you are right
now and pull out something like this and
search anything in the world and get the
answer? Right.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; It's the exact same physics behind it.
Okay. It works on quantum mechanics and
relativity. Okay. The human phalamus,
which is what's damaged in all of these
kids,
&gt;&gt; is the place in the brain where all
sensation goes. But what's the problem
with these children? They can't access
the two and froth pathways because of
what happened to their brain
transgenerationally in uterero. So do
you think that nature is not going to
find a way for them to be able to
communicate utilizing UHF, VHF, FM radio
station technology in neurons to
communicate a different way. The answer
is that ability is there. And what part
of our biology works on this? That's
circadian biology. Why? How do we know
where the earth is in relation to the
sun? The same way we use light to do it.
Okay? And when you begin to see all
these different examples that I'm giving
you, people in the centralized place
will tell you this is anecdote, but it's
not. is centralized biology doesn't
understand really how physics works. And
when you begin to understand that
information transfer happens through
electromagnetic radiation through two
antennas, the problem is what you
believe an antenna to be isn't always
what you think. It turns out that
Montineier was trying to tell us that
water, especially coherent water in
mitochondria, is probably the best
antenna on the planet.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
And that is the reason that this can
happen. That's the reason your friend
and patient with autism, Grayson, can
communicate with you just the way
Stephven Hawking communicated to the
public through his computer interface.
The physics is exactly the same. The
difference is you don't realize that the
antenna is in you and him.
&gt;&gt; So is it via biopotons? Is it a
recursive light? Of course it is.
Exactly what it is. And that's the key.
The thing is you're just waking up
or science is just waking up to what
I've been telling people about for 20
years. That there are so many different
places in your body that make biopotons
which we call upes which are ultra weak
photonic emissions. Your blood makes
them, your white blood cells make them,
your neurons make them, your
mitochondria makes them. They're
everywhere. But the problem is they're
very random. What does an antenna do?
It's tuned into a molecular frequency, a
resonance. And when a connection is
made, information is passed. And it
turns out these kids with autism, when
you put them in these alien environments
long enough, they make a connection some
way somehow. And your patient has done
it this way. Now, does that mean every
autistic kid has Grayson's ability? Of
course not. But does it also mean that
there's a lot lot of other frequency
channels that people can tap? I'll give
you another one that we know that works
the same way. UHF, VHF, that's what the
Schuman resonance is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, the Schuman in resonance, even
though it's in the radio frequency
range, is native EMF. Why? Because it's
the heartbeat of Earth. It's made
through the ionosphere and the the solar
plasma. That's how it occurs through a
resonance, just like sound happens in a
guitar. But realize that everything
around the human resonance is toxic to
us. But because that was native to the
planet, the visible spectrum and the
human resonance are two antennas or
frequencies that our phalamus works on.
That's actually how we're able to tell
where the Earth and the Sun are as we
evolve. That's the reason why there's
two amino acids that have one single
codon. They're time crystals to tell us
when this happens. That's the reason why
methionine and and and tryptophan are
able to do this. Tryptophan has glucenic
pathways and ketogenic pathways. Why?
Because you need those at different
times of the season. This is the reason
why the meattheads that are out there in
the carnivore land don't understand how
powerful the science is that I teach
people. They think if you don't look
like them, you're a dumbass. So, it
turns out the truth is you can look like
them and still be a dumbass cuz most of
them are cuz they can't sit down and
have this conversation I'm having with
you to explain why Grayson's able to
still communicate even though the
superighways that go between his and his
sense organs are destroyed.
&gt;&gt; So, it's still communicate.
&gt;&gt; It's both atistic
and evolutionary, right? Because it's
&gt;&gt; it can be both.
&gt;&gt; And it can be both at the same time.
&gt;&gt; It has to be in that scenario, right? I
mean,
&gt;&gt; exactly correct. So that also tells you
that could future humans have the
ability to do things that we now
consider superhuman. Yes. But why can't
we do it? It's because we haven't made
the uppes coherent enough to get that.
But it turns out autistic kids have
figured a way around that. Why? because
they're probably saving resources from
the normal pathways that humans use
[cough] and now they're able to harness
that energy and do something different
which brings us back to the story of
Rainman. That's exactly what an idiot
Savant can do.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; For the same reasons. So if you think
about when you asked me this question, I
just gave you a bunch of different
answers about how this is possible. Not
only that, I pointed you to Luke Mont's
paper. That's 2009 in Nature magazine.
&gt;&gt; Go read it for yourself. I tried to tell
Yubberman about it, but it went in this
ear and out the other. We have
incredible capabilities. What life is
capable of is amazing. That's the reason
of mine. When someone's really injured,
I believe they can be fixed. But no one
else can because they don't understand
some of these mechanisms that you and I
are talking about. Eating a a rib house
steak every day isn't going to solve
this problem. Okay? It's not. And doing
a V2 max every 3 months is not going to
solve this problem.
&gt;&gt; If you put AirPods in your ear and think
because you can do a 100 push-ups that
these aren't hurting you, you have just
defined yourself as a Dunning Krueger
idiot.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, funny enough, I was well,
not funny, sad, but I was at a pediatric
brain injury conference this past
weekend and it was a Q&amp;A session after I
spoke and one of the parents said, you
know, we've been trying, you know, the
carnivore diet and the keto diet and,
you know, they're only getting worse.
And I said, let me guess, they're
heading into metabolic acidosis. They're
probably already there. I said, but I
can guarantee you your kiddo doesn't see
the early morning sunrise.
And they were like, no, you're right.
They they can't they never do. And I
said, "Well, because if you don't, your
TCA cycle won't spin. You can't use any
of those
&gt;&gt; things that you're putting into them,
right?" And so,
&gt;&gt; that's exactly what you want to do. You
want to use the TCA cycle. You want to
be carnivore or paleo, make sure you see
the sunrise. You do that, then your your
diet will be fine. But you still haven't
solved the original problem. That's only
one little problem. [laughter] If your
little kid's got a destroyed thalamus
and every single array into its brain,
that highway is broken. You have to
learn how to rebuild those highways. You
have to understand how circadian
biology, light and dark and temperature
cycles control melatonin, BDNF,
cortisol, GABA, all of these things. The
default state that happened inside that
uterus is possible to reoptain, but you
have to take the kid's neural circuitry
apart and put it back together. And the
only way I know to do that for to make a
good coconut is to put them in an
environment where there's no
electromagnetic pollution. Where the
child is getting light, dark, and
temperature cycle information that's
proper and they're connecting with Earth
properly. That's it.
&gt;&gt; How we were designed to live and grow,
right?
&gt;&gt; Boom. That's it.
&gt;&gt; So, it's really that simple. If it
happened in a uterus, it can happen
outside the uterus. How do we know that?
Because when a baby is born, that brain
doesn't function. and they can't talk,
they can't wipe their own ass, they
can't go to school, right? But imagine
over 10, 12, 13, 14 years, that brain
starts to work. So there is a plan for
it postnatally and it happens outside
that placenta, outside the uterus. And
it turns out nature controls that
decentralized game and we need to
connect those kids back with the default
state. We do that and we do it
successfully. Brandon, then you begin to
see why Uncle Jack just told you about
the Citadel and why it's so damn
important.
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, I I did get your emails.
You're you're building a community in El
Salvador. And by the way, I'm I'm going
to ask my wife. I' I'd love to come and
see you guys in December. I I would love
to get up there and, you know, see your
place, meet you in person. I think it'd
be fantastic. But do you want to say
anything about the community you're
you're building down there?
&gt;&gt; Well, not really. I'm I'm getting ready
to have, let's say, a live event for my
members. This is not going to be open to
the public. This is only open to my
tribe and [snorts] I'm getting ready to
do that Thursday, just so you know that.
So, on Thursday, I'll be talking to my
tribe members about why I'm doing what
I'm doing, how I'm doing it, what the
goal is, and what what I see as the
future of this. because I believe what
I'm doing down here is [snorts] going to
be what many of your young families who
are appalled by what we talked about.
They're going to need to follow this
model. Why?
&gt;&gt; Because that's how they're going to turn
their young coconuts, you know, into
normal kids down the road. I don't want
anybody to think it's not possible
because it is,
&gt;&gt; right? I totally agree with that. And I
and I've seen it. I mean, I've had
multiple kids that have really recovered
and they could not speak and now they
can speak and they could not socially
interact and now they can interact, etc.
So, I mean, I've seen it, but they,
you're right, they do have to take these
steps and a lot of them are huge
lifealtering, family altering
&gt;&gt; steps, but you have to do it.
&gt;&gt; There's no way.
&gt;&gt; Well, you have to do it. If you if you
decided to have the sex and have the
kid, now the kid's not right. No matter
what the the ideology is, [snorts] you
have a duty for the parent that you have
to put your life on order to get the kid
right. It's as simple as that. And I
understand that that's a big ask. But
the bottom line is that's part of the
reason why Bitcoin is important because
when you do Bitcoin, you're able to do
that. You can put your coconut back in
there. And I mean, I tried to tell, you
know, Nicole Shannon this just like I
told you this last time we were here.
autism. The easiest way I can explain it
to you is like trying to grow a coconut
tree in Edmonton, Alberta. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Okay? And you can't do that. You got to
put the coconut in the tropics so that
you can get all the default state back.
&gt;&gt; There's no sideshow. There's no
greenhouse. If you do the greenhouse,
all you're going to do is make the kids
somewhat better, but not totally better.
We're looking for complete reversals.
And I'm telling you that the default
state is possible, but it's not going to
be a fun trip for the family. You are
quite correct in what you said. But you
have to remember something. This
information that you and I are talking
about, it's not out there publicly. Why?
Because the people that are out there
that are hurting these kids, they want
you not to normal. They want to
normalize autism. And it shouldn't be
normalized. It needs to be, you know,
said for what it is. It's an injury
caused by things in the environment that
shouldn't be there that alter our
transgenerational epigenetic light show
that our body makes. And once we teach
parents that they can control that light
show so that they can renovate
and go back to the default state and
their children can go on to be, you
know, good coconuts and make other good
coconuts, then guess what we just did?
We just created a human blockchain that
we may not have to worry about Kevin
McCirin and Chesca Rose's paper. That's
really what you and I are doing through
this podcast. We're trying to do what
Jessica and Kevin did through their
paper, right?
&gt;&gt; And we're trying to affect as many minds
as we possibly can, but I have no
illusion. The minds that will be
affected by this are going to be the
ones that are open. The ones that
aren't, they should just turn the
channel off. And I I'm okay with that.
I'm not everybody's cup of tea, and I
understand that. But my job is to keep
digging for the truth, and that's what I
do.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Well, that's why I really
enjoy these conversations. I know you're
coming up on time, so I want to be
sensitive to that. So, as always, you
know, thank you for all the profound
truths that you discussed today. I
actually really enjoyed the discussions
on Bitcoin and your thoughts around that
and connections with autism. I think,
you know, it's definitely something that
I wasn't thinking about. So, those are
definitely discussions that I'm going to
do a better job of bringing up and
connecting those dots for people. Again,
those were not really dots that I had
really connected. So, I do appreciate
that. And as always, thank you so much
for your time. Is there anything else
you want to leave us before you go?
&gt;&gt; Well, just get your kids in nature.
That's the single most important thing
you need to do. See the AM sunrise, the
PM sunset. Make sure their feet and
hands touch the earth a lot.
keep them away from technology
and [clears throat] teach them the
history so that they know who the
enemies really are.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Very wise words. Thank you,
sir. I really appreciate it.
&gt;&gt; No problem. Take care.
[music]
&gt;&gt; We hope today's episode has inspired you
to take that next step toward your best
self. Remember, the path to longevity is
paved with small daily decisions. Your
journey is unique and every step, every
choice brings you closer to your
ultimate vision of a healthier, happier
life. For more insights, tips and
resources, visit drbrandcrawford.com.