Our lecture tonight on the 20th Century Crisis is going to be somewhat different in format
in that we’ll be starting directly with a piece of music on film
and, as usual, any of you who’d like to follow the score at the desk
I welcome to come and join me.
What a way to enter the 20th century!
Blazing with self-confidence,
back there in 1908,
this Spanish Rhapsody of Ravel's is totally unaware -or at least unconcerned-
that a crisis lurks just around the corner,
a life-and-death crisis in musical semantics.
But this music has no worries about the future,
it's immensely pleased with itself
it has a childlike faith that the tonality, on which it feeds, is infinite;
that tonality is immortal,
as long as it is continuously refreshed
and enriched by bigger and better ambiguities,
both phonological and syntactic ones, chromatic and metrical ones.
They're all there in that music,
all those elusive and seductive Either/Or's that we found
last time in Berlioz and in Wagner and Debussy; they're all there, and then some.
But all that wandering chromaticism we've been listening to
is still contained in a tonal framework,
and Ravel is telling us, through his music, that he sees no reason
why it can't go on forever similarly controlled and contained,
to the end of recorded time.
In other words,
we’re safe:
it's only 1908, and there's still &lt;i&gt;Rosenkavalier&lt;/i&gt; to be written,
and a few more Puccini operas,
and the Firebird,
and who knows how many other similar delights.
Life is nothing but a joy.
But 1908, if the truth be told,
is not just a bowl of cherries.
Far from it,
there's something else in the air
a disturbance, a prescient feeling that all this smug optimism
can't last –neither tonality, nor figurative painting,
nor syntactical poetry, nor, indeed, the seemingly endless growth
of the bourgeoisie, or of colonial wealth, or of imperial power.
Sensitive minds are beginning to hint at a social collapse
a monstrous World War.
A premature flicker of fascism is already perceptible:
Marinetti's famous Manifesto of Futurism is about to appear,
glorifying war, the machine, speed, danger
and calling for the destruction of the past with all its traditions,
including music.
At the same time, on the other side of the musical moon,
Mahler is writing his Ninth Symphony, agonizing over
his reluctant and protracted farewell to tonality.
Even Scriabin in his &lt;i&gt;Prometheus&lt;/i&gt; is waging a losing battle
to contain his own mystic chromaticisms.
And even Sibelius
is writing a Fourth Symphony filled with unresolved doubts and terrors.
And these troubling presentiments are particularly intense in and around Vienna
–the decadence and hypocrisy of this
over-waltzed Austro-Hungarian Empire–
are seen by the Viennese polemicist Karl Kraus.
(I don’t know if you know that name, but it's a very important
name, you should know it.)
Seen by Karl Kraus as glaringly reflected in the degeneration of language,
and are cruelly exposed in a harsh light of his critical writings.
If you don’t know the name Karl Krauss, look him up,
he’s a key figure,
in this first decade of the century.
And he knows what's coming.
Mahler knows too, but he is about to die
along with his beloved tonal music.
And there is a new composer,
still in his thirties, who also knows,
but who will live to do something about it.
And his name is Arnold Schoenberg,
who has already written a masterly work,
&lt;i&gt;Verklärte Nacht&lt;/i&gt; ("Transfigured Night")
in which he has stretched those Wagnerian tonal ambiguities we found last week
to the snapping point.
The problems presented by &lt;i&gt;Tristan and Isolde&lt;/i&gt; have now
grown to a point necessitating some radical solution.
The works have become not only chromatically unmanageable
but unwieldy, as well, in sheer size.
Like the dinosaur, they've simply grown too big.
Composers like Reger and Pfitzner are vying with each other
for some kind of Oscar to be awarded for the longest, thickest, and most
complex piece in the world.
And Schoenberg too made his bid with an early
super-Wagnerian monster work called &lt;i&gt;Gurrelieder&lt;/i&gt;.
They were all, including Mahler, swept along by
the mighty "wave of the future" that Wagner, in his hyper-romantic egomania,
had predicted and initiated.
But how big can you get, how chromatically ambiguous, how syntactically overstuffed
without collapsing of your own sheer weight like the dinosaur?
There were just too many notes, too many inner voices, too many &lt;i&gt;meanings&lt;/i&gt;.
And this was what caused the crisis in Ambiguity.
So, now in 1908, Schoenberg is already giving up the struggle
to preserve tonality, to contain those post-Wagnerian chromaticisms.
In this very year he is writing a Second String Quartet
that clearly announces the upheaval and his renunciation of tonality.
In the last movement of this quartet he resorts to the human voice,
a soprano who sings Stefan George's prophetic words:
"Ich fühle Luft von anderem Planeten" ("I feel air from another planet").
And it sounds like this.
And then she sings
"Ich fühle Luft
von anderem Planeten”
and indeed Schoenberg does feel that air
and we feel it too.
This Opus 10 is to be his last tonal piece for many years to come.
By Opus 11, we’re already breathing that new air.
Listen
You feel that new air?
Breathing it?
This is atonality –to use that awful and frequently misunderstood word.
Not the atonality of Debussy’s old tonal scale that we’ve studied last week,
which is always –if you remember– tonality contained.
This atonality is not contained, either diatonically or in any other way.
For better or worse, nontonal music has been born.
And the history of music has suffered a sea change.
And in that same year of 1908, but far away from all this
–an ocean and a continent away, in fact in Connecticut of all places–
the sharpest comment, the most trenchant description of the tonal crisis,
was made by an unheard, unhonored and unsung Sunday composer named Charles Ives.
Who also knew, though totally unaware of Schoenberg or any
of that upheaval, he knew something was up,
and proclaimed it in his half-playful, mystic, quirky way through
a marvelous little piece called "The Unanswered Question".
And this music says it all, better than a thousand words.
For this reason I'd like you to hear it –and and also to see it–
to see this almost graphic representation of the conflict.
Of course the question Ives proposes in his title is not a strictly musical one,
by his own say-so, but rather a metaphysical one.
Let me quote part of his descriptive foreword to the piece:
The strings play pianissimo throughout with no change in tempo.
They are to represent "The Silences of the Druids --Who Know, See and Hear Nothing."
The trumpet intones "The Perennial Question of Existence", and states it
in the same tone of voice each time.
But the hunt for the "Invisible Answer"
undertaken by the flutes &amp; other human beings
[typical Ives cracker-barrel humor],
becomes gradually more active, faster and louder...
These "Fighting Answerers, as times goes on... seem to realize a futility
and begin to mock "The Question"–the strife is over for the moment.
After they disappear, "The Question" is asked for the last time,
and "The Silences" are heard beyond in "Undisturbed Solitude".
A charming idea, naive and profound at once.
But I've always thought of Ives’s Unanswered Question as not metaphysical one
so much as strictly musical question, whither music in our century.
Let me reinterpret the piece in exclusively musical terms,
there are three orchestral elements involved: the string ensemble,
a solo trumpet and a woodwind quartet.
The strings do, indeed, play &lt;i&gt;pianissimo&lt;/i&gt; throughout with no changes in tempo, as Ives says,
but more important of anything about druids: they’re playing pure tonal triads.
And against this slow sustained purely diatonic background,
the trumpet intermittently poses his question:
a vague nontonal phrase.
And each time that is answered by the wind group
in an equally vague, amorphous way.
The repeated question remains more or less the same but the answer
is grow more and more ambiguous and hectic
until the final answer emerges as utterly gibberish.
But throughout it all, those strings have maintained
their diatonic serenity imperturbable
and when the trumpet asks his question for the last time whither music,
there’s no further answer except for those strings
quietly prolonging their pure D major triad into eternity.
Is that luminous final triad the answer?
Is tonality eternal? Immortal?
Many have thought so and some still do,
and yet that trumpet’s question hangs in the air, unresolved,
troubling our calm.
You see how clearly this piece spells out the dilemma of the new century,
the dichotomy that was to define the shape of musical life from then to now.
On the one hand, tonality and syntactic clarity;
on the other, atonality and syntactic confusion,
as simple as that, apparently, but not quite so simple as we shall see.
Tonal composers are going to be tempted into flirting with nontonality and vice versa.
And to cloud now this further,
all twentieth century’s composers however splitted they are,
write what they, are out of the same need for newer and greater semantic richness;
they are all, whether tonal or nontonal, motivated by the same drive:
the power of expressivity, the drive to expand music's metaphorical speech,
even if they do so in diametrically opposite ways, and split music apart.
And so we can see this twentieth century split as having had a common impetus,
much as river divides into two forks.
On the one hand, there were tonal composers, guided by Igor Stravinsky,
who were seeking to extend musical ambiguities as far as possible
by constant transformations, but always
somehow remaining within the confines of the tonal system;
while on the other hand nontonal composers, led by Schoenberg,
were seeking their new metaphorical speech through one huge,
convulsive transformation –namely, transforming the entire tonal system
into a new and different poetic language.
these two apparently hostile camps, with all their antagonisms and disputes
about which side &lt;i&gt;really&lt;/i&gt; represented "modern music", actually
shared the same motivation: increased expressive power.
I have recently been reading a fascinating, nasty, turgid book
called &lt;i&gt;The Philosophy of Modern Music&lt;/i&gt;
by the German sociologist and aesthetician Theodor Adorno.
It's curious that a book with this title should turn out to be
a double essay on precisely Schoenberg and Stravinsky,
thus reducing "modern music" to that specific dichotomy.
Now of course the book is loaded: Schoenberg is all truth and beauty,
while Stravinsky is everything evil.
But Adorno confirms what I've been saying by pointing out,
in his Hegelian way, that the Big Split is to be conceived dialectically,
or to use his language, as logical antinomies of the same cultural crisis.
Well, to use simpler language,
both Stravinsky and Schoenberg were after the same thing in different ways.
Stravinsky tried to keep musical progress on the move
by driving tonal and structural ambiguities on and on
to a point of no return, as we will see next week.
Schoenberg, foreseeing this point of no return,
and taking his cue from the Expressionist movement in the other arts,
initiated a clean, total break with tonality altogether,
as well as with syntactic structures based on symmetry.
It's interesting to note that Schoenberg was also a talented painter
(this is one of his self-portraits),
and in those early years of the twentieth century
he was making the same kinds of experiments on canvas
as he was making on music paper.
Actually this particular portrait isn’t half as expressionistic as
a Kokoschka painting a year or two later,
but it’s the only slide I could find for the occasion.
Still it does tell you what I mean, doesn’t it?
We've already referred to some of those early musical experiments,
in Opus 10 and 11, where the break was made and free atonality came to be.
But the clincher was Opus 21
–that wild and spine-chilling masterpiece of expressionism
called &lt;i&gt;Pierrot Lunaire.&lt;/i&gt;
This is a cycle of twenty-one weird poems by Albert Giraud,
–Thrice Seven poems, as they’re called–
set in German for voice and a small group of instruments.
In the course of it, Schoenberg not only goes over the cliff tonally,
but introduces a new ambiguous wrinkle,
which he called &lt;i&gt;Sprechstimme&lt;/i&gt; (Spoken-voice),
whereby the singer doesn't exactly sing.
That is, each vocal note is clearly indicated,
but the singer, having once attacked that note, must immediately let it fall or rise,
as in speaking, producing something halfway between singing and speaking.
And this is indicated as you can see by those
crosses on each note of the vocal line, on the note stems.
In other words, if you can remember back four lectures ago
to our discussion of heightened speech,
the ictus of a syllable such as ma is not prolonged into a note (MA)
but allowed to glide away like ma or ma.
And this naturally strikes yet another blow at tonality,
and lends a new spookiness to the music.
For instance one of the songs
is entitled &lt;i&gt;Der kranker Mond&lt;/i&gt; (“The sick moon”).
It’s written for voice and flute only and begins like this.
Stranger, begins like Tristan.
&lt;i&gt;Du nächtig todeskranker Mond,&lt;/i&gt; (You dark moon, deathly ill,
&lt;i&gt;Dort auf des Himmels schwarzem Pfühl,&lt;/i&gt; (Laid over heaven's sable pillow,
&lt;i&gt;Dein Blick, so fiebernd übergroß,&lt;/i&gt; (Your fever-swollen gaze
&lt;i&gt;Bannt mich wie fremde Melodie.&lt;/i&gt; Enchants me like alien melody.)
I wouldn’t dare to try that in public, if were not for the fact that my
naturally out-of-tune voice lends itself to &lt;i&gt;Sprechstimme.&lt;/i&gt;
When I sing normal music comes out the &lt;i&gt;Sprechstimme.&lt;/i&gt;
In any case, it was soon to become clear
that free atonality was in itself a point of no return.
It &lt;i&gt;seemed&lt;/i&gt; to fulfill the conditions for musical progress:
it seemed to continue the line of romantic expressivity in a subjective way,
from Wagner and Brahms through Bruckner and Mahler;
the expression-ism seemed logical, the atonality inevitable.
But then: a dead end.
Where did one go from here, having abandoned all the rules?
For one thing, the lack of constraints
and the resulting ungoverned freedom
produced a music that was extremely difficult for the listener to follow,
in either form or content.
And this remained true in spite of all the brilliant and profuse
inner structures to be found in this piece –canonic procedures, inverted phrases,
retrogrades, and all the rest.
And secondly, it was not easy for the composer to maintain his atonality,
because of that innate tonal drive we all share universally.
This was particularly true of Schoenberg,
who was so gifted with his own innate musicality.
Even the last song of &lt;i&gt;Pierrot Lunaire&lt;/i&gt; yield to old triadic harmony,
when Pierrot, or Schoenberg, if you will,
sings 'O Alter Duft aus Märchenzeit":
"Old fragrance from Once-Upon-a Time".
And at that moment, it sounds like this:
“O Alter Duft
aus Märchenzeit”.
That is a really touching moment, that yearning for the universal.
It’s a moment that could have been Mahler.
Now, for all these reasons, some new system had to be found.
A new system for controlling the amorphousness of free-floating atonality.
And so Schoenberg gradually evolved his famous serial method.
Gradually.
Already before this and his Opus 19, which is a seven piano pieces,
he was already veering toward a concept of the twelve chromatic tones,
whereby they’re all used constantly,
but with no particular tonal relationship to one another.
You understand what I mean?
It’s like the first piece of this set, which begins like this.
Now, in the course of those two bars, all twelve tones are indeed employed.
But there’s still a ghost of tonality hanging over them.
In the chromaticism is still, just barely, but still contained.
Listen to the melody alone.
Perfectly tonal, in fact it outlines a B-major triad.
With this one not very startling appoggiatura,
which resolves as conventionality as in Mozart or Mahler.
And as it continues, the chromatic wandering
is not very different from the Berlioz’ Romeo and Juliet music we heard last week.
It’s still suggested to be major, right?
With the difference as in the accompaniment which has nothing at all to do with B-Major
And now listen how it goes on.
What is resonating in that phrase?
Do you remember &lt;i&gt;Tristan&lt;/i&gt;?
And now listen again to Schoenberg.
"Son of Tristan"
or is it "Tristan rise again"?
I think maybe "Tristan's Revenge".
Whichever it is, there is still no escaping the past.
The need for a control-system is pressingly clear.
And so, by the early 1920's
Schoenberg had arrived at a twelve-tone &lt;i&gt;system&lt;/i&gt; which guaranteed,
or your money back, that you would never slip into old tonal habits
(no more B major, no more &lt;i&gt;Tristan&lt;/i&gt;),
and more important, that any piece you wrote could be consistent,
could make sense formally and stylistically, from beginning to end.
In other words, aesthetic order has been restored.
Here is the big example, another piano piece but a crucial one from 1923
and, coincidentally, Opus 23
–this happens very frequently in the course of Schoenberg's writing
that his opus numbers correspond to the year in which they were written.
So here we have Opus 23, written in 1923, in which all twelve tones
are presented in a pre-established order, or series,
with no single tone repeated until all other eleven have been sounded.
Now this is the ground rule of the whole system
–vastly oversimplified naturally, but we haven’t got all night
or all week to teach the whole twelve system–
but that is the basic the ground rule
which serves to give each of the twelve tones its equal rights;
its like establishing a pure democracy among them.
Of course the piece doesn't begin with a naked presentation of that twelve-tone set
or "row", as it's called,
(tone row, that’s the usual term)
any more than the "Moonlight Sonata" begins with
the presentation of the C-sharp minor scale.
The first thing actually heard is a transformation of the row
with certain of its notes combined into chords and others used as melody.
In other words, a surface structure has been evolved.
Look at those first two bars and you can see that all twelve notes are present.
Once this row has been presented in its first transformational form,
it's immediately heard again,
but in a new order; that is, the series has now undergone a permutation.
these permutations of the row continue in always new ways,
in new melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic combinations, which we might well call,
in our now-familiar linguistic terms, transformations of transformations.
It's a kind of perpetual variation or metamorphosis,
and all of this through Schoenberg's inventive genius, becomes a piece
with the unexpectedly simple title of &lt;i&gt;Waltz&lt;/i&gt;.
And it goes like this, as you know.
And so on.
Now this history-making little waltz
may not sound so very different in its nontonal style
from earlier examples I played you of &lt;i&gt;free&lt;/i&gt; atonality.
But there is all the difference in the world;
this piece is strictly controlled by its consistent adherence
to the original set of twelve tones.
In a sense,
that tone row performs something like the function of a scale in tonal music
–that is, to provide a basic source of "underlying strings", as the linguists say,
evolving into a deep structure of musical "prose",
out of which this ultimately surface structure arises.
Of course there are lots of other rules of serial music
which have a similar goal of democratizing the twelve tones.
For instance, the extreme top or bottom note of a melodic line automatically
acquires extra importance because of its position, and that’s not democratic.
Likewise, a note that lasts longer than its neighbors will seem more important
or into its extra duration, and so there compensatory rules
that required the extreme highs or lows of a line to be of specially short duration
which prevents them of getting too much attention and,
conversely, long lasting notes must never be at the very top or the very bottom.
These "rules", you understand, are not rigid:
they are suggested rules and Schoenberg always made these rules only to be broken.
He was the first one to break them.
And he used to tell his composition students:
Don't compose in my method; learn my method and then just compose.
All great men were rule-breakers from Plato, Stravinsky, Nietzsche and everybody else.
So, to the extend that the row does provide
certain functions analogous to those of a scale in the tonal system,
this twelve tone, or dodecaphonic method
is indeed a viable replacement for tonal composition.
It was such a welcome gift to the crisis-ridden 20th-century composer
that it took instant strong hold, capturing the imagination of such composers
as Alban Berg and Anton Webern, both ardent Schoenberg disciples,
and persisting to this very day (with evolutionary modifications, of course)
in the music of Stockhausen, Boulez, Wuorinen, Kirchner,
Babbitt, Foss, Berio –and sometimes me, though very rarely.
It's as though a new covenant had been formed,
replacing the old one of tonality.
If we think of tonality as a kind of grammatical covenant, or agreement
that there will be &lt;i&gt;sentences in speech&lt;/i&gt;, then certain rules have to be obeyed.
Only recall Alice's bemused sentence: "Do cats eat bats?"
That’s a puzzled but valid sentence.
Then she wonders: "Do bats eat cats?"
A &lt;i&gt;semantic&lt;/i&gt; change, but still grammatically valid.
But if we invert the sentence, by reversing its order,
we get: Bats eat cats do? Which is meaningless and chaotic.
It's as though we took the opening phrase of the "Blue Danube Waltz"
and inverted it into this.
It's weak, though still acceptable.
It’s just lousy.
Maybe we could even call it a metaphor.
But if we invert the &lt;i&gt;second&lt;/i&gt; phrase,
we're in chaos.
It's cats and bats again.
Of course, that last phrase is conceivable as what used to be called "crazy modern music",
just as "Eat do cats bats" is conceivable as a line of crazy modern poetry,
but in both cases there is an obvious crisis in syntax.
A new system of controls is clearly needed,
a new covenant that will guarantee order.
The trouble is
that the new musical "rules" of Schoenberg are not based on innate awareness,
on the intuition of tonal relationships.
They are like rules of an artificial language
–though hopefully a universal language–
and so such rules must be deliberately learned.
This would seem to lead to what used to be called "form without content",
or form at the expense of content
–structuralism for its own sake.
That's exactly what Schoenberg is accused of, for example, in the Soviet Union.
&lt;i&gt;Formalism&lt;/i&gt;, they call it there, and is strictly forbidden to the Soviet composer.
We know that Schoenberg never meant anything of the kind;
he was just too musical
to hold such an attitude, too much of a music-lover.
And no matter how much emphasis he placed on logical structure,
that structure is still derived from the same twelve tones of the harmonic series,
a universal we all share.
And this fact alone would account for Schoenberg's constant
reversion to tonality –whether overt or implied–
as well as his revision to traditional syntactic structures.
Even in this same Opus 23 &lt;i&gt;Waltz&lt;/i&gt; we were just hearing,
where the serial system is being displayed for the first time in history,
we find a passage such as this, with a perfectly symmetrical sequence,
listen to this:
that’s three bars which are repeated in an exact sequence.
And not only is that passage symmetrical
but their hangs over a strong feeling of tonality.
Did you sense that tonal quality, those perfect fifths on the melodic line?
And did you sense the dominant feeling in the accompaniment?
You hear that? And the next bar?
That dominant quality?
And this kind of tonal feeling hunted Schoenberg’s music
and still hunts it right up to the end of his life.
Even his Third Quartet, Opus 30, which is a highly serial work,
opens with repeated four bar phrase’s groups
that aren’t really very far from the procedures of Mozart.
Let’s see if I can play this, you need four hands to play the Quartet, but anyway…
I knew I'll ruin it,
but anyway, you get the idea of
the four bar symmetrical structures that repeated making eight bars?
And it’s even tonal sounding.
Repeated eight times.
It’s almost as though you had E-minor,
and the dominant of E-minor.
Of course that’s ruining the music,
but I’ve just tried to show you the implications of tonality,
that are so strong.
Eight times in a row.
And even in Opus 31, the orchestral variations,
a work rarely played because of its difficulty
for performers and listeners alike.
Even here we find sequences such as this.
What could be more symmetrical?
And that’s symmetrical both tonality and structurally:
left hand, right hand. Clear as that.
And such examples are bound throughout the corpus of Schoenberg’s work.
In fact as late as 1944, in the last decade of his life,
he wrote an entire work in G-minor, key signature and all.
Would you believe that this is
by the same composer whose dodecaphonic system we've been discussing?
There’s a famous quote from Schoenberg in which he says,
"A longing to return to the older style was always vigorous in me;
and from time to time I had to yield to that urge."
He then went on to say that was why
he had written so much tonal music even late in life,
and then dismissed the whole problem by saying
that these stylistic differences, as he called them, aren't really very important.
Imagine, after having spent most of his life tearing the world apart,
turning everything up on its ears, by denying tonality.
Then come out and say ‘Well, that’s I mean about the great things of the world’.
They’re always contradicting themselves.
Of course, there are those who say that Schoenberg wrote this
tonal piece out of desperation to have his music publicly performed;
and indeed,
this Theme and Variations in G Minor was given its premiere performance by
the Boston Symphony under Koussevitzky, who rarely if ever played twelve-tone music,
by Schoenberg or anyone else.
If the story is true, then it’s a heart-breaking story
because, far from connoting anything deprecatory
or anything to impugn Schoenberg’s integrity,
it rather illustrates the pitiful situation of an unplayed master,
seventy years old, most of whose major works were yet to be performed
by most of our major orchestras, and that it includes the great Violin Concerto,
the Piano Concerto, and the Five Pieces for Orchestra
–which may well be his orchestral masterpiece–
to say nothing about Opus 31 &amp; Variations.
But in whatever sense that story is true,
it cannot detract from the evident truth
of Schoenberg's continuing rocky romance with tonality,
right up to his death in 1951.
How else can we account for his orchestral transcriptions of Bach and Händel,
and even Brahms's G-minor Piano Quartet, which he also made late in his life?
You see, he loved music with such passion
that the magnetic pull of tonality could never lose its hold on him.
And it conditioned his own music, to a smaller or greater extent,
even through the whole revolutionary development of his twelve-tone method.
And it seems, somehow, inevitable that the sense of tonality
hunts his most beautiful works.
Even when it’s not demonstrably present, still hunts those works
by its conspicuous absence, if you can follow me.
Does that sound paradoxical?
It isn’t at all when you realize
that the twelve notes employed by Schoenberg
are the same all twelve notes employed by everybody else,
derived in the same way from the same natural harmonic series.
They’re the same twelve well-tempered notes of Bach.
Only their universal hierarchy has been destroyed;
or at least an attempt has been made to destroy it.
Schoenberg himself was the first to recognize this all important truth,
and indeed the first to renounce the word atonality entirely,
even to deny the possibility of atonality.
Another paradox? Not at all,
he knew –and we too must have learn from him–
that if ever a true atonality is to be achieved,
some uniquely different basis for it must be found.
The rules of the twelve tone method may be
non-universal and even arbitrary,
but not arbitrary enough to destroy the inherent
tonal relationships among those twelve tones.
Perhaps a real atonality
can be achieved only artificially thru electronic means,
thru a really arbitrary division of the octave space
into something other than the twelve equidistant
intervals of our chromatic scale.
Let’s say thirteen equidistant intervals,
or thirty or three hundred and thirteen,
but not twelve!
Not the twelve tones of Bach, Beethoven and Wagner.
With those twelve universals,
neither Schoenberg nor Berg nor Webern nor anyone
could ever escape the nostalgic yearning
for the deep structures implied by these notes, inherent in this notes.
It’s that &lt;i&gt;O Alter Duft aus Märchenzeit&lt;/i&gt; again.
And it’s precisely this nostalgic yearning quality
that so often makes their music beautiful and moving.
Well, is there possibly the beginning of a clue here to The Unanswered Question?
How does the wild thought strike you that
all music is ultimately, and basically, tonal?
Even when it’s nontonal?
Does this hypothetical notion touch off some innate response in you?
I know it does in me.
So I guess we’ve the same sort of electric charge I always feel when
any two facts intersect and spark an idea.
And the two facts here are the two givens of one series intersecting another:
the harmonic series and any given tone row series.
And while we’re on this subject of serial intersections,
let’s take a moment to remind ourselves
that serial phenomena have been around for a long time.
It’s far back, let’s say, as the 13th Century
in the use of &lt;i&gt;cantus firmus&lt;/i&gt;
and even including some significant stops are actual tone rows
by would you believed Bach, Mozart and Beethoven.
Here for example is the subject of
Bach’s F-minor fugue from the 1rst Book of the Well-Tempered Clavichord.
Now that extraordinarily chromatic subject
encompasses nine out of the twelve chromatic tones,
that’s 3/4 of all the notes we possess!
And there’s only one repetition in it:
the first note
–that one.
All the others are different.
What’s even more extraordinary is that in the course
of the immediately ensuing fugal answer,
Bach automatically picks up the three remaining tones.
So that within these few bars, all twelve tones are present and accounted for.
It’s not a Schoenberg row, but it’s remarkably close.
And what about this spooky passage from Mozart’s Don Giovanni?
&lt;i&gt;Tu m’invistasti a cena,&lt;/i&gt; (You invited me to dinner,
&lt;i&gt;Il tuo dover or sai.&lt;/i&gt; now you know your duty)
But all twelve notes are in there, all twelve of them.
Clear as day.
Although the effect is very nocturnal.
And in fact, in my voice is something of a nightmare.
And what about Beethoven’s Ninth?
That sudden obstruct movement, in the Finale,
of recognizing the divine presence?
&lt;i&gt;Ihr stuerzt nieder, Millionen?&lt;/i&gt; (Do you come crashing down, you millions?
&lt;i&gt;Ahnest du den Schoepfer, Welt?&lt;/i&gt; Do you sense the Creators presence, world?
&lt;i&gt;Such ihn ueberm Sternenzelt&lt;/i&gt; Seek Him above the starry firmament)
Fantastic, that passage!
And again, it’s not Schoenberg.
And immediately it presents eleven notes out of the possible twelve,
but it is a row in the sense that, for that brief duration,
Beethoven suspends all tonal harmony, leaving only harmonic implications!
That’s what makes it so suddenly awesome, unrooted in earth!
Extraterrestrial!
So that when earthly harmony does return,
that incandescent A-major triad does indeed cry ‘Brueder’
(Universal brothers).
All emerging together from that non-earthly divinity.
I’ve strayed from Schoenberg but not without intention.
For in going back to Bach and Beethoven, we have revealed to us
a striking new ambiguity –which I was only suggesting earlier thru the
image of intersecting currents.
Perhaps you can sense more strongly now what I meant by
old music being tonal even when it isn’t.
These earlier attempts of tone rows, we’ve been hearing,
are clearly attempts to transcendent tonality;
to evoke mystery by
momentarily denying or ignoring
the universal roots of harmony, which are born in the harmonic series.
And this sudden rootlessness, however brief, in every case
suggests the mystic, the un-earthly, something unrooted in earth:
whether is Mozart’s ghostly stone guest
or Beethoven’s evocation of the Godhead.
What then happens to music when Schoenberg, for example,
constructs a whole system based on that rootlessness?
Does that system, therefore, makes all his music
and that of his followers unqualifiedly mystic?
Or only unqualifiedly intellectualized?
What is happen to a Keats call The Poetry of Earth, &lt;i&gt;which ceases never&lt;/i&gt;?
Is Schoenberg an end? Or a beginning?
These are some of the problems we’ll be confronting in our next and final lecture.
Right now what interests us is the fascinating ambiguity
between the planned antitonal functions of the twelve tone row
and the inevitable tonal harmonic implications
that innately reside in it “Do what you will”.
Of course a composer may
construct any row at his own pleasure
either to emphasize harmonic relationships or to deemphasize them,
even to try to erase them.
But either way, the relationships remain whether overt as in Bach,
where you hear them actually,
or whether they’re implied as in the Beethoven’s
or at anybody’s guest.
And so there is always that resulting ambiguous
tug of war between being rooted and being partly-rooted.
But music can never be totally rootless
as long as there are twelve equal tones in an octave.
Not thirteen. Twelve.
For example, one of the most famous pre-Schoenberg’s attempts
at the twelve tone row, dating from 1850’s,
it’s the opening theme of Franz Liszt’s Faust Symphony.
Here all twelve tones are immediately revealed.
Again with no harmonic support.
And with no repetitions.
A pure tone row, and as mystic as you could wish.
But it’s so constructed that each group of three notes,
in itself, spells out a chord.
You see the first three notes?
That spells out a chord, a so-called augment triad.
So that the whole row winds up outlining four such chords.
And four times three is twelve.
Now the harmonic implications in that row are so strong
that obviously the whole piece is going to be filled with augmented triads
as long as that row has anything to say about it,
and indeed it is filled with them.
All through, all three movements.
Now let’s jump ahead seventy years to Schoenberg’s
crucial little waltz, that same Opus 23 which
officially announced the row as a linear string, and what do we find?
Listen.
Harmonic implications galore.
The most obvious of which is curiously enough that same augmented triad.
In fact as we examine the piece in terms of its groupings of the row,
permutation by permutation,
we find each new one clearly enunciating that augmented triad, in one way or another.
Like the very beginning.
Do you hear it?
There it is, right the way in the left hand.
You can see it boxed on the screen.
Here is it again, the next permutation.
Those three notes which are boxed form the same augmented triad.
And it goes on.
And here it is again boxed!
And here it is again.
You see what I mean? Over and over again, that triad.
And now you’d see what I mean by rooted and partly-rooted.
Rejecting and embracing at the same time;
denial and commitment.
And this conflict
was what engendered the most traumatic and most critical semantic ambiguity
we’d found so far in all of music.
Is this perhaps
why Schoenberg has, still to this day, not found his public?
By which I mean a true mass public which loves his music.
How many music lovers do you know
who can say today in this fiftieth year of Opus 23
that they love to hear it?
That they listen with love to it as they might listen to Mahler or Stravinsky?
Is it not, perhaps, that the ambiguity is simple to huge to be grasped?
Too self-negating to be perceived with our only human ears?
Ears which are after all tuned to our innate expectations
in spite of all conditionings or reinforcements?
Let’s put it in another way.
Have we not finally stumbled at an ambiguity
that cannot produce aesthetically positive results?
Is there conceivably such a thing as a negative ambiguity?
And why people ask me constantly why do we listen with real response,
with innate affective response to the music of Alban Berg,
the most fervent of Schoenberg’s disciples and an equally committed twelve tone composer?
Why does Berg succeed in producing
a positive ambiguity out of the same tonal/atonal contradiction?
Is it only that Berg is so much more theatrical a composer than Schoenberg?
That we’re overwhelmed by the sheer drama of an opera like &lt;i&gt;Wozzeck&lt;/i&gt;?
Many intelligent and fine critical minds have claimed this to be true,
and to some degree it is true.
I was planning to demonstrate
this point by singing some of Marie’s more dramatic moments in &lt;i&gt;Wozzeck&lt;/i&gt;,
but my voice ran out
and besides even if it doesn’t ran out is just too ugly,
I couldn’t do it to a piece a love so much.
As a matter of fact, a good performance of &lt;i&gt;Wozzeck&lt;/i&gt;
–which is not easy to come by—
can be a shattering experience in the theatre, musically and dramatically.
But there’s more to it than that, the fact is
that Berg somehow found its own personal way to deal
with that ultimate ambiguity of deep rootedness and surface rootedness.
Rooted and partly-rooted.
But it's not only in his operatic works
that he succeeded so remarkably where others haven't.
His sense of drama,
that deft and just balancing of these incompatible elements,
tonal and nontonal, carry over into all his compositions.
For example, his very last composition
the beautiful Violin Concerto of 1935, solved that agonizing ambiguity,
to-be-or-not-to-be-tonal, in an equally satisfying way.
First of all, Berg chose a tone row for the whole work
which is filled with tonal implications.
Just look and listen.
Notice that the first nine notes of that row
all proceed in intervals of the third
mellifluous thirds, major and minor thirds.
Moreover, these thirds are symmetrically arranged, in "chiasmus" fashion,
if you recall, according to a pattern of AB:BA
–that is, minor-major: major-minor, etc.
And what's more, the triads
that are formed by these thirds automatically alternate
–minor, major, minor, major–
insuring all mellifluous possibilities.
And what's more, every other note of these nine
form perfect fifths,
and the first four of those fifths
happen to correspond to the four open strings of the violin,
a vey handy tool to have around in a violin concerto.
In fact, the first notes the violin plays in the concerto are these very open strings.
And then, starting with the ninth tone of the row,
we find that the last four notes
present us with our old Debussyan friend, the tritone;
three whole steps,
which if you remember, generated Debussy's whole-tone scale.
So, all in all, Berg has picked himself a row
that has very strong roots in music's traditional past.
And Berg adds to the strength of that traditional feeling
with one device after another:
a Bachian inversion, a Beethovenian fragmentation,
a Schumannesque rhythmic ambiguity,
to say nothing of that sine qua non of all Viennese composers,
the waltz,
which in this case is a rustic peasant waltz
or "Ländler", as they called in Austria.
Listen to a minute or so of this Scherzo section
as played on records by Henryk Szeryng with Rafael Kubelik conducting,
and compare this waltz music with the little Opus 23 waltz of Schoenberg
–no: strike that. Don't compare it with anything;
just enjoy it
for its mellifluous, tender Wienerischness.
Listen at the horn?
That’s the phrase.
Completely tonal Ländler.
All done with thirds.
It's a deliciousness!
Practically a &lt;i&gt;Sacher torte mit Schlag.&lt;/i&gt;
Viennese whipped cream.
And yet strict,
strict twelve-tone writing!
Only it exists somehow
in a tonal universe where it's accessible to us in all its warmth and charm.
Did you noticed how tonally that movement ended?
And that unmistakably tonic final chord
is nothing but the first four notes of Berg's tone row,
a lovely pile-up of sweet thirds.
And so, the crucial ambiguity of tonality versus nontonality
manages to create a thoroughly positive aesthetic surface.
That’s one way of doing it, there’re millions of ways.
That’s one.
Needless to say, the Violin Concerto is not all
sweetness and &lt;i&gt;Schlagobers&lt;/i&gt;; anything but.
It has stretches of almost unbearable intensity,
dramatic brilliance and Olympian calm.
It is, in a very real sense, a tragic work.
I didn't mean to get this deeply involved in it
–after all, we were really talking about Schoenberg–
but I'd dearly love to share with you just one other moment of the piece,
which presents the tonal-atonal ambiguity
in a particularly positive way.
This section is the closing Adagio of the concerto,
and is chiefly concerned with developing the tail end of the tone row,
which, as you remember, consists of these four notes,
spanning the tritone
–the &lt;i&gt;diabolus in musica&lt;/i&gt;, remember?
But far from being the devil here, it is on the contrary angelicism itself;
because, as it turns out, these four notes happen to be identical
with the first phrase of Bach's Chorale, "Est Ist Genug",
which you all know and love.
Or don’t you know?
This is one of the most extraordinary phrases; that first phrase alone
with its tritonic implications of both, melody and bass line.
&lt;i&gt;Es ist genung:&lt;/i&gt; (It is enough:
&lt;i&gt;Herr, wenn es dir gefällt,&lt;/i&gt; (Lord, whenever you want
&lt;i&gt;so spane mich doch aus.&lt;/i&gt; release me from this yoke)
And that's exactly the way Berg uses it.
It comes at the point where
there is just has been a violent climax of shattering hammer blows.
And as it is subsiding,
we begin to hear emerging from the day bree
murmurings of that four note phrase
intertwined with these hammer blows which are fading away,
and these four notes gradually become more and more distinct,
until suddenly the solo violin is playing the choral itself.
And it plays all three phrases that I just played you from Bach before,
note for note.
Of course other things are going now at the same time
–it’s not just the violin playing the chorale–
such as the counterpoint or those thirds from the first part of the tone row,
and the canon in the violas and other things that I won’t bother you with.
But then the most amazing thing happens,
a totally unexpected event in the twelve tone work:
that chorale is suddenly repeated by four clarinets
imitating the sound of a baroque organ
in pure B-flat major Bachian harmony.
Had a little wrong notes hovering around in the background,
but those four clarinets are absolutely pure.
Those three whole phrases,
and then the solo violin takes up the next phrase
again with dissonant counterpoint,
and again the clarinets repeat the phrase in the Bach version
and so on to the end of the chorale.
It’s one of the most astonishing passages in all music,
especially as it grows to its own dissonant climax,
finally subsiding into an equally astonishing
serene close in –guess what? – B-flat major!
I wish there would be time to hear all that but,
let’s at least listen to the beginning of this section,
starting from the preceding climax of hammer blows.
You hear the four notes?
Listen to the violas…
Now
&lt;i&gt;Ich fahr’ in’s Himmels Haus...&lt;/i&gt; (I'm going to Heaven...
&lt;i&gt;Es ist genung&lt;/i&gt; It is enough)
It’s a sin to break into this celestial vision,
but if these particularly demanding lectures
are ever to achieve its point of illumination,
it’d better be soon.
But in what way I’ve been asking myself?
Can I shed further light on the massive problems of this Ultimate Ambiguity?
Is it enough to have examined its origins,
to have identified the great tonal split,
to have traced one side of the split into the development of a Great Method
that changed the history of music,
to have attempted a dispassionate assessment of Arnold Schoenberg
only to have Alban Berg walk off with all the honors?
No, there is further light to be shed,
and that light is to be found in the mind
and in the prophetic soul of Gustav Mahler.
Why Mahler?
What has Mahler to do with Schoenberg?
A great deal,
and far beyond the obvious fact
that he supported and encouraged his young colleague Schoenberg
during those early years of the century.
After this brief pause we are going to hear Mahler,
and in particular his last will and testament,
the final Adagio of his Ninth Symphony.
And I think that after Mahler’s Ninth,
things may be suddenly clearer,
and we may have a new perspective.
Think about that for a few minutes.
Over your low-calorie cigarette,
and think about that for a minute too.
If you really have been thinking during this break,
you’ll surely have some sharp questions in mind.
First of all,
why is Mahler's Ninth Symphony his last will and testament?
What about the Tenth,
that highly significant unfinished document?
And then,
why play the Mahler's Ninth to end a lecture on the 20th century crisis?
Isn't this back-tracking?
Having moved with Berg and Schoenberg into the midcentury,
why now retrogress to that fateful year of 1908?
Because, like the Ives' &lt;i&gt;Unanswered Question&lt;/i&gt;,
which was written in the same year,
this Ninth of Mahler is also
a great question; but it's more: it contains a deeply revealing answer.
I had planned to prepare you for this music with
my customary analysis at the piano,
going in depth into the dualisms that tore Mahler apart:
composer/conductor, Christian/Jew, sophisticate/naif, provincial/cosmopolitan
–all of which resulted in the musical schizo-dynamics of his textures,
and his ambivalent tonal attitudes.
I had also hoped, by a detailed analysis of his treatment of appoggiaturas,
for example, to reach the essence of the tonal crisis,
through examining his nonresolution of tensions,
his reluctant attempts to let go of tonality
–all of which does shed further light on the
inevitable split that was to occur between Schoenberg and Stravinsky.
And so I picked up the score again, after some years away from it,
filled with the sense of Mahler's torture at knowing that he was the end of the line,
the last point in the great symphonic arc that began with Haydn and Mozart,
finished with him.
I was again aware that
it was his destiny to sum up the whole story of Austro-Germanic music,
to recapitulate it and tie it up
–not in a pretty bow,
but in a fearful knot made out of his own nerves and sinews.
But while restudying this work, especially the final movement,
I found more answers than I had expected
–as we always do when we return to the study of a great work.
And the most startling answer,
the most important one –because it illuminates our whole century from then to now–
is this:
that ours is the century of death, and Mahler is its musical prophet.
I want to talk to you about that answer
without the piano, without visual aids
and on a somewhat different level of discourse from the one we’ve been following,
because this Ninth symphony
offers us a great semantic expansion &amp; an infinitely broader interpretation
of what we’ve been calling The Twentieth Century Crisis.
Why is our century so uniquely death-ridden?
Couldn’t we say this of other centuries as well?
What about the XIXth Century, so poetically preoccupied with death
whether as latest Wagner’s Liebestod or as earliest Keats’ &lt;i&gt;Nightingale&lt;/i&gt;?
&lt;i&gt;I have been half in love with easeful Death,&lt;/i&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Call’d him soft names in many a mused rhyme..&lt;/i&gt;
Yes, true. Poetically.
Symbolically true.
And haven’t all centuries, all human histories
been a long record of the struggle to survive,
to deal with the problem of mortality?
Again yes.
But never before has mankind been confronted
by the problem of surviving global death.
The extinction of the whole race.
And Mahler was not alone in his vision;
there’ve been other great prophets of our struggle:
Freud, Einstein, and Marx have also prophesied.
As have Spengler and Wittgenstein.
Even Malthus and Rachel Carson.
All later day Isaiahs and Saint Johns,
all preaching the same sermon in different terms:
mend your ways, the apocalypse is at hand.
Rilke said it too "Du musst dein Leben ändern" (You must change your life)
The 20th century has been a badly-written drama, from the very beginning;
the opposite of a Greek drama.
Act I:
Greed and hypocrisy leading to a genocidal World War.
Then post-war, injustice and hysteria.
A boom, a crash, totalitarianism.
Act II:
Greed and hypocrisy leading to a genocidal World War.
Post-war, injustice and hysteria.
Boom, crash, totalitarianism.
Act III: Greed and hysteria
–I don't dare continue.
And what have been the antidotes?
Logical positivism, existentialism,
galloping technology,
the flight into outer space, the doubting of reality,
and overall a well-bred paranoia,
most recently on display in the high places of Washington, D.C.
And our &lt;i&gt;personal&lt;/i&gt; antidotes:
Making it,
dope,
subcultures and counter-cultures,
turning on, turning off,
marking time and making money.
A rash of new religious movements from Guruism to Billy Grahamism.
And a rash of new art movements, from concrete poetry to the silences of John Cage.
A thaw here, a purge there.
And all under the same aegis, the angel of planetary death.
What do you do if you know all this back in 1908,
if you're a hypersensitive like Mahler,
and instinctively know what's coming?
You prophesy;
and others pick up your trail.
In one way or another,
Mahler lies at the essential core of
all the significant music written after him, whether tonal or nontonal.
Even such diverse composers as Varèse
and Dallapiccola are inconceivable without Mahler.
Shostakovich and Britten are at their greatest when they’re most like Mahler.
And so both Schoenberg and Stravinsky,
Mahler's two continuing prophets, utterly different as they were,
spent their lives both struggling
in their opposite ways to keep musical progress alive, to avert the Evil Day.
In fact, all the truly great works of our century have been
born of despair or of protest, or of a refuge from both.
But anguish informs them all.
Think of Sartre's &lt;i&gt;Nausée&lt;/i&gt;,
Camus' &lt;i&gt;Stranger&lt;/i&gt;, Gide's &lt;i&gt;Counterfeiters&lt;/i&gt;,
&lt;i&gt;The Sun Also Rises,&lt;/i&gt;
&lt;i&gt;The Magic Mountain&lt;/i&gt;, and &lt;i&gt;Dr. Faustus&lt;/i&gt;,
&lt;i&gt;The Last of the Just&lt;/i&gt;, even Lolita.
And Picasso's &lt;i&gt;Guernica&lt;/i&gt;,
Chirico, Dali.
And Eliot's &lt;i&gt;Cocktail Party&lt;/i&gt;,
&lt;i&gt;Murder in the Cathedral&lt;/i&gt;, and &lt;i&gt;the Four Quartets&lt;/i&gt;.
Auden's &lt;i&gt;Age of Anxiety&lt;/i&gt;, and that supreme work of his,
&lt;i&gt;For the Time Being.&lt;/i&gt;
And Pasternak and Neruda,
and Sylvia Plath.
And on the screen, &lt;i&gt;La Dolce Vita&lt;/i&gt;
and on the stage, &lt;i&gt;Waiting for Godot&lt;/i&gt;.
And &lt;i&gt;Wozzeck, Lulu, Moses and Aaron&lt;/i&gt;,
and Brecht's &lt;i&gt;Mother Courage&lt;/i&gt;.
And, yes, also &lt;i&gt;Eleanor Rigby&lt;/i&gt;,
and &lt;i&gt;A Day in the Life&lt;/i&gt;, and &lt;i&gt;She's Leaving Home&lt;/i&gt;.
These too are great works born of despair, touched with death.
And Mahler foresaw it all.
That’s why he so desperately resisted entering this 20th century,
the age of death, of the end of faith.
And the bitter irony was that he did succeed in avoiding the century
only by himself dying prematurely, in 1911.
It’s very strange how the pieces of the puzzle interlock;
Mahler and his message pervade everything he touches.
Think of Kindertotenlieder, the death Rückert’s children
and then of Mahler’s own.
And Alban Berg, who adored Mahler,
dedicated its &lt;i&gt;Wozzeck&lt;/i&gt; to Mahler’s widow, Alma.
And his &lt;i&gt;Violin Concerto&lt;/i&gt; to the memory of her beautiful young daughter,
Manon Gropius.
It’s all tied-in with death.
For instance, this Concerto we heard was Berg’s last work;
he died the same year, 85, exactly the same age of which Mahler had died.
The coincidence is multiplied, but, let’s not be tempted into psychic mysticism
–the facts are potent enough.
When Berg as a young man
happened to hear the performance of Mahler’s Ninth,
he immediately wrote his wife, back in Vienna, that he had just heard
“the greatest music of his life” or some words to that effect.
I feel these connections very strongly and personally.
A few years ago, when I was
first reintroducing Mahler’s music to his own city of Vienna
–where of course had it been banned for years by the Nazis–
there was Frau Berg, the radiantly, beautiful aged widow
sitting in rapture at every rehearsal.
We became acquainted, and she became my living link back to the death written
intercrossing of Berg, Schoenberg and Mahler.
As did Alma Mahler herself, who
attended my Mahler Festival’s rehearsals in New York.
And now I began to feel myself in direct contact with Mahler’s message.
Today we know what that message was.
And it was the Ninth Symphony that spread the news,
but it was bad news, and the world did not care to hear it.
That's the real reason for the fifthy years of neglect
that Mahler's music suffered after his death
Not the usual excuses we always hear: that the music is too long,
too difficult, too bombastic.
It was simply too true,
telling something too dreadful to hear.
What exactly was this news? What was it that Mahler saw?
Three kinds of death.
First, his own imminent death
of which he was intensely aware.
(The opening bars of this Ninth Symphony
are actually an imitation of the arrhythmia of his failing heartbeat.)
And second, he saw the death of tonality,
which for him meant the death of music itself, music as he knew it and loved it.
All his last pieces are kinds of farewells to music, as well as to life;
think only of &lt;i&gt;Das Lied von der Erde&lt;/i&gt; with its final "Abschied." ("Goodbye")
And that controversial unfinished Tenth Symphony
–even that one, which tried to take a tentative step into the Schoenbergian future,
and which has undergone so many attempts at completion–
even that Tenth remains for me basically the one completed movement,
which is yet another heartbreaking Adagio saying Farewell.
But it was one farewell too many;
I'm convinced that Mahler could never have finished the whole symphony,
even if he had lived.
He had said it all in the Ninth.
And third, his third and most important vision:
was the death of society, of our Faustian culture.
Now, if Mahler knew this,
and his message is so clear,
how do we, knowing it too, manage to survive?
Why are we still here, struggling to go on?
We are now face to face with the truly Ultimate Ambiguity
which is the human spirit.
This is the most fascinating ambiguity of all: that as each of us grows up,
the mark of our maturity is that we learn to accept our mortality;
and yet we persist in our search for immortality.
We may believe it's all transient, even that it's all over;
yet we believe a future. We &lt;i&gt;believe&lt;/i&gt;.
We emerge from a cinema after three hours of the most abject
degeneracy in a film such as &lt;i&gt;La Dolce Vita&lt;/i&gt;,
and we emerge on wings, from the sheer creativity of it;
we can fly on, to a future.
And the same is true after witnessing the hopelessness of &lt;i&gt;Godot&lt;/i&gt; in the theater,
or after the aggressive violence of &lt;i&gt;The Rite of Spring&lt;/i&gt; in the concert hall,
or even after listening to the bittersweet young cynicism of an album called &lt;i&gt;Revolver&lt;/i&gt;,
we have wings to fly on.
We have to believe in that kind of creativity. I know I do.
If I didn't, why would I be bothering to give these lectures?
Certainly not to sit here and make a public announcement of the Apocalypse.
There must be something in us, and in me,
that makes me want to continue; and to teach is to believe in continuing.
To share with you critical feelings about the past,
to try to describe and assess the present,
all that implies a firm belief in a future.
I hope that answers the earlier question of why I am ending with Mahler
a lecture that has been mainly on Schoenberg.
Because Schoenberg is one of the
great examples of the human spirit in our century,
that spirit which is, after all, our only hope.
He is a prototype of Ambiguous Man,
compulsively engineering its own destruction
and, simultaneously, flying on into the future.
We will find the same true of Stravinsky, in our next and final lecture.
And all of this Ultimate Ambiguity
is clearly to be heard in the finale of Mahler's Ninth symphony,
which is a sonic presentation of death itself,
and which paradoxically reanimates us every time we hear it.
As you listen to this finale, try to be aware
of what has just preceded it: three other gigantic movements,
each one a farewell of its own.
The first movement in itself has been like a great novel,
a tortured saga of tenderness and terror
of tortured counterpoint and harmonic resignation;
its been a farewell to love, to D major,
a farewell to the tonic.
In the second movement, a scherzo which is a sort of super-Ländler,
we have experienced a farewell to the world of Nature,
it's been a a bitter reimagining of simplicity, &lt;i&gt;naiveté&lt;/i&gt;,
the earth-pleasures we recall from adolescence.
Then the third movement, again a kind of scherzo,
but this time grotesque:
a farewell to the world of action, the urban cosmopolitan life
–the cocktail part, the marketplace,
the raucous careers and careenings of success,
of loud and hollow laughter.
And all three of these movements have been trembling on a tonal precipice,
on the edge of death.
Only then comes the fourth and last movement, the Adagio,
a final farewell.
It takes the form of a prayer, Mahler's last chorale,
his closing hymn, so to speak;
a super prayer for the restoration of life, of tonality, of faith.
This is tonality unashamed,
presented in all aspects ranging from
the diatonic simplicity of the hymn tune that opens it
through every possible chromatic ambiguity.
It's also a passionate prayer,
moving from one climax to another,
each more searing than the last.
But there are no solutions.
And between these surges of prayer,
there is intermittently a sudden coolness,
a wide-spaced transparency, like an icy burning
–a Zen-like immobility of pure meditation.
This is a whole other world of prayer,
of quiet acceptance. But again,
there are no solutions.
Then &lt;i&gt;Heftig ausbrechend!&lt;/i&gt; ("with a violent outburst!") he writes,
again the despairing breaking out of the chorale
with greatly magnified intensity.
This is the dual Mahler,
back to his Western prayer, and then again freezing into his Eastern one.
This vacillation is his final duality.
In the very last return of the hymn
he is close to prostration;
it's all he can give in prayer, a sobbing, sacrificial last try.
Suddenly that climax fails,
unachieved –the one that &lt;i&gt;might&lt;/i&gt; have worked,
the one that might have brought solutions.
This last desperate reach falls short of its goal,
subsides into a hint of resignation, then another hint, then into resignation itself.
And so we come to the final incredible page.
And this page, I think,
is the closest we have ever come, in any work of art,
to experience the very act of dying, of giving it all up.
The slowness of this page is terrifying:
&lt;i&gt;Adagissimo&lt;/i&gt;, he writes,
the slowest possible musical direction;
and if that word weren’t enough then writes &lt;i&gt;langsam&lt;/i&gt; (slow),
&lt;i&gt;ersterbend&lt;/i&gt; (dying away),
&lt;i&gt;zögernd&lt;/i&gt; (holding back, hesitating);
and as if all those were not enough to indicate the near stoppage of time,
he adds &lt;i&gt;äusserst langsam&lt;/i&gt; (extremely slow) in the very last bars.
It is terrifying, and paralyzing, as the strands of sound disintegrate.
We hold on to them, hovering between hope and submission.
And one by one,
these spidery strands connecting us to life melt away,
vanish from our fingers even as we hold them.
We cling to them as they dematerialize;
we are holding two,
then one,
and suddenly none.
For a petrifying moment there is only silence.
Then again, a strand,
a broken strand,
two strands,
one...
none.
&lt;i&gt;We are half in love with easeful death...&lt;/i&gt;
&lt;i&gt;now more than ever seems it rich to die,&lt;/i&gt;
&lt;i&gt;to cease upon the midnight with no pain...&lt;/i&gt;
And in ceasing,
we lose it all.
And in Mahler’s ceasing,
we have gained everything.