Keith has been talking about this moment
where we had a glass of cherry with
Professor Friston for about the last
four years and our dream has been
realized today.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So, pleasure to meet you.
It's absolutely been a pleasure.
&gt;&gt; Cheers.
&gt;&gt; You mentioned consciousness which you
shouldn't really do with me but
if we stay here for long enough for more
than 5 minutes uh we will ultimately
become completely entangled. We will not
become one. We'll still have a We'll
still have Well, actually Chris Fields
thinks you would become one. But uh is
evolution an intelligent process? It's
certainly a free energy minimizing
process. You know, it is just basing
model selection.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's like is is the planet
intelligent.
&gt;&gt; I don't see the weather planning. I
don't see evolution planning. It doesn't
think about its future.
&gt;&gt; Life is the intensive property of matter
and intelligence is the extensive
property. not an ensemble of universes.
Um, well, of course, for the purpose of
this argument, uh, there's only one
state of the univer at any one time. I'm
not sure this is correct, and I don't
want to disappoint you. So,
&gt;&gt; don't worry. It's well beyond my
lifetime when that will happen. If
you're going to make a difference, it's
really understanding how to use all the
marvelous engineering that we've
witnessed in terms of generative AI and
large language models and the like um in
the service of understanding the
principles that underwrite natural
intelligence and deploying that
understanding either to make life better
fun
&gt;&gt; um or to underwrite sustainability in a
slightly more sort of um uh um political
way or to deploy it. you which is why I
got into this game in the context of um
mental well-being and um um
computational psychiatry to quote
Fineman that which I cannot create I do
not understand that means we have to be
able to create things that suffer
&gt;&gt; um which means that we need to
understand the principles of natural
intelligence
&gt;&gt; I don't know if you saw I interviewed um
Yoshio Benjio
&gt;&gt; all right
&gt;&gt; and um I used the term epistemic
foraging a few times and he said I I
love that term I love that term And
where did it come from? Professor
Friston.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Epistemic foraging. It's
what we do.
&gt;&gt; It's what we do.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's epistemic foraging. It's
epistmic foraging.
&gt;&gt; There are certain causal forces in our
universe that are at a distance. Those
usually um mediated by electromagnetic
radiation or magnetic fields in this
particular instance. And that really
sort of complicates the way in which we
construe all the cause effect structures
that we have to model in our brain.
Because if I was a simple little virus
or a little bacterium, I wouldn't have
to worry about electric fields and
seeing things or hearing anything, my
world would just be that world that I
could touch literally. It can just be my
next door neighbors which leads to a
very particular kind of Markoff blanket
structure an ecosystem of Markoff
blankets um that um precludes
oh certainly uh does not license um some
of the deep structures that we were
talking about earlier on in terms of
strange things. Um so strangeness of a
beautiful sort,
beautiful loops uh to use um um one of
my colleagues um notion rests upon
action at a distance of a very
non-spooky sort that is nicely
exemplified by this compass. So, at the
moment, I don't know of any good maths
that allows you to work out what is the
best thing to do to disambiguate between
this structure and and that structure.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, if you can do that, that that'll be
good.
&gt;&gt; Structure learning.
&gt;&gt; Structure learning
&gt;&gt; to structure learning.
&gt;&gt; Structure learning.
&gt;&gt; Somebody out there help us out.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Human data is shaping the direction of
frontier AI. Yet there's little
visibility about how teams are actually
using it. Our sponsor, Prolific, are
putting together their first report on
human data in AI, and they need
volunteers. It just takes a few minutes
to fill out, and you'll also get early
access to their findings, so you can see
how you compare.
This podcast is supported by Google. Hey
folks, Taylor here, creator of Gemini
CLI. We designed Gemini CLI to be your
collaborative coding partner at the
command line. Think about those tedious
tasks like fixing a tricky bug, adding
documentation, or even writing tests. We
built Gemini CLI to handle all that and
more. It iterates with you to tackle
your most challenging problems. Check
out Gemini CLI on GitHub to get started.
[Music]
MLST is supported by Cyber Fund.
Professor Friston, it is absolutely
amazing to have you back on MLST. And as
you know, um Keith and I are incredibly
fond of you. You've been a big hero of
ours for many years. I think this is the
fourth time
&gt;&gt; that you've been on show.
&gt;&gt; So, welcome, Professor Fen.
&gt;&gt; I've lost count. Uh, but it's lovely to
see you both in person and
congratulations on your recent marriage.
Oh,
&gt;&gt; thank you very much. Thank you very
much.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you know, we were we were just
thinking about this. We we've done these
interviews. Um, the free energy
principle originated around about 2005,
right? And I just kind of wanted to get
a bit of a retrospective from you on
let's say like what have been the
successes so far of the free energy
principle? How's it been going? What
what could have gone better over the
last you know 20 odd years? You know
really just what's your what's your take
on the progress I guess of the free
energy principle? It's a difficult
question to answer um in the sense that
um what are you if you ask me if I'd
made a meal and you've asked me how's
that meal going and did you really enjoy
it when you're doing it you're sort of
in in the middle of it and it's very
difficult to assess so it's been a
journey um I um I do catch myself from
time to time thinking this is the the
right way to think about things whenever
you come across, you know, a phenomena
or a problem or an application
um that seems to just slip in quite
neatly to the overall theoretical
framework. Every time that happens, I
get a little buzz of dopamine and that
you know that consolidates and yeah, I'm
on the right track. I haven't wasted so
much time. There have been times in my
life when when I've realized I'm on the
wrong track. So, I'm used to that. But
for the particular application of uh the
free energy principle, I have yet to
have that. Oh, well that doesn't work.
Then think about it. You know, do do
something else. Um what could have gone
better? Um
I'm not
I'm about this, but um I am sometimes
well I am when I read the free energy
principle is notoriously difficult to
understand. Um
now half of me thinks good because it's
always important to have a slight degree
of magic and mysticism to engage people.
You know if people don't think there's a
challenge that they have accomplished
something by understanding it then
they're not going to be motivated to
inquire and to think about it or indeed
debate debate it. On the other hand, um
the free energy principle is not meant
to be complicated or difficult to
understand. It's actually, you know,
almost toologically simple. Um so that
being able to communicate the free
energy principle in a way that people
find a useful and obvious uh sort of
tool or method to apply um could have I
think gone better. Uh, and that may be
because I'm not very good at keeping
things simple or intuitive.
&gt;&gt; We can attest to that. I think,
&gt;&gt; you know, one thing that's interesting
is I I feel the same way about
probability theory.
&gt;&gt; Like, you know, conditional probability
theory is very easy to write down.
There's really that, you know, you end
up with the two fundamental rules, the
sum rule and the product rule. But the
consequences of it are very profound and
probability is notoriously
misunderstood, misapplied. there's many
errors of of reasoning, you know, that
happen when people try to reason through
statistical correlations or whatever.
So, I think there are things like that
in life that are very simple and yet
very hard to to kind of understand the
full extent of their impact, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, it's interesting you picked
up on conditional probabilities. I mean,
that is the heart of the free energy
principle at many many different levels.
Yeah. So the the classical formulation
the free energy principle just starts
off with a partition of different states
of being and that partition suddenly
means you've got the probability
distribution or density over one set of
states of being that now can be
conditioned upon another. So the your
the whole free energy principle is just
basically a principle of least action
pertaining to density dynamics. The the
the dynamics or the evolution of not
densities but conditional densities.
That's just it. This is before
thermodynamics. It's before quantum
mechanics. It's just about conditional
probability distributions. So it's
interesting you picked up on that as
something that is so simple yet so
absolutely powerful.
&gt;&gt; So um Professor Fston, we were reading
your paper earlier. It's from 2023 um
path integrals particular kinds and
strange things and it introduced a
categorization of particles. So for
example um inert to active and ordinary
to strange. The strange um
categorization was particularly
interesting because you were um giving
an account of how these particular
particles could um give rise to
phenomenal you know conscious states or
even agentic states. And we we felt that
this was almost an account of
panagentialism. So you know historically
we've done interviews about the free
energy principle and we've spoken about
self-organization and emergence and um
the agency and the phenomenal states are
something which emerge when you have
this um sort of temporal and
counterfactual depth. And maybe we're
misunderstanding but it but it feels
like this is an account of low-level
agentic potential and phenomenal
potential. So to set the scene just to
come back to that partition that we were
just talking about there are many ways
of um arranging the the conditional
independences you know to um sort of
disconnect various partitions you know
external states internal states my
sensory states my active states um and
the combinations of disallowed
influences give rise to an ontology of
different kinds of things and you could
call them natural kinds. I've been told
by Maxwell I shouldn't use that but I
like natural kinds the things in nature
that just prescribe themselves just by
being special instances of a lack of
causal influence. Um so if we start off
with uh you know the simplest case where
um there are no internal states and
there are no active states and what are
we talking about? We're talking about
some kind of causal black hole,
something that's, you know,
quintessentially inert and you can never
see it because you can only see the
active states that act back on the
environment in which it is embedded. But
then we get to more interesting things
um that have a full complement of
internal states and external states and
a birectional coupling between the two
which of course is mediated by the
sensory states and the active states.
And if you disallow action at a
distance, by which I mean I have to be
in some metric sense next to you in
order for me my active states to become
your sensory states and your sensory
states to be my um active states. Then
you have a very simple kind of markoff
blanket which would be fine for
describing active matter for example or
any medium where I have to touch, to
feel, to influence or to sense. Um and
this kind of particle interestingly has
its or this kind of system partition has
its active states on the inside which is
you know I had to think about you know
you know and it can be no other way if
you you know just try to arrange all the
dependencies.
So what would that look like? It would
look like something like a cell that had
on the outside its sensory states that
was supported by a layer of active
states that surrounded the internal
state. So you're complying with the laws
of the Markoff blanket of of thingness
that you you you need to have that
conditional independence to separate the
thing from everything else or the self
from from the non-self. and everything's
fine because the active states are
hiding behind the sensory states. So the
external states can't influence the
active states. So that's tick one.
That's you know what we need. But we
also have to ensure that the um internal
states symmetrically cannot act
influence the sensory states and that's
fine because they're hiding behind the
active states. So you've got you know a
nice um mathematical image of you know a
a cell if you like. But that doesn't
work for things like you and me. Things
like you and me have um um have a
hierarchical structure. Um and what that
basically means is that the active
states which were hitherto in very
simple organisms um immediately
juxtaposed to the internal states now
become sequestered. So now effectively
the active states are no longer seen by
the internal states and then something
quite remarkable happens mathematically.
Uh you it's really simple and it's just
another aspect of conditional
probability distributions
because you can't see your active
states. So you can now only see your
sensory states. It looks as if from the
point of view of the internal states
that the active states are now become
causes of the sensory states. So now
your world is caused not just by the
external world by the environmental
states by my heat bath by my ex you know
my uh external miller but also my own
actions so now I'm inferring the causes
of my sensorium where I'm actually c a
cause so I'm inferring myself so there's
this beautiful recursion which is
licenses this sort of strange loop um
analogy with with a bit of poetic
license that
another way of putting that is that you
know for these simple structures for
these natural kinds that would be say
single-sellled organisms
the internal states can be read as
modeling the causes of their sensations
that just are the external states. So
they have direct access to the active
states. So there's no conditional
independence that licenses the notion of
description as of in terms of inference
or sense making. Um whereas now the
basin mechanics that attends the the
activi the internal activity internal
machinations now covers both my action
and the things that I'm acting upon. And
of course this is a nice metaphor for
planning as imperance that I'm now
thinking about and trying to infer what
am I actually doing and that to my mind
um
produces a very unique and special kind
of thing um you know things like you and
me basically which are pretty unique uh
when we look at all the different kinds
of things that could be around. Well,
it's it's it's another example of how as
soon as you had this recursion, right,
as soon as you had these these strange
loops, especially for systems that that
are computational, you know, and I I
forget who it was that said life is the
computational phase of matter, but I
mean, when you're at this level of
complexity where you're having some kind
of information processing and you
introduce this strange loop, right, that
unlocks a completely different like
category of behavior, you know, tier of
computation. Right.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; It was David Krakow. He said life is the
intensive property of matter and
intelligence is the extensive property.
&gt;&gt; No, this is a different one though.
Someone it may have been Wolf Ram who
said life is the computational. I I
don't remember. I'd have to look it up.
Um but
&gt;&gt; but yeah, so it unlocks a completely
different category of behavior.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean, you alluded to that
earlier on in terms of phenomenology,
and you mentioned consciousness, which
you shouldn't really do with me, but
we'll read that as an elementary kind of
sentience. Um, so I I think that's
really important. You know, that point
that you do unlock or you do manifest or
now at least you have a mathematical
calculus that allows you to talk about
things that model themselves. And as
soon as you're modeling yourself, you
become an agent or you have an authentic
kind of agency because now in order to
model myself or to model the me as a
cause of my environment, I have to infer
what I am in do what I'm doing in
particular the consequences of what I'm
doing. And because the consequences have
not yet appeared, this has a a
quintessentially future pointing aspect.
So, we're now moving from a thermostat
or a virus or a single-sellled organism
to things that actually have a future on
the inside, their private future that
just exists for them. And of course, if
you can get f, you know, suitably far
into the future where you have a
divergence of particularly paths into
the future just as a nod to the
pathogical formulation, then you have to
select one. So now you've you've really
unlocked again a calculus of selection
of your paths into the future which I
think you know is not a definition of
agency and certainly not consciousness
but certainly would be um I would
imagine arguably necessary to support
something that had true agency and
possibly even uh consciousness you know
of an elemental kind. Could we press on
the consciousness a bit because the
account that you just gave is a is a
beautiful account of agency and it's
it's very plausible. So as you increase
this reflexive layering this recursion
you get these multiple paths into the
future and you become the cause of your
own action. So you become more of an
agent. So it's almost um an account of
strengths of agency with with more and
more layers. But in the um the abstract
of this paper, we were quite struck with
the language that convol consciousness
with agency and intuitively I feel that
that um phenomenal experience is is
quite orthogonal to to agency. So why
were they kind of convolved together?
&gt;&gt; Um I'm desperately trying to remember
how I referred to consciousness.
You got to be very careful when using
that word depending on who you're
talking to. Um
&gt;&gt; the C word
&gt;&gt; the C word. Oh naughty. Um so yeah and I
think you know people like Neil Seth
make a very similar point quite
earnestly you know that intelligence and
and consciousness are completely
orthogonal that you're making agency and
and consciousness are completely and I
would agree entirely. Um so um you know
consciousness um does is not implied by
being agentic uh uh you know having
having agency um
you would first of all well there are
many stories you can tell here um and
you know my mind goes to the people who
might be watching this to make sure I
don't offend anybody by not mentioning
it. So, so yeah, the
from from the point of view of three
energy principle, um the the way that
you'd look at consciousness is um
in terms of a dual aspect monism which
um you get for free from the treatment
of the density dynamics in exactly the
way we were talking about before. But
you know so now my internal say brain
states um have a thermodynamics they
have that that can be written in terms
of an information geometry that itself
is just predicated on conditional
probability distributions. Um but they
also um have an information geometry
that inherits from the fact that my
internal brain states represent
the outside world including my own
actions. So there's both a an
information geometry and and by
implication of thermodynamics of my
brain activity
which supervenes on exactly the same um
substrate as does the information
geometry which is representational which
is the inference the basic mechanics
side of things. So that gives you
license to talk about a sort of dual
aspect monism. But what is it what does
it really mean to be conscious? Some
people might believe that it's just
having a posterior belief, having a
basian belief which is literally just a
conditional probability distribution
that is encoded or parameterized by some
physical state of being and in this
instance in the under the three energy
principle it's the internal states of
being. Um other people say well no just
having you know just just being able to
read a thermostat for example as having
poster beliefs about the temperature of
his external world does not license you
to ascribe consciousness to this thing.
So the next step would be oh it has to
be ignited in some way. It has to be
realized. It has to be emergent and um
I'm sort of paraphrasing Yakobi here and
to a certain extent Mark SS. So they
emphasize now it is when these beliefs
become sufficiently precise in a
dynamical way that they are realized and
influence other aspects of belief
updating in a hierarchal or distributed
system. So Mark Zs would call this felt
uncertainty. So he he would emphasize
that the the the feeling part of
consciousness
just is or is mediated by the
representations not of the content but
of the precision or uncertainty or the
confidence with which these beliefs are
currently in operation. And you know he
will bring to the table all sorts of
very compelling neurobiological evidence
as to why this is how you can switch off
consciousness literally by um I think
he's he says it's a you know a 3 mm cube
part of the brain stem that is the cells
of origin that these ascending systems
that encode and represent I repeat not
the content but the confidence or the
uncertainty or the precision of these
conditional probability distributions.
Um Jacob um would would I think say well
to be aware is to equip all those
messages that are providing evidence for
your current explanation with precision
which has you know these physiological
and you know bioelectric sort of
mechanisms behind it. Um other people go
further. People um in the world of um
phenomenology of the kind that Thomas
Metsinger pursues um would say that it
would be necessary to have control over
the prec precision. Um and furthermore
to be aware that you are rendering that
which was once transparent opaque you
actually have to recognize that you're
attending. So you again not only do you
have this sort of very simple recursion
of modeling self-modeling um in terms of
planning as inference but now you've got
this hierarchal recursion where you're
now recognizing that you're attending to
something and then to be if you're
somebody like LZ Sunvid Smith you'd say
well to actually be self-conscious I now
have to recognize that I was recognizing
that I was attending to something and
you get layer upon layer upon layer um
and to join the dots with um Chris
Fields um who has brought to the table
the inner screen hypothesis. Have you
come across this yet?
&gt;&gt; No. No. Tell us about that.
&gt;&gt; Oh well, strictly speaking, you should
get Chris to tell you about that, but
I'll I'll give I'll give you a quick
preamble. Um so um so Chris Fields is
the um the theoretician who has
formulated the quantum quantum
information theoretic version of the
free energy principle. So for him
the markoff blanket separates self from
non-self becomes a holographic screen
upon which classical information is well
to which it is written and from which it
is read by some internal bulk and some
external bulk. um and in the sense that
um strange loops and strange recursions
are only allowable when you have this
hierarchical structure on the inside.
Um, you've now got lots of inner
holographic screens, inner Markoff
blankets. I mean, Markoff blankets, you
know, in the pragmatic sense just define
things like hierarchies, for example,
and, you know, they define the
architecture of, you know, of any
network, factoraph or or or computer.
And when you got lots of them, you've
effectively got lots of inner screens.
So the idea, well my reading of that
idea
is that there is one irreducible inner
screen. So there's one in a screen that
within it has no other screens.
And this is an interesting screen
Markoff blanket from the the classical
perspective because the only way that
the internal states of this irreducible
Markoff blanket can know themselves is
by acting on the exterior which of
course the exterior is the rest of your
brain. So you got this metacognitive
self-recursive aspect to this inner
screen hypothesis.
um and that um
that has I think a lot of mileage that
particular notion has a lot of mileage
in relation to other people's theories
of consciousness. So we're talking about
higher order thought theory. So the very
notion of higher order thought and its
implicit appeal to metacognition and
meta meta cognition meta meta is again
this this notion of looking at oneself
and inferring oneself but on the inside.
So looking at looking at the looking at
the looking um uh which is of course you
know a natural consequence of having
this this hierarchal structure um you
could also argue it's completely
compatible with um global neuronal
workspace theories that um you know
there is this sort of precision
dependent ignition of certain sources or
um messages
sufficient statistics of conditional
dist uh probability distributions
that gain access to you to all of across
all of these inner screens in a dynamic
way because you're controlling the
access by attending by um encoding and
representing and optimizing the
precision or the uncertainty or the
confidence. So you've got this notion of
ignition and penetration through to the
global workspace which you could read as
this sort of in irreducible inner screen
the core your the deepest part of your
sense making your your brain. So I think
this this notion not only is it
consistent with the you know the
conditional independences that are
implicit in the in the free energy
principle as applied to strange things
that have this hierarchal and recursive
aspect. But it also um I think relates
very comfortably with ext theories all
all coming from different perspectives
seeing different parts of the elephant
as it were. Um but it's you know it is I
think a comfortable um accommodation of
things that we you know presume um or
things that people have brought to the
table in order to explain consciousness
you know from from their direction of
theorizing. It seems that um if you if
we kind of split let's say the um the
camps or the the the the thought the
groups of thought about this there's um
almost all of what you just talked about
now are there is a minimal complexity
required for there to be consciousness
and then we can we can talk about what
the what that level is. Well, it
requires this or this or this. But then
there's also people who say no there's
no there's no minimal complexity. It's
like electrons have some kind of small
amount of consciousness. And I fall much
more into the the category of people who
say there is a minimum like you have to
reach a certain something. I don't
really know where that boundary is. You
know, maybe it's one of these that we've
mentioned. Maybe we'll figure out a more
elegant kind of categorization. But but
it's just like you need a certain number
of pixels in the game of life before you
can have a glider. You can't do it with
three. Like you need there's some
minimum number. And so there's some
minimum amount of brain material. You
know, three cubic millimeters is still a
lot of neurons. I don't know how many
are in there, but you know, hundreds,
thousands or whatever it is. You need
some level of complexity before you have
consciousness or before you have, you
know, let's say um recursive agency or
or something like or intelligence or
whatever. Would you agree with that?
Like there is some some minimum. We
don't know where it is yet. It's hard to
place that, but there is a minimum or
not. No, I would agree entirely.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, so there there is a minimum
and not only that, it has to have a
certain causal structure, right? And we
can we can kind of debate that and
that's really in line too with surl you
know in the Chinese room argument which
is like look a dictionary is not doesn't
have understanding because it doesn't
have the right causal structure. You
have to have a certain causal structure
or a certain minimum complexity and then
you reach this whatever it is whether
it's consciousness we're talking about
understanding agency all of these things
right so I guess my question to you is
will we be able to build machines based
on our current computer architectures
some someday whether it's a hundred
years from now 200 years doesn't matter
but in principle can we build machines
that have understanding that have
consciousness that have all these
capabilities.
&gt;&gt; Yes, that's a that's a good question.
Um, and the answer I think I think in
principle yes. Um, can I just come back
qualify that answer by reference to that
wonderful example of you know um what I
would read as vagueness in a technical
sense. So vagueness is you know how many
grains of sand constitute a pile?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So it's not well defined. It is in
philosophy but not not not not in not in
mathematics. I think that's absolutely
the right way to think about these your
the bright lines. And if I had to commit
to um the dimension the number of grains
of sand that you get before um you have
um consciousness or there is a pile. Um
I would say it's something you actually
referred to earlier on. I think it's the
depth of your of your future.
or your future in your head. So if
you're talking now about an algorithm or
some artificial um intelligence that is
equipped with a generative or a world
model of the consequences of its action,
there will be a time horizon
associated with that component of its
generative model. And I think that it's
the depth of that time
what what anal Seth would refer to um
not as counterfactual breadth which is
the number of divergent paths one could
take into the future the options that
you you select among but the the the
counterfactual depth
&gt;&gt; the temporal depth and um so that means
that you can you can say you can be pany
you uh you can you can you can say that
you know um a thermos at has um a notion
of the future in the sense that it
operates of you know sort of
pathological control and differential
equations. As soon as you put a
differential equation in play, you've
got a you know an instantaneous future
because you've got some gradient with
respect to time.
That's not though the kind of depth that
you and I uh enjoy. So I would imagine
it is really just the the depth you
rather very very reflexive and I think
people like um Maxwell Ramanstead talk
about this as merely reflexive active
inference um with you know very myopic
very shortterm self models for uh right
through to fully well to be conscious in
the way that we've been talking about
you I think you need to have uh you know
a long depth so what does that mean for
um building um AGI or uh conscious
artifacts or machine consciousness. It
means first of all they have to be
agentic because we've just said that
having a you know a world model of the
consequences of your action um would be
necessary to be an agent. Um but more
than that you'd have to look quite a
long way into the future. So your your
your generative model your world model
would have to go quite a long way into
the future. Um, and I repeat, have that
both counterfactual breadth and
counterfactual depth at hand. Um, would
that be sufficient? Um, and I'm now
remembering that I forgot to mention a
Neil Seth in the list of people not to
upset when reviewing theories of
consciousness. So this is an opportunity
just to say that there are people out
there who would say well you know okay
you can write down the maths of all this
and you can write down in a screen
hypothesis or indeed simulate global
neural workspace theories and and and um
try to produce um things that look as if
they have consciousness. Um that's not
going to work unless you actually embody
it. Unless you are in a Neil's words a
beast machine.
Um
I think that that sort of um coheres
with the argument for mortal
computation.
So when you may ask the question can we
build it on our um computer
architectures I would have to ask you do
you mean a vonuman architecture or do
you mean a uh memory uh processing in
memory or in memory processing
architecture which I would take
synonymous with the neuromorphic
architecture not spiking neural networks
you don't need those but you do need the
processing in memory um to be you know
to be mortal you need that substrate
dependence 's um you know read you know
in terms of Jeff Jeffrey Hinton's
definition of mortal computation and you
know and Alex's uh subsequent
elaborations of that. So if you've got I
think um I would subscribe to that. I
think you um largely to keep a Neil
happy. Um but I would sub subscribe I
don't think you can do this on a on a
von Newuman architecture cuz the the
markoff blankets um of a von Newman
architecture where you're reading and
writing from memory um make it very
difficult for the memory to
self-organize.
&gt;&gt; I see.
&gt;&gt; Um and people have written about this
philosophically. I think Vana Vice has
has has written a paper about this and I
think Anneil Seth um speaks to this
argument in in a recent um behavioral
and brain science paper. um you know it
may not be possible and certainly you
know from the point of view of
efficiency
um it's highly unlikely that sort of um
vonuman architectures are the kind of
things that would conform to let me
reverse to be is to pursue a path of
least action in accordance with the free
energy principle to be conscious does
not excuse you from that so if uh
If you want a conscious machine, you
have to have a machine that pursues a
path of least action.
&gt;&gt; Via the Janinsky equality, that has to
be true both thermodynamically and
informationally in terms of the
conditional probability distributions.
If you don't pursue that path of least
action, you can't be and you can't be
conscious for, you know, a non-trivial
amount of time. Um, and I can see you
want to ask a question, so I interject.
Well, only to say um Maxwell pointed me
to a nil's where he defends biological
naturalism and um of course even cells
said that the biological substrate is is
an existence proof. He's not saying it
has to be biology, but Keith and I
certainly agree that it there's
something about the substrate which is
which is very important.
&gt;&gt; Um I wanted to talk a little bit about
viruses. As you know, I'm a bit of an
externalist. I've never been able to
completely pin you down, Professor
Priston, because there have been so many
interpretations of the free energy
principle that um that lean internalist
and externalist and even um the hybrid
version which Maxwell also wrote a paper
about. But I'm fascinated in this idea
of diverse intelligences and for
example, could a virus be intelligent?
And um I I spoke with David Krakow and
he said intelligent things do inference
and they have representations and
they're adaptable and we are a little
bit you know we're a bit chauvinistic
about our brains aren't we because our
brains seem to have a privileged status
but what say you are viruses or actually
we we read your paper with um uh Calvo
predicting green uh really radical plant
predictive processing and in that paper
you gave a beautiful account of how even
plants could be doing inferencing and
and that to me seems it it seems
incredible because I'm I'm amendable to
the idea but it it seems to me
intuitively that plants are not as
sophisticated as as we are. So it comes
back to this line that Keith was talking
about before that if you go too far down
the stack, it's an account of we let's
call it pan intelligence where you have
a tiny little bit of intelligence even
if you go all the way down the stack.
&gt;&gt; Have you spoke to Mike Leaven?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Relatively recently about a year
ago.
&gt;&gt; Right. I I mean you know it would be
nice to um
revisit him. I mean that that that that
is exactly his big question at the
moment. Um and and of course he um
has as an intellectual accomplice Chris
Fields with him as well. So that you
know the two of them are really you know
pursuing this notion of basil cognition
that there is intelligence everywhere.
Um, and it's just a question of, you
know, how we conceive of it and how we
test for it. And indeed, his argument,
Mike's argument is that, you know, you
have to design the right experiments.
It's an empirical question. Is this
virus intelligent or not? Well, you have
to, you know, design the right
experiments to disclose or evidence its
intelligent behavior. And Mike would
claim that, you know, by many metrics,
um, many rule stick u, yard sticks that
we use to measure adaptive intelligent
behavior. Yeah. Slime molds and viruses
and xenobots are incredibly intelligent.
Um, and you know, I think he's fighting
against the chauvinism that you
mentioned that intelligent things are
just properties of things like you and
me, creatures like you and me and our
brains. um and that that kind of
cognitive capacity and competence can be
found everywhere. Um so I you and I'm
very sympathetic to that, but it does
tread on the toes of the vague argument.
Um you know um I certainly don't think
that um viruses um have the same um
expressive kind of agency that we were
talking about. And indeed, you know, the
counterargument to the vague um notion
of intelligence andor consciousness is
of course um hitting you in the face
when you when you read that strange
things paper. You know, I'm talking
about categorically different natural
kinds that do and do not have, for
example, a causal power or influence of
ex active states on internal states.
you're either one of these or you're one
of these.
&gt;&gt; I'm not so sympathetic to the view that,
you know, a virus is intelligent, right?
Because I think this falls into the
category of things like where you're in
a biology class and you learn how to
define life and then somebody's like,
"What about fire?" Then like it seems to
meet all these criteria here, you know,
it it grows, it expands resource, you
know. So, for example, when a virus
quote mutates, the virus doesn't mutate
itself. it is mutated by a gamma ray
hitting it or a you know transcription
error or whatever and and oil you know
vinegar and baking soda undergoing a
reaction is not intelligent right so
there's I think there's some level of
complexity and you know whether it's
recursion or these other types of causal
structures that have to be there before
I'm even interested in talking about
intelligence or entertaining
intelligence you know other things are
just kind of dynamics that unfold in in
certain ways chemical reaction
you know that that sort of thing
&gt;&gt; and I think that that that point um is a
nice opportunity just to introduce the
notion of scale freess um or scale
invariance
&gt;&gt; because I you know I can see you could
also take this towards collective
intelligence and federated learning and
federated inference um
so it's not it's not the single cell
it's a single cell with its neighbors
and its neighbors of neighbors and
neighbors and neighbors um and So what
one's looking for um is some
conservation of intelligent dynamics
that is preserved over different scales.
So you know the single virus is probably
not interesting. It's probably the
colony which is uh which which is which
is interesting. So I thought that was
you know a nice point to introduce the
notion of of that kind of scale
invariance. And of course as a
mathematician you you would be um
looking at the reormalization group to
see how that unpacked mathematically
and interestingly um it also speaks to
this notion of a mutation. Is evolution
an intelligent process?
You know it's certainly adaptive.
It certainly um has uh the level of
complexity that you would uh require um
in order to uh pass those vague
thresholds. But is evolution in and of
itself an intelligent process? It's
certainly a free energy minimizing
process. You know, it is just basic
model selection. Natural selection just
is maximi or selecting those things that
have the highest model evidence or
marginal likelihood of being that
phenotype in this kind of environment.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's like is is the planet
intelligent? You know, it certainly
contains 8 billion or so of us. So, does
that count? I mean,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; why not? Well, I mean, that's where
Well, I would say like uh and and we
talked about this way back when we
talked about um you know, is a flotilla
um an agent or is it the pilot who's you
know kind of kind of controlling the
convoy or whatever. I would say like if
there's a more minimal boundary that
contains the intelligent then the larger
one is not like I'm talking about so the
planet for example I would say since I
can draw a smaller boundary which is an
individual person the individual person
is intelligent anything that contains
that person is just more stuff
&gt;&gt; Keith what is your the issue with with
viruses is it because the individual
virus is inert whereas a cell for
example you can partition ition down to
the individual cells and the cell still
has some degree of agentic property as
as as professor Fston was describing is
is it that you see them as inert and
being carried by something else?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think it's that too much of
their their causal structure and
machinery is basically outsourced to
other things. It's like they you know
they're they're kind of just these
little particles that go around and if
they happen to stick on a cell they're
like a mouse trap that activates and
just injects some DNA but you know the
cell does all the rest of the work,
right? It does the transcription. It has
all that machinery by themselves. A
virus doesn't change over the course of
its lifetime. It doesn't really other
than this simple mouse trap kind of
activation. It does nothing, you know.
It doesn't doesn't have any machinery to
learn and adapt by itself like over the
course of the lifetime of a virus, you
know. So I might be more amendable to
like if somebody says well like an
ecosystem of you know viruses or
something has some degree of you know
intelligence but it still doesn't have
the the type of processing and causal
structure and minimal complexity that at
least for me is the useful concept of of
intelligence. So I think we're coming
back now to um the
the number of inner screens and the
counterfactual depth and the definition
of agency in the sense of strange things
that we're talking about for this
particular scale. So if we just read the
scale as if you like the size of the
markoff blanket. If within at this scale
for this kind of thing um there is a
sufficient degree of complexity read
specifically though in this instance as
um the counterfactual depth and breadth
of your world model about the
consequences of your action. that
particular part of of of your um
implicit generative model. Um and that
would happily accommodate the fact that
when you get something, you know,
something um of the size or the scale of
a virus, there just isn't the machinery
or the space to entertain that in any
non-trivial um in a non-trivial way. Um
uh one could also argue and I got a
sense that you were arguing yourselves
uh towards this that if you go too big
you also lose that. So you know this,
you know, coming back to this wonderful
question, we have 8 billion intelligent
really intelligent um u sound like Trump
there, didn't I? Um
entities constituting our biosphere, but
is is the biosphere is you're from the
point of view say that the K hypothesis
is the biosphere in and of itself
intelligent and I would I would say no.
Not because it's simply because at that
scale
the um the elemental all the complexity
of the constituent elements disappears
at that scale.
&gt;&gt; So you know it'd be a little bit like
saying um well let's just take it to the
limit. Let's just take it to the astron
um astronomical uh limit um you know of
the motion of heavenly bodies.
Now the motion of heaven he heavenly
bodily is is completely described by the
position of the planets and the moon
right and the position of the earth. So
at that scale you've averaged away the
fact that the earth contains a biosphere
and the biosphere contains human beings
and human beings contain cells and the
cells may or may not contain viruses
depending upon who you've been uh uh
exposed to. Um so there will be no
intelligence at that level. So it's
perfectly possible to have intelligence
at a particular scale that disappears
when you get too big and when you get
too small. Um another way of looking at
that is um the um going right back to
things like uh brigine and disputative
structures. You know you're talking
about complexity. If we just think about
you know how have people tried to
understand
complex complex systems and
self-organizing systems that are open.
So we're not talking about 20th century
physics and equilibrian physics. We're
talking about the physics of
non-equilibria
and things that are open in open
exchange with with each other. And of
course you get to the notion of
dissipative structures. What does that
tell you mathematically? Well, what's
not dissipative?
That's a school boy question.
Can you remember? You probably
forgotten. So what is not dissipative is
conservative.
&gt;&gt; So yeah. Uh so I'm sure I'm teasing it.
Um so um
another gift of Helmholtz of course is
that any dynamics
can be um partitioned into a dissipative
part and a conservative part. And the
dissipative part is that which um rests
upon very fast random complicated
fluctuations
um of the kind you might find in say
quantum mechanics or thermodynamics
um whereas the conservative part does
not rely upon that and just goes around
in circles. Basically it's you know
literally it's called solenoidal flow um
or conservative flow. So that basically
means that the that the um the
dissipative structures have to have an
ad mixture of this circular aspect. this
um conservative classical um life
cycles, reproduction, oscillations,
plus the the random dissipative part
that that um um you'll find in things
like thermodynamics and and and and
quant quantum mechanics and that is
definitional of dissipative structures.
Um as you go too small then everything
becomes quantum and random. It all
becomes probabilistic. There is no
conservative stuff other than a scroing
of potential.
Um at which point I think you you'd find
it very difficult to find something uh
that was intelligent in the sense we're
talking about because we have to have
this recurrence this solenoidal aspect
in order to revisit the states. So you
know a virus is a virus in order for
there to be a non-equilibrium steady
state distribution solution to that. Um
so but as you get get bigger and bigger
and bigger you get to to to viruses and
you're still not quite then still not
quite sort of complex enough to be
intelligent in the way that we mean and
then you get to our size and that's
perfect because we're both have both
this dissipative we deal with a random
world with an an itinerant world and yet
we keep revisiting states of being. So
we have this sort of conservative um
biometic kind of self-organization.
But then you get bigger and bigger and
bigger. You get to the level of the the
biosphere or you know the size size of
the uh uh the moon or the sun. Uh and of
course by averaging all the random
fluctuations go away. So you're just
left with the solenoidal part. you're
just left with the solenoidal motion the
Newtonian motion of of classical of of
classical mechanics
&gt;&gt; here because there's there's so one
thing that really fascinates me about
this is however it is possible for us
and we do construct largecale things
that are intelligent like a corporation
you know a corporation is seen as like a
super intelligence but we're only able
to do that by putting in structure right
that maintains this balance of of the
dissipative and and conservative flow,
right? Like we have to put in
organizational structure so that it
continue to function at these larger
scales, right? Like isn't that pretty
pretty interesting? I mean
it's it's again this yin and yang thing
that we run into all the time, right?
where it's the balance between two two
forces like either between say uh
complete order and complete noise or
between dissipation and conservation and
you have to be almost on the edge of
chaos and it has to have a certain
causal structure in order for it to to
be intelligent.
&gt;&gt; No, no, I I agree entirely. and and and
um you know that that that sort of
Goldilocks regime where you are on the
edge of chaos I think is quite specific
to a particular scale certainly you
could you could invoke a sort of strong
anthropomorphic principle here and say
that yeah the kind of intelligence that
we will recognize has to be at our scale
but I think there's something more
fundamental than that I I think the very
existence if you subscribe as an
externalist to quantum physics and uh
Newtonian physics Ronian classical
mechanics. Um I you know I I I I think
that there is a Goldilocks regime which
means that we can only exist at this
scale with with as you say this sort of
yin-yang this ad mixture of dissipative
dynamics and conservative dynamics and
you know the just to reinforce this
because the conservative dynamics is
absolutely essential because it is that
which causes this ponare recurrence. It
defines these strange attractors which
is the other way of licensing the notion
of strange things. You always come back
to somewhere near where you started like
red queen dynamics you know um in even
theoretical biology. So you have to have
the conservative the circular motion
just to re you have a routine have bio
rhythms replicate reproduce many many
different levels at at many different
scales but it's not it it's always
remarkable in the face of a dissipative
itinerant world everything is changing
all the time um and yet we somehow sort
of resist that change by being at the
edge of chaos
oh no you you look more anxious than I
do to say Carry on.
&gt;&gt; Please go on, Professor Preston.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, I'm just so fascinated by
by your observation that with Gaia
theory, for example, when we zoom out,
the the the apparent phenomena seems
less intelligent. And as you said, maybe
intelligence is just what we recognize.
And um when we spoke with Wolf from that
time, he was talking about how we're
computationally bounded as observers.
And we we do this thing called
abstraction where we ignore details or
even idealization where we deliberately
distort the truth. And um David Krakow
said that intelligence is doing more
with less and emergence is more is
different. And
I mean the earth is not doing it's not
doing less. We just don't see what it's
doing. But if it's if emergence is more
is different then that it licenses a
fundamental reorganization of the
underlying substrate which means it it
isn't actually doing the thing at the
lower level anymore. It it's it's a
fundamental course graining and it's
actually changing at the higher level.
So which is it? Well, um I didn't
realize there's a choice there because I
I agree with everything you said,
but I like the notion of poor grading
because of course that is exactly what
you get from the reormalization group
treatment of these things and you can
simulate this. You can simulate um free
energy minimizing processes that are
running at different scales and then you
have to ask the deep questions of how
you couple between the scales and and
there you get to supervenience and
emergence mathematically so defined. But
it all boils down to exactly where you
started and where you ended up which is
a coarse graining in the right kind of
way. So you know to to actually um write
down a renormalization group you have to
have a an RG operator. What is an RG
operator? Well it has two parts to it.
It has a sort of dimension reduction the
R part if you like and a grouping
operator. Um and they basically do the
right kind of coarse graining. they
reduce dimensionality and they group
together in the right way um those
states of being um at at the highest
scale and so on and infinitum um so I
think your the notion of course graining
is absolutely essential here uh and on
that level um you could you could argue
both ways so I I'm getting a sense that
your question is is something is there a
true emergence emergentism here um or
not uh uh again
I don't have a philosophical training so
I'm not sure I can really answer that
but certainly there the the intelligent
dynamics read as um self-evidencing
perspective on the on a free energy
minimizing process are recapitulated in
a at a completely different scale in a
in a different way at each scale through
the recursive application of RG
operators Um so yes there is something
brand new going on and yet
in the spirit of say Haken synergetics
these RG operators
are just taking functions of stuff
that's happening at the finest scale. So
you're not inventing anything new it's
just predicated or emerging or
supervening on finer scale stuff. But
what emerges at the high scale has all
the attributes of self-evidencing and
you could argue um consciousness or
intelligence at some level. But coming
back to to to um the point about
building bigger organizations,
if the argument that as you get bigger
and bigger and bigger um means that you
are effectively to exist, you have to be
effectively conservative. So you know a
company for example um what is its
metric of uh goodness is how long it
survives you know can you get from
series 8 to series whatever um
in some recognizable form so as you get
bigger and bigger and bigger I think
there's less opportunity for this
complex scale-free within sorry not
hierarchal recursive structure within
the scale so I do I don't see the moon
thinking of planning. I don't see the
weather planning. I don't see evolution
planning. It doesn't think about its
future. It's too big.
And I would imagine that you could apply
the same arguments to globalization and
institutions that get too big for their
own good
&gt;&gt; because they can't plan anymore. So,
we're coming back to the pilot who's
really the intelligent person, not the
flotilla.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's in in a way it's um I guess
maybe it's slightly depressing to me
because it means we can't build an
intelligent intergalactic you know uh
civilization. It's it's almost like
beyond a certain scale we just have to
leave it up to kind of distributed
emergent you know um processes that that
may or may not end up doing something
intelligent as a whole. um you know
because because at some point you've got
the speed of light and that's that's
basically going to be a barrier to
organization right across across light
years right so so maybe there is an
ultimate goldilocks limit right to to
intelligence can't it can't get too big
that's certainly what the you know the
arguments from the physics part you
would so there is a goldilocks uh a
goldilocks of scale or zone own in scale
space. Um I'm not sure this is correct
and I don't want to disappoint you. So
&gt;&gt; don't worry it's well beyond my lifetime
when that will happen. But
&gt;&gt; there's a certain beauty though in
federating and and distributing and uh
you know thinking in terms of ecosystems
of things at a particular scale. I mean
evolution is a beautiful thing. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um but you know it doesn't have to be
intelligent to be beautiful.
&gt;&gt; Correct. Correct. Well good point. So it
could be it could be beautiful but not
intelligent. We could have a beautiful
distributed civilization. That's fine.
I'm happy with that.
&gt;&gt; On the internalism and externalism
debate, um I'm a huge fan of Andy Clark
as as you know and um he famously argued
in his was it 1999 paper with with um um
David Charmer's that the phone extends
your mind. And even when we were talking
about the plant example before when we
were talking about plants doing modeling
um there's a there's an inactive
interpretation there and Keith and I
were arguing about this. He doesn't um
agree with me but um is the model the
the physical morphology of the plant?
You know it fits the environment like a
key in the lock or is the model the
software? Is it the DNA of of of the
plant? And and indeed it's just
fascinating, isn't it, that that you can
think of cognition not being entirely
inside our heads, but it's just this
unfurling causal birectional process of
of of so many things around us. So how
do we actually draw boundaries around
things where we say okay well here's the
the principle modeling and cognition is
is in here. This is where bonafide
beliefs are happening. This is where
bonafide thinking is happening. Is it
even possible to make that distinction?
&gt;&gt; Um, I I think it is. Um,
I'm answering it in an almost trivial
way that if you want to talk about
something, you have to be able to define
its markoff blanket. So, yes, you have
to be able to draw lines, bounds and
lines around things to talk about them.
I think that your question though speaks
to um something that we were that we've
just been um covering which is the um
the separation of scales and the the the
everything everything literally um from
the point of view of the free energy
principle that is equipped from the mark
Markoff blanket uh is contextualized by
a scale above and the same rules apply
to the scale above as to the thing
itself. So you have to have a context in
which everything is operating. So the
virus may not be intelligent but it
certainly has to be living in a you know
in a world which is conducive to its
existence. And that world and the states
of of that particular world at the at
the scale above. for example, the host
cell and the host organism um has to
comply and be intelligent in some sense
um in order for the virus to be there
even if the virus itself is not
intelligent. So applying that to the
plant um but we should come back to the
extended cognition and Clark but to the
plant thing you made an interesting
point you know is it in the DNA
um or is it in the morphology
um and the photoactics
uh uh everything else that that plants
um um possess and we infer goes on on
the inside. Um
first of all I think you're absolutely
right to say yes you it is in the
morphology and in a sense that's what I
was getting at when talking about the
importance of mortal computation for
machine consciousness that you have to
realize a um a basin mechanics or
to realize a um a basin mechanics or
self-evidencing you physically have to
parameterize your conditional
probability distributions your basing
beliefs about the environment with you
know um to which you are coupled. So you
it is the substrate is the
parameterization. So by definition it's
substrate dependent computation which
means the structural form the morphology
is the structure of the generative model
in the spirit of structure learning. So
that to be part in very much in the in
the spirit of the good regulator theorem
you know to be in my world I have to
physically encode and embody a model of
the structure of my world which means
that I have to have if you like if you
think your world is scale free that
means that my brain must have some
scale-free hierarchal aspect and indeed
it does and you could actually write
that down and model it with a
renormalization group um and that's just
a reflection of the fact that I um
immersed in a world that has some scale
invariance in it. Um so that is
certainly true for the plant. Um and uh
just one little aside here that paper um
um was written before David Atenburgh's
um
series on the life of plants where he
was able to speed up by a factor of 10
or 100. Uh and of course if you look at
plants doing stuff they're con specifics
by um sending their their little roots
and off in a particular direction or um
you know eating insects or whatever. If
you speed it up the these things are
very anim animalistic and they look you
you'd be hardressed to say that they
weren't intelligent irrespective of
whether they're conscious or not but
they certainly start to look much more
like like you and me when when you speed
things up. So yeah, they have their
morphology matters matters more than
than one could possibly imagine. Um
because
this is how um you become a good
regulator. You model your environment.
you are you install that that cause
effect structure into your computer
architecture which is again the argument
against vonneumman architectures which
is you know um which is why um one might
I think um look to all the um processing
in memory neuromorphic photonics um
possibly quantum computation but
that's gone off the boil recently uh but
the um all that processing in memory
stuff memory for example I think that's
where where the answer the answer will
will be is it in the DNA so is it does
the DNA cause a structure so
&gt;&gt; your comment about the expression make
that point
&gt;&gt; yeah so I think um I I think some of the
hangup or crux may actually be like what
we mean by model and I'm sure this is a
whole philosophical debate that I'm
probably not qualified to you know uh
decide side. But I think for example um
you know if you're flying an airplane
like the airplane internally has a
computational model of the airplane and
you're interacting with this computer
and through controls that then are
enacted through all kinds of gears and
cables and levers and things like that.
But I think of the model as being the
thing that's in the computer and then
it's modeling the the airplane, right?
And so in that sense um you know the the
DNA of of a plant species must
incorporate the code for the model right
because because that's what unfurls is
the plant it's the same DNA in every
cell that's enacting a program that's
essentially happening through gene
expression you know and so a particular
cell maybe some salt content is in there
which causes it to release a hormone
that binds to all the other cells in the
plant which activates certain genetic
pathways case. So I kind of think about
in that same analogy, you know, the the
core of the model is is the code, you
know, that's running and operating and
controlling these processes. And then I
think of the embodiment of the plant as
the stuff that the model is modeling,
right? But I guess, you know, there's
some some vagueness there, too. So
&gt;&gt; you could um if you wanted to simulate
these kinds of things um you could read
the DNA as the code that specif the
prize that specify the structure um and
you know I think that um if if if you
think of DNA
as prescribing the structure of your
generative model or your world model or
your factor
um that will be fit for purpose and is
learnable.
you know, so you know, you start off
with with say DNA. DNA does not tell you
um what particular kind of plant you're
going to be where you it's not going to
tell you how to engage in your photoax
system and point towards the sun or
compete with other uh plants that are
trying to deny you sunlight. That is
something that you have to update and
learn during your particular lifetime.
But you're equipped with the basic
structure the prior on the structure of
your generative model and of course that
um is most e most gracefully
accommodated I think again with respect
to the reormalization group which is
talking about two scales. So you got a
slow scale where you got the slow you
mentioned before viral mutation. So the
the viral DNA should it have RNA or DNA
um um is changing very very slowly on a
time scale that is greater than or
equivalent to the uh the lifespan of any
given virus. And that's if you like
specifying the initial conditions, the
structure for the specification of a
particular instance of a virus.
&gt;&gt; Maybe just jump in for a minute because
I think actually it's not even
specifying the structure. I think it and
and this is what you pointed out before
about the difference between say active
inference versus modeling is actually
the DNA DNA is specifying a policy.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; It's effectively just specifying a
policy that every single cell in the
organism follows. And so this policy is
not instructions for for uh a structure,
but it's in just instructions on what to
do in response to a certain set of
sensory states. Right? So it's almost
it's the policy that the DNA specifies
and this policy applies to every cell
and then somehow miraculously it works
out to create a structure that is fit
for purpose in its particular
environment.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. And of course to work that um
specification
has to change at the same rate at which
the environment changes which is varies
very very slowly. I think that's
absolutely right. I mean just
practically um that hits you in the face
when it comes to um thinking about how
you commit to one policy or another
policy. So in my world that would be the
expected free energy. The um expected
free energy comes in two parts. It has a
sort of expected information gain and
the expected cost or constraints or
utility and that is at the point you
need your DNA. You need to tell you need
to know what it is to be the kind of
thing that I am. What do I not do and
what do I do?
&gt;&gt; Well, the fascinating things in
organisms is this is different even on a
cellbyell level, right? because
morphologically the same code evolves
into all the different organs and parts
and and roots and you know bark and
whatever else which is pretty
fascinating. Well, and yeah, this is
exactly the kind of, you know,
fascinating issue that preoccupies Mike
Leaven. Uh, you know, and how how do you
uh
&gt;&gt; I spoke with our our mutual friend
Maxwell Ramstead the other day and he
actually gave a wonderful description of
the free energy principle because you
know what you want in a good pitch is is
for it to be replicable uh easily
understandable and I I'll try and
recapitulate it to you to just to test
how replicable it was. um he's you know
um second law of thermodynamics closed
systems what if we have open systems
with boundaries and he was saying when
things can't merge together they instead
share information with each other so
they kind of there's thisformational
synchrony and that was his way of
describing the free energy principle but
first of all is is that a good
description but number two the
boundaries where do the boundaries come
from because we we want to have
practical implement presentations of of
the the free energy principle. And of
course, we can we can um implement it
with computer games or um contrived
environments where the boundaries are
clear. But what if I want to build a
robot and I and I have a camera and I
see all of these pixels on the screen
and I need to divvy that scene up into
into objects so I can start doing the
free energy principle. How do we do
that?
&gt;&gt; Right. Five minutes, five questions.
Good.
&gt;&gt; It's got to be practical. That's why
we're only giving five minutes,
&gt;&gt; right? Uh first of all um the um notion
of
being separate but part of a universe
through synchronization I think is
absolutely uh absolutely correct. Um and
could be unpacked in two ways. one, you
could say that, you know, to find a a
free energy minimizing solution to your
dynamics, namely the path of least
action, just is to um events a
generalized synchrony between the inside
and the outside. Um generalized
synchronis also known as synchronization
of chaos. So it's basically that two
systems that are loosely coupled uh in
the sense of um dynamical systems um
will ultimately converge on a
synchronization manifold and they will
show chaotic dynamics on that manifold.
That manifold is a synchronization
manifold and it is being on that
manifold that is the minimization of
free energy. So you can talk about the
free energy principle without mentioning
self-evidence, without mentioning bay,
without mentioning predictive processing
or even extended cognition. Um and you
can just talk about it as um a
variational um specifying a variational
bound on the lronian that specifies
generalized synchronization
or synchronization of chaos. and you
know what you're talking about is is
exactly this sort of um separate but the
same um I think quite quite nicely
although I don't fully understand it um
um recapitulated in Chris Field's
quantum treatment so what he would talk
about there is not the synchronization
between the inside and the outside or me
and you and everything else like me and
you um but entanglement
so the principle of unitarity is just
basic well you can read the free energy
principle as just the principle of
unitarity which just means for if we
stay here for long enough for more than
five minutes uh we will ultimately
become completely entangled um which
means classically we will um we will be
engaged in a generalized synchrony there
will literally be a synchronization of
our interament dynamics we will not
become one we'll still have a we'll
still have well actually Chris feels
thinks you would become one but uh we
will we would be indistinguishable
because we're just playing out on
exactly the same synchronization
manifold. So I think that's absolutely
right. Um your um your last question and
you had about three in between. Um was
how would you how would you practically
use the free energy principle or the
notion of thingness inher that inherits
from Markoff blankets practically if
you're building robots. I think you're
talking here about sort of physics
discovery or Markoff discovery
algorithms which of course you know
Maxwell and Jeff Becker you know sort of
furiously working away on to you know to
try and uh assuming you didn't know
anything about that stuff I mean how
would you approach that problem I mean
from from first principles if if you had
a robot and a camera how would you
partition the scene into boundaries
&gt;&gt; you would be appealing to to um the
notion of markoff boundaries and uh you
I mean you could turn it on head and
look at image segmentation as just you
know what has emerged in computer vision
um as a way of identifying things. So
what you're doing is you're committing
to um an implicit world model or
generative model for your robot. You're
assuming that it is going to be
operating as a good regulator as a good
model of its environment in a in an
environment that is composed of things.
&gt;&gt; Yes. But I think um my intuition is
we've been talking a lot about
understanding and creativity recently
and I I intuitively feel that
understanding is about knowing the
history of something. It's about knowing
how you got there. It's not about
knowing the state. So it's a little bit
different from segmenting an image. Um
to understand the history and the
dynamics of a system seems to be much
much more powerful.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No.
Absolutely. Which is why you know your
mark of B blanket discovery is not image
segmentation because to do markoff
blanket discovery you have to look at
the dynamics and the history.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I mean there's quite a
fundamental point to be made here that
you know we're talking about we have
been talking about from the beginning
right through to the end about
conditional probability distributions.
Probability distributions over what?
Because there's only one state in the
universe at any one time. There are not
many worlds there, not an ensemble of
universes. Um, well, of course, for the
purpose of this argument, uh, there's
only one state of the at any one time.
So, you can't have a probability
distribution unless you invoke some sort
of, um, ensemble canonical ensemble
assumption as they do in thermodynamics
where there's some exchangeability you
can swap swap around universes.
&gt;&gt; You can have an epistemological
probability distribution, right? I would
argue though that what you're implicitly
doing is actually doing that over over
time that there's a history a past and a
future. Um that that epistemological
notion um really has to refer to what
are what is the what what is the the
background over which these multiple
realizations occur from which you can
select to build a probability
distribution. And of course from the
point of view of the of of the free
engine principle on also building robots
um this has to be time. So by definition
it has to be in the dynamics and the
history and not just the short-term
dynamics but this recurrence the
characteristic states that I keep
returning to as a robot as a good robot.
Um uh so yeah absolutely. So
segmentation algorithms are, you know, a
good start, but they're going to be
completely useless when it comes to um
autonomous vehicles, for example, unless
you've built in the fact that there is
conservation of this particular markoff
blanket over time, which of course they
do. um uh but it probably better start
with the generative model that this um
two-dimensional RGB feed has been
generated by Markoff blankets that by
definition persist over time because
that is that time is a support of the
conditional distributions that define
the existence of the markoff blanket. Uh
and then it's a question of how many h
what kind of prize do you put on these
things? Are they things are this stuff?
You know, um what's the markoff blanket
of um water? uh or well perhaps up fog,
you know, if we're doing autonomous uh
uh um and do they uh to what extent
would I now apply uh my prior to these
things and you can go right through to
sort of object centric prior um you know
of the kind you know sort of physics
engine based stuff of the kind that say
Josh Tenbal uh pursues assuming that you
got sort of Newtonian behavior or you
could be much more relaxed Ed um um you
know I would relax but not beyond the
reormalization group.
&gt;&gt; Professor Fen, it's been an absolute
honor. Thank you so much for joining us
today. It's been amazing.
&gt;&gt; I've really enjoyed it. It's lovely to
speak to you both again.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's it's really been an honor
for me because this is the first time
I've met you in person. So uh and you
know I've been thinking about you for
many years. So it's been it's been
really a pres pleasure to to meet you
and thank you for uh coming to the
studio today. Well, thank you for coming
to England.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.