(gentle music)
- [Narrator] Mysterious structures
located all over the world.
- It's as if all these ancient builders
went to the same school.
- [Narrator] Magnificent monuments
emitting powerful energy.
(transition whooshing)
- When you go inside it,
you have the feeling like you are in the hands
of an extraordinary intelligence.
- [Narrator] Did ancient man build the pyramids
as burial chambers?
- You know, if you wanna build the tomb, fair enough,
why use two and a half million blocks of stones?
- [Narrator] Or did they serve another
much more profound purpose?
(upbeat music)
- You have to think that whoever is guiding
such a precise network of pyramids
must have been a very advanced culture,
probably extraterrestrials.
(gentle music)
- [Narrator] Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape our history?
And if so, might there be an extraterrestrial connection
behind the secrets of the pyramids?
(transition whooshing)
(upbeat dramatic music)
(suspenseful music)
(bird screeching)
(gentle music)
Gebel Barkal, Northern Sudan,
Tamil Nadu, Western India,
the Temple of Ur, Southeast Iraq.
From the ziggurats of ancient Babylon
to the temples of the Kush Kingdom,
pyramids dating as far back as 3,000 B.C.
exist throughout the world.
(gentle music continues)
- Pyramids come in many different shapes and sizes.
In Mexico, for instance,
you get circular pyramids and step pyramids.
And even in Uxmal in the Yucatan Peninsula,
the corners of it are curved.
- In India the pyramids are so very, very high, straight up.
The same thing happened with the pyramids
in Central America, they are like this.
While the pyramids in Egypt have this shape,
they're different.
(upbeat music)
- A pyramid is pretty straightforward.
Typically, you have a square base
and you have four sides that are each a triangle
and meet at the top.
If you want to make anything that's gonna be tall,
the first thing you would always build
would be some type of pyramid
because it's the most stable structure
you can imagine making.
(transition snaps)
- We have 250 pyramids
in central Chinese province of Shanxi.
We have dozens of pyramids in the middle of Indian Ocean,
on the island of Mauritius, Canary Islands, Northern Sudan,
Egypt, of course, 155 of them,
but also 300 pyramids in Peru, pyramids in Bolivia,
and of course, over 10,000 pyramids in Central America,
so they are worldwide phenomenon.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] How is it possible
that civilizations spread out over five continents
all built similar pyramidal structures?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe most pyramids
were constructed by builders
who possessed the same advanced knowledge of mathematics,
astronomy, and the Earth's geophysical properties.
(gong resonating)
- In Montevecchia, Milan, Italy,
the pyramids at that location
seem to show a very clear resemblance
to the pyramids at the Giza Plateau.
But without any type of trans-oceanic contact,
how is it possible that all these ancient cultures
had a similar building style?
- The Candi Sukuh Temple in Indonesia
has several identical design elements
as the pyramids at Chichen Itza.
(suspenseful music continues)
Another Hindu temple in Cambodia
mysteriously resembles a Maya temple at Tikal.
(suspenseful music continues)
A possible explanation for all of this
is that all of these cultures
learned how to build these pyramids from the same teachers.
- We see a lot of similarities
in terms of composition in cultures far back in time
between Peru and Egypt and the Olmecs of southern Mexico.
It is quite possible that the ancient Egyptians
and the ancient Peruvians were indeed connected,
that they actually traveled back and forth,
visiting each other
and influencing each other's cultures.
(majestic music)
- [Narrator] The Giza Plateau, Egypt.
Here in the desert just outside Cairo
stands the Great Pyramid of Khufu.
(majestic music)
4,500 years ago,
it was the tallest
and most impressive manmade structure on earth.
(majestic music)
But exactly how and why the pyramid was constructed
remains a mystery.
(majestic music)
- The Great Pyramid, it is the most wondrous place on Earth.
(majestic music)
And when you're standing in front of it,
you're confronted with the greatest mystery of all time.
(majestic music)
Who built this place?
How could it have been constructed?
Why is it still standing?
And then when you go inside it,
you have the feeling like you are in the hands
of an extraordinary intelligence.
- We've got a structure that's 480 feet high.
It covers 13 acres.
There's 2 1/2 million blocks of stone.
(slow tempo music)
The heaviest stones weigh 70 tons.
They quarried thousands of tons of granite 500 miles away.
It's an amazing structure.
- To me, the most intriguing thing
is the scale of the project.
You know, if you wanna build the tomb, fair enough,
but why go 146 meters high?
Why use 2 1/2 million blocks of stones
with a mass of 6 million tons?
(slow tempo music)
- [Narrator] Mainstream archaeologists theorize
that the Great Pyramid was built sometime around 2,500 B.C.
as the burial tomb of the Pharaoh Khufu.
But this claim has yet to be proven
and the debate among various researchers
over for who or for what purpose
the structure was built continues.
(tense music)
- We have found pyramids in the 1950s
by respected Egyptologists whereby the tomb was sealed,
whereby the sarcophagus was intact
and inside there was no body, there was no corpse,
there wasn't even a coffin.
(dramatic music)
And so, this notion that we really think
that grave robbers somehow are responsible for everything
can no longer be maintained.
- There has to be a reason for them to be there,
and they are a tremendous expenditure of resources.
And if not for a revered leader,
they had to have had some benefit
for the civilization that built them.
- So, it's a whole controversy.
Nobody knows why our ancestor constructed pyramids.
- [Narrator] But if the pyramids at Giza
were not intended to house the remains of dead pharaohs,
then why were these towering monuments built?
(tense dramatic music)
Could there be a connection between the Pyramid of Khufu
and other pyramids around the world,
one that has been lost to time?
Or is it possible that the builders
of these engineering marvels
had an otherworldly inspiration
as ancient astronaut theorists suggest?
- Both the Mayans and the Egyptians
have legends that the gods came down
and gave them instructions to build pyramids.
(tense music)
For instance, with the Egyptians, the famous god Thoth
is known as the architect of the universe.
And it was he who allegedly designed
the entire pyramid complex at Giza.
(tense music)
- Imhotep, the person who was responsible
for the first pyramid
actually said that he received this information
from the gods.
Not so much that God appeared to him
and told him,
but that he was able to access this information
from a different realm,
and from there began the pyramid building process.
(dramatic music)
- The fact that different cultures throughout this planet
would have similar structures, I think is mind boggling.
(dramatic music)
What made mankind decide,
let's do these pyramid-shaped objects,
unless they were told,
unless they were given blueprints?
The structures are just unbelievably perfect.
You have to come up with a conclusion
that, you know, it's very possible
that extraterrestrials saw this civilization
gave them knowledge and took off.
(dramatic music fades)
(tense music)
- [Narrator] Egypt, 1940.
While flying above the Giza Plateau,
a British Air Force pilot photographs
one of the most amazing features of the Great Pyramid.
The structure actually has eight sides instead of four.
This baffling phenomenon is only detectable from the air
at dawn and sunset on the spring and autumn equinoxes
when the sun casts shadows on the pyramid
that reveal the eight-sided,
slightly concaved construction.
(tense music)
- This is a light show whereby the ancestors
who built this knew
that something visually spectacular would be seen
on these important calendar days.
(tense upbeat music)
We realized that whoever built this was aware
of the solar cycle,
(pulsing sinister music)
and we also know that the person who built it
had extraordinary understanding of mathematics.
All of these things make it clear that of all pyramids,
the Great Pyramid really is in a league of its own.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] Why is the Great Pyramid's true shape
only visible from above at the equinox?
(tense music)
And how did ancient man create such an intricate design
that is exposed just twice a year
and can only be seen from the sky?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe clues can be found
by examining the unique geographical
and architectural characteristics
of the towering structure.
- According to scholars, the Great Pyramid was built
on what is considered to be
the center of all the land masses of earth.
The massive structure is
almost perfectly aligned
to magnetic north.
Inside the pyramid, the designers added small shafts
aligned towards two specific constellations,
Orion and Sirius.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] The four shafts are not only aligned perfectly
on a north-south axis,
but one shaft also points directly toward Orion's Belt.
(tense music)
(slow tempo music)
Mainstream scientists believe shafts like these
were simply used as ventilation during construction.
But might there be another reason
why they aligned with the stars?
- They used to call it a air shaft of the Great Pyramid.
It's now known to be a star shaft.
It's known to have been oriented to
the passage of Orion's Belt
and it's thought to have represented the release
of the soul back to its origin.
(tense music)
- There is much to suggest
that this correlation is not a coincidence.
We know that the ancient Egyptian pyramids builders
believed that the king was going to become a star in Orion.
(tense music)
- The most extraordinary thing I think
of our ancient civilizations is this.
We have two beautiful pyramid complexes,
one in Teotihuacan, one at Giza.
Teotihuacan is created according to a specific layout.
Within its design,
we have a representation of our solar system,
but we also know that for example,
the Temple of the Sun, the Temple of the Moon,
i.e., two pyramids
and the Temple of Quetzalcoatl
are in same layout as Orion's Belt,
which the three pyramids of the Giza Plateau
have been laid out into as well.
So when we look at these buildings,
we find they are mapped according to the same principle
and incorporating the same information.
(tense music)
- The whole concept that the three pyramids at Giza
are in a special alignment of Orion's Belt
is very interesting.
(high-pitched drone)
The Mayans constructed hundreds of thousands of pyramids
throughout Central America.
Many of these pyramids may be designed
to reflect certain constellations in the sky
like the Orion constellations or others.
The old saying of as above, so below.
(tense music)
- Pyramids in general tend to be very large in scale
and can only be truly seen from above.
(dramatic music)
So it's quite possible that the earliest pyramids
were made as beacons
as a way for those not of this world
to connect with those of this world.
(dramatic music)
- Maybe they were moving around the earth
and using these places not just as sacred places,
but in order to know where they were.
- [Narrator] Is it possible the thousands of pyramids
scattered across the globe
were once part of a cohesive network?
One that could only be understood from the sky?
And who or what could have coordinated
such a precise design?
(tense music)
Magelang, Indonesia.
The Borobudur Temple on the island of Java
is the world's largest Buddhist monument.
Built during the eighth and ninth centuries A.D.,
this religious structure with its wide base
and tiered mound is another example of a pyramid
consisting of six rectangular terraces
topped by three concentric circular terraces.
This intricate pyramid design has intrigued scholars,
especially when viewed from the air.
(tense music)
- The Borobudur Temple is known as a shrine,
but also a place of pilgrimage
where people start at the base
and work their way up to the top,
which they theorize is like reaching Nirvana.
(tense music)
- Borobudur, Indonesia is one of the most
amazing places in the world.
Number one, it's incredibly beautiful,
but number two, the message it conveys
is absolutely mind boggling
because what we have there is a temple mound,
a temple mound to the stars.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] From overhead, the temple takes the form
of a giant Buddhist mandala,
a unique circular diagram representing both the cosmos
and a spiritual place for prayer and meditation.
The design indicates that this pyramid
was once a place where man connected with the gods.
(tense music)
Researchers question why
and how the builders would create
such an intricate religious symbol
that can only be viewed from the air.
But according to ancient astronaut theorists,
the answer can be found on top of the pyramid
where there are 72 bell-shaped structures known as stupas,
each housing a seated statue of Buddha.
(mysterious music)
- They are considered to be world eggs
or wombs of transformation.
It's fascinating because in India,
the word for stupa is the word shikhara, which means tower.
Shikhara is very much like the Egyptian word saqqara,
which is a place, the place of the step pyramid
or the stairway to heaven.
And it makes me wonder if the ancient Egyptians
and the ancient Indians were telling us
the same thing about the stupas,
that these are in fact wombs of transformation,
ladders, or cosmic stairways into the heavens.
(ambient music)
- The journey didn't happen in their heads.
It wasn't something ethereal,
it wasn't something spiritual.
It happened.
Extraterrestrial contact took place
in Indonesia thousands of years ago.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] Ancient astronaut theorists
believe proof may be found
in the archaeological ruins of ancient pyramids,
proof that is hidden in plain sight.
(bright music)
- [Narrator] Shaanxi Province, China, 1947.
While flying 40 miles southwest of Sian,
Colonel Maurice Sheahan discovered a giant,
mysterious mound, isolated in the Guanzhong Plains.
Within days, Sheahan reports his account
to The New York Times, describing what he believed
was a giant pyramid in China,
that seemed to dwarf the Great Pyramid of Egypt.
Since the story broke, 37 more pyramid shaped mounds
have been identified in China, including the mausoleum
of the first Qin emperor,
where thousands of terracotta warrior statues
were buried in the third century BC.
But while mainstream scientists
contend the mounds are simply tombs
of the early emperors of China,
some researchers believe they are, in fact, pyramids
that have been covered up by the Chinese government.
- We have pictures of these.
And, it's pretty convincing that they're pyramid structures.
It's in the forbidden zone of China,
so, unfortunately, we can't go in there.
But that raises the question, what is going on?
- The pyramids in China were a mystery
for the outside world for the longest time.
(haunting drone)
We had some photos during the 1940s and 1950s.
And then during the 1970s and 1980s,
the Chinese government ordered plants
to be planted on top of those pyramids.
They wanted to show them as the natural hills
to the outside world.
- It's interesting to note
that the pyramidal structures in China
were purposely covered over with plants
and vegetation by the government,
to just look like normal rolling hills.
Maybe because of the significance of the artifacts
and presence of what took place in the past
at these structures, they don't want tourists
or anyone to disrupt these sacred sites.
- [Narrator] Why is the Chinese government
attempting to hide these giant structures?
Is it really to protect the sacred tombs
of China's ancient emperors?
Or might the government be attempting to hide
another, even more profound secret?
- Now, an interesting correlation with this
is that ancient Chinese emperors
claim contact with extraterrestrials
in their writing.
And they claim that people from the sky came down
and helped them with information,
and therefore, there could be a historical record
that could possibly link these pyramids
with visitors from another planet.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Is it possible
as ancient astronaut theorists believe
that the Chinese pyramids,
like others found all over the world,
have an extraterrestrial connection?
And could this explain why the Chinese government
would want to conceal them?
If so, might there be more hidden
and otherwise undiscovered pyramids in other countries,
countries that want to ensure
that the truth of their extraterrestrial origin
will never be known?
(slow tense music)
Visoko, Bosnia.
Since 2005, these triangular-shaped hills
located 20 miles northwest of the capital city of Sarajevo
have been the subject of a controversial debate
between mainstream scientists
and a handful of international researchers
led by Bosnian historian and archeologist,
Dr. Sam Osmanagic.
According to Osmanagic, the hills are, in fact,
engineered pyramids,
including two, the Pyramid of the Sun
and the Pyramid of the Moon,
that are both taller than any in Egypt.
(tense music)
- They look like hills,
but you could see four triangular faces,
obvious corners.
And when I took compass,
compass shows me that those sides match
with the cardinal points,
east, west, north, and south.
The orientation of the sides
of the Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun
is the most precise on the planet.
- There are people who look at the hills of Visoko
in Bosnia,
they see a pyramid that looks like a hill.
Other people see a hill that looks like a pyramid.
When I went there, I was looking for evidence of cut stones.
There seemed to be evidence of the activities of man
that go back much earlier than previously believed.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] Osmanagic's theory suggests the pyramids
were built by the Illyrian people
who inhabited the Balkan Peninsula
as far back as the 12th century B.C.
Little is known about the prehistoric Illyrians
but Osmanagic thinks they were more sophisticated
than many experts have suggested.
- The pyramids were built by the civilizations
far more advanced than we are today.
When we find binding material on the blocks
of the Bosnian pyramids,
we got the age of 12,350 years,
meaning that these are the oldest pyramids on the planet
and they require that our history books be changed.
(bright music)
- [Narrator] Mainstream geologists insist the mountains
are simply geological formations
made up of natural rock and soil.
And that Osmanagic's pyramid theory lacks credibility.
But Osmanagic claims to have discovered evidence
of advanced human construction,
(bright music)
including a paved entrance plateau,
an extensive underground network of tunnels and chambers,
and concrete building blocks
each weighing up to 80,000 pounds.
- On the Sun Pyramid, the whole pyramid is covered
by approximately 18 million tons of concrete.
We have analyzed them in six institutes for materials.
The answer is always the same.
This is artificial concrete,
which is three times of better quality
than what we have in 21st century.
Where did they find the material
to build such a huge pyramid?
- What we're beginning to realize
about the Bosnian pyramid side
is not just that we are dealing with one of the most
gigantic pyramid complexes in the world,
also one of the oldest ones,
but also one whereby the approach
which is being taken there
is probably going to tell us an awful lot of new material,
not just about the Bosnian pyramids as such,
but about pyramids worldwide.
(mysterious music)
- [Narrator] Despite Osmanagic's findings,
mainstream scientists continue to deny the existence
of the Bosnian pyramids.
But why?
Is there something hidden in these hillsides
that the government wants kept secret?
Just like the pyramids of China.
(slow music)
- We seem to have been conditioned from childhood,
from texts such as the Quran and the Bible
that we are limited in terms of how long
we have existed as a civilized people.
(dramatic tense music)
But the oral traditions of many cultures state clearly
that our humanity goes back farther back in time
than what Western science believes.
Conventional science is almost like a closed system.
They have a very structured belief system,
and anything which doesn't fit within their belief system
is simply rejected or hidden from us.
This is what is called forbidden archaeology.
(dramatic tense music)
- We can see them, we can explore them,
and the stuff that has already been explored
leads to the idea that this place
has been in fact been built artificially.
(dramatic tense music)
So, what's with all the secrecy about the Bosnian pyramids?
Well, if the Bosnian pyramids were, in fact, manmade,
then that turns the entire history of Bosnia upside down
because who were the builders?
Who were the teachers of the builders?
(rattles)
And so, a whole new line of questioning opens up.
(soft tranquil music)
- [Narrator] Moscow, Russia.
Each year, hundreds of thousands of visitors
travel to a location 25 miles northwest
of the Russian capital,
where a massive pyramid made of fiberglass
is said to amplify
and focus healing energies from the earth.
(bell clanging)
The 144-foot tall, 55-ton structure
is the largest of 17 pyramids located across Russia,
and was financed and built by Russian scientist
and defense contractor, Alexander Golod.
(bell clanging)
- Many people do not realize
that there are large modern pyramids
in Russia and in the Ukraine.
And this was because around 1989,
Alexander Golod from Moscow
believed that pyramids produce large energy fields
that could affect both biological
and non-biological materials.
(eerie music)
- In the past 10 years, the Russian scientists
have looked deeply into the question of pyramid energies,
and they have shown that by placing items within a pyramid
that it promotes growth, it promotes health,
it promotes longevity.
- They've discovered, for example,
that if you take antibiotics and you treat them
in the pyramid for a period of one moon cycle
or about 28 days, that the power of the antibiotic
was multiplied tens of thousands of times.
- This energy field has been documented to exist.
The Russian Air Force noticed a large energy field
that they picked up on their radar,
a mile high going above Golod's large pyramid in Moscow.
- [Narrator] Is it possible that the energy effect
of Golod's pyramid is a phenomenon that scientists
are only now just beginning to understand?
Or could ancient civilizations around the world
have been aware of this pyramid power,
thousands, if not, tens of thousands of years ago?
- The placement of the pyramids are very interesting
because they seem to be placed where the energy is.
And I think the ancients understood this very carefully,
but they were also mapping the planet at the same time,
so they were like multi-purpose structures.
And they were left there for future generations
to work with, and they encode very high knowledge
within the mathematics and the geometry.
And we're just starting to understand the nature of it now.
- If you have certain underground energies,
once you place the pyramid on top of it,
then the pyramid can harness, can use,
can multiply those energy effects 10 or 50 times,
and then you have a perfect energy machines.
- The word pyramid comes from the ancient Greek
meaning fire in the center.
The ancient Greeks thought
that the geometric shape of pyramids focused cosmic energy
and that pyramids all over the world
were some kind of energy collectors.
(spooky music)
- [Narrator] Could ancient civilizations
have built pyramids
not just to represent a symbolic cosmic connection,
but to mark a place of actual extraterrestrial contact
as many ancient astronaut theorists believe?
Some researchers suggest evidence can be found
in Central America where the Mayans
built more pyramid temples
than any other civilization in antiquity.
- In terms of pyramid builders, it's safe to say
that the Maya created more pyramids
than every other culture in the world combined.
But the functions of buildings in classic Maya society
is really one of the weakest points that archaeology has.
We don't have a good idea about what pyramids were used for.
- In different Maya cities, we have many pyramids.
The biggest Maya city was Tikal.
Tikal is in today's Guatemala.
And there were around 80 pyramids.
(birds chirping)
And on top of these towers, we had a little temple
where the god was expected to come.
- All of these pyramids,
even though they have a temple on top,
also had a chamber inside.
And it is known that certain rituals
were performed inside these chambers.
These chambers were also identified
as places of transformation
where people had to go to and came out differently.
Differently because they had been
contacted by or had contacted the gods.
- The Maya, as many other ancient cultures,
viewed planets and the moon and the sun as gods.
And I think that was the motivation for the Maya
to collect incredible bodies of data about planets
to try to see what are the gods' patterns
and how can we emulate and honor them?
- In many of the religious belief systems,
the function of the pyramid was to connect
that above with that which is below.
Now that's symbolic.
It could mean simply that people were calling to the gods
from on top of these pyramids,
or it could go much deeper than that.
It could be an actual connection between human beings
and beings from other planets.
(choir vocalizing)
- [Narrator] Is it possible that the Mayans
and other ancient cultures were given information
about the energy producing properties of pyramids
from extraterrestrial beings?
And if so, what could be the true function
of these structures?
Ancient astronaut theorists
believe the Great Pyramid of Giza
may hold the ultimate proof
that the pyramids could generate enough energy
to reach not just across the planet,
but across the universe.
- [Narrator] Giza, Egypt.
In 1977, and then again in 1987,
electronics engineer and inventor, Joe Parr,
conducted experiments on the top of the Great Pyramid.
(pulsing suspenseful music)
Using equipment of his own design,
Parr measured the pyramid's electrical,
magnetic, and radioactive properties.
- Joe Parr, who was my very close friend
and research colleague, discovered what I believe
is the most incredible discovery
about the Great Pyramid and pyramids in general.
Joe believed that the pyramids
had an energy field around them.
All pyramids had it.
The problem is the pyramid energy field
was usually not strong enough.
So he developed in his laboratory a method,
for generating this pyramid energy,
so then he could actually do scientific studies on it.
- Over the last few decades,
people have been experimenting with pyramids.
What has come to the forefront of this
is the fact that pyramids are an enigma.
They really have powers which are very hard to explain.
And so people like Joe Parr have been looking into this.
When somebody goes to the top of the Great Pyramid
and experiences this weird electromagnetic vibration,
this is not just a coincidence,
but this has to do with the fact
that the Great Pyramid is causing this.
(eerie music)
- Joe Parr found out that if he put
a model pyramid, and spun it in the centrifuge
through an alternating magnetic current,
an energy field, or he calls it an orb or bubble,
would form around the model pyramid.
Joe found that this bubble or energy orb
would block all known types
of electromagnetic radiation, even gamma rays.
Now, this was interesting.
We don't know of any types
of energy forces that could do this.
This is the most incredible thing
about Joe Parr's discovery.
- [Narrator] In later laboratory experiments,
Parr claimed to have discovered yet another
strange physical phenomenon.
The model pyramid became weightless in the energy field
and began to move in a specific direction.
- He calculated the direction of this energy field,
where the pyramid would shoot out from.
And guess what?
It aligns exactly where we would see
the constellation Orion.
So, Joe speculated that it went into hyperspace.
This is speculation, but it makes a lot of sense.
In string theory in physics, it postulates
the existence of six additional spatial dimensions.
So how do we know the way this energy fields were set up,
it allows this pyramid to go into another dimension
and travel? (suspenseful music)
Joe never proved this, but before he died,
he believed that the pyramid acts as a time machine,
if you could unlock its key.
- I believe that it's a gateway
or a portal into multiple dimensions,
that would enable a transmission
of people, objects, or consciousness
from other dimensions into our dimension.
- [Narrator] Is it possible, like Joe Parr believed,
that the Great Pyramid could facilitate travel
through interdimensional space?
(space whirring)
And if so, were there other pyramids
with the same capabilities?
Might the Earth's pyramids be connected
not simply by shape, but by purpose?
Perhaps as part of some otherworldly plan?
- The ancient people were all building these same pyramids
because it was a way for them to to tap into
the natural energy of the earth.
And you have to think, that whoever is guiding
such a precise network of pyramids
must have been a very advanced culture,
probably extraterrestrials.
(eerie music)
- In all of this, I have one single question.
Where are the blueprints?
If all of this was so incredibly important,
then wouldn't you think that we would have
at least one record of some type of a blueprint?
And the reality is there is not a single piece.
Why?
Could it be because the blueprints have disappeared?
(driving electronic music)
- [Narrator] Pyramids, interconnected by design,
transforming the Earth's electromagnetic power
and serving as gateways for otherworldly travelers.
Is it really possible that the ancient pyramids
are part of an advanced, perhaps alien, technology,
one which we have not yet discovered?
If so, what will happen when their secrets are unlocked?
(explosion of light)
Is mankind finally ready for the truth?
Mysterious structures, numbering in the thousands.
- They created as many as 250 within this valley alone.
- [Narrator] Monuments containing secret powers.
- It could be a device used to transmit
a type of energy that we still can't fully understand.
- [Narrator] And architectural wonders,
that could change everything we know about our past.
- It's really rewriting the history of the world.
- [Narrator] All across the earth,
there are massive pyramids, many so old,
that their origins are completely unknown.
But some believe there are thousands more,
hidden by oceans, jungles, and the desert sands.
And that once we find them, they will reveal
shocking truths about our past.
- Is it possible that extraterrestrials
have guided humans to build pyramids,
for some special reason of their own?
- [Narrator] Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past,
by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape our history?
And if so, might there be a connection
between aliens and Earth's hidden pyramids?
(eerie music)
Western China, May 21st, 1992.
(explosion resonates) An underground
nuclear explosion, on the Lop Nor test range,
sends shockwaves through the earth.
The event is recorded by US government seismometers,
which reveal unexpected geological anomalies
under the Earth, just north of Anchorage, Alaska.
Six months later, a US Army counterintelligence officer
stationed at nearby Fort Richardson,
Douglas Muchler, sees a local news report
that claims these underground scans
had detected a colossal pyramid structure
50 miles southwest of Mount McKinley.
Muchler contacts the station to find out more,
but mysteriously they tell him
no further information is available.
(helicopter whirring)
- There has been talk that there's a pyramid up in Alaska.
But nobody seems to be investigating that.
Maybe because it's so remote,
or maybe they have investigated it
and they just don't want to tell us about it.
- [Narrator] Frustrated by the lack of information,
Sergeant Muchler contacts journalist Linda Moulton Howe,
who reaches out across her network,
searching for anyone that could shed light
on the Alaska pyramid story.
(woman testifying)
- [Narrator] Soon after, she receives a response
from a man who requests to remain anonymous.
He claims his father was an engineer,
who got a firsthand look at the secret pyramid.
- His father had had a navy career,
and then was asked to continue to work in Alaska,
(car roars past)
on a very special project, that involved
something underground that put out a lot of energy.
There were mining shaft elevators on the surface.
He would go down to the base
of a huge underground pyramid.
His work was to try to understand
how this was giving off what they estimated
was a gigantic amount of energy.
(lightning cracking)
But he never would talk,
because this was a government secret.
(eerie music)
- There is no doubt in my mind
that there is a coverup going on,
and that something was found there in Alaska.
I think the reason why it's been covered up
is that we would have to completely rewrite
the science of human origins,
the concept that at one point
there was a global, industrialized civilization
that had reached a technology
that is in fact superior to our own,
because we cannot easily build pyramids like this today.
- [Narrator] Could it be, as some ancient
astronaut theorists suggest,
that the United States government
is hiding the Alaskan pyramid,
until they can fully comprehend
and harness its power?
Perhaps the answer can be found 4,400 miles away.
- [Narrator] Central China, 1945.
While transporting supplies from India,
US Army Air Corps pilot James Gaussman
spots a mysterious structure,
that becomes known as the Great White Pyramid.
- One of the most unusual stories of pyramids
came out of World War II.
The story is of an American pilot
who was flying the Burma hump
over to Chongqing in central China.
And what he claimed he saw was a huge pyramid
up in the valley, with a gigantic,
crystal capstone on the top of it.
(dramatic music crash)
- [Narrator] Two years later, The New York Times reported
that Colonel Maurice Sheahan, another American aviator
flying over central China,
spotted a 1,000-foot-high pyramid in the same area.
Since then, many more pyramidal structures
have been discovered throughout the region,
some of them covered in vegetation,
seemingly camouflaged to look like natural formations.
But the Chinese government denies
that there are any pyramids in China at all,
claiming that any structures resembling pyramids
are actually burial mounds, from the Han Dynasty.
- Still to this day, the subject
of the Chinese pyramids is very rarely discussed.
However, you can go on Google Earth
and you can see the pyramids
of the Sian province for yourself,
by just zooming in on this area.
But the Chinese government
does not want you to go in this area.
It is declared off limits to everyone
except for the local peasant farmers in that region.
What are they hiding?
- [Narrator] Could these pyramids reveal
a different version of history,
than what the Chinese government wants us to know?
Curiously, other modern discoveries of pyramids
have been met with similar denials.
In 2005, Dr. Sam Osmanagich, a professor of anthropology
and amateur archaeologist, announced that he had found
five ancient pyramids hidden in Bosnia,
a claim that the Bosnian government
initially supported, but then later denied.
- When I first saw the pyramids in Bosnia,
they looked like hills,
but you could see the regular geometry,
four triangular faces, obvious corners.
And when I took compass, compass shows me
that those sides match cardinal points.
I knew immediately that these were artificial structures,
below the layers of soil and vegetation.
They tell us that the pyramids
were built only in Egypt and Mexico.
Wrong.
They are built on all six continents,
from Asia, Africa, Europe,
Central, North and South America.
So they're worldwide phenomenon.
In 21st century, we'll need to establish a new science,
which will finally answer the question
to who, when, how, and why built
the oldest and the most superior pyramids?
- [Narrator] But why would governments around the world
want to try and discredit these new discoveries of pyramids?
- World governments might not want
to be forthcoming with this information.
Just like we've seen with the Chinese government,
places like Alaska and others might also hold
hidden wealths of archaeological finds,
that we still have yet to uncover.
- [Narrator] Are there ancient pyramids
that are deliberately being kept secret from the public?
Might the discovery of these,
and an untold number of other hidden pyramids,
expose the truth about our origins?
Perhaps further clues can be found
in a region of South America that contains
more pyramids than any other place on earth.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Northern Peru, the Lambayeque Valley.
What appears today to be a ravine of large earthen hills,
is in fact a lost ancient city.
For centuries, this region was overlooked by archaeologists.
But in 1988, explorer Thor Heyerdahl
investigated the mysterious mounds
and determined them to be manmade structures.
The excitement at what he and his team found
led to a series of excavations,
and to the discovery that what had long
been considered natural formations
were in fact massive adobe brick pyramids,
severely ravaged by time.
And this vast system of monuments was built
by what might very well have been
the most prolific pyramid builders of all.
- This was the site of a culture called the Sican.
And these people,
who rose about 715 AD,
seemed to be absolutely obsessed
with the creation of pyramids.
In fact, they created as many as 250
within this valley alone.
And in one particular town, they created 26
that were all basically back to back, side by side.
And it would seem that the stories
from the myths and legends of these people
is that they felt that they had to do this.
'Cause if they didn't create these pyramids,
the world would quite literally come to an end.
- [Narrator] Archaeologists suggest
that it would've taken 2,000 workers an entire year
just to make the mud bricks for one
of the 26 pyramids here in the city of Tucume.
But who could have engineered
such a massive construction project?
Is it possible the builders
had access to advanced technology?
- If they had help to build these pyramids,
it would solve a lot of problems,
in trying to understand how a civilization
could mount such a daunting enterprise.
(dramatic music builds)
- [Narrator] According to mainstream historians,
the Sican people mysteriously disappeared in 1375.
Although there are no written records
revealing why they were obsessed with building pyramids,
ancient astronaut theorists say clues may be found
by examining the multiple images of Birdman
that archaeologists discovered inside one of the structures.
- The Birdman image is something that's iconic
of depicting someone who can come from the sky.
So these glyphs that are seen on the walls
of these structures are particularly interesting.
The idea that we have the pyramids,
that we have this representation
of people coming from the sky,
is yet another validation of an amazing structure
built with the assistance
of some being that came from the skies.
(spaceship whirring)
(bright curious music)
- [Narrator] Depictions of creatures
that are half bird and half man
have been discovered in many ancient cultures.
Approximately 1,400 miles south of Tucume,
in Bolivia, carvings of Birdman
can be found on the sun gate at Tiwanaku.
According to the local Incan mythology,
these are beings who came down from the sky
with the creator god, Viracocha.
(gentle pulsing music)
Similar stories can be found on Easter Island
with the so-called Birdman cult,
in Japan, where supernatural birdman beings
called Tengu are revered.
And on the other side of the world in ancient Sumeria,
birdmen known as the Anunnaki, were said to be
advanced beings that came down from the heavens,
to colonize the earth.
- You have to wonder if these birdmen
aren't the Anunnaki who are coming from ancient Sumeria
who have these elongated heads.
And so it's possible that these Anunnaki extraterrestrials
were coming to Peru and to Tucume,
and instructing the people on building these pyramids.
- I don't think that it is pure coincidence
that there are so many motifs all around the world
that are not just similar, but in many cases identical.
That to me indicates that not only were they not isolated,
but that they were visited by the same people,
by visitors from the sky.
And the only way our ancestors could make sense of it
is to outfit them with wings.
- [Narrator] Interestingly, the Sican people
who occupied this area of Peru
not only made carvings of Birdman,
but also told stories of a mysterious being
who helped build their society
and then disappeared into the sky.
- The great heroic leader of the people was Melayu.
He built the pyramids and taught them a new religion.
And when he felt that his work was done,
he went down to the seashore, turned himself into a bird,
and flew off into the heavens,
and is in the end a celestial being.
(bright curious music)
- [Narrator] Could it be that the birdmen
depicted in Tucume were really alien beings,
that came down to earth and helped the Sican people
to build hundreds of pyramids?
Perhaps the answer can be found by examining pyramids
discovered on the other side of the world,
deep beneath the sea.
(mysterious music)
- [Narrator] Yonaguni Island, Japan.
September, 1997.
Multiple teams of researchers, geologists,
and professional divers launch an underwater expedition
near the southernmost of the remote Ryukyu Islands.
They are there to investigate a mysterious stone
configuration known as the Yonaguni pyramid.
Less than a hundred feet below the surface,
the divers come across rock formations, including pillars,
ledges, platforms,
(water bubbling)
and giant steps that appear to be carved out of the bedrock.
- The Yonaguni Monument has been altered by carving
and it has been very carefully carved
into megaliths, platforms, stairways.
The only problem is that it's built for giants.
The stairs are immense.
So who built this monument
and what cataclysmic event sent it to the bottom of the sea?
- There are all these different cuts that seem to be
of artificial origin and not of a natural origin
because it's too precise.
Was the Yonaguni artificially altered at a time
when the water levels of the oceans were lower?
We know that this happened at some point
during the last Ice Age, which was 14,000 years ago.
- Now we have to remember that at the end
of the last Ice Age,
sea levels were as much
as 300 plus feet lower than they are today.
So at that time, this structure
would've been above sea level.
It would've been, at that time, dried land.
- [Narrator] Could the massive underwater structure
known as Yonaguni really be the remnants
of an advanced civilization
that existed here on earth more than 10,000 years ago?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes
and claim that further evidence can be found
in Polynesian stories of a long lost continent called Mu.
- The Yonaguni monument may represent the remains
of a transpacific civilization that the Polynesians call Mu.
There is evidence throughout Polynesia
for an ancient megalithic civilization.
There are similar ruins off the coast of Pohnpei.
The ruins are partially submerged.
- This lost continent of Mu
was in the middle of the Pacific Ocean
and it encompassed Hawaii and Tahiti, Tonga, and Samoa
and even Easter Island were all part
of this lost continent of Mu.
And the central pyramid complex in Tonga is called Mu'a.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] While most conventional scholars
dismiss the story of Mu as being mythology,
ancient astronaut theorists suggest
an enormous new discovery in Southeast Asia could provide
irrefutable evidence that this law civilization
did in fact, exist.
West Java, Indonesia.
Located in Karyamukti Village is a mysterious site
called Gunung Padang or Mountain of Enlightenment.
For thousands of years,
the local population revered Gunung Padang as a sacred site
and many came here to meditate among the giant stone blocks.
But in 1914, Dutch explorers discovered
that the basalt columns scattered across the hilltop
are not natural features at all.
They are, in fact, fragments of an ancient megalithic site.
A century later in 2013,
the Indonesian government sponsored an excavation
to see if anything was hidden beneath the layers
of dirt and rubble.
What they found was evidence that suggests
Gunung Padang is the world's oldest step pyramid
(lightning crash)
- Gunung Padang is probably
the most remarkable megalithic structure
in the whole of Southeast Asia,
and what it consists of is a hillside
on the top of which is a series of terraces
on which are structures made from basaltic pillars
and other types of structure.
- But what is really important is the age of it.
It has been analyzed by Indonesian geologists
and he seemed to have very good data from boreholes,
from radiocarbon analysis, from seismic sections.
As I've done around the Great Sphinx
that this site goes back an incredible
20,000 or so years, maybe slightly more than that.
- [Narrator] According to geologists, 20,000 years ago,
Java, where Gunung Padang is located,
was not an isolated island but the southernmost part
of a subcontinent known as Sundaland.
This has led some researchers to speculate
that Gunung Padang with its high elevation,
could have been at the pinnacle
of a civilization that disappeared sometime
around 10,000 BC
when melting ice caps flooded the region
and turned it into the series of islands it is today.
- The compelling suggestion is that there was some sort
of civilization here before this flood took place,
that they built this with advanced technology
and therefore, they were extraterrestrial visitors
to the Earth.
And that's why archaeologists are not finding the evidence
that we would normally expect
to see showing a geometric progression
of technology leading up to the ability to build
a gigantic pyramid well over 12,000 years ago.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Ancient astronaut theorists believe Sundaland
is only one piece of an enormous underwater puzzle
that when put together, will reveal
there was an advanced culture here on Earth
tens of thousands of years ago.
(dramatic music)
But why did they build pyramids?
Is it possible pyramids played a powerful central role
in the colonization of the planet?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest
the answers may lie not only underwater
but buried beneath the sand
In Egypt.
(sinister music)
- [Narrator] Cairo, Egypt.
On the west Bank of the Nile River
sits the world's most iconic pyramid complex,
the Pyramids of Giza.
These ancient marvels of engineering
have fascinated mankind for over 4,000 years,
and they are just a handful
of roughly 130 pyramid structures
that have been excavated in the Egyptian deserts to date.
But for ancient astronaut theorists,
even more fascinating
than the Egyptian pyramids that have been found
are those still waiting to be discovered.
Many archaeologists believe that Egypt may be home to dozens
and perhaps even hundreds of hidden pyramids.
- I believe, just like many other scholars do,
that we've only uncovered
less than one third of ancient Egypt.
(suspenseful music)
I am sure there are so many pyramids
that are buried underneath the sand.
But now, there's a new hope.
Satellite imaging technology is the new tool
that can help us find and locate missing pyramids
underneath the sands of Egypt.
- [Narrator] In 2010, Egyptologist Ramy Romany
was part of a team of researchers
looking for lost ancient cities.
Using infrared images from commercial and NASA satellites,
they found something promising 15 miles south of Giza
in the area of Saqqara.
- The satellite image that we had
was just two days after a strong rain.
We found a square-shaped patch in the desert
that the color got darker as you got into the middle of it,
which means the water was absorbed less
right in the middle
and absorbed more towards the end,
which indicates a pyramid-shaped structure
underneath the sand.
Once the digging started,
the political situation in Egypt got really bad
and the digging had to stop.
I believe that there's a pyramid down there, missing.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Ramy and his fellow researchers believe
they have found a total of 17 hidden pyramids
buried across the Egyptian desert.
(mysterious music)
- There are so many pyramids out there yet to be found.
We have evidence that ancient Egyptian kings
built pyramids all the way through the Middle Kingdom,
more than a hundred kings.
- [Narrator] But if there are hundreds of hidden pyramids
buried under the sand in Egypt alone,
then how many might there be worldwide,
and what was their original purpose?
- Because of technology,
we are really entering into an exciting new era
of exploration and discovery.
(suspenseful music)
And we are finding more pyramids than ever
all around the world,
in South America, in Central America,
even on remote islands,
and even pyramids underwater.
(laser beeping)
(ocean rumbling)
- [Narrator] Many mainstream archaeologists propose
that the reason pyramids were built
throughout the ancient world
(mysterious music)
is simply because the design
which distributes the majority of the weight
closer to the ground
was the easiest way to create stable monumental structures.
But ancient astronaut theorists contend
that most of the pyramids are, in fact,
marvels of engineering.
(lasers whooshing)
- These people are moving gigantic 100-ton blocks of stone
and assembling them into perfect, beautiful pyramids
that have still held together
and weathered the test of time nearly 5,000 years later.
And that's based on the conventional dating.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Ancient astronaut theorists suggest
further evidence of a connection
between these early pyramid-building societies
can be found
by comparing their architectural styles.
- There are pyramids all around the world
that show incredible similarities.
We have the pyramids in Mexico.
Now there's ones that have been discovered in Peru.
There's also pyramids in China,
in Tenerife, Mauritius, many other places,
and it really does suggest there was something
very interesting going on there in pre-history.
- You know, something has to be said
about the striking similarities between pyramidal structures
that can be found, for example,
at the Candi Sukuh pyramid in Indonesia
as compared to El Castillo in Chichen Itza.
(stone booming)
- If you have similarities
throughout this entire vast planet of pyramids,
then there had to have been some influence from the outside
that helped those people of that era
build and construct these.
The architect is probably the same.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Is it possible that the pyramids
found all over the world really are in some way connected?
And could it be that the ancients built them
to serve a purpose modern man has yet to understand?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes,
and claim further clues may be found
by closely examining the shape of the pyramid itself.
(somber music)
- [Narrator] Auckland, New Zealand, 1952.
Airline pilot Bruce Cathie spots a UFO
hovering over the city's harbor.
(chilling music)
The craft holds him spellbound
before vanishing straight up into the sky.
The sighting turned out to be the first of many
Cathie would have over the next two decades.
He recorded all of them,
documenting their exact flight paths,
and a startling pattern began to emerge.
(somber music)
- He spotted multiple UFO sightings.
They all followed the same north-south grid lines,
and east-west grid lines.
What he realized was is that perhaps
they were powering their crafts with this particular grid
'cause the earth is like a hugely powerful energy source.
(soft chiming music)
- [Narrator] Cathie worked with software engineer Rod Maupin
to create Gridpoint Atlas,
a computer program designed to map out his theory
that electromagnetic lines crisscrossed the planet.
According to ancient astronaut theorists,
many of the world's ancient cultures
were also aware of this global energy grid.
- All around the world, we find megalithic sites
that are connected by geodetic grid lines
and energy lines that naturally form from the earth.
(energy crackles)
And that there is clear evidence
that there was some kind of ancient survey of the planet
that took place in antiquity.
And the evidence now is the placement
of where these megalithic sites are
that we can still see today.
(upbeat dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Is it possible the ancients
built their pyramids
to tap into the same electromagnetic fields
as extraterrestrials use to power their crafts?
- If we knew the truth,
if we had a sophisticated enough perspective
on planets and geomagnetic fields,
we might realize that the sphere of the earth
with a molten core that sets up these magnetic fields
is exactly what other intelligences look for
in order to use pyramids in a way
that we still have never been introduced to,
at least publicly.
(electromagnetic buzzing)
And that once you have them in the right position,
in the right magnetic field structure,
you have free energy forever.
And this sounds incredible.
It is incredible.
- [Narrator] Some ancient astronaut theorists contend
that pyramids were not only built
to harness the Earth's energy,
but to amplify it by using the pyramidal shape itself.
(heavy bass music)
- There are certain pioneering scientists
that have made the suggestion that the secret
to how the atom is powered is gravity.
(heavy bass music)
That there is, in fact, a union
between gravity and electromagnetism.
So, if the Earth is a sphere
and the energy is flowing in from all directions,
you build the shape of a pyramid.
And as that matter is being created,
you get a swirling current.
And that swirling current generates a great deal
of rotational inertia in the center of the pyramid.
(suspenseful music)
- The Great Pyramid does make an electromagnetic energy.
I have taken over the years instruments into the pyramid,
converts this energy
we're talking about into a voltage,
and measuring in Los Angeles,
it was putting out about 0.08 volts.
(electricity crackling)
And when I took it into the Great Pyramid,
it was producing 1200 millivolts,
which means 1.2 volts.
And the area around the pyramid
was putting out the same voltage.
(eerie music)
- [Narrator] Ancient astronaut theorists contend
that Earth's pyramids were not only designed
for energy disbursement or powering spacecraft,
but were also interconnected to act as communication hubs
and possibly even teleportation docks
capable of transporting living beings between pyramids
both here on Earth and on other worlds.
- If we look at all the specific instances
of pyramids being placed around the globe,
it could be that
the Great Pyramid was meant to interconnect
with these other pyramids that were built
so purposely in different locations,
and could have been orchestrated
by an extraterrestrial species
for reasons we're still unable to fathom.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Might pyramids really hold the key
to self-sustaining energy?
(flash of pure energy)
Was the Great Pyramid of Egypt,
in addition to an untold number of other pyramids
hidden around the planet,
part of a global power network?
But if so, what happened to them?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest
further clues found in Giza provide evidence
that an earlier advanced civilization
was deliberately covered up.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] The Giza Plateau, Egypt, 2008.
Researchers from the University of the Aegean
and the University of Athens
perform a study on the stones
used for many of the region's ancient monuments.
What they discover is that most of these structures,
including the Giza pyramids,
contain hundreds of thousands of marine fossils.
The find intensifies the debate
between archaeologists who suggest
that the blocks used to build the pyramids
were cast like concrete,
versus those who say they were carved out of natural stone.
But for ancient astronaut theorists,
it raises another question.
Is it possible that the pyramids were not built with stone
that had at one time been submerged beneath the ocean,
but that the pyramids themselves were underwater?
(water bubbling)
- Right in the middle of the desert,
seemingly out of nowhere,
we have fossils from the ocean,
different genres of marine organisms.
Where did they come from and why are they here?
Some say that a great flood did in fact happen,
that it was real.
(thunder booming)
- The flood is clearly presented
as being sent with intent as an attack upon the Earth.
Powers that be,
they had an intent and a purpose for experiment Earth,
which they believe had become corrupted,
and therefore, the flood was sent as an attack,
an assault upon humanity.
(sinister music)
- These gods were going to artificially create
this flood and cataclysm with their super technology.
And who could do that except for extraterrestrials?
- [Narrator] According to the Bible,
God sent the great flood
(thunder booming)
to cleanse the earth
because of the sinful state of mankind.
But if the flood really was sent by extraterrestrials,
as some ancient astronaut theorists suggest,
might it also have been an attempt
to eliminate any trace of the advanced civilization
that existed here on earth in the distant past?
Is it possible that the secrets of the pyramids
were initially covered up, not by humans,
but by an alien race that lived among us
thousands of years ago?
- One has to ask the question,
well, what was wiped out?
Could it be
that it was an incredibly advanced society
that existed before recorded history?
- Many new pyramid structures have been found.
You have pyramids off the coast of Cuba
in 2,000 feet of water.
So, who built those structures?
How did they get there?
- Researcher Frank Joseph has actually found
remnants of at least 10 pyramid-shaped structures
beneath the surface of the water in Rock Lake, Wisconsin.
Two of these pyramids
have actually been explored by scuba divers
and mapped out through the use of sonar,
which is how we figure out where things are
in a deep body of water.
(suspenseful music)
(water gurgling)
- [Narrator] The presence of man-made pyramids
at the bottom of Rock Lake, Wisconsin,
much like the structures that have been found
in China, Alaska, Bosnia,
and off the coasts of Japan and Cuba,
is something that government officials continue to deny.
(suspenseful music)
- Are we living at a time
where keeping things like underground pyramids
is considered a national security threat
to our government
if the truth is told?
I hope that is not the case.
And if there are pyramids that could be linked together,
give this planet energy,
then let's move on with getting past
all these policies of denial
and let's find this pyramid in Alaska
and wherever else they are on the planet.
- [Narrator] How many other lost pyramids
might be out there?
(suspenseful music)
Will the truth about who built these pyramids and why
reveal our connection to an advanced extraterrestrial race
that was here long before
even the earliest known civilizations?
Perhaps one of these hidden pyramids is the key
to activating a global power network
that has been lost for thousands of years,
and when reactivated,
it will once again reconnect us with our alien ancestors.
(camera shutter clicking)
- This gigantic pyramid in Antarctica
would be the oldest pyramid on our planet.
- It's possible that underneath the ice
will be keys for us to reclaim our ancient past.
- The Nazis were particularly interested in Antarctica.
- Saucers were coming up out of the water
and were shooting them with some sort of beam,
literally cutting ships in half.
- Antarctica may hold lost remnants
of an extraterrestrial civilization
that existed there thousands and thousands of years ago.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Since the dawn of civilization,
mankind has credited its origins
to gods and other visitors from the stars.
What if it were true?
Did extraterrestrial beings
really help to shape our history?
And if so, might the ultimate proof be found
when we uncover the pyramids of Antarctica?
(eerie music)
Stretching over 5 million square miles
across the southernmost reaches of the Earth
lies the coldest and most isolated continent in the world,
Antarctica.
(eerie music continues)
Because of its hostile climate,
including average daily temperatures
of minus 49 degrees Fahrenheit
and wind speeds of over 200 miles per hour,
Antarctica remains largely untouched by mankind.
According to historical records,
modern man did not even set foot on the continent
until 1853,
when ship captain Mercator Cooper
landed on what is now known
as the Oates Coast of Victoria Land.
Today, anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000 people
reside at the research stations
scattered across the continent,
braving the extreme conditions
in hopes of learning more about this mysterious landscape.
(dramatic music)
- The thing about Antarctica
is that as much as 98% of it is covered in ice.
And just occasionally, there are little areas
that stick out,
mountaintops, ridges, peaks,
- Antarctica is the least explored
of the continents.
Even the North Pole, which is just ice,
has been explored more and it is a mystery
and it's right here on the Earth.
It's perhaps the last big unexplored part
of our home planet.
- Antarctica is a vast frozen world
and we know very little about it,
and in fact, the ice in Antarctica
is up to three miles thick in certain places.
And what's beneath the ice
is still largely a mystery to scientists.
- You just have to imagine this.
The Sears Tower is a little less under 1/3 of a mile tall,
so you have to imagine that you can stack nine Sears Towers
on top of each other and they would still not peek out
from that ice sheet.
- [Narrator] Most geologists believe Antarctica
has been completely frozen and uninhabited
for over 12 million years, but in 2012,
new photographs revealed formations in the landscape
that challenged this notion.
Mysterious pyramid structures emerging
from the now melting ice.
- Recently, there have been a number of reports
of pyramids being found on Antarctica.
There are various photographs that show what appear
to be perfect four-sided pyramids, very similar in design
to those at Giza, Egypt,
and perhaps, other places around the world.
- [Narrator] While the photos were explained away
by mainstream scientists
as nothing more than natural land formations,
satellite imagery analysts like Joseph White
are not entirely convinced.
In March of 2013, he uncovered
what he believes is evidence of yet another pyramid
located just south of Antarctica's
remote Shackleton mountain range.
- I initially found the structure
whilst looking on Google Earth.
I was, in fact, looking at some of the rather strange
blank spots that you get in Antarctica,
when I stumbled upon this very large square structure,
which seems to be some kind of building
or perhaps even a pyramid, but it's certainly,
very large and very square.
It actually lines up perfectly
with the coordinates of the compass
north, south, east, and west.
And this dictates to me
that it's probably an intelligent structure
because random structures like mountains
are not aligned to the compass.
And another way we know
that a structure is not naturally occurring,
it's generally to look for symmetry,
things like right angles and equilateral triangles
and shapes that you would not normally find in nature.
This structure is exactly two kilometers square,
and this corner to this corner is two kilometers,
and this corner to this corner
is also exactly two kilometers,
which would make this more than double the size
of any pyramid thus far found on Earth.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] While it may seem unthinkable
that pyramids could exist in Antarctica, in recent years,
archaeologists have found pyramids all over the world
that had been lost for centuries,
mistaken as natural formations
or hidden in the most unlikely places.
They have been discovered in the plains of northern Peru,
buried beneath dirt and rubble in Indonesia,
and one may even exist in Los Angeles, California.
- All the way around the world, we find evidence
of pyramid structures.
We should start looking at the possibility
that there was habitation on Antarctica.
Was it a lost civilization?
Could it be ancient astronauts?
And, just maybe, the earliest monuments
of our own civilization came originally from Antarctica.
- If this gigantic pyramid in Antarctica
is an artificial structure,
it would probably be the oldest pyramid on our planet.
And in fact, it might be the master pyramid
that all the other pyramids on planet Earth
were designed to look like.
- There has been extensive research done on pyramids
throughout the world
in terms of their structure
and what it is that they really are.
And one of the theories
is that pyramids are power generators.
(dramatic music)
And so if you have these pyramids strategically placed
around the world generating this charge, it's possible
to create a general standing wave around the world
that is basically a wireless transmission of energy.
- It's been theorized that ancient ships, extraterrestrials
and those with high technology could use this interconnected
wireless energy system to navigate around the planet.
And it makes sense that if there was some kind
of worldwide pyramid power grid like this,
that Antarctica would have pyramids as well.
- The whole idea of these pyramidal structures,
where did it come from?
'Cause it's not an arbitrary thing
and these structures, they exist worldwide.
So you know, what was the impetus, what's the origin?
And even more fascinating,
did they originate on the Antarctic continent?
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Might the pyramid Joseph White claims
to have discovered near the Shackleton mountain range
and other pyramid- shaped formations
recently photographed in Antarctica provide evidence
of extraterrestrial visitation
to our planet in the remote past?
And if they are actually manmade structures,
how is such a thing even possible in a place
that has been buried beneath the ice
for over 12 million years?
According to ancient astronaut theorists,
Antarctica may not have been a frozen continent for as long
as mainstream scientists suggest.
And they say proof can be found
by examining a 500-year-old map depicting the continent
without any ice.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Siberia 2013, a woolly mammoth is discovered
flash frozen in the glacial ice,
engulfed so quickly that its blood and muscle tissue
are perfectly preserved.
It is just one of dozens
that have been found within the Siberian ice
since the turn of the 20th century.
Many seemingly caught in suspended animation,
some with food in their mouths
and vegetation in their stomachs
that would only grow in a much warmer climate.
- The discovery of a woolly mammoth that was flash frozen
raises some interesting scientific questions.
There's something happened very locally
to the woolly mammoth that it froze very fast,
but it does also raise the question
of how quickly can climate really change?
And does it take some sort of cataclysm,
or one that's sudden and unexpected?
(suspenseful music continues)
- [Narrator] In 1958, Charles Hapgood,
a Harvard-educated scientist,
published the book, "Earth's Shifting Crust."
(transition whooshing)
In it, he proposed that portions of the Earth's crust
experienced violent and sudden shifts
during Earth's geological history.
(suspenseful music continues)
His theory, known as crustal displacement,
posited that both Siberia and the continent of Antarctica
were located in slightly more temperate climates
prior to the end of the last ice age,
approximately 12,000 years ago.
But then, some unknown catastrophe
plunged them into their current positions.
(meteorite exploding)
(suspenseful music)
- Professor Hapgood came up with the idea
that the previous North Pole position
had been in the area of the Hudson Bay,
and then it shifted to where the pole is today.
And at the Southern Pole,
he believed that the area of Antarctica
had previously also experienced a temperate climate,
and that this was suddenly now thrust
into this deep ice and this harsh freezing climate.
He believed the last time that this had actually taken place
was approximately 12,000 years ago.
- When we think about Earth crust displacement theory
and plate tectonics,
you want to think of the crust
basically floating on the magma
and being able to shift and move around on top of it.
The Earth's crust is not one solid piece.
We know it's made of individual pieces.
So you can look and see how the continents
probably used to fit together and where they've moved
and how they move apart over a long period of time.
But the question is,
would something the size of Antarctica shift suddenly?
Or is that too big?
- These crustal shifts, according to Hapgood,
actually could happen over a period of even days.
And so if you had a thriving civilization,
this crustal displacement
could have hit it very, very quickly,
and so it could have actually been frozen
over a very short period of time.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Although Hapgood's theory
of sudden large scale shifts of the Earth's crust
was not widely accepted,
renowned physicist, Albert Einstein, was electrified by it,
and even wrote the foreword of Hapgood's book.
Hapgood would also find additional
support for his theory
when in 1960, while combing
through the Library of Congress Archives,
he unearthed an unusual map published in 1531.
The map, credited to mathematician and cartographer,
Orontius Finaeus, appears to depict an ice-free continent
remarkably similar to today's maps of Antarctica.
- It was not until as late as 1820
that we had any real idea of what Antarctica looked like.
Yet here, on the Orontius Finaeus map from 1531,
here was Antarctica.
How the hell is it possible
that it could appear on this map?
- [Narrator] Researchers are baffled
as to how the Orontius Finaeus map could include a continent
that was not discovered until over 300 years later?
And are even more perplexed
by the fact that it depicts Antarctica free of ice.
If explorers somehow discovered Antarctica in the 1500s,
it would've been completely frozen over.
Remarkably, the Finaeus map
shows not only a detailed coastline free of ice,
but the entire continent,
including interior features such as rivers,
valleys, and mountains.
- The map shows mountain ranges
that have rivers coming out of the mountain ranges.
How could that be? It's frozen, it's ice.
There's a NASA image of the continent of Antarctica
using radar so that mountain ranges come through
and can be seen.
And you can see a mountain range on one photograph,
and on the Orontius Finaeus map, it's right there too.
It's the same mountain range.
(ominous music)
- [Narrator] According to climatologists,
the estimates of when this feature
would've been free from ice cover
was at least 6,000 years ago.
So, how is it possible that this map exists?
Did Finaeus have access to an older map,
one dating back thousands of years?
Perhaps more confounding.
US Air Force cartographers that were sent the maps
in the 1960s concluded that they were drawn
using advanced spherical trigonometry
with remarkable precision,
especially when considering the maps
were made hundreds of years ago.
- The fact that we find something that's a reference
to modern day technology on a map that dates back
to the 16th century makes me think,
is it possible that some type
of advanced radar technology was used?
Because in order to produce a map
that would outline the areas we see,
you would have to be at an altitude of 80 miles.
So, how was that possible?
Could it be that the basis for these maps
was gleaned from maps that were cartographed
by extraterrestrial land surveyors?
- The implications of all this,
and if you now are able to add things like pyramids.
This would really indicate that there was some kind
of ancient civilization in Antarctica,
and that it would've been over 12,000 years ago.
And you've got to wonder what kind of civilization this was.
Is it possible that it was extraterrestrials?
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Could Antarctica have been inhabited
by extraterrestrials in the distant past?
Did they study this continent and leave behind
detailed information about its landscape?
If so, just what happened to these otherworldly visitors?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe more clues can be found
in Egyptian stories describing
an earth-altering catastrophe.
(dramatic music)
(gentle music) (transition beeping)
- [Narrator] Edfu, Egypt.
Located on the western bank of the Nile,
the temple of Edfu is one of the largest
and most well-preserved temples of the ancient kingdom,
dating back to 237 B.C.
- The Edfu Temple is of tremendous importance.
As you enter the temple,
it's like you are going inside the book.
It's literally full of texts.
Every wall, every column, every room,
every chamber is filled with text.
They're known collectively as the Edfu Texts.
What is very interesting is that the majority of the texts
speak about the creation of the world.
(transition whooshing)
- [Narrator] According to the texts,
the Earth was created by powerful gods
who came down from the sky,
and these gods first established a place
known as the Island of the Egg.
(gentle music)
- Two gods, they created an island
in the middle of the Eternal Lake.
Creation started with that island.
(gentle music)
- The occupants of this so-called primordial,
mythical world, very strange creatures.
There is seems to be three groups of people.
One called the Sages, one called the Builders,
and the other called the Shebtiu.
Nobody knows who they are.
These are the ones that are very mysterious
because they are said to emerge from the water.
(transition whooshing)
Then the Egyptians believed a series of gods
came and built the first temples.
- It says that here, the first temples were built,
the first ones ever in the world.
And that these became the blueprint
for every temple in Egypt.
- Once all the creator gods have done their job
with creating the world,
they would meet with their big bird and ascend to the sky.
Ancient Egyptians believed with all their heart
that everything listed and inscribed on these walls
are true, true, true.
If the walls say there's an island in the middle of nowhere
where gods would go and ascend to the sky,
then ancient Egyptians, the devoted ones,
would believe that island exists.
(gentle music)
- [Narrator] According to the Edfu Texts,
not all of the occupants left.
And after many generations,
the island suffered a terrible fate.
(transition whooshing)
- The texts are very different
as to what happens to the occupants, these strange gods.
They seem to, once they have set the scene,
once they've built the temples,
they hand over their work to the historical lineage,
and then they depart.
We don't know where they go.
There seems to be something very interesting here.
There seems to be a war going on.
The armies of these divinities is led by this falcon god,
and he battles a kind of enemy represented by snake.
(transition whooshing)
- In the skies appeared what was known as the enemy snake.
It had a name.
It was called the Great Leaping One.
And it was said that immediately it appeared,
there was a time of darkness,
and there was suddenly floods
that destroyed this sacred island.
And when the waters receded,
these original beings who were known as the ancient ones,
or the elder ones, were now no longer there.
Perhaps the Great Leaping One, this enemy snake,
was the memory of the comets
that entered into our inner solar system, broke up,
(meteorite exploding)
causing devastation and destruction.
(fire rustling)
- [Narrator] Might the account of this ancient catastrophe
inscribed on the walls of the Edfu Temple
be describing a natural event?
(transition whooshing)
Or was it a deliberate attack?
An attack targeting in otherworldly civilization,
existing on what we now know as the Antarctic continent.
- We need to take a second look at the Edfu Text
and the story of the Island of the Egg
because it's the source material for Plato's story.
In his story of Atlantis, he gives a very important detail.
He describes it as an immense island,
the size of Libya and North Africa combined.
Now, the thing about it is
that there's only one island on the planet
that's out in the middle of the ocean
that matches that description, and that's Antarctica.
(transition whooshing)
- [Narrator] Curiously, the island continent
depicted on Orontius Finaeus map
reveals a shift of the South Pole of 7.5 degrees,
or nearly 1,000 miles from what it is today.
Might this shift corroborate the accounts
of a major catastrophic event in the remote past?
If so, could the creation myth recorded at Edfu
be describing something more than mythology?
- The cataclysm, which would've shifted Antarctica,
this would've destroyed the civilization that was there,
and then over time,
whatever buildings and pyramids that were there
would be covered with ice.
So the whole idea that
Antarctica is hiding beneath its ice
some ancient civilization is a very intriguing idea
and one that may very well be true.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] Might there actually be evidence
of an ancient extraterrestrial civilization
buried under the ice of Antarctica?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes
and believe that this long history
of an alien presence there
is precisely what brought another occupying force
to its frozen shores, the Nazis.
- [Narrator] Hamburg, Germany, December 1938.
Four years into Adolf Hitler's reign as fuhrer,
he is beginning to establish his total dictatorship
by taking direct control of the German military.
(speaks in foreign language)
(crowd screaming)
- But on the brink of World War II,
Hitler is also involved in much stranger endeavors
that are hidden to the public.
He's committed every remaining resource
to searching for ancient relics
that he believes could hold incredible powers.
On December 17th, the German freighter, MS Schwabenland,
sets out on one of these top secret missions.
(shutter clicks)
Its 33-member team is rumored to include scientists,
military experts, construction crews,
and key members of the Thule Society,
an elite group associated with the Nazis
that focused on mysticism and the occult.
(dramatic music)
32 days later, they arrive at their destination.
Antarctica.
(tense music)
- The Nazis themselves were fascinated
by ancient civilizations
and legends of vanished super races.
They were searching for this lost Arctic home
that they thought that the Aryans had come from.
They were looking all over the world,
and that included Antarctica.
- The Thule Society actually believed
that there were mystics or channels
who were able to communicate with these beings
who claim to be either extraterrestrial in origin
or claim to belong to this civilization
that lived in Earth's interior.
They gave a lot of information about the building
of advanced aerospace vehicles, flying saucers,
and I think this is where a Hitler's Nazi party
got a lot of its information about Antarctica,
that in Antarctica there is this ancient civilization
or bases where they could find
a lot of these advanced technologies.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] During their time in Antarctica,
the Nazis were believed to have mapped
huge swaths of the icy landscape by air.
Ancient astronaut theorists believe they also established
an elaborate underground headquarters known as Base 211.
- Hitler and the Nazis were particularly interested
in Antarctica.
I think they really believed
that there were things going on deep under the ice,
and there have always been rumors that the Nazis
with their submarines have underwater caverns,
small cities that they escaped there after World War II.
(tense music)
- When the Germans got to Antarctica,
what they found were massive cities
that were highly technological,
and these buildings were not just on the surface,
they went deep down underground.
So they began relocating a massive amount of equipment
and personnel to Antarctica
repressurizing these ancient facilities
and reoccupying them.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] In 1946,
one year after the end of World War II,
the U.S. government launched its own large-scale mission
to Antarctica.
(suspenseful music)
Operation Highjump deployed 4,700 troops, 13 ships,
an aircraft carrier,
and a number of seaplanes to Antarctica.
Although the government denied it at the time,
it would later become known
that one of the operations' primary objectives was, quote,
"Extending the United States sovereignty
over the largest practicable area
of the Antarctic continent."
(transition whooshing)
- The U.S. Navy then sent what was basically a flotilla
of armed ships to Antarctica.
In Operation Highjump,
there were stories that were quite strange
that ultimately came out of that expedition,
which ended quite early.
There were stories of craft coming up out of the water,
around the ships, and of flying saucer-type vehicles.
- Saucers were coming up out of the water
and were shooting them with some sort of beam,
literally cutting ships in half.
They were shooting planes out of the sky,
and they traveled so fast that it was almost impossible
to visually reference where the disc was going.
So the American fleet had to limp back to the United States
totally broken and destroyed.
- It's still a mystery,
all of the activities that were going on in Antarctica.
You have to wonder if the American military,
and other governments too, are aware
of structures under the ice, of pyramids beneath the ice.
And perhaps they know
that there's some kind of ancient civilization
frozen beneath the ice of Antarctica.
(gentle music)
- [Narrator] If in fact, the Nazis were seeking
extraterrestrial technology in Antarctica,
is it possible that they actually discovered it?
And might the U.S. military have encountered
this powerful technology years later
during Operation Highjump?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe
that further proof of an alien presence in Antarctica
may be found in a prehistoric lake,
buried under two miles of ice.
(transition whooshing)
(somber music)
- [Narrator] Lake Vostok, Antarctica.
Buried under two miles of ice
is a 4,800-square-mile body of water.
It is by far the largest of the continent's nearly 400 lakes
that are entirely covered by ice.
In 2001, pilots collecting data here
recorded unusual and extreme irregularities
in the magnetic field
at the southeastern corner of the lake.
Spanning a remarkable 65 by 46 miles.
The anomalous area is producing
an unusually high level of magnetic energy.
- This anomaly was roughly 50 miles in diameter
and was something that would be commensurate
with the magnetic field being generated by a city.
(suspenseful music)
(plane whizzing)
- I have been to Lake Vostok several times
as part of expedition research.
And when we were in the area,
we did pick up this magnetic anomaly,
but we also found other magnetic anomalies
which are actually transitioning from one place to another.
They were moving.
Highly rare and extremely unusual,
we weren't able to determine
what was causing these anomalies.
- It is totally inexplicable.
Of course, this has given rise to theories
that perhaps there is something else here.
Perhaps it's a UFO, perhaps it's some kind of alien base,
perhaps even the remnants of a lost civilization.
And now, the NSA themselves have almost put a blanket
over any further research
and it's almost become a no-go area.
- [Narrator] Vostok is not the only site
with limited outside access.
Seven different countries
have claimed territories in Antarctica,
yet it remains one of the most restricted locations
in the world.
Currently, there are 68 international bases here,
many of which require permits
or special permissions to visit.
They are manned not just with scientists,
but also military personnel.
But why is it so restricted?
(fast-paced upbeat music)
McMurdo Station, Antarctica.
Located on the southern peninsula of Ross Island,
this is the largest research station on the continent.
It was opened by the US government in 1956
and houses up to as many as 1,200 residents at a time.
In January of 2015, a US Navy flight engineer
who served with the Antarctic Development Squadron
at McMurdo for 14 years came forward
to investigative reporter Linda Moulton Howe
with bizarre accounts of his time in Antarctica.
- In January, 2015, I got an email
from a retired naval flight engineer.
He's asked me to call him only Brian in the world public.
And this is what he told me.
From about 1983 to when he retired from the Navy in 1997,
he was in all kinds of what they call
Antarctic Squadron expedition missions
that included rescuing people in and out of various places.
In all these trips,
nothing of a high strangeness that occurred,
and then all of a sudden it was one thing after another.
During a squadron mission in the Transantarctic Mountains,
the whole crew saw a whole bunch of silver darting objects
and they are round.
And he says, they're doing the strangest thing.
They're going like to this peak in a group,
to this peak in a group.
And then, they'd all take off.
And not only did this happen once,
it happened over and over.
- [Narrator] According to the informant,
this was just one of many strange mysteries
on the continent that he witnessed during his time there.
- They get an assignment.
Not long after, there's a medical emergency.
They are now under the gun,
the clock is ticking and a decision was made.
They're going over through the no-fly zone
because it's a medical emergency,
and what do they see?
(heavy bass music)
In the ice,
like a huge entrance to a cave, but slanted going down.
And he said, "I think it was at least, Linda,
200 feet in diameter.
A big hole in the ice."
And he said, "Our instruments are not operating.
We were losing electricity. We had magnetic anomalies.
And we concluded there's something about this hole
that is now causing these problems."
They do their medical recovery,
and the next thing they know,
they're all being chewed out by men in suits
that are not from McMurdo.
They appear to be from Washington, DC.
And as he said, they told us that we are never ever
to fly over that hole and we are never to discuss it again.
What is that about?
And does that have anything to do
with all these other pieces that keep emerging
that there might be something archaeological in Antarctica?
- [Narrator] According to ancient astronaut theorists,
this was not the first time a massive hole
has been spotted in the ice of Antarctica.
Famous polar explorer, Admiral Richard Byrd,
allegedly reported
seeing a massive entrance to an underground world
during his 1947 expedition to the South Pole.
- Admiral Byrd made a lot of unusual statements,
allegedly talking about a large opening at the South Pole
that went deep inside the earth, ice free,
and was inhabited by various sorts of aliens.
And when Byrd got back to the United States,
he was brought back to Washington
where he was questioned very heavily about his statements
and allegedly he was told to stop talking about this.
You have to wonder.
Is the South Pole some kind of extraterrestrial entry zone?
Some kind of portal that's so important
that it has to be controlled by the military?
- [Narrator] Is the United States government
covering up an extraterrestrial presence in Antarctica?
And if so, could they be the same otherworldly beings
that once occupied the continent thousands of years ago?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the truth
may be revealed when
Antarctica's ice finally disappears.
(heavy bass music)
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] East Antarctica, October, 2015.
Scientists at NASA announced
that despite years of thinking otherwise,
they are now finding that the ice in this region
is actually growing,
averaging 82 billion tons a year.
Snowfall is currently adding ice to most of the continent.
But at the same time,
glaciers are rapidly melting
along the coast of western Antarctica.
Scientists calculate that since 2009,
as much as 60 cubic kilometers of ice,
the equivalent of 70,000 Empire State Buildings,
is disappearing into the ocean each year.
But why is the ice here melting
when it is growing throughout much
of the rest of the continent?
(suspenseful music continues)
- We see these graphic pictures on television
of the ice caps melting and falling into the sea,
but it's actually only in some areas
that the ice caps are actually melting.
What's so strange is that, through various factors,
that the ice in Antarctica
might actually be growing and extending,
and this is very strange.
(sinister music)
- We can't rule out the possibility that,
in certain cases,
there could be entire cities that are built underground
that may even be actively maintained
by extraterrestrials now,
and that as those cities are powered up or expanded in size,
that they are giving off some kind of heat,
and that heat in turn is melting the ice above them.
- If there are things buried
under the miles of ice at Antarctica,
then that would mean that had to have happened
before the last ice age.
So, who knows what we'll find there?
Remnants of a lost civilization,
perhaps even tools
with which these civilizations were built.
- It's possible that underneath the ice
will be keys for us to actually save ourselves and
reclaim our ancient past.
(suspenseful music)
- We may end up in a situation
where this can't be covered up anymore.
Where visible ruins, gigantic pyramids, gigantic obelisks
start to peek through the ice.
And at that point, it's game over.
No longer can this be swept under the rug.
- There's no question that under the ice of Antarctica,
there could be extraterrestrial craft,
there could be cities down there.
Bottom line is,
it will shock the entire belief system of humankind.
It will just change everything we know.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] What really lies
beneath the ice and snow in Antarctica?
Was this frozen continent
once covered with lush vegetation,
as well as pyramids that predate those in Egypt?
And if extraterrestrials truly did inhabit Antarctica,
could these otherworldly visitors
still be hiding out there today?
(spacecraft roaring)
Perhaps one day soon,
we will discover what the ice of Antarctica
has hidden for thousands of years,
and it will finally expose the truth about our alien past.
(spacecraft roaring)
(sinister music)
The greatest civilizations of antiquity
running on electrical power.
(lightning crackling)
- Electricity is one of those things
that ancient cultures seemed to be harnessing in ways
that we still can't wrap our brain around.
- [Narrator] Energy-generating microwaves
produced at the Great Pyramid of Giza.
(lightning crackling)
- The question is not if they used power.
The question is, where did they get the knowledge
with which they created the power?
- [Narrator] And a wireless energy grid
that crossed the globe.
- It was a transmitter of this cosmic power
that fed these celestial beings.
- [Narrator] Could our ancient ancestors have mastered
the ability to harness and create power?
If so, where might this advanced knowledge have come from?
- This evidence of some nuclear reaction,
what we may be seeing is the residue
of one of the ancient power plants
used by extraterrestrials.
- [Narrator] Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape our history?
And what secrets of ancient energy sources
may be unlocked at these alien power plants?
(stirring music)
(eerie music)
The Western Stone, Jerusalem, Israel.
1.2 million pounds.
The Ramesseum statue, Thebes, Egypt.
2 million pounds.
The Trilithon at the Temple of Jupiter, Baalbek, Lebanon,
4.8 million pounds.
All over the world,
ancient sites reveal engineering feats
that mainstream archaeologists believe were achieved
with slave labor and simple tools.
- The reason why I'm convinced
that sophisticated technology
was implemented in these ancient rocks
is because if we go to a stone quarry today
(suspenseful music)
and look at the scope of machinery
required to accomplish similar things,
well, those machines are huge.
They're power machines, powerful tools.
And if the mainstream archaeology explanation is given
that all of this stuff was accomplished
with obsidian or with chicken bones,
I'm sorry, it doesn't hold up.
- There are temples that are built,
but using blocks that range from 50 to 200 tons.
They're just far too big
for people who didn't have the wheel,
who didn't have the pulley,
who didn't have any facilities to move these blocks,
- [Narrator] Could the strength of men alone
have been enough to manage such colossal efforts?
Or did these marvels of engineering
require something more?
(suspenseful music)
Stone Valley Materials Quarry, Riverside, California.
February, 2012.
(earthmover rumbling)
A massive 680,000-pound granite monolith
is prepped to travel over 100 miles
to become part of an exhibit
at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
Workers from 100 utility crews,
a 1.4 million pound crane
and a 44-axle tractor trailer rig
with over 2,400 horsepower are needed to move the rock.
- It's gonna require hydraulically jacking
the boulder up off the ground,
which is incredibly difficult in itself,
building steel girders underneath it,
placing 208 tires underneath those steel girders,
having one power unit pulling it and one pushing it.
And still, after all that,
only achieving about five miles an hour.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] The boulder, called Levitated Mass,
is a gigantic payload by modern construction standards,
but it is small when compared to many of the solid blocks
moved by ancient builders.
- From my perspective, it is almost impossible
to take the 340-ton rock
and move it without modern-day technology.
It baffles my mind.
I have no idea.
It's crazy to think about.
- How did our ancestors move monoliths,
some over five times the size of Levitated Mass,
without the aid of high-powered machines?
Researchers believe the ancients
not only used power to move solid stone,
but to cut it as well,
and the evidence can be found on a remote cliff face
buried in the Andes Mountains.
(calm music)
- [Narrator] Ollantaytambo, Peru.
The walls of this ancient mountain stronghold
tell the story
of what some experts believe to have been thousands
of craftsmen shaping and cutting solid stone
with a precision that today could only be matched
with high-powered machine tools.
- We find huge cube-like sections of stone
and a site which is very hard,
have been removed from the mountain with such accuracy
that we can't find a scratch in the surface.
The corners also are not sharp, they're perfectly rounded
and no one can explain how this could have been achieved.
The ability to fit perfectly fitting stones
of several tons in weight together
so that a single human hair can't fit in between them.
It's not a question of sweat or man hours,
it's a question of technology.
(dramatic music)
- It's really done to perfection
and not just perfection with small blocks of stone,
but with blocks of stone weighing many, many tons.
I believe that Ollantaytambo is evidence
of really advanced human civilization on Earth
that was also worldwide and had power tools.
- [Narrator] But if our ancestors really use
sophisticated tools that ran on some sort of power,
might there have been other applications of this technology
beyond moving and cutting stone?
- All over the world, we have extraordinarily advanced
civilizations with urban systems.
Things we have today in delivery systems for water,
for handling waste, pumps,
very sophisticated farming and agricultural techniques
that they should not have had
given the level of technology they work with.
- The only thing
that we have left over is the original stone
that all these ancient structures were built in.
Everything else that was built on top of it
that had to do potentially with electrical components,
that has disappeared
because only stone withstands the test of time.
- [Narrator] The National Museum of Iraq.
In 1938, the museum director discovers terracotta pots
and copper cylinders in the archives that may have been used
as galvanic cells.
The nearly 2,000-year-old devices called Baghdad batteries
are believed to predate the invention of the cell battery
by more than 1,000 years.
Archaeologists speculate they may have been used
to electroplate gold onto silver
for decorative jewelry.
- The Baghdad battery that we've currently found in Iraq,
about a dozen of them, it can generate around four volts.
Now, a current modern-day flashlight could be run
by a nine-volt battery.
So if we think of a Baghdad battery
around this size generating four volts,
what if we increase the size for around six feet?
That might generate 20, 30, 50 volts
and have the sufficient power
to actually utilize energy in a way that we do today.
- [Narrator] Mainstream scientists agree
that the Baghdad battery is evidence
ancient man had the means to create power
and the understanding of how to apply it.
But is there proof of even more complex devices
that may have run on electricity?
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] 370 miles south of the Giza plateau
stands the Hathor Temple.
Approximately 4,000 years old,
the halls of this monument are lined with curious images,
but one relief depicts
what many ancient astronaut theorists believe
to be proof that the ancients used power.
They call it the Dendera Bulb.
- Here is a replica of the bulb
that's shown in the Dendera reliefs in Egypt.
What's interesting about this bulb is the fact
that on the wall relief, we see the bulb is actually plugged
into what appears to be a power source.
(dramatic music)
- The whole idea that the ancient Egyptians
had some kind of electrical lighting, and this was something
that happened in probably temples around the world.
Baffles Egyptologists, how people deep underground
would be able to paint these ceilings
without fires and lights?
Their explanation right now
is that they used a complex system of mirrors
to move light at just a few minutes during the day
down deep inside these tombs.
But another explanation, of course,
would be they actually had electrical lights.
- [Narrator] Did our ancestors have an understanding of how
to generate power thousands of years before modern man?
Or is it possible
that they received the knowledge
from some otherworldly source
as some ancient astronaut theorists contend?
- We have all sorts of stories, mythologies,
and legends that could be interpreted as gods
who in reality,
were misinterpreted extraterrestrials,
gifting man with technology in the form of power.
For example, when God said,
"Let there be light," in the Old Testament,
or when Prometheus gave fire to man, the burning bush
and the eternal flame at the temple of Apollo,
all of that conceivably could have been technology.
The question is not if they used power.
The question is where did they get the knowledge
with which they created the power?
- [Narrator] The Giza Necropolis, Egypt, 1993.
A team of engineers uses a remotely-operated camera
in an attempt to discover the true function
of what is believed to be an air shaft
leading from the supposed Queen's Chamber
of the Great Pyramid.
First discovered in 1872,
archaeologists long considered these narrow tunnels
to be ventilation ducts.
- This robot traveled up this small shaft
which was too small for a human
or any type of device to go through,
and all of a sudden it finds a closed door
hinged by two little metal clamps.
- [Narrator] According to mainstream archaeologists,
the door and metal handles were intentionally built
as a symbolic passageway that the queen
would travel through to the afterlife.
(mysterious whirring)
But some researchers have questioned
why this passageway would've been designed
with a deliberate blockage?
And why on a plateau filled with monumental pyramids
believed to serve as royal tombs is the Great Pyramid,
the only one with such a door?
- Egyptologists are very much fond of saying
that pyramids are tombs
and that they have been robbed at some point in the past.
But the fact is that we have found in the 20th century,
a number of pyramids whose central king's chamber,
so to speak, is intact.
And when they opened the sarcophagus, they found
that sarcophagus to be empty as well.
- [Narrator] If the Great Pyramid was not a tomb,
what may have been its true purpose?
In May, 2011, another team of researchers set out
to further explore the blocked air shaft
in the Queen's Chamber.
This time, the crew used a robot equipped
with a microsnake camera to slip through a hole
and reveal what was beyond the door.
- When they actually penetrated this small door,
they found a hidden room within the pyramid.
- What they found was copper fittings or the metal fittings.
Another feature of the back of these metal fittings
was that on one side, the loop
looked like it was corroded.
The camera also looked down and scanned the floor.
What we saw was red markings.
My interpretation of those were
they were electrical symbols, but why were they there?
- [Narrator] Could these artifacts be actual evidence
that electricity once coursed through the structure?
(electricity crackles)
And if so, could the Great Pyramid of Giza have been built
to serve as not a royal tomb but a power plant
as some researchers contend?
- If we dismiss the tomb theory
and we look at the pyramid itself, we see something
that modern engineers can really tune into and understand.
What we have is a very, very precise building
that has the precision of a fraction of an inch.
It is something that is very noteworthy
and not indicative of a simple agrarian culture.
So what we have is something that is almost like a machine.
- [Narrator] If the Great Pyramid
was a sophisticated machine potentially capable
of creating energy, how could it have worked?
Some researchers believe clues can be found by exploring
underneath the structure.
In 2000, maritime engineer, John Cadman
proposed a theory that the Egyptians pumped water
from the nearby Nile River into a small chamber
underneath the Great Pyramid.
The pump could then create intense hydraulic pressure
that would cause the entire pyramid to vibrate.
(excited music)
- In the subterranean chamber, there is some evidence
that it shows that there had been water present in it
and that there's water erosion on the floor,
and then up in the fin area, and then also,
because it was a hydraulic pulse generator,
so they have a rarefaction wave.
It's extremely low pressure wave,
which would've struck the ceiling,
and the ceiling is actually chipped,
and that would've bend
from the compression waves hitting the ceiling.
That's very evident.
(excited music)
- [Narrator] If Cadman's theory proves true,
what would've been the purpose of the hydraulic pulse?
Engineer Chris Dunn believes the answer can be found
by further examination of the shafts
in what some call the Queen's Chamber
where traces of zinc and hydrochloric acid
have been discovered.
- I believe the chemical coming in
through the northern shaft was hydrated zinc,
and the other chemical coming through the southern shaft
and into the chamber was dilute hydrochloric acid.
These are actually seen on the chamber walls.
- [Narrator] Dunn suggests that the two chemicals
were poured down through the shafts and then mixed together
inside the Queen's Chamber triggering combustion.
- This vessel represents the Queen's Chamber.
Into the tubes, we're going to pour hydrated zinc
and then hydrochloric acid.
When you bring these two liquids together
and a chemical reaction occurs
and a product of that chemical reaction is hydrogen.
And you can see the vapor, the hydrogen escaping
through the chimney, and there you have the reaction.
- [Narrator] Dunn speculates that the hydrogen gas
traveled from the Queen's Chamber into the King's Chamber.
Then the vibrations from the subterranean pool
energized the hydrogen atoms into a microwave energy beam.
- The evidence that indicates the use
of hydrogen can be found in the King's Chamber.
There is a shaft in the King's Chamber
has dimensions of 8.4 by 4.8, which would be suitable
for a wave guide for a mazer or microwave amplification
through stimulated emission radiation.
And from there, we can actually propose many different ideas
of what they did with it.
- [Narrator] Might the Great Pyramid of Giza
actually have created power in the remote past?
And is it possible that energy ran the advanced tools
of early builders and devices like the Dendera Bulb?
- The ancient Egyptians demonstrated
an exceptional level
of skill in everything that they created
during the Old Kingdom.
But the question remains, did they do it on their own
or did they have some access to information
or technology that was not of this Earth?
- [Narrator] If Giza was, in fact, a power plant,
could the energy have been used
for some otherworldly purpose
as some ancient astronaut theorists suggest?
And if the power coming from Giza was that strong,
could it have traveled beyond Egypt?
Answers may be found in a material that connects Giza
to a special kind of monolith, one that exists
on continents all over the world.
- [Narrator] The Sun Temple at Abu Gorab. Memphis, Egypt.
In 1898, an excavation team with the Berlin Museum
discovered the base of a massive obelisk
estimated to have once stood at over 160 feet tall.
- According to the ancient
Egyptian building texts from Edfu,
Abu Gorab was known as the place of the gods.
Egyptologists know it as a place where the ancients
connected with divine energies.
It is said that this is the very place
where pharaohs and priests experienced heightened awareness
through the use of vibrations
transmitted through the obelisk.
- This ancient obelisk was used as a geodetic marker,
pinpointing the source of some type of ancient energy.
Maybe not spiritual energy, but actual physical energy
that they were able to harness.
(ominous music)
- [Narrator] While scholars believe Abu Gorab
was home to one of the largest obelisks ever constructed,
similar shaped monoliths have been found
in hundreds of variations all over the world.
Unsuitable for shelter, storage or a higher vantage point,
could obelisks have served another more powerful purpose?
(soft somber music)
- There's evidence that obelisks are tapping
into this natural energy that's part of the Earth.
The whole concept is to take these natural energies
of the Earth and manipulate them.
It's a subtle energy.
But for those who have the devices and technology
to see and measure this energy,
it's something that can be used.
- I believe obelisks are kind of like acupuncture needles
for the Earth, focusing and possibly healing Earth energy,
meridians that are not balanced,
and that the ancient cultures knew how to do that.
- [Narrator] A vast number of obelisks
are constructed from granite,
a stone containing high concentrations
of energy-responsive quartz crystal.
(screen whooshing)
Because of its crystalline structure,
quartz has the ability
to convert the Earth's natural electrical vibrations
into usable energy by a property known as piezoelectricity.
- The piezo is for the vibrating or oscillating,
and the electric is for electric.
What this means is that you can use electricity
to make them vibrate mechanically.
And when they vibrate mechanically,
they can generate electricity.
(electricity hissing)
- Crystals have been used throughout all of history
for various inventions, various technologies,
and for getting things done.
Your watch that you wear on your wrist
could be a technology that uses crystals.
Crystals are literally a tool and a technology
that's essentially for transducing energy.
And that is taking energy in one state,
(electricity crackles)
and essentially converting it to another state.
(rousing music)
- [Narrator] Is it possible the ancient cultures
that erected obelisks had some understanding
of the high-tech properties of quartz?
And if so, could they have used obelisks
to transmit energy over vast distances?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the answer is yes,
and that evidence can be found
by studying the work of Nikola Tesla.
(eerie music)
In July, 1899, the famed scientist
claimed to have invented a way to transmit electricity
through the air, wirelessly, all over the world.
(electricity hissing)
By harnessing the Barth's natural conductivity
or what Tesla called standing waves,
giant transmitters could send and receive
limitless amounts of electricity
flowing like invisible water.
And one of the key components in his system
was quartz crystal.
- Typically, when we deal with the energy
of electromagnetic waves,
it's in what we call a propagating form.
It's like the flashlight, you turn it on and it moves.
It propagates through space
and goes from one place to another.
A standing wave is kind of a different phenomena
because the wave just oscillates in one place up and down,
and the energy goes in between
two different regions back and forth.
(screen whooshing)
- Tesla was proposing
and tried to build this system of wireless power.
He built the Wardenclyffe Tower on Long Island in New York.
Tesla was going to then hook this tower up to a power plant
and he was gonna broadcast electricity.
According to him, anti-gravity airships
would draw power from these towers.
Ships, cars, and other power plants
could also draw from this broadcast power.
(electricity buzzing)
- [Narrator] Was Tesla's technological breakthrough
a modern scientific innovation?
(screen whooshing)
Or could it have been a rediscovery
of a lost alien technology?
Some researchers believe that, like Tesla,
ancient builders discovered the ability
to harness and broadcast Earth's power.
And the ancient equivalent to Tesla's Wardenclyffe Tower
may have been the Great Pyramid.
Could obelisks have been constructed
as ancient energy conductors?
And was this expertise really the product of man alone?
Or might it have been the result
of an otherworldly intelligence
as ancient astronaut theorists contend?
- We do know that obelisks symbolized
this power of the gods.
The top of the obelisk is a small pyramid.
It is a Benben stone.
And it is the Benben stone, which is said to have been
a communication device with the deities.
- It's possible that inside of some pyramids
there might be some sort of energy, let's say,
some sort of equipment which creates waves.
So, I could imagine that some of the real gods,
the extraterrestrials some thousands of years ago,
they left some little technology inside the pyramid,
and this technology was very super modern and powerful.
(screen whooshing)
- [Narrator] Could the numerous obelisks
found at various sites all around the world
actually be remnants of a power system
far more sophisticated than anything available today?
(screen whooshing)
And is it possible our ancestors may have pioneered
other types of power plants thousands of years ago
which would be considered cutting edge
by 21st century standards?
Some believe the answer can be found
in the remote mountains of the Himalayas.
(gentle music) (bird screeching)
- [Narrator] The Indus Valley, Pakistan 1922,
the Indian Archaeological Survey discovers the remnants
of what is the largest ancient city
of the Indus Valley civilizations, Mohenjo-daro.
The artifacts and architecture cataloged at the site
indicate a metropolis prospered here
nearly 4,600 years ago.
(transition whooshing)
But the skeletal remains found among the ruins
tell a puzzling story.
- I understand that they found a lot
of radioactive ash there,
and they found radioactive people there.
And so the assumption is
that there must have been some radiation event.
And so it is possible
that there was some kind of nuclear explosion there
a long time ago.
The problem is that in order to do that,
in order for that to be the case,
you would have to have some very advanced technology.
(haunting music)
- These people are just lying dead in the street.
There's radioactive skeletons.
(suspenseful music)
There are ceramics that have been melted.
It's as if some kind of atomic nuclear detonation
went off in this area,
totally destroying these cities and killing everyone.
What we may be seeing is the residue
of one of the ancient power plants
used by extraterrestrials.
- [Narrator] But if, as ancient astronaut theorists believe,
Mohenjo-daro was wiped out in a nuclear meltdown,
where is the power plant
that might have caused such mass devastation?
(gentle music)
Mount Kailash, Western Tibet.
At an elevation of nearly 22,000 feet,
this mountain is one of the most distinctive peaks
in the world.
- This is a very interesting shape for a mountain.
It is cone shaped from one side
and pyramid shaped from another,
and this is precisely the shape we see elsewhere
in ancient Sumeria, ancient Egypt,
various other ancient civilizations,
whereby this pyramid-shaped object
really is said to have some form of power,
some kind of connection with the deity.
(suspenseful music)
- [Narrator] In the Eastern world,
Mount Kailash is regarded
as the spiritual center of the universe
and the birthplace of four of the world's religions,
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Taoism.
For thousands of years,
religious pilgrims have trekked here
to perform the holy ritual
of walking a 32 mile circular path
carved along the mountain's base.
- Everybody, at one point in their lifetime,
had to go to this place to connect with the gods,
and this is really the interesting aspect
because what is it about this mountain
which sets it apart from other mountains?
There are several possibilities.
One of them is that the gods really took residence here.
(gentle music)
- [Narrator] Is it possible,
as some ancient astronaut theorists speculate,
that Mount Kailash was once inhabited,
or perhaps operated, by the gods?
They say the true significance of this mountain
can be found detailed in an ancient Chinese drawing.
(gong resonating)
(gentle music)
The Mogao Caves, Western China.
(gentle music continues)
Between 500 B.C. and 1500 A.D.,
Buddhist monks stored thousands of scrolls and manuscripts
inside a series of painted temples and shrines
dug into a hillside,
approximately 600 miles north of Mount Kailash.
(gentle music continues)
Here, in 1907, Hungarian-born British explorer, Aurel Stein,
discovered a sealed-off room,
containing nearly 50,000 manuscripts
in various languages.
- Aurel Stein finds this incredible place
called The Cave of the Thousand Buddhas,
which is sort of like a Buddhist hall of records.
It's a cache of thousands upon thousands
of ancient Buddhist texts.
Included within this is the Diamond Sutra
which is the oldest printed manuscript
known to human history.
- [Narrator] The collection of ancient texts and relics
also included a 2nd century A.D. Buddhist diagram
of a cosmic mountain called Mount Meru,
a sacred site believed to be a stairway,
connecting heaven and Earth.
(gentle music continues)
For nearly 100 years,
the ancient illustration drew little notice.
But recently, the diagram caught the attention
of a scientist from Northrop Grumman,
who specializes in the development
of advanced weapons for the military.
- He said, "I designed particle beam weapons for a living,
for the government.
Do you realize that that's a blueprint
for a particle accelerator?"
I went and compared the diagram of Mount Meru
with an illustration of what's called a cyclotron,
an atom smasher,
which was used in the development of the A bomb
for the Manhattan Project.
(insistent rhythmic music)
They're a perfect match for one another.
(rhythmic music continues)
- Aurel Stein's diagram of Mount Meru that he found
seemed to show Mount Meru
as some kind of a particle beam accelerator or some device
that was stacked up, had different lenses.
It would've made it into some device that focused energy.
The kind of energy needed
would have required some tremendous power plant,
something putting out enormous amounts of energy.
(upbeat music continues)
- [Narrator] Might the nearly 2,000-year-old
Buddhist diagram of Mount Meru actually depict a device
that today would run on nuclear power?
(upbeat music continues)
(transition whooshing)
- Mongolian myth says that the celestial beings
dwelled around Meru because of the energy
that was emitted from it.
It was a transmitter of this cosmic power
that fed these celestial beings or kept them alive.
(transition ringing)
(transition whooshing)
- Whatever the purpose of this device was,
it would've required
some extremely powerful energy source,
some type of nuclear power,
and I think that power might have come from Mount Kailash.
This wasn't a place
that actually put out spiritual energy,
but what we're talking about is a place
that produced raw energy, technological energy.
Potentially, we're talking about a power plant.
(transition whooshing)
- [Narrator] Could the ruins at Mohenjo-daro
really be evidence that a nuclear power plant
existed in the Himalayas thousands of years ago?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes,
and speculate that remnants of a worldwide power grid,
myabe found among the sacred ruins
of ancient civilizations all over the world.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] Three Mile Island.
Chernobyl.
Fukushima Daiichi.
(tense music)
(alarms beeping)
These sites are now just shells
of what were once thriving power plants of the 20th century.
(tense music)
- Nuclear power is widely used in today's infrastructure
and it serves a very high need.
But we also know that nuclear power
can possibly become unstable and cause a meltdown.
(detector crackling)
- Just like the power plants
we've seen melting down in modern times,
the ancients saw their own power plants fail.
And did that, in turn,
cause some of the greatest civilizations to fall?
If we assume that all of these power plants
were somehow connected
and one power plant went offline,
is it possible that as a result,
the other power plants went offline as well?
(somber music)
- [Narrator] Some researchers believe
just as modern engineers employ strategic placement
of power plants today,
so did the ancients.
And that some sacred sites were not revered
for spiritual or ritualistic reasons
as mainstream scholars believe,
but actually valued for their capacity to produce energy.
(majestic music)
- Certain monuments are placed in certain locations,
and we might think this is haphazard,
but we are slowly beginning to realize
that it is not the case.
And the reason why is because
whether it is the Great Pyramid,
whether it's Stonehenge,
whether it's Teotihuacan,
whether it is another important power site
of our ancestors,
we're beginning to realize
that those sites have an energy
which we don't register at first.
- There's definitely some knowledge by ancient man
of this world grid and these energetic points,
(tense music)
and they are marked by these monuments.
There's a lot of evidence that the ancients
were far more connected
to this higher energy source than we are today.
(tense music)
- [Narrator] But if ancient engineers
pulled energy from a power grid as some researchers believe,
why after thousands, if not tens of thousands of years,
did the power stop flowing?
(tense music)
- The ancient Egyptians had developed their knowledge
over many years,
and they must have had tools and technology
that do not exist in the archaeological record anymore.
So something happened to this ancient culture
that caused the power plants to shut down
and probably wiped out a large portion of the civilization.
(tense music)
(ambient music)
- [Narrator] But where would agrarian cultures,
some that didn't have the wheel or work animals,
acquire the skills necessary
to build a worldwide energy grid
and the power plants to run it?
- According to the ancient astronaut theory,
extraterrestrials have always been motivated by the idea
of advancing human civilization.
They've given us so many gifts of knowledge
that power is pretty much a no-brainer.
The thing all these ancient cultures had in common
is that they included stories and artifacts
that are meant to honor
those who gave them this knowledge,
the gods and the gods were extraterrestrials.
(uptempo tense music)
- [Narrator] Is it possible that alien beings
helped ancient man create a global network
of sophisticated power plants in the remote past,
one that may have powered the devices used
to create civilization's
greatest archaeological mysteries?
Are modern scientists just now rediscovering
energy technology mastered by the ancients?
And if so, could what remains
of these long forgotten power sources