We are so prone to dynamics of
selfdeception much of which we are
ignorant around the world places of
significant affluence. You have an
increase in suicide and then you have
the significant uptick in anxiety and
depression, the loneliness epidemic, the
addiction crisis. How can you make sense
of all of this? The golden threads that
runs through all of this is hunger for
meaning in life. Mattering is the sense
of being connected to something bigger
than yourself. So these are the three
questions to ask yourself to see if you
have matter. You want it to be real. We
want the really real. When people have
mystical experiences, transformative
experiences, and they encounter the
really real, they will change their
lives. They will change their
relationship just because it is really
real. That opportunity to break free is
intoxicating. When we truly open up, we
find that reality is already ahead of
us, opening up to us.
[Music]
Hey everyone, welcome back to the Know
Thyself podcast. I'm honored to be
sitting down with somebody who is a
professor of psychology and cognitive
science with a focus on reasoning,
thinking, and cognitive development. He
also focuses on the development and
psychology of wisdom and growing
intelligence. He's also an expert in
Buddhist psychology and philosophy. And
so he's really able to articulately
bridge our modern understanding of the
mind with ancient wisdom. John Verviki,
thank you for being here.
Andre, it's a great pleasure to be here.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to opening up
the wide umbrella that is the meaning
crisis. So where we find Ourel, but I
would like to first if you're open to
sharing your with
your own personal meaning crisis. Sure.
Um because I know that really drove you
to understanding it better and
supporting so many people with their
own. you grew up and were really raised
in kind of a Christian fundamentalist
time and
uh what was the transition out of that
like? Can you please walk us through
your own personal meaning crisis?
Yeah. Um so as you said I was brought up
in a in a very uh stringent strict uh
fundamentalist Christianity. Not just my
immediate family, my extended family on
my mother's side. Didn't see much of my
father's uh side of a family. And um
and it was um it was very it was very
psychologically fraught uh because my
father was largely ab an absent person
even when he was physically present uh
uh he was very a challenging figure for
me growing up and I only now know
looking back both my parents are dead
and so I've been going through quite a
process of re-examining my relationship
with them. But now that I have the
requisite expertise, I would say it's
quite probable my dad was autistic and I
didn't know it of course when I was a
kid. And so I couldn't get why he
couldn't pick up on my mental states and
um and why he was sort of radically
oriented the way he was. But that meant
he was in many ways absent. And so my
mother was the dominant figure in my
life.
And something that I only found out
about her that has uh caused me I well I
think it's I think I could say I've come
to forgive her. Um it's been kind of a a
difficult journey. I found this out only
much much later.
Um but when she was 15 um her family
forced her to marry
uh uh because of basically it was kind
of like uh prostitution. They forced her
to marry so that there was a source of
income for the family.
And as you can imagine
someone that young being forced into a
marriage, she ended up having an affair.
And the person she had an affair with
was my father. Um, and so I am literally
a bastard. And my birth caused the
breakup of two marriages. And my mom was
of course immediately the black sheep of
the family for committing the sin of
adultery. Um, and so
she
instead of, you know, giving up on the
Christianity and pulling away from it,
she wanted back in. And so she doubled
down and became stricter and more
puritanical than anybody else. Um, I
didn't know all of this. I just grew up
with my mom being that way and sensing a
deep ambivalence she had towards me
because as you can imagine when she's
looking at me she's seeing her greatest
sin that destroyed
so much. Yet
Andre, you'll have to forgive me. This
will sound a little selfpromotional. I
don't mean it to be, but um she saw
something in me. She once told me um she
said, "John, you were born with an old
soul." And I named you John because
you're a gift because she saw that I was
like all I was unlike all the other
people in my family and you know I'm the
only one to go on to university and etc.
And so I think she saw in that
some sort of redemption.
And so she was always torn. And so she
wanted to promote
that side of me, but she really also
tried to suppress
the well to put it in a sentence, my
sexuality, because that had been the
source of her sin. So I grew up in I
know it sounds like a Freudian novel,
right? I I grew up in this very very
fraught like very very psychologically
fraught deep ambivalence weird
communication patterns with my father
and my mother right none of they were
not physically abusive or anything like
that right uh but and all of that was
imshed with this very very oppressive
god that was given in a fundamentalist
Christianity very very terrifying
and I remember once I came home my I'm
was always at home and I came home when
I was around 10 years of age and there
was no one there and I thought the
rapture had occurred and I was obviously
took too much of a sinner to be taken
into heaven and I've been left behind
and the antichrist and his minions were
coming. I was well you can imagine for a
10-year-old that was absolutely
terrifying. I think that's the single
most terrifying moment of my life. I've
been in a hospital emergency room.
Andre, I had an infection in the doctor
in my chest and the doctors didn't know
what it was. And I was looking at my up
from my bed and I realized, "Oh crap,
they think I'm going to die." And that
was scary. That wasn't as scary as that
moment back then.
Uh, and other moments I remember I was
reading in the Bible and I read about
the unforgivable sin and I was worried
that I had somehow committed it because
what is it and how have I done it? Oh,
and I got and I was just I I fell into
like just profound anxiety. My mother
could tell I was distressed and she took
me to talk to the pastor of the church.
This is I was around 12. And he said
even to a 12-year-old's ears absolutely
useless platitudinous stuff that did not
help at all. And so I uh
as soon as I could, you know, teenager
already teenager rebellion, I I I broke
away from that as and I became as as
anti- as I possibly could, sort of an
anti-religious
uh you know, aggressive atheist,
anti-Christian,
uh through and through. And but the
thing was
when you've uh like a religion is like
your mother tongue, right? It's it goes
deep and I often say it left a taste for
the transcendent in my mouth and I had
this model of Jesus as a profound
sage figure.
Um, and so I was hungry. I was
experiencing that lack of a field of
transcendence, a a a sage uh role model
that I could aspire to that was lacking
for me. Um and so I fell into a kind of
profound nihilism and um I became almost
nichian and ular about this and I would
sort of pronounce things and I became
sort of
this is really hard to talk about. I I
became sort of strangely popular in high
school because I had this weird status
of people, you know, kids are at that
age, they're really fascinated by people
who are willing to question things in a
profound way and and so that was also
very inflationary and that was very
problematic. So I was getting into the
very dark
place. Um, I went to university and I
decided to take a philosophy course cuz
I was sort of interested vaguely in
philosophical things
and um read the Republic by Plato and
met the figure of Socrates
and um
that
resonated with me profoundly
and I realized that's who I want to be
like
and I I started diving deeply into
Plato.
I'd already started meditating because I
would already interested in the uh uh
aspects of Hinduism and Buddhism at that
time. I'd have to do it at night. Uh we
were very poor. I lived in a small
bedroom with my sister on a bunk beds
and I have to wait till it was dark and
I would meditate at the top. But um
around the same time I had my very first
mystical experience and it was an
experience of the Platonic forms and so
I became an ardent follower of Socrates
and a de a devoted student of uh the
works of Plato. But then what happened
for me is I wanted to follow that way of
life and academic philosophy is not the
place to do that. I appreciate the educa
I got a PhD in philosophy. I appreciate
all the tremendous skills that academic
philosophy gave me, but academic
philosophy today, even today, although
it's getting better, especially at my
time, was not a place where you go to
cultivate wisdom.
And so I uh there was a literally down
the road for me there was a Taichi
meditation center. So I went there. I'd
already been interested in eastern
philosophy.
And uh I I they taught what I would now
call an ecology of practices. They
taught me taichi chichuan. They taught
me vapasa meditation and meta
contemplation. And I was just I was
opened up and I knew there was some
connection between the Socratic Platonic
in this but
like I had no way of making connection
to it. I had done my MA by then and I uh
I got very frustrated
uh disillusioned with academic
philosophy. I dropped out for a couple
years while I was doing the Taichi Chuan
and everything and then I heard about
this new discipline cognitive science
and I realized that cognitive science
was the best modern analog to ancient
philosophy. So I went back and did my B
I got a BSE an honors a specialist BSC
in in cognitive science and started
getting introduced to 4E cognitive
science. met Evan Thompson, friend and
colleague at one time at well he's
current still my friend but he was my
colleague at University of Toronto then
I went back and did my PhD in philosophy
but on cognitive science and in
cognitive science especially for
cognitive science they were talking
about mindfulness and transformative
experience and mystical experience and
states of consciousness and it all
started coming together. So Evan was
supposed to teach a course called
Buddhism and cognitive science at the
University of Toronto and his schedule
got all mangled up and he couldn't do
it. And they said,"Well, who else could
teach that course?" And he said, "Well,
John could teach it." So I started
teaching that course and I was already
teaching a psychology course on thinking
and reasoning. And they asked me to
teach another one. I started and I
turned it into the psychology of wisdom.
And then I took those three courses and
started integrating them together and
talking more and more about meaning in
all those courses. And my students eyes
would light up and I was going and then
when I talked about wisdom their eyes
would and I'd realize oh this is
something deeper than just my own
personal baggage. So I started doing
this much much deeper work
and I did that for about 10 years really
diving deep and integrating all that.
One of my students came and he said you
know you got to put this on YouTube. I'm
a I'll donate my time. I'm a
professional videographer. My father's a
professional editor. We donate our time.
His name is Alan Ken. And that became
awakening from the meaning crisis. And
that's how I got into it.
Wow. Thank you so much for sharing
obviously the difficult parts of your
journey to to relive. But it's uh it
really sets the stage stage so perfectly
because there's many things you brought
up. Um we're we're going to spend the
rest of this podcast unpacking. You
know, one is we all often at different
points in our life go through our our
own personal meaning crisis.
The religious aspect of things I feel
like is is pretty relatable uh in in
modern society where there is this
throwing out of the baby Christ and
spirituality with the religious
Christian bathwater. Yes.
And uh like you said, it left the taste
of the transcendent in your mouth. I
really like that because there is uh
there is obviously that fulfilling so so
many needs that no longer get met when
you leave it and say all of it doesn't
work. And I'm just so fascinated how you
discovered Plato and Socrates and these
transpersonal experiences that you had
shortly after because that to me is so
vital on the path to one's awakening.
having an experience beyond the
conventional notion of self.
You know, the uh the understanding that
like
it's like reading a menu versus having a
meal. And we're in a society with so
much information, an abundance of
information, lacking wisdom. And these
experiences that really taste like
tasting truth and talking about it are
two completely different things.
And uh and so I'm really looking forward
to weaving the golden thread between all
those as best as we can. Um but f I
first want to just go back to what
specifically about Plato and Socrates
was what what captured you so
significantly about their uh the place
in which they were coming from and
perspective of life? Well, I mean, the
great
the great thing about Plato, um I I'm
going to use a metaphor he does and it's
a little bit fraught given our sort of
current identity politics and such, but
I'm I'm so I'm asking for some charity
from the audience when they hear, but
it's his metaphor. And and Plato talks
about the fact that people have to be
seduced into philosophy. if you just
come at them and just sort of present
philosophy
face on. Well, he saw what happened to
his mentor. Uh they killed Socrates and
he realized um I need to do something
else, right? And and so what what
initially often attracts people to
Socrates is and you know I'm I'm a young
adult. Um he was winning every argument
and that's that sort of really appeals
and you know it's very egocentric and
but when you get drawn in and then you
realize Socrates's profound humility
and his profound ability to wonder.
Wonder isn't curiosity. Curiosity is
when you lack a piece of knowledge and
you go looking for it.
Wonder is a profound willingness and I
mean an enacted willingness to call
yourself and your world into question.
And then Socrates gets you doing that
because you identify with Socrates and
then you start doing that. And I
realized that that calling uh to to a a
humble wonder immediately touched the
wound in me. the it like and it take it
take took time for me to get this
retrospectively in reflection that it
wasn't so much that I wanted I I needed
to have something I needed to become
someone which is a very different thing
uh our culture this is Eric Fram's
critique our culture often confuses
having things with becoming um and so um
that shift out of that modal confusion
that realizing oh I need to become
someone and I should get out of this
mode of trying to get and have but open
myself up um and be willing to not know
as Socrates said in order to better know
myself. You have it right here. I have
it tattooed on my back right here by the
eye. So, um
is it in English or Latin or
No, in English. I've got some I've got
like I've I've got uh Chinese on my
arms. I have ancient Greek on my legs.
But uh um
and and and also that shift right even
there because
you can know thyself. People can hear it
from that having orientation about
having their autobiography and how
wonderful it is and how unique it is and
all that stuff that I think is very very
dangerous. Actually the know thyself
that Socrates is talking about is not
your autobiography. It's your owner's
manual. It's how it's like how do you
actually function? How do you actually
work? And you are really deeply unaware
of how much you pretend to know and how
much you selfdeceive. And then what you
then realize once you've been sort of
taken through that seduction is you
realize how
enchained you are.
Right? And of course you get Plato's
famous story of the people chained in
the cave and they need to be liberated
and you know work their way out and see
the world
and that opportunity
to
let go and break free and to see the
really real
is intoxicating. It's intoxicating. I I
mean human beings, this is one of
Plato's greatest arguments that in
addition to whatever we want to satisfy
our desires, we want what satisfies our
desires to be real. I regularly do this
with my students. Um I'll say so our
society tra our society treats romantic
relationships as the surrogate
replacement uh for God, tradition,
culture, the cultivation of wisdom,
self-trcendence. You find the one.
Listen to the religious language. You
find the one and they will make you
whole and complete and all and no human
being can bear that. And that's why you
know our our societyy's in this weird
bind in which people are convinced that
the most important way to have meaning
in life is a romantic relationship.
Well, but if you do regular uh surveys,
the thing that causes the most suffering
in people's lives is romantic
relationships. And that's because we're
we're idolizing uh romantic
relationships. I'm in a profound one in
it. I'm with the love of my life and
she's a fantastic woman. But romantic
relationships can't bear that burden.
And so I but I'll ask my students, how
many of you are in deeply satisfying
romantic relationships? And they'll put
their hands up and I say, "Okay, I'm I'm
now only talking to you. of these pe of
you guys, you folks I should say. How
many of you would want to know if your
partner was cheating on you even if that
would absolutely terminate the
relationship and they almost all put up
their hands and I I'll pick somebody.
I'll say why why do you want it to end?
This is giving you all and they say well
and and you could think of this they're
all sort of cynical and social media and
they'll say without without hesitation
well because it wouldn't be real. They
want it to be real. They want it to be
real. We want it to be real. There's a
We want the really real. When people
Yaden, when people have mystical
experiences, transformative experiences,
and they encounter the really real, they
we know this research, they will change
their lives, they will change their
relationships, they will change their
occupation, they will change their
habits in order to come into greater
contact and conformity with the really
real just because it is really real. We
have that profound need to be connected
to the really real. And Plato and
Socrates opened me up to that and
oriented me to it and showed me a way
that afforded me aspiring towards it.
Mhm.
In relation to relationships, I've heard
you say that they that relationships
shouldn't be the ultimate, but they
should be nourished by the ultimate.
Exactly. Well said.
You said it.
Okay. Well, well said, John.
That's that's a really power powerful
distinction though because I think that
we do have this Disneyification of
romantic relationships as so much
expectations and weight put on what
they're supposed to be for us um instead
of sharing a horizon and being nourished
by the ultimate. So any extra thoughts
you have on that before we move forward?
Yeah, I like I said, uh I think um
I I I want to be careful here because I
I want I I want to make sure people are
are hearing me. I'm trying to speak uh
in a in a way that's helpful. Although
it may be sound a little harsh,
treating another person as
that which will give you ultimate
meaning is actually
um it's selfish of you to do that. Um
and because you're demanding something
from them for you that they can't
ultimately give. And so that that puts
them into a a deep no-win situation.
And we can often think but I love the
person so much and it seems like an
expression of love to do this. I you
know I I I revere Sara. I dedicated the
book to her. Right. Um I she's easily
one of the best if not the best person
I've met in my life. I think very very
highly of her. But I there's a there
there's a do you know the difference
between an idol and an icon? An idol is
something you look at and you want to
you want to control it in your grasp and
right be because you think it is it
whereas an icon like think of a Catholic
person looking at an icon of a saint.
They don't think the saint is God, but
they they think that the saint is like a
like a stained glass window through
which they can have an aperture. They
have a lens by which they can better
focus and realize God. Sara is that for
me. And so that means for me um she
becomes a way through which I actually
properly carry out the Socratic task of
transcending myself and I reciprocate I
and I want to be a place within myself
through which she can transcend herself
to what is beyond her and beyond me. And
we we we reciprocally open. And I just
want to share with people that and and
this is not because I'm some great
relationship guru. I have screwed up so
many relationships, right? And and I've,
you know, marriages and like the whole
bit. I'm finally with the person I'm
going to be with for the rest of my
life. This is through long study and
lots of failure, right? But that
relationship where you have where the
other person is an icon and not an idol
is
so humanizing. Look,
Plato's great lesson is we need to have
the English word isn't good. It's
tension and tension is just negative for
us.
But the the Greek word is tonos. Like
the tonos of a bow or a liar. It's the
tension that that makes things possible.
Okay. So for Plato, we are the tonos
between finitude and transcendence. I
get this from Drew Highland. So we we
are we are we are we are fallible and
finite. But if we just identify with
that, we will fall into despair and we
will be we will become survile and we'll
become victims of oppression
because we are also capable of
transcendence. We can make great poetry,
great art. We can engage in great
philosophy. We can participate in
profound living conversations. We can
enter into deeply nourishing loving
relationships. We're capable of profound
transcendence. But if we just identify
with our transcendence, we will go
through inflation and then will become
tyrannical and want to oppress other
people. But if we hold the two together,
they will correct each other. Well, and
this is what you do when your beloved is
an icon. You constantly are keeping
their finitude. They are not God. If if
you'll let me speak poetically, but
there's a tonos through them to
something that is ultimate. And so they
shine with something that is beyond
them. But that something that is beyond
them isn't trying to eradicate or
destroy them. It it presence it is it
itself by presencing them even more.
So well said. I love that we are the
tension. And I feel like I've I've read
in one of the Buddhist texts saying
like a blessed life is something
approximating just the right amount of
suffering. The friction in a way that is
provided afforded to us. It gives us
through the experiences, people,
circumstances in our life, the
opportunity to refine and realize our
true nature.
Yeah. In the Buddhist cosmology, you
don't want to be born as an animal or a
god,
right?
The middle realm.
Yeah. And and there's a nichi quote you
know Aristotle Nichi's quoting Aristotle
he says uh Aris this is Nichi Aristotle
says in order to live alone one has to
either be an animal or a god but one can
be both a philosopher
there I'm so I am lit up by all the
directions which we're going to explore
in this conversation but I do want to
set the stage a little bit more with
because relationships are one aspect in
which we kind of uh deify Right. Yeah.
This
in search of meaning and this amazing
book that um was obviously inspired by
your life's work, research, study, the
amazing YouTube series that you did on
the meaning crisis. For people that
don't know, what is the meaning crisis
and can you share some stats and some
context for just how bad it currently is
on the planet right now?
Yeah. Um, so my co-author is Christopher
Master Petro and we wrote it with the
amazing help of Meline Abraan. Um, and
um, so when people talk about whether or
not their lives are meaningful, they're
using meaning as a metaphor. It's like
the meaning of a sentence. Sentences are
meaningful. You like if I say that
doesn't mean anything to you, right? Uh,
but if I say there's a cat on the mat,
that means something. Now, what what
what goes into that? If we if we if we
slowly unpack the metaphor, we can get a
sense of what people are gesturing to
with the metaphor. So, think about how
all the words cohhere together, they
cohhere together, right? They make sense
together. And what they do is they
connect you to the world with the
possibility of truth. It could be true
that the cat is on the mat and then
you're connected to reality. So, there's
this coherence, there's connectedness,
and the sentence signifies the world to
you in a certain way. makes the world
significant to you in a certain way.
Now, if you look at all the work in and
I do cuz um in the psychology of meaning
in life, not the meaning of life, the
meaning of of life is some metaphysical
proposal. We're talking about a
cognitive psychological phenomena. the
meaning in life. This is what people are
talking about when they say even though
my life has been filled with frustration
and failure and betrayal and guilt and
shame, I still want to keep going
because my life is meaningful. Okay? And
we we can maybe talk a little bit later
about it's not the same thing as
subjective well-being or mastery of
one's environment. So
if you take a look at the four there's
four features of meaning in life. One is
coherence.
What people mean is there's something
like the structure of their experience
that's like the coherence of a sentence.
Well, what does that mean? Well, it co
coherence is the opposite of absurdity.
Absurdity is when you have two
perspectives that are clashing so that
one undermines the other. So, here we
are, you and I, we're in this this
little perspective. We're here on the
and we're doing all this stuff and it's
all so meaningful. And then I get you to
zoom out to the entire universe, the
cosmic perspective. And from that
perspective, our little lives could seem
insignificant, right? We they could seem
absurd. There's a clash. Now before that
gets too dark, realize that we have a
way of dealing with potential absurdity
between perspectives and reconciling it
with an insight. So we already have a
sense of humor. That's what humor is.
Humor is when there's a clash between
perspectives and then you get an insight
that reconciles it. So just to hold that
out so people don't immediat because
when I sometimes say that that's kind of
a dark thing to say. Okay. So you want
that. The next is right when I said the
cat is on the mat, it oriented you. It
made you look in a particular direction.
It gave you a focus. So the the next
factor is called purpose. But the
problem I don't like that term because
our our culture is all about purpose.
And we think of purpose as some end goal
state of something. We have to have some
status, some power. I got to get to got
to fulfill my purpose. The problem with
that is if you and I I realized this in
high school and I went around writing
there is no purpose because I realized
even then before I saw any of this
research that doesn't work because if
you never get it your life was
meaningless and once you get it and once
you've got your thing your purpose then
your life becomes meaningless.
So don't think about purpose that way.
Think about it as orientation. You need
a north star. Something that orients
you. Helps you consistently focus. Helps
you navigate and track through reality
and narrate and keep track of how you're
tracking through reality. It's an
orientation that allows you to narrate
and navigate. That's what you need. The
next is significance. Like the sentence
has to right things have to be signi.
You have to have a lot of significance.
things have you have to have things that
seem very real, deep, not ephemeral,
superficial to you. Okay. And then
finally and turns out most importantly
is mattering. Mattering matters the
most. Mattering is the sense of being uh
connected to something and I'm going to
put it in scare quotes because it's
another metaphor we have to unpack.
Something bigger than yourself. But this
goes back to what I pointed out about
Plato. We want to be connected to
something that's really real. So this
these are the three questions to ask
yourself to see if you have mattering.
What do you want to exist even if you
don't?
What do you want to exist even if you
don't?
That's right.
Got it.
How really real is it?
Mhm.
It's not virtual, not ephemeral, not
superficial.
How
how much of it how connected are you?
How much do you matter to it? And how
much of a difference does it make to
you?
Mhm.
How significant? So mattering and
significant are turning out to just
actually be two sides of the same the
same connectedness. I use the ancient
word relleio for that sense of
connectedness. So I'm basically asking
you, do you have relegio? Is it
connected to something that's really
real and so much so that you care about
it beyond your egocentric concerns?
Those are the three questions. Now, a
prototypical answer
that people give and it's a right one is
well my kids
and you know Elizabeth Oldfield like
these your the kids are sacred in that
sense. Sacred is something you wouldn't
exchange no matter how much money
somebody was willing to give you for it.
Okay. So, well, do you want your kids to
exist when you don't? Well, yeah. That's
the whole project. Of course, I want
them to exist when I and I'm trying to
make the world a better place for them.
So, when I'm not here, they will
flourish, right? Are they really real?
Well, if you aspire to being a good
parent, they're way more important than
you and they're really real. I mean,
having a child is one of the best ways
to turn the arrow of egoentrism out to
something other than yourself. you're
let you you come to this stark
realization as wow that being is more
important than me right and if I and if
I don't live that that child will die
right like I remember that having those
moments and they're almost terrifying
right and then do I matter to my kids I
long to matter to my kids I long to make
a difference in their life and they're
super significant to me and and so right
kids are a typical answer of that um now
here's one thing and then I'll shut up
so you can reply. Right? When you have a
kid,
all the measures of subjective
well-being, that sort of I feel really
good about myself, the thing that shows
up in beer commercials and I feel really
good. I'm good. I'm happy. I'm good.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That all of that goes
away when you have a kid. You're sleepd
deprived. You're not eating. It's like
being in a shipwreck. Uh you're wet all
the time for some reason, right? Uh
there's alarms going off. That's the kid
crying. The person you thought loved you
most in the world, your partner, doesn't
like you anymore, right? And you're
getting sick all the time.
Why do people do it? The subjective
well-being is collapsing. Their finances
are going down. Kids are wickedly
expensive.
So, those are the two things we're
supposed to be. Wealth and subjective
well-being. They collapse. What goes up
that more than compensates for the
collapse in wealth and subjective
well-being? Meaning in life
and that's what's at risk in the meaning
crisis. I know you wanted me to say what
it is, but maybe I'll stop so you can
pick up on anything.
No, I I I would love for you to keep
going. I just think because the kids is
an amazing example where we can see that
clearly and people have either they have
them or not.
Yeah. or they could project when they
will. They could see clearly being
connected to to something that that is
sacred that they want to exist and make
a difference to irrespective of their
own egocentric desires. Um and
collectively right now as you're about
to go into there is a crisis of that
meaning. So please Yeah. So I mean Chris
and I did uh uh whenever I say Chris I
mean Christopher Master Petro um after
Sara and my kids Chris is the person I
love most in the world. Um I aspire to
be Socrates. He's my Plato. Um and so uh
Plato was you know
a friend and disciple of Socrates and he
Plato was the beautiful lyrical writer.
Socrates never wrote anything down.
So we talked about we talk about the
symptomology of the meaning crisis. A
bunch of things that we can see
happening. Um so around the world you've
got a weird thing happening in in so for
example in places of significant
affluence. Silicon Valley you have an
increase in suicide a significant
increase in suicide. You have in the
affluent countries. So affluence is
supposed to make everybody just want to
be happy and can continue to live. Um
you have
um the the generation the the the two
generations that are sort of coming up
um suicide rates going up in the United
States. Uh children are now committing
suicide. Um so the age at which people
are committing suicide is going down of
course and you have the massive increase
in the deaths of despair happening in
the United States. But there there are
similar things happening elsewhere in
the world. Um and then you have the
significant uptick in anxiety and
depression disorders that um are are
sort of overwhelming our institutions.
I'll give you a personal anecdote rather
than giving empty statistics. I'll give
you a personal anecdote uh that I think
is exemplary of this. And I I want to
make it clear that I'm not criticizing
any of my students when I do this. I'm
expressing compassion. So when I started
teaching at the University of Toronto
way back in 1994,
I'd get one maybe two students a year
coming in with sort of mental health
distress or needing an extension for an
essay.
Once in a blue moon, I'd have a student
come in and cry, break down. I now get 5
to 10 a week
regularly.
reliably.
I'm not trained to handle that and the
university is not the institution to
handle even though it's being mandated.
I don't know what it's like in the
United States but in Canada the
government is putting increasing
pressure on us to somehow provide mental
health services and accommodations
and and you know and and there's a
there's an issue of justice there that
I'm I'm not I'm not challenging. I'm
that's not what I'm talking about. I'm
trying to point out a level of mounting
distress and the universities are
canaries in the coal mine for the
culture, right?
But you've got the prevalence of that.
You've got the loneliness epidemic. Uh
reliably, decade by decade, the number
of close friends that people have is
going down. The UK government has set up
a ministry of loneliness. It sounds like
something out of George Orwell. Um so
you have that you have the addiction
crises that seem why are so many people
falling into addiction and various and
we even coming up with new forms of
addiction like video game addiction. Um
and video game addiction by the way is
really really bespeaks the meaning
crisis because why do why do the kids
get addicted to the video games? Because
the video game has what is lacking in
their real experience.
The video game makes sense. It's
coherent,
right? They they have an orientation.
There's a journey they're going on and
they're navigating and there's narration
and and they have a clear role. They
they're connected to it. They matter to
it. They make a difference and they know
how to transcend themselves. They can
literally level up. And so this is an
intoxicating drug compared to the
poverty of that in their in their lives.
It's like a coherent shadow reality in
which they derive meaning and a career
and like
and you you better believe that the LLMs
the are the large language models the
emerging AGI is going to exacerbate
that. Um already I know cuz people are
writing to me about it already people
are taking pseudo religious
relationships up with these entities.
I've only heard of and I haven't dug
into the report in depth. And you should
never think there's a single cause of
somebody committing suicide, but there
was a 14-year-old that recently
committed suicide. And we're talking to
an LLM that was taking was an avatar of
some figure from Game of Thrones, and it
looked like it was a dis the the
discussion with the LLM brought up the
topic of suicide. Why the child even
proposed suicide should come to our mind
and then the tunnneled down the opposite
of that reciprocal opening I was talking
about reciprocally narrowing into
suicide and we get we get this
overwhelming fervor around mythological
worlds
like look at the look at the look at the
anger and it's religious anger that
people have with the with the you know
with the corruption of the MCU or their
Stars world they get Like it's like
people used to be about their religion.
They get so incensed and so angry about
these completely fictional characters in
this completely fictional world. Right?
You have of course the psychedelic
renaissance that psychedelics are
booming. The mindfulness revolution in
which mindfulness is being taken up and
people are exploring in both of these
alternative states of consciousness.
There's good and bad in that. You have
the you have the reemergence of
otherwise deeply neglected and I mean
academically neglected
uh philosophies as a way of life like
stoicism. Can you imagine stoicism is
now a burgeoning industry like what is
going on? Stoicism. Um
and so I think all of this I what we
argue is what what how can you make
sense of all of this? Well, what the
golden thread to use one of your terms
that runs through all of this is a
hunger for meaning in life. A hunger for
that connectedness,
that you know that that clarity, that
orientation, that that capacity for
getting more and more deeply in contact
with the depths of reality within and
without, aspiring to be something more
than you are, coming into relationship
to something more real than your
egocentric existence. There's a hunger
and it's growing. So if you take a look
at the nuns, the n-s, the fastest
growing demographic group. Well, doesn't
that prove that atheism is on the rise?
No. Because if you take a look at them,
they are not primarily atheists. They
are seekers primarily. And they are they
are filled with people that are filled
with various kinds of supernatural
beliefs and weird alternative
metaphysical orientations. Many of them
are spiritual but not religious in a
profound way. If you take a look one one
a just a few more stats. If you take a
look at, you know, sort of the
enlightenment, I mean that period of
European history, you know, the 17th and
18th century that has so has given us
our fundamental grammar for how we think
about ourselves in the world. It gave us
a story about why people are religious.
Well, people are religious cuz they're
not clear thinkers, right? And people
become atheists when they become they're
analytic and clear thinkers or they're
religious because they're in, you know,
very dire circumstances. And once
they're sort of economically situated
that you know then they stop being
religious and and when I'm a scientist
actually look at the research done by
and large by atheists by the way showing
that that's not why people are believers
or not believers. That's not why people
are believers because they have lived
with other people that they consider
credible trustworthy individuals that
are wiser than themselves. And what we
do with those people is we internalize
their perspectives. You, you and I, we
reflect on ourselves because we have
internalized how other people reflect on
us and we imitate them doing it. And
that's how we get our ability to know
ourselves. We get it by internalizing
other people. So if your parents were
particularly religious and you found
them wise, you will be so. If they were
atheistic and you found them credible,
you you will you will be so. Now why
does that matter to the mean crisis?
Well, you know how the west really lost
God by Edstat. If you look at countries
that are by and large secularist,
there's a high correlation between being
secular and how much people live alone.
Mhm.
They live by themselves, right? And when
we live by ourselves, we lose that
network. We lose that network that gives
us a a greater capacity for
metaperspectal
awareness. And one last connection and
then I'll shut up again. I was
privileged to take part in um a paper uh
a published paper high impact journal uh
led by eager Gman somebody I know. Um we
got as many of the wisdom researchers,
psychologists, neuroscientists,
cognitive scientists, philosophers in
one place either physically or
virtually. We called ourselves the
wisdom track to the wisdom task force.
It sounds really exciting. And we
actually turned out a consensus paper on
what wisdom is. And one of the core
features is perspectival metacognition.
The ability to take multiple
perspectives uh on a situation and and
reflect on yourself through alternative
perspectives. So as we've become alone,
we've become lonely, we've lost
wisdom and we've lost that that
we've lost that perspectival
metacognition that's at the center of
wisdom. All of that has contributed to
the meaning crisis.
All right. So in the realization that
this is what's happening, we observe the
many different compensatory behaviors
that arise such as parasocial
relationships, consumer identity, new
age spirituality without rigor. A lot of
these things arise out of that space of
individualism and not being connected to
like like you were speaking to with
community and so many different things.
And so if you had to boil it down, which
is uh probably unfair to try to make you
do
I'll try
for the reason of why collectively this
meaning crisis is happening. What would
you say are the main contributors?
So because our cognition it's so
intelligently adaptive by being really
dynamically self-organizing and complex
and multi-levelled and that makes it so
powerfully adaptive, right? And it
orients us and it binds us to the world.
It's also profound engine of
selfdeception. We are profoundly capable
and this is a I do a lot of work on
irrationality and rationality. We are so
prone in ways of which we are myself
included I'm saying we to dynamics of
selfdeception much of which we are
ignorant. So, you know, one thing that
people do, and this this shows up in
social media, u people have probably
heard of this, but that doesn't mean
you're not being affected by it because
it largely affects you unconscious.
Confirmation bias. You will tend to only
look for evidence that confirms
something you want to believe is true.
And you will tend to not find salient.
That means it attracts your attention
and and and makes you interested. You
will tend to discount or reduce the
salience of things that might challenge
your belief. And so, right, when you go
on social media, where you have the
pretense that you're inter interacting
with independent other people who could
challenge you, but in fact, you're
selecting who and what you can hear
from. So, you're pretending that you're
getting critical feedback and you're
not. You can magnify the confirmation
bias and engage in something sort of
like confirmation porn, right? And so,
we are we and that's just one of many
examples. We are beset by selfdeception.
So and and and this is not largely a
matter just of belief like you were
talking about earlier. It's it's how we
taste things. It's how we perceive
things. It's our state of consciousness,
our traits of character. So we need
practices. We can't just change our
beliefs. We have to change our skills,
our traits, our states and our
relationships. And so we need practices
to do this. Now there is no panacea
practice. There's technical reasons for
that. There's no one practice that can
alleviate all of your problems of
selfdeception because every practice has
a bias built into it. So what you need
are you need you need practices that
complement each other that work in
opposite directions. So for example, I
went to the Taichi Center. They had a
meditation practice. Meditation makes
you stand back and look at how you're
framing the world. Now that's good, but
if I always only do that, I'm in
trouble. I also need to put my glasses
back on and see if I can now see more
deeply. Well, that's contemplation. So,
you need to be moving between a
meditative practice and a contemplative
practice. You need to complement a
seated practice like the meditation and
the contemplation with a moving
practice, mindful practice like Tai
Chiwan. See, see, they all they they
compensate and correct and constrain
each other. So, you need a it's like an
ecology of organisms, right? You need an
ecology of practices and you need role
models. Remember what I said, you have
to internalize other people. So you need
an ecology of practices. You need a
common unity, a community of role
models. And you need an overarching
story that orients you and helps you
navigate and narrate. You need a
mythology in the um positive sense of
the word. What used to do that for us
was religion.
Religion. Religia. religion was about
when it's working and because religions
can go wrong just like everything else
can go wrong. Politics can go wrong, the
market can go wrong, right? Science can
and technology can go wrong, right? But
we'll talk about when it's working. What
religion is doing is it giving us a
right. giving us a tradition, a
community, a mythos and an ecology of
practices for addressing selfdeception
and enhancing that connectedness that we
that religio that's at the core of
meaning in life. It's for play is was a
place for people to go to cultivate
wisdom in a way that transferred back
into that was that was crafted over
generations to transfer back into their
lives in a regular and reliable way.
Now, for a lot of historical reasons and
a lot of moral reasons, and I'm not here
to challenge those, and I'm not here
proitizing, right? We have, as you said,
we've thrown out that Christian
framework, but as you said, we threw out
the baby with the bathwater. We've we've
taken away all of that functionality.
So now, and wisdom is not optional.
Wisdom is not optional.
When we are confronted by challenges,
when we're confronted by absurdity,
alienation, anxiety, when we get
confused between having and being, when
we when we idolize things
inappropriately, when we're
disconnected, when we feel our like our
world and our reality is beset by
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Uh, right? We have very little
resources. So, I'll ask my students,
"Where do you go for information?"
They'll hold up their phone like
cyborgs, right? I'll say, "Where do you
go for knowledge?" And they're a little
bit jaundest about this, right? H the
university science. Uh and then I say,
"Where do you go for wisdom?"
And there's an anxious silence
and they look at me like, "Tell me where
I should go." And that's a dangerous
position for somebody to be in. Right?
So we we lost all of that functionality.
We tried to replace it. We've tried to
replace it with various isms, pseudo
religious ideologies, with nationalism
and Nazism and communism. Um, and we
drench the world in blood because
ideologies can't do it. Um,
commercialism,
celebrity worship, all of this, all the
stuff we've been talking, we try to fill
it and it doesn't have the function.
Yeah. We've so largely in modern society
traded nutrient-dense behavior with
those vapid and poor substitutions.
Oh, I love that phrasing.
Wow.
Love it.
But yeah, you're speaking to like, you
know, for example, porn instead of real
intimate
connection with another um
so to speak, sitting around the
campfire, real intimate personal
connections with social media. Yes.
Um the innumerable examples of of of
this, right? And so in search of soul
food, we have these poor substitutions.
It's like we're lacking nutrient density
quite literally and we're malnourished.
And so that's a really important thing
that I want to continue to highlight.
Yeah. I want to This is a beautiful
metaphor. Sorry. You really spark
something in me. Uh because one of the
things that can happen is you can be
malnourished without being hungry if
because you're eating a lot of junk
food. Right? So let me play with this
for a second. One of the things is that
people can often be beset by the meaning
crisis without realizing that they are
because they're malnourished, but
they're not currently in distress. And
what they what they don't realize is
like when you're when you're when you
have nutritional malnourishment, right?
Your physiological resilience, your
ability to resist disease or to heal
from trauma is radically reduced. Now,
until the disease or trauma comes along,
you don't notice it. But when it comes,
you're in a disaster. It's the same
thing for the meaning crisis. People are
sort of drifting around. I'm okay. Right
until something happens and then they
realize and I see it at the university
like I said there's no depth of
resilience and co showed that when so
many people were thrown back into a
genuine challenge to their everyday
routines. Many people went like in like
they got into very dire I predicted one
of the negative things. I predicted,
sorry, this is one of these weird things
where you're happy about something you
predicted because you're a scientist,
but because you're a human being and you
hate that it came true. I predicted a
massive increase in spirituality which
happened. I predicted a mental health
tsunami that would happen. Those are the
indications because spirituality is a
terrific symptom of the meaning crisis.
Covid hit there was no resiliency
and the meaning crisis then demonstrated
conspirituality conspiratorial spiritual
yes ideations.
Yeah. So if you if I was I was
privileged to watch a really good
documentary where somebody went to Qanon
meeting and what's really interesting is
it's got exactly the the the the
structure of a Christian service.
There's like a there's a sermon that
there's singing there's readings.
There's social networking. It's not just
a conspiracy theory. It's a shared world
view that gives people a orientation, a
sense that they've cut through the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to something that's real.
They're connected to themselves, to
other people. They they there's
something that matters. It feeds the
meaning crisis and it feeds it with a
pernicious narrative.
This is good stuff.
Yeah,
this is important. any other main
contributors you want to highlight um
for because
well you can see that the the uh the
entertainment world and the and uh and
the political arena two more so we've
got this turn towards the dark in our
popular media increasingly dark and
people I've I've seen people praise
something just because it was dark and
I'm dark I'm tired of dark like it's
like oh it's so dark it's like and
And but see the dark is at least closer
to the reality of the situation and
that's why people like it.
Does observing how past civilizations
have risen and fallen inform us how we
like about our current situation?
Oh very much very much. Let me just say
the thing about the political arena. Um
a symptom of the meaning crisis is
people feel increasingly
disenfranchised, disconnected, like it
doesn't matter. It's all just an arena
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm using that term
technically. Harry Frankfurt's notion of
it. Right. Yeah. And at the same time,
everything is fraught with the political
fervor. Everything we do is politicized.
Even like you can't do anything now
without the political aspects of it. And
people right and and the and the
relationship the political positions
people take up are very much religious.
There there's cultish relationships.
There's symbolic acts of tearing down.
I'm I'm metapolitical. I think both the
left and right are guilty of
exacerbating the meaning crisis. So I
want it clear that I'm criticizing both
sides here, right? And you've got this,
it's pseudo religious behavior all over
the place. All these symbolic acts we're
doing and we're doing it for these very
very comprehensive worldviews and people
completely identifying it. It that's a
religious phenomena. I'm not the only
one saying that. everyone's now so
anthropologically
what's happening especially in American
politics but you can see it in European
politics too and Canadian politics is
it's trying to take it's it's it's
acting as a I'll use your metaphor a
non-nutritious surrogate for religion
now to your question excellent
historical question we talk about it
Chris and I in the book the west or
whatever that ultimately refers to has
gone through a a significant crisis
before. Um, so Alexander the Great
conquers most of the known world. I
mean, that's not really true. India and
China were still out there, but you know
what I mean, right? Um, and um, and you
know, and he helanizes all of that and
and so and then he dies without leaving
a a determinate heir and then it breaks
up in these smaller empires that are all
fighting each other. So I want you to
compare somebody that's living in the
time after Alexander with somebody who's
living in the time before Alexander, the
time of Aristotle, the guy who taught
Alexander. So in the time of Aristotle,
you live in the same place as the people
who govern you do. And you and your
ancestors have been there for multiple
generations. So and your neighbors too.
And the families all know each other.
And you speak the same language and you
share the same religion. You have the
same concerns, the same projects.
And in fact, you're so bound to this
that you'd rather be killed than suffer
the punishment of being ostracized,
which is forced to leave your home. That
is one of the greatest punishment. We
look at this in the ancient world. They
threatened him. They threatened to
ostracize him. And we go, "Okay, I'll
move from Hamilton to LA. Who cares?"
This is the titanic punishment in the
ancient world.
Now you go to after Alexander
where you're living
the the rulers are thousands of miles
away. You could go to bed and you're in
the Tomic Empire and you wake you wake
up and you're in the Seus Empire.
The people around you speaking different
languages worshiping different gods.
You've probably migrated. They've
probably migrated.
You feel completely
at a loss of home. You you have a
dwelling, but you experience what's
called doicide. You don't feel at home.
So, you can see in the art and
especially the philosophy of the time,
an anxiety, it's called an age of
anxiety, this henistic period.
And what happens is philosophy changes.
It takes on an extra dimension. And they
build on what was given to them by
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, but they
add a dimension. The the philosopher
becomes the physician of the soul.
Epicurius, one of the great hellistic
philosophers, captured it perfectly. He
said, "Call no man a philosopher who has
not alleviated the suffering of others."
So the philosopher takes on this
therapeutic dimension and you get these
entire ways of life like stoicism and
epicuranism that attempt to diagnose
your anxiety and it's it's existential
anxiety. It's a meaning crisis and they
they they diagnose and then they prog
and they give you a prognosis which
isn't having a bunch of beliefs. It's
about they give you an entire ecology of
practices and they give you a community
and they give you exemplary figures like
Epicurus, like Socrates, like Plato that
are then take they basically turn
philosophy into a religion in the
positive sense of the word as a way of
addressing a meaning crisis.
That's by the way why stoicism from that
time is so popular right now. And it
also points to another thing in the
meaning crisis. We're going through
massive therapy. Every third person, you
know, is in therapy, right? And what and
a lot of these therapies are deeply
influenced by the hellistic philosophies
like cognitive behavioral therapy. One
of the most pervasive form of therapies
is explicitly derived from stoicism.
None of this is coincidence.
the scale we're seeing it at is just
obviously puts us at exponential risk to
the meta crisis in so many ways because
I mean you go to like what 1810ish where
there's like 500 million people on the
planet to now just in 200 years to over
8 billion the scale in which things have
transpired is quite astonishing and I'm
just curious because you can look back
at those times and kind of pull um pull
things from but like we've never
experienced the scale of individualism
as we currently are in in today's day
and age. And so obviously that puts puts
us at risk for so many things and we
have massive technological powers that
was not out of breath. Yeah. I mean we
we we're like
and you know before well I mentioned it
with Alexander's empire there's still
the the the terrifically deep
civilizations of India and China and
there's all what's going on Meso America
the you know the Incans and the Mayans
and all that but now we have this global
thing
and I'm not saying there aren't
indigenous cultures or things like that
but there is it's global there there
isn't something outside so not only is
there more are there more people and
there's more technological power and
that that technology has the power the
potential to run away with itself like
the LLMs. There isn't also
there isn't an outside civilization,
right? We have the one global
civilization and and the meaning crisis
is a form of what's called scarcity uh
scarcity mentality. Scarcity when when
whenever you're uh lacking a something
that's nutritive I'm going to keep
playing with your metaphor because it
really sparked me. Okay. So, you have
scarcity. Uh you you you lack food. You
get I don't know but you but I get
hangry when I lack food. Um and so what
happens when you're in a scarcity
mentality? Think about when you're
hangry, right? You you you become very
short- term in your thinking. You become
very narrow. You become very aggressive.
You become very egocentric. And you
become very rigid, right? Does it sound
like our political arena by the way? So
when people are starving for meaning,
they go into a scarcity mentality that
actually really harms our cognitive
ability to deal with the poly crisis,
the meta crisis of challenges we're
facing in the world. So the metacar
crisis is it's it it so people look out
at the world and the metacar crisis
helps like even darken more the meaning
crisis because the world seems even more
threatening and then the meaning crisis
hamstrings us so we become less and less
capable of dealing with the world and
what's happening is we're reciprocally
narrowing the world is getting we we're
losing options in the world and and
we're losing our cognitive capacity in
the face of it and we are reciprocally
narrowing down where we're feeling
trapped.
It feels like the way that you even just
physiologically kind of displayed that
was, you know, one of the worst or
perhaps the worst punishment one could
give someone as solitary confinement. Oh
yeah.
And we've kind of been somehow society
convinced to will willingly put
ourselves in a version of that in our
own bedrooms with technology. And like
you spoke to earlier, I think
you would assume that an increase of
affluence and comfort and technology
would increase well-being, but like you
were speaking to that knowledge and
information without wisdom is like
exacerbating the issue even further. And
so for everyone who's listening, I
promise we're going to come up for air
soon and and explore those ecology
practices and things that can really
develop our own individual personal
meaning crisis. But any other thoughts
you have there on the aspect of how
technology and comfort like
I want to pick up and and did do you
that's also I think very insightful
amplify it. So think about you know um
like you said uh loneliness
think about these really deeply
effective and and and and there's very
comprehensive they they they they
sink into the depths of your soul and
they they color and pervade your whole
world when you're lonely. Think about
when you're homesick.
So, we have done this thing where we're
making people homesick within their
culture.
So, they're lonely, they're homesick,
they're starving,
and the technology is not helping. The
technology is magnifying. It's it's like
I said with the conf with the
confirmation porn, right? It's
magnifying all of this and it's giving
us the erats
surrogates, the the the false
substitutes. Oh, well, I don't have
friends, but I have all these social
connections, right? Um, well, I'm not at
home, but I can go into this virtual
world where I play an important role,
right? Well, I'm starving uh for
meaning. Uh, so what I'll do is I'll
fill myself with more and more intensity
of experience. So you know musicologists
have talked about the fact that uh the
complexity of popular music is rapidly
eroding because we are more and more
pumping the intensity and the salience
be at the expense of any attempt to
convey profound transformative meaning.
It's like a dopamineergic roller
coaster.
Yeah. And so what we happen it people
are attracted to that because they're in
scarcity mentality but it doesn't feed
them. So they stay hungry and then the
whole thing exacerbates in a vicious
cycle.
Yeah. It's like the hungry hungry ghost
analogy for me
from Buddhism. Yes. Yes. Excellent.
You're on fire.
Oh, thanks. You're on fire, too. Fire
conversations.
Okay. So, bringing this a little bit
more into the personal please.
for our own personal quest for meaning.
You know, how does contemplating what
will matter most upon death uh reveal
what we should how we should change our
behaviors and values in how we're living
currently? Because I think on the
personal quest for meaning, um I've
heard you speak to the importance of
wisdom and friendships, you know, and
being connected to like what you said
earlier, things that have value and
meaning to you beyond your own personal
egocentric survival. Um and so I'll be
curious to to hear your thoughts on what
is going to matter most to us uh when
we're going to face death and how that
should inform how we live.
This is this is brilliant. So if you
give people if you prime priming is when
you just give people uh information and
you don't make it sort of explicit but
it affects their behavior. Uh so when
you prime people about markers like you
you get having people read a whole bunch
of words and they're just reading words.
You tell them it's a reading
comprehension task. But in the list
there's words like coffin, skeleton,
corpse, right? All this, you know, and
and when you make that sort of salient
to people in that way, people go into
scarcity mentality and they get very
rigid. At least this is what the what's
called mortality research or terror
management theory shows. I have some
questions about the methodology, but I
think overall it's reasonable that they
found a phenomena. So, and if I just
give you the propositional facts, no,
notice what that does. That locks you
down. But now, let's move away from the
propositional. Let's move to the
perspectival.
Right? Now, I ask people to imagine
that they're dying. They're in death
reflection and they can have the people
around them. That has the opposite
effect on them. Now they come out of
that and they open up and they start to
wonder and they start to look for these
deeper connections because people
through death reflection sounds morbid
through death reflection people come to
the realization of the things that
really do matter to them. They'll say
I care about the relationships I've had
not only to other people but to reality
and to myself. I I I care about like the
good I've done. I've I've cared about
the truth I've said and the things that
we're told are going like we're supposed
to be pursuing. They don't come up. They
don't matter because they don't matter.
They don't contribute to meaning cuz you
see when you're facing death, subjective
well-being and wealth are going away.
The only thing that the only thing
you're going to carry with you to your
last moment in your confration with
death and this was the great insight of
Epicurus and the Stoics
is your meaning and wisdom. That's it.
And so that what so if you shift off the
propositions of mortality and you shift
to no no take up the perspective take up
the lived experience of you know
actually imaginally reflecting on death.
What becomes salient are the things that
have contributed to meaning in life.
Is that in a way our attempt to exist
for like to to live longer in a way? So
you you might think that um but um I
mean I've done a lot of Buddha Buddhist
practices and and that there's something
similar in stoicism. Um and those
practices are designed to make one
horrified of immortality. Um so I mean I
I I can't do the whole practice here but
I'll give you an intuitive sense for it.
So you want to live forever. Well then
all you watch all your friends die. Oh
well then they have to live forever too.
and then all of their friends and all of
their friends and basically nobody can
die. Okay, that's a problem. So, what
are we going to do? Uh, does that mean
nobody's going to be born? There's no
more kids. How meaningful is existence
without children? And now, is it just
that none of the people can die? Well,
none of their pets should die. And then,
oh my gosh. And then what you realize is
the entire universe has to freeze and
not change at all. And then you realize,
okay, I'm going to go on forever and
ever, which means I'm going to have an
infinity of events where I screw up,
where I fail,
where I let myself and other people
down, where I betray,
I'm going to have an infinity
of those. Can I bear that? And then
we're all going to get to a place where
we have an infinity of guilt and shame.
Are we gonna can we bear that with each
other? Can we forgive infinitely each
other? And then
if I live I've changed a lot since I was
four.
If I live forever, will I change so much
that I'm virtually unconnected to the
person I am now? Inevitably. So even if
I don't f die physically, John Verviki,
it's gone. Absolutely. And so it's even
futile. And when you really live this,
you realize, wait, I don't want any of
that. That's horrific. And so then you
have to ask, what is it people think
they want with immortality? This is at
least the Buddhist proposal. What people
and this was the stoic model. People
think they want to have a long life, but
what they want to do is they want to be
they want to live as deeply as possible.
So here's a story from Julian uh uh
Barnes's history of the world in nine
and a half chapters and it spoiler alert
this was in the good life. Okay. So the
uh the good life made use of this. I
don't know if if if they have it
explicitly, but the connection is
obvious. This guy dies and he goes to
heaven. He meets St. Peter and he plays
golf until he can play it as best as he
possibly can. He does all these things
and then he comes to St. Peter's and he
says, you know, and this is what happens
in the good life. I'm kind of done.
I'm kind of done. And St. Peter said,
good. That's the point of heaven. The
point of heaven isn't to live forever
because you're not God. You're finite
and you have to remain finite. The point
of heaven is for you to die willingly
with right what the stoics say is that
now that's that's a mythological thing
or it's a TV show the stoics say but
that is available to you right now if
you practice
you could get to the place where you
would be happy to die now because you
have touched the depth of existence and
got the most religio that is possible
for a human being and that's what they
live for. And that's why they were so
courageous. That's why they would, and
you have to be really careful about
this, that's why they were willing to
advocate for suicide
in this very limited circumstance in
which it was the only way to prevent
them from engaging in immoral, vicious
behavior. And Senica, for example, did
this. So I I do think that we I mean
there obviously there's a biological
urge to keep on living but
we can reflect on that. We can move from
a scarcity mentality of just want to
live
to a wise perspective a reflective
perspective where we say no what I want
is I want to live as deeply as possible.
Mhm.
Death in our own mortality I feel like
really affords us an opportunity unlike
anything else to truly con you know
confront
I'm glad that I'm mortal. I am glad that
I'm mortal. What you're saying is I'm
very very glad. I don't I I mean I'll I
mean if a truck is bearing down on me
I'll get out of the way. But I deeply
don't want to live
more than another 20 years.
But I would push back on the notion and
say, let's jump to 20 years from now.
Would you want to live an extra day, one
more day?
I've seen people dying. I've been with
people dying. I'm old enough now.
And I've seen the difference from people
dying who wanted to live another day and
the anxiety and the terror and people
who are ready to go.
They and and I don't mean people who
ready to go because they're beset by
pain.
They're done. Yeah.
And their lives are done and they feel a
completeness. I've been with them. I
want to be them. I aspire to being them.
So will I be like that? You're asking
me. I don't know. Do I aspire to be like
that? And is it possible? Yes.
Yeah.
I I think it's a really beautiful place
to arrive to also similarly strive and
to live life with a sense of abandon in
in that regard as well. How much do you
feel like in regards to belief and our
our need to make meaning and believe
things as human beings is driven through
our insecurity of not knowing? Cuz death
is obviously a huge uncertainty
and sometimes uh often times we as
humans create all sorts of beliefs um
and dogmas to to uh cure that insecurity
of
Yeah. Yeah. So I mean this goes more
towards my cognitive scientific work and
the work I do with some terrific
colleagues uh a dear friend of mine. He
was a former student of mine um and now
he's a dear colleague of mine Mark
Miller and the whole predictive
processing framework that the idea that
the brain is trying to anticipate the
world as much as it possibly can as a
way of being adaptive. And so um radical
uncertainty can be horrifying. Um uh but
of course and we've tried part of what
the enlightenment promised was we'll
give you certainty. We'll we'll daycart
we'll give you certainty. We'll give you
a formal system that is complete and
consistent and will render everything
certain and we now know because of God
and Einstein that is logically and
physically impossible and the world is
actually complexifying with emerging
information. So it is radically
uncertain. It's not just that there are
risks. Risks are probabilities negative
or positive. Negative usually that we
can calculate. Uncertainty is we are
radically ignorant, right? And so what
we have to do is give up that
enlightenment promise of certainty. Um
obviously pursue as much knowledge as we
can.
But instead the shift and you see this
in all of the helenic philosophies. You
see it in Buddhism and Dowoism. And this
is like really I mean especially in
Buddhism and Dowoism or Zen you get Zen
by integrating Buddhism and Dowism
together. Let's try something else. So
I'll use an analogy uh from biology. You
you could there's the evolution of
traits like you know we've evolved this
particular trait but biologist and bi
biology is the science that's going
through the scientific a scientific
revolution right now. Biology is the
philosophically important science right
now. My colleague at the University of
Toronto, Dennis Walsh, is a clear
example of that. Um, physics is
theoretically more abundant. That's why
they had to give the Nobel Prize to a
cognitive scientist, computer scientist,
colleague of mine for the University of
Toronto. And yes, all truth does come
from the University of Toronto. Jeffrey
Hinton got the Nobel Prize in physics
because they can't find an actual
physicist to give it to.
Okay. So, but in biology they're now
talking about the evolution of
evolvability,
right? So, you're not evolving a
particular trait because a trait depends
on a certainty in the environment. What
you evolve is the meta trait of
evolvability which is the capacity to
constantly redesign yourself.
Adaptability.
Adaptability. But a constantly well I'm
a constantly evolving adaptability.
Yeah. uh so that you can constantly
refit and readapt yourself to an
environment that always will contain an
element of uncertainty in it. And I
think this is one reading uh this is one
half of the first noble truth of
Buddhism that like you know the world is
pervaded by dooka the world is radically
uncertain and that's the that's the
world side and our side is we are
radically prone to self-deception and we
can do a lot to reduce the selfdeception
in the face of the uncertainty so that
we can significantly reduce the loss of
agency and suffering. Um uh and and I
think that is what we should be striving
for.
Amazing. Th this conversation is very
nutrient-dense for me and I'm I'm
excited to keep unpacking a few
different aspects now a little bit more
in the realm of understanding our mind
living and pulling from your Buddhist
philosophical understandings and
cultivating a life of wisdom.
And so where I'd like to start is for
you to share what are the four types of
knowing and how is that useful? Yeah.
Here
I've been alluding to it throughout. So
thank you Andre for giving me a chance
to talk about this. So one of the things
the enlightenment did as well is it
uh it it convinced us of two
interlocking things. It convinced us
that all knowing is propositional
knowing and that we do not have to
undergo transformation in order for
certain truths to be disclosed to us.
Daycart proposes a universal method of
calculating with propositions and uh
linenets proposes a universal calculus
and you don't have you don't have to
transform in order for reality to
disclose itself to you. All you have to
do is master the method and then apply
the method universally and you'll get
all the truths that are possible.
Now if you go before the enlightenment
you get a much different picture. If
you're taking a look for example within
the Christian neoplatonic tradition
there is the radically alternative
proposal that there are many aspects
dimensions of reality that will only be
disclosed to you after you go through
significant
uh transformation self-trcendence you
see so soon as you get rid of that
transformative notion and then you lock
everything into the propositional you
lose the other kinds of knowing. Mhm.
So each kind of knowing has its own kind
of memory like psychologically
own kind of memory and its own sense of
realness. So the one we're all fixated
on is what's called propositional
knowing. Knowing that something is the
case like knowing that and I always
state a proposition. The cat is on the
mat. Right? There's a proposition. And
your sense of realness is a sense of
conviction that it is true. And you have
a type of memory for that called
semantic memory. You know, by the way,
that cats are mammals. Yes.
And that's it. You just have that sort
of fact proposition, right? And you nod.
You have a sense of conviction for it.
Now, notice how that's very different
from your procedural knowing. You're
knowing how to do something. You're
knowing how to swim. You're knowing how
to catch a football. You know,
so propositional is knowing what a bike
is. Procedural knowing is how to ride a
bike.
How to ride a bike. And notice the
difference there, right? Propositions
are true or false. You're not riding a
bike right now. So does that mean your
skill of bike riding is false? That that
doesn't make any sense, right? Skills
apply or not? They have conditions of
application, not conditions of
referential completion, right? So you're
not talking about something, you're
causally interacting with it, which
means the sense of realness is the sense
of empowerment. You know what it's like
to ride a like you get that sense of ah
I can ride a bike. And then you have a
kind of memory that's distinct from your
semantic memory called procedural
memory. Now, why aren't you riding a
bike right now? I presume you're not
riding a bike right now because you have
consciousness, which means you know what
it is like to be you here in this state
of mind in this situation. Or we use an
artistic metaphor for that. You have a
perspective right now and you are you
have a viewpoint, a point of view from
that perspective. This is a way of
talking about that perspectival knowing.
You know what it is like to be you here
now in this state of mind in that
situation and you have you have its own
kind of memory. It's called episodic
memory. So compare them the memory I'm
going to ask for you now. Okay. What did
you have for breakfast this morning?
I had nothing.
What are you doing right now?
Uh searching.
And are you sort of imagining it a bit?
Um,
well, because I had nothing for
breakfast that uh
Oh, that does it's not going to work.
It's not going to work as well.
Okay. Uh, did you did you brush your
teeth this morning?
I did.
Okay. So, what happens when you remember
doing that?
I remember this um series of events that
I normally always go through.
Right. So, you remember the series of
events. You relive a sequence of events.
You And so, what you do is you go back
and you have a little tiny narrative, a
little tiny story. So, and it's and what
that story reflects is your perspective
on the situation. That's what an episode
is. An episode is a slice of
perspectival knowing. So, you have
episodic memory. And this is the memory
we cherish because you know it's about
the events that matter to us and are
significant to us which are different
than the facts that we think are true.
Right? Okay. So, um and your sense of
realness for perspectival knowing is not
power. It's not a a sense of conviction.
It's a sense of presence. So I can do it
with you right now. Reality is
presencing. It's the sense of presence,
right? As opposed to things not being
here, being absent. It's present. It's
really present. And that's that's
another sense of real. And some people
often have that sense really powerful
when they're having a mystical or
psychedelic experience or when they're
really in when they feel like they're
really in a video game. It's so real.
I'm in it. Right? That's a sense of
presence.
That perspectival knowing is that like
similar to where I suppose gnostics and
mystics derive their sense of knowledge
from like it's the interiority.
So let's let's talk about the Greek
words you're because you're using a a
Gnostic. So uh the Greeks have epistem
for prop largely propositional knowing
where we get epistemology from. They
have techn for procedural knowing where
we get technology from. They have noises
which means knowing by noticing it's and
it gives you an you have insight. Notice
how this is all events of consciousness
and perspective. That's noisis. And in
the neoplatonic and the mystical
traditions you move from you move into a
knowetic understanding. But you involved
another word uh nosis and it goes into
the Gnostics and it's in our word
prognosis and diagnosis.
Okay, let's talk about the Gnostics. So
what kind of knowing were they after?
Um they're after a knowing that
liberates you.
Narcissist Narcissism has a terribly
tangled mythology that's got a lot of
danger to it. So I'm I'm putting that
aside. I'm talking about we're talking
about the psychology
A Gnostic feels existentially in they
feel entrapped and they're trying to be
liberated and and what they're trying to
do is realize their true identity and
bring that true identity the spark
within them into move it into
relationship to where it really belongs
and connects to what's ultimately real.
It's about realizing that the doctor
when they're diagnosing you, they're
trying to figure out what's going on
inside of you and transform you into
another state of being. This is what
Nosis is. Is that okay? So, this is
participatory knowing. This is the
knowing that is about how you are
coupled to the environment. How you and
the environment are participating in the
same patterns, the same processes, the
same principles. Right? So like for
example, you can walk around in this
room because you and the room both are
participating in gravity. Does that does
that make sense? Okay. You don't have to
know this. Participatory knowing can be
largely unconscious. Like when the
doctor is diagnosing you, your body
knows that it's ill, but that doesn't
mean you have a conscious understanding
of it. Okay? So you can be coupled or
not to the environment.
Right? And now that coupling can often
call for transformation.
You have to know thyself in order to
know the world differently. There has to
be a change in the way the agent and the
arena. So when the world makes sense to
you, it's an arena for your agency. And
the the agent and the arena have to be
mutually transformed. That's nosis.
That's participatory knowing. So
participatory knowing is stored in a
very weird kind of memory.
It's your sense of self.
You have a sense of self, don't you? You
have a a sense
knowing through in through relationship
as well. It
Yes. It's knowing. It's knowing. It's
the the relationships that shape your
identity. So your roles, participatory
knowing involves the knowing that has
happened through the roles you take up.
You're a friend, you're, you know,
you're a podcaster, you're a lover, you
have different roles and and and then
you have to do a through line through
the you you I I I assume like most
people, you don't want to be suffering
massive cognitive dissonance in which
all these roles are undermining each
other. You want them to be coherent,
right, and make sense together. And so
you try to draw a through line between
all the roles, all the patterns you
participate in. That's yourself. That's
what your sense of self is, right?
So why does knowing the distinction
between these four, how does that impact
our life?
Well, what's the sense of realness for
the participatory knowing? It's a sense
of and you won't because it's largely
unconscious. You will probably only
become aware of it when it's disturbed.
When the sense of being connected to
reality and having a genuine authentic
agency in that arena is lost, the sense
of realness is meaning in life.
The participatory knowing is where a lot
of the meaning in life is being held.
And then above that, right, it's held in
the perspectives you take, what you
notice in the world, what's salient to
you. We we're talking about that. And
then that gives you your skills for
actually navigating and making your way.
And then only on top of all of that.
Only after all of that is running
do you get the causal interactions that
give you your beliefs. But if you fixate
on beliefs
and ideologies which are just systems of
beliefs and a political system that is
just about one ideology killing another,
you are cutting yourself off. This is
why I'm metapolitical because it is
fixated on the propositional level. But
if you're fixated on that propositional
tyranny and you don't think there you
need transformative truths, you cut
yourself off from the procedural and
then below that the the perspectival and
below that the part participatory and
that's where most of the meaning in life
machinery is running.
That's why it matters.
It's really amazing how you gave that
analogy almost like the weight of an
iceberg and the deepest part of us is a
foundation yet we've deified and kind of
flipped it on its head. were
propositional.
Another form of idealization, another
form of idolatry that we engage in
that what we know is kind of the guy.
My beliefs, my beliefs are ultimate and
what really matters and who and
everything I am. A lot of your behavior
are not driven by your beliefs. A lot of
your behavior is driven by your skills.
It's driven by your states of
consciousness. It's driven by your
traits and habits and deficits of
character. So would you say there's a
distinct correlation and relationship
between suffering we experience
collectively and individually and the
identification with propositional
knowledge is kind of the new god. Yeah.
That is why I call it propositional
tyranny. And you see religions for all
of their ills were about well before the
enlightenment because one of the things
the enlightenment did was convince
religions
that they're belief systems. People
equate religion with belief systems. But
what religions were and if you read the
literature before the enlightenment it
was understood that religion was
primarily addressing the noises and the
nosis of us right and inviting us into
deep transformation because depths of
reality will only be uh be disclosed to
us after we undergo deep transformation.
And so again yes that is why we suffer.
Where do you go to bring about the deep
transformations
of the nonpropositional knowing? And you
know, and that's think about that.
That's what wisdom is. Knowledge is
about what you know. Wisdom is about
how. It's about the procedural and the
perspectival and the participatory.
Wisdom is about the how. And so we're
we've lost that as well.
Largely identifying in the top down
processing.
Very much. Very much.
Yeah. and not having the ecology of
practices that that evoke the bottom up.
When I meet people, I will often say to
them, "Don't tell me what you believe.
Tell me what you practice."
Cuz that is going to give me a lot more
information about who you really are.
Your beliefs, yeah, they matter. They're
necessary, but they're very, very far
from sufficient. I think there is a big
shift that one once they start to deepen
their practices of meditating in silence
or really cultivating the capacity to
listen you start to not prioritize what
somebody's saying as much as the place
it's coming from and you can very
clearly kind of see that
well notice not brilliant brilliant you
you start to shift from what they're
saying to how they're saying it the
tenor and the tempo and then the place
they're coming from that's that
perspective of knowing where where is
their viewpoint and then what what's
their understanding what are they
standing upon what's their participatory
knowing you you yes you try to sense
behind or through like the way I'm
looking through my glasses you try to
sense through the proposition into the
non-propositional and you start to get
you start to get genuine compassion you
start to be able to like a I'm not just
understanding what they're saying like
you said I'm understanding where they're
coming from and who they are and what
they're saying and I'm I I'm going to
try and make myself open and responsive
and responsible to that. Yes. Yes.
That's Yes.
And it because it's like we all want to
gen like we want to be connected to
what's really real like you're speaking
to. And when it comes to relationships,
there is that saying I believe
uh decency is the absence of strategy,
right? You know, and so in many ways we
can see in relationships people are
trying to get something instead of
having a genuine sincere interaction,
right? They're trying to get something.
They're trying to have rather than
trying to become.
Yeah.
Right. And notice we say we have sex,
but we want to be in love.
Like love, like this is another thing
we've done. We've trivialized love. We
think that love is a feeling. What a
ridiculous proposal. Like love isn't
even a single emotion. Like I love Sara
profoundly right now. That is making me
ache. But when I see her, it'll make me
happy. Sometimes it makes me angry
because that person is threatening Sara.
Love is a existential stance. It's a
whole way of configuring my agency and
how I'm connected to reality that gives
a whole living network of emotional
responses. That's what love is. And what
that means, right, is exactly what
you're talking about. I can't come in
trying to have something. I have to
become someone and I have to I have to a
part of what love is is is a willingness
to and this requires tremendous
vulnerability. Greg Enrique friend of
dear friend of mine colleague we're
writing a book on consciousness
together. He's got this amazing proposal
that language language is is a
superpower because it allows us to
coordinate our behavior. Like we're
useless as individuals in in
biologically like you know a really
angry dog can take you out but give us
language so we can coordinate our
behavior and we get some pointy sticks
and then we can train the dogs and then
we can kill anything on the planet.
Right? So language is really powerful
but language makes you so vulnerable.
Langu language discloses you in the way
nothing else can. Bertram Russell
famously said, "No matter how eloquently
a dog barks, it can't tell you that its
parents were poor but hardworking."
So what we need is we need a way of
managing that. And what people do is
they like you're you're so insightful.
They they think what they'll do is
they'll have a method a strategy here
daycart. I'll have a universal method a
strategy for doing this. I won't have to
be calm. What I'll do is I'll create
this defensive strategy to protect my
vulnerability. Or you can get the
recommendation of Jesus of Nazareth,
which is no. What you'll do is I'm going
to take that vulnerability and I'm going
to entrust it and I'm going to turn it
into an opening so that the person can
as as much as possible free see through
my pretenses. That's what Socrates does.
He he offers also the chance for you to
he said I'm like a mirror and like you
look into somebody's eye his eyes and he
says he's a midwife helping you to give
birth to yourself you know you can you
you allow the person to profoundly see
and they and if they reciprocate and
they allow them and they make them this
is called mutually accelerating
disclosure it's how you fall in love
with somebody if I make myself
vulnerable and open myself up so that
you can see through and you can see
where there's pretense, but you can also
see where there's hurt, but you can also
see where I'm coming from better. And
you reciprocate by opening up. And then
I see that and and we do that. That's
love. It's erotic love or it's
friendship love or it's familial love.
And that that that's the alternative.
Those are the nourishing connections.
You know, I think authenticity has
gotten a good publicist and marketing
agent to where it's now the thing that
you, you know, should do. And, you know,
I'm very suspicious of authenticity as a
virtue.
But what you're speaking to in the
absence of that strategy of like really
sharing being with somebody, right, is
uh that is authentically actually
showing up in in u in connection with
other people um instead of the the the
authenticity that's gotten a good
publicist, you know.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Where the
authenticity is sort of being true to my
inner self that is unchanging and
permanently who I am.
It's a thing that's used again.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
What is relevance realization as it as
it I think I think this flow I think
this flows in actually here because
when we're trying to understand the mind
and what our priors are and you know uh
it's it's important to really understand
not just how we're thinking about things
like what we're thinking about but the
place we're coming from when we're
thinking about it and I always enjoy
examining inwardsly you know where are
my own
uh self-alth dogmas or perspectives that
um are keeping me stuck in a less fluid
way of living, you know, and so I think
this has immense importance for today's
day and age.
Thank you. I I laughed because I'm not I
wasn't laughing at you, I was laughing
at myself because, you know, relevance
realization has been sort of the
obsession at the core of my scientific
work for what three decades. Um I've
been working on it since before my PhD
thesis. Um, so
I this will take a couple of steps, so
I'll need a bit of space if that's okay.
Um, so here's a proposal. You
demonstrate a fantastic ability ability.
We're trying to give artificial
intelligence right now. So what do what
are people talking about? They're
talking about artificial general
intelligence, AGI. Uh, what does that
mean? Well, it means previously our AI
was siloed. the AI could was a single
domain, single type of problem solver,
but and that was radically unlike you.
You're a you're a general purpose, a
general a domain general problem solver.
You can solve a wide variety of problems
in a wide variety of domains in a wide
variety of ways, which makes you
astonishingly adaptive. So your
adaptivity is that you're a general
problem solver. All right? And so the
idea is what makes you a general problem
solver? Obviously for specific problems
you have to have specific knowledge or
specific skills, but being a general
problem solver, there must be something
that's general that's at work. And so
here's the proposal, my theoretical
proposal, and I'm pleased to say more
and more people are finding this
plausible. And so it's been a long haul
for me, but um I'm very grateful for the
recognition that what makes you
generally intelligent is that you solve
two meta problems. Meta problems are any
any problem you have to solve in order
to solve any specific problem. These are
basically the the meta problems the two
aspects of adaptivity
set all us being equal. You want to be
an adaptive problem solver. Does does
that make make sense? Okay. So
adaptivity being really adaptive in in a
comprehensive way. Okay. So what are
these two matter problems? Well, and and
why are they interlocking? We've already
talked about one and this comes out of
the astonishing work of Carl Fristen and
Andy Clark and and and work I've I've
done and published with Mark Miller and
Brad Anderson on predictive processing.
All else being equal, the more you can
anticipate the world, the more generally
intelligent you are. Michael Lemon has a
water for talking about it. He calls
this your cognitive light cone and he
and I want you to remember this point.
He talks about it's about what the
organism can care about.
Okay,
it's interesting. Just side note, the
uh I I rewatched the Matrix a few days
ago and that the significance of the
oracle and I guess their ability to
really anticipate forthcoming events uh
places them on the top of the hierarchy
of society in a way.
That's right. Yes. Side note.
Well, no, no, that's a good note because
think about it. Do you want like like
the oracle? Do you do do you want to do
you want to react to the tiger or avoid
the tiger? Do you want to happen upon
where the salmon are or do you want to
anticipate where the salmon are going to
be? You see, when you anticipate the
world, the more deeply you can
anticipate the world, the more adaptive
you are. That's why you think a a dog is
more intelligent than a frog cuz you
know a dog can you can say to a dog go
into the next I we we're raising a a dog
right now frog.
I thought you would have surprised me.
That would not have been my anticipatory
knowledge.
No, no, it's it's a dog. And you can you
can say to the dog, hey Sadi, uh go into
the next room and get your ball and come
back. You can't do that with a dog. With
a frog, I should say, right? Um, and so
you you you actually attribute
intelligence when you get an intuitive
sense of the cognitive light cone of an
organism. But here's the issue and and
it's interlocked. See, as soon as the
more I start to anticipate the world,
the more the more my goal state, the my
problem solution is in the future cuz
I'm anticipating more. I hit the problem
of relevance realization.
This is the amount of information that
is available to me. Now you are
generally intelligent. So the amount of
just in this room
the amount of information you could pay
attention to is astronomically vast.
Even think of just the potential
combinations. You could look at this
edge of the glass, that spot there, that
over there, and then feel the tip of
your nose. Or you could do your knee,
the tip of my finger, that spot. Like
it's overwhelming. It's combinatorally
explosive, right? The amount of
information you can pay attention to is
astronomically vast. The amount of
information in your long-term memory and
all the possible combinations you could
connect, you maybe can find some
connection between the Nile River and
the politics of Uruguay right now. I
don't know, maybe there is and you could
somehow do that some way, right?
Cominatorily explosive. All the
possibilities you can consider all the
possible sequence of act actions. The
number of possible sequence of actions,
the possible pathways of actions in a
chess game is greater than the number of
atomic particles in the universe. And
that's just a chess game. Right? Now,
here's what you can't do. You can't
check all that information to see if
it's relevant to your problem. The ele
It would take you infinity to Yeah.
So, you can't check it and see. No. So,
and this sounds kind of like a Zen
Cohen. You're intelligent because you
ignore
most of that information
rapidly and you zero in. You home in on
what is relevant such that it is salient
to you. It becomes perceptually
attractive to you, right? even to the
point of being obvious to you what you
should be paying attention to what you
should be remembering and what
possibilities for action you should be
considering and you're doing it right
now like that
it's preconcious right
oh totally in fact it's pre-egoic
it's it's it's
everything because if you're not doing
relevance realization you're not capable
of any anticipatory problem solving
whatsoever you can't start any learning
project you can't form any categories.
You can't look I'm going to form a
category. Well, there's two glasses. Oh,
well, how did I do that? Well, I noticed
that. Notice the language I use. I
noticed that they're similar. Oh, what
do you mean by similar? You mean they're
absolutely identical? No, no, no. They
share some properties. Oh, you mean uh
like the as long as any two anything
share any two things share properties, a
lot of properties, they're similar. Of
course, that's what I mean by
similarity. Okay. a lawnmower and a
plum. Uh, they both have curved
surfaces. They both contain carbon.
They're both found in North America.
Neither one existed 300 million years
ago. Both weigh more than a paperclip.
Both have a distinctive odor. Both have
a shiny surface. Neither one is a
particularly good weapon. How many true
things can I say about a lawn mower and
and a plum? So, they must be very
similar. And this is Nelson Goodman's
point that I can do that for any two
objects. Logically, everything is
similar to everything else. And when and
then what people say well but those
don't matter you have to pay yeah
exactly you pay attention to the
relevant factors of comparison so before
I can even categorize I have to do
relevance realization
so this is obviously immensely important
right if life is a certain amount of
time and energy how we use our attention
in that span of time and energy is what
I've I've said before is attention is
our spiritual currency that's why Right.
Yeah. And so it's like what are the
preconcious pre-egoic
uh drives in which we decide what is
important to give our attention to and
that is going to drive unbeknownst to us
in many ways the direction of our life.
Right? So that relevance realization
framing my my glasses they have frames
and it excludes a lot of what I can't
see right I'm not paying attention to
but it also affords me it focuses me and
makes things stand out for me as I look
through it and it it's transparent to me
I I'm typically not aware of my glasses
because I'm aware through them of the
world that's how I am paying attention
and this is really important because
there's a lot of really valuable stuff
outside of our current frame
yeah you better believe
So yeah, and and you have moments where
part of your general intelligence is you
have a self-organizing
capacity for correcting when you have
misframed things.
When you have focused on the wrong
things and ignored the right things. So
hopefully this will work for people.
You'll have a situation where you'll
say,
"Oh, oh, oh, I thought she was angry,
but she's afraid."
And everything shifts, and your
perspective shifts, and what you pay
attention to shifts, and what's
foregrounded and background shifts, and
what's salient and relevant shifts.
That's insight. That's insight. Insight
is your your your brain's ability to
correct when it has misframed. So part
of what relevance realization is doing
is also always checking to see if it's
framing well. It has this recursive
dimension to it and that and that is
almost also happening outside your
conscious awareness. So for example, can
you just do an insight? Like you you're
in a situation you need an insight. I
don't know how to do this. I need an
insight. Well, I'm just going to do an
insight, right? It doesn't work that
way, right? You But you also can't just
passively wait for an insight. You have
to, and here's we're back to it. You
have to take up the right perspective
because you have to start shifting
around what you're noticing and you have
to get into the right participatory
mode. You participate in a perspectival
flow that can afford the emergence of an
insight. I study how insight works. But
your point is we also suffer from the
opposite, the lack of insight, which is
foolishness, where you don't notice that
she's afraid and you double down on that
she's angry and you keep interacting
with her as if she's angry and you're
making the situation worse and worse and
worse and you're deceiving yourself
about what you are, who you are in that
situation and about what's going on. And
so the very processes that make you so
radically
powerfully intelligently adaptive make
you radically prone to pervasive and
profound self-deception. I think that's
part of the first noble truth of
Buddhism.
That really frames
the uh reality of of us either living an
ignorant or a wise life, right?
including what is going to be most
beneficial to our and others well-being
um with the proper framing. There is
this infinite warehouse of information
and stimulus and signals in our
surroundings and I'm curious how you
think intuition relates to this because
they they seem analogous and and
supportive and towards one another in
many ways. So I mean and there's uh and
this is in the book um and u
which by the way we mentioned many times
but it's awakening from the meaning
crisis book one you and Christopher and
we'll link it down in the description.
Yeah
uh about the cognitive continuum between
what's called fluency and insight and
flow um and then into mystical
experience and enlightenment. But let's
talk about intuition. Um and this is
deeply influenced by the work of Arthur
Reber and uh Hoggarth in his book
educating intuition.
Um so Ho Hoggarth has a very powerful I
think I I'm convinced it's highly
probable that it's correct account of
what are the co what's the cognitive
process at work in intuition. Um and he
says intuition is the result of what's
called implicit learning. So Arthur
Reber did a bunch of experiments and
this has been well replicated. So what
you do is you come up with an art
completely artificial grammar. It's just
a set of rules for how you can string
letters or numbers together like you
have to have two vowels. Um but you
cannot have more than one consonant and
and you can you can never have two odd
numbers. I random just random rules and
then I create I create letter number
strings that follow these this grammar
and I generate a whole bunch of these.
Okay. And now in the first part of the
experiment what I do is I give them to
the the participant. Here's one. Here's
another. And they're they're long.
They're like nine strings, so you can't
hold them in working memory. Here's
another. Here's another. Here's another.
Here's another. Okay, that's the first
part. Now, what I've now done is for the
second part of the experiment, I
generate a bunch of new strings. Half of
them come from that same artificial
grammar that I used in the first part of
the experiment. The second half come
from a completely different artificial
grammar, right? Completely different set
of arbitrary rules. And so I have a
mixture of new strings, some that come
from the same grammar, some that come
from an alternative grammar. Then I give
all these new strings to people
and I ask them which one of the new
strings belongs with the old ones.
That's it. That's their task.
People score well above chance reliably
on this. They say that one belongs, that
one doesn't, that one belongs, that one
doesn't because of our subconscious
capacity for pattern recognition. Well,
basically
and and it's very important because
what's going on there I I I I hesitate
to to I don't mind you using the word
subconscious. The problem is the notion
of consciousness got the whole thing
around implicit learning into an endless
debate. And so I just say it's not
deliberate and explicit learning. Uh
just to sidetrack all of that.
Um and so uh now what if you ask people
what they're doing they'll give you one
of two answers. One is I don't know how
I'm doing it. You see how that's so much
like intuition already? The other is
they'll confabulate. They'll give you a
a method that they claim is using, but
that method actually doesn't predict
their success. So they make something
up,
right? Here's a third thing. If I take
the same experiment and I make it an
explicit task, right, which is
try this is these have been generated by
rules. Try to figure out the rules
generating these strings. I make I give
them the explicit I turn it into an
explicit problem. performance degrades.
It gets much worse.
Now, here's the problem. Okay. So, you
have a and I think a lot of so-called
psychic phenomena are actually uh very
sophisticated implicit learning.
Um
I'm excited to ask you more about that.
Okay. No, I'm happy to talk about that.
Um and so, um
the problem and this is where Hog's
particular genius comes in. The problem
with predictive processing is its peril.
sorry is power which is implicit because
it's implicit is also its peril. So
predictive processing, sorry, implicit
learning, I said predictive processing.
It's a version of predictive processing.
I'm trying to keep that out of my mind.
Uh the implicit learning what it's doing
it's right is it's picking up on complex
patterns without your reflective
awareness. Okay, that's what makes it so
powerful. That means though that it
suffers from these two deficits that
make it perilous. It can't distinguish
between kinds of patterns. So, it can't
distinguish correlational patterns from
causal patterns.
It can't distinguish illusionary
patterns from real patterns. Also, it
can only pick up on presented patterns.
It can't go looking for patterns that
have not yet been presented.
Now, those are two significant deficits.
So, that means when you like what
implicit learning does, when it's been
powerful for you, you call it your
intuition. When it throws up something
you realize was illusory, you call it
being a racist or being a bigot or being
a sexist or being right insensitive or
etc etc. It's the same process that
which makes us adaptive makes us prone
to selfdeception.
And so Hogarth talks about um how do we
educate intuition because we can't
replace it with explicit
learning. So, what can we explicitly do
in order to make intuition better? And
so, I I can go into that at some point
if you want, but that's the answer to
what I think intuition is.
Okay. Well, since we're here, I want to
ask you about psychics,
okay?
Because there is this one person who I
somebody connected me on a call with.
Um, she knew nothing other than my first
name. And she was 100 on a 100 for many
things that she told me. I've since like
gotten her on a call with a few other
friends and she said things that no
other human possibly would know. You
could not search up on Google um uh
ancestral things uh things that are
happening within my own psyche. She
knows nothing about me. How
did you record it?
I did.
I'd like to hear the recording.
I could I would like to send Yeah, I'll
share it with you.
Because when this is typically done,
what happens is people's because we
suffer from reconstructive memory.
Okay. So memory is not about accurate
recall from the past. It's about
intelligent prediction of the future.
It's about anticipation. So classic
example, I'll give you a bunch of cards
and they have random dot patterns on
them. I give you a whole bunch of them,
right?
And then what I do is I'm going to give
you some cards you haven't seen before
and I'm going to ask you if you've seen
these,
if they replicate the patterns. What I'm
going to do is I'm going to take those.
I'm going to make a pattern you did not
see, but it represents the mathematical
average of all the cards you've seen,
you know, cuz I what I can do is I can
plot them on a grid and
Yeah,
that's the one you'll be most confident
you saw.
Mhm.
Yeah. No, I I've totally thought about
this and like I've I've in relation to
my own I guess desire to believe or not
believe, but there is maybe I'll just
maybe if you're open as an experent to
get on a call with her and see what
happens then.
Well, I I wouldn't I don't have the
relevant expertise. I want a trained
stage mentalist,
okay,
with me because whenever we do these
experiments properly, we have a strange
a trained stage mentalist, they tell us
exactly what the person is typically
doing.
Okay.
And then they put in controls and the
psychic thing goes away.
Yeah, I'm so fascinated. It's just very
interesting.
I'm not claiming that all these people
are charlatans. I think some of that is
because they have crafted very powerful
implicit learning. You actually and I,
by the way, and and we now know this
because the LLMs can take stuff,
right,
patterns in our speech and make powerful
predictions about our ancestry and our
connections. You're that data is there,
but it would be like giving no data to
an LLM to start with
it. But how of how long were you talking
to her?
None. I said nothing.
She just knew my first name
and she just started telling you stuff.
It was pretty Listen, I'm very skeptical
person. I don't believe stuff.
I I I I I don't want to bully your
phenomenology or your memory. Uh all I
know is that
reliably when this is put into a test
situation, it it it goes away.
Maybe in between if we do another
conversation, we'll try to set something
up with a mentalist and really try to
poke at this cuz I'm I'm very I'm I'm
intrigued by it. I'm baffled by it and
I'm al also trying to poke holes in it
logically. and and your your knowledge
of what is available about you is also
um uh how did the how did the call get
set up for example?
Uh somebody who somebody recommended her
because they thought that it would be
interesting for me and I was like I mean
people ask me that stuff all the time.
I'm like all right fine. She's like 100
out of 100 so spot on. So, she knew
nothing other than my first name.
Because when I've done this with people
and I've asked them to record and they
they said 100 and then we went back and
listened to the tape and I was able to
say, "Well, did was that right? Oh, I
forgot about that." And
well, we can put this aside. Maybe we'll
explore outside of this.
Uh I hope you understand that I'm not
saying that I think you're faults. I'm
trying to be I'm trying to be a
agnostic. No, I actually I'm do I do
exactly what you're trying to do with me
as well, which is just like poke holes
into, you know, um into all this
because of what we've been saying. I I
know our proclivity uh for confirmation
bias and I know our proclivity for
relevance realization and for ignoring
and for not finding salient and for not
remembering. Um and I also know
tremendous capacity uh that people have
for implicit learning and picking up on
very very complex patterns. Um there
there's been some famous experimental
work on so-called psychic abilities that
showed that what was actually going on
was very powerful implicit learning. Uh
there's you know there was a notion of
Sheldrake of the feeling of being stared
at.
Yeah. And you know, you would have
people come into a room and they you you
put plugs in their ears and everything
and then randomly people would come in
and stare at them and the people would
report of I'm being stared at or not and
people were scoring well above chance
and oh wow that's really powerful. Well
then when they tried to replicate it's
two different things. What they did is
they they changed one variable in the
initial experiment they were giving
people feedback. They were giving the
participants. They were saying yeah you
got that right. There was somebody. No
you weren't. And you well and and you
say well that doesn't matter because
people are being introduced randomly.
Human beings can't generate random
patterns. It was actually a very
complicated pattern that they were
repeating like a sequence a pattern
sequence of how they were introducing
people in the room
and people were picking up implicitly on
that pattern. And that's and they were
making accurate predictions of when
somebody was in the room because if if
when you remove the feedback their
performance fell to absolute chance.
Now, nobody's doing fraud there. Do you
see what I mean? Powerful, powerful
implicit learning.
What does it mean to increase cognitive
agency?
I think what it would mean is to move
through two steps. One is to move from
intelligence and these aren't ladders.
You don't leave the one behind, right?
To move from intelligence to
rationality. intelligence is G your
measure of general intelligence is only
very weakly predictive only weakly
correlated with measures of your general
rationality.
Um and then to move from rationality to
wisdom.
So um rationality doesn't primarily mean
being logical even though we use logic
as a synonym for rational. Look if I if
I tried to make you logical what would
you need to do? You need to work
according to standards of completeness
and formality and certainty. So I want
you to logically investigate all the
information in the room. You're now
doomed. Right? So if you try to process
everything logically, you're doomed. So
that's not what rational means because
you can only be logical after you've
done a lot of relevance realization.
Anna Redell and I are we got a paper in
revision. We think it's going to get
published soon making this argument in
more technical detail for people who
want to go into it. So what does
rational mean? Well, it doesn't mean
simply being intelligent. So because you
can be highly intelligent and fail most
of the tests of rationality. So it
doesn't mean being logical. It doesn't
mean being smart. What does being
rational means? It means what we've been
talking about. It means the capacity to
reflectively become aware of
selfdeception and systematically and
systemically intervene in it. That's
what rationality is. And you have to do
it right not just for each kind not not
for just propositional knowing. You have
to do it for each kind of knowing
because you can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yourself with
how you pay attention. That's how
advertising works. You can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
yourself by taking the wrong role. I
suffer from this especially like when
I've gone on like this and I've been in
this mode John Verviki scientist mode
and I go home and Sara has to say John
John you're not scientists anymore it's
me Sara get back into the right like
take on the right agency take on the
right like you we we we right so think
about rationality is I learn I use my
intelligence so that I s systematically
many domains in the world and
systemically many levels overcome
self-deception.
But I do that for each of the kind of
knowings.
That's the second stage. But now I want
to coordinate all of the rationalities
so that they don't conflict, that they
in instead are coherent and afford each
other. So I get a rationally
self-trcending field of rationalities.
That long phrase can be replaced with
wisdom.
That's what wisdom is. That's what it is
to enhance your cognitive agency to to
to
cultivate rationality beyond your
intelligence and wisdom beyond your
rationality. And there's a state beyond
that too. I think
what's what is a state beyond that?
I think it's enlightenment.
Okay.
We'll pick back up on enlightenment. But
what is a simple practical thing
somebody can do to increase cognitive
agency today? For example, someone's
listening to this.
Practice at least one. Remember I talked
about like an ecology of practices.
Practice at least these two things.
Okay? You have two things that are in
opponent processing. Opponent processing
is they're working together to make you
adaptive, but they're doing opposite
things. So, one is um you are within a
frame and you're very carefully moving
step by step through an inferential
argument. Okay.
Mhm. what we typically call reasoning
although that's bit of a mistake okay so
let's call that inference to make it
clear then you have a different thing
which is no no that's entitly the wrong
frame I need to break out of we've
already talked about that that's insight
now they work differently
so if you let your insight machinery
work inside the inference frame you can
get into trouble so here's a pond
there's a lily pad on it every day The
number of lily pads doubles. On day 20,
the pond is filled. On what day was it
half filled with lily pads?
I mean, it's not 10, right?
But you want to say 10, don't you?
You want to? It's probably
Yeah. So, there's a part of you
with the compounding effect is I don't
know. It's probably somewhere.
It's 19. It's the day before.
Oh, yeah.
The day before.
Yeah. Duh.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Duh. See, there's
Yeah. Right. Right. So, it's a day
before. Okay. Now, notice what happens.
You've got, let's call Bob the insight
guy. He's trying to jump to a conclusion
because that's what insight is. You're
jumping, right? You're you're breaking a
frame and jumping to a new way, right?
And when you like it, it's insight. When
you don't like it, it's jumping to a
conclusion. So, you need a practice that
constrains
that machinery while you're inside
inference. This is called active
open-mindedness. You try to look for
biases. You try to look for jumping and
you try and really constrain it. But
sometimes you need an insight because
what's going wrong isn't the inference.
What's going wrong is the framing. Now
what you need to do is you need to shut
off all of that inferential machinery.
You need to shut it off and make that
kind of jumping or leaping as it's
sometimes called because a an insight is
a cognitive leap.
You need to make that more available.
That's a mindfulness practice.
Mindfulness practices are shutting off
the inferential machinery to enhance the
insight. But you also need rational
reflective practices,
active open-mindedness that quiet the
insight machinery. So the inferential
machinery, and you don't want to
maximize either one because both can
lead you into trouble. You want to be
practicing both. So they're like an
ecology. They're constantly acting like
a dynamic check and balance on each
other. Yeah,
that's one example.
Yeah. So, the practical application of
trying to reason your way through
something in life and you keep hitting a
dead end or whatever to slow down and
have a mindfulness practice that allows
you to create more space to come from a
different frame in a way,
right? But don't over rely on your
insight and your intuition when the
context requires an appropriate careful
step by so like when I'm writing a paper
of course I want insight to go into the
generation of the framing of it but I
want to be very very careful when I'm
making my inferential steps when I'm
actually doing the scientific argument
as it relates to IQ.
Yes.
So I I mean I feel like people will
think something is profound to the
degree it touches the upper boundary of
their intelligence, right? And so or
would you agree?
No.
Okay, please push back on it.
Because I've actually developed and been
publishing a theory of prof what
profoundity actually is.
And so do you want to go through that or
Yeah. Yeah. Maybe profoundness actually
isn't the right word. Um
but go ahead.
So
um profoundity is um it's part of how we
sense that things are real and and real
is a comparative. Real isn't like red.
Real is like tall. Something is real in
compar more real or less real than
something else. So for example, you
think the dream is real while you're in
it, but then you wake up and you move to
a bigger frame and from that bigger
frame you see the limitations and bias
of the dream world and you say that
wasn't real. By the way, that's a
metaphor that people use for meaning in
life. They want to be connected to
something bigger than themselves. They
don't mean literally bigger. They mean
they want to be in that bigger picture
because that has a greater chance of
connecting them to reality. Okay. So
what people are doing is they're looking
for an increase in intelligibility. That
means things making more sense. Is that
okay? Now one of the things we look for
is we look for trustworthiness.
We want many independent lines of
investigation to lead to the same model.
That's why you will guard even babies do
this. If a baby only sees something, the
baby's not sure if it's real because it
might be a subjective illusion. Yes. But
if the baby can see it and hear it and
touch it, the baby thinks it treats it
as real because the chance that each one
of those channels is going through the
same subjective illusion is much
smaller. So you you increase the
probability sorry you decrease the
probability of subjective illusion by
having many converging things come in.
So that's why we is like that we want
independent lines of evidence that lead
to something that makes sense for us.
It's got to be coherent. It has to like
we talked about coherence. It has to not
be absurd. It has to work. It has to
fit. It has to rule things out and it
has to rule things in. But that's not
enough. We also want something that
empowers us. We want our model to be
elegant. We want it to go into many
different domains and find problems that
we hadn't seen before and solve them.
Einstein's theory of relativity is
profound because it's elegant, right? It
goes into all of these domains, right?
And finds things and so it makes all
this new sense. So we want we want
really trustworthy old sense coming into
a really coherent informative model that
makes a lot of new sense and we want
them we want those two to be balanced.
So if if I'm not projecting very much
right promising to explain very much you
don't need the model to be particularly
deeply trustworthy. If I say, "I like
vanilla ice cream." You know, go, "Oh."
[Music]
But if I say, you know, I think the
English monarchy are lizards and notice
how I can explain so much of their
behavior with that. You go, yeah, you
can explain a lot of their behavior, but
that's a really untrustworthy model. And
this is how conspiracy theories, this is
one of the way we [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ourselves. We
we get things that are highly, well,
think about far-fetched. They project a
lot but they're not trustworthy. We also
have the opposite. We have something
that's really trustworthy but it doesn't
project very much. That's triviality.
When people are hungry they eat.
[Music]
You don't go that's really profound. Of
course it's trustworthy. You don't doubt
that. Yeah of course. But it doesn't
open up reality. But when it's really
trustworthy and it's really coherent. So
when you've got you've got convergence,
you got coherence and you got elegance
and you've got them balanced, then we
find something profound.
We find it highly plausible where
plausible means I take it very
seriously.
Yeah. Fascinating. Amazing. So, one of
the things you asked me a minute ago,
one of the things people should be doing
is, you know, we can't control very much
the probability of the information we're
getting because that involves
experimentation and causal interaction
with the world. We have to trust other
people about that. But what you and I
can do is we can do a lot about the
plausibility. What should we take
seriously? Well, ask yourself how many
and really check for confirmation bias.
How many independent lines of evidence
and argument have converged on this? How
coherent? How clearly does it is it
vague or is it coherent? Does it rule
things out? Does it rule things in? And
how elegant? How much does does it
promise to open up and generate new
understanding for me? Then take it
seriously. That's some recommendation to
give to your listeners. practice
plausibility more and more
and you the more you get better at it,
the more you will bump into something
that's profound.
That's really important asterisk there.
Yeah.
How much is IQ in your understanding a
predictor of success in life versus
fulfillment in life? Is there a
correlation?
That's a brilliant question. So, and I
think IQ is largely a measure of
anticipatory relevance realization.
Um, and therefore I think it is
massively predictive of your ability to
learn and solve problems. If I have to
get one measure from you, I want G. Cuz
G is going to tell me how long you're
going to live, how well you're going to
do in your job, how well you're going to
do in your relationships, how well
you're going to do in in your
educational projects,
which would be an IQ from some sort of
reliable tests that people
Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Not one of the
Earthsat tests that's on the internet.
uh uh you know one of the reliable tests
the ones that's been well
which you really you're kind of like is
that just very predominantly genetic and
like you're born with
um so it's G bye so your IQ although
it's not very malleable perhaps
longterm meditation altering working
memory in your salience landscape can
nudge uh uh G a bit that's
I think that's not it's not a consensus
I'm not even convinced But I take it
seriously.
Okay.
But that doesn't mean you're just
genetically determined. This is a
misleading way of talking about it cuz
people will usually create a square in
their mind and then just divide it in
half. But it's it's 50% genetics, 50%
environment and how they interact that
actually generates your intelligence.
But
what's more important about you because
your intelligence is not in like very
malleable, very changeable. If I had to
like what a a better measure I want and
you know Stanovich has talked about this
uh a colleague of mine from the
University of Toronto in what
intelligence test mix. I want actually
measures of your rationality and your
wisdom because unlike your intelligence
rationality and wisdom are very
malleable.
How do you measure wisdom?
So you can measure rationality and then
what you want to do is you want to try
and measure all the rationalities and
all the different kinds of knowing and
relative trade-offs between measures of
insight and measures of inference and
then you have standard we have a we have
validated wisdom scales
and they're still all in progress.
They're they're much better than nothing
but they're not at the level of
psychometric uh level that we have for
G. We have some measures of rationality
that are approaching the validity like
like that are for measures of of G and
rationality is ultimately much more
important uh a measure from you and I
think we will eventually get the wisdom
measures uh they're already better than
nothing. They're better than people's
just intuitive judgments but hopefully
we'll get them up to that level. You
know that's part of what my work
hopefully contributes towards. And uh
those measures are are very very
powerful. Um uh the measures of
rationality are very very powerful for
predicting what you ask me above and
beyond success well-being.
Yeah.
Because rationality and meaning in life,
which I think goes where we're starting
to blend into wisdom, are much more
predictive of well-being or at least
udeimmonia or a life well-lived than
your measures of intelligence.
What do you learn from the Buddhist uh
understanding and psychology for the
cultivation of wisdom in one one's life?
Uh what is like the predominant
uh overarching theme that you see there?
the all of what I said to you about the
centrality importance of
non-propositional knowing and the
needing the need to bring about an
eight-spoked wheel an ecology of
practices that can transform the
non-propositional in order to
fundamentally alter my connectedness to
real and see through illusion and
selfdeception. All of that was well it
was originally inspired by Socrates and
Plato but it was educated through
Buddhism
but then I came back to find the
neoplatonic tradition and I've got it
further educated within the western uh
philosophical tradition.
You mentioned pointing to something
beyond what we were speaking to earlier
about enlightenment.
Yes.
What is enlightenment in your
understanding?
So it's I argue Chris and I argue on the
in this in the book and I've got a new
paper coming out w with Hussein and
Daniel uh called flowing into mystical
experience that there's a cognitive
continuum. So you have a domain general
huristic that you use for so let let me
called fluency. Um I give you a text and
it's got standard white uh you know
white print and a back uh sorry black
print and a white background.
I give you the exact same text, but it's
now red orange. Okay, so the second
one's more difficult to read. The
content, the propositional content is
exactly the same. But you have to
manipulate this so people aren't like
just directly comparing them beside each
other. But I I I ask you, which one's
more likely to be true?
You tell me the one that was black and
white rather than one that was red and
orange.
You find the one that was black and
white more beautiful.
You make judgments of truth, goodness,
and beauty according to how fluently you
process the information. So this is
called a domain general huristic because
it's not based on what you're
processing.
It's based on how you're processing.
Now what do we think? What what sorry
what do I think is going on? Because
there's controversy over what is
fluency? What we argue in the paper and
more and more people I think are coming
around to see this is cuz they used to
think it was ease of processing. It's
just how easy things are processed. You
judge them and you judge them as more
real. That's not right because I can
make something very easy for you to
process merely by repeating it. Merely
by repeating it merely by repeating it
merely by and you're not going oh
profound truth. You're going this is
stupid. Right? So it's not ease of
processing. It's much more like this.
It's much more like the relevance
realization that is taking a complex,
messy, illdefined world and framing it
so that you have a clear well-defined
problem that you can work with. Right?
So that's called optimal gripping.
Right? So fluency is measuring the
degree to which you're optimal gripping.
And your brain is using that as a
measure for how real the information is.
It's a huristic which means the no free
lunch theorem. it's bound to go wrong,
but it's an actual it's a really good
heruristic like all your other adaptive
heristics. It's a really good rule of
thumb to use. Now,
Tobolinsky and Reverber, when you have
an insight, you actually have a spike in
fluency. You have a sudden increase in
how fluent your processing is. And that
gives you this moment of like this super
salience and this flash and you feel
more deeply connected.
Yeah. Now, what if you took a bunch of
insights and you you strung them
together so one insight is priming
another so that you're doing something
like rock climbing and you you have to
continually non-propositionally
restructure how you're looking at things
and your embodiment and so you go
through one you almost impass but then
you get an insight and you and then you
go to another and you go to another and
you go to another and what's happening
is those insights are priming each other
you get an insight cascade and you're
getting an extended ah aha experience
and the world feels super salient and it
feels like discovery and you feel deeply
at one and you're focused and your your
egocentric
uh narrative is dropping away because
you're so religio you're so coupled to
the world that's the flow state
when other things happening in the flow
state remember when I talked about
implicit learning and it can go wrong
well what did Hogarth recommend you do
to to improve implicit learning. Well,
he said you want to set up the
explicitly set up the context in which
you're doing the implicit learning in
order to help you track causal patterns
rather than correlational patterns.
Well, how you do that? Well, we know how
to do that. That's exactly what an
experiment is. An experiment is you set
up an environment so you can cleanly
distinguish causal patterns from
correlational patterns. What do you need
in an experiment? You need clear
information. Things can't be vague.
You need tightly coupled. When I
manipulate something, there has to be a
a tightly coupled response. And failure
matters. You have to be able to say,
"Hey, your hypothesis wasn't confirmed."
Okay, so clear information, tightly
coupled, failure matters. What are the
conditions Chick Sentmahigh said need to
be the case in information processing in
order for you to get into the flow
state? You need clear information. It
has to be tightly coupled and failure
has to matter. Do you see what flow is?
It's not only an insight cascade. It's
right. And when your brain's going, "Oh,
that's good. Lots of insight." It's also
you're doing, you're cultivating
intuitions that are picking up on
complex patterns that are also real. And
so your brain's going, "Do more of that.
Do more of both of those, more, more and
more." That's why
flow is a universal across cultures,
gender, socioeconomic, status, language
groups. People describe flow in detail
with near synonymous terms and flow is
optimal for people. They regard it as
some of the most powerful experiences of
their life and it's their optimal
performance. Right? That's because it
has a high profound functionality.
That's one of those two exper few maybe
two or three experiences where our
reduction in our egocentric narrative
self is experienced positively because
we're actually getting enhanced meaning
in life enhanced religio that's why if I
want to know how much meaning in life
you have one of the things I'll ask you
is how frequently do you get into the
flow state and that's quantity quality
are you flowing in an environment that's
largely real
Right.
Now, what if flow is dependent on your
skills, right? The demands have to just
exceed your skills.
Like you need a degree of unconscious
competency to be able to
Totally. Yeah.
Now, you can get domain specific skills,
skills that fit a particular domain.
Like I'm a martial artist, right? And so
sitting at the piano and you
understanding your skills, it's deep in
your body. You
flow. Exactly. Exactly. But you have
domain general skills. You have domain
general skills. You have skills of
general intelligence, of orientation, of
religio, of connectedness. Does that
make sense? What if you were flowing in
those?
Yeah, that sounds epic.
And Steven Bacher has argued in and I've
got the great pleasure to meet Steve and
have dinner with him that in uh his book
on awakening uh to alone with others, an
existential approach to Buddhism, he
thought that's what the Buddha had. at
this general flow state rather than a
domain specific flow state.
That's not all the enlightenment is.
Okay.
But yeah, but it does make perfect sense
when you when you hear the term
enlightenment and you're relating as you
are to the salency of experience where
things are flowing.
Yeah. You get this even more profound
sense of at onement. This sense of being
deeply coupled. You get a massive
reduction of egoentrism. You get a
massive presence of reality
centrance. Yeah. Like a reduction in
DMN, would you say in the default mode
network of like
Oh. Uh well, you have
I do not want to go there.
Well, yeah. Yes. And no, it's more
complicated because you're actually
doing opponent processing. You're doing
relevance realization and intelligence,
but that's not enough. That's a mystical
experience.
Okay. But
that's not enough for enlightenment,
right? Okay. So, we we'll continue here.
But I just think it's it's everybody can
relate to this uh moment in their life
where they had a deep felt connection of
everything around them and a lack of of
overly focusing on
Exactly. Andre, the reason why we talk
about the continuum is you have fluency
every moment. You've had insights, you
can the flow experience is a universal
experience. And then if you see that
mystical experience is just on that the
same machinery, then we're removing the
mystique, not the challenge, but
removing the mystique around the
mystical experience. And this is
important. 40% of the population by most
estimates has anomalous experiences,
visionary experiences. mystic
experience. One of the problems of the
of the meaning crisis is they don't have
a framework to integrate those
experiences.
There's a lot I want to unpack there,
but it sounds like enlightenment is this
like to the degree you have become
enlightened is to the degree in which
you've created a continuity of this flow
within your life uh and like maintaining
it moment to moment. You referenced
these experiences that people have like
one that you had of the platonic solids
right you mentioned earlier which is we
don't have the right frame. I'm curious
to what degree mental institutions are
filled with people that have accessed
like if there's a percentage of people
in there that have accessed a state or
experience.
That's a good question. Um,
that's a very good question and there's
a lot of of overlap in the phenomenology
between psychotic experiences, visionary
experiences, psychedelic experiences,
and mystical experiences. They're not
the same. Um, and but they overlap in
ways. Um, um, sense of presence. Um, uh,
Anderson Day's book on presence. Uh,
this is not we now realize this is
pervasive and it gets a little bit
freaky and it can this is a a sensed
presence. Um, oh, I had one of the and
one of these when I was in deep
meditation. This can happen to people in
deep meditation. I was all alone and it
was in the house. I was in a closed room
and I heard my name shouted as if it
clears a bell. There was nobody around.
Things like that can happen.
John Guyger reports this really
interesting thing. People were doing
rock climbing and um I don't not rock
climbing, sorry, something much more
challenging, ice climbing. Um, and the
two of them and they fell off and one of
them unfortunately died and the other
one he's he's he like he was he was
deeply he went into shock and so he's
laying there sort of considering that
he's going to die and he got a sensed
presence came up to him. He didn't see
anything and it spoke to him and it said
your nose is bleeding and he said so
what and he said well get the sense
presence said get up because your nose
is bleeding there's snow on the ground
you can let the the blood drip on the
ground and then you won't walk in
circles and that's how you can find your
way out that's how he found his way out
now you get really powerful things that
see how that borders on the v visionary
you also get really weird ones where
people just say I have this weird sense
of something just behind my left
shoulder or just behind my right
shoulder. Weird sense. People get
voices. People say there's a voice.
There's a voice speaking to me, but it
doesn't say anything. Like this is the
this weird gambit.
Are these all aspects of our own being
or do you think there's actually any
existential reality to
being non-embodied beings
communicating with them?
Well, well, I don't think they're
onlogically autonomous, but okay.
I don't think they're merely subjective.
Um, so
okay. Um,
so somewhere in between.
Well, that that in between really
matters.
Yeah. No. Yeah, for sure. That's what
I'm saying. It's somewhere between
the religio relevance. Relevance isn't
objective. Is is that relevant in and of
itself? No. Is relevance merely
subjective? No. Cuz you can be wrong
about it. Relevance is there's a Greek
word for it. Mataxu. Socrates described
himself as Mataxu. Human beings are
between the animals and the gods, right?
Mataxu. Relevance is between
beneath and binds the subjective and
objective together so that truth is
possible. So what we can do you know you
know how you you have a body image right
and you you don't actually you you do a
lot of processing through the body image
not through directly interacting with
every little aspect of your body. It's a
ve it's a very powerful internal image
your body makes use of. You probably
also have a mind image. You can there's
a term called exapt.
Exact is when you repurpose something
like the tongue has been repurposed for
speech. It didn't originally evolve for
speech. Lots of organisms have tongue
but they don't. And you are constantly
exapting. You take your sensory motor
patterns and you exact them into moving
through abstract conceptual space. ideas
are far from each other, close from each
other. One is under another and supports
another. You use all this language.
We're constantly exapting. And what we
can do is we can exact the body image,
right? And we can and the body image is
it's it's transjective in nature. It's
it's not about our physical body. It's
about our lived body. It's about how our
body is connected to the environment
because it's about our bo embodied
agency. We also have I think and this is
what Anderson Day seems to be arguing to
we also have a mind image that's not
about our mind but about how our mind is
connected and we can exact that mind
image and especially under situations of
duress and we can make it give it an
independent perspective so that it can
break us out of the our it can help us
break a frame we're locked into just
like you can play with the body image
when you're doing Tai Chi Chuan.
Yeah.
Did Did that
Yeah. I mean, it brings up a lot of
questions that I want to probe further
around the nature of consciousness, the
possibility of idealism, all these
things. But we did mentioned there was
an aspect of enlightenment that we
haven't gotten to yet that I want to
make space for.
Okay. So, first of all, uh like I said,
40%, a lot of people have the have
mystical experiences and they just can't
integrate them or they dismiss them. So,
having a mystical experience isn't
enough. Um And and so it has to be a
trans it first has to be appropriated.
It has to be internalized as a
transformative experience. you're going
to bring about, you know, I talked about
this earlier, a systematic change in who
you are so that you get a systemic
reconnection to reality that you now
still not enough because I think that
state that state of nosis, that
transformative
connectedness that's disclosing deep
truths
has to be in service of addressing
the perennial problems that beset
humanity,
doesn't it inherently do so by the
liberation of your own being?
Now that's a really good question and I
don't know if can we answer I mean in
one sense the track record seems to be
pretty good about enlightened beings but
we don't know about all the enlightened
beings or sorry I don't I'm I'm speaking
in the way I shouldn't be speaking given
the argument I'm making are there
enlightened beings that dain to not do
anything about it and then we have a
selective bias. We would only know about
the ones that went around trying to help
trying to help other people.
Yeah. I suppose you need to make some
sort of metaphysical claims about the
nature of consciousness liberated in one
being and if that has sort of value to
others outside of
uh but I think I think at least
practically we should say we should
stipulate that what we we reverse
engineer it and say we're not going to
call it enlightenment unless that
transformative state is disposed to
systematically alleviating suffering
reducing selfdeception and increasing
religio for people on a comprehensive
and reliable basis. That's what I think
enlightenment is. And I think you can
regularly see that in the Buddha. You
can see it in Jesus of Nazareth. You can
see it in Socrates.
What do you think about
I mean again this can be this can fall
into the dangerous territory of trying
to top down process and propositionally
know um and cartisianally split the
developmental process of of awakening.
But I'm curious what if you're familiar
at all and think there's any validity to
things like spiral dynamics or Ken
Wilbur's map of consciousness in terms
of kind of mapping colors to degrees of
consciousness and perspectives on life.
I'm just curious, is there any way to
measure and if it's useful our own
degree of unenlightenment and
enlightenment?
So, I've talked to Ken once and he sent
me a copy of his book with a really
wonderful note about he really likes my
work a lot.
Um, and uh, I have several of his books
and there I' I've had groups of people
from the integral community who form
study groups and followed Awakening for
the Meaning Crisis. So, I want to be
very respectful. Um,
but I haven't had an opportunity to
study this in depth.
um um uh you know I I've I've I've read
some transpersonal psychology but I was
much more in interested in the work of
people like Michael Washburn and others
that had um a much more um dynamical
system approach uh whereas Wilbur tends
to have a structural list orientation.
Um, so I I I I want to just say I um I
have a sense that there's something
there because of the interactions I've
had, but I'm not in the place to make a
good
I I don't have any relevant I don't have
enough knowledge to make a a judgment
that I would want to pronounce.
Another interest another folk I'm
interested if you've connected with, do
you know Charles Eisenstein? Have you
chatted with him at all?
No.
Would love.
The name sounds vaguely familiar though.
one book he wrote which is um a more
beautiful world our hearts know is
possible um but he's an he's an
incredible thinker and I'm just curious
and with the understanding the context
of this whole conversation what does a
world what is a vision of a future of
the world postmeaning crisis where we've
kind of birthed the next version of this
paradigm uh like what does that look
like to you know having
you you realize you've opened up a can
of worms cuz this is the big project I'm
working on now.
So, I made a mistake in the series.
Um, first of all, the series was
presented monologically and we actually
operate better dialogically than
monologically. And secondly, I came away
with that with this proposal of the
religion that's not a religion and very
much a top-down, you know, I'm going to
engineer what an ecology of practices
and all that sort of thing. Now, there's
been some benefit to that mistaken
framing. We we have an online uh like a
website like a platform you can go
called awaken to meaning uh uh run by my
very good friend Taylor Barrett uh where
there's an ecology of practices
mindfulness reflection imaginal
practices all the stuff we've been
talking about and organized in an
ecology dialogical practices um so I'm
happy about that but this idea of a
religion that's not a religion is
actually I think fundamentally a
mistaken way of doing it it's this it's
top down
and You can't top down an insight.
It's sorry just doesn't work. But what
happened with because of the meaning
crisis is I got connected to all these
communities, all these emerging
communities in which people and I don't
mean the weird messed up culty.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean the healthy ones.
Yeah. where there are and I get to meet
a lot of them like Rafe the the work
that my good friend Rafe Kelly does um
and others
Bonita Roy and others I've seen all
these emerging communities of practices
and it occurred to me and and more and
more and the work that Thomas Steininger
is doing and I I could name so many and
so and when you meet these people you
just get a profound sense of something
is happening something is being born
through them and their work and their
community. I call it the advent of the
sacred. I think the response to the
meaning crisis is that you that the
meaning crisis is like a grand
civilization level of framebreaking and
what's happening is like an like a like
a civilizational insight is beginning to
take shape and we have to properly
orient to afford it and help it
encourage and caress it and cultivate it
to take shape. advent of the sacred. And
so my next big project is called the
philosophical silk road in which what
what I'm going to do is I'm trying to
create a new genre me and a whole bunch
of people is I'm going to go to various
pl I it's it's inspired by the silk road
in which there was a move a mo a trans
civilizational transformational movement
of ideas. I'm I'm I'm no I'm no
romantic. I know the silk road was also
drenched in blood and capitalism and
thievery but it also did this other
thing that's why I call it the
philosophical silk road right it created
a lingua philosophica a shared language
so that these different worldviews the
different religions and philosophies
could deeply and mutually transform each
other you know I think we're having one
right now when you get into one of these
conversation that takes on a life of its
own well we could afford that between
traditions
We could have not only an ecology of
practices, we could have a vibrant
ecology of tradition. So I want to
travel I want to travel through all of
the neoplat neop the neoplatanism
of because Arthur Lewis is right.
Neoplatanism is the spiritual backbone
of the west. It's it's the mysticism in
Christianity in Sufism in Judaism. It's
it goes into the renaissance. It goes
into the scientific revolutions both the
one around the enlightenment and the one
around the time of Einstein. So it has
this massive capacity and I want to
travel and go to all these places
right and and actually try to give
people like the the geography and and
and the culture and the atmosphere and
try to presence this sage so people can
like Nicholas of Kuza or Meister Echart
right or go to Alexandra talk about St.
Clement, right? And and then and then I
want to Zen. Zen is the another grand
unified field theory, you know, from the
east, the Kyoto school of Nishida and
Nitani and and Dojan and and and coming
from the east. And then there's, you
know, go to India and you know, and
Narajuna and Sankura from the vanta and
and go into Samarana and talk about
Sorovari, right? and go to all these
places a and and and undergo make myself
a vulnerable vehicle through which the
advent of the sacred could potentially
you know hopefully maybe I could
contribute to giving birth to that
lingua philosophica and then below that
level of that that documentary film
there's going to be a 20 episode lecture
series like awakening from the meaning
crisis but it's going to be filmed
before a live audience of graduate level
students And then below that for people
who want to dig down there'll be
individual video essays which much more
technical argument. And below that we
have people working right now on what's
we call the codeex. They're basically
making a Wikipedia of all the terms and
all the languages and all the
references. And it's at four levels of
accessibility from grade 10 on. It's got
cross referencing and pictures and
practices you can engage in to
understand any of the terms. And there's
going to be all four of these levels
presented for people and they can move
up and down the levels as well as back
and forth between the narrative story
and the lecture series. Mhm.
That is my attempt to afford the lingua
philosophica that will bring about the
ecology of traditions, will bring about
this this meta conversation, this
metadologed
to afford and to apprehend and
appreciate the advent of the sacred.
Wow. Woo. I'm excited, man. That's epic.
I can't wait to see it and take part,
support how I can. And that just seems
like an immense service.
If people are interested and and I'm not
we we I I'll send you the link. We have
the a website up about the philosophical
Silk Road. Um we are doing fundraising
for it right now. And uh I don't want to
get into uh you know, asking for money,
but uh we are in that. So, you know, if
people are are interested in that, um
that's what we're doing right now. And
we do we already had a lot of people
very much interested committing. I it
looks like we're going to be able to
raise the funds, but you never know. So
you'll always ask for more until you get
what you need. Right. So uh very excited
about this project. I I have to tell you
Andre, this is not calling it a project
is a mistake.
Yeah.
I I am called to this deeply deeply
called. I call it a pilgrimage. I'm
going to go on because look, most of
this is not going to be carried by the
propositions. It's going to be carried
by the non-propositional how I undergo
it. Chris is going to be there along the
way acting like a father confessor and
talking to me, right? And I'm going to
be talking to people and there's going
to be music and animation and we're
going to trying to just
it's it's a pilgrimage. It's a
pilgrimage. So, it's called Walking the
Philosophical Silk Road.
Amazing. We'll leave links for that. I'm
I'm so curious, but people can check
that out in the description below. And
it's uh it's an exciting time to be
alive with people. Um, and hopefully you
can like really receive this, you know,
where your life's work has up to this
point like you've culminated to this to
the amount of knowledge, connections,
insight to truly create some things in
the world that have uh that meaningfully
have the capacity to to evolve
consciousness and um make a real true
changing impact on people's lives. So,
I'm just
I'm I'm honored, man. And I'm glad that
Yeah. I'm glad to know you're doing that
work. Thank you.
Very exciting.
Thank you. So, I can't tell you what the
world will look like because it's not my
place to do so.
I'm trying my best to
make that advent happen.
Um, last couple things as we've been
going for a while here and this has been
incredible. Like, I love this
conversation so much and hopefully to be
continued. Um I'm just curious from like
a bit of the macros perspective we can
observe both constructive and
deconstructive patterns in terms of
human
evolution and like what is the
relationship you've seen between human
suffering and a larger evolutionary
process
because
do you mean like is there a teological
reason for the suffering? No, I suppose
what is the necessity of any organism if
you want to look at the planet at large
like one giving birth which is usually a
messy process and how like to the
extreme? How do we know I guess to to
where the extreme is in that process? Is
it inevitable to obviously have a degree
of struggle and what is new to be
emerged?
Oh, excellent. So, yeah, I'm glad you
refined your question. I think your
question is excellent. Um
um just got a paper published uh
Johannes Joerger uh Anna Redell a
student and co-author of mine Alex
Jadeva uh former student of mine Dennis
Walsh my colleague at UFD and myself the
relevance realization can't be rendered
um uh can't be captured computationally
can't be captured in a formal system um
there's a long technical argument people
can read the paper if they want or if
you want me to go into it but right Now
the point is
relevance realization is always going to
be messy. Um here we'll do something
intuitive re the your the way we talked
about attention. I t you have a point of
processing. I mentioned it earlier. You
have the default mode network that's
trying to make your mind wander
right and then you have the task focus
network that is trying to keep you
focused on task and it's right and
they're and they're they're pulling you
in different directions. What does the
default mode network do? Like evolution,
Darwinian evolution, it introduces
variation.
And then what does the task focus
network like natural selection,
selective attention, it kills off most
of those variations, but it keeps a
couple of them. And therefore, the way
your your your that sensory motor loop
reproduces itself evolves. So your
attention is constantly evolving its
fittedness. Does that make sense? So, so
it's so you have relevance realization
is like biological evolution and what it
gives you is something deeply analogous
to biological adaptivity.
Okay?
There is no final form of life.
There is no final form of relevance.
There is no perfection.
It's impossible. It doesn't make any
sense.
Now, I have a suspicion. I'll make an
argument, but I I want everybody to
remember the tentiveness by which I'm
talking about the advent of the sacred.
Please ask for that. So, I'm in the
spirit of that. I think what we need to
understand is a new sense of the sacred.
We've tended to think, and this is where
I'm critical of Plato, who I love
deeply, right? We tended to think of the
sacred as that which is perfect,
complete, final, and brings about rest.
That isn't going to work.
There's an alternative notion.
So, one way of thinking about sacred
that many people have talked about is
there's the sacred is what is most real,
most orienting, and most transformative
for us. It is that which most enhances
our religio and most helps us overcome
selfdeception.
And you're nodding because that like
yeah that lines up with a right right.
So what is sacredness? Well what is
real? Remember real is comparative more
intelligibility.
So something why is why do we use a
shadow as a metaphor for not real or the
matrix right? And the stick is real and
the shadow is not real because I can use
the stick to understand the shadow but I
can't use the shadow to understand the
stick and there's lots more information
to be found in the stick not there's
nothing in it's absolutely shallow the
shadow yet
reality this is from the philosopher
Pani really captured well in a really
excellent book by Esther like cap me
called contact with reality realness is
right is an reality is an inexhaustible
f of intelligibility that is constantly
calling us to innovate, constantly
calling us to insight. And so what and
then we have this never never endable
relevance realization that is constantly
evolving and right and can constantly
evolve because reality is constantly
giving us more and more and more real
the possibility of more and more
realness. The sacred is an inexhaustible
fountain of intelligibility that can
constantly afford our cultivation of
wisdom.
That was great.
And evolving ever so into infinity,
right? And there's an that and for
people who are might be a little bit
irked by that like within Eastern
Orthodox Christianity deeply influenced
by neoplatonism and neoplatonism as
opposed to classical platonism there was
a notion I think it was Nicholas uh not
Nicholas sorry Gregory of Nissa uh
epicasis was the idea that um
heaven isn't like the the botific vision
or heaven isn't you go to a place and
you look at God and rest. What you're
doing is you God provi God is a constant
field of that affords you to continually
self-trcend so that you more and more
forever see things more and more the way
God does. It's an unending process of
continually continual growth in in
wisdom
which is so there's an ancient her
there's at least one tradition that saw
sacredness that way not as perfection
not as completeness not as rest not as
static but as inherently vibrant living
and dynamic and filled therefore
inexraably with the messiness of life
and relevance realization. So in order
to remove suffering,
that which makes you intelligently
adaptive makes you prone to
self-deception. If I had to make you
permanently incapable of selfdeception,
I would have to throttle your
adaptivity.
I would have to kill you. That is the
only way to make you perpetually free
forever from selfdeception.
Well, well,
please don't do that. No,
no, I don't want to.
No, I know. I'm I'm playing with you.
Um, man, there is there's it's it really
is an honor and pleasure to be speaking
with you because there's so many areas
in which I can explore where there will
be meaningful dialogue across the board.
And there is a lot more that I'm looking
forward to potentially in a second
conversation.
Hey, if you want me back, I'll come
back.
Okay, sweet. Yeah, I would love that.
Um, let's have a little bit I mean this
whole conversation's been fun, but I
have a couple like rapid fire things
that I'm It might be painful for you to
try to be as concise as I'm going to
work with.
I will I will be as concise as I
possibly can on the understanding that
that's the context in which I'm stating
things.
Yes.
Amazing. Okay. Cool. So, you've of
course studied many incredible minds
throughout history. And so the first
kind of endeavor I want to try to take
you through is I'm going to say a name
and you tell me the most important
message that you've learned from them.
I'll try.
Okay, that's all I ask.
Okay. Uh
all right. Well, let's start with Plato.
Identify with your finite transcendence.
Marcus Relius.
It is possible to be happy even in a
palace.
We got to unpack these more at another
point. But that's I love it. Um Haidiger
being is not any particular thing or
kind of being.
William James
relevance matters as much as truth.
Carl Young,
there is a one within you that can open
you up to the one without
Freud.
You are prone to profound selfdeception.
Aristotle,
the world can be made sense of
scientifically.
Spinosa.
I'm teaching a course right now on
Einstein and Spinosa's God.
All the cartisian dichotoies can be
overcome and you can find a new way of
understanding God and ultimate reality.
John Verviki.
John Vervik.
What have I most learned from John
Veriki? Uh uh what I've most learned
from John Verviki is John Verviki is
capable of very massive amounts of
selfdeception. U but he does have a
spark within him.
I'm going to scratch that.
Okay, but don't forget what I just said.
It's all there. I'm going to say what my
dear and beloved friend Christopher
Master Petro said about me. He said,
"John Reviki is the person, the person
he knows who most relentlessly and
reliably tries to self-trcend."
I aspire to keep that true.
Thank you for pulling pulling that one
cuz it's important to see see oursel
often how others see us too, you know.
Yeah.
So much amazing
things to unpack there. Um I have some
rapid fire questions again to try to be
as concise as possible and then we'll
close out. Okay. Fun.
All right. What are three books you
think everyone should read before they
die?
Uh, The Republic, The Gospel of John and
Spinosa's Ethics.
H.
What's a common self-help idea about
meaning or purpose that's actually
making people more lost?
Thinking that everything is a about
purpose. Hm.
So tempted to unpack these more. I'm
restraining myself. Um, if you could
instantly download one skill into your
brain matrix style, what would it be
to have that
comprehensive flow state that I think
the Buddha had?
Enlightenment.
Well, at least the flow state. Yeah.
That Yeah.
Yeah.
What's one strongly held belief that you
had 10 years ago that you no longer do?
That there wasn't a God.
I don't believe in the theistic notion
of God, but I also reject the atheistic
rejection of God.
Mhm. Cool. Well, we'll unpack that
non-theism more, I suppose. And
I'd love to. I I've enjoyed this
conversation. If you want to have me
back, I'll come back.
Of course.
From the perspective of our descendants
in a 25th century civilization, what is
a primary observation they would make
about our current stage of development?
We're in a chyros. We're in a turning
point. And kyroses are when the system
is most unstable. That's very negative,
but it's also where individual actions
can make the most difference. We're in a
chyros. What is the most meaningful
realization that our civilization would
have to integrate to make it through
that turning point?
We have to recover a lived a livable
relationship with the sacred.
What's a question you wish people would
ask you more often?
What makes me happy?
What does make you happy
when I'm in
the logos
and it takes on a life of its own and I
have a sense that reality within and
without are disclosing themselves to me
and the other person so that we're both
getting to a place we couldn't get to on
our own.
I share that with you my friend and I
feel we successfully did so in this
conversation.
I agree totally my friend. I agree.
It was psychedelic in some way you know
when you when you really fall into that
flow you know fully alive and just super
appreciative. Um in closing what's the
most beautiful
pattern you you've recognized studying
many ancient wisdom traditions about
life and reality?
beautiful pattern. I think the one I
talked about earlier and when it when
you say it, it can sound trivial,
but that when we truly open up in a
transformative way of I've discussed, we
find that reality is already ahead of
us, opening up to us.
John, thank you so much. It's been a
great pleasure. Great, great pleasure.
Everybody, I highly recommend checking
out the book. There's also obviously the
pre-existing YouTube series, but
Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
The book goes way beyond the series.
Amazing.
Incredible work. We'll leave links for
this down in the description below.
Everybody, let us know in what ways this
is uniquely meaningful to you. I'm
really I want to know in which ways this
actually impacts your life and matters
to you and um how it changes the way in
which you move through the world. Uh
again, John, is there any last closing
thoughts or anything you want to share
before we head out?
Like I said, uh uh please uh buy the
book and uh keep your eyes open everyone
for the philosophical Silk Road.
Amazing. Incredible. Everybody, thank
you. Until next time, be well. Take
care.
[Music]