My father provided an example of who not
to be. If there were shitcoins when my
mother was alive, she would have been a
shitcoiner. H this is going to be
arrogant. Anything I put my mind to, I
get. And I thought to myself, here I am,
a messenger for the Sterling National
Bank, and I was wearing a $5,000 Armani
suit and $1,000 pair of Armani shoes.
This is part of the reason why I like
being a doctor. Patients teach me more
than I teach them. In the emergency
room, when I looked at her fingers and
she had nails like you and the guy's
tissues were underneath her fingers. So,
this told me she fought like an animal.
I fought for her. Two billion deaths.
That's the punch in the mouth that
everybody needs. All views expressed by
the host or guests are solely their own
opinions. Nothing stated in this podcast
should be considered a specific
endorsement to make any particular
investment or follow any specific
strategy.
[Music]
Welcome to Bitcoin Jack. I spent hours
diving into your work and while you have
shared a lot about decentralized
medicine, today I want to focus on
something more personal. your inner
journey and your path as a Bitcoiner. I
believe our listeners will gain a lot
from understanding what shaped you into
the advocate you are today. Ready? Yeah.
Let's kick things off with my 21 takes
on you and we'll take it from there.
Okay. Jack, you're known as a bit of a
bulldog and you probably have to be to
take on big pharma and these huge
institutions head on. What I really want
to know is this. Every superhero has a
turning point like Batman who lost his
parents and became the relentless crime
fighter we know today. So what happened
early in your life that set you on this
path?
H I don't think it was early in my life.
It was much later in my life. Um early
in my life I wanted to be a professional
baseball player and I was on the path to
do that and then my mother derailed it.
So, I'd say my mother was probably
the real reason I'm on the path that I'm
on now. Why did you say your mother
derailed it? I uh was drafted twice to
play professional baseball. Mhm. And um
I was offered a lot of money. I turned
down a million dollars to actually go
and stay in school. And this was after I
had already been in professional school
for a while. Why? Because I graduated
early. I skipped two grades. So, I
finished college when I was 19 and a
half. So, I still had eligibility left
to play. So, I had already been in
professional school. I was in dental
school at the time and went and played
again. And my mother bribed me to
actually stay on the path that I was.
So, she bought me a car. And back then I
was stupid enough to to think that that
really mattered, but it mattered to me
because when I grew up in New York, uh
you know, I was a poor white kid in New
York City and you learn really fast
about the value of things when you're
poor and you live in the richest city in
the world. You mentioned growing up in
New York City on welfare, correct? What
do you remember most about that time and
how did it shape your sense of ambition?
When you grow up poor in New York City
and you see people that have tremendous
wealth, you ask yourself the question,
why don't I have this and they do? And
the answer was steeped in who I came
from, the orchard, the apple, the tree
that I came from. I was a different kind
of apple. And I was fortunate uh to meet
a lot of these wealthy people. And I
started to ask them questions that you
would ask your parents. And my parents
said to me, "Why didn't you ask us any
of these questions?" I said, "Why would
I ask you when you were poor?" That is
how I was built when I was a kid. No one
in my family had ever even been to
college at this time.
Um
so for me it was a natural thing to ask
the people who are successful what did
you do and how did you get here and how
can I morph that into my life by making
different decisions than the people who
I come from the orchard. So I was the
apple that rolled down the mountain into
another pastor completely to this very
day. I I don't have a lot of things in
common with the people that I come from.
Why do you think your mother wanted you
to study instead of letting you become a
professional sportman and be wealthy?
Well, I think the the real reason for
that is when I was young, the teachers
told her that this kid's brain is really
special. And um I never realized why I
was as smart as I was when I was young
until later on. My mother told me the
story when she was pregnant. She wound
up having a miscarriage and she prayed
to St. Jude after the miscarriage.
That's the saint of hopeless cases
that she would have another baby. So
then I come along. But what did she do
to change the situation? Now my mother
doesn't know any physics. She doesn't
know of course anything I teach people
now. But she sat outside in Central Park
every day and ate a can of salmon.
And I believe that that's how I got
started on the path. The number one um
photochemical in our brain is DHA. DHA
is from seafood. We have more of it in
our brain than any other animal on the
planet. So the fact that my mother lived
in a horrible city, but she was always
outside
eating this
substance that actually you need to
build a really good brain. Uh I think
was very interesting. When I came out, I
was two years old. My mother put me in
nursing school. I was the nursery
school, I think, was a Catholic place.
And that's when the nuns told my mother,
they said, "This kid is too disruptive.
He knows too much." I knew my ABCs, my
numbers, multiplication.
By the time I was 2 years old, I always
ask questions.
My family used to say when we had
meetings,
where does all this come from?
like they thought that my mother or my
father
stimulated this. No. What were the
topics of conversation at the dinner
table at home?
It was that that's one thing that I
think um
my mother was really good at. She would
always
try to quench my curiosity. meaning she
brought me books, she brought me to the
library. She's the one that brought me
to the museums the first time to tell me
that this resource was available in New
York City. That's when I was really
young. And I love that because it was
like I was a sponge and I was absorbing
everything. Um my father, he was
interested in sports. Um but he was
never any good at any sport, which I
thought was kind of interesting. But his
life, I think it was affected by the
wars, you know, because when he was born
and the fact that he was involved in in
World War II and also the Korean War.
So, a large part of his life that that
he could develop to do things, I think,
was taken away from him. Um, and I think
that's just a virtue of of the time that
he was born because he was the son of an
immigrant. And my grandmother came from
Ireland, like 59th latitude. And uh she
lived on the sixth floor of a building
in Manhattan on 81st Street. There was
no elevator. You used to have to walk
all the way up and all the way down. And
my grandmother lived until she was 94
years old. She did this every day. To
see that for the first, I'd say probably
12, 13 years of my life because I used
to go to see my grandmother a lot in New
York City. It let me understand that
where I lived in Queens and where my
grandmother lived there,
there was a big disconnect, a real big
disconnect. And to know that my
grandmother lived that way for a long
time, that made an impact on me. I
realized that um early on, I'm going to
say as a young child, the impact of
money on how people live their life was
huge. I didn't truly understand
all of the collateral effects from it,
but I knew at a very early age the
difference between have and have nots,
but also in between there, you know,
like we always say black and white. I
was very fortunate because New York also
showed me there's a lot of gray. And I
was very interested in the gray and I
saw the gray every place that I went
when I went to Manhattan. And when I was
born, I was born in Manhattan. I lived
in Manhattan until I was I think seven
or eight years old and then I moved to
Queens. And when you live in Manhattan,
you live in Queens, even though you're
in New York City, totally different. The
people at that time in Manhattan, it was
still a little bit of a melting pot.
Like you had neighborhoods that were
certain immigrants and everybody stayed
like where they were supposed to be, but
Queens was totally different. Queens was
actually where I met my first person
from El Salvador. It's where I met my
first person from Colombia. It's where I
met my first person from Korea and my
first person from China. And
that was really good when I was 6, 7, 8
years old because the things that we
were starting to do and the things that
they were used to doing as immigrants,
we got mixed together in like a pot of
stew. And it turned out to be a really
good thing because I got to meet their
parents. They got to meet me and their
parents were fascinated by me and I was
fascinated to learn about their culture
and their countries and ask them
why did you come here? And I found the
answers that I got from them
mirrored what I found between Manhattan
and Queens. It's very very similar. In
other words, the story of people being
10,000 miles away from home was the same
as being 10 miles away between Manhattan
and Queens. I understand looking for a
better life. It was not always a better
life. It was actually sometimes
opportunity. Sometimes sometimes it was
uh for example one of my Argentine and
uh Chilean friends her father uh was a
doctor and and he was very well educated
but he couldn't get a job being a doctor
in that part of the world at that time.
Her father sat me down and told me what
it was like to live in those countries
in the 1950s60s and 70s. And I was like
let me get this straight. You're a
doctor and you're poor. And I I said to
him, I said, 'You know, where my father
works in Manhattan, all the doctors have
a bronze uh placard on the outside of
their buildings on Park Avenue, Madison
Avenue, and Fifth Avenue, and none of
them are poor. They all drive
Mercedes-Benz, Rolls-Royce, Cadillacs.
And he said to me, he goes, "Well,
that's the difference." He goes, "That's
the real reason we came here." And he
goes, "I thought that I would be able to
do the same thing as those doctors in
the United States, and it turned out I
was not able to." That's my first foray
into centralized medicine. They actually
blocked him from going to medicine
unless he would go back to school and go
through training so they could do a
wallet biopsy for money. Money which of
course he didn't have. But I thought it
was an incredible waste of resources
that we would make somebody do that that
had smarts that could help people right
here and right now. You know, and these
are things that you put in your time
bank account. I think when you become a
little bit older and you have more
sovereignty yourself, you don't forget
them. They actually begin to form who
you are. When you were a kid, who were
your enemies?
Um,
I don't think I really had any enemies.
I always look
for opportunities in people. Even even I
I remember my grandfather taught me this
lesson and and this lesson has
reverberated in my life. He told me that
um you have to find the good in even the
worst people. Uh and he go he told me we
were sitting on the porch of of his
summer house and he said to me,
"Everybody has good in them." And I'll
tell you who we were talking about. I
can tell you the day it was the
beginning of August of 77 when Elvis
Presley died. And at the same time this
summer, there was some bad stuff going
on in New York City where they had the
Son of Sam shooter going around shooting
people. And my grandfather told me with
the Son of Sam, there's some reason in
his environment that this guy has gone
crazy to do this. And he said, "I know
people want to kill this guy and I know
they want to catch them and put him in
jail and and dissect." pieces, but you
need to be introspective and find out
what it is that made them this way. How
would you describe your mother?
Very compliant. She never questioned the
status quo. And that turned out to be a
good thing for me because I'm 180
degrees opposite that. If she wasn't
that way, I don't think that I would be
who I am. And I didn't like the way
people treated her.
And I couldn't believe that she never
adapted.
And I kept telling her, I said, "Do you
realize the reason why you're getting
treated the way you're getting treated
is because you accept you trust?"
She was the opposite of a Bitcoiner. If
if there were shitcoins when my mother
was alive, she would have been a
shitcoiner
and we would have had fights about that.
But the correlary to that, if she wasn't
like that, I don't think she would have
a son like me.
If your dad walked in the room right
now, what do you think he will say to
you?
Not much.
And what would you say to him? Not much.
My dad wasn't a big part of my life.
My mom was the much bigger half. The one
thing I will say, my father provided an
example of who not to be. So from that
standpoint, I look at my father like a
photograph cuz we develop from the
negatives.
And I don't need to say anything to him
because with a photograph, you don't
talk to it. And if your mother walked in
the room right now, what do you see she
would say to you? I' I'd say to her, you
would be like my mother with 50
questions to ask me because that's what
my mother would want to know. She would
ask me, "How did this happen? How did
that happen? Why did this happen?
Why did you know your relationship with
your sister go the way it went?" And you
know those are the things my mother
would have been interested in because
the one thing um the one thing my mother
realized about me when I was very young
that I didn't think like anybody in my
family and my mother was always
fascinated by that and she she used to
say to me when we would walk in the park
together or go to the museum
what what do you see when you see this?
And I'd sit down. I remember we were in
uh the Hall of Mammals one time in the
Museum of Natural History and she said,
"Well, tell me what you see." So then I
told her and she goes, "Not in a million
years do I see that." And she goes, "And
yet you're my son." And that's when I
said to her, I said, "That's because the
environment that we're in is different,
Mom." I said, "And you don't understand.
you you've been taught to believe, you
know, that it's all about the genes.
You've bought that story. I was a young
kid at the time. I didn't even believe
that even then.
How young? I was probably 8 n years old.
There was a very big moment um in my
mother's life
that happened when I was in fourth grade
and I had skipped third grade and I went
into fourth grade and we got the first
report card and those in the days when
you go to public school in New York City
you get a report card you go home you
have to have your mother sign it. So my
mother would sign it. I'd bring it back.
But my new teacher, her name is Miss
Shinazi.
She gave me an envelope with my report
card and it had a note in. She goes,
"Give this to your mother." I'm like,
"Okay." I didn't know what it was about.
So I hand it to my mother when she signs
it. She opens it up and the teacher
asked my mother to come see her. This is
the first time ever that a teacher asked
to see my mother. So, of course, my
mother thought right away that I did
something bad. So, my mother says,
"You're coming with me because if you
did something bad, you're going to get
your ass whipped." So, we go to the
school and the teacher was surprised to
see me, but I told her, I said, "My
mother made me come." And she goes, "All
right, go sit in the front." And she's
sitting at the desk in the back of the
classroom. And um
she tells my mother, she goes, "Do you
know what you have?" That was her first
question. And I could hear them. They
thought I couldn't hear, but I could
hear them. And my mother looked at her,
you know, and just, "What do you mean,
what do I have?" She goes, "Do you know
what you have in that kid?"
And she goes, "I don't really understand
what you mean." She goes, "Mrs. Kruse,"
she goes, "I have four four children.
All of them are doctors." She goes,
"He's smarter than them at this age of
his life." She goes, "He's right now
doing a project of how chickens form."
She said, "This is not a little project.
He's built a incubator with lights and
everything else. I sent him to the
museum and he came back. I had to give
him a special pass to go to the adult
library." She goes, "He's in fourth
grade. He just skipped third grade."
She goes, "There's nobody like this
kid." She goes, "I've been a teacher for
over 30 years."
She goes, "Where'd this come from?"
My mother told her, she goes, "He's
always been like this." They put me in
something called SP, which is fasttrack
seventh grade. And I was totally bored.
I wound up skipping eighth grade after
that and go straight to 9th. Ninth grade
uh was pretty boring. There was nothing
in ninth grade for me at all. But that's
actually when I started to really focus
in on sports. And I would go to Central
Park and play baseball with people that
were 20, 22 years old, people that were
in college, and they would pay me to be
on their team. Were you a strong kid? Oh
yeah. And not only that, I could hit
like crazy. I at the time I was probably
like 13, 14 years old and I was out
playing people that were 20 22 years old
in the Central Park Leagues and I would
catch cuz I was a catcher both games
with a double header and sometimes I'd
make $1500 $200 back then. This was a
lot of money and I loved it. I
absolutely loved that I could use
something I was really good at and make
money. See, and that was another big
part of the journey that I said, okay,
if you're good at something, you get
something of value in back. It's
actually the first real proofof work
mechanism that I came into contact with.
So, I think that's the reason why I
always wanted to play baseball because
it's the first time that I did something
indogenously that was me that I could
turn into money. And that's when the
teachers in high school said, "Well,
what do you want to do, you know, when
you grow up?" I'm like, I don't I don't
really know, but I think I want to play
baseball, you know, or I want to play
football. And then right at that time,
and I think it happened on purpose, is
my grandfather got diagnosed with uh
cancer, a melanoma in his mouth, which
is unusual.
And um I wound up going to the doctor
with him. And that's where I met the
first doctor that I really ever met in
my life. His name is Dr. Deutsch. He was
an oral surgeon in New York City and he
told me what was going on with my
grandfather. And after meeting me
several times, he knew that I was pretty
smart. So my grandfather went to see him
a lot, two or three times a week. And
eventually my grandfather had to go and
have surgery at Columbia Presbyterian,
which is one of the best hospitals in
New York City. And when he went there, I
had gone to the library to find out all
the things that were cutting edge at the
time for the type of surgery that my
grandfather needed to have. Just so you
realize, at this time, I'm 14, 14, 15
right there. And I walked into the
surgeon's office at Columbia
Presbyterian,
and the the my grandfather warned the
doctor, "You're going to meet my
grandson, and he's got a lot of
questions for you."
And when he told my grandfather and my
grandmother
uh the situation, that's when I said,
"Okay, well, what about this? Why can't
we take his intestine out and
re rebuild his esophagus?" And the guy
looked at me like, "Who are you?" And I
I handed him papers.
He goes, "You read these papers?" I
said, "Yeah." I said, "No, that I
understand it. So tell me why my
grandfather can't have this.
And I found the answer because this guy
couldn't do it. Did they know how to or
could No, not only didn't know how to do
it, but didn't even read these papers. I
read them before him. So I told my
grandfather, I said, "Look, I think you
need to go see somebody else." Um, and
that's when I went back and talked to
the oral surgeon and to get his advice
because he always told me the truth.
This was the first time in my life that
I saw a centralized doctor lie straight
to my grandfather. And that didn't sit
too well with me. Long story short, it
wouldn't have mattered what happened cuz
the disease was pretty far down the
path. And my grandfather at the time was
81. Uh he wound up dying from that
disease. But it turned out his sickness
and his death
was when I started to have the idea,
well, if I don't play baseball, I need
to become a doctor
so I'm not like this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that my
grandfather saw at Columbia
Presbyterian. Who have been the most
influential mentors in your life and
why? Einstein,
uh, Michelangelo,
Da Vinci, and then a Jewish guy named
Mr. Strason
from the penthouse at 75th and Fifth
Avenue. He is the gentleman that taught
me everything I know about fractional
reserve banking. He was the CEO and
owner of Sterling National Bank. He was
one of the rich people that I met. and
he my father worked in the building that
he owned the penthouse. Mr. Stellson was
a personal friend of Donald Trump.
So I knew a lot of things that I as a
young boy that I probably should have
known and Mr. Stson hired me to work for
him. It was the first real job that I
ever had. So what? Oh, I was a messenger
boy. I'd go around New York City with uh
papers like contracts. One time I found
out that I had Barabonds. I had like $10
million in Barabonds.
And he told me after I delivered them to
American Express in the World Trade
Center, he said, "I wanted to see if you
were trustworthy."
But I will tell you, this is probably
the single most important meeting I ever
had in my life. The day that he hired
me, I was sitting at his desk. I was
wearing my father's suit and my father's
shoes because I didn't have any. and I
crossed my legs and he saw that in the
bottom of one of the shoes had a hole in
it.
When he was finished interviewing me
because we talked a lot. He wanted to
find out if I was really smart like he
had heard. He sent me to Barney's on
Fifth Avenue to meet one of his tailor.
He put me in an Armani suit and shoes
that cost $1,000.
And the gentleman who dressed me
said, "Mr. Charleston wants you to go
back to his house after this is over and
he wants to talk to you. And I came back
and he goes, "Do you understand why I
sent you to have the best suit and the
best shoes?" And I said, "No, I think
you're crazy." He goes, "If you're going
to represent me, you're going to look
the part."
That was a big lesson. This is how rich
people play. In other words, appearances
really matter. If you are going to be
taken seriously,
you have to be able to back up what you
have. And I thought to myself, here I am
a messenger
for the Sterling National Bank. I mean,
in this bank, I don't think you could be
lower
as an employee than I was.
And I was wearing a $5,000 Armani suit
and a thousand
dollar pair of Armani shoes. How old
were you?
14 or 15.
And um it made it made probably
the biggest impression
in my entire life. That meeting.
Tell me a childhood dream that came
true.
This is going to be arrogant. Anything I
put my mind to, I get.
But I will tell you, I'm very focused.
I didn't have
a lot of dreams. I was very much a
realist.
And when I put my mind to something,
it always manifested. Why? Because I put
the work in to get what I wanted. And
many people didn't understand
why I didn't want to do what all the
other kids did. Uh, I I was very focused
on on sports and probably learning
things that were new. I mean, to this
day, you know, I'm in my 60s now. I have
never met anybody who's more curious
than me yet.
Like, every day
something happens where if I get
challenged, I want to learn. If I decide
to challenge you, I'm going to challenge
you because I know when I challenge you,
there's something that's going to come
out of that interaction that's going to
give me a new nugget to study, to go
down. This is part of the reason why I
like being a doctor. Patients teach me
more than I teach them. When did you
realize you were different? This will
probably stun people. Uh,
not until I was at my first year
of residency
at LSU. I basically played sports,
didn't break a sweat in the classroom,
and had spectacular grades. But even at
that time, I never thought I was going
to do anything with the schoolwork. I
thought it was always going to be
baseball. And then
after my grandfather died, I kept up
with Dr. Deutsch and he would say you
can come in anytime
and I would go in his office. We would
always talk about sports. He was a
Yankee fan so I didn't really like him
that much. I was a Met fan. And we would
talk about football. We talk about my
family. And then he always brought it
back. He goes, "Do you really think
you're going to play professional
baseball or what do you think about
doing this?" And I said, "Well, if I do
this, I I want to do what you do."
And I told him the reason why. You told
me the truth. You directed me to the
places, you know, that I should go for
my grandfather to help him out. And when
I went to those places, I found out that
these people are full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and
they're liars. And I said, "That kind of
soured me on this." And he said to me,
he goes, "You realize that the people
are full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] They're not
everywhere.
In other words, there's people out there
that you can trust and rely on. So, he's
the one that first told me at this time
that there was four oral surgery
programs in the United States. These
were brand new where you get your dental
degree and you get your medical degree.
You get both and they shave two years
off. And I was like, "Oh." I went to the
school closest to me that had the oral
surgery program that had the double
degree program and that was the
University of Connecticut. And
probably
the most arrogant
Jack Kruse ever
occurred
on my interview for dental school. I was
with a guy Cornelius Pomeier. He's from
France and Austria. So he's European and
he was a crown and bridge expert. Okay,
he that's what he did. He was my first
interview and he sat down and he goes,
"Tell me why you want to be a dentist."
And I said, "I don't want to be a
dentist." And he looked at me. I said,
"I want to be an oral surgeon." And then
I proceeded to tell him the story that I
told you about my grandfather. And he
goes, "Well, that's extraordinary." He
said, "But you know that most people who
come in to dental school, they want to
be either an orthodontist or an oral
surgeon because those are the people
that are the top of the class and they
make the most money." And I said, "I'm
not most people."
I said, "If I tell you I'm going to be
an oral surgeon, I'm going to be an oral
surgeon." That's how arrogant I was at
the time. And he said to me, he goes,
"Well, you know, one of the problems
with this school to do oral surgery is
it's very rigorous because they have the
double degree program, you have to go to
school with the medical students for two
years. You have to take exactly the same
classes and because you do that, it
makes it very difficult to finish the
dental school in two years. So many
people don't graduate on time."
And I said to Cornelius Pomi, I said,
"Not only will I finish on time, I will
finish early and my whole last year, I'm
going to go to an oral surgery program
and intern there
because I'm going to be an oral
surgeon." I actually told him this
four years before.
So now, let's fast forward to what
happens. I finish dental school in 3
years.
Okay? I go to LSU for my whole fourth
year dental school and this is the first
time in my life that I was put in a
great white shark tank with a bunch of
other residents who are the best in the
country. This program was the best in
the country at the time and it was the
best place for me to go because it was a
measuring stick for me to see how good
or bad I was. That was the first time.
That's when I realized, okay,
I got it. When I got to LSU,
this is the first time in my life I was
ever challenged
by the program, by how difficult
things were. It's very difficult to have
to read and become a savage, but stay up
all night and do and take care of people
with problems. I used to love to sleep,
but it was the first six months of not
sleeping and still being a savage was
probably
one of the biggest wakeup calls for me.
That's actually how I became a
neurosurgeon. When they got a hold of me
and they saw what I was,
they were like, "This kid's different."
And at the time when we did brain
surgery on people, we would put wires
back in their skull to put it back on.
And I thought this was the stupidest
thing I've ever seen in my life because
you would see people, you know, 2 years
after a brain tumor or a subdural and
their skull would be sucked into the
head and you could see the wires out
here. I said, "Why don't you guys just
use plates and screws like we do in oral
surgery? Like when we fix the jaw, we
fix the" And they looked at me like,
"Well, we don't know how to do that." I
said, "Okay." And I called my nurse. In
fact, my nurse that still works with me
today. I said, "Shantel, go get me the
plates and screws." And they brought him
in and I showed them how to do that.
This is in
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is like 1990, '91.
And we start doing surgeries like that.
And these guys let me do surgeries that
probably I shouldn't have been doing. I
was already a doctor not with a you know
a technical certificate but I had a lot
of experience and this paid off in my
first rotation in oral surgery. I was
picked handpicked by one of the best
neurosurgeons in the world. His name is
David Klein. He just passed away this
year or in the end of 24. And I loved
him. I I mean I he was we used to call
him the boss.
He was more like my father.
I had ultimate respect for him.
He was smart
but he had so much wisdom but he was
very humble.
And he knew that I was smart but I was
not humble.
and
he handled me perfectly. How
when I was going through my residency, I
was married, I had my son, and we got
divorced. I didn't even have a
discussion with my wife. This will this
gives you a little flavor of how Jack Kruse was at this time. I didn't have the
discussion with my wife that I was going
to switch from oral surgery to
neurosurgery. She had already she was a
pediatrician. She had already got a job
lined up after I had a job in oral
surgery lined up in Arizona.
And I I'm like, "No, no. You're gonna
offer me this? This is the the the
hardest and best thing in medicine? I'm
all in." I didn't discuss with anybody.
Dr. Klein gave me 24 hours to make the
my mind up and I didn't talk to her
about it at all. And she goes, "Well,
this is not going to be good for me. I
want to sign up for seven more years
living in New Orleans.
And I said, "Okay, see you."
That's it. That's really how it went
down. And
it was probably a dick thing to do. But
ultimately, I told you when I was a kid,
you put a challenge in front of me, I'm
very interested. But how did your mentor
help you? Neurosurgeons tend to get
married a lot, get divorced a lot
because our job, we're really married to
our job. We're married to our patients.
We're not married to our family. And one
of the big mistakes that Dr. Klein made
in his life is that he didn't spend a
lot of time with his children. So when I
got divorced early on, right, literally
when I switched into neurosurgery, my
son at the time was
I don't I think he was three or four
months old. Dr. client gave me off every
Tuesday afternoon, threw me out of the
operating room and forced me to go see
my kid. And that's when I I spent time
with my son. I got to do that my entire
residency. The only time it got
interrupted was in my chief year because
that's you're the you're the boss then.
You can't take off. But I will never
forget that.
Tell us about the most unexpected
influence on your career. It was a young
girl when I was a chief resident who uh
came into my operating room.
Uh she was raped or attempted rape. She
was coming home from Catholic school and
one of the guys that tried to rape her
took a brass lantern and smashed her
head and this side of her head was on
the opposite side of her head. And in
the emergency room,
the nurses told me to look at her
fingers. And I looked at her fingers and
she had nails like you and the guy's
tissues were underneath her fingers. So
this told me she fought like an animal.
Soon as I saw that,
I fought for her.
You've mentioned feeling frustrated.
What's the main cause of that
frustration?
Oh, that's a multifaceted one. I think
my frustration
then and now is different. Uh I think my
frustration then
when people get opportunity
you should take it you should jump
without wings people don't understand
time is not promised to anybody you have
the opportunity to do something there's
opportunity cost in not doing it that
was my frustration I think with my
mother with my family
even my ex-wife but it changed it
changed tremendously when I got into
residency, I was frustrated with the
centralization. The centralization hit
me in a lot of different ways, but the
number one thing that hit me. I was
taught
the benefits of centralization for
education. But when you are a doctor,
especially a surgeon, and you're in the
operating room theater, it's just like
being in a war.
Rules and regulations don't work in a
war. When you are in my operating room,
it's me and you. Everybody else is
superolous. You are there to serve me. I
am the king.
My job is to make sure that you get off
the operating room table and I fix your
problem and we're successful and you can
talk to me in the recovery room. I think
a lot of times
that's what gets neurosurgeons in
trouble. That's the reason why we have
the reputations that we do because
people don't understand who we really
are is we are trained to play 4 D chess
all the time
and we're doing that to make sure that
you have a good outcome. And sometimes,
you know, things happen it's beyond your
control. You know, you can't sometimes
you can't fix Humpty Dumpty when they
come in really broken. But you have to
give them your best shot. And
I think
one of the things that can be a problem
is I generalized that experience on the
people around me. I was pretty tough on
everybody. But not tough that they
wouldn't like me. I was like a drill
sergeant. And you can still see that in
me today.
Like I don't tolerate [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] from
anybody.
You talk about your frustrations when
you were a child and also through your
residency. What about now in your 60s as
you say? What are your frustration right
now? That's simple. That's uh Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Maha,
that's uh El Salvador. That's um the
world. That's Israel. That's like the
British royal family, the World Economic
Forum. I just can't believe that we're
this far off track. That people actually
think centralization and communism and
fascism is a good idea. That that people
in the United States, the freest people
in the world who have the illusion of
freedom are now ready to become
Venezuela and put their hands on, put
the cuffs on. To me, that's
unbelievable. You said it with a
negative connotation when you said
frustration. I did, right? Do you know
what I told my people? Embrace the suck.
You know what I learned as a little boy?
Embracing the suck is where order comes
from. I love chaos. You'll have nobody
sitting next to you ever in your life
that loves chaos more than me. If you
talk to anybody who really knows me,
they'll tell you, "Put Jack in the most
chaotic situation and he will thrive."
Because when you put somebody in chaos,
you find out how well they can think.
And then that tells me a lot about you.
So if you don't like the chaos, then
guess what? I don't want you part of my
tribe. I want people that are curious
and embrace the chaos to make order out
of the chaos because those are the
people ultimately that are going to
survive. Those are the Bitcoiners. They
verify. They don't trust. They take the
chaos and they say, "Okay,
think about it. Anybody who's owned
Bitcoin in the great financial crisis in
the beginning, this is the biggest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
show in the United States ever." But
guess what?
those guys, the cipher punks,
all the chaos around them, they come up
with the solution. To me, that's
elegant.
Talk to me a little bit about Maha and
Bob Kennedy.
Well, I I think the frustration is
pretty simple. Um, everybody knows I
went to Bitcoin Nashville last year
wearing a Robert F. Kennedy Jr. hat and shirt.
Trump was on stage. I personally I know
a lot about Trump. I like Trump. He's
not the right person that we need to fix
medicine. He is probably going to be the
right person to fix the banking
situation. But when Bobby and Trump
joined together, I was like, "Okay, I'm
going to get the best of both worlds.
I'm going to have Maha." And Maha
started with uh Naib Buelli. I wrote
Boulli a medical freedom law and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. asked for that law before any of
you knew about it and the president told
me I could share it with him. So, maha
started there and I never said much
about it because to me it wasn't
important at that time. But that's when
Bobby started to come out to talk about
all the things that you heard him talk
about before he joined with Trump in
Nashville. When they started to talk
about Bitcoin and health and Trump
embraced them,
my initial feeling was I think this is a
mistake. And the mistake that I thought
that Bobby would lose some of his juice,
Trump would absorb it because I felt at
the time the only reason Trump was doing
this is to get elected. He needed the
Bitcoiners and he needed the Maha moms
to get over the edge. So when they
joined, if you would have asked me the
day after the conference,
I had $100,000. I would have put $90,000
Bobby being successful, $10,000 on Trump
being successful.
Turns out now Trump's got a $100,000
successful and Bobby's got zero.
That's where my frustration is right
now. Why do you think that is? The
problem in the United States started on
November 22nd, 1963 when the military
assassinated JFK. We had a military coup
in the United States. It started that
day. It still hasn't ended. Do you know
the reason why Naib Bukelli is okay
right now? Because the intelligence
agencies are not interested in El
Salvador. They're interesting in putting
their guns towards the American
citizens. That's what's happening right
now. That's why I'm frustrated because I
never thought they would move the guns
from who they had them pointed at to us.
And the frustration is even worse
because most of the people in the United
States don't see what I just told you.
And it's playing out on the world stage
right now. The people that have leverage
over Bobby are the people in the desert,
the people in the CIA. The desert
people, they're from Israel, okay?
They're the bankers. They're the people
that the Bitcoiners can't stand. the
Rockefellers, the Rothschilds,
okay, the BIS, Belgium.
When I did a podcast with Danny Jones in
the United States on December 2nd, 2024,
I wanted to have this discussion with an
American. You know what I was told? I
don't want to have this discussion
because the people who sponsor my
podcast, they happen to be Zionists and
I don't want to go that route. So why do
I feel compelled to tell you? because
it's important.
Donald Trump earned a lot of trust from
me. Why? His best friend was John F.
Kennedy Jr., JFK's son. JFK's son was
taken out as well. But he made a promise
to JFK that if he ever became president
that he would release the files to tell
the truth to the American people. Well,
guess what? In the first 100 days of his
presidency, he did. Now we know. No more
questions. The CIA, FBI, the Italian
mob, and Israel
killed JFK in a conspiracy. No longer a
mystery. But you know what the
frustration is now? Nobody in America
seems to know that we had a military
coup. Nobody still gets the implications
of that admission. And that is very sad.
Why? Because America is dumbed down. So,
I understand
why America
doesn't get it. But
the people that really need to get this
are the Bitcoiners. Because the
Bitcoiners are the 2025 version of Paul
Rivere
of the crazy people that came from
Britain and told the king
and fought the best army in the world
and beat them. We have to now do the
same thing.
It's there right now is no question
about it in the United States. We're at
that level.
You are frustrated about it. Salvador.
Yeah. Why is that? Uh Blly gave the
people of El Salvador the greatest gift
that a politician could ever give. Why?
Politicians never give people power and
control. Blly did that. He did that
before he put in the exception regime to
go after MS-13. So what does that tell
you? His priorities were right. fix the
money and then fix everything else. The
country's completely changed in five
years. But what's the frustration? Blly
has to build the middle class out here
in El Salvador. That's the single most
important thing. But Salvadorians
need to take their head out of their ass
and buy a little bit of Bitcoin because
the whole country changes
if they understand this very simple
idea. This is you don't even have to
think six steps ahead, just one step
ahead. And B Kelly, the reason I respect
him, in my opinion, the greatest
president of any country of all time, I
I used to put him behind George
Washington. Now I think he's exceeded
it. He is still buying Bitcoin now. When
he makes the deal with the IMF, he's
telling the IMF,
"I'm going to do what's right for my
people." But the people of El Salvador
need to realize they all need to have
strike wallets. They all need to have
moon wallets. They need to start saving
some of their money. Even if it's five
or 10%
in Bitcoin and not in American dollars.
If they do that,
El Salvador could be have a a bigger
ascent than the United States did from
1850 to probably 1945.
Who or what do you watch closely and
why? Nature always. Nature has taught me
more than any person on the planet.
What's the biggest misconception about
you? That I'm an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I understand
why people feel that way, but I'm a
drill sergeant. Why? Because I look at
you, you're asleep.
You are totally asleep. And the only way
for you to wake up is to get punched in
the mouth. So, if you come to me, tell
me, "Jack, I have autoimmune disease or
I have a brain tumor, and you tell me
you can't do what needs to be done, why
are you wasting my time?"
But that's where the drill sergeant
comes out. I will punch you in the mouth
until you understand
that you are in the battle of your life.
You're on the deck of the Titanic and
it's time for you to jump in the cold
water, swim to the boat. If you're not
willing to do that, then don't ask for
my help.
you made radical changes in your life.
What was the toughest part of that
transformation?
Um,
it's kind of funny if I answered this
question when I was going through it,
the answer would be different looking
back through the retrospectcope. Give me
both. Well, I I would tell you I think
going through it, I think it was my
frustration that people around me didn't
see what I saw, didn't think what I
think. So they never understood why I
did what I did. And I think now
looking back
I understand why some people were
disappointed
with some of the things that I did. Like
the potential energy in my family
to take the trajectory I did was really
important. But I don't have anything to
do with my family now. But did they
still
play a big role in what I was to become?
Yes. But the way in which it unfolded,
this probably wasn't the best for them
as the story unfolded. Now, do many of
them like what I'm doing now? Yeah. But
they don't realize
that how I was when I was a kid, a
teenager,
college, all of these experiences,
they make you who you are. And I don't
have regrets.
Like I believe
in the power of now. You only can
control now. You can't control the past
because it's a memory. And you can't
control the future because it's not
here. But you know what? You can control
right now. And I believe if you have an
idea, you have to execute on the idea
because if you don't, the idea goes
away. You delete it.
That is the power of now. How would you
describe your old self and your new
self?
My old self was scary.
You keep saying how scary. I feared
nothing. Okay, that means I would put
myself in situations no one else would
ever consider doing because I was
confident, uber confident
that I I thought I was Superman. But
ultimately, did I pay a price for that
down the road in my own biology? Yeah, I
did. And that's the lesson that I'm
trying to teach Bitcoiners right now.
Like understand you have all this money
and you're not using the money to put
time back in your bank account. What
good is it to be Steve Jobs, Hal Finny,
or Paul Allen for all debt at 60 years
old with billions of dollars? It makes
no sense to me. It's just poor planning
and poor thinking. Can you briefly
explain what you call decentralized
medicine? Yeah, it's a medicine that
doesn't have a focus on RNA and DNA.
doesn't have a focus on big pharma. The
basis of decentralized medicine is the
the three-legged stool of life. All of
life can be explained by light, water,
and magnetism. And how those things come
together to build health or disease in
you. So for example, I tell people
health is the slowest form of death you
create. Disease is when you make a
mistake in light, water, or magnetism
that determines the disease you get. All
diseases are like on the same subway.
They're just different stops. What do
you think it will take for the world to
truly take decentralized medicine
seriously as a legitimate path to
healing? Two billion deaths. That's the
punch in the mouth that everybody needs.
I mean, think about it already. When I
told the world about SV40, what did the
world do? Hiccup. They did nothing. Now
you see all these people dying. You've
seen it. All the soccer players dropping
dead on the field, right? We saw it in
the NFL. We see it every day on TV. You
have to realize they're going to take
you out. So, I think it's going to take
a lot of deaths the next 15, 20 years.
People are going to wake up and go, you
know what? We can't trust anybody in the
government. and the savages have to rise
up. I don't know how many deaths going
to take, but I can tell you this, the
whole five years that the world
collectively lived through COVID,
I'm not optimistic for the people that
are in the experimental group. The
people in the control group like me, I'm
very optimistic for. Those are the
people that I do podcasts like this for.
Those are the people I write my blogs
for. Now, it doesn't mean that the other
people can't get a benefit, but remember
what I told you before. When people
don't value you because they don't use
your information,
they tell you. They're telling you right
away, why would you extend yourself to
help them if they're not willing to help
themselves?
Thanks, Jack. That's it for part one.
Where can people follow you and your
work? Uh, on social media, Dr. Jack Kruse. There's a lot of scammers out
there, so don't get pulled in by them.
If uh you want to learn about
decentralized medicine on your own, you
can do it free on my website. I have a
form. It'll take you 10 years to read
everything on there, but it's free. And
then if you want uh how shall I say more
focus, like a magnifying glass, it's
Jack Kruse DIY on Patreon. And then if
you want more of my time, you pay. You
become a member. And if you really want
a lot of my time, then you pay me in
Bitcoin to be your doctor, and I will
allow you to rent my brain for your
problem. It's been amazing having you on
the podcast. Thank you. No problem.
[Music]