And for those of you who don't know who
I am, my name is Jack Cruz. I'm a
neurosurgeon. I'm in private practice.
Um, probably my
uh I guess that's what I would consider
my day job. My passion is I'm a quantum
biologist. And this change happened to
me about 12 years ago. Um, and last year
when I came to this event, my topic was
photosynthesis and food. And basically
to tell you that everything you believe
about food is a falsehood because it's
all tied to photosynthesis. And if you
don't know anything about light, you
don't know anything about food. And this
talk is the flip side of that talk. In
other words, there's a coupled pathway.
And I got kind of famous on the internet
for making something called the leptin
prescription. So what I decided to
do is give you a a story about actually
how I figured this out piece by piece.
Okay, before I start, I want to say
thank you to Dave. He invited me last
year. I was kind of shocked that he
invited me to a food forward group. uh
especially with my perspective because
my perspective is decidedly not food.
It's decidedly towards light. I mean
food has its place and you'll probably
hear me talk a little bit about that.
But I want to tell you that gratitude
uh is important for this reason and I
think when I get done you'll understand
why because it raises our dopamine
level. And you heard me say something
last night in
Unbound, which brings me to this group
of characters or misfits as I like to
call
them. The answers are right in front of
us, folks. And you heard me say it in
the movie, but you may not know why I
said it. Because even though the answers
are right in front of us, if your
dopamine level is low, you will not
perceive the truth right in front of
your face. Okay? And one of the cool
things that you're going to learn in the
talk is that the best and fastest way to
raise your dopamine level is through AM
sunlight. And I'm going to show you how.
But I don't want you to think that
that's not all of them. These uh guys up
here, you know, Ben, this is Jeremy. For
those of you who don't know him, Ben
made a movie about him. This picture was
taken in New Orleans. And the four guys
on this slide are going to do something
really important in this life. Some
people think we've already done it. My
opinion is we're only scratching the
surface. There's a lot more to come.
When you get us four together in the
French Quarter, we raise our dopamine
levels in a big way in many different
ways. And the point is is that friends,
family is incredibly important. Somebody
asked a question to Ruben a little
earlier about do you uh trim your
friends? Ruben wasn't being honest with
you all. Ruben got off social media last
year for a variety of different reasons,
but one of the main reasons is social
media is a place where a lot of energy
vampires are. They hang out and they
look to take you down. I have a famous
Instagram quote. If you haven't followed
me on Instagram, you may like some of
them, but there's 7.5 billion people on
the planet and I only like six of them
and I always rotate them
through. So, I'm looking to steal
electrons from people all the time. And
it it's uncanny to me that no matter
where I go, I always meet people who are
new and I get to entangle with them and
they don't really know what I'm doing
until they actually hear me talk about
the stuff I talk about. This is one of
those cats. His name's Devin. He's here.
You've probably seen him. His mom's
here. I just met his mom for the first
time. I met Devon at a biohacking event
in 2014. And I to be quite honest you
one of my biases uh I thought
millennials were low dopamine generation
and he he was the first one that changed
my opinion um I did a talk there that
was very controversial
and let's put it this way I had a 12 and
a half hour Q&amp;A that didn't end till
3:30 in the morning across the street
and Devin stayed for the whole thing and
since then he's been a member of my site
because he understood
that the key wasn't buying boxes and
supplements and worrying about different
types of foods when you were getting the
key fixture wrong, which was light. And
you can see he bought all the books and
he started to learn. Last guy is the
latest millennial and he's 17 years old.
He's here. You probably saw him with his
long blonde hair. That's Matt. And Matt
came to my members event. Matt's not a
member because he's broke. He has no
money. So he wrote a blog called Quantum
Thievery. And he met my wife. He met all
my members. He broke into this five-star
resort and basically spent almost two
weeks with us. He did it with his buddy
Brian who's sitting right here in the
front. Matt's right there. And the key
thing is because he took a risk. He
didn't know if he was going to meet me.
Turns out I went down there two days
early with my wife, sat on the beach,
these two clowns showed up, and guess
what we did? For two days, they got an
educational consult for 48 hours. And
then they spend the time with us. And
what
happened? Dopamine levels were risen.
And it happened on the beach. And it's
really important for you to hear. Now,
this guy is Alexander W. And many of you
may not know this, but Dave and Tree
tried to get Alexander here to speak. I
asked him to get him, but it was
logistically and financially not
feasible. You heard him in the movie.
He's German. My name used to be cruiser
before World War I. So, he's my brother
from another mother. So, I've decided uh
to use a lot of his slides and a lot
also some of his ideas to show you
exactly what you need to know about
light. And it's probably the most
important thing. And this is for you
guys. There's somebody in this audience.
I don't know who it is. Every time I
come give a talk, I always meet one
person and I usually tell that person, I
know the reason why I had to come here
was to meet you. So far, I haven't met
that person yet. So, we'll see how it
goes. Bottom line, I'm
grateful to be here, but also to share
the ideas with
you. These changed my life in a big way.
Everything I'm about to tell you is in
these books. If you're gonna take one
picture, take a picture of all these
books. There's more, but this is where a
mitochondriac starts. Okay? And you
heard when Ruben started the movie about
Unbound, he showed that
picture and um told you what Unbound
means. Innovation is about taking things
that are known and connecting them in
ways that nobody's ever thought about
before.
my entire talk. I'm going to tell you
right now in about 15 or 20 seconds
exactly what I'm going to tell
you. All you need to know is that slide
right there. Okay? I could technically
end the talk with this. What does that
equation mean to everybody? And you just
answer it yourself, but I'm going to
tell you what it means to me today.
Energy and mass are exactly the same
thing. The only thing that's different
is the environment that each side of the
equation is in. Okay. So, what does this
mean? This means that when you slow
light down, you create things of mass.
That means everything in this room, this
farm, this planet at one time used to be
light. And that is
very counterintuitive to some people.
They don't believe that's true. That was
Einstein's innovation. And the problem
is in medicine,
biology, research, science, PhD,
nutrition, people, they don't get it.
And last year I came here and told you
that's what the basis of the food web
is. It's light through
photosynthesis. So if you don't know
about light, you don't know about food.
And that's a really controversial thing
to say to people who are big into food.
I don't care. I really don't because
it's true. Now I'm going to show you how
we work the other side of the
equation. The key innovation occurred
650 million years ago in photosynthesis.
That's when we stole a bacteria and
turned it into a chloroplast and we made
food. What did the the uh plants do?
They made oxygen as a b byproduct and
they also put DHA in the seas. Okay, we
know that life started in the seas. What
happened 600 million years ago is
important to everybody in the room.
That's where all complex life came from
through the Cambrian explosion. But what
was the key innovation? It's right there
on the
bottom. A mitochondria brought the sea
inside the cell. And why is that
important? Because we had to bring water
inside to make life work. So if you want
a key slide, take a picture of this one.
because last year's talk focused on that
and this year's talk focuses right on
this and basically what you have is a
coupled system and what people don't
realize that system is reversed here and
here's the key thing that you need to
understand Ruben talked a little bit
about DC electricity what people don't
realize is when a caterpillar eats a
leaf at Shelburn forms it stimulates a
DC current of injury that Becker talks
about in his book the researcher that
did that was Alan Burr at Yale
University
1929. You should know that. Guess what?
When I cut people in surgery, every time
I cut them, what stimulates the healing
repair? It generates a DC electric
current and it tends to work, as Ruben
said, with red blood cells in a very
elaborate way that Becker laid out in
his books. If you don't know that, you
need to. And I'm going to show you why
you need
to. Most of you may or may not know my
story. 12 years ago, I was a big dude,
really big dude. And it was one of the
things that kind of really bothered me.
And the thing is, I would tell you from
failures, you get your successes. And I,
no matter what your issue is today,
there's going to be something in this
talk that is going to allow you to
improve your own situation. And for me,
it was a crazy story that many of you
may have heard in the podcast. It's tied
to this book, and I'm not going to get
too deep into
the book, but it's an old one. But
here's the key. It was a name, a guy
named Julian Battle, who's a famous
attorney in New York City. Remember,
this is a fable. It's story.
It's not for true, okay? But turns out
he had a heart attack in the middle of
the courtroom and he was an
That means low dopamine. So that's the
reason why I started out with the low
dopamine
story. Well, he has a heart attack. He
decides to sell all his earthly things,
go back in. and he went to the Himalaya
mountains, came
back, realized that there's 25,000
sunrises in a life. He was tan, he lost
100 pounds, and he was a nice guy now.
And people couldn't figure it out. So,
the person that sent me this book was
trying to give me a different message.
And that message for this talk's not
important. But what is important is what
did I take away from this book? Those
things right there, those were the key
things that I didn't know. I didn't know
there was these things were possible.
Then I started thinking about the book
after some of the papers that I had
started reading. I said, is this
possible that this could happen in real
life? And that was my picture around 20
2005. And I was a low dopamine
neurosurgeon at that time. Some people
may still consider me that way, but I
think I'm a little bit better than I am
uh today than I was then. But I want you
to look at the title of that. Guarantee
very few people in this room
believe what's up there. Does obesity
begin in the
eye? I'm going to tell you when I'm done
with
you, you're going to see a different
perspective than you've ever seen before
because I'm going to tell you the answer
is yes. And how I got pretty famous on
the internet is by writing something
called a leptin prescription. When you
go read it, you'll never see the word
light in it. Just gives you six steps to
do and you'll find out why those six
steps are important. But what did I do
when I read the book? Immediately I
realized the guy went to the Himalayan
mountains. What's really interesting
about the Himalaya mountains is you see
India's right here. The equator runs
right through here. Noticed that the
equator bisects that country. The other
thing that I knew about the Himalaya
mountains, they're really high up, you
know, like 25 to 30,000 ft. And one of
the things that I realized immediately
is that that would change the light
frequency of what that person would get.
And it turns out for every thousand feet
you go up, you get more UV light. And
then then I remembered in the book he
said, "Yeah, he was tan." So that meant
he had to have a lot more UVA light
because UVA light tans. You know, I did
learn something in medical school from
dermatologist. But the other key thing
that I started to notice is I remember
in medical school learning about how
hllet types in mitochondria vary by
geography and also by latitude. So this
is the key. This is where the cradle of
life is right here. Why is this
important for everybody in the room to
understand? Because people that live in
the east African rift zone, the original
humans, they have an L0 hletype. What
does that mean? That means they do not
uncouple their mitochondria.
Why is that? They need all their energy
to run away from lions. Okay, people
that live up here, which is most of us
in the room, why? Because we come from
northern European hapllet types, we
uncouple our mitochondria. What does
that mean? That means we don't make use
food electrons to make energy, to make
ATP. We use it to make heat. Why?
Because there's no lions up here. You
don't have to worry about lions. You
have to worry about freezing your ass
off. Okay? So, you release heat from
your mitochondria and that does
something specific to water that's
sitting around your mitochondria. And
what is that? It's it's something that's
very
counterintuitive. Warm shrinks water.
Cold expands it. Well, why is that
important to a mitochondriac? Well, it
goes back to this this story right here.
And if you look, most of us have these
hlet types right up here. Well, when you
take a mitochondria and shrink it down,
that brings the respiratory proteins
closer together. What do we know in
quantum physics? Anytime you have an
energy transfer, when electrons move
across a redux couple, the closer they
are together, the more energy efficient
they are. Ain't that interesting? I
started putting these things together. I
said somehow that must be important.
Then I started to read papers that every
one angstrom the distance between
respiratory proteins drops off the
energy it makes by a factor of
10. So what did I start to
realize? Was being a fat ass really tied
to energy excess or was it maybe tied to
energy loss back to the environment? Got
me thinking and I wasn't sure. But this
paper came from the number one
mitochondria researcher in the world. If
you don't know his name, this is a name
you want to write down. Dr. Doug
Wallace. And he just won the Franklin
Award. That's usually something they
give to somebody before they win a
Nobel. He's going to win a Nobel Prize.
He's the guy that found out that
mitochondria are inherited from your
mother only. He's also the one that
linked all diseases. And this is going
to shock you because I know most people
don't know this. You have two genomes
inside every cell. You have your nuclear
genome and you have your mitochondrial.
Medicine focuses in on the genetic one.
I don't. I focus in on the mitochondrial
run. The reason for that, it makes all
the energy in your body. And guess what?
We now know from the science of
epigenetics. Energy turns on and off the
genome. That's the only thing that does
it.
So we come to a point how do we make
energy proximal to a mitochondria in our
body? Where does the process first
start? Well, this is when I started to
look at sunlight and there's an
interesting thing here. What your eyes
can see is 380 to 780. Okay, just for
those of you who don't know, this is UV
light, UVA, and that's red light. But
here's the funny thing. The spectrum of
the sun goes from, this is actually
incorrect. This is Dr. W's slide, but
it's 250 all the way up to 3000. So, it
raised a question. What? Why are we not
seeing these? And not only that, why is
the retina, because most of you may not
know this, we as humans are blind to UV
light and to infrared light. We can't
see it. But why is it there? And why
doesn't our eye look at it? And I
thought that was very peculiar. Then I
started to learn about things in quantum
mechanics. And the reason that that
occurs is something called the quantum
xeno effect. And I'm not going to tell
you what it is. I'm just going to tell
you that when you observe a frequency,
it changes the reality you get. And it
turns out that all the key signaling in
your eye works on the frequencies you
can't see. And it's done that way by
design.
So this question made me realize that
there is an issue in the eye. We have an
eye camera. Almost everybody in this
room would not argue that your eye is
predominantly something we use to see as
we're doing right now. But there's this
other thing that I learned about
neurosurgery called the clock. It's
called the supercosmatic nucleus. Most
of you probably heard it. It's the main
circadian oscillator. And I started to
wonder, is there a
difference based in these frequencies
between these two systems in the eye?
And how do they somehow link? So I went
further. In 1879, everything changed.
This is when we had the first
incandescent bulb. I challenge anybody
in this room to go back and find me any
papers where there's any chronic
diseases present. In fact, Doug Wallace
has publicly said 80 to 85 to 90% of
human diseases are related to
mitochondrial
origins. Okay? Chronic diseases began
right around the turn of the century.
For those of you who don't believe it, I
think I told you this last year. In
1900, colon cancer was the 37th leading
cause of death in the United States.
Today, it's number two. So, if you
believe in Darwin's paradigm, explain to
me how in five generations, we went from
37 to two. It's impossible.
But guess what makes it possible? When
you understand the energetics from a
mitochondria. And guess what? That's
what Wallace has been teaching people.
And nobody is listening in my
profession. Okay? And that includes the
PhD researchers because they're the ones
that teach us in medical school. But
Wallace has been banging this drum for a
long time. So the evolution of light
doesn't equal the evolution built into
your
cells. Let's take it further. You saw
this picture from Reuben, 4.6 billion
years, 1980s, 1879 here. But this is the
key thing I want to show you. What's the
key in this picture? Red balances
blue. Don't forget that. I'm going to
make sure you have that burned into your
retina when I get done with
you. Now, if Dave wants to invite me
back, we'll talk about the skin next
year. This is not a talk about skin,
okay? But it's important. But this year
is all about the eye. And this picture,
the reason why I put it up here is I
want to show you this is what I learned
in medical school. The anterior chamber,
the lens in the cornea block UV light.
That's what every doctor in the United
States is still taught to this very day.
Okay? So when I went on this journey
after reading the monk who sold his
Ferrari, I found out that was
too. Okay? And it turns out if you look
at the signals get through 1% of UVB
gets through and 3% of UVA gets through.
And you heard um one of the other
speakers mention something about
collagen and po electricity. And it's
not important that you know that. But
you know what is important? The vitrius
of the eye is a special collagen. It's
not found anywhere else in the body. You
know what it does? Slows light
down before it gets to the retina. I was
like, hm, that's kind of interesting
because what did I say to you before
about the E= MC²? Anytime you slow light
down, you create things with structure,
with mass. You create matter, don't you?
So, I thought this was kind of
interesting. And then I also want to
teach you another thing that's really
important about UV light. It's the only
part of the visible spectrum that works
in a nonlinear fashion. What does
nonlinear mean? members know what it
means, but I want to make sure you guys
know. A small stimulus leads to a
massive amplification. In other words,
it can have massive effects that you
don't
anticipate. We're going to talk about
some of those. Okay. The key thing you
This is a picture from Ben's
movie. You need to question everything.
You're looking at a guy speaking to you
right now who doesn't believe pretty
much anything he learned in medical
school can be taken with a any truth.
You need to examine everything. And this
story about me constructing the leptin
prescription. And all these things I
learned about the eye are the reason why
I'm passionate about what I do. Now, the
pupil is a perfect blackbox radiator.
What does that mean? Because we're doing
a little physics here. It means that
light can go in and come back. How did I
know immediately that UV light got
through? I challenge anybody to go to
batteries and bulbs, buy a UVA light,
flashlight LED, put it in anybody's
retin, you know what you'll see? You'll
see fluorescents come right back. You
don't need anything else. So, every time
the opthalmologist, like when I gave
this talk three months ago and I proved
to them they were full of that's
how I did it. I brought a UVA flashlight
and shined in all their eyes. I said,
"What did you see? Explain based on what
we learned in medical school." That's
shut them up pretty
quick. Okay? Because you don't need a
lot of photons to see the effect. This
is something that everybody in this room
can do, reproducible. So when you go to
the opthalmologist, you can say, "I
don't believe what you're telling me."
But here's the key. You guys have heard
from all your food gurus that you've
heard previously talk at all these other
years about tryptophan, about tyrrosine,
about felonine, and histadine. But you
know what you don't know about aromatic
amino acids? They all absorb UV light.
Did you know that? Well, I didn't 12
years ago. But the key thing is the eye
is loaded with these amino acids
specifically. So that raised a question.
Why is this?
Well, I found out from physics that a
benzene ring, which is in every single
aromatic amino acid, is a photon trap.
And they absorb all frequencies of UV
light. So, guess what that means? That
250 to 380 is absorbed by this. That's
the reason why we don't see it because
it's designed to do something different.
Okay? And here's the key.
every single protein in the body and
this is something that was missed
earlier in one of the talks. I didn't
want to say
anything. Every protein in your body is
hydrated. Okay? Zinc cannot bind to a
protein in the way you were told earlier
today. And I'm going to show you the
reason why. And I'm going to tell you
exactly how it really works. Okay. The
other big thing to know is from
Pollock's work. I would tell anybody if
you're going to read the first book,
Pollock one is a great one because it's
a third grade reading book. everybody to
understand the basics of water but for
this talk it's not good enough so
there's something that started Pollock's
book came out in 2014 there's two
researchers named Jelus and Proparta in
2000 they they found that the EZ forms
something called the coherent domain 13%
of the exclusion zone in water when
sunlight hits water makes something
called the coherent domain which makes 1
million electrons free electrons deoized
to run all the biochemical programs.
Does anybody know how many biochemical
programs run per second in a cell? It's
100,000. Guess what has the control of
those enzyatic flux? If you ask any PhD
or any nutritionist at all, the answer
is they don't know the answer. But guess
what? It turns out light frequ light
frequencies can control all of them by a
molecular resonance phenomenon. And that
is how biochemistry works.
Now, this one is for the McKissic
lecture. Everything that she told you is
in this slide. So, if you want if you
want to learn how light works, here you
go. This is a protein. UV light hits it.
That is a light antenna. It's surrounded
by water. Light is an electromagnetic
wave that changes to an electrochanical
wave. That's called sound. That sound is
collected in water. Now, here's the
interesting thing. Water is a magnetic
dipole. What does that mean? Hydrogen
and oxygen, positive and negative.
That's the reason why it's tied to
magnetism. The first time that we found
out that magnetism truly controls sound,
Ohio State University acoustic phonons
2014. You can look it up. Okay, some of
us already knew this. And the reason why
we knew it is here's the key. When the
light hits here, it's absorbed in the
water. that changes the hydrogen bonding
networks. What is the physical change?
The physical change is the density of
the
water. That is how this works
fundamentally quantum mechanically. Now,
here's the interesting thing.
Mitochondria makes the cytoolic water
that surrounds all the things in the
cytool, including the nucleus and the
mitochondria. Where is this connection?
Well, for those of you who don't know,
the Schuman resonance comes from the
interaction of sunlight on the
ionosphere of the Earth. That's why
people call it the the heartbeat of
Earth. But it's an electrical tension
that develops between the solar plasma
and the atmosphere that generates the
7.83 hertz. Why do you need to know
about it? What' I tell you my day job
was? I'm a neurosurgeon, right? The
alpha wave in the human brain is 7.83
hertz. Exactly the same. So guess what?
The solar system entrains you to these
solar systems as it comes to earth.
That's how it works. Okay? Why is it
important? It generates the alpha waves.
So when you live in an environment
today, you don't have as many alpha
waves. Why? Because non-native EMF,
what's the number one effect, which
you'll learn about later, dehydrates
your cells because it lowers your redux
potential in your mitochondria. Other
words, original slide, you can't make as
much water from your own
mitochondria. That's where the
dehydration comes. And for the ladies in
the room or the guys in the room who are
not big science people, simple biohack
at home, take a piece of steak that you
have left over, throw it in the
microwave, taste it. What does it taste
like? Shoe leather. Why? What do
microwaves do? They vibrate and rotate
water really fast. It heats up and it
dehydrates the meat. It's happening to
you right now here in Vermont. It's
happening to all of us because of these
shitty lights that we
have. Okay, getting back to the the
topic, the eye, the SCN is the big focus
in medicine. The big focus is on the
camera. That's why all these old people
go see the opthalmologist and what do
they get? Cataract surgery, right?
Anybody know what they put in for
cataract surgery after it's done? An
implantable lens. And guess what that
lens
blocks? UVA, UVB, 100% and also these
days 50% of blue light in case you
didn't know that. That's been a change
since
2009. We'll go we'll go there later.
That's a little different story. It's
even worse. So, getting back to this
story, what people don't realize, 42% of
sunlight that falls to Earth is infrared
a
light. It's balanced all the time by
blue. Okay? Especially when the sun
rises. Now, this is a side picture of an
eyeball. What you need to know, and this
goes back to physics, in case you don't,
blue light bends the most by
gravitational lensing. It turns out this
is important in the eye because when
blue light comes through, it falls in
front of the retina. That's the reason
why when you use a computer screen or
you use these horrible lights up here,
you get visual obscuration. Other words,
your vision gets worse. What does that
cause? It causes elongation of your
eyeball. When your eyeball gets longer,
you get myopia. What happens when you
get myopia? The next step is you get
retinal detachments. What's the end
result? Acute macular degeneration. Any
anybody know anybody who's got that?
Yeah, lots of people. And guess what
else? Guess what causes cataracts? Blue
light toxicity. Why? The brain is trying
to protect itself from this light that's
coming in so it makes the lens hazy so
this doesn't happen. But why is it
important to a mitochondriac? Well, it
turns out in 200 about 2003 2004 through
2009 we had some really cool researchers
that found out there's another option in
the eye and that opsson works with the
retinal ganglen cells and that's called
melanopsin. Melanopsin is the hormone
that runs the central retinal pathways
in the eye and it turns out they're
really important at nighttime and they
link to melatonin but not in the way
most people think. The phobia is where
the rest of the visual light spectrum
fall and it falls right here. Why?
That's acute vision. That's your camera
focus. That's what the
opthalmologist all pay attention to.
They don't pay attention to this. The
only opthalmologists that do, you're
going to hear about later, are the
Japanese guys, who are the guys that I
talked to three months ago. They've been
on this way quicker than our American
counterparts. But here's the key. I'm
going to make a very controversial
statement now for many people in this
room. The central retinal pathway
energizes everything distal to it. So,
let me explain that to you.
It basically turns on your pituitary
gland and it turns on everything distal
in the human brain. And I'm going to
show you
how this paper I should say this
gentleman his name is Fritz Halwitch. He
was an amazing cat if he was an
opthalmologist in Germany. He was born
in the 1920s. He happened to live in a
time where we didn't have intraocular
lenses. One of the things that he
noticed is that when he saw people with
cataracts, he would cut the cataract out
so they could see, and for those of you
who don't know, this is what happened to
Vincent Van Gogh. You know, when he
painted hay stacks, the reason why he
paint them in all different colors is
because when you take a cataract out and
you don't put a lens in, you can see UV,
in case you didn't know that. So, that's
the reason why hay stacks has all the
different shades because he was able to
see it in so many different colors as
the light changed. Well, it turns out
this doctor actually practiced medicine
in a time that we could never
recapitulate now. That's why sometimes
looking back is a good thing. And I
started to look really far back. In
fact, as a neurosurgeon, these guys,
especially Kahal in 1891, he's the
father of modern neuro anatomy. I
started to find papers about this this
energetic pathway that has huge effects
on growth and metabolism through the
eye. You didn't hear me say gut. You
didn't hear me say food, did you? Turns
out that Halwitch did something rather
remarkable and he wrote about it in this
book here from 1979. And I guarantee
nobody in this room's ever read it. If
you think Western A Price's book is
huge, you should read this sucker.
because it's unbelievable what he did.
He basically took cataracts out of
people and then noticed and watched them
and saw that their growth and metabolism
improved tremendously. They started to
lose weight. They started to feel
better. They started to sleep better.
And he documented it all. And guess
what? He didn't just do it in humans. He
did in all kinds of animals. And he
documented the color changes that
occurred on animals after he took the
cataracts out. how their coats changed,
their surfaces, how they started to act
on the
farm. Okay, that's how important this
was. And he went he went even further.
He checked their urine. And you know
what he found? He found there was
metabolites of hormones that occurred
after he took the cataract out that
weren't there before. So in other words,
light was able to make chemicals in us
that weren't there
before. Doesn't that sound a lot like E=
MC²? Like how did light get turned into
things with structure, things with mass?
Things that you heard Chris Master John
talked about earlier. How does this
really happen? Do you really think that
you need it all from diet and
exercise? H there's another way. There
is another way. And when he did these
studies, it was incredible. And I have
to tell you, most of the opthalmologists
I talked to three months ago didn't know
a damn thing about Fritz Hall. And he
was an opthalmologist and well
published. And the crazy thing is there
was another guy that you're going to
learn about a little bit later named
John Audd. And you know what he was
famous for? He was Walt Disney's
animator that did time-lapse
photography. Okay, I don't know the
movie. You guys may know the name, but
it was in 1971 he came up with it and he
he had flowers that he showed grow and
do all different kinds of things. Turns
out that he made some key uh he made
some key uh investigative uh slides for
Disney and and dropped it, but then he
took it to me the medical boards and and
different physicians who' let it go by
the wayside. And what he found is that
when he took plants and he put them in
different light, the chloroplast
molecules rotated faster than not. Then
he decided to do it on animals. And he
found out that one of the cells in the
eye called the retinal pigmentum
epithelium, which you're going to hear
about shortly at the base of the eye has
melanin granules that absorb what? UV
light because it's made out of those
things that we talked about. Rotates
faster. And guess what? It makes what
Ruben talked about a DC electric current
in the eye. So that means you can
regenerate tissues when you have a high
DC electric current. Isn't that right,
Ruben? Didn't Becker tell us
that Ain't that
interesting? He went even further. And
this is probably one of the most
counterintuitive things I'm going to
tell you. This is a picture of people's
pituitary glands who were blind and who
could see. What did he do? He went the
extra distance. This is what I want you
to focus in on. Light slows, energy is
lost, the pituitary gets bigger. When I
saw this, I immediately realized that
everything in medicine was completely
ass backwards. Why? Why did I Why did I
say that to you? Everybody in this room
except the people that heard me talk
last
year believe that people get fatter
because they eat too much. Turns out
it's exactly the opposite. So, I'm going
to ask Well, I'm not going to ask Ruben
this. I'm going to ask somebody who I
don't know. You I don't know you. All
right. When you sprain your ankle, does
your ankle get bigger or smaller? Okay.
When you have heart failure, does your
heart get bigger or smaller? Okay. Just
so you know, he said it gets bigger.
Here's the third one. When the star in
the sky dies, does it get bigger or
smaller?
It gets a red giant. So everything that
loses energy in the universe gets
bigger. What did Hallitch tell
us? Halwitch showed that when light
slows, the pituitary gets bigger. You
know why it's getting bigger? Because
light is getting turned into chemicals
that you call hormones that go in to the
nuclear DNA to change it. Guess what
that means? That means light is capable
of altering DNA. It also means that
light is capable of potentially
reversing my previous problem. Meaning
that when you're obese, maybe your mean
main problem is you're not getting
enough sunlight and it has nothing to do
with food. How's that for a shocker?
That's what Fritz Holwitz taught me.
So, I didn't believe any of this and
most of you may not know this, but I
went to medical school at LSU and
there's a very very famous opthalmologic
researcher named Nicholas Bison who's
done incredible work. And you know what?
He's cut his teeth on DHA. He's he's
like the DHA guy in the world. And I
learned this back in 95 through9 when I
was there. He taught me a lot of crap.
and crap that I thought was crap because
it wasn't important to neurosurgery, but
12 years ago became extremely important
to me right now. It's huge. And the
number one effect right here in this
central retinal pathway between the
clock and your hypothalammus, you have
two loops in the eye. One loop is called
the short loop, the other one's called
the long loop. And what it does, it
recycles DHA constantly as light comes
through. It's coupled to vitamin A,
which you're going to hear about later,
and I'm going to tell you why that's
important. But the key thing that I
realized, Bison taught me that this
central retinal pathway and the retina
had more DHA in it than any other part
of the brain. And I thought that was
bizarre. Then I realized why when I
started to learn about physics, remember
the guys who came out with GPS devices,
Garmin devices? Well, it turns out that
the clock here has to run faster than
all the other clocks in the rest of your
body. If it doesn't, it doesn't work.
So, if you have an iPhone and you use it
to go to a restaurant here in Vermont,
the clock that's up in the sky in up
there has to run 38 microsconds faster
than the one in your iPhone. Otherwise,
you're going to be 100 kilometers off.
That would not work. You'd wind up in
New Hampshire. It wouldn't be good. But
it turns out in your eye, the exact same
thing happens. And the reason why DHA in
the eye is important because this DC
electric current runs faster than every
other part of your body. That's the
reason why DHA is important. And it
turns out when you have too much blue
light because blue light is the antidote
for vitamin A and for DHA. Do you know
why? What kind of light makes vitamin A?
Anybody want to guess? You heard you
heard somebody talk about it earlier?
Blue light makes vitamin A. How do you
know? Is there any any artist in the
room? What's the complimentary color to
blue?
Yellow. And guess what? Vitamin A is
yellow. Ain't that shocker? That's the
that's the link between this light
frequencies control the level of vitamin
A in the eye and also every optin in the
body is tied to retinol to vitamin A.
There's not an optin in the human body
that's not tied to it. That's the reason
why and Chris is here so he can verify
this. He wrote a very nice blog post. I
don't know how long ago it was that
there's data from N. Hannes that when
you have deficiencies of vitamin A, it's
tied to obesity. And nobody has told you
why. I'm telling you why right now.
Because you're blue light toxic. Blue
light makes you fat. Okay? Really fat.
And it starts right here. And it ruins
this biz effect. And the crazy thing
about the long loop, the way you recycle
DHA, this is the way it works. When
photosynthesis makes it in the in the C
in plankton, it's mostly in the SN1 and
the SN3 position. You heard Ruben talk a
little bit about this earlier. Well, SN1
and SN3 get changed when the fish eat it
and the fish change it to SN2. What does
SN2 mean? Means that it becomes planer,
like a semiconductive plane, which is
important in the eye. That's the reason
why taking algae when you're a vegan is
idiotic because there's not enough in
there. You need the seafood to make the
molecular change. Okay? And there's
papers out there that showed that SN2 is
the only thing that gets into the
central and peripheral nervous system of
ukariots, which everybody in this room
is. So guess what? That was another
piece of the puzzle. So we knocked that
one out. I went back and looked at this.
The reason why this is not equal is
because light, the evolution of light
does not equal the evolution of our
retinal anatomy. I started to put this
together pretty quick. Then I started to
look at sunrise and sunset. When the sun
rises, you have visible and infrared
light. You don't have any UV initially,
but guess what else happens at this
time? You don't need your rods, and you
don't need melanopsin in the morning.
So, guess when they regenerate? They
regenerate in the A.M. Guess what else
happens? You actually make melatonin in
your eye in the
morning. The hormone of darkness is
first made in the human body in the eye.
In the morning when you have a
combination of UVA and infrared A light
and the reason for you is what I told
you before about the the amino aromatic
amino acid that absorbs that. And you
see that UVA light doesn't show up here.
So for the guy last night who I don't
know who you are but asked the question,
how am I going to do this as an
executive to fix my life? This is the
key. You need to reconstruct your AM to
fix your real problem. And that was what
I had to do to my surgery schedule.
That's why I stopped operating at 7 a.m.
Started all my cases at 8:30. It's also
the reason why I moved to the 28th
latitude from where I lived. Why?
Because UVA light shows up. Now, you
guys here that live in Vermont, got some
bad news for you. If you've got a
mitochondrial disease, which most
diseases are, you need that UVA light,
and it shows up later here than it does
in New Orleans. So, guess what that
means? You need more control of your
life in the morning than any other time.
That's the practical advice. Okay? These
are not Jack Cruz's rules. These are the
sun's rules. Okay? Hold on. I'm not
done. Questions later.
sunset. This is when you don't need
color vision. This is the camera. They
regenerate at nighttime. There's another
option that you may not know about. It's
called neuroopsin. It's on the cornea of
the eye and it's on your skin. It's a
UVA light detector. So, if the
opthalmologists are right, why don't you
ask him, well, why do we have a UVA
light receptor in our eye if it's really
bad for us? Well, it turns out this is
going to be really important right now.
Melatonin is considered the hormone of
darkness. Remember those photon traps I
told you about? Well, guess what? That
neuropsin tells the brain that UVA light
is present and it can begin to make
melatonin from
sunlight. How do you like that? Now,
what are all the effects? Here's the
quantum paradox. It's a a nighttime
hormone because that's what the
functional medicine doctors in my
profession have told you. And that's
true because that's when it's active,
but it only activates when light is not
present. But it's remade first in the
eye and then generalizes all along the
brain. The other key thing, and I'll
just point this out to you right here.
This one should open everybody's eyes.
It reduces energy production in
mitochondria.
UVA light turns down energy production.
And why is that important? There's a
four the fourth cytochrome is cytochrome
C oxidase in everybody's mitochondria in
here. Anybody want to guess what kind of
light turns it on? Red light. UV light
turns it off. And the reason why, what
does UV light make in the skin or the
eye? Anybody who's a member of mine?
Nitric
oxide. And guess what? That's why UV
light lowers your blood pressure because
it causes 40 to 60% of dermal pooling
and it helps your heart. But what people
don't realize the effect is it turns off
your ability to make ATP from food
electrons. H there's another piece of
the equation that may be really
counterintuitive for some of you in this
room. It has a lot of other effects. one
of these. If you have breast cancer or
prostate cancer, you may want to pay
attention to that one because it affects
the aromatase enzyme. That's the reason
why when Ruben said before, "Well,
ladies, you may not want to do this."
And I said, "Oh, no. They want to take
the girls out to the sunlight because
guess what? That's the reason why breast
cancer's through the roof." Okay? You
need to get your body parts out in the
sun. So, for those of you who don't
believe, this is just from May 19th.
This was a study that came out. Look
what it said. Morning daylight exposure
tied to better
sleep. Okay, remember I've been telling
you this 12 years
ago. This is on Facebook a week
ago. People are now beginning to get the
message. Okay, taking melatonin is a
great way to ruin sleep. Okay, it's
something a mitochondriac would never do
when you understand how this process
works. Okay, Nathan Walls, here's your
slide. Here's the key that I want to
explain to you. You have this direct
loop that goes to the pineal gland, but
the energy comes in here. This energy
has to be balanced, blue and red. What
does this first do? It turns your
pituitary gland on. That's the reason
why the question that was asked to Ruben
before is extremely important. Blue
light balanced by red is what turns on
hormone production. If you look at a
circadian mechanism, all the hormones
are made usually from 6 to 10 in almost
any medical textbook, they're assuming
that you live around the 30th latitude.
That's not true. It's different at
different places. But it's a key.
Anybody want a shocker? What turns off
hormone production? UVA light on the
skin first time it shows up. UV light is
what turns off in your blood plasma. And
I have a slide on that later. But what's
the key point here? The key point here
is this parventricular nucleus which is
part of the hypothalamus that's where
the sympathetic nervous system begins
and ends. That's the the key. So anytime
you hear anybody talk about adrenal
fatigue if you go to my site and read
brain gut 16 adrenal fatigue is due to
an altered light spectrum. And the
reason why that nucleus fires everything
in the sympathetic system that's where
sympathetic overdrive comes and that's
where most problems come. What goes
down? The veagal motor system. Where is
that located? Back here in the fourth
ventricle. And what ties to it? The
vagus nerve that goes to the gut. The
thing that y'all love to talk about. But
guess what? Where does the problem
start? In the brain through the eye.
Okay. Back link here is really
interesting. This interesting link goes
right from the PVN to the sympathetic
trunk down in the neck. Do you know that
we have options in our cervical spinal
cord? Anybody want to guess why that's
the case? Where's brown fat in
humans? Guess why? That's how it ties.
That's when you start burning things for
free heat. What's the other thing? What
does the superior cervical gangling
control in the brain? I don't expect you
to know this because you'll know you're
not a neurosurgeon. Controls cerebral
blood
flow. So that means it controls the
amount of blood that gets to your brain.
think that may have any play in say
AMD? How about Alzheimer's, Parkinson's?
You know, any of these diseases like any
of the old people in the group. Ask your
grandmother, did she ever see any of
these diseases when she was young? The
answer is no. But what showed up in
1879? Light bulbs. H kind of
interesting,
huh? This is Matt's slide.
Matt told you about this. That
connection goes right there. All the
sympathetics run on the corateed and
external corateed system that go right
to your nose. That's the reason why it
happens. And the key is you need to
understand what what's going on here.
The light that comes through at
nighttime that you have to block is 400
to 465. That's what my glasses are doing
right now for me. These are the BPI
tints. The reason I have them on now is
because this crap up here. Okay. I don't
want the signal that the sun that the
sun just rose because you see it's 3:30
or 4:00 in the afternoon. That will ruin
my ability to sleep at night. That's the
reason you block it. Even when you're
inside, when I'm in surgery in the
middle of the day, that's what I do in
between cases. I go straight out to the
sun. Now, I want you to look at the
eyes. You have the pituitary stock and
you have the hypothalamus. What controls
all these? CSF. CSF is made out of 99.
And for those of you who don't know what
CSF is, cerebral spinal fluid, okay,
cerebral spinal fluid is an ultrailtrate
of blood plasma. It is made out of
99.8% water. Okay, so that means light
changes between these things. Here's the
key. Light plus water equals the
exclusion zone. You got that from
Pollock's book. Everybody knows that.
But here's the key. 13% of EZ is the
coherent domain. And that makes 1
million free electrons that run
everything in biochemistry. Okay? And if
you don't believe me, look at this
slide. For those of you who are not
physicists, Tina Karu is uh probably
this the leading researcher from Russia
in LLLT and photobomb modulation, which
is really all the study of red light.
Here's the key to life. I tell all my
members this and they know it. This is
an excited electron. This is a regular
ground state electron. All well, you
know what? You know what life's all
about in this slide? This called a
Jablonsky diagram. For those of you who
don't know that excited light falls to
the ground state, here's how all the
things occur. This is the redux pile of
electrons. That runs everything in a
mitochondria. Here's the ROS signal. As
light slows down, all these things occur
in a mitochondria. Light slows down
further and look what happens. you get
biochemical changes activity. This is
what most of the people in this room
who've talked to you today. This is the
level they're at. They don't know that
much about how this all occurs. And it
all occurs as an excited electron
releases light to the mitochondrial
system. That's what controls
you. It's not what you
think. So when we talk about nature,
here's the problem with my profession.
This is what we need to realize. We need
people to reconnect with nature instead
of PhD researchers who are worried about
getting their journal articles in
nature. Okay? So they can get funded. We
need to think about this a little bit
differently. And when I had this
realization, Fritz Hall's work basically
was recapitulating book. That's book
right there. For those of you who don't
know, you can find it probably for two
bucks on Amazon because it's so old. But
you need to read his book. It's amazing.
And for the ladies in the room, never
wear anything pink again. You'll get the
message, the reason why when you read
that book. But this this all these
things opened my eyes to something that
I had never appreciated before. So I
went back and I started to look at
light. And here's light in the visible
spectrum. Most people know it goes
between UV and IR. But here's this other
part right here. Life life tends to also
use the 7.83 83 hertz because that's
what runs the uh EEGs and the alpha
waves in your brain. But here's the
funny part. Modern life is right here.
And life is not designed to use any of
these. And these are all the things down
here that do it. What happens when you
use these? You lose the alpha wave in
the brain. And when you lose the alpha
wave in the brain, that's when you have
to do some of the crazy stuff that
Reuben's talked to you about about using
BOF feedback to retune the circadian
oscillator in your eye. What's the best
way to do that, Reuben? become the
sphinx. The sphinx looks to the east
every morning with all four extremities
grounded. That is the best way to
retrain the circadian oscillator in your
body through your eye while you're
grounded. So instead of thinking like a
neurosurgeon, I started to think like
Reuben. I started to think
thermodynamically. And that's not
something doctors are taught to do. And
the key part was right here. Life can
only exist between UV and IR light. And
it became imperative for me to figure
out how in the hell this really works.
So I bring you back to this again.
Tryptophan, tyrrosine, fenoli, and
histadine. They all do really important
things. Here's the key. I told you that
I came up with something called the
leptin prescription. I told you this was
a photon trap. Take a look at leptin
down here. Synthesized in 1994,
Rockefeller University. You see a whole
bunch of photon rings. Could it be that
this chemical that's made where in your
fat? Where's human fat?
Subcutaneous, isn't it? H, that's kind
of interesting. But this goes to your
hypothalammus and tells the hypothalamus
what your energy status is in your body.
So I went further. I started looking at
the aromatic amino acids. You got
phenylene tyrosine. You got precursors.
Oh, we heard about thyroid hormones.
Look at that. From UV light, you make
this chemical that makes the hormones
there. It comes from light, folks.
What's the next big step? You have dopa.
You've all heard of that. Look at all
the other chemicals that it makes.
Everything you hear from the functional
medicine doctors is made through your
eye right there. How about this one?
Tryptophan, serotonin,
melatonin. All these connections. This
one's even more interesting for anybody
in the room who's a white boy like me
with northern European skin who goes out
in the sun and gets really red. When you
come to a quantum clinician, that tells
us by definition, you never see UVA
light. And the reason why is ureanic
acid, which is made from
histadine. It's the key. And one of the
biohacks that I did with the qualant
that you guys may be interested in, I
figured out a way to actually stay in
the sun longer with my weak skin. And
how did I do it? I did it by hybrid
tanning. Hybrid tanning is when I use
infrared A light to precondition the
system so I could absorb more UV light.
So guess what? When I did that, I
actually lost more weight. And I backed
up this recently when the Quallet went
live. It actually
works. So what's the story? AM sunlight,
meaning it's got to be red, balanced,
and blue with dal UV, meaning UV shows
up later, but it's important and you got
to get it through your eye. Wearing
contacts, no bueno. Wearing glasses, no
bueno. That's why when you see me
outside, you see me like this or I'll
put it on when the UV is out. The other
big thing is this this uh system, the
way it works has that feedback loop. The
melatonin first made in your eye is
incredibly important. And there's one
other thing that's on that slide I want
to point out just because we've had a
recent problem. Don't you think it's
kind of funny that balanced am light
through this pituitary gland makes this
chemical here called beta endorphin?
Anybody know what that is? That is an
opiate. Do you know what mother nature's
telling us on this slide? that we are
designed to be addicted to the sun. So,
you know that we just had a recent uh
famous guy, sound garden guy who I used
to listen to when I was Chris Carwell.
He died and what did he die? What what
what did Kurt Cobain die of? Drug
addiction. What about Michael Jackson?
Drug addiction. What do you know about
musicians? They're always around
non-native EMF and they're always doing
concerts when at night under what kind
of light. Why do they have to use drugs?
because their body can't make
betaendorphine. So guess
what, Jimmyi Hendricks, Janice Joplain,
should I go
on? You are designed by mother nature to
be in the sun, contrary to what the
dermatologists and opthalmologists tell
you, and the proof is right
there. So remember I told you that
leptin is a fat hormone, right? Here's
what you may not know.
UVC, which we hardly ever get, only
penetrates the epidermis. But UVB light
stops at the epidermis. But look at UVA
gets to the fat area. Ain't that
interesting? How about infrared A? It
penetrates the body between 10 and 30
cm. So for you ladies in the audience,
what does that mean? When light hits you
here, it can go all the way and hit your
thoracic vertebrae. So, if you want to
know how to avoid osteoporosis, take
your freaking clothes off because that's
the key. And just so you guys know, as a
spine surgeon, and some of you may not
know this, I used to be a dentist. I
used to be an oral surgeon. The fastest
way to reverse period the same way. Get
light in. One of the things that people
talked about earlier, people don't know
this, enamel and den are both flororahor
proteins. That means they release
extreme low frequency UV light. Turns
out that vitamin K2 looks exactly like
co-enzyme Q10 in the in the
mitochondria. It absorbs both UV and IR
light. Guess what? Vitamin A absorbs
blue light. What does vitamin D come
from? UVB light. I just gave you three
frequencies of light that you're
designed to get. You want to know how
you you get good teeth? You know why I
told you guys last year that Weston A
Price, if he was alive today, be part of
my tribe and not yours? Every person he
looked at wasn't in a metabolic award
study like all the other idiots that
keep studying these things. They were
out in the
sunlight. Okay? And when we started
blocking light frequencies, that's when
we started seeing
problems.
Okay? So this story about leptin went on
and the key was right here. UV light
turns off the hormones in your skin.
That's the reason why now when you see
people come in and they get their
hormone levels checked, they're
flatlined. Why? Because the blue light
is constantly turned them on because all
of you are under it. And after a period
of time, the compound pharmacy in your
brain turns off. It doesn't work
anymore. That's exactly what adrenal
fatigue is. In other words, the system
can no longer turn light into the
chemicals that it needs. That's what
you're seeing here. And this cerebral
blood flow control is really important
because the people in the audience if
you want to know where dementia is
coming from and all the
neurodeeneration when you don't have
blood flow that means you don't have
oxygen we're talking about about
mitochondria. What's the terminal
electron receptor in mitochondria?
Oxygen. It's totally tied to the amount
of pferin hemoglobin that gets to your
brain. And we're going to talk about
that too because that story is linked.
What's the key? The vitrius collagen is
different. It slows light down. What
light is it interested in? In UVA light.
Why? What sits right here? The retinal
pigmentum epithelium that's loaded with
what? Melanin. That's why it's
pigmented. What is melanin? A UV
flororahore protein. It
absorbs that 3% of UVA that comes in and
makes what? Melatonin. What else?
Dopamine. Oh, there we go. So, there's
another way to raise your dopamine.
Looking at the sun, not only talking to
you nice people, but there's another way
to do it. AM sunlight is critically
important. It's the most important time
of the day. If you miss it, there's no
recapturing. Remember what Ruben said,
being
consistent. Ask him how consistent I am
about the sun in the morning. I am a
Nazi when it comes to
it. This is probably one of the coolest
slides I'm going to show you in my whole
talk. This is actually how the blood
system really works. There is so much
here that you need to look at. This is a
red blood cell. Red blood cells are
loaded with DHA. DHA absorbs this
sunlight. But the other big thing that's
in here is pfins. What do all pfins do?
They absorb all frequencies of UV light.
So basically your red blood cell is a
ferryboat for light. Now I want you to
look at this. everything in the arterial
wall. And Chris has done a really good
job in his blog and his podcast about
teaching people about this wall about
atherosclerosis. What it should look
like is all these negative charges in
there. But as blood flow goes this way,
that blood that RBC makes an
electromagnetic field around it. That
electromagnetic field is designed to
interact with these negative charges.
What happens to be up there? Nitric
oxide.
Nitric oxide is released and the vessel
gets bigger. We have one of my good
friends Josh who's a sleep specialist.
We talk about laminer flow, right Josh?
What happens when you have a negative
charge here and a negative charge on the
surface of the red blood cell to repel?
That's the reason why you don't get
blood clotting. And that's the reason
why we're going to go in an airplane,
you get blood clots. That's the reason
you get a PE. That's the reason why you
die when you're around a lot of blue
light non-native EMF because this
doesn't work. And you know, there was a
big talk in paleo circles about
cholesterol. Turns out if cholesterol is
not sulfated, anybody want to guess what
sulfates
cholesterol?
Sunlight.
Shocker. Huh? Sunlight is the key. And
what people don't realize that blood
plasma is 93% water. This is the
infrared A detector in your body. along
with this one. Although hemoglobin has a
sharp cut off at 600, it's not the main
one. This is really the the the UV
collector, but blood is the big thing in
terms of burying energy in it to ferry
to each part of our body in different
ways. Now, here's one of the key things.
This is a picture of the optic nerve.
This is the opdomic artery coming out.
And I want you to know something. This
is where your vision, the the um camera
vision is in the phobia. This is the
most sensitive part of the human retina
to photons. It pays attention to five
photons. Okay? But there's an
interesting thing here. You'll notice
that there's no blood vessels there. And
I told you that these photo receptors
have to regenerate. And I told you that
UVA and infrared A light are the key to
regenerating every photo receptor in
your
eye. So how does this happen if there's
no blood vessels there? I mean you know
that the RBCs are in these vessels,
right? And this is a florosine die
study. Well, we go back to this.
Remember I told you about that
shortwavelength light? That's UVA light
liberates nitric oxide. Not only does it
do it in your skin, it does it in your
eye. So it vasod dilates that poore
area. Okay. And it enhances the
circulation in that area but it reduces
energy production. So how does the photo
receptors make up the difference? Turns
out it's infrared a light. Do you know
what infrared A light does to CCO? CCO's
cytochrome C reductase. It makes ATP
without any food electrons.
I'll be
damned. You want to hear another crazy
story? A 70 kilogram man has a
requirement to make 85 kg of ATP a day.
You have to make more ATP than you
weigh. You get onethird of the electrons
from food. You get 2/3 from sunlight.
Okay, stop. What did I tell you before?
Sunlight's how many? How much infrared?
42%. So, let me ask you a question. I
don't see anybody naked in this room.
So, could it be that you have to eat
more to offset your lack of sunlight?
Could that be the
reason that maybe people are getting
fat? Because we have dermatologists and
people wearing clothes all the time and
never go out in the sun. These are all
the ideas that were coming up in my head
and you can see them right here. This is
the key. And when I started putting all
this together, I came up with the very
inconvenient truth from my medical
training that we have made a huge
mistake in obesity. It really does start
in the eye. And here's the picture that
proves it. The more disconnected you are
from the earth, as Ruben talked about
grounding, and the less connected you
are to the sun, the more food you have
to eat to make the ATP you need. Turns
out the more connected you are, you turn
out to be this guy. Now, let me be
clear. There's no food in front of them.
Do ukariats, humans who have huge
mitochondrial capacity in their heart
and their brain, need to eat? The answer
is yes. So, I'm not pounding on you food
guys too bad. There's still a need for
food and it's important. But what my
point is is it's less important when you
are connected with nature. And nature
has made you to be addicted to the sun.
That's why everybody in this room feels
good when they go to the beach. It's not
because you're on vacation. It's because
of beta endorphin. You get the same
effect when you exercise. Okay? You are
built by nature to work this
way.
So, was the story really a
fable? Well, guess what? That's when I
got to be really controversial on the
internet about seven years ago because I
found that it wasn't a fable. It's
actually
true. And the reason why is all these
photon receptors here get activated by
UVA and infrared a light subcutaneously
where humans keep their fat mass. And
that message has to go to your
hypothalamus and tell your hypothalammus
truly what the energy status is in your
body. That's related to the sunlight you
get, not the food you
eat. Don't believe it? Take a look at
the sun here in the skin. Like I said,
this may be next year's talk. Visible
light come through here. Turns on all
these systems. These are all the body
systems. You'll see melatonin here and
you'll see all the the D hormones here
and all the sun hormones. When Ruben
said the word allostasis or
homeostasis, this is the slide that I
had in mind. It is absolutely critical
to understand if you have any imbalance
in the system, that is where the organ
system goes south. That is how it works.
If you get out of the way, the anatomy
is controlled by your nuclear
DNA. It is built for perfection if
you're in the right stimulus. None of
you are in the right stimulus. No food
can fix your problem when this is an
error. That's the inconvenient truth.
Now, did I believe it in the beginning?
No. I told people last year when I was
here when I did the leptin prescription
biohack on myself, I went into it not
believing a damn thing. And then when I
did it, I lost 77 pounds in three months
and 135 in 11.
My wife used to come in and watch me in
the shower and the weight would come off
and she's like, I don't understand how
this works. At three months, I added
cold to the mix for a different reason.
And that's not really part of this talk,
but it is part of the story. But cold
accelerated the loss. The reason why it
uncoupled my Khaplletype more. I
released more heat from my mitochondria,
shrunk the water around my mitochondria,
brought the respiratory proteins closer
together, and how to eat less
food. That's how it works. Okay? Once
you become a mitochondriac, once you
understand the physics of organisms,
your understanding of how things really
work in us
change. You don't have to believe it.
I'm cool with that. But here was my
problem. I'm from New York City. That's
my hometown.
Take a look. That's at night time.
That's 11 o'clock at
night. That's what I do for a living. I
put together spines that are dislocated
after car wrecks. And guess when that
happens? Not at 2:00 in the
afternoon.
Okay, that was my problem. I realized
immediately that my job and my lifestyle
were bringing me into an area. And for
those of you who don't know,
neurosurgery residency, seven years of
doing this, I've been doing this for 27
years. Guess what I did? I ruined my
mitochondria. Completely ruined them.
So, what have I been doing the last 12?
I'm a
mitochondriac. Everything I can possibly
do to fix mitochondria is the key. This
is for
you. This is for you to realize. This is
the big thing. Last year when Dave
invited me here, Magda Havis was sitting
in the front row and I made a
controversial statement then and I'll
say it again. Blue light is the biggest
worry, biggest non-native EMF we have.
There's others, but right now it's still
blue light. Do I think in the next 18
months it's going to change to 5G? I do.
Again, a talk for another day, but you
need to understand this. Perins are the
retinal receptors. This is we're coming
close to the end. But this is really
important for you to understand. You
know that there's this huge disease out
now. Number one cause of blindness in
North America is AMD. This is the optic
nerve. There's those vessels I showed
you before. There's the phobia. That is
a hole in the phobia. That's what AMD
looks like under a microscope. And AMD,
for those of you who don't know, is
acute macular degeneration. It makes you
go
blind. Okay. What's changed? Cathode ray
TVs now LEDs. In case you don't know,
LEDs right there, folks. Does that look
like the sun? No. Not even close. I
never saw a case of A&amp;D when I was a
resident. I finished my residency in
1999. I want you to think about that for
a minute. We got a couple other doctors
here that they could probably tell you
what they've seen. The key is you have
to have balanced AM light. AM light is
absolutely critical. Here's the point.
Look at these spectrums. You don't even
have to know the numbers. Does any of
these look correct? This is what you're
optimized to. 4.5 billion years of
evolutionary history right there. Take a
look. And we have changed it since
1879. And we think there's
no biologic toll.
Ha. That is what we're getting. You know
what I consider Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's and Huntington's? That's it
right
there. That's it. That's where we're
headed. We're headed off a cliff and we
don't realize it. And it's so obvious
when you see the mitochondrial
diseases. So, what happened in the last
12 years? See, 12 years ago, Jack was
crazy. Seven years ago, the paleo guys
told me I was crazy. The food guys still
think I'm
crazy. So, what showed up in the in the
literature? Blue light affects the
circadian oscillator in the eye. Okay.
Oh, color entrains the mamlian clock.
Oh, Jack's getting less crazy. Oh, look
at this one. LED lights have links to
the eye.
Shocker. Look at that. Artificial light
that's
made causes a problem with sleep. Can
you imagine
that? Here's the big one. This is the
one I told you about. Betendorphine. you
are designed and this chemical when it
comes through the central retinal
pathways pomsy is made in your brain by
light as it slows down look at some of
the older hormones
act think that's important in an adrenal
stress index damn straight that's where
cortisol comes from that's why cortisol
and melatonin are the opposite sides of
that spectrum that is a story about
light everything is a story about light
this is this is really counterintuitive
for people to hear the first time until
you see it laid out. When I told the
ophthalmologist this and gave this talk,
they were floored. I pulled it from
their own literature. A stupid
neurosurgeon went into their ancient
literature and found what was there.
What did I tell you about innovation?
You take things that are known and
connect them in ways people haven't
thought. I didn't discover I'm
just really curious. That book changed
my life.
Here's the big controller. Melatonin.
You can take a look here. Produced by
the photo receptors and other retinal
cell types.
RP. Guess what it does? It regenerates
every single cell in the retina.
Melatonin is first made in your eye.
Stop believing the nonsense about the
pineal gland. Guess when that comes on?
It comes on with Matty slide. the pfins.
When light signals, as um you heard in
the other talk about light, when light
gets changed to electromechanical wave,
the waveform, the solatons, the acoustic
phonons in the blood plasma send that
signal to the superior cervical ganglen,
that's what tells your pineal gland,
it's
nighttime. The vibrations made by pfins
from your red blood cells is what gives
the signal for melatonin to be released
in the pineal. That process is called
molecular resonance transfer. Meaning
there doesn't need to be a direct
connection. The connection is via light
and through solaton waves in your
vessels. And that's the
key.
So the anterior retina to your
hypothalammus is a central
semiconductive circuit. This goes all
the way back to Albert St. Georgie in
1941. He's the first one that mentioned
it. He won a Nobel Prize. Everybody
laughed at him when he said it. Turned
out a found it. Hol found it. Everything
in your anterior chamber is a
semiconductor. What does that mean? It
absorbs light and it remits light. And
inside that light, that signaling tells
the brain exactly what to do. That's the
key. This hormone, everybody now knows
in food circles, is really important,
but nobody still knows why. Well, it
turns out it absorbs all this light.
That's what leptin resistance
functionally is. You can have leptin,
but if you can't do anything with the
signal, you're leptin resistant. And
leptin resistance is what causes
obesity. We now know all the effects of
blue light. This is the artificial light
that we're around here. Causes all these
things. Take a look at them. Every
single one. Notice that obesity is on
the list. See, Jack's no longer crazy
because now it's well known in the
literature. It's associated with
obesity. But I got a big one coming for
you. That semiconductive pathway. This
is the keys. Red's got to balance blue.
Neuropsin abor uh absorbing the UVA,
then melanopsin at night time. But Ruben
told you you must block blue when the
sun sets. You must get UVA and infrared
A light through your eye and on your
skin every morning. If you don't do it,
you
fail. That is your practice. You must do
it. And if you don't, then you're going
to suffer the consequences.
Don't believe me? AM light is different.
Notice the difference here. See the the
color temperature of sunlight when it
rises is 1,800 Kelvin. Look at what it's
at sunset. Notice this blue scale. It's
mostly red, but the light is bluer as
the day goes on. Why? That's when
melanopsin works because what does it
pay attention to? 435 to 465 light,
which is blue. That's what it's the
signal is. And you want to know the key
right here at noon. 5750 Kelvin. Do you
know what your computer screen is at
home
24/7? 5750 Kelvin. Some of the newer
screens 6,500. So every time you turn
the damn computer on, it's noon to your
brain.
For those of you who don't believe me,
all the kids that have cell phones,
seven, five years ago, I did a hack in
my office on on a whole bunch of kids
Matt's age on, and this is a long time
ago, 150 times per day, they look at a
cell
phone. 150 times per day, that means
they're getting a signal that it's noon.
For those of you who don't think this is
a big deal, when I mentioned this to the
paleo guys about seven years ago, they
laughed. The astronauts that go in the
International Space Center see the
sunrise and sunset 19 times in a day.
You want to know why they all come back
and they age
faster? What happens if you're doing it
150 times a day and you're not going in
the sun? Do you think that you can get
kids at 25 years old that come in with
corateed dissections because they have
corateed disease? Why are all these
diseases seemingly coming out of
nowhere? Guess why?
Light. How many times have I mentioned
food? This is the key, folks. Blue
light, blue light that's man-made is
absolutely destroying us. And it affects
the way your mitochondria can handle
electrons from food.
That's where the food story comes in
because the more those respiratory
proteins get stretched out, it doesn't
matter what you eat, you're going to
have a problem. You have to shrink those
respiratory proteins closer together so
they can do what they
do. Now, this is a really interesting
paper. There's two types of blue light
hazard that I want to go over with you.
One is the rodopsin mediated and then
there's a lip fusin mediated. Both of
these are important, but this one I want
to highlight because I know Chris has
spoke here. Chris wrote an excellent
paper for western a price. I don't
remember how long ago it was, but he
talked about vitamin A, its link to NEI
to options and also to obesity. This is
the path where it goes. When blue light
comes in, what happens? Uh retinol
separates from the receptor, the opsin
protein that has to be recycled. What
happens when there's too much high
energy blue? It cannot recycle fast
enough. So, vitamin A drops. That's why
vitamin A is always linked, you know,
not causal, but it's always linked at
some way, a correlative link to obesity
and most mitochondrial diseases. That's
the key. And that's the take-home that I
want you guys to understand. And the
reason why blue is an issue, vitamin A
is yellow in color. It's a complimentary
color. So, what does that mean? That
means that blue light in AM sunlight is
incredibly important to your vitamin A
cycle.
That's the reason why it's important
because blue light's what makes vitamin
A in your
brain. Here's the action spectrum for
the blue light hazard. You can see
starts at 400, but the peak is 435 to
465. That's why all my glasses block
that. That's the reason why I think Dave
is a great guy. The fact that two years
in a row he bought everybody the blue
blocking glasses. The sad part is
looking out in this audience, not too
many of you are wearing them. They're
all gone.
Okay, what's the key? Cones regenerate
at night in darkness. AMD is now
explosive. It's a blue light disease.
Cataracts are also explosive. The rods
regenerate in daytime. Believe it or
not, most of the opalmologists didn't
even know the stuff that was on this
slide. The key is AM UVA light due to
molecular resonance in terms of how it's
made and how it works. and AM light. The
key critical parts is UVA and infrared A
light to regenerate the photo receptors.
Everybody knows that UVB makes vitamin
D. Not too many people know about the
effect of UVA and nitric oxide both in
the mitochondria and actually on your
skin. It's important. This also reduces
blood pressure. Okay. Visible light is
mostly eye camera function. That's what
most people focus in on and that's why
we know a lot about it. But here's the
big one. What's the the photo receptor
regeneration? I told you from that
retinal picture before that it's really
far apart. How does this happen? Well, I
told you that red light penetrates deep
into the fat layer where the arterials
are. So, that means it gets down to
where the arteries are. And this one is
not important. This is the biz effect,
the two loops that I told you about. But
here's the crazy thing. When you look at
this, light comes through the eye. You
get the slow down effect. Do you know
that the retina is backwards? When you
look at the retina in an anatomy book,
here's the optic nerve. Here's the back
of the eyeball. Why did God or
evolution, whoever you choose to believe
in, build it like this? Because it
needed light to slow down
more to do what it needs to do. And
guess what? When we have these diseases,
you know where retinal detachments
occur? Between the photo receptor here
and the RP. That's where the blood goes.
And that's why you become blind because
all these things atrophy. All the
receptors, the photo receptors atrophy
because there's no UVA and no infrared A
light. So think about that the next time
you put your contacts in or your
sunglasses. Again, back to this one.
Melatonin is what regenerates every
photo receptor in your eye. And you only
make it when you have UVA and infrared A
light. There's the hole again.
There's the OCT. You can see how thin
the phobia is. The blood vessels are
down here. How does it happen? There's
the picture again. Take a look. This is
a picture I showed you last year. This
is a chloroplast. That's
hemoglobin. This is photosynthesis.
They're exactly the same. What's the
difference? Iron's in the middle.
Magnesium. Anybody want to take a guess
what the difference is on a periodic
table between magnesium and iron? I'll
save you.
electrons 26 12. You know why? Plants
aren't complex. They're planted into the
ground to the magnetic field. They're
canopies in the in the sun. You're
designed to move across the magnetic
field. So, you need more electrons. By
whose law? Einstein's law. It's called
the photoelectric effect. Light can only
interact with electrons. When you're
complex, you need an atom in the middle
that can absorb more light. Guess why
hemoglobin absorbs 250 to 600 and cuts
off that right
there. Okay, that becomes extremely
important right here in your eye. Light
enhanced diffusion, infrared lay light
and this is what it's meant to be.
There's the retinal v vessel and there's
the photo receptor. When light hits the
distance and you saw the distance in
that picture I show you is really big
between the v vessels and the phobia.
What bridges the gap? Water.
Water is the perfect red light
chromophore. It absorbs all the way up
to 300
nmters. So what happens when the light
comes on? When that am sunlight comes
on, it changes the density of water and
makes a fluid wave go there. So there
you got uh um mechic's work from this
morning coming right to you. That is a
solaton type of soundwave that crashes
in to the photo receptor to help
regenerate it. There's where light
becomes a sound wave, what we call an
electromechanical disruption, and it
goes further. So what's the big
difference? The velocity speed is what
changes in the photo
receptors. The backward retina told you
before, it slows light down. You need
the light to slow down. Everybody thinks
the speed of light is constant. It is.
By whose law, Josh, does that change?
Isn't that Fermat's law? that it changes
when the medium changes. See, we're not
talking about the speed of light in
space. Now, we're talking about the
speed of light in your tissues. It
follows a guy's principle called
Fermat's law. And Richard Feinman made
that really important when he discussed
quantum electronamic theory. I don't
expect any of you to know it. The reason
why it's important, it's the reason why
your retina is ass
backwards. Again, the majority of
sunlight that falls to Earth is infrared
A. What did Ruben tell you? Why we got
so interested in the quantlet of using
photobomb modulation? You now know it's
one of the ways that you can regenerate
the photo receptors of your eye. What if
I told you that we could make the third
eye in your radial artery by delivering
infrared a light because you know it
penetrates right in because I showed you
a picture, didn't I? So, if you're an
idiot and keep using blue light, can you
work around this in a certain way? The
answer is you can. Turns out the retina
is the key to getting energy into all
the growth and metabolism pathways in
your body. I know that most of you don't
believe that, but I got a little bit
more coming for you. We're back to the
slide. Energy and mass, they're both the
same. The only thing that's different is
the environment they come
in. This was a famous paleo
book, but take a look here. It all
starts with light through the eye. This
is the biggest false narrative on the
planet. And
99.9% of people believe it. Now you know
why I
don't. Now, anytime you open a book,
take a look what it says. Yes, circadian
rhythms do actually affect
everything. Take a look at that one. The
eye is a metronome for the body. These
are all published. Okay, take a look at
that one. It's all there. See, 12 years
ago, 5 years ago, seven years ago,
nobody believed it because they needed
to have sites and research. You know
why? Because a scientist relies on that.
But you know what a quantum clinician
relies on? That's why me and Ruben have
become good friends. We're really
curious and we're observers of reality.
Meaning that we look very carefully.
Observations of the first key step in
any science project or experiment. So I
come back to this one. You learned about
this one last year. Then you learned
about this one. The mitochondria makes
the sea inside of you that also captures
light. Okay? Okay. And the light that it
captures according to Pollock's
work, UV and IR, it covers the entire
solar spectrum. That's why life is the
key. And why I told you before that
around every protein, you have a
hydration shell. That hydration shell,
the reason why zinc and copper are
important in enzyme function because
when light hits it, it makes a redux
pile. The redux pile makes those free
electrons. Those electrons change the
density of water. That's actually what
makes the protein work. It's not the
mineral. The mineral affects water and
water is what drives the process. If you
don't believe me, there's studies out
there that now show that water around
the ATPAS makes the ATPA 100%
efficient in red light. Find me any
other engine on this planet that can do
that. And you know what they also found?
When they remove the water from it, it's
not efficient at all. So, what's really
important, folks? The these are all
things designed to make you realize
things that you've missed. And just so
you know, this happened 650 million
years ago. We covered this last year.
This happened at the Cambrian explosion
when all complex life came. Guess what
happens? Energy flow through plants and
animals is through chloroplast and
mitochondria that both came from a
symbiotic bacteria. And we change this
bacteria. It only works with oxygen
versus the other uh procarats that are
on the planet. But what does it absorb?
This absorbs UV light all the way up to
650. This one is optimized for blue
green light. The reason why they're
coupled is through this chemistry,
photochemistry. And this is the key.
Your future is totally tied. This is
Doug Wallace 101. When you become a
mitochondri, you realize your six sense
is your mitochondria. pays attention to
every
electromagnetic wave that's present in
your environment and it makes the
adjustments. You heard from Ruben and
some of the other speakers about Fritz
Pop. Every cell in your body at night is
designed to release extreme
low-frequency UV light. It's no longer
conjecture. It's now been proven. So,
don't you think that would be important
when melatonin gets released at night?
What did I tell you about UV light and
melatonin? Yeah, we can do some pretty
amazing things when you look into it.
There's the proof. It's out there.
Roland Van Wick's book, What Ruben
showed you, that's another book that was
on my banner
earlier. Low dopamine. And here's the
key. This is we're getting very close to
the end. I said to you in the beginning,
do you believe that obesity could be
caused in the eye? And I told you in the
beginning that most of you wouldn't
believe me till I got close to the end.
Well, what happens when you have a low
dopamine state? The choride in the back
where the RP is, first thing that
happens when it loses light energy, it
gets thicker. I want you to notice what
that says.
2017, the first change that occurs in
childhood obesity is thickening of the
koid plexus in the human retina.
So, how freaking crazy am I
now? Tell
me, is it that maybe we've not
understood light, water, and magnetism
to the degree that we need to? My advice
to you is I think that's true. And you
probably now know why. I have a big
disdain for a lot of modern research
because it's all manufactured and it's
not tied to observations. Just so you
know, every nutrition study ever done on
this planet has been done under blue
light. So you still believe everything
you believe about food. Now you see why
I had the perspective I had seven years
ago. I don't believe a damn thing in the
food literature. But you know who I do
believe? I believe Western A. Price. You
know who else I believe? I believe
Albert Schwitzer. You know why? They
observed humans in their natural
environment. That was the key to their
observations. And to this day, this
foundation still doesn't really
appreciate what that brilliant dentist
really found. So maybe it's going to
take another dentist to wake you
up. Here's the blue light guidelines.
You can see right around 1, 4:35 to 465.
So when you leave here, if you believe
anything what I told you, you go to the
eye eye doctor and get glasses to block
that at night. Every morning you get up
and you make like the Sphinx. That's my
practical takehomes from the whole talk.
That's all you need to do. See, the
hippo and the lion doesn't need to learn
how to eat. Neither do you. And the only
reason you believe you need to learn how
to eat is because you have this thing in
your head that allows you to break the
laws of
nature. That is the key problem. Start
there and innovate your way back. And I
think you'll surprise
yourself. You have this. It's well
known. All the things that are tied to
blue light, they're out there. You don't
need me to tell you. This is what
happens when you have too much blue
light. Your pupil gets big and you
die. Okay? And you usually die first of
diseases that cause the respiratory
proteins to shrink out. That's Doug
Wallace 101. Why? Electron chain
transport slows. What happens when we
give a human cyanide? Same thing except
they die right away. Well, all that's
changed here is the time
scale.
Here's the problem, folks. I want you to
read it and weep. I know Dave's been on
my case. Can I live in Vermont really
good? Dave, you can because you're doing
good. But if you got AMD, dementia, and
this and that, you've got to move to a
higher quantum yield environment and get
that AM light to save your ass through
your eye and your skin. And you need to
get naked as much more naked as you can
get.
So, how does this all work? Doug
Wallace, he's at the Children's Hospital
Philadelphia. He's the world expert
mitochondriac as far as I'm concerned.
Mattie actually went down and met him.
But what happens? The solar EMF comes
in, releases calcium, goes through
nitric oxide, and then you make these
free radicals. This is the entire
pathway of how all EMF works. The
problem is we're optimized to solar EMF,
not non-native EMF. When that happens,
it changes the electron spins of these
free radicals and they do things
differently than they normally would do
in a cell. And that's why we get sick
from the use of cell phones and
electromagnetic devices, which is what I
told Mag to have this last year. Why you
would never catch me using a pulse
electromagnetic anything around my
body. Now, Doug Wallace's lab, I just
want you to pay attention right here.
The position, the geometry of what's
present in a mitochondria is 100% tied
to energy generation. So what did I say
to you
earlier? The respiratory proteins have
to come closer together. When that
happens, these IMJs spike up and guess
what happens? You make a ton of
energy. You know what happens when you
make a lot of energy in mitochondria?
The nuclear genome gets turned off. In
other words, it never gets turned on.
You can't get cancer. So, am I going as
far to say that cancer is an epigenetic
disease of
light? Yep. That's what I'm
saying. Ruben showed you this so I don't
have to show it to you. This is Michael
Crawford's paper.
Huge. You got to focus on the eye clock,
not the
camera. My brother from another mother.
That's why I wanted I I really wanted
him to come here to talk about this. So
I decided to morph my talk so that you
would get a little bit of Alexander and
a little bit of Jack because in my
opinion he's leading the way and I'm
following behind putting everything
together and it's incredibly important
for you guys to understand it. And I've
been clear to show you this picture. So,
I had a lot of ladies come up to me last
year and say, "Look, your talk kind of
blew me away." And I was really
interested in it, but how's it going to
work for me? I'm postmenopausal. I'm
getting fat. My body's changing. So, I
happened to sleep with a
skeptic. Her name is Sandry
Cruz. That was my wife. Same time you
saw me. I want you to notice thing. Pink
and sunglasses. Okay? For seven years,
my wife didn't listen to me. I changed
my son and I changed me. I changed other
members in our family. She didn't
believe me until one day when I went and
locked the had the locksmith come over,
lock her out of the house with my
daughter and said, "Until you get the
message, I'm done." Now, let me tell you
why I did it. This is the important
part. I said, "Sandy, if you want to
kill yourself, I'm cool with it. You
know what I'm not cool with? My daughter
has your mitochondrial DNA."
And she at the time was 12 years old. I
said, "If you don't fix this, she's
going to have a big problem." You want
to know why me and
Ruben? Why we're
friends? He's got the same
issue. It took me doing this to my wife
for her to get the message. I wasn't
trying to force her to do something. I
was trying to tell her it was the key to
fixing my
daughter. So, thing I'm most proud
of, I got my wife to take her damn
clothes
off. I got my wife to take her
sunglasses
off. And I'm happy to tell you that is
my wife at 58 years old, two weeks ago
with her same friend. That is my wife
one week ago at a horse show. Notice
She is in better shape than she was in
high school. So when a post-menopausal
western a price granola eating woman
comes up to me and tells me that it's
not
possible, I'm telling you, you're not
getting naked enough and you're not
getting out in the sun enough. And just
so you guys know, I moved my entire
family uh five years ago from a northern
latitude to the 28th latitude. Why?
because it was important for my family.
Why? Because I understood how light
works. And I know nobody in this room
really understands it that well. But my
goal is to make sure that you all do.
Even if you heard something that's five
or 10% say, "Hey, that's interesting."
I've done my
job. That's what I want you to I want
you to see what is possible. Like last
night in Unbound, the part of the story
you didn't hear, Sarah's sitting there,
and I'm going to bring it up. Sarah has
a disease called electromagnetic
hypersensitivity. Most people in the
states think it's And I told
her when I first met her in London
during the biohack event when me and
Ruben went that if she came to Mexico at
the 20th latitude and went into the
cenotes and spent time in the jungle, I
thought in three or four weeks that
would go away. You know what I told her?
main problem was the UK's uh power grid
oscillates at 50 hertz. You know what
Wallace has found in his research? Every
mitochondria that burns fat. Fat burning
is not a function of food. It's a
function of the oscillation that's made
oscillates at 100 hertz. 50 Hz is the
second harmonic of 100. I said, Sarah,
my belief is that if you come to the the
right place, we can fix this. Sarah
showed up three days in the jungle. Her
symptoms went away. Correct, Sarah or
not? Three freaking days. She's had this
for 12 years in the
UK. That is what a mitochondriac gets.
Would I have ever come up with something
like that 12 years ago? No. I was an
I was Julian Battle. I would
never have questioned these things back
then. But now, not a day goes by that I
don't learn something from somebody. And
Sarah proves something to me. I thought
it would take three or four weeks. The
fact that it happened in three days,
that's really good news for all of you
non-believer skeptics here because you
know what that means? Four to seven days
when you live in Vermont going down to
Plyel Carman gives you six weeks of
benefit. So, if you make three or four
trips in the
wintertime, guess what? You actually may
have a solution, but you have to expose
yourself. You You have to get past all
the society and cultural things that we
do. And it's our biggest thing. You
heard what I said in the
movie. Do the stuff that scares the
out of you. This scared me. You heard
Ruben say a little while ago
that he didn't want to talk to people
about doing shamanism. I mean, Josh will
tell you, we've talked as an MD to tell
the world what I'm telling you guys. Do
you know how counterintuitive this is to
the medical profession? But guess what?
It's really hard to argue with E=
MC². It's really hard to argue with the
1922 Nobel Prize. It's called the
photoelectric effect. And you know, my
favorite part is when I talked to the
opthalmologist a couple months ago, one
of them raised the question, well, this
is all well and good, but we need
randomized control clinical trials. I
said, son, you're not
understanding. The laws of nature are
not subject to man's beliefs. They're
not subject to man's
experiments. It's a pretty powerful
statement. And you may think it's I
should say obnoxious. I don't think it
is based on what I showed you. Why?
Because now there's researchers out
there showing you that it really does
begin in the eye and in the skin. That's
how leptin and all this is linked. And
the cool thing about this, my
prescription doesn't cost you a godamn
thing. And what did Einstein say? In the
end, the answer will always be pretty
simple. So what's my takeaway?
Make like the Sphinx. Ground to the
ground. Take as much clothes off you
can. For the ladies in the audience,
there's a company in the UK. Talk to I'm
putting this on Sarah. They're called
KIKI. They make bathing suits that allow
UV penetration so you can be naked
without naked. Okay? And I can tell you
coming from the south, it's my biggest
problem. I think up here in Vermont, you
guys are a little bit more hippie-ish
and weird. So, it probably would work,
but you guys don't have great quantum
yield here. So the reason I mention it
to you is whatever you can do to help
yourself an infrared a light can work
many different ways. We came up with the
quantlet but you can use sauna you you
know you can use the geothermal units
like uh that you see in Iceland. That's
the reason why the finish and the
Scandinavians always use heated pools.
Why? Because they're getting part of the
sunlight they don't get through heating.
Remember heat is infrared light and we
don't realize it.
Okay, I'm
done. Anybody have any questions?
[Applause]
Talk in the microphone. So that
way it Okay, thank you. So, not only do
we have to deal with the latitude in
Vermont, but it's also cloudy a lot. So,
how does that affect our morning
routine? It's a great question. Um,
well, I'm going to let me finish up with
her. Uh, clouds, when it's clouds like
this, you still get 31% of the light
through. So, the answer is it's still
there. Here's the question. Number one
thing in mitochondriac, what I teach
people, tell me what your hletype is,
what your snips are, and I'll tell you
if Vermont's doable for you. Cuz guess
what? But it's tied to your latitude.
Well, it's simple to do. You It now
costs $69 to get that information. 23
and me. All you need to know is your
hletype. I need to know what your your
677 1298, your VDR receptor, your
CBS. That's it. You put that on my form
and I'll tell you exactly what you're
optimized to. Swedish. Well, that's
good. I'm Swedish and Irish, too. But
you know what the key is? If you have
any mitochondrial diseases and you're
trying to reverse them, Vermont may not
be your place. But guess what? If you
don't, I told you I was able to fix my
obesity with a simple and I stayed at
the same latitude I at the time it was
at Nashville when I did it. But why did
I relocate further south? Because I was
trying to fix my wife and my daughter.
And you see
five years. What were those? Uh 677
1298. Just so you guys know, these are
all tied to the COOMT gene and also
dopamine and melatonin. That's the
reason why they're all important because
you know you hear all this BS from the
functional medicine docs about
methylation. Guess what? How you get
methylation right?
Sunlight. Surprise, Nathan.
You're going to talk. All right. Go
ahead.
So, I need some cataract surgeries. What
am I going to tell an opthalmologist?
I got two members going through this
right now. This you're in a tough spot.
So, uh, one of the people is going to
have custom lenses made in Germany and
going to have them implanted. The
opthalmologist was okay with it. So, I
would tell you the the key with lens
repair, and this is where the the
Japanese opthalmologists that I I told
you I spoke to, they're way ahead of us.
Right now, the standard lenses in the
United States all block UV. That means
both A and B, and they block 50% of the
blue. So, what I would I I I don't
recommend these things because I'm not
an eye doctor, but if I had to have the
surgery, I would have no lens with no UV
protection at all, and I would only
block about 10% of the blue. The reason
why I think it's easier to block the
blue with glasses, you know, at night,
and it's it's just one of the things you
have to do. But the the key thing is the
UVA that gets through, that 3% that gets
through that I showed you how incredibly
important it is for melatonin. Now, I
will tell you some good news. I've got
some biohackers on my form who have had
uh cataract surgery, and one of the
things that I found I it took me a while
to figure it out that you still get UV
light assimilation through your scara of
your eyes. So, if you actually do a lot
of sungazing, and how I do sungazing is
different than everybody else. I don't
look directly at the sun about 15
degrees off angle, but I'll sit there 15
or 20 minutes. It actually helps. Here's
the other key thing, and Ruben's
probably going to kill me when I say
this, but I've got a couple ongoing
hacks with people with your problem.
We're using the Quantlet because what
the Quantlet does, it puts photobomb
modulation, red light through your
artery. Remember I told you the picture
in there about regenerating the photo
receptors. I have found that if you
absorb more infrared a light, you can
absorb more UV light. So when you have a
problem like this, it becomes a very
interesting situation. Now the problem
is this is like at the edge of science
and that's what my that's what a
mitochondriac or a biohacker is all
about. We hack these things. Ruben hates
when I talk about these things. So I
would tell you hybrid tanning is a way
and the best way to do it. Uh Alexander
W and I would I'm going to put Ruben on
this. Ruben um Ruben's got a good friend
and he sits on our board of Quantum
Dynamics. Uh James Carol, he makes Thor
industry beds. These are basically like
tanning beds that are nothing but red
light. They give photobomb modulation.
If you can find a practitioner or say as
a community here in Vermont that you
could get a a booth up here because they
cost about 40 grand. But if you guys go
and pay like a hundred or 200 bucks a
pop, then when you go outside, if you
have a poor light environment, which you
guys do have here, when it's present,
you'll absorb even more. So that is a
way to biohack
Vermont. Okay. I I think it's a great
idea and I I hope somebody in the
audience says, "Shit, why couldn't we do
that? Why couldn't we pull our money
together and buy a unit? Maybe talk to
Tree. Maybe Tree can keep it here at the
farm and everybody can come here and get
their 15 minutes, you know, do it three
times a week. Why not? I mean, let's
face it, it's a farm and we're animals.
The problem is most of the people in
this room are zoo animals. I'm trying to
turn you back into being a real animal.
And I think that's I think that's
something that Western A Price actually
would be behind, too.
All right. Question. Hours hours of
daily. Uh, same same thing with her
question. Her question I need to know
data. I don't if I don't know the D.
See, remember what I showed you in
Wallace's video with the geography. Your
mitochondrial hletype is tied to your
latitude. That's why mitochondrial
changed. Why? Because when you live at
the equator, you're L0, meaning you
don't have to uncouple at all because
you need all your energy to run away
from things. The further you are away,
that's when you start to have more
problems. And guess what? Most people in
the United States come from northern
European ancestry. So we all uncouple.
But one of the things that I do want to
tell you because a lot of people have
talked about it today. But I want to
tell you the real reason it works. CT,
you heard Ruben say, is a magnetic
effect. And it is because it affects
water. But I'm going to tell you the
number one effect that nobody ever talks
about. Cold stress and heat stress
release a protein in you called
HSP70. HSP70 is called heat shock
protein 70. And you know what it does?
Its main function, it keeps the 3D
architecture of proteins perfect. What?
Remember the slide I showed you about um
McKisick's lecture about how light hits
the protein and makes a wave. It makes a
solaton. Well, the reason why cold also
really works, it keeps your proteins
that are misfolded or bent, which is all
the neurodeenerative disorders in better
shape. So CT from neurodeenerative
disorders h you. So if you want to keep
this a human brain instead of a
chimpanzeee brain CT and this is
something that everybody in Vermont can
do cuz Lake Champlain is cold as
and it just so you know the target
temperature is between 50 and 55
degrees. And I personally think it's
okay. And if you saw the slide that I
showed for Nathan and Matt, that
superior cervical connector, when that
goes there, that sends a signal straight
to your brain, you can really change and
affect the proteins in your body so that
when you get little UV, like we talked
about, even if it's
31%. It's still helping you because
guess what? These proteins are optimized
to absorb every last little bit of light
if you're there. And that's why Rudman
told you guys, if you wear glasses and
you're outside, this is what I do. When
I'm walking on the streets in New York,
the glasses down. When I need to see, I
go like that. That's how I do it. You
need that stimulus through your eye.
Your eye is the key to your
kingdom. What about protecting the eye
from the sun? I mean, all my life I've
uh been outside in the the snow and the
and sailing and lots of reflection.
Can't the eye be damaged without
protection? Absolutely. You heard what
Ruben said. If you go on the equator for
12 hours a day and you're an Irish dude
from Sweden, you Yeah, but what did I
just tell you earlier? The more infrared
A light you get, it protects you from UV
damage. Remember the the slide that I
showed you about histadine and uranic
acid? It actually works. The U the IRA
light protects you from UV. But I still
agree with you. If you have an albido
effect from the snow, there is there is
a limit to too much. But here's the
problem. We live in a world where it's
too little. So, do I want to spend a lot
of time telling you about too much? If I
was giving this Western A price Price
talk in Ecuador,
okay, then we need to talk. You're in
Vermont. I think it's impossible. Even
with snow from the albido effect, I
don't think you can get enough. Why?
because you're now a zoo animal that
lives in a non-native EMF blue lit
world. Your world is lit up by an alien
sun. And you have to realize that
technology brings us inside, not
outside. And that is the key. Just think
about you. There's a lot of older people
here that probably have kids. I want you
to think about when you and I were kids,
what do we do? We went outside. We rode
our bikes. We played baseball. What do
the kids do now? They're inside texting,
playing video games. And I told you
that's
5750 Kelvin light. That is blue light
destroying DHA ruining their eye clock,
ruining their retina. And you want to
know why these people are getting
diabetes at at 40, at 30? And it's
already been shown type 1 and type two
diabetes are exacerbated by blue light.
Guess who told you that in my talk?
Fritz Holwitch. When he took the damn
cataracts out, their energy went up.
What do diabetics always get? cataracts.
Now, you know why? Because they're
lacking sunlight and they get too much
blue. And I personally believe diabetes
isn't a disease of carbohydrates. It's a
blue light toxic disease. That's what I
believe.
Anybody else has a question? Come up
here so I can give you the microphone
because we need the
Oh, the benefit. That's a quantum
mechanical answer. It's very simple. the
closer two things are together like
closer two protons are together for
example if you believe the the fusion
model in the sun which I will tell you I
don't um anytime the protons come closer
together it makes energy transfer much
easier so the respiratory proteins need
to come closer together to transfer
electrons because what is the electron
transport train functionally do it fries
electrons from cytochrome one all the
way to the ATP eventually to oxygen and
oxygen accepts that terminal electron.
When it gets to oxygen, it's at its
ground state. When it comes in
cytochrome 1, and I didn't get into all
these details, but cytochrome one is the
NAD positive NADH couple, it is a floror
protein. It absorbs 340 nanometer light.
So, if you want to know why electrons
from carbohydrates always enter at
cytochrome 1, now you know why. Because
carbohydrates grow when long light
cycles when what kind of lights out?
Purple light. So, if you live in Vermont
and you eat a banana on December 31st,
as I famously said at a big paleo
conference, you're a freaking idiot.
Now, you know why. Because what does it
do? It spreads the respiratory proteins
out when you do that. When you're not
getting the stimulus of what through
your eye when you do it? UVA light.
Because it's not present in Vermont on
December 31st. Got it? That that is how
food electrons are affected by light
stimulus through your eye and your skin.
That's the circadian mismatch. That's
what everything that programs your
mitochondria to work is sunlight. And
that's what we're missing in the food
world. And I don't have anything against
food growers. I really truly don't. They
don't understand how mitochondria work.
That's the problem. And guess what?
Everybody knows there's not an argument
from anybody that mitochondria are the
key. They make all the energy in the
cell. But the problem is when you don't
understand the process in
detail, this is why you always hear me
say on my site, a halftruth always leads
to a full lie. That's the reason why you
have guys out there like Jimmy Moore who
keep, you know, using social media and
he keeps getting bigger and bigger and
bigger and he advocates ketosis for
everybody. Is it working? What's he
missing? You know, when you're designed
to be ketoic, remember the picture that
I showed you of the four guys eating,
the last guy was skinny because he had
no food in front of him. What was he in
front of? the sun. What does that tell
you about guy that's always on social
media tweeting and twatting and
everything
else? That's the problem. What What did
I tell you about me? My job. My job is a
killer as a neurosurgeon. I know that
that's got to change. My big biohack of
2017, my members know what it is. I'm
not going to share it on video, but it's
tied to this issue. It's tied to this
very issue. I hold myself to the same
standards of as everybody else. I know
that it is killing me and I've got to
stop doing those things. But the key is
why do I persist? Why do I come out
here? What I told you today? I figured
out 12 years ago. I put these this
information on the internet for free.
It's been on my site for seven years.
When I first put it out there, everybody
said, "Oh, it's too hard. Nobody will
understand it." Well, guess what? or
seven years down the road, I got over a
million people that follow me every
month. And now food people are inviting
me to come talk to them about light. So
don't tell me can't change because
you know what? If you're a true citizen
scientist, you follow the data and not
your beliefs. I know what the beliefs of
Western A Price are right now. They're
not the same beliefs that I think that
he had back in the day. Why? I think if
he would have known about light, he'd be
in a mitochondriac, too.
A different subject. Um, what type of
light bulbs would you say would be the
best since we live in a world where
spouses won't let you turn off all the
lights? None.
I told I told you what I did to my wife.
It took her a while, but if you're going
to use a light, I think Reuben's idea of
probably a red light and it takes a
while for you to get used to it, or you
can use an incandescent. I will tell you
to this day, the only fight that I ever
have with my wife now is about light
bulbs. And literally, I turn them all
off. And I'm not kidding you when I tell
you, remember Ruben left? I don't know
what the guy's name was in the movie
Milman. Remember when he said, "You have
to pay attention to every single thing
you do." And the guy was talking about
the sweatshirt coming off and everybody
laughed. I didn't laugh because you know
what? That's exactly how I'd answer your
question. When you put that damn light
switch on every day, you just took your
respiratory proteins and done that. You
know that when people come to see me
with glyomomas in their brain, they will
spend $100,000 to live six extra weeks,
but you think it's okay to put the light
switch on and cause the same problem.
That is the mindset you have to get to.
So when your husband says that to you,
you know what you tell him? What I said
in the movie, read between the lines.
Yeah, you're exposed to I am. But what
do I do? I do extraordinary things to
offset my risk. So in other words, when
people come talk to me like my members,
you got a couple of them sitting here. I
would tell you find a member who's have
actually been with me like Josh and
Sarah have been with me in Mexico. Why
do I go to Mexico? I live at the 28th
latitude. I've been to Mexico four times
this year. So if you live here at the
50th latitude, you got a problem. And
you don't realize it. And then you keep
want to turn the damn lights on. You see
what I'm saying? From my perspective,
how crazy that is. But think about what
I said in the movie. The answer is right
in front of you. And why don't you see
it? I see it. Cuz you don't make any
dopamine. I'm not kidding you. I'm being
dead serious. When the dopamine levels
go low, when you're faced with the
answer, you're like, "Wait a minute.
What did Ruben say? Everybody who's a
biohacker wants a shortcut. You think
that you can shortcut
light? If if you say yes, you're not
part of my
tribe. And I'm being honest with you.
But what I'm trying to say is I want you
to understand that light is
fundamental. Not only is it fundamental
to you and me, but it's fundamental to
the food web. That was the talk from
last year. If you didn't hear it, go
YouTube it because everything about food
is tied to light, too. All those
electrons that food become are excited
by light frequencies. And your
mitochondria is the Rosetta stone that
deciphers that signal. And I didn't get
into all those details. I gave you the
surface
skim. There's a lot more to this story.
Okay. Hi. Uh just curious from like
going back to John's book where he talks
about the purple light and in that
particular bar. Uh, does does purple
light straight up does that disrupt
circadian rhythm? Because I know that
red kind of can.
Give me that. Let me ask you this one
first. This is a good question. For
those of you who haven't read's book,
there's a part of the book, I forget the
name of it was a restaurant in Chicago
where he did a very interesting biohack.
The thing was something about the name
of the restaurant was something seafood
under the sea or something, but it was
what was it? Star of the Sea. Star of
the Sea. And it was in a famous hotel in
Chicago and their stick was they had
fluorescent menus and the only way you
could see the menus he had black lights.
So here was the funny thing a loved
place. He didn't know why. So he went
and talked to the matraee. He found out
that the restaurant was open for 25
years and not one person ever had a sick
day. Not one. And a said the craziest
thing when I went to this restaurant
every time I went to Chicago I always
wanted to go back. You know why? What I
just told you.
Dopamine because when you have and
you're around UV light, you become
euphoric. Why? Because you release what?
Beta
endorphine. What else? Your blood
pressure goes down because UVA light,
nitric oxide, it's a natural calcium
channel blocker. This is what people
don't get. So to answer your question so
far, and trust me, I've been hacking
this because this is a great question. I
have told my members that in 12 years I
have not found a biologic toll yet to
UVA light at night. And I'm concerned
because neuropsin is on our skin and in
our eye. But if you come to my house
right now underneath where my daughter
does her homework, even when it's dark,
UVA light, UVA light, and an
incandescent, that's the only light
that's allowed on in my house in
December when she's doing her homework.
When my I'll tell you how serious this
is. My daughter had her sweet 16 this
December. She wanted to have the party
at night. I said, "Fine, you can do it,
but I have to be in control of the venue
and everything else." So, my wife goes,
"What the hell are you going to do?" So,
she invites literally half the the high
school. I have an event hall just like
this. I changed all the light bulbs out
to UVA lights and we made it a
fluorescent thing. They had fluorescent
balloons. You want to know the crazy
thing that my daughter learned? Every
single kid came back and told Calie they
slept better that
night. How do you like that? So that
made a huge impact on her friends
because then Cali explained to these
16-year-olds, look, this is how actually
it works. My dad can actually teach
this. So what started happen kids I
would have never talked to. They start
coming over and they start to see me
outside. I'm kicking and they're like
tell us about this. So, they're learning
and I now they all have their screens on
their phone. They're actually starting
to pay attention. Why? You go and ask
the kids like if Maddie was here, he's
left. He will tell you. And Maddie, am I
lying that all your friends in high
school, they can't sleep? Uh, yeah. Most
people are tired of all
that. And this is from a kid that's in
high school now. He's one of my members.
I've got tons of them now. I never
thought in a million years, seven years
ago, when I started putting this
information on the internet, that kids
when he showed up to Mexico sight on
scene to hang out with me, I was like,
"This has got to be resonating with
people." And you know, the crazy thing,
it's resonating with his generation more
than the old farts. Cuz the old farts
are too set in their ways to take their
clothes off and go outside. Let me tell
you something. The hardest thing for me
to do is I'm just tell Well, remember
this is Vermont. You need to come down
south where the ladies won't go outside
without their makeup on that has UV
protection in it. And I'm just telling
you, it is a huge problem in the south.
And that's why people always ask me, why
is the stroke belt and the heart attack
belt in the south? It's very simple with
this story. And I'll explain it to you.
When it's hot outside, what do
southerners do? They go inside to air
conditioning where there's no sun. What
happens in the winter time when it goes
below 50? They look like they're dressed
for the tundra.
So, what did Ruben say? Humans never
face a real
winter. And it's the truth. And they
never face a true summer anymore. I
mean, you guys up here, you have to
realize different zip codes lead to
different problems. And the reason why
is because the light frequencies here
are different than the light frequencies
in other places. And it's not just a
latitude issue. I don't want you to
think it is a latitude issue because you
can change your quantum yield by the
clothes you wear, by the makeup you put
on, by the sunglasses you wear, whether
your contacts are polarized or not. And
I didn't even get into all the
polarization effects, how it changes the
electromagnetic wave as it spins towards
your retina, because it has an effect,
too. And that's called the Faraday
effect. It's an optical magnetic effect.
Trust me, girl, there's a lot of fat on
this
bone. People People don't realize how
incredibly complex light is. And until
you realize it, you you really will find
this hard to believe.
Uh before you mention the type of uh
daytime blue blocking glasses you wear,
uh what are they called?
The lenses I have on now are Blu-Tech
lenses with a BP
Blu-Teek and they have a BPI tint. If
you talk to any like talk to Josh or he
can tell you exactly what the glasses
are that you can buy them cheap. The
cheapest ones you can get are on Amazon.
They're UX glasses. They cost 10 to 15
bucks. They're plastic. They look like
those old cataract glasses. They go over
your glasses if you wear glasses or you
can buy the ones that Dave bought for
you guys. It's not a big deal. I have
these exact same glasses, same frame,
except they're clear lenses. Those are
the ones I wear when I'm working on the
computer. Are they also called? No, this
is this is a BPI tent. These are those
are called Blu-Teek without
Yeah, without the tint.