Hey folks, welcome to the Darkhorse
podcast live stream. It's 3:24. Can't be
prime for at least several reasons.
Um I'm Dr. Brett Weinstein. You are of
course Dr. for Heather Hying. And um
we briefly had an amazing glimpse at
what summer will bring and it has uh
receded and we're back in sort of uh
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's it's it's a little gloomy.
It's it's not so cold, but uh it's it's
remarkable what the mood
&gt;&gt; of a hairless ape will respond to.
&gt;&gt; You're talking about me.
&gt;&gt; I'm talking about all of us. I'm talking
about all of us. uh that that when the
sun is out, it's just easy to uh to be
optimistic and to to see a future that
looks like the present, which is sunny.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It is amazing what a powerful
impact it has. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And even just the feeling of the sun on
one's skin. Oh, yeah.
&gt;&gt; Just unignorable for reasons that we are
increasingly finding out are deeply
physiological.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Who would have thought?
&gt;&gt; Who would have thought? And you know,
can we please stop imagining that what
we need to do is eradicate all the
natural variation and then add back it
add it back in titrated drop by titrated
drop and villainize those who would not
accept the titrated drops. Like for
instance, and I have not done a deep
dive on this yet, but the, you know, you
need to give your newborns vitamin K at
birth debacle. I think that is happening
in in real time now where I think Robert F. Kennedy Jr. was just uh, you know, asked to
please just put your support behind
vitamin K drops at birth. And he's and I
think he said like, look, I've literally
never said anything about this. I'm not
going to start now while I'm beingounded
by you. But no, I'm not going to say yay
or nay until I've looked into it. My
brief look into it is oh, and we've
talked about this, I think, a little bit
on a on a Q&amp;A before. Um, is this is one
more place where we have taken a system
about which we know something in one
developmental stage, in this case,
adults, have asserted uh that the same
things must be true across all
developmental stages, in this case,
newborns. When we don't find the same
thing, we say, "Ah, what we need to do
is raise the levels to that of adults."
Like, hold up. You know, it's quite
possible that a newborn does not
actually have the same physiology, the
same, we know, we know it doesn't have
the same anatomical considerations. And
maybe that's an adaptation, not a
problem uh that needs to be solved. And
if it is a problem that needs to be
solved as opposed to either an
adaptation or maybe a trade-off wherein
if you mess with it, you're going to
mess with the upside of something of
something else, maybe it's a problem
because of something else that we are
doing in modernity that we could fix.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's side effects all the way
down. And we see this across every
domain where we are told avoid salt and
then keep track of your electrolytes,
you may be low. It's like okay. Um
&gt;&gt; you looked at what's in electrolytes.
That's it's it's salts. Yes, you really
need to cut down your cholesterol, which
turns out to be a profoundly important
set of molecules that you absolutely
depend on for proper functioning. Yeah.
You know, there's no question in my mind
at this point that if you had to go with
the experts versus doing triedand-true
things and ignoring the experts, as long
as you did it from the beginning, you'd
be way better off avoiding anything that
had touched the experts than you would
going with their latest and greatest,
which is um not surprising in light of
the fact that they're talking about US
complex systems and all of the
interventions that they've figured we
need to make. Um, but it is it's a
sobering lesson about the difference
between the enlightenment process, which
is fantastic, and operationalizing it
based on the very partial picture that
you have at any given moment, especially
so early in our understanding of
biology, uh, especially of the
humankind. Well, and it's um one of the
errors is mistaking the incredible uh
gains
uh both theoretical, empirical, and just
sort of like toolkit wise of the
Enlightenment. mistaking that,
conflating that with all that science
is, all that human understanding and
flourishing can be, as opposed to
saying, okay, the rigor and the logic
and the reason of the enlightenment are,
you know, absolutely helped us move out
of a darker uh witchier, more
superstitious time. Um, but that's not
to say that some of the witchier,
superstitious stuff didn't turn out to
be right. And it also doesn't suggest
that reason is sufficient. Reason is not
going to be sufficient. And reason isn't
sufficient even within a scientific
framework, much less a human one. Yes.
Um
reason reason ultimately gets you there.
But it is sort of the instantaneous
desire to figure out based on what we
know at any given moment what the advice
ought to be. And you know obviously
&gt;&gt; I don't think it does
&gt;&gt; what
&gt;&gt; I don't think it's sufficient.
&gt;&gt; Um reason might well be sufficient if
you were at a very advanced stage of
understanding some system. And what
reason would tell you is here are all
the feedbacks that are working in you
that you have to be cautious not to
disrupt. And you know every so often
there's something that needs a
disruption for some reason. Usually as
you point out for because of some prior
disruption. Um, but
the wisdom of the experts, if the
experts persist, will ultimately involve
extreme caution about disrupting things
that were built to work and disrupting
the environments in which they uh
evolved.
&gt;&gt; True.
&gt;&gt; All right.
How we um I don't know, pay the rent.
&gt;&gt; You mean the ads?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yes. All right. Uh so we always as
always have three at the top of the hour
here. Um but we also have our locals
watch party going on. So join us at
locals. Consider that. And uh let's just
get started. Our first sponsor this week
is brand new to us. It's Ridge which
makes fantastic wallets like this one
right here. Uh Brett's got one too. We
are now using these amazing wallets.
Most wallets, as you know, because
you're a human being who watch podcasts,
so you're familiar with wallets, are
soft and pliable, made of leather or
synthetic materials. They fold and bend
and they wear. And a new wallet made in
that style looks new. Just a few months
in, it can look quite worn, depending on
how you use it. A few years in, and
there's no mistaking your wallet for
anything elegant or refined, and it's
probably not that functional anymore,
either. It's also true that what we need
to carry in our wallets is changing. Men
tend to carry smaller, more compact
wallets than you can that you can put in
your back pocket. And then when you sit
down, you sit asymmetrically. It's not
good for your posture or the stuff in
your wallet. Traditionally, women tend
to carry larger wallets with more
pockets, maybe a change purse, lots of
room for lots of things. Women's wallets
can be a purse unto themselves. A couple
years ago, I switched to a small metal
wallet, something that just holds a few
cards, that's all. I appreciate its
simplicity and its compact size, and I
liked it enough that Brett got one, too.
But they're flawed. They're they were
not Ridge wallets. Um but they're in a
similar but not identical vein. Uh and
these other ones that we had um are
flawed. Uh they just don't have quite
enough capacity. They're just too small.
And uh as such, I have an accessory
patch. I now have like two wallets where
I or I did until we got these Ridge
wallets where I keep extra cards like a
backup credit card, a debit card,
passport card, AAA card, Costco card,
cash. That little metal wallet just
didn't hold enough on its own. Then
Ridge came into our lives again. Check
this out. It holds up to 12 cards. And
the tight elastic band on the back holds
cash or receipts or whatever else you
might want it to hold. It's compact.
It's beautiful. And maybe most important
of all, it's got RFID blocking
technology. While your cards are in your
Ridge wallet, your data are safe. Ridge
makes other stuff, too. Suitcases, power
banks, key cases. But for us, it's the
wallets that really stand out. Ridge has
over 50 beautiful designs made out of
materials like aluminum, titanium, and
carbon fiber. They've even got a limited
leather edition. And all Ridge products
come with free shipping, a 99-day
risk-free trial, and a lifetime
warranty. If you've been thinking about
a new kind of wallet, try Ridge.
Seriously, they're amazing. For a
limited time, our listeners get 10% off
at Ridge by using code darkhorse at
checkout. Just head to ridge.com and use
code darkhorse and you're all set. After
you purchase, they will ask you where
you heard about them. Please support our
show and tell them our show sent you.
That's ridge.com,
use code darkhorse at checkout. And
seriously, they're such an amazing set
of options and and beautiful and
functional.
&gt;&gt; Yes, you can definitely get something
that matches your particular ethos. I
will say I have switched over from my
mechanical wallet with which I struggled
for several years because when you open
it, you have to get the right purchase
on it to get it to flick open. The
mechanical thing is way better on the
drawing board than it is in in real
life. The Ridge Wallet is great in this
regard. And I would point out that that
&gt;&gt; because there's no such mechanical
&gt;&gt; there's no such mechanical thing. Um so
you just learn it and it works. Um I
would also point out that that strap on
the back is perfect when you are
traveling because you've been paying
attention to Darkhorse and you know that
uh Real ID isn't the way to go and you
have to have your passport card
therefore with you instead of um your
driver's license. If you put the
passport card on the outside then it's
right there when you get to TSA. So
anyway, it's a cool wallet and it really
works.
&gt;&gt; Nice. Okay, our second sponsor this week
is Arma Colostrum, an ancient bioactive
whole food. We live in an age of hyper
novelty. That is, even though humans are
the most adaptable species on the
planet, even we can't keep up with the
rate of change that we are enacting on
ourselves. We are bathed in
electromagnetic fields. Electromagnetic
fields. Apparently, they're just
entering my brain right now, keeping me
from speaking.
&gt;&gt; It's the plants outside.
you'll see later in the podcast
&gt;&gt; that are keeping me from being able to
annunciate.
&gt;&gt; No, no, but they Well, if it's the
electromagnetic fields, they are uh
making a small contribution to that.
&gt;&gt; We are bathed in EMF. I'm going to go
with artificial light, seed oils,
microplastics, endocrine disruptors in
our air, water, food, and textiles. And
there are myriad other modern stressors
like overcrowding and having too little
control over our own choices in life.
But there are things that you can
control and one of them is this. You can
strengthen your immune health with a
bioactive whole food that is armor
colostrum. All of that hypern novelty
can disrupt the signals that your body
relies on negatively impacting gut
immune and overall health. Armor
colostrum works at the cellular level to
bolster your health from within.
Colostrum is nature's first whole food
helping to strengthen gut and immune
health and fuel performance. Armor
colostrum is great added to smoothies.
Combine it with banana, mint, cacao, raw
milk, and ice. It's delicious. Bovine
colostrum can support a healthy
metabolism and strengthen gut integrity.
And armor colostrum is a bioactive whole
food with over 400 functional nutrients,
including but not limited to
amunoglobulins, antioxidants, minerals,
and prebiotics. Armor colostrum starts
with sustainably sourced colostrum from
grass-fed cows from their co-op of dairy
farms in the US, and they source only
the s surplus colostrum after calves are
fully fed. I think I need a lesson in
vowels. I am not the guy to teach any
lessons about spelling or reading.
&gt;&gt; Not spelling or reading vowels.
&gt;&gt; Pronouncing them.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I I can help with that.
&gt;&gt; Unlike most colostrums on the market
which use heat pasteurization that
depletes nutrient potency, Armor
Colostrum uses an innovative process
that purifies and preserves the
integrity of hundreds of bioactive
nutrients while removing calcium and fat
to guarantee the highest potency and
bioavailability. The quality control is
far above industry standards, including
being certified to be glyphosatefree.
People who have used Armer's colostrum
have reported clearer skin, faster and
thicker hair growth, and better mental
concentration. In addition, people using
Armor's Clustrum have noticed a decrease
in muscle soreness after exercise,
better sleep, and fewer sugar cravings.
Armor Colostrum is the real deal. We've
got a special offer for the Darkhorse
audience. Receive 30% off your first
subscription order. Go to
armor.com/darkhorse
or enter darkhorse to get 30% off your
first subscription order. That's arm
a.com/darkhorse.
All right, I'm up with our final sponsor
for this episode, which is FreshPressed
Olive Oil Club. Have you ever had a
relationship with a product that is so
uncomplicatedly positive that when you
got a box of them, you are over the moon
with excitement? That's how it is with
freshressed olive oil. Every amazing,
never disappointing, no, always amazing
is what it says here. Never
disappointing and perennially delicious
and nutritious. Go to getfreshd
darkhorse.com and get a bottle of one of
the world's finest artistal olive oils
for just $1. Olive oil is a succulent,
delicious food that like pretty much all
fats is best when it's fresh. The
fresher the better. Olives are actually
a fruit, making olive oil a kind of
fruit juice. And like all fruit juices,
olive oil is at its peak of flavor and
nutritional potency when it's fresh
pressed. But most supermarket olive oils
sit on the shelf for months or even
years, growing stale, dull, flavorless,
even rancid. The solution is to have
fresh
fresh pressed artisal olive oils shipped
directly to you after each new harvest
when the oil's flavor and nutrients are
at their peak. Once again, go to
getfresh darkhorse.com
to get a bottle of one of the world's
finest artistal olive oils, fresh from
the new harvest, for just $1.
Fresh pressed olive oil club is the
brain failed. Brain failed.
I'm
&gt;&gt; telling you the vowels are going to be a
problem.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, brainchild,
which has the one
&gt;&gt; always struck me as a strange word, but
nonetheless, FreshPressed Olive Oil Club
is the brainchild of TJ Robinson, also
known as the olive oil Jedi. He brings
the freshest, most flavorful,
nutrient-rich olive oils from harvest to
your door. Olive oil is of course a
cornerstone of Mediterranean diets, but
if you've never had excellent fresh
olive oil, you may wonder what all the
fuss is about. TJ's farm fresh oils are
incredible. That is where the flavor is,
and TJ's farm fresh olive oils are
amazingly flavorful and distinct from
one another. We've used several
different varietals now across a wide
array of delicious foods as marinades on
meat and for roasting vegetables fresh
in salads or drizzled on cold soups or
on freshly grilled halumi cheese. We've
made olive oil cake and Italian pesto
and Venezuelan green sauce rich in
cilantro. Every single varietal we've
had is superb. And the health benefits
of olive oil are extensive. From being
high in antioxidants to helping prevent
Alzheimer's disease, this is a fabulous
flavorful fat that you'll never want to
run out of. As an introduction to TJ
Robinson's Fresh Pressed Olive Oil Club,
he will send you a full size $49 bottle
of one of the world's finest artistal
olive oils, fresh from the New Harvest
for just $1 to help him cover shipping.
And there's no commitment to buy
anything now or ever. Get your free $49
bottle for $1 shipping and taste the
difference freshness makes. Go to
getfreshd darkhorse.com.
That's getfreshd darkhorse.com for a
free bottle and pay just $1 shipping. I
really don't know how anybody bypasses
that offer. What do you have to lose?
&gt;&gt; It's so good.
&gt;&gt; It's spectacular. Really?
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; Where do you want to start?
&gt;&gt; Um why don't we start with uh I don't
want to step on your your uh your step
on your thunder. Steal your thunder.
step on your punchlines. Any of those
things would be untorched. I
&gt;&gt; I don't have many today. So, uh so do do
what you want to do. I I don't know
where where you're where you're headed.
&gt;&gt; Go ahead. Um
&gt;&gt; Oh,
&gt;&gt; yes.
&gt;&gt; Wow. This is not professional this week
at all. Uh we're going to be back on
Saturday. Like, we're going to do this
today. We're going to be back on
Saturday. We're going to be better
prepared. That's a promise.
&gt;&gt; That is a promise.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. Um Yeah. So this week uh
Ross Duat in the New York Times uh
published an opinion piece uh that was
titled I don't know by him but you know
by the New York Times oped team
slouching toward Kamala Harris uh of
course a reference to slouching toward
Bethlehem and that caught my eye
sufficiently that I I read the piece. Um
I like you. I like I like his thinking.
He's he's a great writer and and his
thinking and uh and sure enough uh well
I I didn't know actually that Harris was
actually
uh looking like she might be the nominee
for 2028. So that like that is what he
reveals in this piece. Let's just read a
little bit of it and and and then and
then riff. Um so also this picture is uh
pretty remarkable.
&gt;&gt; It's a great picture.
&gt;&gt; It's a great picture. I also don't quite
understand where the light must be
coming from to make a shadow that looks
like she's doing this when she's
actually only got one arm in the air. So
that's that's itself sort of an a
question in physics and lighting.
&gt;&gt; It makes me wonder if it's even real.
&gt;&gt; Uh you know, it could be coming from
down below in like what looks like the
it wouldn't be the orchestra pit because
she's not. But
I I don't know. It's it's interesting
for those of you just listening. Uh it's
it's a great picture that is surprising
with regard to the shadow. Uh but it's
it's Kamla presumably I don't know I
guess at the uh at the Democratic
National Convention in which she was
anointed appointed declared
&gt;&gt; installed
&gt;&gt; installed uh for the 2024 uh Democratic
uh nominee for for president. Rosat
writes there are three polling numbers
you can use to understand the condition
of the Democratic party in 2026. The
first is Donald Trump's approval rating,
which has dropped into the high30s, a
terrain usually associated with dramatic
public rebukes and mandates for the
opposition. The second is the generic
congressional ballot, which is promising
Democrats decent midterm election
results, but is stubbornly refusing to
promise a sweeping mandate or a clear
shot at flipping all the crucial Senate
states. And the third is polling for the
2028 Democratic presidential primaries,
in which the leading Democratic
candidate is consistently Kla Harris,
the face of the party's 2024 debacle. I
want to read a little bit more of this,
but let me just click through on his
evidence that Harris is um consistently
leading in in the polls. And here
indeed, we have this is from Real Clear
Polling. This is what's linked to in the
uh DAT oped in the New York Times from
this week. 2028 2028 Democratic pres
&gt;&gt; That's what I said. 2028 Democratic
presidential nomination in which we have
uh names that will be familiar to
everyone and some that aren't
necessarily familiar but Harris uh in
the leftmost column uh almost routinely
outranking everyone else on the board
with the exception of in a few places
like in the Emerson poll Nuome Gavin
Newsome and Buddha Judge how does how do
you pronounce his name? Buddy, judge,
&gt;&gt; Buddha judge, I think.
&gt;&gt; Buddha judge. Uh, and but in general,
uh, Newsome is the the second highest
ranking guy, but, uh, but Harris is
across the board on average in the lead.
And that and then uh and then in sort of
fourth overall is Alexandria
Accassiocortez. Uh, who, you know, I
think she would be a disaster as a
president, but she does seem to stand
for something. and have some competence
to her.
&gt;&gt; I think actually she'd make a pretty
remarkable candidate. I'm hesitant to
say that. I feel like what I should do
is attack Kla Harris as a foolish
choice, which would then of course have
the inverse reaction to the extent that
anyone's paying attention.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um but no, I think you know, Cortez
would at least be
&gt;&gt; fascinating to watch and you know it it
would at least be an interesting
She put up an interesting fight.
&gt;&gt; She would put up an interesting fight as
would Newsome, I would say. I mean,
&gt;&gt; you think so?
&gt;&gt; Well, the thing about Newsome, I read
him as um a perfectly amoral creature.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um but he's very smart. He's very
articulate. He's very presentable. And
it, you know, if you're going,
&gt;&gt; he's a shape shifter,
&gt;&gt; of course, but if you're going to take
some sort of, you know, you're going to
have two things. There's the policy that
this demonic party wants for whatever
reason it wants it. And then you have
the package that it has to be put in to
sell it to the public.
&gt;&gt; Well, this and this ends up being Oh,
keep keep going, but we'll get back to
the do that piece. This is part of what
he's he as I believe a Democrat who will
vote Democrat is arguing essentially
this point. But if you're going to, you
know, take some anti-American
evil package of policies and you're
going to try to dress them up to look
like they're public-spirited and
patriotic,
Gavin Newsome is the perfect vessel
because for one thing, he lies
without any sense that he even knows
he's doing it. I mean, I think he must
because he's pretty good at
&gt;&gt; it. Willie 2.0. He's super smooth.
&gt;&gt; He's super smooth. And
&gt;&gt; so I mean, you know, that's the job. How
do you take something that is hostile to
the public and sell it to the public as
health food?
&gt;&gt; Gavin Newsome has one liability as I see
it. The liability is California is not
in good shape and he has a lot to do
with that
&gt;&gt; which his liability being his entire
track record that would prepare him for
the job,
&gt;&gt; right? But he has a hidden advantage in
this regard, which is that he'd be
running in the Democratic party where
what actually happens as a result of
your policies is not taken as evidence.
In fact, if things that you do do not
produce the outcome that you wanted or
more likely produce the inverse outcome,
the answer is, well, we didn't do enough
of it, did we? So, if that's if that's
your game, Gavin Newsome's a great
choice. I but I think and you know it's
possible that we just um aren't tuned in
to as much of the thinking in California
as we used to be. But what I hear from
people who continue to vote uh blue in
California is that neither Harris as you
know as someone who was a senator in
California before she was uh VP nor
Newsome uh are held in great esteem by
Californians. that you know the the very
place where they came from see what they
did and uh and reject it. Now that may
not matter for you know California is
still not going to go red but it it
feels like feels like a big hurdle.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Except that there's a dynamic here
which is so unfortunate
where effectively there's a price point
for changing. I mean, Kla Harris was a
an empty suit who was invented into a
political candidate almost overnight.
And yes,
&gt;&gt; we'll we'll get to that. But but but my
point is if the point is you've got
Gavin Newsome who as a human being is
capable of doing the job of putting a
human face on something inhuman
and the problem is that the people
who've lived under his governance are
uh belleaguered. Well the question is
how much money do you have to throw at
that problem to revise how they feel?
And it the answer should be that there's
no price because you know frankly the
lived experience of Californians ought
to tell them that this guy is has no
business being in the White House. On
the other hand, if you look at something
like the campaign to dislodge Thomas
Massie from his seat in Kentucky, the
point is, well, what's at work there?
This is a guy who's actually stood up
for Americans. and what is working
against him, the antipathy of the
president and a huge amount of money,
right? There's just money being flooded
into that campaign against him and he's
actually got uh a a real race on his
hands where that shouldn't be the case,
right? the president deciding to
override the will of Kuckians by uh you
know by primary Massie with you know
just an endless stream of propaganda
&gt;&gt; that shouldn't work but it works and so
my sense is just a question of how many
how many would it be hundreds of
millions of dollars do you need to spend
to make Gavin Newsome fresh and new?
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't I don't know. I guess um I
I I have two reactions to that that feel
like they are they're rebuttals. Um one
is here in the state of Washington, we
are seeing simultaneously
uh revenue grab from taxpayers and an
absolute squandering of the of the money
that the state holds. No amount of money
is sufficient and no amount of money
seem like almost none of the money that
is had seems to be going to actually
fund the right things. Like literally
they are closing down state parks for
the summer because they don't have the
staffing just to clean up the garbage.
At a moment when uh you know the estate
tax and the capital gains tax uh and now
the millionaires tax which won't go into
effect for a few years have all been
passed within the last few years. You
know the state has more funds than it
than it's ever had. And they're closing
down state parks at the beginning of the
summer which is like what what is the
west about? What are what are the
western states known for other than at
this point insane politics? It's the
natural beauty. It's the outdoor
lifestyle. It's it's it's knowing that
people, rain or shine or snow, are
interested in going out and climbing and
walking and running and cycling and
kayaking and being on the water and in
the mountains and on trails and yeah,
we're going to close down the state
parks because we don't have enough
money. So, there's there's that which is
that actually uh money doesn't seem to
be the solution inherently. inherently.
And uh and then I guess the second thing
that I was feeling as you were talking
about Nome and you know what could be
done to change the opinion of
Californians who've been living under
him. Well, California is obviously a
giant state. Uh last I checked and I
haven't looked in a while, it was like
the fifth largest economy in the world.
It was something incredible. Like if it
were a nation state, it would be the
fifth largest economy in the world. And
that may well have changed a lot. That's
that's been a few years since I looked
into that. Um but you know the the
economics and the politics of the
central valley and of the coast are
wildly different of you know far
northern California which has been
trying to secede as the state of
Jefferson forever is wildly different.
um even from that in say um Eureka uh or
or no more yeah Eureka and um Cal and
Humbult, right? Uh so you know just lots
and lots of different areas within uh
within California but some of the most
like most dedicated blue parts were so
for instance ravaged by the fires of 16
months ago now. uh both so you we talked
about the Palisades fire because that's
where I grew up and the neighborhood
that I grew up was just you know burned
literally to the ground and the uh Pasad
Aladena fire at the same time. It's been
over a year and um the mitigation
efforts are stalled. They're terrible.
There's toxins in the soil and many
people aren't being allowed to even
consider uh rebuilding or you know or
doing anything to reclaim any of their
lives. And this is being stalled not
just at the county level but I think at
the state level as well. So those people
who would otherwise be absolutely
dedicated blue voters are having this
experience of having had their amazing
upscale uh lives lives torn from them um
by a natural disaster that was
absolutely made worse by
tens of at least of years of bad fire
wildlands fire management in um in
Southern California at least. but now by
very bad policy from from on high which
includes Nuome.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I don't disagree with that at
all and I you know one would like to
imagine that there's a level of failure
that is so great that propaganda can't
overcome it. But
I think we constantly underestimate the
sophistication of propaganda.
Increasingly good at understanding our
individual blind spots. uh sympathies
and we
uh personally I believe there's a price
point to make Gavin Newsome the uh
enthusiastically supported candidate of
the party if that's what they choose to
do. Why they would choose to do the same
or attempt the same with Kla Harris, I
don't really know because she can't hold
up her end of the bargain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, let's actually see what um
what Duth has to say about her. And then
um I mean we we've we've talked before
during the last election about her. But
um he says, you know, there's there's
these three reasons. Uh there are three
polling numbers you can use to
understand the condition of the
Democratic party. Uh and the third being
that her Kamla Harris is routinely
leading in the polls for 2028.
He says all three numbers are linked to
the dominant mode in democratic politics
right now. It's not the rebellion or
radicalism manifest in say Hassan
Piker's Twitch streamer Marxism or Zaran
Mandani's teleogenic democratic
socialism. Notable as those tendencies
may be, the Democrat's fundamental
condition is a late Trumpian stasis in
which the president's stark unpopularity
encourages his opponents to imagine that
they can keep everything basically as it
was in the Biden era with the same broad
priorities and deference to activists
and interest groups and float back to
power automatically.
And then just a little bit more here,
the continuing appeal of Harris is a
useful indicator of this stasis. Yes,
she is unlikely to be the 28 2028
nominee. I'm not sure why he says that,
but uh and part of her support is name
recognition. Mitt Romney did well in
such polls in 2013 and 2014, but she
seems to want a second run more than
Romney did. And if she goes for it, she
will have one notable advantage. The
fact that many Democrats who find her
renomination unthinkable are nonetheless
incapable of acknowledging the real
reasons that she lost. I Ross Duthat
will list some of those reasons. First,
her party was seen as too beholden to
progressive activists on a range of
issues, including immigration, crime,
education, energy, and the transgender
debate. Second, Harris's vice presidency
was itself a creation of the 2020
identity politics movement without which
Joe Biden never would have picked her.
And she succeeded him without a fight in
part because no one wanted to
acknowledge her painful limits as a
politician. Just a reminder, before she
was picked, Biden said, "I will choose a
black woman." That's what he said.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
Finally, she tried to solve both the
policy problem and the identity politics
problem through evasion and distraction
and yet more identity politics with
empty rhetoric of joy and circumlocution
about her past positions and a mediocre
Midwestern white guy running mate.
It's way worse than that. She's utterly
incompetent. She has no track record. I
went again and we talked about this at
some point. Um, but I remember finding
like a a USA Today article that was
lauding all of what she had done and its
list includes, you know, visiting a
Planned Parenthood clinic, you know,
considering a such and such. Like she's
she's actually affected almost nothing
at all. There are a tiny like less than
a handful of Senate bills that she
pushed through that involve like
increasing by a few acres the size of
existing conservation areas. cool, but
really like that's that's the basis and
obviously we all lived through and some
people may have managed to forget it as
soon as they saw it. But other than her
one surprisingly
competent performance in the debate
against Trump in every debate or or
every every interview that we saw her
in, she couldn't put together sentences.
She couldn't answer questions. She
couldn't speak English. Like h how could
we possibly be considering this? And how
could we possibly imagine that the party
that would put her up there is claiming
to be the party that wants to empower
women when all they have managed to come
up with is this utterly palpably
incompetent woman?
&gt;&gt; Well, I want to argue that there's
something deeper here. I hear echoes of
it in what Dutat is saying, but I don't
think the diagnosis is right.
There is something on the blue team side
that
cannot process evidence that it had it
wrong. And so I think what's really
driving Kamala is that
&gt;&gt; everybody wants a recount because
everybody who convinced themselves that
Kamala was a good candidate enough to
actually vote for her
is feeling like something happened that
shouldn't have that this was not
legitimate that the awfulness of Trump
in their minds is so profound that they
have to go back and double down. And so
I think this is the double down instinct
which
&gt;&gt; I mean whatever else the Democratic
party may be,
&gt;&gt; it's a political party. If it can't
learn the lesson of a massive political
catastrophe and just simply run a better
candidate, that tells you something.
One, one of the things it tells you is
that
&gt;&gt; hey blue team, you drove out all your
likable people. You really did. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And so you don't have a deep bench of
people that you could simply not make
the same error again. At least make a
new error. You'll learn learn something
new. Making the same error is insane.
And maybe
&gt;&gt; your point about Aassiocortez.
&gt;&gt; That would be a new that would that
would be a new thing.
&gt;&gt; None of us have seen that one before.
Right. Right. That's a different thing.
So that would at least, you know, I
don't know how to call that one.
Obviously, it depends on who she'd be
running against. Um it depends on what
happens through the rest of the the
Trump presidency,
&gt;&gt; right? But at least it's not at least
it's not the same error. And even Gavin
Newsome, who I think is in some ways as
ridiculous as Kla Harris at a policy
level, he has demonstrated his capacity
to, you know, to wreck a great state.
&gt;&gt; Um,
but it's at least not the same error.
And he's at least got a skill set she
doesn't have, right?
&gt;&gt; He can answer questions in English.
&gt;&gt; Oh my god, he's he's good at it. He's
actually he's good at it. And frankly,
he's got one of these personalities
that's kind of
&gt;&gt; if you don't know what he is, he's
likable. You know, he seems like a guy
you could sit down with, that kind of
thing. And, you know, I I think we as
Americans should be livid at this play,
which is not just a democratic play,
where they take somebody who's likable
and they put him in front of us to dress
up horrifying things. I mean, this was,
you know, George W. Bush, right? He he
was a guy who would be fun at the
barbecue and people couldn't see that he
was a front for something that boy, you
don't want to be at that barbecue. But
so Kamla isn't that he's not the fun
person at the barbecue. She's
&gt;&gt; But I mean, she tried right the brat
summer thing like she she
&gt;&gt; that certainly didn't go well,
&gt;&gt; right? But but she tried to appeal to I
guess you know millennial women and
maybe even Gen Z women. Uh but it didn't
it it I think it backfired.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It didn't work. So you know if I
were them I would certainly try one of
the two promising people who would
create a new race rather than trying to
rerun the old one when you know they
won't even have Trump to run against.
So,
&gt;&gt; right,
&gt;&gt; uh, speaking of which, uh, so you can
put my screen here back up. This is
what, uh, this is the real clear
polling,
uh, data on who's who people think that
they would vote for if the election were
today in 2028, um, for the Democratic
presidential nomination. And then here's
the equivalent information for
Republicans. Uh, and you know, this
isn't surprising given that he's the
sitting vice president and uh, uh,
usually the sitting vice president is
uh, the air parent. Uh, but Vance is way
ahead of all of the other contenders.
Um, but some of who's here was
interesting to me. It includes uh, Trump
Jr., I had no idea that was even in the
offing. Rubio, okay, Dantis,
interesting. Um, I I think he could be
great. Uh, Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Jr. is even on
here as is Gabbard. Uh so obviously I I
alled some people there but uh that just
you know overall that looks like a more
interesting slate of people by a lot.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; there was you literally one person on on
the Democrat side that seemed
interesting and not you know Okasio
Cortez seems interesting if
&gt;&gt; you know terrifying in a way.
&gt;&gt; Uh Tucker Carlson and Thomas Massie are
not listed.
&gt;&gt; Well I don't Carlson is on here but I
don't know if I maybe that is Tucker. I
I don't know what what that Carlson is.
&gt;&gt; Presumably it is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um and he he doesn't pull well here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, he's he's pretty far to
the right here in term and that's that's
just a a ranked list left to right. Uh
getting about two and a half%. There's
one poll where he got four and most
polls he's not he's not uh polling at
all, but that may just be because
they're not asking about him. I don't
know.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, he's not running, but uh
Right.
&gt;&gt; But he's certainly being talked about.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; All right. Um, was there more on the uh
that
&gt;&gt; No, I mean the the piece goes on, but I
think uh
I think I have been
pleasantly not thinking about
presidential politics, about the race
for a little while and the idea that we
are looking at a similar kind of show as
we did last time is absurd. Now
obviously uh Trump is his own brings his
own circus uh and so it won't be exactly
the same kind of thing but
I am totally shocked that Harris is
has the hutbah to stand up and say I'll
do that again after her showing was as
abysmal as it was.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I can't believe she would want it.
I mean she took such a beating. just
seems like a reasonable person would go
do something else. Um but okay. Um you
know, to me though,
this is like the Democratic Party
announcing, "Yep, we're the people you
you thought we were. We haven't learned
anything and we'll do it to you all over
again." Which again makes things very
simple. on the other side. I cannot vote
for a cabal that wants to use an empty
suit puppet to cloak what it's doing.
And you know, it's not that the
Republican party hasn't done that, but
my god, I just it seems to be the the
standard MMO of this party now and the
party faithful do not seem to be
processing the either the policy side at
all. And they're certainly not
processing, hey, that thing we wanted to
do did bad things that we didn't
anticipate. Maybe it's not such a wise
idea. I think the inability to process
that is just it's disqualifying in a
political discussion.
&gt;&gt; It should be. Um, of course, some of
what we have seen in in the second Trump
presidency
has looked like few of us predicted.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. uh with regard to what appears
just to be capture,
&gt;&gt; right,
&gt;&gt; which was exactly, you know, I went back
to my thinking which I published about
why I voted for him uh in 2024 having
not voted for him any time before. And
uh one of the main reasons and what was
most important to me was that he was his
own guy, that he wasn't owned. Uh and I
see no evidence that that's still true.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know. I don't know what's
going on and why, but I will say on the
Republican side,
there are an awful lot of people who did
vote for him who feel betrayed and
bewildered by how the very things that
we were promised, like no new wars,
could be uh inverted in the way that
they have been. So, that's a different
thing. And I'm not saying that there
isn't a totally committed to Trump
quadrant over there. There is. There are
people for whom he can do no wrong. And
frankly, those of us who are, you know,
uh, feeling like we're getting things
that we specifically voted against, that
we are betraying the president by
calling him out for these things. I
think it's just our responsibility to
try to hold him to the promises that he
made and and to try to understand the
reason that he's not following through
on them. Were
&gt;&gt; were they lies when he said them or has
something kicked in? Has the the
dynamics of the politics taken control?
But nonetheless,
you don't find all of the people who
voted for Trump
happy with whatever Trump does. That is
not what's going on over uh on the red
side.
Yeah. And I think, you know, that was
certainly uh a caricature of Trump
voters in 2016 and even in uh 2020 uh
when he did not take office obviously,
but uh people people in the mainstream
media in in blue team mindset
thought that the critique that was
coming at Biden was simply because there
was totally unnuanced celebration of
Trump no matter what. And again, I as
you I would say I'm sure there are some
people like that out there just as there
are some people um like that out there
with the opposite veilance um over in
over in blue team. Uh but that is not
how he won. That is that is that is he
he certainly could not have won on the
basis of uh everything Trump does is
going to be a good decision voters.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And there weren't, you know, there
are certainly many Trump loyalists, but
Trump loyalists on their own were not
enough to elect him. A coalition of
people got behind him because he seemed
to be willing to partner with people
like Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on, you know, values
that were not traditionally under the
Republican banner. So, you know, that
coalition has to figure out what to do
in order to um not go down with this
ship.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. um to to continue to be heard and
to demonstrate that we're you know we're
a real
&gt;&gt; we're a real
&gt;&gt; coalition with real views who actually
you know maybe in some ways seem like
you know hippie granola moms and uh and
you know mothers of vaccine injured
children and also 2A advocates and
hunters and ranchers and outdoors people
who want to hike and kayak and yes that
is one set of people um many of whom
have historically voted in opposite
directions but actually have a shared
love of uh of our planet and don't want
to see it destroyed for uh for for
trivial reasons.
&gt;&gt; And I will just remind people of the
overarching dynamic here, which I' I've
pointed out many times, which is there's
something odd about the fact that we
don't have a party that simply
represents the interests that most
people have. It's such an obvious
winning strategy if it was allowed to
escape the crib. The problem is anything
that attempts to do that is strangled in
the crib. And so what we're left with is
two deeply corrupt parties beholden in
many cases to the very same interests
doing the bidding of somebody else at
the expense of Americans.
And you know that's the whole game is
you're not going to be allowed to have a
reasonable choice. and we will then
divide over which of the unreasonable
choices is less unreasonable. And that's
that's a blinking red light, right? That
is nature's way of telling you that
something about your democratic republic
is simply not functioning because, you
know, in what universe is there not a
single party that just figures out what
people want and then advocates for it
and wins election after election? How
could that not be a feature of our
landscape? And the answer is the
interests that do control our system
know that they can't afford to have it
exist. And so they do everything in
their power to prevent it from, you
know, ever setting seed.
And you know, that's really the problem
until it's solved or until the republic
fails. It's one of the two.
&gt;&gt; Let's hope for the former.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Let's try to solve it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. All right. Let's try to solve it.
Which brings us very direct. No, it does
not bring us even remotely to our next
&gt;&gt; I don't know what you're going to talk
about. But you have these tells.
&gt;&gt; Oh, do I?
&gt;&gt; Oh, you do?
&gt;&gt; I do. But then, as you know, once you
start depending on those
&gt;&gt; tells tell you what the tells are then
you can un untell yourself.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I can untell myself even though
that's not a thing. Um, all right. So, I
ran across something that was new to me.
I don't know how it had escaped my
notice all this time. Apparently, it was
new in 2013.
&gt;&gt; Are you not concerned about getting poop
on your computer?
&gt;&gt; You You've got it right.
&gt;&gt; Oh, the dung beetle. Sorry. What could
possibly be going on that I'm unaware of
in this studio? Yes. No, that's just a
sculpture of a dung.
&gt;&gt; I I just If possible, you could put you
point that that way so that so the dung
beetle doesn't have to
&gt;&gt; We are redecorating real time. That's I
mean I too would like to have my
computer there, but I I just feel like
the dung beetle deserves a space.
&gt;&gt; Oh, 100%. Um, for one thing, those
aren't easy to control, so you don't
know what direction.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. That's I felt like you you were
going to get that on your computer. And
then what?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then what? Exactly. Um, all
right, Jen, do you want to show the
video that I sent this? So, I had not
seen this and it alerted me to a
biological phenomenon that I was just
completely unaware of. I'll be curious
if you knew about it.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I don't know what we're talking
about yet.
&gt;&gt; Plants are rooted to the ground and have
a small negative charge. The higher up
the plant you go, the greater the
electric charge. This creates an
electric field around the flower. We
can't see it, but these electrodes are
picking up the energy of this tiny field
and converting it into the sound that we
can hear. Bees, on the other hand, have
a positive charge. Friction whilst
flying causes them to lose electrons. As
a bee approaches a flower, the charged
fields around the flower and the bee
interact and the sound changes
there. And when it lands, the positive
and negative fields immediately cancel
each other out. As this happens, there
are two very surprising consequences.
Firstly, the plant's negatively charged
pollen actually jumps across onto the
positively charged bee.
Secondly, the plant has a changed
electrical field and when another bee
comes along, it detects this altered
electrical signature and avoids the
flower. The plant is in effect telling
the bee that it has no nectar and to
come back later.
I have I have seen that Attenboroough
clip shared actually by our our
wonderful friend Diane. Um it's it's
bees grounding.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I was going to point out this
connection. You have been uh
increasingly intrigued with the idea of
grounding. I've been a little
uncompelled by it. Um, but I will say
this does strike me as consistent with
the idea that grounding is not only
potentially a significant factor in
something like human health, but that we
have almost certainly disrupted
the natural relationship that we have
electromagnetically to the ground. And I
was thinking about this as I was coming
over here in my, of course, rubber
bottom shoes, right? an insulator that
prevents you from being connected uh to
the earth in an electromagnetic way. So
anyway, I was fascinated by a the fact
that you have a perceptual mode that is
totally cryptic to uh us humans that is
apparently an important part of the
ecological interaction between
apparently all flowering plants and at
least bees presumably other arthropods
as well.
So there's a question about um
does does the act of flight cause uh
insects
who visit plants in order to get nectar
and inadvertent to them but the point
for the plant end up um pollinating as a
result? Does the act of flight cause you
to lose electrons such that when you
arrive you were effectively positively
charged as a flying insect be or not?
There's that question and then there's
the question of do other insects besides
bees are they able to detect uh which is
the second part of what Adam is talking
about in this clip right that uh that it
also acts as a mode of communication
between the plant where we we would have
using our limited understanding of
senses. We would have thought can they
you know can they smell can they detect
can they you know can they can they
smell can they see uh can they feel uh
through sort of vibratory uh or you
tactile methods the lack of nectar and
thus move on quickly without considering
all of these other sensory modalities
that actually exist.
&gt;&gt; Right? And so I think the answer to the
first question is clear. It seems to be
that that flying insects are naturally
positively charged by virtue of the fact
that they have lost negatively charged
electrons. Electrons being inherently
negatively charged. They get stripped
off in the same way
&gt;&gt; as they fly by the act of fly
&gt;&gt; by the act of flying. Um so it's like uh
rubbing I think a feather uh on a
balloon or rubbing a a a plastic rod
with a a cloth. The stripping of the
electrons creates a static charge, which
we've all experienced. You can create it
as you're scooting across your carpeted
floor and then you touch the doororknob
and the charge you've built up
discharges with a little little
lightning bolt that you can actually see
in the dark. Um,
&gt;&gt; but anyway, okay. So, the bees are
naturally charged by virtue of flight
and that I might have seen coming. I
didn't realize that the plants were
inherently negatively charged. And I did
a little digging on why the plants are
negatively charged and I got a lot of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] back. Okay.
&gt;&gt; I'm sure.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I have not gone looking at that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I initially got
back was well, you know, all creatures
including plants do a lot of work to get
a voltage across their membranes um by
virtue of ion pumping.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; that doesn't
&gt;&gt; No,
&gt;&gt; that doesn't get you there. It doesn't
get you there unless the um positive
charges the protons that is a hydrogen
atom without its electron which is just
simply a uh a proton which is positively
charged unless they're lost to the
environment. It doesn't result in a net
charge. It just results in a voltage
across the membrane. So, even though
there's a lot of explaining about the uh
the work that the plant is doing to get
the inside of its cells to be negatively
charged, it does not explain.
&gt;&gt; It's the beginning of a story, but it it
doesn't it doesn't get us there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not even it's not even really
involved as far as I can tell.
&gt;&gt; It it could be the beginning of a
relevant story.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, if Yeah. If there was some
mechanism where the positive charges
built up somewhere, of course, there's
pressure for that not to happen because
the positive charges repel each other.
But anyway, it seems to be a simple
extension of the fact that the Earth
itself is somewhat negatively charged.
And so you've got basically a negative
antenna sticking up off the Earth. All
plants are in effect permanently
grounded is what's going on.
&gt;&gt; And that results in the negative charge.
&gt;&gt; But these negative charges um are sens
&gt;&gt; that seems that that seems like right.
It's satisfying and it does it doesn't
require all that e extra architecture of
the cells and their um you know movement
of of protons.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; but in any case so this opens up several
kinds of questions. A you've got the
plants are negatively charged presumably
always have been. The bees as long as
there have been bees have been
presumably positively charged
&gt;&gt; after as they fly as they fly
&gt;&gt; as a result of their flight
&gt;&gt; in the hive. You might think that they
because the hive itself is attached to
the ground would also be negatively
charged maybe.
&gt;&gt; Kind of depends how it's attached and
it's a really interesting question. I
have not delved there. Um how it's
attached and what it's made of and how
insulating. I mean the fact
&gt;&gt; yeah what they're on. If they're if
they're on honeycomb which is fully
insulating then they're just going to
&gt;&gt; end up at some neutral which might be
actually neutral or might be slightly
negatively or possibly
&gt;&gt; right. And you might imagine that there
is a whole story to be told. A hives are
obviously constructed of different
materials. They're constructed in
different places. Those may have
radically significant impacts on the
foraging of those bees. In other words,
you might find that bee preference is
about places that do allow either the
buildup or the dissipation of charges
that allow this other system to
function. because
&gt;&gt; maybe another potential reason that bees
are failing that if hives are being
built in places that actually do not
allow them uh to build up the right
charge.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Although
we're doing so many things that have a
potential impact on this electromagnetic
uh interaction that who's to say I mean
you know you've got yeah pesticides
spraying the pesticides stick to the
plants. You know, one of the problems
with the early pesticides, if you're
interested in this story, I strong
&gt;&gt; You mean like early in time in history
or early applied in the crop?
&gt;&gt; Early in history.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, early in history, if you're
interested in the story, uh go read the
moth in the iron lung. It traces the
history of early pesticides trying to
beat an uh an escape of gypsy moth
caterpillars
um from Europe, which began to devastate
plants in the US. And anyway, the early
pesticides, some of them were effective,
but they washed off the plant. So every
time it rained, you had to reapply them.
And so the upgraded pesticides were ones
that persisted through that, which meant
that they were also on the fruit at the
point that you consumed it, etc., etc.
So question is, okay,
what is the impact of that on the
electromagnetism
uh of these plants as they're being
sought by bees? Anyway, there's lots of
things we're doing in the environment
that potentially have an impact. You
know, we're also uh putting up effective
giant antennas, right? Where we've got
these towers everywhere that and
electrical lines and the electrical
lines have fields of their own. And so,
the number of ways given that the
punchline of this is that it turns out
that the bees have evolved sensitivity
to this natural charge differential. Not
only does it result in pollen transfer
uh where the the pollen is partially
adhered to the bee by this electro uh by
static electricity
&gt;&gt; and then it it jumps. That's that's
that's remarkable. You know that that is
a piece of the pollination process that
always seemed a little too accidental
like half-hazard like really the the bee
is getting the nectar and has to just be
waggling around. Waggle is the wrong
word because it's used in a different
form in in honeybees, but has to be
moving around sufficient to get coated
in pollen. Everyone's presumably seen
bees that are coated in pollen, but uh
that seems that seems really lucky and
it feels less lucky if the pollen is
jumping onto the bee on account of the
difference in charge,
&gt;&gt; right? And so um you can imagine
adaptations on both sides. And the
digging I did suggests that the
adaptations on the bee side, I don't
think they've been fully explored, but
they've at least been somewhat explored.
And what has been discovered is that the
bees have become sensitive to the uh the
charge of individual flowers because as
Attenboroough points out, it conveys
um information about how recently the
flower was visited. And I will just tell
you from back when I was a bat
biologist,
one of the things that emerged in
looking at nectariviverous bats, that is
bats that visit flowers, is that the
game played by flowers, is it's game
theoretically fascinating. It's not just
simply that flowers have nectar and
animals visit them to collect the
nectar.
It's that the the plants have an
incentive to keep the insects moving. An
insect that stays on one bush all day is
not doing the job that the plant is
attempting to pay for. The plant needs
the bee to keep going. So
&gt;&gt; or the bat
&gt;&gt; or the bat or whatever the pollinator
might be
&gt;&gt; needs the animal to move on in order to
accomplish the job that is being done
here. So,
&gt;&gt; uh, to put it in in somewhat deeper
context, when you have pollen covering
your car, as we've recently had here,
&gt;&gt; so much
&gt;&gt; that pollen is wind dispersed pollen and
in order to be wind dispersed, it has to
be extremely light so that it floats on
the wind, which it obviously does very
effectively. It is not very efficient in
terms of the plant generating the pollen
reaching the plant capable of being
fertilized. So the broadcasting of huge
amounts of pollen is necessary in order
to get the job done and results in a
spectacular waste for the plant doing
this wind pollination thing. Insects are
a solution because an insect has a a
effectively a brain that can take it
precisely from one plant to a partner
plant which means that one you need a
lot less pollen and two the pollen can
be a lot bigger. it can be a bigger,
more durable thing because it's riding
on it's effectively taking an Uber
between plants. And so
&gt;&gt; and and and with that relationship, you
also get the evolution of showy flowers,
of good smelling flowers. You you get
the evolution of the communication by
the plants to woo the wouldbe
pollinators, which is to say the insects
and the bats and the hummingbirds and
such,
&gt;&gt; right? But the advertisement does not
have to be honest in each case. So the
pollinators are looking for plants that
are producing a large reward ratio for
the amount of searching activity and the
plants are economizing on how much
reward they're providing. If they're too
stingy, the pollinators will ignore that
plant altogether because it knows it's
not a good uh source of profit. Um so
the plants are constantly modulating the
behavior of the animals. they're
providing enough nectar to get them to
arrive, but not so much that the animal
could just sit there and drink all day.
So, it causes the behavior that we see,
the hunting behavior for, you know, for
a a big cache of nectar.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um, and so that interacts with this
system too. The bees are looking for
information that says that flower is not
worth visiting
um because it's been recently visited
and therefore is at least somewhat
depleted in terms of nectar. Of course,
it may not be in the plant's interest to
convey that if there's still value. So,
imagine a flower that has been visited
and depleted of nectar, but still has
pollen. The plant doesn't care that the
bee isn't going to get paid. In fact, it
may be good for the plant to have
effectively a dry flower advertising to
a bee and the bee lands, hunts for
nectar, doesn't get it, still gets
dusted in pollen, and has to fly off to
some other flower, which is exactly what
the plant is looking for. Um so the bees
have adapted to read these signals. That
much is very clear. The bees have
adapted and in fact they have hairs that
are sensitive to the electromagnetic
attraction of the flower. So you can
imagine that as a bee approaches a
flower there's almost a magnetic pole
that the that the animal can detect that
tells it actually this one hasn't been
visited in a while. It's probably a good
bet. What's less clear is whether or not
the plants are modulating these signals
because the plants are naturally
negatively charged. And so that's just a
feature of the universe. And the fact
that it happens to momentarily deplete
after a bee has visited is a natural
consequence of just the way static
electricity works. It dissipates. So the
question that I have is are the plants
modulating these signals in a way that
is clearly adaptive and
&gt;&gt; to them
&gt;&gt; to the plants, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well,
and no plant will only have one modality
of signal, right? There will be uh if
you have a pollinator as opposed to a
wind dispersed like a fur tree. Uh if
you have a pollinator you have a flower
which is a visual signal and often the
visual signal goes beyond the visual
spectrum that we can see. So bees for
instance can see into the ultraviolet
and you have probably many people will
have seen images of like ultra uh what
daisies look like under ultraviolet uh
which is even more like pointed towards
the middle of the
&gt;&gt; Yeah. There's like little landing strips
that we can't see. Yeah. Uh and then
there's of course the the alactory
signals. Uh so whether or not the plant
can modify the electromagnetic signals
uh does not necessarily mean even if it
can't doesn't mean that it can't modify
other aspects of it of its signal.
Although we do not we know that some
flowers close up uh at the time of day
when their pollinators are not out right
you have night blooming flowers but much
more often you have day blooming
flowers. uh that that close up when
their pollinators aren't around. Uh thus
potentially preserving both their petals
and their aromomas. Um and for sure
there is evidence of uh modulation of
scents. Um both the the kind of you know
floral scents that we associate with how
how flowers smell as beautiful but also
uh pherommones that mimic uh the females
of the pollinators uh that they are
trying to attract.
&gt;&gt; Right? And so the question is how would
you test whether or not the plants are
modulating this signal the way they
modulate other signals and
&gt;&gt; I was wrestling with that question and I
came up with a kind of a quadrant where
there are some predictions one of which
I think is very clear.
&gt;&gt; Um the
flowers have a differential interest in
being visited depending upon what kind
of uh life cycle they have. In other
words,
&gt;&gt; you have plants that have both male and
female parts. In some of those plants,
they're both active at the same moment.
In some of those plants, they're
sequential. I've forgotten what the term
for that is, but you can imagine that uh
a plant that was switching from its male
phase to its female phase, unless those
phases overlap, that there would be a
period in which they do not want
visitation. And then there are two
periods in which they want visitation.
But even better is the fact that at the
point that a plant has been fertilized,
at the point pollen has been delivered,
the plant actively, if I'm getting the
ecology right, has an active interest in
not being visited because it has some
set of pollinators and it wants to
concentrate those pollinators efforts on
flowers where there's still a profit
from the plant's perspective
&gt;&gt; to be made. And so the question is,
could you detect something like the
shutdown of the electromagnetic
attraction? Right? The bees are looking
for this negative charge. It's depleted
when the plant has been visited. It
apparently reestablishes itself over
time as the nectar refills. At the point
that the plant has been fertilized and
has nothing left to gain from
pollinator, you might expect that
effectively faster than the petals would
wilt that you would see a shutting down
of this electromagnetic signal. So from
the point of view of an approaching bee,
it can tell that that's already a spent
flower and it can spend its time
elsewhere which would be in the interest
of the plant.
&gt;&gt; Uh I didn't I don't remember it from the
Atenboroough video and I don't I it's
been a while since I looked at anything
primary on this. Are you suggesting that
the bees can detect the EMF, the
electromagnetic field uh at some
distance
&gt;&gt; or do they need to be
&gt;&gt; No, it's it's going to be at on
approach.
&gt;&gt; That's that's what I like very very
close.
&gt;&gt; But imagine a a bush full of flowers,
some of which have already been
pollinated and some of which have yet to
be pollinated. The plant wants the
pollinator to concentrate on the flowers
that still have yet to be pollinated,
hopefully bringing pollen from somewhere
else. And so what I'm imagining is it
would take adaptation to cause an active
shutdown of that mechanism rather than
just its passive decay as the plant
falls apart. So instead of being over
the course of hours or days, it might be
in a matter of a minute. just the same
way that the visitation causes a quick
change in uh in that parameter. And you
might even be able to see this, you
know, at a cellular level because of
course the plant does have the
capability to move ions around and so it
could neutralize a charge. So anyway,
I'd be very interested to know if we can
detect the activity of selection having
favored the modulation of that signal in
some way that is not accidental. Well,
or even I mean I feel like the mechanism
could be B lands on flower. Uh charge
gets neutralized between both bee and
flower. Bee flies off less uh less
positively charged than it was. He was
she was uh and flower is at the moment
less wait I reverse that. The bee came
in
&gt;&gt; positively
&gt;&gt; positively charged. The bee the flies
away with more electrons. the flower
remains um at a more neutral state. And
so can you can the flower effectively
block electromagnetic transmission from
the rest of the plant and maintain its
new neutral charge since being visited
by the by the uh pollinator.
&gt;&gt; Yep. I agree with that. Although in that
case you have to ask the question of
whether the plant is simply
not spending energy to rebuild a charge
that has no uh utility to it rather than
an active shutdown. I'd be much more
compelled by an active turning off of
that signal which I think would be
detectable. Um but anyway, it's
fascinating. You might also imagine that
there are games played by pollinators
that, you know, if they can neutralize
the negative charge that suggests a
fresh flower, then they could maybe
retain, you know, especially given the
way pollinators work. The pollinators
know the specific location of the plants
they visit. Generally, they track this.
They actually have adaptations that
allow them to keep track of it. And so
if you've discovered a flower that's
putting out nectar at some rate, you
don't necessarily, you know, if you're a
bee in a hive, you may very well want
other bees to be able to detect it
because they're your your sisters. Um,
and even more highly related than normal
sisters would be, but you don't
necessarily want other insects to detect
it. Um, and in fact, I wonder in the
case of honeybees,
honeybees famously communicate the
location of rich patches of uh, resource
pollen and nectar with the waggle dance.
And it could be that a beehive that has
become aware of a patch of nectar
uh would actually be interested in
neutralizing the visibility or the
attractiveness of that patch to other
insects because it doesn't need them as
much.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Although I mean it's complex
systems, man. And part of the benefit is
that uh the pollen jumps onto the bee
when you have the the electron
differential. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh so I I I feel like that's uh I can
imagine the little bee engineers trying
to make this happen and then realizing
there were unexpected consequences of of
their engineering protocol.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's the beauty of this being
natural selection is that it only it
only works if it works.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I just I so I I think it won't I I
think it's I think it won't work because
you've got both sides of of the
trade-off.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, it's an interesting question
and you know and you've got both sides
of the trade-off. Also, if you had like
a, you know, a daisy bush, the animal
still gets a benefit from knowing which
flowers are unvisited,
although that advantage
is conveyed by the last bee. So, I don't
know. I think I think it's an
interesting question as to whether or
not there might be some um I'm I'm sure
we can find systems in which blocking
that signal would be to the advantage of
uh the first animal to visit. I'd be
curious if it ever happens and whether
they
&gt;&gt; given that information is being
transferred uh there is the potential
for communication to be occurring
not just between uh the signaler and the
recipient but between two asynchronous
synchronous potential recipients of the
signal.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Exactly.
All right. Well,
I think we're there.
&gt;&gt; All right. All right. Um, maybe the sun
has come out by now. Who knows? How How
would we possibly know?
&gt;&gt; We'd have to install a hole in the wall
or something like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I say I say we do it. I I I say we
do it. Okay. So, we'll actually be back
on Saturday uh in order to accommodate a
little more travel next week. Uh and uh
check and we'll do a Q&amp;A then. Uh so uh
consider joining us not just for the
podcast but the Q&amp;A on Saturday uh
afterwards on Locals as always. And
until you see us next time, be good to
the ones you love, eat good food, and
get outside.
&gt;&gt; Be well everyone.