We have uh Dr. Jack Cruz on the show
today and um he is a neurosurgeon and
somebody that I'm super excited about to
have um yeah speaking with us here
today. So Jack, thank you for coming on
the show. No problem. Um you are in El
Salvador right now, which I'm jealous
of. I'm actually in Massachusetts. We're
just coming out of winter and uh you
know, one of the most difficult parts of
the year for me specifically um
especially after I learned about your
work. I um you know this is a
photography channel and um you know but
I like to think that the community that
I have here we talk a lot about theory
and philosophy of photography. It's less
about you know camera gear and you know
falling victim to marketing tactics and
things that people are trying to sell
us. So community that I have here are
real thinkers and um I think that your
message is extraordinarily important
nowadays. I have had a profound change
in my health since I found you about a
year and a half ago and after years of
abusing myself through technology which
I really didn't know that I was doing.
um when I came across your work and I
had my changes, I have just been
extremely fired up to get you here to
spread this message to a community that
may not have heard about it yet. So, um
I want to jump in by speaking about some
of these statistics. Uh this is the
United States specifically, but you
know, we can extrapolate this to the
whole world. Approximately 1 in 10
people in the United States are on an
SSRI drug.
40% of the population will develop
cancer. 1 in 36 kids will be do
diagnosed with
autism.
41.9% of the population are considered
obese with a BMI above
30. 22% of children ages 2 to 19 are
obese. Roughly 90 90,000 new Parkinson's
cases every single year.
61% of adults are expected to have some
form of cardiovascular disease by
2050 and 41 million adults have
diabetes. I am [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] pissed off about
these statistics.
Honestly, this seems to me like our
country is completely falling apart and
everybody wants to focus on food or a
lack of supplements or something like
that as the root cause of this. But now
with what I've learned through your
work, I realize that this is a
distraction or diversion. So, I just
want to basically start off by asking
Jack, what is wrong with our current
environment?
um a lot. But you you have to realize
that the truth has been obuscated by the
people that started this. And that's
like the hardest discussion to have with
people because when they're asleep and
they don't know they're asleep and they
don't know what they're addicted to is
the thing that's actually causing those
numbers, it's a really tough discussion
to have. Like when you sit down with an
alcoholic uh and there's a bottle of
Jack Daniels sitting on the bar,
everybody knows what the problem is. If
you, you know, are in a pharmacy that
just got looted by a bunch of, you know,
pill
heads, everybody knows what the problem
stems from. Here's the interesting thing
about this silent war that we're having
in the United States. It's caused by a
silent weapon. And the problem is
because it's caused by a silo weapon,
nobody seems to be able to put their
finger on it. And then a guy like me
uh who's been doing this for 20 years
and telling people a very consistent
story. the uh how shall we say the
photograph changed about two years ago
when I stepped into the limelight and
started talking to the mover movers and
shakers of the world about this very
issue about actually the genesis of
where this problem began and when you
take people back to the Manhattan
project people kind of stop they go what
do you mean this goes all the way back
to
1945 and I said well that's when science
science in the United States was stolen
by the Department of Defense and also by
the the corporate structure of the
United States and they learned the
lessons in World War II from the
Manhattan project. Why? In two years
they built uh a bomb which all of us
know about but it was the largest
engineering project ever. They harness
scientists from all over the world and
they were actually able to pull off
something that to be quite honest with
you, if Vegas was taking odds on it,
people would have said probably not. And
because of that
success, the process that science used
to pull that massive engineering feed
off was then basically brought right
into all different versions of science.
And unfortunately and this is the real
unfortunate part it also entered the
world of medicine and that is the reason
why we have a huge problem in
centralized medicine. So the basic
problem is they they silo scientists. So
they put them in different silos. So
this would be like the way for you guys
to think about it as photographers. It's
uh trying to come up with an awesome
picture, but you're not able to put red,
blue, green, yellow, and purple
together. It's almost impossible task to
do. But the reason why the system is
built this way is because of the success
of the Manhattan Project. So after the
Manhattan project's done, most people
know that there's this group of people
that come and get invited back into the
US military in 1959 or 58. That's DARPA.
It turns out the same people who formed
DARPA outside the government were the
same people that were involved with this
Manhattan project. So when you begin to
see that, you can see that the infection
spread because believe it or not,
Eisenhower was the guy that got rid of
this, how shall I say virus cuz that's
what it was. And the leader of that
virus was a guy named Leslie Groves. And
Groves ran the Manhattan project. He's
the guy that hired, you know, all the
scientists um in that project uh through
a program called uh Operation Paperclip.
And I think most people these days know
about the movie Oppenheimer. They've
probably seen it. But in that movie, you
never get to see the stuff that we're
talking about here right now. The real
nefarious part of this, and this will
show you just how crazy this story is,
is the gentleman that that Groves relied
on to go to Europe to poke the right
scientists, mainly physicists, that were
involved in the brand new field of
quantum physics or a lot of Jewish
scientists from all over Europe. His
name is Allan Dulles. And Allan Dulles
uh started to corral all these people
and bring them back.
So, one of the key things that happens
later, um, but I guess we'll talk about
it now because we're jumping around a
little bit. Uh, because of this help
that Dulles gives,
um, the people who try to make Dulles
feel indebted, the DARPA people
indebted, it's a a group of people that
go on to form Israel. And the the the
he's saying is, look, you took our
Jewish scientists to make the bomb. So
now we would like you to give us help
back to get the bomb. So we're not going
to go into the full effects of this. But
this problem, I think everybody who's
listening to this knows that this is
going on still to this very day right
now. I mean, we just had the JFK files
released. People know, you know, an
inconvenient truth. the truth truth that
I've been telling. You know, I've gotten
uh pretty popular on on social media in
the last 6 months specifically because
of that part of this story with the
Danny Jones podcast when you know Danny
famously said, "Well, I don't think
these guys are a part of it." And I
said, "Oh, trust me, not only a part of
it, they're one of the major
architects." Well, now that's that cat's
out of the bag. Everybody kind of knows
it. But the story that you're asking me,
how does this lead to the numbers that
you read at the beginning of the
podcast? Because, you know, this looks
like a random walk through Jack's head
or history, but it's really not a random
walk. All of these things are indelibly
linked. And for you to see the
photograph properly, you have to have
the right perspective. I think your
your group would probably understand
that quite well.
And what happens next? DARPA begins to
hire scientists in postw World War II on
things that they're interested in. One
of the things that happens that is it's
almost like I would say quantum
entanglement, but it's a very
interesting story during the war uh
grows and most people know that the
Manhattan project is called the
Manhattan because it started in the in
the uh Empire State Building in New
York. It had to be moved. But the
question is why did it have to be moved?
Most people don't know this part of the
story. Well, it got moved to the desert
because there was a lot of uh complaints
and rumors that the Germans were sending
Ubot into New York Harbor because they
knew that Allan Dulles poked all these
Jewish scientists that were all
physicists that were all interested in
nuclear physics. So the Germans knew
what the deal was. So Groves told FDR at
that time, hey, look, we don't have
enough manpower because we're fighting,
you know, two fronts, uh, both in Europe
and in the Pacific to patrol the docks
of New York to find out is this really
happening. So, uh, Gross comes up with
the magical idea, well, the the mob
controls the docks in New York. Why
don't we go talk to the mob and see, you
know, if they'll be patriotic? So, uh,
the government, specifically FBI, CIA,
go and talk to the guy that runs the
docks. The number one guy that runs the
docks was a guy named Luc Lucky
Luchiano, but he was in jail at the
time. So, his proxy was a guy named Meer
Lansky. And Meer Lansky and Luchiano uh,
through history are linked. Myer Lansky
is the famous Jewish accountant banker
that was the accountant for Murder Inc.,
Lucky Luciano is the head of Murder Inc.
And what happens uh there the government
tells Lansky what their concerns are and
they ask for help and Lansky says,
"Okay, I think we can do this, but you
have to do something for me if I'm going
to help
you." And what was the the help? The
help was, I want you to get Lucky
Luchiano out and from a maximum security
prison to a minimum security prison so
he can help me run my business. And
magically the uh Department of Defense
uh makes that happen and that's
discoverable by you know savages today.
So the key thing that happens right
after that is Myer Lansky's really
successful with General Gro's request.
He finds a whole bunch of spies. I think
total of 19. He kills them all with the
exception of one guy. And it turns out
it's a surgeon from Nazi Germany named
Plotkin and Kurt Plot Platin. And he
tells Lansancy this craziest story that
the Nazis are using uh Mexican peyote to
see if they can mind control people.
Yeah.
and all different kinds of other things.
And and u Lansky's like, I don't think
um I don't think I'm going to kill this
guy. I'm gonna actually deliver the
information, you know, to the federal
government. And the government is very
happy that, you know, these guys find
and confirm the rumors, but they
actually sit this guy plaquing down and
start talking and they find out that
they the Nazis have this huge mind
control uh program. Yes. Ongoing. And
they don't know anything about it. And
this guy gives them more and more
information. So, uh, at this time, this
is pre-CIA because remember the CIA
comes in in 47. Yeah. It was the OSS at
that point. Exactly. OSS and ONI are the
two branches of the the war
department and they decide to study this
stuff. So, the study goes on and on and
on. Well, you know that Lansky becomes
famous later after the Cuban Revolution,
like when we jump forward to
59. His partner in uh the Jewish mob is
a guy named uh Mod Dallas. Mo Dallas is
very famous for being one of the key
architects of Las Vegas. Most people
know that one of Lansky's really good
friends is is Bugsy um Meyer. Bugsy gets
killed by the Murder Inc. guys, because
all the money that they spent in Vegas,
the casino is not doing well. So,
literally, I think it was an hour after
that hit goes in the Beverly Hills
Hotel, Maya Lansky and Mod Dallas go
into the casino and the first thing that
they do, uh, is they paint the windows
black, they offer free buffets, uh, they
take the clocks off the wall, and then
they start to change all the light
bulbs, and um, they also bring one-armed
bandits into the
casinos. Why does this happen? Well, it
turns out that guy that Lansky found on
the dock with all the work through the O
andi over this now it's almost 12 13
years they find out that light has a
huge impact on the way people behave and
what's happening through the whole
1950s is um we now get the CIA in 47 who
begins to study this the first crazy
thing that the CIA does that was part of
MK Ultra but then flipped out was the
art world. Most of the people who are
interested in artwork like you guys
probably are all modern art was
basically a scops by the CIA to front it
and that's where they used to launder
money. So for example, if you've ever
seen Carl Likenstein's painting in
1963 of the sunrise, it's very very um
modern. It's um for me it's not my
taste, but that's the type of artwork
that they sponsored. They went around
all the uh famous museums at the town to
push this stuff. But
Lansky starts pushing the issue with
what he's learned from this new program
that the CIA starts. They rename it.
It's called MK Ultra. Guy who's running
MK Ultra is a guy named Sydney Gotautle.
And then Sydney Gotautle takes some of
the ideas that he learned from this Nazi
surgeon and starts doing it huge
operations on us. So one of the most
famous ones that um you know was
discoverable uh for MK Ultra was they
basically dropped LSD out of a plane, a
US Navy plane in St. Louis. uh when I
was on Rick Rubin's podcast with Bobby
Kennedy, we had talked about that and
you know a lot of people were surprised
at that in
2023 that they didn't know this history.
I said, "Well, there's a lot of things
you don't know." Yes. The MK Ultra
program. And then you also have to know
that the MK Ultra program once they
moved from wires to wireless then to
light, that's where the story got really
interesting. And you know, I detailed
all of that on Danny's podcast. For
people who are interested in it, there's
a guy named Delgato who is a researcher.
Uh he's he spent a lot of time in
Mexico, Spain, uh working with some of
the people down in New Orleans and he
basically put wires in bull's heads to
see if he could change their behavior.
He did that. Then he did wireless
technology and then he began to use
light. Then they moved from bulls and
they they went through the mammals and
eventually of course they got to us.
They did some of these prison
experiments in California people that
were locked up. Uh and then once the
program got sophisticated enough then it
was moved to the Stanford Research
Institute. So SRRI becomes MK Ultra. So
what do you need to know as a savage in
all this time? Remember our health
metrics are starting to go bad. This is
when we're moving out of the industrial
economy in the United States and we're
headed to the information age and
technology. This is the beginnings of
solid state physics. This is the
beginnings of Silicon Valley. We're
talking 50s into the 60s. We still don't
have Intel. We still don't have
Microsoft. We still don't have, you
know, hard technology, right? We don't
have any of that stuff. But we're
building the infrastructure to
completely retool the economy. M
so what happens uh next at Stanford
research you have the comorbid and I use
that term very very
intently of
technology healthcare and uh this
retooling of the economy and you begin
to find out that they learn very very
quickly that they can use light to
program people. So, the idea is to get
screens in front of everybody. So,
you're probably not old enough to know
this, but the original computers that
came out in the early ' 80s used to have
VGA screens, which were green
um I guess lettering and numbering, not
blue. And the screen looked like, you
know, an old TV tube. Oh, I do. I I do
remember seeing those. Yes.
So that was the the first and second
iteration of some of those computers
back I remember when I was a kid back in
the early8s one of those computers that
had
ridiculous so little power would cost
112,000 you know a decade before that
the supercomputers of IBM they were
millions of dollars and they filled
rooms and they had to be airond
conditioned so you could see what was
happening is that shrinkage and Moore's
law was happening
And then what was happening in society,
we were getting the technology and
slowly getting addicted to it. So how
did they merge this idea? Stanford
Research Institute was critical in
changing the screen technology. So what
did they do? They made everything blue
lit. So now here comes the hard stop for
everybody. Why they pick blue light? Now
that was the work of MK Ultra. That was
the work of SRRI. Why don't a bunch of
Americans who heard the numbers that you
read out are furious with their iPhone
and iPad? Well, the guy that was Alan
Dulles's protege named Richard Helms
destroyed all the files for MK Ultra in
1973. Okay? Because he became the head
of the CIA. Now, he did not know some of
those files still persisted. That's how
we found out about things a little bit
later. For example, in 1977,
uh, Senator Frank Church from Kentucky
put on the Church Commission, and that
was a very, very long commission. There
is where we learned about MK Ultra.
That's where we were learned about the
uh the gun that could give you a heart
attack. Um, that was electromagnetic.
It's also where we learned that the
CIA had 400 operatives in the media.
It's where we found out that Walter
Kankite and Dan Rather were two of those
people. We found out a lot of
information uh that you would have
thought at that time would stun people,
but people back then did not realize
what DARPA's ultimate plan was to
actually take the idea of Kurt Platkin
and use it on their own population at
scale. 360 million people. We're
building pieces and parts. Remember I
told you about the siloing
of different things. So in the 1960s,
late 1960s, a guy named Alan Fry comes
onto the scene. He uh does some very
interesting uh work for DARPA. He's very
famous in in the uh world that I'm in,
but with a good connotation. Why? Cuz he
was never cancelled from DARPA. But what
did he find? He found something called
the fry effect. The fry effect is that
you can use pulse microwaves and you can
actually get voices to show up in your
head. That's what he's famous for with
people who are targeted people. But the
real thing that he found that was most
interesting to a guy like me is that you
could use non-native EMF to open the gut
barrier, the brain barrier, the barrier
that you have between your eye and your
retina. All you had to do is use
non-native EMF. Remember I told you
silent wars that you have silent weapons
so you'll have no way of knowing it. So
when the government gain the ability to
open up the bloodb brain barrier
something very interesting happens in in
the world that very few people really
know about these days.
Um, remember the people had the same
technology coming out of World War II
with the Russians. And the Russians
tried to warn the United States that if
you started to use the low end of the
electromagnetic spectrum on people that
bad things could happen. It got so bad
that the Russians sent a delegation to
Sandos Nuclear Lab to tell the people
that were the, you know, worked after
the bomb, these are the people that were
part of the original deep state. These
are General Gro's people um that this
problem exists. Of course, you know that
the military said, "These guys are full
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] We're not going to believe
them. They're Russians. You know, we're
supposed to hate them because that's
what General Gr told us." And it was
very frustrating. This this meeting
happened in 57 through 58. So what did
the Russians decide to do? They build
this huge antenna in Ukraine. Uh and
they start sending out this frequency
called the Woodpecker frequency. You
could hear this the whole time I was
growing up uh when I was a kid. It
worked on the same latitude as I believe
Portland, Oregon. It would just send
this chirping message. And when people
learned about this, they were like, "Why
are the Russians do this?" This was the
Russians trying to warn the United
States military and the people in the
United States that you're making a big
mistake if you do this
for you guys as tech uh you know,
photographers understand that you know,
Russia doesn't have an Apple, Russell
doesn't have a Google, Russia doesn't
have Facebook. You got to ask yourself
why when they have the same technology.
I mean, it's a very reasonable question
to ask when you're a savage.
So, the next thing that happens is
probably the most shocking part of the
story that I haven't talked that much
about, but the Russians decide to really
send the message to the United States.
They then use um a pulse microwave
device to shoot at the US embassy in
Moscow. So, we have three straight US
ambassadors that come down with a blood
cancer. Wow. At the time. And then
everybody that was in the Moscow embassy
started to complain about horrible
problems with tinitis and man's disease.
And no one at that time in the United
States could figure out what was going
on. So
eventually the physicists that are part
of
DARPA, turns out it's this guy Fry tells
the military exactly what's going on.
Eventually, they figure out how to fix
this. Now, you're going to laugh when
you hear this, but you know that the
idea conspiracy theory is actually a
term that was coined in our lexicon by
the CIA. I have heard that. Yes. about
the JFK assassination. Did you know that
tinfoil hat comes from this event? I I
didn't know that, but I'm I'm not
surprised. Guess guess what the result
was? The DARPA came up with the idea to
line the
entire inside of the Moscow embassy with
tin foil to block the effect. And did it
did it work? Yeah, it actually did work.
And you have to remember it worked at
that time because they weren't really
using high frequency stuff. They were
trying to send a message that if you use
this on your
population, you're going to create a
huge problem for the world. Okay? So for
people who don't believe this story, you
can go back look in the Federal
Register. In 1973, Henry Kissinger gave
everybody who worked at the Moscow
embassy from 1967 to 1973 hazard pay.
They got 30% more pay for working there.
So that is where Havana syndrome first
comes. But where's the name coined? The
name is
coined because Obama used that uh down
in 2008 2009 in the embassy down there.
Turns out it was the Cubans that used it
on our embassy. This was now remember
communists tied to Russia still trying
to send the message to the United
States. What was happening in 2008 2009
that stimulated Castro to do this. They
knew that the SRRI was moving to the
brain health initiative. Guess where the
brain health initiative was going to go
to Central and South America where brown
and darkkinned people were. Why? Because
what
did the government find out at SRRI?
People that are heavily melanated are
not as susceptible to electromagnetic
devices as not as they should be. So the
government said we need to study this.
That was why this all went down at the
time it went down. Okay. So now, you
know, I don't know how old you are, but
you look like you're in your
mid30s. You have lived in a world that
is now filled with these devices. You
know, it's not these are not devices
that are targeted at you. These are
devices that you hold in your hand. You
have computers. This is how we talk with
me in El Salvador. But they're ubi just
so you
know
the the number that you didn't read on
your list to me that needs to be added.
Each idiot in the United States on
average owns 12 devices that emit RF or
microwaves. Wow. Okay. Did you know
that? No, I did not. And that's
shocking. So, guess here's another
thing. You you mentioned something about
obesity, about how everybody's getting
obese. Do you know that every 10%
increase spending of tech money that the
NHANES data for obesity goes up? 10%.
Yeah, that's it's absolutely incredible.
And guess what? Here's the thing that
you need to understand. The data is
discoverable, but remember who I told
you about who we're dealing with? We're
dealing with the Department of Defense
in DARPA. So, they've done a really good
job with your generation. Remember, I'm
a gray beard. I'm in my 60s. You're not.
I've seen the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] nefarious things
they've done. Okay. What you don't
realize is that they've been doing this
on everybody else. Then they stopped in
2008 when Obama came in. Then Obama
decided, okay, now we're going to turn
this on our own people because we're
going to find out if this really works.
Remember, this is where ideiation
without execution leads to deletion. So
Obama, the idea starts from Myer Lansky
all the way to SRRI, but Obama's the guy
that decides to execute the program to
see if you really can control a
population. So what is the major idea
that I want you to
understand? The things that the
Department of Defense, NATO, and DARPA
want you to believe about Russia are the
same things that are about them. They're
communist, but we're using
electromagnetic devices to control and
harness the cows in the United States.
Doing it with weapons you can't see.
See, at least
Putin, people know who he is. There's no
silent weapons with him. But our
government is waging a silent war
utilizing weapons that we don't
understand. And they're doing it by
design. And they've addicted you to it.
Why? because the light frequencies that
they use marry up to the non-visual
photo receptors in the human body and
that's also work that was done at
Stanford that they found eventually just
so you know all of this is codified in
DARPA it g it's given to Google and then
it's also given to companies like
Facebook all of these are DARPA
companies at the origin okay so now this
is exactly exactly what I wanted to talk
about to set the stage here, Jack,
because just for for me, what I've
realized is, you know, I went through my
health problems about a year and a half
ago. I um I got to a tipping point to
where I started experiencing I was, you
know, deadlifting 400 lb. I was in the
best, you know, thought I was in the
best shape of my life, totally fine. But
I was spending a ton of time in front of
screens. My office was in the basement.
I wasn't connected to nature. I was
staying up all, you know, hours of the
night on screens, all that. And I hit a
tipping point to where my body started
to deteriorate like crazy. Thank God I
came across your information. And I
remember, I will never forget this day.
I was listening to one of your videos
and I was laying on the floor in my in
one of my rooms in my house and I felt
like I was dying. Literally, my arms
were burning pain. I couldn't walk up a
staircase without feeling like I was
about to have a heart attack. I had pain
throughout my body. I had twitches in my
muscles. I had all the brain fog. All
these things going on. I was laying on
the floor and I was listening to one of
your interviews. And this particular
room, I had house plants in this room.
And I was laying and listening and I was
looking at one of the plants. And as you
were speaking about the light, it
clicked for me. And I was like, "Holy
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if you take one of these plants
and I put it in a dark room or I put it
in front of a screen or something like
that, I take it out of its environment,
nature, it's going to die. It's going to
get sick and it's going to die." And
that was the beginning of it. So now
that we've established that this is
we've established the history and how
DARPA and you know the technology
companies are involved in this I'd like
to talk about what actually happens when
a human is in their natural environment
aka outside. We can talk about what
happens when they go inside and they're
addicted to technology, but in the
natural environment where a human is
optimized. What is actually happening
when you go outside, light hits your
retina, goes in your eye, or hits your
skin? Well, let's let's keep on the
track that we're on because I think
you're going to like where this goes
because we're going to we're going to
hit that. So, remember I told you about
Fry. Fry's the guy working with DARPA
figures out how these effects are.
Here's what you don't know. at the same
time being funded by DARPA's this other
guy named Robert O. Becker. Robert
Obecker is an orthopedic surgeon in New
York who's actually doing some amazing
work for the government on limb
regeneration for soldiers that are
coming back from Vietnam. He's model is
a salamander. He goes through frogs. He
eventually is twice nominated for the
Nobel Prize. Uh DARPA fans. He's
probably the most famous scientist at
the time when I was a young man.
Okay. He goes on TV 1977 and tells the
world that this antenna that the
government wants to build called Sanguin
in Wisconsin to track nuclear submarines
is dangerous. Then he takes it a step
further. He goes, "In fact, the power
lines that are in your backyard are
actually dangerous for you." Now
remember, nobody owns a microwave or a
cell phone yet. that's going to happen
literally five, six years later. He goes
on 60 Minutes and tells them the world
this literally his lab is defunded and
right away DARPA, holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] puts them
on ice. So, what I want to explain to
you is Fry teaches DARPA how to take
humans apart.
Becker is teaching the world how to put
them back together. And who do they
cancel? They cancel the guy who has the
answers for you laying on your basement
looking at the plants. Got it. That's
the key part of this story.
So, after Becker gets cancelled, the uh
science gets more developed. Here's
where it gets
interesting. To know what we're supposed
to do, you have to understand a little
bit about how we're built. So, between
probably 1998 and 2017, the nonvisual
photo receptor system, which I think you
guys will dig because you're all
photographers,
um, gets discovered, which turns out the
rarest color in nature, and I'm talking
about things that are alive is blue.
What should you know about blue?
uh from the biologic standpoint, not the
photography standpoint. Claude Shannon
came up with an information theory in
1948. He said basically for a message to
be precise and powerful, it has to be
unusual. This is the reason nature
doesn't use blue very commonly. So, if
you listen to the Reuben Yubberman
podcast that I did two years ago, uh,
Yubberman tells the story of one of his
friends named Nicholas Buren who is
sitting down with him in California in
Stanford says, "You guys are not going
to believe this, but we just discovered
that we have amphibian blue light
detectors in our brain." And, you know,
Uberman kind of chuckled and laughed.
And I'm looking at him. I'm like, "Makes
total sense to me." Why? Because the
story I just told you, Becker used what?
Salamanders and
frogs and then graduated to humans.
Okay. But
be humor didn't seem to know the
evolutionary history of how amphibians
and mammals are linked. And I thought
that was very very interesting in that
podcast. So once we find that melanopsin
is the blue light detector, we find out
it's in the brain. What do we find out
over from 98 to
2017? It's in our arteries. It's in our
subq fat. It's in every single tissue.
We look for it. So, you're saying, Jack,
that we have actual cells, not on just
our skin, but inside of our bodies,
which technically shouldn't see any
light, that are detecting, they don't
see light, but they absolutely respond
to it. So, for example, the ones that
you guys will be interested in are the
ones in our retina. They're called
intrinsic photo receptor cells. That's
the melanopsin cell. Those are the ones
that actually control your circadian
rhythm. They also go to another place
called the habenial nucleus that
controls the new territory in humans
which is the frontal loes. So, so that's
the key. Those are first order neurons
that come through your optic nerve that
go to those two way stations. Just
remember that the story gets more
interesting because when we find out
that this blue light detector is
everywhere, but blue light is rare in
nature, you actually begin to understand
what nature is really doing. Okay. Then
we find out 2009 we have a UVA detector
on our cornea and then we find out it's
in our skin. Remember the dermatologist
and opthalmologist been telling you your
whole life the sun is toxic for you,
right? But yet nature put a UVA detector
everywhere along your integimement. Kind
of shocks you. And then we start to
learn about a little bit about melanin.
How do we learn about melanin? Well,
melanin is something that most people
know about in the skin. They don't
realize that mammals do something
interesting with melanin. They
internalize it in their brain. And it
turns out it absorbs all parts of the
electromagnetic
uh spectrum which is the reason why I
told you they went to South America. The
other interesting thing about it and
this is something that you can discover
yourself. DARPA became very interested
in melanin for a what's their front
reason? the facade, not the stuff that
I'm telling you. It's the best thing to
use for solar panels when it's
dehydrated. Why? Because it communicates
you. You turn light into an electric
current. Nothing on the planet works
better than melanin. So, they're now
trying to work on this in the ISS.
That's the front for DARPA using all
this story. But there's something more
nefarious because it turns out the
regenerative current that Becker finds
in
1967 is 1 trillionth of 1 amp that takes
a red blood cell and turns it into a
degiated cell that's a stem cell that
fixes you. Now here's the interesting
part. How does this work?
this the red blood cell has to be turned
from oxygenated hemoglobin to something
called
methemoglobin because that's like a step
back in time. Then what actually happens
that
metoglobin through this current 1
trillion to 1 amp then gets turned into
a fetal red blood cell. You may not know
this, but when you inside your mama,
when you were
hypoxic, your red blood cells had
mitochondrial DNA. And it turns out
that's a key part of regeneration.
Because if you think about pregnancy,
pregnancy is like turning a germ line, a
egg, and a sperm, and then you come out
as a 9 lb baby. And it turns out the
program that you think is really really
bad called
cancer is actually what forms a baby
through this process.
It's controlled. Why? Because of the
part you didn't learn about Becker
because of DARPA.
So this is the part that gets really
interesting. Becker comes out and tells
people this is now 1970s as I told you.
I think it might be a bad idea if we put
all this technology and power line stuff
around
humans because I found one trillionth of
a one amp mirror actually allows us to
tap our stem cells and
regenerate. Well, the reason DARPA
didn't want that information out, my
friend, is because we know what takes
you apart. Now, we know what puts you
together. So, what are we going to do
with technology? We're going to get rid
of it. Okay. So now let's go back to
2008. What's the single most nefarious
thing that Obama does in his first term?
He signs the proclamation that we're
going to get rid of incandescent and go
to LEDs, which have a huge blue spike.
He tells the world the facade story, the
DARPA story. This is to save energy,
okay? Because we're subtracting out the
UV and the infrared A and the light.
We're just going to make this blue and
you're going to be fine. Then he does
something even crazier. He allows big
pharma to start to advertise on TV. Why
is that? Remember that whole church
commission thing that there's people in
the media that are working for the
government? Now you have big pharma able
to pay the salaries of the people in
media. So that now the government has a
propaganda arm that works indirectly
just like an NGO would to actually sell
people the story propaganda because
remember when their brains don't work
because you're using light at them at
scale what eventually happens you got
them in prison. You're living in
Massachusetts and you think you're free
and you have the illusion of being free.
Now the system is very close to being
ready to go at scale 2008 2009. Okay, we
go down to to Brain Health Initiative
and then they figure out a lot of
different things with this program. But
the two events that I want to bring you
back to before we go outside and teach
you how we're supposed to work, two
events happen, both of them with
African-Americans. First one is in the
Navy yards in Virginia where a guy comes
in on his rifle is carved ELF, extreme
low frequency. He goes in with that
rifle and kills 12 people in the
military. You never hear about this ever
again. Never heard. Yeah, never heard
about that. But you can still look it up
and find it for sure. Then a couple
years later, a black attorney with no
history at all goes in back into his
college at Florida State shoots the
library up. Doesn't kill anybody, but he
swears that he's hearing voices in his
head. Same thing as the guy in the
Navyyard. In other words, you're now
beginning to see they are testing this
on us and you don't know it. And they're
doing all different things around You
got towers around you, you got
satellites, you got everything. And
Jack, sorry to interrupt, but for people
that might find this hard to believe, I
really encourage you to go look up the
original patents on the iPhone and the
technology from Apple and see how DARPA
was actually involved in that technology
in creating it. Correct. That and that
that's one of the key when that that
phone came out, that was one of the key
metrics to make sure that you had one of
these devices in everybody's hand. Why?
Because the EMF they were delivering to
you was not only blue through the
screen, RF and microwaves. And just just
to make it even simpler, because I know
you guys may not know this, when the
iPad came out, Steve Jobs famously said
in his book, "Yeah, I created all this
cool stuff, but I would never let my own
kids use it." Well, I remember how he
died. He died from a retroparal cancer.
He's the guy that put our lexicon
laptop. He's the guy that every time you
saw him give a talk, his jeans, the
Levis's had where he put the phone.
These are the two areas you radiate in
between them. That's how you get a
cancer. And don't think the Jobs knew.
Let me tell you how I can prove that he
knew. So I iPad 2 comes out and you can
go and discover this right now. There is
an infrared detector in the iPad. Do you
know why it was put in? Jobs absolutely
said it needs to be put in because if
this device touches the skin of a child,
it should turn off. Wow. They never
marketed this technology. Why? Because
if you knew about it and why they put it
in, then you'd start going, "Well, is
this device healthy for me to use?"
Right. Exactly. Exactly. Got it.
Exactly. And you know how Apple is about
marketing. So, this will tell you how
complicit these people are. And I will
tell you, you guys look at Steve Jobs,
you know, as an icon. I look at him as a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] terrorist. Okay? Why? Because he
was complicit. And now this technology
has been turned on us. Yes. He's one of
the guys that allowed that. Same thing
as Paul Allen. Paul Allen also died from
one of the blood cancers just like the
guys, the three ambassadors in the
Moscow embassy incident. Exact same
answer. Just so you're clear.
Incredible.
So now to get to your
question, what do you need to learn
about when we go outside and we're not
in your basement with your hands
hurting? What's the
difference in that light versus the
light that technology
uses? Uh we are optimized for that light
tremendously. Almost every single key
protein in us from the Cambrian
explosion. When I say us, I'm talking
about
ukariots and all of our
friends are hem proteins. You know the
best hem protein that I think all of you
know since you're not scientists is
hemoglobin. Okay. So, I want you to
think about hemoglobin in a red cell
like a radio antenna. It looks like a
bagel or a bial and it's basically a
radio antenna for the sun to communicate
with your mitochondria. That's how I
want you to think about it. So, I told
you the story of Becker about how he
used in in a broken bone a red blood
cell differentiated. Remember when he
said this, this was considered
impossible in biology at the time that
there's nothing in biology that goes
back in time from a previous atomistic
form. Meaning this is literally space
travel. You're actually doing something
that biology says can't happen. Well, he
proved that it can and you don't know
about it because the military doesn't
want you to know about it. That's why he
was canled. So when you go outside, what
do you do? You make more red blood
cells. Your blood cells are perfect.
When you stay inside, like the day that
you were down in the basement, your red
blood cell atrophies. It's no different
than when you go to the gym. When it
atrophies, you get a disease called
anemia of chronic disease. To this day,
you open any book in medicine, they have
no answer for what causes that disease.
I'm going to tell you what it is. It's a
lack of UV and IR light. Turns out he
proteins their action spectra are UV and
infrared sometimes near infrared. Red
blood cell is very interesting. It's
mostly red. It's got a sharp cut off at
600 but it goes all the way down in the
UV. So that means hemoglobin which is
considered a pfin just like chlorophyll
is a pfin is a UV and IR detector.
What's the key for you understanding
Becker's work? UV and IR light are the
key to the regeneration programs. That
is what Becker really found. So guess
what DARPA found if we bring non-native
EMF blue light into the environment and
take away the regeneration part of the
program, we're screwed. We got we got
everybody. So, what I'd like you to do
now, go back and take a look at your
list that you started this with. That's
the cause because you have no way to
regenerate any of those things. That's
the reason the numbers are there. And
that's the reason the numbers are
getting worse and worse and worse. Why?
Because you are addicted to all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
that's around you right now. That is you
are dropping a massive massive bomb. And
I really hope that everyone's listening
to this because this might be extremely
hard for you know if you've just come
across this information for you to
believe and it might take you actually
going outside like it did and changing
your actual environment for you to
understand this not just words because
for me when I felt like I was dying I
went to the doctors and they one doctor
told me that I might have MS you know
other doctors were just throwing
supplements at me. I went to a
functional health place. They just did
nothing but take my money. The only
thing that worked was me waking up
before
sunrise, standing on the ground with my
shoes off, watching the sunrise, and
then spending the majority in as much
time as I possibly could outside with as
little clothes on as possible. And my
about being the Sphinx. I'm sorry. What
was that? I said you got my message
about being the Sphinx. Exactly.
Exactly, Jack. And this is what I'm
saying is I am so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] pissed off is
because one of the reasons is I got a
pair of blue blocking uh uh glasses and
I wear them at night when I'm driving
and one of the things that just insensed
me is I was driving one night and I kind
of pulled the glasses down just past my
eyes and all of a sudden you see that we
are
enveloped completely covered in a mist
of blue light at all times, 247.
Exactly. It's not It's not just
nighttime light. Like the the people
that are in control of DARPA, the people
that in control of Stanford, the people
that in control of the academia, of the
science world, they want you to believe
that, oh yeah, you know, blue light
maybe at night's bad. Blue light's bad
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] all the time. Yes. The only blue
light you're designed to get is blue
light from the sun. Why? Because the
antidote in the sun is red light.
Remember, blue light never shows up
without red light. And that's the key of
why you began to understand how
nefarious Obama was because he took out
UV and IR light so that you would never
have it. That's what was in an
incandescent bulb. That's why when you
were you guys were little, you touched
the bulb, you burn your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hand.
You know, with an LED light, you can
change it no matter what because there's
nothing as heat. So when you begin to
understand that if we had incandesence,
the numbers that you read probably
wouldn't be as bad. But you have to
realize you're a young guy compared to
me. When I went to school, we had the
windows open. We used to go out for gym.
Now we didn't we had books. Now
everybody's got screens and they got
Wi-Fi and they got cameras [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
everywhere, right? Got it? So when
you're a parent and you're sending your
kid, remember Department of Education is
a government place. You're sending your
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] kid to
Chernobyl every day when you understand
their science. Then when the kid comes
home, what do they do? They run straight
in their bedroom to do video games or
they're on Tik Tok. Kids don't do
anything anymore. And the problem is
parents don't realize they've been
conditioned for this. I grew up this
environment is foreign to me, okay, as
an old guy. And what you need to
realize, young people who are listening
to this, the first thing that they do
with kids, they give them a digital
babysitter, which is put a screen in
front of them. Exactly. Because guess
what
happens? The baby's brain has no milein.
It is absolutely the fastest way to
addict a child when you give them these
devices. It's exactly what DARPA knew.
This is the reason why they were behind
all this technology. They were behind
Google. They were behind uh Facebook,
behind Apple. Every screen is blue lit
except the one screen you know that I
helped get to market which is the
daylight computer which is one of my
members sons built a computer that can
be used in the sun where works
spectacular. The problem is guys like
you that are in your industry they don't
even know this computer exists. Why
exactly? Because Sergey Brin has been
trying to get rid of it. In fact, the
most ironic part of that story, Sergey
Brand and all his friends at A16Z and
Google try to bury this kid's work. I
had to wait until Sergey and Nicole
Shanahan got divorced and I sent Angen
to Nicole Shanahan and she gave him the
money to start this computer company.
Why? Because she had her own come to
Jesus moment, you know, after dealing
with me about the stuff you and I are
talking about. Why? because her daughter
is on your list. She's one of those kids
that got autism from her daddy.
Incredible. Incredible. So, okay. So,
let's just to to to recap here. This is
so important here. So basically what
you're laying out here, Jack, is with
the lighting that's indoors, we are
being assaulted by a certain type of
wavelength, a very specific type of
light. If you walk into a room, 435 435
to 470. Okay? So that's specifically
what the light is. When you walk into a
room nowadays, you it the the light
might look like what it does outside at
high noon, but you're not getting a huge
part of that natural spectrum. And what
is cut off is the part that's actually
regenerating the damage that is caused
by blue light. So,
go ahead. Oh, you got it. That's that
when you asked me the question, Jack,
what's the difference when we go outside
and not? You just nailed it, my friend.
all the regeneration program that Becker
found has been subtracted by your
government and they're forcing you to
live in that world and their friends in
where's the cantalion effect my world
big pharma in in centralized healthcare
the number one driver in every single
city in the United States is cancer care
I don't care what what hospital you're
in guess what they know that and if you
listen to the the the uh interviews. I
don't know if you guys heard this.
Hopefully after listening to this, you
just heard Howard Lutnik talking Shamath
yesterday about how the government
should be involved in healthc care
solutions and monetizing it for the
United States. Dude, let me just tell
you something. These guys, they are the
biggest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] criminals. They are not
our friends. They're not our friends.
No, they're not. None of them are. And
I'm telling you, I always have to remind
Americans this, especially your your age
group, cuz you guys [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] suck at
history. Just remember that the crazy
misfits from the UK came over here 250
years ago because of a 3% tax on [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
tea. They shot at the king. So guess
what? You listen to the story that I
just told you.
This is This is ridiculous that we're
taking it. And the reason we're taking
it is because you've been MK ultra by
light your entire life. They know. They
can actually tell you what they've done,
which they just did by dropping the JFK
files. You now know who really did it,
your government and Israel. And they
still know you won't care. You know why?
Cuz you got your Netflix. You got your
screen. Exactly. your dopamine level and
your melatonin level is so destroyed
that your
neoortex can't think by first
principles. That's how much they know
they have you. Exactly. And it's so
obvious once you wake up out of the
sleep and the hypnosis, it's so obvious
that the ubiquitous thing that's around
us all the time, which is our lighting,
is the thing that's actually making us
sick and disconnecting us from our
natural health and our balance. So now
that we've established that the
technology that we're using, we're all
addicted to has been coming from DARPA.
Okay, you can go look up the patents.
You can go look at where the iPhone
technology, all this stuff came
from. Now, you have to open up your mind
and understand that this is all on you
individually. The person who's listening
to this needs to understand. A lot of
people ask me why I have the Gatsson
flag as, you know, my icon for, you
know, my social media and stuff like
that. And part of it is because the
snake is is an ancient symbol of
creation. But the other reason is
because that represents people who
didn't want to live like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] zoo
animals. Okay? It's not just the taxes.
It was people who wanted to be in
control of their own destiny and didn't
want to have the level of control by
somebody else outside saying how they
should live. Just just use the term with
your tribe so they understand these are
this is a decentralized mindset. Yes.
And it means that you're into self-
sovereignty. It also means that you're
into strict property rights like
aloidial title which is the other part
of the story we haven't talked about yet
but that's what Bitcoin is and what
nature is. Yes. They're two
decentralized networks. One manufactured
the other one natural. If you understand
that flag that you use on your social
media page, this is the mark of the
decentralized mindset. People who think
by first principles were autodidacts.
We're not going to listen to the
narratives that we're we're given. We're
going to go and we're going to dig till
we find the root cause of the problem
and then we're going to take the root
and pull it out of the ground. M so when
you want to know why Uncle Jack is here,
it's not just because the 13th latitude
has great weather, great sun, good
water, and good magnetism because we
live on top of a volcano. But it's also
because I don't want to be next to
people who are watching this video. Why?
Because you think that what I just told
you is hyperbole. It's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Everything I told you in this video is
discoverable and you can fact check it
yourself. If you're a savage, if you're
a decentralized thinker, first
principle, you're going to come back and
watch this video five times, six times,
seven times. Then you're going to go
look at my other videos and you're going
to say, "Wow, this guy is a neurosurgeon
who was talking about health for 18
years, but something happened two years
ago that he's now telling the world this
story." You know what that something
was? Messenger RNA technology. Why?
Yeah. Because what happened in the 1950s
in the cutter event showed up in the
messenger RNA technology today. And
guess who run that? DARPA.
So these problems are are eminent. So
basically we're cattle essentially.
Okay. We've been turning. I would say
not only your cattle, but it's even
worse than that because when people
really listen to my podcast, they're now
tapering the Ponzi scheme with the
people who were complicit. This is what
all the died suddenly stuff's about.
This is what all the the things where
you see healthy, fit people dropping
dead. Remember what Fouchi told you in
the beginning? Fatties with diabetes
were going to die. No, that's not true.
They're not dying. It turns out it's the
fit people. Everybody two years ago was
watching TV just like I was when they
saw Demar Hamlin drop dead on TV. Yes. A
football player. Mhm. Then another guy,
Supreme Health, kind of like you were in
your basement. JJ Watt had to retire his
Hall of Fame career cuz his heart
stopped working. and he had to have it
cardioverted two or three times and it
turned out the cardio version didn't
work. So he's like, I can't play
football cuz I don't want to wind up
like Demar Hamlin. We've had over
250 soccer players die on the field all
over the world. Remember, these aren't
fatties with diabetes, right? But that's
what you were told because guess what?
That's what the paradigm wants you to
believe. It turns out, believe it or
not, people who took the jab who are
fat, they have a layer of protection
that everybody else doesn't have. Why?
Because what do the jabs have? What did
DARPA put in the jab? Something called a
liquid
nanoparticle. A lipid nanoparticle, I
should say. So, when you're heavy, that
particle goes to your fat. There's
nothing in your fat that's going to kill
you. So, the more fat you have, the more
you're protected from how this thing
kills. Turns out the more fit you are,
it tends to go to electrical membranes
in organs. So guess what the number one
target was in the aftermarket data? They
wanted to be the heart. That's the one
you guys know about, but the number one
issue is actually the kidneys. Acute and
chronic renal failure has gone through
the roof uh in CO. And you're going to
appreciate this, my friend. A guy right
in your backyard who you should have on
your podcast. His name is John Badoin.
He's an electrical engineer. He has all
the data for Connecticut, Massachusetts,
five other states that will show you
that this is true. You guys know about
the myocarditis issue. So, it turns out
that the real story that you need to
know about the aftermarket data is if
you took it, um, you are probably going
to have a big problem over the next 20,
30, 40 years. If you make it to 40 or 50
years, those are going to be the savages
that are doing what Uncle Jack's doing
right now outside getting what? The UV
and the IR. Why? Because that drives the
regeneration programs. Exactly. That
keep you away from what they're trying
to do to you. Okay. So, this is the
single most important thing I can tell
you that the UV part drives the melanin
story. The near infrared IR part drives
the water heam part of the story. You
need those two protein systems in your
body to be absolutely on call for when
DARPA comes to take your life away.
Exactly. Telling
you that is with food, with vaccines,
with drugs, with supplements. Why?
Here's the the last kill shot you need
to understand because I told you a lot
in this
podcast. Allan Fry knew that technology
opened your gut barrier, your bloodb
brain barrier. So what does that mean?
When you have processed food, when you
have a jab, when you have supplements
that have heavy atomic um atoms in it,
that actually causes immune problems in
your gut. So if you want to know why
kids are allergic to peanuts, that's the
reason why. If you want to know the
reason why people have multiple chemical
sensitivities or electrohypers
sensitivity, the open barriers are the
reason why. You want to know why celiac
diseases spiked? That's the reason why.
Do you want to know why Hashimoto's went
from very uncommon in my Robins
Pathology book up there in 1986 to now
the number one cause of thyroid disease?
The open barriers are the reason why.
And what did they do? They put all these
atoms in these things that aren't
supposed to be in us. And why is this
important for you to hear? Because you
guys are all photographers. I know that
you don't know the science, but here's
the last part of the Becker story. You
need to understand Becker's work. The
reason why it was groundbreaking, he
found out that we use semiconduction in
us to work. Okay? That bone metabolism
has a PNN semiconductor. That's collagen
and appetite. We have two copper atoms
that sit on there by Vanderall forces
that keep those things together. That's
the work that DARPA paid for. So he's
the first guy that showed every system
in us is built around this. So let me
ask you a question. When Intel and
Microsoft build a fab to build
semiconductors, don't they have clean
rooms? Of course. Don't they let
anything in there? No contamination at
all. Why in the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] then would you take
a supplement? Why the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] would you
take a vaccine? Why in the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] would
you use any processed food that's not
built by photosynthesis? Because guess
what? Nature keeps all of those things
out that can harm its semiconductive
system. 100%. Guess what? They're
putting stuff in and at the same time
opening all your barriers to these atoms
because you know what they know? It
destroys the way the semiconductive
system in you works and you never get to
the regeneration program. So you're
you're you're we're experiencing a loss
of energy that normally should be
flowing through our bodies through our
cells because our barriers have been
opened by the electromagnetic
frequencies that we're being assaulted
with RF, lack of natural sunlight, LED
lights, things like that. It's opening
up these barriers and it's draining our
power essentially. That's exactly it.
And what you need is what I got behind
me. What AAA is for everybody listening
to this video is sunlight. Why? Because
it has UV and IR and profit balance. But
if you want to know the details, and I
didn't think we would get too big into
the science, but I can explain it to you
very very quickly. If you look at my
fingers right here, this is the wiring
diagram for the inner mitochondrial
membrane. This thumb here, you see
wiggling? That's NAD. That's the
beginning part of the electron chain.
Over here, this one's oxygen. Okay?
Oxygen pulls electrons from from to it
from here. So, this part right here, the
bridge, that's a 30 million volt wire.
What did nature do? It put a heem
protein around this wire that makes
dutarium depleted water. Why did it use
water that's pure? Because water is a
perfect insulator for electric current.
So, let's do this again. What does
non-native EMF, blue light, anything, it
does? This separates it. So, guess what
happens then? That 30 million cult uh
current goes wherever everywhere in your
body. Well, wherever the electrical
resistance brings it. Okay, that
determines the disease you get. Oh my
god. Got it. So, what fix this? What
fixes this? Okay, you need the IR to
keep the water here. Why do you need the
UV? Because remember I told you in
Becker's work one trillionth of one one
ampere of current. Here's where it
comes. When melanin is hydrated, it
becomes a poor electrical conductor. So
it went from the best to the worst just
by covered. So that's how you get to the
1 trillion to 1 amp here. Water and
melanin together are your
superpower. People like UV and IR light
are
irreplaceable for savages who are being
taken apart by the list that we started
this podcast with. Exactly. So what Jack
is saying here is if you don't go
outside, you will never experience the
repair mechanisms that were naturally
placed inside you over millions and
millions of years of evolution. What
people have to understand is there are
two and this is from my basic
understanding of of knowledge but from
what I understand there's two main
sources of energy. It's electromagnetism
from the planets the earth wherever it
comes from and then the solar radiation
spectrum. We've evolved under those two
sources of power for millions of years.
And yes, you can talk to a dermatologist
and they're going to tell you, "Oh, UV
light causes, you know, DNA damage or
whatever." And yes, that's true. But
there are natural mechanisms that we've
evolved that that in perfect balance
repair everything. We are in a constant
flux up and down of damage and repair
that creates a perfectly healthy human.
But when we're stuck inside with being
blasted by blue light and you know all
these radio frequencies, this Wi-Fi and
all this technology, we're removing the
ability to repair ourselves. So, we're
actually just going to get a million
different diseases based on, like Jack
said, where that electricity goes. Is
that right? Absolutely correct.
Excellent. Excellent. It's actually it's
actually not that hard to understand the
biology part of this, but the real big
issue is it's hard to fathom for people
that their government would do what they
did. But I'm going to remind you
today, knowing what everybody knows
about these jabs, 1 million children are
getting the COVID jab today because
nobody's stopping it. So guess what that
means, my friend? These brains are not
mileinated yet. They are preconditioning
future Americans to be subject to their
control programs. That's really what's
going on. Like if you look at the most
famous quote in MK Ultra from Dr.
Delgato. He said at some day in the
future, generals will be able to control
humans
electronically. That was the original
idea that DARPA had in 1960s when they
hired Delgato. You now live in a world
where they're this close away from
getting it. Yes. Yeah. And you know
what? Honestly, it's really not that
hard to believe when you just go
outside, go to a mall, go to any
populated place where people are looking
are walking around and look at what
they're doing. They're like this. They
have a phone in their hand and they're
barely paying attention to their
surroundings. People are I was thinking
I was thinking you were going to do
something better. I think the most
obvious
uh thing to wake people up, all of us
collectively, 360 million of us just
lived through co Yes. If that doesn't
tell you what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] government's
capable of, I don't think anything else
does. 100%. I was speaking to my wife
last night about the about this
interview and um you know you this is
not only opened my eyes but hers as
well. And uh you know she she spoke
specifically about that that you know
cuz I was talking about you know my
community we we talk about photography
this a little bit different. I was
wondering how my community would react
to it and I was like look it doesn't
matter. This is a message that's
extremely important. and she said, "You
know what? After COVID and what had
happened with the response and the
vaccines, and now everybody's looking
around saying, okay, we weren't told the
truth, and not only that, we're sicker
than ever, and things are more screwed
up than ever." People are starting to
look around and, you know, the people
who aren't fully asleep and fully gone
are starting to say something's wrong.
Well, I'm going to tell you the the real
the real plan here. for DARPA to do what
they do, you have to cut their energy
source off, which is money. So, I've
told people when you hear this story
like I've laid out for your tribe, uh,
CO was a compliance test for a coming
economic reset. That's really Yes.
what's going on. Why? Because everybody
knows the money is failing. The covert
money is going away. The dollar's worth
nothing. So, they got to get to the next
big thing. If you want to know what the
next big thing is, it's been blocked in
the United States, but Europe, uh,
Australia, and Canada are pushing
forward. They just came out with the
CBDC. Remember, when you have
programmable money like that, then they
can control your money. They'll say,
"Oh, well, look, Scott, you in
Massachusetts, you know, you don't have
enough social credit points because, you
know, you talk to Jack Cruz and we don't
want anybody talking to Jack Cruz.
Therefore, you're not going to be able
to go to Mexico this weekend, right? You
just turn your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] card off." That's
kind of what's going to happen
everywhere else in the rest of the
world. And here's the bad part. It's
going to affect you and me because say
when I get invited to a Bitcoin meeting
in Europe, as soon as I get there, then
I'm subject to those even though I have
an American passport. And here's the
thing I worry about. How likely is the
American government going to fight to
get me back? I mean, we know that they
did it for a
drugdeing, smoking pot, um, WNBA player,
but I don't know if they're going to do
it for a neurosurgeon that's telling the
world kind of what they're doing. And
when you begin to understand that we
have a duty to each other, look, I'm
just going to tell you, if there's one
thing that comes from this
podcast, once you fact check Uncle Jack
and you find out that I'm telling you
the truth, just do me a favor with your
family, sit down and get a copy of the
Constitution and maybe read it and read
read a little bit about what Thomas
Jefferson said in the Federalist Papers.
Exactly. Exactly. And and understand
that we are being ruled like I it's so
hard for me to say this and you're in
Massachusetts so this is really going to
land. We are being ruled by the biggest
den of criminals you could ever imagine.
I'm going to tell you 250 years ago we
shot out a king. If the king was alive
today, the king is better than the
people that are in Washington DC right
now. There's only one guy, maybe two.
All right, I'm going to give you three.
Marjorie Taylor Green, Thomas Massie,
and Ran Paul. The rest of them need to
go to Gitmo. We need completely new
Congress. And I have to tell you, this
is where it's really up to me and you.
We're the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] idiots that keep
electing these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right?
Yeah. So, we need to get rid of them all
and start a new. We need It's like
Buckminister Fuller said, if you think
you're going to reform a broken system
from within, you're psychotic.
Absolutely not. And I think that's the
point that I'm at now. I can tell you
from the outside in for the last two
years, am I that agent provocator now?
Yeah. I mean, you have to realize I was
behind Bobby Kennedy. I was behind
Nicole. Uh basically, Maha has become
haha. I mean, the the craziest part of
this story going into this, literally
three months ago, I was very confident
that Bobby was going to do some really
good things. Mhm. And I was not so sure
Trump was the right
guy, but I thought he was the right guy
for the finance stuff because he was
pushing Bitcoin and not the
CBDC. Who would have thought in March
that I have absolutely zero faith in
Bobby Kennedy and I have more faith in
Donald Trump because he's pushing
forward with at least the financial side
but not the opposite side. So what does
that mean? You said something in earlier
in the podcast that I think needs to be
brought back up and it needs to resonate
with the people listening to
this. You're now you you nobody's coming
to save you. It's an equals one game.
You guys need to
understand that we're all in this game
together. The reason I do podcast with
guys like
him is he's a tuning fork in
Massachusetts and he's sending out a
molecular resonance to me when we have
this kind of discussion. You guys as the
audience get to see if we're resonating
or not. Now, you may not resonate with
this message yet. You may start to
resonate when you fact check Uncle Jack
and you look into the things that both
he and I have talked about. And when you
find that's the case, what do I envision
the next version of America is going to
be? When you look at that constitution,
it's not going to be defined by borders.
It's going to be defined by a loyal
title. All of us are going to live all
over the world and we're going to do
communication just like this. We're
going to use the thing they try to kill
us with to actually build our own
country. We're all resonating together
and we're all we're not we're not we're
not listening to your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] game
anymore. We're not playing by the rules
that you had and then slowly steadily we
do to them what they did to us. We start
taking apart their system. The number
one thing that needs to happen in my
view is you need to take the money
source away. Then we need to get rid of
intelligence. We need to ban the CIA,
ban the FBI. For people who think that's
crazy in this world, let me just tell
you something. The FBI was founded in
1908. This is not like some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] huge
long-term story. CIA is founded in 1947.
Uh, if you ask me which one are are the
real problem, the CIA is the problem for
us now because that's where DARPA came
from. The FBI is a problem because it's
now protecting all the criminals in
Washington DC. That's the reason both of
them need to go. That's if you if you
ask me,
Jack, if you were my doctor when I was
laying on that floor looking at the
plant, what would you tell me the
prescription was? I just gave you the
answer. We need to take our country
back. And what I'm going to do is I'm
going to grab you by the back of that
white shirt. I'm going to throw you out
on the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] grass and we're going to
sit and we're just going to chat. We're
going to have a probably some dutyum
depleted water. I may even give you some
hypertonic saline and put a couple of
drops of methylene blue in it. So now
I'm being provocative with your
audience. Why is he saying that? But if
you want to know why I'm saying that,
why I'm being provocative, you go and
listen to that Danny Jones podcast when
you hear me talk about the little girl
life that I saved in 1998 and how I did
it. Turned out that when Metallica was
playing on that loop and whispered in my
ear that this is a way that I could help
her broken electrical system in her
brain and her broken melanin system that
maybe the wisdom from that surgery could
help each one of you who are listening
to this podcast. Cuz right now the only
difference between that little girl and
you guys is her injury happened very
very quickly with huge intensity. Your
injuries happened over your whole life
incrementally. You got it. And you don't
realize the same story for her is the
same story for
you. That's the key. And when you begin
to understand what I'm saying, just as
you found, when you go back out and you
eat like a great white shark, protein
and fat, and you connect with the sun,
and you're grounded, that's all you need
to do to get Becker's regenerative
program, no matter what your injury is.
Now, depending on how bad the loss of
electrical resistance is that destroy
different parts of your body, that will
determine the length of time that you
need to do what you need to do. Okay? My
goal is not to make you live to 120, 130
years old. My goal is to get you to 85
so that you're fixing the roof on your
house and you fall off and you're not
taking any medicines and you're not
relying on people like Dr. Fouchy and
you don't have Parkinson. Correct. I I
don't want you to rely on on, you know,
Dr. Peter Aia or Sean Baker or Andrew
Yuberman's podcast or Joe Rogan's
podcast. I want you to have a Lloyd deal
title of your own health and your own
money. Yes. Guess what? That's really
what it's about. It's about you taking
back ownership of your life. And when
people tell you that no, it's not
impossible to do in 2025.
turn this podcast on it again and then
then to go read the Constitution and
tell me it's not possible.
100% Jack that I'm so glad that you
talked about the Constitution. If if
anybody has not read and so many
Americans haven't haven't even read
their own Constitution, their own
Declaration of Independence that those
documents have nature and the principles
of decentralized nature all through
them. Those were a highly enlightened
people that recognized their connection
to nature and that's where their rights
came from. That's where the way that
they structured their life should come
from. And anybody trying to step in
front of that, their life was not as
important as stopping that. Okay. So,
what people need to understand now we
need
Exactly. And what people need to
understand now is there's a lot of money
in trying to sell you supplements.
There's a lot of money in going to your
doctor and having them send you for MRIs
and blood tests and all this stuff.
There's not a lot of money in a doctor
telling you just to go outside. Okay?
And that's the real reason why this
stuff is being held back from us is
because they want people sick. They want
people confused and they don't want
people knowing what's actually going on.
So the basis of everything that we've
talked about, if you want to gain
control over your mind and your health,
you need to get back into nature. You
need to get back connected to the
principles of what we've been evolving
under for millions of years. Get the
technology away from you as much as
possible and integrate it responsibly
and you can gain your health back.
I I I agree with that. I I think it's
simple. People don't believe it, but it
works. And I'm not going to tell you
that you're not going to need my
profession. Like when you break your
leg, you have a subdural, you know, from
trauma. Yeah. That's what we're good at.
We're good at the acute stuff. What we
suck at is the chronic stuff. And it
turns out what DARP has targeted is the
chronic stuff. Yeah. That's what you
need to understand. like all the the
disease metrics that you started this
podcast with, every single one of them
are the chronic diseases that doctors
are impotent to fix. And you have to
realize it's not that
doctors are bad people. Uh their
curriculum is paid for by big pharma and
DARPA. Just so you know that that's why
we learn what we learn. We learn just
enough so that we don't question some of
the things that I taught you about here.
Like if you ask uh most doctors today,
and I think your tribe should do this.
Ask your doctor two questions. This is
how you know if you're with the right
doctor. Doc, do you know anything about
the cutter event? Okay. Then number two,
doc, do you know anything about Dr.
Robert O. Becker's work in in bone
regeneration? Do a hard stop. If they
can't answer those two questions, you're
at the wrong doctor. Totally agree.
Totally
agree. Well, Jack, um I just want to
close this out by giving you um my
sincere thank you. I believe that um
that you are one of the few people that
is uh is rare nowadays that are speaking
out strictly from the heart and
experience. And uh we need your voice
more than ever nowadays across any
community. And um my my health has
changed drastically. I literally feel
healthier than I have ever felt in my
life. And that includes my 20s, my
teens. I have never felt so healthy and
clear-minded. And just my vision for
what I want in my life and the things
that are around me has never been clear.
And that has it was a very simple
awakening from you to remind me to get
back connected to nature. And uh I
sincerely want to thank you. And for
everybody that's listening, the stuff
that we've talked about on this podcast,
um, yeah, it might be hard to believe,
but go look up the patents of who put
out this technology. Look how DARPA has
controlled, uh, you know, this the the
technology that's ubiquitous nowadays,
and you'll come to your own conclusions
with that stuff. Uh, but I I I implore
you to really dig in and listen to what
Jack has said and to go in and do your
own research and find out for yourself.
Yeah. Um, let's end it with this because
I want to give them something a little
bit more hardcore. I want you to read um
first book, Going Somewhere by Dr.
Andrew Marino. Just so you know, Dr.
Marino was the physicist and eventually
became a lawyer to protect Dr. Becker.
He's the one that did all the
experiments with Becker. You'll read all
the congressional testimony that was
done in the 70s that told you what they
were doing. It's in his book. Fantastic.
When you read that, you'll be blown
away. And then I would tell you to read
Becker's book. Uh I think Becker's book,
you won't be able to put it down because
you're going to be like, I didn't know
that we had semiconductors in us. And
then as soon as you get that message,
you're going to go, uh, I can't be
putting anything in my body or my
child's body that are going to ruin the
semiconductors that nature has perfected
over 3.8 billion years. You get those
messages, then you'll understand why the
ancients built the Sphinx at the 28th
latitude looking to the east with all
four extremities to the ground. That's
the message. The message is there. Stick
with it. Stop listening to the message
from your government. Stop listening to
DARPA. Stop listening to centralized
healthcare. Stop listening to bankers.
Stop listening to Wall Street.
reclaim your sovereignty for your health
and your wealth by becoming a
decentralized savage and you'll find out
that all it's going to take is you being
a first principal thinker. That's it.
Fantastic. Jack Cruz, thank you so much
for coming on the show. We very much
appreciate it. All right, take care. All
right, we're going to end it there.
Jack, thank you so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] much, man.
That was absolutely incredible and it
was really the message that I wanted to
get across to my community. That was
amazing. No problem. Just let Shantel
know when you let it go. Absolutely.
I'll uh I'll give her a heads up before
we're going to release it. And um yeah,
I really appreciate the time. No
problem. Take care. Thanks, Jack.