Is it possible that the entire earth has
undergone catastrophic upheavalss in the
recent geological past? Upheavalss that
might have profoundly affected not only
the planetary environment but human
civilization as well. New compelling
evidence and research has just recently
been published supporting and confirming
that a catastrophe of global proportions
did indeed occur in the recent history
of the Earth. at the time of the younger
dus boundary around 12,800
years ago. What could have been the
cause of this event? This new evidence
expands the geographic range of this
planetary cataclysm and supports the
hypothesis of a cosmic impact from
space. Is it possible such an event
could occur again? And if it did, how
would it affect modern human societies?
I'm Randall Carlson and I'm inviting you
to join us for another episode of the
Squaring the Circle podcast.
[Music]
Well, hello everyone. Here we are again
about to embark on another journey of
exploration and learning. And to uh join
me in this endeavor will be my friend
and colleague John Arthur Fialo. How
John?
Good to see you again. I'm doing well.
Good to see you doing well over here
too. Okay. Yep. So uh yeah. So, two new
papers have come out uh with evidence
for a a an impact event right at the
lower younger drius boundary which dates
to right around between 12,800 and
12,900 years ago. And one of these uh
one of these areas, one of these regions
that yielded up evidence for a cosmic
impact is in the state of Louisiana,
not too far from where I once lived. And
the other one was in the Baltic region
uh of eastern Russia. So I thought maybe
we would start by just giving a little
bit of insight into the younger Dus
events. And one of the early things, one
of the early uh indications that
something happened at this uh time
period around 12,900 years ago, give or
take a century, uh is this uh mysterious
layer called the black mat.
The black mat is a horizon that has
dated to right around 12,900 years. And
it seems like it's a a a demarcation
zone that is correlated with major
climatic changes. And it also seems to
be correlated with the final demise of a
lot of the great megapona of species
that inhabited the earth for many many
thousands, hundred thousands, even in
some cases millions of years that all
seem to disappear from the earth around
the same time. uh
roughly with the end of the last ice age
from about 14,000 to about 12,000 years
ago. But it seems that there was a major
spike of megaponal extinctions that
occurred uh pretty much right on top of
the younger dus boundary. Uh so that a
lot of species that somehow managed to
survive up to that black mat horizon uh
their their fossil evidence was found
below but not above the horizon. So um
did you uh and did you were you able to
find some interesting pictures showing
the uh well so people could see what
we're talking about? I have a few here.
I could I could uh So, while you're
pulling those up, I actually have a set
of locations prepped where these black
mats have been found. Okay. In the in
the contiguous 48 states and in Canada.
And so, if you're on audio, I I do
apologize. this this podcast will be
worth looking up on YouTube or Rumble,
but you can see quite a few different uh
uh areas where they've taken core
samples or you can see it, you know, in
in a carveout in a canyon where or in
caves where there's this black mat.
Yeah. Now, this um I need to point out
that not all of these sites uh have
impact proxies,
but a significant percentage of them do.
It's also been contested that the uh
black mat sites are
um not exclusively
celestial or cosmic in origin. But what
they do seem to indicate is a very
concentrated period of climatic change
and uh the formation of this these
carbonrich layers. And before you go too
much further, what is an impact proxy
for those who are just tuning in now?
Well, an impact proxy when you don't
have the direct results uh or the direct
evidence of an impact such as eyewitness
accounts or very uh obvious um evidence
such as an impact crater uh you know
along the lines of the famous meteor
crater in Arizona. And the crater in
Arizona is the result of a direct impact
of an iron metallic asteroid into the
earth somewhere around 50,000 years ago.
However, when you have an impact like
that, it creates a highly energetic,
high temperature, high pressure
environment. And this environment can
produce things that only occur under
very extreme or unusual circumstances.
And over the years, many of these now
have been correlated or connected with
known impact events. And amongst these,
and we're going to be looking at those
somewhat in this episode, um
microspherals,
that is one of the uh proxies. We call
it a proxy because it's it's a secondary
effect, but it's a secondary effect that
is produced by phenomena that would
support the conclusion of some high
energy, high temperature, high pressure
phenomena, most likely impacts. And in
fact, some of the temperatures produced
uh that are indicated by the melting of
of material that's necessary to produce
these uh the sphirerals for example is
extremely high up in the range of 2,500
to 3,000° centigrade. So that's
extremely hot. So then the question
becomes under what conditions is it
possible to have temperatures in that
temperature range? And the answer is the
two things we mainly know which is u
cosmic impacts and nuclear weapons
explosions like the atomic bomb
explosions say a trinity produced uh
effects that very similar to in some
regard to the uh effects of a cosmic
impact.
So, kind of like the sprawl that you
would see at a blacksmith when you're
hammering or forging something, you'll
have metal sprawl or glass sprawl, etc.
Yeah. Now, there are chemical proxies
such as uh platinum um aridium is a very
typical one, osmium.
These are the platinum group metals. And
it was aridium that was first uh
indication that the the uh dinosaur
boundary of 66 million years ago the
Cretaceous Paleo gene as it's now called
it used to be called the Cretaceous
tertiary but now it's called the
Cretaceous Paleo gene that is the event
horizon at which the dinosaurs uh
disappeared uh in a geological eyelink
and there are impact act proxies there.
And the first indication that there was
some type of a cosmic event associated
with the demise of the dinosaurs was the
discovery of the aridium uh enhancement
or a spike of aridium precisely at this
uh KT or KPG
uh boundary. And I know there were
technical reasons for changing it from K
uh Cretaceous KT boundary to KPG
but it sure is a lot easier just to say
the KT boundary. So in writing about it
I will use the modern nomenclature which
is K dash PG smallase G. But in talking
about it, I'm going to refer to it as
the KT boundary because that's how I
talked about it for many decades before
the the nomenclature change.
Is that acceptable to you, John? That's
acceptable. Absolutely. Right. Okay. So,
people will know what I'm talking about.
And if anybody's out there, any
paleontologists or geologists, um, yes,
I do know now that it has been changed
from, uh, Cretaceous to Cretaceous Paleo
gene and we don't need to get into the
reasons for that right now but and let
me tease one more one more question.
Sure. Why is the presence of aridium so
important in a spike because aridium is
not that level of aridium is is
indicative of something specific. I'm
going to pause for just a minute to talk
about our partners over at Shipo who may
save you a significant amount of
headache in your day-to-day business. We
sell a variety of geometry tools and
models like our beautiful platonic
solids here at Randall Carlson LLC. And
when it comes to managing shipping,
e-commerce, and returns, we've been
using Shipo for over four years now, and
we're very pleased with their service.
Shipo's interface is intuitive. The
primary order page is easy to navigate
and we have enjoyed stellar technical
support. If Shipo can help you with your
needs, please use the code below to
partner with a great company while
supporting our work here at Squaring the
Circle. Thanks. And now back to the
show. Right. Okay. So, Aridium is a
cideropile
meaning it loves iron. So in the early
formation of the earth you had iron
which is a high density material
bonds to the aridium that would have
been present in the early
crust of the earth. That iron subsides
towards the center of the earth because
it's heavy, it's dense, it sinks and it
drags the idium with it. So what that
does is it leaves a deficiency of
aridium in the earth's crust. However,
in primordial
objects like asteroids, the aridium is
still very abundant and there are high
percentages of it. So, if an asteroid
strikes the earth,
you know, explodes, vaporizes,
it can create a cloud of material that
can literally circumn the globe and
precipitate out. And the aridium that is
in that cloud will then be deposited in
the earth. Now that's what happened at
the KT boundary 66 million years ago.
And Walter Alvarez and his father Lewis
Alvarez and the rest of their team were
looking at an outcrop
uh the dinosaur killing the the outcrop
in Italy. not necessarily at that point
thinking cosmic catastrophe, cosmic
impact, but what they were trying to do
was to determine what was the span of
time over which this layer uh was
deposited.
And so in trying to establish was it a
few years, was it thousands of years,
hundreds of thousands of years, that was
not known. But it was suggested at this
time, which is back like in the 1970s,
that the dinosaur killing episode may
have been considerably faster than had
been previously uh recognized or
considered. And so they were looking uh
to try to determine the duration of this
deposit that seemed to be associated all
over the world with the with the top of
the Cretaceous, right? the transition
from the Cretaceous to the tertiary now
or to the Paleo gene. Okay. But so so uh
important or so profound was this
transition that it was not only
geological
um periods like the creta the Cretaceous
period to the tertiary period that was
shifted. It was also two of the great
life eras on earth. the Mesazoic, which
was the era of middle life, and the
Cenazoic, which was the era of recent
life. So, it was apparent already by the
70s that something really significant
had happened right there. So, they're
taking a look at it, trying to determine
the duration, and that was when they
stumbled across the spike of aridium.
And the first thing they knew, and I
guess I don't remember who it was on the
team, it was probably Lewis Alvarez, the
uh I believe Nobel Prize winning
physicist that suggested that aridium
was abundant in asteroids. And
and so what they did was they were
thinking, well, could there have been an
asteroid impact
that in the explosive in the heat and
temperature of the explosion of the
impact, could the vapor cloud have
encircled the earth and then
precipitated out? But so what they
needed was uh more evidence that that
this aridium layer was found in other
locations around the world. So if memory
serves me correctly, uh they contacted
colleagues in Denmark and New Zealand
and asked them to go back take a look at
the boundary and analyze it for aridium.
And in both cases, yes, they found a
very significant aridium spike
which now they had evidence that you had
uh this uh deposition of aridium both in
the northern hemisphere and the southern
hemisphere.
Additional sites disclose that pretty
much everywhere you looked at the KT
boundary you found enhanced aridium. So
this led to the conclusion that there
had been a a dust iridium dusting of the
entire earth.
Now based upon the estimates of the
amount of aridium that would have taken
so so essentially extrapolating from say
at this point I don't know four four
five six different sites around the
world they were able to assume that it
was a fairly uniformed deposition of
aridium around the entire planet. So
from there they were able to calculate
approximately ballpark how much aridium
that actually was.
Then going back to the known composition
of meteorites and asteroids and so on
which are basically based on two things.
the the the spectral imagery uh which
showed uh the spectral frequency of
aridium from asteroids and actual
deposits
you know associated with meteor craters
uh that or known meteorites right that
um that aridium they had had a sense of
uh what the concentration of aridium
would be in an asteroid. So then from
there you now calculate how big of an
asteroid given x percentage of aridium
would it take to accomplish this dusting
of the whole earth. And the answer was
an asteroid
a a stony asteroid or a stony iron
asteroid somewhere in that range of
densities of about six miles in
diameter.
And that would be, you know, what the
size of Mount Everest. And it's flying
in, slams into the earth at um, you
know, 12 to 15 miles per second, maybe
faster. That's going to release just
inconceivably
powerful explosions. This the the the
kinetic energy released during an event
like that is going to be
incomprehensible.
Um, and this was this work was published
in 1980.
10 years later, it took a full decade.
The critics were going after it saying,
you know, look, maybe, but we're not
buying it until you show us a crater.
There's got to be a crater on Earth
somewhere that dates to that
uh to that period. Uh and it was not
known for early 90s. Uh finally it was
um uh Petroleum Mexico PMEX uh was
drilling uh in the Yucatan Peninsula
looking for um hydrocarbon deposits and
they came up with this they kept their
their drills kept pulling up this green
colored glassy vitrius material and uh I
think this goes back even to the early
80s when they were doing this and uh but
nobody was connecting it with cosmic
impact they assumed that it was somehow
volcanic. panic or something related but
not impact related and I forget the
exact story it's been you know I haven't
refreshed myself on the details of of
the the the historical unfolding of this
evidence but there was an American team
I think I can remember his name um I'll
think of it in a second but um
something led them to take a look at
this green glass and they decided that
it was oh I think what it was was they
they uh found the green glass and the
the date of that deposition of the glass
seemed to fit very closely to the KT
boundary. I think that was it. And so
they went and they took another look at
the evidence and as they did um what it
disclosed and revealed was that there
was in fact this giant sub surface
buried crater under several thousand
feet of limestone. And it was of the
requisite size because um you know uh an
object there's a scaling ratio that you
can look at between the size of an
impacting object and the size the width
of the crater that it's going to
produce. And typically the range is 10
to 20 to one. So if you've got an object
or even larger than that. So I think in
the case of the KT boundary uh they
concluded that the impact would have to
produce a crater about 120 mi in
diameter
maybe larger maybe larger. And that is
what it turned out. They're still
debating the the the size of the the
crater the Yucatan crater. We're taking
a little bit of a detour here to uh tell
a story that I think is going to be
valuable. I was coming down the stairs
and I think somebody just ahead of me
had spilled a little bit. My foot hit
it, slid out from under me and I tumbled
down three or four stairs to the bottom.
I sure banged up my left knee. It was
painful. But uh I was very relieved to
remember that I had brought I happened
to pack my CBD from the god sav and I
was really grateful that I had
remembered to do that. So I that night I
put some of the sav on went to bed
though I've I've you know being in the
construction and building industry I've
had many falls and in uh injuries and
stuff and I figured I'm going to be laid
up with this for a month. We drove home.
I think it was 3 to 4 days later. I
continued applying the SAV and I would
say within a week I was getting around
pretty good. I always bring the oil uh
when I travel and I I'm now after this
episode I'm like okay I'm always going
to have the SAB with me too but it
turned out to be just the required
dimensions and so it's the required
dimensions that you would expect for a
crater that is produced by the impact of
a six mile asteroid. It is dated to the
uh to the time period uh very precisely
now. And you can also see the shock
effects of it. The um it generated a
huge tsunami that washed up and in fact
the area if you dug down below this new
site in Louisiana by a place called
Perkins Lake which is near Lake Charles,
Louisiana, which we'll be looking at in
a minute. If you dug down below that, I
think it's about a half a mile below.
There is a younger dus, not a younger
dus, sorry, a cretaceous tertiary layer
and it has uh it was a tsunami, a giant
tsunami layer and it has been covered
over by material, but it been preserved.
There are giant current ripples that
were found. Um, and it was from this
huge tsunami that washed ashore of
Louisiana,
uh, made landfall, did its run in, and
then flowed back off into the Gulf.
And this was recently discovered as
well. I have a I I wrote something on
that, and I might be able to pull that
up here in in a in a minute. I in fact,
it was a I reported on uh it in one of
my recent newsletters. I described the
discovery and so on, but the thing that
we're going to be talking about uh near
Lake Charles, of course, is much more
recent. It's it is on the surface of the
earth, not buried, you know. So, when
looking for the evidence for an impact,
you have to look for the crater if there
is one or for the imprint of an air
burst, right? Yes. and and then we have
to look for the proxies or the uh the
fallout that would have occurred from
that. And that's what these two new
discoveries really seem to be doing for
us today is they're giving us the
fallout and potentially
potentially the impact from an air
burst. It's not really a crater, but the
impact zone from an air burst. Yeah.
I'll also mention one of the uh very
convincing proxies that is associated
with the the high pressures of an impact
are nano diamonds and that's nano
diamonds have been found over and over
again at the younger dest boundary and
they're interestingly they're very
similar to nano diamonds found at the KT
boundary
and have been compared to to the two. Um
so why don't we talk about a little bit
about the background of the younger Dus
uh events. Um let's see. So going back
uh
let's see how how far should we go back.
You know, the the younger dest boundary
was already a matter of controversy
before a the famous paper that was
published in 2007
first suggesting that the megaponal
extinctions were triggered by a cosmic
impact, right? Um
so like here's a paper uh that was
published in 1989,
right? was entitled a 17,000year
glacio
sea level record. Now what do I mean?
What is glacio ustatic?
Okay, we've talked about the phenomena
of eustacey or ustatic changes in ocean
level. Okay, so we know that the planet
is subjected to uh periods of deep
glaciation
and in periods of delaciation
such as we're in now. So glacial epoch,
interglacial epoch, there have been many
apparent apparently many glacial epochs.
So what happens in a glacial epoch?
You've got an enormous accumulation of
glacial ice on the surface of the
continents. Now, mostly like we see now
in Antarctica and Greenland, we have um
you know, we have I think about what
between four and a half, five million
cubic miles of ice over the South Pole
and we have uh maybe almost a million
cubic miles on Greenland. Right? So now
if we go back to the last glacial
episode, there was more than double the
amount of ice, glacial ice. Well, that
glacial ice is part of the hydrosphere.
And the hydrosphere is more or less
steady state with some some tweaking,
yes, but it's more or less uh a
consistent state. And it doesn't matter
whether it exists in the form of water,
vapor, or ice. It's all part of the
hydrosphere, right? Well, if you have
more glacial ice, it means you have less
liquid water primarily in the ocean
basins. So when glaciers grow, sea level
declines.
When glaciers melt, sea level rises. So
this rising and falling of sea levels
associated with the expansion and
contraction of glaciers is that's what's
called ustatic sea level change. It's
spelled EU static. EU st a tic ustic. So
in this term here the title of this
article is glaciioatic
meaning again just to sort of indicate
yeah because we're talking about
fluctuations in glacier mass
directly correlates with rises and falls
of sea level. Then it goes on to say in
the title influence of glacial melting
rates on the younger drius event and
deep ocean circulation.
Uh so in the abstract it says that coral
reefs drilled offshore of Barbados
provide the first continuous and
detailed record of sea level change
during the last deglaciation.
Uh the sea level was
121 plus or minus 5 m below present
level. So I'm going to put in let's just
look at the the maximum that would be
126 m* 3.28.
So that would be 413
ft.
Right? So if you took out that's how
much of the ocean the world's oceans
were extracted
precipitated as snowfall out onto the
continents that did not melt like we now
have every year of course we have
snowfall in the northern hemisphere
where I grew up in Minnesota by
sometimes by the end of the winter
season we'd have six feet of snow but
then as we all waited and and
anticipated
uh was the spring thaw and all that snow
would melt away. But now in the onset of
a glacial epoch, what's happening is you
have the snowfall, but spring doesn't
ever come. So the snow doesn't melt and
in the next year there is more snow and
on top of that there will be more snow
and this will go on for thousands of
years until the snow is thousands feet
thick. As the snow builds up, the weight
of the overlying snow compresses the the
the snow goes through two phases. It
goes from snow to what's called fern,
which is firm, which is an intermediate
phase between the snow that's
accumulating on the top of the glacier
and the weight that compresses it into
and and transmutes it or transforms it
into glacial ice. Okay. Uh so anyways
the abstract goes on to say that the
deglacial sea level rise was not
monotonic and this is important. It was
being understood already back in 1989.
Rather it was marked by two intervals of
rapid rise.
Varying rates of meltwater discharge to
the North Atlantic surface ocean
dramatically affected North Atlantic
deep water production and oxygen oceanic
oxygen isotope chemistry
and a little bit there is that you have
light oxygen oxygen 16 heavy oxygen
oxygen 18
when you have cooling
atmospheric cooling there will be less
energy available to evaporate ocean
water. When you increase the thermal
energy, there's more energy to evaporate
ocean water. Well, the more energy there
is, the more readily it can uh evaporate
the heavier oxygen. It's more effective
at evaporating heavier oxygen during
warm periods than cold periods when the
energy is not as available. And so what
happens is that during these transitions
you will have um so if you have a lot of
heat energy evaporates a lot that vapor
that precipitates out is now going to be
enriched in oxygen 18 heavy oxygen right
if it's uh if it's a colder period the
opposite happens so that those oxygen
isotope ratios are preserved in the
layers of glacial ice. So you can look
at the oxygen isotope ratios and that's
going to tell you about what's going on
in the climate.
So anyways, this was a study going back
to 1989 where they were first realizing
that the term they use as monotonic. The
rise of sea level wasn't a smooth curve.
There was at least two pulses what they
say uh two intervals of rapid rise which
have come to be called meltwater pulse
1A and meltwater pulse 1b. Right? So uh
at this point they don't have the
detailed
uh uh dating of this. Um
so let's see changes in continental goes
on changes in continental ice volume
during the last deglaciation
generally have been for inferred from
two direct sources geological mapping of
the retreating ice margin and the marine
isotope record. Direct estimates of
glacial ice volume based on measured
glacio
sea level changes are well documented
from 9,000 years before present but are
poorly constrained from before this
time. Ruddman, who was one of the
esteemed scientists who was working on
these problems back then, recently
reviewed evidence supporting three
different deglaciation models. One, the
smooth deglaciation model with the most
rapid change centered at 11,000 years
before present. two was the French
two-step deglaciation
model uh with maximum melting rates from
14,000 to 12,000 years before present
and again from 10,000 to 7,000 years
before present. So there's this now
these dates have been revised. They're
older now than they than what was given
in this paper. Okay, in ' 89. But what
this is showing is that you've got this
period, 2,000-year period, 14 to 12, and
another one from 10 to 7. So, you've got
this 2,000-year interval separating
these two melting episodes where the
large volumes of glacial ice are melting
and going into the global oceans. Um so
yeah they they were uh from 14 to 12,000
years from 10,000 to 7,000 years
separated by a mid dellacial pause with
little or no ice volume loss. So see
this was already being recognized
back in the 1980s. Okay. And third, a
younger drius deglaciation model which
distinguished from the French two-step
model um which is distinguished from the
French two-step model by a mid
dellaciation
reversal,
not just a pause but an actual reversal
with significant ice growth in there.
And it does look like there was ice
growth. Um
it's not our intention to
um go into that depth in this discussion
but this kind of is setting the stage
that there was something that happened
in this interval. Okay. So Richard
Fairbanks he was professor ammeritus at
of the earth and environmental sciences.
He was working on this back then along
with with Ruddman. Um, quoting him, I
sought to test the validity of these
models, the three ones I just discussed,
each with their own important climatic
and oceanographic implications by
extending the existing coral reef sea
level curve to the last glacial maximum.
Because as sea levels go up and down,
corals will build their reefs up to keep
up with sea levels. When sea levels
drop, okay, they can um coral reefs will
die off and then you'll have a re a
replenishment of coral reefs at a lower
submarine level. Um, the fossil coral
reefs surrounding Barbados are a very
good system for examining in detail and
the timing of the last deglaciation.
Here I show that the sea level curve
derived from the Barbados reef supports
the French two-step model. Well, the
French two-step model is the one where
there was a pause but not necessarily a
reversal. In other words, pause in the
melting or disappearance of the ice but
not a regrowth. Um, I then reviewed the
evidence for the oceanic and climatic
response to the this two-step
deglaciation with particular emphasis on
understanding the cause of the younger
dus oft. So then in the same article he
quotes Wallace Breer who uh also was one
of the key scientists working on this
stuff uh back in the 70s and the 80s
into the 90s. So Breer dated the minimum
oxygen 18. That's what this delta 180
means. Oxygen 18 isotope. The delta is a
little sign for the isotope. So this is
your heavy oxygen right here. And so
this is maximum meltwater discharge in
the Gulf of Mexico.
This this is just the the the
nomenclature for the the cores that they
took in the Gulf of Mexico.
And uh they were dated 11,840
and 12,000 years before present which
are equivalent in age to accelerator
mass spectroscopy
uh carbon 14 dated uh minimum in North
Atlantic. Don't worry about that. Here's
the key. These two events correspond
precisely with meltwater pulse 1A dated
at 12,000 years before present. Breer at
Al noted that the maximum glacial
meltwater discharge from the Mississippi
River was followed by minimal discharge
between 10,500 and 11,
uh, 100 years before present. Now, to
get the more updated, simply in in
approximately, and it'll get you close
enough, simply add 2,000 years to these
dates.
So, Meltwater Pulse 1A, which they were
dating at 12,000 years before present
then, is now dated closer to 14,500
years, 2500 years. Um, and so then here,
this would be uh 12,500 to 13,000 if you
did the updating. And so, this period of
minimal discharge would have been the
younger dus. So independently this
recker and his team had noticed that
there was a um maximum meltwater
discharge followed by a minimal
discharge of the Mississippi River.
Well, that is because the Mississippi
River is carrying uh enormous volumes of
melt water from the melting ice sheets
uh up to the north over Canada. Then he
goes on to say, "The rapid
disintegration of the northern
hemisphere ice sheets during meltwater
pulse 1A and meltwater pulse 1B must
have introduced large volumes of low
oxygen 18 meltwater into the North
Atlantic during the summer season. The
oxygen 18 spiked meltwater has two
possible fates. entrainment in the North
Atlantic, deep water or evaporation.
Because deep water formation may have
been halted briefly during the peak
discharge, evaporation of oxygen 18
spiked surface water must have occurred
to some extent. Well, now this is you
know that now one of the concerns is is
that is that there could be because of
global warming
etc. and the uh amount of uh melt water
coming off the Greenland ice sheet is
going to interrupt the circulation of
the the Atlantic circulation.
However, comparatively speaking, the
volume of ice water, I mean, the volume
of water discharged into the Atlantic
Ocean during the melting of the glaciers
was way way beyond the volume of water
coming off of the uh the melting uh
glaciers on Greenland. Um so anyways uh
the Greenland ice cores from die 3 and
camp century are both marked by two
distinct oxygen 18 minima during
deglaciation. The immediate implications
of the Barbados sea level record compel
us to re-evaluate some of the
traditional depictions of the younger
dus event. Whether or not the
reinterpretations presented here are
correct depends on the reliability of
correlations between radiocarbonated
marine and terrestrial signals. My
results emphasize the primary role of
meltwater discharge rates on the
production of North Atlantic deep water
and rapid climate change in Western
Europe. So already we're seeing that
there is this these these what are
called tea connections between these
various events.
Now, what I'm going to do is go to the
next slide here, and you'll see that um
here you have the graph that was in the
Fairbanks paper. And this
uh dash line represents the first of the
models. Let's see, what did they call
it? Uh
the smooth deglaciation model with the
most rapid change centered at 11,000
years BP. So, we go back to here. This
dash line represents the smooth
delaciation. So, it starts melting, it
accelerates, it peaks right at 11,000,
and it tapers off nice and smooth,
right? Well, here's the two-step model.
So, what you've got is you've got a
massive spike right here that is dating
to right around 12,000 years.
Interestingly, they were already getting
data that suggested that it was earlier,
and that's what the green spike is. So
this is actually showing closer to 13
even where it starts right here you can
see it's about 14 12 thousand years ago
right and then um you have this huge
spike and then it tapers off so this
trough would be the younger dus and then
you have this second meltwater spike
meltwater pulse 1b which is a very rapid
uh rise in sea level and this these are
sea level curves that you see right here
Over here you see the apparent discharge
rate in cubic kilm per year. So you look
at this meltwater pulse 1A, you're
looking at almost 15,000 cubic
kilometers per year of water, melt water
discharging off the uh off the ice
sheets. That's a lot of water. Okay. And
there's nothing similar to that going on
right now. Um
okay. Then over here, uh, we've got the
plot of terrestrial oxygen 18 records
from Greenland ice cores, uh, with six
radiocarbon ages. And it's already
beginning to show the the the two spikes
of warming. Here's one warming, and
here's another warming. And here's the
younger dus in between. And then what
you have here is the beginning of the
holene where once you're at this stage
right here where my cursor is the ice
sheets the great ice sheets are mostly
gone and equivalent to what they are
today. Now these are older the camp
century and the die 3 they're older. We
have newer that that were uh published
in the early 90s. These were from the
80s right the resolution is not as
great. Um the the more recent cores are
much uh much more um
uh precise. So as it says here, two
massive meltwater pulses to the world's
ocean during the last deglaciation.
I would suggest that there's actually a
third uh pulse in here that hasn't
hasn't shown up because we didn't have
the resolution available uh back in
1989. So that what is that? That's uh
what is that? uh 20 yeah 30 36 years
ago. So we've got a greater resolution
now and I think that there's evidence
that there might be a third meltwater
spike in here. Um so then uh I'm going
to taking it through um through the um
the evidence that this is 1992. There's
still no um impact hypothesis in '92.
However, what you see happen large
perturbations of ammonium and organic
acids content in the summit Greenland
ice core. So, this is some of the first
results. So, the let me mention that the
that the uh camp century and the die uh
site uh are both near the margins of the
ice sheet well of the Greenland ice
sheet. So, at those margins, the ice is
much more dynamic. It's more susceptible
to changing to melting. And so they
realized that the glaciologists who were
doing these extractions realized that
there was going to be um you know that
there was going to be some inconclusive
evidence in there because of the
distortions that occurred in the ice
sheet. So what they wanted to do was
they wanted to go to where the ice was
the most stable and there would be the
less the least amount of deformation and
that was at the summit of the ice sheet.
Right? It's also going to be the most
difficult to drill because it's almost 2
km thick there at the summit of the
Greenland ice sheet. But over 5 years,
two teams were able to pull off these
cing uh uh efforts. And it it was heroic
indeed because you only have a few
months out of the year that you can
actually get up there and drill. Both
teams uh I think the European team got
to Bedrock first, but both teams did get
to Bedrock. They extracted the ice cores
and those ice cores are still being
studied to this day. However, this is
what I found very interesting when this
article was published back in 1992
because I'm already thinking impact at
the younger dus boundary at this point
for other reasons which we can talk
about later. But this was published in
the geohysical research uh letters on
March 3rd 1992.
And this is what they found. Biomass
burning is influencing the atmospheric
chemistry by emitting large amounts of
reactive species such as hydrocarbons,
organic acids, and nitrogen compounds.
Polar ice cores provide a unique record
of precipitation whose chemistry
reflects the atmospheric composition at
the time of deposition. The analysis of
such ice samples therefore allows an
estimate to be made of the concentration
of atmospheric impurities in the past.
During the first season of the deep
drill operation to grip the Greenland
ice sheet project at Summit central
Greenland, continuous ammonium
measurements were performed between 600
m depth covering the time period from
330 to 25,000 years before present. the
NH4
plus concentration. So, seasonal
variations of 1 to 20 nanograms per uh
per gram with some sporadic high values
uh up to 600 nanogs in narrow layers.
The chemical fingerprint get here's the
important part. The chemical fingerprint
points to biomass burning causing the
high ammonium peaks. Right? Biomass. So
here's a proxy biomass burning proxy.
One of the proxies for biomass burning
is high ammonium peaks.
Ammonium will uh uh be emitted
originally as NH3 whereas the organic
acids are emitted directly and are also
produced in the atmosphere by oxidation
of hydrocarbons. Let's see uh let's see
only by okay so here we go.
Additionally, the emissions must occur
in such a way that they have the
possibility to reach Greenland. Only
biomass burning and more specifically
large forest fires satisfy the
abovementioned conditions. Plumes from
forest fires have enough energy that
they can extend to the free troposphere
where they can be efficiently
transported over large distances.
So the comprehensive study of ammonium
perturbations observed in Greenland snow
layers have shown that such summer
events are characterized by a large
increase of several organic species. Um
such perturbations by one or two orders
of magnitude in the atmospheric content
of reactive species may have strongly
disturbed the photochemistry of these
high latitudes regions. Um
so then let's see. So here we go. Then
we present new evidence suggesting that
the late glacial worldwide episode of
cooling known as the younger dus had
significant impact on climate vegetation
and human economy in southeast in the
southwest. And that is then associated
um because this study also points out
the possibility of reconstructing past
biomass burning events in the northern
latitudes which could have been
modulated by past climatic conditions.
So already now they're showing that
there are changes in climate that are
associated with these peaks in uh large
forest fire proxies and your NH4 as it
says down here that's basically
ammonium. So now uh in the Levant a new
pollen core extracted from Lake Hoola
and plant remains from the early v
village of Abu Herrera one indicate the
forest may gave way to step in response
to uh drier climatic conditions
contemporary with the younger dus. Now
what's interesting is because new
studies have been come out in the last
few years on Abu Herrera which suggest
that it was the site of an impact and I
think I've got the papers and in fact uh
Steven Collins who's going to be at the
cosmic summit was one of the lead
scientists that worked on the studies of
impact proxies at Abu Herrera.
Um
so going on here uh the plea to scene to
holysine transition in human economy in
southwest Asia the impact of the younger
dus blemished in American antiquity. The
younger dus apparently had a profound
effect on the environment of southwest
Asia and contributed significantly to
the adjustments in human adaptations
that resulted in the development of
agriculture. So what we're seeing here
is a pattern beginning to develop that
suggests that the uh that the climate
had changed drastically. Uh there was
meltwater spikes that seem to be
associated with it. Um and here we go.
The younger dus was first recognized in
the pollen record of northern Europe
during the late glacial as the
temperature rose and the glaciers began
to retreat. The tundra vegetation was
replaced by birch and pine woodland.
These trends began during the Balling
and Allerd pollen phases. Now those were
the two stages that preceded the younger
dus. Okay. And they were warming phases.
So those warming phases were what was
associated with meltwater spike 1A. That
was then followed by as it says here the
ensuing younger dus. The temperature
fell sharply. The glaciers advanced once
more and the woodlands retreated
southward giving way to open tundra
characterized by drius octopatala from
which the name of the episode is
derived. That's a dryus octopatala is an
eightp petedalled flower that likes cold
weather. So it it flourishes in the
cold. It does not do well in the warm.
So it disappears. Right? So it had
disappeared during the bottling and all
warming. It had disappeared. It came
back during the younger dus. Here's the
term driest which also implies there was
an older drius which preceded the
balling allid allered warming. This
phase lasted approximately a thousand
radiocarbon years from 11,000 to 10,000
years BP. Now again this has been uh
updated 2,000 years roughly has been
added to these dates. So you could say
13,000 to to 12,000 years. The pollen
evidence suggests that the climate
turned so cold during the younger dus
that it approached the conditions of the
full glacial. So what this is showing us
is that there was and there's a lot more
we won't get into that but this is
showing what I'm trying to show here is
that there was this questions being
raised about already previous to 2007
about what could have happened and a
bunch of different explanations were
being profered at the time for what
could have caused this you know what
seemed to be the gradual more natural
warming through the Balling Alrod it
sudden interruption to return to full
glacial cold possibly regrowth of
glacier and then a second episode of
melting. Right. Well, the other thing
that really seemed to uh raise questions
about this was um the fact that uh it
was associated with the megaponal
extinctions.
Um
now jumping forward three years. This is
a petite
datit in 1995. This was published in the
journal quaternary international. He
says the existence of the younger dus
cold event has been known for over a
century. First named and described from
buried leaves and fruits of dry
octtopala in Scandinavia.
The reappearance of these tundra
indicators after shrubs and trees had
begun to colonize a glaciated landscape
during the Allerd warming suggested a
reversion to colder conditions. Numerous
stratographic studies subsequently
proved the cooling as characteristic of
late glacial pollen diagrams throughout
Europe. While the magnitude, timing, and
distribution of this event has had
considerable attention in Europe itself
since that time, it is only in the last
two decades that the focus has expanded
to include the extra European presence
of the signal. In other words, we're
reaching a point here now. We're getting
up we're at the mid 90s, 1995.
and he's pointing out that within the
previous decades they began to look
beyond just Europe going okay we know
that there's this major climate signal
in Europe but what about the rest of the
world all right so that was where it
sort of went um then he points out that
the late glacial paleo meaning old paleo
ecological history of the globe
comprises a vast literature yes it does
which would pos impossible to summarize
in this review. Um, early reviews of the
younger dus European pollen evidence
emphasized the dramatic changes in
vegetation that characterized both
coastal and inland areas in areas
outside Europe. Few researchers
correlated late glacial fluctuations
with the Allerd younger dus oscillation,
but some exceptions exist and are being
investigated now with renewed interest.
It is the discovery of a clear younger
drius signal in the Greenland ice cores
in the last decade that sparked
additional interest in the late glacial
climate. These highresolution multiproxy
records generated enhanced impetus to
understand the cause of the dramatic
shift in climate that characterize
Greenland and Europe roughly 12,800 to
11,600 calendar years ago. Now you see
here by 95 now they begin adjusting
because they now have these high
resolution Greenland ice scores where
you can literally count year by year. So
as a result of this much greater
resolution now they have revised the
chronology. So you can see here roughly
12,800
to 11,600. So 128 is lower younger dus
116 is uh the top of the younger dus. So
again in the question of a global
younger dus one of the major
contributions of this working group has
been to establish the clear evidence for
the younger dus outside of Europe in
eastern North America. It is quite
evident from the macro fossil evidence
that the accelerator mass spectromedy
spectroscopy carbon 14 dating that
vegetation responds very quickly to
climatic change both at the onset and
the close of the younger dus. The
probable extent of the younger dus in
the midwestern USA and along the north
pacific coast is indicated by
palinological oscillation at many sites.
Palinological is the study of pollen. So
whatever kind of plants are growing
there, they give off pollen. The pollen
can be studied and you can then
reconstruct what kind of plants would
have been growing there. Right? Were
they cold loving plants, warm loving
plants, something in between? The most
convincing evidence outside North
America is from Colombia, South America,
where many sites show an oscillation but
await clear ex AMS carbon 14 dating
through highresolution sampling and
dating in many regions of the globe. We
eventually hope to be in a position to
state with confidence whether or not the
YD was a global event. By focused
attention to interpretation of
vegetational records, we hope to refine
our estimates of temperature or moisture
change. Careful analysis of the timing
of the YD event in icecore, marine, and
terrestrial records will help to expand
the pattern of its geographic expression
and ultimately may help us understand
the mechanism of this dramatic climate
change.
Okay, so maybe what we should do then is
fast forward. Um,
but this is this is okay. Uh, okay.
We're backing up a little bit. Two
years. Uh, because this is when the ice
core results are first in hand. And this
is important. This was the atmosphere
during the younger dest published in the
journal science
and P. Paul Mameuzki
is his team is reporting this. One of
the most dramatic climate change events
observed in marine and ice square
records is the younger dus. They
returned to near glacial conditions that
punctuated the last deglaciation.
Highresolution continuous glaciochemical
records newly retrieved from central
Greenland record the chemical
composition of the Arctic atmosphere at
this time. This record shows that both
the onset and the termination of the
younger dus occurred within 10 to 20
years
and that massive frequent and shortterm
decade or less changes in atmospheric
composition occurred throughout this
event. The magnitude and complexity
massive decadal or 10-year scale
fluctuations of the soluble species
record documented in the YD proportion
of the Greenland ice sheet project 2
core provide evidence of an extremely
dynamic atmosphere thus far unparalleled
in the holene or unparalleled in the
last uh the last uh 10,000 11,000 years.
So here now this is bringing something
else into the complexity of the
equation. The changes in the chemistry
of the atmosphere that are occurring.
See? So now this and it's showing also
that
the changes
were a lot faster than anybody had been
previously thinking because it had
previous to this it had been assumed
that we're talking changes that occurred
over thousands of years. And that's why
this is so significant is because as it
says here the record shows now from the
green ice sheet cing that the onset and
the termination of the younger dry
occurred within 10 to 20 years. So now
this is really like they're scratching
their heads going what the hell is going
on here? You know, scientific literature
tends to be non-emotive,
so you don't get that. But I can tell
you, yes, they were like, "What the what
the f is going on?" 10 to 20 years,
right? And as I say, extremely dynamic
atmosphere thus far, unparalleled in the
holene. So there's been nothing like
this. So it happened at the end of the
ice age, and there's been nothing like
that in the last 10 or 11,000 years.
It's unparalleled.
Potentially cataclysmic.
Yes, potentially cataclysmic. And you
can see where this trend is going. I
hope that people uh are are appreciating
why I'm trying to give some context to
this. What led up to? Now we haven't
even added the uh the the question of
mass extinction of megaponal species but
I will jump ahead here to um the 2007
paper that came out uh published by uh
Richard B. Firestone Allen West uh let's
see one two three four five authors and
this was the first indication we have
discovered what appears this was
published at the American uh geohysical
union. It was a paper presented at the
fall meeting in 2007.
We have discovered what appears to be
micrometeorites embedded in seven
Alaskan mammoth tusks and a Siberian
bison skull. The micrometeorites
apparently shattered on impact, leaving
2 to 5 mm hemispherical debris patterns,
that's supposed to be patterns
surrounded by carbonized rings. Multiple
impacts are observed on only one side of
the tusks and skull consistent with the
micrometeorites having come from a
single direction. The impact sites are
strongly magnetic indicating significant
iron content. We analyze several
embedded micromedorite fragments from
both tusks and skull with laser ablation
inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry. Did you get that there?
Um, John, they're using a laser to
ablate the surface and then they're
using a scanning electron microscope.
Yes. To look at it. That's right. You
got it. It's pretty metal while also
being pretty nerdy. Yes. It's pretty
metal and it's pretty nerdy. And X-ray
fluoresence, which I think what it is is
they bombard the stuff with neutrons and
then they look at the wavelength of the
gamma rays coming off. Anyways, these
analysis confirmed the high iron content
in a uniform composition highly enriched
in nickel and depleted in uranium. The
iron nickel and iron titanium ratios are
comparable to urolyte meteorites and are
unlike terrestrial sources.
So there we go. We've seen the first
evidence that this might be something
involving
uh an extraterrestrial phenomena.
Um
and then let's see uh let's see down
here. The bison skull shows evidence of
new bone growth over the micrometeorite
impact sites indicating the animal
survived the bombardment is dated
approximately 26,000 years before
present which is younger than the tusk.
Now what's interesting here and as we
get into the research and we won't be
covering that today but we will be most
definitely talking about this in
upcoming episodes is the idea that there
have been multiple pulses of cosmic
impacts right and the younger dus was
probably the latest and the greatest but
it wasn't an a singular it wasn't the
only event Right. So what we're seeing
here is evidence that perhaps 26,000
years ago uh it appears likely that the
impacts cosmogenic isotope increases
magnetic excursion and population
declines are related events although
their precise nature remains to be
determined. Well after additional
evidence and studies they came out with
this paper and this as I says here the
paper that started it all in 2007.
evidence for an extraterrestrial impact
12,900 years ago that contributed to the
megaponal extinctions and the younger
dest cooling. And you can see, we'll
read this together, a carbonri
black layer dating to 12.9K,
that's thousand years, has been
previously identified at 50 Clovis age
sites across North America. And that's
the that's the graphic you showed. Okay.
and appears contemporaneous with the
abrupt onset of younger driest cooling.
The NC2 bones of extinct pletosine
megapona along with Clovis tool
assemblages occur below this black black
layer but not within or above it. Causes
for the extinctions, younger driest
cooling and termination of Clovis
culture have long been controversial. In
this paper, we provide evidence for an
extraterrestrial or ET impact event at
12.9Ka,
which we hypothesize caused abrupt
environmental changes that contributed
to younger dus cooling, major ecological
reorganization, broadscale extinctions,
and rapid human behavioral shifts at the
end of the Clovis period. So, we can add
to all of the the stuff we've already
been talking about. Now, megaponal
extinctions and what actually appears to
have been the disappearance of the
Clovis culture in North America and the
abandonment of many of those sites that
had been occupied for number of
centuries prior to the uh younger dus
and then they appear to have been
abandoned.
So that was in 2007. So that was kind of
the paper that started it all. We jump
forward to 2008
and then what do we see? Wildfire and
abrupt ecosystem disruption on
California's northern channel islands at
the Allarod younger dus boundary 13.0 to
12.9K.
And again this is what they're seeing
from what we talked about before the
evidence uh the ammonium and the
evidence the signatures of very large
fires. And that was kind of one of the
reasons I wanted to go into that because
this evidence of the ammonium and other
proxies of wildfires, huge forest fires
preceded this. And now in 2008 in the
aftermath in this new paper they're
documenting um they're documenting the
evidence for enormous forest fires uh
wildfires and associated
ecosystem disruption on the northern
channel islands. Um and then again that
same year the younger dus blackmats
ranchel interan termination that was the
last phase ranchan termination was the
last phase of the megapana occupation of
North America. So when they say ranch
laban termination they're meaning that's
the end of this last phase of megaponal
uh um presence in the North American
biophere or ecosystem.
So in the abstract and and Cance Hayes
is a very
well distinguished I think he's passed
on now. I'm quite sure he is gone
because he was even quite old during
this when he wrote this but he was a
highly distinguished highly esteemed
paleontologist.
So he says that in this paper of the 97
geoarchchaeological sites of this study
that bridge the place to scene holysine
transition approximately 2/3 have a
black organic rich layer or black mat in
the form of mllic paleosols that's just
a a type of soil these are all types of
soils that he's talking about here
datomites and then al mats with
radiocarbon ages suggesting they
stratographic manifestations of younger
dest cooling episode. So he's using the
older dates here. Then radiocarbon uh
adjusted dates 12,900 to 11,600.
This layer or mat covers the Clovis age
landscape or surface on which the last
remnants of the terminal place megapana
are recorded. Stratographically and
chronologically, the extinction appears
to have been catastrophic.
seemingly too sudden and extensive for
either human predation or climate change
to have been the primary cause. This
sudden Rancho Labraan termination
appears to have coincided with the
sudden climatic switch from all road to
warming to younger dus cooling. Recent
evidence for extraterrestrial impact,
although not yet compelling, needs
further testing because a remarkable
major perturbation occurred at 10,900
BP. That needs to be explained. And then
to to to um clarify here, this you add
the 2,000 years to this and you get the
radiocarbon dated adjustments. Uh and
that's 12,900.
And as he says here, it's a remarkable
major perturbation occurred and it does
need to be explained.
Um,
most younger dus age black layers or
black mats are dark gray to black
because of increased organic carbon
compared with the strata above and
below. Although these layers are not all
alike, they all represent relatively
moist conditions unlike immediately
before or after their time of
deposition. as a result of higher water
tables. They are both younger and older
black layers, but they do not appear to
be widely distributed over the continent
like the younger dus black mat, nor are
they known to be associated with any
major climate perturbations as was the
case with the YD cooling. Uh the
following observations are based on
geological and archaeological
investigations conducted over the past
50 years for at least 97
latest place to scene sites or
localities in North America. And here's
here's a photograph. You see this on
George Howard's Cosmic Tusk website.
This is the black mat at Murray Springs
Clovis site. We visited this myself,
Brad Young, uh the Serpent Brothers,
Russ and Kyle. Who else was with us?
Um yeah, we visited this site. Um this
is actually not the thickest example at
the site. There's places where this
looks to be 8 in to 10 in thick, but you
can very clearly see it. And so this is
that lower younger dus boundary right
here. Below you find evidence of
megapona, you find evidence of clovis.
Above you do not. Now there are some
exceptions. Yes, because there were some
limited survivals across the younger dus
boundary or so it would appear but it
also is evident that a major mass
mortality event did occur right here
associated with this boundary. Okay, so
this is um this was uh a photograph from
a paper that was published in 2011.
Uh evidence for younger dus global
climate oscillation and human response
in the American Southwest. Um so look at
this. I mean look at how prominent this
black mat layer is.
A late place has seen coral marl scoured
by alovvium underneath a thick uh YDC
black mat in a tributary stream of the
upper San Pedro Valley, southeastern
Arizona.
Now I have not been to this site but I
definitely would like to get to this. Um
but you can see how prominent it is
here. It says the postclovis
this again the Clovis and we we have to
talk about the Clovis culture in more
depth because there some interesting
questions themselves. The postclovis
archaeological record of the southwest
has been explained by the early
development of a desert archaic
adaptation. Okay. uh the most
significant post YDC that's younger
driest chronosone
change in material culture is the
appearance of groundstone and pinto type
and notch projectile points. So after
the younger dice there was a change in
the type of tool and artifacts that they
found. Um, but here's here's the key
right here. In southeastern Arizona, a
noticeable,400year
hiatus occurs in the archaeological
record following Clovis and placed the
scene extinction. So, in other words,
you've got the black mat layer, the
megapona disappears, the Clovis culture
disappears, and then for,400 years
there's no evidence of human occupation.
That's what it's saying here. Um, and
then you have this new type of of uh
artifacts that show up, what they're
calling the pinto type notch projectile
points that occur between 9 and 8,000
years before present. Um, in any case,
there's no compelling evidence for
hunters or gatherers in the northwestern
Chihuahuan Desert or the Sonoran Desert
uh interior during the younger
destroone.
So, in other words, it's evidence that
that the fairly prolific um Clovis
culture disappeared from both the
Chihuahuan Desert and the Sonoron
Desert. Now, in the old models, well,
they must have gotten up and left and
gone somewhere else. However, the
problem is is when you start looking at
the somewhere else sites, you see the
same thing happening. So it's far more
looking like rather than migrating
uh outside to another location, they
didn't actually migrate. They they
disappeared. They became extinct in that
area. Yeah. To isolate a human response
to younger dus chronosone climate
changes requires controls that are not
always possible using the types of
evidence at hand. But our analysis does
demonstrate unambiguous and largecale
changes in human land use. Um
then the apparent down here the apparent
abandonment of the northwestern
Chihuahua and Sonoran deserts um
by hunter gatherer populations after
12.8,000year 8,000year
this is means calibrated calibrated
years before present um and the
reappearance of people in the
stratographic record of the northwestern
Chihuahua and Sonoron deserts around
10,000 Ka or 115 so in other words what
you have here is you had evidence of
human population and then they appear to
disappear they aband it's abandoned the
sites where they were occupying hunting
and gathering
making their tools, making their uh uh
spear points, all of this, they're gone.
And then there's a hiatus and then after
about 14,500 years or even longer, you
see uh the evidence of cultural
occupancy once again. And their
artifacts are different there. It's like
uh you know a good archaeologist who
studied these can look at the two and
quickly see the difference between the
uh the Clovis artifacts and those which
followed. So, Albert Goodyear, we we got
the tour of uh the Savannah River site,
which was a Clovis site by the lead
archaeologist, Albert Goodyear. And uh
what was interesting, the story he told
us, he said that for years, you know,
that he'd been studying it, he had this
Clovis horizon that he'd been studying.
And if I recall um in an upcoming future
episode, I can show you photographs of
the site. But um maybe 6 ft down below
the surface, something like that, six or
seven feet, there was this Clovis
Horizon that he'd been studying. And he
said, you know, that various people had
come there, you know, sometimes he
brought tours in on a several occasions.
They brought I think even like college
students or even high school students
out to look at the site. it was on
private property, so you could only get
in there with permission from from Al.
Um but
anyways, he said that they kept asking
him um well, what's below it? What's
below the Clovis site, the Clovis layer
or Clovis horizon? And uh he said, well,
we haven't really looked. We don't
assume there's nothing there's anything
there because the dominant paradigm was
Clovis first
and they were the first people to come
to North America and they probably came
across the bearing land bridge
connecting Siberia to Alaska
uh migrated down through the ice-free
corridor between the Cordieran and
Laurentide ice sheets right there just
east of the Rocky Mountain front in
Alberta. And this was the explanation
and it was all pretty much resolved.
Everybody agreed that that was the case.
Clovis were the first and so he never
really looked below. Well, he said
finally he got asked enough uh by enough
people probably you know ignorant high
schoolers you know who would ask
questions like that because they didn't
know what the consensus opinion was or
what the dogma was. So he says, well, he
finally
decided to take a look. So he did and he
looked down below and uh discovered more
evidence of occupancy of the site that
goes back almost 50,000 years if I
recall the number,
which I thought was very interesting.
Um but then of course there was a hiatus
and then you have this mysterious Clovis
culture that shows up um around 13,400
years ago and they're there for 3 to 400
years and then as quickly and as
mysteriously as they show up they
disappear to the paper co-authored by
Goodyear, James Canet, Alan West and
David G. Anderson. So check this out
now. Okay, this is in the journal
Quernerary International, which is one
of my favorite journals to read every
month. The Paleoindian database of the
Americas integrates database and
geographic information systems
technology to provide location data for
almost 30,000 Paleoindian projectile
points, measurement and other
qualitative attribute data on more than
15,000 points and provides photographs
and/or line drawings for nearly 10,000
Paleoindian points across North America.
And now you can go you can go to that
Paleoindian database of America. It's
really interesting to go there and spend
some time perusing that site uh if
anybody wants to to to check it out. Um
so these data clearly indicate this is
where it gets interesting here. These
data clearly indicate a major decrease
in the number of artifacts in many parts
of North America during the early
centuries of the younger dus. This
decrease is interpreted to represent a
decline in human populations and or a
major reorganization of settlement
systems, something likely related to the
major changes in biota observed over
this same general interval. Um, in the
southeastern US, this decline is
particularly dramatic, amounting to a
drop of approximately 50%. The pattern
of immediate post Clovis decline in
eastern North America is also similar in
the central part of the continent in an
area defined by 21 states and provinces
in the Great Basin, Rocky Mountains and
Great Plains.
Um
we're just going looking at the uh the
underlying port here portion here from
the same paper. Nevertheless, a wide
range of evidence indicate that
conditions during the initial few
centuries of the younger dus caused a
significant drop in human populations
or dramatic reorganizations of
settlement in North America and possibly
also broadly throughout the northern
hemisphere. But we're not going to get
into it too much in this uh episode, but
we are going to look because there's a
lot of data now from around the world of
how this affected human populations. So
on the next one here, the next graphic
you'll see here um the distribution. You
see there's a very thick clustering of
points um in the east particularly
um and more sporadic but there's a lot
of these are places now where Clovis uh
artifacts and Clovis spear points and so
on have been found. Right. So quite a
thick clustering over here around the
east uh United States down into Florida
over here down out here in the in the
southern desert regions here up on the
Colorado Plateau all the way up here
into uh you know the unglaciated part of
southern Canada. You see portions of the
cordieran ice sheet over here over the
Rocky Mountains, portions of the
Laurentide ice sheet here. Now look what
happens after 13,000 years.
Particularly look along the east coast
along the eastern. Boom. They're gone.
And they're not nearly as thickly
clustered.
This is fol. So this is 12,000 years.
Let's go back. This is 13,000. So this
is the beginning of the younger just at
the eve of the younger dus. This is what
you've got. The Clovis culture is widely
distributed over unglaciated North
America, thickly inhabited apparently in
some regions, particularly the east. And
then a thousand years later, they're
gone.
And you've got, in fact, the points that
are now showing up are of a different
cultural group altogether called the
Falsome.
And to a trained archaeologist, you can
look at a Folsam point and a Clovis
point and they are they are distinctly
different. You can tell the difference.
This next graph
is interesting. Now, this is the topper
South Carolina site. That's the site
that we visited with Al Goodyear at the
Savannah River. Well, these are two more
um
Clovis sites, Adams, Kentucky and Carson
Con short, Tennessee. Now, if you look
over here, total number of artifacts are
on this vertical axis here. So, you can
see at the topper site over 400 450
roughly artifacts were found um you know
during this period of Clovis occupancy.
The Tennessee site was up to over 800
artifacts. The Adams, Kentucky site,
almost a thousand, right? Then look,
here's the younger dus boundary right
here. And here's post Clovis.
So boom, what's happened? These people
have disappeared. Now the question is,
where did they go? Well, did they did
they pull up their stakes and move
somewhere else? Well, no, because the
the abandonment of these sites was
pretty much continental.
They didn't go anywhere. They died out.
They disappeared along with the megapa.
So, you can see here how this whole
episode is getting extremely and
compellingly interesting. Um we can see
on this next graph um some various um so
relative probability
you can see here um
80% here 80% 100% here. So this is um
what this is showing is uh that um this
is where the the disappearance is
occurring right in here.
Um
we'll skip this and come back to it
because I have more detailed information
on explaining these graphs what they're
actually showing. We won't get into that
here today. Um
uh yeah the lake place this is from a
different paper also published in 2011
the younger dus and late place peoples
of the great lakes region. The late
place to scene archaeological record of
the great lakes drainage area shows that
there were several albeit spatially
variable changes in that record in a
time period corresponding to the younger
dus climate reversal. Notable here are
declines in some areas in the mobility
of paleoindian groups as measured by
distance to the main lithic source
employed. declines in the overall
frequency of sites and find pots,
particularly in the western Great Lakes,
where some northern areas seem to have
been largely abandoned,
and an increasing association of auboc
occupation loces
or extensive wetlands left by recently
drained glacial lakes. Some of the
changes as in range mobility most likely
relate to the colonization of new areas
rather than directly to the younger dus
specifically the earliest groups were
able to target rich but widely dispersed
resource loc due to an absence of
competing groups. Now why I have that
underlined is because this is talking
about in that post uh ice age world. So
what's happened is that the earlier
areas were largely abandoned and then
after this hiatus you have a
colonization of these new areas um after
the younger dus and as it says here
these earliest groups in this
recolonization were able to target rich
but widely dispersed resource loc due to
the absence of competing groups. In
other words, there were these groups
that came into these areas and there was
nobody else there. Basically, that's
what it's saying. And so, there were uh
target-rich resource loces because in
the aftermath of the deglaciation, you
had this period called the climatic
optimum. So, during the climatic
optimum, the climate got quite warm,
warmer than now. You had this
proliferation of plant life, of
vegetation. You had the proliferation of
small game. You had larger areas with no
human occupation. Now you have these
small groups going into these
resourcerrich
areas. There's no competing groups
there. So this is I think an important
model that's emerging from this whole
scenario that we're describing. Now, how
long does it take before those small
isolated groups then grow large enough
during the climatic optimum that they
finally eventually bump up against
neighboring groups? Well, the answer is
probably at least 3 to 4 thousand years,
right? So, uh
anyways, uh let's look at some of the
evidence in these two new papers. We're
going to come back, but I think what we
should do is because it's topical and
timely, we'll look at these two papers
briefly and what they have to show us.
There's a whole bunch of research, very
interesting research, particularly when
you look at the controversy and the
debate that went on between the
celestials and the terrestrials. To to
borrow phrase from the early
controversies over the Carolina bays,
there were two groups. the celestials
who believed the Carolina bays were the
result of some type of a cosmic impact
event and the terrestrials who believed
that it was a a a clustering of
terrestrial events. In fact, Douglas C.
Johnson who was one of the the dean of
geomorphology at um where was he at
Columbia University? I think it was
Colombia. He wrote an extensive paper
intending to debunk this this outrageous
idea that there may have been uh an
impact uh that created the the uh
Carolina bays and it was called the
origin of the Carolina Bays and his
theory was called the complex theory.
Well, if you recall AAM's razor, it's
like always try to look for the simplest
explanation first before you go into the
more uh involved explanations. Well, his
the the the clue was the title of his
theory, the complex theory, and that was
short for um artisian solution lustrin
eolon hypothesis.
Artisian solution lustrine eolian
hypothesis.
So artisian look up artisian aquifer.
So that's where it starts with the idea
of an artisian aquifer. The word
artisian comes from the town in Artois
in France. the old Roman city of
Artesium
where the best flowing artisian wells
were drilled in the middle ages to the
level which water will rise in tightly
cased wells in artisian aquifers called
the potentiometric
surface potentiometric surface there you
go uh that's via the USGS so water under
pressure
okay so picture this layer of bedrock
and water flowing down gradient in
between what's called a perched water
table. Water flowing, it's under
pressure. Now it gets to an aperture in
the bedrock. Right? So because it's
under pressure, it gets to this point
within this layer, this conduit where
there's no overlying lid or ceiling
holding, you know, that's creating the
pressure. So it gets to that overlying
aperture and what does it do? It
immediately goes up
and that's and as it goes up it's if
it's you've got limestone
it's dissolving the limestone it's
solution. So you go from artisian to
solution it's and and now um artisian
solution lustrine
means lakes.
So the water emerges from the ground and
forms a lake
and then eolon means the wind. So the
wind is now blowing on the water and the
waves somehow mysteriously in a in a
rather undefined way circulate and they
shape those irregular
bodies of water the lakes into these
nice perfect elliptical shapes. And that
was Douglas Johnson's theory the complex
theory artesian solution lacustrin eolon
and that was how he explained. So
essentially he brought in all of these
geomorphic processes related to flowing
water and wind and dissolving bedrock to
try to explain the Carolina bays. And I
was very suspicious when I read his book
probably 30 years ago. He I think he
wrote it in the 1950s
and I was able to get a through interl
loan I was able to get an original copy
which I then photocopied. So, I have a
photocopy of his book, um, which I'm
sure is long out of print, um, in which
he's trying to dispel to debunk this
outrageous idea that it could have been
somehow extraterrestrial.
Now, what's the explanation for the
Carolina base? I lean towards
extraterrestrial, but quite frankly, I
don't know. Now, there's going to be
some presentations again at the Cosmic
Summit. Chris Catrell has emerged as one
of the leading authorities. He's really
studied into all aspects of the Carolina
Bays. Um,
uh, what's his name? Tony, uh, Zamora
has come up with a theory which is quite
interesting. I know others scientists
that dispute his theory, which is
basically there was a major impact into
the ice sheet, the southern ice sheet u
near uh the Michigan basin and this
caused a rapid injection into the ice
into the atmosphere of hundreds of
thousands of chunks of ice that then
rain down over the eastern United States
and on the coastal plains of the
southeast where you find the Carolina
base and you might pull up Carolina base
and we can show some people what we're
talking about. I bet a lot of the
listeners have already are all already
familiar with Carolina Bays, but his
idea was these large chunks of ice
landed on the landscape which was
composed primarily of unconsolidated
coastal sediments and the melt water,
the sheets of meltwater flowing
towards the ocean because the coastal
plane of course is tilted towards the
ocean. That water scoured out the
elliptical basins. Oh, okay. There we
go. There we go. So there's some
Carolina bays.
These natural depressions pepper the
landscape of the Atlantic coastal plane.
Around three dozen of these features can
be found in this image, but there's
thousands of them. We on that same trip
that we went to uh visit the topper site
with Al Gore. Al Gore. Oh my god. Al
Goodyear.
Please forgive me. Uh with Al Goodyear.
My apologies, Al. Uh we went with Chris
Moore who is one of the leading
scientists working uh and members of the
younger dus impact group the the the
comet research group but we went out
with him to some of the Carolina bays.
He believes they're more or less
terrestrial. And I I I don't want to
attempt to uh explain his theory of
origin uh because I wouldn't do it
justice uh because I haven't taken a
detailed analysis of it. So, we'll leave
that for now. But um
yeah, if you uh there's probably a lot
more images to give people
uh
sort of an overview of what the Carolina
Bays are. And when I first started
learning about the Carolina bays in the
1980s,
um
it looked like they were terminal
pleosine. And this was based on core
studies taken from the bottom of oh a
number of Carolina bays. radiocarbon
dating sediments that were uh enclosed
within uh radiocarbonating organic
material that was enclosed within the
sediments at the bottom of the Carolina
bays and they kept coming up looked like
uh they looked like younger dus I mean
they looked terminal pletoine
um
what's going to be the final answer on
that I don't know um you You know,
again, we would need probably a lot of
new studies. Okay, so we'll just show
this mosaic here. This was uh some of
the first aerial surveys ever done,
1930.
And you can see all of these are
individual photographs that were taken
from the air and then pieced together.
And surprise, surprise, it showed all of
these elliptical features. And there
were, this is just a small little area
of it. And there's thousands of them.
And
we could we could get into an episode on
the Carolina Bays. I think it would be
interesting. Um I won't claim to have
the most recent uh ideas on them because
I did study I mean most of the research
I did on the Carolina bays was in the
late 80s and early 90s. In fact, I think
it was 92.
I went down to South Georgia where some
of the Georgia bays are and I went to a
local airport and I hired a pilot to
take me up and fly me over uh because I
wanted to see them from the air cuz you
you can't it's they're hard to see from
the ground. Um
so I have some of those pictures that we
can share in the future. But this is
right here. You can see some of the uh
the perfect ovals and how they are the
long axis of the ovals are parallel.
And so
what this led to was the idea that if
these were impact produced or somehow or
maybe also produced along the lines of
the Louisiana and this is a good segue
into this recent paper on the uh the
Louisiana feature that we're about to
talk about. Um but because it's very
possible that and and this is in my
opinion um you know I talked about Tony
Zamora's idea that there was a a uh what
does he call it a but imagine large
chunks of bo bro bro bro bro bro bro bro
bro bro bro bro bro bro bro bro bro bro bro bro bro
broken ice land landing on the
bro bro broken ice land landing on the
coastal plane and also I want you to
notice like take this one it's very
noticeable that there is a very
prominent sand rim on the south and
southeast sides here you see that um
unless on the north. Well, this would be
consistent with an oblique impact from
the northeast, right? Which would blow
the sand towards the south. I mean, in
other words, if this was impact
produced, the the idea was that it was a
very low angle to the horizon.
Otherwise, it would have been circular.
Cuz if you take a cone and and we're
going to see evidence that this is what
it looks like we're seeing on this
Louisiana feature is that there would
have been a plasma cone preceding the uh
the arrival of the of the object, right?
Well, if you take a cross-section of a
cone at an angle, you get an ellipse.
Okay? So if like you had a plasma cone
intersecting the surface of the land and
that is a high pressure uh feature and
it's blowing out because remember this
the the substrate here is more or less
unconsolidated. It's not hard bedrock.
It's coastal plane. Um so it's it's a
relatively soft ground. Right. So that's
what I initially believed that it was
probably going to be something along the
lines of a Tungusa event that there may
have been a pressure cone preceding it.
um that the thing didn't actually hit
the ground that it exploded in the
atmosphere something along the lines of
Tungusa or this new study of the
Louisiana event and then created a cone
of pressure and that cone of pressure uh
intersects the horizontal surface of the
land and hence that's where you get that
cross-section slice of the cone and it
gives you an ellipse if that makes
sense.
Note parallelis parallelism of long axes
of ellipse and prominent sand rims on
the southern and eastern sides. And then
the next slide shows the long axis and
the parallelism. Now that to me was
always one of the sticking points with
the terrestrial hypothesis. How do you
explain that? The first of all the
perfect ellipses. Second all the par
second of all the parallelism of the
long axis of of the ellipse. But it
seems to me that some kind of an
terrestrial event superimposed from
above is going to be more easily
um able to explain these features. One,
the elliptical shape, the prominent
southeast sand rims, the parallelism of
the long axes, the shallowess of the
crater material of the crater form
itself, which in most cases has then
been in infilled with holysine sediment.
Okay, so here's the new paper. Let's
see. This just came out. Uh it was
published online the 4th of June. Okay,
so this is really only
barely more than a, you know, week and a
half old since this paper was published.
And it's entitled Evidence of a 12,800y
old shallow airbururst depression in
Louisiana
with large deposits of shocked quartz
and melted materials.
Um, and that's just see the the shallow
air burst depression. That was the
original concept I had for Carolina Bays
is that they were shallow air burst
depressions.
This uh expands on it quite a bit. I
have to confess I have not studied the
paper yet. I've scanned it and to just
get the highlights, but I have not
studied it in depth because I only fell
into my hands two days ago and I've not
been able to really take a deep dive
into it yet.
But it says here, "We report evidence of
a likely lowaltitude
cosmic air burst near Perkins,
Louisiana, associated with
semiconsolidated deposits
uh containing abundant shocked quartz
grains.
uh which of course is an important proxy
a classic classical classical impact
indicator along with sphirerals melt
glass micro brechia. Now micro brechia
is microscopic
material that is basically during the
heat of the explosion and the violence
of the explosion the the uh the rock the
bedrock is broken up into billions and
billions of very small microscopic
pieces and that's what you call the
micro brechia the broken rock bre's
broken rock and then you've got a bunch
of really um sophisticated analytical
techniques that they used. In fact, they
used eight different analytical
techniques. I think we will not get into
all of that right now. It's very
interesting and people interested in
this should have just a you know a basic
working knowledge uh of some of the
techniques that are used. Um scanning
electron microscopy is is probably one
of the main ones. Um optical microscopy
which is just simply an optical uh
microscope. Cathode,
cathodoluminescence,
laser ablation, we came across that one,
neutron activation, radiometric dating,
that would be like radiocarbon dating.
Um,
so these analysis revealed that the
deposits exhibit morphological
and compositional similarities to known
impact related proxies. radiocarbon
dating uh based on the uh isotopes of
argon 40 and and 39 analysis constrain
the likely age of deposition
between 30,000 and 10,000 calibrated
years before present but there's a
concentration of dates clustering around
12,800 years before present coinciding
with the age range of the younger dest
boundary sphereral and melt glass
abundances along with evidence of high
temperature mineral in transformations
are consistent with the effects of a
high energy air burst or impact.
Hydrocode modeling suggests that a
touchdown air burst could plausibly
account for the observed shallow
depression material dispersal patterns
and geochemical signatures. Now, we're
looking at the um this new paper, and
this is the uh
the paper is entitled Evidence of a
12,800y old shallow air burst depression
in Louisiana with large deposits of
shock quartz and melted materials. So,
here we go. And this is the showing the
area in Louisiana right here in the
little in the box. And then this is a
closer up. There's a lake. Notice
there's a lake right there in the center
of this uh uh circle of dots right here.
Uh and this is the town of Perkins,
Louisiana.
Let's go through and look at this. Here
we go. So here's a is this a Google map
or Google Earth. Um so here's lake
depression, seasonal lake with locations
of glass and sphereral rich material
outlined in the white dotted line. the
pond deposit which is right up here
uh is northwest of the lake depression.
Let me close this down a little so we
can see the whole thing. Okay, so there
was they dug a trench right here.
Another deposit down here. Um the pond
deposit is northwest of the lake
depression and the V deposit is south of
the lake depression. Trench number one
is on the east rim. So they trenched
right here and uh the lake deposit is
within the lake depression. Calibrated
radiocarbon ages on organic material and
carbonri melt glass are shown for three
key deposits. Okay. Images. Yeah. Your
Google Earth. Um so then they get into
information on air bursts. Cosmic air
bursts can occur at various altitudes
producing distinctly different surface
effects. High altitude air bursts like
the 1908 Tangusu event primarily cause
widespread devastation through blast
waves but typically leave no craters.
Now that's really I think that's
important to keep that in mind. Even so
the airbururst evidence at Tangusa has
been reported to include sphirerals,
shocked quartz, glass filled fractured
quartz, melted felt spar carbon
sphirerals and glass-like carbon. Shock
quartz I will mention is any kind you
have quartz crystals and shock because
they have fractures all throughout and I
think we've got pictures here of some
shocked quartz. Let's just look at some
of the first of all the macro scale
stuff. Um as it says here this is
optical photographs which is just your
typical microscope photographs. But this
last one is I find very interesting
because here you see the spirals that
are embedded in this matrix. Like here's
melt glass from within the matrix. And
look at what you have here is vesicles,
you know, uh which were formed by gas
bubbles. Um
so this is some of the rocks that were
picked up. Some of the the matrix
material. If you look at this, let me
let me zoom in a little here.
You can see that there's these this
material, darker colored material spread
throughout here. Um here you got glass,
this dark colored glass embedded within
this matrix
and yeah here you can see the vesicles
and then here you can see sphirerals.
Would we call these proxies? Yes, these
are proxies. Thank you. Those don't
happen naturally in the rock. It has to
be pretty hot, doesn't it? Yes.
So yeah, here you have this was formed
by melt glass, right? This is melt
glass. This is So here this lighter is
sort of the matrix and you've got the
melt glass and then you've got the
sphirerals. So um
the original discovery was of a sizable
semiconsolidated surface deposit
primarily comprised of billions of
sphirerals and fragments of melt glass
embedded in a matrix of partially melted
and unmelted grains of quartz, sand, and
limestone.
Uh so here's yeah F is your photo
microraph of sphirerals embedded in the
pond deposit the pond deposit matrix. Uh
let's see here.
So you'll see a graph on page 10 of
where they believe the air burst. Okay.
There's your arrowheads. Yeah. Your pre
and post Clovis and boundary.
Yeah. Here we go. Yeah. So
interesting. There's your
uh accelerator mass spectrometry 12,000.
Yeah. So here's your here here's your
younger dest boundary date right here.
And here's your here's the peak the
glass peak right here from 12,835
to 12,735
calibrated years before present.
Um,
let's see. You said 10. Page 10. You got
a good layout of where they think the
air burst occurred.
You've got your cone imprint on the
landscape. I must be close to 10 here.
That's it. Oh,
this one. This is the one.
Spiral distribution.
So this is where they took all their
core samples. Uhhuh. Yep. So each one of
these numbers, I presume, is a core
sample.
Okay.
And this is where they found all of our
proxy sphererals.
And it's quite a actually quite a
collection of diverse proxies in one
place. Yeah. Which to me is very much uh
indicative of an impact. And the dating
would certainly suggest that it was
right there near the younger dus
boundary. Um,
melt glass. So, let's see. There's some
of the temperatures we're talking about
for melt glass
are really impressive. Oh, yeah. Let's
see. So, this is kind of an oblique
view. A profile across the lake
depression showing sphereral peak by
depth.
Okay. So right here by the lake, notice
that the spheroids are much deeper.
Well, that would seem to suggest to me
that this is probably right where the
most of the energy was concentrated
and was able to excavate a deeper and
that's what's now occupied by the lake.
Let's see what else we've got here. Oh
yeah. Oh wow, look at this.
Spheros from various deposits from
several locations. So A through C are
photo microraphs
and look you see the spirals embedded
there. These are from just south of the
lake southeast on the V deposit.
Yes. And then D, E, and F are uh
let's see sc uh scanning electron
microscope image with two epiated
photo microraphs of the thin sectioned
sphireralrich matrix. Panels D and E
exhibit approximately 800 sphirerals
representing approximately 1.8 8 mineral
million sphirerals per square
centimeter. So that's just a little, you
know, that's a lot of sphererals and a
very little space. But look at this
stuff.
Pond deposit. Let's see what it says
about those. So that's G.
Uh
images of sphirerals within the matrix
in panel G number seven is an ironrich
sphireral right here
uh with a platey texture. Look see the
platey texture it's talking about
um which would be suggestive of uh you
know violent pressures imposed upon
these sphirerals. In panel H number
eight is a hollow aluminum siliconrich
sphireral surrounded by hundreds of
smaller sphirerals.
You see here like all of these smaller
sphirerals
in panel I
uh nine marks a small hollow spiral a
few microns in diameter and number 10
marks an elongated ironrich object. So,
it looks to me like there's a bunch of
stuff that's kind of all become fused
together here, which is typical. Um,
it looks like what you see after you get
done welding something or smithing
something, if you ever actually work
with a hot iron in a forge looks like
everything that's in the bottom of the
floor of the shop,
hot and violet.
Okay, so these are all from the V
deposit, which is just south of the
lake. um platey textures characteristic
of ironrich sphirerals covering an iron
silicon aluminum siliconri core uh at
number two.
So that right there so this is what he's
calling the platey texture. I mean look
at this one. So what does it say about
B? uh platey textures and number four
dendritic textures on ironrich
sphirerals surrounded by a sphereralrich
matrix.
So this is this is basically all broken
up. Now let's see pit D uh I mean uh
sphero D was from pit three.
Um,
let's see. Number five, impact pit on a
spiral.
Uh, right here. Right there. So, you had
a spiral and you had a smaller piece
that slammed into it right here and
created that hollow that that
indentation right there.
Look at
E and F. Okay. So, E and F
uh splashes of once molten material
draped across uh an aluminum calcium
silicon sphireral.
Number eight is a cluster of submicron
sphireral splashed onto the large
sphireral. Oh yeah, look at this. Here
you see the large sphireral and then you
see that these have been basically
welded onto it.
Look at G. G says it's a a ironrich
sphireral that collided with number 12,
an aluminum siliconrich sphireral. So
there, yes, two sphirerals that collided
and then stuck together.
And all of these are found where?
Well, these are all part of the V, which
is that site just all of them except for
uh D, which was pit three. All of these
are found in the V deposit just south of
the lake. Well, I meant I meant
geologically. They're all in the Oh,
well, they all appear to be clustering
around the younger dus boundary.
So,
at least at least this event at least
this black mat was exposed
to something
very very hot,
very very fast. We have what looks like
an air burst impact.
It's hard for me to imagine anything
terrestrial that would create this
naturally other than a volcanic
activity. Well, no, even that wouldn't
because the pressures in volcanism and
and the heat necessary to create these
sphererals is insufficient and and it's
the wrong material. Mhm. And it's the
wrong material.
It wouldn't be coming fast enough. Yeah,
I'm I'm I'm with you. There's nothing
terrestrial, right? Look at these
sphirerals. Wow, what a collection of
sphirerals these are. And it says
they're extracted from the V deposit.
A through D is clusters of iron and alum
aluminum siliconri sphirerals. Multiple
colors of glassy. We have calcium,
aluminum, silicon, iron, calcri
sphirerals.
L JKL a hollow broken glassy sphireral
containing numerous submicron sphirerals
inside of it.
Um
yeah here's look at this one. So here's
a hollow broken dark colored glassy
calcium aluminum silicon iron carbonri
spiral.
Uh,
Miller Brav indices confirm shocked
quartz.
Uh,
geez, what a collection of stuff
from this one site.
Multi-layered V sphirerals.
Multi-layered sphirerals. Yeah, I'm
going to have a good time working my way
through this.
Yeah, it's quite the read. It's 47 pages
long. So, if if you guys want to have a
look at that, uh link will be in the
description.
Yeah. To this article and the Russian
one, which is nowhere near as uh replete
as the one from Louisiana.
Uh we're going through the mo most
interesting of the two,
but the fact that there's one in Russia
now and we we have proxies impact
proxies in
the younger dus boundary uh layer.
Yeah. What would that what would that
intimate Randall?
Well, it would certainly to me in
suggest that um
I mean it seems that what it amounts to
is we're we're we're drawing boundaries
around the uh the extent of the younger
dus boundary
uh event but it seems to be constrained
only by as far as we've actually looked
and when we look at new places
it keeps showing up. I mean it it to me
it points in the direction that it was
global in extent and that's what I think
we can conclude from this and when we go
through we'll we'll we'll take on
another episode of this where we sort of
like try to fill in the gaps we'll
address some of the um some of the
criticisms of the theory uh and and look
at some of the popular uh
in in the popular press some of the way
they treated it and it was always uh all
kind of over uh what we say over
glamorized, over sensationalized
and then 6 months later they would have
uh you know the headlines would be you
know impact hypothesis disproved,
right? Um,
so there was a lot of controversy, but I
think the controversy has kind of
subsided because uh because the evidence
favoring a um
an event like this keeps accumulating. I
think what I'd like to do is zoom to the
Let's see. There's
uh let's see.
I was looking for the graphic on the
plasma plume. I believe that's on page
37.
Ah, there it is. Okay. Yeah.
Melted and shocked quartz during an air
burst. So, this is what they call a
hydrocode model of an asteroid air burst
showing crater formation.
Look at this. Okay. And here you see
down here crater formation. You've got
this high energy plasma plume that hits
the hits the surface of the ground.
This model by Boslo and Crawford shows
the jet from an asteroid air burst
excavating a crater melting surficial
material at greater than 5500°
Kelvin. Yesesh, which is yellow. That
would Yeah, that would hurt if you got
burned up. If you got uh
if you got uh swallowed up by a 5500
degree Kelvin plume
uh which is yellow as it says and
ejected blade blade a bladed material
which is the small black dots. So you
see if I let's try to zoom in a little
more.
Okay. So there you've got all of this is
the ejecta that's being blown out of the
crater. And then that falls some of it
falls to the outside some of it falls
back within the crater itself.
Um
uh melted material such as those
produced under these conditions have
been observed by at Perkins.
Uh so this is
most likely the event. It didn't
actually the object itself didn't strike
the earth. Um okay visible
representation. So you got a low density
low velocity impactor coming in uh like
this. Then what's happening here? So
this would be the ejecta plume going out
this way.
Uh let's see visible hydrocos low
density low velocity impactor. The
legend shows various materials after a
350
meter comet broke up in an air burst.
108 km high. One 100 meter wide ultra-
low density fragment uh shown in red
here
um
struck the earth traveling at 975
kilometers per second at an angle of
45°.
Uh earth's surface was relatively flat
with vegetation and trees. Uh and then
uh at 765
m the impacting air burst fragment
created a shallow crater approximately
25 m deep. You can see that that's right
here that's forming this crater shallow
crater right here.
Um because the air burst fragment was
much less dense than the Earth, it broke
into a laterally moving cloud of small
particles shown in red. That's what this
is. What I was saying is the ejecta and
it moved all the way over and then it
kind of did this wave coming back on
itself here. Um
it broke into a laterally moving cloud
of small particles. The impact created
pockets of near vacuum conditions in
white
and begin to vaporize vegetation. At
number three,
uh after 220 22
2,235
m the crater deepened. Oh no, this is
probably milliseconds, not meters.
Sorry. Apologize everybody. This would
be milliseconds. the crater deepened and
the denser vegetation deflected the low
density impactor cloud.
So there we go. That's kind of so a
cross-section of what would have created
this um a low angle impactor, low
density. If it's a piece of a comet,
it's going to be low density
um low density, low velocity impactor.
And what's going on here?
Um, a 100 meter wide ultra low density
fragment of a 350 m comet struck the
Earth as described in the figure above.
After 720 milliseconds, the impacting
fragment created a shallow crater.
Temperatures rose to more than 2,000°
centigrade. In red, the boiling point of
quartz.
At 720 milliseconds, the comet fragment
broke into a laterally moving cloud of
small particles. The high temperatures
began to vaporize vegetation.
After 2,235
milliseconds, the crater deepened and
greater than 2,000° centigrade
temperatures continued to melt surficial
sediments and vaporize vegetation.
So here you can kind of see. So here's
the path of the incoming object. This
would be the plasma plume intersecting
the ground here. And here you can see
all of this would be ejecta thrown out
from the impact site. And in fact you
can see there's an outer layer, an outer
boundary to the ejecta here.
And it looks like ejecta thrown out this
way as well almost in a butterfly type
shape. not unlike uh the distribution of
of tree destruction with the Tungusa
object. Um
so we used a LAR derived digital
elevation model to show a potential
crater with an ejecta apron to the west
with two possible wings of debris
extending away from the crater lake. An
additional potential crater is shown in
blue. That's right here. And that would
certainly fit and be possible which
warrants investigation.
elevation in black. The vertical scale
is meters above sea level and is
exaggerated several times for better
visibility.
Um and then you have your conclusions.
Um
go through that. Uh let's see here. So
in the conclusion uh we propose that the
Perkins Lake depression represents an
airburst impact crater associated with
the younger dus onset and as such
contributes to the broader understanding
of the frequency and effects of cosmic
impact events on Earth's surface
environments. Recent research, extensive
research and observations at this site
and elsewhere imply that air bursts, now
this is important. I think this is the
the one takeaway of this that people
should really uh take with them. Uh air
bursts have been more common than
currently accepted and that numerous
easily overlooked such air burst impact
events may have occurred in the past.
Well, why would they be more common?
Well, it's because they don't hit the
ground and gouge out large craters that
can be studied,
you know, years later. Um,
so, uh,
and that's something important to keep
in mind. Why? Because if they are more
common, here's the thing. If we look at
a crater like Meteor Crater in Arizona,
it was an iron asteroid. Okay? An iron
asteroid is a very dense object. Uh, and
because of its density, it's able to
penetrate much more readily through the
atmosphere, strike the ground, and gouge
out a big hole. Right? Um, whereas a low
density object is only going to create a
shallow crater, whether it's Tungusa,
whether it's this Perkins crater in
Louisiana, or possibly the Carolina
Bays. Right now, here's the thing about
the Tangusa. another century or two, you
would scarcely see any evidence that
this event had even happened there. Um
whereas, you know, when it was first
reached by scientists back in the late
1920s,
the blowdown of the trees was still
extremely apparent, right? So, a lot of
information has been able to be derived
by looking at the pattern of of tree
destruction and, you know, looking at
the site for proxies. But, you know, if
you're just walking through the woods,
like, you know, a century or two from
now, you'll be going there'll be pretty
much full recovery. Who's going to think
to, oh, let's excavate a sample of Earth
and see if there's microsphererals or
nano diamonds or shock quartz or any of
that stuff in it? No, you wouldn't even
think of that, right? So, here's the
thing. the iron asteroids that leave
craters like when you go and you know
there's approximately 200 impact craters
now identified on the earth well the
vast majority of those are going to have
been created by higher density objects
like asteroids right in the event of an
air burst
la tongusa or this event here it is not
going to leave an obvious crater that's
whose signature is so obvious that
you're immediately You can go look at it
and look for all the impact proxies that
would normally be associated with an
impact crater.
But the iron objects compared to the low
density objects that would cause air
bursts, those low density objects are
about 10 times more abundant than the
iron objects that create that gouge
craters. So what does that imply? I mean
implies it could have a lot more air
bursts that we don't even know about.
And that's the point. That's that's the
the point that they're that they're
making here in this article is that
yeah, it's very possible that these
things are a whole lot more uh that
they're easily overlooked and uh that
numerous uh easily overlooked air burst
impact events may have occurred in the
past. But, you know, a thousand years
later, 500 years later, how do we
identify those? Well, maybe this is
where lidar will come in. Maybe things
will show up because certainly the
Carolina bays are showing up quite uh
impressively in lidar uh in lidar
mapping. Uh so one more thing here,
hydrocode modeling supports the
hypothesis that a lowaltitude air burst
impact could have generated the observed
depression and associated deposits. Um
while alternative explanations for this
material including natural fluial or
anthropogenic processes were considered,
they failed to account for the full
suite of geological and geochemical
evidence. So Randall,
what's the ultimate takeaway here? Air
bursts happen. Air bursts happen. Fine.
Yeah, air bursts happen. And in our
estimates of how how numerous cosmic
encounters are, I would suggest are
being grossly underestimated
only because they're primarily derived
from crater counts. And as I just
explained, those crater counts are based
upon actual impacts into the surface of
the Earth. And an event like Tungusa or
this event here, we'll call it the
Perkins, Louisiana event.
Yes. Now we can we can um come back you
know thousands of years later because
there is a depression there and that
depression it appears was formed by a
high pressure high temperature plasma
plume that was preceding the the uh
encroaching object right but and like if
we go to the Tungusa object and I think
there are actually uh shallow elliptical
craters in in the region of Tangusa.
Uh which would suggest to me the a
higher likelihood of that being an
explanation for the Carolina bays. But
in any case, um if you have a Tangus
object, my point being that if you have
a Tonguska object that happened a
thousand years ago, what's going to be
our evidence that we can look for in the
field? Well, if you have fossilized
trees from a blowdown,
that could do it. But typically, you get
back several millennia, those they're
going to be buried. You're not going to
see them still laying on the surface
because if they are still laying on the
surface, they're going to likely have
decayed away and become just part of the
soil and you wouldn't even know they
were there. So, the takeaway is that the
real danger
uh the most uh immediate danger uh would
be air burst phenomena rather than
impacts. Impacts are still highly
dangerous. Um, you know, if a if a say
an object a thousand feet in diameter
slammed into the earth,
we're looking at global repercussions of
that or reverberations. I pronounce
mispronounced reverberation in one of
our previous uh I called it rever
reverbation when it should have been
reverberation. But hey,
what can I say? I get tired and
sometimes I occasionally even I
occasionally mispronounce a word.
Supposably. Anyway, I was gonna say
supposedly. Yes, suppose I supposedly
mispronounce words from time to time,
but that's the takeaway here. Um,
Tangusa type events may be far more uh
numerous than we had previously
estimated. And here's the thing, a
Tangus event is extremely catastrophic
and devastating and damaging to the
immediate local area, right? But a
single object is not going to really
have global consequences. Although the
Tangaska event did have some global
fingerprints that we can talk about in
an upcoming episode, right? However,
they weren't overt. They weren't
obvious, right? But once you begin to
you have the timing, you know, uh, early
morning June 30th, 1908, you can look
and you can see, oh, there are
fingerprints of other things that
happened like a pressure pulse that
passed over newly installed baragraphs
in the British Isles and went around the
entire planet twice.
And based upon the velocity of that
pressure pulse, we're able to back it up
in time and see that the time correlated
almost exactly with the Tungusa air
burst which created a pressure wave that
literally moved around the earth. But
here is the thing, the final thing we
should say is that there is evidence in
hand, compelling evidence that sometimes
air bursts well no put through the air
bursts are not always limited to single
events. Just like what we're looking at
here with the Louisiana event, it's
probable that that was one of multiple
air bursts, perhaps even hundreds or
thousands of air bursts
that uh afflicted the planet at the
lower younger dest.
And if it turns out the Carolina bays
are the consequence of air burst
phenomena, then that would also imply
that there were thousands of air bursts
occurring during the younger dus
boundary if the dating correlates. But
that would certainly explain the graph
we looked at where we saw almost the
complete eraser
of Carolina I mean of Clovis cultural
sites Clovis occupation of the eastern
United States
during the younger dus interval. So I
would say the takeaway again this is
just more of the constantly accumulating
evidence that we are cosmically
vulnerable and we need to be paying
attention to the bigger picture of which
we are a part but we're so distracted
over this because of this Malthusian
worldview that our human civilization is
limited to the resources of planet Earth
that we're going to go down as a
civilization fighting over a dwindling
finite supply of resources when we don't
need to. If we just begin to really uh
undertake the what I think is the
inevitable
evolution to become a cosmic
civilization which we will be able to do
two things simultaneously. one, we will
be able to much more effectively uh
create a planetary defense system and
also we will begin to harvest the
resources both energy resources and
material resources of space. However, we
need to get past this thing that's going
on right now because we're in a
dangerous time right now. We have to
recognize that. Um, you know, we talk
about catastrophes. I call myself a
catastrophist. I look at catastrophes
throughout the history of this planet
and most of what I look at is
catastrophes uh of a natural kind. But
we could be facing a catastrophe of a
human kind, humanmade kind if we don't
get this these conflicts under control
and soon. Um so I just, you know,
whatever it takes to get people to wake
up and realize that no, there's an
alternate path. We don't need to go down
this road of perpetual conflict uh
competing for a dwindling uh supply of
resources. We need to really change our
thinking. So uh that is something that I
I really hope and pray that uh we get
through this time because this is
probably the most dangerous time since
early 60s when we were going toe-to-toe
with the Soviet Empire like during the
Cuban missile crisis and we we we
managed to uh you know come through
there by the skin of our teeth even
though we came this close.
What saved our asses was high level
diplomacy, talking, communicating,
discussion, negotiations.
We have to have that and we have to
demand it from our leaders. And I think
Donald Trump need to have his feet held
to the fire because virtually everybody
that I know personally voted for Donald
Trump on the basis of the fact that he
was portraying himself as a peace
candidate and he was going to end the
war in Ukraine and he hasn't done that
and he's now looking like he's ramping
up another war. Um, and who knows where
this is going to go, but I've got to be
optimistic and believe that we're going
to come through this ultimately
unscathed. But there's so many variables
here and we know that these are the
kinds of events and kinds of things that
can rapidly spiral out of human control.
So, I mean, it's coming down on, you
know, America's got to wake up and
say, "No, we're not going to this. this
is not sustainable,
which it isn't. So, that's part of the
takeaway as well. So, uh let's reconvene
soon with another episode. I think that
will have to be after the cosmic summit
which is coming up this coming weekend.
Um and I think there's going to be a lot
of great knowledge and information
exchange there. a network is growing
worldwide of people who are looking at
these kinds of things, learning about
these things, studying, researching,
etc. This is also a very important thing
that needs to go on because hey, we
could be we could go to war with the
Russians over, you know, dwindling
resources in Ukraine or we could form a
joint venture with the Russians and the
Chinese to build a planetary defense
system and a lunar outpost on the moon
from which we could use as a base to
begin to explore, colonize, and reap the
infinite riches of the solar system. So,
I'd rather go that direction.
same here. And one of the things that's
holding us up is just general cynicism
on the part of too many people who just,
you know, are dismissive of these
possibilities. But when you look at the
big picture, no, I don't think that it's
that it's, you know, pie in the sky.
It's not uh something that's just out of
our reach. I think we can do it. It's
just do we have the will? Do we have the
motive? Do we have the inspiration? And
with those things, I think we can do it.
And believe me, I would way rather be
working together internationally towards
those goals than the kinds of things we
now see going on. So on that note, I
guess we'll uh we'll uh disperse. I'll
go to the cosmic summit, be back next
week. We'll record another episode.
We'll be looking further at this.
There's the whole the whole history of
this younger dest controversy is super
interesting. and we'll provide links and
all kinds of things for people who want
to do their own independent research
because the more brains and minds we get
on this the the more uh productive I
think that our research will be. Indeed.
See you soon. All right, John. Adios, my
friend.