Jesus Christ. Who is he and why is he
such a big deal in the world today?
Jesus might be one of the biggest
mysteries. To some people, he is
literally the embodiment of the fullness
of God. And to others, he never existed.
The historical evidence of him is also
strange, with it both seeming
self-evident and non-existent, which is
paradoxical to say the least. Isn't it
about time that these kinds of questions
about Jesus were answered? Especially
when it comes to the question of
relationship between Jesus Christ and
Christ consciousness.
For those who have followed spirit
science for a time, way back in the
beginning, we created the original human
history movie and in it discussed the
coming of Jesus, his birth, death, and
resurrection. We explored the idea that
his life was one which created a pathway
for us to reach something called Christ
consciousness, a state of embodying the
divine qualities intrinsic to our being.
However, even this idea today must be
challenged because the traditional
Christian thinking is that Jesus alone
is God. Naturally, as you might expect,
this conversation is a very sensitive
subject which must be approached with
great care since we are addressing a
precious belief system which is a part
of many religions today.
Truth can be known, but it requires
humility and surrender in the face of
our own shortcomings in order to see it.
We must all be careful here for when
anyone attaches themselves to a position
or opinion without allowing for
different ideas or perspectives, they
limit their understanding. Some of the
brightest minds and most successful
people in the world are those who can
hold multiple paradoxical ideas in their
minds at the same time. And we would all
be wise to practice this. Therefore,
today we wish to extend an invitation.
No matter where you may be coming from,
let us together thoroughly discuss the
nature of Christ and not stop until we
arrive at a higher understanding and a
greater truth. Even for us, this series
is a learning journey. And so, let us
each be mindful to carefully weigh all
of the information against the metric of
our own conscience and belief system.
Have your own experience and decide for
yourself what makes the most sense to
believe in. And before we really jump
in, one more disclaimer is needed. We
have a ton of ground to cover here. Over
the past 2,000 years, the words of Jesus
Christ have been explored around the
world by billions. And today, there are
over 45,000 denominations of
Christianity globally. And while so many
do their best to uphold the wisdom and
teachings of Christ, not all of them
agree. And some even seem to go against
what Christ taught.
Further, there are both orthodox literal
interpretations and mystical
interpretations surrounding Jesus. And
we want to appropriately explore both of
these. Certainly, some might be offended
that we'd cover one side or the other,
but we really want to be respectful to
all perspectives and reconcile them
against each other. And so, this series
is going to begin with a more orthodox
tone, starting on familiar territory to
the story of Jesus. And as we continue
to explore, we will break into mystical
ground by discussing Gnostic
Christianity and other mystical
interpretations and seeing if and how
these perspectives fit together in order
to find the ultimate truth.
Something to consider while we get
started. It doesn't matter if we believe
in a higher power unless we believe that
we have access to it. It does not matter
if we confess that God has come in the
flesh unless we are willing to
understand that we are that flesh. One
could even identify as atheist if it is
the false gods they are refusing to
acknowledge.
By viewing these ideas from multiple
perspectives instead of just our own, we
may come to find that it's not who's
right that's important, but who's
righteous, those who are characterized
by justice and act with virtue.
As a collective, we are standing on the
shoulders of spiritual and intellectual
giants who have brought us to see as far
as we can today. Our entire reality is
built upon the minds, hearts, and hands
of those who have come before us. And so
may it be our intention here to learn
from our past, not from one exclusive
perspective, but by weighing all
perspectives with that which is pure and
true. It is our hope that from this
movie, regardless of where we stand in
relation to the subject, we may all come
a little bit closer to the truth, and in
doing so, come a little bit closer to
each other.
Now, there's one more thing I want to
mention in this movie before we properly
begin. It's actually in regards to the
AI art, which certainly is a bit of a
twist for us, as traditionally most of
the art in Spirit Science cartoons have
always been handdrawn, which of course
is super fun and definitely not
something we want to lose. However,
these days I find myself a lot busier
than I've ever been with so many things
that I'm passionate about. So, with the
advent of AI generated visuals, I wanted
to try and experiment and produce this
movie using this tool. Something I'd
like everyone to understand. If it
wasn't for the ability to generate
scenes with AI, this movie would simply
not have been made at this time. As a
4-hour documentary, you can only imagine
how long it would have taken to draw all
of it. What's more, we actually have put
in a great deal of love into generating
each scene very specifically, often
rerendering specific scenes multiple
times in order to get it looking right
and doing our due diligence to make sure
that this is the most beautiful and
authentic expression that it possibly
can be. But on that note, I want to
briefly also discuss the representation
of Yeshua with you. As we were making
the parts of this movie, many people
expressed concern that Yeshua should be
depicted differently. However, one of
our challenges with AI at this time is
in how it references the internet
drawing upon reference material when
doing generations. When prompted
generate an image of Jesus, it most
often comes out with a Caucasian man
because that's how he's traditionally
depicted in the mainstream western
world. And so that's the bulk of the
reference material available. We fully
acknowledge that the people in Judea and
Galilee 2,000 years ago predominantly
had olive to medium brown skin tones.
But during the making of this movie,
this was often more difficult to capture
and have it come out looking right. For
the sake of consistency in our
narrative, we have done our best, but
generally stuck to a more traditional
image of Yeshua as he is commonly
portrayed.
So, with all of that said, I hope that
we have not caused any offense or made
anyone feel like we're playing into this
whole whitewashing thing. That's not the
intention for us. It's more about the
message than one specific depiction. But
to be very clear, our team strongly
values historical and cultural accuracy
and we are committed to improving
representation as technology evolves.
Thank you so much for understanding. And
now without further ado, please enjoy
the film.
In the traditional Christian
understanding, Jesus is seen as the
incarnation and embodiment of God the
Father in a mortal body. The very same
absolute deity and creator of the
universe who spoke to Moses through the
burning bush. We might like to start
with a question such as is Jesus God?
And in order to answer that question,
let's begin with some defining terms so
we can get on the same page together.
Firstly, the word Christ is a word which
means anointed, translated from the
Hebrew word for Messiah, which today has
come to designate Jesus as the savior of
the world. These words also
intrinsically signify heir to the throne
of David, linking Jesus's personal
genealogy to the greater biblical
history and prophecies of the Jewish
people. Before Jesus, the term anointed
was used in the Jewish Torah to describe
kings who would be anointed with oil. It
was only then after his coming that the
term was applied exclusively to him in
Christianity as not just anointed with
physical oil but the divine oil of God,
meaning the essential Holy Spirit. As
the Messiah, Jesus was spiritually
anointed to proclaim and fulfill the
good news of salvation to humanity.
However, the term Christ is only one of
many which have been applied to the
person of Jesus. All of these names must
be addressed together to paint a picture
that can be used as a framework of
understanding. Anyone familiar with the
story of Jesus might know him as the
way, the truth, the life, the son of
God, son of man, unblenmished, lamb of
God, great shepherd, logos, and light,
as well as by many other names such as
hosana, Emmanuel, Lord, Redeemer, and so
on. Wow, we went a little Jesus Christ
superstar there, didn't we? I hope that
wasn't blasphemy. Blasphemy, the act or
offense of speaking sacriiggiously about
God or sacred things. Profane talk, huh,
I guess we're good.
All of these names seem to set Jesus
apart from the other gods of various
religious pantheons. Where in other
mythologies we see particular aspects of
the supreme creative power manifesting
itself to guide humanity such as how Th
is the god of wisdom or Krishna and
Buddha or the embodiment of Vishnu one
part of the trimeerty. Jesus is believed
to be the supreme ultimate power in
totality manifested in the flesh. One
way that this is often considered is
through the opening of the book of John,
which begins, "In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God. He was with God in the
beginning. Through him all things were
made. Without him nothing was made that
has been made. In him was life, and that
life was the light of all mankind. The
light shines in the darkness, and the
darkness has not overcome it.
Then later in the same chapter, John
writes, "The Word became flesh and made
his dwelling among us. We have seen his
glory, the glory of the one and only son
who came from the father full of grace
and truth." This opening of the book of
John may rightly be considered the
genesis of the New Testament since the
opening lines are very similar to that
of Genesis 1, which also describes how
God created all things. And God said,
"Let there be light." and there was
light.
Let's consider that words are
instruments in the creation of our
reality. One can easily see that without
words, our thoughts would remain
isolated in the mind and more complex
and intricate patterns of thought would
not be possible. Without words, there
would be no language, no books, no
sharing of ideas. Not only Jesus but
many philosophers, sages, ascended
masters, and mystic teachings across
history have expressed the absolute
power that words have in the creation of
our reality and that through them we can
create or destroy.
But in principle, we also have to
understand there is a difference between
the word and mere words. Whereas we use
words to influence and understand our
reality through definition. It is said
that God used the word to create and
define all creation. It is through this
understanding that we identify the word
as the vibration of creation itself. And
this vibration was illuminating by its
nature. And so while God saying let
there be light is certainly a
personification of the act of creation
so that humans could comprehend it the
essential nature of sound and light
being fundamental to the manifestation
of reality is paramount.
The word word in the Greek tongue is
called logos and is a term which is also
considered to be the origin of mediation
between the visible and invisible within
reality. So although the spoken word
cannot be seen with the eyes, the
results are observed and felt. So too,
the word God paradoxically exists in
both visible and invisible forms, being
the vibratory expression of God, which
continually brings forth all of reality,
and an expression of that which cannot
be visibly seen in what otherwise might
be called the mind of God.
Words could be seen as the mediator
between the thoughts that we think and
the actions that we take. But words can
exist in a multitude of ways, including
invisibly as thoughts within the mind,
audibly spoken, or even written down so
as to last longer. Words are not just
things that exist when we speak them,
but are concepts and structures of
thought that allow for the translation
of energy and ideas from one dimension
to another through us.
To understand the logos better, let us
know that the word itself is derivative
of the Greek word for logic or reason.
Scripture suggests that it is the thing
which pulls order out of chaos at the
beginning of time and sets reality in
motion. From this perspective, the word
or logos then is the transformative
agent which sits at the center between
order and chaos which may even be
associated with articulated truth.
Articulated truth for us may express our
own ability to articulate that which we
know. But from a God- level perspective
signifies the great power which sets
forth the cosmic laws upon which reality
exists in perfect order. We find this
concept all the way down to our very DNA
where we find the syntactical structures
of genes so logarithmically sound that
we can read it like a book. That the
logo sits at the boundary between the
visible and invisible reality may also
yield an understanding that it is in
fact consciousness itself. One may
surmise that experiences cannot be had
without consciousness as it is the light
of awareness which shines upon our
reality and makes them real. It is
through our consciousness that thoughts
become words and the words which we hear
are understood in the mind. By that
logic, consciousness seems to be
necessary for reality to exist. For
without consciousness, there would be no
sense of time, space or orientation
wherein the matrix of reality could be
explored. It may be said that the logos
is necessary for existence because it
gives structure to the absolute chaos of
reality and makes way for self-awareness
and comprehension. This is an amazing
idea because it gives consciousness a
constitutive role in the creation of
reality. Therein we may even wish to
identify God and thus consciousness to
be the equal sign between the E and the
MC² in Einstein's legendary formula
which demonstrated that all of matter
and energy were equal to each other and
could even cross the boundaries from one
form to the other. But we should not
jump to conclusions regarding the
association of God with consciousness
itself because God is also considered
completely indescribable and beyond what
we can know. But all of this probably
makes sense until we bring the person of
Jesus into the equation as a general
concept. The logos idea makes sense. But
then how could Jesus be this word of
God? How could one person be the
embodiment of this vibration of creation
if the vibration of creation permeates
into all things? Well, the belief is
that the supreme cosmic power would
communicate with its creation's best
through direct contact with them and by
living among them and guiding them
personally. Certainly, one might presume
that God would use all means available
to connect with humans, whether through
dreams, strokes of insight, or our very
contemplations of the movements of the
heavens. But reality is so intricate and
if it was so easy to really understand
everything in existence, surely we would
all be enlightened by now. Wouldn't it
make sense that the supreme spirit would
also embody itself within flesh so as to
be the most directly relatable in a
tangible way? And if we too are, as the
Bible states, made in the image of God,
could it not be then that the coming of
Christ was a means to show us a way into
awakening to our own divine nature too?
Then again, John's words about the word
becoming flesh can be interpreted in one
other rather significant way. But that's
a much larger exposition that we'll have
to save to explore later. Nevertheless,
if all of this is true, we must consider
what Christ meant when he said, "Whoever
believes in me will also do the works
that I am doing. He will do even greater
things than these." Jesus was a man who
became known not only for his profound
wisdom and undying love but also many
miracles that he performed. Could it be
that one who is illuminated to such a
degree could do the very same as he did?
This is often given as a reason for why
faith or belief in Jesus is a good thing
even if we lack the material evidence
before our eyes. Because if not him then
how us? His works, compassion, service,
and ultimate sacrifice demonstrated to
humanity what it means to come in
service to all and embody the innate
divine qualities that we are all
intrinsically imbued with. And so when
Jesus said that those who believe in him
will become like him, he is saying that
by believing in God's love, we will
naturally begin to think, feel, and act
according to that love. Compassion,
forgiveness, generosity. These are a few
of the foundational principles to living
and co-creating a life with the
intrinsic divinity that is our
birthright. And does this not sound like
a path to salvation?
But wait a second, on that note, this
last statement probably requires some
more attention. Why do we need salvation
at all? People say that he died for our
sins, but what does that even mean?
Especially since humanity today is well
still pretty sinful and actually what
even is sin anyways.
Jesus is sometimes known as the perfect
sacrifice and the unblenmished lamb. And
such titles many believe speak to his
sacrificial and redemptive nature. But
in order to make sense of these titles
we must comprehend the need for
redemption which comes from the presence
of something called sin. And to
understand sin, we must also bring
consideration to the soul and the body
of consciousness.
The soul is a microcosm of spirit. It is
an everpresent light in the human body
which guides us from within through our
discriminative intelligence and
intuitive conscience. But all too often,
our desirable habits and whims refuse to
follow that higher instruction. Tempted
by lower forces, that which may be
commonly known as Satan, humans often
choose actions that obliterate the inner
light. And these actions are known as
sin.
The word sin originally derives from an
ancient archery term which means to miss
the mark. And just like in archery,
wherein one can miss the mark by only a
tiny bit or by a long shot. So in the
same way, sin must be understood as a
spectrum within which one may tarnish
their body of consciousness. It can be
said that there are degrees of sin as
there are lesser and greater evils in
the world. If a child lied to their
parents about their grades because they
were ashamed, that would be a minor sin
in comparison to say what Judas did.
Now, the creator made all humans as
spiritual beings. We are souls endowed
with an individualization of the
ultimate divine nature. And evolving
from the supreme oneness, the soul was
bestowed with the instruments of a body
and a mind with which to perceive and
interact with the materially manifested
universe. And these mental and physical
instruments that we possess are held in
existence by specific lawful processes
of God's creative power. If human beings
live in perfect harmony with the
workings of the cosmic principles, they
remain spiritual beings in charge of
their bodies and minds. Sin is that
which compromises perfect selfmastery.
It has its automatic negative effect to
the degree of the influence of delusion
within the sin. A person's free will
actions simply harmonize and strengthen
the expressed essence of his sole
perfection or weaken and degrade it into
enslavement to delusion and suffering.
As we explored in our God explained
episode, God is sometimes understood as
the laws of creation itself. And one
such law that is responsible for the
measure and judgment of sin is the law
of cause and effect. Known often in
eastern spiritual traditions as karma.
God has ordained cosmic law to support
the process of governing life so that
man himself becomes the judge of his own
actions. By good action, he compels the
law to reward him and through evil
action he invites his own suffering. In
scripture, it was written that the fear
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
an insight given to propel sinful men
away from doing wicked things, lest they
compel even greater suffering upon
themselves and others. For by evil
actions, we do reap what we sow. Yet, it
should be understood that when a person
works evil, there is no great bearded
man on a cloud somewhere, ready to
pounce upon him and destroy him. Rather,
there are principles of justice at work
in the cosmos, even if that justice is
not duly received in the same way that
we might imagine. The cosmic laws are
perfectly at work at all times,
regardless. When we succumb to lesser
desires, we keep our consciousness
concentrated on and confined in the
material world. The darkness or gross
portion of cosmic creation then heavily
obscures the illuminating divine
presence by the shadows of delusion.
When ignorant souls repeatedly indulge
their erroneous ways of living, these
patterns become firmly entrenched in the
brain as bad habits of mortal behavior
and create long-standing suffering
within their body of consciousness in
this life and the afterlife.
During his time with Nicodemus, Jesus
says, "The light has come into the
world, but men loved the darkness rather
than the light because their deeds were
evil. Everyone who does evil hates the
light and does not come into the light
for fear that his deeds will be exposed.
But whoever practices the truth comes
into the light so that it may be clearly
seen that what he has done has been
accomplished in God. When Jesus says
that men loved the darkness because
their deeds were evil, he is saying that
evil and selfish material habits keep
most people away from connectedness with
God. Those who make no effort to resist
the temptation of evil action, taking
instead the easy way of rolling down the
hill of bad habits become accustomed to
the darkness of ego consciousness.
Because they shut out the subtle voice
of Christ consciousness whispering
within them, they shun the infinite
abiding joy that comes from following
the light within and practicing
goodness. Material temptation promises
happiness from gratification of a
desire. But giving into temptation will
bring misery, the annihilation of
happiness. For those who follow that
dark path, these habits often become so
ingrained that the very thought of
forsaking their wicked pleasures is
rejected outright, laughing at the
suggestion that self-control might be
beneficial and believing they would be
unhappy, even tormented if denied their
indulgence.
And so if it is true that so many people
today are ravaged by sinful habits and
indulgences, what can anyone do about
it? Well, Jesus is said to have died for
our sins. And nearly 2 billion people
believe that he was the perfect
sacrifice.
So what does that mean?
Sacrifice is a concept which relates to
each of us very deeply, even if we don't
realize it. Because sacrifice is the act
of giving up something in the present
moment in order to guarantee something
better in the future. A common example
could be sacrificing one's time working
today for a paycheck tomorrow. When one
fasts, they sacrifice food in order for
the body to essentially eat itself,
starting with the old and gked up cells
first and residual fat in the body,
which actually brings greater health and
longevity. For those who get married,
the potential of being with a multitude
of partners is sacrificed in order to
guarantee one strong and deep
relationship with another for the rest
of their lives. This is why in
Christianity, marriage is known as a
sacrament where sacrifice, sacrament,
and sacred all share the same root. A
word which ultimately means make holy
and therein make whole.
We all make some kind of sacrifice each
and every day. Some greater or some
lesser. And it is through the degree of
our sacrifices that leads us to greater
or lesser lives.
Generally, the hardest sacrifices are
the ones wherein we find the most
attachment.
According to the biblical tradition,
though we had fallen into a dark and
sinful path, God did not give up on us
and created sacrifice as a means by
which we might be restored to purity and
perfection. Throughout the books of
Moses, a great deal of instruction is
given as to the different types of
sacrifices called for, each of which
designed to help humanity atone for
their hardened hearts and minds. In all
of them, when there were animals that
needed to be sacrificed, it was always
done with a perfect or unblenmished
creature. As it is written, "Do not
sacrifice to the Lord your God an ox or
a sheep that has any defect or flaw in
it, for that would be detestable to
him."
This is because the sacrifice of an
unblenmished animal represents an
offering of wholeness and that which is
incomplete or flawed cannot become a
sufficient or equal match for that which
is whole and complete.
But this might also be understood in
another way. When giving up anything
meaningful, one does not bestow that
which might already be unwanted.
Otherwise, it would also not be a
suitable sacrifice. When we give up
something dear to us, something that is
functional and has a clear purpose, the
gravity of that act is much greater.
Imagine if a shepherd has to put
something to death, like the best of
their livestock. They are going to take
that offering far more seriously than if
they were to sacrifice something they
saw as weak and useless.
It is only with this context that we now
can conceptualize what it might mean
that Jesus was the perfect sacrifice and
the unblenmished lamb as well as why his
sacrifice is believed to have been
necessary. He is called the unblenmished
lamb because he was a human being
perfectly integrated with God the
supreme spirit and thus reflecting the
fullness of the love, truth, wisdom and
light of the godhead. He is also
considered the final sacrifice because
after the death of Christ, it was
believed that animal sacrifice was no
longer necessary and this was because
the death and resurrection of Jesus had
created a pathway of transcendence
within the human consciousness and
changed our hearts forever. The act of
non-resistance towards his own death
demonstrated to humanity a depth of
compassion that we had never seen
before. And his resurrection showed that
with God, anything is possible.
[Music]
But there's one major stick in this
whole thing that must be addressed.
Despite everything that we've discussed,
humanity today is still very sinful. In
fact, considering that we entered into
the dark ages only a few hundred years
after the death of Christ, an era of
unenlightened thinking for most of
Christendom for about a thousand years.
Some might argue that humanity got worse
after Jesus died, not better. Today,
selfishness, greed, and pollution of
thought and cruelty still run rampant in
varying degrees across the world. And
this is something we should all come to
terms with. In regards to Jesus dying
for our sins, it would be foolish for us
to presume that anyone, even Jesus,
could take away sin unless the sinner
himself cooperates in the removal
process. If Jesus had taken away
everyone's sins by dying and
resurrecting, wouldn't the world be in a
state of perfect paradise today? And
likewise, if believing in Jesus were all
that were required, then all Christians
for all time would be perfected beings.
We must understand that Jesus becomes an
instrument of transformation for people
who seek him or redemption in some way
or are touched by his spirit. But if
someone is closed off from receiving
him, they will not receive his blessing.
And if someone believes in him
half-heartedly or doesn't explore to the
greatest of depth the words and
teachings that he brought forth, they
also will only carry with them a
superficial understanding of Christ
consciousness.
But in truth, Jesus's sacrifice was
primarily to exemplify for all time the
power of spiritual force over ignorance
and brute force. He showed that the
power of love could conquer the Roman
Empire, which with all of its might
could not suppress his philosophy. His
reign has outlasted that of all warrior
conquerors based on the divine edict,
love your enemies. Further, in all
spiritual disciplines across the world,
masters can take upon themselves some of
the burden of a disciple if that devote
makes a worthwhile spiritual effort to
improve himself. But most of all,
spiritual masters serve in the highest
way by example and provide teachings
that inspire the errant children of God
to free themselves from their bad habits
and spiritual negligence.
Because of this, we each have to come to
terms with the fact that our own effort
plays a big part in the results of our
purification process.
As a savior, Jesus brings salvation in
two dimensions, personally and
universally. Personally, he bestows
qualitative or liberating blessings and
grace on his contemporary disciples and
on those of all succeeding generations
who look to him for salvation. But he
also came to fulfill a universal
understanding of the qualitative good,
establishing a moral and spiritual
standard for all mankind by calling
sinners to repentance.
He mixed with those people most in need
of healing from sin to demonstrate by
way of example his quantitative ministry
to the masses to show the transforming
power of righteousness that brings
response from the forgiving heart of
God. Now with all of that said, one
major question that sometimes arises in
this dialogue is what about people who
are good people but have never heard of
Jesus or follow some other teacher? Will
they be condemned because they don't
believe in him? It should be known that
spiritually virtuous people act properly
and ideally in the various situations in
life in harmony with the laws of
righteousness. They move along the path
towards redemption through their right
actions performed at the inner prompting
of conscience rewarded by a silent
satisfaction from their soul. Righteous
people need little or no corrective
discipline because their innate
spiritual sense keeps them on the right
path and prevents them from wandering
into the temptation of ignorance. This
is even why Jesus said that he came for
the sinners specifically.
Further, if a sinner of their own accord
comes to repentance even without hearing
or knowing about Jesus, it's the same
spirit that will help deliver them to a
higher understanding and a better life.
At the end of the day, what it's really
about is understanding who and what he
embodied, the spirit of God. That spirit
is omnipresent and found in all things,
even if obscured by the darkness of
illusion. And within each of us, were we
to go within and to not stop seeking
through the chaos of illusions within
our own minds and hearts, we would find
ourselves connected and one with the
same spirit which moved through Jesus so
fully. And that spirit can do absolutely
anything. Miracles draw the attention of
curiosity seekers, but it is the love of
God that calls to highly developed
souls. The Lord has placed before us an
endless array of wonders, inviting us to
behold the miraculous in every facet of
creation. What could be more
extraordinary than the presence of
divine intelligence in all things?
Consider the tiny seed that grows into a
mighty tree. The cosmic dance of
countless worlds spinning in perfect
harmony. Or the marvelously intricate
human body formed from a single
microscopic cell gifted with
consciousness and sustained by an unseen
power. In every atom, in every breath,
God is ceaselessly working miracles. But
man, dulled by familiarity, often takes
these miracles for granted.
God, the silent overseer of creation,
regulates this vast cosmos with infinite
perception. Yet, he seeks no
recognition. Humbling himself, he
remains hidden behind the veils of forms
and forces, whispering his presence in
subtle and intimate ways. He does not
demand acknowledgement, nor does he
compel belief with dramatic displays of
power. Instead, he calls to us gently
through the inner stirrings of love and
intuition. In every moment, he offers a
choice. To look beyond the illusions of
the world and seek his divine wisdom, or
to remain ins snared by Maya, the great
cosmic delusion. This freedom to choose
is God's greatest gift to humanity. He
desires not worship born of compulsion,
but love that flows freely and
spontaneously from the soul. If God were
to reveal himself through overwhelming
miracles or undeniable authority, the
freedom to choose would be lost.
Humanity would rush to his glory. Not
out of devotion, but out of awe and
fear. Even through his saints, God
refrains from displays of spiritual
power that override free will. He
desires that we seek him not because of
spectacle, but because of the quiet,
unshakable knowing within our hearts.
Jesus himself resisted the call to
perform miracles for the sake of proving
his divinity. Though he healed the sick,
raised the dead, and walked on water,
these acts were never for show. They
were expressions of divine purpose
performed under the will of the father
and for those whose hearts were ready to
receive their deeper meaning. Even when
faced with demands for signs and
wonders, Jesus often declined, knowing
that true faith does not depend on
external proof. To Thomas, he said,
"Because you have seen me, you have
believed. Blessed are those who have not
seen and yet have believed." Faith born
of spiritual understanding rather than
the senses is the foundation of true
devotion.
When Jesus turned water into wine, it
was not to endorse intoxication or
social marryment, but to demonstrate a
profound truth. All matter at its core
is an expression of divine intelligence.
To Jesus, water and wine were not
separate entities. They were different
vibrations of the same underlying
energy. He understood that every element
of creation, whether water, wine, or
human consciousness, is governed by the
same divine principles. By his oneness
with that divine intelligence, Jesus
could alter the atomic structure of
water, transforming it into wine with
the power of thought. Modern science
provides glimpses into this truth.
Physicists tell us that all matter is
composed of subatomic particles,
electrons, protons, neutrons, arranged
in infinite configurations. These
particles, though appearing separate and
distinct, are governed by unseen forces
that give rise to the vast diversity of
creation. But why do these particles
arrange themselves in such intricate
patterns? Why do they form the stars,
the oceans, and the miracle of life
itself? Here, science encounters
mystery. The power that directs this
infinite complexity is divine
intelligence. The same intelligence that
Jesus understood and demonstrated.
Matter, energy, and thought are not
separate realities. They are different
frequencies of the same divine
vibration. Thought is the subtlest form.
Energy lies in between and matter is the
densest. What we perceive as solid and
unchanging is in truth a fluid dynamic
expression of divine will. Just as we
shape images in our dreams through
thought, God shapes the universe through
his creative consciousness. What we call
miracles are simply changes in this
vibratory field directed by divine
intent. Yet humanity bound by the
illusion of Maya perceives only the
surface of creation. Maya hypnotizes us,
making us believe that water is fluid,
stone is solid, and fire is heat. But
these forms are not fixed. They are
temporary expressions of vibrating
energy. Like waves on the ocean, all
matter rises and falls, appearing and
dissolving back into its source. The
wave may disappear, but the ocean
remains. Similarly, the forms of matter
change, but the divine intelligence
behind them is eternal. For most, this
truth remains hidden. Bound by finite
consciousness, we see the glass as a
glass, the stone as a stone. Unaware
that these are merely vibrations of
thought crystallized into form. But
through spiritual practice, we can
awaken to a higher state where the
illusions of matter dissolve. We begin
to see that all things are
interconnected, flowing from the same
divine source. In this state, the finite
becomes infinite and the boundaries
between self and creation fade away.
This was the consciousness Jesus lived
in beyond the illusions of matter, awake
to the infinite reality of divine
intelligence. For him, transforming
water into wine or feeding thousands
with a few loaves was not a miracle, but
the natural result of his unity with
God. He saw creation as it truly is, not
rigid and fixed, but fluid, dynamic, and
responsive to divine will. The law of
cause and effect that governs the
material world is but a shadow of the
higher laws of divine creation.
Scientists can trace the formation of
matter to subatomic particles, but
beyond that their understanding falters.
They cannot explain why these particles
come together in such intricate and
purposeful ways. Here, science meets
spirituality. The activity of subatomic
particles is guided by the same divine
intelligence that animates the cosmos
and sustains life. This intelligence is
not distant or abstract. It is the very
essence of our being. Thought, energy,
and matter are not separate from us.
They are expressions of the same
creative power that flows through us by
stilling the restless vibrations of the
mind. We can tune into this divine
frequency, awakening to the truth that
all creation is one. God does not compel
us to see this truth. He whispers it in
the rustling of leaves, the rhythm of
the waves, and the beating of our
hearts. Those who seek him with pure
intention will find him not in grand
displays of power but in the quiet
unshakable presence that pervades all
things. Miracles then are not
suspensions of natural law but
revelations of higher law. And the
greatest miracle is not the
transformation of water into wine but
the transformation of the soul awakening
from the illusion of separation to the
reality of divine unity. This is the
miracle that awaits all who seek the
truth with open hearts and minds. For in
the end, the entire universe is a
miracle, and we are an inseparable part
of its divine story.
As we deepen our exploration into the
nature and reality of Christ, today
we're going to open up the question into
the ever popular discussion of Christ
consciousness.
This idea has become very popular in
more new age circles and even certain
Christian circles. However, the vast
majority of Christianity generally seems
to disregard or even oppose the concept.
And in that there is a bit of a
challenge with the idea of Christ
consciousness today which is that
generally there's a lack of cohesiveness
in the idea that is often put forth.
Different websites and networks and
people will suggest various ideas and
interpretations ranging from Christ
consciousness is a universal state of
love and acceptance and connection with
all things all the way to it is a level
of unity with the creative spirit so
great that it allows one who attains it
the ability to perform miracles just
like Jesus did. In this video today,
we're going to explore this term in a
way that is both scientifically sound,
spiritually resonant, and bridges the
gaps between the various belief systems
of the world. Ready? Here we go.
Creation is not an act of separation,
but an expression of the infinite
spirit's desire to experience its bliss
in multiplicity. The spirit alone and
allsufficient entertained a desireless
desire to create and enjoy its cosmic
play. From this impulse, the universe
was born. Not as a distinct entity, but
as an extension of the spirit itself.
From that vast impulse of creation, a
singular essence permeated all things.
The cosmic universal intelligence that
pervades everything. This essence is
what we know as Christ consciousness.
The divine intelligence that binds and
sustains the cosmos. It's not bound by
culture, religion, or time. It is the
eternal thread that connects the finite
to the infinite, the material to the
spiritual. But to truly understand
Christ consciousness, we must first
understand the nature of reality itself.
Reality is not a single unified plane,
but a dynamic interplay of three
distinct layers. The causal, the astral,
and the material. Each layer serves a
purpose in the divine design. All
interconnected, each sustained by the
universal intelligence of Christ
consciousness.
The causal plane is the highest and most
subtle. It is the realm of divine ideas
where everything that exists begins as a
thought in the mind of the supreme
spirit. In this plane, the universe is a
blueprint, a seed of potential waiting
to unfold. It is from this realm of pure
causation that creation flows untouched
by form or limitation.
From the causal plane emerges the astral
plane, the realm of light and energy.
Here the divine ideas of the causal
plane takes on vibratory forms. It's a
world of radiant energies of life force
and subtle vibrations. The astral plane
serves as a bridge between the infinite
potential of the causal realm and the
manifested reality of the material
world. Its energies are dynamic,
constantly in motion, shaping and
sustaining the physical world below. A
wise master once described the astral
like this. The astral universe made of
various subtle vibrations of light and
color is hundreds of times larger than
the material cosmos. The entire physical
creation hangs like a little solid
basket under the huge luminous balloon
of the astral sphere. Just as many
physical suns and stars roam in space,
there are also countless astral, solar,
and stellar systems. Their planets have
astral suns and moons more beautiful
than the physical ones. The astral world
is infinitely beautiful, clean, pure,
and orderly. There are no dead planets
or barren lands. Astral planets maintain
the even temperature of an eternal
spring with occasional luminous white
snow and rain of many colored lights.
Astral planets abound in opal lakes and
bright seas and rainbow rivers. The
ordinary astral universe is also people
with millions of astral beings who have
come more or less recently from the
earth and also with myriads of fairies,
mermaids, fishes, animals, goblins,
gnomes, demigods and spirits all
residing on different astral planets in
accordance with karmic qualifications.
Various spheric mansions or vibratory
regions are provided for good and evil
spirits. Good ones can travel freely,
but the evil spirits are confined to
limited zones. In the same way that
human beings live on the surface of the
earth, worms inside the soil, fish in
water, and birds in air, so astral
beings of different grades are assigned
to suitable vibratory quarters.
Therefore, among the fallen dark angels
expelled from other worlds, friction and
war takes place with electronic bombs or
mental mantric vibratory rays. These
beings dwell in the gloom-drenched
regions of the lower astral cosmos,
working out their evil karma.
Understanding this reality of the
astral, we can easily correlate the
description with how many traditions
would describe concepts like heaven or
hell and that those with dense and evil
karma would upon death return to the
lower parts of the astral, the hell, and
the rest of us would enjoy for a time
the higher more heavenly astral reality
that we earned by participating well in
life. Now, moving down from there, of
course, we have the material plane,
which is the gross manifestation of
these higher realms. It is the world we
perceive with our senses, the tangible
and the physical. But even this
seemingly solid reality is a
manifestation of divine vibration.
Matter, as modern science confirms, is
simply energy vibrating at lower
frequencies. In this, the spiritual
wisdom of ancient teachings and the
discoveries of modern science converge,
affirming the vibratory nature of
creation. The process of incarnation is
that the soul, an individualization of
light from the supreme spirit, which is
the Christ consciousness, is
continuously wrapped in the three
vibratory bodies. The causal first, then
the astral, and then the physical in
successive stages. The act of coming
into being is a journey of entering into
the womb of creation within a mortal
body through the light of love coming
from the union of two humans. And the
process of death is the release of the
mortal body, returning back to the
higher spheres. It is said that we
continue to journey between these
realms, learning in all of them until we
attain complete mastery in each, after
which we can mount higher and return to
full union with the supreme spirit from
which we came. After that unity, what
happens is truly beyond any of us to
know. But it's said that we are then
free to go wherever we want and do
anything we want, which can include
making our own universes if we like, or
reincarnating back into the lower
worlds, wherein we usually become master
teachers or saints among people. Christ
consciousness is the thread that unites
these three realms. It flows through the
causal plane as divine thought, through
the astral plane as light and energy,
and through the material plane as the
energy which brings forth the forms we
see and experience. It is the unifying
essence that sustains all of existence.
The divine intelligence that brings
order and meaning to the cosmos. To
grasp this concept, consider the example
of the supreme light and the crystal.
Imagine a bright and supreme white light
in an endless void. This light is
shining in all directions, but there's
nothing else for it to shine upon. Now
imagine that from out of this supreme
light, the light itself becomes
concentrated with so much energy that it
materializes a form of a blue spherical
crystal. Then you have the white light
shining through the void and all around
this crystal. But the light also passes
through the crystal. When it passes
through the crystal, the light becomes
blue, creating a new expression of the
light that didn't previously exist. Now,
the singular light appears in two ways.
As white light and as blue light inside
the crystal. The blue light is not
separate from the original white light,
but is a manifestation of it conditioned
by the crystal. So in this analogy, the
white light and its source represent the
unmanifested supreme spirit. The crystal
is the vibratory creation essentially
the causal astral and material world and
the blue light is Christ consciousness
the reflection of the infinite within
the finite. Now this analogy aligns with
the profound truth of the holy spirit
and a concept which is very necessary to
make this whole thing make sense. The
Holy Spirit, one portion of the Holy
Trinity, arises from the Supreme Spirit
as the vibration of creation. That
supreme spirit in its absolute state is
undivided and transcends form and
vibration. However, when creation comes
into being through the vibration of
divine thought, a triune relationship
emerges. So the supreme spirit untouched
and infinite then from our awareness
becomes the father the source and
sustainer of all that exists. The
vibration of creation the cosmic pum of
om or amen becomes the holy spirit the
intelligent creative force that animates
and sustains the universe. As the light
of the supreme spirit shines into this
vibration it becomes Christ
consciousness. the universal
intelligence imbued within creation,
guiding and upholding it according to
the divine plan. Thus, the Holy Trinity
reflects the eternal interplay between
the unmanifested and the manifested. The
Father exists beyond creation,
transcendent and formless. The Holy
Spirit is the active vibratory power
that brings form into existence.
Christ's consciousness is the divine
light within this vibration imminent in
every particle of creation and the
bridge between the finite and the
infinite. This triune relationship
illustrates the unity of spirit in its
three expressions source, energy and
consciousness, each inseparable from the
other. Creation itself arises from
vibration known in spiritual traditions
as the word or in Eastern traditions as
M. In the beginning it was said the word
was with God and the word was God. This
word is the first vibration the divine
sound that brought forth all things.
Science corroborates this understanding
revealing that everything in the
universe from the smallest particle to
the largest star is in a state of
vibration. Every form is a frozen wave
of energy. Every sound a ripple in the
cosmic ocean.
Christ consciousness then is not only
the sustainer of the universe but also
the guide within each individual. It is
the divine spark that resides in every
soul, the reflection of the infinite
within the finite. But if this is the
case and Christ consciousness is within
everything, why don't we all have
supreme access to this limitless light?
Well, the great barrier to experiencing
Christ consciousness is a form of
delusion which manifests in two forms.
In the Eastern scriptures, it's called
Maya, the cosmic delusion, and avidya,
individual ignorance. Maya is the divine
play of opposites, light and shadow, joy
and sorrow, creation and destruction
that keeps the universe in motion.
Avidya, on the other hand, is the
personal illusion that veils our
awareness of the divine within us.
Together, these forces obscure the
radiant truth of Christ's consciousness.
Yet even within delusion, the divine has
placed clues to guide us back. The very
structure of creation with its vibratory
interplay of energy and matter hints at
a deeper reality. The teaching of saints
and sages, the scriptures of the world,
and the quiet voice of intuition inside
each of us all point towards the same
truth that we are divine beings
temporarily lost in the dream of
separation. Thus to access Christ
consciousness, one must transcend these
illusions through meditation, prayer,
and acts of selfless love. It is through
these practices that the soul reconnects
with its divine source, rising above the
constraints of the material plane and
aligning with the higher realms of
astral light and causal thought.
This journey is not merely theoretical.
It is profoundly experiential. As one
meditates and prays deeply, connecting
with the spirit within, the layers of
illusion begin to dissolve and the inner
light of Christ consciousness becomes
perceptible. In moments of deep
stillness, one may hear the cosmic hum
of M, that sacred vibration that
sustains the universe. This is the voice
of creation, the echo of the divine
calling us back to our true nature. The
realization to Christ consciousness is
not limited to meditation though. It
manifests in every act of love,
compassion, and forgiveness. Every
moment of kindness, every selfless deed
is an expression of this divine essence.
It reminds us that we are not separate
from the universe, but intricately woven
into its fabric. That the same
consciousness that sustains the cosmos
flows through each of us. The teachings
of Christ consciousness bridge the
realms of science and spirituality. The
insights of ancient sages align with
modern discoveries, revealing the
harmonious interplay between the seen
and the unseen, the finite and the
infinite. This understanding offers a
profound message. We are not mere
observers of creation, but active
participants in its unfolding. By
aligning with Christ consciousness, we
become co-creators with the divine.
Throughout history, certain souls have
fully embodied this universal
consciousness. These master souls known
as avatars descend into the material
world to guide humanity. They live among
us teaching by example, demonstrating
the potential of the human soul to rise
above delusion and realize its divine
nature. These beings are not separate
from Christ consciousness. They are its
purest expression, mirrors of the
infinite in human form. Jesus,
especially to traditional western
thought, was the living reflection of
the supreme spirit. His life was a
testament to the power of God to
transform, heal and uplift. But what is
the purpose of such incarnations? To
many Christians, Jesus is seen as beyond
any other avatar.
But why is that? And was he? To answer
this, we must explore the nature of
avatars and their role in guiding
humanity.
In the great story of creation, the
supreme spirit through its infinite
compassion manifests itself in a myriad
of forms to guide humanity. These
manifestations known as avatars are not
mere mortals, nor are they entirely
distinct from humanity. They are divine
emissaries, beings who embody Christ
consciousness and take human form to
lead us back to our divine origin. An
avatar is a soul who embodies the
supreme spirit's infinite light. In
them, the transcendent spirit becomes
fully manifest, making the light and
wisdom of the supreme creative power
available to humans in an accessible
way. The supreme spirit being infinite
and formless cannot be combined to a
singular image or identity. Thus, when
the most high incarnates, it does so
uniquely for the times, people, and
needs of the era. Thus, every avatar's
mission is shaped by the karmic
conditions and spiritual challenges of
their age, while their essence remains
an eternal reflection of divine love and
wisdom. It's important to understand
that there are different types of
avatars, each serving specific purposes
in the divine plan. Some like Jesus
Christ or the avatars of Vishnu,
Krishna, and Rama are considered by
their followers as the supreme
manifestations of divinity. They embody
the highest expressions of God's
presence, taking on monumental roles in
reestablishing the pathways of righteous
order for humanity and offering
liberation from suffering. These avatars
carry unparalleled spiritual authority
and are seen as complete reflections of
the supreme spirit's infinite
intelligence and compassion. Other
avatars, while equally divine, serve in
distinct ways as wisdom bearers or
guides. For example, sages like Lasu or
Shriyukteswar demonstrate divine truths
through wisdom and the inner path of
realization. These avatars may not
display the cosmic grandeur of supreme
avatars like Krishna or Yeshua, but they
are still fully divine expressions of
God guiding humanity through the
transformative power of truth,
meditation, and self-discipline.
The distinctions between these types of
avatars underscore the infinite
adaptability of the supreme spirit.
While all avatars carry the light of
Christ consciousness, the forms they
take and the ways they express their
divinity vary widely. Supreme avatars
tend to embody both the might and mercy
of the creator, often demonstrating
miraculous powers and reshaping the
moral and spiritual fabric of the world.
Wisdom avatars, on the other hand,
illuminate the path of divine
realization for individuals, focusing on
inner transformation rather than outward
acts of divine intervention. This
dynamic interplay between the
transcendent and the imminent is what
makes the role of the avatar so vital.
They remind humanity that while God is
beyond all creation, transcending all
forms and forces, the light of God
dwells within all beings. Through their
presence and teachings, avatars awaken
humanity to this truth, guiding us to
recognize that divinity is not a distant
reality, but an intimate essence waiting
to be realized. The concept of an avatar
emerges from the understanding that
humanity often loses its way.
Caught in the illusions of Maya, the
cosmic delusion and Avidya, individual
ignorance, people stray from the path of
righteousness. In such times, the
supreme spirit intervenes, descending
into the material world in a form that
humanity can recognize and relate to.
These avatars bridge the infinite and
the finite, carrying the light of divine
love and wisdom into the shadows of
human existence. Now, one major thing
many may be wondering at this point has
to do with the nature of Jesus and who
he was in relation to other avatars.
According to Christian tradition and
belief, Jesus would be seen as an
incarnation of God above all avatars. In
order to make sense of this, we might
consider a few things. First, in the
Gospels, we see Jesus speak to himself
as both the son of man and the son of
God. These titles reflect distinct yet
complimentary aspects of his identity
and this can better help make sense of
who he was. As the son of man, Jesus
represented his human personality, the
relatable and accessible human self. And
as the son of God, he referred not to
his mortal shell, but the supreme spirit
speaking through and as him. This dual
recognition enabled him to proclaim with
divine authority, I and my father are
one. But Jesus isn't alone in this and
this is why this is so important. In the
Bhagavad Gita we see Krishna proclaim
among words I am the syllable om. I am
the beginning middle and end of
creation. In fact Krishna also says this
whenever there is a decline in
righteousness and an increase in
unrighteousness at that time I manifest
myself on earth to protect the virtuous
to destroy the wicked and to reestablish
dharma. I appear in every age. Could it
be that it's the same divinity speaking
through both Krishna and Christ? Many
today believe this to be the case,
especially because the word Krishna
itself has an etmological parallel to
the word Christ. The voice of the avatar
is the voice of the supreme spirit
guiding humanity regardless of the
incarnation.
While avatars are divine, they often
choose to live as humans, experiencing
the joys and sorrows, trials and
triumphs of earthly life. They will
often even take on new karma of the
present age when they incarnate, working
through it in their life in order to
better relate with the suffering of the
people of that era. This is not due to
limitation, but to show humanity that
divinity is accessible within the human
condition. By overcoming the challenges
of the day, they demonstrate the
potential within every soul to transcend
suffering and realize its true nature.
Consider the life of Jesus Christ. He
was born into a humble family, lived
among the poor and the marginalized, and
faced persecution and death. Yet through
it all, he radiated love, forgiveness,
and faith in the divine plan. His
crucifixion and resurrection were not
merely historical events, but profound
spiritual teachings illustrating the
triumph of spirit over matter and the
eternal nature of the soul. Similarly,
Lord Buddha, another incarnation of
Vishnu after Krishna was born a prince
but renounced his royal life to seek the
truth. Through years of meditation and
inner struggle, he attained
enlightenment, discovering the path to
liberation from suffering. His life
showed that spiritual awakening is not
reserved for a select few, but is a
possibility for all who seek it
earnestly. Many may wonder about the
birth of Christ, being born of a virgin.
He was very unique among avatars. Does
that make him more supreme than others?
Well, it is said that avatars can
incarnate in a number of ways, including
through immaculate conception or not.
While we're all likely familiar with the
virgin birth of Christ, we might also
consider the lesserknown story of Lord
Buddha, which took place only 500 years
before. Few know that Buddha was also
said to have been born of a virgin. The
story goes like this. Queen Maya lying
down on her royal couch fell into a
divine dream. In this dream, the four
guardian angels came and lifted her up
along with her couch, carrying her to
the Himalaya mountains. There they
clothed her in divine garments, anointed
her with perfumes, and adorned her with
divine flowers. Nearby stood Silver
Hill, within which was a golden mansion.
The angels spread a divine couch in this
mansion, positioning its head towards
the east, and laid Queen Maya upon it.
At the same time, the future Buddha, now
transformed into a superb white
elephant, wandered nearby on Gold Hill.
Holding a white lotus in his silvery
trunk, the elephant descended from Gold
Hill, and ascended Silver Hill,
approaching from the north. Trumpeting
loudly, he entered the golden mansion,
circled Queen Ma's couch three times
with his right side toward her, and then
struck her on the right side, appearing
to enter her womb. This act marked the
immaculate conception of Buddha. When
Queen Maya awoke the next day, she
recounted the dream to King Sudodana,
who summoned 64 eminent brahinss to
interpret it. The brahinss declared that
a divine child had implanted itself in
her womb. They prophecied that if this
child chose to remain in the household
life, he would become a universal
monarch. But if he renounced worldly
life and embraced aseticism, he would
become a Buddha, destined to dispel the
clouds of sin and ignorance from the
world.
An avatar's life is a testament to the
unity of the divine and the human.
Through their words, actions, and very
presence, they reflect the infinite
love, wisdom, and power of the divine.
They remind us that divinity is not
something external, but an innate
reality that we too can realize across
all incarnations and teachings. They
remind us of the unity of all life.
Jesus proclaimed to love your neighbor
as yourself because in truth, we are all
connected and one. Similarly, Krishna
taught Arjuna to see the divine in all
things, transcending the dualities of
life. Love is the central message of
every avatar. It is not an emotion but a
divine force that unites and uplifts.
Jesus demonstrated this through his acts
of healing and forgiveness. While
Krishna emphasized bacti, the path of
loving devotion to God. Avatar stressed
that salvation is not achieved through
external rituals but through inner
transformation. This requires
transcending the ego, purifying the
mind, and aligning with Christ
consciousness, the true light of the
soul within. The Buddha's eight-fold
path and Jesus's sermon on the mount
both emphasize this inward journey. The
impact of an avatar's life extends far
beyond their physical presence. Their
teachings resonate across generations,
inspiring countless souls to seek the
truth. Even after they leave the
physical world, their spiritual presence
continues to guide those who call upon
them with devotion. As we discussed in
the previous chapter, once attaining
final and complete liberation, a soul is
free to participate in reality
transcendentally at whatever level they
want. This would surely be the level of
mastery that Jesus has. Complete unity
with God. And so this is why so many
people have reported seeing him in
mystical visions at significant moments
in their lives, fully changing their
lives forever. Christ is alive, existing
transcendentally beyond the material
realm, but able to appear in any
dimension if he so chooses.
Yet the person of Jesus meaning his ego
or personality and the spirit that he is
while eternally one thing also can be
identified uniquely and this is the
mystery of Christ consciousness. While
the spirit is fully embodied in an
avatar, it is not confined to them. It
is a universal reality present within
every soul waiting to be awakened.
Avatars remind us of this truth not by
asking us to worship them but by urging
us to discover the divine within
ourselves. The lives of avatars
challenge us to rise above our
limitations and embrace our divine
potential. They show us that we are not
separate from God, but are in fact his
children, capable of reflecting his
light and love in the world. By
following their teachings, we can
overcome the illusions of the material
world and realize the eternal joy and
freedom of spirit. The coming of an
avatar is not an event of the past, but
an ongoing reality. Even today, their
presence can be felt by those who seek
it. They come not to create new
religions, but to restore the eternal
truths that unite all faiths. In doing
so, they remind us that the ultimate
purpose of life is to realize our unity
with the divine and to break free from
the shadows of illusion.
Traditional Christian belief considers
that Yeshua goes beyond the concept of
an avatar entirely. He is God, the one
and only, above everyone else. The
concept here becomes fascinating and
complex when we consider humanity's
place in the vastness of existence. Many
rational thinkers today supported by
advancements in astronomy and cosmology
are open to the idea that humanity
cannot be the sole intelligent species
in the universe. Let's reflect on the
numbers. Galaxies often contain anywhere
from 10 million to over a trillion
stars. Current scientific estimates
suggest that there are over 2 trillion
galaxies in the observable universe. If
even a small fraction of stars host
planets and an even smaller fraction of
those planets are habitable, the
statistical likelihood of other life
forms effectively falls to zero. That's
just how big the universe is.
If we take into account the vast
timeline of the cosmos, 13.8 8 billion
years since the Big Bang and an unknown
span of billions of years into the
future. It's nearly impossible to
maintain a perspective in which humanity
is utterly unique or isolated. The idea
that Earth is the sole cradle of
intelligent life across this immense
cosmic expanse strains credibility. This
of course doesn't even account for the
question of the mythologies and stories
of ancient aliens, profound spiritual
channelings that account for other
beings in this dimension and higher
ones, or even the countless UFO
sightings and aerial anomalies that have
taken place around the world for
countless generations.
This brings us back to our theological
question. If Jesus as a person with his
human identity, image, and cultural
context is the sole manifestation of
divinity, then what does that mean for
the rest of the universe? Would every
other intelligent species across all
time and space be left outside the scope
of salvation? This seems inconsistent
with the expansive universal nature of
God as traditionally understood.
Let's consider a hypothetical. Imagine a
distant planet where sentient bug-like
creatures have evolved. Let's say they
look like large intelligent praying
mantis beings. Would these beings
require a human Jesus as we know him to
come and offer them guidance, salvation,
and spiritual awakening? Would that make
sense to do? Especially if that alien
species wasn't capable of understanding
or conceptualizing yet what life on
other planets might look like? I mean,
if we saw a giant alien praying mantis
being, we might freak the heck out in
mass, even if it was clearly glowing
with divine light and healing people.
Sure, why not? What's to say these
beings wouldn't feel the same about an
ascended Jesus visiting them? Now, the
alternative option here, would the
Supreme Spirit, the divine essence that
was embodied in Yeshua, incarnate among
them in a form that resonates with their
own experience and understanding? This
idea seems far more likely and
consistent with the concept of a loving
all-encompassing universal deity or
consciousness or spirit which transcends
all form and limitation.
If this logic holds true for
hypothetical alien civilizations, it
also reshapes our understanding of
divinity throughout human history. The
spirit that incarnated as Jesus could
theoretically have manifested in various
forms across different cultures, times,
and dimensions, always adapting to meet
beings where they are. This possibility
reframes Jesus not as an isolated
singular figure, but as a part of a much
larger cosmic tapestry of divine
expression. So in that case, is Jesus
God? This is the fun paradox of it,
which we have also discussed before.
Jesus can absolutely be understood as a
perfect expression of divinity. But God
as the supreme spirit also transcends
form which includes the body of Yeshua.
God must be considered as both deeply
personal and completely impersonal at
the same time because God is
simultaneously the cosmic law and divine
love, light and truth which transcends
personality. The spirit is eternal,
infinite, and universal, present in all
creation, and accessible to all beings.
Jesus's life and teachings serve as a
window into this higher reality, helping
us understand how we too are connected
to the divine. As we expand our thinking
to consider humanity's place in a
potentially populated cosmos, this idea
becomes even more essential. God's
presence cannot be confined to one form,
time, or place. It must encompass all of
creation.
This view finds support in the mystical
traditions of Christianity which often
emphasize the infinite and universal
nature of Christ. Consider the words of
St. Paul in Colossians 11:17. He is
before all things and in him all things
hold together. Paul's description
transcends the physical person of Jesus,
pointing instead to the cosmic Christ,
the divine principle underlying all of
creation, or the supreme light that is
inherent in the fabric of reality. In a
universe of such vast scale and
possibility, it becomes increasingly
clear that our understanding of divinity
must evolve to encompass more than we
currently comprehend. Rather than
diminishing the significance of Christ,
this perspective elevates it, inviting
us to see him as a universal and eternal
presence. As science continues to expand
our awareness of the cosmos, perhaps our
spirituality must also expand, moving
beyond the confines of earthbound
thinking to embrace the infinite mystery
of existence. This shift in perspective
doesn't ask us to abandon faith, but to
deepen it, to trust that the same spirit
that walked among us as Yeshua is
present throughout the infinite reaches
of the cosmos, guiding, loving, and
uplifting all that is.
In the traditional Christian tradition,
Jesus is seen as the sole and exclusive
embodiment of God. And certainly
investigating his story and life and
nature does seem to have a particular
weight that sets him apart from the
other avatars that we've explored. Is it
just that this is the case because most
of the Western world has been steeped in
Christianity for 2,000 years? Or is
there something more here that might put
the pieces together? Turns out there is.
The essence of reincarnation, the divine
cycle of souls, is deeply embedded in
the chronicles of human spirituality
across the board, including Christianity
and Judaism. What's more, Yeshua's
journey as a soul across lifetimes is a
profound one. And this revelation alone
completely transforms our understanding
and redefineses the religion in a
transcendent and beautiful way. In the
ancient texts, the prophecy of Elijah's
return resonates as a pivotal marker of
the divine plan. The Bible recounts,
"Behold, I will send you Elijah the
prophet before the coming of the great
and dreadful day of the Lord." This
prophecy found fulfillment in John the
Baptist, who in spirit and power carried
Elijah's essence to prepare the way for
Jesus. Their relationship, as fate would
have it, traversed lifetimes,
culminating in their respective roles to
guide humanity towards enlightenment.
The teachings of reincarnation are not
confined to esoteric traditions, but are
subtly woven into the fabric of even the
Bible itself. When Jesus was with his
disciples, he asked, "Who do people say
that I am?" They replied, "Some say John
the Baptist, others say Elijah, and
still others Jeremiah or one of the
prophets." If the Jews didn't believe in
reincarnation, why would they even
consider that Jesus was one of their
prophets returned in a new life? Further
in the book of revelation Jesus reveals
this truth. Him that overcomemeth will I
make a pillar in the temple of my God
and he shall go out no more. This
statement alludes to the sessation of
the reincarnation cycle for those who
attain spiritual mastery free from the
cycle of reincarnation entirely aka
going out from the higher worlds and
into the lower ones. It must be known
that reincarnation is a just mechanism,
offering each soul the opportunity to
evolve and align with divine will,
transcending earthly desires and karmic
bonds. As for Yeshua's past lives
specifically, there are two great
luminaries who have brought forth
revelations of his nature. One of which
was Paramahansa Yogananda, who one day
in deep contemplation and spiritual
devotion was drawn to the Christian
Bible, seeking clarity on Yeshua's
previous incarnations. In a moment of
divine illumination and prayer, God
spoke to him and guided him to open to a
particular verse in one kings which was
one detailing the life of Alicia, the
disciple of Elijah. Yogananda discerned
the profound connection. Alicia
perfected through Elijah's spiritual
mentorship was reincarnated as Jesus.
This revelation highlighted the
continuity of spiritual roles and the
transcendental journey of these great
souls. Elijah's ascension, marked by a
fiery chariot, symbolized his liberation
from earthly bonds. Yet his mission was
incomplete. Reborn as John the Baptist,
he returned to bear witness to the
divine mission of his disciple, now
Yeshua or Jesus, imbued with a double
portion of the spirit. This karmic
intertwining reflects the celestial
harmony where guru and disciple
alternate roles guiding humanity through
divine wisdom. But the story doesn't end
there. Edgar Casey, known as the
sleeping prophet, further unveiled the
reincarnation tapestry of Jesus through
his other worldly journeys. Casey, a
humble man with little formal education,
channeled profound spiritual truths. His
revelations connected Jesus to a lineage
of incarnations, including Mechisedc,
the priest king, Enoch, the heavenly
traveler, and even Adam, whose fall
symbolized the soul's entanglement in
material existence. Through these
incarnations, the Christ's soul, as
Casey described, evolved, ultimately
achieving atonement and embodying divine
unity. Adam, as the initial Christ's
soul, joined his twin flame, Eve, in
allowing himself to be seduced by
materiality himself. This karmic
connection between Adam and Jesus
explains why Jesus was able to pay the
karmic debt by atoning for the sin of
Adam. This Adam Jesus connection can be
seen in the following excerpt from the
Casey readings. The questioner asked
when did the knowledge come to Jesus
that he was to be the savior of the
world. Casey's response when he fell in
Eden.
But Casey identified a number of
identities of the soul which he called
the Christ soul indicating that first
incarnation of spirit in mortal flesh.
He also identified Joseph as another
incarnation, the boy with the
technicolor dream coat and who became
the vizier of Egypt. And later he
reincarnated as Joshua who took over
leadership from Moses and led the
Israelites into the promised land. Casey
prophecied that this Christ soul would
incarnate again one day in the future as
well to become the Messiah foretold by
the Hebrew prophets and usher in the
so-called throne of David, aka the
kingdom of heaven on earth.
Casey's insights extended to the lives
of those intertwined with Jesus's
spiritual journey. He identified the
Virgin Mary and Eve as twin souls, too.
Their incarnations mirroring the Christ
soul's path, but on the feminine side
and the feminine role in that journey.
This duality emphasized the balance of
divine masculine and feminine energies
in the cosmic plan. Both Yogananda's
reflections and Casey's revelations
converge in affirming the Christ soul's
role as a beacon for humanity. Yeshua's
life, teachings, and sacrifices were not
isolated acts, but the culmination of a
soul's journey through multiple
lifetimes. Now, this perspective, of
course, challenges orthodox
interpretations and invites us to
embrace a broader, more inclusive
understanding of spiritual evolution. It
also shows how Jesus could be seen as
unique among avatars when contrasted
against those such as Buddha or Krishna
being the soul of the first created
human known to us as Adam. Although some
might suggest that it was also the same
soul walking through those bodies too,
especially Krishna if any.
This idea reveals a profound truth. Each
soul, even Jesus, is on a path towards
divine revelation. Although since his
death and resurrection, Jesus himself
attained complete and final liberation,
transcending all suffering and returning
to absolute divinity. We can see herein
that the trials, tribulations, and
triumphs of our lives are steps in this
eternal journey, guided by the cosmic
law of karma and the infinite grace of
the creator. As humanity stands at the
crossroads of spiritual awakening, here
we find a timeless message of hope and
transformation. Jesus's life seen
through the lens of reincarnation
becomes a universal archetype inspiring
us to transcend our limitations and
embrace our divine potential. And yet
this is a difficult journey, one in
which almost all of us struggle and
suffer. What of these shadows which
tempt us, which Jesus overcame, how can
we do it, too? Jesus's triumph in the
wilderness, resisting the devil's
temptation, was not merely a victory of
will. It was a revelation of the divine
power within each of us to overcome
darkness. But if Jesus really was Adam,
then perhaps the answer for our own
liberation lay in a deeper understanding
of that story. Why does such darkness
exist within God's creation? And what
role does it play in our spiritual
journey? The answers lie within the
heart of our great cosmic drama, a
battle between light and shadow that
shapes the very fabric of existence.
Evil in its many forms is a force that
has confounded humanity throughout
history. It appears to contradict the
notion of an allloving, omnipotent God.
Yet, a closer examination reveals that
evil is neither random nor meaningless.
It is an integral part of the divine
plan, a necessary contrast within the
duality of creation that enables
spiritual growth and the ultimate return
to God. In the beginning, God existed in
perfect unity, an undivided
consciousness of eternal bliss. However,
to manifest creation, this unity had to
create the illusion of division, giving
rise to duality, light and darkness,
good and evil. This division was not a
flaw, but a deliberate act, a way for
God to experience and express himself
through myriad forms.
Evil in this context is not an
independent force opposed to God, but a
distortion of divine energy, a shadow
cast by the light of creation. Now, this
cosmic shadow falls into the realm of a
force or abstraction of energy. But for
the purpose of sharing these ideas, it's
sometimes depicted here as a being. Just
keep that in mind as we go through this.
The idea that the devil is a redhorned
entity with a pitchfork is not meant to
be taken literally, but is a useful
expression to get the idea across.
Now, ordinarily upon glimmering into the
fabric of existence, all creation
wandering in its perfect creative
splendor for a time and realizing its
unity would naturally dissipate and
dissolve all apparitions of being into
the cosmic ocean of unity from whence it
came. But such was not the nature of our
story. For at the heart of this dance
lies Satan, the adversary.
In the divine plan, the archangel
Lucifer was a force of consciousness and
cosmic power tasked with sustaining
creation. In the divine plan, Lucifer
was meant to use the cosmic energy of
the Holy Ghost to manifest and maintain
forms within the physical realm in
harmony with divine will. However, as
both an independent being and an
interdependent creation of the one, a
new sensation arose within him, the fear
of disillusion. Lucifer recognized that
if the cosmic energy he controlled
returned to God as per the divine plan,
his own existence would cease. This new
experience of fear led him to rebel
against the divine order, which
ironically wasn't born out of malice. He
was just trying to do his job. Instead
of allowing forms to dissolve back into
God, Lucifer began manipulating the laws
of creation, establishing patterns of
imperfection that trapped beings in
cycles of material existence. It was in
this way that the shining Lucifer fell
from heaven and became Satan.
Lucifer's rebellion transformed him into
a force of delusion, one that turns
beings away from God by enshrouding
their consciousness in material desires
and dualistic thinking. Originally
intended as a facilitator of creation
and disillusion, his misuse of cosmic
power created the cycle of suffering and
reincarnation. By manipulating the
material realm to perpetuate its
existence, Satan obscured created beings
awareness of their divine essence,
binding souls to the illusions of the
physical world. This act, though
opposing God's will, serves a
paradoxical purpose. Through the
suffering caused by delusion, souls are
eventually driven to seek liberation and
return to their divine source. Thus,
Satan's fall reflects not just
rebellion, but a distortion of his
original mission, turning a divine
service into a cosmic challenge for
humanity.
You see, duality is central to the
divine order, not as a flaw, but as a
creative necessity. Without opposites,
the contrast that enables experience and
choice would be impossible.
God in his omnipotence chose to create a
universe where souls would be able to
grow and evolve through their encounters
with light and darkness. Evil as a
distortion of divine energy plays a
critical role in this. By veiling truth
and presenting challenges, it provides
the soul with opportunities to affirm
its alignment with God. This
understanding reframes the concept of
God's relationship with evil. It is not
an indication of divine imperfection but
of divine wisdom. The struggles brought
by duality are purposeful, meant to
awaken souls to the greater reality of
unity beyond opposites. Satan's role is
deeply tied to the concept of Maya or
cosmic delusion. Maya veils the truth of
God's omnipresence, creating the
illusion that the material world is the
ultimate reality. Through this veil,
Satan entices souls to identify with
their physical bodies and external
circumstances, leading them to seek
fulfillment in transient pleasures
rather than eternal truths. This
delusion binds souls to the cycle of
birth, death, and reincarnation,
perpetuating their journey through
duality. This rebellion, while seemingly
destructive, established the framework
for souls to grapple with free will and
grow spiritually. The imperfections
introduced by Satan, such as disease,
death, and suffering, are not random
cruelties, but deliberate distortions
designed to keep creation bound to form.
Yet even this serves a divine purpose.
The discontent created by delusion
eventually drives souls to seek
liberation leading them back to God.
Misery though painful is often a
benefactor which further drives people
toward God. And without the contrast of
sorrow, the joy of spiritual realization
would lack meaning or depth. Similarly,
death while feared is a natural
transition meant to free the soul from
the limitations of the physical body.
But it's the illusion and question and
mystery of it all and the fear of it
ultimately that keeps us bound.
For each of us personally, Satan's
influence extends into the realm of
desires and habits by amplifying
attachments to sensory pleasures,
material possessions, and ego-driven
ambitions. He creates the illusion that
happiness can be found in external
things. This delusion leads to
dissatisfaction and reinforces karmic
patterns trapping souls in the cycle of
action and reaction across many
lifetimes. Yet, even this cycle serves a
divine purpose because each life
provides an opportunity for the soul to
learn, grow, and align more closely with
God's will. The story of Adam and Eve is
a powerful illustration of Satan's
tactics. The serpent, a manifestation of
Satan, tempted Eve with the promise of
knowledge, leading her and Adam to eat
the forbidden fruit. This act symbolized
humanity's shift from divine unity to
duality consciousness, from immortality
to mortality. It was not merely a
punishment, but a necessary step in
spiritual evolution. By experiencing the
consequences of their choices, humanity
began its journey toward redemption and
reunion with God.
Now this story in Genesis is often taken
very literally but it also can be
understood on a deeply profound
metaphysical level. In the garden the
tree of life represents the human body
specifically the spinal cord. You can
imagine it as an upturned tree with its
roots at the crown of the head and its
branches extending through the apherrant
and epherent nerves of the body. This
tree bears the fruits of sensory
experiences, sight, sound, taste, touch,
and smell that humans are permitted to
enjoy. However, within the garden of the
human nervous system lies another tree,
the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
This symbolizes the sex energy or the
sexual impulse situated at the center of
one's being. The serpent in the story
represents the coiled energy at the base
of the spine, a force capable of both
creative and destructive influence.
In this allegory, Adam represents
reason, the faculty of discernment,
while Eve symbolizes feeling, the
emotional aspect of human consciousness.
The fall of humanity begins when Eve,
feeling, is tempted by the serpent, the
stirring of sexual energy. She succumbs
and her actions influence Adam, reason,
to follow suit. Once reason and feeling
are both captivated by sensory impulses,
divine harmony is disrupted. This moment
signifies the descent of consciousness
from a higher spiritual plane into the
dualities of earthly existence. Prior to
the fall, humans were endowed with
divine creative powers. Imagine little
immortal gods able to manipulate even
the densest of matter through their
consciousness alone. Their awareness was
anchored in a state of unity with higher
consciousness, a condition of spiritual
immortality. However, by indulging in
anim animalistic reproduction
represented by the serpent's temptation,
they identified more strongly with their
physical bodies. This realization is
symbolized by their awareness of
nakedness, a sign that their
consciousness had shifted from the
eternal soul to the transient body. The
fall was not just physical, but
emotional and spiritual. It marked a
departure from divine unity and led to
the entanglement of humanity in the
cycles of pleasure and pain, life and
death, and good and evil. The narrative
of Eden then is not merely a historical
account but a profound depiction of
humanity's journey from higher
consciousness into physical limitation.
Temptation thus operates on both
external and internal levels. Externally
it manifests as the allure of worldly
pleasures, power and recognition.
Internally it reflects the residual
tendencies and habits formed over
countless lifetimes. These karmic
patterns shaped by past actions create a
momentum that draws the soul towards
material entanglement. However, through
selfdiscipline, wisdom and divine grace,
these patterns can be overcome.
The journey of Jesus in the wilderness
exemplifies this process as he
confronted and transcended the
temptations presented by Satan. The
ultimate victory over evil is not
destructive but transcendence. When the
soul realizes its unity with God, the
shadows of delusion dissipate in the
light of truth. This understanding fully
reframes the concept of evil. It is not
an external enemy to be feared, but an
inner challenge to be faced and
overcome. Evil serves as a black mirror,
reflecting the soul's own struggles with
attachment and ignorance. By confronting
these struggles, the soul evolves,
shedding the layers of delusion that
obscure its divine nature. In this
sense, the interplay between good and
evil is not a battle, but a dance, a
dynamic process that guides creation
back to its source. Reincarnation, as
described before, is both a result of
evil and a pathway to liberation. Souls
bound by unfulfilled desires and karmic
debts return to the material plane to
work through these attachments. Satan's
goal is to keep them ins snared. Yet,
the very process of reincarnation offers
the soul countless chances to awaken.
Each life is an opportunity to break
free from the delusion of separation and
rediscover the soul's unity with God.
Further, the law of karma governs this
cycle, ensuring that every action
produces corresponding effects. This
law, while binding, is also liberating.
By understanding the patterns of cause
and effect, souls can consciously choose
actions aligned with divine will,
breaking free from the chains of karma.
Reincarnation, therefore, is not a
punishment, but a process of
purification, a path leading back to
God, offering endless chances for
redemption. The magnetic pole of God's
love operates quietly but powerfully,
counteracting the outward force of
delusion. This love is reflected in
every aspect of creation, from the
beauty of nature to the wisdom imparted
by spiritual teachers. Even amidst the
trials introduced by Satan, the presence
of divine love is unmistakable. It is
the silent voice that whispers to souls
reminding them their eternal connection
to the creator. This magnetic pole is
also evident in the Christ consciousness
which serves as a bridge between finite
creation and infinite spirit. Jesus as a
manifestation of this consciousness
embodied the perfect alignment with
divine love. His life and teachings are
a testament to the power of this pole
showing that no soul is ever truly lost.
The journey back to God may be long and
arduous, but divine love ensures that it
is inevitable. This is the promise
embedded in creation. That no matter how
far a soul strays, it will always find
its way home. The trials of evil, though
challenging, are stepping stones on this
journey. They are means through which
the soul remembers its true nature and
reclaims its place in the infinite
embrace of God. If the message of Christ
is to love even our enemies as
ourselves, then from the Christ
consciousness in all of us, to Satan,
the once great archangel Lucifer, let us
say, "I love you. You are forgiven."
In the Bible, there is a profound
mystery. 18 missing years of Jesus's
life from ages 12 to 30. Many theories
attempt to explain this gap, but beyond
speculation, there is tangible evidence
suggesting that Jesus studied among the
Essenes, delved into cababalistic
wisdom, trained in the Egyptian mystery
schools, and even traveled to India.
These formative years were not just
about preparation. They shaped his
teachings, miracles, and the spiritual
mission that would forever transform the
world. One of the strongest theories
places Jesus among the Essenes, a
mystical Jewish sect that lived in the
deserts near the Dead Sea. These were
known for their devotion to purity,
communal living, and apocalyptic
prophecy, believing in the arrival of a
great teacher who would guide humanity
to spiritual awakening. There are even
stories that suggest his parents were
Essenes, but we'll save that
conversation for later. In 1947, the
discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls at
Kuman shed light on the Essen teachings,
revealing striking parallels to Jesus's
message. The scrolls emphasized themes
of divine justice, spiritual purity, and
the idea of a teacher of righteousness.
A figure some scholars argue could have
been Jesus himself or an influence on
his ministry. Edmund Zeke in the Eene
Gospel of Peace describes ancient
manuscripts that connect Jesus to this
aesthetic brotherhood, suggesting that
he was trained in their rigorous
spiritual discipline, fasting, and
healing arts. The Esenes also practiced
daily ritual baths similar to baptism
and preached a vegetarian lifestyle
rooted in divine law. Many of these
principles are reflected in Jesus's
teachings on purity, self-discipline,
and the coming of a kingdom of heaven.
Beyond these scenes, though, there is
compelling evidence that Jesus was
exposed to the deeper mysteries of
Jewish cabala. Kabala, which translates
to receiving or received teachings, is
an esoteric tradition that explores the
hidden nature of God, the structure of
the universe, and the soul's journey
towards enlightenment.
Lawrence Gardner's the Magdalene Legacy
suggests that Jesus studied these
mystical teachings which emphasizes the
tree of life, sacred numerology, and the
divine light within all beings.
Cabalistic wisdom, particularly its
teachings on unity and divine
emanations, align closely with Jesus's
message in the Gospel of John, I and the
father are one. This knowledge may
explain why even as a child, Jesus was
found in the temple astonishing the
teachers with his wisdom. He was not
merely repeating scripture. He was
interpreting it through the lens of
divine consciousness. Some scholars
believe Jesus's journey took him beyond
Judea to Egypt where the secrets of
resurrection, transformation, and inner
divinity were passed down in sacred
mystery schools. Gerald Massie in the
historical Jesus and the mythical Christ
draws comparisons between Jesus and
Osiris, the Egyptian god of
resurrection. The Egyptian mysteries
taught that the soul must undergo
trials, purification, and symbolic death
before attaining divine wisdom. An idea
echoed in Jesus's later teachings of
dying to oneself and being born again.
In the secret teachings of all ages,
Manley P. Hall proposed that Jesus may
have been initiated into the Egyptian
rights, learning the alchemical process
of spiritual transformation. The rituals
performed in the great pyramid mirrored
the journey of enlightenment, something
Jesus would later express in his own
teachings on eternal life.
Many ancient historians, including Pho
of Alexandria, noted the presence of
Jewish scholars in Egypt, particularly
in Alexandria, which housed the greatest
library and center of learning in the
ancient world. If Jesus sought wisdom,
this would surely have been the place to
find it. But Egypt may not have been the
final stop on his journey. His search
for truth and divine understanding could
have taken him even farther east. The
ancient world was deeply interconnected
through trade, pilgrimage, and the
exchange of ideas. Egypt served as a
crossroads between west and east,
linking the Grecoman world with the
wisdom traditions of Persia and India.
It is here that a new possibility
emerges that Jesus already immersed in
the esoteric teachings of the Essenes
and the mystery traditions may have
continued his journey to the lands where
meditation, non-violence, and
self-realization were at the heart of
spiritual practice. And there exists
several profound accounts that suggest
this is truly what happened, filling in
even more of the gaps in his 18 absent
years. The connection to India actually
begins very early in his story with the
magi, wise men from the east who visited
Jesus at his birth. Traditions identify
these sages as not merely travelers from
Persia or Arabia but actually as Hindu
rishies, mystics who hailed from the
Indian subcontinent and their journey
was no ordinary pilgrimage. They were
guided by the mystical star of
Bethlehem. The verse specifies that the
wise men said, "We have seen his star in
the east and are come to worship him."
In the traditions of India, the human
body is often seen as a microcosm of the
universe with directions mapped
symbolically onto it. The north and
south axes refer to the upper and lower
parts of the spine. The directions of
east and west conversely relate with
inward or outward experience.
Specifically, east generally relates
with the spiritual eye or third eye
located at the forehead between the
eyebrows, a gateway to divine insight
and inner illumination. The west, in
contrast, symbolizes the outward pull
towards materialism and sensory
engagement with the external world. The
star in the east then is not just an
external celestial phenomenon, but
revealed that the magi were guided by
the inner illumination and knowing of
Christ's arrival and brought gifts of
deep symbolic and cultural meaning. But
if that doesn't convince you, an even
more direct connection here is that for
thousands of years, gold, frankincense,
and myrrh were traditional gifts in
India used to celebrate the birth of
newborns. The Magi's reverence for Jesus
marked the beginning of a remarkable
exchange between the teachings of the
east and west. But beyond this
connection, there are actual accounts of
Jesus's time in India, which come from
several sources, including Tibetan
manuscripts, which were first discovered
by Russian war correspondent Nicholas
Notivvich in the late 19th century. In
his book, The Unknown Life of Jesus
Christ, he accounts that he was told by
the chief lama of a monastery in Ladak,
Tibet, that their library contained
records of a visit by Jesus in ancient
times. They denied Noteovich seeing the
writings at first, but finally the chief
lama relented to Note's requests to
examine the records from two large bound
volumes. Notic translated them through
his interpreter as the life of St. Isa,
best of the sons of men. These texts
written in Pali referred to Jesus as
Issa and described a fascinating story
almost all of which was further and
later corroborated by the chneled
revelations of Edgar Casey. From these
accounts we learn that young Jesus's
journey beyond his home began when he
sought to avoid the conventions of
marriage and societal expectations. And
so he joined a caravan of merchants and
embarked on a transformative pilgrimage.
He first spent 6 years in India
including time in Puri a revered site
dedicated to Lord Krishna where he
studied the vadic scriptures and the
spiritual teachings of the upupanish he
delved deeply into the principles of
non-violence universal love and
self-realization concepts that are
cornerstones of both Indian spirituality
and his later ministry in Judea his
teachings on love thy neighbor humility
and the inner kingdom of God reflect the
influence of these ancient spiritual
lessons
However, it is also said that he got
into some trouble challenging the rigid
orthodoxy that had been building up.
Issa rebuked the Brahman priests for
upholding the cast system. Issa would
also violate their customs by giving
teachings to the lower casts. He is seen
calling out and belittling their fall
into idolatrous ways and then barely
escaped India with his life. After that
he traveled to Nepal and Tibet where he
spent six years studying Buddhist sutras
which we find relevant to his later
teachings on selflessness and the
renunciation of worldly attachments. The
manuscripts also describe Jesus
preaching and teaching in other regions
such as Persia as he made his way back
to Judea. His reputation as a holy man
grew, attracting both admiration and
resistance. Along the journey, he is
reported to have condemned human and
animal sacrifices, sun worship, and the
dualism of good and evil, and the
Zoroastrian priesthood. The Zoroastrian
priests seized him and abandoned him to
the wilderness to be devoured by wild
beasts, but he escaped anyway.
Notic's claims were controversial and
faced criticism, but they ignited
widespread interest in the idea of a
hidden chapter of Jesus's life. But
notic's discovery was not the only
evidence of Jesus's time in India. Other
accounts including those by Swami
Abedaandanda and the writings of
Parahansa Yogananda reference ancient
texts and oral traditions from India and
Tibet. Abenananda personally identified
that he traveled to Ladak too and
corroborated notic's findings claiming
to have read the same Tibetan
manuscripts. Yogananda in particular
emphasized the universality of Jesus's
teachings which he believed were deeply
aligned with the yogic science of
self-realization.
While skeptics have questioned the
authenticity of these manuscripts and
accounts, they align with long-standing
traditions in India that Jesus known as
Issa visited the region. Hindu and
Buddhist oral traditions speak of a
great soul from the west who came to
both learn and teach. The idea is
further supported by historical trade
routes that connected Judea to India
making such a journey quite plausible.
This is of course not to suggest that he
learned everything he taught in his
travels as avatars come with their own
divine wisdom, understanding and
purpose. However, spiritual scholars and
masters suggest that Jesus refined his
understanding of universal truth during
this period. Whether through the
disciplined aestheticism of these
scenes, the mystical insights of Kabala,
the initiatory rights of Egypt, or the
meditative sciences of India, his
journey was one of profound spiritual
training. He likely attained mastery of
these traditions, distilling them into
the parables and teachings that would
shape his ministry upon his return to
Judea. Interestingly, this entire story
of Jesus's 18 absent years are also
corroborated and elaborated upon very
thoroughly in a mystical text called the
Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ
written by Levi Dowing and first
published in 1908. Levi claimed to have
transcribed the text from the aosic
records and the book very thoroughly
describes what happened in those 18
absent years which includes very
thorough stories of him traveling
between India, Tibet, Persia, Assyria,
Greece and Egypt and corroborating that
he studied under various religious
masters acquiring wisdom from different
spiritual traditions. Now, many of the
ideas of this book suggest that Jesus
arrived not to lord over humanity in a
way that is separate from us, but to
show us all a pathway to help us on the
journey of becoming like him, embodied
fully in divine consciousness, which is
something we will learn more and more of
as we fully enter into and move through
the Aquarian age. Though of course,
mainstream Christian orthodoxy contends
with this and many of these works we've
explored today, finding inconsistency
between the stories and the gospel
writings, which begs the question, are
the Gospels and the Bible the ultimate
truth? Can we trust it fully? Especially
if we know that they were edited at
certain points in time in order to suit
the needs of the church as they grew in
power. Well, this is a conversation
we'll have to save for later. But for
now though, from the Aquarian Gospel and
the other texts that we've explored here
today, what we find is a vision of Jesus
that emphasizes universal truth and the
potential for personal spiritual
development. Even in the canonical
gospels, we find Jesus guiding us to be
the best version of ourselves that we
can become, aligned with God within and
without.
Today, some people would claim that
Jesus's teachings go against that of
other religions. But as we have seen,
this simply isn't the case. His
teachings of inward prayer, fasting, and
seeking the kingdom of God within bear
striking parallels to yoga's meditative
practices. Just as yoga emphasizes
self-realization and inner
transformation, Jesus taught that true
spirituality is found in communion with
the divine within oneself. The Gospel of
John and the book of Revelation contain
symbolic language that aligns not only
with yoga's inner science but also with
the esoteric teachings of Egypt and the
numerological structure of Kabala
revealing the profound depth of Jesus's
wisdom. Plus, the word yoga itself means
union, speaking to union with the
divine. The convergence of Eastern and
Western traditions is not merely a
possibility but a divine necessity in
fulfilling the highest ideals of
humanity. Both traditions hold the
potential to complement and elevate each
other. Eastern spiritual depth
harmonizing with western material
pragmatism. Without the spiritual ideals
of the east, material advancements can
lead to selfishness, conflict, and a
disconnection from higher truth.
Similarly, without the practicality of
the west, spiritual aspirations can
remain ungrounded and disconnected from
the realities of life. Together, these
paths create a harmonious union that
bridges the inner and outer aspects of
human existence, fostering peace,
understanding, and global unity.
This harmony, however, requires a shift
in perspective, one that moves beyond
cultural and national identities to
embrace the shared spiritual heritage of
all humankind. Jesus's teachings, deeply
influenced by his time among the
Essenes, the mystics of Egypt, and the
sages of India, stand as a universal
example of this integration. His message
transcends the boundaries of creed and
culture, encouraging the realization of
our divine nature and the expression of
universal love. By shedding the
divisions created by ignorance and
prejudice, we recognize our true
identity as children of God, united in
purpose and destiny. Jesus himself
embodied this ideal, blending the
spiritual wisdom of the east with the
moral and social engagement of the west.
In a world increasingly fragmented by
materialism and ideological divides, the
synthesis of east and west offers a path
towards collective enlightenment. It
reminds us that spiritual truth is not
bound by geography or tradition, but is
the eternal essence uniting all. By
integrating the depth of eastern
spirituality with the dynamic expression
of western ideals, humanity can realize
its highest potential. This sacred union
exemplified in the teachings of Jesus
and other great masters is not only a
call to personal transformation, but
also a blueprint for a more harmonious
and spiritually attuned world.
The Pharisee stood tall in the temple,
his robes immaculate, his demeanor proud
as he began to pray. God, I thank you
that I am not like other men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even like this publican. I fast twice a
week. I give tithes of all that I
possess. Not far from him, a publican,
head bowed low, stood trembling. He
couldn't even lift his eyes to heaven.
Beating his chest, he whispered, "God,
be merciful to me, a sinner." In that
moment, unseen by the Pharisee, the
heavens shifted. The humility of the
publican's prayer rose to God like a
beacon, while the prideful words of the
Pharisee fell flat. It was not the
Pharisee, though virtuous in his outward
acts, but the publican whose heart was
humble, who left the temple justified.
For whoever exalts himself will be
humbled, and whoever humbles himself
will be exalted.
The lesson is clear. The kingdom of God
does not bow to appearances. It does not
rest in tithes or rituals performed for
self- glorification. It is within the
divine presence waiting to be discovered
by those who turn inward in humility and
seek it sincerely. When the Pharisee
demanded of Jesus when the kingdom of
God would come, he answered, "The
kingdom of God cometh not with
observation, neither shall they say, lo
here or low there, for behold, the
kingdom of God is within you." This
profound teaching reveals the cosmic
truth that the eternal blissful
consciousness of God resides not in
external observances, but in the silent
sanctuary of the soul.
Jesus spoke not only of what the kingdom
is, but also of how to enter it. Strive
to enter at the straight gate, he
taught. For many will seek to enter and
shall not be able. The path is narrow
and requires the seeker to be reborn,
not of flesh, but of water and spirit.
It demands a transformation of
consciousness, a turning away from the
outward distractions of the senses, and
a journey inward to perceive the divine
reality within. The gateway to this
inner kingdom is meditation. The sacred
art of stilling the restless mind and
opening the heart to God's presence.
[Music]
The journey begins with silence. In the
stillness of meditation, the mind ceases
its ceaseless chatter. Restless thoughts
fade like clouds, dissolving into a vast
blue sky, revealing the peace that lies
beyond them. Peace is the first glimpse
of God's kingdom. A tranquil awareness
that is unshaken by the storms of life.
In this peace, the seeker begins to
experience the comforter, the Holy
Spirit, as the cosmic vibration of Om or
Amen, resonating within the subtle
centers of the cerebral spinal system.
It is the still small voice, the breath
of God that brings life and unity to all
creation.
As the seeker deepens in meditation,
peace gives way to bliss, an evernew joy
that surpasses all earthly pleasures.
This bliss is not an abstract concept,
but a tangible experience, the
reflection of God's infinite love. It
fills the soul with light, the heart
with unshakable faith and expands beyond
the body, encompassing the entire
universe. The individual begins to see
God everywhere. Then in the flowers, the
stars and in the eyes of all beings. The
external world ceases to be a
distraction and becomes a mirror
reflecting the infinite beauty of the
creator. From a very spirit science
level here we can consider the body of
consciousness like a toroidal field with
three distinct parts. The conscious
mind, the subconscious mind and the
superconscious mind. Generally speaking,
the conscious mind is where most of us
live. Then the subconscious mind is
under the surface of what we're
typically aware of, including our inner
programs and habits and patterns and
beliefs that often go unchecked.
Then finally we have the superconscious
rarely accessed except in moments of
transcendence or spiritual liberation
which connects us to the higher divine
intelligence permeating the cosmos. In
this diagram the conscious mind is very
active and busy and it consumes our
awareness. Then the subconscious mind
deeper than that is also restless
constantly pulling at us to satisfy
desires usually without realizing the
effect that it's having on us. For
instance, if our body has a craving for
some sensory experience like sugar or
sex or entertainment, then we will get
pulled to take action there and satisfy
the craving. But which pulls us away
from the superconscious experience.
Though if we can sit in meditation and
prayer going deeper and deeper into
stillness and penetrate our restlessness
and become at peace, that peace opens up
to transcendent bliss, which is like in
our diagram, passing through the narrow
gate of the center of the too field and
giving ourselves access to a much
greater field of energy experienced as
pure bliss and joy beyond the material
body and its attachments.
This joy, however, is not given freely
or without effort. The seeker must
persevere, overcoming the restlessness
of the mind and the distractions of the
senses. Meditation and prayer are the
keys, a discipline that requires daily
practice and deep concentration. We
might consider prayer as talking to God
and meditation as listening to God. As
we sit in silence, our breath calm and
our mind focused, the tensions of the
body are released and the consciousness
is drawn inward. The journey is gradual,
but each step brings the seeker closer
to the ultimate goal, union with spirit.
Now, of course, this journey is not
without its challenges. The mind, just
like a fickle horse, resists control.
Restlessness and doubt arise, the
remnants of what Jesus called the
kingdom of Satan. Earthly attachments
and distractions that pull the seeker
outward. But the seeker who like a
patient rider gently reigns in the mind
brings it back to the inner stillness
again and again. And through that
perseverance and devotion, the soul
begins to ascend, shedding the layers of
ignorance that obscure its divine
nature. It is worth the effort for to
live in the consciousness of God is to
be free from the bondage of fear,
suffering, and death. It is to reclaim
the birthright of eternal bliss that has
always been within us, hidden behind the
veil of restless thoughts and worldly
desires. The kingdom is not far away. It
is not in some distant heaven, but
closer than the breath, nearer than the
heartbeat, and entirely within you.
How can we understand or describe such a
state? To attempt to put words on it can
only go so far because we must
experience it ourselves to truly know.
But some might consider that it is a
state of merging with divine unity. A
state of pure being beyond thought,
beyond sensation, where the soul knows
itself as a reflection of God's eternal
light. It is the fulfillment of the
soul's longing, the end of all seeking,
the answer to every prayer. The
Pharisees pride and the publican's
humility are not just characters in a
story. They are reflections of the inner
battle within all of us. The ego, like
the Pharisee, seeks recognition and
validation from the world, while the
higher parts of the personality, like
the publican, yearns for divine grace,
though acknowledging its shortcomings.
To enter this kingdom, one must let go
of the ego's demands and surrender to
the infinite love of the creator. This
surrender is not weakness, but the
ultimate strength, for it aligns the
seeker with the omnipotent power of God.
This kingdom is not an abstract idea but
a living reality. It is the cosmic
consciousness from which all creation
arises. The source of all joy and
wisdom. It is the divine presence that
sustains every particle of matter, every
vibration of joy and every thought of
the mind. It is the boundless love that
flows through all things, uniting them
in a harmonious dance of light and
shadow. This journey inward is the
essence of Yeshua's teachings. When he
said, "I am the door. By me if any man
enter in he shall be saved. He was not
speaking of a physical gate or even of
his physical body but the doorway of
consciousness that leads to God. That
thing we call Christ consciousness or in
other languages the eternal
consciousness or known in India as
coutasta chaitana. This door is within
every person. A spiritual center that
can be accessed by settling the mind,
calming the senses and going within.
When we touch this place, the endless
joy of spirit becomes alive within us.
To be very clear and contrary to
mainstream opinion, this journey is not
reserved for saints or mystics. So many
people are waiting for Jesus to show up
physically and save them. But to do so
without making any inner effort to
become better ultimately can become an
obfiscation of responsibility that
inhibits growth and development of the
soul's connection with the spirit. Yet
it is the birthright of every soul and
the promise of Yeshua to all who seek
the kingdom of God. The one who
perseveres, who knocks at the inner door
with sincerity and devotion will find it
open. The peace and joy of God are not
distant rewards, but present realities
waiting to be realized within the depths
of one's own being.
The kingdom of God is not a distant
heaven, but an inner reality, not found
by observation or external rules, but by
interiorizing the mind and awakening the
soul. This is the path of salvation, the
way to eternal joy. The kingdom of God
is within you, waiting to be discovered,
waiting to be lived.
When exploring the deeper truth behind
biblical stories, one often encounters
something that disrupts conventional
understandings of the Christian faith.
Beneath the familiar narrative lies
traces of something far more ancient.
The echoes of a world that existed
before. Thousands of years before
Christianity emerged, the ancient world
was already filled with stories of
divine beings who were born of virgins,
performed miracles, died for the sins of
humanity, and rose again. In other
words, Jesus was not the first. Long
before the New Testament was written,
the Mediterranean was saturated with
spiritual traditions known as the
mysteries. These were the dominant
religions of their time and at their
heart was a powerful archetype, the
dying and resurrecting god. Among the
most prominent were Osiris in Egypt,
Dionis in Greece, Mithras in Persia,
Atis in Asia Minor, Eskeipius in Greece,
Tamuz in Mesopotamia, Adonis in Syria,
and Sarapus in Hellenistic Egypt. For
thousands of years, these figures were
revered not only as deities, but also as
symbols of the human soul's journey
through transformation and
enlightenment.
But these mysteries were not like
mainstream religions are today. Because
at the heart of these traditions were a
culture that offered initiates a direct
personal connection to the divine within
them.
Now, here's what's curious. The stories
of these god men followed strikingly
similar patterns. They were often born
of virgins, performed miracles, died
sacrificial deaths, and were resurrected
to offer salvation to their followers.
What's more, they were each considered
to their followers as the son of God. To
these traditions, though, these myths
were not meant to be taken as literal
history, but as allegorories containing
profound spiritual teachings. initiates
participated in elaborate ceremonies
including rights of purification,
symbolic meals, and dramatic
reenactments of the god's death and
resurrection. These rituals aimed to
lead participants through a
transformative experience, offering them
spiritual rebirth and a glimpse of
immortality.
In essence, the wisdom was that by
following in the meaningful story of the
death and resurrection of their deity,
the individual would undergo the same
within, the death of their ego, and the
rebirth into embodying the light of
their soul.
One of the most famous examples is the
story of Osiris, the Egyptian god who
was murdered by his brother Set,
dismembered, and then later was put back
together and resurrected. Osiris later
was killed a second time and became the
ruler of the underworld and a symbol for
eternal life. His story was enacted in
rituals that symbolized the initiate's
own death and rebirth. Encoded in the
myth was the idea that Osiris being
dismembered was a reflection of how each
of us have become fragmented from our
inner unity. And being remembered was
the process of returning to wholeness.
Literally remembering who we are. After
dying the second time, Osiris, while in
the underworld, performed a ceremony
with Isis, his wife, who was still in a
physical body, and she conceived their
son, Horus. This was the first account
of the virgin birth in history thousands
of years before Jesus. Similarly, in the
Greek mysteries of Dionis, the god was
torn apart and reborn representing the
cyclical nature of life and the
potential for spiritual renewal. And in
the Persian mysteries of Mithras,
initiates underwent a series of trials
and symbolic baptisms to cleanse their
sins and achieve spiritual
enlightenment. This begins to raise some
red flags as we consider the revelation
of history against what is known of
Jesus Christ as we find consistent
matches across the board to his
character traits which seems to suggest
that Yeshua's story is not an original
one. Jesus's birth was heralded by a
star and later he was known for turning
water into wine, healing the sick and
raising the dead. All wonders previously
attributed to figures like Dionis and
Eskeipius.
But the similarities don't end there. We
might also consider the last supper and
the pivotal moment where Jesus offers
bread and wine as symbols of his body
and blood. This practice also echoes the
rituals of the mysteries where
participants shared a symbolic meal to
commune with the son of god. In the
elusinian mysteries of Greece, initiates
consumed a potion made of barley and
mint symbolizing the body of the goddess
Deer. And in the mythic mysteries, bread
and wine were consecrated and consumed
in a ritual that closely resembles the
Christian Eucharist.
We might also here consider baptism
which has its roots in the mysteries. In
Christianity, baptism is a right of
purification and initiation symbolizing
the washing away of sins and the
beginning of a new spiritual life. In
the mysteries of Mithras and the
Egyptian mysteries of Isis and Osiris,
initiates underwent ritual cleansings
with water to prepare for their
spiritual journeys. These baptisms often
included symbolic elements like the
sprinkling of holy water or full
immersion representing death and
rebirth.
Even in the teachings of Jesus, we find
parallels. Many of the ideas attributed
to him have older origins stretching
back hundreds or even thousands of
years. For example, the idea of union
with the divine was central to the
teachings of Pythagoras and Plato, both
initiates of the mysteries. The concept
of the logos was prevalent in Greece for
centuries before Christ, particularly in
the works of Heracitis and later refined
by stoic philosophers. Themes of divine
incarnation can also be found in
Krishna, in Shiaosant and in Horus. Even
the emphasis on an inner kingdom,
self-realization, and salvation through
knowledge has deep roots in hermetic and
other traditions long predating
Christianity.
But several major questions arise from
this. First, where do all these stories
come from? How did Christianity actually
come to be? And was there even a Jesus
at all?
Let's start by answering the first
question first. It would seem the
uniting theme of these stories derived
from the ancient world's understanding
of the heavens. Long before
Christianity, civilizations recognized
the sun as the giver of life, the source
of warmth, light, and sustenance. As
early as 10,000 BC, cultures carved
solar symbols into stone, depicting the
sun's vital role in their existence. But
they did not merely observe the sun.
They anthropomorphized it, creating
myths that aligned its movements with
the human experience of birth, death,
and rebirth. The zodiac, one of the
oldest conceptual frameworks in human
history, provided a celestial backdrop
to these myths. As the sun moved
throughout the sky over the course of a
year, it appeared to pass through 12
constellations. These constellations,
known as the zodiac, were seen as cosmic
markers of the sun's journey,
representing different phases of life,
seasonal transitions, and spiritual
transformation.
The 12 signs became personified as
deities, each embodying the qualities of
the period in which they ruled.
Aquarius, the water bearer, represented
the life-giving reigns of spring, while
Leo, the lion, symbolized the peak of
summer's power. Because the sun was the
sustainer of life, it was often depicted
as a divine figure, the son of God in
many traditions. In Egypt, this figure
was Horus, the solar deity who was born
of a virgin, marked by a star in the
east, and followed by three kings. His
adversary was set, the personification
of night and darkness, whom he
vanquished each morning, only to be
overcome again each evening. This cycle
of struggle and rebirth mirrored the
movement of the sun, a theme that
repeated across numerous traditions. And
as we have seen, these mythological
structures did not belong to one single
culture as there are many ancient sons
of God who shared characteristics in
narrative structures such as the
miraculous births, 12 followers, the
performance of great works, and an
ultimate resurrection. Each of these
figures is an archetype of the sun's
cycle, embodying its journey through the
zodiac and its annual death and rebirth
at the winter solstice.
Even the narrative of Jesus aligns
perfectly with this ancient solar
allegory. The star in the east that
heralds his birth is Sirius, the
brightest star in the night sky, which
on December 24th, along with the three
stars of Orion's belt, known as the
three kings, point directly to the
location of the sunrise on December
25th, the date of Christ's birth. The
constellation Virgo, meaning virgin in
Latin, aligns with this event,
reinforcing the allegory of the virgin
birth. Bethlehem itself translates to
house of bread, a clear reference to
Virgo, whose symbol is a maiden holding
a sheath of wheat. The pattern continues
with Christ's death and resurrection.
Each year, the sun reaches its lowest
point in the sky on December 22nd,
appearing motionless for 3 days before
beginning its ascent again on December
25th. This death and resurrection of the
sun became the foundation for myths of
dying and resurrecting gods, reinforcing
the idea of spiritual renewal and
salvation. The 12 disciples of Christ
correspond to the 12 zodiac signs just
as Mithras had 12 companions and Horus
had 12 followers.
Naturally, perceiving this truth calls a
great deal into question. Did Jesus
exist at all? Or are all of these
stories just that stories? We can see
clearly that the ancient people had a
deep universal reverence for the cycles
of nature. But if their wisdom is to be
considered, that doesn't have to suggest
that they are entirely removed from any
embodied reality. As the wisdom of the
great Hermes Trismagist writes, "It is
true without lying, certain and most
true. That which is below is like that
which is above, and that which is above
is like that which is below to do the
miracle of one only thing." It can be
that a physical Yeshua was incarnated,
reflecting that which is above, here
below on the earth plain. It may also be
that some of the stories of other
deities were attributed to him. But that
doesn't necessarily mean he didn't also
do some of or all of those things
ascribed to him. While challenging these
Orthodox traditions so heavily will be
seen as blasphemy to many, what we may
all find is that part of the magic is in
the mystery.
However, where did Christianity actually
come from?
In order to answer this question, we
have to consider the state of the world
2,000 years ago. But what we find might
be shocking to many. So, especially with
a subject as sensitive as this, please
have your own experience, do your own
research, and decide for yourself what
you choose to believe in.
The great city of Alexandria, founded by
Alexander the Great in the 4th century
BC, became one of the most remarkable
melting pots of the ancient world. Here,
the intellectual traditions of Greece,
the mystical rights of Egypt, and the
religious convictions of Judaism all met
in an unparalleled fusion of ideas.
Unlike the insular world of Judea,
Alexandria was a city where cultures
collided, blended, and gave birth to new
spiritual movements. The Jewish
community in Alexandria was vast. Some
scholars estimate that up to half the
original population of the city were
Jews. Unlike their more conservative
brethren in Judea, these helenized Jews
had abandoned Aramaic and Hebrew in
favor of Greek, the universal language
of the empire. They lived alongside
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, rubbing
shoulders with philosophers, mystics,
and initiates of the mysteries. While
traditional Jewish laws forbade
participation in pagan festivals and
rituals, many younger Jews found
themselves drawn to the sophisticated
world of Hellenistic culture. The city's
greatest treasure was its legendary
library of Alexandria, which housed
hundreds of thousands of scrolls and
sought to collect all the knowledge of
the ancient world. Here, scholars
studied Plato, Pythagoras, and the
Egyptian mysteries, drawing parallels
between Greek philosophy and Jewish
thought. It was in this setting that the
Jewish scriptures were translated into
Greek in what became the Septuagent, a
work that subtly infused Hebrew beliefs
with Platonic and Stoic ideas.
One man at the heart of this fusion was
Pho of Alexandria, a Jewish philosopher
who sought to reconcile the Torah with
Greek philosophy. Pho was not a
traditionalist. He openly embraced the
idea that the Jewish scriptures could be
read allegorically, much like the myths
of the mystery traditions. He identified
Yahweh with Plato's concept of the one
and equated Moses with Hermes
Trismagist, the legendary founder of
Egyptian mysticism. In doing so, he laid
the groundwork for a mystical
interpretation of Judaism that would
influence later Gnostic and Orthodox
Christian thought. Yet, Pho was not
alone. Among the Jews of Alexandria, a
new sect was forming, the Therapeut, a
group that lived a monastic life near
Lake Marotus, south of the city. They
practiced a form of aesthetic Judaism
that bore striking similarities to the
mystery traditions. Pho himself
described them as being initiated into
the mysteries of the sanctified life and
compared their spiritual practices to
those of the followers of Dionis. They
sought direct experience of the divine
much like the initiates of the mysteries
of Osiris and Ilus.
These Jews raised in a city saturated
with myth, ritual, and philosophy did
not see a sharp divide between Judaism
and the religions around them. Some
openly rewrote Jewish scripture in the
style of Greek plays, like the
playwright Ezekiel, who adapted the
Exodus story into a Greek tragedy in the
style of Uripides. Others claimed that
Greek philosophers had borrowed their
wisdom from Moses, an effort to elevate
Judaism to the intellectual prestige of
Greek thought. Among those who sought
deeper spiritual knowledge were the
Essenes, an aesthetic Jewish sect that
shared many similarities with both the
mystery schools and later Christian
movements. While commonly associated
with the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Kuman
community, some scholars believe the
therapeut of Alexandria might have been
an Essene offshoot adopting henistic
ideas while maintaining their rigorous
devotion to purification, prophecy, and
communal living. Their emphasis on
baptism, angelic visions, and an
apocalyptic worldview bears striking
resemblance to early Christian themes,
suggesting that in Alexandria, is may
have been key intermediaries between
Jewish mysticism and the broader
religious fusion that would shape
Christianity.
It is within this world that
Christianity as we know it began to take
shape. In Alexandria, the idea of a
Jewish mystery religion was not
unthinkable. It was inevitable. Here,
Judaism was already merging with the
mystery traditions, the philosophical
allegorories of Plato, and the cosmic
speculations of Stoicism.
For the young Jews of Alexandria, the
mysteries were not a foreign concept,
but a part of life for them, too. As
they sought to reconcile their faith
with the wisdom of the ages, they laid a
foundation for something new. For it was
in those early days of Christianity that
a form of it existed unlike anything we
are familiar with today, that
ofnosticism.
The term nosis comes from the Greek word
for knowledge. But it is not knowledge
in the conventional sense. Nosis is an
experiential understanding, a deep
intuitive insight into the nature of
existence and the divine. To the
Gnostics, salvation did not come through
blind faith or obedience to a church
hierarchy, but through inner
transformation and the discovery of the
divine spark within. It was about
awakening to the truth of who we are and
discovering the divine spark within each
of us. This knowledge they believed had
the power to liberate the soul from
ignorance and reunite it with its divine
source. For the early gnostic
Christians, the figure of Yeshua was
central to this process of awakening.
Their understanding of Jesus differed
significantly from the Orthodox
portrayal. To the Gnostics, Jesus was
not merely a historical figure or a
sacrificial savior, but a divine teacher
and revealer of mysteries. His role was
to guide humanity out of spiritual
ignorance and into the light of nosis,
true knowing. The Gospel of Thomas
captures this perspective beautifully
with Jesus's words, "The kingdom of God
is inside you and all around you. When
you come to know yourselves, then you
will be known and you will realize that
you are children of the living father."
This focus on self-nowledge as the path
to divine understanding is a hallmark of
the Gnostic tradition. The gospels of
Mary, Philip and truth along with texts
like the Pist Sophia emphasize the
transformative power of going within.
The Gnostic journey is often described
as an ascent, a process of moving
through layers of ignorance and illusion
to uncover the divine reality that lies
within. This is not a journey of the
intellect but of the soul guided by
wisdom, reflection, and spiritual
practice.
The secret gospel of Mark provides a
powerful allegory for this
transformative process. In this text,
Jesus raises a young man from the dead
and later initiates him into the mystery
of the kingdom of God during the same
night. This narrative reinterprets
resurrection as a spiritual awakening
rather than just a physical miracle. The
story parallels the account of Lazarus
in the Gospel of John, which may also
have originated as an allegory for
initiation. When Thomas declared, "Let
us also go and die with him," the
statement can be understood as an
invitation to undergo the symbolic death
and rebirth of an initiatory process.
These stories convey the essence of
Nosis, a mystical awakening to one's
divine nature. At the heart of the
gospel of Nosis is the concept of the
divine spark. The Gnostics believed that
every soul carries a fragment of the
divine, a spark of light that connects
us to the higher realms. This spark is
often buried beneath layers of material
existence and societal conditioning, but
it can be uncovered through nosis. Once
this divine essence is recognized, the
individual experiences a profound
transformation, a rebirth into spiritual
awareness. The mystical framework of
Nosis is deeply rooted in the
understanding of the self. The Gnostics
taught that each human being is composed
of a mortal false self called the Adelon
and an immortal true self called the
Damon or the soul. Now the word Adelon
comes from the Greek word meaning
phantom, image or idol and was
considered synonymous with the ego
representing the external conditioned
identity shaped by material existence
and societal expectations. The word
Damon comes from the Greek word meaning
divine spirit, guiding force or lesser
deity. Essentially describing the pure
soul which is an individualized lesser
form of the fullness of spirit.
Interestingly even the word demon was
later transformed and quite literally
demonized giving us the word demon
today. Isn't that interesting? The
concept of the soul was quite literally
changed into a demonic or evil force. We
might come back to this later, but for
now, the purpose of gnostic initiation
was to transcend identification with the
ego and awaken to the divine nature of
the soul. This process of
self-realization was encapsulated in the
ancient inscription at deli, know
thyself. Through this inner journey, the
seeker uncovered the divine spark,
realizing their oneness with the divine
source and attaining liberation.
The Gnostics had many frameworks to
understand the nature of the human. One
of the ways was with this with three
interwoven aspects, the body, the soul
and the spirit. To illustrate this, they
used the image of three concentric
rings. A diagram which is familiar to
several ancient teachings which we will
identify briefly. The writings of Plato
described that the lost kingdom of
Atlantis was also set up in a model of
three concentric circles. A concept we
first explored in the Spirit Science
Human History movie. And further across
all of these mystery traditions, they
viewed the mysteries themselves as
established on a three- ring basis. The
outside ring were the uninitiated who
viewed their stories not as mystical
allegorories but as historical fact to
be taken very literally. The middle ring
was for those who were initiated into
the inner journey reflecting on the
mystic wisdom as an inner experience and
the innermost ring was a state of being
complete spiritual enlightenment or
embodiment of the Christ consciousness.
But as mentioned, these rings also
identified three aspects of
consciousness between individuality and
unity with all things. The outer ring
was the body, the physis. This is our
physical form, the material aspect of
existence that interacts with the
external world. It is the most tangible
yet the least essential part of our
identity. The middle ring, the soul or
psyche. This represents our inner world,
our thoughts, emotions, the
psychological experience. Unlike the
body which is transient, the soul is an
intermediary between the material and
the divine. Were we to connect this
concept to one of our previous
discussions, we might find this level
relative to the astral body. At the core
of our being lies numa or spirit which
is pure consciousness. It is the eternal
divine essence that transcends physical
and psychological limitations. And this
level may also be identified with the
causal body. The Gnostics saw these
layers as different levels of awareness
that correspond to different states of
being. In deep sleep, we exist as pure
spirit, unconscious of both body and
soul. In dreams, we experience reality
through the psyche, disconnected from
physical form. When awake, we inhibit
all three levels simultaneously, often
mistaking the body for our true self. To
the initiated, they saw that the body
actually existed within the soul and
that the soul existed within
consciousness. An idea that is becoming
more popular again today with the
emergence of quantum mechanics. If the
body is within the soul, then we are not
physical beings who have a
consciousness. Rather, we are
consciousness experiencing itself
through a temporary physical form. This
perspective aligns with the idea that
reality itself is a projection of a
deeper hidden divine structure. what the
Gnostics called the Plleoma, the
fullness of God.
Here we find the great unity back to the
core ideas found earlier in our series
about the nature of Christ
consciousness. At the highest level of
reality, there is one ultimate
consciousness, but this divine presence
manifests in infinite forms. This means
that our perceived individuality is an
illusion. We are all expressions of the
same divine source. This idea is
reflected through a powerful teaching
found within the gospel of Thomas where
Jesus says when you make the two into
one and when you make the inner like the
outer and the outer like the inner then
you will enter the kingdom. The goal of
Gnostic practice was to remember this
unity to break free from the illusion of
separation and recognize that all things
are interconnected manifestations of the
divine. The illusion of separation is
what leads to suffering. We mistake the
ego, the personality, and even the body
for who we are, forgetting that at the
core of our being, we are a part of
something eternal and infinite. This is
why Jesus in Gnostic texts appears in
different forms to different people.
He's not a single historical figure, but
a representation of the divine presence
that takes different shapes depending on
the perception of the seeker. Now, the
origins ofnosticism are as mysterious as
the tradition itself. Some scholars
trace its roots to pre-Christian Jewish
mysticism while others see influences
from Greek philosophy, particularly the
works of Plato. And as we've previously
discussed, it is most likely both. What
is clear though is that in the early
days,nosticism had become a very
significant force within the early
Christian movement, offering a radically
different interpretation of the faith.
One of the most remarkable aspects
ofnosticism is its inclusivity. Unlike
the rigid hierarchies of the Orthodox
Church, Gnostic communities often
treated men and women as equals,
allowing women to take on leadership
roles. This egalitarian approach is
evident in texts like the Gospel of
Mary, which portrays Mary Magdalene as a
central figure in Jesus's inner circle
and a key interpreter of his teachings.
This emphasis on equality and individual
spiritual empowerment madeism
particularly appealing to those
marginalized by traditional religious
structures. Yet another character in
Christian history must be analyzed with
great depth. But in so doing, it changes
a lot of what we think we know about the
religion today. The Apostle Paul is one
of the most influential figures in
Christian history, credited with shaping
much of the theology that defines the
faith today. Yet beneath the surface of
his epicles lies a figure who may have
stood for a very different vision of
Christ than the one most of us know
today.
As we all know, Paul's letters, the
earliest Christian text we have, predate
the Gospels by several decades. Written
between approximately 50 and 60 CE,
these epistles reveal a vision of
Christianity that is strikingly
different from the later, more narrative
focused accounts of Jesus's life. Paul
rarely mentions the historical details
of Yesua's ministry. Instead, his focus
is on the mystical significance of
Christ, his death and resurrection as a
cosmic event that transcends time and
space. Paul often speaks of Christ in
you, emphasizing the inddwelling of the
divine within each believer. And his
words resonate with the Gnostic ideas of
discovering the divine spark within. In
his letters to the Galatians, Paul
writes, "I have been crucified with
Christ. It is no longer I who live, but
Christ lives in me." Such statements
suggest a spiritual rather than literal
understanding of Christ's presence and
the believer's transformation. For the
Gnostics, this inner awakening was the
true path of salvation, a perspective
that aligns closely with Paul's mystical
language. The ultimate realization in
Gnostic spirituality is that Christ is
not a man but a state of being. In the
Gnostic tradition, to achieve nosis is
to recognize the Christ within oneself.
This is why some Gnostic texts boldly
declare that a true initiate is no
longer a Christian but a Christ.
The idea was not to worship Jesus as an
external savior but to become Christ
through enlightenment.
Paul's letters hint at this deeper
meaning though it was later buried under
church dogma. He writes Christ in you
the hope of glory emphasizing that
salvation is an inner transformation
rather than an external event. Likewise,
in the Gospel of Philip, Jesus states,
"You saw the spirit, you became the
spirit. You saw the Christ, you became
Christ." This was the essence of early
Christian initiation, the awakening of
the divine consciousness within each
person. Furthermore, Paul's teachings on
the powers and the principalities,
spiritual forces that govern the
material world, bear similarities to
Gnostic cosmology. The Gnostics believed
that the physical realm was the creation
of a lesser flawed deity. the demiurge
and that true salvation lay in
transcending this material existence.
While Paul does not explicitly adopt
this dualistic worldview, his emphasis
on the spiritual struggle against these
powers hints at an esoteric
understanding of reality.
But more so, Paul's relationship with
the Gnostics is further complicated by
the church's later efforts to co-opt his
writings for orthodox purposes. Some of
the letters attributed to Paul such as
the pastoral epistles 1 Timothy 2
Timothy and Titus have been identified
by modern scholars as later forgeries
written to counternostic influence and
reinforce church hierarchy.
Additionally, the Pauline epo heavily
edited and interpreted through an
orthodox lens obscuring potential
gnostic elements. Yet traces of his
mystical vision remain. One of Paul's
most enigmatic statements say in the
original Greek, "We speak Sophia among
the initiates." The term Sophia meaning
wisdom was central to Gnostic thought,
often personified as a divine feminine
figure and the spiritual counterpart to
the masculine Christ. Yet in Orthodox
traditions, this passage is often
translated as we speak the wisdom of God
among the mature. Yet returning to his
original words, who was this Sophia, and
what role did she play in the story of
Christianity? It would seem the answer
is it's bigger than any of us really
know.
In the earliest days of Christianity,
the masculine Christ had a feminine
counterpart, wisdom. In the beginning,
she danced through creation. She was
there before the stars, before the
earth, before time itself. a force of
life moving in harmony with the dynamic
masculine principle rooted in the
foundations of existence itself. The
ancients called her Sophia, the goddess
of wisdom. For the early Christians, she
was a radiant beacon of insight and
divine understanding. But her voice,
once central to their sacred traditions,
was silenced. This is her story.
Sophia, a name that means wisdom in
Greek, was revered by the first
Christians as the feminine face of the
divine. In their mystical writings, the
Gnostics spoke of Sophia as both the
source of divine knowledge and the
companion of Christ. Together, they
formed a sacred union embodying the
balance of masculine and feminine
energies in the cosmos. And this divine
feminine expression was present and
revered in their beliefs as much as the
masculine Christ. For instance, the act
of communion was not just a remembrance
of Christ's passion, but also a
celebration of Sophia's wisdom. They
prayed to her, asking, "Come, hidden
mother. Come, you who are made manifest
in your works, and give joy and rest to
those who are bound to you." Sophia's
presence was woven into every aspect of
their spiritual practice. Priests and
priestesses would invoke her name, and
wine symbolizing her blood was shared
among initiates. These rituals
emphasized partnership spirituality,
recognizing both men and women as equal
reflections of the divine. For a long
time, depictions of Sophia persisted in
Christian art, particularly in the
Eastern Orthodox tradition. In the Haga
Sophia, the Holy Wisdom Cathedral in
Istanbul, we see a tribute to her
enduring influence. The name itself
honors Sophia, the divine wisdom that
early Christians cherished. But over
time, her presence became symbolic
rather than devotional. Her story hidden
beneath layers of patriarchal theology.
Her name lived on, but her role as an
active divine force was diminished.
The rediscovery of the Gnostic texts in
the 20th century reignited interest in
Sophia and her teachings. Among these
texts, the Sophia of Jesus Christ and
the peace to Sophia reveal a rich and
complex narrative about the relationship
between Yeshua and Sophia. These
writings portray her as an integral part
of the spiritual journey, guiding
initiates towards enlightenment and
unity with the divine. In these texts,
the divine pairing work together to
bring salvation, not through blind
faith, but through the awakening of
inner wisdom. And that is the story of
their mystical marriage, the divine
union of the masculine and feminine
aspects of creation. The Gnostic texts
reveal the centrality of this mystical
marriage. In the Sophia of Jesus Christ,
Jesus refers to Sophia as his companion
and emphasizes her role in guiding
humanity towards wisdom and
self-nowledge.
This relationship was not merely
symbolic. It was seen as a cosmic truth,
a reflection of the unity that underlies
all existence. Sophia, the goddess of
wisdom, was both the source and the goal
of the spiritual journey. Now, as
mentioned, this mystical marriage was
celebrated in the rituals and sacraments
of the early Christians. The Eucharist,
for example, was not solely a
remembrance of Yeshua's sacrifice, but
also a celebration of Sophia's wisdom.
Wine symbolizing Sophia's blood was
offered alongside bread, representing
Jesus's body. These elements were
consumed in a sacred meal that united
participants with the divine couple. The
prayers of the Gnostic Christians often
invoked both Jesus and Sophia
recognizing their partnership as
essential to spiritual awakening. In the
Gospel of Philip, one of the texts
discovered in the Nagamati library,
Sophia is described as the mother of the
angels and the bride of Christ. Her
narrative is one of profound spiritual
significance where she seeks to restore
balance to a world fractured by duality.
But here's something very interesting.
Throughout history, we see several
versions of Sophia's story as she exists
both as the cosmic mother and as an
incarnated human who for a time falls
from grace. In the piece to Sophia, one
of the most significant Gnostic texts,
Sophia's story unfolds in intricate
detail. She is depicted as a divine
being who becomes trapped in the lower
realms of existence known as chaos due
to her desire to know the unknowable
light of the father. This yearning leads
her to fall from the Plleoma, the realm
of divine fullness into the material
world dominated by the archons, the
rulers of the physical dimension. These
malevolent beings, jealous of her light
and devotion to the true light, deceive
her by creating a false glittering light
that lures her into their domain.
Mistaking this false light for the true
light, Sophia descends and the archons
steal her light power and bind her to
their realm. In her exile, Sophia
undergoes profound suffering and
degradation. She is subjected to various
forms of abuse and exploitation by the
archons, symbolizing the soul's
entrapment within the material world. In
her longing for wholeness and return to
the light, she seeks comfort in the
wrong places, turning towards lesser
beings, false lights, and even wicked
men who promise salvation, but instead
use, manipulate, and violate her
further. These encounters deepen her
sorrow, reflecting the soul's search for
healing in illusions that only
perpetuate pain. It is only after
exhausting every worldly refuge,
betrayed time and time again, that she
cries out in sincere repentance to the
divine. Moved by her cries, the higher
realms respond, and God sends Yeshua,
reflecting the logos, to rescue her,
restore her light, and guide her back to
the fullness of her origin. As Sophia
ascends through the spiritual realms,
she is repeatedly challenged by dark
forces that seek to pull her back into
chaos. Yeshua acts as her guide and
protector, offering her teachings and
revealing mysteries that restore her
divine knowledge. Along this journey,
Sophia's redemption becomes a metaphor
for the spiritual awakening of humanity.
Her ascent through the spheres
symbolizes the soul's gradual return to
its divine origin, guided by wisdom and
grace. In a way, Sophia's dual aspect,
both as cosmic mother and incarnated
human, further reflects how we see Jesus
both incarnated as human and also a
reflection of the cosmic father. The
journey of Sophia and her redemption
mirrors the individual spiritual
journey. As Sophia descends into chaos
and rises again through the guidance of
Christ, so too does the human soul
navigate the challenges of the material
world, striving to reconnect with its
divine source. To this aspect of the
narrative, Sophia represents the
material body and Christ the soul and
the uniting each of them is the mystical
marriage, a transformative process that
leads to enlightenment and
self-realization.
Yet, as we know, there is no one in the
gospels named Sophia who represents an
archetypal force of the feminine as the
Gnostics were very mystical and
allegorical in their understanding.
However, there is an expression of
Sophia embodied in the Gospels,
something even many Christians have long
speculated about. The Gnostic Gospel of
Philip provides a striking glimpse into
the intimate relationship between Yeshua
and Mary Magdalene, who was often
associated as the embodiment of Sophia.
This text describes a moment that upset
some of the disciples. It says, "The
companion of the Savior is Mary
Magdalene. The Savior loved her more
than all the disciples, and he kissed
her often on the mouth. This expression
of intimacy was both physical and
symbolic, representing the union of the
divine masculine and feminine forces
that shaped the cosmos. In the mystic
channelings called the Sophia Code, as
well as the Magdalene manuscript, Mary
Magdalene herself further shares a story
about how she served Yeshua's ministry,
not just as a disciple, but as a leader
as well.
In these writings, she recounts that
before she met Yeshua, she was trained
in the Egyptian temple traditions,
specifically within the mysteries of
Isis, where she underwent rigorous
spiritual preparation. This training
involved learning the sacred alchemical
practices of divine union, known as the
alchemies of Horus. These teachings were
designed to transform and awaken the
initiates divine essence, preparing them
to serve as spiritual conduits for
divine wisdom.
Mary's initiation was not merely
theoretical, but deeply embodied. As
part of the Isis mysteries, she learned
the sacred rights of sexual alchemy, a
practice intended to merge the divine
masculine and feminine forces and
facilitating higher states of
consciousness. This wisdom allowed her
to act as both a spiritual partner and a
catalyst for Yeshua's ministry. When
they first met, she immediately
recognized him as a divine being who
carried the Christ light. Their union
was not only one of companionship but of
sacred purpose. A continuation of
ancient initiatory practices where the
priestess played an essential role in
elevating the consciousness of the
divine masculine. Yet it was because she
was learned in the art of sexual alchemy
that later she was branded as a
prostitute.
It was told then that their love and
spiritual mission eventually led to the
birth of a child. A detail long obscured
by the Orthodox Christian tradition, but
preserved in esoteric accounts. As
political and religious tensions
heightened in Judea, Mary and her child
were forced to flee, escaping
persecution. According to alternative
historical traditions, she traveled to
Europe, specifically the regions of
Gaul, modern-day France, where she
continued her spiritual teachings in
secrecy, preserving the sacred wisdom of
the divine feminine. Over time, these
teachings became embedded in various
mystical traditions, including the
Cathars and later Templar movements,
which revered Mary Magdalene as a vessel
of divine wisdom and the true keeper of
the cristic mysteries. Yet beyond this,
Yeshua and Mary were understood as
avatars of the higher Christ and Sophic
light whose stories existed for
generations before. As we have seen, for
instance, Yeshua is to Osiris as Mary
Magdalene is to Isis. And the cosmic
stories have been revered since time
immemorial, reflecting even the unity of
the masculine and feminine qualities
within each human, including the unity
between body and soul, or even the left
and right hemispheres of the brain.
However, if this is all true, why don't
we see the reverence for Sophia in our
world today? Where did all the Gnostic
wisdom go? Well, like with the Gnostics,
the suppression of Sophia began with the
rise of the Roman church. As
Christianity became the state religion,
the emphasis shifted from mystical
knowledge to rigid dogma. The divine
feminine was gradually erased and
Sophia's role was replaced by a
patriarchal vision of divinity. This
left a void in the spiritual lives of
men and women alike. Women lost the
divine figure who could reflect their
own spiritual journeys. And men were
denied a relationship with the nurturing
and intuitive aspects of the divine. In
an attempt to fill this void, Mary, the
mother of Jesus, was elevated to divine
status. Yet even Mary, now revered as
the queen of heaven, retained only faint
echoes of Sophia's wisdom and power. The
rich partnership between the masculine
and feminine aspects of the divine was
lost. The suppression of Sophia also
marked a deeper loss. The loss of
balance, harmony, and a holistic
understanding of the cosmos. Why was
this done? Who decided which truths
would remain and which would be erased?
Who held the pen that rewrote the divine
story, shaping what we now call
scripture? Because in the end, it wasn't
just about what was left out. It was
about how the words themselves were
changed.
Something is changing.
She is rising, awakening from the
depths. I know you can feel her.
This is not a call to arms. It is a call
to soften.
For too long, humanity has lived out of
sacred balance because the feminine was
silenced, buried, and forgotten.
We have suffered because of it. The
earth has suffered because of it. As she
rises from her forced sleep, she does
not rise seeking revenge. She does not
come to conquer the masculine or to pour
out her rage upon him. She does not come
to fight at all, but to feel.
She seeks to restore the nobility of
rest, to honor the seasons, to whisper
the lost wisdom of the moon. She comes
to sparkle with delight and to plum the
depths of her ecstasy.
Her strength is not in her muscles. Her
strength is in her sovereignty. Her
strength is in her surrender.
Her most holy gift is her ability to
receive.
And receive she must. It is the only way
to balance the unchecked masculine
running rampant across the planet.
Yes, beloved. I know that your heart has
been broken, your body betrayed, your
voice silenced.
No one can deny the injustice or the
pain of your long-standing suffering.
But the time has come,
not to demand recompense, but to release
both victim and perpetrator from cycles
of blame and pain. To liberate us all
from suffering through forgiveness.
The time has come to remember who you
are.
Women, you must learn to trust yourself
again, to trust your heart, your womb,
your voice. You must love your voice
back into its full strength. You must
restore truth to your words. You must
decide that God is love and love is
safe.
And yes, you must learn to trust the
masculine again.
Call him forward back into his power.
Show him the value of rest. Honor him.
Nourish him. Celebrate him.
Release control. And follow his lead.
It's the only way you can remind him who
he truly is.
For without her, without the feminine,
he too has forgotten who he is. beloved
son, an honorable king devoted to his
purpose and loving his queen with all
his magic and all his might.
And then you must become worthy of her
trust.
Hold her with the purity of your
presence. See her, protect her, cherish
her,
show her she is safe with your hands and
with your heart.
This is the sacred dance.
This is the way. It requires both sides
in their fullness and their sovereignty.
Equal but opposite.
And it begins
with you.
Now, in our great journey of exploring
the mysteries of Christianity, one thing
that has yet to be discussed is the
authenticity of the narrative itself, we
know that the great avatars, Yeshua
included, did not write their own
stories. So, who did? And can we trust
their penmanship? Let's begin with the
so-called foundational texts, the five
books of Moses, also known as the Torah.
For centuries, tradition held that Moses
was the sole author of these books. But
modern scholarship, linguistic analysis,
and archaeological study paint a very
different picture. The Torah was not
written by one man in a single lifetime.
It was composed and compiled over
centuries by multiple authors and
redactors, each bringing their own
theological and cultural perspectives.
This is evident in the shifts in
language, tone, and even names for God.
Sometimes he's called Yahweh, other
times Elohim. These inconsistencies
aren't just stylistic. They reveal the
merging of multiple traditions and
sources into a single narrative
tapestry. Even within Genesis itself, we
can clearly see this editorial layering.
For instance, the creation story is told
twice back to back with drastically
different details and emphasis. In
Genesis 1, creation unfolds over seven
structured days with humanity created
last, male and female together. But in
Genesis 2, there is no 7-day timeline.
Instead, man is formed first from the
dust and woman is created later from his
rib. But here's the thing. Scholars
widely agree that Genesis 2 is the older
account originating from the Yahwist
tradition around the 10th century B.CE.
Whereas Genesis 1 with its more orderly
and cosmological tone was written
centuries later by the priestly
tradition during or after the Babylonian
exile. For narrative cohesion, Genesis 1
was placed first in the canon, even
though it came later. You might remember
that many years ago, we made a series
called the Sumerian Epic, wherein we
observed quite clearly that all of these
stories seem to come from something much
older. Many scholars have pointed out
strong parallels between the Genesis
narratives and earlier Sumerian stories.
In particular, the tale of Enki and
Ninhersog from the Sumerian tradition
contains elements that are strikingly
similar to the Garden of Eden, a divine
garden, sacred trees, and even a moment
where Enki is cursed after eating
forbidden plants. The name Eden itself
is believed to have originated from the
Sumerian word Eden, meaning plane or
step. This suggests that the earliest
Hebrew storytellers were drawing from a
much older mythological well, reshaping
Mesopotamian themes into the emerging
identity of their people. So, we have to
understand from the very moment one
opens the Bible, there are layers and
layers of meaning to sift through. You
might think that you're reading the
words of Moses, but really there is a
mountain of translation,
transliteration, and reorganization on
top of all of it. And so we have to
start to wonder, was there even a Moses
at all? And what about the rest of the
Bible? Well, the New Testament is the
exact same way. The four canonical
gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
did not appear all at once. Instead,
they were written over several decades,
reflecting the theological and cultural
concerns of their respective
communities. The earliest gospel, Mark,
is believed to have been written around
70 CE, nearly 20 years after Paul's
writings and 37 years after Jesus would
have died, with Matthew and Luke
following in the 80s or '90s CE and John
coming last around 90 to 100 CE. But
here's what's crazy. This chronological
progression reveals a fascinating
pattern of development. Mark's gospel is
the most concise and presents a raw,
almost urgent account of Yeshua's life
and death. It focuses on him as a
suffering servant, emphasizing his
humanity and the esqueological urgency
of his mission. Then came Matthew and
Luke, drawing heavily from Mark, but
embellishing it, shaping Jesus into
something greater. Matthew writing for a
Jewish audience roots him in prophecy,
tracing his lineage back to David,
marking his birth as the fulfillment of
ancient prophecies. He alone tells of
the magi, the guiding star, Herod's
slaughter of the innocents, elements
absent in Mark, but essential to the
emerging narrative of Yeshua as the long
awaited king. Luke, more universal in
his approach, softens the edges. His
Jesus is more compassionate, his message
inclusive. Luke adds new parables, a
different genealogy, a nativity story of
his own. This time with shepherds and
angelic hosts. The gospels are no longer
mere accounts. They are theological
statements shaping Jesus not just as a
teacher, but as the Messiah, his life
crafted into divine archetype.
But it is with John that the
transformation is complete. written
last. Jesus is no longer just the
anointed one, the chosen prophet, the
suffering servant. He is the logos, the
divine-made flesh, the eternal word
through whom all things were made. Gone
are the short enigmatic parables, the
exorcisms, the gradual realization of
his identity. From the very first verse,
John declares what Mark only hinted at.
Jesus is God. This is a cosmic Christ
speaking in grand pronouncements,
performing miracles not just of healing
but of mastery over nature itself. He is
no longer a secretive figure telling his
disciples not to reveal his identity. He
proclaims it himself. I am the way, the
truth, and the life. Before Abraham was,
I am.
This shift from Mark to John is not
merely a deepening of the story but a
transformation. With each gospel in
order, Jesus becomes more divine, more
powerful, and more the supreme absolute
divinity. And the process of
canonization further cemented this
shift, solidifying one version of
Christianity while suppressing others,
particularly Gnosticism.
By the 2nd through 4th centuries, church
authorities sought to create an official
scripture selecting Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John while excluding alternative
texts such as the Gospel of Thomas, the
Gospel of the Hebrews, and the Gospel of
Mary. These texts and many others like
them emphasized direct spiritual
experience over institutional hierarchy
and personal communion with the divine
rather than obedience to a church. As
such, they were deemed heretical and
systematically destroyed. The gospel
writers, of course, were not
eyewitnesses. They were architects of a
faith in shaping the Christ that they
needed. These were people who sought to
answer the theological questions of
their time. And the biblical edits
become very apparent the more that
they're studied. Early critics such as
Celus accused Christians of modifying
their texts to respond to theological
disputes. and modern manuscript studies
confirm that scribes made numerous
changes. Despite their shared focus on
Jesus, the Gospels sometimes present
wildly conflicting accounts of the
story. For instance, the genealogies of
Yeshua in Matthew and Luke differ
significantly. Matthew traces his
lineage through King David's son
Solomon, emphasizing Jesus's royal
lineage and fulfillment of Jewish
prophecy. Luke, on the other hand,
traces the lineage through David's son,
Nathan, offering a very different
perspective, the discrepancies of which
reflect the theological priorities of
the authors rather than a commitment to
strict historical accuracy.
Another significant difference is found
in the accounts of the resurrection. In
Mark's original ending, the women who
discover the empty tomb flee in fear and
tell no one, leaving the story
unresolved. Later manuscripts add
post-resurrection appearances of Jesus
to align with the other gospels.
Matthew, Luke, and John include more
detailed and varied accounts of Yeshua's
appearances, each tailored to the
theological emphasis of their
communities. Truly, the end of Mark in
many Bibles actually have a little
subnote that says, "The earliest
manuscripts do not include this next
part, affirming that they were added
later." Here's another thing that's
interesting. Both Matthew and Luke
introduced specific geographical
locations into the narrative which were
absent in Mark, adding layers of
historical realism that weren't there
before. However, scholars have noted
that many of these locations appear to
have just been thrown in half-hazardly,
with some being incorrectly placed or
anacronistic. For instance, Luke
situates Jesus's birth during the census
of Quirinius, which took place in 6 CE,
while Matthew places Jesus's birth
during the reign of Herod, who died in 4
B.CE. creating a 10-year discrepancy
between the gospels. There are also
instances where travel routes described
in the gospels contradict known
geography. In Mark 7:31, Jesus is said
to travel from Ty to the Sea of Galilee
via Sidon, a route that does not make
sense as Sidon actually lies in the
opposite direction. Additionally, Mark
5:1 describes Jesus arriving in the
country of the Gerosines on the eastern
shore of the Sea of Galilee. However,
Geresa, modern-day Gerash, is more than
30 mi southeast of the lake, far too
distant for the events described in the
passage, which require a steep slope
leading directly to the water. Through
these inconsistencies, we can see that
the gospels were not based on
firstirhand knowledge, but were inserted
later to give an impression of
historical authenticity. Many scholars
argue that these locations were added to
provide a sense of realism to a story
that was originally more mythical in
structure, reinforcing the transition
from an allegorical symbolic Christ to a
more concrete historical figure. Like
seriously, I can just imagine these old
kermagins in a church room somewhere
saying, "Ah, they'll never know." And
for 2,000 years, we didn't. But those
ancient people didn't foresee the
internet. And here we are. To reinforce
the conceived historical continuity, the
Acts of the Apostles was composed
between 150 and 177 CE, presenting the
disciples as historical figures who
carried on Yeshua's mission. However,
many scholars also argue today that Acts
was not an objective record of early
Christian history, but a later attempt
to establish apostolic authority
retroactively. It depicts a unified
church led by a cohesive group of
disciples. A portrayal that contradicts
the diversity of beliefs and sects
evident in early Christian writings. In
this way, the construction of
Christianity as we know it was not
merely the preservation of a single
tradition, but a process of revision,
selection, and suppression. A
transformation as much political as it
was theological.
The story of Christianity's rise to
dominance is as much about politics as
it is about faith. By the 4th century
CE, a once persecuted sect of believers
had become the official religion of the
Roman Empire, reshaping the spiritual
and political landscape of the ancient
world. At the center of this
transformation was Emperor Constantine
the Great, a ruler whose embrace of
Christianity forever changed its
trajectory. But Constantine's
motivations were far from purely
spiritual. His actions reveal a
calculated effort to unify an empire and
consolidate power. When Constantine rose
to power in 306 CE, the Roman Empire was
fractured. The vast territory faced
threats from external enemies and
internal divisions, including a growing
diversity of religious practices. The
mysteries once the dominant spiritual
framework was giving way to new faiths
with Christianity emerging as a
significant force. Despite periods of
brutal persecution, the Christian
community had grown in size and
influence, particularly in urban centers
where its organizational structure
provided support to the poor and the
marginalized. Constantine, a shrewd
politician, recognized the potential of
this growing movement to unify his
empire. Constantine became the first
Roman emperor to openly support
Christianity. In 313 CE, Constantine
issued the Edict of Milan, granting
religious tolerance throughout the
empire and ending the persecution of
Christians. Persecutions, it's worth
noting, were not solely the result of
Roman hostility, but were also
influenced by tensions between the early
Christian communities and other
religious groups. Ancient writings from
that period reflect that some early
Christian sects openly denounced
existing Greor Roman and mystery
traditions, often proclaiming themselves
as the sole holders of truth. In
response, followers of older traditions
viewed Christianity with suspicion,
sometimes mocking it as a derivative
faith that blended elements from their
own deities while claiming to be wholly
unique. These mutual hostilities
combined with Christianity's growing
refusal to participate in traditional
civic and religious rituals contributed
to social friction and ultimately to
periodic state sanctioned persecutions
that spanned roughly two centuries.
There's a movie called Agora that
depicts this quite well and I highly
recommend giving it a watch if you want
to jump more fully into that world. So
anyways, Constantine granted religious
tolerance for Christians for the first
time and this was a revolutionary act,
but it was also a pragmatic one. By
aligning himself with Christianity,
Constantine secured the loyalty of its
followers while maintaining a stance of
inclusivity towards other religions.
However, Constantine's patronage of
Christianity went beyond tolerance. He
provided financial support for the
construction of churches, granted
privileges to Christian clergy, and
helped position the church as a central
institution of imperial life. These
actions elevated Christianity from a
marginal sect to a favored religion,
layering the foundation for its
institutional power. But Christianity at
that time was deeply divided over
theological issues, particularly the
nature of Christ. Was Jesus of the same
substance as God the Father or was he a
created being? To resolve this and
prevent division within the empire,
Constantine convened the Council of Nika
in 3:25, bringing together bishops from
across the empire to define a unified
Christian doctrine. And the Council of
Nika was that turning point. Church
leaders ultimately affirmed the doctrine
of the trinity declaring that Jesus was
of one substance with the father. This
decision was formalized in the nyine
creed and became the cornerstone of
orthodox Christian belief. Alternative
views such as aryanism which held that
Yeshua was subordinate to the father
were condemned as heresy and their
followers were marginalized or
persecuted. Which, side note, super
interesting. If Yeshua was of the same
substance of the Father in his entirety,
why would he say, "Father, if you are
willing, take this cup from me, yet not
my will, but yours be done." Anyway,
Constantine's role in the council
underscored the new relationship between
church and state. He was not a
theologian, but he understood that a
unified religion meant a more stable
empire. In doing so, he set the
precedent for imperial involvement in
defining spiritual truth, an influence
that would shape Christianity for
centuries to come. You can see where I'm
going with this, right? Most of us
believe the things we believe because
1700 years ago, some old guys decided it
was going to be that way. Not to
mention, Yeshua's whole mission seemed
to revolve around telling us that all of
us are one with God in the deepest way.
Well, you know, except maybe the
Pharisees. As Christianity became the
state religion under Constantine's
successors, its relationship with the
mysteries shifted, where once
Christianity was the suppressed, now it
became the suppressors. The mysteries
were rebranded collectively as paganism,
which meant country dweller and was
intended as an insult. Pagan temples
were repurposed or destroyed, and pagan
practices were outlawed. The old gods
once revered across the empire were
relegated to the shadows of history.
This transition was not merely a
spiritual victory but a political one as
the church aligned itself with imperial
power to consolidate its authority.
Constantine's influence on Christianity
then extended way beyond his lifetime.
His reign marked the beginning of a
transformation that saw the faith evolve
from a persecuted minority to an
institutionalized religion with global
reach. Yet this transformation came at a
cost. The consolidation of doctrine and
the suppression of dissenting views
stifled the diversity of early Christian
thought. All others who focused on
personal spiritual knowledge or mystical
development were branded heretical and
driven underground. The richness of
diversity gave way to a more rigid
orthodoxy shaped by the demands of
political unity. So remarkably and
without any surprise, all of these
changes and the suppression of older
wisdom teachings led to the
thousand-year period that we know today
as the dark ages. Truly, it was in Italy
in the 14th century that the writings of
the Greek philosophers and especially
Hermes Trish Magajistas with the corpus
hermeticum re-emerged in a meaningful
way to the Christian world and those
philosophies helped people in mass break
out of the old conditioned thinking and
a new enlightened era began which today
we call the Renaissance which means
rebirth. Now, this window of time,
zooming out a little bit, from generally
300 BC to,700 CE, was a time when
humanity walked through the darkest
point on the procession of the equinox,
the Caliuga, a window of unenlightenment
and disconnection from ourselves and
each other, ignorant of the cosmic laws
that permeate all of reality.
Fortunately, we're in a new era of
awakening now. The dark ages are long
behind us, and there's a lot to look
forward to.
And so you can see humans were forced
and taught to believe in one specific
thing for a really long time. And then
even once that was done, there were
hundreds of years of biblical
scholarship which made things even
worse, especially regarding
translations. Here, let me show you. A
recent documentary revealed that in
1946, a very interesting word never
before seen in any Bible translation was
introduced. a word that would alter
religious doctrine and social attitudes
for generations. The word homosexual.
Before this, no biblical text contained
that word. Instead, the Greek words
maloy and arcenicai appeared in 1
Corinthians 6:9-10.
Malachy translates to soft, historically
used to describe luxury, weakness, or
decadence. It was never a reference to
sexual orientation. Arino Thai is a bit
more complex. It's a compound of arson
meaning male and kitai meaning bed.
Scholars debated its meaning for
centuries. But today it is understood to
refer to economic exploitation or abuse
of relationships particularly involving
pedarasti, the practice of older men
taking advantage of younger boys. But in
1946, the translators of the revised
standard version made a fateful
decision. They combined these two words
into a single English term, homosexual,
which was a relatively new word by
contrast. This change transformed the
passage. What had once been a
condemnation of exploitative or abusive
acts now became a condemnation of an
entire group of people. Instead of
addressing issues of power, coercion,
and predation, it labeled
non-cisgendered individuals as
inherently sinful. And once that
translation was published, it spread. By
the 1980s, this mistransation became a
weapon. As evangelical leaders like
Jerry Fwell and Pat Robertson rose to
prominence, they used the altered
scripture to push anti-gay rhetoric. The
AIDS crisis only intensified this.
Religious figures claimed that
homosexuality was both a sin and a
curse, a divine punishment for those who
defied God. Their message was clear. The
Bible condemned homosexuality and those
who engaged in it were unworthy of
salvation. Over time, some translations
corrected the error. The New Revised
Standard Version and its updated
editions removed homosexual from the
text, returning to language that more
accurately reflected the original Greek.
But by then, the misinformation had
spread too far. Many churches continued
to use older translations, reinforcing
decades of prejudice. Today, most
scholars agree homosexual should never
have been included in the Bible. The
original texts do not address sexual
orientation as we understand it today.
Instead, they speak about social
corruption, economic exploitation, and
abuse of power dynamics. Seriously, one
translation mistake made in 1946
reshaped religious beliefs and justified
discrimination against millions. The
consequences have been devastating.
Families have been torn apart, lives
lost, faith weaponized against those who
needed it most. And just think, if this
happened here, how many other times
could this have happened? What other
words might have been mistransated and
changed things over generations and the
original meaning and intentions
completely lost? Well, here's a few
other ones. When Jesus is giving the
sermon on the mount, he says, "Blessed
are the meek," which is a word that
ultimately means docile and submissive.
Obviously, something controlling powers
would want you to be so that you're
easier to manipulate. But the original
translation of meek was something far
more like those who have power but
choose to keep it under control. Those
who are strong, disciplined, and humble,
not weak or submissive. Yet for 2,000
years, Christians have largely practiced
meekness instead of this original
quality Jesus was describing.
And here's another powerful example. In
the film Christ's Spiracy, the
filmmakers uncover a striking
mistransation in one of the most iconic
moments of Jesus's life when he
overturns the tables in the temple. Most
modern Bibles render his words as, "You
have turned my father's house into a den
of thieves." But when the Hebrew term
karitz is examined more closely,
scholars reveal that it more accurately
translates to violent ones or murderers.
This changes everything. Yeshua wasn't
condemning greed or corruption. He was
protesting the mass slaughter of animals
happening in the temple. At that time,
the temple was essentially a large-scale
slaughter house. Animals were sold,
killed, and barbecued by the priests,
generating wealth for both the temple
and the Roman state. In this context,
Jesus's protest takes on a deeper
meaning. He wasn't flipping tables over
coin exchange. He was shutting down a
system of institutionalized killing,
calling it out for what it was,
violence. As Christ's spiracy suggests,
this aligns with early traditions that
portray Jesus as a vegetarian mystic
deeply rooted in the teachings of
compassion, nonviolence to all, and
inner spiritual awakening. A man who
wouldn't kill, even for food. The list
goes on and on. Throughout the Bible, we
find many other places and instances in
history where mistransations have
created dastardly effects for humanity
in mass. And so in closing to this
chapter of our grand exploration, here
are a few final examples. Thou shalt not
suffer a witch to live. That infamous
line from Exodus 22:18 comes from the
Hebrew word Meccashifa, which more
accurately means sorcerer or poisoner.
But the King James translators chose
witch, fueling centuries of brutal witch
hunts, mostly against women, midwives,
and healers.
Behold, a virgin shall conceive. That
from Isaiah 7:14, but the Hebrew word
alma simply means young woman, not
virgin. A later mistransation into Greek
gave us parthnos and suddenly a young
mother became a virgin forming the basis
of the entire doctrine of the virgin
birth.
Hell that word doesn't exist in the
Hebrew Bible. Instead we get shaol hades
and gehenna each with very different
meanings. Gehenna for example was a
literal garbage pit outside Jerusalem
used as a metaphor for spiritual decay.
But later translations lumped all of
them together into hell, constructing an
image of eternal torture that Jesus
himself likely never taught. And
Ephesians 5:22, "Wives, submit to your
husbands. Most people don't quote the
verse right before it. Submit to one
another out of reverence for Christ."
That mutuality was erased in how the
passage is usually taught, turning a
message of equality into a tool of
patriarchal control.
And then there's the word repent. For
thousands of years, it's been loaded
with guilt and shame, like begging for
forgiveness. Repent of your sins. But in
the original Greek, the word is
metaninoa, which means to change your
mind or to shift your perspective. It
was never about graveling. It was about
awakening.
And truly, it would seem that in the
case of most of these translations, they
weren't just mistakes. Maybe some of
them formed by ignorance, but in most
cases, these really seem like deliberate
acts that reinforced systems of power.
They gave divine weight to patriarchy,
fear, violence, and shame. And unless we
know where the edits happened, we're not
reading scripture. We're reading
strategy.
[Music]
For centuries, people have tried to peel
back the layers of myth and tradition to
uncover the real figure behind the
stories. The historical Jesus, not the
stained glass icon. But the deeper we
look, the more elusive he becomes.
Tracing him through the sands of time
means navigating centuries of
theological edits, political agendas,
and artistic inventions. What we often
find isn't the man himself, but
reflections of the cultures that sought
to define him. The man we called Jesus
may never have looked the way we imagine
him. That softeyed, long-haired figure
in flowing robes, the one hanging in
stained glass windows and printed on
prayer cards, isn't historical. It's a
composite, a projection, an invention.
In the earliest Christian art, Jesus
looks more like a clean shaven Roman
philosopher than a mystic from the
desert. Short hair, tunic, no beard.
Even Paul, the earliest Christian
writer, says, "Does not nature itself
teach you that if a man has long hair,
it is a disgrace to him?" That one line
alone would disqualify most paintings of
Christ, at least as far as ancient
standards go. So, where did this image
come from? The long-haired, haloed icon
didn't take hold until the 8th century
when churches in Constantinople and Rome
began unveiling supposedly divinely
revealed portraits of Jesus. One said to
be imprinted on a cloth, another
allegedly painted by Luke and completed
by angels. But these were not
archaeological discoveries. They were PR
campaigns, holy propaganda. Their
purpose wasn't to show us Jesus. It was
to anchor a rising theology in something
visual, fixed, and above all,
controllable. And therein lies the trap.
The church gave us a face so that we'd
stop asking questions about the meaning.
They gave us an icon to follow, not a
mystery to enter. The real Yeshua, the
historical teacher, the mystical symbol,
that Yeshua was buried beneath centuries
of mythmaking, political strategy, and
power consolidation. And to some extent,
it seems that this was necessary for us
as a species. During the time of the
mysteries before Christ, our
spiritualities were becoming very
diluted with so many different
representations of the divine. The
destruction of the old way in favor of a
unified image that forced a single
narrative doctrine was necessary to fix
everyone's minds on an image of the
supreme ultimate power and give everyone
an idea to reflect upon and hold in
their minds and hearts. The challenge
was that these beliefs were ideiated
around something outside of us instead
of an inner reality to embody. The
journey of transcendence associated with
Yeshua was destroyed and therein lies
the problem. And we can see this taking
place in history.
Even the most basic details we think we
know don't hold up. Take Jesus of
Nazareth. The title sounds specific,
grounded, historical. But there's a
problem. There was no Nazareth at that
time. No town by that name appears in
any Roman records, maps, or writings
from the first century. Even Jewish
historian Josephus, who listed over 200
towns and villages in Galilee, never
mentioned it. The earliest
archaeological evidence for a settlement
in Nazareth doesn't appear until well
over a century later. So, where did
Jesus of Nazareth come from? Most
likely, it's a linguistic mixup. The
word Nazarene doesn't refer to a
geographic location, but to a spiritual
sect. The Nazarines were a gnostic,
aesthetic, vegetarian brotherhood
devoted to a mystical path of
purification and inner awakening. Jesus
wasn't from Nazareth. He was a Nazarene,
a title, not an address. But over time,
those two words became confused and
eventually institutionalized.
One so-called red herring in a sea of
theological misdirection.
But then there's the question that
haunts every scholar and seeker. Did
Jesus even exist? The historical
evidence is slim. There are no
contemporary Roman records of his life,
no birth certificate, no personal
writings. The earliest gospel accounts
were written decades after his death by
people who never met him. Outside of the
New Testament, the references we do
have, like those from Josephus or
Tacitus, are brief, secondhand, and
possibly altered by later scribes. And
yet, as literally billions of people
believe, maybe he did exist. Maybe there
was a radical teacher who walked the
hills of Galilee, who performed
miracles, challenged the empire, and was
ultimately crucified for his defiance.
Maybe he was an avatar, a rare soul of
such profound realization that his very
presence changed people. Maybe his life
was the seed of a story so big it could
not help but absorb the myths that came
before it. Dionis, Osiris, Mithras,
Krishna, and all the dying and
resurrecting sons of God. But if I may
for a moment speak from personal
experience, Yeshua, I believe, was
definitely a real person, an embodied
avatar of the highest caliber. But I
also believe that the truth of what he
did in his life has been swallowed by
myth, culture, and doctrine and shrouded
in illusion. And in speaking personally,
what I can say is I have had a direct
and personal experience with him,
multiple actually. And in the time I
spent in what can only be described as a
mystical one-on-one and conversational
experience, I know his presence
personally. And so there's no doubt in
my mind that he lived and was a
remarkable human. And even today, I feel
him not only as a human outside of me,
but a living presence within me.
However, what became clear from my time
spent with Yeshua is that the story
surrounding him must be taken from a
mystical lens because so many older
mythological stories have been applied
to his life. Yet, that symbolic layering
doesn't negate his reality. It doesn't
mean he didn't live or that he didn't
perform incredible feats. I don't ask
that you take my word for it, but go
within and decide for yourself what you
know to be true.
What I can say for certain and what we
can point to is the power of that myth.
The impact, the echo, the archetype.
Yeshua exists in the way all great myths
do. Not just as history, but as an
ongoing invitation to transformation.
And here's the most important part.
However it was that he existed for us
today, it is the belief in the story
which has all the power. Scientific
discoveries today are now firmly
supporting this understanding as well.
As great men like Dr. Bruce Lipton
explains through his work in the biology
of belief, our thoughts are not passive.
They are biochemical signals that shape
our bodies, our choices, and our
reality. Belief literally rewires the
brain, reorganizes the nervous system,
and reprograms our cells. When we
believe in something, whether it's fear,
faith, failure, or freedom, our biology
responds accordingly.
So if we believe in the spirit of
Christ, not as dogma, but as divine
presence, we can embody it. We can
become more compassionate, more
courageous, more radiant. We can become
vessels of peace, truth, and healing.
That's not fantasy. That's
neurochemistry.
But if we believe we are weak, unworthy,
and broken, so shall we become. And
that's the deeper meaning behind the
Jesus story. Regardless of whether he
was historical or not, the myth works
because belief has power. And when that
belief is pointed inward toward
transformation, toward awakening, it
becomes a force of evolution. Because
for the earliest Christians, especially
the Gnostics, the Jesus story was not
taken as a literal biography. It was
myth by design, an initiatory allegory,
a symbolic road map for spiritual
awakening. Just as Osiris, Dionis, and
Mithus died and rose again, so did
Yeshua. Not because it happened once in
history, but because it happens again
and again within us. To the initiated,
these myths weren't superstition. They
were sacred geometry in narrative form.
coded rituals meant to guide you into
nosis or direct knowledge of the divine.
Jesus's baptism, death, and
resurrection. These weren't just events.
They were inner milestones on the path
to transcendence. Baptism, the
purification of identity. Death, the
disillusion of the ego. Resurrection,
the birth of divine consciousness.
But when Rome took over the story, it
needed more than symbols. It needed
power. It turned the myth into history,
the metaphor into doctrine, the mystery
into dogma. And that's when the red
herring was born. Because suddenly
Christ wasn't a path to follow. He was a
belief or an identity to worship, a
fixed narrative, a singular savior. The
journey inward was replaced by obedience
outward. And the revolutionary spiritual
myth became an authoritarian religion.
So here's the truth. The real spirit of
Christ doesn't have a face. The supreme
consciousness doesn't need a face
because the moment we try to define it
in static terms through portraits,
creeds, or history books, we miss the
entire point. The real Christ is the
question that leads you back into
yourself. The myth that opens a door.
The riddle that won't let you rest. And
every time we fixate on what he looked
like or whether he actually walked on
water or if he really said this or that,
we're chasing the red herring. We're
swimming in circles, never diving into
the deeper waters. Because the real
treasure was never the man. There's
always a mystery.
[Music]
Heat
up here.
[Music]
Heat up
[Music]
here.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
[Music]