Sateen, me a em nema mrp nn te ht SAR fits Peat arn nL AREA TRONS TROIS 


is Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


, * ra 
a“ 


February 1982 Vol. 70 No. 2 


PROCES EEE 


Scanning the Issue 


Adjustable Speed AC Drives—A Technology Status Review 
(Invited Paper), Bose, page 116—After nearly a decade and a 
half of intensive development, adjustable speed ac drives have 
assumed a position of great importance in a large variety of 
industrial applications. This has led to a pressing need in the 
industrial and academic communities for an understanding of 
the basics and state of the art of this growing technology. This 
invited paper, believed to be the first of its kind on this subject, 
is a tutorial-review of ac drives intended to be useful both to 
the reader who has a general interest in industrial control using 
ac drives and to the specialist who wishes to extend and expand 
his or her knowledge. 

The ac machines which constitute the principal subsystem of 
these drives are first concisely but thoroughly reviewed in the 
paper, Following this, the technical features of different classes 
of drives with converters, such as voltage-fed converters, cur- 
tent-fed converters, cycloconverters, static Kramer, and static 
Scherbius drives, are discussed. The paper then describes 
modeling and simulation of ac drives, and finally the subject 
of microcomputer control is reviewed in some detail. Through- 
out the paper, the current trends of development of power 
semiconductor devices, machines, converters, and controls are 
indicated wherever possible. 


The Persistent Paradox of Psychic Phenomena: An Engineering 
Perspective (Invited Paper), Jahn, page 136—The persistent, 
fragmentary indication of the possible existence of psychic 


phenomena requires us, in the interests of scientific integrity 


and intellectual honesty, to apply the same spirit of objective 
inquiry that ‘we have focused on the more traditional and 
accepted branches of science and technology. 

It was nearly six years ago—in March 1976, to be exact—that 
the PROCEEDINGS took the unusual step of publishing a paper 
on the psychic phenomenon called remote viewing. That paper 
was received with great interest, considerable skepticism, some 
hostility, and even a bit of shock. In the intervening years, no 
breakthroughs have occurred to prove or disprove the existence 
of this and other psychic phenomena, but interest and research 
have continued unabated. Where does research on these topics 


stand now? It was with this question in mind that the paper in 
this issue was invited, 
This paper reviews the history, nomenclature, conceptual 


organization, and status of the generic field of psychic phe- — 


nomena; presents a few detailed examples of contemporary 
research that could have ultimate technological implications; 
and attempts to offer a balanced view of the viability and value 
of continued study of this fascinating and controversial field. 

The paper is believed to represent the first attempt at a 
comprehensive engineering survey of the field. Most readers 
will likely approach it with a healthy blend of curiosity and 
skepticism. It is hoped all will find it informative and thought 
provoking. 


Performance Evaluation of Data Communication Systems 
{Invited Paper), Reiser, page 171—Great strides have been 
taken in recent years in developing the architecture of message 
or packet-based communication networks. Much has been 
learned about organizing, controlling, and operating such net- 
works, but performance and design principles were developed 
in parallel, and networks were built before a complete under- 
standing of their performance was achieved. Major progress 
has been made in evaluating the performance of such commu- 
nication systems, and this invited paper presents a tutorial 
survey of the state of the art of this field. The majority of the 


literature on performance evaluation emphasizes protocol © 


evaluation, and the author systematically develops this ap- 
proach. ; 

Following a general introduction to performance evaluation, 
the paper gives considerable attention to the mathematical 
tools involved, using the language of the communication engi- 
neer, The major mathematical techniques are Markov chaina 
applied to discrete time systems and queueing theory. Through- 
out emphasis is given to how these tools are applied in practice. 
The mathematical methods do not map on a one-to-one basis 
to the system, and the leading modeling ideas are highlighted. 
The embedding environments in which protocols are analyzed 


are discussed in some detail, and the paper follows the frame- 


work of layered architecture. Separate sections are devoted 
to the performance analysis of data-link protocols, path-con- 
trol protocols, and end-to-end protocols, 


118. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


——— 


4 


SOR Ream, ag OH 


Sind RR APO SS A lt ele a > Re er eae 


, (Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


[132] M. Schwartz, “Performance analysis of the SNA virtual route 
pacing control,” IBM Res. Rép. RC 8490, Thomas J. Watson 
Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, Sept. 1980. 

{133] F. Tobagi and L. Kleinrock, “Packet switching in radio channels: 
Part IV—Stability considerations and dynamic control in carrier 
sense multiple access,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-25, 
pp. 1103-1120, Oct. 1977, 

[134] F. A. Tobagi, M. Gerla, R. W. Peebles, and E. G. Manning, 
“Modeling and measurement techniques in packet communica- 
tion networks,’’ Proc. IEEE, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 1423-1447, 
Nov. 1978, 

{135] F. A. Tobsgi and V. B. Hunt, “Performance analysis of carrier 
sense multiple access with collision detection,” Comput. Net., 
vol. 4, pp. 245-259, 1980. 

[136] V. L. Wallace, “Algebraic techniques for the numerical solution 
of queueing networks,” in Mathematical Methods in Queuing 
Theory, A. B. Clarke, Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1974, 
Pp. 295-305, 


Contributors 


Bimal K. Bose (S’59-M’60-SM’78) received the 
B.E. degree from Calcutta University, Calcutta, 
India, in 1956, the M.S. degree from the Uni- 
versity of Wisconsin, Madison, in 1960, and the 
Ph.D. degree from Calcutta University, in 1966. 
He was a Member of Faculty at Calcutta Uni- 
versity where he was awarded the Premchand 
Roychand scholarship and the Mouat gold 
medal for research contributions, In 1971, he 
joined Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, 
NY, as an Associate Professor of Electrical 
- Engineering. He was responsible for organizing undergraduate and 
graduate power electronics programs, including an advanced course on 
adjustable speed ac drives. He was a consultant for several industries 
including General Electric R&D Center, Bendix Corporation, Lutron 
Electronics, and PCI Ozone Corporation. Since 1976 he has been with 
General Electric, Corporate Research and Development, Schenectady, 
NY. His research interests are power conversion systems and micro- 
computer-based performance optimization of ac drives. 

Dr. Bose has published 42 research papers and holds a number of U.S. 
patents. Recently, he edited the IEEE press book Adjustable Speed AC 
Drives. He is Chairman of IEEE Transactions Review of Static Power 
Converter Committee, a member of the Power Electronics and Micro- 
computer Control Committee, the IEEE Industrial Electronics and 
Control Instrumentation Group, the Scientific Committee of the Inter- 
national Conference on Digital Control of Electrical Machine, and of 
the Program Committee of the International Static Power Converter 
Conference, a member of the Steering Committee for the Workshop on 
Automotive Applications of Microprocessors, a member of the Fellow 
Nominating Committee for the IEEE Static Power Converter Committee, 
and a member of the Program Committee of the Tokyo International 
Power Electronics Conference. 


* 


Robert G. Jahn received the B.S. degree in 
mechanical engineering in 1951, the M.A. de- 
gree in physics i in 1953, and the Ph.D. degree in 
physics in 1955, all from Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ. 

He has taught at Lehigh University, Bethle- 
hem, PA, at the California Institute of Tech- 
nology, Pasadena, and, since 1962, at Princeton 
University, where he is Dean of the School of 
Engineering and Applied Science and also serves 


as Professor of Aerospace Sciences. His principal © 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


{137] C. H. West, “General technique for communications protoco! 
validation,” IBM J. Res. Devel., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 393-404, 
July 1978, : 

{138] J. W. Wong and M. 8S. Unsoy, “Analysis of flow control in 
switched data networks,” in Proc. IFIP Conf. on Information 
Processing. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North- Holland, 1977, 
pp. 315-320. 

[139] J. W. Wong, “Distribution of end-to-end delay in message switched 
networks,” Comput. Net., vol. 2, pp. 4-49, 1978 

[140] J. W. Wong, J.A.B. Moura, and J. A. Field, “Hierarchical model- 
ing of local area computer networks,” in Proc. Nat. Telecom- 
mun. Conf. ‘80 (Houston, TX, 1980). 

{141] J. W. Wong and S. S. Lam, “Queueing network models of packet- 
switching networks, Part 1: Open networks,’ Performance 
Evaluation, to be published. 

(142] P. Zafiropulo, C. H. West, H. Rudin, D, D. Cowan, and D. Brand, 
“Towards analyzing and synthesizing protocols,’’ JEEE Trans, 
Commumn., vol. COM-28, pp. 651-661, Apr. 1980. 


areas of scholarship include high temperature gasdynamics, ionized gas 
kinetics, plasmadynamics and plasma propulsion, and his book, The 
Physics of Electric Propulsion remains the standard text in its field. His 
interest in psychic phenomena traces to his supervision of a student 
project begun in 1977, and although his present program in this area 
remains a very minor part of his professiorial activity, it has achieved 
international prominence in the field. 

Dr. Jahn received the Curtis W. McGraw Research Award of the ASEE, 
and he is a Fellow of both the American Physical Society and the 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. He has served on 
several NASA Advisory Committees, and is a member and past-chairman 
of the Board of Trustees of Associated Universities, Inc. 


Martin Reiser was born in Switzerland in 1943. 
He received his education from the Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) where 
he obtained the Ph.D. degree in 1971. 

One year later, he switched from the IBM 
Zurich Research Laboratory, Rischlikon, Swit- 
zetland, to the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research 
Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he 
joined the Performance Evaluation group. He 
specialized in the numerical solution of queueing 
networks, and made contributions to the theory 
of multichain networks and their numerical solution. Together with 
J. Buzen and H. Kobayashi, he laid the foundation for today’s fast 
algorithms in queueing networks and created one of the first modeling 
software packages, known as QNET 4. He is author or co-author of 
numerous publications in the field. After spending about 1 year at the 
IBM Research Laboratory in San José, CA, he returned to Yorktown 
Heights where he was soon appointed Manager of Performance Evalua- 
tion. He led efforts in analysis, hierarchical modeling, and system 
Measurement. In late 1977, he started a new group in the area of 
Computer Communication Network Modeling and Architecture. This 
activity led to a new assignment in 1978 as Senior Manager of Com- 
munications and Computer Science back at the IBM Zurich Research 
Laboratory, a position he still holds. His latest technical interests are in 


‘Mmean-value analysis, a theory he co-founded with S. S. Lavenberg and 


which he applied to computer networks, 
Dr. Reiser is a member of ACM, IFIP WG.7.3, and IFIP WG 6.4. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


136 


~ Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


The Persistent Paradox of Psychic Phenomena: 
An Engineering Perspective - 


ROBERT G. JAHN 


Invited Paper 


Abstract~Although a variety of so-called psychic phenomena have at- 
tracted man’s attention throughout recorded history, organized scholarly 
effort to comprehend such effects is just one century old, and systematic 
academic research roughly half that age. Over recent years, a sizeable 
spectrum of evidence has been brought forth from reputable laboratories 
in several disciplines to suggest that at times human consciousness can 
acquire information inaccessible by any known physical mechanism 
(ESP), and can influence the behavior of physical systems or processes 
(PK), but even the most rigorous and sophisticated of these studies 
display a characteristic dilemma: The experimental results are rarely rep- 
licable in the strict scientific sense, but the anomalous yields are well 


‘beyond chance expectations and a number of common features thread 


through the broad range of reported effects. Various attempts at theoret- 
ical modeling have so far shown little functional value in explicating 
experimental results, but have served to stimulate fundamental re-exam- 
ination of the role of consciousness in the determination of physical 
reality. Further careful study of this formidable field seems justified, 
but only within the context of very well conceived and technically im- 
peccable experiments of large data-base capability, with disciplined at- 
tention to the pertinent aesthetic factors, and with more constructive 
involvement of the critical community. 


Prologue 


The world of psychic phenomena might be likened to a vast, 
fog-shrouded swamp, wherein are reported to dwell a bewilder- 
ing array of bizarre phenomenological creatures, ail foreign to 
our normal perceptual and analytical catalogs. Some scholars 
who have explored this clouded domain have returned to an- 
nounce categorically that all such life is illusory—mere sunken 
stumps and swirling subsurface shadows, inviting misperception 
by the gullible and misrepresentation by the purveyors. But 
others of comparable conviction have described in-minute de- 
tail their observations of a variety of extraordinary beings of 
awesome dimensions and capability. Some of these are claimed 
fo appear unexpectedly, erupting from the roily depths to 
flash momentarily in the sunlight of human experience, only 
to disappear again before any systematic calibration of their 
characteristics can be taken. Others are reportedly enticed to 
more replicable and controlled behavior, but only by persons 
of special talent or extensive training. Much invalid, even 
fraudulent evidence of such activity has been touted by ex- 
ploiters of these mysteries, thereby casting deep suspicion on 
all other testimony. When fully sifted, only a very few legiti- 


Manuscript received July 15, 1981; revised October 26, 1981. This 
work was supported in part by the McDonnell Foundation, Inc., and 
by the John E. Fetzer Foundation, Inc., The Explorers Club, the Insti- 
tute of Noetic Sciences, and the Little River Foundation. 

The author is Dean of the School of Engineering/Applied Science, 
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, 


mate specimens seem to have been captured, by tediously de- 
liberate trolling of the brackish domain, or by more incisive 
invasion of its turbid interior, and even these have proven so 
incomprehensible and so delicate to exposure, and the imposed 
criteria for their credibility have been so severe, that they have 
not been fully persuasive. Yet the goal remains alluring, and 
the search continues. 


INTRODUCTION 


\ X ] ITH THIS unlikely bit of allegorical musing, I venture 
to begin the most extraordinary writing task I have yet 
attempted: to respond to the request of the Editors 
of this journal for a critical review of the status and prognosis 
of scientific research into so-called psychic phenomena. I do 
so with some trepidation, first because the topic is far from 
my principal line of scholarship and my involvement with it 
has been brief and tightly circumscribed, and second, because 
of the intensity of reactions any commentary on this subject 
tends to call forth from many quarters. 

For these reasons, it may be well at the outset to specify my 
perspective on the field and the purpose that I hope this article 
will serve. My formal training is that of an engineer and applied 
physicist, and the bulk of my research has concerned a sequence 
of topics in the broad domain of the aerospace sciences: Fluid 
mechanics, ionized gases, plasmadynamics, and electric propul- 
sion. In my present position as Dean of the School of Engineer- 
ing and Applied Science of Princeton University, I have occa- 
sion to be involved with an even broader selection of topics 
selected for undergraduate independent projects, and it was 
in that context some four years ago that I was requested by 
one of our very best students to supervise a study of psychic 
phenomena. More specifically, this young lady proposed to 


- bring her talents and background in electrical engineering and 


computer science to bear on some experiments in controlled, 
low-level psychokinesis. Although I had no previous experience, 
professional or personal, with this subject, for a variety of 
pedagogical reasons I agreed, and together we mapped a tenta- 


.tive scholarly path, involving a literature search, visits to appro- 


priate laboratories and professional meetings, and the design, 
construction, and operation of simple experiments. My initial 
oversight role in this project led to a degree of personal involve- 
ment with it, and that to a growing intellectual bemusement, 
to the extent that by the time this student graduated, I was 
persuaded that this was a legitimate field for a high technologist 
to study and that I would enjoy continuing to do so. 


0018-9219/82/0200-0136$00.75 © 1982 IEEE 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


de- 
sive 
150 
sed 
lave 
and 


— 


I 
’ 


(C PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


I have since assembled a small professional staff, secured the 
requisite funding from a few private sources, and undertaken 
a modest experimental program in selected aspects of the field 
that could ultimately have some engineering implications. I 
should emphasize that my fractional involvement with this 
program remains quite minor in comparison to my other re- 
sponsibilities, and that the work is still very preliminary and 
tentative, but it provides the base of cognizance for my broader 
observations on the field as a whole. 

The intention of this article is to provide some balanced per- 
spective on the modern status of this conceptually and logis- 
tically difficult subject. Certainly no field of scholarly endeavor 
has proven more frustrating, nor has been more abused and 
misunderstood, than the study of psychic phenomena. Dealing 
as it does as much with impressionistic and aesthetic evidence 
as with analytical substance, and carrying by its nature strongly 
subjective and numenistic overtones, it has been incessantly 
prostituted by charlatans, lunatics, and sensationalists, catego- 
rically rejected by most of the scientific establishment, and 
widely misunderstood by the public at large. Interspersed 
with this, and greatly encumbered by it, a pattern of legitimate 
effort to comprehend and utilize the purported phenomena 
has evolved to a point where some dispassionate assessment of 
its accomplishments can be attempted. The questions addressed 
by this review are whether, once the overburdens of illegitimate 
activity and irresponsible criticism are removed, there remains 
sufficient residue of valid evidence to justify continued research 
and, if so, how this research might most effectively be styled, 
facilitated, and evaluated. 

Before addressing these issues directly, it may be helpful to 
review briefly the historical evolution of the field, its contem- 
porary nomenclature and conceptual organization, and the 
dimensions of current activity. This can then be followed by 
a general overview and critique of the modern research, and 
that in turn by more detailed description of a few specific 
efforts, drawn primarily from our own work. Toward the 
close, we shall attempt to survey several theoretical approaches 
to modeling of psychic processes and comment briefly on po- 
tential implications and applications of the phenomena. In all 
of this, no tone of advocacy is intended, other than for objec- 
tive assessment of the evidence in hand. 


HISTORY 

In a sense, the study of psychic phenomena is one of the 
oldest of human endeavors [1]-[7]. As far back as can be 
traced, mortal man has pondered the supernatural in one form 
or another. Cave drawings at Lascaux and Altamira, circa 
20000 B.C., reflect this preoccupation, and the religious 
tites of early societies of both the eastern and western worlds 
were heavily loaded with psychic formalisms. The classic 
civilizations of Egypt, Greece, and Rome dealt extensively in 
psychic process. The Delphic Oracle was politically important 
from the earliest Hellenic times to the age of Alexander the 
Great, and was consulted on problems as diverse as the proper 
measures to stop a plague, the constitutions of Greek city-states, 
and the best locations for new colonies, Even Aristotle, one of 
the most empirical of the classical philosophers, examined the 
causal links in prophetic dreams. 

Virtually every form of organized religion practiced by man 
has been thoroughly laced with various forms of psychic mech- , 
anism. The Bible, like most other basic theological texts, treats 
Psychic process as a central ingredient, in a tone so matter-of- 
fact that one is inclined to believe that people of those times 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 
JAHN: PSYCHI 


137 


accepted such events rather routinely. Indeed, the Bible is an 
excellent catalog of psychic phenomena; virtually every cate- 
gory of effect identified today is illustrated there in one form 
or another. 

Christian writers and philosophers, from Augustine to the 
Reformation, recount many purported instances of psychic 
phenomena, usually attributed to visitations of divine grace 
or demonic posession. Secular medieval writing also abounds 
with supernatural and mystical reference, and even in the 
Renaissance period it is still difficult to separate psychic allu- 
sion from religious dogma, although both were then translated 
into more organized forms in art and literature. Early in the 
16th century the celebrated Swiss physician and philosopher 
Paracelsus wrote extensively on psychic capabilities and po- 
tentialities. In his words: 

The mind of man is the microcosmic counterpart of the uni- 
versal mind..... ... One man may communicate his thoughts 
to another with whom he is in sympathy, at any distance however 
great it may be, or he may act upon the spirit of another person 
in such a manner as to influence his actions... . [8]. 

Perhaps the first major scientific commentaries on the topic 
were offered near the turn of the 17th century by Sir Francis Ba- 
con, widely regarded as the originator of the scientific method. 
In The Advancement of Learning he suggested that “supersti- 
tions and the like” should not be excluded from scientific 
study, and in his posthumous book, Sylva Sylvarum, he 
proposed deliberate investigation of telepathic dreams, psychic 
healing, and the influence of “imagination” on the casting of 
dice [9]. Some years later, a group of British intellectuals 
including Henry More and Joseph Glanvill met regularly to 
discuss paranormal topics, and in 1681 Glanvill published 
the substance of these studies in a book entitled Saducismus 
Triumphatus [10]. , 

Meanwhile, some four centuries of public and church hysteria 
over sorcery and witchcraft, as manifested in a sequence of 
trials, tortures, and executions, had begun to subside, and by 
the mid-18th century, the Roman Church authorized Prospero 
Lambertini, who later became Pope Benedict XIV, to carry 
out a scholarly investigation of reports of psychic events. His 
conclusions, recorded in De Canonizatione [11], were surpris- 
ingly unecclesiastical: namely, that 1) psychic experiences 
were not necessarily divine miracles, but could occur to “fools, 
idiots, melancholy persons, and brute beasts”; 2) apparitions 
had little to do with sanctity or demonic entities; 3) prophesy 
occurs more often in sleep than in waking; 4) it is difficult for 
a prophet to distinguish his own thoughts from extrasensory 
messages; and 5) predictions frequently take.symbolic forms. 
In all of these, he presaged to some degree modern thoughts 
on these topics. 

At roughly the same time, Anton Mesmer’s discovery of hyp- 
nosis opened an alternative route to demonstration and study 
of unconscious psychic process that has continued to this day. 
Early reports of hypnotized subjects performing telepathic or 
clairvoyant tasks were common [12], [13] , and although much 
of this evidence might now be discounted on the basis of in- 
adequate experimental control, interest in hypnosis specifically, 
and in various altered states of consciousness generally, as 
facilitators. of psychic experience persists into some of the 
modern experimentation. 

Also in this mid-18th century period, a spiritualist move- 
ment focused on extrasensory contact with the dead, possibly 
influenced by the work of Emanuel Swedenborg [14], [15], 
germinated in this country as well as in England, and by the 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


v 


138 : 


19th century had reached the dimensions of an organized 
religion. Symbolic of the popular preoccupation with the topic, 
Mary Todd Lincoln was.reported to have held séances in the 
White House in the early 1860’s [16]. A classic two-volume 
work by F.W.H. Myers, entitled Human Personality and the 
Survival of Bodily Death [17], brought the topic to its acme 
of sophistication, but eventually the fanaticism the movement 
attracted and its fraudulent exploitation created a negative 
attitude in the scholarly community which prevails yet today. 

Despite these millennia of human concern with the paranor- 
mal, orderly and organized scholarly search for verification and 
understanding of psychic phenomena began only a century 
ago, with the establishment in London in 1882 of the Society 
for Psychical Research, in whose Proceedings appeared the first 
formal publication of controlled experiments in telepathy and 
clairvoyance [13], [18], [19]. Three years later the counter- 
part organization in this country, the American Society for 
Psychical Research, was founded in Boston by several distin- 
guished scientists and philosophers. Because of financial 
difficulty, this shortly merged with the British group, but re- 
emerged in 1905 as a separate entity with its own professional 
journal, and has continued as such to the present [20]. 

Although the SPR attracted a barrage of criticism from the 
scientific and intellectual communities, it also attracted 
significant participation of eminent scholars from established 
fields. Numbered among its presidents are three Nobel Lau- 
reates, ten Fellows of the Royal Society, one Prime Minister, 
and a substantial list of physicists and philosophers, including 
Henry Sidgwick, Frederic W. H. Myers, Lord Rayleigh, Sir J. J. 
Thomson, William McDougall, Edmund Gurney, Sir William 
Crookes, Sir William Barrett, Henri Bergson, Arthur, Earl of 
Balfour, Gardner Murphy, G.N.M. Tyrell, Charles Richet, 
Gilbert Murray, and one of the most articulate contributors to 
the evolution of critical thought on this topic in this period, 
the Harvard psychologist and philosopher, William James. 
One of the founders of the ASPR, James wrote extensively 
and eloquently on behalf of objective and disciplined study of 
psychic phenomena [21]-[25]: - 

Any one with a healthy sense for evidence, a sense not methodi- 
cally blunted by the sectarianism of ‘science,’ ought now, it 
seems to me, to feel that exalted sensibilities and memories, 
veridical phantasms, haunted houses, trances with supernormal 
faculty, and even experimental thought-transference, are natural 
kinds of (phenomena) which ought, just like other natural events, 
to be followed up with scientific curiosity [25]. 

Entering the 20th century, anew perspective on psychic phe- 
nomena was proyided by the emergence of psychology :as a 
scholarly discipline, and especially by the early efforts in clinical 
psychology and psychoanalytic therapy. The patriarch of this 
evolution, Sigmund Freud, was a member of the SPR and con- 
tributed, albeit somewhat reluctantly, to its publications {26], 
[27]. His recognition and exploration of the unconscious 
mind and of the function of dreams prompted Myers to suggest 
a possible explication of various psychic effects which is still 
of theoretical value [17]. Freud’s interest in parapsychology 
increased toward the end of his life, and he is reported to have 
conceded informally that were he to begin his career anew, he 
would focus on this topic. 2 

Freud’s former protegé, Carl Jung, who had written his Ph.D. 
thesis on the psychology of occult phenomena, pursued ex- 
ploration of the unconscious to deeper dimensions of para- 
normal experience, publishing widely on such subjects as telep- 
athy, mediumship, synchronicity, the collective unconscious, 
and theoretical models of psychic process [28]-[30]. In 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL, 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


Memories, Dreams, Reflections, he stated: 
...the relationship between doctor and patient, especially 

when a transference on the part of the patient occurs, or a more 

or less unconscious identification of doctor and patient, can lead 

to parapsychological phenomena. I have frequently run into this 

[30]. 
Jung’s collaboration with the eminent physicist Wolfgang Pauli 
on the topic of synchronicity clearly influenced the subsequent 
evolution of both careers and of fundamental concepts in both 
disciplines [31]. Although much of the established psychologi- 
cal community has since rejected parapsychology as a valid 
discipline, some interest has been retained by a few clinical 
practitioners, presumably because of the demonstrated con- 
comitance and similarities of apparent psychic experiences 
with certain psychological processes [32], [33]. 

It was also early in this century that the first organized 
academic studies of psychic phenomena were mounted. One 
of the more visible of these devolved from gifts and a bequest 
from Thomas W. Stanford, brother of the founder of Stanford 
University, to endow psychic research at that institution, and 
to this day the university provides support of a “psychic research 
fellow” and retains a collection of so-called “‘apports” indicative 
of the donor’s long personal involvement with the field. Modest 
research programs were also undertaken at Harvard and a few 
European universities in the first decades of this century, as 
evidenced by occasional publications in various established 
journals, 

The benchmark academic effort, however, germinated at 
Duke University in the late 1920’s, when William Mc Dougall, 
who had been James’ successor at Harvard, arrived to chair the 
department of psychology and appointed J. B. Rhine and 
Louisa Rhine, “to study the claims to scientific value of the 
field known as psychical research.” Their early tentative 
efforts in the study of postmortem survival gradually evolved 
into a laboratory for controlled research in “extrasensory per- 
ception,” as they first termed the process. In this laboratory 
were established many of the basic concepts and protocols of 
modern psychic research, as well as the first extensive and sys- 
tematic data bases of several types of psychic experimentation. 
The professional and personal history of the Rhines and their 
laboratory is a fascinating saga in its own right, but would take 
us too far afield here [34]-[37]. A few excerpts from a 1967 
address of J. B. Rhine to the American Psychological Associa- 
tion, in which he attempted to summarize his first two decades 
of intensive study, give hint of the inherent attractions and 
frustrations of this field, and of the man’s optimistic vision: 

The phenomena that were being studied began to show lawful 
interrelations and even a degree of unity. One by one the major 
claims, based originally only upon spontaneous human experi- 
ences, were subjected to laboratory test and experimentally veri- 

- fied.... Certain general characteristics of the psi process became 
clear during this period. The most revealing of these is the sub- 
ject’s lack of conscious control over any type of psi ability, a 
characteristic which accounts for its elusive nature. It was new 
methodological ground, even for psychology. ... Also, we were 
surprised to find that psi ability is widespread, probably even a 
specific human capacity rather than a capability possessed by a 
few rare individuals as had been the popular belief. Evidence 
that psi is not linked with illness or abnormality was another 
welcome advance.... By 1951...a healthy young science was 
emerging [38]. 

In 1937, the Rhines began publication of the Journal oj 
Parapsychology, which remains a leading journal in the field 
today. A professional organization calling itself the Parapsy 
chological Association was formed in 1957, and in 1969 was 


_Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


1 
a Pa 


JAHN: PSYCHIC pAppPOMe dvEe@rcRelease 2090/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6:139 


accepted as an affiliate by the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. 

At the present time, there are eight English language publica- 
tions covering this field [39], supplemented by numerous less 
formal magazines and countless books of widely varying quality 
and relevance. Research activity is reported from some twenty 
U.S. universities and colleges and at least as many institutions 
in Western Europe [40], but in most cases it is of very small 
scale. There are very few academic programs of study, although 
some fifty M.A. and Ph.D. theses have been accepted on psychic 
topics at reputable universities over the past forty years [41]. 
Some ten research institutes and private corporations in the 
United States have also authorized publications and reports in 
the field [42]. The extent of Eastern Bloc and Oriental efforts 
(43]-[54] and of classified research in this country are matters 
of considerable speculation on which I cannot comment with 
authority. : 

Further review of contemporary programs will be attempted 
in subsequent sections, following an outline of modern nomen- 
clature and conceptual organization of the topic. In closing this 
historical overview, we might simply observe that in many re- 
spects the growth pattern of this field resembles that of the 
natural sciences in their earliest days, or perhaps even more 
the incubation of classical psychology, in terms of the ab- 
sence of replicable basic experiments and useful theoretical 
models, the low level of financial support and internal profes- 
sional coordination, and the low credibility in the academic 
establishment and public sectors. Also like those fields, the 
survival and early growth of psychic research can largely be 
attributed to the efforts of a few scholars of sufficient convic- 
tion, stature, and courage to withstand the rejection of the 
orthodox communities. 


NOMENCLATURE AND CONCEPTUAL ORGANIZATION 


Before turning to an assessment of contemporary research, 
it may be useful to specify some notation and delineation of 
the field, to an extent consistent with the present limited 
comprehension of the phenomena. First, let us agree to a 
global definition of “psychic phenomena” (frequently denoted 
by “psi” or “wW’’) to include all processes of information and/or 
energy exchange which involve animate consciousness in a 
manner not currently explicable in terms of known science. 
Similarly, let “‘psychic research” imply any scholarly study of 
such phenomena employing scientific methodology, as opposed 
to any dogmatic, ritualistic, or theological approaches. Within 
these definitions, the field may then be roughly divided into 
two major categories: extrasensory perception (ESP) and 
psychokinesis (PK). 

ESP refers generally to the acquisition of information from 
sources blocked from ordinary perception. Under this category 
are included such subdivisions as telepathy, which refers to 
detection of another person’s thoughts; clairvoyance, which 
refers to contemporary perception of remote physical objects 
or events; precognition and retrocognition, which refer to 
perception of future events and events in the past not accessible 
by normal recollection; and animal ESP, which encompasses a 
variety of seemingly inexplicable capabilities, such as homing, 
psi-trailing, collective behavior, communication, etc. 

PK (occasionally termed telekinesis, or psychoenergetics) re- 
fers to a palpable influence of consciousness on a physical or 
biological system. The interaction may be deliberate or spon- 
taneous, and the energy transfer involved may range from 
Microscopic disturbance of atomic-level processes, through 


macroscopic distortion or levitation of objects, up to some 
very drastic “poltergeist” effects. Psychic healing and man- 
plant interactions would be two examples of PK in biological 
systems. 

Note that in its major subdivision into ESP and PK, the field 
conforms to two of the main categories of present-day science 
and high technology, i.e., that encompassing the extraction, con- 
version, transmission, storage, and utilization of information, 
and that comprising the same sequence of processing of energy. 
Other domains of psychic research can be identified which do 
not fit into these major categories of ESP and PK and with which 
we shall not be further concerned in this article. Examples 
would include research into survival of death, and the family 
of “out-of-body experiences (OBE),” including astral projec- 
tion, autoscopy, and bilocation. The following table attempts 
to summarize the subdivisions in a concise form. 


Categories of Psychic Phenomena 


I. Extrasensory Perception (ESP) 
A. Telepathy 
B. Clairvoyance 
C. Precognition/Retrocognition 
D. Animal ESP 

II. Psychokinesis (PK) 

’ A. Physical Systems 

B. Biological Systems 

Ill, Survival 
A. Reincarnation 
B. Apparitions 
C. Mediumship 

IV. QOut-of-Body Experiences (OBE). 


Clearly this particular arrangement is neither unique nor 
orthogonal. Elements of one category frequently appear in 
the context of another, e.g., precognitive clairvoyance, tele- 
pathic healing, etc., and occasionally an assignment is ambigu- 
ous, ¢.g., a patticular effect may be regarded as precipitated 
by PK, or simply to be forecast by precognition. Notwith- 
standing, the table may aid in keeping the subsequent illustra- 
tions in some order. 


PATTERN OF CONTEMPORARY RESEARCH 


By its nature and heritage, modern psychic research remains 
rather diffuse and lightly structured, making any attempt to 
catalog the work by institution or laboratory, or by tracing 
developments of given lines of effort, rather ineffective and pre- 
mature. Instead, it may be more useful to comment on the 
pattern of attention to this field by academic disciplines, noting 
the variations in emphasis, methodology, representation, and 
interpretation brought to bear, using specific projects only as 
illustrations with no implications of hierarchy or attempt at 
completeness. Even in this format, no recitation of specific 
research results or conclusions will be attempted, since these 
can be misleading or incomprehensible when extracted from 
the detailed context of their experimental arrangements and 
protocols. In later sections, an effort will be made to follow a 
few sample experiments through to their particular results and 
conclusions. 

By far the most sustained and broadcast attention to this 


field has been given by a cadre of scholars with professional 


backgrounds in classical psychology, comprising a controversial 
subdiscipline termed “parapsychology.” This group has tended 
to approach the field with the traditional psychological proto- 
cols and vocabulary, and to interpret results in the context of © 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R0011 00010004-6 


140 


their clinical, cognitive, and behavioral psychological heritages, 
with the natural consequence that they have concentrated 
mainly on the ESP category of psychic tasks, although some 
PK work dots their recent literature. Perhaps the most exten- 
sive class of parapsychological research has attempted to 
correlate psychic performance with personality variables. The 
age, sex, creativity, openness, hostility, extroversion, motiva- 
tion, and intelligence of the participants as indices of ability to 
perform ESP tasks have been explored at length, and some sig- 
nificant correlations, most notably with positive @ priori atti- 
tudes toward the tasks and with outgoing, creative personalities, 
have been reported from several laboratories. Other studies 
have searched for connections between psychic performance 
and dream recall, learning and response strategies, memory, 
and feedback (55]-[61]. 

A more aggressive style of parapsychological research has in- 
voked a variety of altered states of consciousness in attempts 
to enhance psychic process. These have included various natu- 
ral and traditional practices, such as sleep, meditation, and pro- 
gressive relaxation [62}]-[67]; more mechanical sensory in- 
hibition strategies such as hypnosis, isolation and “ganzfeld” 
[66], [68]-[70]; and a few controversial efforts with drug- 
induced states [71]. Physiological correlates have also been 
sought, using conventional EEG, GSR, and plethysmographic 
equipment to monitor neurological, cardiovascular, and mus- 
cular response to psythic effort [35], [72]-[75]. The diffi- 
culty of obtaining successful replications of previously positive 
results and an observed common tendency of participant per- 
formance to deteriorate over time (“‘decline effect”) have led 
to systematic study of the role of the experimenter in eliciting 
results, i.e., to consideration of the possible influence of the 
experimenter’s personal attitudes, expectations, and style of 
interaction with his subjects, as well as the overall environmental 
ambience of his laboratory, on the experimental yield [76]- 
{81}. : 

Despite its present recalcitrance toward more systematic 
study of psychic phenomena, the richly diverse, rapidly matur- 
ing parent field of psychology continues to offer an expanding 
array of modern methodologies and models which could be 
brought to bear on increasingly sophisticated study of this sub- 
ject. Computer-assisted linguistic analyses; psychoneurological 
studies of attention, perception, and concept formation, social 
learning theory and similar approaches to human interactions; 
and the emerging formulations of transpersonal and humanistic 
aspects of human consciousness, all bear possible relevance to 
comprehension of various aspects of this ultra-difficult step- 
child, but at the moment, the low level of financial support, 
and negative professional peer pressures have discouraged such 
enterprise. . 

The involvement of physicists in psychic research, while con- 
siderably less extensive, has been no less dedicated and no less 
controversial. Since the days of Sir Francis Bacon, a number 
of noted physicists have made excursions into this field, 
usually to the bemusement and ridicule of their colleagues of 
the day. One of the most notable of these was Sir William 
Crookes, discoverer of the element thallium and pioneer in 
the physics of low pressure discharges, whose broadside pro- 
fessional and personal battles with the scientific establishment 
over this issue make entertaining, and possibly enlightening, 
reading [82]. Sir Isaac Newton was intensely involved in the 
study of alchemy, including some of its more metaphysical 
aspects [83], and as already mentioned, Lord Rayleigh and 
J. J. Thomson were active members of the S.P.R. 


ap Re 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


In more recent years the attention of physicists has influenced 
development of the field in at least three ways. First, their in- 
terests have focused more on the PK category of problems, i.e., 
the interaction of human consciousness with physical systems, 
to balance the predominant ESP interests of the parapsycholo- 
gists. Second, more sophisticated experimental equipment 
than has typically been available to the psychological com- 
munity has been brought to bear on the identification and 
correlation of very low-level physical effects. Third, the tradi- 
tional theoretical physics formalisms have been directed to the 
proposition of various models of psychic phenomena, from 
whence has arisen some hope of establishing the traditional 
dialogue between critical experimentation and theoretical 
hypothesis essential to any ultimate comprehension and appli- 
cation of such phenomena. 

Typical of the modern physicist’s specific contributions to 
the field have been the development and application ofa variety 
of electronic random event generators (REG) for the purpose 
of identifying and correlating PK abilities in human subjects 
{84]-[93], and similar application of magnetometers [94], 
torsional pendula [95], lasers [96], interferometers [97 J, and 
electronic strain gauges [98], [99] to a variety of other PK 
tasks. On the theoretical side, a number of applications of quan- 
tum mechanics, statistical thermodynamics, electromagnetic 
theory, and other formalisms to the representation of psychic 
process have been proposed {100]-[113], and attempts at 
some philosophical correlation of the phenomena with other 
previously or presently obscure physical processes have been 
suggested [114]. Again, despite the open identification of 
a few distinguished personalities with such efforts, a more 
broadly held categorical rejection of the field has inhibited 
much collaborative or systematic attention to it. 

Up to this time, the involvement of engineers with psychic 
research has been very recent, very sparse, and very much along 
the lines of the experimental physicists. Beyond our own 
program, which will be outlined in some detail below, I am 
aware of only a very few engineering laboratories addressing 
any aspects of the field in any substantial and deliberate way 
[115]. These have so far tended to concentrate on applied 
physics types of experimentation and on aspects of informa- 
tion processing, rather than on more empirical technological 
applications. 

Another community of scholars to influence the pattern of 
psychic research comprises the statisticians and other applied 
mathematicians and logicians who have been concerned with 
the proper evaluation and interpretation of the research data. 
In the absence of any experiments displaying rigid causal 
replicability, all of the inferences and hypotheses about psy- 
chic phenomena have necessarily been based on either anec 
dotal or statistical evidence. The former defy any systematic 
representation, the latter are vulnerable to alternative inter 
pretations and hence to impressionistic bias and argument. 

Early in the emergence of mathematical statistics as ar 
integral discipline, S. 8. Wilks found himself involved:in ¢ 
controversy over the validity of the statistical procedures o 
early psychic researchers, and published some recommenda 
tions for methods that could be applied to telepathy experi 
ments [116]. Since that time, much of the commentary fron 
the critical community has addressed perceived flaws in th: 
statistical methodology underlying the experimental evidenc: 
[117], [118], and the advocate community has reacted b: 
paying disproportionate attention to this aspect of their logic 
Most of the encyclopaedic references in the field contai: 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


/ 


JAHN: Psy CHICAMD PHONE AGI eteasesPO0 0108/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 14 


substantial components on the statistical methods [119], 


and the leading journals regularly display intense dialogues on — 


specific statistical issues [120]-[124]. At least one of these 
journals routinely refers all articles submitted for publication to 
a consultant statistician as a part of their review process. A 
few illustrations of the statistical questions that can arise in 
psychic experiments appear in the detailed examples presented 
below. 

A number of other disciplines have played roles in the evolu- 
tion of the study of psychic process and continue to contribute, 
albeit somewhat more peripherally. A succession of philoso- 
phers, from Aristotle through James and Bergson to C. D. Broad 
in the present era, have mused on these topics [21]-[25], 
{125]-[129]. The intersections of the field with anthropology, 
theology, and history have been approached from many per- 
spectives ranging from aesthetic to analytic, and from dogmatic 
to scholarly [130]-[134]. Its relevance to the study and 
practice of medicine has been an enduring and intense debate, 
focusing in the present day on the propriety and efficacy of 
holistic health strategies and psychic healing. Isolated instances 
of interest on the part of chemists, biologists, geologists, and 
archaeologists can be found, and the application of psychic 
techniques in criminology and law enforcement, while less 
rigorous than most of the academic efforts, contributes further 
anecdotal evidence to the overall data base. In the arts and 
humanities, the topic continues to provide stimuli for a variety 
of creative compositions. 

Still other areas could be cited, but these become progressively 
more satellite than central to the task of this paper. Rather 
than pursuing this disciplinary survey further, it seems prefer- 
able next to focus in greater detail on a few contemporary 
studies that can serve to illustrate more specifically the bizarre 
phenomena, the awkward and tedious protocols, and the un- 
conventional theoretical concepts that arise in this class of 
research. Although these will provide a better sense of the 
status of the field than any attempt to summarize results from 
the diffuse multidisciplinary pattern of effort sketched above, 
one general assessment may be useful at this point. Namely, 
throughout all of the work just skimmed, and that sharpened 
somewhat below, I am aware of no reputable investigator who 
has claimed, let alone demonstrated, any psychic experiment 
approaching classical scientific replicability. What have been 
put forward are a varied assortment of observations, currently 
inexplicable in terms of established science, which display cer- 
tain common phenomenological and psychological features, 
and which could have substantial implications for basic physical 
theory and ultimate practical applications. The following ex- 
amples are presented in that spirit. 


PSYCHOKINESIS 


The first group of experiments selected as more detailed illus- 
trations of contemporary psychic research are drawn from the 
general subdomain of PK. As defined above, this broad cate- 
gory of purported psychic phenomena encompasses the possible 
influence of human consciousness on the behavior of physical 
or biological systems or processes, and comprises several loosely 
related classes of effect characterized by different scales of 
energy, forms of manifestation, replicability, and statistical be- 
havior. Confining attention to interactions with physical objects 
or systems, the most popularly publicized class features the de- 
formation, levitation, or other macroscopic disturbance of ob- 
jects, as commonly propounded by professional performers, 
mediums, and various Eastern practitioners [135]-[137]. Al- 


though a number of serious efforts have been made to submit 
such demonstrations to rigorous scientific testing, these have 
tended to yield only equivocal confirmations, fodder for the 
critical community, and some embarrassment and frustration 
to the investigators. 

Of a yet more bizarre nature are the family of very rare and 
spectacular “poltergeist” effects, more technically termed 
“recurrent spontaneous psychokinesis”” (RSPK), wherein are 
reported specific major events of levitation, vibration, telepor- 
tation, and breakage of a wide range of objects, a variety of 
acoustical and electromagnetic phenomena, and various optical 
aberrations [138], [139]. For years these phenomena were 
naively attributed to manifestations of the spirit world, or return 
of the dead to “haunted”’ houses, and inspired countless horror 
movies and pulp-magazine articles. Recently, some order has 
been brought to this weird business by systematic surveys of 
documented poltergeist cases undertaken by A.R.G. Owen, 
W. G. Roll, J. G. Pratt, and others [138]-[142]. In one of 
these surveys, 116 cases of reported poltergeist activity, rang- 
ing back to the year 1612, were re-examined. Of these, 92 
were found to be associated with particular individuals living 
in the affected dwelling, most of whom were adolescents, and 
most of whom were affected by some ‘neurological/emotional 
ailment, most commonly epilepsy. Often a precipitating 
traumatic event could be identified which seemed to initiate 
the activity, after which the general pattern involved a period 
of relatively mild precursor events, a sequence of major dis- 


_ turbances, and a period of “after shocks,” extending as much 


as several weeks beyond the main events. Controlled experimen- 
tation on poltergeist phenomena has proven virtually impossible 
because of their infrequent and unpredictable occurrence 
pattern and because of the delicate physiological and emotional 
situations prevailing in most cases, which have taken precedence 
over the technical investigations. Nevertheless, these processes 
have retained some fascination because of the magnitude of 
the energy transfer involved and because of their apparent 
correlation with specific types of individuals and neurological 
disorders. 

The most systematic and persuasive studies of PK, however, 
have dealt with much more modest scales of physical distur- 
bance, in some cases reaching down to the atomic level. This 
somewhat more viable domain has been addressed by numerous 
investigators in various ways, but basically one of two strategies 
is followed. In one approach, relatively simple physical systems 
are employed—mechanical, electrical, optical, thermal, etc.,— 
each of which involves a particular component or process that 
is ultra-sensitive to disturbance. The experiment is arranged to 
signify such disturbance by a relatively large change in some dis- 
play which provides feedback indication to the operator, much 
in the spirit of a biofeedback instrument, and simultaneously to 
provide some form of permanent data record. Examples of this 
class of experiment would include the use of magnetometers, 
torsional pendula, optical interferometers, electronic strain 
gauges, glow discharges [143], and sensitive thermistors [144]. 

In the second approach, attempt is made to distort the nor- 
mal statistical patterns of various random physical processes on 
either a microscopic or macroscopic scale. In a sense, these ex- 
periments deal with energy rearrangement within the systems, 
i.e., with their information content or entropy, rather than with 
energy transfer to the system per se. The earliest versions of 
this class employed dice, or other simple mechanical implements 
of well-known statistical behavior [37], [92], [145]-[148], 
but more recent studies have tended to employ more sophisti- 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


ty ie en rac it 


_ (Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6. 


142 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO..2, FEBRUARY 1982 


FABRY PEROT ETALON 
fA 


| MOVING 
PLATE | 


FRINGES ON SCREEN 


PHOTO 
LL MULTIPLIER 


REFLECTIVE 
COATINGS 


RAMP DRIVE 


SCREEN 


CHART RECORDER 


Fig. 1. Photograph and schematic of Fabry-Perot interferometer. 


cated apparatus, such as electronic REG’s like those described 
in detail below. 

Although the first two categories of PK feature more dramatic 
effects and thus have enjoyed greater popular attention, the 
smaller scale phenomena seem more amenable to controlled 
experimentation and theoretical interpretation, and the re- 
mainder of this section deals only with such. Perhaps the most 
efficient means of elaborating on this type of research would be 
to review briefly the spectrum of such experiments in progress 
in our own laboratory, and then to display and attempt to 
interpret data from one of them. In so doing, we intend no 
neglect of other work noted in the references, but simply deal 
from greater familiarity. 

As examples of the first class of low-level PK experiment 
mentioned above, we have in operation a Fabry-Perot optical 
interferometer, a dual-thermistor bridge, and a photoelastic 
strain detector. In the interferometer experiment, shown in 
the photograph and schematic of Fig. 1, a Coherent Optics 
Instrument #360-370, using a diffuse sodium lamp as source, 
is adjusted to produce circular fringes on a screen visible to the 
operator (Fig. 2). Small changes in the separation of the inter- 
ferometer plates cause the fringes to migrate radially inward or 
outward. By visual observation of the fringe movement, plate 
motions of less than 0.1 wavelength can be readily detected. 
Via a pinhole in the screen, the brightness of the central fringe 
is recorded by a photomultiplier/chart recorder system at an 
order of magnitude higher sensitivity, thereby preserving quan- 
titative output data while the operator simultaneously sees an 
attractive optical “handel of his progress for use as feedback. 


the fringe pattern in a stated direction relative to the normal 


baseline drift of the instrument. The protocols involve rigid 
control and monitoring of the environment of the instrument 
and surrounding laboratory, and the interspersing of baseline 
responses with active PK efforts obtained under otherwise 
identical conditions, including the position of the operator and 
any other personnel relative to the instrument. In pilot studies 
with this device, a variety of fractional-fringe responses were 


observed, using several different operators and various initial , 


interferometer settings. A more formal procedure has since 
been developed which provides more precise conditions for 
an ongoing series of trials. In this protocol, the central fringe 
is set initially on a maximum gradient position between a 
bright and dark fringe, and its progress monitored for subse- 
quent periods of baseline or PK effort. Encouragingly repli- 
cable data have been obtained from a number of different 
operators, in the form of chart recordings of 5-min PK trials 
with interspersed 5-min baseline drifts of the instrument. Using 
computerized graphic, regression, and spectral analyses of the 
data, it is possible to discern characteristics in the hierarchy 
of trace derivatives and the Fourier spectra which, while not 
definitive, display certain recurrent features [97]. No physical 
interpretation has been attempted other than to acknowledge 
that the observed fringe migrations could also be indicative 
of slight changes in the index of refraction of the air in the 
plate gap or in the wavelength of the light source, as well as of 
a displacement of the plates. 

The dual-thermistor experiment comprises a much more sen- 
sitive version of a multiple-thermistor arrangement on which 


Ql eagei200G/08/0%r31Cl AER DR IGAGO BBR OO4400 OFO0G4h6 Schmeidler [144]. 


ca 


Fig. 2. Interferometer fringe patterns. 


As shown in Fig. 3, two Omega Engineering thermistors, 
Model UVA 3254, each with its own electronic bridge and volt- 
age source, are connected differentially to a Tektronix 1A7A 
oscilloscope preamplifier and to a visual feedback display. With 
suitable ground planes and cable shielding, sensitivities greater 
than 0.001 K are obtainable, and by subtracting the two output 


_ Signals the major portion of spurious electrical and mechanical 


interference is eliminated. The effects of ambient thermal vari- 
ations in the laboratory are essentially excluded by enclosing 
each of the thermistors in identical Pyrex flasks immersed in 
a large liquid reservoir, in which configuration the undisturbed 
system exhibits stable baselines over long periods of time. 
Using the same interspersed baseline protocol as in the inter- 
ferometer experiment, the task of the operator is to achieve an 
increase in the reading of one thermistor with respect to the 
other or in some more subtle fashion to alter the PK response 
relative to the baseline. Some such effects have indeed been ob- 
served, but little systematic data have so far been accumulated 
on this experiment. : 

Also in a preliminary Stage is an experiment to monitor in- 
ternal strain in a solid specimen via photoelastic optical tech- 


niques. Several studies have been reported on the PK deforma- 


tion of solids, but most of these have employed conventional 
engineering strain gauges or microacoustic sensors as detectors 
[98], [99], [135], [149], [150], both of which require sub- 
Stantial interface electronics before a feedback signal reaches 
the operator, leaving unclear the role of the sensor in any pos- 
sible PK influence.. Although less sensitive than the electronic 
methods, photoelastic techniques have the advantage of relating 
the operator more directly to the sensitive element of the ex- 
Periment via an attractive optical fringe pattern much like that 
of the interferometer (Fig, 4). This equipment and technique 
may also be applied to a sensitive levitation experiment wherein 


; JARI: Sey a eas dM: Release2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 2 


Fig. 3. Dual-thermistor apparatus. 


the object is suspended on a photoelastic lever arm of suitable 
dimensions, 

Within the second category of low-level PK experiment, we 
are employing or are now constructing several devices based on 
random physical processes, some macroscopic in scale, others 
deriving from atomic-scale Processes. The largest of these in- 
volves a 6 X 10 ft apparatus, shown in Fig. 5, which drops some 
‘10 000 3 in spheres through a “quincunx” array of 336 nylon 
pegs in about 12 min. Asa consequence of the multitudinous 
collisions with the pegs and with each other, the spheres are dis- 
persed into a good approximation of a Gaussian distribution 
as they fall into 19 collecting compartments at the bottom. 
The goal of the operator is to distort the distribution in some 
prescribed fashion to a significant degree compared to empirical 
baseline experience. Photodiode counters mounted in funnels 
at the entrance to each bin provide real-time digital displays of 
the bin populations to supplement the more qualitative feedback 
of the growing ball stacks seen by the operator and to provide 
quantitative data for on-line statistical analysis. Fig. 5 shows 
a typical baseline distribution for this device and a distorted 
distribution obtained in a particular PK effort. Full statistical 
analysis of the significance of any particular achieved pattern 
is a challenging problem in its own right, since it must deal 
with a combination of 19 bin populations, each of which has 
its own empirical baseline mean and standard deviation, all 
constrained by total ball count. 

A somewhat similar experiment, not yet refined, employs a 
device which allows small metallic or dielectric spheres to 
bounce on an optically flat, precisely horizontal circular plate 
of glass, which is oscillated by a vibration coil at frequencies 
from 10 Hz to 20 000 Hz. In the absence of any external dis- 
turbance, a sphere started at the center of the plate executes a 
random walk toward the outside edge, arriving with equal prob- 
ability at any azimuth. Since the sphere may make as many as 
108 collisions in the process, it is vulnerable to Statistical distor- 
tion of its trajectory and consequent terminus. The task of the 
operator is preferentially to direct the sphere to a prescribed 
terminal quadrant. 

In an attempt to intervene with a random physical process at 
the atomic level, we have constructed a large glow-discharge 
device whose luminous patterns are indicative of the mean free 
path of the current-carrying electrons against inelastic excita- 
tion collisions with the background gas. This device, shown in 
Fig. 6, presents a 36-in X 2-in diam cylindrical glow marked by. 
a sequence of bright and dark zones along its positive column 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Joe se cece cere LAE Lift: Nepean pute Set nena th Se A MEDEA: ALCL SL . 


, Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


144 


Fig. 4. Photoelastic stress pattern. 


Fig. 6. Glow discharge experiment. 


turn depends on the gas type and density, the electron tempera 

ture, and the local electric field. Striation position is monitore: 

oo ORT ; by photoelectric detectors, and the goal of the operator is te 

Fig. 5. Gaussian analog device and distributions, expand or contract the pattern on demand, to a significan 

- extent compared to the normal background jitter and drift 

typical of dc discharges in a given range of gas pressure and Protocols are much the same, output data take the same ger 

terminal voltage. The number and locations of these striations eral form, and are analyzed by the same algorithms as in th 
are sensitive to the electron inelastic mean free path, whichin interferometer and photoelastic experiments. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


iar 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 .- 


1982 f, 


smpera- 
nitored 
or is to 
nificant 
d drift. 
me gen- 
3 in the 


sprees ee 


é 


JAHN: PAPROVAGMEGL ReleasaeQNOWsiAz : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


ELGENGO 
NOISE 
# 3602 A15124 


145 


PULSE 
GENERATOR 


Fig. 8. REG waveforms: (a) Filtered noise. (b) Clipped noise. 
: (c) Sampling pulses. 


A number of other atomic-scale random system PK experi- 
ments are under consideration, design, or construction, involv- 


ing such processes as information storage on a microelectronic © 


chip, the spontaneous decay of phosphorescent surfaces, lam- 
inar to turbulent transition in a fluid stream, atomic and molec- 
ular resonators, and resonant acoustical or electrical cavities, 
but none of these is far enough advanced to merit description 
here, Rather, we shall concentrate for the remainder of this 
section on a more detailed presentation of our most serviceable 
experiment, and the one on which we have the largest data 
base, the electronic REG. 


RANDOM EVENT GENERATOR EXPERIMENTS 
REG’s have been the most widely used and most productive 
facilities for experimentation with low-level PK. Although a 
broad variety of such devices exist, most involve four conceptu- 
ally and functionally separable components: an electronic noise 
source; a sampling system which examines the noise at pre- 


evra vem omecirtieninear eines ine Oe ae ONE ORR ate, LES Sh 


scribed intervals and prepares an output pulse train correspond- 
ing to the samples thus obtained; a system which analyzes the 
pulse train in accordance with preset instructions and prepares 
suitable output for a feedback system; and the feedback dis- 
play itself, which informs the operator of the results of the 


‘sampling process. 


The particular version we have employed utilizes a packaged 
commercial noise source module based on a solid-state junction 
and precision preamplifier (Elgenco Model 3602A15124), but 
modules employing radioactive decay units or glow discharges 
can be readily substituted. This source produces a random noise 
spectrum up to several megahertz, which our logic circuit first 
filters to a flat spectrum from 50 to 20 000 Hz, then amplifies 
and clips to the flat-topped profile shown in Figs. 7.and 8. This 
is then sampled by a regular train of gate pulses, yielding a cor- 
responding random succession of positive and negative output 
pulses indicative of the sign of the noise at the time of sampling, 
and these are then counted. Since the average time between 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


i ee erin alte mente RRO EEE ARE Lo eee ne 


ae edsas, é odie eee 5 wrk Eats pcesee einai ena ie am RST a ay highs A" 


a Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


146 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO, 2, FEBRUARY 1982 : 
TE pwa L_int__ je“ SSHONAL SELECTOR . @u® [eae - @© ooN = ee 
~,' ‘SAMPLING or to ae = 9 Outpu 
Source es Sqrel CONTROL EVENT COUNTER, O 


Externol Nolse Source | 


+1.0 Volt : 
Slove Display Unit 


pew 

v N CUMULATIVE 

| METER GAT Ou--O UP/DOWN 
COUNTER AND 


D DISPLAY 


SAMPLING | Int joy 


RATE r OQ % . 
GENERATOR 4 
‘ / 5 
Rote iol . 
CD control Ent 
Print Commond 
START — 
SCALE - OF - 50 rey VA 
CONTROL Oo D 
Externat Pulse COUNTER cIRCUIT er a EVENT 
Generotor . Nee [EVENT | 
( Smicro sec. width) (Programmable) Monuol Stort or COUNTER 
Automatic Repect 
START {80 Tes) PRINTER 
O40 COUNTER 
Stort Switches 7 , . 
Reset to 
Printer 
Trial Counter 
Reset Signal 
To Event 
reer a 05} —> [rors } > reman ] 


Fig. 9. Electrical schematic of REG. 


Fig. 10. REG arrangement. 


zero crossings of the clipped noise waveform is about 30 us, counting system may be set to count only positive pulses, only 
sampling rates to about 15 000/s can be tolerated with statis- negative pulses, or to alternate positive and negative counting 
tical independence. on successive samples. The alternating positive/negative mode 

The full functional array is sketched in Fig. 9, and a photo- effectively factors out any systematic bias in the noise source, 
graph of the boxed units in Fig. 10. By panel setting the and is the mode employed in all the experiments reported here. 
sampler may be instructed to take “trials” of 100, 200, or 2000 The counting results are displayed by LED arrays tracking both 
samples, at a frequency of 1, 10, 100, 1000, or 10 000/s. The the running count of each trial and the concurrent mean rela- 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


only 
iting 
rode 
Arce, 
lere. 
both 
rela- 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


JAHN: PSYCHIC PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


TABLE I 
REG 200-SAmMPLE DaTA SUMMARY 


SSS 


No. Std. 
Series Instr. Trials Mean Dev. t-score P; n,/n_ 
eee 
REGI B.L. 12 000 100.009 6.994 0.144 0.443 5678/5611 
PK* 4550 100.264 7.037 2.528 0.006 2230/2056 
PK 3 850 99.509 7.063 -4,313 103 1716/1926 
A PK 8 400 4.890 5x 107 

REG II B.L. 2 500 100.033 6.875 0.239 0.406 1188/1179 
PKt 1950 100.247 6.849 1.590 0.056 916/919 
PK~ 1 800 99.597 6.775 ~ 2.526 0.006 797/902 
APK 3 750 2.920 0.002 

REG III B.L. 3 500 99.977 7.013 -0.193 0.424 1658/1655 
PK* 2 400 100.227 6.821 1.634 0.051 1150/1086 
PK~ 2 600 99.736 7.026 -1.918 0.028 1192/1270 
APK 5 000 2.507 0.006 


147 


DREGI B.L. 18 000 100.006 6.981 0.115 0.454 8524/8445 
Il PKt 8 900 100.250 6.938 3.403 3x 1074 4296/4061 
I PK~ 8 250 99.600 6.989 ~ 5,203 1077 3705/4098 
APK 17 150 6.107 5 x 107% 
ep rere 
REG Ila no B.L. : 
PK* 2150 100.206 7.091 1.340 0.088 1059/993 
PK7 2 100 99.945 6.937 -0.365 0.358 954/1019 
APK 4250 1.213 0.113 
REG Ila B.L. 5 000 100.186 6.974 1.882 0.030 2367/2337 
PK* 2 000 100.117 7.041 0.746 0.228 955/950 
PK" 1750 99.941 6.898 -0.360 0.359 803/839 
A PK 3750 0.772 0.220 
DREGI B.L. 23 000 100.045 6.980 0.978 0.164 10891/10782 
la 
ul Pk* 13 050 100.223 6.979 3.644 10-4 6310/6004 
Ila 
lll PK- 12 100 99.709 6.968 - 4.596 2x 1076 5462/5956 
4 PK 25 150 5.828 3x 1079 


eee 


tive to a preset origin and are permanently recorded on a strip 
printer. For most of the experiments described below, an AIM- 
65 microprocessor interface is also utilized to insert the trial- 
count data on-line into processing routines supported by a 
TERAK Model 8510 used as a terminal and PDP 11/45 and 
VAX 750 employing a UNIX operating system programmed in 
C language. All of the sampling, counting, and display functions 
can be simply checked by referring them to an internal or ex- 
ternal calibrated pulse train generator. : ; 

The device also has a manual/automatic option, whereby it 
will either collect its trial samples only when a panel switch 
or parallel remote switch is pushed, or it will repeat that process 
for 50 trials automatically once activated by the switch. The 
operator thus has the option of triggering each trial or of 
initiating a repetitive flow of 50 such trials with no further 
intervention. 

The experiments reported here were performed by a single 
operator, seated in front of the device with the remote initia- 
tion switch in hand and the LED count indicators and TERAK 
terminal display visible. This operator attempted, on instruc- 
tion or volition, to distort the trial counts either toward higher 
or lower values. The several options of sampling number, sam- 
pling frequency, +/- polarity, and manual/automatic sequenc- 
ing were variously determined by random instruction, operator 
preference, or experimental practicality, and recorded before 
the beginning of each trial. Clearly, the full matrix of such pos- 
sibilities could not be explored, and for our first sequence of 


experiments only 200-sample trials were used, at 100 or 1000 
counts/s, all counted in the +/- alternating mode. The auto- 
matic/manual and high/low options were more thoroughly 
tested, in both the volitional and instructed choice modes. 

Fifty trials of the 200-sample units comprised a test run, and 
data from these were processed individually and in many: concat- 
enations via a statistics package in the UNIX system developed 
specifically for this task. Calculated were the mean, standard 
deviation, range, kurtosis, skew coefficient, z-score, f-score, 
X? goodness-of-fit with both 8 and 16 degrees of freedom, and 
the corresponding one-tailed probabilities against chance of the 
last four measures. Applied to earlier and ongoing baseline 
data, this analysis confirmed that in undisturbed operation this 
REG conforms very well to a Gaussian approximation to the 
appropriate full binary statistics. 

The major portion of the results listed below comprised three 
separate experimental series, extending over fifteen months, 
labeled REG I, REG II, and REG II, respectively. All other 
data acquired under slightly less formal conditions of protocol 
during this period, included for completeness, are grauped 
under two other series, labeled REG Ia and Ila, respectively. 
Details of these series protocols, calibration tests, and their in- 
dividual results are available in the reference [93]. All told, 
over 25 000 active PK trials were obtained, corresponding to 
more than 5 000 000 binary events. 

Table I summarizes all of the baseline and PK data acquired 
during these five experimental series. A total of 23 000 base- 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Co ee ee ee ee ee 2 ee 


_ Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


148 


% OF TOTAL TRIALS 


60 80 100 120 {40 
COUNT 


Fig. 11. REG 200-sample baseline data on theory. 


@ PK* (n=13050) 
© PK (n #12100) 


% OF TOTAL TRIALS 
Bb 


) aa tt 
60 80 100 120 140 
COUNT 


Fig. 12, REG PK* and PK™ 200-sample data on theory. 


“% OF TOTAL TRIALS 
a 


%o 80 100 120 140 
COUNT 


Fig. 13. REG PK* and PK™~ 200-sample data fitted curves. 


line trials were taken under a variety of conditions before, 


during, and after the active PK trials. Their overall mean was - 


100.045, and their standard deviation 6.980, compared with 
the values of 100.000 and 7.071 predicted by the theoretical 
Gaussian approximation to the appropriate binary statistical 
distribution. As shown in Fig. 11, the frequency of count dis- 
tribution conformed very well with the theoretical curve. 

The results of the PK trials are also presented in Table I and 
in Figs. 12 and 13. Briefly, the 13 050 high-instruction trials, 


denoted PK”, yielded a mean of 100.23 and a standard devia- - 
tion of 6.979; the 12 100 low-instruction trials, denoted PK’, . 


yielded a mean of 99.704 and a standard deviation of 6.968. 
The one-tailed probability of chance occurrence of the former, 
computed from t-score, is about 107*; of the latter, about 
2X 107°. The combined probability of the split, i.e., of this 
total ‘“‘direction-of-effort” success, denoted APK, is about 3 X 
107°. ( A number of more elaborate statistical measures have 
been applied to these data; the results are not qualitatively 
changed thereby.) 

As is evident from Figs. 12 and 13, and as is verified by the 


2000, 4000 6000. 8000 


NUMBER OF TRIALS 
Fig. 14. REG cumulative deviations of PK* and PK~ 200-sample data. 


0000 =12000 = 14000 


CUMULATIVE DEVIATION 


NUMBER OF PAIRS OF TRIALS 


Fig. 15. REG cumulative deviations in direction of effort of all 200- ~ 


sample data. 


CUMULATIVE 
AVERAGE DEVIATION 


a) 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 
NUMBER OF TRIALS 


Fig. 16. REG cumulative average deviations of PK* and PK ~ 200-sample 
, _ data, 


more detailed statistical tests performed, no significant distor- 
tion of the frequency-of-count distributions other than the 
shifting of the means has occurred. In other words, the ob- 
served effect is to shift the total distributions intact, rather 
than to distort any of their higher moments significantly. This 


result clearly has felicitous implications for this class of experi- .. 


mentation, since it allows much simpler and faster data collec- 
tion and analysis than might otherwise have been anticipated. 
It is illustrative to exhibit the overall data behavior via graphs 
of the cumulative deviation of the trial score means versus the 
accumulated data base. Fig. 14 shows such a representation 
for the total data pool plotting PK*, PK™, and baseline data 
with reference to cumulative 0.05 confidence levels. Fig. 15 


uses a similar representation for compounding the PK* and PK™ 4 


data in a “direction of effort” cumulative deviation. (Had REG 
Ja and Ila been excluded from these data, the overall slopes 
would have been slightly more severe and uniform.) 
Alternatively, the cumulative data may be presented in terms 
of the progressions of the average deviations from the theoreti- 
cal mean, as shown in Fig. 16, where the stochastic variations 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


i 
j 
< 
z 
i 


a 


ro 


oO 


tl 


32 


200- 


ample 


istor- 
n the 
e ob- 
rather 
This 
xperi- 
sollec- 
tted. 
sraphs 
us the 
tation 
e data 
‘ig. 15 
id PK™ 
dREG 
slopes 


i terms 
1eoreti- 
jations 


terminal values after several thousand trials. 

The PK* and PK” effects also manifest themselves in terms 
of the number of trial means recorded above and below the 
theoretical value. As displayed in Table I, PK* efforts were 
generally characterized by an excess of trial means above 
100.00 and PK™ efforts by an excess below. The total con- 
catenations in these terms are significant at a level of 0.003 
for PK* and 3 X10°° for PK’. 

The ensemble of results acquired in these experiments dis- 
play certain instructive general features: 

1) The importance of accumulating very large data bases 
when dealing with such marginal phenoma is emphasized by 
the relative scales of the statistical vagaries and the broader 
systematic trends in Figs. 14-16. Although the trends are 
established early in the data collection sequence, unambigu- 
ous departures from the accumulated vagaries of chance be- 
havior occur only well into the total 25 000 trial, 5 000 000 
bit, sequence. : 

2) Over this large a data base, there arises some quantitative 
statistical regularity in the PK process, epitomized by the mean 
slopes of the cumulative deviations in Figs. 14 and 15 and by 
the terminal values of the average deviations in Fig. 16. Traced 
back to the elemental binary samples, these values imply direc- 
ted inversions from chance behavior of about one or one and a 
half bits in every one thousand or, alternatively, of 0.2 or 0.3 
bits per trial. 

3) The differences between the somewhat larger values for 
the PK~ deviation and the lesser values for PK* are only mar- 
ginally significant on this data base, but prevail rather uniformly 
throughout all the test series. The suspicion that these reflect 
some subtle bias in the REG itself is not supported by the base- 
line data, which concatenate to a grand mean very slightly 
above the theoretical value. ; 

One of the primary goals of such controlled PK studies at 
this early phase in the understanding of the phenomena is to 
develop experiments of sufficient yield and replicability that 
various parametric correlations may be systematically explored, 
thereby hopefully separating the consequential from the incon- 
sequential factors. The experiments outlined above hold some 
promise of serviceability for this purpose, but a great deal of 
data will need be accumulated to establish any such correla- 
tions. Four classes of parameters could be considered: those 
associated with the experimental equipment; those associated 
with the operator’s physiological and emotional characteristics; 
those associated with the operator’s technique; and various en- 
vironmental factors not directly associated with either. So far 
we have accumulated only small amounts of data from other 
operators, and given the general indication #1 above regarding 
the importance of large data bases, we can make no statement 
about the generality or peculiarity of our principal operator’s 
performance. Similarly, we have attempted no systematic vari- 
ation of external environmental factors, and although test times, 
dates, durations, and laboratory temperature, pressure, and 
humidity have been routinely recorded, we cannot comment 
on the importance of this category of parameter. 

On the matter of operator technique, it should first be re- 
emphasized that the sole formal difference between the PK* 
and PK™-trials is the specified intention of the operator to in- 
fluence the device to generate numbers in the assigned direction. 
No other variation in protocol is permitted, save those subjec- 
tive differences in psychological attitude the operator chooses 
to invoke. Although no records of such aspects were kept, 


SAHIN: ‘rev AP RFOVE FOMRGIEARE 2ngoinio 7: 


of the small data bases are seen to damp out to well-defined 


CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 149 


this operator, who claimed no special talent for this or any 
other psychic task, reported that any conscious variations in 
psychological strategy, such as focus of visual attention, or 
intensity of concentration or desire, did not appear to have 
any evident effect on the yield. Similarly, differences in the 
laboratory ambience, such as the lighting level, background 
noise, or peripheral presence of other persons, did not seem 
to influence this operator’s performance. When queried about 
any impressionistic sense of the interaction process, the opera- 
tor alluded to a “resonance or identification with the system, 
leading to a loss of self-awareness similar to that experienced 
in a game, a movie, or some creative occupation.” Clearly this 
class of parameter will be the most difficult to specify and cor- 
relate, and we are far from any definition of its mechanisms. 

With respect to experimental options on the equipment pa- 
rameters, we can make very limited explorations. with the 
acquired data base. Briefly, binary correlations of the data for 
the 100/1000 counting rate option, for the volitional /instructed 
direction of effort, and for automatic/manual sampling give 
little indication of importance of such factors in the overall 
performance. Each category shows clear and significant separa- 
tion of the means for the PK* and PK” efforts, with little to 
choose between the t-scores for the various categories. Thus, 
at least for the data base at hand, the process stems insensitive 
to these particular experimental parameters. 

We have also attempted correlation in terms of the trial- 
number sequence. With cognizance of the ubiquitous ‘“de- 
cline effect” which is reported over a broad range of psychic 
experimentation, we have prepared an algorithm which cross- 
concatenates from the data base all scores achieved on. the 
first trials of the experimental run, all achieved on the second 
trials, etc., up to the fiftieth, and arrays those fifty means in a 
graphical form. The results show little systematic profile of 
yield versus trial number. A similar exercise has been per- 
formed to cross-concatenate the data by run-number over the 
various series to search for a decline effect on that larger scale, 
but again no significant correlation is found within this data 
base. ; 

The most extensive parametric exploration attempted to date 
was motivated by the apparently fundamental question implicit 
in general conclusion 2) above, i.e., whether the magnitude of 
the observed effect correlates with the total number of bits 
processed, or with the number of trials. To explore this aspect, 
the same operator has performed a second ensemble of experi- 
mental series totaling 25 000 trials, all consisting of 2000-sam- 
ple bits rather than 200. As before, various combinations of: 
the automatic/manual and volitional/instructed modes were 
employed, but to speed data acquisition and reduce the opera- 
tor’s tedium, only the 1000/s counting rate was used. This, 
coupled with the more elegant data processing capabilities that 
had evolved over the preceding experiments, allowed this 
sequence to be completed in less than six months. 

The results of this effort, as presented in Table II and Figs. 
17 and 18, are curiously ambivalent. As before, there is clear 
and ‘significant separation of the means of the PK* and PK™ 
efforts, and the baseline is well behaved. As could be antici- 
pated from the larger standard deviation of the 2000-bit data, 
the cumulative traces display larger statistical fluctuations and 
require a larger number of trials to settle toward well-defined 
terminal values. To the quantitative precision allowed by this 
data base, these terminal values appear not to endorse any 
simple bit-level hypothesis in that they fail by a factor of 6 or 
J to achieve the one or one and one-half bits per thousand 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP9:00788R0011000400048,, reonuany 982 


TABLE Il : 
SUMMARY OF REG 2000-SAMPLE DATA i 
No.. Std. ; 
Instr. Trials Mean Dev, t-score P; n,/n_ 
t 
BLL. 12 500 1000.016 21.879 0.079 0.468 6157/6088 ; 
PKt 12 200 1000.380 21.906 1.914 0.028 6092/5897 
PK~ 12 800 999.569 22.005 - 2.216 0.013 6218/6351 
APK 25 000 os 2.920 0.002 


(ta te pT 


BASELINE 


CUMULATIVE DEVIATION 


- 7500 
[¢) 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 
NUMBER OF TRIALS 


Fig. 17. REG cumulative deviations of PK * and PK ~ 2000-sample data. 


inversion accomplished in the 200-bit trials. However, the 
new values are larger on a per-trial basis by a factor of about 
1.7, which is not negligible in this context. Again, much more 
data of this sort will be required to come to grips with this class 
of correlation. 

In addition to continuing study of this sample-size parameter, 
our next generation of experiments employs a number of other 
operators to explore the variation of yield with operator type 
and technique, and anumber of alternate noise sources, includ- 
ing pseudo-random sources, in an attempt to localize the effect 
somewhat and thereby to narrow the range of future experi- 
ments and models. 

The results outlined above are by no means the only conse- 
quential REG data available for contemplation. Of particular 
interest are a variety of experiments reported by Schmidt, 
some employing pseudo-random as well as physically random 
sources, and others using taped source outputs recorded well 
in advance of their presentation to the operator [87]-[90]. 
In another approach, May has recently reported an REG study 
using electronic gear specifically designed to preclude very 
subtle artifacts that might confound the effects of interest, 
and includes in his paper a thorough search of the modern 
REG literature [91]. 

In addition, considerable research in the parapsychological 
community has been performed using REG devices as drivers 
for various forced-choice video games employed in both the 
PK and clairvoyance modes [151]. Many of these claim sig- 
nificant yields, but rarely are the data-bases sufficiently large 
to present quantitative trends, or to allow much parameteric 
correlation. 

Regardless of their particular implementation, any potential 
vulnerability of random electronic noise sources to incidental 
or intentional distortion by the means under study here would 
seem to be of some interest to a number of engineering com- 
munities, given the proliferate application of such devices in 
various functional and computational capacities. 


REMOTE PERCEPTION 
As a second example of contemporary psychic research that 
has displayed some substantial yield and interlaboratory repli- 


=A elena neh pm net = mb eel Ree iat MR ein be! ee 


z PK*2000 
So - cate 
& PKt200 
ul 
EB 
Ret a 
5 B i 
Oo i 
} 


gH 
fa) 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 
NUMBER OF TRIALS 


Fig. 18. REG cumulative average. deviations of PK* and PK™ 2000- 
sample data compared to 200-sample data. 


alba Sa 0 a 


cability, we select a topic which has come to be called “remote ; 
perception” or “remote viewing.” The basic concept of this ; 
process is far from new; in the early 16th century, Paracelsus : 
stated it unequivocally: 

Man also possesses a power by which he may see his friends and 

the circumstances by which they are surrounded, although such 

persons may be a thousand miles away from him at that time [8]. : 
In its modern form, the experimental protocol requires a- 
“percipient” to describe, by free-response oral or written 
narrative or drawing,.a remote, unknown target location at 
which is stationed an “agent,” with whom there is no normal 
sensory mode of communication during the course of the 
experiment. The targets are usually selected by some prescribed 
random process from a previously prepared pool of targets, 
which is unknown to any of the active participants. The 
quality of the perception is assessed by various impressionistic 
or analytical judging methods described below. 

Historically, this experiment has evolved from several genera- 
tions of free-response clairvoyance and telepathy experiments, 
which were found to have certain advantages over the more 
traditional “forced-choice” ESP tasks, such as the Xener card 
identifications of the early Rhine laboratory [34]-[37], in 
displaying less tendency for percipient stagnation and ‘“‘decline- 
effects” over extended testing, and in maintaining some of the 
spontaneity of anecdotal clairvoyance experiences. One of 
the earliest detailed reports of such free-response studies appears 
as a book by Upton Sinclair entitled Mental Radio, which 
features an equivocal foreword by Albert Einstein [152]. 
More modern work of this class was performed at the Mai- 
monides Medical Center by Ullman and Krippner in the 1960's, 
and reported in their book Dream Telepathy [64]. From this 
work emerged the so-called “ganzfeld” or sensory inhibition 
perception studies of Honorton and many others which pro- 
pounded the desirability of emotionally stimulating tasks to 
which the subjects could relate in a personal and spontaneous 
fashion [66], [67]. ; 

The contemporary version of the remote perception protocol 
was introduced in a sequence of publications by Targ and Put- 
hoff [94], [153]-[156], which prompted a substantial num- 
ber of attempted replications [157]-[174], and considerable 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


f a 


san: Fsvcric APRKANE RAE RAE a88x2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 **1 


Fig. 19. Remote perception target: Picnic area, Feathered Pipe Ranch 
near Helena, MT; 12:00 N MDT, Sept. 5, 1978. 


Percipient transcript: Princeton, NJ; 8:30 A EDT, Sept. 5, 1978: 


“Outdoors...open landscape—large areas of trees—pines? inter- 
spersed with open fields. Single road. High overcast, cool, breezy. 
(Agent) in dark jacket talking to someone near road—possibly turn- 
out area or picnic area. Assembly of stones—possibly pylon or marker 
or wall. Large sign somewhere.” 


critical comment. The most extensive of the replications, con- 
ducted by Dunne and Bisaha in the Chicago area over the period 
1976 to 1979, comprised 40 formal trials to which were applied 
157 independent transcript judgings, 84 of which assigned first- 
place rank to the proper targets [161 }, [162]. 

The type of data which can be acquired in such studies is 
illustrated in the sequence of Figs. 19-22. In each case is 
shown a photograph of a particular target, selected by some 
random process, which was visited by an agent on the date 
and time indicated. Below each figure is a portion of the cor- 
responding percipient transcript, with the time and location of 
the perception effort also noted. The examples shown are 
drawn from a variety of experimental series conducted under 
somewhat different protocols, but serve to display some of the 
characteristics which commonly appear in the more successful 
efforts: 

1) The overall ambience of the scene is accurately perceived. 

2) Certain details are accurately identified; others are mis- 
construed or totally ignored. 

3) A feature which is impressive to the agent is not necessarily 
so to the percipient, and vice versa. 

4) The composition of the scene may be distorted by errors 


left inversions. - 

5) The aesthetic aspects, such as colors, general shapes, degree 
of activity, noise level, climate, and other ambient features 
tend to be more accurately perceived than more analytical 
details such as number, size, or relative positions. 

6) The perception is not necessarily centered on the defined 
target, and may even provide accurate information on ad- 
jacent areas external to the target, unnoticed by the agent. 

7) The fidelity of the perception seems to be independent of 
the remoteness of the target, up to distances of several 
thousand miles. 

8) The time of the perception effort need.not coincide with 
the time the agent is at the target. Perceptions obtained 
several hours, or even days, prior to the agent’s visit to the 
target, or even prior to selection of the target, display at 
least as high a yield as those performed in real time. 


in scale, relative positions of key objects, or total right-. 


Fig. 20. Remote perception target: Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton, 
NJ; 2:15 P EDT, Aug. 28, 1980. 


Percipient transcript: Princeton, NJ; 12:15 P EDT, Aug. 28, 1980: 


“Some kind of courtyard, enclosed by buildings on two sides. Paths 
or waiks around periphery, a statue or monument of some kind in the 
middle surrounded by grass. Could be a fountain; I have the feeling 


of water. Trees or tall hedges on one side. Fairly quiet, but some 
people walking around. Not sure of sound, the idea of a fountain sug- 
gests sound of water but I’m not sure I really hear it or not.” 


The philosophical and practical implications of items 7 and 8 
are clearly substantial. If the data are valid, the most parsimo- 
nious explications would require access of the percipient’s con- 
sciousness to other portions of the space-time grid than that in 
which it is currently immersed, or that it can reach by normal 
processes of communication or memory. These same items 
also seriously delimit the potential physical mechanisms for 
such access. 

Rigorous evaluation of the data from experiments such as 
these is confounded by the psychological components of the 
process, by the impressionistic nature of the information in- 
volved, and by the inevitable subjective biases of all those par- 
ticipating in the experiment. Doubiless the earliest and most 
primitive assessments were informal a posteriori exchanges of 
impressions about the target between agent and percipient 
which, although possibly informative and stimulating to them, 
lacked any quantitative basis and held little scientific credibility. 
In a somewhat less vulnerable strategy invoked more recently, 
the percipient, after completing his transcript, visited several 
possible targets drawn from the pool and attempted toidentify 
the one he perceived, or to rank-order each of them in terms 
of conformity to his earlier perception. Statistical arguments 
could then be applied to these ranks to estimate the likelihood 
that information about the target had been acquired by means 
other than chance [175]-[177]. 

In an attempt to separate the possible ESP functioning of the 
percipient during the visitation and ranking process from his 
original perception effort, the protocol subsequently evolved to 
invoke independent judges who were provided copies of the 
various transcripts and taken to the target sites to perform their 
preferential rankings. Even in this form, the technique has 


- been criticized for possible sensory cuing of the judges {178] 


and has tended in turn to be replaced by a protocol. wherein 
the judges perform their ranking on the basis of photographs 
of the targets, usually taken by the agent at the time of the 
trial. In one such version, the judges, who have not been in- 
volved in any earlier portion of the experiment, are asked to 
compare ‘a single percipient transcript with agent-generated 
descriptions and photographs ofa number of alternative targets, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


se Anse nteamen mean en ge vex eet 


, Approved F 


152 


. 


or Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL, 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 . 


Fig. 21. Remote perception target: Rockefeller Chapel, Chicago, IL; 2:15 P CDT, June 10, 1977. 
Percipient transcript: Mundelein College, Chicago, IL; 1:00 P CDT, June 10, 1977: 


“I'm seeing a heavy wooden door with a black bolt on it rounded at the top ina dome fashion. I have a feeling of opening the doors and 
looking in and it’s dark inside. My feeling at the moment is that it’s a building like a church. And I can see the pews. There is some light but 
I feet basically a kind of darkness in there and a quietness. I’m seeing little turrets, very elaborate-looking Hittle turrets, a whole series of them 
like across the entire top of the building and there’s a straight line and then up toa triangle. I have a definite image of an angel-type of statue, 
marble, flowing robes. I see the door again and I see some stairs. ] think it’s very high. I’m getting some stained-glass windows that are arch 
shape and they would look to be dark blue. Whatever the architecture of it the ornamentation on the building is quite elaborate and it looks 
like there’s a section on the top with the turrets and then below that there sre some other kinds of designs but more linear designs. 

“Y again have a vision of the doors and then maybe 8 ledged area or an area of the building that protrudes with some kind of a design and 


there maybe even be 


a couple of those before you get to the top part which is either triangular or rounded. There is filigree work, little filigree 


turrets or something. And within the building there is a sort of a continuation of arches, but possibly they meet columns or something like 


Approve for 


i se tions, it looks like it’s arched.” 
Rureiwe VOONTIsIO7 “CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


ae 


. 


ert acing eas nlipaem ae ee ee Soe EE 


and 
but 
hem 
‘tue, 
arch 
oks 


and 
igree 
slike 


y 


Fig. 22. Remote perception target: Danube River, Bratislava, Czecho- ~ 


slovakia; 3:00 P European Standard Time, Aug. 24, 1976. 
Percipient transcript: Minoqua, WI; 8:30 A CDT, Aug. 23, 1976: 


“T have the feeling that the agent is somewhere near water. Iseem to 
have the sensation of a very large expanse of water. There might be 
boats. Several vertical lines, sort of like poles. They’re narrow, not 
heavy. Maybe lamp posts or flag poles. Some kind of circular shape. 
It’s round on its side, like a disc, it’s like a round thing flat. on the 
ground, but it seems to have height as well. Maybe with poles. Could 
possibly come to a point on top. Seeing vertical lines again. Seems to 
be a strong impression, these vertical lines. Predominant colors seem 
to be blue and green. Water again., Some very quick impression of a 
fence, a low fence. The steps seem to go up to some kind of fence. 
It’s a dark fence and it’s along like a walk sort of at the top of the 
steps. The steps sort of lead up to like a path or walkway. Like a 
boardwalk. And there’s a fence along it. There’s people walking 
along it, and there’s vertical lines along that walkway.” 


including the proper target, and to rate or rank-order them by 
some prescribed criteria. Again, statistical assessment of the 
significance of the rankings follows. 

The bulk of the remote perception data reported in the litera- 
ture has been evaluated by some form of these independent 
judging processes, and displays sufficiently high yield to encour- 
age further refinement. of the protocol and analysis before 
attempting categorical judgment on the validity and viability 
of the phenomena. “ Beyond minor tightening of the target 
selection, agent maneuver, and perception acquisition and re- 
cording phases of the experiment, the major potential improve- 
ments would still seem to pertain to the judging process, which 
remains potentially vulnerable to subtle cues in the transcripts, 
to-vagaries in the judges’ capability, to their subjective biases 
toward the individual experiments and to the topic as a whole, 
and to possible psychic input of their own [161], 162]. 

In an effort to improve the judging process further, our labora- 
tory has explored-the applications of various information theo- 
retic methods to the quantification of the data, and an analytic 
technique has been devised which is based on a limited binary 
alphabet of target/perception descriptors [179]. While less 
sensitive to the Gestalt impressionism and symbolic represen- 


| JAHN: PSYAPPPOMOENOTERGHERSB52000/0807 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 152 


tations which a human judge might capture, this method does 
provide a rudimentary framework for evaluation of signal-to- 
noise ratio in the information transfer, and an assessment 
standardization less dependent on subjective interpretation. 
In essence, the strategy is to replace impressionistic assessment 
of the quality of a perception by the identification of specified 
elements of information therein, after which a mechanical 
scoring and ranking procedure takes over. In the hope of con- 
veying a bit more substantive flavor of the data acquired in 
remote perception experiments and the processing thereof, 
permit us to describe this analysis in a little detail. - 

The heart of the method is the establishment of a code, or 
alphabet, of simple descriptive queries which may be addressed 
to all targets and all perceptions, responses to which serve to 
distinguish them and to permit quantification of the informa- 
tion acquired in the perception process. In one version, these 
“descriptors,” thirty in number, are posed in binary form and 
range over a spectrum from quite factual discriminations, e.g., 
whether the scene is indoors or outdoors, whether trees are 
present, or whether there are automobiles, to much more im- 
pressionistic aspects, such as whether the ambience is noisy or 
quiet, confined or expansive, hectic or tranquil. The particular 
ensemble of descriptors has evolved in part through personal 
experience and intuition, and in part through trial-and-error 
application to various pilot data. The goal has been a balanced 
alphabet whose elements are a) relatively unambiguous; b) com- 
monly perceived by a broad selection of percipients; c) individu- 
ally instructive in defining the scene; d) complementary to one 
another; and e) sufficient in number to permit reasonable syn- 
thesis of the scene, but not so numerous to burden the data 
collection or computation excessively. 

Given this descriptor alphabet, each target in the pool is then 
represented in terms of 30 binary bits, corresponding to the ap- 
propriate YES/NO responses to the queries. This encoding is 
normally performed by the agent at the time of target visita- 
tion, although reference may be made to the target selector’s 
judgment or to photographs of the target for verification. 
Each perception is similarly rendered into a corresponding 
sequence of binary digits, but only after the percipient has been 
allowed to form a free-response impression of the target. Vari- 
ous scoring recipes are then invoked for quantitative comparison 
of the perceptions with the targets, using for computation the 
UNIX operating system of a PDP 11/45 or VAX 750. 

The simplest recipe merely counts the number of correct 
responses to the 30 descriptors, i.e., the positive correlations 
between the target and descriptor matrices. This does not nor- 
mally provide a particularly accurate index of the quality of the 
individual perceptions, since the a priori probabilities of the 
various descriptors are widely different. For example, a given 
pool may have more outdoor than indoor targets, and hence 
a correct identification of an indoor context should be given 
higher credit than identification of an outdoor context. To 
facilitate such weighting, a step is included in the computational 
program to provide the a priori probabilities of all descriptors 
in the prevailing target pool, on the basis of which more elabo- 
rate scoring recipes may be invoked. , 

Since the various targets have substantially different charac- 
teristics and hence different capacities for achieved scores, a 
variety of normalization procedures also have been developed, 
using as denominators the total number of descriptors, the per- 
fect score, i.e., the score that would be achieved for a given 
target if all descriptors were identified correctly, and various 
“chance” scores for the target, defined by some random or 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


cee Rae Oe RR Ne ee ious kot, 


Sethe SAE ASR TAN hes inmate Mite at Reinier a 


‘. , Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


154 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


, TABLE III ; 
PrecoGniTIve REMOTE PERCEPTION 24 X 24 “CHicaGo” SERIES 
Proper TARGET RANKS 


Scoring Method? 
Human Judges 

Perception No. A B Cc D E Avg. Avg./24 Mean Rank® 
1 3/4 7 7 9 2 5.9 0.25 2.7/8 = 0.34 
2 1/2 2 4 1 1 19 0.08 1.0/8 = 0.13 
3 1 1 1 1 1 1.0 0.04 1.5/8 = 0.19 
4 2/8 7/2 2/2 4/2 2/2 4.5 0.19 2.7/8 = 0.34 
5 7/3 9 11 4 8 8.0 0.33 1.7/8 = 0.21 
6 9/5 12/2 7/2 16/2 7/2 11.0 0.46 3.5/8 = 0.44 
7 13/2 11 14 10 13 12.3 0.51 2.3/8 = 0.29 
8 20/3 22 20 14 19 19.2 0.80 1.8/8 = 0.23 
9 4/2 4 8 1 5 4.5 0.19 2.6/7 = 0.37 
10 10/7 13 13 9 5 10.6 0.44 1.4/7 = 0.20 
11 9/4 9 11 6 12 9.7 0.40 3.6/7 = 0.51 
12 1/3 2 2 2 5 2.6 0.11 1.8/7 = 0.26 
13 1/3 1 3 1 3 2.0 0.08 2.2/7 = 0.31 
14 1 2 2 1 1 14 0.06 1.4/7 = 0.20 
15 1/2 2 2 1 1 . 15 0.06 1.0/7 = 0.14 
16 2 2 2 1 2 1.8 0.08 1.0/10 = 0.10 
“47 1/4 9 1 9 1 4.5 0.19 1.0/5 = 0.20 
18 2/2 10 5 “1 2 4.1 0.17 1.0/5 = 0.20 

19 14/3 14 14 19 17 15.8 0.66 unjudged 
20 U6 11 11 8 10 9.9 0.41 5.0/6 = 0.83 
21 1/2 2 3 4 1 2.3 0.10 2.0/6 = 0.33 
22 5/6 7 12 2: 7 7A 0.30 3.0/6 = 0.50 
23 16/4 23 11 15 9 15.1 0.63 3.0/6 = 0.50 
24 3 3 4 3 4 3.4 0.14 2.0/6 = 0.33 
Mean 6.73 1.15 7.13 5.96 5.79 6.67 0.28 0.31 


3 Computed rank/number of ties for that rank. 
bAssigned rank/number of possible ranks, 


arbitrary process of descriptor response. A “selective” scoring/ 
normalization process has also been applied which effectively 
allows the percipient to reject any descriptor on which he feels 
unqualified to comment, and thence to be scored only on the 
reduced descriptor set. 

The statistical significances of these various normalized per- 
ception scores are assessed by a collective ranking process 
reminiscent of the traditional human judging techniques, but 
having the advantages that the ranking proceeds on a much 
more standardized and analytical basis, and that many more 
alternative targets can be ranked by the machine than by a 
human judge. Specifically, the program scores each transcript 
not only against its proper target, but against every other tar- 
get in the pool, and then ranks these targets in order of descend- 
ing score and specifies the rank of the match with the proper 
target. This process is repeated for every scoring method, and 
the results displayed in corresponding matrix arrays. 

Table III displays typical results of these analytical ranking 
procedures as applied to a group of 24 perceptions of 24 targets 
in the Chicago area. Tabulated are the ranks of the proper tar- 
gets compared with all other targets for each of the perception 
efforts, as computed by five of the scoring methods we have 
found to be most instructive, namely, A) number of correct. 
descriptors/total number of descriptors; B) weighted full de- 
scriptor score/perfect score; C) weighted full descriptor score/ 
number of descriptors; D) weighted selective descriptor score/ 
perfect score; and E) weighted selective descriptor score/chance 
score. Also included in the table are the mean ranks assigned by 
independent human judges subjectively comparing these per- 
ceptions with a much smaller number of alternative targets. 
Although the bases of comparison are quite different, it 


appears that in the majority of these cases the analytical and 
impressionistic evaluations concur at least roughly in their 
estimate of the quality of the perceptions, particularly for those 
which consistently obtain low rank assignments. If the analyt- 
ical computation is carried through using as target pool only 
those alternative targets available to the human judges, the 
agreement in mean ranks is found to be somewhat closer, per- 
haps fortuitously so, given the categorically different bases of 
assessment implicit in the two methods. 

To this analytically scored and ranked data it is possible to 
apply a variety of statistical assessments of widely ranging 
sophistication and complexity. Consistent with the rather 
broad mesh of the descriptor code and the elementary scoring 
recipes invoked in this version of the concept, we confine our- 
selves to correspondingly simple statistical measures which 
provide at least semi-quantitative indication of the yield beyond 
chance. Specifically, we address only the distribution of proper 
target ranks achieved in the series of perceptions, such as sum- 
marized in columns 2-6 of Table IH. Using the common z- 
score method for a discrete distribution, the probability of 
achieving the. mean rank of any of these columns by chance 
may be directly computed. Table IV displays the results of 
such calculation for the same 24 X 24 “Chicago” series. Note 
that, whereas all of the methods suggest significant departures 
of the computed mean ranks from chance, there is relatively 
little disparity among them, indicating that the specific method 
of scoring and normalization is not a sensitive element in the 
overall evaluation of the perception series. 

The departure of the shape of the proper target rank distribu- 
tion from chance is also displayed in Table IV in terms of the 


number of perceptions achieving first-place ranks, the number 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


AY a safes 


JA 


be, sn ihn PS 


hae ke cn gate ise 


ie 


wep tbe Eo on 


aed be 


4G > 


Y 1982 


zical and 
in their 
For those 
we analyt- 
-ool only 
iges, the 
Dser, per- 
bases of 


sssible to 
- ranging 
ne rather 
y scoring 
afine our- 
es which 
od beyond 
-of proper 
‘h as sum- 
emmon 2- 
ability of 
ey chance 
results of 
tes. Note 
lepartures 
relatively 
ic method 
2nt in the 


k distribu- 
mms of the 
ae number 


JAHN: P HIC PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


TABLE IV - 
PRECOGNITIVE REMOTE PERCEPTION. 24 X 24 “CuicaGo” SERIES 
Score SUMMARY 


Mean -No. Ist (2nd) No. Ranks 
Method® Rank Ranks Below Mean z P, . x74) Py 
Chance 
expectation 12.5 1.0 (1.0) 12 
A 6.73 4.4 (4.0) 19 - 4.08 2x 105 18.5 <0.005 
B 1.15 2.0 (6.0) 20 ~ 3.36 4x 1074 11.8 <0.01 
Cc 7.13 2.0 (4.5) 20 ~ 3.80 7x 1075 19.6 <0.001 
D 5.96 8.0 (2.0) 20 -4.63 2x 1076 24.0 <0.001 
E 5.79 6.0 (3.5) 21 4,75 1x 1076 27.6 <0.001 
4 As described in text: 
A) Number of correct descriptors/total number of descriptors. 
B) Weighted full descriptor score/perfect score. 
C) Weighted full descriptor score/number of descriptors. 
D) Weighted selective descriptor score/perfect score. 
E) Weighted selective descriptor score/chance score. 
TABLE V 
PRECOGNITIVE REMOTE PERCEPTION 6 X 24 “OCEAN” SERIES 
Score SUMMARY 
Mean No. 1st (2nd) No. Ranks 
Method? Rank Ranks Below Mean z P, 
Chance 
expectation 12.5 0.25 (0.25) 3 
A 4.5 10 (1. 6 - 2.83 0.002 
B 4.2 2.0 (0.0) 6 2.95 0.002 
Cc 5.0 1.0 (1.0) 6 -2.65 0.004 
D 5.2 1.0 (0.5) 6 -2.59 0.005 
E 5.3 1.0 (1.0) 6 - 2.54 0.006 


8As described in text: 


A) Number of correct descriptors/total number of descriptors. 
B) Weighted full descriptor score/perfect score. 

C) Weighted full descriptor score/number of descriptors. 

D) Weighted selective descriptor score/perfect score. 

E) Weighted selective descriptor score/chance score. 


ranked better than the chance mean, and a simple X? test with 
its associated probability. 

The method is not restricted to square arrays, i.e., to equal 
numbers of targets and perceptions in one-to-one correspon- 
dence. Table V displays the results of a recent “Ocean” series 
in which six perceptions were ranked against 24 targets in the 
pool from which the six actual targets were drawn. (The per- 
cipient for this series was at the time sailing alone across the 
North Atlantic Ocean.) 

Because of its particularly severe protocol, we also include as 
illustration the results of a “European” series judged by this 
method. In this series, the agent was traveling in eastern 
Europe, and on five successive days, at 3:00 P.M. local time, 
utilized whatever location he happened to occupy as the target. 
The perceptions of these targets were recorded by a single 
percipient in northern Wisconsin at approximately 8:30 A.M. 
local time of the preceding day, i.e., each perception was 
roughly 24 h precognitive. (Fig. 22 depicts a target and percep- 
tion from this series.) Table VI displays the analytically judged 
results of this series, and compares them with the results of 
previous human judging. Although the data base is small, the 
consistency of yield is striking. 

To obviate the possibility that this method of analysis may 
somehow process even random inputs to apparently significant 
scores, artificial target data matrices and artificial perception 


data matrices have been constructed from the output of an 
REG, and the computational schemes applied to various com- 
binations of these with each other and with true data. The 
pattern of results conforms to chance expectations. An 
alternative form of control is provided by application of the 
method to discernibly unsuccessful test series, which yields ~ 
appropriately insignificant results. 

The project outlined in the last few paragraphs is described 
in greater detail, with many other experimental examples, 
both successful and unsuccessful, in reference [179]. We have 
since developed the capability of employing ternary rather 
than binary responses to the descriptors, in order to convey 
more shaded information about the aspects queried. A given 
feature may thereby be specified as a) present and dominant; 
b) present but secondary; or c) absent. Or alternatively, the 
feature may be described as a) definitely present; b) ambiguous 
or unspecified; or c) definitely absent. While these approaches 
clearly provide more specific target and perception data, the 
scoring thereof becomes more complex, especially in the defini- 
tion of certain of the normalization denominators. 

We have also been exploring a modification of this analytical 
judging procedure which would bypass the ranking steps alto- 
gether and move directly to compute individual statistical scores 
for each transcript. The key to this variation is the definition 
and utilization of a generalized target pool composed of over 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


i 


’ 


“ isApproved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDR96:00/88R001,4100050004-6,. resruary i982 


! TABLE VI 
PRECOGNITIVE REMOTE PERCEPTION 5 X 5 “EUROPEAN” SERIES 
Score SUMMARY 


Mean No. 1st (2nd) 
Method® Rank Ranks 
Chance 
expectation 3.0 1.0 (1.0) 
A 1.2 4.3 (0.3) 
B 1.4 4.0 (0.0) 
Cc 1.4 3.0 (2.0) 
-D 1.8 4.0 (0.0) 
E 1.6 3.0 (1.0) 
Seven human : 
judges (avg.) 19 2.1 (1.6) 


8Axs described in text: 


No. Ranks 
Below Mean 4 P, 

3 

5 -2.85 0.002 
5 -2.53 0.006 
5 -2.53 0.005 
4 -1.90 0.029 
5 -2.21 0.013 
4.6 ; 


A) Number of correct descriptors/total number of descriptors. 
B) Weighted full descriptor score/perfect score. 

C) Weighted full descriptor score/number of descriptors. 

D) Weighted selective descriptor score/perfect score. 

E) Weighted selective descriptor score/chance score. 


200 targets, local, national, and international, assembled for a 
broad range of earlier and ongoing experimental series, from 
which correspondingly generalized @ priori descriptor proba- 
bilities may be calculated. Evaluation of the transcript scores 
on the basis of these generalized probabilities, rather than 
those calculated for the specific series target pools, has been 
found to alter only slightly the relative ranks of the perceptions 
determined by any of the five methods used above and provides 
the desired common basis for evaluating the individual statis- 
tical significance of those scores. 

To pursue this, the program next assembles a set of empirical 
chance distribution functions, one for each scoring method, by 
concatenating all mismatched perception scores assigned by 
that method, ie., all off-diagonal elements of that perception- 
target matrix. With reference to Gaussian fits to these empiri- 
cal chance distributions, the proper perception-target scores 
can then be assigned z-values and corresponding probabilities 
against “chance.” As one example of this approach, Fig. 23 
shows the empirical distribution of scores compounded from 
some 1400 mismatched targets and transcripts by method E, 
on which are superimposed the scores achieved by the 24 proper 
target perceptions of the “Chicago” series. The corresponding 
z-values and probabilities against chance are listed in Table VII. 

These individual significance values can subsequently be com- 
pounded into an overall significance level for the entire series 


’ by various standard procedures [180]. The latter result should 


agree with that derived from the original ranking method, to 
the order of approximation implicit in each form of this anal- 
ysis. In this case, the series value is about 1078, compared to 
107° for the ranking method. 

The specific results shown in Tables HI-VII represent some of 
the most successful data we have acquired; many less successful 
examples could also be displayed. To summarize our total ex- 
perience with over two hundred remote perception efforts, all 
performed with volunteer percipients claiming no special abili- 
ties, we might note that the data tend to fall into one of four 
categories, in roughly comparable quantity: 

1) the target is accurately represented in detail and composi- 

tion; 

2) particular features of the target are accurately perceived, 

but the context is incorrect; 

3) the ambience of the target is perceived, but the details 

are inaccurate; 


MISMATCHED 


TARGETS 
Sag? P 


FITTED GAUSSIAN 
MEAN « ].0016 
S.D. *0.1163 


FREQUENCY 


0.6 0.8 10 12 L4 
NORMALIZEO SCORES 


Fig. 23. Remote perception empirical chance distribution (method E). 


4) the perception seems unrelated to the target in context 
or detail. : 
Survey of the pertinent literature indicates a comparable pat- 
tern of yield across the experience of others involved in similar 
experiments. 

To date there has been little progress in correlating the degree 
of success of such efforts with the prevailing experimental 
conditions or with the personality traits or attitudes of the 
participants. A certain body of lore has compounded from the 
testimony of the more successful percipients, such as the desir- 
ability of a personal rapport between the agent and percipient, 
the value of a lighthearted attitude, the importance of exclud- 
ing any associative or constructive logic, etc., but much of this 
is still too vague and inconsistent to provide any basis for ex- 
perimental refinement or theoretical modeling. At present, 
the only fair statement would be that empirical evidence for 
this class of phenomena continues to accumulate, but with 
frustrating irregularity and little basic comprehension. Not- 
withstanding, the present and potential applications of the 
process in a variety of arenas, combined with the relatively 
simple and inexpensive nature of the experiment, keep this 
type of study active. 


THEORETICAL CONCEPTS 
No remotely satisfactory physical theory of psychic phenom- 
ena yet exists. Indeed, next to the evasiveness of the effects 
under controlled experimentation, the second greatest frustra- 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


i 


a 
4 
=thod E). 


context 


able pat- 
n similar 


he degree 
srimental 
33 of the 
from the 
the desir- 
ercipient, 
of exclud- 
ch of this 
sis for ex- 
| present, 
dence for 
but with 
on. Not- 
as of the 
relatively 
keep this 


¢ phenom- 
he effects 
ist frustra- 


roved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


- 4982 a JAHN: P Appr PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


157 


TABLE VII 
PRECOGNITIVE REMOTE PERCEPTION INDIVIDUAL STATISTICAL SCORES 
(METHOD E) 24 X 24 “Cuicaco” SERIES 


Perception No. 


CWARUNSWHe 


z-score P, 
1,210 0.113 
0.089 0.465 © 
2.737 0.003 
1.700 0.045 

-0.553 0.709 
1.533 0.063 

-0.315 0.623 

-0.315 0.623 
0.451 0.326 

-0.197 0.578 
0.191 0.424 
2.037 0.021 
2.948 0.002 
2.244 0.012 
2.661 0.004 
2.478 0.007 
2.180 0.017 
1.904 0.028 
0.083 0.467 

-0.152 0.560 
2.679 0.004 
0.701 0.241 
1.057 0.145 
0.113 0.455 


tion in the study of psychic processes has been the absence of 
viable theoretical models with which to begin the traditional 
dialogue between theory and experiment on which all scientific 
progress eventually depends. This may, of course, be indicative 
of an illegitimacy of the phenomena themselves, or at least of 
an evanescence that fundamentally precludes any analytical 
representation. On the other hand, it may be an indication 
that modern physical theory, elaborate and sophisticated as it 
is, has not yet evolved to a stage where it can properly acknowl- 
edge and deal with the role of consciousness in the physical 
world [181], and that this should be one of its new frontiers. 
Before pouncing toward either extreme, it may be worthwhile 
to play through some of the more canonical attempts that have 
been made to deal with this domain, both from a formalistic 
and philosophical point of view. 

Efforts toward theoretical explication of psychic phenomena 
over the past century have proceeded from various levels of 
presumption as to the fundamentality of the effects observed. 
Some have insisted that the effects are totally illusory, i.e., arti- 
facts of poor experimentation or data processing, or that they 
are the chance results of random processes. Others have assigned 
the effects to known physical and physiological mechanisms 
associated with, but not deliberately precipitated by the partic- 
ipants, e.g., electromagnetic radiation from brain circuitry or 
intercardial potentials, or heat transfer, vibration, or aerochem- 
ical changes in the experimental environment caused by human 
presence or exertion. More ambitious efforts have contended 
that no such conservative models can suffice, and that it will 
be necessary to identify new forms of energy or information 
transfer to retain the established physical formalisms, or pos- 
sibly even necessary to expand the physical laws themselves, 
as was required in the generalization from classical mechanics 


to quantum mechanics or to special and general relativity, with - 


the present forms becoming subsumed under more compre- 
hensive statements. Still others have concluded that the scien- 
tific paradigm in general is inadequate and that basic revision 


in the representation of the process of conscious observation 
of physical events will be required. 

Beyond the uncertainty as to the fundamentality of the 
model required, these modeling efforts have labored under the 
confusion of whether the purported phenomena are most basi- 
cally psychological, physiological, physical, or some inextricable 
combination thereof, and hence which class of concepts should 
dominate the model and which should be secondary. Virtually 
all permutations have been explored to some degree, under 
labels of “psycho-physiological,” “biophysical,” “psycho- 
physical,” etc., but none of these can claim more than sugges- 
tive analogies or philosophical stimulation. This author is 
unqualified to assess any models based in the psychological 
or physiological domains, other than to note that those most 
frequently discussed tend to acknowledge the role of random 
processes, information ordering, and statistical, rather than 
directly causal mechanisms [182]-[187], all of which have 
their counterparts in several of the more physically oriented 
modes which have been proposed. Confining ourselves to such 
physical theories, the history of credible analytic effort is con- 
veniently short and, in my view, more instructive in its philo- 
sophical than in its functional characteristics. 


Electromagnetic and Geophysical Madels 


For perhaps naive reasons, the earliest physical models tended 
to presume wavelike propagation of psychic effects, usually in 
the electromagnetic modes [188]. Doubtless the concurrent 
emergence of radio technology with its revolutionary wireless 
capabilities influenced the concepts and nomenclature of these 
versions, and frequent reference to psychic “transmitters,” 
“receivers,” “antennas,” “tuning,’’ and “static” are found in 
them. Upton Sinclair’s book, Mental Radio, mentioned earlier, 
is one example of such an analogy [152]. 

More modern models of this genre, appearing predominantly 
in the Russian literature [43], [50], [100], [189], [190], have 
focused on very low frequency bands, of the order of 10 Hz, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


SAL ak Le led 3 aa le RE BR 


ont Las 


are) 


ow 


1 


158 


characteristic of various physiological frequencies, especially 


the brain wave spectra. Some variations of these have invoked 
modulation of the earth’s magnetic field or of the electrostatic 
fields of the atmosphere. Wave models involving other than 
electromagnetic environmental media have also been proposed, 
such as infrasonic atmospheric waves, geoseismic waves, and 
barometric fluctuations, possibly stimulated by contemporary 
attention to the inexplicable homing capabilities of birds, fish, 
and animals, and the hive or swarm behavior of certain insects 
{101], [102], [132]. 

As suggested by the pre-occupation with screen-rooms in the 
early days of the electromagnetic concept, and by more recent 
long-distance remote perception experiments, some of the ob- 
vious validation/disqualification tests examining attenuation, 
diffraction, interference, and polarization effects have indeed 
been attempted, but the very large dimensions involved for these 
wavelengths leave the studies less than conclusive. Some con- 
temporary workers retain support for this category of model, 
claiming that the necessary electromagnetic signal levels re- 
quired for influence on the brain circuitry are so small that no 
coarse-grained tests can properly discriminate against them. 
More problematic, in my own view, are the absence of any 
demonstrated velocity of propagation of psychic effects and 
the large body of precognition evidence which, if accepted, 
cannot be accommodated by any reasonable advanced wave 
characteristics. 

However, setting aside for the moment the quantitative func- 
tional difficulties with the electromagnetic approach to psychic 
phenomena, certain broader philosophical analogies in the 
conceptual and experimental aspects of the two topics may be 
worth noting. In electromagnetism, beyond the bald empiricism 
of the definition of the fields themselves as representations of 
“action-at-a-distance,” there are many features which to a 
naive or primitive observer would, and indeed historically did, 
appear as “paranormal,” or at least anomalous: the noncolinear 
aspects of Ampere’s and Biot-Savart’s laws and of the Faraday 
effect; induction effects and switching transients; the Maxwell 
displacement current; the propagation of waves in a vacuum, 
with a specified finite velocity—each of these in some sense 
digressed from contemporary “normal” experience, was con- 
ceptually difficult in its time, and required certain leaps of 
einpiricism to get on with the formalism. 

To the extent that we just now hold a similarly naive and 
primitive view of psychic phenomena, it may be necessary to 
tolerate similarly empirical representations until a more com- 
prehensive model can knit itself into a more fundamental 
representation. For this purpose, there may be some merit in 
looking to just such electromagnetic effects for analogies. As 
one example, the pervasive “decline effect” in psychic experi- 
mentation, wherein the performance on psychic tasks is widely 
reported to be highest immediately after initiation, to decrease 
over protracted testing periods, and then to improve again just 
before termination, is somewhat reminiscent of the induced 
signatures of certain electromagnetic processes. The decline 
effect has been commonly ascribed to a psychological boredom 
or reduction. in the emotional intensity of the operator per- 
forming the task; just possibly it may be a more fundamental 
characteristic of the phenomenological domain. 

In a similar vein, many psychic effects are reported to be in- 
trinsically transient, e.g., the “fleeting impression”; the “sudden 
vision”; the “unexpected effect.” One of the favored techniques 
of some remote perception percipients is to “sweep through” 
their image of the target repeatedly until it is clarified. Many 


_ Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


PK effects are reported to be achieved just at the first effort 
or immediately after the effort is terminated. Such ‘“‘beginner’s 
luck” evidence might be construed to indicate that psychic 
processes are invalidated by prolonged and careful examina- 


tion; alternatively, it may be a hint that they are inherently 


“inductive,” in the electromagnetic sense, i.e, that they are in- 


trinsically unsteady phenomena wherein the time derivatives 
influence the magnitudes of the effects. 

Yet another characteristic that psychic effects share with 
certain electromagnetic processes is their tendency to be in- 
direct, tangential, or peripheral: direct effort on one PK task 
fails, but a secondary effect is noted on another component 
or device; central elements of a remote perception target are 
ignored by the percipient, but minor or peripheral aspects are 
identified with precision: the pattern of physical disturbance in 
a poltergeist event is reported to be vortical rather than radial, 
all of which call to mind cross-product and vector curl effects 
in the electromagnetic domain. 

The point in suggesting such analogies is not to endorse direct 
physical correspondence between electromagnetic and psychic 
processes, but rather to speculate whether the human mind 
may tend to perceive and assess phenomena in the two domains 
in certain similar fundamental ways. 


Entropy and the Random Process 


A second, more recently opened class of psychic model 
addresses the interaction of consciousness with natural random 
processes [95], [187], [191}. A common aspect of the estab- 
lished physical formalisms of kinetic theory, thermodynamics, 
statistical mechanics, and information theory is the role of 
randomicity as the reference plane for information and energy 
exchange. By whatever representation, the second law of ther- 
modynamics, expressing the tendency of isolated physical 
systems to drive irreversibly toward configurations of mini- 
mum order and information content, stands starkly asymmetric 
in the time coordinate, thereby raising profound philosophical 
issues in virtually every domain from biophysics to cosmology. 

Some of the most controlled and replicable experiments in PK, 
such as the REG studies outlined earlier, could be construed to 
challenge the second law, or at least to suggest modifications of 
the concept of an isolated physical system. Namely, under 
the circumstances of those experiments, human consciousness 
could be postulated to be inserting order, albeit to a smail 
degree, into a random physical process. 

This possibility can be extended conceptually to the anoma- 
lous acquisition of information in remote perception experi- 
ments, to psychic healing, and to animal and plant PK, but to 
my knowledge, no attempts at formulation have yet specified 
any details of the ordering capability, e.g., its physical or phys- 
iological source, its propagation modes, or its manner of inter- 
action. Pending these, one can again only proceed with high 
empiricism to attempt to represent the observed correlations 
in a useful fashion, a strategy which has sustained many other 
observational fields in their primitive phases. Notwithstanding, 
this class of psychic model poses a profound question: The 
long-accepted essence of consciousness is its ability to extract 
information from its environment; may the reverse also be 
possible? May consciousness have the ability to insert infor- 
mation into its environment? 

One extreme variation of this model escalates the question 
even one step further, to ask whether it is possibly an indige- 
nous property of extremely elaborate and complex systems 
that they may embody inherent functional consciousness of 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Bees ee 


rn 


ie tena SERN Bes 


phys 


Y 1982 


t effort 
zinner’s 
psychic 
camina-- 
rently 
7 are in- 
ivatives 


re with 
» be in- 
PK task 
:ponent 
rget are 
ects are 
dance in 
1 radial, 
| effects 


ie direct 
psychic 
in mind 
jomains 


> model 
random 
ie estab- 
mamics, 

role of 
1 energy 
of ther- 
physical 
of mini- 
mmetric 
sophical 
mology. 
tsin PK, 
strued to 
ations of 
y, under 
‘iousness 
>a small 


3 anoma- 
a experi- 
<, but to 
specified 
or phys- 
of inter- 
vith high 
‘relations 
ny other 
standing, 
ion: The 
o extract 
2 also be 
ert infor- 


question 
in indige- 
‘ systems 
usness of 


JAHN: P HIC PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 
their own—that somehow out of their very complexity, the 
interlockings of their systems, they derive not only abilities 
to learn, to reproduce themselves, to adapt to their environ- 
ment, but also to exert an entropy reversing form of “con- 
sciousness” on themselves [192], [193]. 


Hyperspace Representations 


A few attempts have been made to represent paranormal 
effects by re-casting the basic laws of physics in more than the 
four coordinates of normal human experience and applying the 
consequent new terms to the. representation of paranormal 
effects [104], [105], [194]. For example, one such approach 
adds an imaginary component to each of the spatial and tempo- 
ral coordinates, i.e., invokes complex space and time, somewhat 


in the spirit of ac circuit theory or exponential wave mechanics - 


{195]. The imaginary components and their “cross-talk” with 
the traditional real ones thereby permit representation of anom- 
alous effects within the framework of established physical laws. 
To date, no convincing fundamental definition of these new 
dimensions has been offered, thereby reducing such models to 
an heuristic or empirical level. In this sense, the approach bears 
some similarity to the “hidden variable” aspect of quantum 
mechanics, mentioned below. 

One may speculate that if such models are to address the in- 
teraction of consciouness with physical process, the requisite 
new coordinates or components must relate to, or in some way 
define or localize, the processes of consciousness. In other 
words, to the normal “hard” coordinates, whereby events are 
conventionally specified in the physical world, it may be neces- 
sary to add certain “soft” coordinates to specify the conscious 
processes by which those events are perceived and possibly in- 
fluenced. Clearly, the coordinate frame in which one chooses to 
observe and represent any physical process is intimately linked 
to the perception of that process) Two common examples 
would be the perceptions of kinematic and dynamic effects in 
a rotating frame of reference, such as a merry-go-round or an 
orbiting spacecraft, or the even more bizarre appearances of 
physical processes in rapidly accelerating frames, 4 la general 
telativity. 

To compound this interdependence of perception and refer- 
ence frame by including ‘“‘consciousness coordinates” in the 
specification of the latter is.an awesome proposition, but an 
intriguing one. And the consequences need not be restricted 
to the mechanical behavior of physical systems, but may also 
influence their perceived substance. The noted British astron- 
omer Sir Arthur Eddington, some fifty years ago, presaged this 
concept most boldly and heretically [196], [197], [203]: 

The whole of those laws of nature. . .have their origin, not in 


any special mechanisms of nature, but in the workings of the 
mind.... 

All through the physical world runs that unknown content 
which must surely be the stuff of our consciousness... . 

Where science has progressed the farthest, the mind has regained 
from nature that which the mind has put into nature. . .. 

We may look forward with undiminished enthusiasm to learning 
in the coming years what lies in the atomic nucleus—even though 
we suspect that it is hidden there by ourselves... . 

The stuff of the world in mind-stuff. 


Transform Models 


Another rather extreme approach proposed recently has come 
to be referred to as the “holographic” or “transform” model 
{198]-[200]. Essentially what is suggested here, as I under- 
stand it, is that the information of the universe is arrayed, not 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


159 


in terms of position and time as we have come to perceive it, 
but rather as frequency and amplitude information, and that 
the human consciousness essentially performs ‘Fourier trans- 
forms” on this to order that information into the more familiar 
form. In the sense that the space and time coordinates are 


‘thereby downgraded from the fundamental coordinates of 


experience to useful ordering parameters, one could interpret 
such models to imply that consciousness may, by this mecha- 
nism, access any portion of space and time to acquire informa- 
tion, and then interpret it in some characteristic form. 

The physicist David Bohm, in conjunction with the psychol- 
ogist Karl Pribram, has elaborated such concepts to a consider- 
able degree of generality, proposing a so-called “implicate 
order” or “enfolded order” of fundamental reality from which 
the more familiar “explicate order,” i.e., the commonly mani- 
fest perceptions are assembled in accordance with the prevail- 
ing circumstances of their observation [201], [202]. 


Quantum Mechanical Models 


Probably the most exercised category of contemporary model 
attempts to apply the concepts and formalisms of quantum me- 
chanics to represent some of the paranormal effects presented 
in the psychic domain. Of all the forms of physical analysis, 
quantum mechanics invokes the largest array of empirical pos- 
tulates that are at variance with conventional rationality, and 
yields in their implementation a corresponding array of results 
which contradict common impressions of reality. The quan- 
tization process itself, which limits measurable properties to 
discrete values; the representation of particulate systems by 
wave functions; the role of observation in collapsing the wave 
functions to a single state vector; the uncertainty principle; 
the exclusion principle; the indistinguishability principle; and 
most drastic of all, the commitment to totally probabilistic 
mechanical behaviors—all, in some sense concede a degree of 
paradox in human perception of physical processes. The famil- 
jar conundrums of “Schrodinger’s Cat,” “‘Wigner’s Friend,” or 
the “Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox,” all suggest that the 
laws of quantum mechanics are not so much statements of 
fundamental physical reality, as of our ability to acquire in- 
formation about that reality. Quantum mechanics, in other 
words, does not so much describe the state of a physical sys- 
tem as it describes our knowledge of the state of that system. 

It is somewhat in this spirit that a number of authors have 
aspired to model psychic process in quantum mechanical terms. 
Some have attempted to invoke the so-called “thidden” or un- 
used variables of the formalism to involve conscious process 
more explicitly in the behavior of physical systems [107], 
{204]-[208]. Others have endeavored to draw analogies 
between the synaptic processes in the brain and quantum 


_ mechanical “tunneling” [209]. 


Given the primitive state of the phenomenological data base, 
much of this effort may be prematurely elaborate and complex. 
Our own approach to quantum mechanical modeling has been 
far more superficial and generic, attempting only to explore 
possible analogies between the paradoxical consequences of the 
formalism, and the paranormal evidence of certain psychic ex- 
periments. - Again with the indulgence of the reader, we might 
sketch a bit of this argument, for the purpose of illustrating 
this class of approach with the example closest to hand. 

One conventional interpretation of the application of quan- 
tum mechanical formalism to the observable behavior of phys- 
ical systems is to associate appropriate mathematical operators 
with a corresponding measurement process. When applied to 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


160 


the prevailing wave function of the system, these operators call 
out the observable values of the property in question as eigen- 
values of an equation of the form 


My; =m; 


where M is the measurement operator, m, are the observable 
values of the measured property, and y; the corresponding 
eigenstates of the wave function. Our approach is to general- 
ize this representation to include conscious systems as well as 
conventional physical ones, and to allow the measurement 
‘operator concept to include specification of psychological as 
well as physical properties. 

Thus, we denote a particular individual consciousness by a 
“state function” W;, and represent a situation to which it is 
exposed by an operator S. Application of the situation opera- 
tor to the consciousness wave function then yields the possible 
psychological responses, s;, as eigenvalues: 


Sp = 5, Vi. 


We then invoke certain aspects of quantum mechanical in- 
teraction theory to develop the capacity for “paranormal” be- 
havior of both physical and conscious systems. For example, in 
the traditional theory of the covalent chemical bond between 
two hydrogen atoms, sons constructs from the separate atomic 
functions, W* and w?, using arguments of symmetry and in- 
distinguishability, a coninoaite molecular wave function yr 
which yields expectation values for the molecular energy levels 
substantially different from simple linear superposition of the 
atomic energy eigenvalues, i.e., 2 


ef =e teP + Ae? 


where ej and ep are the energy eigenvalues of the atomic 
systems, and Ae? embodies an “exchange energy” term 
which is classically inexplicable, but devolves formally from 
the postulate that the electrons are indistinguishable in the 
bonded configuration. Stated more bluntly, surrendering in- 
formation about the identity of the atomic electrons in the 
molecular configuration leads directly to a significant and ob- 
servable component of the binding energy, thus posing an 
equivalence between information and energy far more stark 
than that implicit in the second law of thermodynamics. 

Using similar formalism, we may represent the state function 
of two interacting individuals, or of an interacting individual 
and physical system, by a composite state function yr whose 
behavior characteristics also differ significantly from those of 
the separated systems, i.e., 

9? = 59 +5? + Ast? + As PA 
where sf denotes the “normal” response of the first individual 
to the prevailing situation, and sP aed of the second individual 
or of the physical system, and Asf® and Asp denote modifica- 
tions of those behaviors arising because the two systems are 
strongly interacting during the observed situation. : 

As a specific example, to apply this approach to remote per- 
ception experiments we could denote the percipient by w?, the 
agent by W%, and the experimental protocol by the mathemati- 
cal operator P. In the absence of interaction between the per- 
cipient and agent, each would have certain “normal” reactions 
to the experimental situation, p?, p;', derived from the eigen- 
value relations: 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


PyP=pP ye 

PWT =DiVG 
ie., the percipient would perceive nothing about the target 
that was not accessible to his normal perceptual modes, and the 
agent would react to the target under no influence from the 
percipient. 

However, if the percipient and agent are strongly enough 

interacting to require a new “molecular” wave function, Y?%, 
“paranormal” terms will appear in their response patterns: 


pR4 = pP + pf + Apf? + Ap}? 


where in Ap?4 we may accommodate the anomalous acquisi- 
tion of information about the target, and in Ap?? the com- 
monly reported experience of the agent of having his attention 
attracted to specific details he would “normally” have ignored. 

Application of this formalism to a PK experiment proceeds 
in a similar fashion. Here we might represent the experimental 
operator (person) by W°, and the experimental device by y?, 
Again the experimental protocol is represented by a mathe- 
matical operator, K. In the absence of major interaction, the 
device behaves ‘‘normally”: 


Kypakiy? 
and the operator has the “normal’’ psychological experiences: 
KW? =k? W?. 
But if the operator and the device are in some state of reso- 
nance, pr, each behaves somewhat differently, ie., 
00 = KF +k? + AKG? + AKO4, 


The anomalous modification in the behavior of the system 
Ak? is termed PK; Axed accomodates any paranormal psy- 
chological reactions of the operator. 


Development of further illustrations of this general method. 


here would be inappropriate and would require more detailed 
specification of the nature of the consciousness wave functions, 
their functional form, their proper “‘soft”’ coordinates, and the 
interpretation of their quantum numbers. Some of this has 
been attempted, along with various other applications to the 
psychic domain, and is available in a reference [210]. The 
point of exposition here is largely a philosophical one: namely, 
the “paranormal” effects emerge as a consequence of the com- 
parison of the behavior of an interacting system with that of 
its separated components. 

Quantum mechanics may have quite another analytical 
precedent to contribute to the representation of psychic 
phenomenology. Clearly, much of the psychic research data 


_ will continue to be acquired and processed in statistical form, 


using established statistical methods. Yet, all statistical models 
ultimately trace back to certain fundamental probability rules 
for the elemental systems involved. For the statistical models 
to be viable, these probability rules must a) exist; b) be known; 
and c) be analytically tractable. At present, virtually all pro- 
cessing of psychic research data presumes the applicability of 
classical statistics, yet the basic probability rules for the ele- 
mental processes are, in point of fact, unknown [211], [212]. 

It may fortuitously be the case that much of psychic process 
can be adequately treated as marginal deviation from classical 
chance behavior. In some cases, however, it may be necessary 
to invoke categorically different statistics, tracing back to funda- 
mentally different probability rules, to deal with the effects. 
The quantum mechanical precedents of relevance, of course, are 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


= target 
and the 
-om the 


enough 
an, WP, 
mns: 


acquisi- 
‘he com- 
ttention 
ignored. 
proceeds 
rimental 
2 by y4. 
4 mathe- 
-tion, the 


-riences: 


2 of reso- 


re system 
ermal psy- 


al method 
-e detailed 
‘functions, 
zs, and the 
of this has 
wns to the 
10). The 
w: namely, 
«f the com- 
ath that of 


analytical 
af psychic 
search data 
stical form, 
ical models 
rbility rules 
‘ical models 
| be known; 
illy all pro- 
icability of 
for the ele- 
1}, [212]. 
shic process 
om classical 
ve necessary 


ck to funda- 
the effects. 
€ course, are 


JAHN: Ago PN Veh dvan AR eheaSer BOHN WE CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 164 


the two systems of quantum statistics, i.e., the Fermi-Dirac 
and Bose-Einstein systems, which are based upon the phase- 
space population rules for half-integer and integer spin particles 
as imposed by the Pauli principle, i.e., the wave function sym- 
metry requirements. For most common physical systems, these 
quantum statistics conveniently degenerate into the classical 
form, but for certain special situations, e.g., the specific heats 
of metals and certain radiation properties, their full applica- 
tion is essential. 

By analogy, one could postulate that physical reality, as per- 
ceived and influenced by human consciousness, actually plays 
by more elaborate probability rules than commonly attributed 
to it, and hence strictly requires a more complex statistical 
mechanics. Thus, in this view, the processes commonly regarded 
as “normal” would be those for which the “classical” approxi- 
mation to this more complex system is adequate; small-scale 
psychic effects would then comprise those displays of minor 
deviations of the complex statistics from the “‘classical’’ limit; 
the more drastic phenomena—poltergeists, levitations, metal 
bending, etc.-would presumably become explicable only in 
terms of the full statistical formulation. 


Holistic Models 


Yet more. extreme in conceptual difficulty is a body of con- 
tention that psychic processes are inseparably holistic, and that 
no model rooted in any sector of established science can ad- 
equately represent them [213]. In particular, the suggestion 
is offered that psychic processes are manifestations of the inter- 
diffusion of the analytical, scientific world with the creative 
aesthetic world, and thus to represent them effectively it will 
be necessary to combine the philosophical perspectives and 
techniques of both domains. To resort to metaphor for illus- 
tration once again, one could ponder such analogies from the 
common physical world as the interface regions between the 
sea and land, where the diffuse patterns of the ocean wave 
structure meet the solid promontories and sloping beaches of 
the coast to produce the crashing breakers and hissing foam of 
seashore phenomena, or the overrunning of a warm, moist 
atmosphere by a cold-front of drier, cooler air to initiate the 
striking electrical and acoustical phenomena of the summer 
thunderstorm. 

By whatever analogy it may be illustrated, theoretical repre- 
sentation of the interpenetration of causal physical mechanics 
with creative conscious process must be a formidable under- 
taking, yet not totally without precedent or allied effort. For 
examples, interest is just now growing in the humanistic psy- 
chology community in the analytical study of human creativity 
[214}]-[216], and, on the other side of the interface, a few 
physicists are beginning to muse openly about the role of 
aesthetics in subnuclear and cosmological physical behavior 
[217]-[220]. In yet a different arena, certain futurists are 
now examining the interplay of aesthetic and functional hu- 
man needs and values in the evolution of social and political 
structure [221]. To be sure, none of these has produced much 
in the way of analytical formalism, but the peculiarity, magni- 


| tude, and significance of the interpenetration effects are being 


acknowledged. : 

Any summary assessment of the status of physical models of 
psychic phenomena should properly begin with reiteration of 
the opening statement: none of the approaches outlined above 
has yielded anything approaching a functional theoretical basis. 
Yet, the ensemble of empirical experimental experience seems 
to suggest that certain of the conceptual and perceptual char- 


acteristics underlying ‘those formalisms may be relevant to 
ultimate representation of such processes. Specifically, they 
suggest that the following rather general hypotheses may be 
worthy of more detailed examination: 

1) The phenomena may be inherently statistical, rather than 
directly causal, and we may be observing them ‘‘on the margin.” 
That is, the observed phenomena may represent marginal 
changes from normal behavior on a very grand scale and with 
fluctuation times which tax human observational capability. It 
also may be necessary to deal with more complex statistical 
mechanics, appropriate to more involved basic probability 
rules, to represent the most drastic effects. 

2) Just as human consciousness has the ability to extract in- 
formation from an external system, e.g., by observing it, that 
consciousness may also have the ability to project information 
into it, e.g., by ordering random processes. 

3) Quantum mechanics may be more than a system of physi- 
cal mechanics; it may be a more fundamental representation of 
human consciousness and perception processes, and the empiri- 
cal pillars of this formalism, such as the uncertainty principle, 
the exclusion principle, the indistinguishability principle, and 
the wave/particle dualities may be as much laws of conscious- 
ness as laws of physics. 

4) Psychic processes may be inherently holistic, and thus 
the ultimate model may need to integrate both the scientific 
and the aesthetic aspects in order to identify ‘the sources of 
the phenomena. That is, psychic processes may be manifesta- 
tions of the intersection of the analytical, scientific world 
with the creative, aesthetic world, and thus, to represent them 
effectively, it may be necessary to integrate both perspectives 
without sacrificing the integrity of either. 

Clearly, any of these intuitions will have to be developed in 
far more philosophical and analytical detail before a trenchant 
theoretical model can emerge, but at this primitive stage it is 
probably stimulating to consider a few such radical possibilities, 
along with more prosaic explications. Changes of this magni- 
tude in representation of human perceptual reality inevitably, 
and properly, would be attended by much philosophical re- 
calcitrance and agony, but the broader personal and collective 
insights that could derive from legitimate efforts to bridge the 
analytical/aesthetic interface could be of at least corresponding 
benefit. 


THE NEGATIVE SIDE 


Contemporary criticism of psychic research and rejection of 
the phenomena it purports to demonstrate tend to focus on a 
number of specific objections, each of which has some degree 
of validity and merits some thought in any balanced assess- 
ment of the topic [118], [178], [222]-[224]. The mast 
commonly cited concerns include: 


1) demonstrable fraud; 

2) naivete of technique, including inadequate controls, 
faulty equipment, sensory cuing of participants, other 
experimenter biases, selective treatment of data, im- 
proper statistical methods, and general experimental 
and theoretical incompetence; 

3) little improvement in comprehension over many years 
of study; 

4) absence of adequate theoretical models; 

5) suppression of negative results; 

6) poor experimental replicability; . 

7) elusiveness of effects under close scrutiny; 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


PE RTI ISNA ERIE SP Eh, eg RE 


ae eee eee 


Pa ee ee 


“162 ' 


~ 8) sensitivity of results to participants, attitudes, and labora- 
tory ambience; ; 
9) tendency for many results to be only marginally signif- 
icant compared to chance expectation; 
10) inconsistency with prevailing “scientific world view;” 
11) contradictory to personal psychology, philosophy, 
theology, or “common sense.” > 


Obviously this list runs a gamut from rather technical and pro- 
cedural objections, through phenomenological inconsistencies, 
to rather categorical and subjective rejections, and only a few 
of these issues can be constructively addressed here. 

Unfortunately, but undeniably, one or the other of the first 
two judgments may legitimately be applied to a large body of 
the propounded results. By its nature, the field is immensely 
vulnerable to fraudulent exploitation and naive gullibility, and 
such have indeed occurred to a distressing degree. It is also 
true that the topic has attracted a disproportionate share of less 
than fully competent researchers, and that it presents extra- 
ordinary pitfalls for even the most disciplined scholars. Yet 
despite the substantial validity of these claims, and the suspicion 
they inevitably cast on all other results, it does not seem that 
they should predicate categorical rejection of the entire field. 
Rather, the vulnerable cases should be patiently ferreted out 
using obvious scholarly criteria, and only those efforts surviving 
such scrutiny used for scientific insight and judgment. 

The lack of definitive progress toward comprehension of the 
phenomena and the absence of viable theoretical models have 
already been acknowledged in the foregoing text, and although 
these assessments should perhaps be qualified by the relatively 
minute integrated investment of resources made in this field in 
comparison to many of the more favored areas of science, they 
nonetheless constitute legitimate concerns about the ultimate 
tractability of the field. It should perhaps also be noted that, 
despite the prolonged effort, it is only very recently that more 
sensitive and powerful experimental equipment and data pro- 
cessing techniques have been brought to bear, and equally re- 
cently that more sophisticated physical formalisms have been 
invoked, and that these have had a much briefer opportunity 
to render the phenomena into comprehensible terms. ; 

The subsequent five objections, 5)-9), are more specific and 
substantive, and merit examination from two orthogonal points 
of view. Namely, to what extent do such characteristics indeed 
invalidate the results, and conversely, to what extent might they 
illuminate the basic nature of the phenomena? With respect to 
suppression of unfavorable results, there has undoubtedly been 
some tendency in this field, as in most others, to advance posi- 
tive or definitive findings more enthusiastically than negative 
or equivocal ones. Indeed, this paper has been guilty of the 
same bias. In an effort to. provide concise representation of 
the style and substance of psychic research and of the nature 
of the effects it can produce, we have tended to invoke as illus- 
trations some of the more successful and familiar pieces of 


work without balancing the presentation with comparable ex- . 


amples of the negative or equivocal results that are regularly 
acquired in these efforts. 

To the credit of the psychic research community, it has offi- 
cially encouraged thorough and objective reporting of negative 
data, and much of these indeed appear regularly in its established 
journals [225]~{228], with a number of consequent benefits. 
First, beyond ‘adding credibility to the body of positive results, 
such data compound to provide some quantitative index of the 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : ClAPRDRSG&2O? S8ROMH 100 01 BOO4EGBRUARY 1982 


ratio of positive to negative yields ina given class of experiment, 
thereby contributing to a broader sense of the grand statistics 
of the phenomena. In addition, documentation of the specific 
conditions prevailing in unsuccessful experiments may be help- 
ful in excluding irrelevant parameters from further considera- 
tion, and in identifying and reducing counterproductive influ- 
ences. Perhaps most pointedly, however, the body of negative 
and equivocal data emphasize that psychic phenomena, if real, 
are highly irregular and sensitive to intangible influences well 
beyond current scientific control, and, if their study is to be 
pursued, this caveat must be accepted ab initio, at least for the 
present. 

A similar interpretation also applies to the irreplicability 
complaint, and to the three following it. Without question, 
the dominant experimental frustration in this field is the in- 
ability to replicate on demand previously observed paranormal 
effects, not only at other laboratories, but even in the original 
facility, using the original participants, under apparently identi- 
cal experimental circumstances [172], [173], (229]-[231]. 
This ubiquitous characteristic has precipitated major philosoph- 
ical excursions which are well beyond our capacity to review 
here. Only briefly, four possible categorical interpretations 
have been advocated: 


a) The phenomena are illusory. 

b) The phenomena are rare and bizarre chance occurrences, 
beyond any hope of regularization. 

c) The phenomena are precipitated, at least in part, by psy- 
chological and/or physiological factors which are presently 
beyond experimental control, but which if fully compre- 
hended would conform to established scientific paradigm. 

d) The phenomena are inherently statistical, and possibly 
quantum mechanical, on a macroscopic scale, thus mani- 
festing themselves with finite but fractional probability 
on any given occasion. F 


The latter pair of options are not necessarily mutually exclu- 
sive, particularly if one takes a rather generous doubly statistical 
point of view, namely that the human population embodies a 
range of capability for engendering such effects and that beyond 
that, any individual may display a variable range of personal ca- 
pacity, depending on a variety of environmental, physiological, 
and psychological factors prevailing at the time. 

The evasiveness of the phenomena under carefully controlled 
and observed study may be the most damning criticism of all, 
or it may also constitute a valid and illuminating phenomeno- 
logical characteristic. The tendency of a given preliminary or 
anecdotal effect to disappear or diminish when the experiment 
is tightened, or when it is displayed to a skeptical jury of ob- 
servers, obviously casts major doubt on the scientific integrity 
of the process. Yet it also brings to mind at least two other pro- 
cesses which, while superficially dissimilar, may not be totally 
irrelevant, namely artistic creativity, and quantum mechanical 
measurement as limited by the uncertainty principle. In the 
former, there should be little quarrel that the creative processes 
of artistic, musical, or literary composition, or of lofty philo- 
sophical thought in general, are not usually facilitated by rigid 
constraints or by the presence of a body of unsympathetic 
observers. The importance of favorable ambience and mood 
for such efforts is intuitively and demonstrably clear, and little 
creative achievement is likely to occur in overly sterile or hostile 
environments, a truth Richard Wagner vividly conveyed to his 
own critics by his portrayal of the fate of young Walther at- 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


ce camera nS ote ERO 


Sideie dg eal F ‘i pili dicen ott 


ae 


ake +3 


Jai ested bn. aide tide eek AR ABLES ALE 


CY 1982 


=riment, 
statistics 
specific 
be help- 
ensidera- 
ve influ- 
negative 
n, if real, 
ces well 

is to be 
tt for the 


-icability 
_uestion, 
s the in- 
-anormal 
: original 
iy identi- 
-[231]. 
nilosoph- 
o review 
retations 


arrences, | 


» by psy- 
Dresently 
compre- 
_radigm. 
possibly 
aus mani- 
wbability 


ly exclu- 
statistical 
nbodies a 
ut beyond 


rsonal ca- & 


-iological, 


ontrolled 
sm of all, 
snomeno- 
cninary of 
=periment 
ary of ob- 


: integrity 


other pro- 
‘be totally 


sechanical § 


e. In the 
processes 
fty philo- 


d by rigid § 


mipathetic 


. and little 


: or hostile § 
yed to his 


Walther at- 


ry 


JAHN: PSYCHIC PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


tempting his avant-garde “Trial Song” before the assembled 
Meistersingers. Virtually every creative artist preserves some 
form of retreat or sanctuary, and even the most rigorous of 
scientists will concede the role of unstructured mental imagery 
in enhancing their technical insights. 

The analogy of the quantum mechanical measurement process 
is somewhat more strained, in that it requires generalization of 
the concept to the macroscopic level of information or energy 
exchange between two persons or between a person and a 
physical system. The point will not be developed here, other 
than to note that if there is any validity to the application of 
quantum mechanical logic to this class and scale of intellectual/ 


intuitive process, as discussed earlier and in the references, - 


some form of “uncertainty principle” could predicate a limit 
to the precision with which psychic effects could be observed. 
More specifically, if the “hard” and “soft” coordinates of repre- 
sentation are canonically conjugate, some form of AgAp ~h 
rule may apply, so that attempts at excessive precision in speci- 
fication of a psychic effect could dissipate its cause, and vice- 
versa [210]. 

The final two reservations regarding inconsistency of the phe- 
nomena with established scientific and personal views, while 
constituting powerful professional and personal discriminators 
and properly predicating great caution and discipline in ventur- 
ing into any anomalous field, also cannot be allowed total veto 
authority if new domains of conceptual experience are ever to 


| be challenged. In responding to a critic of an earlier paper who 


stood on these points I wrote, perhaps too floridiy, 


Authoritarianism such as this encourages established knowledge 
to sit smugly on its duff and categorically reject alt new evidence 
that does not support or fill in its contemporary “world-view 
compatability criterion”—whatever that is. Worst of all, it stifles 
the most precious attribute of human consciousness, the yearning 
for ever new, ever higher wisdom that has driven the mind and 
spirit of man to evolve upward, rather than merely to replicate 
[232]. 


More persuasive to this issue, however, would be a simple histor- 


ical count of the number of leaps of scientific insight, from 
Aristotle to this day, which would have been, and in most 
cases were, for a time, rejected on the basis of these criteria. 


+ Curiously, it has often been those giants of science who with 
} soaring insight and courage of conviction violated such tenets 
} (o lead their fields to new plateaus of understanding, who also, 


in a later day, led the recalcitrance of the establishment against 
comparably sacrilegious visions of their successors, while still 
endorsing in general terms the importance of visionary thought. 
Galileo, early champion of scientific methodology and revolu- 
tionary concepts in terrestrial and celestial mechanics against 
vicious dogmatic opposition, rejected Kepler’s elliptical orbits 
as “occult fantasy”; Thomas Young, whose brilliant interference 


B experiments finally established the wave character of light, 


contended with Fresnel’s theoretical formulations of the same 


| processes; Ernst Mach disputed relativity and atomic theory; 


Rutherford, who showed the world the nuclear atom, dismissed 


Rany practical significance for nuclear energy; Lavoisier and 


Ostwald disputed atomic theories of chemistry; D’Alembert 


opposed Probability theory; Edison discounted alternating 
and mood & 


current; Lindberg despaired of Goddard’s rocketry; and Albert 


Einstein retained an enduring uneasiness about quantum theory 
f despite his many contributions to its evolution [233]-[235]. 


Incidentally, the same Albert Einstein who would invoke the 
establishment criteria against Upton Sinclair’s clairvoyance 


‘+. Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


163 


data: 

...the results of the telepathic experiments carefully and 
plainly set forth in this book stand surely far beyond those 
which a nature investigator holds to be thinkable [152]. 

could in quite another tone testify eloquently to the impor- 
tance of the aesthetic dimension in creative science: 

The most beautiful and most profound emotion we can ex- 
perience is the sensation of the mystical. It is the sower of all 
true science. He to whom this emotion is a stranger, who can no 
longer wonder and stand rapt in awe, is as good as dead. To know 
that what is impenetrable to us really exists, manifesting itself as 
the highest wisdom and the most radiant beauty which our dull 
faculties can comprehend only in their most primitive forms— 
this knowledge, this feeling is at the center of true religiousness. 

The cosmic religious experience is the strongest and noblest 
mainspring of scientific research [236]. 

Individually and collectively, these critical challenges to psy- 
chic research raise valid concerns which merit deliberate atten- 
tion and predicate great caution, and can also help to illuminate 
some of the subtle phenomenological features. However, they 
can perform these functions well only if they themselves are 
informed, reasoned, and fair. Regrettably, from my reading of 
the critical literature, this has not invariably been the case, and 
instances of naiveté, selective representation of data and pro- 
tocol, and excessive generalization also appear therein. 

The role of the critic in psychic research is a most essential 
one, perhaps more so than in any field of scholarship yet 
broached. When the criticism is based in fact and experience 
and is objective and fair, it can instill healthy discipline in the 
study of this or any other difficult field and ensure that the 
fundamental! requisites of scientific methodology, e.g, dippas- 
sionate rigor, humility in the face of observations, limitation 
on extrapolation of results, and openness of mind will prevail 
in the search. But it is equally essential that the process of 
criticism play by these same rules. If it violates any of them, 
if it lapses into categorical rejection, guilt by association, or 
sloppy logic, it can become as suspect as the object of its 
complaint, and thus fail in its proper role [237]. 


IMPLICATIONS 


Despite their compounded length, the foregoing historical 
outline, survey of contemporary activity, and selected ex- 
amples of ongoing research and theoretical efforts are still far 
from adequate to convey the full essence of this complex and 
contradictory field. Fortunately an extensive body of refer- 
ence literature exists, including a number of comprehensive 
general volumes, whereby an interested reader may flesh out 
this sketch and extend it to many aspects not broached here 
{6}, [44], [45], [56], [57], [92], [130], [238)-[242]. 
Hopefully, such more thorough study would tend to confirm 
the general impressions of the status and prospects of the field 
conveyed above. To restate these in summary, it appears that 
once the illegitimate research and invalid criticism have been set 
aside, the remaining accumulated evidence of psychic phenom- 
ena comprises an array of experimental observations, obtained 
under reasonable protocols in a variety of Scholarly disciplines, 
which compound to a philosophical dilemma. On the one hand, 
effects inexplicable in terms of established scientific theory, yet 
having numerous common characteristics, are frequently and 
widely observed; on the other hand, these effects have so far 
proven qualitatively and quantitatively irreplicable, in the strict 
scientific sense, and appear to be sensitive to a variety of psycho- 
logical and environmental factors that are difficult to specify, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


r 


: «a, Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIARBRR96:007 8BRAO-WNON10004Bavary 1962 


let alone control. Under these circumstances, critical experi- 
mentation has been tedious and frustrating at best, and theoret- 
ical modeling still searches for vocabulary and concepts, well 
short of any useful formalisms. ; 

Given these difficulties, what then are the motivations, if any, 
to proceed? As for most speculative topics, three potential 
generic benefits cquld be considered: 


a) acquisition of fundamental knowledge, 

b) practical applications, 

c) humanistic benefits. — 

In this particular field, basic knowledge might accrue in two 
ways—the attainment of new scientific information in the usual 
sense, and the broadening of scientific methodology to deal 
more effectively with irregular phenomena of this type. In other 
words, study of this topic not only might provide certain phe- 
nomenological answers, but also might serve to broaden the 
context in which science can formulate its questions. New 
mechanisms for transfer of information or energy might be 
identified, or broader understanding of those properties, and 
how they are perceived and measured might emerge. The latter 
half of the opportunity clearly is a major challenge to science, 
but hardly a new one. William James posed it rather bluntly 
some eighty-five years ago: 

The spirit and principles of science are mere affairs of method; 
there is nothing in them that need hinder science from dealing 
successfully with a world in which personal forces are the starting 
point of new effects. The only form of thing that we concretely 
have is our own personal life. The only completed category of 
our thinking, our professors of philosophy tell us, is the category 
of personality, every other category being one of the abstract 
elements of that. And this systematic denial on science’s part of 
personality as a condition of events, this rigorous belief that in its 
own essential and innermost nature our world is a strictly im- 
personal world, may, conceivably, as the whirligig of time goes 
round, prove to be the very defect that our descendants will be 
most surprised at in our boasted science, the omission that to 
their eyes will most tend to make it look perspectiveless and 
short [24]. 

The potential applications of psychic process are best con- 
sidered with conservatism and restraint, especially given the 
tendency of certain elements of the public media and private 
exploiters to extrapolate the possibilities far beyond any dem- 
onstrated accomplishments. Clearly, the process of remote 
perception described earlier, along with other forms of clair- 
voyance, could hold some potential interest for intelligence 
agencies, law enforcement units, and any other activity relying 
on surveillance, as well as for archaeological searches, natural 
resource prospecting, and the like, and such operations have 
indeed engaged in empirical efforts to evaluate the efficacy of 
such strategies in their particular domains. From a strictly 
engineering standpoint, however, the potential efficiency and 
precision of such tactics are unclear, given their apparent ten- 
dency to trade more effectively in impressionistic generalities 
than in analytical detail. 

Low-level PK effects, such as the REG distortions indicated 
above, could have more pervasive implications for high technol- 
ogy. If, for example, the basic functions of microelectronic 


elements could be even slightly disturbed by intentional or in- . 
advertent intervention of human consciousness, it would seem: 


important to obtain some assessment of the potential magni- 
tude of such effects, and of the factors favoring or inhibiting 
such interference, before much more elaborate integrated cir- 
cuit arrays, graphic display systems, and other sensitive man/ 
machine interfaces are committed to delicate or critical opera- 


tions, To focus our assessment of such possibilities, we are now 


‘examining PK disturbance of the memory function of a single 


microelectronic chip [243]. If the indications that psychologi- 
cal and environmental factors bear on the precipitation of such 
effects are sustained, it may be necessary to expand considera- 
tion of such parameters beyond the usual scope of human 
factors engineering, especially in situations involving high psy- 
chological stress. 

The potential humanistic benefits of better comprehension 
of psychic phenomena could be addressed on either a personal 
or social level, but to do so in any detail would far exceed the 
purview of this article. Again, extensive references on various 
facets of the issue abound [244]-[252]. Ultimately, most of 
these philosophical excursions arrive at the same monumental 
question, namely whether convincing demonstration of the 
capability of human consciouness to influence its reality to a 
significant degree would substantially alter individual and col- 
lective perception of the human state, its value system, and 
its behavior pattern, and thereby facilitate its evolution to a 
higher life form. Such projections have been offered from a 
variety of perspectives. Engineer/futurist Willis Harman fore- 
casts an “inner experience” paradigm: 

Just as conventional science depends upon a prior consensus 
on how knowledge of the sense-perceived world shall be publicly 
tested and validated, so the complementary paradigm will have 
to include consensus on how knowledge relating to the world 
of inner experience shall be publicly tested and validated. 

Its essential characteristic would be that consciouness and its 
contents are primary data, rather than being secondary and de- 
rivative as in the conventional paradigm. Where the conventional 
paradigm involves reductionistic models the complementary para- 
digm would add holistic models; where the first employs deter- 
ministic (or stochastic) explanations of events the second would 
add teleological, purpose-recognizing explanations; where the first 
is little involved with matters of values and meaning, the second 
finds these of central concern; where the first is dominated by 
technology-focused values of prediction and control, the second 
would tend to value understanding relating to human well-being, 
development and evolution [221]. 


Biologist /immunologist Jonas Salk phrases it more in terms of 


a resonance of human volition with natural processes: 


Man has come to the threshold of a state of consciousness, re- 
garding his nature and his relationship to the Cosmos, in terms that 
reflect ‘reality.’ By using the processes of Nature as metaphor, 
to describe the forces by which it operates upon and within Man, 
we come as close to describing ‘reality’ as we can within the limits 
of our comprehension. Men will be very uneven in their capacity 
for such understanding, which, naturally, differs for different ages 
and cultures, and develops and changes in the course of time. For 
these reasons it will always be necessary to use metaphor and 
myth to provide ‘comprehensible’ guides to living. In this way, 
Man’s imagination and intellect play vital roles in his survival and 
evolution [249]. 


And philosopher/paleontologist Teilhard de Chardin states his 


hope in terms of a collective consciousness of the human race: 


Thus we find ourselves in the presence, in actual possession, of 
the super-organism we have been seeking, of whose existence we 
were intuitively aware. The collective mankind which the sociol- 
ogists needed for the furtherance of their speculations and formu- 
lations now appears scientifically defined, manifesting itself in its 
proper time and place, like an object entirely new and yet awaited 
in the sky of life. It remains for us to observe the world by the 
light it sheds, which throws into astonishing relief the great en- 
semble of everyday phenomena with which we have always lived, 
without perceiving their reality, their immediacy or their vastness 
[253]. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


sak y diadiehurd sig a LOU dee tile a as ER ee 


won edi Pabbabvas. « 


sta; 
-exy 
sely 
foc 
thri 
» | 
dex 
Phy 
der 
“nc 
pla: 
acc 
con 
pro 
cor 
can 
call 
fou: 
mer 
and 
whi 
data 
the 
allo: 
hun 


Y 1982 


are NOW 
a single 
shologi- 
of such 
nsidera- 
human 


igh psy- 


hension 
yersonal 
seed the 
various 
most of 
umental 

of the 
‘ity toa 
and col- 
am, and 
ion to a 
| froma 
an fore- 


sensus 
iblicly 
1 have 
world 


ind its 
nd de- 
tional 
y para~ 
deter- 
would 
ie first 
second 
ted by 
second 
-being, 


terms of 


-BSS, Te- 
mas that 
aphor, 
in Man, 
= limits 
upacity 
nt ages 
e. For 
or and 
“is way, 
val and 


states his 
nan race: 
sion, of 
=nce we 
» sociol- 
formu- 
sf in its 
awaited 
by the 
teat en- 
ws lived, 
wastness 


sann: ARREOMED AA REMASRROQRIORO A: : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 165 


On a somewhat less lofty, but possibly more functional level, 
a recent lengthy study prepared for the House of Representa- 
tives Science and Technology Committee, in a section encourag- 
ing serious assessment of further research on “the physics of 
consciousness,” stated that recent experiments: : 
suggest that there exists an ‘interconnectiveness’ of the human 
mind with other minds and with matter; ... that the human mind 
may be able to obtain the information independent of geography 
and time 
and later concluded that: 
.a general recognition of the degree of interconnectiveness 
of niltids could have far-reaching social and political mae 
for this nation and the world [254]. 
The details and tones of these visions clearly are matters of 
individual heritage, experience, and intuition, but the messages 
share a common theme: the next stage in human evolution may 
involve expansion and interconnection of human consciousness, 
features clearly central to the psychic concept. 

Beyond the difficulty of the phenomena and potential bene- 
fits of the knowledge, a more prosaic factor to be considered 
in contemplating further psychic research is the requisite cost 
of the effort. To date, such.experimentation has been extra- 
ordinarily inexpensive by usual scientific standards. The primi- 


} tive level of comprehension, the lack of organized interest within 


the established scientific communities, and the Bohemian status 
of many of the investigators have predicated projects of very 
low budgets compounding to a total annual national investment 
of the order of one million dollars or less [255]. Clearly, if 
more incisive progress is to be attempted, some increase in the 
sophistication and interaction of the principal programs must 
be funded, but it is most unlikely, and for the time probably 
undesirable, that this will consume any magnitude of resources 
comparable with, or distractive from, the better established re- 
scarch domains. A comparable statement could be made with 
respect to commitments of the requisite scholarly personnel. 

If on the basis of such cost/risk/benefit considerations a 
modest ongoing program of research seems justified, it re- 
mains to consider the selection of topics, experimental styles, 
and evaluation criteria which would optimize the effort at this 
stage. In addition to the obvious desiderata that the specific 
experiments be clearly posed, conceptually simple, lend them- 
selves logistically to rigorous, tightly controlled protocols, and 
focus on the more tractable and potentially applicable effects, 
three more specific recommendations could be offered. 

First, given the irregularity of the phenomena, their possible 
dependence upon a broad range of physical, psychological, 
physiological, and environmental parameters, and their ten- 
dency to display effects as marginal deviations from some 
“normal” distributions, some premium should probably be 
placed on the capacity of the experiments for large data base 
accumulation and processing. While less prolific studies may 
continue to provide interesting anecdotal effects and suggest 
procedures for more detailed programs, it is unlikely that much 
correlation of those effects with pertinent prevailing parameters 
can be achieved without large quantities of data. More specifi- 
cally, the favored experiments should 1) deal with processes 
found to have relatively high intrinsic yields; 2) employ equip- 
ment and protocols which permit data acquisition at rapid rates; 
and 3) have access to computational equipment and "software 
which allow storage of large data arrays and processing of that 
data in many selective cross-concatenations. As an example, 
the latest refinement of the REG experiment described earlier 
allows acquisition, storage, and primary processing of several 
hundred experimental trials (~10° - 10° bits) per hour, and 


subsequent concatenation of all previously stored data by any 
permutation of ten parametric indices, e.g., sampling rate, 
manual /automatic, volitional/instructed, operator characteris- 
tics, etc. For any such parametric explorations to be indicative, 
the pertinent data subset must be adequately large to display 
any systematic deviation from the baseline distribution beyond 
the statistical noise background. This we have found to re- 
quire at least several thousand trials; the implication for the 
total data base is clear. 

This very large data capability inevitably predicates a sophis- 
tication in equipment and software which, beyond the initial 
and operating expenses, may introduce some undesirable effects 
of complicating the phenomenological processes and clouding 
the experimental ambiences. Specifically, one needs to consider 
whether any observed effects, in either the PK or ESP categories, 
still trace unequivocally to the primary physical processes, or 
whether there now might arise confounding interactions with 
elements of the data collection and processing equipment or 
techniques. Related to this concern are possible uncertainties 
of the participants in defining and focusing on the primary 
tasks, 

Reservations of this sort lead directly to a second general rec- 
ommendation for effective psychic experimentation. Namely, if 
the phenomena derive to any significant degree from conscious 
or subconscious processes of the human mind, it is important 
that such not be inhibited or excessively complicated by the 
design and operation of the experiments. For this and numer- 
ous other reasons, it is probably essential in planning and im- 
plementing the experimental programs to include the insights, 
interpretations, and intuitions of the human operators, espe- 
cially those who have demonstrated some success in the gen- 
eration of the phenomena. It is quite possible that the differ- 
ence between a sterile experiment and an effective one of equal 
rigor lies as much in the impressionistic aspects of its ambience 
and feedback as in the elegance of its instrumentation, and the 
former need to be well-tuned to the participants who are asked 
to function as components of the experimental system. On oc- 
casion, there seems to have been some tendency in this field to 
treat the experimental participants in rather perfunctory fash- 
ion, discounting any insights they might offer on the tasks at 
hand. If one subscribes at all to the concept of the phenomena 
emerging from some interpenetration of analytic and intuitive 
processes as suggested by the holistic models, there would seem 
no better place to combine perceptions and insights from these 
two domains than in the design, operation, and interpretation 
of the experiments addressed to illumination of the interface. 

Finally, it seems most evident that given the intrinsic trans- 
disciplinary nature of the business, research on this topic in 
any established sector should become much more communica- 
tive and interactive across traditional scholarly boundaries if it 
is to have any hope of rendering the phenomena into compre- 
hensible and serviceable terms. This cross-talk cannot be 
limited to naturally contiguous fields, 4 la the usual exchange 
between physicist and engineer, or between psychologist and 
sociologist. As its lengthy heritage illustrates, in this domain 
the interests and insights of the theologian, philosopher, statis- 
tician, technologist, hard scientist, and creative holistic thinker 
are all potentially valid, and need to be melded in scholarly 
symbiosis and common respect. No insular approach is likely 
to prevail. ; 

This requisite has implications for the staffing of particular 
projects, for the institutional environment in which they oper- 
ate, and for the professional societies and publications which 
choose to attend to this topic. Individual laboratory personnel 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


setae oo torte come saree ee 


i oe ar ne 


. ..+t Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


. 


166 


groups should comprise a broader range of experience and in- 
sight than the conventional hierarchy of technical specialists, 
and their cognizance of other contemporary work should be 
broader. The institution housing that laboratory needs to dis- 
play considerable tolerance and support for the unusual tone 
and special requirements of the research and not force its con- 
formity to established scientific subdivisions and research styles. 
Likewise, the professional community at large cannot at this 
time profitably ask for total adherence to its own reductionistic 
superstructure, but can. only inquire dispassionately regarding 
the respective implications of this conglomerate field for the 
traditional areas of endeavor. 

In this last regard, I should like to express my personal re- 
spect for this particular Society, and for this particular Journal, 
for the openness and generosity of spirit with which they have 
solicited and presented the results of legitimate scholarly effort 
in this difficult field. Their attitude could well stand as a model 
for other institutions and organs in dealing with this topic or 
with any other present or future projective area of human 


inquiry. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


The author would like to express his indebtedness to his re- 
search colleague, Ms. B. J. Dunne, who has provided immense 
logistical help in the preparation of this manuscript and who, 
as laboratory manager of the Princeton Engineering Anomalies 
Research program, has played a primary role in the generation 
and interpretation of much of the data reported herein. Dr. 
R. D. Nelson also contributed heavily to the experimental pro- 
gram and to the refinement of the manuscript. Prof. W. H. 
Surber designed much of the REG circuitry and software, and 
wrote the original programs for the remote perception analytical 
judging procedure. 

The program has also benefitted immensely from the interests 
and efforts of several present and past students and staff, most 
notably C. K. Curry (Dunham), E. G. Jahn, T. A. Curtis, and 
I. A. Cook. 


« 


REFERENCES 


{1] M. Ebon, “A history of parapsychology,” in Psychic Exploration, 
E, D. Mitchell et ai., J. White, Ed. New York: Putnam, 1974. _ 

{2] A Gould, The Founders of Psychical Research. New York: 
Schocken, 1968. 

[3} J. B. Rhine and associates, Parapsychology from Duke toFRNM. 
Durham, NC: Parapsychology Press, 1965. 

[4] H. Carrington, The Story of Psychic Science (Psychical R esearch). 
New York: Ives Washburn, 1931. ; 

{5] R. C. LeClair, Ed., The Letters of William James and Théodore 
Flournoy... (Foreword by Gardner Murphy.) Madison, W1: Uni- 
versity of Wisconsin Press, 1966. 

[6] B. B. Wolman, Ed., Handbook of Parapsychology. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977. 

{7] D.S. Rogo, Parapsychology: A Century of Inquiry. New York: 
Taplinger, 1975. : 

{8] F. Hartmann, Paracelsus: Life and Prophecies. 
Rudolf Steiner Publications, 1973, pp. 103-131. 

(9] M. Bell, “Francis Bacon: Pioneer in parapsychology,” Int. J. 
Parapsychol., VI, no. 2, pp. 199-208, Spring, 1964. 

[10] J. Glanvill, Saducismus Triumphatus, Introduction by C. O. Par- 
sons, Facsimiles edit. Gainesville, FL: Scholars’ Facsimiles and 
Reprints, 1966. (Originally published in 1689.) ; 

[11] R. Haynes, Philosopher King—The Humanist Pope Benedict XIV. 
London, England: Weidenfeid & Nicholson, 1970. 

[12] C. Richet, “La suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilités,’* 
Rev. Philosoph., 18, pp. 608-674, 1884. 

[13] C. Richet, “Further experiments in hypnotic lucidity or clair- 
voyance,” in Proc. Soc. for Psychical Research, 6, pp. 66-83, 
1889, 

[14]. E. Swedenborg, Divine Love and Wisdom. New York: Sweden- 
borg Foundation, Inc., 1979. 


Biauvelt, NY: 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 70, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1982 


{15] G. Trobridge, Swedenborg, Life and Teaching. New York: 
Swedenborg Foundation, Inc., 1976. 

[16] I. Ross, The President’s Wife, Mary Todd Lincoin. New York: 
Putnam, 1973. 


{17] F.W.H. Myers, Human Personality and the Survival of Bodily & 


Death, (Abridged and edited by S. Smith.) Secaucus, NJ: Uni- 
- versity Books, 1961. (Originally published in 1903, 2 vols.) 
[18] W. F. Barrett, “Appendix to the report on thought- -reading,” in 
Proc, Soc. for Psychical Research, 1, pp. 47-64, 1882. 


[19] O. J. Lodge, ‘“‘An account of some experiments i in thought-trans- 


ference,” in Proc. Soc. for Psychical Research, 2, pp. 189-200, 
1884, 


[20] The American Society for Psychical Research, Inc., 5 W. 73 St., : 


New York, NY 10023. 


[21] W. James, Human Immortality: Two Supposed Objections to the 3 


Doctrine, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1898. 


[22] —, “Report of the Committee on Mediumistic Phenomena,” in 3 


Proc. American Soc. for Psychical Research, 1, pp. 102-106, 
1896, 

(23] G. Murphy and R. O. Ballou, William James on Psychical Re- 
search. New York: Viking Press, 1969. 

[24] W. James, ‘'Psychical research,” in The Will to Believe and Other 
Essays in Popular Philosophy. New York: Longmans, Green, 
and Co., 1897. 

[25] —, “Review of human personality and its survival of bodily 
death by F.W.H. Myers,” in Proc. Soc. for Psychical Research, 
18, p. 23, 1903. 

[26] S. Freud, “A note on the unconscious in psycho-analysis,” in 
Proc. Soc. for Psychical Research, 26, pp. 312-318, 1912, 

[27] ——, Studies in Parapsychology. New York: Collier Books, 
1963, 

[28] C. G. Jung, Synchronicity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press (Bollingen Series #20), 1973. 

[29] ——, On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called Occult Phe. 
nomena. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press (Bollingen 
Series #20), 1957. (Originally published in 1902, doctoral dis- 
sertation, University of Basel.) 

[30] ——, Memories, Dreams, Reflections. (Recorded and edited by 
A. Jaffe, translated by Richard and Clara Winston.) New York: 
Vintage Books, 1965, p. 137. 

[31] W. Pauli and C. G. Jung, Eds., The Interpretation of Nature and 
the Psyche. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press (Bollingen 
Series #51), 1955. 

{32} J. Ehrenwald, “Psi, psychotherapy, and psychoanalysis,” in 
Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 529-540. 

[33] M. Ultman, “Psychopathology and psi phenomena,” in Handbook 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 557-574. — 

[34] J. G. Pratt, J. B. Rhine, C. E. Stuart, and B. M. Smith, Extra: 
Sensory Perception After Sixty Years. New York: Holt, 1940. 

{35] J. B. Rhine, New World of the Mind. New York: William Mor- 
row and Co., 1953. 

(36] J.B. Rhine, Ed., Progress in Parapsychology. Durham, NC: Para- 
psychology Press, 1971. 

[37] L. E. Rhine, Mind Over Matter: Psychokinesis. New York: Mac- 
millan, 1970. 

{38] J. B. Rhine, “Psi and psychology: Conflict and solution,” J. Para- 
psychol,, 32, pp. 101-128, 1968. 

[39] Bur. J. Parapsychol., Int. J. Parapsychol. (defunct), J. Parapsy- 
chol., J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, J. Soc. for Psychical Re- 
search, Parapsychol. Rev., Proc. Soc. for Psychicai Research. 

[40] US Universities/Colleges: Chicago; Colorado; Columbia; CUNY; 
Delaware; Denver; Drexei; Duke; Finch; Harvard; Llinois; John F. 
Kennedy; Kent State; Michigan; Missouri; Mundelein; Newark 
College of Engineering; New School for Social Research; NYU; 
North Carolina; Oakland; Pittsburgh; Princeton; St. John’s; St. 
Joseph’s; South West Minnesota; Syracuse; UC/Berkeley; UC/ 
Davis; UC/Irvine; UC/LA; UC/Santa Barbara; Virginia; Wesleyan; 
West Florida; West Georgia; Wisconsin; Yale. Foreign: Amster- 
dam; Andhra; Argentina; Benares; Bonn; Cambridge; Chile; 
Copenhagen; Edinburgh; Freiburg; Ghana; Halifax; Iceland; Jung 
Inst.; Leningrad; Leyden; London; Loyola; Lund; Mc Gill; Mu- 
nich; Mysore; New South Wales; Oxford; Paris; Peking; Rhodes; 
South Africa; Tasmania; Tel Aviv; Utkal; Utrecht; Warsaw; 
Waterlog; Zurich. 

[41] List available upon request. 

[42] Research Institutions: Amer. Soc. for Psychical Research, New 
York; Ballistic Research Labs., Aberdeen, MD; Foundation for 
Research on the Nature of Man, Durham, NC; Inst. for Noetic 
Sciences, San Francisco, CA; Menninger Foundation, Topeka, 
KS; Midwest Psi Research Inst., Chicago, IL; Mind Science Foun- 
dation, San Antonio, TX; Parapsychology Foundation, NY; 
Psychical Research Foundation, Durham, NC; Psychophysical 
Research Labs, Princeton, NJ; Science Unlimited Research 
Foundation, San Antonio, TX; SRI International, Menlo Park, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


Peo ere rer ear eee e ere oT 


(46 


[47 


(48 


[49 
{so 
{51 


[52] 
[53] 


# 


= 
a 
2 


vlna il a de eel shia Sas 
a 
a 
tate 


BRUARY {982 ' 


» 


ng. New York: 


on. New York: 


trvival of Bodily 
caucus, NJ: Uni- 
103, 2 vols.) 
ight-reading,”’ in 
1882. 

n thought-trans- 
2, pp. 189-200, 


nc., 5 W. 73 St., 
bjections to the 


Phenomena,” in 
+» PP. 102-106, 


in Psychical Re- 


lieve and Other 
ngmans, Green, 


vival of bodily 
thical Research, 


lho-analysis,” in 
18, 1912, 
Collier Books, 


eton University 


"led Occult Phe- 
?ress (Bollingen 
#2, doctoral dis- 


1 and edited by 
1.) New York: 


8 of Nature and 
?ress (Bollingen 


noanalysis,” in 
wl. New York: 


"in Handbook 
= Van Nostrand 


Smith, Extra- 
=: Holt, 1940, 
: William Mor- 


tham, NC: Para- 
=w York: Mac- 
tion,” J. Para- 


*t), J. Parapsy- 
~ Psychical Re- 
Research. 
ambia; CUNY; 
Hnois; John F. 
elein; Newark 
ssearch; NYU; 
5t. John’s; St. 
3erkeley; UC/ 
nia; Wesleyan; 
eign: Amster- 
oridge; Chile; 
Iceland; Jung 
3 McGill; Mu- 
King; Rhodes; 
wht; Warsaw; 


esearch, New 
undation for 
-t. for Noetic 
ton, Topeka, 
science Foun- 
adation, NY; 
ychophysical 
-ed Research 

Menlo Park, 


y 


AR. 


(43] J. G. Pratt, “Soviet research in 


Fe Tce nate neat hat ee FARRER Sa etn at on Ee 


PSYCHIC PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


CA; Society for Psychical Research, London; 
fiir Psychotronik, West Berlin; Matsui Hospital, Kasahara, Japan; 
Inst. of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow; 
Shanghai Municipal Human Exception Functions Research Soci- 
ety. Corporations: Airesearch Company of California; Boeing 
Scientific Research Laboratories. 

Parapsychology,” in Handback 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 883-903. 


{44} E. K. Naumov and L. Vv. Vilenskaya, Bibliographies on Parapsy- 


chology (Psychoenergetics) and Related Subjects. Arlington, 
VA: Joint Publications Research Service, 1972. (Originally 
published in Moscow, 1971.) 


[45] E. K. Naumov and L. Vv, Vilenskaya, Bibliography of Parapsy- 


146} E. C. Wortz, A. J. Bauer, R. F, Blackwelder, 


chology (Psychotronics, Psychoenergetics, Psychobiophysics) 
and Related Problems. (Literature published in the. USSR), 
1979 (in manuscript). 

J. W. Eerkins, and 
A. J. Sour, “An investigation of Soviet Psychical research,” in: 
Proc. Special Session: The State of the Art in Psychic Research; 
Electro 77 Professional Program, New York: Apr. 19-21, 1977, 


[47] A. J. Lewis, A Report. Document EW-76-011, Airesearch Manu- 


facturing Co. of California, 
Wortz et al., #46 above.) 


January 1976. (A supplement to 


[48] M. Johnson (Chairman) et al., “Symposium: Current directions 


{49} S. Ostrander and 


in European parapsychology,” in Research in Parapsychology 
1978. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1979, pp. 1-10. 

L. Schroeder, Psychic Discoveries Behind the 
Tron Curtain. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970. 


[50] L. L. Vasiliev, Experiments in Distant Influence (Edited with 


151] T. Moss, 


Introduction by A, Gregory). New York: Dutton, 1976. 
“Psychic research in the Soviet Union,” in Psychic Ex- 
Ploration, E. D. Mitchell et al., J. White, Ed. New York: Putnam, 
1974, pp. 469-486, 


[52} R.A. McConnell, “Parapsychology in the USSR,” J. Parapsychol., 


39, pp. 129-134, 1975, 


[53] V.P, Zinchenko, A. N. Leont’yev, B. F. Lomov, and A. R. Luria, 


“Parapsychology: Fiction or reality?” Voprosy Filosofli (Ques- 
tions of Philosophy), 9, Pp. 128-136, 1973. 


[54] Zhang Feng, “New advances made in study of exceptional human 


[55} 


[56] 
[57] 
[58] 
[59] 


{60} 


[61] 


162} 
[63] 


[64] M. Ullman, S. Krippner, 


{65} 
[66} 


[67] 


168] 
[69] 


[ 70} 


{71] C. Tart, 


functions,” Shanghai Ziran Zazki (Nature Journal) in Chinese, 
no. 8, p, 606, Aug. 1980. 

J. Palmer, “Attitudes and Personality traits in experimental ESP 
research,” in Handbook of Paraspsychalogy, B. B. Wolman, 
Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 175-201. 

S. Krippner, Ed., Advances in Parapsychological Research: I, 
Extrasensory Perception. New York: Plenum Press, 1978, 

K. R. Rao, Experimental Parapsychology: A Review and Inter- 
pretation. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1966. 

G.. Schmeidier, “The psychic personality,” in Psychic Explora- 
tion, C. Mitchell et al., 3. White, Ed. New York: Putnam, 1974, 
H. J. Eysenck, “Personality and extrasensory perception,” J. Soe. 
Psychical Research, 44, pp. 55-7 1, 1967. 

G. R. Schmeidier and R. A. McConnell, ESP 
Patterns, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 
published 1958). 

J. Palmer, “Scoring in ESP tests as a function of belief in ESP. 
Part I. The sheep-goat effect,” J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 
65, pp. 373-408, 1971. 

A Parker, States of Mind: ESP and Altered States of Conscious- 
ness. New York: Taplinger, 1975. 

R. L. Van de Castle, 
psychology, B. B, Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Rein- 
hold, 1977, pp. 473-499. 


and Personality 
1973 (originally 


and A. Vaughan, Dream Telepathy. 
New York: Macmillan, 1973. 

I, Strauch, “Dreams and psi in the laboratory,” in Psi Favorable 
States of Consciousness, R. Cavanna, Ed. New York: Parapsy- 
chology Foundation, 1970, pp. 46-54. 

C. Honorton, “Psi and internal attention states,” in Handbook 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 435-472, 

W. Braud, “Psi conducive conditions: Explorations and interpre- 
tations,” in Psi and States of Awareness: Proc, Int. Conf. heid 
in Paris, France, Aug. 24-26, 1977, B. Shapin and L. Coly, Eds. 
New York: Parapsychology Foundation, 1978. 

E. Dingwall, Ed., Abnormal Hypnotic Phenomena (4 Vols.). 
New York: Barnes and Noble, 1968. 

C. Honorton and S. Krippner, “Hypnosis and ESP performance: 
A review of the ©xperimental titerature,” in Surveys in Parapsy- 
chology, R. White, Ed. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1976, 
Pp. 227-270, 

C. Sargent, “Hypnosis as a Psi conducive state: A controlied repli- 
cation study,” J. Parapsychol., 4, pp. 257-275, 1978, 

“Drug induced states of consciousness,” in Handbook 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 500-525, 


Forschungsinstit - 


“Sleep and dreams,” in Handbook of Para-* 


proved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


(72] 


[73] 
[74] 


[75] 
[76] 


{77} 


[78] 


[79] 
[80] 
[81] 


[82] 
[83] 
[84] 


[85] 


[86] 


[87] 
[88] 
[89] 
[90] 


[91] 


[92] 
[93] 


[94] 
[95] 


[96] 


[97] 


[98] 
[99] 
[100] 
[101] 


{102} G. E. Wolstenholme and E.C. P. Millar, 


{104] G. Feinberg, “Possibility 


167 


J. Eccles, “The human person in its two-way relationship to the 
brain,” Invited address to the Parapsychological Association Con- 
vention, State University of Utrecht, The Netherlands, Aug. 20, 
1976. Research in Parapsychology 1976. Metuchen, NJ: Scare- 
crow Press, 1977, pp. 251-262, 

J. Beloff, “ESP: The search for a physiological index,” J. Amer, 
Soc, Psychical Research, 47, Sept. 1974. 

J. Ehrenwald, “Psi phenomena and brain research,” in Handbook 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, Pp. 716-729. 

D. Dean, “The plethysmograph as an indicator of ESP,” J. Sac. 
Psychical Research, 41, Pp. 351-353, 1962. 

J. C. Carpenter, “Intrasubject and subject-agent effects in ESP 
experiments,” in Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B, Wolman, 
Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 202-272, 

R. A. White, “The influence of experimenter Motivation, atti- 
tudes, and methods of handling subjects on psi test results,” in 
Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, Pp. 273-301. 

C. Honorton, M. Ramsey, and C., Cabibbo, “Experimenter effects 
in extrasensory Perception,” J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 
69, pp. 135-149, 1975, 

G. Murphy, “Psychical research and human 
Soc. Psychical Research, 48, Pp. 1-15, 1949, 
J. B. Rhine, “Conditions favoring success in psi tests,” J. Para- 
psychol., 12, pp. 58-75, 1948, 

G. R. Schmeidler and M. Maher, “The non-verbal communica- 
tions of psi-conducive and psi-inhibitory experimenters,” J. 
Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 75, pp. 241-257, 1981. 


Personality,” Proc, 


W. Crookes; Crookes and the Spirit World, collected by R. G, 
Medhurst. New York: Taplinger, 1972. 
B.J.T. Dobbs, The Foundations of Newton's Alchemy, Cam- 


bridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1975, pp. 7-8. 

C. Honorton, “Has science developed the competence to confront 
claims of the paranormal?” in Research in Parapsychology, 1975, 
Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1976, pp. 199-223. 

B. Musicante, Experiments in Psychokinesis: Critique and Pro- 
Posed Study, Senior Thesis submitted to the Department of 
Psychology, Princeton University, May 1979, 

R. Jungerman and J. Jungerman, “Computer controlled random 
number generator PK tests,” in Research in Parapsychology 1977, 
Metuchen NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1978, pp. 157-162, 

H. Schmidt, “A PK test with electronic equipment,” J. Parapsy- 
chol., 34, pp. 175-181, 1970, 

H. Schmidt and L, Pantas, “Psi tests with internally different 
machines,” J. Parapsychol., 36, Pp. 222-232, 1972. 

H. Schmidt, “PK effect on pre-recorded targets,” J. Amer, Soc. 
Psychical Research, 70, pp. 267-291, 1976, 

——, “PK tests with pre-recorded and pre-inspected seed num- 
bers,” in Research in Parapsychology 1980. Metuchen, NJ: 
Scarecrow Press, 1981, pp. 47-50. 

E. C. May, B. S. Humphrey, and G. S. Hubbard, “Electronic sys- 
tem perturbation techniques,” SRI Int.,. Final Rep., Sept. 30, 
1980, 

S. Krippner, Ed. Advances in Parapsychological Research, Vol. J, 
Psychokinesis. New York: Plenum Press, 1977, 

B. Dunne, R. G. Jahn, and R. Nelson, “An REG experiment with 
large data-base capability,” in Research in Parapsychology 1981. 
Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press Cin press). 

H. Puthoff and R. Targ, Mind-Reach. New York: Delacorte, 
1977. 

——, “Physics, entropy, and psychokinesis,” in Quantum Physics 
and Parapsychology, L. Oteri, Ed. New York: Parapsychological 
Foundation, 1975. 

W. W. Eidson, D. L. Faust, K. Getsta, J. McClay, and B. Conoway, 
“An investigation of possible anomalous interaction between a 
human being and a Polarized laser beam,” Preliminary rep. on 
investigations June-Sept. 1977, Drexel University, Physics Dep. 
(unpublished. 

R. D. Nelson, B. J. Dunne, and R. G. Jahn, “Psychokinesis studies 
with.a Fabry-Perot interferometer,” in Research in Parapsychol- 
ogy 1981. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press (in press), 

J. B. Hasted, “Physical aspects of paranormal metal bending,” 
J. Soc. Psychical Research, 49, pp. 583-607, 1977, 

——, The Metal-Benders. London, Boston and Henley: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1981. 

M. Ryzl, “A model for Parapsychologicat communication,” J, 
Parapsychol., 30, pp. 18-31, 1966, 

M. A. Persinger, “Geophysical models for parapsychological ex- 
Periences,” Psychoenergetic Syst., 1, pp. 63-74, 1975, 

Eds., Extrasensory Per- 
ception: A CIBA Foundation Symposium. New York: Citadel, 


1966, 
[103] 0. C. de Beauregard, “Time symmetry and interpretation of quan- 


tum mechanics,” Foundations Phys., 6, pp. 539-559, 1976, 
of faster-than light particles,” Phys. 


Rev., 159, p. 1089, 1967, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


t 


cys 


168 

[105] 
[106] 
[107] 
{108} 
[109] 
{110} 


[111] 
[112] 


[113] 
[114] 
{115} 
{116] 
(417) 


[118] 


(119] 


{120} 
(121) 


[122] 


[123] 
{124] 
[125] 
{126] 
{127} 
{128] 


[129] 
[130] 


[131] 
{132] 
[133] 
[134] 


(135] 


W. A. Tiller, “A lattice model of space and its relationship to 
multidimensional systems,” in Proc. A.R.E. Medical Symp., 
Phoenix, AZ, Jan. 1977. ; 

L. Oteri, Ed., Quantum Physics and Parapsychology: Proceedings 
of an International Conference heid in Geneva, Switzerland, 
August 26-27, 1974. New York: Parapsychological Foundation, 
1975. 

J.H.M. Whiteman, “Quantum theory and parapsychology,” J. 
Amer. Soc, for Psychical Research, 67, pp. 341-360, 1973. 

E, H. Walker, “Consciousness and quantum theory,” in Psychic 
Exploration, E. D. Mitchell et al., J. White, Ed. New York: 
Putnam, 1974, pp. 544-568, 

R. D. Mattuck, “A quantum mechanical theory of the interaction 
between consciousness and matter,” Colloque International 
“Science et Conscience,’ Cordoba, Spain, Oct. 1-5, 1979. 

D. Bohm, “The enfolding-unfolding universe and consciousness,” 
Colloque International “Science et Conscience,” Cordoba, Spain, 
Oct. 1-5, 1979, 

H. Margenau, “ESP in the framework of modern science,” J. 
Amer, Soc. Psychical Research, 60, pp. 214~228, 1966. 

J.H.M. Whiteman, “Parapsychology and physics,” in Handbook 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Woiman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 730-756. 

A. Puharich, Ed., The Iceland Papers: Select Papers on Experi- 
mentai and Theoretical Research on the Physics of Consciousness. 
Foreword by B. D. Josephson. Amberst, WI: Essentia Research 
Associates, 1979, 

A. H. Klopf, Mental and Physical Phenomena: Toward @ Unified 
Theory, July 1977. (Unpublished manuscript.) 

Duke University, Dep. of Electrical Engineering; Princeton Uni- 
versity, School of Engineering/Applied Science; Syracuse Uni- 
versity, School of Computer and Information Science. 

S. S. Wilks, “Statistical aspects of experiments in telepathy,” 
H.C.L.R. Lieber, Ed. A lecture by Samuel S. Wilks given at 
the Galois Institute of Mathematics, Long Island University, 
Mimeographed, 1938, 18 pp. 

P. Diaconis, “Statistical problems in ESP research,” Science, 
201, pp. 131-136, July 14, 1978. 

C.E.M. Hansel, ESP and Parapsychology: A Critical Reevaluation. 
Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1980. : 

D. S. Burdick and E. F. Kelly, “Statistical Methods in Parapsy- 
chological Research,” in Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. 
Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, pp. 81-130, 
1977, 

J. A, Greenwood and C. E. Stuart, “Mathematical techniques 
used in ESP research,” J. Parapsychol., 1, pp. 206-225, 1937. 
W. W. Carington, “Experiments on the paranormal cognition of 
drawings,” J. Parapsychol., 4, pp. 1-134, 1940. 

L. L. Gatlin, “A new measure of bias in finite sequences with 
applications to ESP data,” J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 
1, pp. 29-43, 1979, 

C. T. Tart, “Randomicity, predictability, and mathematical in- 
ference strategies in ESP feedback experiments” (Discussion of 
Dr. Gatlin’s paper). J Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 1, pp. 44- 
60, 1979. 

J. G. Pratt, “Is ESP only a misnomer for response sequences 
chosen to match inferred target sequences?” (Discussion of 
Dr. Gatlin’s paper.) J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 1, pp. 
60-66, 1979, 

D. S. Rogo, Parapsychology: A Century of Inquiry. New York: 
Taplinger, 1975, pp. 29-30. 

H. Bergson, “Presidential address to the Society for Psychical 
Research (1913),”’ Proc. Soc, Psychical Research, 27, pp. 157- 
175, 1914, 

—, Mind Energy. New York: Henry Holt, 1920. 

C. D. Broad, Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research. New 
York: Humanities Press, 1969. : 

J. Ludwig, Ed., Philosophy and Parapsychology. Buffalo, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1978. ; 

G. R. Schmeidier, Ed., Parapsychology: Its Relation to Physics, 
Biology, Psychology, and Psychiatry. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow 
Press, 1976, 

R. L. Van de Castle, “Parapsychology and anthropology,” in 
Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 667-686. 

R. L. Morris, “Parapsychology, biology, and anpsi,” in Hand- 
book of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 687-715. 

W. H. Clark, “Parapsychology and religion,” in Handbook of 
Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 769-780, 

J. M. Backus, “Parapsychology and Literature,” in Handbook 
of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1977, pp. 781-802. 

C. Panati, Ed., The Geller Papers: Scientific Observations on the 
Paranormal Powers of Uri Geller. Boston, MA: Houghton Mif- 


[136] 


[137] 


[138] 


[139] 


[140] 
[141] 
(142) 


[143] 
[144] 
[145] 


[146] 


[147] 
{148} 
[149] 
[150] 


[151] 


[152] 


[153] 


[154] 


[155] 


[156] 


[157] 
[158] 


[159} 


{160} 


[161] 
£162] 


[163] 


(164) 


flin, 1976. 

C. Crussard and J. Bouvaist, “Study of certain seemingly abnor- 
mal deformations and transformations of metals,’” Memoires 
Scientifiques Revue Metallurgie, Feb. 1978. (English transla- 
tion H & P de Maigret, Nov. 1978). 

J. G, Pratt, ESP Research Today: A Study of Developments in 
Parapsychology since 1960. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 
1973. : y 

J. G. Pratt, “The Pearisburg poltergeist,” in Research in Parapsy- 
chology 1977. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1978, pp. 174- 
182. 

J. Krieger, D. DalCorso, and G. Solfvin, “RSPK in Philadelphia,” 
in Research in Parapsychology 1978, Metuchen, NJ: Scare- 
crow Press, 1979, pp. 59-60. 

A.R.G, Owen, Can We Explain the Poltergeist? New York: 
Garrett Helix, 1964. 


W. G. Roll, The Poltergeist. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 


1976. 


W. G. Roll, “Poltergeists,” in Handbook of Parapsychology, 3% 


B. B. Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, © 


pp. 382-413. 

W. Tiller, “A technical report on some psychoenergetic devices,” 
ARE. J., 7, p. 81, 1972. 

G. Schmeidler, “PK effects upon continuously recorded temper- 
ature,” J. Amer, Soc, Psychical Research, 67, p. 325, 1973. 

R. G, Stanford,. “Experimental psychokinesis: A review from 
diverse perspectives,” in Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. 
Wolman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 
324-381, ‘ 

H. Schmidt, “Psychokinesis,” in Psychic Exploration, E. D. 
Mitchell et ai., J. White, Ed. New York: Putnam, 1974, pp. 
179-193. ‘ 

W. Cox, “The effect of PK on the placement of falling objects,” 
J. Parapsychol., 15, pp. 40-48, 1951. 

——, “The effect of PK on electromechanical systems,” J. Para- 
psychol., 29, pp. 165-175, 1965. 
J. Hasted, The Metal Benders. 

Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981, p. 131. 

M. G. Shafer, ‘“‘PK metal bending in a semi-formal small group,” 
in Research in Parapsychology 1980, Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow 
Press, 1981, pp. 32-35. 

C, Honorton and L. Tremmel, “Psitrek: A preliminary effort 
toward development of psi-conducive computer software,” 
Research in Parapsychology 1979, Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow 
Press, 1980, pp. 159-160. 

U. Sinclair, Mental Radio (Rev. 2nd printing, Introduction by 
W. McDougall, Preface by A. Einstein, with a report by W. F. 
Prince). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1962. 

H. E. Puthoff and R. Targ, ‘“‘A perceptual channel for informa- 
tion transfer over kilometer distances: Historical perspective and 
recent research,” in Proc. IEEE, vol. 64, pp. 329-354, 1976. 

R. Targ and H. E. Puthoff, “Information, transmission under 
conditions of sensory shielding,” Nature, 252, pp. 602-607, 
1974, 

C. T. Tart, H, E. Puthoff, and R. Targ, Eds., Mind at Large: IEEE 
Symposia on the Nature of Extrasensory Perception. New York: 
Praeger Special Studies, 1979. 

H. E. Puthoff, R. Targ, and E. C. May, “Experimental psi re- 
search: Implication for physics,” in The Role of Consciousness 
in the Physical World, R. G. Jahn, Ed. Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1981, pp. 37-86. . 

B. J. Dunne and J. P. Bisaha, “Precognitive remote viewing in 
the Chicago area,” J. Parapsychol., 43, pp. 17-30, 1979. 

—~, “Multiple subject precognitive remote viewing,” in Research 
in Parapsychology 1977. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1978, 
pp. 146-151. 

—, “Long distance precognitive remote viewing,” in Research 
in Parapsychology 1978. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1979, 
pp. 68-70. 

J. P. Bisaha and B. J. Dunne, “Long distance and multiple sub- 
ject precognitive remote viewing of geographical locations,” in 
Mind at Large: IEEE Symposia on the Nature. of Extrasensory 
Perception, C. T. Tart, H. E. Puthoff, and R. Targ, Eds. New 
York: Praeger Special Studies, 1979, pp. 107-124. 

B. J. Dunne, Precognitive Remote Perception, M.A. thesis, Com- 
mittee on Human Development, University of Chicago, 1979. 


B. J. Dunne and J. P. Bisaha, “Precognitive remote perception: 
A critical overview of the experimental program,” in Research =. 
in Parapsycholagy 1979. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1980, /- 


pp. 117-120. 

R. G, Jahn, “Psychic process, energy transfer, and things that go 
bump in the night,” Princeton Alumni Weekly, Dec. 4, 1978. 
S-1-12, ‘ 


E. A. Rauscher, G. Weissmann, J. Sarfatti, and S.-P. Sirag, “Re = 


mote perception of natural scenes, shielded against ordinary 
perception,” in Research in Parapsychology 1975. Metuchen. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


London, Boston and Henley: . 


% 
$ 


“4 


Pe eut meer rain Te te 


sais Saeed 


Bio ibs tie RS Bed aE 


Wigs. bb, 


bd 137 
RY 1982 JAHN: 
sly abnor- 
Memoires [165] 
h transila- 
pments in 
‘ow Press, 1166] 
i Parapsy- 
» pp. 174- 1167} 
udelphia,”’ 
NJ: Scare- {168} 
sew York: [169] 
“ow Press, [170] 
sychology, 
eold, 1977, 71] 
= devices,” | 1172] 
sd temper- 
973. 
view from [173] 
ogy, B. B. 
1977, pp. 1174] 
on, E. D. 1175} 
1974, pp. 
: objects,” (176] 
» J. Para- 
(177) 
J Henley: 
all group,” {178] 
Scarecrow 
{179} 
mary effort 
software,” 
Scarecrow {180] 
uction by {181] 
by W. F. 
{182] 
© informa- 
ective and 
1976. 
don under [183] 
602-607, 
urge: IEEE 
ew York: {184} 
utal psi re- 
Sciousness [185] 
Westview 
wiewing in 
9. [186] 
n Research 
-ess, 1978, [187] 
_ Research 
-ess, 1979, 
(188] 
Itiple sub- 
ations,” inf® [189] 
wrasensory 
ads. New 
-esis, Com- 
, 1979. (190) 
erception: 
_ Research 
-ess, 1980, 
[191] 
ugs that go 
. 4, 1978, {192] 
rag, “‘Re- 
= ordinary {193] 
Metuchen, 


PSYCHIC PHENOMENA: ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVE 


NJ: Scarecrow Press, pp. 41-45, 1976. 
S. Allen, P. Green, K. Rucker, R. Cohen, C. Goolsby, and R. L. . 
Morris, “A remote viewing study using a modified version of the 
SRI procedure,” in Research in Parapsychology 1975, Metuchen, 
NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1976, pp. 46-48. 

A. C, Hastings and D. B. Hurt, “A confirmatory remote viewing 
experiment in a group setting,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 64, pp. 1544- 
1545, 1976. . 

J. Vallee, A. C. Hastings, and G. Askevold, “Remote viewing 
through computer conferencing,” Proc. JEEE, vol. 64, p. 1551, 
1976. : 
T. W. Whitson, D. N. Bogart, J. Palmer, and C. T. Tart, “Prelim- 
inary experiments in group remote viewing,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 64, 
p. 1550, 1976. 

H. Chotas, “Remote viewing in the Durham area,” J. Parapsy- 
chol,, 1, pp. 61-62, 1978, 

M. Schlitz and S. Deacon, “Remote viewing: A conceptual re- 
plication of Targ and Puthoff,” in Research in Parapsychology 
1979, Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1980, pp. 124-126. 

E. Karnes and E. Sussman, “Remote viewing: A response bias 
interpretation,” Psycholog. Rep., 44, pp. 471-479, 1979, 

E. Karnes, J. Ballou, E. Sussman, and F. Swaroff, “Remote view- 
ing: Failures to replicate with control comparisons,” Psycholog. 
Rep., 45, pp. 963-973, 1979. 

E, W. Karnes, E. P, Sussman, P. Kiusman, and L. Turcotte, “‘Fail- 
ures to replicate remote viewing using psychic subjects,” Zetetic 
Scholar, 6, pp. 66-76, 1980. 

M. Schlitz and E. Gruber, “Transcontinental remote viewing,” 
J. Parapsychol., 4, pp. 305-317, 1980. 

C. Scott, “On the evaluation of verbal material in parapsychology: 
A discussion of Dr. Pratt’s monograph,” J. Soc. Psychical Re- 
search, 46, pp. 79-90, 1972. 

R. L. Morris, “An exact method for evaluating preferentially 
matched free-response material,” J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Re- 
search, 66, p. 401, 1972. 

G. Solfvin, E. Kelly, and D. Burdick, “Some new methods of 
analysis for preferential ranking data,” J. Amer. Sac. Psychical 
Research, 72, p. 93, 1978. 

D. Marks and R. Kammann, The Psychology of the Psychic. 
Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1980. 

R. G. Jahn, B. J. Dunne, E. G. Jahn, “Analytical judging pro- 
cedure for remote perception experiments,” J. Parapsychol., 3, 
pp. 207-231, 1980. : 

B. J. Winer, Statistical Principies in Experimentai Design. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1962, pp. 43-45. 

R. G. Jahn, Ed., The Role of Consciousness in the Physical World, 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1981. 

R. G, Stanford, “An experimentally testable model for sponta- 
neous psi events. 1, Extrasensory events,” J. Amer. Soc. Psychical 
Research, 68, pp. 34-57, 1974. “II, Psychokinetic events,” Ibid, 
pp. 321-356. 

C.T.K. Chari, “Some generalized theories and models of psi: A 
critical evaluation,” in Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. Wol- 
man, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 803- 
822. 

R. G. Stanford, “Conceptual frameworks of contemporary psi 
research,” in Handbook of Parapsychology, B. B. Wolman, Ed. 
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, pp. 823-858, 

B. B. Wolman, “Mind and body: A contribution to a theory of 
Parapsychological phenomena,” in Handbook of Parapsychol- 
ogy, B. B. Woiman, Ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1977, pp. 861-879, 

A. M. Young, The Geometry of Meaning. New York: Delacorte 
Press/Seymour Lawrence, 1976. 

B. Shapin and L. Coly, Eds., Concepts and Theories of Parapsy- 
chology: Proceedings of an International Conference held in 
New York, NY, Dec. 6, 1980. New York: Parapsychology 
Foundation, Inc., 1981. 

F. Cazzamalli, “Phénomenes télépsychiques et radiations cere- 
brales,” Rev, Métapsych., 4, p. 3, 1925. 

I. M. Kogan, “Is telepathy possible?” Radio Eng., 21, p. 75, 1966. 
—, “Telepathy, hypotheses and observations,” Radio Eng., 22, 
Pp. 141, 1967. 

——, “Information theory analysis of telepathic communication 
experiments,” Radio Eng., 23, p. 122, 1968. 

M. A. Persinger, ‘ELF field mediation in spontaneous psi events: 
Direct information transfer or conditional elicitation?” in Mind 
at Large, C. T. Tart, H. E. Puthoff, and R. Targ, Eds. New York: 
Praeger Special Studies, 1979, pp. 189-204. 

L. L. Gatlin, Information Theory and the Living System. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1972." 

W. von Lucadou and K. Kornwachs, “Development of the system- 
theoretic approach to psychokinesis,” paper presented at the 
Parascience Conf., London, 1979. 

K. Kornwachs and W. von Lucadou, “Psychokinesis and the con- 
cept of complexity,” Psychoenergetic Syst., 3, pp. 327-342, 
1979, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100 


cet ere a lett ree fir Panne dre Ene ese ed wee oe 


[194] 
[195] 
{196] 


[197] 
[198] 
{199] 


[200] 


{201] 


[202] 


[203] 
{204] 


[205] 
[206] 
{207} 


[208] 
[209] 
[210] 


[211] 
{212] 


[213] 


[214} 


[215] 


[216] 


{217] 
(218] 
{219] 
[220] 
{221] 


[222] 


{223] 
[224] 


eed aE ERR ESD 2 


wae Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


169 


G. Feinberg, “Precognition—A memory of things future,” in 
Quantum Physics and Parapsychology, L. Oteri, Ed. New York: 
Parapsychology Foundation, 1975, pp. 54-64. 

E. A. Rauscher, “Some physical models’ potentially applicable 
to remote perception,” in The Iceland Papers, A. Puharich, Ed. 
Amherst, WI: Essentia Research Associates, 1979, pp. 49-83. 
A. S. Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation: An Outline of 
the General Theory of Relativity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press, 1920, pp. 198-201. 

A. 8. Eddington, The Nature of the Physical World. Cambridge, 
MA: Cambridge University Press, 1928, p. 276. 

K. Pribram, Languages of the Brain. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1971. 

K. Pribram, “Toward a holonomic theory of perception,” in 
Gestalttheorie Modernen Psychologie, 8. Ertel, Ed. Darmstadt: 
Steinkopff, 1975. 

K. Pribram, “Problems concerning the structure of conscious- 
ness,” in Consciousness and the Brain, G. Globus, Ed. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1976. 

D. Bohm, “Quantum theory as an indication of a new order in 
physics. Part A. The development of new orders as shown through 
the history of ‘physics,’ Foundations Phys., 1, pp. 359-381, 
1971, 

D. Bohm, “Quantum theory as an indication of a new order in 
physics. Part B. Implicate and explicate order in physical law,” 
Foundations Phys., 1, pp. 139-168, 1971. 

A. Eddington, Relativity Theory of Protons and Electrons. New 
York: Macmillan, 1936, p. 329. 

O. C. de Beauregard, “The expanding Paradigm of the Einstein 
paradox,” in The Iceland Papers, A. Puharich, Ed. Amherst, WI: 
Essentia Associates, 1979, pp. 162-191, 

E. P. Wigner, “On hidden variables and quantum mechanical 
probabilities,” Amer. J. Phys., 38, p. 1005, 1970. 

3. S. Bell, “On the problem of hidden variables in quantum 
mechanics,” Rev, Modern Phys., 38, p. 447, 1966. 

BD. dohm and J. Bub, “A proposed solution of the measurement 
problem in quantum mechanics by a hidden variable theory,” 
Rev, Modern Phys., 38, p. 453, 1966. 

J. Mehra, “Quantum mechanics and the explanation of life,” 
Amer. Scientist, 61, pp. 722-728, 1973. 

E. H. Walker, “Foundations of paraphysical and parapsycholog- 
ical phenome.a,” in Quantum Physics and Parapsychology, 
L. Oteri, Ed. New York: Parapsychology Foundation, 1975, 
pp. 1-44, 

R. G. Jahn and B. J. Dunne, “A quantum mechanical approach 
to the representation of paranorma! phenomena,” 1982 (to be 
published). 

T.N.E. Greville, “Are psi events random?” J. Amer. Soc. Psy- 
chical Research, 74, pp. 223-226, 1980. 

J. A. Greenwood and T.N.E. Greville, “On requirements for 
using statistical analysis in psi experiments,” J. Parapsychol., 43, 
Ppp. 315-321, 1979, F 

R. Jahn and B. Dunne, “Physical models of psychic process,” 
in Concepts and Theories of Parapsychology, B. Shapin and L. 
Coly, Eds. New York: Parapsychology Foundation, Inc., 1981, 
pp. 69-79, 

R. May, “Creativity and encounter,” in The Creative Imagination, 
H. M. Ruitenbeek, Ed. Chicago, 1L: Quadrangle Books, 1965, 
Pp. 283-291. 

F. Barron, “The needs for order and disorder as motives in crea- 
tive activity,” in the second (1957) University of Utah research 
conference on the identification of creative scientific talent, 
C. W. Taylor, Ed. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 
1958, pp. 119-128. 

D. McClelland, “The calculated risk: An aspect of scientific per- 
formance,” in Scientific Creativity, its Recognition and Develap- 
ment, C. W. Taylor and F. Barron, Eds. New York: Wiley, 
1963, pp. 184-192. 

S. D. Drell, “When is a particle?” Phys. Today, 31, pp. 23-32, 
1978. : 

W. Heisenberg, “The nature of elementary particles,” Phys. To- 
day, 29, pp. 32-39, 1976. 

F. Capra, Paper LBL-796, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Uni- 
versity of California, Berkeley, CA, 1978. 

J. A. Wheeler, “The universe as home for man,” Amer. Scientist, 
62, pp. 683-691, 1974. 

W. W. Harman, “Broader implications of recent findings in psy- 
chological and psychic research,” in The Role of Consciousness 
in the Physical World, R. G. Jahn, Ed. Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1981, pp. 113-131. i 

A. Angoff and B. Shapin, Eds.,.A Century of Psychical Research: 
The Continuing Doubts and Affirmations. New York: Parapsy- 
chology Foundation, 1971. 

C. A. Murchison, Ed. The Case For and Against Psychical Belief. 
New York: Arno Press, 1975. (Originally published in 1927.) 

W. F. Prince, The Enchanted Boundar 1 600 York: Arno Press, 


-6 


ate mt 


a7 a 


{225} 


[226] 


{227] 


[228] 
[229] 


[230] 


(231] 
[232] 
[233] 


[234] 


[235] 
{236} 
{237] 
[238] 
{239} 


[240] 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : ClAkRBP&6s00 788 RAD +4000 F000 ek vary 1982 


1975. (Originally published in 1930.) 

K. M. Goldney and S. G. Soal, “Report-on a series of experiments 
with Mrs. Eileen Garrett,” Prac. Soc. Psychical Research, 45, 
pp. 43-87, 1938. Zi 

J. Beloff, “The ‘sweethearts’ experiment,” J. Soc. Psychical Re- 
search, 45, pp. 1-7, 1969. 

M. Maher, D. Peratsakis, and G. R. Schmeidler, ‘‘Cerebral locali- 
zation effects in ESP processing: An attempted replication,” 
J Amer, Soc, for Psychical Research, 73, pp. 167-177, 1979. 

S. Blackmore, “Correlation between ESP and memory,” Eur. J. 
Parapsychol., 3, pp. 127-147, 1980. 

J. Eisenbud, L. Hassel, H. Keely, and W. Sawrey, “A further 


study of teacher-pupil attitudes and results on clairvoyance tests - 


in the fifth and sixth grades,” J. Amer. Soc. Psychical Research, 
54, pp. 72-80, 1960. 

E. Belvedere and D. Foulkes, ‘““Felepathy and dreams: A failure 
to replicate,” Perceptual Motor Skills, 33, pp. 783-789, 1971. 

J. Beloff and D. Bate, “An attempt to replicate the Schmidt 
findings,” J. Soc. Psychicat Research, 46, pp. 21-31, 1971. 

R. G. Jahn, reply to Bradley Dowden, Zetetic Scholar, 7, p. 127, 
1980, 

Cc. C. Gillispie, Ed., Dictionary of Scientific Biography. New 
York: Scribner’s, 1970- 1980. 

R. L. Weber, A’ Random Walk in Science, E. Mendoza, Ed., 
Foreword. by W. Cooper. New York: Crane, Russak, 1973, 
Pp. 66-67. 

R. S. deRopp, The New Prometheans. New York: Delacorte, 
1972, p. 2-28. 

L. Barnett, The Universe and Dr. Einstein (Rev. edit.). 
York: The New American Library, 1952, p. 117. 

R. G. Jahn, “Psychic research: New dimensions or old delusions?” 
Zetetic Scholar, 6, pp. 5-16, 1980. 

J. Beloff, Ed., New Directions in Parapsychology. Metuchen, 
NI: Scarecrow Press, 1975. 

J. B. Rhine and J. G. Pratt, Parapsycholagy: Frontier Science 
of the Mind (Rev. edit.). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 
1962. 

R. A. White, Ed., Surveys in Parapsychology. Metuchen, NJ: 


New 


[241] 


[242] 


[243] 


[244] 


[245] 


[246] 


[247] 
[248] 
[249] 
[250] 


{251] 


[252] 
[253] 
[254] 
[255] 


catesrow Press, 1976. 

R. A. White and L. A. Dale, Parapsychology: Sources of Infor. 
mation. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1973. (Rev. edit. by 
R. A, White in preparation.) 

N. Bowles and F. Hynds with J. Maxwell, Psi Search. San Fran- 


cisco, CA: Harper and Row, 1978. 


R. G. Jahn, B. J. Dunne, R. Nelson, and H. Mertz, “Anomalous 
operator influence on elementary microelectronic “devices,” 


Tech. note, School of Engineering/Applied Science, Princeton 


University, 1981, 
J. Bronowski, Science and Human Values, 
and Brothers, 1956. 


New York: Harper 


M. Polanyi, Personal Knowledge. Chicago, Ib: University of 3 


Chicago Press, 1962, 

A. Korzybski, Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non- 
Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics. Clinton, MA: The 
Colonial Press, 1933. 


W. Penfield, The Mystery of the Mind. Princeton, NJ: Princeton # 


University Press, 1975. 

M. Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy. Los Angeles, CA: J. P. 
Tarcher, 1980. 

J. Salk, Survival of the Wisest. 
1973. 

A. M. Young, The Reflexive Universe. New York: Delacorte 
Press, 1976. 


New York: Harper and Row, 


E. Jantsch, The Self-Organizing Universe: Scientific and Human : : 


Implications of the Emerging Paradigms of Evolution. Elmsford, 
NY: Pergamon Press, 1980. 

D. Dean et al., Executive ESP. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- 
Hall, 1974, 

P. T, de Chardin, The Future of Man. New York: Harper and 
Row, 1964 (pp. 166-167 in Harper Torchbooks edit.). 

Report to the House of Representatives, Committee on Science 
and Technology, June 1981. 

C. T. Tart, “A survey of expert opinion on potentially negative 
uses of psi, United States government interest in psi, and the level 
of research funding of the field,” in Research in Parapsychology 
1978. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1979, pp. 54-55. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/07 : CIA-RDP96-00788R001100010004-6 


eae a 


haSedoc  ipeeditancot 74 


cate a 2 


the 

the 
ne 

the ; 


We ha 

operat 
. are pr 
” procec 
‘Indi 
-compr 
_the pr 


and ox 


tion is 
and se 
signers 
insuffi 
Toda 
ciples 


Manus 
The ai 
ZH, Swi 


