[Music]
Welcome everyone. Today's conversation
is going to be on the foundations of
physics, issues of quantum mechanics,
the measurement problem, entanglement,
non-locality, you know, things of that
sort. And I'm so pleased that we have
Tim Mlin who is a professor of
philosophy at NYU. Also the founder and
director of the John Bell Institute.
John Bell, a name that those of you who
have done some reading on the
foundations know is a towering figure in
that field. No doubt a name that will
come up in our conversation. So welcome
Tim. So good to be here. Good to have
you. So let me just jump in with my own
experience of some of the issues that
you have spent your life thinking about.
I was a young faculty member at Cornell
in the 1990s I guess and I went to this
colloquium by David Murman
and he did this beautiful job of
explaining you know what Bell had had
put forward and what the experiments had
shown and so forth and I was sitting
there and I said to myself I'm a
professor
I teach some of this stuff, but I'd
never really appreciated
things at that point until I was really,
you know, privy to this wonderful
explanation by David
Murman. Is that a common thing that you
find in terms of people's knowledge of
the insights? Yeah, I I mean I can give
you a data point before yours and a data
point after yours. So before yours is my
own. When I was an undergraduate
uh in
1979, I read a scientific American
article by Bernard Despa, which you may
I maybe you're maybe you're too young
for that. It had a big dung beetle on
the cover. Um and that was the first
time I'd heard of Bell's work.
When I look back at that article, it has
its problems, but it got enough of it
across to me that I became
extremely worried or I I don't know how
to describe it. I was pacing. My
roommate saw me pacing in circles
reading this thing with my brow
furrowed. I understood it was a very
very profound and surprising result. Now
that's of course long after it was
published and then I can give you
another data point from a few from last
year. I gave a talk on Bell's theorem
and relativity at John's Hopkins for a
general audience and a guy in the
audience put up his hand. He said I have
a PhD in astrophysics. I've never heard
of any of this. He was completely
unfamiliar. He said why didn't they tell
me? Right. So yeah, I think it's a very
strange history that Bell's work which
is so remarkably clean, logically clean,
um, sharp, it kind of got buried and a
lot of physicists completely
misunderstand what he proved. Right? So
I'd love to get into that, but maybe we
can walk through a little bit of the
history. And the reason I want to do
that is not so much to give just
historical context for its own sake, but
rather they're key people in the history
of quantum mechanics that at least as I
read the history and I'd be interested
to hear your perspective. They set
thinking even from a sociological point
of view in a direction that I think
perhaps explains at least in part why
these experiences, my own and the two
that you just recounted are not that
uncommon and and I think a person who
played a key part look who had a
profound impact on our deep
understanding. So this is not a general
criticism but bore Neils Boore had this
perspective that look what are you
supposed to do as a physicist you're
supposed to explain the numbers that
come out on our readouts on our
detectors and once you can explain those
numbers you're done. There's no need to
kind of be able to tell the actual story
of what's going on. That's not what
physics is about. Is that your reading
of what he was trying to say? Um, well,
it's a curious word you used there,
which was explain. Ah, because Yes.
Yeah. I I should take that back, right?
Yes. You know, because the the right I
mean, I don't think this was exactly
Boore's attitude. The common
attitude is
calculate. Predict tell me what the
numbers will be, and if the numbers are
right, that's all I want. Absolutely.
Boore was actually trying to make a much
more profound
argument which was that a certain sort
of explanation which had been provided
by classical physics was no longer
available. Just could not could not be
found. There wasn't that nature didn't
provide the kind of explanation we're
used to. Um, I think there's a very deep
background here going into Kant and
neocontianism, but I don't want to bore
you with that. But, but certainly Bore
used some words he seemed to have gotten
out of Kant about visualizability. So,
he sort of had this idea that we've
reached a point where we can't
visualize the subatomic world. One might
respond, fine. I don't care if I can
visualize it, but there's more to ex,
you know, there are explanations you
could give that wouldn't require you to
visualize. I mean when somebody tells me
look I think space has 10 dimensions as
you're familiar with right 11
22ualize whatever the number I can't
visualize it but I can really understand
what they're saying I can you know it's
not obscure what they're saying so you
can get your hands on comprehension or
understanding in other ways than
visualization what what Bore was
certainly trying to argue was that the
reason people found quantum theory hard
to understand was that they were asking
for a kind of comprehension that was not
available. And what we know now is right
or wrong there are completely
comprehensible theories that will give
us these numbers and therefore it's not
impossible that there be a
comprehensible explanation.
Now you use the word theories there and
I know that you chose that word with
care because a lot of
times physicists and I look I sometimes
use loose language too so I'm to blame
for some of this as well but but
physicists often talk about
interpretations
of quantum mechanics
when perhaps they should use the word
theory or at least is that how you would
certainly I mean
that you start with, as you say, you
start with these observable numbers out
of the lab. If you're doing an empirical
science, that better be at some level
what you start with as the thing you're
trying to account for.
And we certainly know there are
different approaches that can account
for the numbers we have. Now those
approaches sometimes may make make even
different predictions from each other
but only on the margins and in very
difficult situations to realize
experimentally. But nobody would say
those are just two interpretations of
anything because they straightforwardly
conflict with each other even on the
empirics. Um nonetheless often that'll
get rolled under oh it's just a
different interpretation. Sometimes
people say, "Well, if two theories give
me the same predictions, empirical
predictions, then I'm just going to
count them as two
interpretations when you're talking
about quantum mechanics." The curious
thing is they would never say that when
you're talking about, say, space-time
theory. So special
relativity gives certain predictions and
there's a way that Einstein understood
it. And there's a different way that's
associated with Lorent where he didn't
change the space-time structure from
classical spacetime. But under his
understanding, he could still account
for all of those same phenomena. And
nobody says those are just two different
interpretations. They say these are two
conflicting theories. They have to be
because they say contradictory things
like is there a preferred uh notion of
simultaneity according to Einstein? No.
According to Lance, yes. So you can't
just say, "Oh, these are just two ways
of talking about the same account of the
world." They're clearly contradictory
accounts of the world. Absolutely. And
and where did the word, if you happen to
know, interpretation in quantum
mechanics first get in? And and the
reason I ask is in classical physics
there are of course distinct
formulations of classical mechanics. You
can write down Newton's equations in a
straightforward differential form. you
can write down a Hamiltonian approach to
it. Uh I mean often we don't call those
different interpretations. We call them
maybe different formulations of the you
know. So what is it about quantum
mechanics that brought this word
interpretation into the lexicon to the
historical question? I think that's a
great question. I don't know the answer
to. Um they're they're funny words that
sneak in. As you as you may know with
Bell's theorem, the word realism got
stuck in somewhere. Yeah. Um not by
Bell, but by later by people who wanted
to stick the word realism in so they
could think they could get around the
theorem by denying realism, whatever
that means. I'm not sure when the word
interpretation I mean we often we talk
about the Copenhagen interpretation, but
they talked about the Copenhagen spirit
or the Copenhagen school. Those those
are the actual words that that spirit is
a word. spirit is a word that they used
meaning meaning I don't know a general
approach to what science itself is
rather than a specific approach to what
quantum mechanics is I think right and
it's sort
of operationist and sort of empiricist I
mean it's a little bit hard to nail down
and spirit of course gives you a sense
this is a very openextured uh thing of
course bore I mean I'll just say
historically
It's pretty clear that one thing Bore
was good at was making allies. So Boore
and Heisenberg and this uh assistant of
Boris Rosenberg, I mean they were a
pretty
tightly organized group under the
Copenhagen banner and the opposition
which was Einstein not you know small
names Einstein, Schrodener, De Bruy
um De Bruyne later said the reason they
didn't win the debate was that they all
went their own ways. I mean Einstein
disagreed with Boore. So did Schrodener,
so did De Bruyne, but they all disagreed
with each other and they didn't form a
united front. And a united front, as we
have learned, even from recent
historical situations, is pretty
important. But we'll put that to the
side. Yes, it is. Yeah. And and so if
we're thinking about bore and the
Copenhagen spirit or school or whatever,
do you consider what is normally
described as the Copenhagen approach, is
it actually a theory? No. No, it's
certainly not a theory. What I mean by a
theory, I think what anybody ought to
mean by a theory is a
presentation of fairly high precision. I
don't want to say perfectly precise
precision because we've never had that
for reasons we might talk about but of
fairly high precision about saying
here's what I think exists in the world
so what is there and here's how I think
it behaves so that a dynamics which is
usually presented now in mathematical
physics you use a mathematical formalism
to represent what there is and then in
terms of that you write down dynamical
equations which could be deterministic
or not
probabilistic. Uh that give you a
dynamics. I would say a theory has to
have both of those to a reasonably high
precision. And if you don't have that,
you just don't have a theory. You may
have a perfectly good kind of recipe,
what I call in my book a recipe for
making some predictions, but you don't
really have a theory, right? So there is
an algorithm that a good student could
be taught. If you are presented with
such and such a problem, here's what you
do to make a prediction. Yes. And so
this involves things like the wave
function which embodies the
probabilities of various outcomes, the
Borne rule, taking the norm squared to
get the relative likelihood of one
outcome or another. But where in that
would you say it fails on your criteria
for being a theory? Good. So, in two
ways.
Um, neither of which I think gets enough
attention because I think there's a
general idea that this recipe or this
algorithm is
somehow almost all powerful with respect
to making predictions. Um so here here
are two ways that fails. One is that
there are some just plain old laboratory
situations to which it does not apply.
That is you could you can give people
this set recipe uh which will work like
if you have a screen and you say oh I'm
going to say for whatever reasons that
that screen is a position right detector
or I have some other device that's a
momentum detector. And once you say that
and then you say, well, if you're
measuring quote measuring position, use
this operator. If you're quote measuring
momentum, use that operator. Now we're
into the math. Yep. You give me a wave
function, you give me the operators, you
give me Borne's rule d I turn the crank,
I get a probabilistic predictions for
for the outcome of the experiment.
But two things as I say sometimes I can
give you a lab situation to which this
recipe just does not apply because
there's no operator but nonetheless we
can do the experiment and collect the
data. Okay. So you'd think a good theory
of fundamental physics ought to handle
any physical situation you can set up in
the lab not just a little subset of
them. You mean like a a time object?
Yes. Like for time. And we might I hope
get into the the problem of time of of
transit times of and so on. There is no
time operator. This is well known but
I'm not sure people have really thought
about how significant that is. And the
other thing
is in the case I just gave you I mean
the kind of standard thing you do is you
say oh this device whatever it is it's a
position oper it's a position measuring
device so I know which operator to use
blah blah blah blah. But you'd say, "But
look, um, I'm sending some particles at
this other physical object. I call it a
screen. I call it a position measuring
device, but who cares what I call it?
It's it's a bunch of atoms, right? It's
it's got a physical structure.
Surely, a proper theory shouldn't care
what you call it. It certainly shouldn't
care whether you call it a measuring
device. A proper theory, a proper theory
of fundamental physics ought to be
capable of capable of modeling it as a
physical object and the interaction with
this incoming particle as a physical
interaction and just derive what will
happen or what might happen from that.
Yeah. And that certainly you are not
told and really to this day no one knows
how to do. I only found out within the
last month or so in the literature there
is a thing called the problem of the
screen which is can physicists actually
in a precise way physically model what
we call screens where dots show up and
the answer is no they cannot
that's a bit of a surprise so I'm not
precisely sure what that means either
but I mean I would think I could
physically and mathematically model that
screen. Yeah, you would think you could
give it a shot. I mean, I I'll tell you
there are things you think you can do
that I know not from talking to people
who have looked deeply into this and
when you think about it a little like
just um I'll give you an example. I I
mean I don't want to put you on the
spot. Everybody thinks one thing you can
cleanly use quantum mechanics to do is
predict if I shoot electrons one at a
time as it were, whatever that means.
Yeah. through a screen with two slits,
we know an interference pattern will
form. You would think the algorithm we
have can predict easily the exact
structure of that interference pattern.
If I collect more and more and more
data, I can get to more precision. How
many particles land where? Yes.
Nobody knows how to do that with
precision. Why? When you say with
precision, is that the key? Well, what I
mean is this. What? What what's going to
come I'll tell you what's going to come
to your mind. You're going to say, "But
wait, I've got the wave function. Okay,
I know how to propagate it. Yeah, I know
how to get it to the place where the
screen is." Exactly. I know how to
square that and use Bourne's rule. Okay.
But notice you can only use Borne's rule
for the wave function at a certain
moment, at a certain time. But those
dots, you don't know when that dot is
going to form because the dots form at
different times.
Now trying to take account of
that turns out to be really hard to do
just mathematically. What do I
do? I can try if I try to model the
screen and some people will be able to
follow this and some people not. If I
try to model the screen as as it were
making a very rapid succession of what
we call position measurements. Yes. Then
you get into what's called the quantum
xeno effect and your prediction will be
no spots will ever form on the screen.
That's not right. Right. And if if you
think off the top of your head you know
how to solve that problem, I suggest you
you could write a paper about it because
nobody as far as I know has ever solved
that problem. Interesting. U but yes,
obviously I would follow exactly the
procedure that you summarized the
procedure that we teach our students.
But I guess the particular way that
you're framing the question, I agree
does give me a little bit of pause. I
I'll say just another word for you to
think about in your spare time. The
normal way we talk about it, a position
measurement is an intervention from the
outside at a moment. So we can pick that
moment. Like if I were to flash suddenly
flash lasers everywhere and look for a
dot to show at that moment. But a screen
just sits there. It it doesn't have a
timer on it. We don't turn it on or turn
it off. The time that the spot forms is
as it were determined by the particle.
True. Not by the screen. So the standard
way that we do that doesn't apply
because you apply Bourne's rule at a
moment at a pre-chosen moment. Sure. Now
Bour would describe this screen as this
macroscopic intervention and he would
say stop using quantum mechanics at that
point. because he drew this line in the
sand between the micro world and the
macro world. Are there people who still
hold to that way of thinking or is that
really just a stepping stone that helped
us get to where we are? I mean I I
shouldn't make comments about the
sociology of this among physicists
because you know I I haven't done I can
give you a little bit of data about it.
Um, but think of what you just said. So,
first of all, you say, well, let's draw
a line between the microscopic and the
macroscopic. And this is one in John
Bell's paper against measurement. One of
the he uses says lots of words that
should never appear in a foundational
account. One is microscopic and
macroscopic because where's that line?
Exactly. Right. It doesn't exist in
nature. Furthermore, you think, hey,
that screen is just a bunch of
microscopic particles following the
rules of quantum mechanics. It's not
somehow a magical. is not made of a
magical classical substance that's has
different physics to it. So why should I
have to make this distinction? As I
said, why isn't this just a regular
physical interaction between two
physical things? Now the the little
piece of data I'll just mention is is
Adam Becker wrote a nice book called
What is Real? which was a popular book
about Bell and about David Bow and about
Hugh Everett and certain people who were
running against this stream of
mainstream physics. Uh he was very
critical of Bor and Copenhogen in the
book and he has a degree in cosmology.
He's a physics you know a trained
physicist. He had a lot of uh talks
about the book in front of physics
audiences and he was expecting very
strong
objections and he said he was just
shocked that he didn't get it. He would
go and give these talks and criticize
very strongly Copenhogen and he'd see
nodding heads in the audience. So I
don't have myself a lot of data but I do
have the sense that
Copenhagen as a kind of dogma doesn't
capture a lot of people. They've more
many of them are just don't have any
opinion. They're kind of I don't know.
We never talked about it in my classes,
right? I don't I don't really know.
Yeah. No, certainly the case. In fact,
here at Colombia when I've taught the
undergraduate quantum mechanics course,
the only pressure is the wrong word. The
only encouragement that I've gotten from
the other faculty who have taught it
over the years when they see what I want
to focus on because I teach the basics
of the subject but then I do get into
issues of the measurement problem and I
do describe bomb mechanics and things of
that sort and the only sort of push back
is don't do that at the expense of time
dependent perturbation theory. Do you
know what I'm saying? So it's it's a
very it's it's really focused on we want
these students to be able to do the
calculation which I I completely
understand that's that's vital to do but
if the student doesn't really understand
what the theory and and what the holes
are I think that's a pretty pretty big
gap too. Yeah. So so yeah totally get
it. So when it comes to issues like the
measurement problem, can you just give
us a a quick description of how you see
that? Well, I mean there are different
ways of approaching it, but the simplest
one is the way I think about it is more
or less what I said.
Um again, let let me just channel John
Bell. I'll do that probably all the
time. Um he said look we do things f
first of all physics should be about
everything. It's it's not about what we
do just what we do in the lab right it's
not about laboratory operations. It's
about stars and galaxies and you know
the entire world that exists long before
us. Um and even among laboratory
operations it's very dangerous to call
one a measurement because the word
measurement has a
connotation. When you say you measure
something, you mean before you did this
operation, there was some quantity out
there, right? When I say, look, I'm
going to get on the bathroom scale to
measure my weight. I believe I have a
weight before I get on the scale. Yeah.
And it's exactly because I have a weight
that you can ask questions like, how
accurate is this scale after all? I
mean, how well is it registering what my
weight actually is? And you can do
various kinds of tests and compare
scales against each other and compare
the same scale when I put the same
object on it. Um for accuracy. Now the
problem is I mean one way to put the
problem conceptually is that quantum
mechanics is often presented as if
measurement was this very important
almost semi-agical moment in physical
interactions where something special
happens. Um, but then we also tell
students things like this. Well, a
screen, what does it do? It measures
position. Yeah. Right before that dot
appeared on the screen, did the particle
have a position? No, didn't have one.
Right? It just had none. Right? But if
it didn't have one, then you didn't
measure its position. Right? Then that
interaction created the position. It
didn't measure it. So, you're you're
going to end up being extremely confused
quite rightly by that language. Um Belle
said we should get rid of the word
measurement alto together and just talk
about experiments which is again just a
subclass of all physical interactions
right and the way the algorithm is
taught to students and I suspect that
some of those students may be watching
this conversation is it's sort of a
two-step process step one use a
schroinger equation to evolve this wave
function that you have some initial data
to set the boundary conditions on the
differential equation evolve it forward
important time and then when you do this
thing called a
measurement change the procedure and at
that moment use the born rule to predict
probabilities and since you know there's
one outcome you imagine this weird
notion of collapse of the wave function
to the one result that the experimentter
found and you can using this algorithm
predict the likelihood that that is what
they got. to this two-step procedure.
Step one, we understand well I got this
nice differential equation that
Schroinger wrote down in January 1926.
But the second part just is the whole.
Right. Right. And and that shows up even
you know early when vonoman writes his
book mathematical foundations of quantum
theory which was you know vonoman was a
mathematician and he was sort of looking
at the physics and saying all right I'm
going to clean it all up mathematically.
But if you go into that book um in the
fundamental axioms he says there are
these two processes process one and
process two or process A and process B.
And one is as you say when no
measurement is occurring then you just
evolve the Schroinger the wave function
by Schroinger evolution which is nice
and continuous and deterministic and
unitary and all kinds of math you can
learn about how to do that and then
under the other process you
suddenly
drastically change it in a
non-deterministic way right you it's no
longer determinist IC you only have
probabilities and so you say wait so the
picture you seem to be giving me is that
the world evolves by these completely
different
methods and when does it do one and when
does it do the other? Well, when you
measure, now if you say that, and you
don't have to say that, you can you can
have a theory where it does different
things, but you don't tie it to
measurement. But if you do what they do
and you tie it to measurement, then the
question, well, when does a measurement
occur? Takes central stage in physics.
And this Einstein, you know, immediately
objected or when you make an observation
and Einstein would say, well, who can
make an observation? Can a mouse do it?
Yeah, right. Good question. Can a mouse
can an amoeba do it? I mean, these are
the kinds of questions Bell also echoed.
If you're going to put that
dichotomy at the center of your physics,
it should be a sharp dichotomy, but it
isn't one, right? And Einstein was also
troubled by a particular detail of this
unknown thing called the active
measurement, which is if you've got a
nice spread out wave function, let's
just do a single particle. So we can
actually picture that wave function just
in three dimensions. So you have this
nice spread out wave function and then
you measure it and you find the particle
here. Then this algorithm suggests that
this wave has changed everywhere is now
spiked. It has its support where the
experimenttor found the particle.
Einstein was like wait how's that
possible? Right? You got this spread out
wave in principle through the entire
universe and this act of measurement
that you're not really telling me really
what that is is somehow affecting that
wave everywhere. Was that like a central
part of his discomfort? That was the
central part of his discomfort and this
also has been buried or or intentionally
disguised in the history. So Einstein
almost immediately in the 20s I know 26
27 came up with these kinds of examples
where you would have say I mean take a a
radioactive atom so you know uranium 235
and stick it here and then put a a
spherical detector around it at equal
distance.
Um the predictions of quantum theory are
first of all that there's no preferred
directionality. So eventually a spot may
form which we would say loosely is
because the atom decayed uh anywhere on
that sphere with equal likelihood and at
what time? Well again kind of at
different times this there's this the
wave function is sort of leaking out.
You you can think of it as leaking out
from this central atom all the time in a
spherical way. Um and eventually some
dot forms. Now there are two things
about that dot. Everybody focuses on one
but Einstein was really focused on the
other. One is quantum theory doesn't
predict exactly where it will appear and
but does does give you probabilities. So
you'd say well um I'm giving up
determinism. God plays dice with the
universe. If that's a complete theory if
quantum theory tells you all there
is then then you give up determinism.
And people think that really upset
Einstein. But the other thing is exactly
as you say. Imagine you have this
picture and you say, well this alpha
particle or whatever is decaying
electron, it isn't anywhere until the
spot forms. So a moment before the spot
formed here, there was some real
physical likelihood probability chance
that it formed way over here. But as
soon as it forms here, that chance
immediately has to be annihilated to
zero because you never get two spots.
That has to be global and instantaneous
change. And Einstein called that spooky
action in a distance or telepathy. Yeah.
And those are connected with each other.
The the indeterminism sort of forces the
telepathy on you. There's a nice quote
of Einstein's where he says that as the
quant as the present quantum theory says
that God plays dice and uses telepathic
methods. Right? There is such a quote.
Yes, there's such a quote and the
complete quote is that God plays dice
and uses telepathic methods as the
present quantum theory says I cannot
believe for a moment. But when I first
saw that on the web, the quote was that
God plays dice dot dot dot I cannot
believe for a moment. I mean, literally
the I've never heard the telepathic and
and uses telepathic methods got
literally cut out because they didn't
want to draw your attention. And there's
a a letter that Bourne writes that makes
clear he says Einstein really isn't all
that upset about indeterminism, right?
He could he could stomach that, but what
he couldn't stomach was the
instantaneous action of distance, right?
And it's interesting because I don't
mean to jump around too much, but the
famous
1935 paper Einstein Podilski Rosen,
which we'll get into maybe in a couple
minutes, but the reason I bring it up
now is my understanding is that Einstein
was somewhat upset at that paper because
this issue that he had of this I guess
in this language telepathic approach to
the change of the wave function, it got
kind of buried. Mhm. Within this more
complex arena of entanglement where my
understanding is he said we could have
explained the issue without having to
bring in all this architecture of
entangled particles. I could have
explained the issue I have simply being
a spread out wave function and now it's
not spread out. How did that happen? I I
think there are two points there. It's
certainly true. There's a direct quote
where he's he he says after the paper
and again people think that uh Podolski
wrote the paper because it seems like
someone whose native language was
Russian by the use of and and and it's
clear that Einstein was not completely
happy with the paper and he says that
the main point was buried in the
formalism something like that. I do I
think what he saw and what we can
already see from our discussion was that
the paper made a huge
advance by dealing not with a single
particle like the example I just gave
you where there's just going to be one
dot right but with a pair of particles
that could be sent off to labs very far
apart and in order for the argument to
go through he did have to use an
entangled state for that pair. It
wouldn't work for an unentangled state.
So, I don't think you can get away from
entanglement. There's a kind of weird or
unnecessary bit of grandstanding where
they try to attack the Heisenberg
uncertainty relation in the end of that
paper. You don't need that and that was
just a distraction. He may have been
upset about that. Yeah, that too. But
the point I was making is his
fundamental issue
of this telepathic collapse. You can do
that with a single particle. Yeah. You
don't you don't need the the formulas of
entanglement, but the entanglement does
take it further in certain ways, right?
Uh which I'd love to get to pretty much
now because 1935 rolls around and he
starts to work with Pedulski and Rosen.
Um the idea of entanglement was already
known, right? Schroinger had already
described entanglement. No. Are you
sure? Because my understanding again do
correct me if my history is wrong but I
thought Schroinger earlier had said that
he considered entanglement to not be a
quality but the quality of quantum
mechanics. Yeah, but your timing's off.
So that was after the fact. No, here's
So I'll give you the exact thing. Yeah,
please. 1935 the EPR paper comes out.
Schroinger reads it. The what we call
the cat paper is his response. He says
and there's a footnote where he says I
don't know whether to call this
something like a a paper or a
confession. That paper is his response
to
EPR. There he introduces the term
entanglement.
And then in a in another paper in 1935
that's in the Cambridge mathematics he
uses this phrase that entanglement is
not
one but the uh characteristic of quantum
mechanics. it forces a a deviation from
classical thought. That's in 1935 also
after EPR. So I believe both of those
papers, the CAT paper and the Cambridge
math paper are written in response to
him reading the EPR paper and seeing the
point. Interesting. Um so why don't you
just give us a quick idea of
entanglement just so our audience can be
on the same page. Okay. So there's a
kind of mathematical aspect to it and
and then a physical aspect to it. So
let's separate those. As everyone knows,
a central piece of the mathematical
architecture of quantum theory is a
thing we call the wave function.
Um when we learn all of us learn to
begin, we talk about the wave function
of just a single particle. And in a way
that's nice because you can if we go
back to visualizing it, you can kind of
visualize it. Um because just
mathematically like a electric field or
a magnetic field the wave function for a
single particle is represented by a
single number associated with every
point in space. It's a complex number.
So that's a little tricky but okay it's
a it's a number. You can sort of say oh
there's the wave function is is there's
more of it here than here right and
compare how much or the squares or
whatever. But as soon as you get a pair
of particles, a two particle system or a
three particle system, the wave function
no longer even mathematically is a a
number associated with points in
physical space. It's it's associated
with the points in this higher
dimensional space we call configuration
space. And what happens then with a pair
of
particles, you can imagine all of the
physical states available to just this
particle if it was the only particle in
existence. Okay, so there's kind of you
know a state space of of ways it could
be and then for the second particle a
state space for ways it could be and
then there are product states which
means you just say well particle A is
like this and particle B is like that
from that zoo of states those are fine
those are kind of everybody understands
the product states but just as just
given the mathematics because we're
dealing with a vector space there are
also other states that simply cannot be
expressed as this state of A and that
state of B. Right? You can only try to
describe A by mentioning B and only try
to describe B by mentioning A. There's a
kind of global uh
unification so that the physical state
of one can't even be expressed
mathematically without reference to the
other. And typically this is set up just
so people can have a picture in mind.
Typically it's set up where these two
particles they had some interaction or
perhaps they were even born in the same
process. If it's like a decay of a
calcium atom that's sending photons out
back to back. There's something that
allows these two particles to have some
intimate connection early on and then
they separate and somehow that
separation doesn't make them independent
of each other any longer. That's a
little bit of a tricky claim because
I'll just
mention as you know in quantum field
theory there's a thing called a vacuum
state. It's a highly entangled state. It
is a very very very entangled state. I
wasn't trying to say this is the only
way but just to sort of have a picture.
Yes. Typically if we want to create in
the lab uh particles that we know to be
in entangled states we do it that way.
Right. There's a there's a common source
say you have two uh photons that come
out of an atom or whatever. Yes.
Absolutely. And so so you find yourself
in this unexpected situation compared to
a classical world, right? In the
classical world almost by definition. If
things are separated in space, they're
independent. Yes, they can influence
each other by sending a signal that will
propagate across the separation between
them, but you can speak about them as
independent. And that's what we mean by
reality in a classical world, right?
Yes. And I I should just mention
Einstein said almost verbatim what you
just said in a nice letter to Bourne. I
see. He says if we if we cons says and I
was just quoting this letter for a talk
I'm gonna give. He says if we consider
the some conceptual world of physics and
he says putting aside quantum mechanics.
So he says let's leave quantum physics.
Yeah. We find this that that there the
idea is that there's a real objective
physical world and that
uh we say that a a if two systems at the
same time are situated in different
parts of space then they each have their
own separate reality. Right? He says
that is what's characteristic of
classical physics. It's local in that
sense. And he furthermore says in in the
field theory this this locality is
carried to the extreme. So not only are
the physical items like fields all right
it you know electric field has a state
here it has a different state here. Not
only are the
objects separate and local like that,
but the laws themselves right you can
ask are the laws of
electromagnetics obtaining in this
little region without looking outside in
this little region without looking
outside and he says this is what's
characteristic of physics and he knew
that that quantum mechanics was swimming
completely against that right this
entanglement was completely in the other
direction and that's why he didn't like
it right and
know what does he do about this? So he
writes this paper uh and then other
people begin to try to make sense in a
way that either will give some
ammunition to an Einsteinian perspective
or not. And what I have in mind here is
the whole David Bow saga. So again I'm
not expert on the history but I gather B
writes a textbook on quantum mechanics
uh inspired by vonoman uh believes that
there is an argument to be made that you
can't have definitive quantities in a
local theory that will be compatible
with the ideas of quantum
physics shows this to Einstein. Einstein
says, "No, no, no. There's some problem
in the von Noman argument." And this
gets David Bow to think about things.
Oh, say, so I'll tell you what I know
about this. It's a very interesting
story. Bow, as you say, he's an
assistant professor at Princeton. He
writes a textbook, quantum theory, and
his intention is to exposit the
Copenhagen
school more clearly than anybody else
has. Because if you try to read Boore,
Boore is very impenetrable writer. He's
a very poor writer. Um, and so Bow's
idea was to really clean this up. He
actually, one thing he does is he takes
the EPR argument that that Einstein did
with position and momentum and he
reformulates it for spin, which turns
out to be very important for what goes
forward, although nobody I think
realized that at the time, but it makes
it much easier to comprehend what's
going on. So he writes this book and
he's at at Princeton and he very much
would like to talk to Einstein about it.
I think Gal Man was tell tells this
story and he was hoping somebody at
Princeton could go like bug Einstein and
as he's doing that he gets a note from
Einstein just spontaneously and Einstein
says you know I read your book I very
much liked the book would you like to
come talk about it and then again I
think it was Gman says okay so bow goes
to to to the institute for advanced
study and talks to Einstein and comes
back from that meeting and just says I'm
back to square one Einstein has has
convinced me the whole thing is
hopeless. This is 1951 he publishes the
book and then by 52 he's he writes then
these
papers a a an interpretation a a quote
interpretation he actually puts
interpretation in quotation marks a
quote interpretation of quantum theory
in terms of hidden variables. No, I'm
sorry. An interpretation of qu of of
quantum theory in terms of quote hidden
variables. He puts the quote around
hidden and he he realizes that you can
produce a completely deterministic
theory without any measurement process
in the fundamental axioms with just
you've got some particles they move
around. There's also a wave function
that guides them in how they move. The
wave function evolves by Schroinger's
equation that's nice and clean and
deterministic. The guidance equation
which determines how the particles move
given the wave function is nice and
clean and deterministic and it makes all
the same predictions as standard quantum
mechanics. So this is a version of
quantum or maybe I don't know what the
right language is a a distinct
formulation that allows you to explain
the measurement the data to get the same
predictive power and yet in this
approach the particles actually have
positions they actually have
velocities and it differs from classical
physics only because there is this new
idea of the quantum wave, the wave
function pushing the particles around.
Well, I I
I think it differs from classical
physics more profoundly than that
suggests
because the whole idea of pushing is a
kind of Newtonian idea. It's the idea of
a force. And Newton's theory, the
fundamental dynamical equation F= ma,
the A is the acceleration. The
acceleration is the change in the
velocity. So for people who know it's a
second order differential equation and
kind of the whole idea of pushing is
tied to Newtonian mechanics. Yes. The
right way I think to think about bow
theory is that the fundamental equation
is not second order. It doesn't involve
acceleration. So it doesn't f of t
equals h bar. It directly gives you how
given given the particles are in this
configuration now and the wave function
is such and such. This is how the
configuration will change. Yeah. So
nothing's pushing. I mean pushing is is
is not the right picture. A very
Newtonian description. Yeah. I mean I
mean Bow used to talk about choreography
which is slightly better.
That's very poetic. I like that. Uh but
the bottom line is people thought that
couldn't be done right that that quantum
mechanics required that we give up this
idea of particles with positions and
speeds and just let that go guys because
that's an old way of thinking about
things and van seemed to establish that
you had to let that go some issue with
that proof and then bow is able to slip
in that crack and actually come up with
a formulation So the interesting again I
don't want to focus too much on
sociology and I'm glad that we're
blending physics in with it but I do
have a sociological question which is on
the face of it if someone like came to
me and you know I was just learning
about these ideas and whatever the 40s
50s or something like that and they said
there's one approach to this theory
where you're going to have to give up
positions and velocities and move over
to probabilities. Like there's this
other formulation where you can still
have your positions and velocities are a
little different from what you would
have thought from a Newtonian
perspective. You still have
probabilities, but at least you've got
trajectories. I would say I'll take that
approach, right? Because it seems to
require less of a mental rearrangement
of the furniture of reality to do that.
And yet here David Bow gives this
approach but it kind of falls completely
on deaf ears. Right. Well, so again now
let me give you two more historical data
points that are of interest. One is the
story of John Bell. Um
Bell is going to school. He's learning
quantum theory. He can't understand it.
Um and he's asks his professor but you
know is it really necessary? I mean you
know with this measurement and these
probabilities and so on and what he
reports is that his professor says yes
vonoyman has proven that no hidden
variables theory can return the same
prediction. Just so the audience knows,
hidden variables here would be the usual
non-hidden qualities of position and
velocity. Here it just means that you
actually have particles that are moving,
right? Particles that actually have
position. If the spot forms here, it's
because a moment before that spot
formed, the particle was really near
there and it was heading in that
direction. Um, so so bell reports that
his his professor tells him Vanoyman has
proven this can't be done. And Bel says
I didn't know any German and and
Vanoyman's book had not been translated.
So I took it for granted. I just figured
my professor tells me a famous
mathematician has proven X is
impossible. I guess X is impossible. I
should stop, you know, beating myself up
over it. And then he says, and then one
day I woke up in 1952 and read Bow's
paper and said, but wait, Bone just did
what you told me vonoyman prove can't be
done. So So Belle could understand what
Bow did and see that it all worked,
right? Yeah. And by that time Vanoyman's
book had been
translated and then he can read the book
and later in an interview bell says that
there's not a mathematical mistake in
the book of course and son was a great
mathematician but there of course for
any theorem there are assumptions and he
says one assumption he says is foolish.
He he says you can quote me on this it
was just a foolish one. Now the other
interesting data point is that very soon
after von vonomy's book it wasn't that
Bell was the first to realize this
greater Herman who was a philosopher and
a woman which were two strikes against
her as far as any physicist was
concerned also understood this error I
mean
this undefensible assumption and pointed
it out and there's another data point
which is that someone was talking to
Einstein I believe in the 50s in in in
Princeton and Einstein said, "Well, I'm
working on deterministic theory that it
will give me all these predictions." And
they said, "But what about Vonoyman?"
And they report that van he went to his
shelf, pulled Vonoyman's book off,
opened it up. We have no reason to
believe this. And he pointed and we know
what he was pointing at. Right? So the
flaws in what Vonoyman did were actually
quite well appreciated by people who
cared enough to think hard about it.
Right? But you get the sense that many
physicists were perfectly happy to have
van's word that they don't have to think
about it, right? Just made it cleaner
and simpler and easier. I I I can stop
worrying about do we really know it's
indeterministic and so on because
Vonoman, the great mathematician, has
proven it must be so. And that lets you
off the hook. right now. Another thing
that is a
real issue or quality or should be
brought to light in our conversation
that's of course well known in circles
of people who think about Bow's approach
the way in which this wave function uh I
won't use pushes choreographs that was
the word the way in which it
choreographs the motions of the
particles has within it this non-local
aspect effect which is you can fiddle
with some particles over here and it
affects the the motion of the particle
way over there. Yes. And and
so often times even today people will
say h but you've got this non-locality
which is the technical way of describing
this. I I think the right answer to that
is but quantum mechanics itself has
non-localities. It's just sort of hidden
in entanglement the thing that we
discussed
earlier. Is that your response? I mean
yeah I I look so the exact and and it's
really help of course of course Einstein
knew about Bow's theory. It's really the
same as De Bruy's theory which was
already in the 20s. Yeah. Um well known.
So Einstein knew about that theory and
he knew it was a deterministic theory.
And this again goes back to if what
Einstein was so worried about was
indeterminism and God plays dice, why
didn't he just get on the Deoy bandwagon
or the bone bandwagon? Yeah. And the
answer is as you say in that theory, the
non-locality, the spooky action at a
distance is in your face, right? Because
it's a theory. So when you have a theory
and it says exactly what there is and
how it behaves, you can start asking
very clear questions. Well, what would
happen in this experiment, if this piece
of apparatus had been that way rather
than this way, right? The theory will
tell you. And and what you can see is
that in certain circumstances, if we
separate Alice and Bob into their labs
far apart, and that's again in the EPR
case, we have these two particles. So,
we can send them off in very distant
locations. It's just manifest in that
theory that sometimes what Bob sees in
his lab will depend on what Alice does
in her lab. This was the spooky action
of distance. This was the telepathy that
Einstein didn't want. So he knew about
the theory but rejected it. He wanted a
local theory. Yeah. And I don't blame
him. Right. I I don't think that
Einstein can be
criticized. He really thought the
physics the progress of physics through
electromagnetic theory, special
relativity, general relativity, all
those are local theories in his sense.
He thought the progress of physics was
telling you the world is local and he
rejected a theory that that didn't have
that feature. Now what interested Belell
and now this is after unfortunately
Einstein died. He says well I know I can
get determinism because Bow has shown me
how to do
it. Can I also get back locality and
still keep all the predictions of
quantum mechanics? And that was the
question that that that Belle hit on. Um
it wasn't his day job to think about
this. He was just working this as a
hobby kind of thing. He was doing it on
the weekends. Eventually he got a
sbatical and sat down to go through all
the so-called no hidden variables proofs
and wrote a paper about them and their
weaknesses. But then he hit on Bell's
theorem and what the theorem shows. And
this is like the early 60s. This is 63.
Yeah. What the theorem shows is that no
local theory of the kind Einstein wanted
can possibly reproduce the predictions
of standard quantum mechanics. So the
non-locality can't be gotten rid of and
you know and keep the same predictions
and then when you go into the lab and
see the predictions are correct you say
well forget about quantum theory the
predictions are correct. Belle has shown
us that these kinds of phenomena can't
be explained in any local way. And when
you say forget about quantum mechanics,
it's kind of important. You're saying
regardless of what the explanatory
fundamental structure is, the results in
the laboratory cannot be explained by
any theory that is local. Local in is
local in the sense Einstein wanted it to
be relativistically local. Uh it's very
important to understand that Bell's
theorem is not about quantum mechanics
at all. Yeah, it, you know, it's like,
okay, I have a lab. Alice can do this or
that. Bob can do this or that. They're
just going to record some data. Um,
here's some correlations between the
data that Alice record and the data that
Bob record that cannot be produced by
any local theory. Period. Period. And
the amazing thing is, I mean, just going
back to how we began, there are versions
of exposition of Bell's theorem that a
seventh grader could understand, right?
You don't really I mean, you you you can
basically set it up where, you know, if
you get this over here and this over
here and trying to assume there's
locality, you simply can't explain the
data, period. And you can just do this
counting on your fingers. Yeah. Um and
and so uh it it's it's it's a very
straightforward argument, very
straightforward proof. It's
revolutionary. And again, just going
back to how we began. Somehow it doesn't
immediately turn the world upside down.
Yeah. I mean, it it's interesting. It
hit some people. uh you know it hit me
when I read
Despa's Scientific American article
about it even though that article was
kind of a little bit confusing and not
right but he gave enough of what was
going on that if you thought about it
you'd said wait a minute this is really
really really strange um it hit it hit
some people who were kind of on the
fringes of physics and a little bit
hippie trippy I think that may be part
of why it didn't spread as wide because
it's sort sort of at least again I could
be rewriting my own past but I think I
had the feeling that this whole bell EPR
stuff it was just like the new age
physics people that that cared or were
thinking about it and somehow for a
hard-nosed physicist who was going to
actually be doing real calculations that
just wasn't something to think about.
Well, the interesting thing is that idea
of a hard I mean, exactly what you said,
a hard-nosed physicist doing
calculations, right? Because there's
another piece of rhetoric that goes
along with this. Everybody cites Fineman
before Bell uh in
in in in his famous lectures and, you
know, and elsewhere. And he says,
"Nobody understands quantum mechanics.
Nobody. I don't understand it. I've
never gotten used to it. I've never felt
comfortable with it. Maybe I'm just too
old." You know, Fineman is saying this.
Yeah. And that's propagating this
idea something available here. But later
in the 70s
uh Fineman writes a paper where to tell
you the truth what he did was rediscover
on his own Bell's theorem. Oh really?
About a decade after Bell. I see. And
makes a big deal out of it. He says,
"All my life I've thought there was
something weird about quantum mechanics,
but now I can actually reduce it to an
equation that this must be larger than
that." Right? And it's really just
Bell's theorem. I think he either never
read Bell or certainly didn't appreciate
it, but somehow when he came across the
same proof on his own, all of a sudden
it struck him as, "Oh, this is what's so
weird about quantum mechanics." I can
imagine that. So the other quality
though of of the the bomb approach which
again is uh not one that is w maybe we
should say it's not widely taught among
physicists. Uh part of it is this red
herring of saying well the non-locality
is in your face but if there's
non-locality whether it's in your face
or not it's not a bug it's a feature is
what I always say right you know Belle
showed us it's a feature right Einstein
thought it was a bug because he didn't
know about bellact good for him once you
have bell you say no it's a feature but
the other thing which is not a feature
is that it is challenging to do a to
make a relativistic version of of this
approach approach. So yes,
non-relativistic quantum mechanics that
an undergraduate will take in say their
first year, their first exposure to
quantum mechanics. Typically, we just
do, you know, the non-relativistic
Schroeder equation. It allows you to do
things like hydrogen and particle in a
box and things like that. But then if a
student goes on in physics and if you're
actually going to be in the field, you
have to include relativity. And
typically we do that by getting to a
quantum field theory, a relativistic
quantum field. There are
non-relativistic quantum field theories
too but but that's the framework. So
where do we stand in this bombian
approach being able to take that next
step? Yeah. Uh so there there are things
to say on both sides of this. Let me say
on each side of them. I don't know of
any way to implement the basic idea of a
pilot wave theory and and and there are
different versions and you can do them
for fields and so on. I don't know of
any way to implement that without using
what we in the business call a preferred
foliation of spacetime which is um the
idea that you have spaceime it's
four-dimensional but it is by nature
sliced up which is a foliation called a
foliation uh sliced up into a series of
as it were leaves that have a definite
order and and the leaves are all of
space at a given moment of time Right?
So it's what it it corresponds to what
Newton called absolute simultaneity. So
and that's of course the way we think
about the world until we get to
relativity. You see I snap my fingers.
Okay, that was an event and there is as
it were a snapshot of the entire
universe. What was going on right then,
right? What was going on here and and
and in LA and on the moon and on Alpha
Centuri. Now, we won't know what's going
on on Alpha Century for quite a while
because we've got to get the news. But
still, something was going on there,
right? That was Newton's picture. You
know, he says an an instant of time is
spread out throughout the entire
universe. That's the normal picture.
That is what we now call a preferred
foliation of spaceime. Um, relativity
got rid of that because Einstein
realized he didn't need it for his
purposes. and his purposes were
basically getting uh Maxwellian
electronamics and then eventually a
theory of gravity that was pretty much
like Newton's not quite the same
predictions but close enough to explain
the success of Newton that he could do
all that without a preferred foliation
without absolute simultaneity and I
think that's why Einstein was so upset
about spooky action at a distance
because it requires if you say doing
something here has an effect way over
there. Well, just pairing up the cause
and the effect gives you a preferred
foliation. So, I don't know of any way
to to implement
uh something like the pilot wave
approach without a preferred foliation.
Now, some people like to say, well,
okay, but I can give you a rule where
for most wave functions, not all, but
for most wave functions, you just give
me the wave function and from that I'll
give you a foliation. kind of derive the
foliation from as it were the state of
matter and that rule can be
relativistically invariant right they
they say this is a more relativist my
own view is ah put the foliation back in
looks like we need it what bell proved I
think what bell proved is that there's
non-locality and the easiest way to
implement non-locality in a theory is to
postulate there is a preferred foliation
and to use it in writing down your
equations that's there's two So you can
have a preferred have to know exactly
what that means but you can choose a
foliation. Usually we say yeah sure you
can choose any foliation you want but we
want there to be some relativistic
invariance of the formulation and so if
you do choose a foliation and realize
bomb mechanics in that framework and I
don't know the the detailed literature
on this at all can you do it in a way
that does respect a change of foliation
that come that's the point and you you
should know this because in David's book
David's first book quantum meanan
mechanics, David Albert, sorry, quantum
mechanics and experience. He gives you a
very nice example coming from EPR and
coming from Bell. Alice is over here,
Bob is over here. We send them an
entangled pair of particles. They're
going to do some spin measurements on.
Okay? And in in bomb mechanics, you do
this with a foliation. What you you're
going to get either a result say of
Alice's is shows up and Bob's shows down
or the other way around. So the
everybody agrees the quantum mechanical
predictions are it'll either be this or
this maybe 50% chance of this 50% chance
of that. Um David gives you examples
where in this theory because it's a
precise
theory you use a foliation and whether
you get this result or this result will
depend on whether Alice does what she
does before or after Bob does what he
does relative to that foliation. So if
you suddenly switch the foliation, you'd
actually get a different prediction. I
see I see for that individual case,
right? The statistics would be the same
for many repetitions. But for that
individual experiment, right, the
foliation plays a role in determining
whether it's this outcome or that
outcome, right? And you're saying that
doesn't necessarily trouble you when you
see that you're like, hey, maybe that's
Well, I because for most of us that's
very troubling. Well, the it's and
certainly this is uh a standard reaction
from physicists. As soon as you say I'm
using a preferred foliation, I'll just
tell you a little story. I was I I ran
into Scott Arensson. You probably know
Scott. And uh I said I was working on a
a certain kind of theory blah blah blah.
And he says, "Oh, but aren't you going
to get into trouble with these causal
loops?" And I said, "No, I'm using a
preferred foliation." And his total
response
was that was it. That was it. It's like,
all right, I'm working on a theory
that'll solve all these problems that I
can write down and blah blah blah blah
blah, but gee, I don't like it because
you've got a preferred foliation. Now, I
think now you have to stop and think,
where did this come from? And the answer
is clear. It came from relativity. Of
course, it's because there's no
preferred foliation in relativity. But
again, special relativity was designed
for Maxwellian electronamics, which
doesn't need it need a preferred
foliation, right? General relativity
showed you how to do gravity without a
preferred foliation that's close to
Newtonian gravity. That's what Einstein
was trying to do. Sure. They didn't know
about quantum mechanics. They didn't
know about Bell's theorem. I mean, I
like to think that Einstein, if he had
read Bell, would have seen the point and
would have said, "Maybe I shouldn't be
demanding." So, you don't think it would
have been the Scott Aronson? Uh, I don't
know. I don't think I I mean he was
Scott Aronson when he was just thinking
up theories and says oh here's a theory
it has a preferred foliation I don't
like it but once you have bell in front
of you of course what Einstein didn't
like was the spooky action the
non-locality once you realize there is
non-locality
the it's kind of a very simple say the
easiest way as I say the easiest way to
implement it is to have a preferred
foliation and is there what's the
prescription for choosing that preferred
foliation I'm not sure what you mean by
choosing. I mean, I, for example, I'm
just playing around with a theory that
has one built into the space-time
structure. It's just there. So, I don't
know what you mean by So, from the get
go, you say, right? You're saying you're
saying from the getgo, I'm just part of
the way the way standard relativity has
a light cone structure, right? It has
one. You say, but how did it get chosen?
I It's just part of the theory is that
that's part of spaceime, right? It's
part of the space-time structure, right?
Why do I believe in that? because I seem
to need it to do physics. I believe in
the structures that I that seem to be if
not forced on me very heavily right
suggested to me by the physical
phenomena and violations of Bell's
inequality which are the physical
phenomena
really to me are a very good motivation
for thinking let's open up our minds
right right interesting so so Bulma's
one interesting direction as we spent
some time on many in our audience and
people more generally have heard of the
many worlds approach as sort of a
another direction in which people took
these ideas. Uh maybe take us through a
little bit of that and we can then talk
a little bit about where things stand on
that way of thinking about them. Yeah.
So
um my preferred way to to triage
approaches to quantum mechanics what
again people will call interpretations
but I'll just say are different families
of theories is to start with the fact
that there is just a a flat
contradiction
um between three different propositions
all of which one would like to hold
right intuitively you come into the game
and you'd say these all seem quite
reasonable to me um or anyway my life
would be easier as a physicist if I
could hold these one is we know that
quantum theory is using a wave function
question this is the question EPR asked
is it complete which just means if you
tell me the wave function of for a
system does that contain all the
information about the physical state of
that system or not right if it contains
all of it somehow then it's complete
then two systems ascribe the same wave
function are physically identical in all
respects you'd kind of like that because
you know you've got wave functions and
you've got Schroer's equation and you
kind of know how to play with them and
so it would be pretty straightforward.
Yeah. Um the second thing that once
you've got the wave function, you then
ask, well, how does it evolve in time,
you'd like it always to be Schroinger
evolution? Because it's this nice,
clean, deterministic, unitary, simple,
basically pretty simple evolution
mathematically. Um does it always do
that or not? As we said, if you look at
Vonoyman, he says no. Does sometimes,
but other times it does this other
thing. It collapses. Very different
process. And that duality of process is
very worrisome and you wonder why does
it do it sometimes and other times. And
uh there are collapse theories that tie
the collapses to measurements. Those are
especially worrisome because we don't
know what a measurement is. There are
other collapse theories that don't tie
it to measurement that just have it
collapse randomly from time to time at a
certain rate. The so-called GRW theory,
that's a little better, but it still has
this duality of smooth collapse smooth
collapse. That seems a little more. So
you would so you ask is the wave
function complete? Does it always evolve
by Schroinger evolution? You'd like it
to be complete. You'd like it to evolve
by Schroinger evolution. And there's a
third thing you'd sort of like, which is
that if you do an experiment like the
famous Schroinger cat experiment, you'd
like to say, I started with one cat.
Don't I end up with one
cat? One cat in, one cat out, and the
cat coming out is either alive or dead.
I mean, Schroinger thought that's
something we know about the world. We
know if we take a single cat and put it
in a box with some, you know, a
mechanism and some cyanide that at the
end of the day that very cat is still
one cat and it's either a live cat or a
dead cat. That seems like something
you'd like to maintain. Yeah. Now, it
turns out you can't maintain all three,
right? those three you can't if you
insist the wave function is complete and
you insist that it always evolves by
Schroinger evolution you can't maintain
that the cat ends up either alive or
dead so you have to give up at least one
of those three
hypotheses the pilot wave theory gives
up the completeness of the wave function
the collapse theory gives up the
Schroinger evolution and the many worlds
is what you're stuck with if you refuse
to give up either either of those two
and you say, "Okay, I guess I have to
say I started with one cat and I ended
with well people often say two cats, a
live cat and a dead cat." But that's not
right for Schroinger's case. There are
an infinite number of dead cats because
how the cat died. I
mean, you know, it depends on when the
when the thing decays and the cat would
die. So, you know, and and then you
okay, now you're in a already in a mess
because you say the world sort of
doesn't seem like that and then you have
to go through all of these hoops to try
and first of all make any sense of the
theory and then especially to make sense
of probabilities because you say but
just take it a little bit further. I
mean just to to bring your
description to the picture that I think
people have heard before. So if you are
going to go in the many worlds approach,
you're basically coming to a picture
where you the measurer of the state of
the cat will encounter that cat alive in
one universe, dead in another un dead in
another and so on and so forth. And so
the many worlds or the many possible
outcomes allowed by the spectrum of
possibilities that are embedded in the
quantum wave function. Yeah. Although
again I mean one advantage the many
worlds people can claim is they don't
have to mention measurement. So you said
you the measurer right? Um the theory
says you know Schroinger says look go
into the lab and set up this situation.
We could do it. I mean we could it's
cruel. We couldn't to kill the cat but
you get the idea. There's nothing
nothing hard experimentally about the
situation. quite apart from anybody
else. The mini world says, well, after
say 10 minutes, I if if we could see all
of physical reality, there would as it
were be a branch where the cat is alive
and a whole bunch of other branches
maybe where the cat is dead in different
ways. That's independent of us looking
at it, right? And then you say, but what
if we go look at it? You know, you've
now got all these, as it were, different
cats. Then they say, ah, then what's
going to happen is that you, we started
with one cat, we now have many cats. We
start with one U. We're now going to
have many U's. There'll be a U that's as
it were inhabiting the branch with the
dead cat and you're grieving and another
U that's inhabiting a branch with the
live cat and you're playing with the cat
and you're going to fish in this way
just as the cat did, right? Um so the
term measurement does not appear in the
foundational principles of many worlds.
So it does have that conceptual
advantage. So in that sense it it it
solves the measurement problem by
operating it. Yeah. I mean the best way
you shouldn't right the only decent way
to avoid it is by formulating a theory
that doesn't mention measurement. So it
never comes up. That's what Belle
demanded. That was why measurement was
on a one one on this list of forbidden
words that he had which included
macroscopic, macroscopic, reversible,
irreversible information he didn't like.
There were lots of words he said these
aren't sharp enough physically right to
be appropriate terms to be using in a
fundamental physical theory and just to
again I I love the organization that you
were describing just to sort of spell it
out so this approach I guess is Hugh
ever 1957 is a person who a student of
John Wheeler so he's assuming that the
wave function is a complete description
yes so very straightforward he is
assuming that the Schroinger equation
that we teach our under is the equation
be all and end all of the entire theory
and that's where those two assumptions
take him to this
reality in which there are what we would
normally describe as world upon world
upon world upon world I mean I should
say a word historically about this if
you
read Wheeler's original paper he called
it the relative state interpretation
um largely as I understood it because he
wanted bore to not immediately reject it
well I whether that was the reason or
not it certainly when he talks about the
relative state that's language that has
dropped out of modern the modern version
the modern version runs through
something called decoherence or attempts
to run through something called
decoherence in a way that as I
understand it wheeler's original
approach didn't uh so it's a it's a bit
hard to get your h your hands on exactly
whater was proposing in 1957 he says I
mean what he says is look suppose I have
an entangled state of this pair of
particles okay so kind of neither one
has its own state as we were talking
about I can't describe this one
independent but he says okay yeah but if
I as it were just out of thin air
postulate some state for this one I can
now plug that arbitrary state in here
and now calculate a relative state of
this one so this is the state of this
one relative to what? Well, not relative
to the actual state of this one because
this one doesn't have an actual state,
but relative to this, you know,
arbitrarily chosen state. So, it's a
little hard to understand what he's
proposing there. The people think that
that problem can be solved by
decoherence. And that's a complicated
question, right? uh which maybe we'll
have time to but I want to get to the
more concrete issue that people have
certainly banged their heads against the
wall for a long time on which is a
simple statement that quantum mechanics
as we understand it as a theory that
speaks of probabilities of one outcome
or another right in this many worlds
this everian approach we're basically
saying that every possible outcome
happens so if you for instance want to
say that some outcome is extremely
unlikely. What does that mean in a
theory where you're guaranteed for it to
happen in one of these worlds? Yes. And
so where do you I think that that is con
I think that's exactly right and that's
conceptually incoherent and and it and
you can put it in very concrete terms,
right? I mean, suppose I literally have
my pet cat and I'm being forced by some
nefarious agent um to put my cat in one
of these Schrodener like uh boxes. But I
have a choice between two boxes. And in
quantum mechanics, normal quantum
mechanics would tell me if I do this
apparatus, there's a 90% chance the cat
lives and a 10% chance the cat dies. And
if I do that one, it's the other way
around. Okay, 90% chance that it dies
and 10% chance that it lives. I loving
my cat would clearly choose, right, the
one that gives a higher chance of
survival. I of course would then cross
my fingers when the actual experiment
goes because, you know, it could breaks
could be bad and so on. Now, from the
many worlds perspective, they're going
to say, "Look,
uh, no matter which choice you make,
there'll be some worlds where the cat
lives and some worlds where the cat dies
and some worlds where you're continuing
consciousness is with a live cat and
some worlds in which it's a dead cat.
And the only difference is on this side,
the live cat part has high amplitude and
on this side the live cat part has low
amplitude." And then you say, "Yeah, but
can I tell the amplitude of the world
I'm living in? does this amplitude
you're talking about have any empirical
uh marks or anything? And you say, "No,
no, it feels just the same to be in a
high amplitude as a low amplitude
world." And I'd say, "But then what's
the difference?" Now, if they say, "But
your cat is much more likely to live."
No, no, they can't say that because in
both cases, you get some live cats and
some and you can't really count the cats
and all these things. I mean, so I I
just don't think you can make sense of
probability in a situation. I'm
sympathetic to all that, but I'm also
aware of some really smart people who
for a very long time have worked on this
to the point where I remember, and this
is now going back a number of years, so
it's not even that recent. I was
engaging one of them in a conversation
of this sort and their reaction was not
Scott Aronson's reaction but it was oh
come on we've already solved that just
leave leave me alone it's already done
we understand the probabilities and
let's just move on it all works and so
how and this is sort of coming mostly
from the Oxford school like you know
these are wonderful people it's not
meant in any way you know so where's a
disconnect where you have people who
feel that they've they've resolved this.
It would be it would be curious. I would
I'm not sure what to say because um even
the people in the Oxford school who are
the most serious about it like David
Wallace. I mean David tried to come up
with a very complicated decision
theoretic
justification for treating these squared
amplitudes. So what you really have
according to the theory is the wave
function and it has amplitudes. That's
okay. That's part of the physics. And
then you take those amplitudes and
square them. You have to square them
because they're complex numbers. And
then you as it were act as if the
squared amplitudes were probabilities in
the normal sense of probabilities. Now
there are some very
complicated attempts to give decision
theoretic arguments for why you must or
it's a reasonable thing to act that way.
Um when you look in precise detail
because you can look because they're
trying to prove theorems. What what are
the assumptions that go into this
theorem? You find first of all a whole
lot of them more than you would have
expected. Second of all, a lot of them
have to do with decision theory, which
you wouldn't have expected to show up
when you're doing physics. And third of
all, some of them are just weird. I
mean, there you wouldn't it wouldn't
naturally occur to you that this is an
assumption to make. Um, I I think this
all has more the feel, as we say, of
rationalization than reasoning, right?
Reasoning is a process where you take
some a priori or you know apparently
plausible premises and figure out what
follows from them and follow the
argument. And rationalization is where
you know the conclusion you want to get
to and you find an argument that will
lead you there. And some of these people
they want to be many worlds no matter
what. And so if you raise an objection
they're going to find some way out some
wiggle way out of it. I don't think
anybody finds any of those attempts
terribly
convincing. Um, and you would not,
again, you would not
put a preferred frame of foliation into
the latter category of you do consider
that to just follow from the very
natural Newton believed in it, right?
Well, Newton believed in a lot of
things. It was, but it was a big deal
when we got rid of it. It's not like,
you know, it was it's not like it's it's
this out of nowhere thing. It's actually
what you originally believed in. Right.
Right. But Newton also believed in
alchemy and God and all sorts central to
his actual physics, not his side. No,
but I mean he also side hobbies that
obviously he believed in qualities of
the world that we certainly don't I mean
arbitrarily high velocities. It was a it
was a
monumental achievement of
Einstein to point out that one could get
away without a preferred foliation.
Although you pay a price, you have to
have light cones. You have to have other
space-time structures that are Newton
doesn't have, right? It's not as if it's
just cleanly simpler than Newton. You
take out the preferred foliation, you
put in a a conformal structure and so
on. You know all about that. It was a
monumental discovery of Einstein that
that was possible. But I will say one
more time, Einstein did not have on the
plate in front of him, by the way, can
you explain violations of Bell's
inequality? And it turns out to be
really hard to do without it. Yeah. So
where where do you think that we stand
right now? If uh if you were to list the
top two or three remaining mysteries of
quantum mechanics, I mean, do you have
ones that immediately strike you as the
critical things that we've got to still
figure out? Well, I we have these
different very large scale different
umbrella approaches. We have the pilot
wave approach which is the the standard
example is bowing mechanics we talked
about but there are other ways you can
implement that basic idea. You have
objective reduction or objective
collapse approaches which have been
implemented in different ways. Some of
them continuous some of them
discontinuous.
Then you have the many worlds. I mean I
think those are the three big things. So
one thing you would really like to know
is can we at least knock out one of
these three or two of the you know
ideally two of these three and at least
focus our attention now um the collapse
theories always in principle make
slightly different predictions
non-olapse theories but it's very tricky
to test for those. Um it's looking as
time has gone on the parameter space for
those theories that it still fit with
what's observed is getting smaller and
smaller and the parameters are like how
often these collapse process how often
the collapses occur and how narrow the
wave function is after the collapse. So
there's a and and it may be that in 10
years experimentally it'll be wiped out.
It's possible
um if you because both many worlds and
the pilot wave theory are non- collapse
theories. You don't have that kind of
argument that even in principle if you
can make sense of the many worlds making
any predictions. I mean it's this kind
of thing. It's not quite clear how you
make any predictions with it. If if you
could you might say I don't see how they
could differ. Um although I personally
think
um if there's a preferred foliation and
my I I think it's a plausible thing to
pursue then the next question is well
can I can I tell in the lab what it is?
Can I do an experiment that would reveal
it to me? Now you're not guaranteed you
can but you're not guaranteed you can't.
The only way to answer that question is
to have a precisely articulated theory
and analyze it. Now what I have found
out in recent very recently for me and
to me is very exciting is
that one thing one might
expect or imagine you could do is send
superuminal signals. If you can send
superuminal signals,
uh, relativity is gone, right?
Everybody's just going to have to say,
"Sorry, Albert. You know, it was a nice
idea. Didn't work out." So, just hold
that for just for the audience. In the
usual
approach where there's non-local
interactions, we stress that there isn't
an actual message that that super
luminal influence is able to
communicate. You know, if you got spins
up over here and spins up and down over
here, the results will be a random
collection. If it was 50/50, random
collection here. And only when you bring
them together and compare, do you find,
oh my god, up, down, down, up. Is there
information in the data? So that's a
slower than light process even though
there seems to be some faster than light
connection of some particular sort. But
you're not talking about that. You're
talking about an actual super luminal
signal using this actually send an a
message right. So so right the two steps
are I would say look three steps.
Einstein thinks ain't nothing goes
faster than light not causation there.
No non-locality. I don't want any of
that. Belle says, "Sorry, here's some
data. You can't explain it under the
assumption there's no super luminal
causation." So, we're stuck with that.
Now, from my point of view, just without
any argument, I would say, gee, if
there's super luminal causation, why
can't we, if we're really clever, why
can't we use it to actually send signals
for our use? Remember what that means?
It means on one side we call the
transmitter. There's something that we
can freely set, right? So Alice can set
her apparatus this way or that way. And
on the other side we call the receiver
there's something Bob can see can
actually observe. And the idea is that
if there's a correlation between how she
sets and what he sees then they can
signal. Then by setting it this way or
that way Bob can make an observation and
say either for sure or at least with
better odds this is probably what Alice
did.
um if there's super luminal causation
and I think bell shows there must be an
immediate question that you ask is well
why can't I use it to signal right I
mean I kind of expect you could now
there's no guarant maybe nature is put
together in a very specific way so that
even though thing there has to be
non-locality it can't be used for
signaling I've always assumed that that
is the case that somehow relativity
properly circumscribed surv revised by
the skin of its teeth because even
though there's this kind of super
luminal connection or instantaneous
connection, you can't tell someone to
sell stock, right?
So I I will report to you that that Will
Caendish who actually was a student here
at Colombia and and is a mathematician
has been looking at various proposals
uh specific
proposals and finds in the literature in
the standard physics literature that for
almost all of them you can superuminally
signal. But people haven't realized it
but they write down some equations and
they say do it this way this way if you
know. But in which context is this like
a a bombian or he's not a bombian. So
it's it's true it it's true you can do
it in in certain ways of implementing
bowian mechanics but he is not a
bombian. He's looking at all kinds of
standard field theoretic. I mean let me
put this very specifically in a way
you'll understand maybe some people in
the audience will understand. It's often
said that relativistic quantum field
theory is relativistic because it is
built into it that you can't send
signals.
This is why this isn't. You have to say,
well, what is it to send a signal? It's
that Alice does something or other.
Could be anything. And there's a
correlation between what she does and
the statistics of what Bob sees. He
could be looking at
anything. The technical formal condition
in quantum field theory is something
called the equal time commutation
relations. What they tell you is that if
Alice does something we call making a
measurement and Bob does something we
call making a different kind of
measurement, then the statistics of what
Bob sees can't depend on what Alice
does. But there are lots of things Alice
could do that we would never call making
a measurement. And there are furthermore
things Bob could look for that we don't
know how to represent as the outcome of
a measurement, like arrival times. We
talked about that at the beginning. we
just don't know we can't fit that into
this into this paradigm. So even there
when people are being very careful about
quantum field theory not from a bowian
perspective but they have proposals
about for example how to make
predictions about arrival times uh
proposals we talked about the screen
problems proposals about how to deal
with screens if you look at those very
carefully they allow for superuminal
signal so uh this is new to me but it
was new to me too so so if I understand
correctly and again steer If I
misunderstood what you said, normally I
would think in relativistic quantum
field theory, I've got these uh
operators at space-like separation. They
commute period sort of and destroy. But
you're telling me that that's a limited
way of thinking about the things that an
observer in the laboratory can actually
do. There are things I can observe in
the lab that don't correspond to any
operators. I mean, this is again a
standard example that that people just
don't think about enough are arrival
time. So, here's an experimental setup.
I take an electron or a single particle.
I put in a in a trap. Um, it has to be a
certain kind of trap, a pole trap, it
doesn't matter. I put it in a trap. I
kind of hold it here and prepare it in
some quantum state that we all agree
that's what it is, a spin state. And I
have a wave guide that runs this way to
a screen. And at some predesigned moment
by a clock, I drop one wall of this. And
I'll let the wave function as it were go
down this wave guide. And then at this
screen eventually a dot will form and I
not only record where but exactly when
with great as much temporal precision as
I can get right ftoc clocks right that
gives me some data. What is the time lag
between dropping this and dots forming?
Now every time you do the experiment
you'll get a different result. It'll the
dot will form both in different places
on the screen and at different times. So
you get a nice histogram of all of this
data. Nobody knows how to predict that
because there's no time
operator, right? Nobody really knows the
spatial distribution for reasons we
talked about. But it's clear with time
there is no time operator.
And there are situations where if now
instead of doing that I have an
entangled pair and I send one this way
to Bob and I send one this way to Alice
where at at least you you can imagine
Alice doing something that will affect
the arrival time distribution of Bob's
particles. So that if she does one
thing, you get one distribution. If she
does something else, you get a different
distribution. then she could signal Bob,
right? I mean, not it might require a
lot of copies or you're doing them all
at the same time, but Bob on the basis
of what he sees could make a better than
random guess about what Alice did. So,
that would be Shannon information being
sent. I see. Interesting. So, let me
just let's just finish up with one other
era if you have a few more minutes,
which is this. We've been the whole time
speaking about these ideas which we
embody in mathematical equations.
Schroinger equation, Borne rule,
Newton's equations, Einstein's, you
know, all these things that have come up
in our
conversation. How do you think about
those equations in the following sense?
When I was younger, I used to think
about those equations as I think I was
naive. They were reality to me. Like
there it is. This is how the world
works. Now obviously sometimes equations
change. So you have to ask yourself,
what do you mean it's reality if it
change? But I wasn't really I was just
like we're going to find the equation.
Yeah. As I've gotten older, my view has
really shifted radically to a place
where this is our best model of the
external world. We come up with these
mathematical concepts in order that we
can get ever more precise descriptions
of things, but it's all just humanmade
descriptions. So that's kind of both
ends of the spectrum and I've kind of
gone from one to the other. Where do you
sit in there? Um I'm not quite on your
spectrum here. So let me make a
distinction. uh mathematical physics by
definition is a discipline that uses
mathematical structures in an attempt to
represent the physical world. Okay. And
that's a representation relation which
is something philosophers think about a
lot. How does language manage to
represent the world? In this case, the
language happens to be mathematics.
Then make a further subdivision in
mathematics. Um there's number theory
and algebra that involves numbers and
there's geometry which doesn't involve
numbers. This is a distinction the
Greeks made. They really took
mathematics and said there's geometry,
there's arithmetic, these are different
subjects. Um it was in arithmetic you
eventually got algebra which was a very
powerful tool for solving algebraic
equations. And then there was a whole
thing of trying to take physics which
had been stated in the language of
geometry right Newton if you open
Newton's Prancipia you will not see an
equation you will see a whole bunch of
very complicated uklitian diagrams right
he wasn't using numbers he was using
geometry daycart figured out how to use
coordinates to translate geometrical
problems into numerical ones solve them
using algebra and translate the result
backwards. Now, I think it's it it
should immediately be a puzzle. How did
numbers get into this at all? Because
the world isn't made of numbers, right?
I mean, supposedly Pythagoras thought a
horse was the number 10, but I have no
idea what he was talking about. But our
intuitive ideas, but the physical world
is geometrical. I mean, look, here's a
here's a round more or less round
object, right? You can see how ukitian
geometry could kind of apply to that
pretty well. Um so the first thing to
ask is well what is the math I'm using
anyway and then there's a question well
which parts of the math are supposed to
correspond to the world because we have
what we call gauge degrees of freedom in
the description where the idea is I can
change the mathematical description but
it doesn't change what it's saying about
the physical world because those those
don't correspond to physical degrees of
freedom. So um I think the project of
mathematical physics has succeeded
certainly in terms of prediction and
control so astoundingly well that we
have good reason to believe the general
project of mathematical physics can work
and can work all the way to the end.
Right? This is when people talk about I
want to be able to write on a t-shirt
the fundamental equation that describes
all of physics. Now, you'd have to
understand the math in which that's
written, and you have to understand how
that math is being used, and so on. Um,
I still think that could work. Um, I I I
I haven't given up on that. And that's
that only works if the world is a
certain way. We can't make it that way,
right? We we don't decide whether the
world is mathematically describable. But
could that be an underdetermined problem
in the sense that there could be
multiple solutions, multiple theories
that would all give the same answer and
yet somehow they're really fundamentally
radically different? Well, there
certainly could.
Well, again, let's divide that into a
couple questions. Could there be
different theories that make all the
same empirical predictions? Answer:
Sure. Sure. Just add some other stuff.
We, you know, we we know we can do that.
Typically the kind of trivial ways of
doing that are such that it's clear that
one theory is hoped up and artificial
and the other isn't and if you had to
choose between them you'd say well the
choice is not empirical but still we
have really good reasons to believe this
one rather than that one. Yes. Um so now
the question comes could there be two
equally plausible looking kind of simple
naturalook theories that are nonetheless
different theories. They make very
different, you know, fundamental
postulates, but make all the same
empirical predictions. That's certainly
logically possible. I mean, when we
reach the aliens at some point who've
gone on a radically different trajectory
and maybe they're smarter than we are or
equally smart and they've got their
t-shirt, their t-shirt in principle
could use different ideas, different
ontology, what's real, different
dynamical equation, if that's even the
structure. And yet it might be as good
as anything that we have in in a certain
kind of principle that is I can't rule
it out but I don't think you can rule it
in that that's possible. Sure. Right. It
may very well be that the actual
physical structure of the world is such
that there's essentially only one simple
mathematical structure that will give
you all the right predictions. I can't
rule it out but I have no reason to
believe it. I mean I would assume the
aliens went through Newtonian dynamics
and went through Maxwellian
electronamics, right? I mean it seems
like a natural conceptual progression
unless the thing that I always wonder
about if their senses somehow are so
radically different from ours that they
engage with the world so differently
that the things that seem so natural to
us like gravity, electricity, magnetism.
Could it be this? Okay, this one I I
don't have any sympathy with. The aliens
are going to stumble over that table
just as well as we will. Right. I mean,
their their senses have to present the
world at macroscopic scale pretty much
like ours if they're going to survive in
it.
I'm sympathetic to that, too. But I can
also imagine that we may be sensitive to
a slice through reality.
And what's amazing is that our slices
coherent and self-contained and they
have a different slice of reality. We've
expanded through our instrumentation. I
mean just take the visual spectrum,
right? We we are naturally only
sensitive to a very small slice
literally because of where the sun
because of where the sun spectrum is
basically. But but now with our
instruments Yes. Right. we are sensitive
using our instruments to the entirety of
it. Yeah. So, our natural, it's true,
our kind of natural
unaded awareness of the world is
limited, but we've managed through
technology to expand that. Sure. And to
imagine that there's kind of an ent how
could there be an entirely different
world we're not touching at all and
they're in contact with. I mean, I don't
even see how that's possible. Yeah, I
certainly see how it's possible, but I
think it's extraordinarily unlikely.
Yeah, it's logically possible, but but
it's not something I'm going to stay up
at night worrying about. That that I
certainly agree with. Well, this has
been a fascinating conversation. Thank
you so much for coming and it's been
fun. Thank you for watching.
[Music]