[Music]
So, thank you all for being here and uh
we're going to try to make this a a very
interactive panel. So, each of us is
going to talk for a little bit about a
perspective on the question of free
will, which I think is a a question of
interest to everybody.
And uh then we'll perhaps ask each other
a couple of questions depending on on
what we say. We haven't planned a whole
lot in advance about about arranging
with ourselves our positions.
So uh then we will take questions from
you all about um
how all of this looks from your
perspective.
So, um,
free will is an interesting question and
it's something that people have wondered
about and and philosophers and novelists
and poets and scientists have written
about for thousands of years.
And it is buried deep in the heart of
our ethical systems and our political
systems and economic systems and legal
systems. So in a sense the question does
free will exist
um is an interesting philosophical
question on the one hand and it's an
extraordinarily practical question on
the other hand u for the legal system
for example that at least in the United
States has this notion that
intent
uh counts more than facts.
and that if there's no connection
between intention and and action, then
that whole legal notion just collapses.
So, uh this is a topic that I think is
one of of uh extreme practical
importance.
So, if I can have the first of my
slides. Oh, great.
It's already up there.
So the the job of philosophers is as you
all know is to draw distinctions.
So this is a distinction that is very
common in the philosophical literature
on free will. And if you look at that
literature, you'll find this stated in
many many many different ways. But it's
essentially a distinction between two
concepts of of what it means to have
free will. And what I call the negative
concept of free will is is freedom from.
So it's freedom from determination by
some external agent.
And to state this negative view very
precisely, it's freedom from being
completely
your actions being completely determined
by some external agent. So you may say
no one believes that that's crazy. Uh
but in history it's maybe somewhat
unfair but it's at least a very
reasonable interpretation to think that
for example figures like Cotton Mather
who were very important in establishing
what American culture in particular kind
of means
um believed that all of our actions were
completely determined in advance by God
who wound up the clockwork universe and
set it on the table and it started
ticking away and whatever that clock did
we did. So there was a very definite
puppet master who set up the universe uh
in a fully deterministic way and uh
there was no concept of free will and
our actions were completely
predetermined long long long ago by
someone else. And so you may think that
that view is nuts but it's a view that
has considerable historical import.
And this negative concept of free will
is the concept that that's not true.
That uh there is no external agent who
is controlling our actions and
determining what our actions will be. So
that's that's a concept of free will.
Now there's a very different concept of
free will which I've called the positive
concept
and it's often called freedom of as in
freedom of action.
But of course that's not very precise.
So to make that more precise,
the positive concept of free will stated
in its strongest form is that each of
you individually is completely and
exclusively
responsible, causally responsible for
your actions.
So you are not determined at all by any
outside agency or force or circumstance.
Your actions are your own. Period.
You're completely in charge.
And you may also say that's crazy. No
one believes that. Uh but many of you
have been to talks or conferences for
example where you see people like John
Surl. He's a great believer in free will
and he says free will is simple. I will
my arm to go up and it goes up and
that's all there is to it.
Uh so that's a a very strong notion of
the positive concept of free will. So
you'll see these stated in in different
ways, but this is basically what it
comes down to. And note that the
negative concept is not just consistent
with
you being at least partially responsible
for your actions. It in fact requires
it.
So if you're if your actions are not
completely determined by external
agencies then they must be at least in
part determined by you.
The positive concept on the other hand
is inconsistent with any outside
determination of your action.
So in a sense you can think of a sliding
scale from one to 100 where you're 50%
in charge of your life or you're 75% in
charge of your actions. I won't say in
charge of your life and one poll is 0%
and that's strong predetermination.
That's kind of the what's at least
parodyied as the Calvinist view. and
100% you in charge is what I've
characterized here as the positive
concept of free will read strongly and
everything else from 1% to 99% is at
least consistent with this negative
concept of free will. So I think it's
useful to keep this distinction in mind
as we have this conversation because
these concepts are often conflated in
ordinary language when people talk about
free will. it's sometimes not completely
clear whether they're talking about the
negative concept or the positive
concept. So it's just a good distinction
to keep in mind. So if I could have the
next slide please.
There's been a lot of work in quantum
theory on what determination means.
And a few years ago
uh a paper that's now become very famous
was published by Conway and Koken and
the title of the paper was the free will
theorem and if you get on Google and
look up free will theorem you'll get
hundreds of hits
and basically what Conway Koken did was
make a number of of very simple
assumptions
and they didn't assume quite all of
quantum theory but they assume most of
quantum theory. So their assumptions are
are very precise mathematical
assumptions and they're just a little
bit weaker than quantum theory and they
they prove that given those assumptions
uh you can arrive at the following
conclusion that if in a situation where
an experimentter is manipulating the
world and making an observation,
if you attribute to the experimentter
free choice and Henry talked about this
for example in his talk u the other day
that the experimental is classic is
canonically viewed in quantum theory as
having free choice. If you view the
experimental as having free choice then
you have to view the system being
observed as having at least the same
amount of free choice.
And uh what free means here is not
predictable and Conway and Koken
emphasized this means not even
predictable as a probability
distribution. So this is a strong sense
of not predictable from the information
that's available to either the
experimentter or the system being
experimented upon.
So if you if the experimentter's actions
are free with respect to the information
available to the experimentter. So in
relativity terms all the events in that
experiments experimentter's past.
Uh
then the responses of the system are
also not determined by any information
available to the system. In other words,
all the events in the systems past. And
that's a that's a strong result that got
people excited. And Conway and Koken are
absolutely perfectly upfront and clear
about what that means. And the quotation
on the bottom is from their paper. They
say, "Fundamental particles are
continually making their own decisions."
End quote. Uh if you think that's an
outrageous thing for a physicist to say,
that kind of statement appears elsewhere
also in the physics literature. uh
Christopher Fuches for example who who
founded in a sense quantum basianism
makes a very similar statement uh John
Wheeler's discussions of the the uh what
he calls the participatory universe
uh makes very similar statements. So
there are a lot of physicists who
actually think that electrons are
constantly making their own decisions
and this free will theorem gives a
certain amount of formal justification
to that. So can I have the next slide
please? This is my last one. Um so let's
try to make things a little bit
stronger. Let's assume all of quantum
theory and let's assume quantum theory
in its deterministic version. So you
often hear that quantum theory is a
probabilistic theory and quantum theory
is a probabilistic theory about outcomes
of measurements but it's a deterministic
theory about the dynamics. So it's
deterministic about what's actually
going on and probabilistic about what
we'll see when we look at what's
actually going on. So these two sides of
quantum theory. So if you assume that
the universe has a well- definfined
quantum state and you assume this
deterministic dynamics as as represented
by the Schroinger equation
u then you can ask what are the
consequences for whether some system is
determined by any outside agency
and if the universe is in a quantum
state then its evolution is a function
of that entire quantum state. Shorting
or action equation is acting on that
entire quantum state as a unit and sort
of evolving it forward in time. And if
you change anything about it, then you
have a different quantum state.
So if you carve out the tiniest little
piece of the universe,
even that tiny little pieces component
of this evolution of the entire quantum
state is not determined by all the rest
of the universe.
So even deterministic quantum mechanics
in its most deterministic form uh not
only justifies but absolutely requires
uh this negative concept of free will
that not even the entire rest of the
universe determines what an electron is
doing.
Uh so every elementary particle has a
certain what Fuches calls interiority,
a certain uh borrowing this term from
William James um
a certain lack
of forceful input from the entire rest
of the universe.
Um, and if you saw my talk a couple of
days ago, this assumption that the
universe has a well- definfined quantum
state is actually equivalent to the
assumption that that none of the
boundaries we see around us are
objectively real. That all of those
boundaries are made up. Uh, which is in
fact a position that's very similar to
the position that Don Hoffman talked to
you about this morning. So um I'll leave
you just with this uh the notion that in
quantum theory at least even if you if
you try to be absolutely as
deterministic as you could possibly be
uh you're still forced into a position
where the most elementary entities you
can imagine uh have at least the
negative form of free will. So thank you
and I'll turn this over to Don.
Hey,
it's blank so far.
There you go.
On your way here.
Use your free will. That's right. Yeah.
Nope.
using Ronald's free will.
Okay.
It was showing free won't.
Well, I'm going to bring a neuroscience
perspective here. So, we'll have two
quantum talks and one neuroscience talk.
Then we can see how they meet together.
I'm going to suggest while the slides
are coming while telegraph what I'm
going to talk about. I'm going to
suggest that
there are experiments that make us ask
the question is free will something that
you can cut in half with a knife? That
might sound pretty odd, but I'm going to
show you experiments that are at least
going to raise that question. Can you
cut free will in half with a scalpel?
There we go. Dissecting free will.
If you hit Apple shift P, I believe
to start the thing.
No.
Oh, maybe it's
does someone know how to start? I can
start it if you if you need
See, if you ever wonder why your
computer never cooperates, it's because
of free will.
Or free won't. Yeah. Sometimes if you
show them a hammer.
Do we want to change the order? I could
talk cuz I don't need to. Oh, yeah.
Maybe we should switch and let you go
ahead. Yeah. While they're doing that.
How about that? Yeah. Okay. So now I'm
on stage. Um, so I want to tie my um
remarks not only to what's just been
said but uh also to what we've been
hearing throughout the conference and
particularly um this morning's uh
sessions. Um we've been uh informed that
uh quantum mechanics is somehow
intimately connected with these
mysteries that we're talking about. Uh
on the other hand um the mysteries as as
they have been described have been uh
formulated often in terms of this idea
of uh statements can be either true or
false. They're half and half. And uh uh
of course quantum theory doesn't work
that way. U in quantum theory you're
restricting yourselves to statements
that are either true or false. Quantum
theorists can't go on and make a
calculation. uh which everybody agrees
with is a solid confirmation uh or
prediction of quantum theory. Some of
which are exceedingly precise. Uh the
example today is is one of the
predictions of quantum theory is precise
to the width of a human hair compared to
the distance between the earth and the
moon. So there's something very and you
can't make predictions about like this.
If somebody says well maybe this
assumption that you're making is false.
I mean you you you have a certain range
of of of statements that you're talking
about and within that category of
statements everything is either true or
false and all physicists agree that this
calculation uh is should be done in this
way and uh there's not any ambiguities.
So this goes against it doesn't exactly
go against but all of these things have
been said uh where you equate true and
false and say they're both true is not
part of quantum mechanics. Quantum
mechanics is just the opposite.
Everything is that you deal with is
either true or false. And u so how does
quantum theory then put together all of
these things that seem in some sense to
be both true and false? Well, the point
is if you think about those things in
terms of classroom mechanics,
then of course they're in com in
conflict.
They're in conflict. Uh and uh there's a
contradiction and you don't know what to
do as a scientist. Um, now how does
quantum theory work in the sense of
being able to separate things into ways
that you're only dealing with true or
false statements. And the main u
premise of quantum theory was this
fundamental idea that whereas in
classical mechanics you thought the
fundamental description was in terms of
physically described material stuff. In
quantum theory the primary move was
already the essential move and it says
what is science? Science comes from as
you heard this morning if you were there
comes from the word ski to know. So it's
about what we know and the uh the
essence of the essential assumption of
quantum theory is that the theory is a
description of what we know the
knowledge that we gain from doing
experiments and uh having experienced
our life experiences. And uh so the uh
the way that the theory works is that uh
uh the other and there are the point is
there are three separate
realities that uh enter into quantum
mechanics.
The first one is the observer.
The observers are people like ourselves
as prime examples who have experiences.
And u the second part is uh nature. The
uh the function of the observer is to
pose certain questions about the nature
of the of the what seems to be the
physically described world. and uh then
nature
is supposed to answer these questions
according to certain statistical rules.
So we have already two separate elements
of this reality. The observers and
nature who's answering the questions
that we ask. And uh then the third
element of reality is called the quantum
state. And ultimately it's the quantum
state of the universe. And this is
another reality. And uh it's described
in the same terms physically described
terms that you describe the uh the
classicalally described universe. In
other words, it's described by assigning
mathematical properties to space-time
points. So this description is is in
that sense the same as or very similar
to uh the description of classical
mechanics. But u the thing that is
described does not have the onological
properties of uh the material world of
classical mechanics. It's u it its
onlogical character is the character of
potentiality
possibilities. It's a a realm of
possibilities. A realm of
potentialities.
Potentialities for what? Well, I've
already said that the observer poses a
question and the question it poses is of
the form will my experience be such and
such and then he describes in some
detail or imagines in some detail what
the experience that he would be a yes
answer to his question. And uh so the po
the observer enters in a very dynamical
way into the dynamic. He has to pose
these questions and uh nature answers.
But the uh things the thing that is uh
uh holding the question and the answer
is the quantum state of the universe.
And this state is not a material state.
It's a state of potential of
potentialities. And these potentialities
are possible answers to the question
that he is posing. So um the uh the
essential point here is uh this the
state of the universe which you might
tend to think of in material terms is
not at all like a material universe.
It's a it's a it's a realm of possible
answers to the questions that the
experimentter has posed. And uh and uh
the uh the way the system works is that
given this state of the universe and
then given the question that's being
asked uh there are some calculations
that you go through and uh and that
produces a statistical
u uh that
the yes and no answer to the questions
are giving statistical weights. In other
words, if you do a large number of
experiments, it seems that 50 or maybe
30% of the time you get yes and 70% you
get no. And u so the main point here is
that the reality
uh this experiential reality has three
experiential parts. It has the um
experience of asking the questions the
observers and it's called the free I'll
get to that the free choice the part of
the experiment that's going to tie it
into free choice there's a free choice
on the part of the experimentter and
then there's this the free choice um is
um
then in order to uh so the experimentter
in asking the question uh is basically
able to get an impression on the basis
of his own personal experiences. His own
personal experiences in life is a series
of asking questions and getting
responses. Asking questions and getting
responses and that builds up a certain
um internal idea of who I am. If I ask
this question, I get this response and
also evaluating those you get a value.
This is a bad response. Uh this is a
good response. So the observer on the
basis of his experience asking these
questions and getting response builds up
an idea of an eye. An eye who has the
capacity to act and an I who has
evaluated these uh possibilities. So
there is an impression the psychological
impression of who I am. I'm a person
that can ask these questions, get these
responses with these values. So you're
able to u act in a way that allows you
to and your uh and your and you have
this feeling of if I ask this question
I'll get this sort of response which has
this sort of value. So you are able to
impose your values
onto the evolution of the physical
universe in a way that uh is both based
on your values and what's called your
free choice. uh that that word enters
very prominently the free choice on the
part of the experimentter. Now what does
free choice mean in that context?
The primary
uh requirement of being a free choice in
quantum theory is that this choice is
not determined by the physically
described aspect of the universe. The
physically described aspect is this
state of the universe that's described
in physical terms describing
mathematical properties of space-time
points. It's not determined by that part
of the universe. It's determined by
something else. And the something else
is supposed to be the experience or his
himself his image of himself with his
values which is then able to impose or
be impressed upon uh well nature is
first got to respond. I at least can ask
the question and nature that's then
going to respond yes or no. Now there's
another aspect of this that is very
important. Uh it's although the observer
is only allowed to ask questions, pose a
question, uh do a probing action, uh
because of something called the quantum
xeno effect and uh and uh and more
importantly something that sometimes
called the anti- quantum xeno effect.
The observer by the capacity to control
his questions
and uh the timing of these questions is
actually able to you can understand how
it is uh by given this capacity of the
observer to ask the questions and pose
the questions. It allows you to uh uh
through the through the action and the
nature is actually doing the work.
You're just asking nature. nature is
responding but because of the rules of
quantum theory in these situations where
we ask the questions very rapidly
nature's response is almost surely going
to be uh a yes to certain questions. So
that yes series of yes answers actually
is allowed to move the state of your
brain in such a way that you can
understand the fact that I can will my
arm to rise and my arm rises. So um so
from this quantum mechanical point of
view which as I stress doesn't allow any
statements that are both true and false
it's all well organized in terms of
rationally coherent uh understanding of
things in terms of statements that are
either true or false and uh there's none
of this fussiness. That doesn't mean
that all these uh things we've been
hearing about uh are not true in some
sense but they are all sorted out in a
way in terms of statements that are
either true or false and that's what
quantum theory provides you a way for
understanding and in in a way
understanding uh the fact that that your
free choices uh and by the way I should
say that these free choices seem to be
able to access the
uh to look down on the
system of possibilities that is existing
in the state of the universe. And it
chooses basically from among the various
possibilities. And an important point is
that if you're looking at the brain, the
actions of the brain, there are things
called
ion channels. Ion channels are huge
molecules that have a little hole kind
of through them. And ions like calcium
ions and potassium flow through these
ion channels and when they emerge
they're they're passing through the cell
wall and they go to the inside of the
cell. And uh because of the very narrow
size of the hole and the uncertainty
principle, their velocity when they exit
these holes is very undetermined. So
they could be there's a smear of
possible worlds. Uh and the uh so what
that means is that by virtue of these
the dependence upon these ion channels
uh the brain is going to in a quantum
mechanical universe be able to describe
lots of alternative possibilities for
what could happen. For example, if
you're in the in the dark forest and
something jumps out at you, uh there's
the fight or fight or flight. I mean, am
I going to do this or am I going to do
that? And according to this picture, uh
both of these possibilities will emerge
into this quantum state of
potentialities.
And the observer um looking essentially
with a certain access to this realm of
possibilities is able to on the basis of
who he is, what his values are and his
prior experience actually select one or
the other of these and ask the question
is it true? And by virtue of the quantum
xeno effect, if you ask the questions
fast enough, you can basically force the
statement to be true. In which case,
you're allowed to understand through
neuroscience and through the action of a
quantum mechanically described
neuroscience the capacity of of you to
control your actions.
Uh by the way the um in the free choice
uh theorem that you're talking about um
just to kind of answer this question in
advance uh this theorem
uh has two things that are somewhat
objectionable. Once there is assumption
in it that amounts to assumption of
locality
uh the failure of non-locality and of
course uh uh
I think that that is contradictory to
quantum theory. Quantum theory has
non-locality built into it in an
essential way. And secondly, the way
that the theorem is formulated, it says
that the particles are deciding what
they're going to do. If the if the
observer's choice over here is free,
then the particle
uh is free to choose has inherits the
freedom and it has a freedom to choose.
But of course in this quantum mechanical
view that I've been describing uh it's
not that the particle itself has any
knowledge because what happens is what
is really predicted is the the results
of the experiments that are performed on
the particles and u so for various
possible choices you can perform uh you
have various possibilities which
experiment you're going to perform but
it's nature
It's nature that makes the choice. It's
not the particle that somehow has
consciousness and is able to make the
choice within this framework at least.
It is nature that makes the choice. And
so it gives to nature
uh uh a certain freedom of choice. Not
that it gives an individual electron uh
somehow a mentality that can choose. So
u so uh I think that's how it gets
around the free will uh problem. Nature
certainly does have a free choice. And
by the way, I can conclude by saying
that in fact um this question of the
character of nature was uh basically
posed to me by a a question I wrote an
article called Copenhagen interpretation
of quantum theory back in 1972 and
Heisenberg uh I asked Heisenberg comment
upon it and uh he said this raises the
question of what happened what is the
world like before there were any human
observers or any observers. And uh his
answer uh said that um uh he he pointed
to this u uh uh platonic idea of uh the
of a idea like
ex something an idealike aspect of
nature that is existing um within nature
itself. And I think what that ultimately
interpret
boils down to is the fact that I think
this requires this nature that we're
talking about here probably to itself
have some sort of uh uh idealike
character. In other words, this idea is
not just a mechanical thing but it
itself has this uh idealike quality. So
all three of these three aspects of
reality the observer and his choices uh
the quantum mechanical reality and the
choice on the part of the observer all
through three have an ideal like a
basically idealike character and uh so
consciousness right at the very
beginning of quantum mechanics the
quantum mechanics that I'm talking about
here can be extended to relivistic
quantum field theory uh but already at
the very beginning when it was a
non-realistic theory you already had the
essential ingredients that we're talking
about here, the three parts of reality,
all of which are basically idealike in
nature.
Thank you. Thank you, Don. So, we'll
can we have Don's slides up again? Thank
you. Thank you. Okay, great. So, we'll
switch a little bit from quantum theory
to from the microscopic to the
macroscopic.
Um
the brain as you know is an
electrochemical computer um with 86
billion neurons
and trillions of synapses and um a 3D
layout.
And in epilepsy you have a part of the
brain that has random
bad
signatures electrical activity. It's
called epileptic focus. And this can
cause a storm of electrical activity
over the entire brain that causes
seizures and um loss of consciousness.
And it can be life-threatening. If
you're driving or even walking and you
fall, it could be life-threatening.
And often there are drugs like Ponazipan
that can deal with this, but sometimes
they don't. And so in extreme cases,
they do a surgery. And the basis of the
surgery is this diagram of the brain.
You have the brain has two hemispheres,
a left and a right. And there's a band
of cables called the corpus colossum
between that is actually a signaling
system between the left and right
hemisphere. About 225 million axons.
It's a little bit bigger in women than
men. They're better connected.
Um so
so there's a connecting cable and it's
got that many neurons. So that's sort of
the idea. So the idea of the surgery was
was this um if there's a focus an
epileptic focus on the left hemisphere
and it's causing random neural activity
and a seizure
um and drugs aren't working to stop it
maybe we can confine the seizure to one
hemisphere.
If we cut this corpus colosum with a
knife we can separate the two
hemispheres electrical activity can't go
across to the other hemisphere and cause
it to go down. That was the idea. Big
risk but they tried it. So they they did
it. So cut the cable and um confined the
storm to one hemisphere. That was that
was the hope and it worked. It was a
clinical success beyond people's
expectations. In many cases the seizures
either were greatly diminished or
disappeared altogether. And this raised
a question. Okay, what's different about
these people? Right? So this is great.
But now they got their brains cut in
half. What's different about them? And
it turns out um they act normal. For
most of them, their families, their
spouses, their immediate families, their
friends can't tell any difference, you
know? Well, of course, after the surgery
is healed, right? When to do the
surgery, you have to shave your head,
cut off your top of your skull like, you
know, pumpkin at Halloween and get in
there. So, there's a lot of scars and
so, but after that's all healed, then
you look normal and you act normal.
Even to a psychologist, acolytist in the
1940s who did careful studies on these
patients couldn't find anything
different about them. So they began to
you know remark like maybe the corpus
culum is there just to conduct epileptic
seizures
but you know probably not. So then
Sperry in 1960s in um Caltech did some
experiments. So I'm just going to show
you a version of his experiments. He won
the Nobel Prize for the stuff I'll just
tell you about right now. So in his
experiment you have a subject which
that's the best I can do for a human
subject and that's the best I can do for
a computer screen. Um, so the subject S
views a computer screen and an X appears
on it and the subject just has to look
at the X. It's called a fixation cross.
So they look at the fixation cross and
then a phrase like keyring appears on
the screen for a tenth of a second and
it disappears and then so the screen
goes blank and all the subject has to do
is um just say what they saw. For
normals it's easy. If you do this
experiment it's drop dead easy.
Everybody gets it 100% right. You say
key ring. No problem. What's what's the
issue here for the split brain patients?
So the normals is they say key ring.
It's easy for the split brain. They just
say I saw the word ring. And you say
well you know wedding ring, doorbell
ring, key ring. What kind of ring? I
want ring. That's all I know. Then you
say well um with your left hand I'm
going to give you a box of stuff. Put a
blindfold on you. There's a bunch of
stuff in there. I want you to pick out
with your left hand what you read on the
screen. The left hand will go through
and it might actually pick up a ring and
it'll pick up a ring, put it down and
keep going until it finds a key and it
pulls out a key.
If you have them do it with the right
hand,
it'll go through. They're blindfolded.
It goes through. It might pick up a key
first. It puts it down until it finds a
ring. It pulls it out. You unblindfold
them. The two hands have different
things. One has a key, one has a ring.
And if you ask the person, "Well, you
said you saw the word ring. How come you
picked out a key with your left hand?"
They either go I have no idea or they
make up a story that's just false.
Confabulate. So when they if you have
the hands do it at the same time, they
work independently.
Um and one the left hand pulls out a
key, the right hand pulls out a ring.
So and if you have them pull something
out with their left hand, if you
blindfold them and just put anything in
their left hand and ask them what it is,
they can't tell you what it is. If you
put it in the right hand, they can. But
if you put it in the left hand, they
can't tell you what it is. Okay,
that's the first experiment. So, the
second experiment, and this is even
weirder. Um, so in this experiment, they
just look at the fixation cross briefly.
And then they're told that there's going
to be a disc that appears just to the
left of the fixation cross for a tenth
of a second, and it can be white or
black. And on each trial, all they have
to do is say what the color was. So
every trial something up here and they
just have to say white or black and for
normals. Yeah. So that's that. So for
normals trivial 100%. Your confidence
just no problem. This is like give me
something hard. Split brain
50%. And it's clear they're guessing.
They go I don't know. I don't know
white. And half the time they're right.
Half the time they're not right. And you
give them no feedback. No smiles, no
nothing. You You don't tell them if
they're right or wrong. You could even
just have a tip recorder that you hit.
You just ask them the question again.
What color was the disc that then they
get 100%. And they're confident. They
know the answer. And you've given them
no feedback.
So those are those are the experimental
data and they might be a bit confusing.
What's what's going on is is as follows.
The two hemispheres
have different functions. The left
hemisphere is the only hemisphere that
talks.
The right hemisphere can understand
language
um but it can't talk. It can cuss. If
you have a stroke in your left
hemisphere, you can't talk, but you
still are able to cuss. The right
hemisphere can still do that. Um
and the left hemisphere controls your
I'm sorry, the right hemisphere controls
your left hand. and also feels what's in
the left hand and the left hemisphere
controls and gets sensory information
from the right hand. So what's
going on then is
the neat thing is that the notion of
visual fields when you if you look at
the X anywhere you look to the when you
look at that X for example or some of
you can't see that. So take this disc up
here in the front. If you're looking at
that disc, everything to the left of the
disc is your left visual field.
Everything you see to the right is your
right visual field. And every time you
move your eyes and look somewhere else,
your v visual fields have moved, right?
Everything to the left of where you're
now looking is your left visual field.
Everything to the right is your right
visual field. Okay? So, what happened
was when the guy had an X on the screen
and and the phrase key ring flashed up
on the screen, the word key was in the
left visual field. The word ring is in
the right visual field. And it turns out
that the way the brain is organized and
the optic nerve is organized is that um
the left visual field gets seen by your
right hemisphere
and the right visual field gets seen by
your left hemisphere. So it's not that
your right eye sees the right field and
the left eye sees the left field. Each
eye sees both fields. Your left eye sees
both visual fields, but it's that the
right visual field maps in a strange way
only to your left hemisphere. the left
visual field only maps only to the right
hemisphere. So what what happens in this
experiment is the word um key goes to
the right hemisphere and the word ring
goes to the left and so the reason the
person says I saw a ring is because the
left hemisphere sees the word ring it
didn't see the word key so it only says
what it knows
the right hemisphere saw the word key so
it can control the left hand to pick up
a key but it can't talk so it can't say
what what went on. Okay. So, what you
have, by the way, in terms of
consciousness studies is two hemispheres
with distinct spheres of consciousness.
One is conscious of the word key. One is
conscious of the word ring. And there's
no one that's conscious of both. By
taking a scalpel, Joe Bogan, a guy I
actually knew who did these surgeries.
By cutting the corpus colossum in half,
he cut consciousness in half. Literally
cut consciousness in half. So,
consciousness is something you can cut
with a knife.
So now the reason for the um tenth of a
second is that's not enough time to move
your eyes. If you have enough time to
move your eyes, you can move your eyes
around so that the key ring stuff goes
to both hemispheres. So that's that's
why they have a brief presentation of
this stuff. So now what what's what's
interesting now? Um so I've explained
all that.
So so did we dissect? So there's a
couple things now that I'll say about
this.
It's it seems like the normal subjects
when you ask them to pick up what they
saw, they would pick up a key ring.
The two hemispheres are working
together. There's one decision, one free
will choice and they pick up a key ring.
As soon as you cut the corpus closen
with a knife, you get two separate
decisions. Two separate free will
decisions. Someone decides to pick up a
key. Someone decides to pick up a ring.
And so they're they seem like two
separate free will decisions based on
two separate conscious experiences. And
it gets even more interesting. The
sometimes these patients exhibit what's
called intermanual conflict, a naughty
left hand. So, one woman that had this
went to get dressed for for work and her
right hand picked out a an appropriate
business dress and started to put it on
and the left hand grabbed, you know, a
slinky thing for her party and would not
let go. So, she'd have to get it pride
out of her hand. And then when she was
actually dressing trying to button up
her dress, the right hand would button
it up, the left hand would unbutton it.
Right? Clearly separate free will. She
goes to make an omelette. Um the right
hand is making rice omelette. The left
hand throws in an entire egg, a salt
shaker, and an onion. Clearly, someone
likes omelets and someone doesn't. And
they have different frugal decisions.
And you can actually send messages to
the right hemisphere in the middle of an
experiment. Gazanaga did an experiment
where the guy do an experiment and all
of a sudden without any clue or you know
warning, he flashes the word walk to the
left visual field of the so goes only to
the right hemisphere. the left
hemisphere doesn't see anything and the
person gets up and starts walking and
Gazanaga fains surprise and goes, "What
what's going on here? We're in the
middle of an experiment. Why are you
walking away?" And and the the guy
without missing a beat says, "Oh, I'm
thirsty. I need a Coke."
Well, who's talking? It's the left
hemisphere. The left hemisphere doesn't
know why he's walking. And it doesn't
know that it doesn't know. It's
confabulating a story to make itself
look good. And most of our beliefs about
ourel are in fact left hemispheric
confabulations made up after the fact
that have no bearing on reality. They're
just there to make us look good. And so
so now this raises all sorts of
questions about free will. By the way, I
guess I didn't explain the one thing.
What about the black and white disc? How
did the patient get that this not the
first time and and did get it the second
time? What's going on there is that the
first time who saw the color of the
disc? It was in the left visual field.
only the right hemisphere saw it. So the
left didn't see it and it can't it can't
talk. So the person says, "I don't
know." Because the left hemisphere
doesn't know. Well, the right hemisphere
hears the answer. And if the guy is
right, it shakes the head yes. And if
he's wrong, he shake his head no. And
all of a sudden, the left hemisphere
goes, "Oh, I must have got it wrong." So
you just ask the question again, and he
gets it right. So now what's going on is
the two hemispheres are communicating
with each other in the way that
different people communicate with each
other. You use your body like I'm doing
right now to talk to you because you
can't get directly what's in my head. I
can't get directly what's in your head.
We have to use our bodies to
communicate. The two hemispheres
normally can do that when they're
connected. But now they have to use the
external body to communicate. So this
raises all sorts of questions about free
will. Um and I'll close with this.
First,
many of our beliefs about free will
could be complete confabulations. I
think 99% of what I believe about
myself, my motives and my reasons for
doing things is just false. It's just a
story I make up that's completely false.
So maybe free will is in that category.
But on the other hand, picking up a key
or picking up a ring or putting on a
neglige versus a business dress does
seem like a free choice. And cutting the
corpus closenum with a knife does seem
to take one unified free will and split
it into two. And I'll stop with that.
[Applause]
So, thank you. Um,
I'll just make a couple of remarks
uh and then I'll I'll pass on to my
fellow panelists. Uh, the first remark
is um in response to your implicit
question uh Henry. And yes, Henry's
absolutely right that the Conway Koken
theorem does make a locality assumption.
Uh it assumes that the universe is
divided into three parts. Uh an
experimentter, a system being
experimented on and everything else
which physicists tend to call the
environment.
Uh and so in the context of the theorem
like in in many other contexts in
quantum mechanics actually u the
environment is completely ignored. No
one talks about the environment at all
and the the freedom is ascribed to the
system only.
And uh that is in fact a view uh a way
of talking
that at least in my opinion makes a
critical error of treating this boundary
around the system as an objective
boundary.
uh and uh the Conway Koken theorem in
fact makes that assumption which I do
regard as an erroneous assumption. Um
it is also I think an erroneous
assumption to imagine that the observer
is localized and distinct from the
environment. So I my question for Henry
is do you believe that the observer is
actually part of nature? is part of what
nature. Um
yes absolutely. I think the best way to
understand things is there is this
nature which itself is
uh metal fundamentally metal and you
might even say conscious at least metal
in its basic structure. And each
observer is somehow an aspect of that
larger reality. And uh and um it appears
that certain physical structures take a
brain uh are such that um
they attract to it an aspect of the
greater reality which you might call the
individual experience or or the the the
the
stream of consciousness that's
associated with this particular
structure.
And uh so the whole thing is is
consciousness. Nature we call it. And
this consciousness
is nature basically. And uh it has
aspects that are somehow pulled down
when there is a piece of nature, a
feature of the physical structure that
uh enables it to uh have a a
an impact upon the physical state of the
universe. that um um allows uh it it
must allow this aspect to u form an idea
of an eye. In other words, it has to
gain some experience through its
interaction with the uh with the
physically described universe and
mathematically which is ideal like in
character and uh once you have a certain
amount of communication of that sort,
there is an a consciousness eye that's
based on the realm of experience that's
associated with this brain. And uh and
that's how you answer the basic question
that is not really
answered in the original form of quantum
theory. The original form of quantum
theory thought there was no problem with
somehow identifying
the experiencers. I mean we were the
experiencers and there are not these
subtle questions that also the question
always also immediately arose how about
dogs? How about cats? How about worms?
How about uh amoeba? And uh uh so it
wasn't immediately answered, but each of
these at least has a little bit of
potentiality of having a realm of
experience that is uh could create uh an
image of an eye and it's of course a
matter of degree. I mean we have a lot
more experience. So yes, basically the
eyes are a part of the overall nature
that is created by the fact that you
have a piece of the physical universe
that u uh
interacts with it in its appropriate
way. Okay, I just got a time warning. Uh
so I think we're only are going to have
time for a couple of questions.
So you either you have a question that
you would at this point I have one
question really like to ask one quick
one for you and that is did I understand
you correctly to say that you think that
nature itself is conscious or composed
of consciousnesses. uh you did that.
Yes, it is nature. It is conscious and
uh it is also composed of consciousness
in the fact that these individual parts
can kind of be part of it. And uh and do
you think that Heisenberg in his later
years might have agreed or disagreed
with you on that? Well, as I told you,
uh uh I wrote this uh article after
working with Heisenberg for a few months
in uh in Munich. Um, I went back and
wrote this article, the Copenhagen
interpretation and um, on the basis of
what I and also my earlier conversations
with PI thought was my way of explaining
what they were trying to say and words
that I could understand better. And um
uh Heisenberg uh kind of complimented me
on my uh and but then he asked kind of
this question what about the universe
before there were any experiencers any u
any experiencers and uh his answer as I
say referred to the platonic idea of a
realm of ideas that were somehow
in the universe somehow and and the
suggestion I think was that this nature
itself had that character. I mean had
the character conscious experiences and
then our own experiences are little sub
parts of it that are somehow connected
to bits of matter. So you'd say yes. He
would say you would say yes that has a
very I would say yes. Okay. Very good.
Do we have time for a couple of
questions from the floor? Pardon me.
Okay. Let's have and you can
Thank you. This has been amazing. Um
what I I'm wondering about the
interiority of fundamental particles. If
they're void of external influence,
would you call that the ground of being
conscious, pure consciousness? It seems
to me it would be void of influence
because it's outside of any system that
has an inside and outside or anything to
influence or be influenced by what Hafis
would call the ground of being where the
rose ever blooms.
Is that what you're talking about? Is
that directed to
I'm I'm actually not sure I understood
your question. Could you All right. It
was stated that the interiority of the
fundamental particles of matter are void
of any external influence. Oh, okay. Uh
I'm the one who who made that statement
uh essentially quoting Chris Fuches uh
who introduced this idea of of any
quantum system having interiority
and
he was not stating that they were devoid
of any external influence.
He was rather saying that external
influence didn't explain everything that
there was at least some influence left
over to whatever this system was and you
know Chris's Chris Fuches is once again
making this assumption of boundedness uh
which quantum theorists tend to make u
but I think it would be fair to say if I
understood the second half of your
question that the ground of being
uh
could be thought of uh in physical terms
as what I referred to as what's
happening
and I think of as as what Henry referred
to as um the physical universe.
Thank you.
taking into account that this is a very
decidedly non-class non-material object
notion of a physical universe. Let me
partly answer that also by saying that u
something that I ne neglected to say is
um within quantum theory
we have this statement free choice on
the part of the experimentter.
It's a fundamental statement by Bora
that uh and re reiterated often. Now
what does that free choice mean really
in that context? And the main thing that
it means this freedom means it's it's
not determined by the physically
described part of the universe. There's
something else that's got to come in.
And free choice is about that something
else. And how about it's coming from
mind.
Okay, one more question.
uh David Bow's um idea of causality I
read somewhere is that there's a million
events which are causes
and you are you know you as an observer
are contributing is one of those many
many events and each of them have a
different weightage and all of those
events contribute to a an effect and im
immediately that effect becomes one of
million other causes which cause the
next effect and this is how causality in
the universe goes on. So in that sense
your free will or your choice is just
one of many causes. Could you comment?
I did you understand that question? I
didn't couldn't understand a word that
my hear I have bad hearing and I
couldn't understand it. Can you can you
can you repeat the question please real
real short? uh in David Bow's idea of
causality cause and effect you know
millions of causes different weightages
giving rise to one effect. Yes. Okay.
Now yeah would you like to comment on B?
I didn't understand. What's the
question? Okay. He asked about David
Bow's idea of causality. David Bow and
whether free will is consistent with the
Bowian notion of causality.
I can hand that over or I can take a
crack at it. Either one. Oh, you you
take it first. Oh, okay. Um, I'm not an
expert on on Bow's view of quantum
theory. Uh, but what I have read of Bow
uh emphasizes
very explicitly the notion that the the
causal influence that gives a particle
its apparent classical trajectory
is the entire rest of the universe.
So uh bone
accepts the idea that the universe
itself is always in an a fully entangled
state.
So uh this notion of causality in in
bombian theory at least as I rate it is
utterly non-classical
uh and does not go from the past to the
future. Uh it's sort of a the entire
universe resonating with itself produces
what we see in our limited way as
causation. But that's my reading of of
Bow's notion. Would you like Well, I've
I've talked to Bow himself at length on
this uh question. In the first place, he
insists that um uh as you know there are
in the bombian all of these possible
possible realms. You have all of these
different possible classical
trajectories through spaceime. And uh
the first question is does only one of
them exist or do they all somehow exist
in some sort of supercloed? And he was
insistent that there's only one that's
the real world. All the rest of them are
nonreal and are you have to and as you
say this one however is entangled in
this very complex way with everything
that's happening to every other
particle. This trajectory is is not
described in a threedimensional
space. It's described in this huge
dimensional where every particle has its
own three dimensions. So it's it's
described in this uh uh gigantic space
which enti which in uh allows everything
to become entangled. When you say
that this bombian description is local
in this 3nd dimensional space where n is
n is bigger than any number and uh it is
local in that in that space but it is
highly non-local in three-dimensional
space and u so although there is a a
from his point from that point of view
there is a deterministic
universe um um it is not understandable
as deterministic in our in
three-dimensional space.
I'm not sure if that answers the
question. I think we're probably out of
time. So, I thank you very much for
coming and patiently listening to us.
[Applause]
[Music]