Okay. So, our rebels are going to
continue before they're over at the end
of these two hours. Uh since we are a
somewhat smaller group than usual,
probably because of the holidays, I
wonder if I can persuade the people who
are sitting on this side to come and
join us over here. If it's not too much
trouble, I think it would be more
communal if we could and probably easier
for Larry and Mel to do the 50 yard dash
with their
uh
good
should have done this long ago, don't
you think?
Thank you all
very much.
So again, just to remind you of what our
sequence is, uh today we're going to
talk about The Tempest. On the 2nd of
January, right after the break, there
will be a plenary discussion where
you're supposed to come with questions
and protests and suggestions and
thoughts and preoccupations.
Uh, and there'll also that will segue
seamlessly into a kind of review for the
exam. And the exam will be the following
week. Is that right?
On the 9th.
On the 9th in this very space.
So,
don't for Okay, those are due at 5:00
p.m. this Friday, Eastern Standard Time.
For folks who are coming in late, we're
going to try to organize ourselves in
smaller space, please, because we're a
smaller group today. So, I would be
grateful. Larry, maybe I can station you
at the door and you can kind of steer
people just just so we can get rolling
would be great. Thank you very much.
So, The Tempest,
um,
conventionally regarded as, you know,
Shakespeare's last play, his farewell to
the stage, as you know, if you have read
my chapter, which I hope you have. Um,
it is none of these things. We're we're
going to try to s we're going to try to
move everybody into the into the middle
here. Yeah. Actually, into actually
really actually into the middle. Yes.
Yes. Um, right. If you want an end seat.
Whoa, careful. Uh, we can we can put you
over here. Um, if you've read my
chapter, then you will know that uh this
is not true that uh Shakespeare and his
company produced at least one more
single authored play uh Henry VIII or
all is true. uh that there are other
plays that Shakespeare is seems clearly
to have collaborated in producing. Uh he
doesn't retire from the stage at the
moment when this play is finished. Uh
his death comes several years later in
1616.
uh and in fact what we have in this
notion that the play itself is
Shakespeare's farewell to the stage is a
kind of cultural fantasy that we have
produced because we cannot bear to lose
him and so we would like him to be able
to say goodbye to us. Uh, nonetheless,
there is some goodbye saying and some
hello saying in this important play,
this really crucial and extremely
powerful play. uh a a play that that
that is full of recognitions,
refindings, startings a new uh and
confrontations with mortality, not only
the mortality of the protagonist
Prospero, but also the notion of figures
outside the play who have died, the
fantasy that Ferdinand's father has
died. Uh the play is full of intimations
of both mortality and immortality.
uh and it handles these things with
extraordinary grace and beauty. Uh this
is uh justifiably and uh consistently
one of Shakespeare's most admired plays.
It's certainly a play that I very
greatly admire myself. Um it's a play
that has gone through many different
strong periods of interpretation.
And one of the things that I think that
we should do in talking about this play
is to review for ourselves the modes of
interpretation that have seized upon the
play and made it their own. And I will
also want for us to look at some of the
particular passages in the play that are
so again justifiably moving and
beautiful and celebrated and quoted out
of context whether it's by TS Elliott in
the wasteland or or uh in various other
places. uh and we'll also want to look
at the major characters in the play
because what what after the the other
three romances that we have looked at uh
which had a a vast uh landscape the
moving from place to place to place a
huge time span with two of them having
in the middle of them a space of 14
years and 16 years many characters
armies nationalities
uh personalities
uh flowing through these plays and here
I'm speaking again about Pericles symbol
at the Winter's Tale. Here we have a
play that's extremely compact in its
personnel, very compact in its location,
very compact even in its time span. Uh
what's happened in this play to the uh
the the the growing up gap that we
noticed in the the other romances, the
necessity for the second generation to
grow up. What's happened to it here?
Happened before the play begins. We saw
that in Symbolene. uh but we we
nonetheless symboline was full of of you
know losses that took place in real time
so to speak here the losses most of them
although not Ferdinand's supposed loss
have already taken place what's the time
span uh 12 years 12 years does that mean
that Miranda is 12
how do we know that
she was three splendid okay very good so
she is in the Juliet young marriageable
age she is a a a young woman uh who has
never really almost never known anything
that she has a dim memory of where she
came from. Uh but she is uh one of the
few as she thinks of it uh inhabitants
of this island. Maybe let's set the
persona first and then we can talk about
the effects of the play. So um the there
was the the play begins in Medios race
so to speak. something happened 12 years
ago that we're going to find out about
in retrospect by a conversation. Uh
who's who's in the play? I was going to
say who's on the island, but who's in
the play?
Who are the characters whom we will
encounter?
Yes.
On the island now. You have Prospero,
you have his daughter Miranda, you have
Caliban, and you have Ariel, right? The
non-human. not only nonhuman but how to
how many of these characters is Ariel
directly available
who sees Prospero
Prospero so so that that Ariel is a I
mean we see him or her uh there was a
long tradition at the end of the 19th
century in which Ariel is played by a
woman u I've seen productions in which
Ariel is played by a male gymnast it's
an acrobatic role uh it's a dancing part
it's a but but but not everybody body
encounters Ariel directly. Prospero does
and the audience does. And that tells
you something about the angle of
incidence into the play, the degree to
which we are, you know, part of the
Prospero world. Ariel indeed. Um, and
so, so these are the the current
inhabitants of the island. Who has lived
on the island previously?
Cicarax. And who is Ciccarax?
Calban's mother. What does she look
like?
Sorry.
How do you know?
They tell us that she's ugly, but I
don't remember the language.
The foul witch sick, who with age and
envy was bent into a hoop. The blue-eyed
hag says who?
Prospero.
Um uh so so one thing to I mean it's not
that I'm telling you that Sikarax was
actually you know movie star but but but
we this is hearsay this is all reported
information uh and Sikarax as as as it's
important to keep underscoring is
outside the boundary of the play. Uh
she's she is the dispossessed former
occupant of the island. She's female
rather than male. She um is also a witch
the way Prospero is a witch or a
magician or a sorcerer, but she does not
get to speak for herself. She's outside
the boundaries of the play. And the
degree to which she is demonized or
described in these negative terms uh is
this is the language of dare we say it
the conqueror or the dispossessor or the
successor or the winner. uh this is how
the people who have replaced her on the
island uh describe her. We don't have
any contrary information. Caliban
doesn't say, "Oh, but she was
beautiful." We don't it's not it's not
that. But we do have an interested
population that describes her as unfit
in various ways or malevolent in in
various ways. Do we know anything about
any actions that she performed while she
while we had her? Yes.
She imprisoned Ariel. She imprisoned
Ariel inside a tree.
Uhhuh. What kind of tree?
I don't remember.
A pine tree. Pine tree. Not that it
matters, but or maybe it does, but but
inside a pine tree. Why
we know what
anybody know? What
we learn? What? speculations as to why
he also was able to do magic and in some
sense compete with her.
Well, he's he's a he's a he's a sprite.
He's a spirit. He's we we he
uh imp so we could say that, you know,
that that there's a if we wanted to
allegorize it, we could say that this is
a life denying or it's a controlling
situation. It's hard to say. Um,
thank you.
That's okay.
Uh, so, so Cigarax
That's okay. Uh, so, so Cigarax
imprisons Ariel in the pine tree. Uh, is
that worse than what Prospero does?
It's similar in that she imprisoned him
and Prospero has enslaved him and it's
the same amount of time. It's 12 years,
right? Uh now enslaved is a tough word.
Uh is it used in the play?
It's who uses it?
Um well Ariel uses it. Um several people
use it at different times but um he
Prospero calls Caliban his slave.
Caliban. Yes. Right.
And so there's there's and then but
Ariel's always begging for his freedom.
So he's
enslaved in in his
there's an analogy to be drawn here but
I don't remember maybe other people will
correct me. I don't remember that the
word slave is used with respect to
Yes. Ariel.
Ariel repeatedly refers to Prospero as
master.
As master. Yes, indeed. Indeed. But, but
there I mean, for example, there's a
master among the shipman. There's a, you
know, there's a bosen master. Uh, you
could be the master with a servant
rather than a master with a slave. You
could be a master with a mistress. There
be many different ways of being a master
without being a slave master per se.
Certainly, Prospero controls him,
employs him. He consistently asks for
his freedom. There is a tremendous
analogy between that and Caliban's
request for freedom. But I don't
remember in the text that the word slave
is used. Servant. Yes, exactly. Servant.
Now this you may think that this is a
distinction without a difference. You
may think that this is just you know we
like Ariel better than we like Caliban
or Prosper likes Ariel better than he
likes Caliban. And so the word is used
differentially. Uh nonetheless the tasks
that that that Ariel gets to perform are
different from the tasks that Caliban
gets to perform. What kinds of tasks
does Ariel perform?
Enchantments.
Enchantments. Okay. Um, like what?
He's the one that causes the ship to be
tossed at sea. He separates all the
characters so that none of them know
each other is alive. Right.
And he also um causes the entire crew of
the ship to be enchanted for the
duration of the story.
Right. Yes. And then at various other
points he causes characters to be fall
asleep
to fall asleep. Right. That's right. To
be at one point Ferdinand is frozen in
his tracks. Can't he's enchanted he
cannot move. The banquet with the
several strange shapes entering bringing
a banquet. The music the island that's
full of music that's so remarkable to
Caliban. One of the most beautiful
passages in the play. This is Ariel's
music. Ariel is the musician. He is
playing the music. So music. What
elements do we associate with with with
Ariel? What ele?
Air. What are the four elements? Remind
me.
Earth, water, fire, and air. Uh, so air,
fire, aerial. Earth, water, caliban. Too
simple. Yes. But this is a very
elemental play. This is a play that that
that is so sophisticated and so sure of
itself that it can mobilize all of these
great Renaissance cliches and all these
great Renaissance uh u set texts and set
pieces and make them do something very
special. It's it's a remarkable play.
The economy of this play, the brilliance
of this play, the way in which it boils
things down to things that are very
elemental is what has given rise among
other things to the sets of
interpretations that we'll talk about in
a second. So, so Ariel Caliban, there's
an analogy and a disjunction between
them. Uh, Caliban also enslaved
abhored slave always. Is this his
history on the island?
No. Why? Yes, please.
He was um nurtured um by um Prospero
until he tried to rape Miranda.
How do we know?
Um they tell us.
Okay. Again, again, no reason to doubt
it. Oh ho. Oho. Would it have been done?
Would I peopleled the aisle with
Calibans? There's certainly a sense that
he, you know, he doesn't deny it. Uh but
but again the accusation or rather the
description of what took place this is
like date rape you know that he said she
said I mean the the the description of
this as a violent act as an unwanted act
as an as a as a an act that deserved
punishment and that deserved to uh move
him from the state of playmate and
favored second child into this enslaved
state in which what is what kind of work
is he doing No,
menial work. He's car there's wood wood
enough within. He's carrying the wood.
Uh he's uh what else does he do?
Brings the water. Yeah. He's he he he is
supplying the necessities of life.
He helps um them survive. Um but it's
almost as if his act was amoral. Um
it it when you hear him talk about it,
it it's he's not even um apologetic. Um
it's almost as if he was meant to do
that and he didn't know what else how
else to be.
Well, and indeed we hear something about
his education, don't we? That I mean who
who has his prince been his principal
source of education?
Prosper.
Prosper. What has Prosper taught him?
Um
through his books um to be civilized.
astronomy to how to name the bigger
light and how the less taught him
language taught him and and and but but
Caliban himself did a little teaching
did he's the naturalist here are the
berries here's the the fresh isles and
the fertile water and so forth that
there's a kind of exchange that goes on
um and but but while while uh Prospero
is busy doing you know big science so to
speak he's not doing the sexed lecture
he's not there there's no sense in which
he is uh training Caliban up to be
himself, to be uh a a suitor, a
courtier,
a gentleman. A gentleman. Exactly. Think
about about the Winter's Tale and about
that wonderful moment when they decide
they they they the shepherd and the
clown are given titles and money and the
clown says, "See, I'm now a gentleman
born." Because the phrase gentleman born
is one phrase to him. He doesn't
understand that gentleman and gentleman
born are two different things. Uh so the
the caliban who actually is a queen's
son uh is not brought up uh as the
inheritor of the aisle but rather as
somebody who is taught certain sets of
things but not other kinds of things but
he is taught language uh and that
becomes crucial. Um and uh what is in in
his own estimation? What's the effect of
his having been taught language? You
taught me language and my profit on it
is
curse.
I know how to curse. I know how to
curse. Why is that? Because of his
nature. That's what Prospero says. Or
and and Miranda too. Uh one on whose
nature nurture could never stick.
Is he just bad? He's just bad.
bad seed,
figure of evil,
please.
From his perspective, wouldn't it be
that he's been put to hard labor and
doing all this menial work and being
treated as a slave, which is enough
reason to curse those who impose those
conditions on him?
Yes. And behind you, please.
That also um love was withdrawn from
him. He was loved at first and then no
longer.
Right. Right. This is partly a sort of
tale of adolescence too. I mean if if
you there many many ways of allegorizing
this play and many ways of appropriating
it into our own time as allegorization.
If you ask historians of the Renaissance
they will tell you there's no such thing
as adolescence uh in the Renaissance.
Indeed, if you remember again the very
wise shepherd in the Winter's Tale who
says, "I wish there were no time in life
between, you know, a certain age and 23
because all the time in between is just
fighting and and and and disputation and
so forth." That's the sort of little
adolescent moment described that if you
think of of the shepherd as the sort of
the Dr. fill of of of the Winter's Tale
that that that in this case uh we have a
Caliban who again offstage and we don't
quite see it because we we that we don't
have that sense that they're in that
same moment um has has reached this
point of rebellious adolescence um and
behaves against the father's surrogate.
Yes, please. It's also I think worth
noting it's a stage of adolescence that
begins with his awakening sexuality when
he first
right
time to
right and indeed this is often the case
in the plays that we have looked at in
the plays that that that are in this
first half of of of the Shakespeare's
career as well that what causes a
sundering between parent and child is
the awakening of desire uh whether it's
Juliet's preference for Romeo over the
county Paris or or Roslin falling in
love with Orlando in As You Like It. Uh
in all of these plays of adolescence and
there are many of them or or indeed
Ferdinand not Ferd and Florizel and
Perturto falling in love with one
another and as they think uh going
against the wishes of the father uh the
father Pelixynes who only you know comes
back into the fold when he discovers
this is actually a a princess and not a
shepherdess. Uh but these these
rebellions uh are almost always moments
of sundering from the parental bond and
a going out into the world uh and the
beginning of another kind of narrative.
And indeed in this case it is very
unvarnished. It clearly is sexual
desire. It's not Caliban uh doesn't um I
mean again the figure probably we should
compare him to is Clottton in in
Simolene where where again it's a kind
of a desire mechanism that Clottton
causes beautiful music to be sung.
Caliban is a consumer of beautiful
music. He likes the twangling of
instruments that sound he that that he
can't identify because he can't see
Ariel. Um but in fact the story that we
are told of the offstage again negative
event that took place between or upon
with Caliban and Miranda is a violent
event not a courtship. It's not that he
brought her flowers. It's not that he
wrote poems to her that you did you know
uh attempt the chastity the the to
violate the honor of my child is what
Prospero says. Again, he's an interested
father. He I I So I don't It's not that
I want to sew doubt in your minds about
what actually happened. I just want to
remind you that these are offstage
events. That the story of Ciccarax is an
off-stage event. The story of the
attempted rape of Cal by Caliban of
Miranda is an off-stage event. What else
is an offstage event in this play?
Excuse me.
What else happens offstage? either
before the play begins or around in the
surroundation
of Prospero's kingdom by his brother.
Indeed. Indeed. And and uh this this
happens before the time space time span
of the play begins and often hap also
happens in a different place where
Milan
in Milan. Yes. Which which is pronounced
Milan in this play just because of the
the scans. in Milan. Yes. Um, yes,
please.
Arabel's marriage.
Ah, yes. We Well, I want to talk about
that, but let's let's let's stay with
the the usurppation too. No, that's
crucial and that was actually what I was
thinking of, but let's just hang on to
that for a second and go back to the
usurpation of the duked just to flesh it
out a little bit. Uh, why does who who
who usurps the duke from Prospero?
Antonio is his brother, right? Um, is he
wrong to do so?
Wasn't governing. He was into his magic
into the magic,
right? His his he prefers his books. He
neglects the governance of the state
that he is in his study instead. Uh, the
opportunity presents itself for
usurpation. Again, it's not as if
everybody says, "Oh, it's great." You
know really much better to have Antonio
ruling but Prospero is like King Lear
unburdened crawling toward death like
that he is ignoring the issue of state
and he's wrapped in secret studies. He's
enraptured by the study of magic and
magic in in this period encompasses a
very wide range of things. It is not
only doing tricks or playing tricks. It
magic, science and religion are terms
that are very much imreated in one
another in this period. The evolution of
the notion of science uh develops from
the notion of magic of natural theology
of understanding how the world works of
commanding by because again if you don't
understand how the wind works you could
think that a sailboat is magic that that
that so that it's partly a matter of who
understands and who doesn't understand
how natural forces work and who
understands and doesn't understand how
math works and how language works. Um
out of this period will come a practice
that will come to be called science. A
word that literally means knowledge or
knowing. Uh and out of this and and will
come a kind of rationalization of
science and a certain kind of notion of
science as a set of practices.
But in this period these categories are
very fluid. It is until quite a long
time after this for example that alchemy
is thought of as distinct from
chemistry. Alchemy is the immediate
parent of chemistry and in this period
not distinct from it. So that when we
hear that Prospero is a magician, I
think we we we need to have that or that
he he deals with secret studies, I think
that we need to have the broadest
possible picture of what that means.
that this is not merely
the kind of thing that we see Ariel
performing on the island with the the
disappearing banquet and so forth. Uh
that the that the study is really the
study of how to control the universe and
how to understand the universe and this
is both noble and dangerous. Uh and it's
and and and it's also extremely
preoccupying.
uh it's preoccupying to the extent that
he neglects then the affairs of state
and his brother Antonio users the dupe.
How does he get rid of Prospero?
Sets him a drifty
little boat
in a little leaky boat with a leaky
little daughter. Right. Okay. So So we
the the a cherubim thou was that did
preserve me. That's I think what the
text says uh because she says of course
that now again remember the completely
artificial exposition at the beginning
of this play. They have been together on
this island for 12 years now. Maybe he
never told her this story before uh uh
because why she didn't need to know it
before because something's about to
change. We again the play begins in
Medios race the there's there's the
shipwreck and again how many of you have
seen this play in the theater? It's
fabulous the way this play begins
because be you're in the middle of this
storm in the shipwreck and you hear the
clanging and and it's the people are
shouting and things are very distinct
indistinct sorry and hierarchy is gone.
I mean, this whole remember the again
the scene in in the um in the Winter's
Tale when the clown is on the shore
watching the shipwreck and he's talking
about the shipwreck and the poor souls
and so forth. And he's also watching the
Antigonist being torn apart by the bear
and how the the Antigonist cried out
that his name was Antigonist a nobleman,
but the bear paid no attention to the
fact that he was a nobleman and ate him
anyway. Uh this now we're in the middle
of that shipwreck, so to speak. And
again, there's no distinction of of
class or rank. Everybody is in the same
boat literally uh and everybody is in
the same storm. And who in fact is in
that storm that is coming toward the
island? Who has been ens snared in this
storm that Ariel has made happen at
Prospero's command?
Sorry, who?
No, it's it's it's it's all these
Neapolitan and Melanesian uh dignitaries
who are part of the Prospero story.
um the Prospero story of the past and
also the Prospero story of the future
because we get not only uh Antonio the
brother but Alonzo the king of Naples
and his son Ferdinand the prince of
Naples and there's a plot in view. Uh
this is the good suitor as opposed to
the bad suitor and pretty soon we'll
find a third suitor arrives on the
island to make this even more explicit.
So, so the uh the the offstage uh is
this this action which precipitates
where we are right now that that it it I
mean there's a sense in which this
island that Prospero is on is just or
entirely his own mind that that that's
that's where he withdrew. That's where
he went. He went into his study the
place with his books. He went into the
his mind and into the notion of the
elements and how he could control them
and so forth. And there's a sense in
which he he he has journeyied or been
shipwrecked on a place that is the
equivalent of that psychic space that he
was in before. Um it's a place of
possibility. It's a place of elemental
distinctions uh in which those elements
that he might in his magic place be
playing with are uh personalized by
Ariel and by Caliban. Uh it's we could
say that it's a laboratory. We could say
that it's a place of experimentation. We
could say that it's a place in which
both human and material or elemental
experiments will take place. Uh uh but
historically
uh it's an island where where is this
island?
Why do you laugh?
Because it's variously attributed to
lots of different islands, even Jamaica,
but it's
most likely an island that's just north
of Africa in the Mediterranean. And when
you say most likely
for the for the story
for Yeah. in ter in terms of what we
know about where they're coming from and
uh Yes. Okay. Good. Over here, please.
Well, they're they're coming back from
the the wedding in Alers.
Yes.
Which is referred to as Anier, I
believe.
Right. Right. Argier.
Argier.
And so presumably they're going back to
Italy. So they're somewhere in the
Mediterranean,
right? It seems seems as if this is a
Mediterranean island. But there, you
know, this is a perpetual question for
Shakespeareans who have, you know, these
large concepts to worry about. Is the
play a new world play or an old world
play? Is this island? Because some of
the flora and the fauna, the business
about the still vexed bermouthies, the
Bermuda Triangle. This is the Bermuda
Triangle play, the play about sort of
the ship that gets lost, the people that
get lost, the things that are never
heard of again because of this kind of
magical set of vectors in the the the
the atmosphere. Uh there's a sense in
which this apparently perfectly clear
location is also perfectly unclear that
there are enough confusing clues thrown
in here just to make you say, "Wait a
second, wait a second. Why are there
Bermuda winds here near Alers?" And you
could say, you know, well, Shakespeare
is not a naturalist. He doesn't know how
to read maps. He's using to mixed
sources or so forth. Or you could say,
this is inadvertent genius. This works
spectacularly well to make this the
quintessential island in the
quintessential body of water. U having
to do with the quintessential set of
enslaved or uh incarcerated populations.
Certainly people Europeans have often
read this play as a play about Algeria
or about about the European African
relations. On the other hand, as you
probably know, the play has been
rewritten by uh Latin American, South
American
um Haitian martin
writers, New World playwrights and and
poets and essaists in the 20th century
in the late late 19th century to as
their story as the story of their
enslavement or their hopes or their
their necessity of them separating from
north America or from white colonization
or from from from England or from
whatever or from France uh whatever the
colonizing power was thought to be. So
that the the the it seems to be clear
only it's not quite clear and the not
quite clearness um this was a topic. In
fact the Shakespeare Association of
America which is the annual conference
of Shakespeareans always takes place in
a kind of nice and interesting place.
several years ago. How did you go to
this meeting took place in Bermuda? And
so on a completely horrible rainy
weekend in Bermuda in February and I
kept saying to the president of the
Shakespeare Association who was a friend
of mine that year. Uh and I said to her,
you know, it rains in Bermuda and oh no,
it'll be great. It'll be great in
Bermuda. So there we all were in a hotel
in Bermuda raining like that. Um and
though it did clear the next day but but
the so that one of the topics of this
particular uh meeting of the Shakespeare
association was is The Tempest a new
world play or an old world play to which
the answer is yes. Um and there there
are vigorous proponents of both and for
the reasons that you guys have mentioned
absolutely that's one kind of argument.
There's another depends upon what you
want it to mean kind of it depends upon
what you want to use it for. depends
upon what what the uh what story you
think it's ultimately telling or what
story your audience is is receiving but
but so so indeed take 12 years ago in
another place there was the usurppation
in other words Prospero for all that he
is deeply agrieved and has been used ill
there's some as with king uh shouldn't
give away your kingdom shouldn't you
know uh shouldn't stop being king before
you have to so also Prospero here again
shouldn't neglect the affairs of state
if you want to stay Duke which maybe you
don't uh and again if you know the whole
wide scope of Shakespeare plays you'll
know that they're often two brothers
Hamlet uh old Hamlet and Claudius uh the
as you like it Duke Senior and Duke
Frederick think of some others some
other cases in which they're they're two
fathers so to speak rather than on
think of any any more of these? There
are lots of them. Um and and and here
too we have is it's a it's as if the
character splits in half. It's as if you
have the the the the Duke who who deals
only with affairs of state and is rather
malavelian about it and the Duke who is
of higher mind but also uh not paying a
lot of attention to affairs of state. Uh
and that's the that's the part of
Prospero so to speak that comes to the
island. So now, sorry, did you more on
this? Sorry,
please.
I thought more of measure for measure
than King Lear as a reference for this
play.
The abdication of Yes, that's a very
good example. It's a very good example.
The that the old fantastical Duke of
Dark Corners that this that the Duke
begins by saying something is rotten in
the state of Vienna and I can't fix it
because it's partly my fault. I have let
the the laws grow lax and so I can't
myself enforce them. I'm going to have
my substitute Angelo do. So now whether
that turned out just to be a ruse in
order to test Angelo or not hard to say
but precisely something some some
basically virtuous person in a and very
very similar that there's some sense in
which what was his set of
preoccupations? What was he doing
instead?
You have any instinct about this at all?
Yes, please.
Well, he would the the Duke was sort of
running around and manipulating things
behind the scenes and moving the
characters around, which is kind of
similar to what Prospero winds up doing.
That's what he does. Yes. In the play,
absolutely. That that that that this
notion that this Duke is a playwright or
that Prospero is a playwright that that
he's uh that's actually absolutely what
happens in the course of the play. Do
you have any instinct about why what
before before the play begins, so to
speak, what he was doing instead of
running the government? Well,
partying. You think
he he says, you know, the dribbling dart
of love, dribbling dart of love will
never pierce this complete bosom. He's
not interested in love and sex, even
though he actually is interested in love
and sex. So, we don't have I think the
sense that he's a party boy
particularly. Anything else?
I think it's it wasn't he just
preoccupied with being too kind and
things got out of hand because he
couldn't bring himself to enforce the
laws
there. He's too mild.
It's not it's not that he actually did
anything.
let things go.
Hard to say. He's more I mean if you
imagine you the Hamlet of the early
scenes of Hamlet as the king rather that
that there there's some sense which he
thinks too much whatever he's not
obeying the laws and and one of the
things that dukes often do in the
Shakespeare plays that have dukes in
them is to first lay down the law and
later mitigate the law that they often
come out at the end of the play as
happens in Measure for Measure as
happens in Comedy Ver and says well you
know don't worry I I pardon you you can
have mercy rather than the law and so
forth. that the Duke is often in that
position of first being the person who
has to enforce and lay down the law and
impersonate the law uh mortality and
mercy in Vienna uh and also the one who
can change it. This certainly exactly
what happens in measure for measure.
Here too uh we have a duke who has some
choices to make.
Uh Clarabel, tell me about Clarabel,
please.
Clarabel was Alonzo's daughter and she
uh she is
forced into an arranged marriage that
she really doesn't want to.
Why and why doesn't she want to marry
whoever it is she's marrying?
Well, I think there he was black.
He's an African.
African.
He's an African.
Yeah. And she she didn't want to go
there. And I think that the I don't know
whether I'm just intuiting this. she
didn't want to give up the power in uh
Naples as well.
I don't know that we know that. I mean,
this only comes in in this question of
who is the you know, the king is the the
the king is dead. So, who is the next
heir of Naples? Clarabel.
Uh but she, you know, she'll never hear
that her father's dead because she's
miles and miles and miles away. So if
Ferdinand is dead, you know, as it's
postulated or fantasized at one point by
Alonzo,
theoretically she could uh not take over
the power and that it would go to
Antonio.
Oh, to Sebastian. Sebastian.
Sebastian, the the again the the wicked
brother of the king of the king Alonzo.
Um so so so we have we have this family
of uh Alonzo the king and his daughter
Clarabel and his son Ferdinand. Clarabel
as you say arranged marriage again
remember dynastic marriage very common
in this period. Father chooses the the
the husband uh all the women we have
come to know uh who are they who resist
this name me some of Shakespearean
heroins. Sorry, Desdona. Good choice
here since since she actually chooses
the the the black husband rather than
the a a darling of the city whom he
might whom her father Bravantia might
prefer. Who else?
Imagin. Imagigent. Great choice. Good.
Okay. Uh even um the Cordelia
uh they won't marry Burgundy, King of
France instead and so forth. it this
doesn't turn on the choice of husband
but the choice of husband is related a
little bit to this question of obey
obeying the father and of the father's
edict where the uh burgundy changes his
mind you know election makes not up on
these conditions I won't marry her if
the if the dowy isn't there but also I
won't marry her if she her price is
fallen the father doesn't adore her any
longer uh king of France has a different
set of values let us say so he he
marries her but so so this this business
about the daughter submitting to the
marriage edict of the father or the
daughter choosing for herself. Again, we
we're told this we're told this in a
very vivid way about her resistance to
this marriage. And I think you mentioned
both reasons that the play gives us for
it. One that he's an African and that
he's other than she and other also that
it's very very far away. It's she's
leaving Europe in order to make this
marriage. And uh nonetheless, they've
all been to the wedding. So it's not as
if they've hidden her away. It's not as
if they I mean they they this is a kind
of a hello arranged marriage, but it's
one that's obviously sanctioned by and
and this is where they're coming from.
So we could say, you know, part of their
problem is that the ship is burdened
with, you know, bad vibes because of the
the this forced marriage. Uh but
Clarabel indeed is way out of the the
the edge of the play. Uh so Clarabel and
Sicarax
again are
different kinds of women from the woman
that Miranda is and Miranda is the only
woman whom we see. How would you
contrast
uh Miranda with Sicarax? How would you
contrast Miranda with Clarabel
for Sicex?
Anybody compare them in the play?
The obvious
differences. I mean, everything that
Sickarax is described as being Miranda
is the opposite,
right?
She's young, she's beautiful, she's
innocent, she's, you know,
she's oh, brave new world. Uh whereas I
I would think if you were contrasting a
Clarabel, you don't have the physical um
description, but you have the
experiential kind of difference because
Miranda has none of this experience of
dynastic. I mean, she's about to be
made a dynastic marriage. She doesn't
realize it. She doesn't realize but um
she's that total that totally innocent
of not even having seen human beings
before except for her father and Caleb
if you
right but you you very well show both
the the disjunction and the conjunction
here that in a way very same things
about about to happen to Miranda her
father has arranged a suitable marriage
for her uh he has brought her together
with the suitor he's going to make sure
they get married but we see this
production of uh
what about feigned resistance. The
father pretends to not wish this in
order to test or to create the climate
for healthy disobedience or whatever it
might be uh that there have we seen this
before in the romances? Have we seen a
father pretend to resist the daughter's
choice?
Was it?
It is in Pericles. Yes. Ta.
Taiz's father. Great. Great. What you
remember his name?
Simonades, which is also the name of of
a great uh Greek poet. Uh that Simonades
pretends to be angry at the daughter's
choice and tells us that he's happy with
this, but that he tests her by by
pretending to be displeased. We get a
very much more fully fleshed out version
of that in the proar apparent way in
which Prospero feels or seems to feel
toward Ferdinette. Uh but but Miranda as
you say is a brave new world, innocent,
has not not brought up in the court. Uh
doesn't have this sense either of
parental constraint or of uh what the
you know both the the dangers and the
beauties of the court world. Uh there's
a sense in which she is a kind of
natural innocent at the same time that
she's a natural sophisticate. And when
we first see her the beginning of the
play uh what is her role? What is her
role visa v her father? What is her role
visa v the shipwreck
empathize
if by your art my dearest father you
have put the wild waves in this roar
allay them. Um, she again, think about
the scene that we saw last week with the
clown standing on on the shore and
watching the shipwreck and having this
kind of distanced account of it. It's
not that he and his father that the
shepherd don't feel compassion, but it's
way out of their control. Shipwreck is
one of those things that happens in
nature and all you can do is grieve and
and pray and move on to the next thing.
In this case, however, what's the real
story about this shipwreck?
It's not a shipwreck. It's a piece of
magic. Everybody's clothes are dry.
Everybody's alive. Everybody there
there's there's a it's a um it it is so
much like the real thing that we first
encounter it as the real thing. We're in
the dark. It's noisy. It's we hear
people shouting and so forth. We we
don't begin on the shore saying, "Watch
this magic false uh storm I'm going to
create." We wind up in the middle of it
and then we are disabused of its danger
as she is. That we are part of that
spectatorial moment with Miranda whose
name means what?
Wonder.
Wonder meaning one Miranda.
uh to be wondered at and to wonder at
itself. Now wonder a a again a a a major
major category in the medieval period in
the Renaissance. Uh people collected uh
wonder objects in wonder cabinets. It's
a it's a the idea of the natural world
and what it can do is full of these
objects of wonder. Sometimes they're
they're uh uh they're amulets and rot
things and sometimes they're things in
nature like crystals. Uh but the and and
aberrants in nature too. You could say
that that Caliban is himself a kind of
natural wonder in that he looks like a
fish as well as like a man and so forth
that that that there's this there isn't
an attraction repulsion difference here.
These are all wonders in a way. They're
all kind of creations of nature. But
Miranda is both herself. Oh, you wonder
says Ferdinand to her and admired
Miranda once he learns her name. So that
we it's underscored for us that he
understands both that she is a wonder
and that she is a wonderer. She's a
great audience. Uh but she's not a wimp.
She's not merely the good girl. And the
fact that she's not merely the g good
girl is is brought home to us by the
fact that she is allowed to rebel
against her father. That again she keeps
secrets from him that the capacity for
subtrafuge uh which is a kind of Juliet
skill uh and an imaginike skill is also
one that she is able to use. Uh so that
that that that she's not entirely
passive that her femininity is not
entirely a negation of action or power.
She has her own mode of action and
power. But she begins in the play as
this wondering personage uh someone who
is somehow conflated with the baby that
she's described as having been and with
the cherub or cherubim that he describes
the the the the infant angel that he
describes her as being who lifted his
spirits when he was set a drift into the
boat. Uh but she she is and again this
is characteristic of the way this play
is set up that you've got one example
rather than many of a certain type of
thing with the other examples offstage
uh or not immediately available to us.
So that Miranda's occupies the only
onstage female role uh but leads us to
ask certain questions about the women
who are around the edges of the play and
what happens to them. Uh uh what about
um uh Prospero himself? We have held him
a little bit at arms length here in our
description of the rest of the cast of
characters. How would you characterize
him?
Yes.
Does doesn't Prospero in fact control
everything and everyone like a chess
master? At the end there's that chess
game and
it's almost as though as the magician
chess he is the master he controls
everybody. He from the beginning he
it seemed to be a plan. From the
beginning it seemed to be a plan.
Absolutely. And it turns out that even
for example the courtship is a plan that
that that you you know what seems to be
accidental or a fortuitous circumstance
turns out to have been very carefully
crafted. Is there any point at which
Yes. Go ahead please. when he went into
his books, it was as though he went he
he went into some different place which
allowed him then to control
um reality.
Is there a limit to his power?
Yeah.
Would you say this Would
you say that there is a limit and that
is why he
takes the point of view at this point
with his daughter's emancipation coming
that he is being freed and he goes on to
uh to grow himself in a new way.
What's he going toward?
He's going toward forgiveness of his
brother and of himself.
Okay. Is it this his own idea who
suggests forgiveness to him in the play?
Yes, please.
Ariel uh
describes how he he is moved, I think,
to pity.
Yes.
And Prospero replies um he's almost
ashamed that he doesn't have as strong a
reaction.
Right. Dust thou who art spirit etc. And
am I I mean
let me see if I can get the lines right.
uh where where um Ariel says you know
mine would sir were I human and uh and
Prospro says and I mine shall but I I
will in fact uh release this is when
they're there they're he's describing
the people in the stinking meer uh and
uh the that Ariel begins to have a sense
of pity about this that there's there's
this kind of transformation from because
the the this play has the shape of a
revenge drama this is is this is a
famili amiliar genre in this period. Uh
the long nurtured
um sense of hurt and injury. Finally,
the culprit comes within your grasp and
you're going to do everything you can to
disconcert him and to have revenge upon
him and to bring him low and even to
kill him. And it's a revenge tragedy
which uh in a different way different
way from Hamlet but in a related way
averts itself here and becomes something
else. Yes, please.
Um, I was just curious um about where
Prosper's wife was.
Um, and the question earlier about what
the limits of his power. He can't make
people love or not love. And I was just
wondering about for him um the meaning
of the wife not being mentioned, I don't
think, in the play. And Miranda's not
curious about her mother,
right?
Uh, is the wife ever mentioned?
Um, if it was, I missed it.
There's a there's a a
right
sir, are you not my father? And he
replies, thy mother was a piece of
virtue and she said, thou was my
daughter.
Right. This is very characteristic. We
just came just came out of Winter's Tale
where this this issue of the
undecidability of paternity here it's
often u a kind of
unpleasant witicism of this kind the the
very same joke is made by u Leonato in
uh much you do about nothing this very
same joke about the sort of the mother
said and so and it's kind of a boys and
boys joke about this um this is a so
it's a proverbial kind of thing to say.
It's uh it's coming to the common
language. But here's the place in which
the mother is mentioned in relation to
dynastic succession in and authenticity
and legitimacy. Then there's the moment
quite late on in the play um when
Ferdinet is watching the mask and he and
this is a disputed crux about which
there have been interesting things
written where he says either so rare a
wondered father and a wise makes this
place paradise
or so rare a wondered father and a wife
makes this place paradise. The question
is whether it's the long f the the long
s which is the in in Elizabeth
imprinting or jackaban printing uh an s
in the middle of a of a line often has
this long tail or whether it's an f and
you can't really I mean you can tell but
but it's there's been some dispute about
but but in this case he's talking about
his own wife of course not about
Prosper's wife but it did give give rise
to a very interesting article by Steven
Orle called Prospero's wife about this
qu very question of the absent mother
and the and of Absent mothers, as we've
noticed, h are are are pretty present in
these plays. Uh that most people except
for for uh for Cory Lanus has an absent
have an absent mother and there's
there's almost always this sort of
glance toward it. I I uh what what do
you want to make of this? Do do you want
to interpret this?
Um um I'm I'm not uh ready to
Okay. Uh but but what one thing it does
do is to make her rather like perturita
uh in the little domestic world of the
shepherd and the clown. The or indeed
like um Imagigen in among Bolarius and
Guadarius and Arvaros the only woman
playing the role both of mother and of
daughter or mother and of brother or
whatever role that they they think
they're playing. uh that the the the
daughter, mother, wife role is I mean
this is the other woman to Prospero and
indeed there have been arguments not
mine but there have been arguments that
part of his resistance to other suitors
is a kind of incest that kind of a
desire to keep her for himself. Before
we laugh at that too much, we can
remember the incest moment, that
fleeting incest moment in act five of
the Winter's Tale in which uh Leantes
mistakes his daughter for somebody that
he could marry. Yes, please.
The um the idea the limits of Prospero's
power. It seems to me that that it's his
power is is conditional on this on the
island.
Yes. that you know if he if he had
unlimited power he could just take off
and go take Milan back anytime he wanted
to. I mean he has to make everybody come
to him
right.
It just seems very interesting that kind
of movement that everything has to come
right
to him.
Again the question will I mean from my
kind of reading of the play since the
island and Prospero are are versions of
the same that the space is a kind of
imagined the space of his mind in which
all these things are happening. Uh
there's a certain kind of of logic to
that. But but in any case he was
certainly powerless in Milan. Somebody
took his power right away from him.
Magic or no magic. his magic was not
helpful in trying to keep his his
position in the world. So he was exiled.
He didn't choose this. This was not a
pleasure trip. This was not a Kunard
liner that he was taking to this island
where he then decided to stay. This was
a a place of exile, place of rejection
that he then made into something. Uh and
indeed when he's going to go back to
Europe, it is going to be at some cost.
What's it going to cost him?
Sorry.
Giving up.
Giving up his magic. Giving up
his books and breaks his staff.
Drowns his books, breaks his staff.
Every third thought will be my grave.
That that he's going back into the
world. Uh it's as if he's had this
moment of eternal life that is now
turning back into the, you know,
suddenly he's going to be an old man.
And it's clear that his time is almost
over. That he's going back into time.
He's going that he's choosing death.
It's not it's not it's poss
he's he's going forward but going
forward means going into death rather
than away from it uh at this inopportune
time. We'll have to stop and take a
break uh to come back to these yellow
sands after these five minutes or
10-minute break. Okay. So let's let's
now take a moment to sort of look at the
big picture issues that have marked
various strong interpretations
of this play before we then come down to
look at some of its textural moments. uh
and I I mention this in part because as
I say the the if the island is a kind of
laboratory for Prospero. So also the
play has become a kind of of laboratory
for various kinds of criticism. It has
has called forth very different very
compelling very persuasive modes of
criticism. Maybe we can just name some
of them to begin with. What would be
various critical approaches to this play
that you're familiar with?
take the colonial approach.
Okay, great. Let's let's just list these
to begin with and we'll come back and
talk about them.
Okay. Anything else?
Yes.
Uh metaphictional.
Metaphictionals. We'll end it. Okay.
Great.
Mora,
that's it.
Okay, fine. Let's talk about that.
It's crucial.
Well, there's the the the Prospero is
Shakespeare, the kind of
autobiographical.
Okay.
Anything else?
Okay. Anything else?
Anything
else? I would say that there is both, so
to speak, a psychological and a
psychoanalytic way of reading this play
and that they are different from one
another.
Okay.
And I think also probably under colonial
we can put issues like the master slave
dialectic but discourses of power I
think and enslavement are are things
that we might might want to talk about
uh slightly adjacent to rather than
completely identified with the colonial
discourse because the colonial discourse
is to a certain extent a historical
reading and the com the phenon's
argument about this play for example or
Manon's argument about this play uh
would be an argument that combines the
psychological, the psychoanalytic and
the power argument to talk about how it
is that people get themselves into these
relationships of master and slave or uh
how it is that this is a kind of consent
agenda so to speak and what kind of a
relationship this is. Uh so all right,
this is a good start. We'll get rid of
these fs and s's that are confusing us
here. Um
that though sorry
this reminds me that there are also
quite good feminist readings those with
FS and SS remember were part of the
Prospero's wife discourse that they're
quite good feminist readings of this
play uh and and many others that the
play as I say is uh because it's so
perfect it really lends itself to many
readings of this kind. Uh pick one out
and let's talk about it for a second.
psychological. Okay. So, um how would we
distinguish the psychological from the
psychoanalytic just in very very
broadbrush terms?
Do I feel I must refer to the expert in
the room? Um
anybody have a view about this? Well,
just a broad um stroke would be one
would be um psychoanalytic would be more
unconscious forces as opposed to
conscious.
Sure. Okay. So, I mean bearing in mind
that these are not absolutes but but
psychoanalytic would have to do with
with with unconscious motivations or the
motivations that were somehow uh not
perfectly understood by or even maybe
aggressively misunderstood by the people
who were performing them. There there
are psychoanalytic ways of reading texts
and psychoanalytic ways of reading
characters. uh psychology
of a again this is very no psychologist
will agree with me about this but when
we talk about psychological readings of
plays we're to a certain extent talking
about character and motivation and the
relationships among characters and uh
family clusters and and and things like
that and a psychological reading of this
play then would participate in the
conversation that we had a little while
ago about the uh fatherdaughter daughter
tensions about the sexuality causing a a
a
imperfect conversation between them and
uh deceit or dissimulation. The
competition between the the father and
the suitor. Uh the uh the absent mother
and what this might suggest about the
extra roles that are heaped upon
Miranda. the and and and the discussion
that we had about Caliban too and
whether whether you can talk about
Caliban having a psychology, whether he
has a persona uh that where he has
motivations, he has desires, he has
relationships. Uh so that for example a
very very famous beautiful passage in
which he talks about music which the be
not a fear the full of noises, sounds
and sweet airs that that that
uh
give delight and hurt not uh that that
this this is a kind of childlike
utterance kind of that gives you an
insight into an aspect of Caliban that
seems quite different from the the the
the figure of Caliban that you see in
front of And this figure Caliban is
itself persuade performed in many
different ways. Sometimes as a kind of
hybrid monster, sometimes as a
native resident of an island in uh woven
clothing. Uh but the the question is
sort of what what what is the
interiority of Caliban like? What is the
interiority of of Prospero like? Uh what
are the motivations of these characters?
uh and what's the extent to which if
there is one uh that there more than one
father, more than one child in this play
that there that there's there's a kind
of splitting out of uh the the the
typical roles of typical 20th 21st
century roles of generational
relationships.
Um the let's the colonial story here in
is is as you probably know from reading
the footnotes in whatever text you're
using embedded a little bit in the
history of the time in which the play
was written. Remember again that we're
always going to pay attention to the
time which it's written, the time which
it's set, the time which is performed.
Uh and in this case, even though it's
not a history play per se, those three
things have coincided in the late 20th
century to remind people that
decolonialization
that colonization were preoccupations in
uh the Elizabethan and early Jacabian
period and also of course in the last
half of the 20th century in the
beginning of the 21st century and that
uh that the uh the the journeys of
Columbus, the journeys of of uh
Strachi, the journeys of of of various
Captain John Smith that very various of
these journeys of exploration seem to
find a paradise and then uh maybe a
disease came and destroyed the the the
the
sailor population or uh they they were
marooned and they they either found that
it was magical and then found their way
back to to to England. Uh that that
these stories that are that that that
seem to be part of the subtextual
history of this play are stories that
new historicist critics were very
interested to find actually reflected
and rewritten uh or and in some kind of
conversation with what was going on in
these reports of uh exploration and
conquest in the period. Uh exploration
and conquest which remember is part of a
kind of nationalist project. It's part
of an it's the rising capitalism. It's
the beginning of a kind of triangular
trade in goods and slaves um and in
which so-called civilization is exported
and so-called nature is imported and
people are part of what's brought back
and so forth. But it's also nation
building. I mean all these terms that
came back to haunt us ourselves in
recent history. It's also a notion of
sort of that whether this place belongs
to us or to the people who live on it
but don't deserve to have it because
they don't understand it the way we do
or whatever it is. that the the the the
allegorization of the colonial moment is
multiply written into this play and the
degree to which the play is so to speak
about Caliban has been at the center of
this question about the the degree to
which the play is colonial. I had a
colleague uh when I first came to
Harvard when I was I came here as as a
tenure professor but I was quite young
and I had a very senior colleague who
had been teaching this play for years
and who was very startled by the then
rising tide of colonialist readings of
the play which again then for 15 years
became the most common way to read the
play and he said to me one day he said
if Caliban were the hero of the play I
don't know what the play would mean and
for him news was completely
destabilizing to imagine uh reentering
the play around Caliban and what he had
lost and what he might get back. I also
saw a production of this play that I
believe was directed by Mark Lamos, the
same guy who did the symboline in New
York at the Hartford Stage Company um in
which Caliban at the end of the play
remember that that there's much much
stage business about Prospero's magic
garment lie there my art the art of what
thou art the question of the the the
magic garment that that is his part of
his his magician's apparatus that he
will abandon at the end as
uh drowns his book and breaks his staff
and so forth. And in this production,
the magic garment lay on the stage on
the island and Caliban picked it up and
wrapped himself in it and began to dance
around. And you could see that the whole
cycle might be about to repeat itself
again. That what Caliban had learned was
how to be a colonizer. that what he had
learned was how to be a master, how to
seek revenge, how to be a figure of
power. That in this particular
production, what had happened to Caliban
was not I'll be wise hereafter and seek
for grace. Not this thing of darkness, I
acknowledge mine. not this notion of the
somehow conversion of Caliban along the
way but in fact a Caliban who stood
apart from any uh uh reunion at the end
of the play much as stands apart from
such a reunion at the end of the
winter's tale and decides he's going to
be himself but now he's learned how and
that he he picked up the magic garment
and put it on was in this production a
sign of repetition rather than of the
end of that repetition it was things had
not been redeemed they maybe they're all
the rest of them going back. But here
was Caliban uh about to to to show what
he had learned. You know, he'd learned
language. He'd learned how to curse. Uh
he'd learned astronomy and so forth. Now
he'd learned politics. Now he'd learned
learn colonial politics. He'd learned
dictatorship. He'd learned mastery. So
this would be one one way of making your
way through the material of the play. Um
the
uh humanist I'm so glad you mentioned
the notion of a humanist reading of the
play. What would a humanist reading of
the play be?
First of all, what is humanism? Yes, go
ahead, please. If you've got an answer
to question one, we don't need question
two.
Um, I might I might be simplifying it a
little, but it's sort of Prospero learns
the true meaning of Christmas, I guess.
You know, he
ah, I see. I see. Yeah. Well, that's
that. Now, the that that's that's an
applied notion of humanism that that he
becomes humanized.
uh the humanism in this period is among
other things a kind of of educational
movement in the Elizabeth and Jackian
period. It's something that is fueled by
Italian philosophy and basically what it
does is to put man rather than God at
the center of the universe that the the
Hamlet's famous speech about what a
piece of work of man is man and so forth
which is an echo of picodela
morandelola's oration on the dignity of
man one of the great humanist documents
uh is a is a text that wants it's not
that they forget about god but they're
you know when you hear people shaking
their hands and their fingers these days
and saying secular humanism. This is
what they mean that the the idea is that
that man supersedes God or religion. In
this case, it's a restructuring of this
image. There's still the idea of man of
of God and of the beasts and so forth,
but that man, a little lower than the
angels here, assumes a more powerful
role. And this this role was often
emblematized on the theater on the on
the stage by the figure of the actor who
again was in in in the the the Globe
Theater situation between the heavens
above and the hell below as the names of
these parts of the theater were
described and so forth that that this is
a very man- centered human centered art
form and there's there's a way in which
uh Prospero precisely because he doesn't
know everything he doesn't have infinite
power only in this one space. He is
going to die. He does lose things. He
does need to be corrupted by Ariel. Uh
he does need Miranda's support as a
cherubim and so forth that he is man in
the old-fashioned sense of mankind. Uh
he's also a man. And this this split now
we're going to take a very short but
important little little uh detour into
deconstruction. you'll give your five
minutes of deconstruction that that uh
man as the substantive that means all
human beings is uh is a word that stands
by itself. Uh when you break man into
man woman or man animal or any other
binary in which man is only half of
something. So we say man woman man
animal man god man beast. Um the then uh
then man becomes not the whole thing but
something in relationship to either the
the the the primary partner or the
secondary partner is God man woman. Uh
you can tell who's who's in charge here
so to speak but but Prospero at various
points of this play is man. And at
Prospero at at various points he is man
in a binary relation. Um and this is
structuralism not deconstruction but but
uh what deconstruction will do is to
sort of talk about how that word man
then gets emptied out of meaning once it
once it gets broken so to speak once it
once it fall you see it in tension with
itself that it that it can mean at the
same time all humankind and it can mean
a man or even that man and once it does
that you see you you can't put the
Humpty Dumpty you can't put the pieces
back together again without remembering
that there's this tension within the
notion of man. And this the play is very
good at performing precisely that
tension within the notion of man that
there are times when he seems this seems
to be a play about mankindness.
And there are times when when when you
put Prospero in the frame with Ariel,
with Caliban, with Miranda, with uh uh
Ferdinet, uh you see his partialness and
you see his lack of impartiality, you
see his interestedness, you see his
desires, you see his blindnesses and so
forth. And so that uh again the play is
brilliant in the way it emblematizes for
us both the wish to have a notion of man
empowered man man proud man dressed in
his little brief authority that's
Isabella again in measure for measure
and the idea that man is only actually
one of a variety of ways of being a man
or a version of mankind. Um and uh so so
so the humanist reading of the play so
to speak really begins with this notion
of Prospero as all in all and what that
means and also looks at his limitations
before the play and after the play and
also his limitations within the play.
And those limitations far from being a
flaw in the character are what make the
character an interesting character
rather than just a an allegorical
cutboard cardboard figure cutout figure.
uh the we've talked a little bit about
the feminist reading in that we have
talked about about what would happen if
you focused on the women in the play uh
and the autobiographical reading again I
mentioned a while ago because it's so
persistent this is the fant there's so
many fantasies that attach the to the
notion of of of Shakespeare including
the fact that we can know something
about him that we can know him that he
knows us that he's scripted us and the
desire to uh actually have some kind of
relationship to Shakespeare and even if
I can go back to the master slave for
just a second to have some control over
this figure who seems to have some
control over us does play into the way
in which this persistent recurrent
notion that this play is about
Shakespeare's biography uh that he had a
daughter who married, that he, you know,
lost his son, that he was getting old,
that he left London, that he went back
to Stratford, that he shortly died and
so forth, that the the that the there
that the the events of the play
foreshadow the events in Shakespeare's
life or retell the events in
Shakespeare's life. This is again our
our cultural desire I think to have some
some intimate connection with
Shakespeare and even to be his heirs
even to be the survivors of Shakespeare
and the inheritors of Shakespeare in
this way. There's nothing wrong with
these desires. Uh there's nothing wrong
even with this kind of reading. the fact
that it's not historically accurate
isn't the end of the story because the
the theater is a magic space and we get
out of it partly what we put into it.
And so the very persistence of this
fantasy or wish or reading or misreading
is itself a kind of reading is a it
tells us a kind of story about the power
of the play. And again about and I want
really to keep insisting on this about
the simplicity of the architecture of
the play about the way it is reduced to
elementals. the island, the man, the
halfman, half something else, the one
daughter, the king, the I mean every
there and and and this mention of the
chessboard uh reminds us that there are
other places in which these kind of
allegorical roles are mentioned even
within the play. But the the the immense
simplicity and therefore monumentality
of this play is partly what makes it so
very great and so very powerful. Um, I
asked Larry and Mel if they would would
be so kind as to introduce a topic into
the mix since we could talk about this
play forever and I think they've been so
fabulous within the course that I would
like for them to sort of conduct us in a
direction. Larry, could you point
towards something that you think it'd be
good for us to talk about?
Yeah. Um well something that I think
about in terms of the production history
of this play um is that it sort of has
is that is that it's been um an occasion
for spectacle um and particularly its
sensuous elements um its translation for
instance into opera or into ballet um
they've been incredibly suggestive um so
I think it would be great for instance
if we would look at some of the songs in
it or perhaps that mar the marriage mask
um but all all these various theatrical
forms that seem to have kind of lended
an incredible durability in production
Absolutely right. And this goes along
with this issue that that I mentioned
very briefly at the beginning of the
play about whether Ariel is male or
female, whether whether he she flies or
not. There seems to be a really desire
to and Ariel is associated with almost
all of these things. He is the
entrepreneur of the mask. He is the
singer of the songs. Maybe let's look at
a couple of the songs to begin with
because they're so wonderful. Uh
the uh in act one, scene two, we have
two songs from Ferdinand. Um and this is
the moment that TS Elliott was
remembering and rewriting in the
wasteland.
Um
uh can we impose upon you Larry to
copy the text but
okay
you thinking of come unto these yellow
sands.
Yeah. Starting with that. Yeah.
All right. Well, I won't sing it but um
come unto these yellow sands and then
take hands. Curtsied when you have and
kissed the wild waves whisted feet here
and there and sweet sprites the burden
bear. Hark hark bow wow the watchdogs
bark bow wow hark hark I hear the strain
of struting shantacle clear cry
cockadoodle do so this is the first song
that Ferdinand hears enter Ferdinand and
aerial invisible playing and singing now
this this kind of stage direction which
sounds like science fiction is actually
fairly common in the period that if a
character is is is meant to be in could
be wearing a cloak of invisibility
visible to us not to Ferdinette. Uh, can
can you interpret this song?
What does it seem to be talking about?
Who's it addressed to?
come into these yellow sands and then
take hands the audience. Okay, good.
Anybody else? I mean maybe there is
nobody else but the audience
to Ferdinand to all the party that came
with him. Um come into these yellow
sands and then take hands. This is
because it's a song. It's a song and
it's an invitation to dance. It is an in
it's it's like a rebels moment. You know
the moment at the end of a court mask
when the actors and the audience dance
together. This is possible in a court
mask because the actors on stage rather
than being ordinary people are
themselves noble men and indeed noble
women. So it's not a scandal to touch
them or to dance with them because
they're social equals. So this is in a
way Yes. Larry,
could you say a few words about the
court mask as a form?
You know, what what it where where it
originates historically, what it means,
how how it's conducted.
I'll try. Okay. Um, so you'll remember
that the public theater emerges uh as an
entertainment which is relatively
speaking democratic in its interests.
that apprentices go to the theater, that
uh noblemen go to the theater, that that
Queen Elizabeth went to the theater,
that King James went to the theater, but
that it was open access, uh that there
were different levels of um of payment,
and that it was a kind of a rowdy the
public theater was kind of a rowdy
place, plays put on the daytime, um
different places where you could food
sold in the probably in the in the halls
and so forth. uh and that there were all
these kind of anti- theatrical trackcts
and writings that sort of talked about
the dangers of theater. That theater was
danger because it impersonated real
life, because it made you fall in love
with the actors or actresses, because it
made you dissatisfied with your own with
your own lot. Uh because it was
unreligious in that it did, you know,
pretend to be image do what God's
supposed to do to make images of man. Um
but also because it was so seductive and
it was seductive even in a very material
way. That is to say that uh apprentices
would cut work in order to go to the
theater and that that and that it was
also a place and we're still talking
here about the public theater where uh
when there was plague in the city it was
rampant because a lot of people are
stuffed together in this this small
space and so forth. So so uh this is a
kind of performance which is very
popular but but also very demotic very
interested in the general populace and
also a place in which you know rebellion
and revolt might take place. In contra
distinction to this they're developed uh
private theaters indoor theaters in
which for example a play like this might
be performed. This one is also a play
that was performed in a public space uh
and also court masks which were
extremely popular especially during the
time of King James and uh James's son
Charles. So we have the Jacabine ma mask
and the the uh Caroline mask. And what
what and and this is a case in which
there's a collaboration between a poet
and a and a and a a scene designer. The
most famous of these collaborations is
between Ben Johnson and Indigo Jones who
was a great scene designer in which
Johnson finally writes a poem called an
expostulation upon Indigo Jones in which
he complains that the stage effects are
taking over that painting and carpentry
are the soul of mask. He's extremely
unhappy about his words being eclipsed.
But the the general structure of the
court mask is that there is an anti-mask
anti mask which is also an anti-mask n
mask. Something that happens before the
mask of something monstrous of there's a
mask of blackness. There's a mask of
witches that begins with with
begins with w with witches and turns
into queens. Uh there's a mask of
pygmies. some spectacular you can
imagine a mask of calibans. You could
have plural calibans that some
spectacular image of uh negativity that
then gets transformed or converted by a
theatrical exfoliation that it's a
literal changing of the stage. The
wonderful devices in which what looks
like a cave turns into a mountain. What
looks like a a a a an enclosed space
opens up and so forth. And the
characters also the the the negative
characters disappear replaced by
positive characters who are signs of
virtue. Uh and and often these masks are
very allegorical and they're figures of
harmony of uh of of political success of
uh pleasure reconciled to virtue is the
most famous uh mask that that that
Johnson writes and and it's about deta
and and the maze and and the idea that
the choice of Hercules uh and the idea
that pleasure and virtue can indeed be
reconciled. So in this play we have a
mask at which is performed the wedding
mask. Uh and indeed this the the play
the tempest and the play the winter's
tale were almost surely performed at the
weddings at the wedding of James's
daughter uh Elizabeth. Uh so here we
have a wedding within a wedding and a
wedding mask within a play. It is self-p
performed at a wedding and itself
allegorizes the eternal happiness of the
wedded pair which turned out not to be
so happy but that's another story. Um
and and in this mask, the mask of Juno
and series, uh Juno, the the the goddess
of marriage, Siri, the goddess of the
harvest here, uh combined. Notice that
who's not who's the major goddess who's
not present in his mask.
Sorry,
Venus. Yes. No, no Venus. No Aphrodite.
No lust. Uh no lust. Instead, we have
the, you know, marriage and fertility.
uh we have the fruits of marriage rather
than the runup to marriage taking place
uh and and nymphs and reapers happening
here. So again, it's fertility, its
nature. Um and it's a mask that's
interrupted, you may remember, by what?
By by what? Why does he interrupt it?
Why does he interrupt it? Yeah.
Ariel reminds me of murder. He forgot
about the plot that's going on outside
there. The plot to murder him. Caliban
and the low conspirators Stephano and
Trinkulo. My god, we're never going to
finish talking about this play. Stephano
and Trinkulo who have become who who are
the the the the low user. Uh these are
the the butler and the court jester who
also came off the ship who used to be
servants in the old world. Now in the
new world they're going to be masters.
And Stephano is going to be the new
suitor to Miranda. Uh, and bring thee
forth brave brood, says Caliban,
speaking in this wonder wonderful
illiterative language that associates
him again with an older English
tradition. The Caliban having failed
himself to become the suitor of Miranda.
Going to hand her over to this god
figure, Stephano, the butler, with his
magic potion, which is what? Alcohol. Uh
again, you know, if you know anything
about how what what happened to native
populations, this is a kind of poignant
moment here. But Caliban basically gets
drunk. Ban ban Caliban, Liberty,
Liberty, and so forth begins. This is
the opposite kind of song from the
transformative songs of that that Ariel
sings to to Ferdinand. Um and so again,
not on the stage with us, but kind of
offstage is this conspiracy against the
life of Prospero. the very conspiracy
that we talked about when we said that
that Ariel has them stuck in the
stinking mire. Uh but Prospero
interrupts the mask right in the middle.
Uh and everything disappears and we have
that most beautiful speech in all of
Shakespeare. Our rebels now are ended
which is about the rebels. It's about
the mask. asking the word revel here is
a technical word that has to do with I
mean we have you know revel the
Christmas rebels and so forth uh with
the and which is not unrelated to the
notion of revelation incidentally but
this but we we have this notion that
rebel means general playing around and
having a festivity and so it does but
the rebels were a technical term for
what happens at the end of the mask when
there's the image of earthly and godly
harmony uh by the actors who are often
the family of the audience because it's
a noble audience, a private audience
dancing with the audience. So that that
and and again the image of dancing here
from the Elizabeth and times to the
present and very poignantly in this play
is the image of earthly and godly
harmony that the the music of the
spheres again why can't we hear Ariel
because we are fallen. Uh Ferdinand can
hear him. Uh but it still seems a little
bit strange to him. Uh so this the the
dance here at the end of the re of the
of the marriage uh uh mask is meant to
be again an an an an image of earthly
harmony uh modeled on heavenly harmony
and it's the best possible omen for a
marriage. But of course it's interrupted
as it always will be interrupted because
the message of Shakespeare and drama is
interruption. It's not conclusion. We
never get to harmony. you get instead to
some kind of realization or revelation
or or perception and it's often a
memory. It's often something you forgot
that then comes back as Hamlet's father
will come to him and say, you know, uh
this is to wet thy almost blunted
purpose. Remember me. So this the
forgotten memory comes back again. And
that memory is the human trait. We know
this from Niche. We know this from
everybody. The memory is the thing that
that actually makes these characters
human. Uh so that the the the mask at
the end which is an entertainment and
would have that would have occupied a
lot of stage time and stage space and
every time I've seen it it's very spe
I've seen wonderful versions of this
with three foot high characters. It was
fabulous production at the Chicago Stage
Company a couple years ago was just
amazing and I had never been enraptured
by this mask before. I'd always thought
of it as pages I had to get past in
order to get back to the text. But but
it can be fabulous. Absolutely fabulous.
And then you feel as Ferdinand and
Miranda did. What happened to it? You
know, this is great. We were in the
middle of this. How come we're back in
the revenge plot? How come we're back
precisely in an older mode of drama? An
older mode of drama. I had forgot the
file conspiracy against my life. Um, and
we're back in that moment of Prospero
wanting revenge. And so we're we we
rolled back not only in terms of
adivistic human behavior but also in
terms of the sort of stage history of
how certain kinds of plays came to the
Elizabeth and Jackaban stage. So the
mask is is always an image of harmony
and slightly an image of timelessness
and it's always again going to be
interrupted by time. Uh let's just
before we now we're going to backtrack
to the second song of Ferdinand because
I don't want to leave us with only the
one just to read you this one again very
shortly after uh the one that Larry read
us full fathom five thy father lies of
his bones are coral made those are
pearls that were his eyes nothing of him
that doth fade but doth suffer a sea
change into something rich and strange
cymp's hourly ring is Now, dingdong
hawk. Now I hear them. Ding-dong bell.
So, what's this an image of?
It's transformation. Yes. That's step
two. Transformation of what?
Of death. Of death. Yes. We're looking
at a dead body underwater. This is an
image we're going to see a lot in
Shakespeare. You see it in in Clarence's
dream in Richard III. You see it. There
are many places in which this fa this
fantasy or this this imagination of what
it's like to be a drowned person
surfaces here but here again immediately
you're quite right it turns into
transformation sea change that to suffer
a sea change into something rich and
strange and this this notion of the sea
change could be again take lifted from
this play and talked about as the way in
which Shakespeare makes metaphor the sh
way in which Shakespeare makes
characters the way in which he he he
makes makes drama that seems to be
natural But also it's kind of magical.
Uh bear in mind that this is a fiction
that his father is not dead. That the
that that we we are relieved to find the
transformation. The dead body is already
turning into natural life again and
pearls. So that we have both jewels,
coral and pearls and also you know new
creatures. uh but also we have
ultimately the sense that this is a
fictive event that he has got to
Ferdinand comes to terms with death
imaginatively and in the bounded space
of a song so that he can begin to think
of himself as fatherless and therefore
as man as the king of Naples as a figure
with a future uh and it's he needs to go
through this death of the father this
would be to go back to the psychological
or psychoanalytic reading. needs to go
through the death of the father
imaginatively so as to be able to
re-enccounter his father alive again at
the end of the play as a different
person and in the meantime to have
conducted as he does in an extremely
elegant as well as arduous way his
courtship of Miranda because again what
what he does is of course to take over
all the jobs that Caliban had the
carrying of the wood the being the slave
and so forth but he is not the slave he
is the servant and he animates that word
servant
out of the Petrarchan discourse in which
the lover is the servant of the beloved
in which everything he does is at her
servant in which this language of
servant and mistress is the completely
common language and the completely
common practice and he talks about the
fact that the mistress that he serves
makes all his trials pleasures that that
so that that he the purposelessness so
to speak of the enslavement of Caliban
here becomes purposeful
And the notion of slavery is is set
aside again in in favor of this notion
of a servant. Um, so you have more,
Larry, that you want us to talk about
about the about the mask?
I think that was great.
All right, Mel, please.
Really? because you you know what I'm
gonna want to talk about. But I I want
to offer the students a chance to chime
in too though because in all
seriousness, my voice has been pretty
forward on the discussion board this
week. Um I've kind of been still stuck
back on Anthony and Cleopatra heranging
on that. So
shall should we open it up for for
student questions or
Okay. Um because otherwise I'm going to
want to talk about despair and everyone
will leave here all dreary and we we
certainly don't want to leave the
Tempest on that note.
Do you should we should we talk a little
bit about it? As long as we just don't
leave it on that note. I don't want to
send everyone out. So, we got 10 minutes
and I think we probably need to talk
about Prospero's various farewells
because I would not want to say farewell
to you without taking note of the fact
that this is a guy who says goodbye for
half the play. That um that you know
he's like an old actor. You cannot
really get him off the stage and he
begins rehearsing his departure quite
early on. Uh our rebels now are ended
again. a magnificent speech and we can
read it together. What are his other
farewells?
What? Sorry.
There's an epilogue.
There is an epilogue. Absolutely.
There's the epilogue and between that
there's the moment that we talked about
before in which he abandons his magic.
The ye elves speech in which he drowns
his book in which he he abandons his
magic. that this is another kind of
farewell.
um he
it's important I think that he keeps
leaving and not leaving that he keeps
articulating his losses that he and that
that that in each of these spheres he
says goodbye to art he says goodbye to
magic he says goodbye to his daughter he
says goodbye to the island he says
goodbye to life what doesn't he say
goodbye to he says goodbye to Ariel go
chick farewell Caliban.
Caliban is the one thing that he doesn't
say goodbye to this thing of darkness. I
acknowledge mine. that there, you know,
whether or not you see them going off
into the the the ether together, there's
a sense in which the the the release is
also an act of claiming that and this is
and the I acknowledge mine is different
from but also importantly similar to
that moment that we looked about before
at before in which the we hear that the
mother said that you were my child and I
believe her. That that's a kind of mine
I acknowledge mine moment. This is a
very different I acknowledge mine
moment. I think we don't fantasize that
this is his actual physical child. So
how do we understand that moment of
Caliban being acknowledged?
Acknowledged. Such an important word.
Yes.
In what sense?
Prospero molded Caliban's character. He
taught him things that he chose to teach
him.
Right. And so he is very much a creature
of Prospero
and he's responsible. He's responsible
that that that the deformationation of
Caliban is not a physical
deformationation though he's described
at some points in this way but that he
is formed and then he is deformed by by
the paternal law by the first the the
teaching of of langu the humanization
and then the dehumanization by the
refusal of the courtship and by the
enslavement and so yeah the withdrawal
of love
the withdrawal of love yes exactly But
but first he gives it and then he takes
it away. So that the the isofold music
speech is really a speech about love. I
mean it's a speech about the access to
to identification and to going outside
yourself and so forth and then then the
because Caliban feels loss and he
doesn't only feel loss of Miranda. He
feels a more profound kind of loss.
Exactly.
It's just heartbreaking.
It is heartbreaking. It's absolutely
heartbreaking. Absolutely. Um and and I
mean all of these figures encounter loss
but Caliban in a way incarnates it. He
he is both one who has lost and one who
allegoriz is loss and one who cannot be
lost because he is
indeoluble from the prosper who is going
forward. Yes. I
can I jump in a little bit on this point
now? Um I to me it's a very powerful
thing as well because I'm reading it
through the lens of um Prospero setting
himself up a good death and it's not
that that is what the play is trying to
function but it's appropriating all the
forms that people used to use in order
to itemize their existence and say
goodbye to it and bequeath certain
things so that there's a stock taking
you know as he says every third thought
will be on death. Um, some of you may be
familiar with the idea that in the
Renaissance, uh, if if death took people
by surprise. This was a very, this was a
terrible thing and it was not indicative
that you were headed toward a good
place. So that they were very obsessed
with the idea of getting everything in
order conscious conscience-wise,
conscious wise, material-wise.
And this is this is sort of the form of
what he's doing at the end. And so
therefore, it's all the more tragic and
heartbreaking that Caliban seems to have
no place in his thoughts as he's
ordering what's most important to him as
he's getting ready to go to the next
realm, whether that's on earth through
death, whatever next imaginative realm
is coming for him, Caliban doesn't have
any any place in right
his sense of leave.
This is why this production that I saw
that left Caliban on the stage. is like
the the famous Peter Arno cartoon about
the nose arc and the unicorn. You
remember anybody see this? This is old
New Yorker cartoon in which there
there's a it's heart completely
heartbreaking cartoon. You you'll
understand what I mean in a second. Uh
huge storm going on and over in the
distance you can see on the horizon is
this arc just disappearing and here you
are on the edge of a piece of of island
landscape and there's a unicorn looking
at No. Exactly. Exactly. Looking out at
the disappearing ark and you know, wow.
So, so it's but it's that it's that
image of the unpartnered,
unique,
uh, fabulous
uh, and unsaved figure. And it's the
perspective from that look. I mean,
again, he's meant to be a cartoon, but
actually, you know, philosophy. Um so
all right the the the the let's talk
about the epilogue for a second just one
second uh that just to say that it I
mean like all epilogues it it is epia it
comes after the play uh epilogue speech
after something and that it is a much
less powerful piece of poetry in some
ways than some of the speeches that
Prospero is given within the text. Uh,
I'm going to read it and then I'm going
to read the rebel speech and then I'll
let you go till after Christmas. Um,
here's the epilogue spoken by Prospero
uh after he has let Ariel go. And
remember the struggle that he has to let
Ariel go. And if Ariel is imagination
and invisibility and creativity and so
forth, uh, he grounds his book. He uh
breaks his staff. He and this is of
course an echo of media the witch in
Avid. Uh he lets Ariel go and then he is
alone on stage. Exunt omnes. Everybody
else leaves. Now my charms are all a
throne and what strength I have is mine
own which is most faint. Notice that
this the sajour in the middle of the
line emphasizes that the line stops in
the middle. Now it is true. I must be
here confined by you. Who are you?
Audience. Okay. Confined
as Caliban was confined here on the
stage by you or sent to Naples. Let me
not since I have my duke and pardon the
deceiver dwell in this bare island by
your spell. So who's the magician now?
Audience. But release me from my bands
with the help of your good hands. So
what's being asked for here? Thank you.
Gentle breath of yours my sales must
fill or else my project fails. Which was
to please. Again, watch the souras here.
Watch the the the halts in the middle of
the sentence. Now I want want in what
sense?
Lack might be desire, but it's also
lack. Lack and desire at this point in
this play are the same. Now I want
spirits to enforce art to enchant. And
my ending is despair unless I be
relieved by prayer which pierces so that
it assaults mercy itself and frees all
faults as you from crimes with pardon
be. Let your indulgence
let set me free. And here again a kind
of echo of the notion of a religious
indulgence is both a high and a low
notion. So this is Prospero to the
audience. Now I'll take you back uh to
act four scene one um which is Prospero
only to Ferdinand really um and again
it's this speech so often taken out of
context that we forget that it's
actually spoken just to his puditive
son-in-law. You do look my son this is
act 41 line 446. You do look my son in a
mov as if you were dismayed. Be
cheerful, sir. Our rebels now are ended.
So, be cheerful. Our rebels now are
ended. How often do we quote those two
lines together? These are actors. As I
foretold you, were all spirits and are
melted into air, into thin air. And like
the baseless fabric of this vision, the
cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous
palaces, the solemn temples, the great
globe itself, yay, all which it inherit
shall dissolve. And like this
insubstantial pageant we just seen
faded, leave not a rack behind, not a
wisp of cloud. We are such stuff as
dreams are made on and our little life
is rounded with asleep.
This is the classic passage. It's the
middle of the speech. Sir, I am vexed.
Bear with my weakness. My old brain is
troubled. Be not disturbed with my
infirmity. If you be pleased, retire
into my cell and their repose. A turn or
two, I'll walk to still my beating mind.
So here we have sublimity returning into
drama. We have this passage that speaks
more wisely than it knows about endings
and about the the artifice of drama and
the way dreams are reality. Uh it speaks
about the ambitions of the theater and
about what it can do for us. And then
the speech draws right back into the
humanity and frailty of the actor and
the character and his beating mind. And
that beating mind that we saw in Lear on
the Heath. Uh that beating mind in which
there's a kind of pulse in the mind that
is so painful that he's aware of himself
thinking and that's what makes it so
intolerable for him. The play will
always return always return into the
human from the sublime. There are these
dream glimpses of dream. This what
happens in this speech for us is what
happened to the mask and Ferdinand and
we're in the position of speaking to the
dismayed and discomforted
Prospero and perceiving that what is
temporarily at bay here is just an
aspect of the same kind of theater that
is here represented by the figure with
the dismay and the walking into the cell
and the beating mind. And it's that
frailty in him that is finally the most
recognizable aspect of the play.
Our little life is ended with a sleep.
I'll see you on the 2nd of January. Have
a great holiday.