Don, it's our fourth conversation
together. So, thank you so much for
joining me once again.
&gt;&gt; Oh, it's my pleasure. Great, great
pleasure. And thank you for inviting me
back, Kevin.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's my pleasure, Don. It's a
privilege. We've had three very long
conversations, over two hours each. So,
I'm not going to go through all of them.
I I'd rather the listeners and viewers
go back watch all of them because we go
through we trace the path from ITP which
is interface theory of perception to
conscious realism conscious ages theory
we go into the observer so there's hours
worth of content if anyone wants to
watch it please do and there's two
lectures on the channel do we see
reality as it is the other on spacetime
and its headset so enough content to go
watch enjoy come back promise it will be
worth it don since the last time we
spoke which is two years ago which is
crazy you've You've been revisiting the
framework. What has actually changed in
your own thinking in the last two years?
And what updates and clarifications do
you feel have been most significant to
you?
&gt;&gt; We do have some pretty interesting
clarifications and updates just in the
last year which are are are mind-blowing
to me. I didn't it's something I've been
looking for for a long time, but to have
it actually pop out in the last year and
a half is is pretty amazing. So, I'll be
happy to talk about that. the sort of
the background ideas that we need to
talk about this update is is before I've
talked about the notion of conscious
agents and how you know a conscious
agent it's a it's a formal and you know
mathematical thing that we using marov
chains and marov kernels and so forth
but but the intuition is that a
conscious a conscious agent has
experiences like the taste of chocolate
the smell of garlic the color seeing the
color red so it has a a repertoire of
conscious experiences for humans it's in
the trillions we trillions of
experiences that that we could have
based on the an experience we can then
choose what decide what action we want
to take. So we would we might have a
repertoire of things we might do and we
have to decide among them and then once
we've decided we act and in in our model
what we're acting on is not a physical
world but essentially a social network
of other conscious agents. So it's one
big social network
like you see in all social networks on
the internet. Um but we were having this
idea before the internet. Social
networks were a big thing. So so then
the the other agents in the network also
get they they are influenced. They get
experiences based on what I do to them
and they make their own decisions. They
they send out uh their responses and I
get uh perceptual influences based on
them. So, so it's it's a a passing of
experiences basically and and
interactions of experiences among
conscious agents. So, it's a vast social
network tweeting and following kind of
thing, right?
So,
that is it's all mathematical. It's each
agent has a repertoire of of experiences
which you can write down as what we call
a measurable space in mathematics.
Measurable space. So you can talk about
probabilities of having various
experiences and then the mark of
dynamics basically says if I have this
particular experience what's the
probability that I will take decide to
have that action for example so you it's
just a bunch of conditional
probabilities arranged in a matrix but
there's a nice mathematical I mean it's
it's a very highly developed um ma
branch of mathematics the theory of
markup chains and that's what we're what
we're using but the intuitions are very
very simple if I have this experience
What's the probability that I'll take
take this action? That kind of thing.
Well,
so one question that comes up in all of
this is, okay, you got this nice stuff
about all these consciousnesses, but we
do have a space and time physical world
around us, or so it seems. So,
how are you going to make predictions
that we can test in this space and time
physical world? For for example, you
have this nice theory of conscious
agents, but um can you actually show how
we get um Einstein's special theory of
relativity out of it? Can you show how
we get general relativity? Can you
explain where quantum theory comes from?
In other words, it's it's
theories of consciousness are a dime a
dozen. We've had theories of
consciousness going back thousands of
years.
Have any of them ever given us
a prediction for example that they can
show you how Einstein's special or
general theories of relativity come out?
No. Nothing. There's nothing on the
table there. So on on this so there's
been spiritual ideas like this for
literally thousands of years. But from
the scientist point of view now of
course in their own turf this the
spiritual things are making great
contributions and and it's about human
you know development and and self
realization and so forth but ultimately
you know scientists want to say you know
where where's the beef in terms of
empirical predictions give me spaceime
give me Einstein spacetime in particular
and and there's nothing on the table
there right there's not a single paper
that says here's my theory of
consciousness and here's precisely how
you get um manowski
there's nothing. And and of course,
conversely,
as we've talked about before, there are
many many physicalist theories that are
trying to understand consciousness. And
these have been around for for quite a
while, too. But what's interesting there
is if you ask all these physicalist
theories and and I'm good friends and
colleagues with most of the players who
who are doing this, and they're
brilliant. They are they're very very
smart people. But if you know if you ask
them and I I do in in conferences so
what specific conscious experience does
your theory predict like the taste of
mint or the smell of garlic or whatever
it might be I want you you have a
mathematical theory of consciousness
great what is the mathematical model for
example in integrated information theory
that you know what's the um the marov
kernel and actually they use marov
matrices as well in a different way they
use them to describe the causal cause
and effect structure that they claim is
what's required to a maximally
integrated cause effect structure that
will be um identical to the the
conscious experience. So great. So it's
very very specific for each conscious
experience there's going to be a markov
matrix which has the the maximally
integrated cause structure. So give me
one. And I I I Stuart Hammer knows well
well not I mean Kristoff Co and and um
and and
others Tenoni and so forth who who
and others Tenoni and so forth who who
are working on this will you know they
know I'm going to ask them that question
if we're ever together on stage and and
and right now they they'll sometimes say
we can do something about space but but
I'm talking about a specific conscious
experience like mint or color red and
there's nothing on the
And and it's not because they're not
trying. They are and they're very very
smart. It's just it can't be done. It's
actually a principled problem. So So I'm
just saying that to say that both sides
have issues here. On the spiritual side,
we're saying consciousness is first.
They've been around for thousands of
years and no one's put anything on the
table in terms of like spacetime. Give
me manowski space. But on the other
side, the physicists haven't been able
to put anything on the table in terms of
real conscious experiences. So we're
it's really it's amazing. here it is
2025
and neither side has put any points on
the board and and the physicists will
say well that's not fair you know we we
have these neural coralates of
consciousness and we can we can talk
about that um I I I think that those
aren't even points on the board either
so but we we can we can get into that
later but in terms of the theory of
conscious agents the new the new thing
that's come out is
a way to connect with spacetime that I
hadn't seen before
and it's something that I call the trace
logic. What what I noticed
about a year and a half ago and I've
been working on these Markoff chains for
45 years.
So, so, so quite a while. And and Marov
chains have been around since 1906 when
guy named Marov first sort of invented
them.
But I noticed something about them
that's that hadn't been noticed before
that there's a logic that relates all
Markoff chains, all Markoff kernels, all
these matrices. And it's it's based on
on an operation that's very well known.
I didn't invent this operation. It's
it's called the trace. So if I have a
big
I I'll give a concrete example like a
markoff chain that's that's just on
three colors, red, green, and blue. And
it it all it tells you it's very very
simple. If if if you're seeing red now,
what's the probability that you'll see
red at the next instant or green or
blue? That's all. And then if you're
seeing green now, what's the probability
you'll see green next or red or blue. So
you can see it's just very very simple.
It's just saying there's three colors
and for each color you have a
probability of either seeing the same
color next or one of the other two
colors. And so you get a what's called a
3x3 matrix. the row, you know, the first
row says all the probably I'll see red
next, green next or blue next. And so
that's very very easy.
Now suppose that
I'm watching a reds and greens and blues
that are coming up and they're governed
by a particular matrix. So it's a
particular 3x3 matrix that's governing
the probabilities. But now suppose that
I I don't get to see the the blues for
some reason. I put on a pair of glasses
that doesn't let me see blue, for
example. All I see is red and green.
Well, I'm going to see a pattern of
reds. Sometimes red goes to red,
sometimes red goes to green. And there's
going to be a probability there. So I'll
get a effectively a 2x2 matrix that
describes what I'm seeing. But that 2x
two matrix is of course entirely
determined by the big 3x3 which is
governing the red, green and blue.
Right? The red, green and blue is what
is the real dynamics that's going on. I
can only see the red and green part but
the is controlled by the bigger matrix.
Right? So that little matrix that I get
just on red and green is called a trace.
So that so that's called the trace. So
for any big matrix I can look at any
subset of its states like take red,
green, blue and yellow. I can just trace
onto red green or blue and yellow or red
and yellow. There's all all sorts of
combin I can take a trace on any subset
that I want to. So very very you know
simple idea but theiite the nice thing
is it's it's in general unique. There's
you give me a big matrix and you tell me
which states you're interested in right
like red green I don't care about the
blue and yellow and then I will give you
the matrix for the red and green and it
will be unique and it will be determined
by the bitcoin. That's the trace. So
simple idea the it turns out the math is
not trivial to to actually compute the
trace is non-trivial it's um but the
idea is very very simple well what I
noticed was the trace gives you a logic
on the space of all markov chains
that means I can by logic I mean I can
tell you how to take two matrices and
ask can they be combined if so what is
their what is their or so you in logic
we can talk about um ands and ors and
implication right so you might say it's
raining today and it'll be sunny this a
tomorrow that would be an and I could
say it's rainy today or it will be sunny
tomorrow there you can talk about ands
and ors and so forth or I could say um
you know if if I eat this then I will be
full in half an hour right So you can
talk about implication. So this is just
standard logical notions of andor and
implication and also negation. Um we can
say you know if it's raining today right
now then it's not sunny right now.
Right? So so it turns out you can give
the same kinds of logical things for
marov for entire marov kernels all these
matrices. So I can say when does one
marov kernel imply another? Well, when
when it's a trace. So the red green ma
matrix that's a trace of the red green
blue
in my logic what I call the trace logic
implies the the larger it entails the
larger
it also. So the logic tells you how to
take the conjunction and the disjunction
of matrices and the implication and so
forth. So it so it gives you a a big
logic. the logic is is
complicated. It turns out some of the
more simple kinds of logics that we know
are called boolean logics. Um, and in in
Boolean logics, they're the they're the
simplest. They they have the property
that you can, you know,
have the distributive property and so
forth. They're they're they're the
logics that that I I won't go into them
in great detail, but I'll say they're
the logics that everybody's intuitions
sort of square with. It turns out that
the this trace logic
is non-bullan
and it's comp it's complicated.
But if you take if you give me one
matrix and say look at all of the
submatrices all the traces of it they do
form a boolean logic. So, so you have
all these interesting local boolean
logics throughout,
but the
global thing is not now. So, you might
say, well, you this is starting to get
boring, but this is just mathematics.
But here, so there's one one more little
bit of mathematics and then I'll make
the connection, which is quite
interesting. So, so far it's quite
simple. The notion of the trace is very
very simple idea. the fact that okay
there there's this logic and you just
trust me that it gives you a way of
combining you know two traces to make a
bigger a bigger matrix when they're
compatible sometimes they're not
compatible so you can't combine them and
you can also take two matrices and find
their intersection which is their and so
you you so and
there's one one more thing that we do
with the matrices and that time that is
we add a counter
So this is standard in Markoff chains.
Um is called they actually call them
space-time Markoff chains. I'll I'll
call them enhanced Markoff chains
because I'm going to talk about
spacetime in the physics sense. So there
there's a notion of space-time markoff
chains that it's not about normal
spacetime. It's about the technical
thing in Markoff chains. So I'll call
this enhance. So every time I get like
in my red, green, and blue, every time I
get a new color, my counter will just
increment. So I can start with zero. Now
I see red. Okay, that's one. Oh, now I
see blue. Okay, two. Now I'm back to
red. That's three. So, I just every time
I get a new color or or if I see, you
know, the same color reappears, then my
counter increments. That's pretty
It's as simple as it sounds. I'm not
making anything. So, that's called an
enhanced markoff chain. You add a
counter.
Now, what's here's what's here's the
interesting thing that anybody can see.
It took me a year to see it, but once I
say it to you, it'll be just obvious.
Look at the red, green, and blue case.
Every time I get a red, green, or blue,
my counter increments, right? But what
if I can only see red and green? I can't
see the blue. Well, then I'm not going
to get my counter incrementing. When the
big guy sees blue, I don't see blue. So,
my counter doesn't increment, and his
does, right? So, my counter, the trace
counter, isn't incrementing as fast as
the bigger counter.
And
so after about a year after I discovered
the trace logic and by the way I should
say when I say I discovered it um it's
it became apparent to me that it
probably was a logic and then I went to
my mathematician friend and collaborator
Chayan Pash who I've worked with since
1985 and I said to Chaitton I you know I
think this this is a logic you know is a
partial technically we call it a partial
order. So the trace gives you a partial
order instead of all markup chains. And
he said, "Nah, it's too pretty to be
true." I said, "Well, you know, check it
out." And he did and and he proved it.
So he it's it it he proved that it it's
it's a logic and we're we're we've got
the proof, you know, written up and
we're we're writing a paper to to to
publish it. So So
that's an interesting thing. So the
trace then the counter isn't going as
fast on the trace. The red green misses
the blue. So the red green blue counter
is counting blues and the red green
counter is not counting the blues. So I
I thought to myself, okay,
that sounds like time dilation. One of
the weird things about Einstein's
special theory of relativity is Einstein
says if
I'm sitting here and you're on a train
and your train is going past me and I
look at your clock, I'm going to see
that your clock is ticking slower than
my clock. But you on the train, if
you're looking at me, you're you're
going by and I'm I'm sitting here. You
look at my clock and you'll say that my
clock is going slower. So I think your
clock is going slower. you think my
clock is going slower. That's bizarre,
right? I mean, it's like that's not that
doesn't seem right, but but Einstein's
right and that's been checked. And then
if you're holding a meter stick on the
train and and you're pointing it in the
direction that the train is going and
I'm holding a meter stick as well, I if
I look at your meter stick, I'm going to
say your meter stick is short. It's not
it's not a full meter. But you'll look
at my meter stick and you'll say the
same thing. No, Hoffman meter stick is
short. It's not a full meter.
So
I thought, well, so I'm getting this
time is going
slower on the trace in the sense that
for for three clicks of the red, green,
and blue on average, I'm only getting
two clicks. So my clock is clicking at a
slower rate.
I said, now could that be Einstein's
could that be related to Einstein? And I
nah, but I would be a fool not to just
check it out. So I checked it out and
I couldn't see any obstruction. But
okay, then the next question was, what
about that meter stick? What what is the
notion of length?
And and it turns out just in 2017
Markoff theorists gave us a nice clean
way to talk about the distance between
the states of a Markoff chain. So like
the what's the difference between the
red and the blue in the Markoff chain.
It turns out that there's a canonical
way to do it. It's and it has to do with
something called the commute time and
it's very simple. What is the how many
steps on average
will it take to get from the red say to
the green and then back to the red
that's the called the commute time
between red and green so I start with
red what's the how long will it take me
on average you know how many steps of
the markup chain before I get to green
and then back to red
and that's sort of a notion of a
distance if it takes you long more steps
then you're in some sense
further away from each other, right?
Intuitively. And what what the
mathematicians um Doyle and Steiner, so
they they're the mathematicians who who
discovered they they showed that the
the right formula is that the commute
time is the square of the uklidian
distance. So it's not the distance
directly, it's the distance squared.
So the so so here we have it. So I have
a time counter that's just in your face
and it and it does dilate like you know
and now there's this length
measure which is the commute time and so
the question was in Einstein's theory of
special relativity they have to be the
same right the contraction rate for
they're both related by what's called
the Lorren factor so so it has to be the
same now in in general relativity it's
not you know you with curve space but
for special I need them to be the same
so I asked myself so is there a class of
markoff chains for which these are the
same and there is and it's the some
something called an end cycle and so an
end cycle would be um the kind of thing
you see in a traffic light a real
traffic light with red green and yellow
no blue red green and yellow so what you
red if you if you see red now the next
thing you'll see is green and if you see
green, the next thing you see is yellow,
yellow, and then red. So, it goes in a
cycle. It's those kind of chains where
there's for one state, you go only to
one new state, the same one all the
time, and that always goes to the same
new state. So, you cycle.
So, those have the right Lorent
contraction,
the same as the um as the time
contraction.
But what's interesting is so so so
now I've been working uh on this. It
looks to me like I can now embed these
end cycles into
it looks like I can boot up manowski
space entirely from them. So, so
we we haven't proven the theorems.
You're not done until you're done. But,
but I see no obstruction. Looks it looks
to me I would say 99.99%
now that you can we can build menowski
space in the limit as the is the number
of elements in your n cycle goes to
infinity. So, this is a big traffic
light right lot of different you know
colors in it. But as that goes to
infinity um you can embed it on a Taurus
B a Taurus on a circle but in in three
dimensions it would be a Taurus and
you'd have to embed three of these end
cycles and you have to have cross links
between them. There's some technical
things but it looks like in the end it
converges
um in the
Lorenzian Gromov housef
uh sense it it converges to manowski
space. So there's a lot of technical
stuff I won't go into there but it it
looks looks good to me. So that that's
stunning. But what's also interesting is
the Doyle and Steiner result says that
the commute time distance is not a
distance, it's a distance squared. So
that means that the
the distance itself is the square root
that so if I'm going to think talk about
spacetime you know manowsky spacetime
that distance has to be the square root
of this marovian commute time that's
outside of spacetime
and when you take a square root there's
there's not one answer there's two plus
and minus you can you know like the
square root of four is not just two it's
also minus two because minus 2^2 is also
four. So, so that means that if I start
off with this
marov dynamics outside of spacetime
and I'm I'm forced to say that there are
two different kinds of spacetimes that I
can create. One in which time is going
in a positive direction and one in which
time and and distances are are have the
opposite sign.
Well, that's parody in time symmetry.
That's that's a big symmetry in physics.
So, it's so I mean, and that was just I
I'm not even trying. This is I'm for
it's all forced on me. So,
I was stunned. It it it it seems like
it's just falling right out. So, now
what we're working on
is
um general relativity.
Uh so there
first first thing I should point out is
that there are a lot of different kinds
of marov matrices
the the n cycles are the only ones that
make minkowski space
and so it means that there's 0% 0% of
the marov matrices that are available to
me in this theory of consciousness are
required to make Einstein's special
relativistic spacetime 0% of
And my guess is that when I go to the
general relativistic case where now
you're going to have curved space times
not flat space times there'll be a
larger class of markup matrices that
once again we'll have the time dilations
because you'll have you know traces
change the counters and they also change
the commute times but now they change
them in different ways. They don't have
to be in sync with each other and that
the that will then lead to um
in the sync that in the sense that that
there's not going to be some global
you at every point in spaceime in some
sense in Manowski space everything's the
same. It's all flat. But in curved
spacetime locally in some sense the time
is going faster here and and slower
there and distances are in some sense
shorter here and longer there and so
forth.
So so that's going to require matrices
that are not just you know end cycles
are going to be more complicated.
But again, I think it's going to be 0%
of
a bigger 0% but but still 0% of all the
the Markov matrices that that are
available to me in the theory of
consciousness which which means and ones
that that won't fit for example are are
weird ones that to us seem weird.
They're so-called expander graph. They
have expander graphs and pinsler met
metrics. It's sort of complicated stuff,
but but there but there's a whole class
of these matrices that just won't fit
into Einsteinian um curved spacetime,
which means as I expected that
spacetime, even curved spacetime is just
one of a an infinite class of headsets
that consciousness can use. So I'm
thinking about space and time not as
fundamental. They're they're just
consciousness has a huge range of
headsets available to it and manowsky
space and and Einstein's curved space
are are just you know I I think actually
probably some of the simpler headsets
that are available there's only three
dimensions of space one dimension of
time there's absolutely no reason why I
couldn't have a thousand dimensions of
space there's just no reason
so so it's it does I I was surprised
Okay. So, it looks like it's all all
fitting together in this way. So,
of course, now there's lots of specific
questions that have to be to be
answered, right?
But it looks like we're about to put one
point on the board for the consciousness
first theories, which is Manowski space.
and and that that that'll be, you know,
so when we I I was working with Chayon
on this and we were looking through the
math and he was trying to raise
objections and we you know they they all
work out. So of course it's not it's not
real until you publish it and so we're
we're working on it. So I won't say that
we're done but but I will say I would
bet good money right now on the Macsky
space. Now there's lots of hard work to
do ahead on the curved um and I'm doing
my homework. you know, I'm a cognitive
scientist, so this is, you know, um, a
little bit of a, you know, a learn for
me to to move into general relativity
and really master it to the point where
we can do this. But, you know, hey, it's
worth it. This is what what has to be
done. Then there's the issue of quantum
mechanics,
right?
So,
it's not enough to put Einstein's
special and general theories on the
board. Ultimately we need to get
Schroinger's equation for example and
then we need to understand how they
relate right in other words quantum
gravity kinds of stuff. So it turns out
now this part isn't new. This is
something that Chayon discovered um and
we published in 2014. So I think we I
might have mentioned it earlier in
podcast
that when you look at the Markoff chains
each markoff chain is saying as as we
discussed if it's red now what's
probably be green next or or yellow
next. So, it's sort of giving you a
stepby-step plotting description, but
you could also think about that as, you
know, is telling you about the different
frames of a movie. But what if you step
back and you look at the whole movie
sort of at a higher speed? So, you look
at the sort of long-term behavior. Like
if you look at a traffic light, you
would see red, green, yellow just
circling really, really fast, right? You
that would be the movie instead of just
seeing, oh, now it's red. Oh, now I'm
waiting. I'm bored. Now, you see a
movie. So that's that's the the what's
called the asmtoic behavior in the mark
of you're looking at the at the movie at
sort of a fast rate that's the asmtoic
behavior and when you do that there's
mathematics that you can use to describe
the asmtoics
and that mathematics it turns out showed
so this is not me this is Chayan Pash
the mathematician I'm not a
mathematician I'm a wannabe
jayon proved or showed that um The
functions that describe the asmtoic
behavior of markov chains they're called
harmonic functions and these are for the
enhanced markoff chains where where you
have a time counter. You have to keep
the the you're keeping track of the time
counter as well. Their long-term
behavior is described by exactly the
same mathematics as the wave functions
of free particles in quantum mechanics.
Exactly. So we have an immediate
connection between free particles
in quantum mechanics with their wave
literally their wave functions with all
the complex values. So it turns out the
markoff chains are all real. Yeah, every
step is a real deal. I didn't talk
about, you know, imaginary numbers any
at any time until just now. When you
look at the long-term behavior, that's
when you get imaginary numbers
coming up. That's just the way you
describe the the long-term behavior
because it now starts to get periodic
kinds of things. Long term, you start to
see periodicities and that's modeled by
these imaginaries.
So, so that's one connection that we
published in 2014. So, that that's been
out for 11 years. So that's that's not
new and and it's not been contradicted.
So that is that is one clean connection.
There's another connection that this is
now speculative.
Um but I've looked at it enough to think
that this is I I'll I'll put 50/50 on
this speculation. I think that
there's another even deeper way that
quantum mechanics is connected with this
trace logic of of
conscious agent dynamics.
And that is when you
one way to think about the trace
is that when you take a trace,
you're hiding
part of reality. like when when I saw
the the traffic light red yellow and
green
and that's what's really going on say in
this but now I can only see red and
green so I'm missing part of I'm missing
the yellow part of reality so that
that's so
I'm hiding it so so you can think about
tracing as hiding some of reality
and I
it looks like there's this whole branch
of mathematics
that
involves geometric algebra and something
called barisen integrals. B e r e z i n
integrals. And it looks like this
process of hiding states that the trace
does
can can be represented very very nicely
with geometric algebra. But it can also
be represented with
the compra compressed form of the
imaginaries of quantum mechanics. So it
looks like we will get the the complex
amplitudes coming out not just for the
um
long-term behavior but also just as a
consequence of the tracing process
itself. So that that that the what
quantum mechanics. So if this is right
and so this one again I'm only putting
50/50 the the the the long-term behavior
100%. That's published. It's been out
for 11 years. No one has said we're
wrong. So so that connection with
quantum mechanics is strong. The trace
stuff I'm telling you is is true. Time
does dilate. Lengths do contract. That
that is absolutely true. And that
mathematics is is well established.
The embedding of this stuff into
Manowski space hasn't been published. So
in some sense it's not real until it's
published. Um but Shayton hasn't been
able to find anything wrong with it. And
um but of course you so I I'll say I'm
I'm 90 plus% on that. And then general
relativity I I'm convinced we'll be able
to do it but I don't have the answer
yet. Right. And then I'm thinking we're
we we'll get a very interesting new
interpretation of where the complex
numbers are coming in in in in
quantum mechanics and and generalizing
that.
Now now this also gives us a new way of
thinking about the big bang,
right? So,
so you can see all the the the the key
has been we've had the conscious agent
stuff for for a long time. Actually,
Jayton and I with a mathematician named
Bruce Bennett published our original
version of the conscious agent formalism
in a book we called that's called
observer mechanics. So that was 1989 we
published. So, we've been at this for a
while. And basically, the conscious
agent formalism is is a simplification
of what we did in observer mechanics.
That was that's a nasty math book. Um Um
So, so this is but so I've been at it
for a long time. But the trace logic, if
we just seen the trace logic back then,
we could have blown this whole thing
wide open back in 1989. It was it was
the the trace logic that seems to me is
is the the because markup chains have
been around for a long long time but the
trace logic um the trace has been around
for a long time. Daniel Ravuz's book
Markov chains has it and that's 1984 or
something like that and it was known
well before that. So that's not new, but
but the trace logic is. So So here's the
here's the the connection now with with
um
with the big bang and cosmology.
The weird thing about
the big bang is it starts
with nothing,
right? And then and and then spacetime
starts to expand. And you know the best
model we have right now is that it's
it's accelerated. There's been some back
and forth just in the last couple weeks
about well maybe it's not ex maybe the
acceleration is slowing down and and it
it I think the the jury is out on that.
Right. Right. So right now this the the
model that the Nobel Prize winning
result is that it's accelerating and
there's something called dark energy. We
don't know what it is. Um, and then
there's some new, you know, the type 1A
supernovas may not be the quite the
standard candle that we thought they
were. There's there's a big debate going
on about that right now. But anyway, the
there's no doubt the universe is
expanding. There's doubt whether it's
accelerating or or maybe slowing down
the expansion or not, but it started.
No, no one's doubting there's a big bang
and it and it and it grew and you know,
how did it grow? What what is what is
the energy that's making it grow? And
there's all sorts of dark dark matter,
too. Stuff that's making galaxies behave
ways that with matter we can't see. So,
it's it's amazing that most of reality
is dark energy and dark matter, and we
don't know what it is. What we know is
it is is a tiny bit. You know, I forgot
what percent, but it's a very very small
percent of of what's out there.
So, so what's going on and what is the
nature of this dark energy?
So
we have a way of thinking about
cosmology that's entirely different
using the marov stuff in the conscious
agents and and that's the following.
Suppose I have a marov
matrix and it says you know here's the
probabilities of of if it's red now
you'll see green next or red yellow or
yes so red green or yellow just to do
the traffic light that everybody knows a
traffic light. Well, so I can then say,
okay, um, let me just run that matrix.
Let me just, you know, start sampling
according to M. So what's what's the
first, oh, now I see yellow. And this is
not a good traffic light. So things can
happen randomly. So So now I see yellow.
Now I see green. Now I see red. So I can
just write down a sample of, you know,
it was red, red, red, green, green,
yellow, yellow, red, green, yellow. So I
just look at the sample that I get. And
so this is what we call a sampled trace
chain. So it's it's it's a trace and
it's a a sample trace.
So now as I look at that sample
I can say suppose that's that's all I
see is just the sample I'm just red
green so I'm trying to now estimate what
is the matrix what is the mark of matrix
that's that's governing this whole thing
right so I I see maybe I only see red
and yellow for a while so I only get a
matrix with red and yellow so it's only
a 2x2 matrix then all of a sudden I see
green I go oh no I have to my matrix has
to now be a three you know a 3x3 I have
to get the green in there. And so I
start and as I get more more colors that
I see now, suppose I can see purple and
blue and brown and and orange and so
forth. My my matrix is getting bigger
and bigger. Now notice what's happening.
The commute times between states, it's
going to take longer. First, when it was
just say red, all I saw and red was the
only color. I have a one by one matrix
and it's only red and so the commute
time is zero because red is already at
it's already to itself. So my my
distance is zero. So I I have my big
bang and the first step in it is zero
distance by the the rule that the
commute time is the square of the
uklidian distance. Right? That's that's
the rule. So so plus and minus 0 are the
answers to the square root of zero. uh
and and that's but now when I have two
red and red and green suppose I get a
cycle just just for one concrete case so
red goes to green green goes back to red
so the cycle time from red to green is
that's one step and then green back to
red is is two so the ex the commute time
in fact is just two so now my universe
has a radius of square root of two plus
and minus square root of two so notice
I'm I'm making two universes There's one
universe where the distance is plus
&lt;unk&gt;2. the other universes which is
minus square root of two and and then
when I get to red green and blue say
now if it's a cycle if I get to a cycle
then all of a sudden it it's going to be
it takes red to green to blue that's two
steps and then blue goes right back to
red that's one step so it's three so so
that's the commute time is three if it's
a cycle and that means now my universe
is not the square roo of two it's the
square root of three so I went from 1.4
4 to 1.7 and and and and so you can see
my universe
is expanding. So as the as my sample
increases the commute times are going up
as the time as the time counter goes up.
So so now now the interesting thing is
it's it's a very clean problem. I need
to find a master matrix. pick a master
matrix
who's such that when I take a generic
sample. So I mean because you could
start your sample any way you want to
and just and and then look at so you can
look at a typical sample from from that
ma matrix
and it should give me
an evolution that matches what we have
measured um in our universe
and I I'm not saying that every matrix
will do this no almost no matrix will do
it but there will be one that does and
that's our matrix or that's our class of
matrices but there's an infinite class
of other matrices. So our universe is
not the universe is not in the sense of
the whole thing. Ours is one little one
little headset out of an infinite number
of headsets. So, so that's going to be
what we have to do is to show that we
can put out a matrix which does give us
the evolution that we we see, you know,
inflation and and and uh all all all
the different phases of of the big bang.
So, that's that's a big project. And so,
I mean, I'm going to have to learn some
cos, you know, eventually, you know, I
just have to find some collaborators who
are real real cosmologists. Um and and
we're we're we're we have some
we have some leads. So we're going to
try to get some collaboration with real
cosmologists on this kind of thing.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think so.
&gt;&gt; Sorry, Don. Continue.
&gt;&gt; So, I'll just quick a quick quick
summary is just to say
&gt;&gt; No, no, take your time. Don't worry.
This is exactly what you need to do. I
think it's best to get your ideas out
there. If any cosmologist is watching,
this is the perfect time for them to
jump on.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So, I'd love to have a
cosmologist jump in and help us with
this because there's a lot of details in
cosmology, but the the idea that that as
we take a sample from a matrix and we
estimate a maximum likelihood estimate
of a of a Markov matrix that would give
rise to the sample, for example, then
those matrices themselves will
have
they will model a certain geometry and
we can see how that geometry evolves as
the matrices as the sample increases. So
my sample is increasing. The matrices
are growing in size. They're growing in
therefore in the geometries that that
come out from this commute time metric.
Uh the square root of the commute time.
So I'm getting actually two universes
branching out from one initial point. So
I'm getting at least
um
time symmetry
and and and and space symmetry charge is
an interesting thing. I I think that
charge will also come out of this. I one
way but here here I'm not I'm not
expert. So so what I'm about to say is
now I'm speaking quite amateur but I
believe that they sometimes will say
that you know a posetron is electron
moving backward in time.
So if if that's the case we may I think
we won't have any trouble getting
antimatter effectively and and getting
charge conjugation. So we'll we'll but
of course that I'll put this out there
as you know for someone who actually
knows better you know come collaborate
with us and and and and help us on this
but I think that that's going to be the
the case. So so it's it's remarkable
that
this trace logic
was the missing key. I've been at it for
45 years. The trace logic was the
missing key. But now here's the
interesting thing about it.
Wheeler, John Wheeler in was is very
very famous for talking about we need to
have some kind of notion of observer
participant participators and that
somehow the universe is made up of all
the interactions of observer
participators and that the very act of
observation
is somehow important in creating what
what we observe. And and by the way, his
his 1989 paper, the it it from bit paper
cites my book with Jayon and Bruce
observer mechanics. He so he cites he
cites our our book in his paper on the
it from
bit stuff.
So he was aware of our of our work
there. But but we didn't have the trace
logic. We had the notion of a bunch of
agents interacting to create spaceime,
but we didn't have the trace logic to
but now the trace logic is really
confirming Wheeler's point of view that
that
it's
it's a coherent
well at least for this
boolean sublogic if I take one big
matrix the boolean sublo is a nice
coherent
interaction of these observers is is
really quite quite beautiful. And
the other aspect of it is it it means
that there are infinite number of other
in some sense distinct universes
because in the trace logic you can go to
an infinite number of states. the the
Markov chain could have an infinite
number of states that it's it's
operating on infinite number of
experiences. So red, green, blue, off to
infinity, you know, hot, cold,
smells, taste, colors, things we can't
even an infinite number of experiences
and there could be an infinite number of
markoff chains at at infinity. an
infinite number for each one of them
there's a boolean sublogic
but the between them they're
incompatible right there there's be
almost no connection between them so
when when we so this is the model of
consciousness is coming out the model
and by the way I
I agree with the spiritual traditions
that
the ultimate nature of consciousness
whatever it is transcends s mathematics
and it transcends science. I I
completely agree with that.
But that doesn't mean we shouldn't do
mathematics and science. We we should we
should go as far as we can with the math
and science. But but our attitude should
be quite quite humble in in the sense
that no matter if we had a billion
Einsteins working for a billion years,
we would still have 0% of reality.
That's that's that's the name of the
game. Literally 0% of reality. And yet
consciousness for whatever reason has
chosen to be here with mathematics
looking at itself through mathematical
lens. And there's there's some reason
for that. So I'm not going to dismiss
that either. So so it's it's very
interesting to say to there's two big
errors. One error is to say we're close
to a theory of everything. mathematics
is going to give us the final truth.
That that's a big error. That that's
that's
hubristic and and and and and wrong. The
other error is to say there's no point.
Consciousness transcends mathematics.
Just sit back, don't do any mathematics.
That's I think both both there's
something in the middle. And and the
fact that we're able to you you're in
South Africa, I believe, and I'm in
California. We're talking via Zoom. This
is magic, right? What we're doing is is
and and to anybody say a century ago,
this would be indistinguishable or say
two centuries ago, indistinguishable
from magic.
But we're able to do it because we, you
know, Maxwell wrote down some equations
and then other people worked on them and
and these equations are not the final
theory of everything, but they're not
pointless. We're doing Zoom because of
Maxwell's equations. So that's what
that's the reality we're in. Absolutely.
Maxwell's equations and our current
mathematics are not the theory of
everything. And yet you write down any
other system of equations, we're not
going to do Zoom with those equations.
We're going to do Zoom with these
equations and and our current theory and
and and so there's something our
mathematics and our science isn't a
theory of everything. But what is
important is is it more or less accurate
depiction of this perspective
on on reality this perspective of the
one consciousness. So this mathematics
won't hold for another perspective. So
as we if we change headsets now
Maxwell's equations may no longer hold.
We'll have to have a new set of
mathematics. So there's an infinite
number of
mathematical frameworks for an infinite
number of different headsets that that
we'll probably be inter interacting
with. So and again I'm I'm I'm talking
way over my pay grade, but you know,
someone has to do it. We have to it's
really hard here. We're, you know,
there's almost no one who's qualified
because it's such so many different
factors here and so so much going on
there. But I think we have to avoid both
problems. We're close to a theory of
everything.
it's only trivial stuff left over versus
there's no point in doing anything
because the one transcends anything that
we could possibly talk about. I think
both are mistaken.
Um and something in the middle good
science with proper humility seems to be
the the path. Um
&gt;&gt; yeah, Don, I think
&gt;&gt; I feel like it's been watching it from
the outside. It's almost like you're
getting access to all this new
information during your search. I mean
this when you think about the trace
logic it reminds me of the time many
years ago when you first sat down looked
at reality took evolutionary game theory
and and and you you guys did the
calculation and suddenly this where you
sat there and thought okay we're not
seeing reality as it is this sounds very
similar to me do you feel like it was a
similar experience when you guys um
figured this out
it it it I had to sit down when when I
when I first had the idea it it it was
like a thunderbolt from in the blue.
This was like, could this I mean, could
this be? And when I just did my first
little looking at it and and it wasn't
just crumbling, I got pretty excited
and and and then when I saw the Doyle
and Steiner paper because I then I
started looking. I go, okay, I got to
find who who's done how do you get
distances in Markoff chains? I had to
look that up. And if I'd done this work
in 2016, I would have been stuck because
Doyle and Steiner hadn't done their
work. And I am not qualified to do what
Doyle and Steiner did. They they that
that was technical mathematical work.
Hoffman couldn't do it. No way. So, so I
couldn't have done this before. They
that that result wasn't there. So, it
only came just a few years before
I could. But it came when when I saw
Doyle and Steiner's
commute time is the square of the
distance and I saw that that would work
for N cycles. That's when I just began
to say, "This this looks real, and this
is I've been at this for 45 years, and
it it finally cracked. I mean, I I just
I thought I didn't know if I was ever
going to get it, but it it finally
cracked open here in a way that I'd
never imagined."
And it really taps into
a couple a couple interesting things.
One is, you know, it goes all the way
back to Linets. Lineness talked about a
pre-established harmony. A bunch of
monads
interacting according to a
pre-established harmony.
And
of course, Livveness was a genius. He'd
run circles around me. He'd take what
I'm doing right now and tell me exactly
where I'm wrong and how I'm stupid and
how I could immediately turn this into a
much more rich frequency. So if Leness
were around, I would just say what what
should we do next? But but but I think
that he he would say,
"Yeah, this is like, you know, the the
traces are like my monads and the the
master matrix is like the
pre-established harmony because it once
you spell the master out, all of the
traces are defined in at least in the
boolean sublogic, right? that boolean
sublogic is defined. But then there's an
infinite number of these boolean
sublogics which may or may not have the
question of whether you could find
connections between these separate
boolean sublogics. I don't know yet.
I don't there there may be but I don't
so that's that's above my pay grade
right now. That's that's an interesting
question but so it connects with with
livveness enough. I think it's um
that livveness would probably like this.
He'd probably then show me exactly where
it's uh coming short and he would run
with it and I wouldn't be able to keep
up. Um but this this is also
interesting. It it's related to stuff
that's coming up in quantum physics
where where physicists like like Wheeler
said we need to have a theory of the
observer participant somehow. That's
really really critical and Frank Wilchek
has has said the same thing. We need to
get a formalism
of of what is in observer and even um
well I won't say even but also in for
philosophers in the foundations of
physics they're now when they're trying
to understand quantum gravity and how
how to get um
get it to work. the fact that um
the mathematics there you know you know
Einstein's theory of of gravity um is a
local gauge theory so that means that
you can make local gauge transformations
and and the physical content doesn't
change and that that makes asking what's
what's
the role of the observer becomes really
interesting because
the the field
the fields in quant in general
relativity
So you have values of a field at every
point in space. In some sense that's not
observable because it's not physically
real. A gauge transformation could
change all those numbers. The physical
content doesn't change but the numbers
have changed. So you're not you're not
perceiving the numbers in the field.
What is the observer and what what are
we doing then? What? What? So th this is
actually not a trivial issue right now
in the foundations of of
physics and and philosophers are are
working on this. uh many many
philosophers are are are working on this
kind of thing
and and
it turns out that the kinds of things
that they're coming up with it this
conscious agent formalism has exactly
the right properties to give you the
kinds of observables that they're
they're independently finding you need
to to deal with the the the local gauge
transformation properties of of of
Einstein's general relativity. So I'm
I'm in fact in in fact I'll be giving a
talk in a couple weeks in with with some
um philosophers
uh at the foundations of of of physics.
So we be talking turkey on this. So
it'll be be a lot of fun. I think
there's a lot of
back and forth that can be really really
valuable there. the stuff they're saying
makes sense to me and the conscious
agent formalism is actually doing what
they say needs to be done. So it's it's
it's it's quite
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I can I can tell Don the
excitement on your face. You can see
that there's something big happening and
you can tell that you
&gt;&gt; that there's almost this um there's this
feeling of
&gt;&gt; just there's there's this this hut in
you. You can tell that something has
happened and clearly this trace logic
has been has changed the way you guys
are perceiving this and and it's almost
like there's an endless possibility
stream here that you that you want to
keep drinking out of
&gt;&gt; that that that that's right and and
what's remarkable about it is that in to
any mathematician in this area it's
simple right this is this is not hard
math like the kind of stuff that you're
dealing in in you loop quantum gravity
and and these other kinds of things or
or
there all sorts of attempts to to to get
a theory of quantum gravity and the math
is is is very very difficult. The the
trace logic is
relatively speaking very very simple.
So, and what's what's been remarkable to
me is in trying to make the connections
with physics.
At every step, I've realized there is
only one option open to me.
This works or the game is over. At every
step, I I've I've realized there's no
there's no wiggle room here. There
there's there's if I can't define this
physical thing in this way, I'm done.
And at every step I go, this is probably
it. Okay, let me let me look. Okay, I'll
probably this will be the end of it. And
at every step, there is one and only one
answer. And it and it and it fits. So it
it doesn't mean there's always going to
work, but but so far it's
if it's not true, it's really leading me
on. Put it that way.
&gt;&gt; I love that. So it's I was saying
earlier I mean it's almost it's like for
some people I mean when they look at
idealism or they take it into the
mystical realm the the spiritual realm
these these revelations are not they're
not coming from a mystical side in your
sense this is a very scientific quest.
This is a very scientific grounded
journey and and and to see this
happening in that way though is still
it's still quite fascinating to see it
happening and it's almost like you're
getting these answers from the universe
itself. So it's it just fits beautifully
and I think there's a poetic nature to
this where a physically grounded
scientist working on something that's
considered to other physics to other
physicists something let's say more
mystical that and I'm I'm personally not
that religious but for me it's I think
it's beautiful to kind of see something
like this happen and it's like a
mystical side to it as well that I think
is quite admirable.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And and and again, you know,
I there may be a hole somewhere and I'll
I'll find out that, you know, I've been
led along by the math, but but you know,
Shayon is a pretty hard-nosed customer.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And um he he hasn't seen anything wrong
yet. So, and when we publish, you know,
the the the connection with quantum
mechanics that I mentioned, the the
harmonic functions and giving us the
quantum wave function free, that's been
published and that's been around. No one
said no on that. Um
&gt;&gt; yeah, Don be looking at so let's before
we move into cuz many of a lot of the
new discoveries have come with this
trace logic and so you guys wrote about
this in 2024. I think you guys already
had a version of this published where
you guys discussed traces of
consciousness, but obviously you guys
have updated and addressed a few more
things. Sorry. Anything you want to add
to that?
&gt;&gt; Well, that that that's you're right. We
have a a traces of conscious paper. It's
we're we're revising it. So, it's we're
still and part one thing that's held it
back is with the trace logic and then
this new connection
with with spacetime
showing that so when we had the trace
logic in the last year, but when we
realized
we can get Manowski space, we thought we
need to put that in in this paper. We if
we can have the trace logic and a
section with that says we can get as as
the n cycles n goes to infinity we get
manowski space no handwave
um lorenian gromov housef convergence is
real and and and and so that that would
be I mean I've been looking to show that
we could get a space-time headset from
consciousness for decades. This would be
our first here's how you get
the foundation of a headset. It's not
the whole headset, but this is the
foundation of a space-time headset and
we can get it. So, I want to put that in
the paper before we get final
publication.
&gt;&gt; So, this is literally a a new discovery
for you guys and something quite
groundbreaking that shifts and changes
everything metaphysically,
philosophically, mathematically. Um,
before I before I ask you specific
questions about that, because I've read
the paper that's that's upcoming and
I've seen the sections you're talking
about, am I allowed to talk about
certain aspects or should we just walk
around?
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; Oh, we can. Okay, cool. Before we dive
into that, Don, something I wanted to
ask you was when you look at your work
over the last few decades, do you feel
that anything when you look back feels
now incomplete, misleading, or need a
conceptual upgrade?
Well,
there is one point that um I think has
confused a lot of people. Um and it's
about our work on evolution by natural
selection and our claim that
we have evolved not to see the truth.
And
people claim that I've made a big
logical error. Me and my team have made
a big logical error. And and the
argument goes like this. So Hoffman,
I'll just put it on me. Hoffman says
that you know he starts with Darwin's
theory of evolution but natural
selection. Darwin's theory says that
there are organisms in space and time
competing for resources in space and
time.
And um Hoffman then uses evolutionary
game theory which is you know John
Maynard Smith's um mathematization of
Darwin's ideas and and he uses that to
to show that he claims that the
probability that we see reality as it is
is zero.
Well, but if the reality of seeing if
the probability is zero that we see
reality as it is, that means the
probability is zero that um organisms in
space and time exist and that that
they're comp that they really are
resources they're competing. In other
words, the whole physicalist framework
of Darwin now is has been falsified. So
I've used Darwin's theory which assumes
physical objects in space and time like
organisms and resources
to prove that the probability is zero
that those things are real. So clearly
Hoffman has no idea how science works.
He you know you shouldn't go shooting
yourself on the foot logically. Um and
and so we shouldn't pay attention to
this stuff. So that's and and I get this
a lot. This is almost the universal
reaction to to that work and not just by
casual observers. It's it's been
published in philosophical journals like
serious ones, Cintace by by and by
serious philosophers who are are are
really quite bright. So, so of course I
I I owe a response to this and and my my
response is is quite simple actually.
The key point to note is that every
scientific theory starts with
assumptions.
That's the big point right there. Just
that simple. Every scientific theory
starts with assumptions. These are
the statements that the theory says,
please grant me these statements.
I can't explain them. I don't explain
them if you but please grant me these
these assumptions and if you do then I
can do all this other wonderful stuff.
So Einstein
said please grant me that the speed of
light is the same for all observers no
matter how fast they're moving and that
the laws of physics are the same in all
inertial frames.
What is light? I don't know. Why is the
speed of light the same in all? I don't
know. Just please grant me that. And
then I then he gives us us manowski
space. Well, you know, he he gives us
special relativity which then his
teacher Manowski turned into Manowski
space.
So, but that's the way science works.
You start with assumptions and then you
prove other things. That means that no
theory in science
is a theory of everything
because it never explains its own
assumptions.
So every theory in science, so this is a
clean statement. Every theory in science
has a limited scope.
At a minimum, its assumptions are
outside of its scope. Probably a lot
more is outside of its scope. At a
minimum, it doesn't explain its
assumptions. It assumes its assumptions.
Now that now there's two kinds of
theories. There's bad theories which
don't get published hopefully. Then
there are good theories in science and
those are theories which give us the
mathematical tools we need to explore
their scope. The good scientific theory
does have a realm of explanation.
So it has an explanatory scope and it it
will give us mathematical tools to
explore and and Darwin's theory with
John Maynard Smith's tools of
evolutionary game theory does that. It
gives us mathematical tools to explore
evolution and it's it's beautiful.
A great theory does even more. Not only
does it give you the tools to explore
its scope, it gives you the mathematical
tools to find its hard limits. Where
does the theory
stop? Where does it explanation stop? We
know that it stops. That's not a
question. It stops. The question is, is
the theory good enough to tell you where
it stops?
Einstein's theory of general relativity
and and special relativity together with
quantum theory. So quantum field theory
is a great theory. These theories start
with spacetime, right? They they well
they start with assumptions. They build
spacetime. It's one of the foundational
structures in in them.
So they they effectively start with
spacetime or or the assumptions needed
to build spacetime
but then they tell us
precisely where spacetime falls apart.
When you bring special with gravity
together with um quantum field theory,
you find that um spacetime falls apart
at 10 theus 33 cm and 10us 43 seconds.
So
we can apply the same logic that has
been applied to me with with evolution
with natural selection. So Hoffman used
Darwin's mathematical you the
mathematical theory of evolution to show
that organisms and and
resources aren't fundamental in reality.
Shot himself in the foot. Well, here's
Einstein's spacetime together with
quantum theory showing that spacetime is
not fundamental and therefore quantum
fields are not fundamental because
quantum fields are defined over
spaceime. So, we've used quantum field
theory and gravity to show that
spacetime and fields cannot be the
fundamental nature of reality. Shot
yourself in the foot. No, you haven't.
They haven't shot themselves in the
foot. That's the sign of a great theory.
We knew that it couldn't possibly be the
case that we have the final found. These
are just assumptions.
They're they're not the final word.
There's always going to be you your
child can always ask you, but why? Why
should fun why should spacetime be
fundamental? You know, the thing with ch
you every time you give them answer,
they say, but why that? But why that?
And and the the kid is on to something.
The children are on to something. At
some point, we just throw up our hands
and say, "It's just the way it is."
Right? But but in science, you can't
throw up your hands. That's not just the
way it is. That's all that that's all
that we've been able clever enough to
figure out so far. So, so when I use
evolutionary game theory to show that
organisms in space and time competing
for resources cannot be the fundamental
nature of reality, I'm not shooting
myself in my foot. I'm saying
Darwin's theory is great enough with,
you know, John Maynard Smith's
evolutionary game is great enough to
show you the limits of the theory. We
knew there were limits. There have to be
limits.
But this is a great theory that shows
you the limits. Now
I should be also careful on another
point.
I am not at all in sort of an
anti-evolution camp which is you know
let me be very very clear inside space
and time looking at
how organisms behave and human behavior.
I know of no better theory than Darwin's
theory. It's a fantastic theory. I've
done a lot of consulting for companies,
helping them with their products and
advertising and so forth. I use
evolutionary game theory and and ideas
from evolutionary theory all the time
and they work. They make money. This
stuff is it's not just a handwave.
Darwin's theory works. It's beautiful.
And it's not the final word. And and so
that's the So I'm not an
anti-evolutionist. I'm a
pro-evolutionist. I think it's
beautiful. And when I say that, you
know, Einstein's theories, you know,
space time is doomed. I'm not against
Einstein's theories and quantum field
theory. They're they're unbelievably
beautiful. But we knew that they're just
stepping stones. Any Hoffman's theory,
if it catches at all, is merely a
stepping stone. And every theory will be
merely a stepping stone. I would love to
live long enough to see the next thing
that overthrows my stuff. If I live long
enough, that'd be fantastic. It's going
to happen. That's just the nature of the
game. So, so that's one big big thing.
And the reason I bring it up is is it's
not just
average people with no scientific
training who bring this up. I get emails
all the time. You you didn't think about
this. But you also get it from from you
know serious philosophers who actually
had done Ph their dissertation was on
this right the dissertation was showing
that that Hoffman has shot himself in
the foot and you know I I can make
mistakes but but the the very fact that
I show that using the tools of
evolutionary game theory that evolution
is you know the the foundations of
evolution of organisms and space and
time can't be the final reality that
that's not shooting yourself in the
foot. That's just how you you go. So, so
that's that that's a big one. And I
think it's important not so much about
defending my view of evolution as just
highlighting how how does science really
work. This is this is how science really
works.
Talk about a theory of everything.
That's a technical in in in physics.
That's a technical term that that
physicists use to talk about the
unification of, you know, gravity with
with the other fundamental forces. It's
it's it's
not a claim that we're done. Science is
done. We can all go home.
Not at all. And and that kind of theory
of everything just doesn't exist.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Don, I completely agree. I
think that uh I mean for anyone who says
that you're not someone who takes
evolution seriously, I mean they don't
know you, of course. Um I mean you're
one of the most passionate people when I
speak to when it comes to um who speaks
to Darwin who speaks about Darwin at
least because you can tell that that is
someone who's fundamentally shaped the
way you think in many ways and obviously
we realize that certain theories work
under certain frameworks within certain
conversations under certain contexts and
for the most part that theory works in
in most contexts and it just so happens
that when we're discussing something
like this that goes beyond that
metaphysics it's just slightly different
and difficult to to do that. But uh Don,
I wanted so for this for this episode, I
was looking forward to it because I want
people to be excited about this new
trace logic and I want people to know
that the new traces of conscious paper,
this update is is pretty much
groundbreaking. So I broke this up into
arcs. I figured arc one would be uh
connecting the first three conversations
to now. Then we'll go to the deep
structure of reality which is the traces
of consciousness updates. Um move into
time causality causality uh and
emergence beyond the interface. Then the
mathematics of conscious agents next
generation work um objecthood identity
and the self in conscious realism the
hard problem IT and competing frameworks
uh okay revisited uh freshly
&gt;&gt; and neuroscience AI and ethical and
empirical implications overall for this
and even the meta framework and
metaphysics implications because I think
implications of this is going to be very
important.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Sounds like a lot but yeah
&gt;&gt; yeah absolutely. So this updated version
traces of consciousness this
&gt;&gt; there's a major breakthrough that occurs
you guys want to update this paper and
you want to make sure you include all
the necessary parts to it. A major theme
in the new draft is the idea that the
traces need not be representational.
How does this shift your view of
perception and its role in the
interface?
Right. the the trace
is
hiding most of reality, right? So
there's a a fundamental reality out
there that's quite complicated. And what
this is saying is you're seeing
only a trace of it on a on the subset of
experiences that you can have. Whatever
reality is is is quite complicated
and you're just getting the trace. Now
the mathematics of the trace is nice.
One thing that it tells us is the trace
is the minimal surprise representation.
That's an interesting aspect of it. If I
ask so it's minimal surprise in a in a
following sense. If I ask
I got the my 3x3 matrix and that's
that's governing the red, green and blue
transitions and I can only see red and
green. The trace is
gives me exactly the frequency of red
and green transitions that I will in
fact see. It's it's so it it it's
telling me what I will see if I can't
see the blue. it it's minimal surprise
in that specific sense. There's no no
other matrix will minimize surprise.
So that's but it's another it's minimal
surprise in another sense. Every Markov
chain every Markov matrix of a certain
class that that that have some regular
they're called erotic but they but that
they have some nice stable behavior long
term. Put it that way. they have nice
long-term stable behavior
has um what's called a stationary
measure. It it tells you what's the
probability long term that I'm going to
see red, what's probably I'll see green,
probability I'll see blue. So maybe I'm
at at you know a situation where I see
red 60% of the time, green 20% and blue
20%. Something like that.
That would be the long-term behavior.
That's called the stationary measure.
It turns out that the
when I take the trace from red, green
and blue onto red and green,
the stationary measure
also gets transferred. The the
stationary measure I get on the on just
red and green turns out to be the
normalized restriction of the trace of
the measure on red, green and blue. So
if I take the red, green, and blue thing
and just look at the red, green part of
it and renormalize it, that's the actual
stationary measure I get for the trace.
So that's that's incredible, right? So
it's minimum
it's minimum long-term surprise and it
so because the the stationary measure is
the right stationary measure to minimize
long-term surprise, but it's also
minimum surprise in my individual
transition probabilities.
So it minimizes. So So this is
interesting because there's it's well in
a big thing in psychology right now is
the free energy principle. Carl Fristen
and and collaborators are working on the
free energy principle. Um where they're
they're minimizing free energy
as a way of trying to find a way to to
minimize surprise.
Right? So they they they don't minimize
surprise directly. they they by by
doing a gradient descent on free energy
they can try to get to minimum surprise
and he's actually um Carl's got his own
um AI company that they're building to
use the free energy principle and
minimizing surprise to build a new kind
of artificial intelligence and already
they have apparently success they're
they're beating large language models in
some some measures and and the idea
about this by the way in intelligence is
is is actually a simple idea about
surprise. If
every time I make an action, I'm
surprised for, you know, for example, I
pick up a glass and and it falls to the
floor and breaks or I try to button my
shirt and I rip a hole in it or I I try
to comb my hair and I cut my head. I
mean, if everything I do I'm I'm
surprised, well, then I'm not very
bright, right? That's that's that's
that's so you can see that there
minimizing surprise is not everything
there is to intelligence but it's part
of intelligence. It's an important part
of intelligence. And so another way to
think about this trace logic is it it is
a logic of intelligence.
It's the logic of minimizing surprise
and it minimizes surprise in two ways.
the trans the literal transition
probabilities
minimizes surprise in the transitions
and it minimizes surprise in the
long-term expected
um number of time in each state the
long-term probability being red green
blue and so forth. So both it minimizes
surprise. So this is a logic of
intelligence. We won't have to minimize
free energy. We compute the trace and
minimize surprise. So I could see an AI
down the road based on on this trace
logic because it's it's not only a
theory of observation, it's a theory of
intelligence. The logic of intelligence.
&gt;&gt; Don, what what do you think uh Cole
would say to that if Fristen heard this
idea?
I Well, I would I would love to talk
with Carl. I've actually I think I've
talked with him a little bit, but but um
I would love to have a conversation.
&gt;&gt; I think what I could do is is just set
up a a meeting for you guys so the two
of you can be on the show together. I
think it would be a great colloquium
episode.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it would be a lot of fun.
Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; I I'll set that up. So, we'll we'll talk
about that afterwards. But yeah, if in
your newer thinking Don
&gt;&gt; does conscious agent remain the
fundamental ontological primitive or is
the primitive being reconceived as
something more abstract now would it be
like patterns of interaction processes
of participation or something else
still in the way that I'm in our current
model the way I would start still is
with the notion of conscious agents
interacting
and and then I go from there to the
trace logic.
Um and from there then I would start
branching off and showing headsets
appearing. So manowski space general
relativity but then there's an infinite
number of much more interesting headsets
that that could could come out of there.
So so that's that's the way I would look
at the ontology of it right now. See,
and that's an important question because
I think a lot of people are thinking,
okay, we're trying to do quantum
gravity. And so, so we need to have, you
know, so we have have some kind of
notion of of some primitive things that
are related to something spatial or
temporal or something like that. And I'm
I'm saying no, we start entirely outside
of that kind of framework altogether.
So, so this is it is sort of an approach
to quantum gravity, but it's utterly
unlike the the approaches. I'm I'm not
I'm letting go of spacetime completely
completely. I'm I'm I'm jumping into
consciousness with both feet. I'm I'm
saying
conscious consciousness conscious
experiences are fundamental. Nothing
about matter is not fundamental. Space
and time are not fundamental.
Quantum theory is not fundamental. And
that's a that's a big one. I I should
say
we we talked about spacetime is doomed
because it's it falls apart at 10us 33
cm and 10us 43 seconds. That means
quantum theory is doomed. Some people
say well I'll start with quantum theory
if you use Schroinger's evolution
there's time right there. Time falls
apart at 10us 43 seconds. The shortinger
evolution does not make sense at 10 - 43
seconds. Period. And if you go with
quantum fields, they're defined over
spacetime. Spacetime doesn't make sense
at 10us 33 cm period. So you're going to
have to have a new theory of of of
quantum mechanics that's not defined
over space and time. And that's what
it's defined over is space and time. So
good luck with that. So So spaceime is
is doomed.
By the way, on this I'm I'm not making
that up. David Gross has said that. Nemo
Herkani Amed has said that the
physicists at high energy theoretical
physicists are saying this and and Nemo
will also say that means that quantum
mechanics is doomed. Just deal with it.
It's it's over. So So it's not like I'm
trying to go after quantum theories of
consciousness.
Absolutely not. And um you know there
are theories of consciousness that that
start with quantum. There's there's one
that you know starts you know a good
friend of mine Federrico Fine
good friends and he supported my work. I
have only good things to say about him.
So so this is now technical difference
that we have. He wants to start with um
quantum fields and he's very interested
in privacy of qualia. My qualia you
can't you know tean can't experience
Don's green and Don can't experience
Tevon's green and for all I know what
you call green could be what I would
call the the taste of chocolate. Who
knows? I mean I I I just don't have
access to your So there's privacy of
Qualia in that sense. and and
Feder Rico and and his collaborators
rightly point out that the states in
quantum theory um can't be cloned.
There's a no cloning theorem. If I have
a quantum state, it can't be cloned. And
that suggests to them that um quantum
states might be the right thing to use
to represent qualia because I can't I
can't clone your qualia. I can't
experience your qualia. So privacy of
quality and
that's a nice idea but it turns out you
don't need quantum states for that. It
it it turns out that um the the no
cloning theorem does not require this is
a little technical doesn't require
unitary evolution operators of of
quantum theory. All you need are linear
operators and marov matrices are linear
operators. We have a no cloning theorem
for marov states. So it's a it's equal
theorem that if you if we think about a
probability measure as a markoff state
there's no markoff kernel that can
universally clone any markup state. End
of story. Same thing as the the no
cloning theorem. So if if that was your
choice you know for going after quantum
theory um that there's no reason for the
for the privacy. Another one is to say
well um you know
quantum theory is is is is in some sense
deeper than marov theory. Markov theory
is just these linear matrices. It's not
unitarius. It's it's it's not got these
unitary operators and so forth. And my
answer is that's got it just backwards.
The unitary operators emerge as the
asmtoic description of the marov chains.
The marov chains give you unitary
operators if you want them as the
asmtoic description. But we have more.
We have the step-by-step description. So
we can actually give you if you want a
hidden variables theory of quantum
theory. Quantum theory just gives you
the asmtoic. We give you the step by
step. So in fact what I'm doing can be
thought of as a a hidden variables
theory of of of quantum theory. And and
then of course the so the immediate
objection is well
well then we have some some very strict
theorems about that right there you
you can't have a local hidden variables
theory.
um that's um
deterministic
that's measurement I'll say measurement
independent
so this is Bell's theorem and and the
Nobel Prize was awarded you know just a
few years ago for empirical
verifications of Bell's theorem and and
so one one can say well Hoffman you know
you just admitted you're doing a hidden
variable survey we've those have been
ruled out and so what what are we up to
here. The Nobel Prize has already been
handled out for showing you can't do
what you're what you're claiming to do.
And and the answer is
Bell's theorem is fine, but it says that
you can't have a local hidden variables
theory that is measurement independent
and and and is also deterministic.
Our theory is probabilistic. It's not
deterministic. It's not local in space
and time. And it is me. It's it's a
theory of observers. It's not
measurement independent. The whole thing
is about measurement. So, so none of the
the assumptions that Bell's theorem are
being, you know, that that have to be
violated to violate we violate all those
assumptions. So, you know, Bellerm
doesn't apply to us. We're we're outside
of Bell's scope. So, so yeah. Yeah. So,
look, I think that's a great way to sort
of give people a nice You've done a
great job at giving people an overview
of this new version of it. One of the
main things, let's move on to time
causality and emergence for now,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Um, one of the most uh, one of the
bolder claims in the updated work is the
reframing of causality as a user
interface construct. If cause and effect
is not fundamental, I'm hoping this can
help fine-tune all the things you
actually just said already, though. If
cause and effect is not fundamental,
what actually explains the orderly
regularities of experience?
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. So
the issue that we have inside spacetime
is if I you know take two things and you
know take this and hit that
I might make that thing move and and it
looks like one physical object is
causing another physical object to to
change in in and it's useful in tight
inside space time to talk about one
object causing another.
But for something to have causal powers,
it first must exist.
If you don't exist, how do you have
causal powers? And I I want to say very
very clearly, one implication of this
theory is that spaceime is just a
headset.
Think of it like a VR headset. And the
objects that you see in space and time
are
merely icons that you perceive in the
headset.
So think about like playing a game like
Grand Theft Auto and you have on but
it's imagine it's an immersive version
of multiplayer. So I'm got a headset on.
I see myself immersed in this world. I
see my steering wheel in front of me. I
see a red Ferrari over there.
And I mean someone in Japan is driving
the red Ferrari and someone from from
you know Vienna is driving a you know
some other car over there.
If I look what's what really going on
there's some supercomputer somewhere.
There's and if I looked in the
supercomput there's no red Ferrari and
and there's no steering wheel. There's
just bits in a computer. There's
circuits and software and that that's
it. There there's nothing red.
The red Ferrari that I see
does not exist
unless I look and perceive it. Then all
I it p it exists in my conscious
experience. I have a an experience of a
red Ferrari. But there is no real red
Ferrari. Now, when that red Ferrari
crashes into a telephone pole and knocks
the telephone pole over in Grand Theft
Auto,
it might look like the red Ferrari
caused the telephone pole to fall over.
It looks like a cause and effect thing.
And that's a useful fiction inside the
Grand Theft Auto game. A very useful
fiction, but in fact, it's just a
fiction. There is no causality. There is
no red Ferrari to begin with, and it did
not cause a telephone pole to fall over.
What in this metaphor? What happened was
some bits there's a sequence of millions
of bits being you know or voltages being
toggled in in some very specific order
in a computer and it has to be exactly
that right order and I perceive that as
a red Ferrari hitting a telephone pole
and causing it to fall over but that's a
fiction and what I'm saying is
all cases inside space and time where I
think one physical object is causing
something to happen
is is a useful fiction.
Well, it's a fiction. Hopefully, it's
useful, but it it those are all
fictions. Those objects don't exist when
they're not perceived. And this so I
I'll be very very clear. The moon does
not exist when it's not perceived.
Another to be, you know, just to make
this very very clear right now, I have
no neurons.
Period. There are there aren't there
aren't no neurons are in Hoffman's head.
And people might say, "Now I believe
you, but neurons are not are causing
none of my experiences. I'm a cognitive
neuroscientist. I I've been involved in
fMRI and EEG study. I love neuroscience
and I love studying brains. I think
neurons do not exist when they're not
perceived, but I think when I look
inside brains, I see them. That's the
symbol my user interface gives me. So
that's what I have to study. I have to
study those symbols. But I take them
seriously. I do neuroscience. I do not
take them literally. The fact that I do
neuroscience and take the neurons
seriously does not mean that I'm taken
in and believe that they're literally
real and have real causal powers. No,
this is a headset representation of
something going on entirely outside of
spaceime. Entirely. So causation inside
spacetime is in every case without
exception a fiction.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; In some cases it's a useful fiction. In
other cases it's a mistake.
&gt;&gt; And and we've covered and we've covered
this quite intensely. I think in the
first our first conversation together
you went quite in depth on this. The
reason why I'm I'm sort of bringing this
up a little bit so you can build towards
the next few things is one of the things
I wanted to ask is then from cause
causation to emergence. Um when we think
of conscious realism when we think about
emergence in the physical sense we look
at it from okay from subatomic particles
all the way up to consciousness. Uh take
us on the reverse. What is emergence
like from a conscious realism
perspective?
Oh right. So, so right the standard view
is in some sense uh you go from the
microphysical to the macroscopic right
and the the way the philosophers talk
about is supervenience that the super
the the the larger scale things
supervene on the smaller they're they're
dependent on the smaller so ultimately
you know it's it's the elementary
particles of the standard model of
physics the the the
um bzons lepttons and quirks They're the
fundamental thing. They build up atoms
and atoms build up molecules and
molecules build up biology and they
build up us and and and so forth. So
there's this whole emergence of of of
things from the the fundamental things.
The the point of view that comes out of
this is to say that whole
emergent theory is wrong. Because by the
way in that emergent approach what what
ultimately happens is in for physicalist
theories.
Eventually we get to the place where we
have brains and then brains if they have
the right say causal or functional
properties give rise to consciousness.
Right? They maybe they have the right um
integrated information, you know,
maximal maximally um integrated cause
effect structures or they might have um
the right quantum you know collapses of
microtubial states or or or whatever it
might be
the right attention schema.
Of course there they don't believe in
consciousness but but anyway so somehow
cons in the physicalist theories that
take consciousness as real consciousness
emerges or is an illusion but but the
but it's an emergent illusion from from
a physical reality and and I'm saying
that that whole approach
is is wrong there there is no emergence
and in fact um it's not this is actually
coming now very interesting from
philosophers in the foundations of
physics
saying this very very similar thing and
it turns out there's an issue in in
physics that they call the problem of
fine-tuning.
There are certain parameters at a at a
small scale that have to be adjusted
just right for things to be happening
properly at at a higher scale. So
there's and and and this is a big puzzle
and and so some um philosophers in the
foundations of physics for example um
professor Emily Adam at Chapman
University in in in Southern California
is is talking about these all at once
theories where maybe there's some top
level constraint
and and
I guess it would be
very much like you know Livveness's um
idea of a pre-established harmony but
it's at a higher scale and then as you
look at this
the higher scale then dictates
everything at smaller and smaller scale.
So this is just the opposite direction
instead of saying we start with the the
bzons lepttons and quarks at the
microphysical level and we build up
atoms and molecules and biology and and
brains and consciousness. it this is
saying no we're going to start at the
top and everything like Livess said is
going to be
pre-established harmony from from the
top and that's what the that's the
interesting thing is that the trace
logic does that it says there is this
top matrix and as you look at the traces
you get the pre-established harmony I I
view by the way I view each matrix as
corresponding to a different conscious
agent a different conscious obser so all
The conscious observers though
are coherent at least in in this um
boolean logic part of the trace when
when we go from one boolean logic to
another. I haven't done my math yet. So
I I I can't. So that's that's open
territory. I'm looking forward to
exploring it. But right now my hands are
full with the boolean logic and and
getting space time. But then I want to
step out of that and and look at what
these other things might be. If if my
brain is up to it, we'll see if it's my
brain is up to it. That's that's that's
but but it is you're it's a good point,
Kevin, because instead of having the
bottom up approach where we're just
trying to build stuff higher and higher
and then we have the finetuning problem
in physics and so forth, we take the
liveness approach and say there's a
pre-established harmony. There's a big
matrix at the top and then the monads
have the pre-established harmony. all
the traces come out of that. And so in
the foundations of physics, you know, I
found it striking. It was just in the
last couple weeks that I read professor
Adam's paper on on
or or or actually I saw her on Kurt
Jungle's podcast actually as well,
talking about this this very thing of of
getting the the constraints the other
way, the finetuning constraints top
down. Brilliant idea. And I realized,
oh, that fits right in with the trace
logic. Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The reason why I asked these two
questions uh Don is because it allows
you to set up this headset one more time
uh just for anyone who was was too lazy
to watch the the other three episodes.
But you've often when when we look back
at the past, you've described spacetime
as a headset and but this new version of
thinking changes things a little bit. So
um it's sort of suggests that time
itself may arise from the structure of
traces, not the structure of the
interface. Does this mean that the true
arrow of time is internal to
consciousness?
&gt;&gt; Oh. Oh, right. Yeah. The arrow of time
is an interesting issue in this. The for
example, if I start with if my top
matrix that I'm taking the traces,
if I start it in its stationary measure,
then in some sense
there's a a notion which it doesn't
really evolve. It it It's it's it's sort
of timeless. It's this the
and so there's no arrow of time for it
and there's no increasing. It doesn't
have to have an an entropy increase. But
as soon as you
I'll put it this way as soon as you do
conditional probabilities on it, you
will get an entropy increase. Now I have
to look at the the there's a a question
when I take a if I start the initial so
this is a technical question. If I start
the initial top one in a stationary
measure will the
I guess the all the traces will also be
in their stationary measures
as well because they're the
theorem I mentioned earlier. So I guess
all the the traces themselves will all
already be stationary. very very
interesting. Um so so there is a a sense
in which there is you don't have to have
very very you don't have to have a an
increasing entropy. Now when we do the
the big bang stuff that we were talking
about earlier, right? So with the big
bang we're doing a sample trace. Now I
think we we'll get an evolution of
matrices and we'll and we'll we'll we'll
get something looks like an evolution of
of an increasing of entropy, right?
So, so that so that may actually be the
entropy may actually be a function of
the the the actual sample tracing
process.
&gt;&gt; Don, when you look at the within the new
formalism um around conscious agents
networks, um this manuscript tightens
that formalism a bit. What technical
obstacles have been most difficult in
building a mathematically sound
universal model of interacting agents?
Uh well
one is to ask what what is this network
right so the way we were thinking about
before was we'd have this definition of
an agent but there would be some network
of agents and it was it was a real
question about how do we and and Chayon
really was worried about this quite a
bit as a mathematician trying to get a
clean formalism of what that network
would look like Right? We we we could of
course easily write down simple little
networks. That's not a not a problem.
But if we're trying to get like a
comprehensive network, what would that
look like? And I would say that if I
start with one of these
big matrices and the trace logic and
look at all the agents that come out of
the that trace logic, then then we get a
nice coherent set of agents. when I look
at the incompatible matrices and all
their boolean logics then it's there is
there is a mathematical structure and we
haven't yet understood it yet. So so we
we we we
understand the partial order.
So it's one thing to know the definition
of the partial order. We we have that
and it's a partial order. So, and we
know that has local boolean, but to know
more about the global structure, the
nonboolean global structure. I don't
think Chayon and I really understand. I
think that's a big a big fun open
problem well above my pay grade. Um
maybe not above Chayons, but it's a it's
a a real I think a serious challenge for
him and I'm sure he would welcome some
help. Um so so actually on that I I
don't know the answer. What it does say
to me is is it is infinitely complex.
It's infinitely complex because there's
an infinite number of infinite
dimensional matrices.
Literally there's an infinite number of
quote unquote top infinite dimensional
matrices and under each of them is this
infinite boolean sublogic.
So, I have not wrapped my I'm not even
close to wrapping my head around that
kind of complexity, but but for each for
there'll be headsets for all of that
complexity. All of it. I'm having a hard
time just wrapping my head around
the other headsets inside this our
little one boolean sublogic. Um, I'm
sure there are mathematicians out there
who could run circles around us right
now with with this. they could see the
the partial order and go you you you
adults this this you know here's here's
what the the the bigger structure is and
here's how you I'm sure there are
mathematicians who could do that I'm not
one of them um but but
&gt;&gt; from a mathematical perspective um how
close do you guys how close are you guys
to defining a mathematical measure of
conscious richness or agent capacity
something like fi uh but grounded in
conscious agents rather than physical
information and structures
Uh well, we could of course have a
measure of the complexity of a of of the
consciousness in terms of
at a minimum the number of experiences
that they have, but then also a measure
of complexity of the of the um of the
markoff kernel, the transition
probability. For that we would have for
example the same tools available to us
that um Tonia and Ko are using for you
know talking about um um integrated
information in in in in
their theory but their the idea is very
very different from from ours and so I
need to really spell out we're we both
use Markov matrices
we use them in very very different ways
and for very very different purposes.
For for us, the Markov matrix is a
mathematical representation of conscious
experiences. Period. Conscious
experiences are fundamental.
There is no substrate.
Conscious experiences
have no substrate that we're that
they're emerging from that that we're
mathematically. So, it's not like we're
we have some other substrate and
conscious experiences are emerging from
that substrate. And we have to write
down the mathematics by which they
emerge from that substrate. If if you
have this kind of kind of complexity
then you get this conscious no I'm using
marker matrix and we're saying grant me
that there are red green and blue
experiences
and grant me that there is a probability
if I see red next that I'll see green
next and so forth then I will write down
a transition probability matrix to
describe that reality. So that's that's
my assumption. And that's what I'm
asking you to grant me. Where do
conscious experiences come from? That's
where my theory stops. That's my magic,
right? Every every scientific theory has
magic. I start with conscious
experiences. But I promise to give you
spaceime. All of spacetime. I promise to
give you quantum mechanics, general
relativity, the whole bit or I'm wrong.
Also, Darwin's theory of evolution by
natural selection has to come out as a
projection of this in in the headset.
So, so it's, you know, now what's going
on with Tenonian Coen in integrated
information theory is very very
different.
They're they're saying there is some
substrate typically physical. Um I I
think they would say that might doesn't
have necessarily be physical but I don't
know what else they suggest. So a
physical substrate um and if that
substrate has certain kind of um
cause effect structure a maximally
integrated cause effect structure then
and only then does conscious experience
appear. Okay. And
so you can see the philosophies are very
very different.
I the I'm not trying to give you a
structure that will then talk about the
when a co you know conscious experience
appears. I'm saying consciousness is
fundamental and and my own take on again
integrated information theory
if they
if we take them seriously what they're
proposing then they're saying for every
experience there is a matrix there's a
markup matrix and or or a class of
matrices. So maybe it's not a single
matrix. Maybe there's a class of
matrices which is um the experience of
the green at you know wavelength you
know 555 or whatever it might be. Okay.
So for or for if for the molecule that's
at the heart of of mint that molecule
the experience of the taste of that
molecule is this matrix or this class of
matrices. So what what they've set
themselves up what they've chosen to do
is to say we owe you for each experience
a matrix. The matrix which is the
maximum cause effect that's what we owe
you or a class of matrices. And when you
ask okay well well great that's what you
said you want to do. So what are the
matrices? So mint or whatever you know
give me a matrix for and they can't do
it. They they'll talk about spacetime,
but they haven't actually given a
matrix. Then when they say, "Well, we
got a theory of space time." Really? So
if you're going to give me a matrix, it
has a certain number of states. So is it
a,000 by,000 or a million by a million
or 543 x 540? How many states are in it?
And if it's, you know, 543 x 543,
there's 543 squared entries in the
matrix. What are each of those 543
squared entries? What are the numbers
and why are those the numbers that lead
to mint? That's what they're saying they
want to do. So I'm I'm just pointing out
I didn't ask them to do this. No one
said they had to do this. They're saying
this is our theory. And so so then I say
okay for me to evaluate it you need to
give me the 500 say it's a 500 thing.
Why is it 500 by 500? What are the 500
squared numbers? Why do they have to be
exactly the values they are? Why are
they and why? And and then how does that
connect with the taste of mint?
Good luck.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's it's difficult.
&gt;&gt; It's not going to happen.
&gt;&gt; It's just not going to happen or
disaster almost.
&gt;&gt; That That's right. And it's the same
thing with the the quantum collapse of
microtubules,
orchestrated collapse, right? So again,
no one put a gun to their head and and
said you have to do this, but they're
saying what we owe you is we'll we'll
we'll show you for each experience
a a set of microtubules in a particular
quantum state and we'll give you a
particular orchestrated collapse and
that is the experience.
Wow. Okay. If that's what you want to
do. So which ones can you do?
What? Show me the microtubial
configuration, the quantum state and and
the collapse. And that has to be meant.
Holy smoke. And why is that meant? You
can see where we are here. It it's now
what's interesting to me is the state of
play in this field. And and by the way,
I I let me be fair. These are my friends
and colleagues. I love them. They're
brilliant. These are brilliant really
brilliant people. There's nothing
personal in this. This is just about
theories. They if it could be done, they
would do it. They're brilliant. And and
the reason they're stuck in the
physicalist framework is that we've
inherited that. I mean, that's we were
raised in it. We have to be the
generation that steps beyond
physicalism. And we're learning the hard
way that as smart as you are, you can't
be smart enough to solve the problem in
a physicalist framework. It just won't
work. We actually have to let go of
physicalism. That that horse has had its
ride. It's time for a new horse.
So,
so we have to to just step step aside.
What's but what's going on here is
the theories
are starting with something in space and
time and trying to boot up consciousness
and and they haven't been able to do it.
And if I if I said to you, look, I've
got a theory of particle physics, a
brand new theory of particle physics.
Oh, really? Oh, wow. Um, so what what
specific particle interactions can you
can you model? Like quark gluon
interactions or, you know, electron
photon inter what? Oh, oh, no, no. I
can't give you any specific interaction.
I've just got a a a new general theory
of of particle interactions. Well, you
you you'd say, "Well, um, come back when
you've got something specific to say."
And and that's where we are in
conscious. I've got a theory of
consciousness.
Oh, really? Okay. I've got a theory of
you've got a theory of conscious
experience. Okay. Well, well, give me
what's your theory of men. Oh, I can't
give you any specific conscious
experience. Oh, well, well, maybe come
back when you got something. Well, what
what they'll say, well, we can give you
the neural coralates
or some kind of physical correlates and
we can predict coralates of conscious
experience.
And
here's why I'm not impressed with that.
And and by the way, that's where all the
research is right now. So the the
adversarial collaborations are not about
we're going to see if your theory of
mint is right or my theory of mint is
right. is is can I predict an area of
the brain
that's going to have more activity than
you can and you're going to predict
different area of the brain that might
be correlated with certain kinds of so
this that's that's where we we are right
now in in this kind of thing and
I'm not impressed with that in the least
if I for example we're on a zoom screen
right now and I I see a bunch of pixels
on the screen and pixels are just pixels
some are pixels of
heaven's face and some are pixels of a
wall. And I always say, you know, I can
give you the pixel coralates of
consciousness.
And there are these are the pixels and I
can I could probably write down some
dynamical things. There's motions in the
tean pixels that aren't happening in the
wall pixels or the guitar pixels or the
book pixels, right? and and so I I could
write down and and and above average
predict which pixels are corresponding
to to consciousness in that way. Should
I be impressed? Not at all. There's the
the the fact that there are correlations
between pixels and and and tean's
consciousness and I think that te tean
is conscious but the the the pixel
coralates of tean's consciousness are
irrelevant
to te's and they certainly
tean's consciousness doesn't emerge and
is not caused by those those coralates
there there's there's there's there's no
beef there
the neural coralatess of consciousness
are very interesting in one sense
because that's the only data we have.
I'm a cognitive neuroscientist. I am all
for studying the neural coralates of
consciousness. We have to get our data.
If we think that neural activity is
causing conscious experiences,
we've made a fundamental error. Neurons
do not exist when they're not perceived.
Neurons have no causal powers
whatsoever. They have no functional
properties whatsoever. Neurons cannot
cause conscious experiences because they
do not exist independent of
consciousness.
That is as clear a statement as I can
make of the difference between my
approach and almost all of my
colleagues. Neurons don't exist when
they're not perceived. They cause no
conscious experiences. Period.
That's
&gt;&gt; and I mean already we've seen an
expensive bottle of wine being given
away because pretty much the neural
corates have not been found.
they they they've not worked out.
&gt;&gt; And
and again, these are my friends, in many
cases, good friends and and colleagues,
many I've I've known for decades,
and they're they're brilliant. And I
guess the field just has to go through
where we have our brilliant people
really proving that this way won't work.
Yeah, I think it's it's one of those
cases, Don, where the epistemology is
important. We need to know all these
things. So studying the neural
correlates, as you said, is fundamental.
It's very important. It's going to help
us in many ways. Um, absolutely. But we
it shouldn't be mistaken for the
ontology. And and trying to figure out
this deeper structural layer of reality
is something that
&gt;&gt; is for different people to explore, but
is also important. And I think uh
&gt;&gt; one shouldn't one shouldn't see it as
oh, we think one's more important than
the other. Um but
&gt;&gt; this is the data that we have.
&gt;&gt; Right. I I I agree. Yeah. So neural
activity is very important data. Some of
the most important data that we have.
&gt;&gt; We have to use the data that we've got
and we have to be creative and and make
the creative leaps that go beyond that
data.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. in the recent work uh don so again
going back to this paper and there's a
shift so from discrete to more
continuous models of agency is
consciousness better modeled then via
discrete entities or continuous fields
of agency
that's an interesting question right I
I'll say that
I don't know right now we're working on
discrete models and that's partly just
because of Hoffman's lack of
mathematical skills um and to it's a
little bit easier in some ways to to
work in the discrete case. Um, and I
think that, you know, it's it's easier
to start there. I'm open to the idea of
of a continuum. There are Markoff chains
in the continuous case. So Mark So the
Markoff formalism is easily able to go
there. Whether Hoffman's ready to go
there is a different story. I think
Chayton has got the tools to go there. I
would have to think out of the box. So I
would say my guess is I don't see an
obstruction to going to the continuous
case.
My only obstruction is I've got to learn
more math. You know, I've got to to
really boot up on on learning the
continuum
case markup chain stuff. Um so that's
just a Hoffman problem. I don't think
it's a it's a a deep technical problem.
So So and who knows
it might even go deeper. I mean,
Caner's hierarchy doesn't stop with
ALF1. So, I mean, I don't know what
tools we might develop to go even to
higher levels of infinity beyond um
ALF1.
&gt;&gt; And this sets us up for the next for
this next section on that focuses more
on objectivehood on objected sorry
identity and the self in conscious
realism. So a striking thread in your
newer work is that the self may be just
another interface construction, not a
fundamental agent.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Has your understanding of the self
changed since then? And what does it
imply for personal identity?
&gt;&gt; That's a that's a really interesting
question because the trace logic does
really give a new wrinkle on this this
whole thing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's that's what I that's what I
felt while reading it. was that there's
there's a whole new shift here
philosophically,
theoretically. It's it's interesting.
&gt;&gt; It it is and it and it it really what
what the the spiritual traditions have
been saying for thousands of years is
really it's coming it the trace logic it
agrees. It says that there is one
source, right? They they made say and
and we're all just in some sense
perspectives on the source.
And that's what the trace logic is. It's
saying, "Give me a master matrix. All
the traces are perspectives on that
master." Now, this is not quite going
all the way to what the wisdom
traditions are saying where because
they're they're going beyond my one
master to to even beyond that to all
these the infinity of masters and then
the source even transcends that. So, so
I'll again say I agree that mathematics
has a limit and my ma so science has
fundamental limits. Nevertheless, within
this framework, it's pointing in the
direction that the the wisdom traditions
have for thousands of years been saying
that there is this in some sense the one
source looking at itself from a lot of
perspectives and we get that with the
trace. The the traces are different
perspectives. So what that means then is
you know and I've actually been dealing
with this on a personal level you know
just okay this is not just abstract
science now this is about consciousness
I'm conscious this is about me okay this
is this is and it's saying okay
I've been sort of identified with this
guy named Hoffman and and you know and
and you know he's got a certain height
and weight and he was born he's got a
certain family and and all the the stuff
and a career um but is that who I really
am and and the answer has to be no.
That's just a trace
of who I am. That's that's I mean this
is all fun stuff and I'm glad I'm doing
it. But in some sense to be identified
with it is to miss something far far
deeper and that is there is an aspect of
me which is my my conscious essence.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Which transcends my name. My name you
change my name nothing really has
changed. You could change my hair color.
You could change my height. You could
change all sorts of things and and it
doesn't really matter. Um
what does matter is something
that transcends all that and and it
can't be described. If I ask what it is,
all I the best thing I can do Well, so
this is there's this is an interesting
thing to to the point of um pointing to
things. So, so one way to think about
this is we learn a lot
of the meaning of words by what's called
extensive definition, right? So, you
take a child at the right age they're
ready to learn words. You might mom
might point and say rabbit and at the
right age 18 months or so that the child
can get rabbit and they'll understand it
with just one or two points. They they
get it and that's learning by extensive
definition. And it's amazing if you
think about it. It's it's miraculous.
The child,
you don't you don't give them a
dissertation on the rabbit. You all you
do is point and say rabbit. And and
there's an infinite number of
hypotheses. It could be the color of the
fur, the texture of the fur, the left
ear and the right paw, the the front
tooth and and the rug that the there's
an infinite number of things that you
could be referring to. There's some
pre-established game between mom and dad
and the kid where at the right age at
the right time, the kid knows you're
pointing. You're not you're not going to
say mammal, you're not going to say
quadriped, you're going to say rabbit.
That there's the game is set up. So, and
and and the kid learns
and and and and they get it right. Of
course, I don't know what the kid is
experiencing because your experiences
are different from mine. But whatever
something worked and in the right
context, the kid will say rabbit and I
will agree. So that's by a sense of
definition. But now
what am I? I mean he can point and say
Hoffman. But but that's that's in some
sense. Yeah. That yeah okay yeah that's
Hoffman. But there but there's something
deeper there. There is something deeper.
And and the only way I know how to point
to that is um Another kind of ostensive
definition. If I say um
if I ask you to to say I wonder what my
next thought will be and so just for I
want to say
wait and see what your next thought is
going to be and you wait.
No.
&gt;&gt; And then and then so there's but and
then finally you have a thought, right?
Some some thought
that empty space before you had the
thought.
That's the best I can point to who you
are. That's my best sense. So the best I
can do just like when I I have to point
and say rabbit and I'll leave it up to
you to get it because I mean if if if
you can't see rabbit there's nothing I
can do, right? If if you aren't if the
child is 3 months old and you say
rabbit, they can't get it. They're not
equipped to get rabbit. And if I do it
with an ant, if I have an ant there and
I point and say rabbit, they're not
equipped to do it either. So I can do
all the pointing and I want to. You have
to be equipped yourself to get the
ostensive definition. And the same thing
is true here about what I'm saying about
you.
&gt;&gt; All I can do is say
what? wait and see what your next dot is
going to be. And in that gap, I can say
I point to that and say
whatever you experience there, that's
the closest I can point to to who you
are. And I can't tell you what it is,
just like I can't tell the child what
the rabbit is. That's all I can do. So
there's nothing more mysterious about
pointing to you as the source than there
is to me pointing to someone and saying
rabbit. equally mysterious because I
don't know what's going on in you. All I
can do is point and leave the rest up to
you and and assume that you've got it.
So, so in that sense I can say that's
who I am and
but that's there's infinite exploration
there because I can go back into silence
and spend more and more time in silence
and
even without concepts it's very very
deep and in some sense I you're face to
face with an intelligence that
transcends anything that you can talk
about and in fact that's where I go
to get the creative idea just for my
science. I I choose to go into silence.
I do my homework. I do my study. I do
all this my reading. But then when I
want something truly creative, I let it
all go and go into silence. And that's
where the real creative insights come
from.
&gt;&gt; I think another good point to you then
would be pre-b pre-birth, post death,
anesthesia. Those are those elements of
reality where the self tends to
disappear quite literally because if you
think about it anesthetic when you wake
up there's literally a chunk of time
that's gone but some for some reason you
feel like nothing has happened you just
wake up as if nothing really
&gt;&gt; had changed and same thing in deep sleep
too every night deep sleep I I disappear
&gt;&gt; um and then I reboot and oh still seems
like the same dawn what happened it
Don disappeared for a while and then
rebooted and yeah it's still it's and
and of course in the framework that I'm
discussing my body is just an icon.
Space and time is just a headset. So
effectively what's what's happening is
the conscious the the one is choosing to
look at itself through this headset and
then it sets it aside for a little while
and then it puts the headset back on and
looks at itself from this perspective.
And so that's the best I can say is that
the the ones the one the source of all
things for some reason
wants to look at itself from an infinite
number of perspectives.
There's and and that's a a a deep deep
question I don't have the answer to.
It's it's it's it's
John Wheeler has a book I've actually
got it here. um a journey into gravity
and spacetime.
And the first one of the first page with
on it says something like
here it is. Truth is less than truth
until it is made known.
And that's that's from John Wheeler's
book. And that
I say I'm not saying it's the final
answer to the question I just raised,
but it's an interesting perspective on
why does the source
need to look at itself from an infinite
number of perspectives.
It it maybe Wheeler's idea that that
it's the very act of observer
participency that creates the reality
that's that's being observed. and and
the the the the source
I'm way over my pay grade here. This is
way over this is way over my pay grade,
but but you so now
I don't have any mathematics or anything
to to go with on this. So I'll just this
is just intuition and not very good.
&gt;&gt; This is more u
speculations.
&gt;&gt; That's right. But it looks like it has
to be a lot of perspective.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. when you look at do conscious
though so I think it's important to
touch on this because it it leads to
this next question which is do conscious
agents in this new ontology have
persistent identity or are identities
constructs emerging from
temporaryformational
partitions
&gt;&gt; yeah it looks to me like it's um is just
a temporary construct um that that that
the personal identity is
o ultimately
There's just the one
source
and these perspectives are
compared to the one are are absolutely
trivial.
But on the other hand, I am the one. So,
so it's it's the Hoffman avatar in some
sense that's trivial. By the way, as
complicated as that avatar is, right, we
have 86 billion neurons, trillions of
synapses. when we look, they're not
there when we don't look, but when we
look, we see 86 billion neurons and
trillions. So, it's it's it's incredibly
complicated. And yet, this avatar is
trivial compared to the source. And when
I look around, right, when I look around
the the world and I I see the sun, I see
a tree, and I see the complexity,
I'm making this all up on the fly,
right? this I'm not see in the
physicalist framework I'm seeing a
pre-existing world
I'm saying there is no pre-existing
physical world this is a headset I'm
rendering this stuff on the fly I see
that beautiful rose all the complexity
of that beautiful rose and the scent
that's how good you are you're making
that up on the fly instantly so so you
are
stunning
all the stuff you're making and it's It
seems to you effortless, completely. I
mean, I look over there, I see this
transcendent beauty. I look at the ocean
waves. I look at Mount Everest. I look
up at the moon. I look at galaxies. I'm
making this stuff all up.
And and it's and it's a piece of cake.
So, so whatever I am completely
transcends this this Hoffman avatar. And
yet, this avatar when I look at it is
unbelievably. So, in some sense, we're
showing off. The the source is just like
it's effortless. It's just plain showing
off all the time. This universe is no
problem on the fly. It's just this. So,
I so
the Hoffman avatar or the the the tean
avatar, these these are
&gt;&gt; these are 90 years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And then they're gone and
it's it's nothing's lost.
I look through that thing.
&gt;&gt; Last question on self don on selfhood.
&gt;&gt; Are there degrees then of selfhood that
emerge in agent networks similar to how
coherence emergence in quantum systems?
&gt;&gt; Well, there there is complexity of
right. So the fewer states I have the
the less complexity that that's
possible. So there is a notion
of complexity but but the self is very
interesting your question about selfhood
and a lot of times
see even a a single agent with only one
state is fully conscious in in my theory
of that state. So, so it's only so
consciousness is fundamental. It it
transcends selfhood in some sense. It's
so there's a full full consciousness
there. Selfhood is is maybe you know a
consciousness of the process of
experiencing consciousness itself.
There's some kind of reflexive loop on
it there. But but but even that
reflexive loop is trivial compared to
the fundamental source.
&gt;&gt; Do you see that? Uh do you see that
these selves as something similar to
what Bernardo says is like these
dissociative altars of the fundamental
consciousness?
&gt;&gt; A very very good point because you know
I'm good friends with Bernardo and and
you know he's he's an idealist um
philosopher and and and
I think the trace logic is the logic of
dissociation.
it it's so he his his emphasis on
dissociation I think is the the right
emphasis and the way at least in in the
trace logic the dissociation happens is
by taking the trace and so we can also
talk about now not only the dissociation
but the recombining of of
consciousnesses because the trace logic
gives the the not not only it gives the
meat and the join of so it's it's it's
saying how all these different
consciousnesses can be interrelated and
how they're all ultimately just
perspectives on the one.
&gt;&gt; Have Have you chatted to Bernardo about
this? Is he familiar with this concept
yet?
&gt;&gt; I don't think I've talked with him about
the trace logic yet.
&gt;&gt; Uh I'd love to. He's been he's been
quite busy with with other stuff. So
&gt;&gt; yeah, he's he's very busy, but but I
would love to to talk with him. And also
I know he's now interested in integrated
information theory. So I'd love to to
have a little discussion about that
because as you can see I'm I'm I'm still
not enamored of it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I completely understand. So
it's but I think yeah I think that's
something that he would really love
because it it does fit perfectly with
his dissociated altars. I mean it sounds
very much the same.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Absolutely. We're on the
very very same page. And in fact, I I
knew about his dissociated altars idea
before I had the trace logic. And almost
as soon as I had the trace logic, I
realized, oh, this is yeah, this like
the alter stuff that uh he's interested
in. And tell me Don, when you when you
look at the future moving forward, does
the updated theory predict that advanced
AI, AGI, let's say, could instantiate
conscious agency, or would artificial
agents always be subsets of a deeper
agent network rather than independent
conscious entities?
&gt;&gt; Great question. That that sort of helps
get at the difference between what I'm
doing and what most people are doing.
So, so most most people think of
consciousness as somehow emerging. So,
perhaps if we get um AIS that get
complicated enough,
there'll be some kind of critical
threshold that maybe they'll get the
right integrated information or whatever
it might be, some kind of correct
properties that then they make the
transition to to consciousness. And
there's been all sorts of ideas,
different ideas about what that would
be, the integrated information theory
and and others about what would what
would be the the the trick, the global
workspace structure, whatever it might
be that will do the trick. And
my
reply to that whole approach is that
nothing inside exists when it's not
perceived.
The
computer that you're running your AI
software on does not exist when it's not
perceived.
That computer itself resides in
consciousness, period. And so does the
software. And so there's no notion of
consciousness emerging from software
um at all.
That that's that's just the wrong way of
thinking about it. Now, will we get more
and more useful kinds of AIs?
Absolutely. More and more quoteunquote
intelligent ais more valuable and
helping us to do more tasks absolutely.
Will we get consciousness out of it?
Absolutely not. Because conscious the AI
itself is a model in a consciousness
already. That's that is the other way
around. So
the the key point on this is to
understand that spaceime is not
fundamental. No object in spacetime
exists unless it's perceived
consciously. Period. So there's no way
that consciousness emerges from
something. Now, should we try to build
more and more interesting AIs? Very much
so. And I'm very interested in using the
trace logic to see how far it can go to
to build um
more more advanced. I use AIS. They're
very very helpful while I'm stuck in
this headset. And AI is a useful tool.
And so so why not build them uh and have
fun fun with it? But the the hope of
getting an AI to the point where it's
conscious and actually emerges free will
emerges from it and so forth not not
going to happen. Now does that mean that
they couldn't be dangerous? That's a
different story. Could they be dangerous
is a different story. I mean when I deny
that they're going to be conscious, it
doesn't mean that I'm denying that we
need to be careful.
They're different stories. Yeah. And and
then tell me Don, if let's say all
conscious entities cease to exist,
what does that mean for this ontology?
So if every species that has any element
of consciousness
no longer existed, mass extin
extinction, does this actually even
matter? Or is this just the overall
consciousness's way of just retracting
back into its original state?
Right. Well, yes. So, this that's a it's
a good question because it reveals
another aspect of this whole theory. The
distinction that we make between living
and non-living and between conscious and
unconscious is an artifact of the limits
of our headset. So, we try it's been a
hard task in science to try to define
the boundary between living and
non-living, animate and inanimate. very
very lots of lots of theories put out
there, lots of arguments also between
conscious and unconscious systems
and that has as much chance of success
as the distinction between conscious and
unconscious pixels on the zoom screen
that I talked about not going to happen
for this very very same pixels are just
pixels they're not conscious or
unconscious so the distinction we make
between living and non-living
conscious and unconscious is entirely
elucory
It's entirely an artifact of our our our
interface, our space-time interface
is always interacting with
consciousness. But whatever I pick up a
rock, I'm interacting with
consciousness. But my interface has to
give up at some point because it is a
dumbing down. An interface is a dumbing
down. And at some point, it says, you
know, you're you're dealing right now
with an infinite consciousness. But all
I'm going to show you is this dumb rock.
That's all you get to see that because I
mean this this is just a headset. So,
where you know there's the the old
question about, you know, the aliens,
where are they?
Where are they? And the my answer is
they're all around us.
You pick up a rock. You're you're
interacting with consciousness, the
utterly alien forms of consciousness.
You can't see them because your headset
doesn't allow you to experience them.
They're all all around us. So, so I
should say something very be very very
clear. This is
it's not a kind of thing that says, you
know, there's a kind of mystical
consciousness inside the rock. I'm not
saying that the the rock
has nothing inside. The rock is
something I make up when I look. The
rock doesn't even exist when I'm not
there. So, I'm not saying there's a rock
and it's got this kind. The rock is a
symbol that I create and that symbol
itself is so profoundly simple that it
doesn't really reveal to me anything
about the consciousness that I'm
interacting with. So it's yeah if okay
so if space sum is an icon system tuned
for survival what governs the diversity
of possible icon systems are there laws
of interface design at the level of
conscious agents?
Yeah, that that's that's a really
wonderful question because you inside
the interface inside spacetime Darwin's
theory of evolution does a a pretty good
job of
of of
answering that question in inside the
headset. But ultimately I I want to step
outside the headset and look at the
evolution of
dynamics in this marovian sense and look
at its trace and show. So so this is so
effectively what you're posing is a
challenge that I I agree has has to be
met by my framework. The challenge is
I have to show ultimately that I can
find a master matrix and a trace
or a sequence of traces
that looks like Darwin's theory of
evolution and see the evolution of so I
talked about the big bang right I talked
earlier we talked about how I could get
the big bang and and get it growing by
the commute times and so forth but that
would just be the first part of that
simulation the simulation would then
have to ultimately show how I could get
all the galaxies forming and then
something like planet Earth and then
show um how the headset could finally
finally lead to things like um
organisms and and and have it look like
nature red and truth and claw fighting
competing and and so forth. So
absolutely that all has to to come out
of this and
so there's absolute job security in
pursuing this work.
There's a lot of work ahead.
&gt;&gt; Lots of work to be done.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Lots of work. But that's a good
one. That that's and it's one I'm really
interested in because I I love Darwin's
theory and I'd love to see how it comes
out. So notice this is very very
different than than um
someone who
who just trashes Darwin's theory and
says it's it's wrong and and I don't
like it for for often for spirit like
Christian certain Christian groups will
will do this the well they will they
they'll they'll they'll run rough shot
over the theory and and they'll ignore
the every scientific theory has its
limitation but so there are things it's
not going to get right. But what Darwin
does, it gets a lot right. And
evolutionary game theory gets a lot
right. And of course there's going to be
it doesn't get everything, but we should
really enjoy and appreciate how much
it's gotten right. Um, and then of
course then do the hardnos stuff about
okay, here's here's the limits. But but
seeing the limit, but there's new
there's limits to Newton's theory.
Absolutely. It it it will not give you
a lot of stuff that we we won't do any
quantum stuff. For example, it won't
give you chemistry. Do we now look at
Newton's theory and and you know, thumbs
down? No. We we look in awe at Newton's
theory. We're grateful for what it did.
We're now mindful of its limitations and
we're moving on. And the same thing is
true of Dharm. Of course, there will be
limitations to the theory. So, and we
should but it's but the attitude of it
is all all garbage. No, no, no, no, no,
no. It's brilliant and it's just a
stepping stone, but it was a brilliant
stepping stone.
Um, Don, when you look back prior to
this these this recent work and you
think of things like multiverse, many
worlds theories in physics and now when
you look at what you've done and how it
shows that there's these multiple
universes grounded in this deeper agent
dynamics, does it give you a newound
respect for those theories or how how
have you perceived it over time?
Well, it's it it's it's it's interesting
the I'm I'm of course glad for and and
and
in awe of the intelligence of the people
who are are coming up with these
theories. It's it's they really have to
know their quantum theory, then they
have to think out of the box. So,
they're they're smart, creative people.
That being said, of course, it's our job
as scientists to find the problems and
and comment them and try to move
forward. I I think that um on the upside
the multiverse is thinking out of the
box and is saying that there could be
things utterly different than what we're
experiencing right now and we should
open up our imagination and I on that
point I agree on on the other hand the
the way that it it comes out at least in
like the ever interpretation of of
quantum mechanics right where for every
possible branching every um observation
there's a branch point and you have a
new universe coming coming out. Um I I
think that to solve that problem I think
the ever interpretation is is logically
incoherent. I I so so so you can see so
on the one hand I'm praising it. It's a
brilliant idea,
brilliant thinking out of the box and I
think correctly saying that there's more
than the kind of universe that we're
experiencing right now. All good. This
particular approach though has technical
epistemological problems with it. I
think that that you you can't get the
probabilities right. Which universe am I
in? Answering question about if if every
time Hoffen makes a decision there's an
infinite number of universes that branch
out for all the possible outcomes from
the quantum state. Which one am I in?
And you try to do probabilities
coherently and that I don't think you
can do it. I think that that you that
for technical reasons that will not
work. Um so so
others I will fault again not for their
lack of brilliant they're brilliant but
I think that if if you stick in a
physicalist framework
then you're missing the big picture. If
if your if your if your cosmology is
stuck in a physicalist
framework,
you're you're stuck.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I think and that's a perfect way
to get us into this meta
framework/metaphysics and implications
when you look back. So you've got ITP
moves on to conscious realism, conscious
agents theory, now traces of
consciousness or trace logic altogether.
How do you see this as a metaphysical
proposal? Do you think of it as a
altogether as a descriptive theory, a
generative principle, or something
closer to a mathematical cosmology at
this point?
Well, the the way I look at it is it's
in there's several ways to think about
what this whole thing is is doing. in in
one sense I can view it as a natural
next step beyond our space-time science.
So science
I I I think has a a natural evolution in
which if you look back at our history,
the spiritual traditions were were
saying that there's something far beyond
space-time physics, but they didn't have
the mathematical tools to
to to
really tell us what and to to and we
had, of course, the
the church and and and the that the
birth of science and and and and so
forth. Um
some problems there and so science went
its own separate way. We we started with
mathematics. We had to sort of make a
clean break with religious traditions
which were based on you know authority
and claims of miracles and so forth. And
we just had to to walk away and for for
centuries and and say no thank you. We
we will start with we'll have we'll go
with physicalism. We'll start with
mathematics and we'll see and and we got
to the point where we built all these
tools. But then we got to the point
where we realized our theories tell us
that spacetime can't be fundamental.
So oh the spiritual traditions were
right.
They were right all along about that
spaceime isn't fun. But we now have
tools.
We've been studying our headset. We
thought the headset was the whole
universe. We thought it was the ultimate
nature of reality. It we just we
discovered we were just studying our
headset. The spiritual traditions have
been outside the headset saying there's
much more outside the headset. We're
we're now ready as a species to take off
the headset, you know, theoretically to
to in terms of our theories and step out
there. Now we have new tools that the
spiritual traditions didn't have. So, so
I in that sense I see this
it could be there there could be a
raproman now between the the two the
spiritual traditions and and the new
hard no science that is taking off the
headset.
What the spiritual traditions
will find is that they had some deep
insights that are I think genuine and
then they had a lot of gobbledygot
lot of nonsense that we will show is
nonsense and that'll be hard to take.
It'll be it's very very hard when you've
been dogmatic for centuries about
certain things to have it shown without
doubt to be wrong and other parts shown
to be confirmed. So it's it's it's going
to be not an easy thing but I think it
it's an interesting step forward. So I
see this as in that context this
framework the trace logic and this whole
thing is a natural next evolution of of
science going outside of the of the
headset but but now from a bigger
picture from the from the point of view
of the of the one and and consciousness
being fundamental just starting there
now from from that point of view I view
the work that I'm doing with my
colleagues as a tiny baby step right
this is now I mean At least it's it's in
the ball game where consciousness is
fundamental, but there's an infinite
number of steps. So, I'm 0% of the way,
literally 0% of the way uh
in understanding the source and and its
nature. And ultimately, it transcends
the source. But, but what's interesting,
if you want to know the source anyway,
sit in silence. Let go of all thought,
sit in silence. And you can know the
source not as you know something outside
of you but by knowing yourself. You you
are not separate from it. So letting go
of any duality whatsoever and being with
yourself with no
veil of concepts whatsoever. And so I I
do both. I I spend my time studying my
mathematics, studying the science, being
really hardnosed, really getting it
right.
So precise concepts, absolutely precise
concepts, no messing around,
precision and then zero concepts,
absolute no concepts and that's where
the true intelligence comes and then go
back to the so the the
there's this interplay that I don't
understand yet but it's really essential
to the nature of reality absolute
silence
complete transcend concept and and back
into the realm. But when you get back
into the realm of concept, then
precision turns out to be critical.
And when you're not precise, we see the
history of what happens. We get
dogmatism. We get one religion
persecuting
another. We get people killing each
other all in the name of
God.
And
so
this is just a baby step outside of all
of that. It's just a baby step.
&gt;&gt; And and Don, at this point, what have
you perhaps thought of? Is there a
different name to all of this or are you
going to stick with conscious realism as
the overall
name for this approach?
&gt;&gt; Right. right now conscious realism
partly because
a lot of people
have
you know unfairly said that idealism is
versus realism. So there's idealist
theories and we and we want to be
realist and I and I want to say that you
can be you can make the claim that
consciousness is real and have a science
based on the idea that consciousness is
is real. So, I I decided that I I I
couldn't just say it was an idealist
theory. I mean, I'm good friends with
Bernardo and and he he he he's
using idealism of some kind with his his
stuff and I I'm perfectly fine with that
and he's a philosopher and I'm not. So,
I mean, I respect on philosophical stuff
I I I defer to Bernardo completely and
on many technical things. He's got
technical chops as well. So, but I I
just chose conscious realism because I
really wanted the word realism in there
to to say this is this is we're going to
be doing some real mathematics on
something that I take to be real, but
it's not a physical system. But to to be
non-physical doesn't mean you're not
real. It's perfectly real. In fact, I
think the physical stuff if anything is
elucory, it's the physical. It only
exists when you perceive it. And
otherwise, it's not even there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think within even if it is a
quote unquote idealist theory, it's it
still can be its own subgroup of a
different version and it needs a name
because most of the time if it wants to
stick as a philosophy, you want that
that unique
that that's right and there are other
versions of idealism that would be sort
of incompatible with this in terms of
specifics. Not not broadly but in
specifics.
&gt;&gt; No, definitely. And then so Don if
idealism I'm sorry if conscious realism
is correct what do you think is the
single most surprising implication for
human life for meaning death suffering
creativity spirituality or love?
Well, what's was really surprising is
you, if this is right, you are
the infinite source. You are
choosing
to have been fooled all of your life
into thinking you're just Dawn or Tevin
or Sam or Sally or or you've put on a
headset and you let yourself
be fooled. You let yourself
be wrapped up in you got lost in the
game and and but but you chose for some
reason you are the infinite
who choosing to get so identified with
the avatar that it lets itself get lost
in it and then slowly wake up to who you
really are. That's so for me the big
surprise and the thing I I I don't
understand
yet
is why it's necessary it seems to get
lost in the avatar. Not not not only to
have an avatar but to not not only to
take our perspective but to get lost in
the perspective to completely identifiy
with the perspective and then slowly and
often painfully
wake up from that. And for a lot of us,
you know, it's it's through an
addiction, a crisis, a tragedy
that we wake up or we spend our entire
life, you know, as a workaholic and then
look back and and go, I just wasted 50
years of why did I do that? You know,
because now I'm facing death. And I look
back and that's like the 50 years. Why
was I beating myself? What? What? What?
So we get completely lost in it and yet
we we are the infinite. We are
ultimately love and often we don't wake
up to it. So that's
why that's part of the one knowing
itself is very very interesting to me.
Why that seems to be so that's the big
surprise for me. It's it's not about
something in the in spaceime itself.
Spacetime itself is already surprising
enough but this is at a completely
different level of surprise. It's about
you and me and why we're here and why
why we're we have the problems that we
have and why all of a sudden we wake up
and realize I had no problem the whole
time. It's just a game.
&gt;&gt; And do when you look back, let's say 40
years ago and to the person you are now,
how much has this actually changed who
you are fundamentally with regards to
many of those topics, death, suffering,
love, spirituality?
Well, it's
the the change is really it's
interesting the there's a lot of inertia
which is one reason why I brought this
thing up is that just knowing this stuff
intellectually is one thing. Having it
affect my perceptions and my actions is
a much slower process. At least in my
case, it's it's really so that's also
for all the work that I've done um in my
everyday life, I see myself becoming a
physicist all on on the on a turn,
right? Just I'm I'm all I I am my
avatar. I am in space and time. That's
that is the reality. That's and so I
understand physicists and I understand
physicalism because when I'm not
thinking about it, I'm a physicist.
That's that's my So that's the default.
My default mode is a physicalist mode
and the spiritual mode is is is
not my default. But what's happening
with meditation
and all the work that I'm doing is that
I have brief moments in which I'm not
attached to the headset. Brief moments.
So when when people disbelieve my theory
and think I'm full of it, I completely
understand. I I I agree most of the
time. My my default is to agree with
them most of the time. It's only when
I'm thinking very very clearly about
things and thinking hard about it, they
go, "Oh, no. No, okay. No, I'm not my
body." And when I when this body dies
that that it's not the end of the story,
even though it feels like it's going to
be the end of the story. And no, it's
not that important what I do here. I
mean, I it's important in some sense,
but ultimately,
you know, who who was the richest guy in
1823?
Who cares? Who was the most intelligent
person in in 1702? Who cares?
Then in in in 200 years they'll ask who
is the most important person in 2025?
Who cares?
&gt;&gt; Takeatter of us. It's one.
&gt;&gt; That's right. It's it it's it's all all
one. And so the avatars
apparently need to be honored
and and yet transcended.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a it's uh it's pretty
mind-blowing. I mean, I feel like you
just described exactly how I am with
this podcast because when I when I leave
it, I have my own my own beliefs and
firm fixed views, but when I interview
guests, I obviously embody their their
philosophies. I try to actually put
create that model in my mind to try and
explore it as much as possible. And I
forget about who I am in the moment
because I actually am taking that theory
very seriously. And I do that all the
time to a point where it does sort of
blur the lines. But there is that
inertia cuz the moment I leave, it's not
like I'm going to sit down cross-legged
and start meditating immediately after a
podcast. So, so I completely understand
that,
&gt;&gt; right? Then you have your default and
you go back to your default.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's me too. And and and the
default isn't my theory. So, it's my my
default is physicist, you know. It's
very interesting.
&gt;&gt; It's it's crazy. But yeah, Don, it's um
once again absolute pleasure. The work's
growing so much. Um, I feel like you
haven't lost a step at all. I mean, and
you've been quite ill for a moment, and
I'm super glad you're well, but you
cannot tell. I feel like you've gotten
even better, which is crazy. Um, but
yeah, I appreciate your time so much.
Thank you so much for joining me once
again.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for inviting me and thank you
for your your wonderful questions and
follow-ups. I really appreciate it. So,
&gt;&gt; you know, it's been it's been
incredible, Don. And um and I'm looking
forward to seeing what comes next. Any
idea when this is going to happen? The
Traces of Is it coming out? Is it when's
the publication date planned for?
&gt;&gt; I I would say that um
the the technical issue is um I have a
first complete draft of the proof that
we can get Minowski space. So I have a
complete draft. Um
Shayon and I will have to go over it
with Schwon a ma mathematical well a
physicist that we work with. He's a
particle physicist. And when the three
of us agree and that may I mean there's
no rush probably two or three months I
would say two or three months to really
believe that we have this thing worth a
reviewer's time and then the rest of the
paper is done. So it's just this last
section. The paper's done except for
this section that I wanted to add on
manowsky space because that's the
capstone. We can get Manowski space.
Let's do it. So that's what's holding up
the paper. Otherwise, we could just send
it in right now. But so, and then so I'd
say three three to four months, then
we'll send it in and and the review the
re review process, assuming we haven't
made any mistake, we should have this
thing probably by by summer.
&gt;&gt; I'll try and get this episode out as
soon as possible so that anyone
watching, anyone listening, if they've
got any ideas, any feedback, anything
they want Don to possibly go through,
I'll try and sip through all the
comments for you, Don, and send you as
much as possible. And if there's any
mathematician who knows Markoff chains
and and and and high energy theoretical
physics and wants to work with us, we're
open. Don, anything about this paper?
So, traces of consciousness, uh, trace
logic, all the stuff we spoke about in
the past um, three episodes as well.
Anything you feel you haven't said or
need to clarify that you would like to
just drive home for people who are who
have not who who you think might have
misunderstood anything? Well, I think
we've covered, but maybe I'll just say
one summary thing, and that is that
my attitude is that a theory is just a
theory. That includes my theory. I'm not
claiming to have the theory of
everything. I'm just suggesting that the
next step, a next useful step in science
is to let go of spacetime and to embrace
consciousness as being fundamental and
to be hard-nosed about it and say,
"Give me a theory of consciousness
outside of spaceime and show me how we
get spacetime mathematically,
precisely." That's my agenda and I think
that's the next a useful next step for
science and I'm trying to take that step
right now.
rigorous outside of spacetime, rigorous
theory of consciousness and then
rigorously getting Einstein's spacetime
and physics and quantum theory out of
that. That's that's the goal. And if
that works, then there's this raw roach
between science and spirituality. That
would be an interesting next step.
&gt;&gt; And I think you're doing an excellent
job with that, Don. So, keep it up. It's
incredible to watch from the outside.
So, I can't imagine what it's like to be
on the inside.
It's a blast. It's a blast.
&gt;&gt; I can only imagine.
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much for for what you do,
too. And being a doctor and doing this,
I can't imagine.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Look, sometimes it does take its
toll, I must say. I've I've quit the
podcast a couple of times over the
years, but I always find myself coming
back. So, clearly it's something I love
too much to stop.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's because I know that a little
bit about the doctor's life and I just
have admiration for what you do.
&gt;&gt; Thanks so much, Don. Take care. Hey, and
keep well. Stay healthy and I hope
everything goes well. But we'll we'll
keep it
&gt;&gt; let's not wait two years for the next
one.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. I agree. I agree. Okay.