Welcome to what may very well be one of
the most important videos we've ever
made. Now, in order to even begin this
video, I must first establish this
disclaimer. This video is a set of
hypotheses,
an exploration of the world. And while
many ideas will be explored, what we are
sharing here is not meant to be taken as
definitive truth. We're not claiming
this is entirely made up of facts.
Rather, we are attempting to explore a
deeper, perhaps darker area of human
consciousness and see the bigger picture
of what is really going on. Please have
your own experience, do your own
research, and don't be afraid to go
deeper down the rabbit hole, for the
truth is often stranger than fiction.
There's no denying that the collective
human consciousness is in quite of a
pickle today. It is chaotic and
overtaking itself and all of nature.
Because of the internet, we have nearly
real time access to information. And
yet, most people are only seeing a
particular slice of the story. For
example, the algorithms behind what you
find when you use Google, Facebook,
YouTube, and almost every other social
network are designed to show you what
you're already looking for or what the
computer code thinks you want to see
based on other people's behavior. Unless
you're actively searching for new
information to find something different
or follow someone who is creating
content that is going down rabbit holes
and sharing what they find, what you get
is generally what you're already
accustomed to seeing. You only see what
you want to see. Further, due to the
controversial nature of many ideas,
especially those labeled as conspiracy
theories, many ideas are not explored by
the masses because when they hear about
it, they see that these ideas are
ridiculed and they write them off as
nonsense or dangerous extremism.
Following the herd mentality makes it
easier to dismiss exploring new ideas so
people can easily go along with their
lives. This is critical because the
ability to change one's belief changes
your experience of life. And most people
are happy just letting things be as they
are. A minority of people are compelled
to seek higher truth at all cost. And
certainly most of us know that sometimes
it can be very hard to empathize with
those who choose comfort over following
their passions. As the saying goes, you
can take a horse to water, but you can't
make it drink. and trying to convince
others to think differently only leads
to distress on everyone's part. As many
ancient texts will suggest, this is not
how true wisdom is passed on. This
creates a sort of self-created deception
and distraction from the bigger picture
which is rarely explored. If you're
already familiar with spirit science,
we've talked before about how everything
is connected. This was even a
fundamental part of my own awakening
where I had a transcendent experience
that all things were one, unified and
stemming from and linking to a singular
greater whole. Yet today and the
struggle of human consciousness is that
most people are not seeing it, simply
not looking or not even wanting to look.
In modern science today, there are many
scientists searching for an
all-pervading theory of everything.
something that unifies quantum mechanics
and the theories of relativity. And so
today, we respectfully present to you
the conspiracy theory of everything. I
invite you to watch this with the
intention of self-reflection. For as is
the nature of consciousness itself,
pointing the finger and blaming others
only creates more of the same cycle that
we've been trapped in. Liberating
ourselves from the illusion is the only
way to really break free of the shackles
that bind us to our lower state of
being.
Our conspiracy theory of everything
begins first with the demiurge. The
demiurge is an ancient Greek and Gnostic
concept describing a consciousness that
is considered to essentially be the
creator of the physical universe but not
the supreme creative force behind all
things.
A good way to explore this idea is
through the Matrix, a science fiction
story that suggests everything we think
we know of as the real world is nothing
but an illusion, a false world within
which most are imprisoned. Unable to
effectively identify what is real. As
people go about their day-to-day lives,
they think that their world is
authentic, but that every individual is
truly plugged into an artificial reality
severed from the real world. While
people suffer, there is a tremendous
benefit to the ruling overlords who in
the film were a form of AI. As it
relates to us, this AI is in essence the
demiurge. The demiurge was described as
a force, a deity or a consciousness who
was responsible for the creation of the
physical world and reality. However, in
a way, it had imposed itself over top of
the true reality, the supreme oneness
that created all things. In this it was
a false god who had assumed authority
over the world masking the living beings
namely us from the supreme truth the
highest order of creation and making us
believe that what we experienced as real
the physical reality that we are a part
of was the true authentic reality even
though it wasn't. Depending on the
school and belief of different gnostic
sex, the demiurge was either seen as
something malevolent, deliberately
trying to deceive us, or something that
was simply ignorant or misguided of its
place in the universe and the rest of
creation, which led to us becoming lost
in the illusion as a result.
said in simple terms, the demiurge was
the force behind the physical universe.
But within our consciousness, so long as
we perceived that which is physical to
be real, we were slaves to the illusion
of the false or at least incomplete
reality.
To that end, these ancient people, at
least those who were part of the ancient
mystery schools, believed that the
physical reality was an illusion. They
sought to liberate themselves from the
illusion of reality through varying
spiritual practices from meditation to
plant medicine ceremonies and everything
in between in order to connect with
higher realms of existence and break
free of the false world by finding the
truth, the supreme oneness within. This
is because even the demiurge and the
physical universe still stemmed from the
supreme oneness and the light of truth
could be found within known to the
Gnostics as Sophia meaning wisdom in
Greek. It was the act of awakening this
divine spark within us that would return
us to the higher realms which became the
ultimate goal of many gnostic schools.
This is where we find the roots of
enlightenment and like concepts from
around the world which teach that within
this world of suffering we can release
ourselves from the illusion through
various forms of mastery and
self-discipline both physical, emotional
and mental.
This of course takes considerable effort
and intention to do so. In essence,
transcendent people do what is hard and
that's why their lives are easy. People
in suffering do what is easy and that's
where their lives are hard.
Fast forward to today. There is a
tremendous volume of voices from across
the internet exploring ideas, concepts,
and sharing a metric buttload of memes.
But amidst the voices of the masses, we
find a new concept emerging and being
discussed in scientific and even some
mainstream circles. an idea that
proposes that the entire universe as we
know of is actually a hologram or a
simulation of some kind. Scientifically
speaking, if we look at the cosmos from
the perspective of quantum mechanics,
there is a general acknowledgement that
we really don't understand the universe
like we thought we did. We are seeing
the building blocks of the universe, the
subatomic particles, the waves behaving
in ways that do not make sense in the
context of classical mechanics, which
revealed discrepancies in the laws of
physics. Yet, the laws of physics still
stand and apply in a practical sense
when talking about our macroscopic
world. But the fabric of the reality
that we live in operates by rules that
we have yet to uncover. The holographic
universe seems in principle to be very
much like how you might expect a movie
and a projector to work in tandem. When
you watch a movie, you enjoy it
linearly, going through it one frame at
a time, usually at 24, 30, or 60 frames
per second. The stories on the screen
follow a narrative of some kind. And
generally speaking, there are definite
laws that make up the universe you are
experiencing in the film. Yet the
quantum world on the other hand is like
being able to observe the entire role of
film timelessly at any point which
includes zooming in on individual
frames, playing things backwards,
forwards, the sequels and prequels all
at the same time. The particles and
waves that make up our reality are
nonlinear and could potentially imply
notions of retrocausality.
And while they too follow their own set
of laws, they are different from the
world we exist in at a macro level.
Another example of this is found in
computer code. What you are seeing on
your computer or phone screen at any
given time is a filtered projection of
what is really going on underneath the
surface, designed to be easy for you to
interpret. Yet under the surface of
these machines, there is a computer
language that is incomprehensible to
nearly everyone. Languages like binary
and machine code are too simple to make
complex algorithms effectively in.
Instead, programmers use higher level
languages designed to be understood by
humans to write code that is then
translated into the lower base level
machine code and then binary at the
bottom. What you are seeing when you
look at your phone or computer monitor
ultimately comprises mountains of ones
and zeros that lay under the surface of
the digital world just like what is
under the surface of our own reality.
You might be familiar with the ancient
wisdom teaching as above so below. A
concept that applies on several levels
describing that which exists in higher
realities is a mirror of lower ones. So,
as with machine code and binary,
ultimately all of that computational
code is equal to and actively creates
the digital experience on your devices.
But they are two entirely different
paradigms.
This is the great challenge of modern
science today, unifying quantum
mechanics and general relativity.
Because we are unable to comprehend yet
how the physical world and tangible
substance continuity, gravity, life,
time, and consciousness emerge from this
flux field of quantum information which
appears to operate by an entirely
different set of laws related to
statistics and probability.
Yet, like with machine code and
computers, are they really so different?
The question then becomes, as many are
theorizing today, could our entire
reality be nothing more than a
simulation, an artificial reality that
our consciousness is plugged into? There
are some oddities that have been
captured on camera that some people
believe are glitches in the matrix. Now,
maybe these oddities are fake. Who
knows? But as an example, we do have
this curious clip of a bird who was
perched in midair without moving before
flying away.
There was also this news footage from
Russia several years ago that someone
caught an individual levitating on
camera, but when the guy with the camera
called out to them, the girl dropped
down and ran away. Now again, I'm not
trying to say this is hard evidence of a
real life matrix, but it certainly
compels curiosity. And this is what it's
really all about. Humanity living in the
question in the mystery of life and
these strange occurrences that beg us to
ask the question, what is the true
nature of reality?
Now on that note, I encourage you to
please do your own research and go down
these rabbit holes yourself and make up
your own mind. In this way, you become a
conduit of free thought rather than
following in the herd mentality of that
which has been established for you by
the powers that be and society at large.
Even if the laws of physics as we know
them today say that this is impossible,
levitation or birds perched in midair,
we also know that the laws of physics
are incomplete. We don't even know how
to properly fit gravity into our
standard model of physics. And perhaps
unlocking these secrets will change
everything for us.
And this brings us to our primary key
where we begin with our conspiracy
theory of everything. The basis from
which everything to come will build off
of. The demiurge is in essence a lesson
about the illusion of reality. that the
entire world as we conceive it to be is
based on what we perceive with our
physical senses which is a limited
experience of the totality of that which
exists in the whole universe. This idea
suggests that the illusion of the cosmos
is incomplete and as long as we believe
in only it by itself we too shall remain
incomplete. We are living within a
material universe. Yes, but there is
more to the cosmos than just that. And
as long as we choose to believe in this
limited reality, we will continue to
perpetuate its existence. It is only by
embracing that which we don't know and
asking the right questions can we break
free of the fetterss that bind us. In
the emerald tablets of Thlantan, there
is a great deal of discussion that
describes the human soul as a light
trapped in the veil of the night. A
metaphor suggesting that the night is
the illusion of separateness. The soul
disconnected from the supreme oneness or
simply trapped in illusions in general.
Basically, anything that is not the
highest truth. It is the unilluminated
mind that actively creates the reality
that it perceives to be real. And as
such, humanity lives out its days in the
dark, veiled in the illusion of one's
own beliefs, disconnected from any
higher reality. This was portrayed
excellently in Marvel's Doctor Strange
when Steven denies anything beyond the
material universe and then is shown a
glimpse of the multi-dimensional nature
of reality that thoughts are things. He
has shown that all of us steer the
reality field by our conscious intent.
But yet as we become complacent in the
creation of our lives, we give up
control of the driver's seat. But then
the question is who is driving the ship?
Literally anyone and everything else.
Carl Young called it the collective
unconscious. The collective mindfield of
everyone whose thoughts and feelings
influence our own very decisions and
actions by the concentration of their
energetic weight. Whether it be the
media, the news, advertisements, what
your family or friends tell you, or
things that you just happen across on
the internet, ultimately all of it is
processed by our egos, which shape who
we think we are as we disconnect further
from the nature of our being. So the
question then becomes, what is the
truth? What is the higher reality? And
how do we connect with it? The ancient
wisdom teachings describe that the quest
for wisdom or enlightenment or the true
nature of being is a continuous journey
into the unknown and the illumination
that we are active creators of our lives
not simply beholden unto the
preconceived patterns that we've been
following in. The great truth we must
understand about the demiurge is that we
are the ones who actively perpetuate its
existence by believing in the physical
universe as the ultimate reality. Your
beliefs shape the reality that you
experience as Dr. Bruce Lipton has
demonstrated through his work with the
biology of belief. The beliefs and ideas
that we hold in our minds can be
scientifically proven to affect how our
DNA and cells express themselves.
If you believe you are a low life with
nothing going on and will die alone and
miserable, guess what kind of life you
will lead. If you believe you can change
the world, guess what kind of life you
will lead. In order to break free of the
limitations that we feel are imposed
upon us, we must first believe that it's
possible to do so. We must open
ourselves to a greater truth, a greater
reality, one that is beyond the demiurge
and perceive a cosmic truth that forever
changes life as we know it. Yet,
humanity is not paying attention to
messages like this in mass. And there is
a reason for it. It is a very
significant and critical thing. For this
one piece of the puzzle must be resolved
in order for humanity to truly advance
as a species and break free of illusion
collectively.
But with that the mysteries of who is
behind all of this aside, how exactly do
the world elite control human
consciousness due to the sheer volume of
control mechanisms? Here we're going to
provide a lighter overview and you are
encouraged to explore these as you see
fit.
Fear and scarcity. At the highest level
of control, fear is one of the most
easiest methods to control the
population in mass. This is a two-way
street that binds the influence from the
elite and us together. For we actively
perpetuate the problem when we live from
fear and scarcity, spreading it around
to each other like a nasty virus. Fear
can be used to corral people in all
manner of directions, to take actions
that are not in their best interest, or
to give up their power and control to
others.
Our
food. For the most part, all of the food
that we're eating today is toxic,
designed to subdue our creative energy,
making us easily addicted to things that
are unhealthy for us. Whether it's
processed foods rich with salt, sugar,
and fat, or even our produce, which has
been chemically engineered or sprayed
with pesticides and herbicides. We can
see this with Monsanto who have actually
patented seed and GMO production,
disallowed the ancient practice of
saving seeds and ultimately controlled
the food supply but have masked it as
providing the world food. We recently
published a movie called Healing Your
Body with Food: Spirit Science 33 which
reveals the truth about food and where
it comes from today. So we won't get
super deep into it here because there is
a lot to cover. But if you want to go
deeper into this, please watch that
movie after this one is done. Ultimately
though, the bottom line here appears to
be that we are what we eat and most of
us eat far too much and in that consume
too many harmful substances.
Fluoride in the water. Some have said
that fluoride is the metaphorical tears
of the new world order and that it's
their most widely used weapon against
us. The idea in a nutshell is that
governments put fluoride in our water
supply in order to negatively affect
huge populations and facilitate mass
control, whether for financial gain
through the health defects that it
causes or for the purpose of disrupting
our connection to the spiritual plains.
Any quick search of a fluoride
conspiracy brings up notions that it
calcifies the pineal gland, the organ in
our brain that is often linked to
consciousness and the third eye. The
idea of the pineal gland being linked
with consciousness originally came from
the French philosopher Decart who argued
that the interaction between non-local
consciousness and the physical world
occurred inside of it. If you dig into
why water fluidation began, you find a
convoluted, suspicious mess, mostly
centering around the aluminum production
company Alcoa, who supposedly had a lot
of toxic waste to spare that took the
form of fluoride as a byproduct of
aluminum production. After a single
biochemist who was sponsored by them
showed in a lab that fluoride affects
cavities in rats in 1939, so the story
goes, the first public proposal that the
US should fluoridate its water supplies
were made, not by a doctor, but by an
industry scientist.
Nowadays, our water is fluoridated in
over 24 countries, mostly in the western
world. According to chemist and
researcher Charles E. Perkins, who wrote
the book, The Truth About Water
Fluoridation. Repeated doses of
infantessimal amounts of fluoride will
in time reduce an individual's ability
to resist domination by slowly poisoning
a certain area of the brain, thus making
them submissive to the will of those who
wish to govern them.
While there are unsupported theories
that the Nazis used the chemical in
concentration camps or the USSR in their
goologs, the threat of fluoride isn't
just a theory. The work of Jennifer Luke
in the9s showed that by old age, the
pineal gland contains the same amount of
fluoride as teeth, having been calcified
as we age. Further, a huge review on
fluoride toxicity published by the
National Research Council in 2006
reported a range of negative side
effects from fluoride, including
decreased melatonin production and other
effects on normal pineal function, which
in turn could contribute to a variety of
bad effects in humans. In fact, studies
from Harvard and China's Shanghai Health
Institute may even have linked fluoride
to reduced IQ in children and even
suggest that it could be toxic to a
developing brain. As well as being
linked to certain types of cancer, it's
also been shown to destroy the male
reproductive system in rabbits. The
bottom line is the benefit to risk ratio
on water fluoridation is unclear due to
a lack of good evidence with most people
not even knowing that they're drinking
it. If the conspiracy theories are to be
believed, professors doing this research
have been met with numerous attempts to
discredit them. Steven Peekham, director
of the Center for Health Services at the
University of Kent and professor at the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine at the University of Toronto,
has had his research of water
fluoridation rejected from dental health
journals. He's even spoken out about
being accused of statistics hacking and
for research that made the link between
fluoride and hypothyroidism.
It seems as though someone does not want
this info getting out.
Entertainment and subliminal messaging.
The entertainment industry has been a
source of conspiracies for a long time
with often disturbing subliminal
messages in children's entertainment
such as references to suicide and sex
found in everything from Disney movies
to Spongebob. But it often goes deeper
and darker. The entertainment industry,
especially Disney, has seen several
instances of hiring young children,
making them into massive celebrities,
making a fortune off of them, and
driving them insane. This has also
happened with the K-pop industry, with
their so-called slave contracts that
force the young singers into decades of
servitude, having them work endless hour
days and running them to the point of
exhaustion. There are actually many
instances of these young singers
collapsing on stage due to exhaustion.
This also links back to the conversation
of pedophilia networks. For many
celebrities have now spoken out about
how bad Hollywood really is for
pedophilia, including people like Brad
Pitt, Elijah Wood, Evan Rachel Wood, and
Corey Feldman.
The news. The news often perpetuates a
story that things are bad and getting
worse. There is a consistent theme from
the news of toxicity. And as people
watch this in mass, we come to believe
it and thus perpetuate it. The people
running the news command more attention
by spreading this kind of information
because bad news gets more attention
than positive stories and therefore we
continue to create this reality. When
you are constantly looking at the world
in a negative light, you are not looking
at your own light. In fact, you don't
even know that there is light within
you. There is only darkness, shadows,
and frightening imagery. And so, what
happens? But humanity falls further and
further into a world of self-created
delusion.
It's also worth mentioning that even the
local news is ultimately both written
for and controlled by a unified source.
Regardless of the network, just watch
this clip and you'll see how bad it
really is.
&gt;&gt; Plugging our country,
&gt;&gt; the sharing of biased and false news has
become all too common on social media.
&gt;&gt; The sharing of biased and false
&gt;&gt; false news has become all too common on
social media.
First, unfortunately, some members use
their platform to push their own
personal and gender control. Exactly
what people think and this is extremely
dangerous to our democracy.
&gt;&gt; Mass surveillance.
The Medal of Honor for revealing this
really goes to Edward Snowden, the
whistleblower who brought to the
collective attention how the Secret
Service of the US and UK governments had
the ability to spy on literally
everyone, tracking metadata, watching
everywhere that you go and what you're
up to.
The first program to be revealed was
Prism, which allows for courtapproved
direct access to Americans Google and
Yahoo accounts and everything in them.
Then came Tempora, a British black ops
surveillance program run by the NSA's
British partner, GCHQ.
This includes stuff like call databases,
numbers, text messages, and even a
secret court order requiring Verizon to
hand the NSA millions of Americans phone
records daily.
One of Snowden's most frightening
statements came in 2013 when he
explained that by using the X Keyscore
program, I sitting at my desk could
wiretap anyone from you or your
accountant to a federal judge or even
the president if I had a personal email.
The NSA's top secret black budget
obtained by Snowden exposed the
successes and failures of over 16 spy
agencies comprising the US intelligence
community and revealed that the NSA was
paying US private tech companies for
clandestine access to their
communications networks. All in all, it
was revealed that the NSA was harvesting
millions of emails and instant messaging
contact lists, searching email content,
tracking and mapping the location of
cell phones, undermining attempts at
encryption via Bull Run, and that the
agency was using cookies to piggyback on
the same tools used by internet
advertisers to pinpoint targets for
government hacking and to bolster
surveillance.
And yet, after all of this info being
dropped, it has mysteriously disappeared
from mainstream discussion.
Our belief systems, we do it to
ourselves.
At some level, we have to take
responsibility for ourselves. As easy as
it may be to point the finger at the
ruling elite, and there's no question
justice must be served, we must also
recognize ourselves as a part of the
problem through our own beliefs, herd
mentality, and lack of mindfulness, and
unwillingness to strive for wisdom. If
we wish to truly be a part of the
solution, I know you've heard this
before, but it's more serious than ever.
Be the change you wish to see in the
world.
As Bruce Lipton has demonstrated with
his groundbreaking work in epigenetics,
our very beliefs affect our biological
systems in deep and very impactful ways.
If we can believe we can live a happy
life, then we can. And if we believe
that it's impossible, then we actually
shut off ourselves and our bodies from
receiving and experiencing satisfaction.
Further, people will often try and rope
their friends into their belief systems
in order to validate their own opinions
and perspectives. And so, what we're
dealing with here is a mass field of
consciousness that is trying to push its
beliefs onto everyone else. And the
truth is muddled and lost. Generally
speaking, all of this unconsciousness
keeps us small and we do it to
ourselves. The collective mindset often
appears to lack any interest in
education, learning, wisdom, or
connecting with truth. And in this may
compel us to outrageous levels of
stupidity. Now, at some level, we must
be able to laugh at ourselves because
humans are notorious for often doing
very dumb things. And in today's day and
age, these things are often captured on
camera and shared for all to see, which
fills up Reddit and YouTube channels to
no end. For example, scrolling through
Reddit's our what could go wrong channel
will bring endless laughter at the
ridiculous things that people do every
day. Yet, it is also a clear reflection
of our lack of ability to generally
exercise a higher consciousness on a
regular basis. If we really want to
evolve, we have to do better.
From the very top of the chain to the
very bottom, it seems clear that there
is a problem. At the beginning of this
chapter, we said that there is a
sickness running through the underbelly
of human consciousness. And while we
have explored the idea that this
sickness may be perpetuated and
inflicted upon us by a demonic
consciousness, whether it's sick,
twisted psychopaths, a reptilian
species, or demonic entities themselves,
the truth is that we actively perpetuate
it by staying asleep, pessimistic and
disconnected. And such is the nature of
this chapter within the conspiracy
theory of everything.
Upon exploring the spiritual path, we
can see that we remain complacent due to
the disconnection of our souls. For when
we live just from the ego, we live as
self-centered, materialistic, pleasure-
seeeking beings who do not actively
perceive or care for the search for
anything greater. The soul is the voice
of truth, love, and compassion within
you, the most authentic and highest
version of you. It is the eye of
awareness within your heart that
connects you to everything that sees and
knows that all things are connected.
However, in mass there are so many who
are disconnected from the soul and don't
even believe that it exists. Thus, ideas
like this are often ridiculed and
demeaned by the masses which further
perpetuates the soulless body of human
consciousness running rampant. a body of
ego.
Obviously, this makes it very easy for
the elite to control the collective mind
using all of the ways that we've
explored because we are not operating
from a state of higher collective
consciousness.
Rather, we are operating as if we are
chickens with our heads cut off.
Yet, if even but a glimpse of the soul
can be seen, which often happens through
lucid dreams, near-death experiences,
psychedelic experiences, or other
personal transformational revelations,
an individual is usually changed
forever. It is very difficult to go back
to the way things were when you suddenly
see and experience within that you are a
part of something so much greater than
yourself and that your own thoughts,
feelings, and actions have a direct
impact on the world around you. How
could you go back to being ignorant of
this once you know a higher truth? We
must be mindful that solving this
problem must be taken from both ends of
the spectrum. Those who are perpetuating
the crimes against humanity, the mass
manipulation, the pedophiles, the
rapists, the murderers, all of them must
be brought to justice. However, if we
think this will solve all of our
problems, we are sorely mistaken. For if
we remain asleep and complacent, we
remove one leader and a new one just
takes its place and the cycle continues
forever. Thus, the other half of the
equation is that we must also take it
upon ourselves, each of us, to evolve
our way of thinking to heal the
connection with our soul and to be
examples of what it means to be
virtuous, soulful, and compassionate.
But again, this is only still just the
beginning. For our journey of waking up
also stands in alignment with the
evolution of technology and the
introduction of new tech that will
forever shape the future as we know it.
The subject of extraterrestrials has
mystified humanity for countless
generations. The question of are we
alone in the universe has inspired us to
push forward and advance as a species in
the search for life in the great beyond.
But to this day, judging by the way
people generally treat the subject, it
would appear that we have yet to make
any form of substantial contact. Yet the
awareness of a deeper truth that
something is being hidden from us is
regularly being leaked to this day.
Let's start with some basics, which
would be UFOs, which we all know stands
for unidentified flying objects, or as
they're starting to be called today,
UAVs, unidentified aerial vehicles. It
was shortly after the two atomic bombs
went off during World War II, that UFO
sightings spiked around the world.
Hundreds of reports of UFOs began to
emerge in the decade that followed the
incident. And it was in 1947 in Roswell,
New Mexico that things got really
interesting. Reports of a UFO crash
landing in the shape of a flying disc
inspired tremendous interest in possible
alien activity as the US military
quickly quarantined and cleaned up the
site, claiming it was simply a weather
balloon. This was really the beginning.
And today, thanks to modern technology,
especially cell phones, we have access
to thousands, if not tens of thousands
of seemingly unexplainable UFO sightings
from around the world. My own personal
favorite is the Dome of the Rock
incident from 2011, where several
independent people caught footage of a
bright, glowing, and oscillating orb
that descended over the Dome of the Rock
in Jerusalem. After hovering over the
sacred temple for several moments, it
shot upwards with tremendous speed,
disappearing into the sky.
In more recent times, a video that was
leaked several years ago was released by
none other than the Pentagon, featuring
three separate accounts of US military
pilots attempting to track and follow
incredibly fastmoving aerial ships
without any clue as to what they were.
Along with curious phenomena like these,
we also have a long list of ex-military
officials who have either claimed to
have seen or even had some level of
interaction with these crafts,
identifying that not only are they real,
but they have no idea what they are.
One particular interesting subject in
this discussion is the work of Robert
Dean, a retired command sergeant major
who after that job became a ufologist
and had been very public about his
experiences with UFOs and ETSs up until
his passing away in 2018. At one point
he gave a presentation the full thing of
which you can find available on YouTube
accounting many of the things that he
saw in the military and NASA. The most
interesting of which being the story of
what happened during the real moon
landing.
Now, many people today believe that the
moon landing itself is a conspiracy,
that it was faked because of certain
things that stand out about the moon
landing that don't make sense, such as
why the crosshairs of a camera are
appearing behind a particular object on
the screen or the strange objects in the
reflection of the astronaut's visor. But
what Robert Dean has described was that
there was actually a real moon landing.
But what happened was that upon arriving
at the moon, what the astronauts found
was that it was populated. There were,
according to him, little alien people
walking all over the place, ships flying
through the well, I'd call it air, but I
guess they don't have oxygen up there,
do they?
This was such a shock to the astronauts
that after their visit, they returned
back with 40 rolls of film of what they
saw and NASA supposedly destroyed it.
The thinking seems to be that the
revelation of this truth was so out
there that NASA buried the truth because
of what would happen to the world if
this was to get out. Now, I'm not saying
that I'm in support of hiding the truth.
But at the same time, think of how many
religious beliefs would be shattered
from this truth. how much chaos would be
caused if all of a sudden our entire
global paradigm was to change in an
instant.
Again, I'm not saying that they're
destroying the footage if it did happen
was a good thing, but at the very least,
trying to see things from every
perspective.
Specifically, there was an ex CIA
operative who spoke with AJ Plus at one
point, and she described that the single
most important thing that she learned
from her time as basically a spy was
that everyone believes they are the good
guy. So, even if this event did happen,
whoever it is at NASA who controlled all
of the information probably did it
believing they were doing the right
thing. We will return to Robert Dean at
another point soon because he shared
something else that was very
interesting. However, first we have to
discuss this. You may be familiar with a
man named Bob Lazar, one of, if not the
first to come forward with inside leaks
about the secret government UFO
programs. He claimed to have been hired
in the late 1980s to reverse engineer
purported extraterrestrial technology at
what he described was a secret site
called S4, a site similar to and rather
close to Area 51.
He described that he had access to a
recovered UFO ship and for several years
was attempting to discover the secrets
of how it worked. Lazar claimed that the
propulsion of the studied vehicle was
fueled by the chemical element with the
atomic number 115 known today as Moscow
or E115
which at the time was named unimpentium
since it hadn't been created yet.
However, it was first synthesized in
2003 by a joint team of Russian and
American scientists for real. He said
that the propulsion system relied on a
stable isotope of E115 which supposedly
generated a gravity wave after being
excited by liver morium element 116
during proton bombardment. He argued
that the decay products brought about by
the reaction between the two elements
would include gravitons a hypothetical
quantum particle that is thought to be
responsible for gravity. In his new
Netflix documentary, he used the analogy
that the craft is kind of like a bowling
ball. If you were to put a ball onto a
piece of fabric or your bed sheet and
then proceeded to push down on the areas
around it, the bowling ball would fall
forward into the bends and gaps that you
create around it. In this way, the craft
would kind of just fall through space by
distorting spaceime around it, like in a
continuous rolling motion.
This is what allowed the vehicle to fly
and to evade visual detection by bending
light around it. He said it levitated
silently and when it was activated, he
was unable to even put his hand on it
because the force would repel his hand
away like a strong gravitational field.
According to intel that he received
while at S4, the ship, which was one of
nine that the military had access to,
was originally from the twin binary star
system called Zeta Reticuli and had
belonged to the grays, which are the
most common visual of aliens that we
generally see today when you think of
what an alien might look like. We even
have an emoji for it. He also explained
that the way that the military worked
was so secretive that they wouldn't even
let the various divisions studying the
craft to communicate with each other. So
progress on reverse engineering the
technology was very slow.
While one group would be working on
controls, another on propulsion, and
another on well, you get the picture.
But due to this isolation, they wouldn't
easily be able to identify how the
different parts of the ship were
interconnected and worked together. and
thus reverse engineering became very
difficult. This was especially
challenging because supposedly the ship
was entirely interconnected. There
weren't really any moving parts. It
seemed to be one singular solid object.
The seat and floor and panels and walls
were all one singular material with no
sharp edges anywhere. An entirely
different kind of machine than anything
we're used to today.
Now, after Lazar came out publicly about
this, his life fell apart. Many people
quickly looked into his life and found
that he seemingly never had any of the
education degrees that he claimed to
have had. Yet, upon deeper
investigation, documents stored away in
his old university proved that he was
telling the truth. Bob explained that
after he came out publicly, he received
a phone call from his ex employers who
said, "Do you have any idea what we're
going to do to you now that you've done
this?" And for many years, Bob suffered
as much of his past was erased and he
was made to look like a fool in front of
the masses. Now, Bob's story is a very
interesting one. My highest
recommendation is checking out the
documentary he created with Jeremy
Corbel called Bob Lazar, Area 51, and
Flying Saucers, as well as the Joe Rogan
podcast that they appeared on, where Bob
goes deep into the story of what
happened and what he learned. But Bob
isn't the only one to come forward with
some fascinating stories. And this
brings us to Dr. Steven Greer, who
founded the Center for the Study of
Extraterrestrial Intelligence, or CETI
in 1990 to create a diplomatic and
research-based initiative to contact
extraterrestrial civilizations along
with the disclosure project in 1993, a
research project devoted to disclosing
to the public information that the
government and military supposedly have
had regarding the existence of UFOs and
ETSs.
The organization claims to have over
3,000 confirmed reports of UFO sightings
by pilots and over 4,000 proofs of what
they describe as landing traces,
evidence of UFOs landing on the Earth
and leaving behind a sort of
electromagnetic signature. If we pair
this with what Bob Lazar said, it's
entirely possible these ships could be
bending light, entirely invisible to us,
though perhaps not highle military
scanners.
Dr. Greer also appeared on the Joe Rogan
podcast many years ago and explained
some very interesting things. What he
received from a collection of over 30
documents from the NRO, NSA, CIA, FBI,
and presidential briefings was that the
way that these ships work and the way
these ETs understand the universe is
leagues beyond our own.
What he described was that while today
we believe that light is the fastest
thing in the universe, this is only a
barrier. And on the other side of the
speed of light are laws that are
governed by some sort of super
consciousness. And that it is from this
higher awareness that interdimensional
travel becomes possible. And you can
move throughout the universe nearly
instantaneously without worrying about
the speed of light, which is simply too
slow to travel at if you're going from
solar system to solar system or
especially across the galaxy or even
between galaxies. This is incredibly
important to us because it's relative to
the idea that consciousness and
conscious thought actively steers the
field of reality that creates the
experiences that we have. This is a
subject we will return to shortly.
However, this conversation has one
massive implication. You see, one thing
that Dr. Greer explained was that the
significance of alien life to us isn't
really all about ETSs at all, but about
technology. The very instant that it
became available would completely
transform life on Earth forever. Imagine
suddenly being able to travel to distant
planets or explore the universe and
forget about having power to fuel the
entire world's energy requirements
forever. You'd have enough power to blow
up a planet if you wanted to. This has
tremendous implications to it and may
even be part of the reasoning for
keeping the technology hidden for now.
The question arises, is this technology
hidden so that only the secret rulers of
the world can have it? or is it because
humanity is not yet ready to inherit
such a gift? One final piece in the ET
and UFO conspiracy is the concept of the
hoaxed alien attack. This comes from the
late Dr. Wernner von Braonn, the top
Nazi scientist of Hitler's army, who
after World War II came to the United
States to work for the US government.
Funny how that happens. And on his
deathbed, he theorized that after a war
with the Middle East, one day there
would be a hoaxed alien attack, which
was a part of the secret plan to
weaponize space and control the world.
He actually urged Dr. Rosen, his
secretary, to thwart this plan above all
else. Because if it were to come to pass
and space was weaponized, whoever
controlled these powers would have
complete and supreme control over
everyone and the world would fall under
the complete control of the oppressors.
Now, the subject of ETS does not end
there, however, because there is also
the reptilian conspiracy. Most famously
brought to the public attention by the
British conspiracy theorist David Ike.
It's become one of the most infamous and
popular conspiracy theories ever,
sparking numerous parodies and
commentaries in the media and TV shows.
To put it simply, Ike believes that an
interdimensional race of reptilian
entities known as archons have hijacked
the earth and are stopping humanity from
realizing our true potential.
He has argued that these archons are the
same beings mentioned in many Gnostic
texts that have identified themselves as
demons and rulers of the seven planets
in various traditions mostly having the
ultimate goal of preventing souls from
leaving the material realm. He claims
that because of this they have gone by
many names throughout history including
the Anunnaki from Sumerian myth and the
watchers and Nephilim from the book of
Enoch. He argues that human sacrifice to
the gods in the ancient world was
actually for the reptilians benefit,
especially the sacrifice of children.
Because he tells us that at the moment
of death by sacrifice, a form of
adrenaline surges through the body,
accumulating at the base of the brain
and is apparently more potent in
children, something that is today
reminiscent of adrenochrome.
Bringing it more into the modern day, he
claims that a genetically modified human
archon hybrid race of shape-shifting
reptilians known as the Babylonian
Brotherhood or the Illuminati or
Freemasons to us today manipulate global
events to keep humans in constant fear
so that the archons can feed off of the
negative energy that this creates. Now,
he has also claimed that the members of
this secret elite are descended from
reptilians coming from the Draco
constellation.
He stated that the reptilians come not
only from another planet but also
another dimension, the lower level of
the fourth dimension which he calls the
astral plane, the one nearest to the
physical world. As of 2003, when his
books originally brought this theory
out, he said that the reptilian
bloodlines include all American
presidents, three British and two
Canadian prime ministers, several
Sumerian kings and Egyptian pharaohs,
and a whole bunch of celebrities.
Remember when that article went viral
about how Justin Bieber supposedly
turned into a giant reptile in front of
everyone? Some of the most prominent
bloodlines are said to include the
Rockefellers, Rothschilds, various
wealthy European families, and
established families of the Eastern
United States and the British royal
family.
In fact, he said in numerous interviews
that he saw former British Prime
Minister Ted Heath's eyes turn entirely
jet black while the two men waited for a
Sky News interview in 1989.
Ultimately, the global elite make up the
top of the pyramid for the reptilians in
modern day. All with the intention to
keep us sedated and trapped in this
reality without gaining a higher
knowledge. At the top of the global
elite are what Ike has referred to as
the prison wardens, who oversee us in
what is to them just a prison world.
Along with the new world order, their
main goal is apparently to create a
microchipped population, a one world
government, and a global Orwellian
fascist state, a brave new world, which
he claims will be a post-truth era where
freedom of speech is denied.
And how are they planning to do this you
might ask? Well, if Ike is to be
believed, then the Brotherhood either
created or controls everything. things
like the United Nations, the
International Monetary Fund Round Table,
the Council on Foreign Relations,
Chatham House, the Club of Rome, the
Royal Institute of International
Affairs, the Trilateral Commission, and
the Bilderberg Group, as well as the
media, military, CIA, MI6, MOSAD,
scientific publications, most religious
doctrine, and even the internet. In
other words, they control every aspect
of our society and can make us believe
what they want when they want.
Before we move on, I think it's
important that we now revisit Bob Dean
and a particularly interesting story
that he shared during the European
Exopolitics Summit in 2009. He described
that he was attending his son's
retirement ceremony from the US Navy in
Washington DC. And at this event, there
were a great deal of active and retired
generals, admirals, captains, and more.
One particular retired Navy scientist
approached him and said, "Hey, I know
you. You're that retired command
sergeant major who has opened up about
the UFOs. I have a story for you that my
last government job was as a plasma
fusion physicist at a top secret place
outside of Las Vegas. And I was working
there for 5 years with two guys who were
not from here. They were from somewhere
else, delightful people supporting us in
figuring out plasma fusion, which
equates to infinite energy forever. The
man said, "After a few years of working
with these guys, I approached one of
them and asked, 'Okay, what do you
really think of us humans as a species?"
And the alien said, "Well, since you've
asked, we think you are a primitive,
savage, and dangerous race." The other
alien who was listening in then leaned
in and said, "And you also smell bad."
And he explained that it's not really
about our bodies, although yes, we have
polluted our bodies and the earth to a
wild extent, but that we also have a
psychic odor about us. Our thoughts and
feelings are so negative that other
higher species find it terribly
offensive.
While this story is actually kind of
funny, it's also something that we
should take very seriously. According to
the reports and expressions from many
whistleblowers, the other species who
are interacting with us are actually
mostly benevolent. And if we can really
listen to what they have to say and do
some meaningful self-reflection, it may
just help us to clear out our own
negativity, release ourselves from any
reptilian or other controlling
influences, and put us into a position
to meet some really cool otherworldly
species.
Know your customer. It's the de facto
business mantra of our modern era.
Collect enough information on everyone's
web browsing and social media habits.
Listen to what they talk about when they
believe they're alone. And feed the data
into a network of computers so complex
that computer scientists aren't even
sure how it works at all anymore.
This complex neural network of
computers, data, and programs are then
linked to nearly all of us through the
apps and web services that we use on a
daily basis. Spitting out products,
content, and suggestions,
catered to individual desires better
than anything that has ever been done
before, keeping the masses glued and
engaged on their phones, tablets, and
desktops like nobody's business. and
have been specifically designed to
manipulate our thoughts and feelings in
order to keep us using the apps longer,
get our friends and family engaging, and
spend more money in the process. This is
our current reality. And what's more
interesting, the business model is
wildly successful, and most people don't
even know that they're a part of it.
Where does humanity go from here? A
cyberpunk dystopia?
As technology continues to advance,
there is concern growing in the minds of
those who have freed themselves from the
matrix long enough to realize that there
is an issue. As technology continues to
evolve and humans become more integrated
with it, the line seems to blur between
what is real and what is not. Then
again, if all of reality is an illusion
anyways, does it even matter?
Let us begin our exploration with a
software that currently exists today
that begins to blur the lines between
reality and illusion.
Deep fakes. Technology is just now
reaching a point where we can produce
videos of just about anyone saying or
doing things that they otherwise
wouldn't say.
&gt;&gt; President Trump is a total and complete
&gt;&gt; Granted, this technology is still in its
infancy. And while that clip itself can
easily be identified as a fake, every
day as it improves, it becomes more and
more difficult to tell the difference
between deep fake and reality. Even
today, it's being used in nefarious
ways, including making porn videos of
celebrities by taking their faces and
applying them to other bodies. As time
goes on, we may exist in a world where
across the internet could exist
countless videos of famous people,
celebrities, politicians, all saying
things that they would never otherwise
say. And what happens when it gets so
good that nobody can tell the
difference? The real and fake versions
arguing over which one is authentic. But
of course, this is only the beginning of
our technological conspiracies and how
we slowly lose touch with our world as
we enter into new ones.
One of the biggest growing concerns in
the world is the belief that the powers
that be are attempting to control
everyone through advanced microchip
technology. For while each of our mobile
devices already track and monitor us,
the microchips could be used to monitor
and potentially even manipulate thoughts
and emotions on a mass level, just like
Facebook and Google are already doing
today. The powers that be wouldn't just
be watching you on the outside. They'd
be able to monitor everything inside,
everything about you, down to what you
think about.
This technology combined with an AI that
can associate complex combinations of
states within your physiology,
predicting future behaviors and
affecting our perception and
decision-making processes, a very scary
and possible reality becomes available
to us. One where we integrate with
technology.
As we know, this is already happening on
some level right now with the algorithms
actively recording everything you search
and serving it back to you on a silver
platter. This, however, would be a far
more invasive integration. And what's
even crazier to consider is that people
would do it voluntarily.
You see, very few people are going to
just allow this technology to be
embedded in their bodies just so that
the government can monitor them. Rather,
just like with cell phones today, the
microchip will be a no-brainer for
people who are willing to receive the
benefits of this tech. And the exchange,
intimate access to your personal
information, everything you see, think,
feel, touch, taste, and so on. But what
kind of benefits would there be? Well,
at the earliest level, which Elon Musk
has already announced with Neurolink, is
that by connecting a very few tiny wires
directly into your brain, they could
theoretically overwrite neural patterns
of depression, anxiety, and even help
heal spinal problems, among other
things. But in the grand scheme of
things, and with a great deal of
innovation, where this technology seems
to go is into the realm of having a sort
of telepathic link to the internet. When
you have a question, instead of pulling
out your phone and searching for the
answers on the internet, you can access
all of the information instantaneously
about anything that you want. For others
with the implant, you may find yourself
connecting to others in a pseudo
telepathic kind of way where your
thoughts and feelings could be
personally shared with others in real
time, communicating beyond words, but
with a language of images, pictures, and
even sharing experiences.
This would allow you to connect with
others both mentally and empathically as
well, which could bring people closer
together. This would fundamentally
change the education system, too. For
who needs school when you have instant
access to every bit of information known
to mankind right there in your mind?
This chip could theoretically support
you in downloading information
thousands, if not millions of times
faster than reading or watching
documentaries. Much like Neo in the
Matrix, downloading a lifetime worth of
fighting techniques and becoming a kung
fu master in a single day. This level of
integration could be possible with this
kind of technology. Imagine if you
wanted to become an amazing artist or
learn everything there is to learn about
programming, quantum mechanics, or even
becoming a professional accountant or
lawyer. So, why not just spend an
afternoon or evening downloading and
installing courses directly into your
mind? You could theoretically condense 6
years of intense university studies into
a weekend and have the exact same level
of knowledge or even greater knowledge
compared to someone who took the time to
learn it the old-fashioned way.
And as more and more people integrate
with technology, it may even lead to a
collective hive mind where everyone's
own brains become processors for a
collective consciousness shared amongst
all integrated people. On the one hand,
it's very much like the Borg from Star
Trek. But on the other hand, it seems to
relate with many ancient writings such
as the hermetic texts as well as ideas
that people like Steven Greer have put
forward. The idea that there is only one
consciousness and while all of our
bodies appear separate and perceived
disconnection from one another,
ultimately we're all sharing the same
consciousness within the source field.
The advent of this kind of technology
would have earthshattering implications
for all of us and life would never be
the same. A sense of personal boundaries
and privacy disappears as we become more
open and interconnected in mind and
body. But again, as wonderful as some of
these ideas sound, the conspiracy
remains. Who programmed the AI that
links into our minds? And much like
Facebook and Google operating today,
would this mental tech dissolve our
personalities, losing our individuality
and making us more like robots?
When all of us are connected in this
kind of way, the lines of reality blur
further, and we are called to ask, who
are we really?
Yet, the microchip technology is really
only the beginning for how we might
connect through tech. Because where
things could go are directly into the
realms of something straight out of a
sci-fi movie. Let us start with some
rather inconspicuous innovations that
could change the landscape of the world
in a massive way. Perhaps one day, let's
say scientists and engineers complete a
prototype for an artificial eye for
blind people. One simple surgery and
it's a miracle. People who have been
blind their whole lives suddenly have
the gift of sight. But it won't stop
there, though. Suddenly, these people
can see wavelengths of light that normal
eyes can't. Have an integrated zoom
feature, giving them binocular eyes, and
even have an augmented reality display
directly in their inner vision. These
people could literally play Pokémon Go
anywhere without a phone, literally
seeing Pokémon all over the place. When
cyborgs can not only see but see better
than someone with normal eyes, even
people with fine eyesight will want this
upgrade and a new generation of upgraded
humans begins.
Even on a less invasive level, we have
the ideas like the digital contact lens
depicted in the new Brave New World
series, which is a contact that hooks
into receptors in the back of your eye,
giving you a direct mental and visual
link to everyone else in society.
This could happen with prosthetics, too.
And in a way, it already is, although
the tech is still in its infancy. If
someone loses or breaks their legs or
arms in a terrible accident, they can
one day get bionic limbs that are more
powerful and capable than any normal
body part, giving them super strength or
super speed, at least up to the limits
of what the rest of the biological body
can handle. When this tech is available,
of course, some people will opt to have
their arms or legs replaced by bionic
body parts. This may even be especially
popular in top secret super soldier
experiments done by militaries of the
world, if they're not already doing it.
Ideas like this have also been made
popular in pop culture, such as with the
cyborg in Treasure Planet or Ed Elrich
from Full Metal Alchemist.
But speaking now to integrated
experiences, let us shift our focus for
a moment to consider VR. It's not
impossible to think that something like
the Oasis from Ready Player 1 could be
right around our doorstep, a massive
multiplayer online universe that puts
you into the experience through VR
technology. This could and likely would
lead to a form of mass exodus from real
life as people begin shifting their
lives into this digital realm. Why go to
work in an office when you can work from
any conceivable place in the universe?
And then instead of spending time with
friends at the bar after work, why not
go hunting dragons together? Instead of
playing racing games on your iPad, why
not go and actually experience a race
yourself? Completely immersive yet safe
from the comfort of your home. With all
of the suffering in the world and the
fantastic possibilities offered by VR,
some people might seek out a life spent
mostly or even totally in game. And
while everyone is inside of the game,
what would happen to the real world? If
we are not careful, we may end up with a
reality like Ready Player 1 with massive
slums taking over as people spend less
and less time in the physical dimension.
Why bother fixing the real world when
the in-game world is always perfect,
beautiful, or at least exactly as it's
designed to be? But even this is not the
end. And the lines around what is real
begins to blur until you can't even see
the line anymore. One day, it may even
become possible to transport your entire
consciousness into a game. This concept
was demonstrated powerfully by a show
called Sword Art Online in which a VR
headset allowed individuals to leave
their body behind as they enter into an
entirely virtual reality. Your body is
unconscious. You're not even aware of
it. And you experience reality as if you
are physically running around in Azeroth
or Minecraft, Hyrule, or literally
anywhere that you want as anyone that
you want. Recently, this idea was also
portrayed in an episode of Black Mirror
with a next level VR headset that is
just a little disc that you put on the
side of your head and it transports your
consciousness into a video game.
As you enter into a world where you can
literally do anything like fly, use
magic, go on epic quests, or even just
spend an entire summer fishing by a
beautiful lake in paradise. The question
becomes, why spend any time in the
physical world at all? Do you want to
have a super powerful body or a super
sexy one? How do you want your face to
look? You can customize it to your
liking freely. Since this technology
would connect directly to your brain, it
could even stimulate sensations like
getting drunk, taking psychedelics, or
rewiring your thinking patterns to be
however you want. If the only concern of
having to unplug is eating and going to
the bathroom, then undoubtedly someone
will create a technology that makes it
so that that isn't even an issue and you
will truly never have to leave.
One might also wonder exactly what would
happen to your physical body if you were
to rewire your consciousness and brain
inside of the game world. Would it
change your body appearance at all? A
mass exodus from the physical world
would create tremendous changes within
humanity as part of the human race
strives to live in this new world and
another part rebels against it or simply
cannot afford to play the game. Further,
once brain integration happens and mass
data is collected on people's reactions
to certain stimuli or events, the
artificial intelligence could skillfully
filter and alter your perception in
reality or completely guide your
experience in VR so that you rarely if
ever have a desire to stop using it.
All this technology, especially putting
your consciousness into a game, will at
some point give the game creators an
awareness of everything about you, your
thoughts, your feelings, your choices,
and it would allow anyone with the
knowhow to monitor you on a very
intimate level. And yet, most people
will probably skip past the 50 to 100
pages of terms of service and press
accept anyways because the ability to
shoot fireballs and fly is waiting for
them on the other side of the signup
page.
and seeing the pinnacle of all of this
together. As humanity grows and becomes
more advanced and can even create an
entirely robot body, if we can transfer
our consciousness, our thoughts and
memories into a machine, then we could
exist with a robot body just like Ultron
himself. When that day comes, we will be
forced to ask, "What constitutes a human
being?"
Now to some people this already sounds
amazing and can't wait for the future.
However, the conspiratorial aspect of
this comes in the form of a question as
we step into the next 100 years of
change and beyond. Who is really running
the show? The foundation of the internet
as we know it is rooted in algorithms
beyond anyone's understanding. Designed
almost entirely for the purpose of
profit and marketing. Who controls these
algorithms? Who dictates what we see?
Currently, our attention is essentially
open to the highest bidder. But is it
possible that the AI itself could take
us all over? And if we are integrated
into this collective mind, is it
possible for someone to simply decide
what we think and feel? Even when the
internet was in its infant stages,
people were fantasizing about free and
open access to information.
revolutionizing the world. And while
that tech did become available, social
media has also come to the forefront and
allowed some of our worst primal
instincts like tribalism and
manipulation to resurface with greater
strength than ever before.
To go deeper into this, we must
acknowledge that we're all responsible
for our own behavior. But as far as
social media is concerned, how we use
this technology is also beholden to
those who created it. In a recent
Netflix documentary called The Social
Dilemma, several ex employees of many
social media tech giants like Google,
Facebook, Instagram, and more sat down
to reveal what they had inadvertently
created with this pioneering technology,
a monster. They explained that they have
created a world in which billions of
lives are affected by the decisions of a
small number of programmers. A social
reality in which through the way that
the apps and software work, it
facilitates very small and subtle
changes in the way that people think and
feel. It's so subtle that you don't even
know it's happening. But the result is
that most of us end up living inside of
a delusional bubble, seeing only the
content that we're already exposed to
seeing. And this software can even help
us create negative responses to people
who believe anything different than us.
The technologies, they explained, are
designed specifically to get as much
engagement out of you as possible, to
get you spending more and more time and
then more money just by browsing these
social media sites. Really take a moment
to think about that. Every single thing
that comes up on your own social media
feed was put there by an algorithm that
was trying to get you to keep scrolling
to warm you up to spending money with an
ad or continue to foster engagement by
connecting with other people and
bringing them back to the app, too.
A supposedly leaked document from a
marketing presentation for video games
showed dozens of pages, plans, and
methods to use AI and data collection on
the target gamer to determine when they
were more likely to buy in-game items
and aggressively market to them by
displaying offers at those times. Audio
captured by the devices revealed to the
AI the gender and mood of the player and
found that Wi-Fi signals could reveal
their location, such as if the player is
in the car or in their bedroom laying
down. The AI would also pick up mouse
movements and typing speed, revealing
levels of engagement, determining how
best to serve these ads to the
individuals.
All of this data is fed into the AI and
analyzed by the marketing team to
exploit human psychology for the sake of
selling virtual goods. The presentation
goes as far as using voice tone analysis
to determine when players are slightly,
moderately, and severely depressed and
then reduces the use of emotion-based
advertisements and switches to
logic-based advertisements which were
shown to be more effective in a
depression. You can imagine what other
tactics they might be using. And
combined with their ability to
manipulate the game to influence your
state once you purchase more from their
store, well, we weren't kidding when we
said technology can be used to control
us. Even if this presentation was fake,
everything mentioned in it is well
within the demonstrated power of AI
today. And if it hasn't been integrated
yet, you better believe that someone is
working towards it.
One singular and perhaps most critical
questions we can ask ourselves in
relationship to this new technology is
what is truth? How do we define and
collectively agree on truth?
Specifically, if we live in a world
where no matter what you believe, you
can always find support or evidence for
the argument and perspectives that you
hold. Want to believe the earth is flat,
round or hollow? You can find ample
evidence for all three. Are you
left-wing, right-wing, extreme center?
It doesn't matter. On the internet,
these ways of thinking are both the
greatest and most logical and perfect
way of thinking and the most destructive
way of thinking that is destroying our
beautiful planet all at the same time
depending on who you ask. Thus, the
question of truth becomes a pertinent
one. How do we collectively as a species
find truth together? This is a question
that we will revisit further down our
path.
Regarding the modern news and
entertainment industry, we already know
that the masses are manipulated daily to
think and feel and respond in certain
ways. And with the insights offered in
the social dilemma, it seems as though
our social media is also encouraging us
to begin behaving in hive mind
mentality. This technology appears to
cause us to stop becoming unique
individuals and become just a cog in a
massive machine. And this is where
there's a pending issue with the
integration of technology. What's to
stop the AI from changing the nature of
your being based on who's advertising to
you in any given day on a deeper level
than ever before? In the world today, as
people have negative responses to news
or events, this fuels more negativity
around the issue. Not to mention, the
news actively fuels more negative press
and stories on a daily basis. So that
even if there's a lot of good in the
world, the negative stories always seem
to get more attention.
Conspiratorally speaking, there is more
and more evidence that shows that
consciousness actively steers reality.
That our focus and what we focus on
dictates what kind of life we
experience. People with hope for the
world are driven to create things. But
people who focus on all the negative
stuff in their life generally have more
anxiety around things that happen and
become stuck in their own fear. The
Corona virus pandemic was a great
example of this as we saw mass divisions
from people wearing face masks and
generally being scared of potentially
spreading this thing and those who just
relaxed into the quarantine and said all
right we're here and I'm going to use
this as an opportunity to create some
meaningful change at least in my own
life and they did. If Facebook and
Google are steering the mainstream
narrative, then they ultimately have a
massive influence in the direction that
society goes. They could design their
systems to create peace and prosperity
in the world. But their core focus is
profit, which is good for business. So
why would they change their business
model?
This couldn't have been made more
evident by a personal quote from Mark
Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook, who
actually said, "What's good for the
world isn't necessarily what's good for
Facebook." Yes, he really said that. And
he owns one of the largest companies in
the world, influencing the lives of
billions. Even if humanity was connected
digitally with all of this access to
information such as consciousness
integration and all that, unless you
were actively looking to download and
install books and wisdom into your mind,
it's all too likely that the focus of
our collective mind could be hijacked by
advertisements, entertainment, or other
things. The exact same as how we are
constantly distracted by social media
today. And this could even be used to
steer our species in the direction of
whoever or whatever was pulling the
strings.
At this point, it almost appears as
though this kind of technological
integration is inevitable. And if you're
conflicted about it, you're not alone.
On the one hand, the ability to read
every book you ever wanted to in days or
learn more about yourself and the
universe in such a short time and master
kung fu is very appealing. On the other
hand, if your mind can be controlled or
even forcefully steered in any direction
by someone else, then is that really a
paradigm that we want to be a part of?
I imagine that there will be some big
turning points for our species in the
journey of development of this
technology. But if we can learn to do
this in an open-source way that allows
each and every individual their own
sovereign right to freedom of thought
and feeling and actually choose what
they share with the collective mind.
Well, I don't know. I'd be curious about
the potential outcomes of this. The
silver lining we have going into this is
how the process mirrors what the
internet of today brought us, good and
bad. If we can learn from our mistakes
and take that wisdom at a large scale
into the new paradigm, we have hope.
Even if its temptations still clutch the
majority of people, a select few can
guard the light and guide others into an
enlightened cyberpunk reality.
You can start practicing right now by
being mindful of how your relationship
with social media truly affects your
life and the lives of those that it
connects you with and hopefully pass
that wisdom on to future generations. If
a great positive shift doesn't occur, we
will forever be destined to repeat our
mistakes on greater and greater scales
until we finally do.
As we've seen so far, humanity is
undergoing an exponential increase in
veils being lifted, and we are seeing
life being stirred up and changed like
never before.
One analogy we might use here is as if
humanity has been in the dark for so
long, isolated by socioeconomic and
cultural divides. And yet with modern
technology, it would seem as though the
lights are collectively turning on. But
now there is so much light all at once
that it is blinding. And despite our
access to so much information today, we
are still just as blind as we ever were.
That is while we allow time for our eyes
to adjust yet the root of revelation
doesn't just speak to veils lifted but
our own revelation from divine origin.
Belief systems and ideologies are
challenged in mass as new information
comes out that asks us to reassess our
paradigms of identity. As this happens,
those who are willing to explore new
ideas grow, and those who rail against
anything new only burrow deeper into
their own existing paradigm. Even in the
new world we are creating, there are
bound to be different paradigms that
people live within. We must remember
that some people are filled with hate,
negativity, and suffering. All of which
are descending from their own pain which
inhibits their higher consciousness and
keeps them rooted in a lower vibration.
This does not mean that they are bad
people for the only true remedy is
compassion. No matter how far
disconnected from their soul someone may
be, they can always come back to the
light. However, the only way for this to
take place is if they genuinely want to.
For unless someone seeks their own
salvation, they will never end up
finding it. Thus, it doesn't matter if
someone spends their time living in a VR
reality for years, abuses their bodies,
or even in some future reality travels
throughout the universe. All paths
through life can be taken, but only one
path leads to the liberation of the
soul. This is the path within.
May this be a lesson for all of us too.
For if we are afraid of the darkness
within us and others, and we attempt to
quell it by attacking it with anger and
hate, then we lessen our own vibration
and reduce ourselves to the same state
of consciousness as that which we are
fighting against. Evil begets evil. And
in the words of a wise Jedi master,
"Fear leads to anger, anger leads to
hate, and hate leads to suffering."
Hence, the true solution to the
salvation of humanity or the
reconnection of our souls as we
discussed so long ago is through genuine
and authentic compassion. By elevating
our own consciousness to such a degree
that our light radiates to those around
us and we become instruments of sacred
transformative change by the goodness
that we embody.
And while this may sound to some like
spiritual woo, the discoveries around
this today have the power to radically
change everything we think we know about
both science and religion. These
discoveries speak to a deeper basic and
more intrinsic understanding about the
nature of who we are and our place in
the cosmos as well as the abilities that
we have and may inherit.
speaking to the nature of consciousness
itself. These discoveries are so
paradigm shattering that life on Earth
as we know it will never be the same
once the knowledge becomes common place
among the people of the earth. That is
if it's ever allowed to get there.
For a long time, our perception of
spirituality has been governed by the
religions of the world. and our
perception of the universe and the
nature of life has been governed by
science. Movies like Zeitgeist outline
and identify ways in which the religious
institutions have monopolized people in
a myriad of ways while others today such
as Dr. Rupert Sheldrake's the science
delusion demonstrates how science has
been used to shepherd people into a
mindset keeping us locked into a
paradigm of physicality and nothing
more.
Further, these two voices of science and
religion have been at odds for a very
long time, sharply criticizing one
another or otherwise outright refusing
to acknowledge each different
perspective or their many merits and
wisdoms that they bring forth.
Despite this, today, new revelations
about the nature of consciousness stand
to shatter the illusion of separateness,
destroy the dogma we've clung to for so
long, and give us a foundational
blueprint to create a new world for
ourselves. Truly, it's how we can create
heaven on earth. All that's required is
our complete participation.
One example of this is found in the work
of Dr. Bruce Lipton with the biology of
belief. which explains with profound
scientific logic that our beliefs and
selfidentity are a product of our
environment and that as we think it so
shall we become. His work describes that
if we spend our lives believing that my
family had a hereditary disease so I'll
get it too. You are consciously and
subconsciously programming your body
with signals that will facilitate you
creating that outcome. And of course,
this belief and others can come from our
parents and family or the environments
that we expose ourselves to. When we
look at all of our childhood programming
together, we find today a mashup of
countless different media programs and
entertainment news stories passed down
rhetoric and ideas that we received from
friends and others around us. Who we are
today was shaped by the world. And while
many of the lessons that we received
growing up were good and valid, many
others were simply long-held beliefs
that have been passed down for
generations, yet may not hold our
highest interest at heart. These beliefs
shaped our perspective of the world and
in that how we behave and act which
leads us to create our destinies.
As it would seem, many of the belief
systems we hold on to disempower
ourselves from being able to live our
lives to the fullest. Further, many of
the largest industries today are built
upon previous paradigms. And so, their
continued growth means the limiting of
this new understanding. For example, we
return here to the pharmaceutical
industry. If you help someone cure their
depression, it's very difficult to
justify charging them thousands of
dollars a year for a prescription.
It is far easier and much more lucrative
that their depression or illness will be
with them for a very long, long time.
We must understand that the environment
has played a very significant role in
the creation of our collective reality.
even from the moment that we were
conceived and all of the experience that
we've had since birth. And while birth
defects do exist, Bruce's research says
that 95% of people have perfectly fine
DNA and can change how their genes are
expressing themselves if they will it.
So for some this may be easier than it
is for others, but it's very empowering
research nonetheless.
If we can change the signals our bodies
are receiving, the thoughts and feelings
we tell ourselves and receive from
others, the places we live, the music we
listen to, the food that we eat, the
entertainment we watch, all of these
aspects will play a role in reshaping
our lives by influencing us from surface
to very deep levels. As Bruce's work
suggests, it doesn't matter what ails
you. If you can address the root cause
and provide yourself with a stimulus of
a higher vibration, there is nothing
that you cannot heal.