(static cracking) (wind swooshing)
(bells chiming) (chimes humming)
- Thank you very much, Lisa.
And thank you all for being here.
I was going to say this evening,
but I realized it's not necessarily evening
for all of you.
So as you just heard, I'm publishing a book.
In fact, it's released today in the United Kingdom,
in a couple of weeks in the United States,
with the same title as my talk,
"The Hidden Spring:
A Journey to the Source of Consciousness."
Hopefully when I've finished in an hour's time
what I'm going to present to you,
you will understand why the book has this title.
The book is of course about consciousness.
And I'm quoting here what the physicist Paul Davies
recently wrote about consciousness.
But I could have found 100 scientists saying
basically the same thing.
Davies says, "Among life's many baffling properties,
the phenomenon of consciousness leaps out
as this especially striking.
Its origin is arguably
the hardest problem facing science today
and the only one that remains almost impenetrable
even after two and a half millennia of deliberation.
Consciousness is the number one problem
of science, of existence even."
So our topic tonight is not a small one.
It is widely regarded
as the number one problem of science today.
So my book is about this problem, but this is a lecture.
And of course I can't
begin to cover all the complexities
that require a book-length treatment.
So what I'm gonna say tonight is sort
of extracting things down to their essence,
I'm going to simplify.
And I'm gonna simplify
by focusing on just one strand,
although it is a sort of
a red thread running through the book,
one strand of the argument.
And I'll state that argument upfront,
it is that we have made so little progress in terms
of solving the problem that Paul Davies identifies here,
because we've been looking in the wrong place.
We've been looking for the explanation
of how and why consciousness arises in the cerebral cortex,
the longstanding assumed seat of consciousness.
And I'm going to argue that we should be looking elsewhere.
We should be looking in a far more primitive structure,
the brainstem, in particular,
the reticular activating system
at the core of the brainstem.
And not at these higher cognitive functions
that are performed
by the cortex and, in particular, by the human cortex,
but rather at far more basic functions
of the kind that are performed
in the brainstem, specifically raw feelings.
I'm going to argue
that raw feelings are the fundamental form
of consciousness in all sorts of ways.
And that if we shift our attention
from higher cognition to lower as it were feelings,
the hard problem becomes less hard.
In order to escape the risk of
overly abstract ideas,
I thought I would tell my story
via a series of cases,
some clinical case histories.
I've lined up six for you.
And I hope I get through all six of them because as I say,
I have only an hour, so let's hope I get through them all,
but at least it'll give you some flavor
of the lived experience of patients with disorders
of consciousness who have been so helpful
to me over the years
in terms of my efforts to unravel this problem.
But let's start in the obvious place.
I'm going to read you now the formulation
of the hard problem by David Chalmers.
In a paper in 1995,
he coined that term and this is what he wrote,
"It is undeniable
that some organisms are subject of experience.
But the question of how it is that these systems
or subjects of experience is perplexing.
Why is it that when our cognitive systems engage
in visual and auditory information processing,
we have visual or auditory experience:
the quality of deep blue, the sensation of middle C?
How can we explain, there is something it's like
to entertain a mental mage or experience an emotion.
It's widely agreed that experience arises
from a physical basis, but we have no good explanation
of how and why it so arises."
Now this is the way the Chalmers formulated
the hard problem.
But of course, this is not a new problem, as David said.
It's something we've been pondering for millennia.
But in particular, I've emphasized this phrase,
something it is like,
in order to make a link back
to another philosopher, Tom Nagel,
who wrote in 1974,
"An organism has conscious mental states
if and only if there is something that it is like
to be that organism,
something it's like for the organism."
And later in the paper, that same paper he wrote,
If we acknowledge that a physical theory
of mind must account
for the subjective character of experience,
we must admit
that no presently available conception gives us a clue
about how this could be done.
So my aim this evening in this brief talk
is to give you a clue about how this could be done.
I told you I'm going to, well, let me, first of all, sorry.
I see what I have on the screen here is,
I wanted to state as succinctly as problem,
as possible what this problem is that I'm addressing.
And you can think as I go along
whether or not I am answering this question.
This is the hard problem.
Why and how is there something it's like to be an organism,
something it's like for the organism?
Now what I started to say is I told you
I'm going to address this via a series of cases in order
to not get too lost in abstractions.
Here's our first case.
This is the case.
He is, in fact, my brother.
This photograph was taken when he was two and a half,
just short of three years old.
And I, as you can see, was a baby.
We were born in a small village
and for all sorts of reasons, we were rather isolated.
So we were best of friends.
And we got on famously.
One day, four and a bit years
after this photograph was taken,
my parents were yachting
and my brother climbed up onto the clubhouse roof
while I was waiting in the waters of the lake below.
And he tripped and he fell three stories
and landed on his head
on the paving stones below, fractured his skull,
and sustained an intracerebral bleed.
He was flown by helicopter to a hospital
in Cape town called Groote Schuur,
to the neurosurgery department where amazingly,
but not entirely coincidentally where I work today.
That sort of hemorrhage is a life-threatening emergency.
But fortunately, in my brother's case,
the bleeding stopped and the hemorrhage,
the hematoma reabsorbed and he survived.
And a few weeks later, he was flown back home.
He looked exactly the same as he had before,
apart from the fact that he had to wear
a helmet to protect his fractured skull.
But despite the appearance being the same,
he was not the same.
As a person, he was utterly different.
And you can imagine to me as a four
and a half year old, how uncanny,
this is Lee.
He looks Lee, but he isn't Lee.
It was of course a terrible tragedy
for him and for my family.
For me personally, it was extremely disturbing,
especially for, in the way that I've just described.
I couldn't get my head around
the fact that he was so changed.
And so in this way,
I was confronted, I think, a little earlier
than most of us are
with this fact that we ourselves are subjective beings,
our personalities, our minds,
are somehow also just a bodily organ.
And if that organ is damaged
then we're changed.
And by implication, what happened to my brother
could have happened to me,
could have happened to any one of us.
If our brains were damaged
in the way that his was,
the hematoma reabsorbed but it leaves damage,
and also there's these things called axonal shearing
from the kind of injury that he had.
If this were to happen to any one of us,
we would not be ourselves.
We would be somebody else.
And by further implication,
when our brains die, we literally disappear.
So this is the gravity
of the problem that we are talking about.
It wasn't obviously at the age of four,
I didn't decide, okay, in order to solve this problem.
I better become a neuroscientist,
but I have no doubt that those early childhood experiences
are what drove me to study neuroscience.
And in particular, to be interested in that branch
of neuroscience that we call neuropsychology.
In other words,
how mental functions relate to brain functions.
When I went to a university,
which was in the, to study this,
which was in the early 1980s,
I was however quickly disabused
of the idea that studying neuropsychology
would provide the answers I was looking
for as to how does it happen?
This thing that Davies was talking about,
that Chalmers was talking about,
how does it happen that out of,
how can it possibly be that a physical organ is me?
How am I produced by these physiological processes
in these anatomical structures?
But this is not what I was taught.
What I was taught rather was how the cortex,
and I emphasize here cortex,
because in the 1980s,
neuropsychology basically was the study
of higher cortical functions.
And neurologists study the brainstem functions,
those have to do with the body.
Neuropsychologists study cortical functions,
they have to do with the mind.
And I was taught how visual information is processed
in this part of the cortex
and somatosensory processes here
and auditory processes there.
But when I asked my lecturers
where does all of this information,
where am I in the processing of all this information?
Where's the subject that receives the visual and auditory
and somatosensory and whatnot information?
And I was kindly advised
by my professors not to ask questions like that.
Those are not proper scientific questions.
And they're bad for your career.
But I wasn't studying this,
because I was interested in building a career.
I really needed to understand how this works.
And so when I was taught,
as I'm showing in the slide on the screen at the moment,
how visual information processing occurs
in the visual cortex,
and how incredibly elaborate all
these different component processes are,
how we go from
the initial image in V1
to these various processing streams whereby in,
in one of them,
you recognize color and movement and faces.
And another, if you're a human being,
you're able to recognize letters
and words and read.
All of these things and how ultimately all of
this official information is encoded
into the hippocampus into long-term memory.
All of these functional mechanisms
were incredibly interesting,
but the question, the problem for me was,
visual information processing
of this kind can be done by your mobile phone.
And in fact, what I have on the screen for you now
is not that different from a circuit diagram,
which describes the sorts of information processing
that your mobile phone does, performs.
Your mobile phone can recognize faces,
as you might've noticed
when you're taking a photograph and the way that it sifts
through the stored images.
It classifies them. These are faces.
These are places, et cetera.
Exactly the same sort of thing
as I was being taught about how our brains work.
But the sentient subject who receives this information,
what it is like to see was not a respectable question.
It wasn't addressed at all.
Around that time,
I read this book by Oliver Sacks called "A Leg to Stand On."
It was before he became so famous with his book,
"The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat."
In this book, "A Leg to Stand On" in 1984,
he wrote, Neuropsychology, like classical neurology,
aims be entirely objective,
and its great power, its advances, come from just this.
But a living creature and especially a human being,
is first and last active, a subject,
not an object.
It's precisely the subject,
the living eye which is being excluded.
Neuropsychology is admirable
but it excludes the psyche.
It excludes the experiencing active, living I."
So that sentence, "Neuropsychology is admirable,
but it excludes the psyche,"
captured exactly my dismay and frustration
with my field.
Such was how things stood in the 1980s.
And I think that this has a great deal to do
with why David Chalmers formulated the hard problem
in the way that he did.
I'm now going to read you a further passage
from his book in which he clarifies
that this hard problem pivots on the question of function,
on the function of visual experience, for example.
Let me read it to you,
"The easy problems are easy,
precisely because they concern the explanation
of cognitive abilities and functions.
To explain a cognitive function,
we need only specify a mechanism
that can perform the function.
The methods of cognitive science
are well-suited for this sort of explanation
and so we're well-suited
to the easy problems of consciousness.
By contrast, the hard problem is hard,
precisely because it is not a problem about
the performance of functions.
The problem persists even when the performance
of all the relevant functions is explained.
What makes a hard problem hard and almost unique is
that it goes beyond problems about
the performance of functions.
To see this, note that even when
we've explained the performance of all the cognitive
and behavioral functions in the vicinity of experience,
there may still remain a further unanswered question:
why is the performance
of these functions accompanied by experience?
A simple explanation
of the functions leaves this question open.
Why doesn't all this information processing go
on in the dark, free of any inner feel?"
Just to make clear
the gravity of the problem that Chalmers
is identifying here,
I want to tell you briefly
about what another philosopher said on this point.
This was Frank Jackson in
his celebrated knowledge argument.
The story revolves around
a visual neuroscientist named Mary.
And I'm going to tell the story
in a simplified form in the interest of time.
Mary knows everything that there is to know
about the functional mechanisms of vision,
but she's blind.
So although she knows exactly how light waves
are transduced by the photosensitive rods
and cones of the retina
and transmitted to the lateral geniculate body
and from there to the visual cortex
and how all those processing streams that I showed you
in the earlier slide further,
in specialized modules,
process that information, exactly what those neurons do,
exactly what the functional mechanisms
of the different processing streams are.
Despite all of that,
she knows nothing about what it is like to see.
And then, thank God, one day,
the gift of sight is bestowed upon her.
And for the first time in her life,
she actually experiences that deep blue
that Chalmers spoke of,
the actual quality of visual experience:
redness, blueness, movement, form, contour, and so on.
And Jackson's point is at that moment,
she learned something utterly new about vision.
something which was not predicted,
not explained at all by her functional,
her understanding of the physical mechanisms
whereby visual information is processed.
And the point is that because those mechanisms
can be absolutely understood without there being any,
not only any need to understand
what visual experience is like, but also no bridge.
It doesn't predict that there will have
to be visual experience.
And so this new thing, this new
qualitative, experiential
thing that Mary becomes acquainted with
is not at all contained within the knowledge,
that's why it's called the knowledge argument,
that she had of the functional mechanisms of vision.
And the alarming conclusion that people
like Jackson and Nagel and Chalmers come to
in consequence is that
conscious experience, the actual
something it is likeness of seeing,
exists in some sort of parallel universe,
some other dimension,
some place other than the physical universe
in which causal mechanisms explain
how one thing produces another.
So this is what Chalmers is talking about when he says,
why is the performance
of these functions accompanied by experience?
Why doesn't all this information processing go
on in the dark, free of any inner feel?
The information processing accounts,
the mechanistic functionalists accounts
of visual processing in the cortex.
And I'm using vision as my model example
because that's what we do in cognitive neuroscience
when it comes to trying to understand
the mechanisms of consciousness.
That's where we've been looking,
on the assumption that if we can,
if we can isolate the mechanism of visual consciousness,
then we can generalize from there to other forms
of consciousness and explain consciousness as a whole.
Chalmers's point is
that Mary who knew everything there was to know
about the functional mechanisms
of visual information processing knew nothing at all
about what it is like to see.
This seems to be an entirely different order of things.
So how are we to make sense of this?
By the 1990s,
John Kihlstrom was able to write an article with this title.
It's a review of the literature
on unconscious, visual and other perceptual,
and other cognitive cortical mechanisms.
The title says it all,
"Perception Without Awareness of What Is Perceived,
Learning Without Awareness of What Is Learned."
The literature, the research literature reviewed
in this paper shows,
in a nutshell, that you can perceive visually,
and in other ways,
you can process this sort of information
without knowing that you're doing so.
You don't seem to have to know
that you're doing so.
The cortex and the brain as a whole can process visual
and other perceptual stimuli and
act upon those stimuli
without any awareness that they've done so.
The same applies to learning.
You can learn things and remember things
and they will influence what you do
in the future without having any knowledge
that you've learned those things
and that you're remembering things.
All of this can go
on automatically, to paraphrase Chalmers, in the dark.
Just to give you some sense of the kinds of evidence
that Kihlstrom drew upon in writing this review article
and coming to the conclusions,
which are sort of alluded to in the title,
in one study research participants are shown
in the vajra paradigm called,
an instrument called the tachistoscope,
which flashes visual information
so briefly for so few milliseconds
that you don't even know you've seen anything at all,
let alone what you've seen.
In this experiment,
the participants were shown two faces.
Face A, under which was written the word rapist
and face B, under which was written the word philanthropist.
Now remember they didn't know they'd seen anything at all,
let alone that they'd seen a face and read a word.
After the tachistoscopic phase of the experiment,
they're then shown supraliminally
those same two photographs
and asked which of the two faces they prefer,
which of the two people they prefer.
And with a very high degree of statistical significance,
the research participants choose face B.
When asked why are you choosing this face over the other?
They say, I don't know,
because of course they don't know consciously
why they're doing so.
They say it's just intuition
or my gut feeling.
I just prefer this chap.
Now we know why they did it.
They did it because
of the words that were associated with those faces.
And that's precisely the point:
that this kind of cognitive process,
this higher visual cortical,
because let me be clear
that recognizing faces is a uniquely cortical function,
and indeed reading with comprehension
is a uniquely human cortical function.
So these sorts of functions can go
on perfectly well without awareness.
And this is the essence in a manner
of speaking of what Chalmers is saying.
He's saying, these things can go on
in the dark, and that begs the question that Chalmers asks,
why doesn't it do so?
Why do we have to be aware
of these things at all?
And the provisional conclusion that I now want to state is
that it's because they don't.
Visual cortical processes and all cortical processes
and cognitive processes are not intrinsically conscious
as Kihlstrom's review shows.
Therefore, it's no surprise that
if we have focused our research efforts
on trying to understand the brain basis of consciousness,
the physical mechanisms of consciousness,
by looking at functions
which are not inherently intrinsically conscious,
which can work just as well without consciousness,
then we're looking in the wrong place.
If you remember my introductory remarks,
this is the red thread that's going to run through
what I'm going to say to you tonight.
So let's move on to my next case.
I told you that when I was a student
and I was taught about how these different streams
of information coming from our sensory organs
and projected onto our cortex produce visual consciousness,
auditory consciousness, et cetera.
And I asked my professors, "But where am I?
Where is the subject who receives all this information?"
By the 1990s, 10 years after I asked that silly question,
which was considered silly, it's a naive question,
but many of the most naive questions
are the most important questions,
by the 1990s,
neuropsychology was asking those questions itself.
And the answers that it came to was that
visual and auditory and somatosensory information,
the sort of raw phenomenal consciousness is not
the main thing about subjectivity.
It's where it all comes together,
that question that I'd asked,
where does it all come together?
And one of the main answers was it all comes together here
in the prefrontal lobes.
So for example, Bernard Baars and Stanislav Kehaene
were saying that there's a global workspace,
a sort of integrating
of all of these different information streams here.
And this is where the subject of the mind is,
that remember consciousness,
the global workspace in the sense
of not just information processing streams coming
from our sensory end organs
but rather the subject of the mind that receives them.
So I'm going to, remember,
I'm just giving you an impressionistic account
in this brief lecture.
I'm going to ask you,
as scientists or people who understand science,
if there's a theoretical claim that this is,
this part of the brain is where consciousness is generated
in the sense of a subjective sentient being of the mind,
then if this part of the brain is damaged,
then that function should be lost.
So somebody who has no prefrontal cortex should
have no subjectivity in the sense
that we are talking about here.
No person who receives all this information
and knows, this is my vision.
I am a sentient being, the sort of agent,
or I, the active me,
that Oliver Sacks was talking about.
Damage to this part of the brain,
complete damage to this part of the brain
should completely remove the thing that we are looking for.
So I will now briefly describe
to you a patient of mine who I'm calling Patient W
who due too complex pathology,
basically a subarachnoid hemorrhage
in the anterior communicating artery
which needed to be operated
on and the operation didn't go that well.
And then there were sepsis.
And then it wasn't recognized early enough,
et cetera, et cetera.
Basically, after a series of operations,
he ended up like this with absolutely no prefrontal lobes.
So there's the prefrontal lobes. He doesn't have any.
Here you see it again.
But fortunately he has a little sliver
of cortex here, language cortex,
which enables him to describe his experience.
So I explained to Patient W
that according to my colleagues, he should lack a self.
He should lack an overarching sense
of sentient, receiving this perceptual information
and knowing it's me
who's seeing these things, that me should be missing.
I asked him, "Is that missing."
He said, "No, not at all."
So I said, "Well, then bear with me.
I'm gonna ask you a series
of questions whereby I can illustrate,
demonstrate to my colleagues that they're wrong."
I said to him, "Are you consciously aware of your thoughts?"
He said, "Yes, of course I am."
I said, "In order to confirm that,
I'm going to ask you to solve
a problem that will require you to consciously picture
a situation in your mind."
He says, "Okay."
I say, "Imagine that you have two dogs and one chicken."
He says, "Okay."
I said, "Do you see them in your mind's eye?"
He says, "Yes."
So I say, "Now tell me how many legs do you see in total?"
You get the point that if he's there looking
at this visual information that he's conjured up
in his mind's eye, he should be able to count two dogs,
four plus four, one chicken, two, turtles, 10.
And that would show that there's somebody there looking
at the visual information.
So you can imagine my disappointment when I say
to him, "Now telling me how many legs do you see in total?"
And he said, "Eight." And I said, "Eight?"
And then he said, "Yes, the dogs ate the chicken."
Now that's not the best joke in the world,
but it shows that there's somebody at home.
There's Mr. W was there thinking,
looking at this information
and even been able to take this additional humorous step
of imagining that the dogs had ate the chicken.
So the idea that it's the sentient being
of the mind resides in the prefrontal cortex,
I don't believe it.
And of course, it's not based only on this case.
I'm using that to illustrate a point.
The other major theory in cognitive neuroscience
as to where the subject of the mind exists
in the cortex is associated with the name of Bud Craig.
And he identifies the insula
as the critical part of the cortex.
The insular is not like the prefrontal cortex
where all the different
information processing streams converge
from your various senses,
leading to your capacity to make decisions about
what are you going to do about it,
but rather it's where the visceral internal information
from the vegetative body is transmitted
to the cortex and integrated with
this extra set of information.
So very, very mainstream theory that this is where
the self resides in the cortex.
So let's see what happens if this part of the cortex
is damaged as it was in this patient, Patient B,
a patient of Damasio's.
Like I did with my patient W,
Damasio interviews his patient and asks him
if he has a self,
because the prediction arising from Craig's theory
is that he should lack such a thing.
Damasio says, "Do you have,"
this is a dialogue,
a conversation which hasn't been published,
but an article on this case has been published.
"Do you have a sense of self?" Says Damasio.
Patient says, "Yes, I do."
"What if I told you that you weren't here right now?"
Patient says, "I'd say you've gone blind and deaf."
Damasio says, "Do you think
that other people can control your thoughts?"
He says, "No."
"And why do you think that's not possible?"
He says, "You control your own mind, hopefully."
Damasio said, "What if I were to tell you
that your mind was the mind of somebody else?"
Patients says, "When was the transplant,
I mean, the brain transplant?"
Damasio, "What if I were to tell you
that I know you better than you know yourself?"
Patient says, "I would think you're wrong."
Damasio says, "What if I were to tell you
that you're aware that I'm aware?"
He says, "I would say you're right."
Damasio, "You're are aware that I'm aware?
Patient, "I'm aware that you're aware that I'm aware."
Please note all these references to I,
this is the very thing that's supposed to be missing
in such patients.
So clearly the sentient being of the mind
is neither in the prefrontal cortex,
nor in the insular cortex,
but these patients have some cortex left.
What about a patient who has absolutely no cortex?
What if the cortex as a whole word to be removed?
Surely this would remove
the sentient subjectivity that we are seeking to explain
with our cortical theory of consciousness.
Well, here's a patient three years old, this one,
with absolutely no cortex.
This is a condition called hydranencephaly
where the patient is born
with the brainstem and a cerebellum
which hangs off the back of the brainstem,
but no forebrain at all.
Is she conscious?
Yes, she is.
Here she is.
She's awake. She goes to sleep at night.
She wakes up in the morning.
Clearly she's conscious,
but much more importantly, look at this.
This is her reaction
to her baby brother being placed on her lap.
She responds emotionally to this experience.
So it's not only that she's awake.
It's not some sort of blank wakefulness,
but a reactive mind with feelings and content.
It's not, it cannot possibly
be representational cognition of the kind
that the cortex performs,
because she doesn't have any cortex
She has only a brainstem.
And yet she's conscious and her consciousness
has a particular quality
and it doesn't have anything to do with what's streaming in
from the outside consciously,
because remember the brainstem
only processes sensory information unconsciously.
This has got to do with her subjective response
to that information, even though she has no cognitive clue
what that information is actually about.
It's a pure, raw feeling.
And it's not just her.
Most of these kids are like that. Here's another patient.
Tell me this patient isn't conscious
and that there's nobody home.
Bjorn Merker wrote a review article about these patients,
whom he studied a great many of them.
And I'm not gonna read you this long quotation,
but you can see the words
that I've emphasized in yellow.
They have a wide range of emotions
and most importantly of all,
those emotional responses are situationally appropriate.
In other words, the patient shows laughter
or irritability or fear
in response to stimuli,
which would evoke those same sort of feelings in you and me.
So this is a weighty piece
of evidence that the cortical theory is wrong.
The parts of the cortex that are supposed to be
the centers for consciousness, the integrative centers,
where a sentient self comes about it,
even just the little smatterings of evidence
that I've given you this evening show
that this is not the case.
And even in patients in whom there is absolutely no cortex,
there's evidence that there is consciousness.
Consciousness, not of the cognitive kind
that we've been focusing on in our attempts
to solve the hard problem,
but rather consciousness of a far more rudimentary kind,
basic, raw feelings of the type that you saw
these two little girls and other children
like them with the same condition able to express.
But of course, how do we know,
how do we know
what it's like to be such,
is there anything it's like to be such a child?
These are just behaviors.
We can't be sure what they're experiencing.
But let's just slow down.
Although I'm anxious about the time I keep
on looking to my left, which is where my clock is,
and I see that I must speed up,
but let's just make sure
that I'm conveying this really essential point.
You can remove the cortex,
the supposed it's seat of consciousness in its entirety.
And I say, remove, of course, in these children,
it's not removed experimentally,
in experimental animals, it is removed,
and we find exactly the same thing.
They are conscious with their wake
and they display a full range of emotional
and situationally appropriate emotional responses.
By contrast, with that lesion evidence,
now we look at the brainstem,
if there's damage in these structures,
these tiny structures in the primitive brainstem called
the reticular activating system,
then the lights go out.
So the lights do not go out if there's no cortex,
but if there's tiny lesions
in the reticular activating system of the brainstem
as small as two cubic millimeters,
Fischer and colleagues recently published a article
in which they studied numerous patients
with brainstem strokes and showed
that a two cubic millimeter lesion
in the parabrachial region is all that's required
to totally obliterate consciousness.
So what that shows is that cortical consciousness
is dependent upon brainstem consciousness.
What's generated here in the reticular activating system
is a prerequisite for cortical consciousness.
And what is more, remember that critical consciousness
is not always present.
In other words, the cortex is able
to process information without consciousness.
So what makes it conscious is activation
by this reticular activating system.
Now that's not controversial what I've just said to you.
Where I'm making the argument,
we're looking in the wrong place.
This is not intrinsically conscious.
This is the foundation of consciousness.
Why don't we look there?
And I've showed you in those hydranencephalic girls
that the people who only have a brainstem have consciousness
of a particular type, and that is affective consciousness.
So is this not this intrinsic prerequisite
for all of the other forms of consciousness?
Is this not the place that we should be looking
if we're trying to find out
what the functional mechanism of consciousness is?
So let me now go to my case 5.
And the reason I'm doing this is because I'm very much aware
that in the case of these kids with no cortex,
you can't be sure that they have consciousness,
because they can't speak.
The one function which certainly is cortical is language.
And my patient W was able to describe his mental states
because he had the sliver of frontal cortex,
which enables us to produce language.
Those children didn't.
So we don't know.
They can't tell us what they're experiencing.
Just like our pet dogs and cats
can't tell us what they experiencing.
We sense that they're conscious.
They respond emotionally.
We have relationships with them.
But we can't know for sure.
So in science, in such a situation,
what we have to do is rely upon multiple lines
of converging evidence, we have to make predictions.
On the hypothesis that the brainstem produces consciousness
on the lesion study suggests that that's
where the consciousness comes from.
And I'm saying it is a consciousness
of a particular type, it's feeling,
it's affective consciousness.
Then using another method, for example,
deep brain stimulation,
if we stimulate those structures,
those deep brainstem structures
in patients who do have intact cortex
and can tell us what they experience,
we might predict that they would experience intense affects.
And that's exactly what happens.
If you stimulate the substantia nigra,
which is a mid brain part
of the reticular activating system,
this is what happens
in a patient, 65 year old patient
with Parkinson's disease.
That's why the stimulator was put into her brain.
But a patient who'd never had
any psychiatric pathology in her life,
that within five seconds
of the stimulator being switched on,
that had actually gone deeper than the intended site,
the intended site was not in the brainstem,
it went a few millimeters too deep into
the reticular activating nucleus that I mentioned,
and she, within five seconds, she falls into a depression.
"I'm falling down in my head.
I no longer wish to live,
to see anything, hear anything, feel anything."
When asked if she's in pain, she says, "No,
I'm fed up with life.
I've had enough.
I don't want to live anymore.
I'm disgusted with life.
Everything is useless, always feeling worthless.
I'm scared in this world."
Please note this, "I don't want to live anymore,"
a suicidal depression.
When asked why she's so sad, she says, "I'm tired.
I want to hide in a corner.
I'm crying over myself, of course, I'm hopeless.
Why am I bothering you?"
After the stimulation, within 90 seconds,
the depression disappears.
The patient very bravely
or generously agreed to do a double-blind trial after that
where Blomstedt stimulated either
in the higher structure that he had aimed for or
in the reticulate structure that he had struck accidentally
without the patient knowing where he was stimulating.
And every time that he stimulated
in the reticulate nucleus, she fell into this deep despair.
So this is a second line of evidence.
You can actually stimulate intense emotions
by stimulating those deep brainstem structures.
Here's a third line of evidence,
functional imaging, PET imaging in this case.
These are normal subjects with intense emotional states.
They are feeling intensely sad, angry, happy, or fearful.
The PET imaging shows where in the brain
the activity is that's generating this mental state.
And in all of these cases
it's in the brainstem.
Sadness, anger, happiness, fear,
look at what's going on in the cortex, next to nothing.
So it's absolutely clear by this method too
that the affects are generated in the brainstem.
One last line
of evidence is psychopharmacology.
Psychiatrists tinker with the neuromodulatory chemicals
that are sourced
in these very same brainstem nuclei.
So antidepressants increase serotonin,
which is sourced in the raphe nuclei
of the reticular activating system.
Antipsychotics block dopamine,
which is sourced in the ventral tegmental area
of the reticular activating system.
Some antianxiety drugs blocking noradrenaline
which is sourced in the locus coeruleus complex
of the reticular activating system.
If all that this system did was woke you up or
produced a background level of consciousness,
which is the standard view of what this part
of the brain is doing,
this is why when you lesion it,
you go into a coma.
Then anesthetists might be interested
in these brain structures
and these brain chemicals.
But, no, psychiatrists are.
Psychiatrists, doctors for feelings,
treating emotional disorders.
Clearly these neuromodulators sourced
in the reticular activating system
have something fundamental to do with feeling.
So let me just sum up,
I'm gonna tell you about another one
of these neuromodulators
in a few minutes if I get that far.
But let me just sum up what I'm saying.
I'm saying that the evidence is very strong
that the source of consciousness,
remember the subtitle of my book,
is this hidden spring deep in,
in the reticular brainstem or structures,
which are prerequisite
for consciousness to occur.
Think of the the forebrain or the cortex
as a sort of a television set.
And think of this as the power supply.
The standard view is, well,
of course, consciousness happens in the cortex,
like televisual program transmission happens
in the television set, it has to have a power supply.
It has to be plugged in at the wall, but that doesn't mean
that the source of television is the power supply.
But as you've just seen,
if you tinker with this power supply,
you change the program.
You change the actual televisual content.
It's not just a power supply.
It is literally the font of consciousness.
And because it's prerequisite for these cortical forms
of consciousness, the cortex isn't conscious
unless it's aroused by the brainstem.
And because I've, as I've showed you,
the brainstem is generating not some power supply,
but rather consciousness with a particular content
and quality, a particular feel,
a particular something that it is likeness,
that means the foundational elemental basic form
of consciousness is feeling.
And feeling is prerequisite
for all other forms of consciousness.
Sigmund Freud, the discoverer of the unconscious,
even Freud who was the person who taught us
that the bulk of our cognition is unconscious,
what we rediscovered a hundred years later
in cognitive science,
that the bulk of our cognition is unconscious,
even he said, "It's surely of the essence
of an emotion that we should be aware of it,
that it should become known to consciousness.
Thus the possibility of the attribute
of unconsciousness would be completely excluded
as far as emotions, feelings and affects are concerned.
Now I've emphasized the word feelings,
because the words affect
and emotion mean different things to different people.
Some people claim you can have unconscious emotions.
They don't agree with Freud.
So I want to be clear
that I'm talking about this thing, feeling.
You cannot have a feeling that you do not feel.
And this is not just a linguistic point.
As I've just showed you, the brainstem mechanisms
that generate raw feeling,
they generate consciousness itself.
But I say again this,
this thing that I'm calling feeling
cannot be other than felt.
If you don't feel it, it isn't a feeling.
And what I'm saying therefore is that unlike cortex,
the processes of which, the information processing
of which is not intrinsically conscious,
shouldn't we be looking to the brainstem,
the processes of which are intrinsically conscious, in fact,
are the source of all consciousness,
If we want to understand the function of consciousness,
then surely we need to understand the function of feeling.
David Chalmers, one more time, he says,
"This is not to say that experience has no function.
Perhaps it'll turn out to play
an important cognitive role," et cetera.
And he ends up saying, "There's no cognitive function,
such that we can say in advance that explanation
of that function will automatically explain experience."
This is, you can see a reiteration of what I said
to you earlier.
But please note, it's the word cognitive.
If you change the word cognitive to affective,
does his, I mean, would he ever even have said this?
"There is no affective function such
that we can say, in advance,
that explanation of that function
will automatically explain experience."
I'm saying, in advance, that an explanation of the function
of feeling will automatically explain why it feels
like something, because that is the function of feeling.
I hope you can see why this is an important red thread
in the argument of my book.
If we're wanting to understand consciousness,
we should be focusing on its most basic form:
the form which is intrinsically conscious,
that is to say feeling,
because feeling has to be felt.
Unlike vision, unlike hearing, unlike memory,
unlike all forms of cognition,
for the most part, they're unconscious,
but feelings are always conscious and they are prerequisite
for the higher forms of consciousness.
So if we understand the function of feeling,
then we understand the function of consciousness.
That's where we should be looking.
I say again,
there is every possibility that
if you can explain the function of feeling,
then you'll know why you feel it.
So what is the function of feeling?
Well, it's an extended form of homeostasis.
Homeostasis, as many of you might know,
is the basic mechanism that keeps us alive.
Living organisms, unlike inorganic matter,
they don't dissipate.
They don't just,
if the ambient temperature is 10 degrees,
then we just sort of become 10 degrees ourselves.
If we did, we would die.
So we can't dissipate.
We can't equalize with our environments.
We can't allow ourselves to obey the second law
of thermodynamics, which states that in any natural process,
entropy will always increase.
Homeostasis resists entropy.
We say, no, I can't equalize.
I have to maintain a particular temperature range.
I have to stay between 36 1/2 and 37 1/2 degrees Celsius.
And if I deviate from that, it's a problem.
It's a demand for work.
And I have to perform work to get myself back
into the temperature range that is viable for life.
And I speak here of temperature range.
This applies across a wide range
of physiological parameters.
So you have blood glucose levels,
blood oxygen levels, hydration levels,
sodium levels, et cetera,
that you have to remain within.
Otherwise you die.
And you note the word prediction here.
There are algorithms built into our brains, which say,
if you're getting too hot, that's a problem.
So you've got to do something and what must you do?
The algorithm says, well, sweat, that'll cool you down.
Pant, that will cool you down.
That's the work that you have to do to get yourself back
into your viable range.
So that's how homeostasis works.
And I said, feeling is an extended form of homeostasis.
And that extended form is that
when you deviate from your expected states,
from your viable states, it feels bad.
The value system that underpins all life
is that it is bad to die and good to survive.
So if you're moving in the direction of death,
of a physiological state
which is incompatible with life, it feels bad.
That is the function of unpleasure.
That is the meaning of unpleasant feelings.
It means this is bad for me.
And conversely, performing the work that gets you back
into your viable state feels pleasurable.
And this is how you know
that you're heading in the right direction.
Why is this important?
I told you that you have to have predictions here,
algorithms built into the system
that tell the system what to do.
Demand for work,
I know what I've gotta do, gotta pant, gotta perspire.
That's the work,
gets me back to my required temperature range.
But the enormous adaptive advantage provided by feeling is
that if you are in a situation
for which you do not have a predetermined prediction
for which there is not a phenotypic algorithm built
into your brain, then the feeling tells you here
and now whether you're heading
in the right direction or wrong.
Let me take, let me give you an example.
You're in a, respiratory control is an automatic process.
You don't need to be aware
of your need for oxygen in order to breathe.
It just happens automatically.
But if you're in a building that's on fire
and carbon dioxide is filling the air,
then suddenly respiratory control becomes conscious
and you feel this demand for work
in the form of an acutely unpleasant state
of mind called air hunger or suffocation alarm.
Now you're in a situation you've never been in before.
You can't possibly predict,
you've never been in a burning building,
let alone this particular one,
and you can't possibly predict what to do.
So that's a state of uncertainty
with no predetermined predictions.
And the way in which you solve that problem
is to feel your way through it.
So if I go this way
and my air hunger gets worse, that's bad.
It feels bad.
That means it's bad.
If I go the other way
and my air hunger reduces, that's good.
That means I must go that way.
So the oxygenation in the air
is felt without there being any preordained solution
to this particular problem, you feel your way through it.
So feeling tells you how you're doing
within this basic biological frame of values,
scale of values which is
that it's good to survive and bad to die.
And you feel what is increasing
and decreasing your chances,
your probabilistic chances of surviving
by feeling the feelings.
So that enables you to make choices.
And this too, I cannot emphasize enough,
choices have to be grounded in a value system.
Something has to be better and something has to be worse,
otherwise you have no basis for making a choice.
And feelings provide the value system
which enables choice in unpredicted novel situations.
So you decide which way to go on the basis of
what feels good and what feels bad
without any cognitive knowledge as to what,
that drives the cognition
and you feel your way into your cognition so
that what you're perceiving and what you're thinking,
flavored, colored, driven by the feeling
that determines which choices you make.
That is the function of feeling.
That is what feeling adds to basic automatized homeostasis.
Now I've just identified one
of the two most essential properties of affect,
that is valence.
It feels good or it feels bad.
But I must add that it also has a categorical quality.
Each affect feels,
so air hunger feels different from sleepiness,
feels different from the need to urinate,
feels different from fear,
feels different from separation distress,
feels different from thirst.
Each of these has a flavor,
a categorical quality of their own,
because you need to know what need is being met
or not being met.
So the color coding or flavoring, the qualification
of these different affective needs
is is why consciousness has quality.
So consciousness, in its basic form, is inherently valuative
and it's inherently qualitative.
And it does something.
What does it do?
It enables you to survive in unpredicted situations
which is an enormous adaptive advantage
over creatures who do not have this capacity.
So we're coming,
I notice I really have to end earlier
than I would have liked,
but we're coming to the crux of the matter,
which is that this is the function of feeling.
So remember the question I was asking,
why and how is there something it's like to be an organism,
something it's like for an organism?
Well, affect feeling explains why it's something,
why it has to feel like something,
the feeling, the quality of it,
and the category of it is its very essence.
It's what it does is to bring to the awareness
of the organism for the organism, how it's doing
in terms of its literal,
literal potential to exist,
to continue existing, its most basic design principle,
the design principle that homeostasis embodies.
And this extended form of homeostasis,
bringing to the level of awareness
by the organism of its state,
as it's navigating uncertain environments,
is the function of consciousness in its most basic form.
And going back to Chalmers's claim that
if you explain the function,
it doesn't explain why it feels like something,
I'm saying that doesn't apply in the case of affect.
And affect is generated in the brainstem
which is the source of all consciousness,
all consciousness is contingent
or dependent upon brainstem consciousness.
Now I'm going to end here
so that there's time for questions.
I just want to let you know that in my book,
I then go on,
based on work I did with Karl Friston,
to explain how that mechanism works mechanistically.
Homeostasis is not complicated.
It can be reduced to laws.
And if affect, feeling,
is an extended form of homeostasis,
it too can be reduced to laws.
And these laws are explicated
in the book and it explains how feeling governs,
how voluntary action and learning
from experience works in the brain.
I was going to tell you there's one last case,
but I don't have time.
So I'll just flick through and tell you,
read my book, please.
This is a complicated topic.
I can't begin
to do it justice in a short talk like this.
So why is the performance
of these functions accompanied by experience?
Why doesn't all this information processing go
on in the dark, free of any inner feel?
I hope you can see why I believe that when it comes
to feelings, that they can't go on in the dark.
They can't go on without any inner feel.
They're very functioned.
They're very causal contribution
within the physical economy.
Bodily economy of the living organism is to feel
and the feeling is what has
the functional causal consequences that Chalmers felt was
so badly missing when it comes to perception and cognition.
Although he didn't realize that his argument applied only
to perception and cognition.
I am sorry I've had to rush at the end.
And I want to remind you in,
for that reason that I said at the beginning,
only that I was going to give you a clue.
Please read my book,
"The Hidden Spring," out today in Britain
and in a couple of weeks in America.
Thank you very much.
I look forward to your questions.