[Music]
Hey, hey everyone. Back again. Today I'm
going to talk about Marshall McLuhan's
idea of the medium is the message. Now,
before jumping into that, if you want to
follow me anywhere else, you can find me
on Instagram at theory_and Philosophy.
If you're new here, welcome, welcome.
I'm David. I try to explain
philosophical texts and ideas in a
somewhat accessible uh way to help you
on your philosophical journey. If you
want to help me out and you're new here,
subscribe because most people that watch
this aren't subscribed. So, subscribe
and you'll see videos I release every
week, sometimes more than once a week.
Uh, like, share, tell your friends. Who
knows? They might like it. If you want
to help me out monetarily, you can do
that via Patreon or PayPal, but
obviously, no pressure. If you're
listening to this in podcast form, you
can find the video on YouTube. If you're
watching this on YouTube, you can find
it in podcast form. Pretty much anywhere
you get podcasts where there shouldn't
be any ads, which is obviously better.
Yeah. So, now let's talk about the
medium is the message. Now, this was
from a request from one of my patrons.
uh Matt who wanted to know more about
this stuff specifically how it relates
to Bogodiard's work. Now I won't get
into that kind of affiliation here.
Instead this is I'm treating this as a
kind of introduction for when I will
eventually do more of Marshall McLuhan's
texts or just do them period cuz I
haven't done any yet. Now, in order to
grasp what Marshall McLuhan means by the
medium is the message actually requires
us to take a little detour through
another Canadian uh media studies
scholar and that is Harold Inis who
Marshall McLuhan modeled a lot of his
work off of. Now Inis is uh an
interesting figure in that he was doing
a kind of dialectical materialism
without it being Marxist. So he was
looking at for example the fur trade in
Canada uh and how that kind of catalyzed
the emergence of certain uh routes and
and and whatnot and the formation of
Canada itself. So looking at economic
conditions and how they shape uh shape
the nation of shape the nation of Canada
but without it being like explicitly
Marxist and he he he does have a lot of
other dialectical things and I will talk
about I'll do his work eventually. um
because it is complicated and it's
interesting but it's also very
historical which makes it hard to
present because he's jumping all over
the place and it's yeah in any case he's
an an important figure specifically
Heraldinus puts forward or put forward
the idea that a a civilization
at least how a civilization will grow
and how it will uh command on an on on
the Earth will be determined to some
extent by their means of communication.
So the two kind of big examples that he
gives are Egypt and Babylon. Now in
Babylon, Babylonian people relied upon
mostly stone tablets for communication,
for writing, which meant that they were
hard to transport, meant that they were
actually hard to use for communication,
which meant that the Babylonian Empire
was restricted and that it couldn't
expand too far precisely because it was
so burdensome. It was so cumbersome
because of the media, the medium, in
this case, stone tablets that they used.
Now he contrasts that to Egypt that was
using papyrus just paper quite simply
which could be easily transportable um
easily written on easily obviously then
uh read which allowed for Egypt to
expand quite rapidly that is
geographically across uh what is now you
know Egypt and and and beyond that. So
he gives us these two examples to
demonstrate that the media that a
civilization uses will have a pretty
significant effect on how that
civilization is able to expand and how
it will grow as a civilization. Now he
goes on into quite a few more
territories about how uh a civilization
has to attain a kind of dialectical
equilibrium between what he calls
monopolies of knowledge and monopolies
of power. um and having a steady
equilibrium between what he calls a
space bias and a time bias. But without
going too much into that, he says that a
a civilization or a nation has a time
bias when it is more concerned on
lasting through time as in the case of
Babylon. Because if you have a stone
tablet, it's going to last a very long
time, which will allow the civilization
to last much longer to into the future.
Whereas a spacebiased one is much more
concerned with expanding that is they're
have a have a kind of predisposition
towards space expanding through space
and with lighter transportable
communications or media like paper it is
that much easier to expand and he
thought it was necessary to have a kind
of natural equilibrium between the two.
Now in comes Marshall McLuhan and
Marshall McLuhan takes up this idea to
say that well we don't have to talk
about as quite grandiose things as uh
civilizations per se but specific media
be it television or radio will in a
sense determine how they will be
understood that is the medium itself
will shape the people that use it. So if
people engage primarily in letter
writing as a form of communication,
they're going to have different
interactions than people who have
communication with like texting for
example in that texting allows for
quicker communication. Uh texting
probably produces I assume more anxiety
in people in that you know if you don't
get a text back you feel like the
person's ignoring you whereas if you
write a letter you you can expect that
you probably won't get a a response back
for a few weeks. So in that we see a
different a kind of alteration of what
it means to be a human not only to
oneself but engaging with others as it
is determined by uh media. Now I should
clarify that for both Inis and McLuhan
they aren't saying that the media that a
uh nation or people uses is going to
explicitly determine how they act but
it's just one component of many that
will determine it. Now, when McLuhan
says that the medium is the message,
he's saying that we can actually read
more into a civilization based off the
media they use rather than the specific
things that are said in media or on
these media. So knowing that a
civilization uses quick forms of
communication will tell us a lot will
convey to us a message about that
civilization
a different message than if we were to
read the content of any of those forms
of communication.
Now it's important to note that for
McLuhan he doesn't just say that there's
media on one side and messages on the
other. He actually all lots some space
to discuss how any given message is
another messages medium which might seem
like a complicated idea but the way that
I like to think about this to kind of
simplify it is with um to take a
biblical example with Moses. So for
those that aren't familiar, Moses was
led the exodus of of the Jewish people,
uh, the people of Israel out of Egypt.
And after doing that, God sits them down
for many, many, many what feels like
years, uh, to lay down all these rules
for the uh, the just freed people uh, of
Israel.
And God inscribes his words upon these
stone tablets that Moses is to is to
bring to these freed people.
Now in that moment we have Moses
carrying these tablets.
So Moses is the medium that is he's
holding these tablets which are
themselves a type of medium that are
holding the word of God. So what we see
is a kind of concentric circular effect
where we have one circle let's call that
Moses and the other circle beneath it
which is concentric circles like circles
within circles are the tablets and then
within that is uh the word of God in in
those tablets. So what we have then is a
kind of honing in on the message. But to
each message there is a respective
medium and to each one of those media
there is in itself to itself another
medium that holds it and then Moses can
be said to be uh kind of mediated by God
in that God gives Moses that that
privilege. But to kind of uh fathom
another example, think about how on
Twitter, Twitter is just a essentially a
medium upon which or within which people
can tweet, share, share messages and
tweet things. But Twitter is only made
possible because it exists on the medium
that is your cell phone or your
computer. So it is in a sense the
content of another medium that is your
computer or your phone. So you have this
kind of um this concentric circle effect
in that you go from more broad media to
smaller ones. And the reason that I
bring this up is that it would be wrong
to think that there are just for McLuhan
that is just media and then just
messages. In fact they they do um kind
of fold in onto one another. But broadly
to put it quite simply when he says the
medium is the message he is saying that
we can learn a lot a lot more perhaps
from the medium itself for a given
civilization or people than we can about
the specific content that we find on
that medium. And that's pretty well uh
it. If you you know like what I did
here, you can expect if you subscribe to
see more videos of McLuhan coming up in
the next few months. I imagine I'll do
some more. And yeah, if I omitted
anything that you think is important,
you know, leave a comment. I'll I'll pin
it and then anyone can see it. And yeah,
catch you catch you next time.