All right. Thank you, Michael, for uh
coming on the show. Michael Kremo is
here with us. Thank you. I appreciate
you uh coming on. Good to be with you
and all your viewers and listeners.
For those that aren't familiar, Michael
is the author of Forbidden Archaeology,
Human De uh Devolution, and the Hidden
History of Humanity. Is that correct?
The Hidden History of the Human Race. of
the human race. Okay. My latest book is
My Science, My Religion. My Science.
When did that come out?
where just last year what it is is a
collection of 24 papers that I presented
at
mainstream scientific conferences. Okay.
You where I integrate my spirituality
and my research and
archaeology and other topics related to
human origins and antiquity. And many
people find that extremely unusual
because I'm very open about the
inspiration for my work. I'm very much
inspired by the ancient Sanskrit
writings of
India which speak about human
civilizations that have existed on this
planet for many millions of years. Mhm.
Uh they also present a picture of human
origins that is
consciousnessbased rather than
matterbased.
Okay. So many people find it unusual
that I'm able to present my ideas about
these things at mainstream scientific
conferences. It's something that I
regularly do.
I speak to all kinds of audiences
because I
think all kinds of people are interested
in these topics. Some from what we might
call a more alternative point of view
and some from a more
mainstream scientific point of view. So,
I try to stay in touch with all of these
different audiences. There's a rumor
going around that you uh spoke at Google
recently and um there's I think I read
somewhere where some people weren't
really all that happy that you were
speaking there. Yeah. Well, Google
Google headquarters in Mountain View,
California has a nice program. If
employees want to invite an author to
speak at Google, they can do that. and
you're provided with a forum for
speaking at Google during the noon time
hours and it's also videotaped and
broadcast live throughout their whole
complex during that time. So there were
some employees there who wanted to have
me come and speak about my book,
Forbidden Archaeology.
Some other employees found out about it
and they objected and they tried to get
the lecture cancelled. But it really I
mean that happens some that that's why I
call my topic forbidden archaeology.
Bizarre, right? It really it really, you
know, if I didn't get forbidden a couple
times a year, I'd have to call my work
something else. Yeah. You'd have to
check yourself too to make sure am I am
I doing the right thing, you know? Yeah.
Yeah. Maybe I'm getting too soft. That's
funny. Yeah. So, the the the lecture
actually did go off and it's up. I mean,
Google has a a YouTube channel, authors
at Google, and if anybody wants to see
the talk, you know, they could have a
look at it. But yeah, so um for those
that aren't familiar with your work, um
and the ideas in your work, um
conventional mainstream archaeology is
telling people that, correct me if I'm
wrong here, uh human beings as we exist
today, uh have been on the planet for
100 to 200,000 years, they say. And um
oddly enough, I just watched a debate
recently with uh do you know who Bill
Nye, the science guy, is? I've heard of
him. I've never met him personally. He
was debating Ken Ham, who is a
creationist. He's got like a creation
museum or creation sort of center. I'm
familiar with him also, although I I
don't think I've ever met him
personally. You may not agree with his
his ideas either, but he uh he says that
um Kenham takes the conventional
approach and Bill Nye um sorry opposite
Bill Nye the science guy takes the
conventional approach and Ken Ham he
thinks that the earth is uh or humans
have been on the earth for 6,000 years
and not only that but the earth itself
is only 6,000 years old as well. So,
we're talking about something completely
different from compared to your work.
Well, you know, I do have one thing in
common with biblical creationists like
uh Ham. Ken Ham. Yeah. Ken Ham. Uh what
I tell them is whether we think the
earth is a few thousand years old or a
few billion years old as I do, humans
have been around since the very
beginning and they didn't evolve from
apes and monkeys. So on a certain level
I can get along with people like that.
we would just disagree about the age of
of the earth and the age of the human
species but we would agree that humans
have been around since the beginning.
Okay. So Ken Ham would say take the
biblical approach and say that humans
and the earth started at the same time.
Bill Nye I think believes in
conventional evolution where it took
however many thou hundreds of thousands
of years or millions of years to come
into existence. Um but you would agree
with Kan Ham saying that you think that
mankind and the earth sort of coexisted
and came together. We were there at the
beginning. Yeah. That's because
according to the ancient Sanskrit
writings, we're not living in an
accidental universe.
We're existing in a universe that is
basically a virtual reality system for
conscious selves who are not fit to
exist on what I call the level of pure
consciousness.
Now the ruling principle of that level
of pure consciousness is love. Unselfish
love. If a conscious self becomes
egotistical or selfish and wants to
exploit and dominate and control other
conscious selves. There's no place for
that on that level of reality. There has
to be a another place for such conscious
selves to act out their desires to
dominate, control and exploit others. So
what do you mean? There's not a place in
a phys in a physical location. There's
not a place for these. There's not a
place on the level of pure
consciousness, the highest spiritual
level of reality. You can only the only
thing that goes on there is loving
cooperation among all conscious selves
and the source of all conscious beings.
If a conscious self desires to dominate,
control and exploit others for selfish
purposes, then there is no place on that
level of reality for such a conscious
self. there has to be another reality,
the world of matter, the universe, the
planet that we exist on. Okay? So that's
why I was saying
uh humans and the planet or the even the
universe
are contemporary in terms of both
existing at the same time.
The universe, the material universe with
all its different planetary systems
including ours is designed as a virtual
reality system for conscious selves who
are not qualified to exist on what I
would call the level of pure
consciousness spiritual world in these
physical bodies in order to whatever it
is we have to do. Yeah, this is
something I wrote about in my book,
Human Devolution, a Vadic alternative to
Darwin's Theory. Most scientists today
believe that as conscious beings, we've
evolved up from matter. They would say
matter when it's organized in a
sufficiently complex way in the brain
produces what we call consciousness.
Okay? But only temporarily and only in
association with the body made of
matter, the brain made of molecules. So
they would say matter made the
consciousness. Yeah. Matter produces
consciousness. But it seems like it be
the other way around, wouldn't it? Well,
that's what I would say. I would say as
conscious selves, we have an existence
independent from matter. Matter does not
produce consciousness, but consciousness
can become
associated with matter,
become covered by matter. And those
coverings are what we call bodies. Mhm.
So under that
view uh I would say as conscious beings
we don't evolve up from matter as most
scientists now say rather we devolve or
come down into from the level of pure
consciousness into the world of matter
where we become covered by matter and
those coverings are what we call bodies.
So bodies made of matter are vehicles
for conscious
selves. And there are a variety of
vehicles. There are human vehicles,
there are plant vehicles, there are
animal
vehicles of all different kinds.
And all of them have always been
available for conscious selves who have
come into this level of reality. So that
makes sense from a uh from a
reincarnation kind of perspective,
doesn't it? You know, yes. If beings are
going to come in and um sort of take on
the ma the matter of whatever it is that
they need to come through and and learn
or or whatever they would come in as a
plant, come in as an animal, a human,
something like that.
Yeah, there are, you know, just like
there are varieties of motor vehicles
because people have different needs,
they have different taste, they have
different amounts of money that they're
able to spend for vehicles.
So automobile
manufacturers provide a whole range of
vehicles and you might evolve from one
vehicle to another. You might start with
a certain type of vehicle and you get
tired of that or develop some other
needs and you get another kind of car or
vehicle. Uh uh before the show I think
you were talking about you know going to
a hybrid vehicle or something like that
because your values change. Yeah. Isn't
that interesting? So but it isn't that
one
vehicle evolves into another vehicle.
They're all separately manufactured and
designed. But you as a conscious self
may go from one to the other. So I think
it's the same with bodies. A conscious
self may be in a plant body and then in
an animal body. Maybe an ape body, an
ape man body and then a human body. Mhm.
The human
vehicle I believe is a very special one
because in the human vehicle it's
possible
to understand what our real position is
as conscious selves and do something
about it. uh restore consciousness to
its original pure state beyond the world
of matter, beyond the cycle of
reincarnation and karma. And that that's
the actual goal of human life as far as
I'm concerned to restore consciousness
to its original pure state to appreciate
I'm a being of pure consciousness.
You're a being of pure consciousness.
We're all beings of pure consciousness.
We're all related to each other on that
level. There's no need to divide
ourselves into so many competing groups
based
on just external considerations related
to the particular kind of vehicle that
we're inhabiting at the present moment.
So it's it's something quite different
from the view viewpoint of modern
science. Most scientists today would
say, well, you're just a machine made of
molecules in competition with other
machines made of molecules, right, for
survival. And because of
that, people's goals and values tend to
become extremely materialistic. The
thing that's really bizarre is that we
forget all of what you just said. We
forget it all. And we think
that there's somehow some sort of
identification and attachment to the to
the physical nature of our bodies. And
we think like people say, "I'm a black
guy or I'm a white guy or I'm a man or
I'm a woman." And it's it's almost as if
they people don't realize that who they
are is not is not their skin. It's not
their it's not their body. It's not any
of that stuff. Uh we but we have this
weird identification with these types of
things and then we just fight each other
forever because we think that we're
these certain things, right? you know, I
I couldn't say it any better myself than
weird than the way you just put it, but
uh there are different traditional
wisdom systems, ancient knowledge
systems that try to put out that message
that we are something more than machines
made of matter. right? You know, we're
in one way or another. If you look
at Australian Aboriginal traditions,
Native American Indian traditions, the
traditional wisdom systems of ancient
India and other countries,
uh even you know, traditional
Judeo-Christian
views, they tend to put more emphasis on
the conscious self. I mean they might
use a religious term for it different
words right you know like a soul for
example and then some people might think
well soul that requires some belief or
something like that it's a matter of
faith so I tend in my work not to use
term a term like soul for example I
prefer conscious self conscious because
nobody can deny that it doesn't require
any faith or belief. It's the most real
fact of of our existence that I'm
conscious, you're
conscious, you're an individual, I'm an
individual, you're a person, I'm a
person. You can't argue those things.
Those things are not matters of faith or
belief. Those are matters of direct
experience at every moment. Right? And
if we think about it, you know, that
conscious self remains even though our
own physical bodies go through so many
changes. Say, you know, when I was 5
years old, my material vehicle was in a
certain state. Now it's in a different
state, but I'm the same. You're the same
conscious self, right? The the same
person. And by extension I could say
while the person in a completely even in
an animal body is also a conscious self.
Yeah. Even there have been studies
showing that plants appear to have some
kind of consciousness or even you know
simple creatures like bacteria and
amoeba you know if you study them
carefully under a microscope you'll see
they behave in ways that display
consciousness
and intention. Yeah it's interesting.
Um, I don't know if you've seen the the
studies going on recently with
uh plants. It's just fascinating.
There's um there's plants that actually
communicate with each other when there's
predators, other predators um around um
that were ready that are trying to eat
the plants and so they'll communicate
with each other and each of the plants
will develop some sort of like a
bitterness to their leaves if they're
downwind. Um so the predators won't come
and eat the plants that are downwind
from a particular plant. if some some um
organism is going to come eat that,
they'll communicate with each other.
They'll they'll build uh uh defense
systems against attack. Um it's just
incredible what plants are doing and and
they've studied where uh they can
anticipate being burned. There's
electrical energies that's being calc um
measured coming off of plants where they
they can anticipate if someone puts a
flame up to their a leaf. It's amazing.
I mean, these are I mean, these are
plants, you know. So, to me, it's all
part of understanding we're in a
consciousnessbased
universe rather than a matterbased
universe, which is the dominant idea
in science, right, today. So it seems as
if the the scientific community is um
intent on making sure that we've we
encase ourselves within the paradigm
within the structure of matter only and
and no consciousness, no spirit, there's
nothing deeper.
Um I wonder why that is. Why do you
think that is? I think there are a few
reasons for
it. In one
sense, science is a
game. And in any game, there are rules.
For example, tennis is a game. And
you've got lines on the court and a
ball. And if the ball hits a line, it's
it's out. It's out. If it's inside the
line, it's in. Mhm. And you know there's
judges who are looking to see if the
ball hits the line in or goes in or
outside of the line. Mhm. And it's a
science is also a game that's can be
played according to certain rules. The
rules don't always have to be the same,
but scientists have chosen to play their
game by certain rules. And one of the
rules is no
non-material substance. Not a no. I mean
you have to explain everything in terms
of atoms and molecules, subatomic
particles and things of that sort. But
it's funny that they play by those
rules, but they readily admit they don't
understand what holds these things
together. Yeah. You know what I mean?
Another rule
is no intentionality.
What do you mean? You can't
have the idea that say there's some
supreme conscious being that has
something to do with the order and
complexity that we observe around us.
That's something that's to bring in an
idea like that is against the rules that
scientists currently play by. You know
that you might have some higher
being exercising some
intelligence in say for example the
design of the complex biomolecular
structures in
organisms
that's not allowed by the current rules
and that's
okay. Uh you could play science by those
rules and that those are the rules that
scientists are currently playing by. But
then you should be prepared to admit
that your science is not dealing with
everything that's possibly true about
the world that we live in. It's
excluding
uh by definition certain possibilities.
Say uh for example the idea that there's
a conscious self that is not produced by
matter that has an existence independent
from matter. But they would just say
wouldn't they just say well it's not
proven so it can't be science. Well they
define science in such a way that it can
never be proved. There you go. Yeah.
Yeah. It's the they their def their
definitions are the lines on the court.
Right. Right. So you could have a
science that actually because it it's
either true or it's not true that there
is a conscious self that is not produced
by matter that has an independent
existence from matter. It's either true
or it's not true that there's some
higher conscious self that is
responsible for for some of the order
and complexity that we observe and the
world around us. Now if you exclude that
possibility by saying no we can't invoke
any higher intelligence we can't concern
ourselves with any non-material
substances. Well, fine. You can do that.
But then you should be prepared to admit
that your science is not dealing with
everything that's
possibly true about the world that we
live in. Right? And actually if you look
at the
history of
science say if you go back a century or
more you'll see that there were many
mainstream scientists who were
conducting their scientific
research based on the idea that there is
non-material substance. There are more
subtle energies and vital
forces that you know the human mind had
powers like telekinesis, extra sensory
perception and so on or that there was
some higher intelligence that was
involved in the origin of the universe
or the origin of species. Who were some
of the scientists that did that? Do you
know Alfred Russell Wallace is one. Was
Nichollet Tesla considered a scientist?
Yes, he was Tesla was a scientist. Okay.
So, Wallace was an interesting science
scientist. He was the along with
Darwin, the
co-founder of the theory of evolution by
natural
selection. Actually, Darwin had been
working on that theory for many years.
He was writing a book and he kept and I
I know what it's like because I it takes
me a long time to write uh the books
that I write. Gosh, I would imagine my
book forbidden archaeology took me eight
years to write. So Darwin was working on
his book, The Origin of Species, year
after year after year. And he wasn't
publishing it. He was always working on
it. And one day he got in the mail a
letter from Wallace who was a younger
scientist.
And in this letter Wallace outlined the
whole theory of evolution by natural
selection and said I'm going to present
a paper about this at a meeting of a
scientific society in London. So Darwin
was shocked. You know, he'd been been
working on this theory and this other
scientist Wallace comes up with the same
idea and is going to publish it. And the
way that science works
is the scientist who first publishes a
theory gets credit for it. Yeah. Yeah.
So Wallace So why did Wallace tell tell
Darwin that? You notified him? Yeah.
Well, he was a a young scientist and he
thought, well, Darwin is a naturalist.
He might be interested in this idea.
Okay. I wonder if he knew what Darwin
was working on. No, because Wallace was
I mean Darwin was doing that privately.
Wow.
So what so what Darwin proposed is okay
he decided let me write a very quick
paper first you know you know and
proposed to Wallace that we both present
papers at the same meeting of the Lana
society in London which is a society
dedicated to the science of biology.
ology. So Wallace agreed to do that.
They both presented papers about the
theory of
evolution by natural selection at this
meeting and they both got credit. For a
long time the theory was called the
Wallace Darwin theory of evolution. And
you may wonder well why is it now only
called the Darwin theory Darwin? Yeah.
It's because Wallace then became
involved in paranormal
research with another English scientist,
Sir William Krooks, who was uh a
president of the Royal
Society, England's topmost scientific
organization. They were conducting
research into mediums.
You know, for
example, they were investigating one
medium whose name was Daniel Dunglass
Hume, and he had some unusual
psychoinetic abilities. I mean, this may
seem a little strange, even a little
amusing,
but Hume could take an accordion and
hold it by the end opposite the keys and
cause it to play very elaborate
tunes. So, Wallace and Crooks thought,
okay, uh maybe he's using a trick
instrument. So they went out to a music
shop and they bought an entirely new
accordion that Hume had never seen or
touched before. And then they decided,
okay, maybe somehow or other he's a
magician. He's distracting us. He's
getting his other hand
somewhere down by the keys and he's
playing it. And you know, like a
magician would do a trick. Yeah. So they
thought, okay, to prevent that, let's
build a
cage. So they built this cage that he
had to insert his hand into holding the
accordion. Mhm. And the other hand would
not be able to get through the
cage to touch the keys. Okay. Yeah. And
under those conditions, they found he
was still able to do it. And then both
Wallace and Crooks said on occasion they
s would see him take his hand out of the
cage and the accordion would be floating
in the cage all by itself playing very
elaborate tunes. Wow. So you may like in
Disneyland where the where the heads are
inside the thing just talking by
themselves. Yeah. You know, so you may
think I mean the these these are
prominent
scientists, the co-founder of the theory
of evolution by natural selection, a
pres a physicist, a prominent
physicist, a president of the Royal
Society, England's
topmost scientific organization, kind of
like the American Academy for the
Association of Science, the equivalent
of that.
And both of them are reporting to their
colleagues that well we're seeing we're
testing this man Hume and he's got these
psycho kinetic abilities these mind over
matter abilities and they did lots of
experiments like that. So Darwin became
very upset with Wallace. He said, "I,
you know, you're just messing up
everything. You're going out on the deep
end. You're crazy. You, you know,
so because of that, it's no longer
called the Wallace Darwin theory,
although it was Wallace who really came
up came up first. Came up with it.
Simply called the Darwinian theory of
evolution because Darwin was a pretty
strict materialist. Mhm. Now it's uh is
that correct what I was saying at the
beginning that conventional archaeology
is saying that uh humanity in our form
now is about 100 to 200,000 years old.
Is that what they say? Yeah. They would
say humans like us first appeared on
Earth less than 200,000 years ago. And
before that time they would say there
were not any human beings like us. There
were just more primitive ape-like
creatures that they call Neaanderls or
Homo erectus or Homoabilis or
Oustralopythecus. And before that they
would say there were just, you know,
primitive apes and monkeys, you know,
about six or 7 million years ago. So
conventional wisdom or conventional um
approach to this, how old is the earth
in conventional terms? If we're 200,000
years old, how old did the earth how
long was the earth existing
before 200,000 years ago when they say
we came on? Uh they would say about 6
billion years. I think that's the
current estimate for the age of the
earth. Doesn't that seem bizarre that we
would live for 5 and billion 900,000
years without 5
billion800,000 or 8 mill whatever the
number is years before we would come
along. That's that's well to me it's
kind of strange. It sounds bizarre but
you know according to many ancient
wisdom traditions the earth has a
purpose you know just like you know we
send satellites we send a space station
into orbit around the earth. It has a
purpose. It's to house astronauts, you
know, doing their scientific work up
there, right? So, it's not that it just
appeared there and somehow or other some
by some accident, some molecules and it
formed some
first cell and it gradually evolved
until it turned into human beings. And
that's why you have human beings on the
space station. Yeah. No, the space
station was deliberately designed for a
purpose and the human astronauts were
connected with that purpose and
therefore as soon as the space station
was there, the astronauts went into it
to carry out their work. Right? So
according to the views of many of the
ancient wisdom traditions including the
one that I'm most inspired by the
spiritual tradition of ancient India
the world has a
purpose and its purpose is to be kind of
like a little virtual reality system for
conscious selves who aren't fit to exist
on higher level of reality that I call
the realm of pure
consciousness. So the human vehicle has
always been there. Now I first learned
about these things when I began studying
the ancient Sanskrit writings of India.
Among them is a group called the
piranhas or the histories and they
contain histories of human populations
on this planet going back hundreds of
millions of years and they use that that
number. Yes, they do.
Because the piranhas involve a cyclical
concept of time and the cycles are
expressed in terms of how many solar
years they last. Okay. One of the cycles
is called the kulpa or the day of
Brahma. Okay. It lasts for about 4
bill320 million
years. It's followed by a night of
Brahma which lasts the same period of
time 4
bill320 million years. Then there's
another day, another night, another day,
another night. During the days, life
including human life is manifest in the
universe. And during the nights it's
dormant
sleeping. So the entire planet. Yeah.
Okay. So according to the piranic
cosmology, the current kalpa or day of
Brahma began a couple of billion years
ago. So yes, these writings do attach
years to the cycles. Yeah. So, as a
Vadic archaeologist, I would expect to
find evidence for human presence going
back many millions of years, perhaps as
much as two billion years. Two billion
with a B. Two billion with a B. Whoa.
Now, if you look in the current
textbooks of
archaeology, you're not going to find
any such evidence. You're only going to
find uh the
discoveries that show that the first
humans like us appeared less than
200,000 years ago. But I decided to in
my research to look beyond the
textbooks. I decided, let me look into
the original scientific reports by
archaeologists, geologists,
paleontologists, other scientists who
dig into the earth looking for traces of
life.
When I did
that, I was very surprised to find many
cases of scientists finding human bones,
human artifacts, and human
footprints many millions of years old.
And I'll give an example of a scientist
who did that. Dr. J. D. Whitney. He was
the chief government geologist of
California in the 19th century in the
1860s and 70s.
So at that time, gold was discovered in
the mountains of California in the
Sierra Nevada
mountains and miners were digging
tunnels into the sides of mountains to
get the gold at places like Table
Mountain and Twomni County in uh central
California. And deep inside the tunnels
and the solid rock, the miners were
finding human
bones and human artifacts. They were
finding
obsidian spear points, stone mortars,
and pestals at many different
locations in the gold mining region. How
far down into the sediment or deep are
they going to find this? Uh, you know,
for example,
uh, there's the
Montazuma mine at Table Mountain. They
went in about 1,500 ft into the side of
the mountain. Okay. Several hundred feet
from the the top of it. It's a flat
mountain. It's like a plateau. Yeah.
So,
uh, they dug over 1,500 ft into the base
of this mountain and there they found
human artifacts, stone mortars and
pestals. Now, these discoveries came to
the attention of Whitney. He went out,
he visited the places where the
discoveries were made. He interviewed
the miners who had made the discoveries
and he conducted his own research and he
wrote a massive report that was
published by Harvard University in the
year 1880.
But you know we don't hear anything
about these discoveries today. We don't
read about them in today's textbooks of
archaeology. And that's because of what
I call a process of knowledge
filtration, right? That operates in the
scientific world and it has to operate
like that, right? If they want to
continue with their current paradigm,
right? It has to act, it has to go
through that um unfortunately for
people. Yes. you know and you know I'll
tell you how this knowledge filtering
operated in this particular case uh Dr.
Whitney reported these things to the
scientific world in a publication
published by Harvard University. Mhm.
There was another scientist, William
Holmes, an anthropologist who worked for
the Smithsonian Institution in
Washington. And he said if Dr. Whitney
had understood the theory of human
evolution, he wouldn't have published
that report. In other words, he should
have known better. Yeah. That that
couldn't possibly be true. Yeah. Yeah,
there's one fact I didn't really
mention, which is these human bones and
human artifacts were found in layers of
rock that modern geologists consider to
be about 50 million years old. So now,
do modern geologists consider that did
they was that their estimate before they
found any bones? Uh, it probably would
be. These are modern ge the discoveries
were made in the 1880s the 19 so modern
modern geologists and archaeologists
uh dates Whitney thought they were very
old. He he
he said these belong to what's called
the tertiary period. Okay. So the
tertiary period
uh according to modern geologists would
cons would go anywhere from
about
2.58 million
to 66 million years ago. But they've
studied the strata
at Table Mountain. Uhhuh. and they've
looked at the plant and animal fossils
in these deposits. They've used
different dating methods like the
potassium argon method to date the
deposits and they've concluded they
belong to a division of the tertiary
called the
eene which is about 50 million years
old. All the way up to 50 million. Yeah.
about 50 million years old. What do
modern archaeologists and geologists say
when you present that to them? What do
they what's their conclusion? What do
they think about that? Well, uh, some of
them say, well, there must have been
some mistake. Yeah, we did it wrong or
something, right? Yeah. You know, like,
yeah, there there was a hoax. Yeah.
Maybe some Indians brought these things
into the mines. But you know, in when I
was doing my research for forbidden
archaeology, I got in touch with some
historians in California who are very
expert about that period of time and
they said the Indians would not have
gone anywhere near those
mines at that time. Okay. So the is
there any so the the way that they try
to explain them is mistakes, hoaxes,
uh things of that sort. Okay. Now
there that's if they could actually
demonstrate or or they might say there
were fissures
through which objects came from some
higher more recent levels fell down or
there might have been some earth
movements or something. Now, if you're
going to proceed in a scientific way,
it's you can't just raise possibilities
without proof without proof. You should
be able to demonstrate in this
particular location, there were fissures
that went from a level where there
are, say, fairly recent artifacts,
right, that could have slipped down into
that very place. Or you'd have to
demonstrate there was an earth movement.
Or you'd have to demonstrate, well, here
is the person who in this particular
case uh took from some other location a
human artifact or bone and deliberately
planted it. Yeah. You have to have some
proof, right? You can't just
raise possibilities because that's not
science. That's not science. Yeah.
That's just conjecture. I mean, that's
that's really no different than what
scientists would
claim spiritual people or Christian
people or religious people would do when
when they would say something like,
"Well, God did this or God did that."
Right? It's the same thing if they're
coming up with conjectures. If they've
got nothing really scientific to I
remember once I was giving a lecture
about my book, Forbidden Archaeology, at
the Russian Academy of Sciences in
Moscow. Okay. And at least they were
open open enough to allow me to present
my ideas there. And actually when I
first started my research on this topic,
it was still during the Cold War and you
know, you never imagined Yeah. Right.
being able to go to Moscow
andur present you know ideas like but I
was I was in I was given an invitation
to speak. What year was that? This was
in about the year 2007.
Okay.
So I presented a paper a presentation
about my work at the Russian Academy of
Sciences in Moscow. And one of the
archaeologists said during the question
session, "Well, look, I haven't read
your book, but I'm sure everything in it
is a hoax, illusion, or mistake."
He said that without even reading your
book, right? Which is
sometimes the attitude. I remember
once I was in Copenhagen in Denmark.
Yeah. I was giving a lecture about
forbidden archaeology and an
archaeologist from uh the University of
Copenhagen was was there
and you know he listened and during the
question or comment session he
said something to the same effect.
Uh-huh. I'm, you know, these things are
very possibly, you know,
mistakes. There were fissures. Yeah. And
I told them it's possible that you're a
holographic projection from Mars. you
know that's completely you know I mean I
mean anything is possible but if you're
going to proceed in a scientific way you
have to show that the kinds of
objections that you're raising actually
did occur in the specific
locations that I'm talking about. Well,
it seems like what some of them would do
would be to say things like they said to
you because they obviously haven't had
the time to do the their own research.
And it seems like if you were them, you
your first reaction would be what their
reaction was, but then they would go off
and do some research and try to disprove
you and try to prove their theories
about there being fissures, right? Have
has anyone tried to do that? Have have
they been successful with have they had
any theories that have actually not that
I'm aware of. Yeah. But I I would like
to say this however that I respect the
right of each individual to make up
their own minds about these things.
Right? say I if if
somebody listens to what I have to say
or reads a book that I've written and
they
find well it's not convincing to me.
Uhhuh. You know I'm not convinced. I
respect
that. What I don't agree with is if
people who disagree with me or with
[Music]
others
use
government to
suppress the idea that they don't like.
How would they use the government? Just
through through education policy, you
know, for example, schooling and things.
Yes.
uh say at the present moment the
supporters of the Darwinian theory of
evolution have a government enforced
monopoly in the education system. Right?
Nothing else can be taught. Even though
there are scientists who are proposing
different alternatives to the Darwinian
theory of evolution, it is it's a fact
that scientists like that are there.
That's why there's sometimes some
controversies about intelligent design
or creationism or something like that.
Right?
So usually in a country that we consider
free and
democratic, we wouldn't like it if the
government through
its policies on education were to say,
for
example, only one religion can be
mentioned in discussions of the history
of the United States.
only only one religion. We we wouldn't
we say no no no you can't do that. Yeah.
Or only one political party can be
mentioned in histories of the United
States or only one race can be mentioned
or something like that. We wouldn't
tolerate it at the present moment.
However, government is saying although
there are diverse
opinions about the origin of life on
this
planet, we're going to allow only
one idea to be presented.
Yeah, they're doing that already. That's
what they're doing. Right now I think
the more appropriate thing to do would
be to say okay today most scientists
let's say 95 or
98% accept you know the current
Darwinian theory of evolution and
everything that's connected with it
that's a fact so but there are and it's
also a fact there's a minority of
scientists who are supporting ing other
alternatives. So I think the correct
thing to do that's true with the
textbooks and the curriculum would be to
acknowledge the diversity that's there.
Give the supporters of the currently
dominant theory 95 or 98% of the
textbook pages in biology and say most
scientists accept this. But in the
remaining few pages of the textbooks,
just acknowledge in a neutral and
objective way, not in a put down kind of
way. Well, that's yeah, there are some
others who are proposing alternatives
and that's also a fact and here are
their reasons and then let students make
up their own minds about it.
If that were done, I think we would
start seeing some changes in the
scientific world generally. Well, what's
cool about I think the way our culture
is going is that I mean I've listened to
so much of your content on YouTube and
you've got all these books and uh what's
cool is that I mean it seems to me that
people are starting to wake up and and
and start looking outside the box and
start you know they're not going to do
it in school. So in school you're not
going to get any of the cutting edge.
You're not going to get any of the
fringe sort of information. uh you're
not going to get anything that um sort
of opposes what the mainstream wants.
And so the beauty of the way it is now
with YouTube and with the internet and
with shows like this, you've done a
thousand shows like this. Oh, sure. It's
awesome that that this is getting out
there so people can seek this stuff out
if they want to do their own research.
Yeah. Which is really cool. I mean, if
this were, you know, in 1960, it just it
wasn't possible unless you went to the
libraries and you did that kind of
thing. But today it's just it's amazing
the amount of information that's
available you know. Oh that's absolutely
the that's absolutely true and I think
eventually it will have an effect and
eventually the effect will be I think
some you know if if we want to
see
societywide changes
Mhm.
you know, then you know to influence the
cultural and political and
financial institutions the way they're
set up if we want to see changes. I
think there eventually will have to be
some changes in the
education system that is the foundation
of those different institutional
frameworks in our society. And
meanwhile, of course, through all these
different alternative media, people can
inform
themselves and get get some real
knowledge that's not taught in schools.
What do what are your thoughts on
on the origin of the earth,
creation, evolution? What are your
thoughts? How long ago do you in your
research uh are you
showing uh that humans and the earth
came into into existence and what are
your thoughts about how it all started
and how long ago that was?
Well, it's been going on
forever because there's always been a
need for an alternative
reality for conscious
selves that are not fit to exist on what
I
call the level of pure consciousness.
You could call it the spiritual world.
You could call it whatever, you know.
So, by alternative reality, you mean the
earth. The earth. Okay. Okay. And
according
to the ancient Sanskrit writings of
India, there are millions of
universes and millions of planets inside
each universe. And they've been going
through these cycles of creation and
destruction endlessly. endlessly because
there are always some conscious selves
who use their free will in such a way
that they really can't be accommodated
in the spiritual
world. So there's a virtual reality for
them where they can act out and it's
constantly being created and destroyed
again and again and again and again. But
you mean other there there's an ongoing
existence of alternative realities
meaning physical um material material
world. So, as far as the earth, how how
long do you think that's has that do you
think been going forever or h how long
do you think ago did did the earth come
into an existence in the current
creation cycle? According to
this cosmology that's revealed in the
piranhas of ancient
India, the current creation cycle began
about 2 billion years ago. 2 billion.
Then before that, the earth was in a
dormant state for about 4 billion 320
million years. And then before
that there was another creation cycle
and before that another dormant cycle.
And so it just kind of endless. Say it's
like you have a hard drive or something
like that. you know, a computer disc,
not used very much anymore, but say like
a hard drive
and you can write on it and then you can
erase it and then you can write on it
again. So I think the earth is something
like that. It
has an
existence but during the creation cycles
during the days of Brahma it's written
on. Okay. In other words there's data
there's programs on it. It's active.
Mhm. Whereas during the nights of Brahma
it's erased. I mean the disc is still
there. Meaning the earth the earth is
still there. Yeah. But the data is
erased from it.
Now the what makes it possible to you
could say rewrite the history of life on
the disk of the earth is that you know
it's something like cloud computing.
Uh-huh. You know, like a lot of people
these days, they store all their files
and songs and pictures in the cloud
somewhere, right? Which means if their
device gets broken or erased or somehow
they can download everything again or
access everything again from the
cloud. So I think the earth is something
like that. Uh life goes on here for some
time but then there are periodic
devastations and this is even part
of modern paleontology modern science.
You know, if you look at the history of
the earth in terms of modern science,
they would say, well, life began on
Earth two or three billion years ago,
which basically lines up with what the
ancient Sanskrit writings say roughly.
It's ballpark correct.
And then they would
say then the history of life went on and
during that history there were six major
extinction
events. You know according to modern
science the last extinction event being
the one that wiped out the dinosaurs
about
65 million years ago. Right? So they
they say there were six major extinction
events. According to the ancient
Sanskrit writings, since life began on
earth at the beginning of the kalpa or
day of Brahma about two billion years
ago, there have been six
devastations at intervals of several
hundred million
years during which most life on earth
was wiped out and it had to be
repopulated. Mhm. So both from these
ancient wisdom sources and from modern
science, we're seeing a similar picture.
There are parallels.
Yeah. I wonder if but what enables the
repopulation is that according to the
Vadic
cosmology at higher levels of the
cosmos, there are intelligent beings who
have all the resources to repopulate the
earth. after these
cataclysmic cataclysmic events that take
place periodically.
That's interesting. How does that I
wonder how that relates to um I'm sure
you're familiar with Sitchin's work and
all of that um with
the seeding of the planet and the slave
species and all of that, right? I mean,
normally in my work, I don't address the
work of other researchers in the
alternative history field because I feel
people can read my stuff, read their
stuff, make up their own minds about it.
But if somebody asks me a question,
yeah, I I feel obliged to give some kind
of answer. Mhm. So, uh I would say my
work has some things in common with
citroins and there are also some
differences. Mhm. The one thing that we
would have in common is the idea that
there are
extraterrestrial forms of humanoid life.
Mhm. You know, there's humanoid life in
other parts of our universe.
So that's an idea that we would have in
common. We would also have in common the
idea that those extraterrestrial
humanoid beings have something to do
with our human presence on this planet.
Okay. So those are ideas that we would
have in common. The the
differences would have to do with the
timing of these things. What is he
saying? As far as I can
understand,
he basically accepts
the history of life as given by modern
evolutionary scientists. Okay? Uh in
other words, life begins on earth two or
three billion years ago with some single
formed
uh species, bacteria or amoeba.
Multisellular creatures come into
existence.
And then plants and animals, primitive
plants and animals come into existence
on the land. The land animals develop
into apes and monkeys gradually then
into ape men. Uh the ape man homo
erectus was existing about three or
400,000 years ago according to him.
according to him and at that time there
was some intervention by some
extraterrestrial beings. I think they
used the term Anunnaki for them. Yeah.
Searching for gold or something. And uh
they engaged in some genetic
manipulation of the ape men homo erectus
to form the anatomically modern humans
which they wanted to use as a slave race
or something like that. That part I
don't accept. You don't accept. You know
I think humans have been present on
earth since the very beginning. We're
not a a slave
race. Uh the
human vehicle is there to allow
conscious selves to understand their
real purpose. And there are different
systems of yoga and
meditation, prayer,
contemplation that have been provided by
different ancient wisdom traditions to
allow conscious selves to elevate their
consciousness and qualify themselves for
existence on that higher level of
reality that I call the level of pure
consciousness.
So I would say I have some similarities
with Sitchin's work and some
differences, but normally I just leave
it up to people. They can read my stuff.
They can read his make up their own
mind. Make up their own mind.
Yeah. I mean, I know I read his 12
Planet book and um you know, I'm just
not sure. I mean, I it's just I'm not
sure where he was getting all that stuff
with with the tablets and all of that.
his in different researchers and
alternative history have different
sources of
inspiration. My main source of
inspiration is the ancient Sanskrit
writings of India. He was looking at the
Samrian texts. Oh right. I know other
researchers who are very much inspired
by ancient Egyptian text and others are
inspired by other things. Chinese and
Chinese hermetic text. Uh I think they
although they have some differences,
they also have some basic
commonalities to them as well. But
uh as I was saying a little while ago, I
respect the right of each individual to
find their own path through all of this.
I can only report what I have found
helpful in my attempts to understand
these things. And if people want to look
at that, well, fine. But I don't claim
to have a monopoly on truth, I think
truth can be found in a lot of different
places and different different ways. How
many other areas of the world have there
been um artifacts of people that people
are saying that are are millions and
millions of years old? Yeah, this
evidence for extreme human antiquity can
be found all over the world. I'm not
really aware of a whole lot from
Antarctica, although I have read
some reports, you know, in what we might
call the tabloid
press, but you know, from, you know,
anything that's scientifically
verifiable. I'm not aware of anything.
Was a bird down there when he uh when
when he went down there to visit and to
check it out, did he find anything?
Admiral Bird. I'm not sure if there was
anything related to archaeology.
Yeah. There I think I think his name is
brought up in terms of other things.
Yeah. But in terms of the evidence for
extreme human antiquity, there are
examples from Africa. You know, for
example, in
1979, Mary Leaky reported finding
footprints at a place called Lei in the
country of Tanzania in East Africa. And
you know, they were found in layers of
rock that are about 4 million years old.
But in her original report, you know,
she said that the footprints are exactly
like modern human footprints. And other
scientists also agreed with her. But she
didn't think, even though the footprints
were exactly like those of modern human
beings, she didn't think human beings
like us made them. She just thought,
well, there must have been some kind of
ape man at that
time who had feet exactly like modern
human feet. But, you know, we have the
skeletons of the eight men from that
time. They're called
Oralopythecus. And the footbones of
Oralopythecus have been discovered. And
the foot of Oralopythecus was not like
that of a human being like us. It was
more like the foot of a chimpanzee with
very long. Yeah. Like you know the first
toe would kind of move out to the side
like a human thumb. The other toes are
long sort of like human fingers. Right.
Made for grabbing and things. Actually,
the only creature known to science today
that has a foot exactly like that of a
human being like us is human being like
us.
So you've got evidence from Africa,
there's evidence
from Europe. You know, there are
science, there are museums in Europe who
have that have uh stone tools that date
back 20 million years, 30 million
years. Human skeletons have been found
in places in Europe. So what are they
doing with these skeletons? What are
they doing with them? Are they just hi
hiding the evidence or what's the deal
well with that? You know this process of
knowledge filtration operates in a very
interesting way. Yeah. Say the
scientists who are engaged in this they
don't think in their minds well I'm
hiding
evidence which if known would cause
people to disbelieve in our theories.
They're not thinking like that. They're
thinking something's got to be wrong
with this evidence. I don't know exactly
what. Probably if I talk to my colleague
down the hall, he'd be able to tell me,
okay, exactly what's wrong with it.
Obviously, there had to have been some
mistake made or it slipped down through
a fissure or the dating was wrong or
something a hoax. uh this has been
looked into and you I'm just being a
responsible scientist. I'm not engaged
in any kind of conspiracy, but the
effect is just the same as if there was
an
actual conspiracy. Yeah. Because the
that's what you said, the effect is the
same regardless of the intention.
Regardless of the intention. Yeah.
That's bizarre. Uh, but you know, I'm
working
to get my message out and I do get a
hearing in the professional circles
later this year. I'm going to a meeting
of the World Archaeological Congress,
world's largest international
organization of
archaeologists. They have a meeting
every four years in a different country.
This year it's going to be held in
Kyoto, Japan. Oh, really? And I'm going
to go there and I'm going to present a
paper. I They're going to allow you to
speak. Yes. Wow. Some some scientists
are a little bit open-minded. You know,
basically, I get three reactions from
scientists because they're not all the
same. I find three basic groups. One I
call the fundamentalist, materialist.
Mhm. And they're very much opposed to
what I do. They don't want to hear it.
They don't want anyone else to hear it.
Very against it. There's another group
of
scientists that may be supporters of the
currently dominant theories, but for
more or less scientific reasons, which
means they're willing to listen to
alternatives. And it's scientists in
that group that invite me to speak at
universities,
uh, allow me to make
presentations at What percentage
scientific are those, do you think? I
would say about 60%. Really? That are
somewhat open? Somewhat open. Wow. I'd
say there's this 20 to 30% that are
what I would call the fundamentalist,
materialists. They they hold their
positions. I wouldn't think it would I
would think the percentage would be
different. I and I'm sorry opposite.
Yeah, I'm talking about
archaeology in particular.
Yeah, that's interesting.
And you know for
example in archaeology there are many
archaeologists who understand that their
discipline was used during the colonial
period to
suppress the world views of the
colonized people in India and Africa the
Americas and Asia. Mhm. So they're a
little bit some of them are a little bit
open to alternative archaeologies. You
know, they want to know, okay, well,
what would an Australian Aboriginal
archaeology be like or a Native American
Indian
archaeology or in my case a Vadic
archaeology? Actually the journal the
scientific journal of the world
archaeological congress is called
archaeology plural kind of in
recognition of that. So there are many
scientists I find who may be supporters
of the currently dominant
theories but they're open to
alternatives and they're willing to
acknowledge them. So I noticed at this
conference there was going to be a
section on hidden treasures in museums.
So, a lot of my work is you I've been,
you know, I mentioned to you going into
the Museum of Anthropology at the
University of California at Berkeley and
looking at some of the artifacts that
were found in the California gold mines.
They're not displayed to the public.
They're kept in a storage building uh a
few miles from the main museum on the
campus, but they are still there. And
the same in Europe. I went to the Museum
of Geology in Lisbon and I looked at
artifacts that were discovered by Carlos
Ribero who was a Portuguese
geologist in the 19th century. He
discovered human artifacts and layers of
rock 20 million years old. So, I'm going
to be talking about these things when I
go to Kyoto. When is that? What What's
the date of that? It's uh from August 28
to September 2. Oh, coming up. Yeah.
Wow, that's awesome.
So, I my paper's already been accepted.
I'm going to go there. I'm going to
present it. Maybe it'll be published.
Who knows? So, how long do you have to
present
at a conference like that? Typically,
you're given 20 minutes. Oh, really?
Okay. That's typical, is it? So, you got
to be quick. Yeah. But uh usually you
don't only you know your presentation is
more or less like a summary of your
paper. Okay. Right.
You know that's just how that
works at a a scientific conference.
Usually the average presentation is
about
20 20 minutes.
So in your opinion it is true that
people have lived with dinosaurs.
They're people lived before the
dinosaurs, during the time of the
dinosaurs and after the time of the
dinosaurs.
Is it true they found fossils with in
the same sediment layers with dinosaur
fossils that um are also in conjunction
with human remains?
Well, what I'm familiar
with are reports that human footprints
have been found alongside dinosaur
footprints. Okay. At places like Peluxy
River in
Texas, some Christian creationist
scientists
discovered those things, human
footprints alongside dinosaur
footprints. I didn't include them in my
book, Forbidden Archaeology. You did
not. uh because the Christian
creationist scientist who originally
promoted them withdrew his
claims. But you know I get letters from
archaeology students.
You know, it's amazing. Somehow or
other, they get a hold of my book and
they write to me really and you know,
they say things like, you know, uh, I
mean, in one case, a student wrote to me
and said, you was out on an excavation
with my professor and I just happened to
mention to him that maybe humans have
been around longer than we now think
possible. and he said, "My professor
told me I've got a book you should
read." Really? And he gave him gave the
student his personal copy of my book,
Forbidden Archaeology. Really? So, it's
kind of circulating in
underground circles, you could say. our
professor. If professors were to speak,
archaeologists professors were to speak
um in class and say some of the things
that were mentioned in your book, would
they just what what would happen to
them? What would their what would be the
reaction? Do you think it would all
depend? But
uh you
know I once got invited to speak at
the geology department of the University
of Oklahoma in Norman. Uhhuh. And this
full professor of
geology invited me to
speak
and I couldn't understand you know I
spoke he wanted me to speak to the
graduate students and professors of the
geology department there and I did and I
was just wondering why did you invite me
because you know you look at the guy
you know he's looks fully
orthodox conventional writing textbooks,
publishing in the standard journals.
And I said, asked him, "Why did you
invite me? How did you hear about me?"
What did he say? said, "Well, I heard
you on Coast to Coast," which is a radio
show that airs at midnight usually in
most places,
you know, and deals with all these
alternative topics. Yeah. So I, you
know, I was just thinking, well, here's
this guy, a professor of geology at a
major
university, and at night, you know,
privately, he's listening to this radio
show about all this alternative stuff.
Weird, decides to invite me. So he heard
you on there. Yeah. Oh, wow. You know,
now later I think he got demoted. Uh oh.
Because we, you know, he, you know, I
told him about a case that I had learned
about in Oklahoma. Okay.
where in some excavation in some gravel
pit, you know, or sand pit or something,
some human artifacts had been found in
layers of rock a million or more years
old. So, you told this to him? Told it
to him. Okay. And he decided, okay,
let's let's go out and have a look. Oh,
really? So he got in touch with a
paleontologist in the same
university, some other scientist, and he
got in touch with a land owner and
arranged. He said, "If you want to come
with us, I'm going with a couple of
other scientists out
there. If you'd like to come, you can
come, too." So I flew out there. We all
went. I think because he had organized
that he he was kind of
sidelined in
his department. You think so?
Not just thinking he told me. Really? I
mean so there
is some risk. Oh yeah. Or, you know,
just another example, another scientist
I know, a geologist, her name is
Virginia Steen McIntyre. Mhm. You know,
in in the 1970s when she was a young
scientist, she was kind of like a rising
star in her profession. You know, she
invented a new method for dating ancient
layers of rock. You know, she was
getting invitations to speak at
international conferences. She was
getting all kinds of grants to fund her
work. She was invited to help date an
archaeological site in Mexico called
Hyatt Lockco. Mhm.
Where a team of American and Mexican
archaeologists had discovered stone
tools and weapons and they wanted to
know how old they were. you know, they
were found in certain layers of rock and
they wanted to know how old are these
layers of rock. So, this geologist,
Virginia Stein McIntyre and some
colleagues of hers went down to the
site. They used four methods to date the
site and they got an age of 300,000
years. So, the archaeologists refused to
accept it. They said that's simply not
possible. Human beings capable of making
these
artifacts didn't exist anywhere in the
world 300,000 years ago. They hadn't
evolved yet. It's like and what what to
speak of being present in North America.
I mean, the current dominant idea is
that there not any human beings in North
America until about 20,000 years ago
when supposedly they came over from
Siberia to Alaska. Right. At that time
the sea levels were lower and it was
possible to walk from Siberia to Alaska
and then they came down through Canada
down through the lower 48 into Mexico
and then went down into South America.
So what happened to this lady?
Well, first the archaeologists refused
to publish the age given by their own
handpicked team of geologists. Okay. So
she was just thinking, well, what's
this? So she decided to independently
publish the age for the site in a
scientific journal. And when she did
that, there was an extreme negative
backlash from her colleagues in the
scientific world. They began calling her
a publicity seeker, maverick, and her
her career in geology was basically
finished. What was she doing with this?
She was a teach she had a teaching
position at a university. She lost that
position. Really? She had a position
with the United States Geological
Survey. Her career path there was cut
off. That's crazy. I mean, things like
that can happen. It doesn't happen in
every
case, but things like
that do happen.
What are your thoughts like this? What
are your thoughts about uh I know you've
talked extensively about giants and like
pyramids, ancient structures. What are
your thoughts about how they came to be?
Well, I'm not primarily a pyramid
researcher. So, what I know about that
topic is just what any interested person
would know. I mean, you know, there are
people like John Anthony West and Robert
Beval and Christopher Dunn who are
fullon pyramid Dr. Shock, Robert Shock,
Dr. Robert Shock, who I you know met
personally and you know they've used
well Dr. Shock for example did a study
of the weathering patterns on the
enclosure that surrounds the Sphinx.
And in that enclosure you can see
erosion
channels. and he pointed out well there
hasn't been enough rain to create such
erosion channels
in the Sahara desert you know for maybe
you know 12,000 years so he said the
Sphinx had to have been built before
that
time and Robert Bval and others have
looked at the alignments of the pyramids
on the Giza plateau So they're aligned
towards, you know, the constellations of
the sky in such a way that
indicates that they must have been built
over 11,000
years ago, which is thousands of years
older than most scientists say. Mhm. So
I'm just aware of these things from
having been at the same conferences
where Bval and Shock and John Anthony
West and others have spoken, but it's
not my main field of research. It's kind
of more in the more recent end of
things. Right. Right. Whereas I'm
looking at the deep history of the human
race going back millions and millions of
of years. I mean it's interesting
research but it's not my specific focus.
As for giants, yeah, I believe that
giants existed in the past. The ancient
Sanskrit writings of India say that
before about 5 or 10,000 years ago,
living things were bigger than they are
today. And this is part of even
mainstream science. Even according to
mainstream science before 5 or 10,000
years ago, the plants and animals were
bigger than they are today. The bears
were bigger, the elephants were bigger,
the wolves were bigger, the birds were
massive, the trees were bigger. You
know, like we're from California, you've
got the California redwood trees, some
of which are thousands of years old.
They're the biggest living things on
Earth. 300 ft high. Yeah. You know, you
drive a car through the base. Yeah. And
I think those are holdovers from that
previous age.
Now there's there's theories that um
that you hear within religious circles
where there was a firmament over the
earth at some point that was um water
that protected the earth from radiation
from the sun as a result of this. There
was extreme longevity. Everything was
massive. I I don't know about any of
that, but uh what are your thoughts
about why these things were so big?
Uh I don't know why. It just seems to be
a fact. But as far as giants go, you
know, there's a lot of reports of
largesiz human bones having been found.
And you know, you see a lot of pictures
on the web. Unfortunately,
I think we have to conclude a lot of
those are Photoshop hawks. Yeah. And
because it's very difficult to track
them down. I like to track things down,
you know, be able to physically go to a
location, verify them. Yeah. You know,
and I haven't been able to do that in
any of the cases that have to do with
giant human bones. The best documented
case that I'm familiar with is the bones
that were found by a French
anthropologist at Castle now in France.
C A S T E L N A U. Okay.
Uh the photographs of the bones were
published in some scientific journals
and they look pretty genuine. Hopefully
they could be tracked down. They weren't
complete human skeletons. They were like
uh upper armbbones, thigh bones, you
know. And if anthropologists have a
thigh bone, you know, they can measure
it and they can tell you how big how
tall the person with a thigh bone of
that size would have been would have
been. And they calculate that a person
that had the thigh bone of the length of
the one that was found at castle now
would have been 11 feet tall. So that's
pretty big. That's pretty big. I mean
you find living people 7 feet tall maybe
one or two 8 feet tall but there's
nobody 11t tall. the guy in the Guinness
book uh today in the 1920s. Well, I
think they said he was 8' 11 or 8t 10. I
think I think there's one guy from
Mongolia today who's maybe just a little
over 9 ft. Oh, really? In Mongolia?
Yeah. See, but I wonder if those bones
that they found back then, if everything
was on average larger, then couldn't
that have been the equivalent of finding
the bones of this guy from Mongolia
today? That doesn't necessarily mean
that everybody was that tall, does it?
Yeah, I I tend to agree with you on
that. And it's just a question of what's
becoming bigger. Is everything becoming
bigger? Even the fossils? Yeah. Doesn't
mean it was the norm, right? Yeah. I
mean, yeah. I mean, if there was a guy
that's over a little over 9 ft tall now,
I mean, that's that's massive. But it it
would
almost if that were the norm, it seems
like you'd find lots of fossils, lots of
of of remains of that, not just one or
two. Yeah. You know what I mean? Of
course, there are lots of reports of
these things. Yeah.
You know,
but verifying them is the problem. And I
like to verify things like Oh, yeah.
In terms of the kind of research I did
with forbidden archaeology, I did
actually go to museums, verify that
artifacts existed. I like to be able to
do that. That's why I haven't written
anything in my book, Forbidden
Archaeology about giants, for example.
Although I do believe that giants
existed, just haven't been able to
verify any of the reports.
Mhm. What are your thoughts on um on all
these elongated skulls and these these
skulls that are super long? What do you
think about those things? Well, I know
there are researchers who focus on that.
Again, it's something I know about, but
I haven't really
directly looked into. Um, mostly they're
they're not considered to be very old by
even the researchers who specialize in
them. You know, they'd say maybe they're
a few thousand years old, whereas my
focus is on the deep history of the
human race, extreme human antiquity.
So, I just know that different
researchers have looked into them and
some of
them, like I said, I haven't looked into
it myself, but they're proposing that
they may be the remains of
extraterrestrials.
Mhm. Or another species of human. Some
people explain the shape of the skulls
by binding of skulls. Yeah. like they do
in Africa and uh places in the South
Pacific when a child is young and the
bones and the skull are still pliable.
Uhhuh. So it's not again it's one of
those topics that I'm aware of but just
aware of in the same sense that you were
you haven't researched it. Yeah. I
wonder what do you think mankind was
doing you know um hundreds of millions
of years ago? What do you think life was
like? Is there any speculation on that?
Well, it all depends. You can speculate
about it or you can look
into what the the written records of
ancient civilizations have to say about
it.
In the ancient Sanskrit writings of
India, there's this idea of cyclical
time. And in different cycles of time,
humans live in different
ways. Basically, there's a cycle of four
yugas that the ancient Sanskrit writings
speak about. Mhm. Uh the first yoga is
called the satya yoga, the age of
truth. And it said during that
time practically everyone was
spiritually advanced and living in a
very simple natural
way. And they had not divided themselves
into social classes.
They were living in harmony with nature.
During the next
age which is called traa
yoga, they developed a social
system. You know that certain people do
this kind of work or that kind of work.
How long are the yugas?
uh the cycle the whole cycle of four
yugas lasts for
4,320 million years. Okay. The last one,
the Kali Yuga, which we're in now, it's
an extremely materialistic age with a
lot of conflict and quarrel and
hypocrisy. It lasts for
432,000 years. It began about 5,000
years ago, which means we're just in the
beginning of
it. And it's going to go on for another
427,000
years. And it's going to be a time of
increasing environmental and social
disturbance,
which we're kind of seeing. Oh, yeah.
It's already started and it's it's
already so prevalent too. Keeps getting
worse and worse. Yeah.
So, so the previous age was called the
dwarat. It would lasted twice a kali
yuga. So that means
864,000 years. And then the traaea yuga
which was before
that was uh three times the kali yuga.
Okay.
Which means
about
1100,000 years or 111,000
uh is that right?
864,000 plus 432.
I'm not really so good at addition. be
1 800,000. So that' be a over a million
years. Yeah. Okay. And
then the satya yuga, the one I was
talking about before, it'd be four times
the kalyuga, which I think is
1,726,000
years. So that
started, you know,
about
4,300,000 years ago. And at that time as
I said most people were involved in
meditation and yoga and spiritual
practice. They were living very simply.
They didn't have towns or
cities. They
uh it was a very it's called the age of
truth. It was kind of like a golden age
of truth. And then where they growing
all their own food and living on the
land and that kind of thing. Yeah. Like
that. The next stage they developed
settlements and cities and a social
system
and some portion of the people
were not so spiritually elevated. Yeah.
You know like you about 25%.
Okay. And then the next stage it kind of
went another 25% down. And in the
current
age, it's even less totally messed up.
Yeah.
Wow. Yeah. So at different So those
cycles repeat again and again and again
and again. So at different
times people could have been living very
simple natural lives in harmony with
nature and in harmony with each other
and they were they would have a good
chance of getting out of the whole cycle
of reincarnation
if they were able to elevate their
consciousness to the level where they'd
be qualified for that. So they wouldn't
have to come back, right?
Interesting. Yeah. Whereas in other
times, you know, there'd be
civilizations, cities, towns, politics,
war. War, but more or less based
on spiritual principles. I wonder what
the lifespan was during those other
yugas. Uh there's information given
about it. In the Satya Yuga, it was a
100,000 years. A lifespan. Yeah. In the
traitor Yuga, it was 10,000 years in a
physical body. Yeah. That's crazy. In
the Dwapera Yuga, it was a thousand
years. That would be the Yuga just
preceding ours. It ended about 5,000
years ago. So a thousand years and that
kind of lines up with a lot of the
biblical information in Genesis and all
that extremely long. This one was living
900 years or a thousand years or
something like that. Do we know what is
there any and then in this in the Kali
yuga it's 100 years maximum and it
decreases as the kali yuga goes on. Did
they decrease in the other yugas too?
Do you think I I would guess
so, but I'm
not it's not really specified. It's What
do you think was going on with their
physical bodies that what like when
someone in the other Yuga was, you know,
uh if they were their lifespan is
100,000 years, let's say, at 50,000
years, what do you think their body
looked like?
Uh do we have any any writings on that
or any
There's some information that they
just were able Yeah. There wasn't old
age as we experience it. They just
live up to a certain point and then
that's the end. Isn't that wild? Because
I've often thought about like even
biblically they uh the Methuselah was
supposed to have been 969 years old.
Yeah. And I often wonder did they age
you know was someone who is 969 years
old like if you think of today's aging
process with like a little baby after 2
years they obviously look different than
the baby when they were first born after
3 years. So was it the same in terms of
the numbers back then? So when someone
who was, you know, would they have still
looked like a 2year-old but they were,
you know, 70? Well, you know what I
mean? Or did they get up to maybe 30
years old and then they just didn't age
much after that? It seems like it's more
like that. Think so.
I'm not, you know, I'm just speculating.
It's hard to tell. The information
that's given in the piranhas is simply
in Satya Yuga they lived a 100,000 years
in traa 10,000 in Dwapra Yuga a thousand
in Kali Yuga our age 100 maximum and
decreasing
we're decreasing fast because our
lifespan now they're saying is what
mid70s and we're only 5,000 years is
into this
yoga. Is that right? Yeah, that's quick.
Yeah. You know, some people live 100 or
more years, some
few. Uh but it's interesting in in India
they have these festivals called Kumba.
Uhhuh.
where you know pilgrims gather from all
over and sometimes they point out people
this yogi is 600 years old or 700 you
know there there claims like that yeah
I've seen stuff like that yeah true or
not I'm not sure but there are claims
like
that yeah I've seen something an article
was going around recently about the um
gosh I forget where where it was these
people. Um, but they have no cancer,
they got no sickness, they don't die of
disease. And there's claims that these
people are living till 250 years old and
things.
Um, I mean, I don't know without going
there and researching and looking and
seeing, you know, but uh because at some
point you you're looking at uh the
inability to look at correct in um
information with birth certificates and
things like that. So it's it's hard to
hard to really know, you know. Yeah. You
know. Wow. So what age
was So you're
So 4 million years ago or you're Well,
dinosaurs were around 65 million years
ago if you accept you know all the
conventional conventional dating
methods. But how reliable is
conventional dating methods, do you
think?
Um, they seem to be see it all depends
who you're asking. If you're asking
a young earth Christian creationist who
believes the world is 6,000 or 10,000
years old, they would tend to say
they're not very reliable at all. Now
maybe
because the Vadic texts have a longer
time
span, you know, involving millions and
billions of years for the history of
life on Earth. I'm not so motivated
to critique the dating methods. Yeah.
You know, they seem to me to be based on
pretty sound principles. Yeah. you know
the known rates of decay of different
radioactive elements right but any
particular case I think they can be
wrong say like radiocarbon dating Mhm.
Uh that's based on the idea that a
living thing has two kinds of carbon in
it carbon 12 and carbon 14. The carbon
12 is not radioactive. The carbon 14 is
radioactive. When an element is
radioactive, that means it decays into
the other elements. You know, the carbon
will turn into something else, right? At
a certain
rate called a halflife. And the halflife
of carbon 14 is about 5,000 years. So
that means like say if something dies
and it's got carbon in its bones, the
carbon 12 will stay the same, but the
carbon 14 in it will decrease every
5,000 years by half. So after five this
is if if this is the carbon 14 it would
go half half
half you know by the time you go through
20 half lives there's nothing left to
measure
right so it's every 5,000 years yeah so
you go through 20 half lives by the time
you get back to about a 100,000
years there's nothing left to measure
really right so that means that that
radiocarbon method works to about a
100,000
years. But
say what if you have a human bone and
there are cases like this that I talk
about in my book forbidden
archaeology. For
example, some human skeletons were
discovered at a place called
Castanatalo in northern Italy in the
19th century by an Italian geologist
named Jeppi Ragason.
He found them in layers of rock that are
considered to be about 4 million years
old, you know, by modern geologists.
Okay.
So, and he looked very carefully to see
if there were any fissures or any earth
movements that had taken place,
something that could have. So he
concluded that the bones belong in the
layer in which they were found, which is
about 4 million years old. So let's say,
okay, you've got a bone that is
allegedly 4 million years old, and you
do a radiocarbon date on it, a carbon 14
date on it. Right.
Now if the bone is contaminated with the
least amount of modern carbon
14 which can enter the bone
through
bacteria that are entering the bone or
through maybe in the museum the bone was
treated with organic
preservatives and that does happen.
Okay. So then when you do the
radiocarbon date, even though the bone
is 4 million years
old, it will
show an age of less than a 100,000
years.
So although the radiocarbon method is
based on a sound
principle, you have to take into account
the problem of
contamination with recent carbon. So
sometimes people do that. Okay, you've
got a bone you say is 4 million years
old. Well, let's
do radiocarbon dating on it. and they'll
get an age of less than a 100,000 years
and say, "Okay, your bone really isn't 4
million years old. It's 100,000 years
old or less." Is that the Are there any
other ways that can go further
beyond 100,000 years?
There's one method called the uranium
series method which is based on the
decay of
uranium to daughter elements. Okay. So
that can give
ages of three or four or 500,000 years
at the most. But yes, but if we're
talking about bones that are millions of
years old, there isn't any scientific
method you can directly date the bone
by. That's why I've mentioned in many of
the cases that we've talked about, this
bone was found in layers of rock. Yeah.
That geologists consider to be 4 million
or 50 million or whatever million years
old. For example, if scientists find
dinosaur bones, they believe the
dinosaurs went
extinct 65 million years ago. So,
there's no method they can use to date
the bone directly. They have to date it
according to the elements there in of
the strata in which it's found. Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. So, those are some of the
intricacies you can get into when you're
dealing with a forbidden archaeology
topic. Yeah, that's fascinating. But,
uh, but basically, my methodology as far
as the dates go, well, maybe the dating
methods are all wrong. If somebody wants
to admit that, then that means, well, we
don't know how old anything is and we've
got nothing to talk about. Yeah.
Everything's just done. Everything's
fine. That's fine with me. Yeah. But
basically, I use it as a framework of
discussion. If you're going to discuss
with somebody, you've got to have if I'm
going to talk with scientists today,
we've got to have some framework. Yeah.
So my position is to say according to
methods that you consider reliable,
yeah, the age of this formation is let's
say 50 million years. So how do you
explain the
presence in that layer of rock of this
human bone or human artifact?
Yeah. You know, it's so I'm kind of
putting it on them. Yeah. You're using
something according according to methods
that you consider reliable, dating
methods that you consider reliable,
this formation is so and so many million
years old. So, how do you explain the
presence of this human footprint or
human artifact or human bone in a layer
of rocks so old? Have they ever tried to
come back and say, "Oh, we made a
mistake in dating this this particular
sediment in this rock and we were
wrong." Um because now there's evidence
showing that there's a bone here. So um
to sort of save face so that they can
come back and say this particular rock
isn't as old as we thought it was. Not
in any of the particular cases that I've
been dealing with. Yeah. But seems like
they'd want to.
Well, but they usually choose to
reinterpret the human evidence. Yeah.
And there's an example of that from just
last year.
Uh there were some archaeologists doing
some excavations at Uluva
Gorge and they discovered it's a really
a small thing, a finger bone. It's
actually called
a fifth manual proximal
failins. That means the fifth finger of
the hand. Okay. The proximal bone. You
see each finger bone is made of three
bones. Mhm. The one closest to the palm
is called the proximal one. Okay. So
they found this
bone, a finger bone. And whereabouts did
they find it? in Uluvi gorge which is in
Africa and they studied this bone very
carefully. This is what scientists do.
They measured it very carefully and they
compared it with the measurements of the
same bone from several species of apes
and monkeys you know gorillas,
chimpanzees, orangutans.
They compared it with also with uh
similar finger bones from different
kinds of ape men. Oralopythecus,
homohabilis. And they also compared it
with modern human finger bones. Uhhuh.
Of the same kind. And they found it fit
squarely within the modern
human fingerbone measurements. Okay. and
was different from any of the apes or
monkeys or ape
men. But the the key point is it was
found in a layer of rock
1,840,000 years old. So in their
scientific
report, you know, the scientists said,
"Well, we found this finger bone. It's
just like modern human finger bones,
homo sapiens, but we can't call it that.
because of the age of the strata in
which it was found. It's almost like
their own paradigm is limiting their
ability to do any further research.
Well, it is just a very current example
of the knowledge filtering process that
I'm talking about. So, yeah, it's just,
you know, it's just interesting. Yeah.
So they just sort of either try to
explain it away by anomalies or this
this couldn't be or
just try to come up with something even
though even though the evidence is
staring them in the face and they've
conducted this huge statistical study
you know comparing the measurements of
this finger bone to finger bones of
apes, monkeys, ape men and modern
humans. They find it fits exactly in the
modern human group. But they say we
can't call it homo sapiens because of
the
age. Now they're talking to other
scientists who are sharing the same
paradigm. So they're accepting that. So
yeah, that's bizarre. That's It is
bizarre. Maybe I should write a book
called Bizarre Archaeology. Bizarre
Archaeology, man. It's just it's just I
don't know. I mean, I guess see the
structure is set up in such a such a um
a great way because there's so many
benefits and privileges um that are
handed out to people in society, from
governments, from uh universities,
institutions where uh you have this
reputation that's nice to maintain. You
have a lifestyle that's nice to
maintain. A a nice um uh career and a
job that you want to keep. And so
to to to question anything that's
outside of the mainstream, you're
risking all of this stuff that makes our
lives nice and to be able to pay our
rent and our mortgage and our bills and
to have prestige and tenure at a
university.
I mean, it's a beautiful system because
it is it's it it perpetuates itself and
it
perpetuates the inability for people to
question what's going on. It's it's it's
beautiful in that way. I couldn't put it
better myself. Yeah. I mean, from their
perspective, it helps. It's a
self-perpetuating cycle that keeps
people from being able to question the
norm. And when um I mean there was
a a a university stu um I'm sorry not
university student but a university
professor in Florida who was um he he
was writing some papers about about the
the what happened at the Sandy Hook
shooting and he was questioning some of
the the stuff that was going on and he
he was a professor a PhD that had tenure
and they he thought because of the
tenure that he wouldn't nothing would
happen and this was something he was
doing personally on his private time. He
wasn't telling his students anything
about this. Um but they fired him and so
it's like
um it's just a great system that they
have, you know, to keep people nice and
in line and not questioning really
anything, you know. Yeah. It's
just just bizarre. So I think it's
better to be outside completely outside
of that where you have nothing really to
risk or to lose. Don't you think? Well,
uh I I feel that I can say anything I
want cuz I'm not subject to those kind
of pressures.
However, uh I could
imagine
somebody working trying to work within
the
system going through that whole
institutional process of getting the
training in a discipline,
uh getting a
PhD, getting tenure, all those years and
and trying to push things a little bit
in the direction from inside. Of course,
you'd have to be very careful to to do
that. But I decided in my own case when
I started doing this research, you know,
I had a colleague
uh Richard Thompson who I co-author,
right? Yeah. He was my co-author of
Forbidden Archaeology and he had a PhD
in mathematics from Cornell University.
Oh, wow. And I, you know, he's a
co-religionist of mine and I asked him,
you know, do you think
uh
maybe I should go back to school and get
a PhD in
archaeology, you know, before, you know,
completing this this work, which took
about eight years.
He said, you know, he advised me and I
think it was good advice. She said, "No,
uh, it's not really necessary. You know,
you're writing this book is pretty much
like producing a PhD dissertation with
me as your thesis
advisor." And he said, "You just do the
work and the work will stand on its
own." Now, do you have people that are
archaeologists and professors that
don't, aside from what you're saying in
the book, do they not take to it because
you're not a professor or you're not a
PhD? Uh, is that a hint? Nobody Nobody
has ever challenged me on that point to
my face. So, that's good. then then you
didn't go through all because uh I think
it is it's not the easiest way to do
things but you know I'm able even though
say I don't have a PhD in archaeology
I'm able to present papers at mainstream
archaeology conferences some of them
have been published I've been able to
speak at some pretty high scientific
institutions like the Russian Academy of
Sciences, the Royal Institution in
London and
others. So, I've been able to have now
maybe if I had a PhD in archaeology from
Cambridge or Oxford or something like
that,
maybe I maybe they'd take to it more,
but I wouldn't be able to say as much. I
don't think. Well, you might be able to
as long as you didn't derive your income
and have your career be based around
that. Do you think?
Well, I think a lot of times even
for
unrelated topics, you can be pressured
within the academic system. So bizarre,
isn't it? Such a weird world. Yeah.
Well, but I would say
uh you know there
are people in the world of archaeology,
archaeology students, doctoral students,
graduate students and others who write
to me
privately and I try to give them
whatever advice and guidance that I can
telling them how they can work within
the
system because in the world of
archaeology they're basically two
groups. I call them the archaeology
group and the
archaeologies plural group. And we
talked about this a little bit earlier,
right? that there's uh within
archaeology there's a group of people
who believe there's one scientific uh
objectively
true archaeology my way or the highway
and uh that's all there is to it right
whereas there's this other group who's
more open to various perspectives in
archaeology you know they acknowledge
well yes there's modern western
scientific arch archaeology, but that's
not everything. There could be
alternative
archaeologies. So,
uh I at sometimes advise these students
when you're looking around your
department gravitate towards the
archaeologies group rather than the
archaeology group. Interesting.
So I, you know, I think, you know, there
could be
uh a possibility of, you know, you can
have the renegades and mavericks like
myself running around on the outside.
Yeah. And working with people on the
inside who have to be more careful. How
do you think about what they do? How do
you think the whole thing is going to
change? Do you think that um we're going
to need more people on the inside slowly
pushing the envelopes combined with
people on the outside that are doing the
work that you're doing? Do you think
there's a a like a a synergy between the
two camp? I I think so. Yeah. And I
would say, and again this is something I
touched on a little bit earlier, some
changes in the education system where we
get diversity, the the actual diversity
that's there represented in the public
taxup supported education system because
it's a very I think it's a very unstable
situation for
uh what I would call the fundamentalist
materialist
whose worldview is pretty much dominant
in in science today. It's a very
unstable situation for them because say
in America, Gallup surveys have been
done about people's belief in the
paranormal, UFOs,
extraterrestrials, human origins, and
evolution
and say on the question of human
origins, the the a majority of the
American people about
60% according to Gallup surveys believe
that humans have been around since the
beginning.
60% of people. Yes. Now, that could be
and it obviously probably is because of
the biblical Christian beliefs of a lot
of these people, right?
And you know, they don't believe humans
evolve from apes. They do tend to
believe in a young earth. Now, that
would be a difference I would have with
them, right? But on the point, humans
have been around since the beginning. I
would
agree we didn't evolve from the apes. I
would
agree. And that's something that
completely goes against what the
official curriculum is in the education
system. And scientists consider it
problematic that such a huge percentage
of the American people have a belief
that
counters what is being promoted by the
scientific establishment through the
education system. And it's also the same
with uh paranormal. Huge percentages of
people claim to have had paranormal
experiences.
Things that are completely denied by the
scientific establishment and its
education system. Mhm. Uh same with
extraterrestrials and UFOs.
So it's not a very stable situation I
think for the scientific
establishment you know to have such huge
numbers of the people who are supporting
them with their tax money who are also
believing other things than what they're
saying other things. Yeah. I think it's
possible at a certain point. I mean,
there's so many political and financial
problems today that people have so much
else on their minds, but if things kind
of settle down a little bit, I think
that taxpaying
public might start thinking, why are we
paying
people to teach us things we don't
really accept?
Yeah. And I think it has a lot to do
with I think human nature just really
loves to um have like you know you watch
the news and and it's always the
authorities say this and and you know
the it's always this use of language
with the authorities and this and that
and um I think humans like to
be told what to do and we like to have a
leadership and we like to have
confidence that they feel confident
about telling us how the world works.
And there's something that's weird about
that. And for for there to be issues
with science and questioning the the the
authority that science has in our
current um system, our cool our current
school system. You know, it doesn't it
doesn't help them at all if you have a
bunch of people that are questioning
everything they're trying to say to us.
and that that way if we don't question,
if we just freely accept everything
that's handed to us, um that's better
for them, you know, it's just it's just
better to have a population full of
people that just accept what you say.
It's just easier. Yeah. I And I think
there are
some
reasons for that. I think it's
been you know like we set our goals and
our
values and our ambitions based on our
sense of identity you know if I think
I'm an American man then you know I
behave like that certain way you know
and through the monopoly uh they have in
the education system scientists have
been able to dictate to people their
sense of identity And basically they
they're telling them you're purely
material beings. You're machines made of
molecules in competition with each other
for
survival. And they've managed to
erect on that sense of identity a whole
system, economic system, political
system, cultural system that benefits
certain people. Mhm. You know, if people
define their existence in a purely
material way, they begin to think that
to produce and consume more and more
material things is the main purpose of
human life. And that process of
production, consumption generates
wealth. And the wealth flows into
certain pockets. And there's a whole
economic and financial and political and
cultural system that's based on that. If
people had a different sense of identity
and thought, "Okay, I'm a being of pure
consciousness. You're a being of pure
consciousness. We're all beings of pure
consciousness. Let's satisfy our
material needs in the most simple,
natural, efficient and fair way
possible. Right? Because we love each
other,
right? The whole economic, political,
cultural, financial system that we have
now would completely collapse, crumble.
M it would you know people might begin
to think well let's put less energy into
production and consumption of material
things and put more energy into
developing the resource of consciousness
and they would have a civilization based
on that would that be nice
that's that's and I think the kind
of civilization we have is kind based on
how many people we have with certain
kinds of identities and associated
values, goals, and ambitions. Uhhuh.
So within a Caliuga, we're or we're in
the Caluga now, right? Yeah. We're going
against the kinds of things that we're
talking about are going against the flow
of the age. So the flow of the age of
the caliuga is one of increasing
enlightenment and awareness and openness
or decreasing decreasing. But doesn't
that seem to be the opposite of the way
that seems things seem to be going with
with the internet and people waking up
more? Well, here's here's here's the
thing. According
to the sources that I'm inspired by
within the Kaluga in the first part of
it, there's a little golden age at the
beginning at the beginning of it and it
lasts for about 10,000 years. It began
about 500 years ago
and will continue for about 10,000
years.
And it's sort of like what we we could
call Indian summer like in say a place
where you have a winter a hard winter
you know the during the fall the winter
starts coming on the days get colder and
colder but you might get a few warm
days you know although the basic trend
is down right there can be
a period a swing within that general
downward
trend, but then finally the winter will
come. That's interesting. So, so I think
we're in the middle of a period like
that where there's an opportunity,
although the trend the general trend is
down. there's an opportunity for people
to shelter themselves and shelter others
and try to increase the shelter that's
available for as many people as
possible.
So during this time, how long did you
say the Kellya is going to be?
432,000 years. It started 5,000 years
ago. Okay. It's got
427,000 years to go. I wonder what would
happen. What is So you So let's say
we're in that age of the sort of mini
golden age at the beginning, right? Uh
and so if it started 5,000 years ago, if
this if it started about 500 years ago,
this mini golden age. So at the end of
9,500 more years of this golden age
within this
caluga, what do you think there's some
sort of catastrophic event that happens
on the earth or how does humanity's lack
of awareness become the predominant
theme from thereafter?
uh because the general trend is down but
there's a special opportunity
now but it's not an unlimited
time you know after
that I mean the predictions of kalyuga
are given in the
piranhas and people their their lifespan
will gradually decrease what does it go
Yeah.
Uh in the end it'll be
about 30 years. Wa that's crazy.
Starting at 100 maximum.
Yeah. Yeah. In some places in the world
it already is like 40 or 45. In
Swasilland in South Africa I think it's
like uh in the mid30s. Yeah. It's crazy.
It already is in some places in the
world. And then the the deserts will
increase. More and more species will
grow
extinct. In the end, you know, humans
may be reduced to
cannibalism. So what happens at the end,
do you think of one of the yugas like
the Cali yuga if we have 400,000 or
427,000 more years? Is there a period
like you were talking about where it
goes the earth goes dormant for a
certain amount of time where there's
just nothing on the earth? At the end of
the kali yuga there'll be a transition
to another satya yuga golden
age. See there's cycles within cycles
within cycles. Yeah. There's the cycle
of four
yugas. 71 cycles of four
yugas
result in a mvventar. It's a larger
cycle. How do you say it? Manvitar. Mont
vantar. Manvantar.
Yeah. It's a It's a larger cycle. It
lasts about 307 million years. It's
composed of 71 cycles of the four yugas.
71. How do they know this stuff? That's
crazy. It is. I mean you're just asking
you know like you're asking for details
so I'm giving giving them normally I
keep things simple but if people ask for
more details about the vadic time cycles
I give them so they wrote about this and
what's what text is it called the the
the texts are called the piranhas the
cosmological and historical text of
ancient India how long ago were they
written
uh they were I mean they've always
existed. Yeah. The vadic knowledge has
always you know they've always existed
but in different cycles you could say
they're I mean they they manifest in all
the different
cycles but like at the beginning of the
kali yuga they were simplified a little
bit. Okay. Well, it makes sense because
this whole idea of cycles, that's a more
of a of a female sort of way of looking
at life, you know, um, and, you know, I
I think we've lost that. We think
everything's sort of linear in today's
world, you know, instead of cycles.
Well, we're kind of familiar with
cycles. There's the day and night cycle
that we're all used to. During the day,
most of us are awake. At night, we
sleep. There's the cycle of seasons.
We're used to it, but we we don't really
live by it these days. It's Yeah, we
don't. But it's still there. Kind of
aware of it. We're still dealing with
it. Yeah. Yeah, we do. I mean, there
different sports during the different I
mean, there's basketball, football,
baseball. Yeah. Boys of summer and all
that. Yeah. I mean, women are more more
aware and in tune with cycles than men,
just intuitively. And it makes sense.
But uh as a culture it seems like we've
just really been unable to live by these
cycles or be aware of them, you know.
Yeah.
Like I mean a few years ago people were
really talking a lot about the Mayan
time cycles.
2012. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So actually I was on a during December
2012 I was on a cruise ship. I was a
speaker. There was some spiritual group
had put together a cruise to go down to
Chetsanita one of the Mayan
sites in uh
Yucatan
and I was a speaker on this cruise. I
chose to talk about the vadic time
cycles. So I said we're not scheduled
for a devastation. So don't expect FYI
don't it's coming but not in December
2012. So during that whole time with the
2012 did you just sort
of kind of laugh about it?
Well, as from my sources of information,
there wasn't going to be a devastation.
And I I I I think uh a lot of
the people
who really had deeply studied it
and the Mayan elders and others were
saying, "No, it's not going to be a
devastation. It's going to be a
transition." So, expanding awareness or
something. I mean, it's past history. I
mean, I mean, it's 2016 now. Yeah, we're
still here. We're four years four years
beyond that. But yeah, I mean, when that
was going on, it it was that was the,
you know, the biggest thing ever. And
then, you know, the whole thing in 1999
with the with the switch over to 2000,
you know, all these things just sort of
blow over. Yeah.
I think I I think people do have a sense
that there are periodic
catastrophes and you know they may get
misled
about exactly when it's going to happen
but I think eventually there are going
to be such things and they've happened
in the past and they'll happen again
with uh what are your thoughts about the
flood in in the mentioned in the Bible?
Um you know it's interesting according
to the vdic sources the piranhas at the
end of at the ends of the mvententar
periods there's kind of a cosmic flood
that's the source of the
devastation. Of course it's
different
than in some ways than the biblical
flood. You know, there's the idea that
uh the universe is like a globe and the
bottom part of the universe is filled
with an ocean and then at certain times
that ocean expands and rises
up. It's not like a normal flood. It's
more or less like a cosmic flood.
Say that again. Like the the the earth
would be a globe. The universe. Oh, the
universe is a globe. Okay. And the
different planets are floating within
that globe, but the bottom part of it
is occupied by an
ocean and at different
times that ocean comes up like the tide.
Yeah. Okay. And covers over the planets.
Oh, so that would be the earth that
would be considered a devastation,
a huge flood.
Wow. Never heard that one before.
Well, some, you know, once once I was at
a an archaeology, it was a a meeting of
the World Archaeological
Congress, and it was held at on the Dead
Sea in Jordan a couple years
ago. 2012, I think it was. Okay.
And I was talking about
how a famous archaeologist used a
psychic as part of his research. And one
of the archaeologists said the same
thing. Well, I've never heard that
before. And I said, "Well, that's what
I'm here for, to tell you things you
already haven't heard about.
Otherwise, if I'm just telling you
things that you know already, then
what's the point? What's the point?
Yeah. You know, it's it's interesting
with times um you know, hundreds of
thousands of years ago, it it seems as
if people were much more in tune with a
psychic energy
or I don't know, it seems like people
were more intuitive and able to to
understand concepts like free energy
more and uh higher level technologies
um than we are today cuz everything is
you know explo explosion energy. Um, and
we're not really, you know, in tune with
our intuition or Yeah. Well, I think
today a lot of our technology
today is our
attempt
to
express
through
matter, you know, through consumer
products which can be marketed and sold
abilities people once had naturally.
Like you could say maybe a hundred,000
years
ago maybe everybody was telepathic.
Everybody had extra sensory perception.
So there would be, you know, they could
communicate with each other at a
distance, right? Whereas today, you
know, to kind of satisfy that basic
need, people feel and why do they feel
it? Because I think it's a natural
ability. They once had this ability to
communicate with people at a distance
and somehow we've lost that.
It's still within us and we hunger for
it. But the way it's being provided is
by big
corporations selling it to us.
Yeah. Uh, and then what they're doing to
sell us the devices and the minerals
that are used to to create these devices
and the workers that are have to jump
off of buildings to kill themselves
because they can't stand to to to make
them. You know what I mean? So obviously
it exists within us because we have the
desire to create the create the devices
that allow us to do it, right? And so it
makes sense. And and there is I mean
when you get into paranormal
research, you
do
encounter studies that show that people
have these
abilities, which is bizarre. Yeah. But
if this is how everybody was living a
long time ago, then they were just part
of the norm.
They were just part of the everyday
crowd. That's right.
Yeah. That's amazing. Well, I think we
should wrap it up because I think we
need to get you back to the uh to the
train station. We have a few minutes. Um
Okay. So, if people uh want to learn
more about you, your website's
mcm o.com. Is that correct? That's
correct. That's a good place to start.
Okay. And all of your books, are all of
your books available on on Amazon?
or can they buy them right on your
website? Uh they're available in if they
people want hard copies, I recommend
going to my
website, but uh my books are available
on Kindle and other ebook platforms. Ah,
okay. All of them? Pretty much all of
them, I think. Yes. Yeah. forbidden
archaeology, the hidden history of the
human race, human
devolution. I think even My Science, My
Religion is now available as a Kindle
book. Yes. My Is that your latest one?
My Science, My Religion. Yeah, My
Science, My Religion is uh the latest
book of mine. That's for people who
would be interested in how I present
these things to scientific audiences.
It's a collection of 24 papers that I've
presented at mainstream scientific
conferences about all of these things
we've been talking about. Especially the
archaeology topic kind of being very
open about the spiritual element of it
but also presenting the scientific
evidence. So that's why I call it my
science my religion. How do you think uh
because I blend both of them. A lot of
people try to keep them completely
separate. Well, that's what I was going
to say. Um people who are extremely
religious are very much
um also consider science to be its own
religion and they're opposed to a lot of
scientific facts. But then people who
are scientists oppose anything to do
with religion or spirituality. Are you
seeing uh more uh more more people being
open to both these days? Yes. Even you
know even within the scientific
community and even within the the
scholars who study
science you know like the historians of
science and philosophers of science you
know they've been seeing that
um this attempt to completely
divorce science and religion is
something that
really doesn't reflect the truth about
science historically. Mhm. You know, for
example, Sir Isaac Newton, the founder
of modern physics and you know, he was
writing about all kinds of things. You
know, he wrote his books about physics
and optics, but he also wrote about
alchemy and all kinds of spiritual
things. And he regarded it all as one
unified system. Mhm. Of course, today,
you know, scientists tend to ignore, you
know, what he wrote about alchemy and
paranormal topics, and they only pick
and choose what they like, right? But
so,
it's just not true that science and
religion have always been separate. It's
kind of a modern myth, you know, that
they have been. And I'm an example of a
person with
openly spiritual inspiration who enters
into the world of science especially in
the realm of
archaeology and I'm able to present
papers at international scientific
conferences where I integrate my science
and my spirituality.
So that book, my science, my religion is
a collection of 24 scientific papers
where I do
that. Another recent book of mine is
called The Forbidden Archaeologist.
It's a collection of columns that I
write for Atlantis Rising magazine.
So that may be a good introduction for
people who aren't already familiar with
the kinds of things that I write about
because they're all short. Easy to read.
How long is that book? A couple hundred
pages. Big print. Big print. So easy to
read. Easy to read. So why the forbidden
archaeologist?
Uh that's the name of my column. Oh,
that's the name of your column. Within
the magazine. Within the magazine. I see
because I was known for the book
forbidden
archaeology. So I thought what what
shall I call this column? Got to have
something different notes from the
forbidden archaeologist. Are people
becoming more open to I mean that book
that you wrote forbidden archaeology was
that 1993?
Yeah. So since 93 it's been 23 years
since then. What's been the overall
general attitude towards that work? Have
have people become more open to it, do
you think? Well, I think people have
always been open to an alternative
archaeology. You know, the book has sold
pretty steadily ever since it first came
out.
And I would say what I have done is I've
been able to introduce the topic into
the scientific world a little bit more
and and the proof of that is say my book
my science my religion with 24 papers
that I presented at mainstream
scientific conferences. Now I don't want
to
exaggerate you know but you know there
there just different ways to judge the
impact of of your work or my work in my
case right and one is well are the books
selling yes they are they're not New
York Times best sellers but they are
selling uh they continue to be
translated into more and more
languages and uh the last couple of
years I've been pleased to note some of
my books have been published by
publishers in mainland China really you
know in Chinese which is pretty amazing
you people in in China are reading about
these things
so and then another way to judge is well
do I keep getting invitations to speak
on radio and television
Yes. So I think that shows that people
are continuing to be interested in
topics like this.
That's amazing. So your next talk is uh
you said at the conference in um Kyoto
in August, September. Yeah. A meeting of
the World Archaeological Congress. Wow.
Is that going to be available online, do
you think? Yeah. I don't know. I mean
people could go to the conference
website and see if they are going to
have uh that kind of facility. They
might. It's called the World
Archaeological Congress. I think it's
uh whack
8. It's the eighth World Archaeological
Congress. WAC
whack 8
wac.org I think. Okay. So people are
going to look that up.
That's cool. That would be that would be
awesome if it was available on uh
YouTube if their YouTube channel was
available. Yeah. I don't I don't know if
they do that, but possibly they might. I
remember
once at the last World Archaeological
Congress meeting, they were having a big
discussion about some some of them were
saying that the conference should just
be
digital. People shouldn't be flying from
all over the world to meet Oh, really?
But I think people like to meet face to
face. Yeah. Especially within the
community of of this kind of people, you
know, these kind of people where they
want to meet, don't they? Yeah. Of
course, you could say, well, you can
meet
digitally. Digitally. Yeah. But that's
not fun. It's not the same I mean,
that's why I like doing um our
interviews in person because you get to
meet the person and right, you know, the
conversation flows and it's just easier.
It's better. Yeah, we could have done it
by Skype, but Yeah. Yeah. It's not the
not quite the same, but Yeah. Yeah. And
you've done a ton of interviews, so you
know, and I have, too. It's just the
connection is just not the same on
Skype. Um, all right. So, it's uh mcm
o.com.
That's my web page. My books are there.
There's a travel diary. There's list of
upcoming interviews and lectures. Do you
have a newsletter people can sign up to?
Yes, if if on on the website there's an
opportunity to sign up for a newsletter.
Okay. And I also have a Facebook page.
Yeah, I was going to ask you. Michael
Ko. It's really me. Oh, yeah. I saw that
last night. Yeah. And I was just it was
interesting that I It says it's really
me. Did you have someone impersonating
you? Well, people somebody on Facebook
did start a Michael Ko web page and it
wasn't me. Really? And there are they
still running it? Uh I think I asked
them to take it down at a certain point
and I think they
did. But
uh there are all kinds of forbidden
archaeology and Michael Kremo pages that
you never started that I never started.
So I I wanted this one to be
something that's completely you. Yeah.
Completely me. Oh, that's cool. Okay. So
you are there there's links to that on
mcm o.com.
No, you have to go to Facebook for that.
Okay. So there not there's no link to
it. Okay. Cool. Well, thank you,
Michael, for being on the show today. I
appreciate that. Good to be with you.