Hello everyone, and welcome to another episode of The Healthy Heart Show.
I'm Dr. Jack Wolfson, board certified cardiologist.
Today I've got a super special show for you.
I've got none other than the brilliant, amazing Dr. Jack Kruse on my podcast.
I first met Dr. Kruse back in 2016 in Vermont at Shelburne Farms, and I was so blown away
by his message, by his presentation, and his backstory.
Listen, if you don't know Dr. Jack Kruse, he's a neurosurgeon.
If you look at the top of the food chain, when it comes to medicine it's like neurosurgeon
of course is at the top, and then maybe cardiovascular surgeon, and then cardiologist is somewhere
down below that.
Of course, whenever somebody gives their opinion on something it's like, "Hey, what are you
a neurosurgeon?"
Well, this guy is the neurosurgeon, and he's the neurosurgeon's neurosurgeon.
Welcome Dr. Jack.
Thanks so much for being on my podcast.
Hey, no problem.
Tell me your story.
I know your story, but just for the audience, tell everybody how you came to be.
What was your progression to where you are right now?
Well, I mean, it started probably 15 years ago when I designed some spine instruments
for minimally invasive spine surgery and was invited to come and speak to a group of orthopedic
spine surgeons and neurosurgeons in Birmingham, Alabama.
When I stood up, I tore my knee meniscus in my right knee.
I had to have help to get to the podium actually to give my talk.
It was kind of embarrassing.
It turned out I was fortunate, because one of the orthopedic surgeons in the audience,
wife worked for Amgen.
She came up to me at the end of my talk, and she saw I was struggling.
She goes, "Look, I know why this happened to you.
I'm going to send you six papers and a book."
That jumped me down the rabbit hole.
She was trying to give me information tied to a hormone called leptin that I had absolutely
never heard about, because I graduated in medical school in '93, and leptin wasn't discovered
until '94.
I had no way of knowing about it.
She was trying to get me the message that Amgen was trying to cook their clinical trials,
because at that time, back in the early 2000s, they had pulled their synthetic leptin drug
because it worked too good.
They found out at that time that cold and light, especially from the sun, could actually
have the same impact as their drug.
When they stopped doing what they were doing they immediately went out and patented all
the cold receptors that humans had at that time.
That's actually where we got the cool sculpting trend that's probably big out in your neck
of the woods in Arizona, where people are fat, and they use metal plates on their body
to lose weight.
Well, I did it a little bit more old school.
I began to eat like a great white shark, and live like a polar bear, and take cold baths,
and eat a lot of seafood because I stumbled upon this ancient pathway in the brain called
the leptin melanocortin pathway.
One thing led to another.
I stood in front of my family, I think it was about 2005, or 2006.
In fact, it was right around this time.
It was close to Thanksgiving.
I told my brother-in-law that, in a year, that I was going to be as thin as him.
At the time I was 360 pounds, six foot two.
My brother-in-law was like five eleven and about 200 pounds, and he freaking laughed
at me.
In fact, the whole family did.
I told him that Thanksgiving was going to be the last supper for me.
Long story short, this was probably my first foray into biohacking, and really it was considered
a mito-hack by myself, because I realized the whole story is about mitochondria, the
engine and not the fuel, and I lost 77 pounds in three months, and lost 133 in eleven.
Since that time, I've probably put back on maybe 35 pounds.
The reason for that, you may want to get into in the podcast, actually is tied to my job.
You know as a physician, as I do, cardiologists, unless you're an interventional cardiologist,
you don't have to spend a lot of time in the hospital at night, but neurosurgeon unfortunately
you do.
I found out over the subsequent 10 or 15 years, through this whole story about leptin, that
light was driving my biology the wrong way, and that's what was causing a lot of my problems.
Subsequently, over I'd say the last 10 years, I've had to make several moves, and it was
all designed to get light out of my professional and social life.
Out of my social life it was easier.
Out of my professional life being a neurosurgeon it was not.
Long story short, in 2017, back where I trained, a small hospital wanted to build their spine
program and I told them, "Look, I'd be willing to come and do what you want if you're willing
to come my way and change the hospital bylaws and make it so that I don't have to take call
anymore, and don't have to be up at night, and I can be off all night, and not work on
weekends."
Jack, you know me saying that as a neurosurgeon, that's like I'm asking for the world from
the hospital, but these guys had a previous history with me because the company that worked
for this hospital in terms of their management partner, worked with me in Nashville when
all this stuff that I told you was going on with me, when everything changed, and they
knew about how I changed my surgical practice literally overnight.
They told the guys down here in Louisiana, they said, "Look, if you can get this guy,
you gotta get him."
They changed the bylaws, and I've been here for a year.
I have to say I'm pretty happy.
I'm not taking call.
That's limited my leptin, and melanopsin issue, which is really what you asked me about.
What is the key factor?
Those are the key factors.
You think over the last year, I mean, do you feel different?
Do you feel better?
I'm a lot nicer guy, I can tell you that, because I mean, I'm not constantly sleep-deprived,
and I'm not as blue light toxic as I was.
Most of my blue light exposure these days comes from doing podcasts, comes from [crosstalk
00:07:06] with my members, and trying to help people online, but it got to the point, Jack,
really I would say in 2015, where I realized that I was going to have to do something pretty
radical.
Really all the moves in my life have always been associated with moving towards the sun,
and getting blue light and non-AD BMF out of my life.
It's not like this trend was new.
This was a plan of mine for probably 10 years, but you know having a good idea without execution
leads to deletion of every good idea.
You have to make it happen as a doctor.
You probably are the perfect person to be interviewing me about this, because you know
that medicine is really not set up with circadian biology in mind, especially my specialty.
Most people who are obedient idiots that get out and get trauma, it's happening at night
time.
It's a really big issue, and it's one that I found in my mito-hacks, that I no longer
could get around.
I got to my mid 50s and I said, "If I am going to be good for myself and my family I have
to change what I'm doing.
I have to control my environment better."
I took my own advice that I give my own members.
I will tell you, it was a big-time struggle.
The cool thing about sharing this story with you is when I talk with people, or I meet
them at meetings, or at different events and I tell them, "Look, you need to move.
This is a really big deal," I can actually empathize with them because I've done it so
many times.
I know what it entails, and I know that it's not easy, but here's the problem.
When somebody tells me, "No, I can't do that," then I immediately say to them, "You're telling
me that your job is worth more than your health?"
That's when I make the comment to them that most neurosurgeons don't make the patients.
If you're not good enough for yourself, who the hell are you good for?
When you actually really stew in those tomatoes, you begin to realize that it really is a really
important decision not only for yourself.
You've met me in what I call the real world versus the virtual world, and I truly believe
that when you meet someone in the real world versus the virtual world, you have a very
good awareness of that person's passion and energy, and where they're coming from.
I try to explain to people that I am all in this.
I mean, I realize that my job absolutely destroyed me from the time I was in medical school through
residency, and if you would have told me that at 39 years old, which was a year before I
got the message, I would have laughed at you.
I would have called you the biggest asshole, because as you said before when you introduced
me about neurosurgery, talk about the top of the pyramid, I think the old Jack at 39
and 40 years old would give you a thumbs up on that.
The new Jack thinks that all doctors are on the top of the pyramid, because we have a
duty to teach the things that we're learning that we didn't learn in medical school, because
our knowledge, especially in quantum biology, is radically advancing, far outstripping what
they're teaching in medical school and residency.
The thing is, when you're in medical school and residency, the public gets mad at docs,
and they shouldn't, because you have to learn a shit-ton of stuff just to get through.
The stuff that we're talking about, that we're learning, what I call aftermarket data, doctors,
is really important.
That's why you deciding to do a podcast I think is cool.
I think to extend your reach, write more books, write more blogs, get deeper into it from
your angle, on a hard angle and the cardiology angle, is good.
I'm actually doing a little bit of the opposite.
Instead of being a super specialist, I look at my role now as a neurosurgeon to try to
be a jack of all trades, but a master really of none.
The reason I say that is the more that I've learned about quantum biology in the last
five years, the more that I realized that you have to know the interconnectedness of
all the different systems.
The one good thing about my training as a neurosurgeon, being a relatively smart guy
in the top of my class, I actually did really well in things that I hated in medical school.
It turns out now Jack, those things are really important for me as an educator for quantum
biology, because I can sit down and have a discussion with somebody now about why Vitamin
D and platelets are linked through the wireless connection, through your red blood cells.
I can sit down with a hematologist/oncologist and have a very cogent conversation, cite
papers, and they look at me like, "Why do you do this?"
I try to explain to them, and you know this, when we signed up for medical school, we wrote
that stupid essay and we signed it on the bottom.
I think everybody who went to medical school or chiropractor school, any kind of health
care profession at all, when you sign that essay, you're doing this really to help people.
The thing is, when you get into medical school, even into residency, I don't think it's until
you get out of residency where you realize that you're really not helping a lot of people.
It's a shock to your own system as a physician, and I guess the reason why I'm passionate
about it now, I never lost my passion even in neurosurgery, to be a doctor.
I thought I was a good doctor when I was below 40 years old, but I realize now when I tore
my knee meniscus and that lady came into my life, she gave me the opportunity to be great
at what I do.
The book, The Monk Who Sold His Ferrari, I know that's the book that she gave you and
told you to go read.
After you told me about it I went to go read it, and that's a fantastic story for anybody
to read.
When I speak from the stage or I see people out here in Arizona and I'm telling them about
the importance of sunshine and like, "What do I do?
I live in Minnesota, I live in Canada, I live in Seattle, I live in Portland."
I tell people, my best advice is to move.
You can move to Arizona.
It's sunny here 450 days a year.
You can move to the Caribbean.
I mean, I know that once again, I'm not seeing any patients that are coming in from Mexico
or from these sunny climates.
It's all from the clouds, but let me ask you about this.
Another thing you turned me onto was the idea from Gerald Pollack about the Exclusion Zone.
The Exclusion Zone, certainly from a cardiovascular standpoint, how when you make the Exclusion
Zone and you really increase the size of that, and now that is your buffer between blood
flow and blood vessel wall, and the fact that the sun increases the size of the Exclusion
Zone, I think that is Holy Grail, cardiovascular medicine.
What do you think about that?
Yeah, I agree with you.
I think those are the foundation principles.
I think really, once every cardiologist really delves in to that science, then they add the
other parts in that they kind of know about.
I think they become much more wise.
The real big ticket that's really good about Pollack's work, his book as you know, is written
for a third-grader.
I love turning my patients on.
I tell my patients, "If you really enjoy your doctor and you want to make them better, buy
them this book for Christmas or Hanukah, or just to buy it for them, give it to them,
and I guarantee you, very few patients buy their doctors books.
When you do that, you may not light them all on, but I try to tell my patients this, that
if your doctor changes and opens their mind to truly look at the biophysics of water is
all about, you may affect 1,000 other people in your own town.
It might not be huge impact.
I tell people, "Don't be afraid of it."
There's cheaper books out there.
You can use John Ott's book, Health and Light, because it's so old you can find it in Good
Will for five bucks now.
I tell people just to go on Amazon and buy 20 copies of it and give it to their chiropractor,
give it to their physical therapist, give it to whomever.
When they read the passages about clothing, about sunglasses and what Albert Schweitzer
found from the mouth of his daughter, people are stunned.
I've had cardiologists come up to me.
In fact, it happened about three weeks ago where someone in the hospital came up to me
and said, "Look, I watched one of your podcasts and I went and bought that book about the
eyeglasses," and he sat down with me and talked to me for an hour about how the RP and the
heart work together, via the eye.
He goes, "I would have never thought this in a minute."
I said, "Look, all you have to do is tell your patients, tell them to take their glasses
off and look at the sun in the morning.
In my world," I said, "That is a cardiology maneuver, but that operationally occurs through
Gerald Pollack's work, but also understanding that a red blood cell is a ferry boat for
sunlight that connects the sun wirelessly to our mitochondria."
It's not that hard for a doctor to get, because you know when we went through medical school,
we learned all this bullshit in biochemistry, we learned it in hematology and physiology.
The problem is, we didn't learn really what matters.
We didn't learn the reason, why does hemoglobin have a strong cutoff at 600 nanomoles?
Well, you read Pollack's book, you're going to find out why.
When you understand why the red blood cell is shaped like a radio dish, you begin to
understand why.
It's a radio dish for the visible spectrum of sunlight.
When docs look at this, they start to go, "Man, have we really missed the boat."
The cool part of the story is, most people who get into my stuff probably, even when
you jumped in, most people think it's really hard and complex.
I try to tell people, "Look, if lions and hippos can learn this shit, so can you."
The problem with humans, it's harder for us, because we have this crappy computer in our
brain, our skull, called our brain, that allows us to break all of nature's rules.
If you can teach people not to break nature's rules in the environment that they choose,
guess what?
You can be a rock star cardiologist.
It's not that difficult.
I think it just all comes down to common sense.
I mean, obviously if people want to go to Jack Kruse level, that's a different degree
of understanding, but if all you get out of this whole thing is about, yeah, getting more
sunshine, get sleep when you're supposed to, get away from the EMF and the artificial lights.
Eat the organic Paleo foods, and certainly pack in all the seafood.
I mean, when I talk to people about seafood, why can't a vegan eat an oyster?
Does an oyster have any more or less feelings than a head of cabbage?
Why can't they do that?
From a biophysics standpoint, actually they both emit extreme low-frequency UV light.
I mean, the argument that they have really is a religious argument about food.
I don't really engage people about religious arguments about food because as you know,
I am not a food guru.
I am an engine guru.
I'm a mitochondriac.
When you have my perspective, you begin to see that divorcing yourself from the macro-nutrient
game, and even the vegan game, I tell people, "You want to be a vegan and be a black swan
mitochondriac, it's possible.
The only problem is, you have to live within the 20s, 20th north and 20th south latitudes,
and you have to do some exceptional things.
How do those people get their DHA, because I test all the vegans that come in and they've
got no DHA.
Well, that's the key.
The key is, there's a mechanism in the eye called the Bazan Effect.
Dr. Bazan, Nicolas Bazan, he's a world-famous eye researcher.
Guess where he is?
At LSU.
He's the guy that taught me a lot of stuff in the central retinal pathways when I was
a resident, and it turns out, he's an older guy.
He's probably close to 80 years old and he's still active.
He just published another paper.
It's his sixth paper on this effect that he discovered several years ago.
What the Bazan Effect is, is we have two loops in our eye.
The first loop, any time sunlight comes in, it disassociates DHA and we recycle it in
our eye.
The key to that process, it's controlled by the circadian mechanism, so if you're blue
light toxic or you happen to live next to a cell tower, you lose that ability.
What's the back-up system that evolution built into humans, because remember, the central
retinal pathways has the highest level DHA of any mammal on this planet in humans, and
our brains also the same way.
We have a back-up system called the long loop, and the long loop connects the eye to the
liver.
It turns out that your liver is designed to put that in there.
If your eye gets broken, your liver can replenish the situation.
A vegan who gets as little DHA as possible is constantly recycling.
Assuming that they're living on the equator where there's 12 hours of sunlight in daylight,
that effect is no longer present.
For example, the book that you mentioned earlier, how I got to understand this, is about a guy
who went to these monks in India.
I had the realization that India sits on the equator, the southern part is full of vegetarians,
the northern part is filled with people that eat a lot of meat, and there's no seafood
there.
That was the key.
When I figured this out I was like, "You know what?
These vegetarians have made it for four or five thousand years.
They've done really good."
You know what they didn't have?
That's when I got the message when I was standing at Michelangelo's statue and I looked up.
I said, "You know what?
They didn't have any fake light."
The only fake light that ancient people ever had was full moon, and that's where we get
the word lunatic from, luna meaning moon and when you had the reflected blue right off
the moon, even the ancients knew that blue light causes a problem.
It turns out that vegans can recycle the little DHA that they get.
Remember, in humans we do convert about 1% to 3% of ALA to DHA.
It's very, very small, but if you happen to have a perfect circadian mechanism, veganism
can work.
Now, do I think it can work in a zero G to 5G world?
Absolutely not, I think it's psychotic, but if you're going to do it, you have to do it
in a tropical environment.
Which nobody does.
I mean it's not [crosstalk 00:22:02] Well, this is what I was going to tell you.
They actually do do it.
Remember that India is the perfect example for this experiment that I want to share with
you, because right now they have the highest rate of diabetes in the world.
This is the reason why.
They're still vegetarian, but guess what?
Bangalore, India, which is in the southwestern tip, that's all our call centers for big tech
companies.
Guess what?
It's the Google and Cisco of southern India.
This is the reason why this is important.
This is an important teaching point for people who are former vegans or vegetarians.
I tell people, if you're vegan or vegetarian, the move to greatness is just become a pescatarian.
Just get something in your system, because now that we know about melanopsin and how
it works with leptin, once you fix this Bazan effect in your eye with the short and long
loop, you can do extremely well.
Amazing, amazing, and certainly, me coming out of Chicago, huge Indian population there
when I was doing my cardiology training, and the vegans, they've got some of the worst
coronary artery disease you can ever imagine.
What we used to call tiny vessels until now, you know that when you go in there with the
ultrasound wire, you take a look at the inside of the vessels, they're not tiny vessels.
The vessels are normal size, they're just caked full of disease in a total, circumferential
manner.
Yeah, it's obviously a major problem for them.
Let me ask you, as far as water.
A lot of people are talking about hydrogen water, about adding hydrogen tablets to the
water.
Give me your thoughts on that.
No.
The key with water, this is, how shall I say, Gerald Pollack 2.0.
Pollack gives you the base of understanding water.
The key with water is it has to be devoid of dielectric blockers, you know what those
are because we talked about it in Vermont.
The big one is fluoride and bromine.
The key in water that's really good is iodine.
That's the one halogen that's good because it's got an atomic number 127, so it stimulates
something called the Grotthuss mechanism.
The second level, when I tell you that you're a black swan in training, the next big thing
you need to know about water is remember, what is water's chemical symbol?
H20.
Well, H has three different isotopes on planet Earth, protium, which is H plus, which our
mitochondrial matrix and chloroplasts are geared for.
Then there's deuterium, which is known as heavy water, that has a neutron added to the
proton.
Then we have tritium, which is a radioactive form of hydrogen that's not used in biology
but it's present in nuclear power plants, and it's actually present in nature, inert,
in a very small degree.
The most dominant form of hydrogen on earth is actually H plus.
It turns out through evolutionary biology history, both chloroplasts, which showed up
on this planet about 60 million years before the Cambrian explosion, photosynthesis was
here first.
Then at the Cambrian explosion, that's when mitochondria became dominant in complex life
forms.
It turns out that both of those things, if you look at the atomic structure of chlorophyll
and hemoglobin, you'll be shocked at how similar both of them look, but the key is, is the
mitochondrial matrix absolutely loves H plus.
That's what it's filled with.
It turns out that the bio-alkaloid membranes in chloroplasts love H plus, too.
Well, Jack, here's where the food story comes in, and you know this is how we met at that
Weston A. Price meeting, when I got up there and told people that everybody in the Paleo
community is clueless, because they don't know that the entire food web is linked to
the photosynthetic web.
The question is, how much do you know about light, electrons and protons?
You know my position on that.
The food gurus know diddly squat about it.
Well, it turns out that different foods put different amounts of deuterium in it.
Now, why would life do this?
I'm going to give you and your listeners a very quick run-through of all you need to
know about deuterium depletion.
That's what your mitochondria and chloroplasts do.
Deuterium is found in sea water, about 150 parts per million, that's normal.
Believe it or not, you'll be interested in this, your blood vessels in your body is also
designed to be between 145 and 155 for a very deep reason.
It turns out where in the TCA cycle and the urea cycle meet at the outer mitochondrial
membrane, it's called Krebs bicycle because there are two tires.
It's designed to be devoid of deuterium, okay?
In other words, it doesn't like it at all.
It breaks the ATPase, because remember the ATPase has a proton channel in it that only
fits a proton.
It doesn't fit the proton and neutron.
It breaks the ATPase and you know when you break the ATPase in the heart, electron chain
stops, you die or you get sick before you die.
That's the whole reason behind it.
Here's the interesting thing, how it works in life.
When you get close to the equator, the deuterium content in things grown by photosynthesis,
like food for us or grass for the herbivores, is much higher.
At the equator there's only two seasons.
There's a summer season and a wet season.
Turns out there's a difference in the deuterium content of the grass, so this is how the wildebeests
know when they eat the grass, to migrate that huge migration that you always see on the
Discovery Channel.
They have to go across the Nile River where the crocodiles are and several of them get
picked out.
That's how it goes.
It turns out that the enterocytes in their gut get filled up with the deuterium.
It gives them a bellyache and that's how they know they need to leave.
See, they didn't know anything about deuterium.
They didn't know anything about hydrogen, but this is how the system is built and that's
when they know how to migrate.
It's also when they know when to come back.
That's how this works.
It turns out that same basic mechanism is present in humans.
All the things that you hear a lot of people in alternative health care talk about, like
leaky gut, they have no earthly idea that it's tied to the deuterium content.
Why is this important, Jack, for you to hear?
Because you learned, just like I did in medical school, how fast the enterocytes turn over
in our body compared to everything else.
24 to 48 hours, you know what that means?
That means nature, when your circadian mechanism is working, has a mechanism that works very
efficiently getting rid of enterocytes that are filled with a bag of shit.
Got it?
Yeah.
Guess what happens when you're blue light toxic or you put the cell phone up to the
side of your head instead of putting it on speaker phone?
Your enterocytes are filled.
That's what leaky gut is.
It's an electromagnetic phenomenon.
It ain't tied to any bullshit tied to foods that anybody you're going to have on here,
and I'll argue with them up and down.
They just don't get the biophysics behind it.
Give me some strategies, if you will, to deplete the deuterium from the body.
How do we minimize our exposure?
Well, the number one way, if you use the fuel ... This is where a guy who I know you said
you had Luke on.
Luke is just getting into this about deuterium depletion.
Dr. Laszlo Boros, who is an MD PhD at UCLA, he has shown pretty clearly through his work
in Hungary with a researcher and MD named Gabor Somlyai that ketogenic diets are deuterium
depleted diets.
In fact, one of the number one things that you could eat to deuterium deplete yourself
is coconut oil.
It has a deuterium level of about 101 parts per million.
Well, it turns out that all fats, almost all animal products are deuterium depleted.
Guess what has the highest level of deuterium in it?
This is where you're going to laugh.
Vegetarians won't like this part.
Anything that's made from C3 or C4 photosynthesis.
It turns out C3 photosynthesis forms 80% of the food webs on the planet.
That's the one that has the highest level of deuterium in it.
That's the one that vegetarians eat.
Guess what depletes us of deuterium?
Solar mechanism, meaning the sun and your circadian biology.
It's present in many different systems.
In fact, when I went back to the Weston A. Price meeting this year in 2018, that's what
the talk was about.
I've been waiting to give this talk in 2018 for a long time, because it was the other
part of the leptin story when we found out in December 2017 that melanopsin was actually
in the retinal arteries, the arteries of our skin, the arteries of our gut.
We also found out in December '17, it's in our subq fat and skin.
That was the missing data that I didn't have to complete the story.
Now that the story is complete and you can see that any kind of blue light or non-AD
BMF uncouple vitamin A from melanopsin.
That released retinol becomes, the best way to describe it is a nuclear weapon for all
photo receptors, so you'll be interested in this.
You may not know it, B12 is a photoreceptor in humans, okay?
Guess what happens when you have melanopsin and retinol damage, that's the reason why
vegans have such demolished B12s, because when you put them in a blue light environment,
they can't recycle their Vitamin B12 through the liver.
The other thing that people don't know, if you take every single vitamin known on this
planet, the only one that emits light, guess what it is.
Vitamin A. That's the reason why retinol is bound to every opsin in the human body.
I know you're not a supplements guy, but I'll ask you anyway, what are the best strategies
to get Vitamin A into the diet.
I mean obviously I know, organ meats, eating seafood, whole seafood products.
Liverwurst for me, and believe it or not, seafood.
Is there any role at all for retinyl palmitate supplementation, Vitamin A or no?
No, and I'll tell you the reason why.
If you look at the literature of Vitamin A, the one thing that you'll notice immediately,
and this is important for everybody to hear.
It's also important for doctors to hear.
Excessive retinol in any form, I don't care if it's synthetic or even natural, has been
associated with significant problems.
What is nature telling us there as clinicians that we have a duty to tell patients?
That it has to be linked to circadian biology.
That's what controls it.
All these reactions that I just told you are quantized.
When I used the word quantized to non-biologists, what am I saying?
It means it's highly specific and highly sensitive.
You can't go taking something exogenously and thinking you can replace it endogenously.
The cool thing is, if your redox level isn't trashed, eating liverwurst or eating seafood
every so often, helps prime the whole system.
Why?
Because Mother Nature and evolution designed you to take the pieces and parts that are
built by photosynthesis and have the substrate in itself to do the right things.
The key that you have to do, is you have to understand how sunlight controls the entire
system, both in the eye and all the peripheral clock genes that are present.
Guess what controls the peripheral clock genes?
Melanopsin.
Guess what controls the SEN?
Turns out it's melanopsin again, because where did we find melanopsin first?
It was in 1998.
We didn't find it again in a new place until 2014, which will interest you as a cardiologist.
It's in every artery of the body and the arterials.
In 2017, that's when the seminal paper came that completed my Monk Who Sold His Ferrari
story, because I thought it was the craziest thing ever that Mother Nature or evolution
or God would put the key fat hormone in our subq fat that goes into our hypothalamus.
I was like, "Why in the hell would she do this?"
Then I had this come to Jesus moment.
I read one of Suzanne Somers' old books.
I think it was called Breakthrough, and there was a passage in there that actually said
that she read a paper from Germany that showed that ... You know those little penlights that
we used to get when we were in medical school to check the eyes?
She read a study where they put the penlight behind someone's knee and it turned their
melatonin level off.
I thought to myself, "Jeez, that's crazier than shit."
I thought it was just one of those things in the alternative health world that was just
total bullshit.
It turned out, guess what?
Suzanne Somers reported this.
She had no idea how it worked, but that always stuck in my head and I made the calculated
guess.
Scientists and clinicians, we call that a hypothesis, that leptin had to have a photoreceptor
with it wherever it was present in the body.
That photoreceptor controlled it.
When you heard my talk in 2016 and 2017, remember I talked about those benzene rings and all
the aromatic amino acids are photon traps?
When I saw the chemical structure of leptin and saw all those photon traps, you know what
I realized immediately?
Leptin fundamentally is a photoreceptor, just like B12 is.
Then I went, "Son of a bitch.
That means there's got to be a photoreceptor there."
I knew it was an opsin, but I didn't know which one.
If I was a betting man, and I was truthful to you, I thought it was going to be rhodopsin.
When I read the paper in 2014, remember this is two years before you and I met, and I saw
that melanopsin was in the arterials of the skin and the retina, I said, "I'll be a son
of a bitch.
This could be it."
Then I started to go pedal to the metal down this rabbit hole.
When I saw the paper show up in December of '17, when the guys from Weston A. Price asked
me to come back, I said, "Okay, but you need to let me give this talk because I've been
waiting to give this talk, because it's really the culmination of what I learned from that
lady from Amgen."
Now I know really how it works because it turns out when you have blue light or non-AD
BMF, really any other part of the spectrum besides visible light, it disassociates the
retinol from the melanopsin.
Why is this important?
All diurnal mammals on the planet, Jack, that covalent bond is weak.
It turns out nocturnal animals have a strong covalent bond and the reason why, so they
can handle different parts of the spectrum differently, because remember, our retinins
are photopic, meaning they work by sunlight.
Turns out a rat and mice, all the stuff we see in the medical literature, those are scotopic
retinins.
They have scotopic skin.
That's the reason why you've always heard me say, "Anything that we learned in medical
school is bullshit."
Here's the reason why, because everything we've learned has been on nocturnal animals
that have a completely different retinal melanopsin system, and that means leptin works differently.
Whatever you find from a mouse has no input into a human.
See, I never told anybody this because I was making hypotheses the whole time, but I didn't
have the data even when you and I met in 2016, to tell you, "Now I do.
Now I can let the cat out of the bag and tell you why I was saying what I was saying, what
I was thinking."
My members know this now.
They've known it now since the damn paper came out in 2017.
The real cool part of the story is what happens is, when retinol comes on it's not connected
to the circadian mechanism.
It becomes toxic, which is why I tell people, "Do not supplement with it," because what
does it do?
It destroys leptin biology.
That's the reason why leptin cannot be released from the subq fat in the blood to get into
the hypothalamus at midnight.
That's the reason why the brain has no frigging clue what the energy balance or metabolism
is anywhere in the body, because the retinol locally destroys the photoreceptor.
It's the same reason why we have AMD in the eye, because when retinol gets out there,
it bins the retina.
It destroys it, okay, because it's ruining rhodopsin, melanopsin, and all the cones.
It's also the reason why people get cataracts.
In just four weeks I'm going down to Mexico to speak to a large group of ophthalmologists
about what I just told you, because none of them know about this melanopsin story, and
they need to.
It's really, really important that people understand, now that we know that melanopsin
is in the arterials and also in the skin, this is the reason why you need to have blue-blocking
glasses, but it's also the reason why the way you dress indoors has to be like an orthodox
Jew or a Muslim woman.
It's a smart move.
Then when you're outside I want you as naked as a jaybird, which doesn't make a lot of
people happy, but when you understand this whole story laid out, you begin to see why
I've said what I've said for the last 15 years.
I've seen some, I'm thinking about two in particular, Muslim women in my practice.
They came in, in their full religious garb, and checking or course their Vitamin D levels.
They've got no Vitamin D, yet, I mean, whether we're talking about them, why aren't they
all dying very young?
I'm sure a lot of them are and they get cancer and whatnot, so about them and then maybe
on the other side, what if we're talking to a vegan?
Like, "Wait a second, you guys are bashing vegans, yet the vegans have some of the best
longevity data coming out of the Seventh Day Adventists.
What do you think about [crosstalk 00:40:34] That data's no longer accurate, just so you
know that.
The Seventh Day Adventist data has gone back and been looked at.
They have some significant problems.
The guy that made that all famous was Dan Buettner, The Blue Zones.
People have gone back and looked at his work and realized, that work has been cooked.
Those epidemiological studies, I'll give you another for example.
There's a guy on Twitter, his name is Tucker Goodrich.
He's a big Paleo guy, big into protein and fat.
He posted a picture, and I'm glad he did it.
I actually recapitulated, because I've known about it for a while.
You know that I'm a big fan of the Okinawan people because they eat a lot of pork and
they eat a lot of seafood, which is all about my way of thinking.
Do you know that in the last 25 years that they were the leaders in the super centenarians
of the world, that it's reversed in the 25 years that technology has come in?
It goes back to what I just told you about melanopsin.
See, here's the thing.
Now that we know how melanopsin operates, we need to go back and start looking at different
places.
This is the reason why I told you, and you heard me say this and probably smirked when
I said it from the stage, I said, "If Weston A. Price was alive today, he wouldn't be part
of Sally Fallon's tribe, he'd be part of my tribe, because everybody he saw eat, ate wild,
but guess what they did?
They ate out in sunlight."
Yeah, I get it.
That's the key, and guess what?
Once you get past the dogma that you've learned, you begin to understand how this works.
Even the data on vegans is up for debate right now.
I'm going to tell you, I truly believe this.
Longevity is totally tied to how good or bad your mitochondrial biology is and how good
you match that up with your single nucleotide polymorphisms, your single amino acid polymorphisms,
and if you live in nature.
I do believe that you could eat shit on a shingle.
As long as you live in nature properly, you can get by.
A lot of my critics will say, "Well, Jack, when you gave us the analogy of Paleo effects
about the car, if you put shit gas in a car you know that it doesn't work good."
You know what I have to point out to all the food gurus?
I said, "Does your car have the ability to self-regenerate through a process called mitophagy
and apoptosis?
The answer is no."
Does food really control that?
It turns out no.
Guess what controls it?
Melatonin levels do.
Guess what controls melatonin levels?
Solar exposure via melanopsin.
Melanopsin dysfunction is what causes melatonin to go up and down, and that's what controls
mitochondrial DNA.
That's the key.
When you get to that level, then you begin to understand, you know what?
This is the reason why, when Usain Bolt became the fastest human, he was publicly stated,
all you guys listen to this and Google it.
He ate Chicken McNuggets during his training, before he won all the gold medals.
You believe that you can't fuel on shit, this is the fastest man in the world, who had unbelievable
performance.
I wasn't there this year in Vermont, and I think, correct me if I'm wrong, that's some
of what Jeff Leach's work was, what he was doing, was he was trying to feed the African
tribe all this garbage food, and it didn't matter.
I mean, they were just [crosstalk 00:44:02] I wish you were there, because you would have
loved what I did from the stage, because I was pretty, I don't want to say toxic, but
we had another doctor there, Zach Bush, who was selling people this Restore product, and
I told people, "Look" ... Jeff spoke the night before me and Zach talked."
Zach talked first, I talked last.
He was telling people how wonderful this Restore stuff was, and Jeff got on the stage and told
people, "We fed them Coca-Cola, high-fructose corn syrup," I mean, the stuff that would
make you and your wife's head explode, but here was the crazy thing.
When they sampled their microbiome, it didn't change at all.
Jeff, to his credit, said from the stage, "We don't know why, but we're going to study
it."
I'm sitting back there, after his talk, and I said, "Does anybody in the room know the
significance of what Jeff just said?"
Because you know Jack, this blows up the food paradigm, especially in the microbiome, because
what it says is that people who live on the equator, like the Hadza do, they live in constant
sunlight.
In other words, it's 12 hours of daylight and night-time.
Guess what?
It turns out that light controls the microbiome, and guess what?
You go read the literature, the microbiome of the breast, the microbiome of the gut,
it turns out when people's redox potential is high, the microbiome doesn't change.
So what is Jeff going to do this year?
He's going to take the Hadza and bring them to Texas and feed them shit on a shingle again.
Now he's going to say, "Okay, what does the 29th latitude do to these people when we feed
them shit on a shingle?"
I think when that gets published, because his other paper got published in Nature.
When this gets published I am hoping that it limits the bullshit that we hear from functional
medicine doctors, from the food gurus out there that doing something, or feeding people
pre- and probiotics, somehow is a magic pill to fix their microbiome.
Turns out it's not.
It goes all the way back to what I've been teaching people.
It's about fixing your redox potential, which means increasing the net negative charge,
which goes back to what Pollack said in his book, when sunlight hits water, what happens?
The Exclusion Zone forms a net negative charge.
That's what mitochondria need, because people forget, what do mitochondria need?
Water, okay?
They take glucose and turn it into CO2 and water.
What does photosynthesis do?
It takes CO2 and water and makes sugar with sunlight.
It reverses the process.
When you start to put all the pieces together, you start to see where they fit, and I think
Jeff's talk this year, I sat from the stage.
I said, "I thought my talk was going to be good."
I thought his talk was way better, because it actually blew up the paradigm that was
all around me in Vermont, that, "Oh, no, no, we have to eat cabbage and kimchi and all
kinds of other bullshit to get your microbiome right."
No, I'm fine with people doing that.
I don't have any issue with it.
If you think it's going to work for you, great, but I'm going to tell you, get your gut, your
torso, your abdomen, out in the sun as much as you can and you can be Usain Bolt.
You can be just like the Kenyans that live in Nairobi that win every marathon around.
There's a reason why people do this.
I tell people, Jack, this all the time.
I'm going to tell it to you.
You take it for what you want because I think it's going to be something you'd be interested
in, since we brought up Bolt.
You know that a.m. sunlight, the transition between UVA and infrared A light, actually
make dopamine.
That's one of the things that programs dopamine and dopamine is made from aromatic amino acids.
Here's what people don't know.
Dopamine actually goes to fiber-type muscles.
This is really important for you to know as a cardiologist.
When I talk to the meatheads in Paleo, they're always interested in big muscles and this
and that.
We just had one of their big, meathead guys die, who I tried to get the information to
for 10 years, which is Charles Poliquin.
He was a great guy, and he was a rule-breaker, like I am, but he just didn't understand that
you needed to work out outside and not in a gym.
The guy was 58 years old and died from a heart attack, which is your organ.
I know also you and I were both critical, and I'll give you a lot of credit obviously,
for increasing my knowledge on it, but Bob Harper from America's Biggest Loser.
I mean, outside that guy looks like he's Superman and on the inside he was just frying his body
for all those unhealthy reasons that we talked about.
Right, now he's on TV selling Brilinta to obedient idiots.
That kills me when I see that.
Not that I watch Remember, he's got to replace his salary because
he can't exercise anymore people to death, but the point that I wanted to make to you
is, you know that skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle have dopamine in it, and dopamine's
really important for fiber type.
Well, here's the crazy part, the a.m. light is what builds dopamine levels highest.
You know that Usain Bolt is Jamaican, right?
He lives on top of a volcano in Jamaica.
The higher you go the more UV light you get.
Also, the darker your skin you get, so it makes your redox higher.
His fiber type was fast twitch.
That's the reason why he's amazing.
Now you know the story I told you about Kenyans.
Kenyans come from Nairobi.
Nairobi's at one degree north, 8,000 feet on a plateau on an old super volcano.
They're the blackest people on the planet, to protect their skin from the UV light.
They get more UV light.
The natural UV index there is 14 or 15, that's the reason why they have the fiber type for
endurance racing.
That's why they win everywhere they go.
That's why they train there.
What's the third story?
This brings it back to you and me.
If you're an NFL fan, you'll take out an NFL rushing list when I get done with this podcast
with you, and you'll notice that the top 20 NFL rushers all went to school in the Southeast.
Not one of them with the exception of one guy, John Riggins, went to school north of
that.
Guess why?
Because muscle fiber type is linked to actually your physiology and the amount of solar exposure
you get as a kid.
What's the key here?
As a cardiologist, if you have anybody that has cardiac disease, your job is to get their
chest, their sternum out in the sun as much as possible.
With ladies who have heart disease, they say, "Well, I can't just take my boobs out and
walk around."
Well, actually you can, ladies.
They make something called Cooltan out in your neck of the woods in Arizona, a clothing
company in the States.
There's another one that I push my members to, which is Kiniki].
They're in the UK, and I found that Kiniki allows more of the infrared A and UV light
to come through.
These are things that we can do to help people.
These are little, actionable steps that actually improve people's things.
Instead of them coming to see you to have a wire placed in their coronary arteries,
or coming to see me to have pedicle screws placed in their back.
Yeah, now, tell me how obviously, someone who's been told of course, the sun is bad
and all that rhetoric.
How do you get people safely in the sun?
I know, obviously we wouldn't tell anyone, "Hey, listen, you haven't been in the sun.
Go out at noon and just go bake yourself for an hour."
How do we get people into that?
Well, the way I do it.
I'll give you my way as a physician, because it may help you and some other physicians
I've that have listened to this.
The first thing that I do is I make the patient buy John Ott's book, and I direct them to
the story.
You first have to understand why dermatologists and ophthalmologists believe UV light's bad
in order to understand the whole paradigm.
It turns out babies that were born with jaundice, who always come from mothers with melanopsin
problems, and Dads with melanopsin problems, because that's why they're jaundiced to begin
with, they used to be put under UV light in the '50s.
Well, it turns out a lot of those kids got retrolental hyperplasia in their retina.
Immediately they found out, "Oh, this is UV light exposure that caused the problem."
What didn't they know?
That babies have lenses that are completely permeable to UV light, because you remember
Jack, when we were in medical school, we were told by ophthalmologists that the lens blocks
UV light, which is also bullshit.
It lets 2% TO 4% of UV through.
Well, it turns out babies really let it through.
Do you know why?
Because UV light stimulates brain growth.
What do you know about human babies?
They are born shitting on themselves, a fat ball of goo, not like chimps.
Chimps are almost fully functional.
It turns out their lenses are permeable for sunlight to help stimulate them to grow.
The story became that the people back in the '50s that dealt with jaundiced kids, they
would use these lights.
They eventually switched in the late '50s to the early '60s to blue light, because they
found out the blue light didn't cause the retrolental hyperplasia and it was able to
get rid of the jaundice, but what have we found out in the 2000s about kids that are
irradiated for jaundice?
They all have higher levels of melanoma, skin cancer, and this new cancer that's blowing
up everywhere called ocular melanoma.
It's the number one fastest-growing cancer in the ophthalmology literature.
Guess what we found out now?
We found out the story that the blue light goes from 435 to 465.
That's what stimulates melanocytes in the retina of the eye and on your skin.
It's actually the key frequency range that melanopsin works at, so now we know that it's
artificial blue light that really causes the cancer.
Turns out that UV light taken out of its spectrum, so if you're thinking about the Pink Floyd
album cover, remember, UV light only makes up purple.
There's six other colors.
UV light will never hurt you when the six other colors are present, okay?
UV light's different than every other part of the spectrum for this reason.
It only makes up 1% to 4% of the terrestrial sunlight that falls to earth, but in that,
it's predominantly UVA, it's a little bit UVB, and there's no UVC.
The other interesting thing is, it's diurnal, meaning that it's not present equivalent every
place on the earth.
The only place it's always present equivalently is at the equator, which is the reason why
anybody who is sick, if you look at any epidemiologic study of any disease known to man, the incidence
drops at the equator.
Type I diabetes, Type 2 diabetes, heart disease, MS. [crosstalk 00:54:47] Right, and everybody
knows it but nobody knows why.
Well, it turns out when you understand the story in Ott's book, and you take it forward
and you start going through the ophthalmologist literature and the dermatologist literature
... One of the things that I love doing because you know I'm a shit stirrer in medicine, I
love sitting down with the dermatologists and say, "Tell me, why is it that people have
the highest rates of melanoma and skin cancers, have the lowest levels of Vitamin D, if UV
light is the cause, and we know that 312 nano of light is the only thing that converts cholesterol
to the active form of Vitamin D." They just look at you and dribble on themselves,
because this is in their literature.
They know it, but you know what they haven't been able to explain?
Why the incidence of melanoma on the skin and in the eye, is exponentially greater today
in 2018 than it was before we had sunglasses in the '30s and sunscreen in the '50s and
'60s.
The reason is the lower your Vitamin D level is, the higher your rate of cancer.
If you put that person in an indoor environment and you know that most of your patients and
most of my patients, they live 98% indoors.
That's where the blue light is.
We don't realize, as I said to you before about the story about the polar bear and the
great white shark.
This computer allowed us to start breaking nature's laws for light in 1874 when Edison
came up with the light bulb, and then in 1893 Tesla really screwed us because he made the
AC power grid.
Now we have all kinds of shit plugged into it.
Since that time, if you look at the disease metric data, charts from 1900 to 2018, the
country that's done it the best is Sweden.
They have the best health medical records back.
Guess where I found all this information about blue light and ocular melanoma?
That's in a blog that's out published in the Swedish registries.
That's the key.
When you begin to really dive deep, you begin to realize that what people are told ... Listen,
I'm going to tell you right now, if you want skin and eye problems the smartest thing you
can do is put a tarp over that.
That's the greatest benefit to the medical profession for dermatologists and ophthalmologists,
because you're guaranteed you're going to have medical problems.
This is the reason why people in the alternative health world were shocked when I told people
10 years ago that the celibacy syndrome in Japan was caused by all the technology.
The other big issue that people started to realize is that myopia, all the kids in Asia
are myopic.
96% of teenagers by the time they're 20 years old, they're myopic, for the same reason.
Why?
Because dopamine controls the way the globe grows, which goes back to our story about
muscles.
Have you ever seen Kenyans that win races that wear glasses or contacts?
Did Usain Bolt have them on?
You know why?
When you're in UV light it's the antidote for myopia.
When did I become myopic?
Guess when?
When I was in medical school.
Yeah, but as far as sun exposure, what do you say?
I mean, I know obviously you're out there with every sunrise, you're out there, you're
getting some sun in the morning, you're getting some sun in the noontime, you're getting some
sun in the sunset, and you're getting that whole spectrum coming through.
Yeah, to cut to the chase, I'm going to make it easy for you and everybody listening to
it.
I have a very detailed answer, but you're right, if you see every sunrise ... This is
what I got from The Monk Who Sold His Ferrari.
Julian Mantle made a comment in there that just stunned me.
I shouldn't say it was him.
It was the monk that was talking to him, said that humans on average see 25,000 sunrises
in their life.
I stopped when I read that in the book and I said, "How many sunrises have you actually
seen?"
Honestly, at that time, the answer was probably 10 or 11, and I started to think about it
and that's when I started to realize that the light in the morning is different than
the light every other time.
I started to really delve into that, but what I did is, I took all these observations that
I made when I was reading this book and doing all my homework at the medical school library
to learn all this shit, and I came up with something on Patreon that I released called
How to Build Your Solar Callus.
The answer to you is, I tell people once they read Ott's book, then I want them to go read
his Patreon blog, because it lays out how to build your solar callus.
Here's the long story.
I can give you the short story.
The short story is, infrared A light forms up 42% of sunlight.
It's the dominant form of light.
Turns out red light in U is the fastest way for you to build your solar callus, so that
means the more red light you get, the more UV light you can assimilate and you don't
need to be outside and you'll never get red.
You know you've met me, I'm an Irish guy with freckles.
I can stay out in the sun for eight to 10 hours.
In fact, this weekend on Sunday I was outside watching some of the NFL games, out 10 hours
straight in the sun.
Do I look like I'm blistered and miserable?
No.
The key is, people don't know this about the skin, that this ability is there.
Women are recalcitrant to do this because they assume that they're going to get wrinkles
because that's what the dermatologist tells them.
You know what the irony of the story is?
The higher your skin redox is, the more mitochondria you have, the more water it makes, the less
wrinkles you get.
It's actually the opposite.
If you want to get wrinkled, sit in front of a computer all day.
That's for sure.
All right, this is absolutely brilliant, brilliant information.
I took down so many notes of so many things I want to research and look up and learn more
on it.
Tell me, where can anyone who's listening to this show, where can they learn about you?
What have you got coming up next?
What are your lectures?
You mentioned Patreon.
How do people become a member in your tribe?
Tell me where people can go.
Well, probably the first and easiest thing I would tell people to do is just go to my
jackkruse.com website, read all the free stuff.
99% of what I've written is free, okay?
The second thing is, if you want to cut through the first three years of blogs that are all
on leptin, probably better off reading my book.
I think it's only 10 bucks now on Amazon because it's been out for about six years.
That would be second thing.
Third thing, I have shit-tons of podcasts online.
Just put my name in and put podcast, you'll pull up a ton.
Like Jack said, the ones I did in Vermont I personally think are pretty epic.
The one in 2017 about the eye is amazing.
The one I did this year is all about melanopsin.
That one unfortunately is on Patreon, so you'll have to pay for that.
Patreon is when I moved the blog to more clinically oriented things.
Jack, you'll understand why.
When you start talking clinical and you're a doctor on the internet, you have to be very
careful.
Patreon is, you go to www.Patreon, P-A-T-R-E-O-N.com\drjackkruse and in there I will give you a treatise on
quantum biology.
I'll teach you about deuterium till your head splits open.
You'll get the solar callus blog.
You'll learn about what survivor soup is.
Survivor soup is actually how you create deuterium-depleted water in your body, especially if you have
a serious mitochondrial disease.
Probably the last thing that I would say is, over my 10 years being in public now and talking
about this, always had a goal, actually make a quantum clinic.
In other words, a place where black swan mitochondriacs in training could come to learn, to teach
other doctors.
I wanted to build a facility that was tied to my teachings.
I found a piece of property at the 28th latitude that I'm currently developing.
I'm actually talking to you from the kitchen of the farmhouse now.
The clinic is about 100 yards away.
It's not done, it should be done in two months, so I will be probably every quarter teaching
doctors.
You don't have to be an MD.
You can be any kind of doctor, any kind of practitioner, even a massage therapist or
anyone else.
I think I'm going to mix it with the public.
People [inaudible 01:03:13] learn about quantum biology will be able to come there for a fee,
and I'm going to teach with a curriculum the things that I've learned in detail.
The last part is, I've had a lot of members.
You can become a member of my website.
We have four different levels now, that's silver, platinum and gold, and titanium.
Titanium's for families.
I personally think gold is the best way to go, because you get access to me every month.
We do webinars on different health topics and most of the Q&amp;As last three or four hours.
Jack, you know I like to talk, so they last a long time.
The last level of membership is going to be, if you want your hand held and you don't want
the full force of reading everything Jack does, you just want my wisdom and you want
me to be your doctor, you'll be able to hire me direct.
That's what the farm is going to be about, and it's going to focus in on all the quantum
biology that ties light, water and magnetism completely together.
I'll make sure I put all that stuff in the show notes.
It's absolutely brilliant.
I don't know how to thank you.
I know you got so many people that demand so much of you.
You're such a sought-after speaker and educator and to get on the different podcasts, I appreciate
you spending the time with me.
It's always difficult.
I know you feel this way as well that we want to get this information out to the world and
we do so through the computer and social media and blue light, and sitting there in front
of that camera, and you got the light back here to make sure that we look legible, yet
knowing that it's so unhealthy.
It's a real difficult dichotomy that we all live in, but I applaud your efforts to get
out of the hospital and get rid of night call and the weekends and all that toxic lifestyle.
I wish my father heard this information.
I told you the story about my Dad dying, a cardiologist dying of progressive supranuclear
palsy, and the people at that Mayo Clinic, they've got no idea why, they've got no therapy.
I meet my future wife, who's a doctor, chiropractic, and she says, "He worked inside of a hospital,
never saw the sun, in Chicago, lousy sleep, lousy food, too much alcohol, around all the
environmental toxins."
She's got all the answers as to why my father is dying, and the Mayo Clinic has nothing.
The funny thing is, I forgot when you shared that story with me in Vermont and it's so
ironic that you brought this up.
See, this is what quantum entanglement is about.
I just released a Patreon blog three days ago called Quantum Thermodynamics 20.
Guess what it's about?
It's about how light and EMF through the eye can cause a brainstem disease, which is what
your Dad had.
For people who don't know, most people don't know what that disease is, but you know what
the disease process that I used as the analogy was?
I used Tic Douloureux, and I used Tic Douloureux because you know as a neurosurgeon we treat
that, but I explain to people how that disease linked through the blood vessels via the melanopsin
deficit because guess what?
The fiber tracts do not connect.
Your Dad's problem is exactly the same way.
I can tell you now, it was likely the blue light that really did it, because the circle
of Willis that fed his upper brain stem, which is where that nucleus is located, that's what
caused it, Jack.
Yeah, yeah.
All right, my friend, thank you so much.
Dr. Jack Kruse, everybody, this has been The Healthy Heart Show, another fantastic episode.
Read the show notes, go find Dr. Jack Kruse, watch his podcast, watch YouTube on him, subscribe
to his channels.
He is worth it, this is money that you're talking about that's going to save your life,
so pay attention to Dr. Jack Kruse.
Signing out.
Take care.