[Applause]
Well, good evening. I'm Gleeves Whitney,
the moderator of this evening's debate,
and I'm the director of the Hallstein
Center for Presidential Studies at Grand
Valley State University. and I want to
welcome you, a warm welcome to you and
also to viewers of our webcast live.
Tonight's event has caused a stir
because it brings together two imminent
writers who happen to be
brothers. Some people would have you
think the only thing Peter and
Christopher Hitchens share is
DNA. But anybody who has read their work
knows they share much more than that.
Both are independent
thinkers. Both are fierce debaters. And
both are superb writers who show a
profound respect for the English
language. Christopher Hitchens, the
older of the two, is one of the most
controversial voices in Anglo-American
journalism based in Washington DC. He
has written 20 books including
biographies of Thomas Payne, George
Orwell, and Thomas Jefferson with whom
he shares an April 13th birthday. So
early happy
birthday, as well as scathing critiques
of Henry Kissinger, Bill Clinton, and
Mother Teresa.
Most recently, he wrote the book on
atheism, God is not great, and edited
the portable atheist, a contributing
editor to Vanity Fair. He also writes
regularly for a number of high- toned
publications. Peter Hitchens, the
younger of the two by two and a half
years, has crossed the pond to be with
us. He is one of Britain's most
independent journalists who blogs and
writes a regular column for the Mail on
Sunday.
Formerly a longtime writer for the Daily
Express, Peter was once asked by former
Prime Minister Tony Blair to quote, "Sit
down and stop being
bad." This after aggressive questioning
at a press conference. Peter is the
author of The Abolition of Britain and
the Abolition of Liberty. He has also
written for The Spectator, The Guardian,
and New Statesmen. And it's worth noting
that Peter is no stranger to our shores.
He lived in Bethesda, Maryland for two
years. Well, this event is unique.
Christopher and Peter have never before
debated one-on-one in the United
States. I guess it's also unique because
Christopher is in a
church. Both brothers agreed to the
topics and the format beforehand. They
will debate Iraq and God principally,
but this evening's format also allows
considerable time at the end for you to
jump in and put questions to both of our
distinguished guests. The coin toss
earlier this evening determined that
Peter will speak first on the topic of
Iraq. The brothers will debate the
proposition the invasion of Iraq was
wrong. Peter, you have 10 minutes.
Well, thank you. Uh, can you hear me?
Right there. And good evening, or
assalamu alaykum as they say in
Detroit.
Now, in Britain, as you know, we take
the adversarial principle rather further
than you do. We don't just have
adversarial courtrooms. We have an
adversarial parliament and an
adversarial press and we have
adversarial
families. And I know I'm going to be
asked all kinds of foolish questions
about whether we got on and what our
childhood was like. I would say that it
had its ups and downs. My father at one
point forced us in a scenario similar to
that at Dayton, Ohio to sign a peace
treaty uh which I later repudiated by
breaking the frame open and tearing it
to shreds. And we would spend long
summers drenching each other with what
was available to hand in those days
before the Super Soaker, which was used
washing up liquid bottles. And since
then, we've really kept our hands off
each other more or less. Tonight, those
of you who are hoping for a session of
mud wrestling will, I hope, be
disappointed. But I I can offer you one
small thrill, which is that it seems to
me uh and it seemed to me the closer
I've got to this evening that I don't
ever want to do this
again. So, there is a very strong chance
that this will be the last time we shall
ever do
this. Turning to the subject under
discussion, uh the war in Iraq. I don't
want to make this too easy for myself
because it seems to me that it is
actually a fantastically easy position
to take. First of all, I'll confess that
at the beginning for some time my mind
was not made up. I considered supporting
it and almost everything in my past made
me want to do so. One of the reasons
that I didn't was the rank stupidity of
much of the propaganda in its favor. And
I was particularly struck by an article
by Michael Kinsley in which he said that
the people who want this war are
treating their own arguments with
contempt. But one of the reasons that
I would have and would have expected
myself to support it is that and this is
bound to come up in the first half as
well as the second half. The religion
that I grew up with in England was not
what you might think. The Christianity
of England by that time was a palid
anemic thing. The thing that we were all
brought up to believe in was in
something called we won the
war. Its saints were the pilots in the
battle of Britain. Its god was Winston
Churchill. And it suffused everything we
did. We lived, you must remember, in
this wonderful peaceful country largely
untouched by foreign attack in a land
honorably battered by war. I was
surrounded the cities that we lived in
or near. My father was a naval officer,
our father I should say on this evening.
Uh we lived in cities battered by war or
near cities battered by war. And
everything even as small children that
we talked about was overshadowed by that
war. And we thought that it had been
good. In fact, we were convinced it had
been good. And we grew up entirely
believing that you could by launching
war do good
things. As time has passed and as I have
traveled to the nastier places of the
world, I've become less sure of this.
And I've seen more and more the
consequences of those pictures which we
so often see on our television screens
of the missile being launched from the
ship of what happens at the other end.
And I've seen
also on a particular and terrifying
occasion in Somalia the arrival of the
US Marines intent on rescuing a country
in desperate desperate straits and the
subsequent failure despite the enormous
good intentions of everybody
involved. But there was something else
about the Iraq war that I didn't like.
And that was this. And it was
particularly just as it began and as I
was beginning to feel most strongly that
I didn't like it. Uh a rear admiral of
the United States Navy and of course I
feel rather strongly about navies
because of my parentage was portrayed on
the television
addressing his ship's company. This was
not a stirring or poetic narration. It
concluded with the words, "It's hammer
time." And this was succeeded by a
playing of a song called We Will Rock
You. Well, yes, it is quite funny except
that what they then did was to launch
missiles which headed towards a country
where they would land inevitably in some
cases on places where entirely innocent
people were living. I didn't think this
was a serious attitude towards war. I
was reminded continuously and I have to
say I have a largely conservative
audience in Britain and I said
repeatedly that I I didn't like this war
and I would get angry emails, phone
calls and letters saying that I was
unpatriotic and wrong and I would send
back one thing to most of these people
which was Kipling's
recessional. And Admiral Kissing's
outburst made me think most strongly of
that that particular passage.
We loose wild.
Ah, I should have written this down,
remembered it. I I remembered it earlier
on. Drunk with sight of power we loose
wild tongues that have not thee in awe.
And of the wreaking tube, an iron shard
upon which the heathen rely. And I
thought there was an arrogance about
this war and a
belief flowing from self-righteousness
and misdirected idealism which was bound
to end in disaster. And I thought of my
own country at the end of the 19th
century embarking on the bore war and
ending essentially its imperial power by
its overweening folly. And I thought not
merely wrong but a mistake.
And
nothing, absolutely nothing which has
happened since, and I have been to Iraq
twice since that war took place has
convinced me in any way that I was
wrong. This was an idealist war. It was
an idealist war supported by idealists
for the best of
reasons. And it fulfilled my belief that
there is nothing in this world more
terrifying than somebody who thinks he
is right.
[Music]
Thank you, Peter. Christopher, you have
10 minutes
and I'll take all nine and a half of
them. Um, it goes, by the way, if drunk
with sight of power, we loose,
loos, wild tongues that have not thee in
all such boastings as the Gentiles use
and lesser breeds without the law. uh
the the it's the whole magnificence of
Kipling that is exactly what makes
people nervous about quoting him
correctly because when you get it right
it's unsettling and lots of things about
this are unsettling and so they should
be and it's um my duty as well as my
pleasure to congratulate Peter on on
keeping things edgy for this evening.
You didn't come here we hope for a benal
debate ladies and gentlemen. Um, now
listen. Uh, you can't see underneath my
shirt the garlic uh
necklace and you have no idea that I'm
fighting my way by Northwest Airlines
back from here tomorrow morning to be in
New York for the uh memorial service for
William F. Buckley at St. Patrick's
Cathedral. In other words, you've got no
idea what I've been going through lately
and there's no real reason why you
should. Uh
but when they said to me this evening,
"When you come out, do you want to be at
the throne or at the
pullpit?" I did feel slightly uh
discombobulated. And when I said, "Well,
where's the men's room?" And they said,
"It's down there." And there's men's
room and then there's women's room. I
understand that bit. And in between
Sexton's
room, I began to feel more
discombobulated still.
Um, and today is the anniversary of the
day in 1945 when my mother and my father
got married after both of them having
been through a very long war, very long,
brutal, cruel war that succeeded the
long austerity, poverty struggle with
which they'd had to beguile their youth
in the 1920s and 30s of interwar
Britain. If you can even assume that
people in Europe in those days lived
between two wars rather than endured a
long
armistice between two terrifying
resumptions of hostilities. Every time
you read fragile truths in the New York
Times, think of that as applying to the
1920s and 1930s in Europe and you'll get
a better idea of what those resumption
of hosterities were. And yes, I think if
I look at my brother and think, well,
our parents got married in this day
1945, that is a little unsettling. It's
also, I think, hope you don't mind my
saying so rather reassuring. We are both
here after all and determined to
testify. Now, on this question about the
Mesopotamian war,
um, everybody knows why they oppose it,
don't they? Everyone's clear on what
their reasons are. Um, we were told
wrong things. We were given inaccurate
information by dubious governments. We
were sort of cheated into a feeling that
we our
uh delegations of the UN uh had
overstated the matter of weapons of mass
destruction and terrorism. In fact, when
you think about it, um, you'll find that
it's probably even wrong to mention
Saddam Hussein in the same breath as
weapons of mass destruction or
terrorism. I have a couple of tests from
of my own for whether people know what
they're talking about when they're
talking about
Iraq. Anyone who says that Saddam
Hussein was okay, a bad guy, doesn't
know what they're talking about.
You hear that said quite a lot. They
don't know. They don't know what fascism
feels like. They don't know what it's
like to see families forced at gunpoint
to applaud the torture and execution in
public of their family members. They
don't know what it's like to see
180,000 members of the Kurdish people at
a minimum killed by poison gas in the
northern provinces of Iraq. They don't
know what it's like to see at least that
number of Shia Arabs killed in southern
Iraq. They don't know what it took,
Anglo-American, BritishAmerican policy
to put a no-fly zone from 1991 onwards
over those two zones to make sure that
those two genocides could not be
replicated. They don't know what it
would be like to be a citizen of Kuwait
or Iran. Seeing Saddam Hussein's army
coming over the horizon, attacking your
civilians in that way, abolishing in one
case the whole existence of a member
state of the Arab League and of the uh
Muslim, excuse me, the the Islamic
Conference and of the United Nations
abolishing it, annexing it, making it
part of Iraq. They don't they didn't
hear the speech from Saddam Hussein
saying the only mistake he ever made was
that he invaded Kuwait before he
finished the nuclear weapon. He should
have done it the other way round. First
get the nuclear weapon that at the Tua
uh reactor which we found as a result of
the Kuwait war when we weren't looking
for
it. Get the bomb first, then invade
Kuwait, then ask them what they're going
to do now. Now that I've invaded it,
don't do it. Don't get it the wrong way
around. We lived at this man's
permission for a long time. We lived by
his
warrant. Only his stupidity allowed us
uh to be
uh as complacent as we were. And in the
meantime, fighters in northern and
southern Iraq were fighting against a
time we should have been fighting
ourselves. the liberation of Iraq. In
other words, the decision that we had to
move the Iraqi people and the region
into a post Saddam era will stand, I'm
convinced, as one of the greatest
decisions of American statecraft as one
of the things that American soldiers,
male and female, and politicians who
voted for it, those who've defended it
will be proudest of in the future of any
decision we've ever made. Despite the
ridicule, despite the incompetence,
despite the failures, despite the
disappointments, let us review what
we've done. First, we have removed a
keystone state of the Middle East from
the control and sole ownership of a
psychopathic crime family who owned all
of Iraq and treated its people as if
they were disposable citizens. I remind
you that this keystone state occupies a
choke point on the Gulf and an arterial
corroted point in the world economy. It
cannot be left to the control of a
fascistic mafia. I remind you further
that it exists between the uh
exorbitant Sunni Wahhabi theocracy of
Saudi Arabia and the no less exorbitant
Shia theocracy of Iran. that it is it is
the keystone that allows us yes us we
who have the right to do this we who
have the right to insist on oil we who
don't have to be ashamed of mentioning
oil in the same breath as democracy to
say if we can recuperate Iraq if we can
recuperate its oil industry if we can
stop it being the private property of a
psychopathic crime family we can not
only help the Iraqis but we can undercut
the monopoly or the duopoly of Shia Iran
and
Wahhabi Saudi Arabia. Does anyone think
this is a matter of
indifference? Is anyone willing to get
up and say, "You sir, very good for you.
I admire your nerve, I wouldn't mind if
you were the only one, as you seem to
be, you're indifferent to it." Um, the
rest of us here, voters and consumers,
all believers in uh freedom, u might
possibly want to take the view that it
can't be for us a nothing question what
happens to Iraq. We'll add one in the
remaining time that we have brought one
of the great uh war criminals of the
world to justice and put him and his
crime family and his main uh complicit
associates on trial in public in a
country where until recently, very
recently, it was death, slow death, very
slow death to possess a cell phone or a
satellite dish. that we have undone what
UNESCO calls the greatest crime against
the human ecology ever committed. The
destruction of the marshes of uh
southern Iraq, the oldest wetlands in
the Middle East, the smoke and
destruction of which could be seen from
the space shuttle. So terrible was the
uh environmental decay that we have uh
proclaimed uh the autonomy of the
Kurdish people, the oldest uh and
largest uh nation in the world not to
have a state of their own. And that
where they live in their federalized
uh democratized provinces in northern
Iraq, which were released from Saddam
Hussein's control uh a full 12 years
before the liberation of the rest of the
country. uh business flourishes, uh
press flourishes, democracy flourishes,
civil society flourishes. The sooner the
earlier the intervention by the British
and American forces in Iraq, in other
words, the happier, the sooner, the
greater, the deeper, the more enduring,
and the more useful in the future is the
outcome. Um, I'm willing to defend
because I've just seen time. I'm willing
to defend and underline and repeat and
restate and emphasize everything I have
said so far. So all of you who've come
here under the pathetic illusions pedled
by Hillary Clinton and Harry Reid and
move on.org have all your work still
ahead of you. And you thought it was
going to be easy, didn't you? Bye now.
Thank you, Christopher. Peter, the next
five minutes are
yours. Oh, thank you. The lesser breeds
without the law were the Germans. It was
the law that they were outside that made
them lesser. I just thought I had to add
that. Right. Consequences of the Iraq
war.
$6 trillion dollars which the United
States does not have
expended. Iraq under the control largely
of the Ayatollas of Iran. Uh the resorts
to torture by the United States often by
proxy but not always disgraces in
themselves and
disasters. An untold number of innocent
people killed.
the certainty that the United States is
unable for the foreseeable future to
mount a justified military operation
abroad. The dimmonition of the moral
authority of the Western democracies
again for the foreseeable future.
Fantastic. What more could you ask?
resulting from deliberate ignorance of
the past, deliberate willful ignorance
of the past, of Britain's own attempts
to control and exploit and govern Iraq
through fake parliaments and fake
elections. at least more successful for
a while in gaining the cooperation of at
least one of the Iraqi factions without
necessarily having to pay them to fight
by the day with
AK-47s against our enemies instead of
against us. Again, triumph. I really do
not see what justification there could
be of the operation on its own merits.
But if it is a principle that the United
States has to intervene in every country
which is misgoverned, where there are
despots, where there is torture, where
there is no freedom, then where else can
anybody in this room think of that we
might be intervening? For instance, the
site of the summer Olympics might occur
to some, but we do
not. nor if we're terribly tender about
the massacres of uh of Arabs by Arabs or
the citizens of Arab states by other
Arab states. Why is it that we accepted
as our allies in the first Gulf War the
state of Syria whose then president
Hafes al-Assad ordered his troops with
artillery to surround the town of Hmer
and shell it until everyone living in it
was dead. If our principle is that we
only associate with uh nice foreign
regimes and we always attack and
devastate nasty ones, where was that
principle then? None of it makes sense.
None of the objectives turned out to be
true. When I was in Iraq for the first
time, only a few weeks after the
invasion, people crowded around me in
Najaf and Kaba saying, and many of them
spoke English, they said, "Thanks very
much indeed for coming. Now, will you
please get out?" And that was the nicest
thing that anybody said to me all the
time is that how can anyone stand here
and say that this is a success. All I
can say is that it must take the most
enormous courage and resolution to
continue to stick to an obviously losing
argument.
Well, it's obviously come to the
actuarial. Uh, seems a waste of
Hitchensism in a way to just reduce
things to the balance sheet. But we do
balance sheet. We do balance sheet
properly.
Um, let me uh suggest some things to
you. First,
um, everybody knows that there isn't a
single clever person here who doesn't
know, is there, or watching this on
webcast who doesn't know that you can't
mention weapons of mass destruction and
and Saddam in the same breath, even
though he used them against
uh against uh Iran and against the
Kurds, wrongly described as his own
people within the borders of his own
country, and was continuing to incubate
and maintain the capacity to recover.
covered them. Um, however, for actuarial
purposes, let me just say that having
enforced the resolutions that governed
this question in the case of Iraq, we
forced the capitulation of Colonel
Gaddafi, whose stock of WMD, we had
underestimated when he came in and he
didn't surrender, I might add, to Kofi
Anan or Jack Shirak. Where did where did
Colonel Gaddafi come the few weeks after
the fall of Baghdad to say, "Okay, you
can take all my stockpile now and put it
in Oakidge, Tennessee, where it now is,
which is where it should have been." He
didn't come to
Kofan. Hold your applause, comrades. I
know I'm never going to get any from a
um but thanks for thanks for trying.
Um I sort of appreciate it. Um, he
didn't come to Kofiana nor Jacqu Shiraak
or or the prostituted uh equally
prostituted Gear Schroeda, the real
blood for oil pimps and prostitutes uh
who constituted the leadership of the
anti-war movement in European politics.
No, he came to Tony Blair and he came to
George W. I give up. Okay, let's have a
look at this big stock pile that Colonel
Gaddafi's got all this time. Um, it's
bigger than we thought. Much bigger than
we thought. We accused him of a lot. It
was much worse than we thought as it had
been with Saddam Hussein at the time of
Kuwait. Much worse than we thought.
Well, let's have another look. Where's
he got it from? Where's it come from?
It's come from North Korea and it's come
from Pakistan. Pakistan, our ally. So,
by walking back the cat, as it's called
in Washington, we discover from this
capitulation, the AQ KHN network, we
shut it down or at least we put its
leader under house arrest, at least for
now. At least we put the North Koreans
in the frame and they know we've got
them. This is the biggest
non-prololiferation victory there has
ever been for any US administration ever
in history. That's the first thing. The
second is we catch the guy who rolled
Leon
Klinghoffer off the deck of a cruise
ship in the Mediterranean who were
avoided arrest when he was caught had to
be released because he was traveling on
a a diplomatic passport. A what
passport? A what passport? A diplomatic
passport. What diplomatic passport? An
Iraqi diplomatic passport. Just like Abu
Nidal had been traveling on, just as
like every other terrorist gang you've
ever heard of in the Middle East have
been headquartered in Baghdad. We shut
that down, too. You think this is
nothing? You think it's nothing? You
want to sneer at it and say Bush says
mission accomplished. Sneer. Go on.
Sneer. These achievements are real.
There are four four reasons for which a
state previously sovereign may lose its
sovereignty, may be deemed to be outside
the law. They are four. I'll recite them
quickly. One, violations of the genocide
convention which we have signed. And by
the way, by all means, let's impose this
on Sudan. And by all means, let's impose
it on them for Darur and on China for
many other offenses, too. because just
as China has backed Saddam Hussein and
just as it backs Robert McGabby and just
as it's backed uh the worst elements uh
in Burma. So it has been behind many of
our woes in um the Middle East. So
that's the first thing. The genocide
convention may not be violated. We've
signed it. It mandates that you must
move to punish or prevent genocide.
Second, a regime loses its sovereignty
if it violates the non-prololiferation
treaty. Iraq has used weapons of mass
destruction on its own territory and on
the territory of others. Third, you may
uh lose your sovereignty if you give
aid, comfort, and harbor to
international terrorist groups. Iraq is
multiply convicted of this. And fourth,
for occupying and invading the territory
of other nations, which Iraq had done
several times, continued to do, and was
intending to do again. This is not
unfortunately uh the case with all the
despots we'd like to get rid of. The
cheap point that Peter ends with saying
if you if you going to do Saddam Hussein
don't you have to do anybody must reach
the critical standard I've just
mentioned the four great offenses
repeated flagrant gross and intentional
and and going to be repeated all of them
again. It was essential that we move
Iraq and the region into a post Saddam
Hussein era and the the woes that have
fallen upon us. The second thoughts
we're bound to have, the worries about
the the blunders that we made while
doing it. None of which I would deny and
some of which I know more about than you
could dare to know. I know things about
what went wrong that would curl your
hair. Still, none of these can impeach
the idea that we did it not too soon,
but much too late, and that only therein
lies our shame. Thank
you. Thank you for spirited debate on
our first topic. By prior agreement, the
second topic concerns God.
The proposition is God does not exist
and he is not
great. A historical note exactly 80
years ago back in 1928 Clarence Darrow
debated a similar proposition within
these walls. Well, since Peter went
first on the previous question,
Christopher will go first on this one.
Christopher, 10 minutes.
You mean you Okay. You mean you're ready
for another burst from Okay.
CH that's there's something wrong with
this coin toss business.
Um okay, let me see. I don't think it's
going to take 10 minutes to disprove the
existence of God.
Um the the atheist proposition is the
following. Most of the time it may not
be said that there is no God. It may be
said that there is no reason to think
that there is one. That was the
situation after Lucriccius and Democrus
and the original anti-theistic
uh thinkers began their critique of
religion. And I would just ask you all
ladies and gentlemen to bear in mind a
mild distinction while we go on. You may
wish to be a deist as my uh heroes
Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Payne were
and you may not wish to abandon the idea
that there must be some sort of first or
proximate cause or prime mover of uh the
known and observable world and universe.
But even if you can get yourself to that
position, which we unbelievers maintain
is always subject to better and more
perfect and more elegant explanations.
Even if you can get yourself to that
position, all your work is still ahead
of you. to go from being a deist to a
theist. In other words, from someone who
says God cares about you, knows who you
are, minds what you do, answers your
prayers, cares which bits of your penis
or clitoris you saw away or have sworn
away for you. Minds who you go to bed
with and in what way. Minds what holy
days you observe. Minds what you eat.
Minds what positions you use for
pleasure. all your work is still ahead
of you and lots of luck because there's
nobody there's nobody even Aquinus had
to give it up. There's no one who can
move from the first position to the
second. So I could and I'm actually
strongly tempted to I can leave it right
there. But then it's not in my nature to
um let off a captive audience so
easily. So I'll add a couple of things.
The reasons why I am glad this is not
true would I suppose be the graman of my
case. Some people I know who are
atheists will say they wish they could
believe it. Some people I know who are
former believers say they wish they
could have their old faith back. They
miss it. I don't understand this at all.
I think it's a it's it's an excellent
thing that there's no reason to believe
in the absurd propositions I just uh
admittedly rather briefly rehearsed to
you. Um the main reason for this I think
is that it is a totalitarian
belief. It is the wish to be a slave. It
is the desire that there be an
unalterable, unchallengeable, tyrannical
authority who can convict you of thought
crime while you are
asleep. Who can who can subject you who
must indeed subject you to a total
surveillance around the clock every
waking and sleeping minute of your life
I say of your life before you're born
and even worse and where the real fun
begins after you're dead.
A celestial North
Korea. Who wants this to be
true? Who but a slave desires such a
ghastly fate? I've been to North
Korea. It has a dead man as its
president. Kim Jong-il is only head of
the party and head of the army. He's not
head of the government of the state.
That office belongs to his deceased
father, Kim Ilssung. It's a
necrocracy, a thantocracy. It's one
short of a trinity, I might add. The son
is the reincarnation of the father. It
is the most revolting and utter and
absolute and heartless tyranny the human
species has ever evolved. But at least
you can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] die and leave North
Korea.
[Music]
Does the Quran does the Quran or the
Bible offer you that liberty? No. No.
The tyranny, the misery, the utter
ownership of your entire personality,
the smashing of your indivuality only
begins at the point of
death. This is evil. This is a wicked
preachment. So that's the first thing.
Second, it attacks us in our deepest in
our deepest most essential
integrity. It's an insult to us in other
ways. It says that we, you and I, could
not individually or collectively decide
upon a right action or right thing
without celestial divine permission. We
would not know right from wrong if we
did not have heaven's uh permission to
do so. Where else? How else could we
know? Our human solidarity, our innate
knowledge of right and wrong, our our
our acute awareness of what is fair and
what is unfair, what is just worthless
to us. These come to us also as gifts
from uh the great unassalable dictator
and
throne. What what what could abolish our
integrity? What could abolish our
honesty, our decency, our dignity more
than that? The second third,
uh, is a little more pragmatic. Um,
religion is our first, that's why I'm so
fascinated with it. It's our first
version of the truth. It's our first
attempt as a species. It's what we tried
when we didn't know anything. We didn't
know we lived on a spherical planet. We
didn't know that our planet revolved
around the sun. Uh, we didn't know that
there were microorganisms that explained
disease. We thought diseases came from
curses or witches or uh ill-wishing
or devils or dust devils. We know
anything from the childish, terrified,
ignorant uh origins of our animal
primate species. We comes religion. It's
also our first attempt at philosophy,
our first attempt at morality, our first
attempt at healthcare actually. But
because it was our first, it is our
worst. We now have better explanations
for all these dreads and we have cleared
up all of these mysteries. Yet we still
dwell
um and in some countries in some
societies not just dwell but live under
under a totalitarian regime that forbids
us to think about the progress that has
been made or denies us the knowledge
that these advant advances have in fact
occurred. So it has become uh where once
it probably was an aid to our survival
um a a really great peril to our
continued ability to live as a
civilized species. Thus, it seems to me
that in point of its uh proposing of a
totalitarian solution to what is after
all a real problem, to its ghastly uh
reliance upon the supernatural rather
than the much more miraculous, much more
beautiful, much more elegant, much more
numinous, much more harmonious natural
explanations.
Think how much lovelier uh Einstein and
Darwin are. Think how how how much more
uh elegant and persuasive they are than
the idea of the burning bush or the or
the or the or the demand that without
circumcision there can be no redemption.
Just just picture it. And then I'll I'll
give you one final thought experiment.
This is what you have to believe. Now,
if you're a
monotheist, we because we now know
things we didn't used to know. We know
that the human
species could be as much as 200,000
years ago. It did it become separate
from the chromagnons and the
um uh the rival
prehis could be as little as 100.
Richard Dawkins thinks 200,000. Francis
Collins who did the human genome project
who's by the way CS Lewis kind of
Christian thinks 100,000. All right,
I'll take a 100. I'll take a 100. Here's
what you have to believe. For 100,000
years, humans are born as a primate
species. Expectation of life, what? 25
years. For the first few hundred
thousand years, first few tens of
thousands. Infant mortality,
rife. Microorganism disease, terrifying.
earthquakes,
uh,
volcanoes, extraordinary, but and fights
over land, over territory, over food,
over women, over
tribalism. Frightening, too. For 95
96,000 years, heaven watches
this with folded arms, with
indifference, with coldness.
And then around 3 to 4 thousand years
ago, but only in really barbaric,
illiterate parts of the Middle
East. Not in China. Not in China or
where people can read or think or do
science. No, no, no. In barbaric,
illiterate, backward parts of the Middle
East, it's decided we can't let this go
on. We better
intervene. And what better way than by
human sacrifices and plagues and mass
murder. And if that doesn't make them
behave morally, we just don't know what
does. If there is a single person in
this room who can bring themselves to
believe anything remotely like that,
they convict themselves of being first
very stupid and second very immoral. And
thus it seems to me that the case for
divine intervention and for the
supernatural falls. and that we should
be glad that it's fallen. And thank you,
[Applause]
Peter. 10
minutes. 10 minutes.
Uh, yeah. Um, well, I I I I can tell
you're all enjoying the post Saddam era,
uh, which which we were told was so
good. I I I wonder whether an invasion
of the, uh, celestial reason regions
might now, uh, be in order, and we could
then have a post God era, which would be
of similar delightful quality. I am
amazed when confronted with this
argument, how little my brother seems to
know of that which he attacks.
how he
prefers to mock and belittle, how he
prefers to select from it all those
things which I think most educated
believers themselves are troubled by.
how he imagines that people other than
himself do not seem ever to have been
troubled by the things which trouble him
and nonetheless have come to the
conclusion despite all that belief in a
god in my case God call him by his first
name that belief in God is
nonetheless wise beneficial ial and good
not just for ourselves but for the
universe. If
only
the how shall I say the
flippant during tone could be abandoned
for a moment and we could discuss this
more
seriously. It seems to me to be
incurious to the point of
tedium to examine the universe and not
to ask yourself certain very powerful
questions. The first of which is why is
there something rather than nothing? The
second of which
is since we do not know anything at all
about our origins and must work out what
we think we know from extremely scanty
evidence that it would be unwise to form
absolute certainties on
this. Now the character of the book God
is not great which my brother wrote is
one
entirely of the jeering the mocking the
caricature the picking out of that which
is bad.
What I do not stop that.
Stop that. I do not think that this
Sorry. Did you wish to intervene? No.
No. Please telling him not to. You sure?
I mean I needed No. Absolutely. Stop
that.
No. Right. Um, that's that's the end of
the Christian charity for the moment.
Um,
had it been couched, of course, in a
more generous tone, it would have been
less fun to do. And who knows, there
might have been other consequences in
the bookshops. I don't
know. But since it wasn't couched in
that turn, that is what we have to argue
with. And I would simply say this.
First of all, for a while, I'm surprised
he hasn't asked it tonight. Uh my
brother would go around saying that
there was uh a question which no
believer could answer about what action
could no um could no believer take,
which an unbeliever could or something
of of that character. To which I would
reply, the question of morality is
utterly irrelevant to you. If you
genuinely believe that which you say you
believe, if you think that there is no
authority, if you think that we are the
products of random chaos, if there
is no reason for the existence of the
universe apart from a series of
accidents, then you may behave exactly
as you wish. Now in the case of
Christopher and his uh ally and
colleague Professor Dawkins, I refer to
this as luxury atheism. I know where
they live. They live in very pleasant
parts of very pleasant cities and they
are able to advance the theory of
atheism purely as a theory.
Well, I live in England and I don't need
to travel very far from my home, which
is not far from Professor Dawkins's home
in Oxford to find a large number of
highly practical atheists. In my
country, it is common, no more than
three or four times a week, to read
accounts of people being kicked to death
by youths aged between about 13 and 17.
It invariably ends with the phrase, "And
then they started kicking his head as if
it were a
football." These accounts grow more and
more common. If you venture into the
areas where these people live, you will
find a complete absence of any kind of
moral feeling whatsoever. A complete
absence of self-government among the
strong, among the healthy, among those
who are able to control and take
advantage of their neighbors.
Christianity and everything that went
with it have vanished from among them.
They are practical atheists and they
really mean it. In fact, in some ways
they're not atheists. If you examine my
country carefully, you'll find that the
worship of monarch, the slaughter of
children at the rate of 180,000 a year
in the womb continues. That the worship
of Mammon is out of control. That the
worship of Ashtaroth is pretty well
advanced as well. and a number of the
other pagan gods there way out in front
of the dear old Anglican Jehovah in whom
I attempt to believe.
All this seems to me to point to an
important factor in religion which is
why it seems to me that it is reasonable
given that we are ignorant of the answer
as to whether there is or is not a god
and cannot know why we might reasonably
think that it was worth believing in
such a being. If the universe does have
an order, if it does have an origin, if
there is running through it an eternal
law, then wouldn't it be a good idea to
try to find out what it was and to seek
to govern ourselves by it? Now, I too
have been to North Korea, and I will
tell you that I have the opposite
impressions to that which my brother
had. This is a country entirely run by
people who hate and despise the idea of
God and who have made themselves into
gods. And that indeed is what so very
often happens when people ignore the
very very earliest part of the Bible in
which the serpent says to Adam and Eve
eat of this fruit and ye shall be as
gods. This is what we do when we decide
for ourselves that there is nothing
above us. We destroy authority. We
destroy all the things which turn the
hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom
of the just. They go they are going very
rapidly in my country. I suspect that if
things proceed as they are in our
educational system and our trash
culture, they will happen pretty rapidly
in this one too. And then you will know
then you will know what happens when God
is truly absent. Not because he isn't
there, but because the only place he can
occupy lies within our hearts. And
either he is there because we invite him
and we seek his assistance in the
governing of ourselves or he is not and
we cease to be able to govern ourselves
because we no longer know how to do so.
There are many forms of morality. I'm
told that human solidarity is a way of
of running the world. Well, up to a
point it is. But the problem with human
solidarity is that it operates at
different levels. Now, when I lived for
some years in Moscow, it was folly uh to
expect anyone to hold open a door in the
Moscow metro. Big, heavy steel and glass
doors, they were too, because nobody
there knew anything about manners. They
let the things swing back in your face.
And if I ever held the door open for
somebody else, as I did in my naive
early weeks in that city, they'd look at
me as if I were mad. Now, something
similar has begun to happen to me in
Britain. I I'm I'm I'm walking down the
the the the aisle of a crowded train and
I see somebody coming the other way
struggling with luggage and I think well
I'll step out of the way and let them
pass. Well, increasing the people behind
me think I'm having a heart attack so
they barge past me. The breakdown of
general assumptions about what is good
affects the way that everybody behaves.
You cannot have a private morality and
and for very long if the public morality
is is declining. And I say there are
three stages of this as the whole is so
elliptistic. I will do what I want when
there's nothing but left and right. And
left is that way this way and it's the
other way if I turn around. And then
there's what you might call the
shipboard morality where there's port
and starboard and there's four and a
half but they change when the ship
moves. And then there's the universal
one which flows from the universe where
there is true
north and where there is no difference
ever about which is right and which is
wrong and which is the root of all
authority. The authority of the state
which places power under the law. The
authority of the family where the
parents rule the children. The authority
of the country where the people govern
themselves under a law which all accept.
All these things derive from that
understanding. Without it, we're lost.
Why sneer at it? Why seek to bring it
down? Why mock it? Why make silly jokes
about circumcision? This is far more
important than that. I really do wish
he'd treat it seriously for once.
Well, well, I I know it's easy to sneer,
but still someone has to do
it. And if you like, um, I will stop
with the, uh, circumcision, which you
think is a trivial thing. I mean, have
you ever talked to anyone or interviewed
anyone who's been subjected to female
genital mutilation because of God's
will?
You wouldn't think it, you wouldn't say
it was trivial or tease if you had, let
alone to the number of boy children who
die every year because of the covenant
the the hideous covenant that's imposed
upon them by Mosaic law. um which also I
might add celebrates every year in all
three monotheisms the decision of a
father to put his knife to his son's
throat because that's how much he loves
the
dictator. Now I find this wicked and I
won't have my belief called frivolous.
And any one of you who's prepared to
show how much you love God and
appreciate true north by holding a knife
to your firstborn's throat to prove your
devotion can stand up
now or be regarded by my brother as
someone who's not morally serious.
And now you see the depth to which now
you see the depth now you see the depth
into which religion wants to throw you.
Now my book does have a few jers at
religion because after all you know in
the in this veil of tears let's do that
but it's been reviewed very seriously by
many bishops many rabbis by the pope's
uh chaplain in Rome all of whom have
said as they've said about previous
pmics of mine that I make some points
that they haven't yet come up with an
answer to the answer the reason for that
is because they can't it's not in the
nature of them to be able to do so you
either believe ladies Ladies and
gentlemen, brothers and sisters,
comrades and friends in the idea of
vicarious redemption or you do not. And
you either think it's morally serious or
you don't. In other words, you can
either say, "Yes, I may have sinned
badly, but I can throw my sins on
another and he can take them from me and
die for me and suffer for me and take my
responsibility away or you don't think
so." I think vicarious redemption is the
most immoral idea in current
circulation. I could if I wanted to, if
I knew you, or even if I didn't know
you, I could offer to take your debt and
pay
it. It's been done. People will do that
for friends, for lovers, even for
strangers. I could offer to serve your
term in prison if if the law allowed it.
Say, "I'll I don't think you can do it.
Probably I can. I'll serve your term.
I'll do that for you." But to say, "I'll
take your sins away. You never committed
them. They're all washed white as snow
and clean as new. And and you can watch
me being tortured and put to death as a
lamb, as a sheep, and I'll call you a
sheep, and my congregation will be
called a flock from then on. Is a double
humiliation. First, it's a hideous
outrage on the scapegoat. Second, it's a
terrible insult on those who agree to be
called sheep. Anyone here want to stand
up and say, "I'm a sheep. I'm a lamb."
Yes. Good for you. Anyone else? Good for
the rest of you. Fine. Sheep you are.
Um, it's not usually that easy. Uh, now,
okay. Why is there something, not
nothing? Good question.
Why is the universe expanding so fast
now that it's just been discovered that
the red shift of Edwin Hubble is not a
an expanding rate that is slowing down
as Newton would have had us believe is
an expanding rate that is speeding up.
People thought the physicists thought
the universe would slow down. No, the
rate of expansion is so great now that
very soon it won't be possible. Read
Lawrence Krauss's piece in the current
scientific mirror. Won't even be
possible to work out how we ever worked
out what the big bang was. Such
nothingness is coming to us. We won't
even know where we were before. And in
the meantime, the Andromeda galaxy is
heading towards us directly. You can see
it in the night sky now with the naked
eye. And in five billion years, which is
in physics time, nothing. It's tomorrow
in physics. It's here. So the something
we have now is about to meet with a
great deal of
nothing. Some design, huh? Who designed
that? The question always is the same.
Even with without science, we knew what
the philosophers knew. Anyone who claims
this is a design must either convict the
designer of one thing, extreme
incompetence and noodling and futling
and
chaotic planning and or probably both
extreme cruelty, callousness and
indifference towards those whom he
summoned into existence and made to
suffer. These points cannot be
overthrown by any kind of casuistry and
certainly were not even challenged by
the casuistical efforts you just heard.
Thank you.
Peter, five minutes. Less I hope. um the
knife at the
throat was not used and that is the
point of the story. Why else is it
told the those one of the fascinating
things about those who who who seek to
sweep Christianity out of the society
and one of the things in Christ's book
which is actively repellent and the only
thing in the book which I found actively
repellent was a suggestion that
Christianity should be treated as a form
of child abuse and therefore driven out
of education.
One of the things these people do not
seem to realize is that if you were to
abolish it, it would not be replaced by
a blank
space. It is important to realize what
it replaced. That the argument about
that sacrifice was an argument about
getting rid of human sacrifice and child
sacrifice. then common that what we are
dealing with here is an immensely
powerful force in human emotion which
existed before Christianity and which
Christianity sought and seeks to divert
elsewhere. You have to give people hope
when they have done things whose
remembrance is grievous and whose burden
is intolerable. It has to be done. And
what other hope can be offered than some
kind of sacrifice? The arguments, the
very complex arguments about that
atonement are all to do with the
discovery. As I said earlier, the
attempt that we make in our feeble way
to discover what it is that we are
intended to do. but to mock them as if
they they were a matter of a a man
sticking a knife towards his son's
throat with the idea that this was a
recommended action in the manual of life
is not merely a misunderstanding. It's
falsehood and really shouldn't be
acceptable in in civilized debate to
speak as if something is being advocated
when it is actually being preached
against. And it is again this this this
failure of of of understanding of the
purpose of the thing. The failure to
understand that it has any good or
benevolent characteristics whatsoever.
When it does produce good
characteristics in the book you will
find that those who are Christians who
do good things are recruited to the
atheist cause. No, they didn't do it
because they were Christians. They did
it because they were something else. And
if if societies do anything bad then it
the the Stalinist state of the Soviet
Union is said to have done those things
because Stalinist communism was in fact
a form of religion. You can't win. It's
completely secular. There is nothing
that anybody can do which is religious
and which is based on a belief in God
which Christopher will think is right.
And if anybody does anything which is
wrong then it will be God's fault. And
there is no escape from this circle. And
I I think it's very well exemplified in
this in this misrepresentation of one of
the central stories in in the Bible.
[Applause]
Well, uh, my fellow, uh, sheeplike
Americans,
um, is it not the case that, uh, in the
matter of the Aid, uh, the Muslim
sacrifice or in the matter of the, uh,
Abrahamic sacrifice of Isaac, that the
first test the father must pass is to
show his God that he's at least willing
to do it. uh that his submission can be
taken for granted even to this extent.
Is there anyone here who does not think
that that is the grandeur of the story
as well as what I would describe as the
horrible sedo masochistic submission?
Only then only when he's shown yes I
will do it. That's how much I love big
brother. Only then is he released from
the obligation. This is the torturing.
This is even worse than the book of Job.
It's even worse than the
toying of with by the dictator of uh the
fate and emotions of one of his
effortlessly made creatures. Anyone who
loves this loves to be a
slave. Now on the moral on the point of
morality, my my brother has written very
well in in England and in indeed
elsewhere about the awful
nihilism and uh relativism that uh has
poisoned so much of our social and
national uh and collective life. And I
have more agreement with him on this
than perhaps he understands. But to say
that this is to be equated with uh
atheism is simply to misunderstand what
nihilism and relativism mean. And that's
very I think I can make this point
relatively simply. Um someone who says
uh that do what you will must be the
whole of the law. That's supposed that's
supposedly what Satanists say at their
ceremonies. By the way, Satanists are
not atheists by
definition. Their satanic majesties are
not non- entities. Um uh is saying uh is
giving themselves permission to act
entirely as they might wish at their own
pleasure. How does the person who says
God is on my side
act? I don't demand an answer from you.
I simply demand you think about my
question. How do those act who say God
is on my side? Do they not act as if do
they not do they not behave in Iran, in
Iraq, in Bombay, in Beirut, in Belfast
as if they have the right to do anything
at all because God has given them
permission? Yes, they do. You don't get
rid of nihilism. You don't get rid of
relativism by claiming you have God in
your corner. Rather, you make you make
it you make it possible for any torture,
any cruelty, any child abuse, any
nightmare of violence and shame to be
yours and to be proud of it, too. Now, I
have two challenges that Peter has
despised in the past, but I'm going to
repeat them to you, and you decide what
you think.
If you think that morality must be
supernaturally referred, that without
heavenly dictatorship, we would not have
a moral guide, you must have an answer
to this question, which I've now asked
in print many times, in public, many
times, radio, TV, any any number of
times, not yet an answer
to. Name me a moral action performed or
moral action recommended or moral
statement made by a believer. Name me
one by a true believer in religion that
could not could not have been made by a
non-believer. Name me one. Think about
it. I'm not demanding an answer now. You
have all
evening. However, you won't need all
evening for my corollery question. Name
me a wicked statement or a stupid or
evil statement made or stupid or evil
action performed by someone claiming
God's permission to do so. You've
already thought of one. Before this
evening is over, you'll have thought of
two or three more. The connection
between religion and morality proposed
by the believers in supernatural
dictatorship is thoroughly, utterly,
morally null and void. In fact, it's
worse than that. It it is an excuse for
and has always been continues to be and
will be an excuse for worse evil than
any secularist or atheist could ever
have permitted themselves or
others. Glad you got that
point, Peter. Oh yeah, I was just going
to say I mean I can think of actually an
instance of something which uh a
believer did and an unbeliever didn't
do. Uh which is that a few years ago I
resigned from my newspaper when it was
taken over by a man whose main business
was pornography. And I was surprised the
other week uh to uh see a copy of
another sister newspaper owned by that
same man uh being adorned by a column
written by my
brother I didn't
get I didn't I didn't get that bit.
Would you want do you mind saying it
again? I uh I don't mind at all. Um you
may remember I didn't I just didn't hear
it. I'm so I'm not trying to be funny.
No, no, no. I I I I resigned if you
recall from the Daily Express u about
seven years ago when it was taken over
by a man whose main business is
pornography. I was slightly surprised a
few weeks ago to find uh that uh a
column written by you appeared in one of
his
newspapers. But that isn't a response to
either of my charges, is it? I mean, you
ask for I submit myself to the
arbitration of the audience. That
doesn't answer either of my questions. I
by the way I'll tell you two answers I
have had the best two. One is an
exorcism to throw out a devil couldn't
be performed by a
non-believer. A better try than the one
Peter's just come up with, but a bit of
a tortology. And the second that I got
only yesterday from a very thoughtful
writer uh of a letter from I think
Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia is um could
John Dunn, one of my favorite poets
along with George Herbert, religious
poet, have written the songs and sermons
if he had not been a believer.
The answer to that which has kept me
awake longer than any of the other ones
is that I don't
know because I don't know how Very wrote
the reququum while being an atheist
either. But I think that the fact that I
don't know the answer to the second
question means that the answer hasn't
been proposed by the proposed answer to
the first one. U let alone by uh Peter's
lame attempt to complain about the fact
that my column is more widely syndicated
than his.
[Applause]
Peter, did you want to respond? More
widely and promiscuously syndicated than
however widely I was syndicated, I
wouldn't want it there.
Well, thank you. That concludes part one
of our debate. and as advertised. I
think it was provocative as uh we
anticipated. Part two gives you the
audience the chance to put questions to
the brothers. I think they're doing a
good job putting questions to each
other, but why don't we mix it up a
little bit. And uh if you'll come to the
microphones at the end of each aisle,
there's also, I believe, a microphone
upstairs, although I do not Okay, it's
back in this corner over here. if you
would please take your place at the
microphone and let's go ahead and start
since we have a queue over here. Let's
go ahead and start with you. Yes, ma'am.
Professor
Hello. Hello.
Okay, we can hear you. Professor
Hello. Okay, we can hear you. Professor
Hedgins, um, can you Dr. Hens, I heard
you correct someone in a previous talk
and tell them. Thank you, ma'am. Yeah.
Um, can you speak on what you see as the
relationship between self-interest,
enlightened self-interest and morality
and morality?
The the lady, in case it wasn't audible
to all, the lady asks if I will comment
on the relationship between enlightened
self-interest and morality. My line is
not uh that taken by um for example in
Rand
um that that that selfishness is a
virtue.
um on its own. Uh I don't believe in the
abnigation of the personality. I don't
believe in the horrible uh Christian
idea of of of massochism,
um modesty, self-sacrifice, self-hatred,
the endless confessions of of sin and
worthlessness any more than I believe in
the equally vile Quranic idea that we're
made not out of dust but out of clots of
blood by a by a celestial dictator. But
I think that probably we are innately
selfish enough to begin with um because
of the process of evolution by natural
selection that we don't need
additionally to cultivate uh our own
selfishness and that the the trick the
clue and the odd thing and the thing
that comes to people strangely naturally
is this um they understand about human
solidarity. I'll just take I'll just
give you two examples one from each
testament. Um the uh ancient Jewish
people of course never went to Sinai and
never were in Egypt and and never
wandered in the desert and all of that
is completely as everyone now knows from
archaeological evidence none of that
ever occurred. But the idea that um our
our Jewish ancestors got as far as Mount
Si under the impression that rape,
murder, theft, and perjury were okay and
only when told by tablets that they
weren't all right, uh felt the penny
drop or the shekele drop, um is of
course an insult to our decency and our
integrity. They couldn't have got that
far or been a people of any kind if they
had been under any other impression. So
this is innate in us and it is comes in
our solidarity, our humanity, our
brother and sisterhood. The second is
from the new so-called new testament the
the Samaritan so-called the man from
Samaria who wouldn't see someone just
lie bleeding and and suffering by the
side of the road without helping him.
whatever motive he had. And we don't
know what it was. He can't have been a
Christian because it's the alleged Jesus
of Nazareth telling the story about
someone who existed before he did. And
the only people in the story who we're
told about who didn't do anything for
the victim are the priests and the
Levites. So what the story tells us this
parable is you don't need religion to
behave with ordinary decency and
morality. And anyone who says you do
says that you need dictatorial
permission to do the right thing and
then you're a surf.
It's in my interest that people don't
suffer. I don't want I don't want
someone bleeding to death from AIDS on
my doorstep for not just for their sake,
for mine. I don't want that. Um Oscar
Wild in the soul of man under socialism
puts it very beautifully. He says
socialism would free us from the awful
necessity of living for others. Uh
George Bernard Shaw when he ran for
office in London said there should be no
more houses built for the working
classes without baths. And and it was
objected to him by the Tories and the
conservatives said why give them baths?
The poor are so ignorant and stupid they
won't even know how to use them. Uh
they'll keep coal in them. uh they don't
deserve baths. You're wasting your
compassion on them. He said, "I don't
want them to have a bath for their sake.
I want them to have bath for my
sake." That's the right mix of
self-interest and
morality. And it works too. It works. It
works. Whereas religious exhortation and
telling people, telling children that if
if they don't do the right thing,
they'll go to terrifying punishments or
unbelievable rewards. That's making a
living out of lying to children. That's
what the priesthood
do. And if all they did was lie to the
children, it would be bad enough. But
they raped them and torture them and
then hope we'll call it abuse. No. The
priesthood must get out of the way for
this argument to become grown
up. So two brief points. The fact that
you know something is wrong does not
necessarily mean that you don't then do
it as I think most of us are aware. And
secondly, it's all very well saying the
people uh who are unbelievers know what
is right. But how do they know it's
right? How what what reason do you have
to suppose that any action is right
apart from that which suits you? There
is none. And and and you and you can
have none. You may borrow with pleasure
uh the morality of the religious if you
wish to do so, but to pretend that by
doing so you're not borrowing it is an
untruth. And I I really it's it's
amazing how difficult it is to get
atheists to understand this very simple
point. And one other point about
threatening people with terrible
punishments. It seems to me to be fairly
evident uh looking again at my own
country that in societies which do not
believe in hell, hell pretty quickly
comes into
existence. You're going to clap that.
Who clapped that? Stand up. Who clapped
that?
Okay, we have other people want to ask
questions. Let's move on to our next
questioner.
Uh Dr. Hitchens. Uh quick question. Is
uh truth real?
And if so, how do you determine it?
Excuse me, it's my fault. I stepped on
your line. Would you mind repeating your
question? It was brief, I think. So,
does is truth real? Does it exist? And
if so, how do you determine it?
Once more. Is truth real? And if so, how
do you determine it? Okay. Well, having
attacked relativism on purpose, I should
maybe specify precisely what I meant to
say it's a famous line as you know what
is truth asked just conscious pilot and
did not stay for an answer. Well, it's a
long stay if you do stay for it. what
what I believe to be the case is that
there there is a difference between
fair-mindedness
um
impartiality even-handedness and
objectivity which is the search for the
truth and the willingness to say that
upon coming upon an uncomfortable truth
if it was at one's own expense meant one
had to change one's own opinion or
analysis one would be um obliged to do
so that's what objectivity means and I
think that while the The grail of truth
may not be entirely attainable without
the idea of it um and without the
obligation to seek it uh very intensely
and and very seriously one would be in a
rudderless world a world without true
north if you
like. Uh but the uh as Rabba Hel says um
the the um you the task may be
unattainable but that does not mean you
can give it
[Applause]
up. Rabbi Hell, by the way, who is the
author of the golden rule, which the
Christians so often claim to be their
own, uh, wrongly, falsely, lyingly, um,
and doubly falsely actually, because the
obligation to love others as yourself is
an unattainable one. And it's sinister
for that reason, because you're
demanded, it's demanded of you that you
that you do the impossible. Thus, you'll
always be falling short. Thus, you'll
always be in sin. Thus, you'll always be
guilty. Thus, you'll always have to
confess. Thus, you'll always be in the
claws of the priests. Um, that's the
trick. As it's said by Phil Grareville,
you're created sick and commanded to be
well. This is a sedo masochistic
relationship with the dictator. You
can't be right. You'll always be wrong.
The law is such as you can't keep it.
Whereas the the relatively sane
injunction of the Babylonian rabbi at
least is is what is repulsive to
another. Sorry, what is repulsive to
you, you should not do to another.
That's a decent rule. But no one no one
had better stand up and tell me that I
need a god to tell me
that. Peter, did you want to respond?
No, I love it. Okay, we have a question
up in the balcony.
Yes, this is a question for Professor
Hitchens again. Um, Dr. Doctor, fair
enough. On your uh your website and in
your books uh build up that wall, you
mentioned um the eliminating taxation,
freedom of taxation for churches. And I
was wondering what your thoughts were as
to how that might if we were to someday
do something like that, how that might
affect the separation of church and
state that we enjoy right now.
Well, um it seems a violation of the
establishment clause of the first
amendment that any religious institution
can receive any payment from the United
States government. I would regard being
tax exempt or taxfree as a disguised
form of subsidy as I regard the
so-called faith-based initiative to be a
surreptitious violation of the
same I I should say for sincere
believers that um there is a there's an
excellent reason why the establishment
clause of the first amendment was first
proposed. wasn't proposed just by people
like myself who who wouldn't go any
further than deism in their attitude to
religion. It was proposed by many people
who were quite devout and who thought
not just that the government must not be
corrupted by religion but that the
churches mustn't be corrupted by the
association with the state either. And I
think that's an equally morally valid
point. Um, James Madison, the co-author
of the Virginia Statute on Religious
Freedom and of the First Amendment and
the other things that bodyguard our our
our wonderful Republican secular
constitution. Didn't think there should
be chaplain to open Congress. Didn't
even think there should be chaplain in
the armed forces. If people want to pray
in the army, they can. No one can stop
them. But we're not going to pay for
someone to pray over them. These are
very uh tough questions but it must be
understood that these were part of the
very urgent views of the framers and the
founding fathers and it's our
responsibility to be discussing this
very seriously now at a time when
Hillary Clinton's joined some
reactionary
uh evangelical organization John McCain
to try and bolster her faith-based
connections. John McCain, a lifelong
Episcopalian, has this year, I wonder
why, said he's a
Baptist. And uh Barack Obama, Senator
Obama, has been caught in some big mouth
sinister windbag rock and roll horror
show church on the south
side. Religion. Religion is poisoning.
Religion is poisoning our election and
our democratic republic. And it's
time that we said enough.
If you want to be if you want to be a
fraud and a fundraiser and a and a
shakedown artist and a big mouth and an
ethnoracist in this country, try your
best. But it's in it's long past time
that we said putting reverend in front
of your name is not enough of an
achievement to do that.
We sort of agreed 200 or so years ago
that um we in Britain would not
intervene in United States politics. And
I I feel I
should uphold this tradition. But there
is one small point here. There's a
tremendous air of challenge and bravery
and uh and uh hurling uh himself into a
storm of rage and oppression in all this
stuff. uh and I have to say I do not
find the Christian churches either in
this country uh and especially not in my
own particularly terrifying force to
combat or one which is capable of
crushing a dissenter. However, I would
challenge him, for instance, to wage any
kind of campaign of dissent against the
dreadful tyranny uh of, for instance,
the theory of man-made global warming
against which it is almost death to
speak if you wish to be in any kind of
public life in either this country or
mine. But I don't think he will because
that requires a little bit more in the
way of how shall I say? No, I won't say
it. Well, as a matter of fact, you want
to do it? You see, I mean, since
I I've warned you before about this
clapping business,
um, since that's a challenge, uh, I hope
you won't mind if I speak again. It's
not really my turn, but I have just
written a piece for for free inquiry. uh
secular atheist magazine I contributed a
regular column to saying that it
disturbs me to see how much the green
movement is taking on the um linements
of a religion that that the human
species has an original sin in other
words existing
um uh making smoke um other things that
upset the air um that it will be
punished for this that uh an Armageddon
or an apocalypse is on its way uh that
if all don't understand this that there
could be terrible punishments and that
there's only one true way out of it. No,
I've already written that I don't like
the tone of this at all. Just in case of
course you don't have to read you don't
have to read everything I write. You
don't but you guys you
do. And next time we talk I will expect
you to have read everything I would.
Okay. Our next question.
Before I attempt to challenge Mr.
Christopher Hitchens uh with a question.
Professor Christopher Hitchens, thank
you. I I should say that I've taught a
number of your books here at Grand
Valley State University. My students
rever them and and so do I. Thank you.
Um uh you've been a very eloquent critic
of empire throughout your career and as
a young man I admired you a great deal
for it. Are you prepared to admit now
that the United States adventure in Iraq
is also uh an adventure in imperial
activity?
Well, and and and uh you you ask this
audience uh what a person who acts as if
God is on their side acts like and I
would suggest to you that that person
acts much like the candidate you
supported in 2004, George W. Bush in
particular as regards the adventure in
Iraq. Yes. Yes. No, I I quite see I
quite understand your point and my my uh
response would be the following. Um, and
I hope you're ready for it. And those
I'll do my best. And those who did that
clapping thing that they still haven't
uh is this everything the United States
has done in Iraq has been imperial since
1968. At least when the Central
Intelligence Agency claims that it
helped install the Saddam Hussein wing
of the Bath Party, follow me here. Not
just the Bath party, bad enough, a
fascist party with some Stalinist
inflections, but the Saddam Hussein wing
of it in power in Baghdad. That's how
the CIA claimed to have acted in ' 68.
The United States was still an empire in
1974 when Henry
Kissinger promised the Iraqi Kurds
American support in their fight against
Saddam Hussein with the backing of the
sha of Iran in Israel. um and didn't
tell them that he was about to sell them
out when Saddam Hussein and uh the sha
of Iran were going to make a handshake
over their dead bodies. That was just as
imperial. It was the United States was
an empire when Jimmy Carter gave a green
light to Saddam Hussein to invade Iran
in 1980
um and told them that with through with
American intelligence supplied by
satellite through Saudi Arabia that they
would achieve a swift victory over the
Iranians and probably recover the Arabic
speaking territories of Kuzan of Persia
for Iraqi control. that war. We reckon
I've been to the cemeteries in Iran and
in Baghdad of that war, probably not
less than a million and a half
casualties. I'm just I haven't factored
in all the casualties. All of these were
imperial. In other words, if the United
States is either imperial or it isn't.
If it is, it's just as imperial not to
intervene in Iraq and to leave the
status quo the way it is as it is to
intervene. In 2003, for the first time I
know about, the United States intervened
in Iraq on the right side. And I'm proud
of having advocated that policy. Okay. I
knew I wouldn't get any applause, but I
just want you to know that's what I
think is the distinction. No, no, hold
please. That's the distinction. Now
there was to not to intervene would have
been just as imperialist and that was
the attitude that Kissinger Skroft Bush
senior Pat Buchanan the other elements
of the conservative and imperialist
right did advocate because these are the
Saudi lobby who are the core of
imperialism in my hometown of
Washington. They said no leave Saddam
Hussein as the buffer state. We like
things the way they are. Don't you tell
me that's a non-interventionist policy.
Okay. And don't tell yourself that
because you're letting yourself and your
move on.org friends off much too
lightly.
Okay.
Voila. Uh it seems to me to be fairly
simple that to launch an aggressive war
uh is different from not launching an
aggressive war. And
if if you can't tell the difference to
the aggressor, if you can't tell the
difference, then uh it it's difficult to
know where to begin. Uh but I think I
was accused of casuistry a few minutes
ago. Uh and I think I can now return the
accusation.
Well, all right. Next question. Hi. I
was going to ask Christopher a question,
but it's Christopher now, isn't he?
Mr. Christopher, but I I getting very
informal. I think I'll ask I'll I'll ask
Peter a question and your answer I think
says a lot about honesty and your
honesty. When you walk into a natural
history museum and you look up at a
Tyrannosaurus Rex fossil, how does that
relate to your religious
belief? What how do you place that in
your religious belief? And your answer,
I think, is it'll it'll speak volumes
about
I I'm not sure how how it's supposed to
I you have to explain is there something
I should if you hold a fossil in your if
you hold a fossil in your hand or if you
look at a fossil in a natural history
museum you're you're a you're a
believer obviously that that has to
those two things have to come together
in some way in your mind. How do they?
I I'm sorry. I I really don't know what
you're driving at. I just don't Peter.
Okay, I'll let you professor Hitchens.
I'm sure I'm sure Christopher can help.
If you don't if you don't mind me
ventriloquising the last time we
discussed this and I don't hold you to
it, I got the impression that you had
some sympathy for the argument that it's
called intelligent design. I think the
questioner wants to know if you think
there's merit in that argument or not.
Yes. And I think you can't possibly have
not got that point by the way.
Well, go ahead. And if you say no. So,
so what what what actually is the
question? Settle that. I'll answer it.
Well, that's a that's a good question.
It's just a general question about if
you walk into natural history museum and
you see these fossils. Well, back to the
museum. Do you think there's any merit
to intelligent design?
To me, the two cannot. They cannot. It's
either one or the other. It's just an
honest question. One waddle. One watt or
what?
Give it
up. Give it up. Are we at an impass?
Forget it. Sorry. How can you believe in
a young earth and a god? I think Well, I
don't believe in a young earth. You
don't then? How then? How can you um
have a making statements or asking
questions? I thought it was a question.
What if we what if the question was, do
you think intelligent design is an
argument with merit? So pretend that was
the question.
So sorry it's these microphones. How do
you actually I'd like to know what you
do you think that intelligent design is
an argument a case that has merit?
Uh yes I think it's an interesting
skeptical current and I think that uh
it's it deserves to be discussed fairly.
It's interesting in my country you can
go into almost any bookshop and the the
shelves are groaning with the works of
Richard Dawkins denouncing the uh the
the the terrible people uh who think
that just maybe possibly the uh the the
theory of evolution may have some
faults. You cannot find try as you may a
single book which can give you any idea
of what it is that Professor Dawkins is
attacking. It's not allowed. No
publisher will publish it. No bookshop
will stock it. It seems to me it's an
interesting thing to be discussed. I
have no idea how the realm of nature
took its present shape. Nor has he, nor
has you, nor have you. Nobody has. We
don't know. It's it's something which is
which is which is open to discussion as
a skeptical current. It's interesting. I
think it's one of the other things which
is fascinating is the way in which the
the uh what what what I might call the
uh the Darwinist lobby exalts currently
over the recent court case uh in which
it managed to suppress uh any teaching
of the existence of the theory of
intelligent design. Now the case which
the Dharmist used to exalt over quite
rightly was the Scopes case so aly
misrepresented in the film Inherit the
Wind uh in which it was the boneheaded
literal Bible literalist creationists
who were attempting to suppress the
teaching of Darwinism and the
evolutionists quite rightly defeated
that in court and exalted over it. Now
they're exalting over the suppression of
what somebody else wants to say. That
seems to me to be a strange
transformation and a very telling one.
And it is the intolerance and rage of
the Darwinists against any expression of
skepticism, however cautious,
scientifically based and wellqualified,
which actually makes me wonder whether
the ID people may not have a point.
[Music]
Well, I mean there's the go there's the
there is I think there is a ghost of a
point there, but it's only this ghost.
is following that that evolution
occurred
uh
is conclusively verified by the uh
record of molecular biology and of the
fossil
record.
Um there isn't there has never been an
article in any peer-reviewed journal and
there never will be to say to the
contrary. However, that's only to say
that it that it did occur. how it
occurred is not uh something that's
completely consensual and the Darwinian
theory of natural selection is only so
far the uh least contested of those
explanations and Steven J. Gould for
example of whom I was something of a
friend and a great admirer and Richard
Dawkins who's also a friend of mine had
a tremendous disagreement still
dopostulous in the case of now Mr. about
punctuated evolution, about the steps by
which this occurred, but that it
occurred is not to be doubted. And thus
the the idea that there can be equal
time for the opposite theory in a
science class is as false as to say,
well, children, the chemistry period is
over now after the break, we'll be doing
our alchemy uh
class. Or
um your astronomy teacher is off today,
but your astrology uh alternate can
check in. nonsense. And when and when
President Bush says we should teach the
argument, I'm with him, if he's sincere,
because everything I know about the the
Darwin argument comes from two great
setpiece debates. one in Oxford in the
late Victorian epo between Bishop
Wilberforce and Thomas Huxley, the
inventor of the term agnostic about
Darwinism and the second in Tennessee
um in the the 1920s u even more famous.
But if the president wants that and he
wants his faith-based initiative, then
every church that gets a subsidy or a
grant must also teach
Darwinism.
Equal time. Is that what the president
wants? I am sure I know the answer to
that.
Thank you. Let's You're a fine American,
Christopher. I'm up here.
We need the microphone upstairs, please.
Try it again, sir.
Please do.
I have two questions I've already
answered while I move a third about
experience and religious experiences. Uh
what about both brothers? What about the
experiences of individuals claim to be
religious and then they proceed to what
the general a general population might
see as noble or worthy of other people.
But how would that be regarded? And
should that be considered uh random acts
of kindness or should they have
[Music]
Oh, I I'm sorry. I did not hear that.
Well, was that was that was audible to
everybody, wasn't it? You first. I I I I
really couldn't hear it. I'm sorry.
Okay. I'll tell you. He said, "What
about subjective experience? If someone
says I had a religious experience and I
went on to do a noble action, shouldn't
we credit that to religion? Would that
be a fair precy of your question sir? He
says
yes. I have an answer but I'm sure you
do too.
Uh suppose so I it doesn't seem to
present any difficulties to my position
so I think I'll hand it over to him.
Well, I mean the be one of the best
books for the unbeliever to read is um
is William James' varieties of religious
experience where which is by the way is
a a trope you come up against a lot with
CS Lewis, many other religious writers.
They say you who believe in the material
world and don't believe in the
supernatural. you can't account for the
the experiences of revelation and um
enlightenment and miracles that other
people experience and you you don't
understand the numminous in other words
and I I say that that's true for me I
don't um and I don't trust them um
though I do think they can be confused
with experiences of
uh
nature
um landscape
music, sex and love, the numminous in
other ways. But if these
experiences, the positive ones are going
to be credited to the religion account,
then so must the person who says that
God told him to go and get a gun and
kill all the unveiled girls and their
instruments. They if they're going to be
if they if all these things are going to
be charged, they've all got to be
charged. And that would leave us exactly
where the argument from design leaves us
and all the others leave where we
started sa I
don't if I could just respond very
briefly to that I don't think that's
true. I think a lot of time is wasted in
this argument by uh atheists blaming
Christians for all the horrors and
oppressions that have taken place in
history and Christians returning oh no
it was only done by atheists. It's quite
plain that human beings are always
capable of enormous wickedness and the
misunderstanding and misapprehension of
religion is is incredibly dangerous. And
I think that the the idea that either
side is faultless in this is absurd and
indefensible. But I would very strongly
argue that far more good has been done
by religious belief than harm. and that
great harm is likely to be done to our
civilization by an abandonment of
religious
belief. Sarah, next
question. I was just at a philosophical
lunchon at the University of Chicago
where they teach your brand of atheism
with morality in their theology school.
But they were congratulating Chicago
alderman on his life. And one of the
things that they cheered was that he had
spent several months with Trosky in
Mexico in 1928. They thought this was
really great and that a group of
atheists would cheer a man who' killed
between 40 and 60 million people and
having spent would now do it having and
having spent months with him and this is
something they look up to and this is
the top of the people who do this. The
Chinese who were atheists killed what
100 to 200 million people. They did 90
million people in one locking up two
provinces in the north and they preached
atheism and Trosky went and preached
atheism across Russia and then he hung
priests from the back of the train. This
to say that atheis atheism will kill
without any limit if it gets if it gets
into power anywhere. This has been
proved from one end of the world to
another. after Ethiopia where this is
this is this is your thing atheism will
kill there is no defense sir we need a
excuse me sir sir we need a question
please no he's got he's got made a
perfectly good question it's how can you
defend a I mean you know how can there
be you say that atheism won't kill I
mean if you bring atheism back in a
government it will kill as many people
no the question by the way I thought it
was a perfectly well phrased question um
to be an atheist doesn't guarantee you
against being a sadist or a nahilist or
a fascist or a Stalinist or a Mauist
though it's slightly unlikely I think
you'd be a fascist or a national
socialist but it's it's I would say a
necessary condition for enlightenment
not a sufficient one um and I'll take
your question seriously in the following
way
um the 20th century totalitarianisms
that are accused of being secular I'll
say something about each of them it was
a long question I hope you'll allow me.
I I'll try and condense it. Um to start
with the the original 20th century
totalitarian ideology which originally
called itself fascism. If in any account
you read of fascism historical account
you read from its origins in Italy uh
through Spain, Portugal, Croatia,
Hungary uh Slovakia etc. If you take out
the word fascist and put Catholic right
wing, it's the same story. There's no
difference. And if you add polit with
parties in political alliance with the
Vatican, it's the same. All of them.
Fascism is another word for the
Christian Catholic right-wing. In in
Slovakia, the actual head of the fascist
dictatorship was a priest, Father Teiso.
In almost every case, the regime was in
holy orders and or with the direct
alliance with um with the the pope
himself. That's a simple matter. Anyone
can check it out. I'm not going to
assert it now. I would say factchecking
and I would be as one on this point.
Now, that's not completely true with
national socialism. It's true of the
Nazi party in Austria and Bavaria in its
heartlands that it begins blessed by the
Vatican by a concordat with the church
by the Protestant churches also. But
it's not true to say it's a Christian
movement in quite the same way. It's a
pagan movement in to some extent. Um my
favorite example is this. I suppose uh
Joseph Gerbles was expelled from the
Catholic Church. He was he was the only
Nazi who was Why was he
expelled? for marrying a divorced
Protestant Magda Gerbles. You see, the
church does have its
standards. However, no, it is estimated
by Paul Johnson, Catholic historian,
that more than 40% of the Vafan SS were
practicing confessing Catholics. No one
was ever excommunicated or threatened
with excommunication for taking part in
the final solution. And that was because
of the alliance between the Nazi party
and the church on two main things.
Antibulcheism and
anti-semitism. Again, I'm condensing a
bit now. Brings me to the Stalinists.
Okay, you're Joseph
Stalin. You've taken over
Russia. You've been educated in a
seminary in Georgia. By the way,
please up till 1917. For hundreds of
years, hundreds of millions of Russians
have been told that the head of the
state is a
god. That the Zar is above power,
ordinary secular power. That he's and
he's the head of the Russian Orthodox
Church as well as the you shouldn't be
in the dictatorship business if you
can't take advantage of a well, a deep
well of credul and cervility like that.
It's your golden opportunity. What does
he do? Heresy trials.
heresy trials, witch hunts, miraculous
discoveries such as Lysenko's biology,
the worship of the leader from whom all
blessings flow. As I described, North
Korea, the most religious state I've
ever seen. Um, mutatism, this would
apply also to ma China with the same
background of superstition and civility.
Now, for there to be a fair test about
this, you'd have to do the following.
And no one I've ever debated with has
even tried it. So, you be the first. You
find me a state or a society that threw
off theocracy and threw off religion and
said, "We adopt the teachings of
Lucriccius and Democratus and Galileo
and Spinoza and Darwin and Russell and
Jefferson and Thomas Payne." And we make
those what we teach our children. We
make that scientific and rational
humanism our teaching. and you find me
that state that did that and fell into
tyranny and slavery and famine and
torture and then we'll be on a level
playing field. As it is, all you've done
is show that the idea of worship and the
idea of credul and the idea of civility
and slavery to religion is a bad idea in
the first place. But none of the Zars
and none of the Chinese
kings none of his
by the way the Russian the Russian
Orthodox Church always stayed with
Stalin. Always stayed with Stalin. But
they never killed 30% of their
population. Who didn't? The Russians
never killed 30% of the population
before the communists took over. 20 or
30%. No Zar ever did that. No. No
Christian Zar ever did any killing on
Well, no. Excuse me. They started the
first world war. They started the
pograms. They brought the protocols of
the elders of Zion to that was imported
by Tsarist secret policemen to national
socialist Christian gangsters in Europe.
How much do you think the export of
Russian Orthodox anti-semitism cost us
in point of lives and war? And have you
ever counted up what happened to uh the
wars in the wars that Tsarism started
and carried on? and the persecutions and
the famines and the tortures and the
starvation and the people who just died
of neglect. Come on. You want to do this
accounting, I'm here. I'm really here
for
you. or what the Serbian or what the
Serbian Orthodox and the Russian
Orthodox have just done in the
Balkans. The the most recent genocide
we've seen in Europe entirely done by by
Russian and Serbian Orthodox fascists
and Catholic uh
Croatian grinding a whole part of
civilized Europe into nothingness and
bloodshed for their filthy stupid
medieval quarrels. How dare you say that
any secularist, we who've opposed this
kind of barbaric stuff, are on all fours
with these creeps. Don't, you should
take it back. You owe me an apology.
You lose, boy. You lose, boy.
Please. Hey. Civility. Civility.
Civility is overrated.
Not here. It's not
Peter. Right. I think I just conceded
the point that you could attribute evil
acts to both religious and non-religious
people and I continue to concede it. But
I think that the answer that you've just
heard was shocking in its evasiveness.
First of all, the most enlightened
government that humanity had ever seen
in terms of its own self-conceit, which
of course is something that atheists are
very fond of, was that of the French
Revolutionary
Terror, which ended by executing so many
people that what is now the plaster
Concord was ankle deep in blood and the
executioners were too tired and
disgusted to continue with their work.
As for the Soviet Union in which I lived
for two and a half years of my life, to
portray the ideology and regime of that
country as religious is an absurdity
almost beyond belief requiring actually
the most colossal nerve to make. This
was a state which tried to murder God.
It was a state of massacred priests of
desecrated and demolished churches in
which people were brought
up with enormous energy not to believe
in God. Oh, there was no establishment
of religion there and no tax breaks for
no tax breaks for priests. Nothing of
that kind. A total totalitarian horror
of persecution of something which people
believed to their own comfort in times
of the greatest trouble and which they
had to keep in their hearts privately
and especially if they were anything
other than the humblest in society and
keep secret if they wished to survive
without being thrown out of their homes,
thrown out of their jobs or having their
marriages deliberately destroyed through
persecution. That was the state of it.
This was not a religious phenomenon. It
is straightforwardly untrue to maintain
that it was I have conceded. I have
conceded the evils done by my side. Why
can't you just simply accept that the
Soviet Union was an atheist regime which
hated God. Why can't you do that?
Because it would be because it would be
false because the Russian Orthodox
Church stood then as it did with Stalin
as it now increasingly does. Blackhowled
figures appear next to Vladimir Putin,
former KG former current KGB thug,
tyrannizer of Ukraine, uh, Georgia and
the Baltics.
Uh, replacement of the filthy
synthesis, the same Russian orthodoxy is
his official nationalist and statist
ideology. There was never a moment in
Russian history where the powers that be
didn't find that church convenient. It
may not have been convenient for you as
a believer to notice it, but I am
obliged to the truth in the matter.
Russia was not an atheist state. Wasn't
even a secular state. It was a
pseudo-religious uh state borrowing from
the practice of orthodoxy and trading
upon its teachings and its tradition.
And I repeat my challenge. You for this
question to be valid at all must propose
and point out a government that adopts
or state or country or nation that
adopts the teachings of of Spinaza and
Einstein and Jefferson and Payne and
that fell into massacre and tyranny and
you can't do it. And so you have to look
for 10th rate substitutes. It's an
impossible. I can find you a regime
which Spain supported which attempted to
execute him as a as gratitude for his
support and so can you. The the the
point is you you will not accept the
simple truth which is that the Bolevik
regime from its beginning persecuted
religion with deep and determined
violent murderous hatred and to maintain
that this was in some way a religious
phenomenon is an absurdity and the to to
to believe it is to is to is to reveal a
credul a credul driven by an unreasoning
faith in God. every um every every
modern state uh has had to go through a
period of declaricalization of one kind
of violence or another. Um the
Cromwellian revolution, the Henry VI dis
dissolution of the monasteries, uh the
wars in Spain, the uh the wars in Italy,
uh the French Revolution, which you
mentioned, they all have to go through
it. It's usually in in proportion to how
vile, how filthy, how cruel, how
tyrannical, how greedy, how ghastly was
the pre-existing clerical regime on
which much of this must be blamed. But
you can't say that the uh the test of of
humanistic, secular, atheist values has
been conducted until you've had that
conducted fairly.
Hitler's birthday was celebrated from
the pulpit by order of the Vatican by
every church in Germany till the last
day of his regime. Do I say that makes
you a national socialist? No, I
don't. No, I don't. I would know how to
if I was capable of a low blow, but as
you know, I'm not.
[Applause]
Peter, any last response? No, it's it's
it's obviously futile.
Our last question, invincible faith.
In in the last few years, we've
witnessed um Speak up. In the last few
years, we've witnessed many atrocities
perpetrated by
fundamentalists. And I'm concerned that
um we run the risk of letting our
responses fall into a
fundamentalist mode of thinking. And I'd
like to have each of you comment on
that.
I'm not sure I got the grammar of of
your question, sir. I must be honest.
Well, the the the the concern I have is
that how can we sustain a modern secular
response
to a medieval fundamentalist atrocities?
and and how can we convince our
politicians to take a secular modern
approach to uh thinking about these
things and educating the populace about
them.
Um there's something slightly faint
about the question I have to say.
Um I'm I'm going to assume I know what
you mean by fundamentalist. If we take
the best known current political dispute
in which this country is involved I
suppose and the oldest one and the best
understood it would probably be the
question of Palestine. Okay. Where
there've been there has been for some
time a conflict between two
nationalisms approximately
equivalent size of
peoples Jewish and Arab
um over piece of land about the size of
Wales
um with a great and quite just claims
emotionally just claims on both of their
parts going back quite a long time.
Um, for a long time now, the solution to
this very uh difficult matter has seemed
to many people to be something like a
partition, an an award of roughly half
each of the disputed territory. Not it's
not perfect. It's not great, but it is
the it is the accepted view of of the
PLO now, of most of the Israeli voting
public, of vast majority of American
Jews, of the UN, of the European Union,
of the international community. And so,
and it makes a rough kind of sense. It's
not brilliant, but it's it's thinkable.
It's not insane. Why can't we get what
everyone seems to want? Because of
religion.
That's why because there are enough
people on the Jewish side to say what
land split. God gave all this land to
us. All of it to us. And on the other
side doesn't take much to say you're
dead right about that. God did award all
the land but not to you. To the Muslims
only. And there are enough of them to
make certain there cannot be a solution.
And just as if that wasn't enough, the
mad supporters of Judaism and the mad
supporters of Islam, American Christians
to the
rescue. With luck. With luck. If the
Jews can be supported long enough, as
our rope supports the hanging man, they
can bring on the battle of Armageddon,
the thing we all secretly yearn for, as
all religions do. Totalitarian first in
their origin, genocidal in their
conclusions. We want this to be over. We
want this world to pass away. We are
pointless without that demand. We are
not humanists. We are
esquetologists. And hey, what could be
more wonderful? The Jews will bring it
on and those who aren't converted in
time to Christianity will be turned to
ash, as will everybody
else. So, what could be more heavenly
than
that? So, now you see why religion
poisons everything?
These congregations, these congregations
and their religions and the filthy texts
on which they base themselves earnestly
desire that everything we call
civilization and everyone in this room
be destroyed. They want it. They relish
it. They work for it while you're asleep
as well as while you're awake.
Coexistence with this kind of thing is
as impossible as coexistence with
fascism or Stalinism. The sooner we wake
up to it, the better our chances of
survival will be. Thank you,
Christopher. It's my unhappy task to
have to call the question time to an end
now. Uh, thank you very much Peter and
Christopher Hitchens for a very lively
and provocative debate.
told. Thank you, ma'am.
You know, many helpful people and
organizations come together to make an
event like this so interesting and make
it possible. I'd like first to thank Tom
Hos, president of Grand Valley State
University, for his
support. Also a wonderful partner that
we've discovered, Jeff Sber and the
Center for Inquiry.
Thank him for the financial support and
all the enthusiasm and hard work that
that institution brought to this event.
Two donors tonight, Bob Goodrich and
John Hunting. Thank you very
much. And wow, what a venue. Heather
Beretta and the co her colleagues at uh
Fountain Street Church for providing
such great services
here. Frank Stella and the Interfaith
Dialogue Association. Frank, where are
you? Thank
you. Doug Kinshi and Grand Dialogue.
Thank
you Grand Rapids Community College for
your enthusiasm for this
project. And most of all, the founding
benefactor of our presidential studies
center, Ralph Howenstein, who just
celebrated his 96th birthday. Thank you,
Ralph. Thank you all. We are adjourned.