It turns out the conifers, pines and
spruces and hemlocks, but mostly pines
and spruces, they need fire to thrive.
So often they're going to burn a
lightning strike or drought or
something. They're going to burn. You
know, I talk about which is lance in the
Sahara. Who would who would have
expected? I mean, what a great place for
Poseidon and Zeus to hide Atlantis
underneath the desert. If it was an
aquatic city, I think to look in the
desert to find an aquatic city.
Heat. Heat.
It's a nice Wednesday evening.
Rare to see Mike in the multiverse these
days. He's been busy.
Good afternoon everyone. here with Britt
and I would like to introduce our guest
for this evening, Dr. Joanne Ballard,
PhD geologist who has presented at the
Cosmic Summit as a member of the Comet
Research Group and we are very very
pleased to have her on the show. Welcome
to the multiverse, Joanne.
&gt;&gt; All right. Thank you, Mike. It's great
to be here.
&gt;&gt; Thanks so much. Well, I I wanted to
start off the show by just asking a bit
about your childhood and what inspired
you to become a scientist. We're going
to talk a lot of science tonight, but
take us back to childhood and what
inspired you to go down this path.
&gt;&gt; Well, that is an interesting question
since you're making me go back to
childhood because as a child, I wanted
to be I wanted to be an artist. So, and
and I am to some extent, but I thought,
well, I can't really make a living off
of that. So, uh, when I first went to
college, I started out in freshman
engineering and, uh, at Purdue
University and started taking courses
there, but I felt kind of overwhelmed.
Maybe, you know, it's a huge school.
There was huge classes, flunk out
classes. So, I felt like this is not my
area to shine. So I switched to the
school of technology and got a degree in
industrial illustration technology which
is a little bit of commercial art and uh
oh my we went down to the machinery room
and drew pictures of lathe. We did
sketches of the lathe. We shadow
perspective and that kind. So then I
worked at um uh Philip Morris in their
engineering department which was uh
interesting but I was looking more for
if I'm going to do art I would prefer to
do and this was like engineering
drawings which was it's a good skill to
have but now everybody uses CAD CAM you
know uh and other softwares so uh I
worked there for several years and then
I got married and started a family. So
stayed at home with the kids and
homeschooled them.
Then much later I did and I was on the
uh Atlantis rising forum way back and
there were discussions about different
things pertaining to paleo environments
and the delta oxygen 18 and delta oxygen
16 and it's like what the heck is that
you know? So then I got interested in
the woolly mammoth extinction and so
there was different people on there
talking about that and how all this kind
of happened in the lake glacial and the
stunger dryus. So
I became fascinated with that and as the
mammoths, the woolly mammoths, there was
an expert in the Netherlands and he's
still there, you know, Dick Maul, Sir
Dick Maul, and he's done uh different
shows on the Discovery Channel and
things like that where he went to
Siberia and they were they have the ice
cave and they were excavating,
you know, a carcass out of the perafrost
which I thought was fascinating. So he
invited me to come to the Netherlands
and so I went there and he showed me
around and I went to his house and
everything and and met Dutch experts
over there. So that was the start of me
getting interested in the woolly
mammoths and here is this professional
scientist that's willing to do outreach
and help anybody that's interested in uh
this topic in his field which is uh
vertebra paleontology.
So that was a great experience. And then
when I got the opportunity to go back to
school, I went to Indiana University
Southeast, which was closest to me in
New Albany and uh enrolled in the
geosciences department because that's
the closest thing you could get to like
how can I investigate the woolly mammoth
extinction and what happened back then
and all that. So uh I I had a head start
because my coursework at Purdue helped
me. So a lot of that transferred. So
then it didn't take quite as long to get
a bachelor's degree there. So I did that
while I was working there as a
receptionist.
And so then uh I was able to get a
graduate uh assistship at the University
of Cincinnati. So left the new Albany
area and moved to Cincinnati and under
the toutelage of Tom L a glaciologist
Dr. Thomas Lel.
Um,
I enrolled in in a master's degree
program there and master's degree that
took two years. We took a trip to
Iceland because at one point I was uh
helping out in a lecture hall with
another professor and uh he he was
talking about glaciers and he said, "Oh,
well that's Tom L student over there.
She'll know all about glaciers." And I
thought, "I have never set foot in a
glacier." So I feel kind of stupid, you
know. So whenever he planned a field
trip to Iceland, I thought I need to go
so I can learn firsthand how glaciers
work and what's going on with them. So
we spent two weeks in Iceland and did
all kinds of field work and it was
really interesting.
So once I left there, uh
uh I I
ended up working at the Census Bureau.
So I came back to the area where I live
now and I got a job at the Census Bureau
as a cardographic technician working on
an addressing campaign for the Census
Bureau uh on their denials every 10
years. We count everybody. And that
turned out to be a very interesting job
although kind of boom and bust. You know
they hire a lot of people and then once
that assignment is finished with well
then they you all get laid off. But
nevertheless, it was very interesting
experience. And then later I went to uh
University of Tennessee
with Sally Horn as my advisor and uh did
a PhD. The the advertisement was she
needed a research assistant and oh by
the way, you're going to be getting your
PhD while you're here. And so that's
that's what I right. And so while I was
there, you know, she kind of had it laid
out what she wanted done, which was uh
paleo environments work where I'm going
to quantify charcoal on cores that she
already had inhouse that a previous
researcher Hazel delort had done the
pol. So now I'm going to add the
charcoal data to this. So that was the
plan. And so there was a lot of fairly
straightforward as well as geochemical
data. we were going to put that with it
as well. Uh and
uh so I got the data and you know being
kind of a technical person I wrote it up
as a report and by the time we got done
it was like 200 so on pages and it was
supposed to be a proposal. Well you know
I've already done this work so I might
as well tell where I am and Sally's like
join this is uh this is not a proposal.
This is way too long. Here here's a
template. Redo it. So then as time went
on, sometimes she would be busy and I
would add notes and that before you know
it, it's 200 pages again, you know. So
here's the next edition. She's like,
"No, no, it has to be, you know, less uh
has to be 25 pages." Okay. Well, I had a
25page one, but then I added to it. So
eventually I did get done with a third
version, you know, with all this data
from six different uh uh lake sediment
sites. So what we were doing is taking
lake sediment cores and the deeper you
go the older you are in time and you're
going to analyze for different things
and and the core is about 2 in in
diameter and you take a meter at a time
and you just keep going deeper and
deeper until you know you typically that
that it's the bottom of the the pond or
the lake or uh that's as far as you're
going to go but typically we get to the
bottom
&gt;&gt; but when the you know so in the
southeast east. Those those ponds are
sinkhole ponds. And in Michigan, which
is where I cord lakes for uh the
Cincinnati research, those are kettle
lakes up there where it was close to the
ice sheet, the Laurentine ice sheet, and
chunks would fall off and get buried in
the mud. And then eventually when that
ice finally melted, then you had a pond.
So that's a little different situation.
And that's different from a sinkhole
pond which is where you're describing
really underground erosion where water
can wash away sort of carbonate type of
stuff. Is that right? Versus what what
starts a kettle bond then?
&gt;&gt; Well, a sinkhole pond is lime it's in a
car terrain which is limestone. So over
time, you know, there's cracks in the
limestone and then it dissolves, you
know, with the CO2 that's in the
rainwater. Eventually it dissolves and
you know underground you might have
caves in that form and and so uh if the
if that sinkhole pond gets plugged well
then you can have pond a pond and the
sediment start to accumulate and that's
what we as researchers want. And so we
do we take sediments from ponds rather
than just the soil up on a hill or
something because there could be worms,
there could be tree roots that would
disturb the soil whereas it researchers
consider that typically palms and lakes
are not as disturbed. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So that's why they go to those
repositories to try and get information
on what happened in the past using
proxies,
which means we can't we can't be there
to measure the temperature. So maybe
we're going to look at the NAT's head
capsules and we know that this type
likes that kind of environment and this
one likes warmer temperatures and so on.
&gt;&gt; And that of course is the biggest
challenge to understanding the past and
science. It's all about being able to
repeat your experiment. have someone
else reproduce the results. We can't all
go back in time and try to see what
happened. The best we can do is take
more measurements and try to discern
with those measurements of what was
going on. Um, I wanted to rewind a
little bit because I I remembered in one
of your presentations you described
going out to get the lake sediment
course. You said it was a team of
researchers and volunteers. You had
mentioned before you even started the
master's degree about a trip to the
Netherlands or being involved in the
Netherlands. So were you that volunteer
for someone else's uh research endeavor
at first?
&gt;&gt; No, that was my own uh I initiated that
and I coordinated with researchers over
there such as uh Bassen Hale and Jon Sev
Inc. And since they know that area and
they're experts in the field of paleo
environments and Bassin Hale is ao
palinologist so he looks at pollen and
botanical macroossils and so forth and
so uh I checked with them and I said do
you know any sites where I could look at
the black muso horizon and take samples
so that I can look at them. And this
came about because uh Han claustroman
who was a Dutch researcher that was an
expert on the black mats and was part of
the comet research group and he was a
co-author on that initial paper with uh
Rick Firestone and Alan West co-authors.
He had sent me samples from the
aenderect site and these are so what the
horizon is. They have cover sands over
there. And in some places, you can look
at a profile, you know, where the the
you have an exposed surface of the cover
sands and there's a black layer. And
that black layer has charcoal, soot,
sometimes like twigs and burned wood and
typically fused quartz, melt glass, you
know, all this indication of a thermal
pulse. And so,
&gt;&gt; yes,
&gt;&gt; I had analyzed samples at Horizon
that Han had sent me and there was a ton
of soot. There was wood that had a a
coating of silica, you know, that had
melted and it looked like fresh wood and
all kinds of things like that. Um,
I had a thin section made to look at the
sand sand and so you can have a thin
section made where uh epoxy with it. uh
and then uh take a paper thin slice of
that and then you can look at that under
the microscope and examine the grains in
cross-section and use cross polar lens,
you know, cross polarized light and and
all that plain polar light and and and
so I was seeing some pretty strange
things and and so I actually wrote to
Christian Cobberl and hey, what do you
think about this? Could this be uh a
microsphereral like Alan West and and
Rick Firestone have been talking about?
Look at these strange structures. So his
view was,
you know, fused quartz and things like
that could have been transited down the
river and just deposited it and they
were detridal grains. And so he kind of
was dismissive of it and I thought,
&gt;&gt; you know, well, this is one site so I
don't know. So then I came up with a
plan to like why don't I go back and
sample from different sites at different
geographic locations and then we'll
compare and we'll see what we find.
&gt;&gt; So that's when I got with Vasan Hal and
Yvink and others over there uh Case
Cassie I think. Uh and and so we took
samples from
uh a site near Amsterdam that uh uh Bass
Van Hal and Jon had worked on. So I got
samples from there and then so that was
around Amsterdam. Then we traveled to
the east side of Holland and went to
Lutterand and took samples from there
and then we traveled to the south and we
collected samples from uh Belgium.
uh and at from Lommo, Belgium. And so
now now I had three additional uh sets
of samples to look at. So then I came
back and used the microscope at
University of Cincinnati. Uh Orin Huff
had a very sophisticated microscope
there that with very high magnification
and you can see images of
&gt;&gt; No, it was just a regular uh microscope
uh light microscope uh but it went up to
like a thousand power and it kept you
could take pictures. So it was a little
tricky because you had to at that uh
resolution at that magnification you had
to stack your images so that you had a
clear enough view of the sand grain
because otherwise um you know had the
depth of field problem. So anyway, I
collected images from that and so so
there were uh interesting like so this
is the actual loose sand grains I'm
looking at to kind of assess what's
there and there were a lot of uh sponge
spicules
as well as charcoal as well as sand
grains that were uh had a coating of mud
on them because I did a scanning
electron microscope uh analysis of one
of those because it's like what is that
looks kind of like and it actually was
3D once you looked at it on with the
three 3D with the uh scanning electron
microscope. It was threedimensional like
it was a mud crust or something on
there. So there's uh when you look at
the Uslo horizon in the field, you know,
there's the the yellow sand grains
that's iron oxide coatings and then
below that you've got like the charcoal
layer where all the action happens and
this is the balling aller to younger dus
transition boundary.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And below that typically the sand light
colored like it's bleached or something.
So most of those Dutch scientists over
there consider it a soil,
&gt;&gt; but to me it's like it's kind of obvious
it's an event horizon. Can't you see
that? You know, but Basel
wrote a paper. I think it was in 2008
that said, "Oh, well, we don't need a
comet impact to uh to explain this burn
layer, which by the way is pretty
widespread across Europe." And it's
called a thinno soil in Germany and
Poland and Uso Horizon in the
Netherlands and Belgium. So there's this
widespread layer that is uh dates to
around that time. Uh although Han
Clausterman told me there was more than
one of them like was there another event
some other time you know later you know
maybe end younger drias or something. So
anyway there's uh to me that looks like
an event horizon but they want to
interpret it as as a soil. they call it
a soil
and I think the the uh the white color
underneath may be due to uh acid rain
because if you have an extraterrestrial
impact that's going to uh you know you
have that shock wave to the atmosphere
it dissociates the nitrogen the nitrogen
forms nitrates that rains out as nitric
acid rain that's a known thing
associated with an extraterrestrial
impact so um
that's what I think is it will explain,
you know, why why it's pale underneath
these uh burn layers, you know, the slow
horizons. So, uh,
&gt;&gt; is it also just
&gt;&gt; I was I was going to ask is it also just
underneath that layer because at that
time the burn layer has formed and it's
thin enough that the acid rain sort of
soaks down and can be underneath because
otherwise underneath would be before the
burn or am I understanding that right?
&gt;&gt; Right. Right. So, I'm interpreting that
as the acid rain soaks down through and
that may not be correct. That's one
hypothesis. And there is a paper out
there that I saw not too long ago uh
where they were saying that the Uso
Horizon was impermeable.
So I have to go back and revisit that
and compare that to you know to that
idea that I have of the nitric acid
rain. However, there was a place in
where typically you just have this you
typically have it just the burn layer
with different things. Sometimes it
looks like pete. So when we went to
lutter sand, it looked like there was
great bit of pete in that layer as well
as charcoal.
Um but there was a place at Llmel where
you know there was a trench dug and we
went further down and dug a new hole and
there was uh laminations the burn that
that brown was in laminations of like 20
22 thin very thin layers and there's
sponge spicules in there. So is that the
sponge sponges building up uh you know
one layer and then another and then they
die off and you know but it almost
looked to me like nutrient pulses
because nitric acid rain can serve as a
pulse of nutrients and you could get
algae overgrowth and that kind of thing.
So to me it looked like you and as time
goes on there'll be less and less uh
acid rain washing out of the atmosphere.
Eventually things will return to
relative but at the beginning it's going
to be more concentrated and then that
stack of layers which you can see in the
PowerPoint in research gate I've got a
picture of it. Uh it it's like a a deep
a deep brown color at the bottom and
then it gets lighter and lighter and to
me it looks like
&gt;&gt; the nutrients are raining out. The
nitric acid rain is raining out and
that's why it's getting lighter as you
go up in that stack of laminations.
&gt;&gt; Well, that makes sense. And to their
point about being, well, it's a layer of
a certain type of soil, there still
needed to be an event or series of
events that transpired that made that
layer of soil different, physically
different from the layers of soil
surrounding it. Whether it was one
trigger event followed by a couple
hundred years of of altered altered
equilibrium. Uh I mean that to me that
constitutes a different layer of soil.
So perhaps there's a subtle agreement
there, but I get what they were trying
to say was you don't have to invoke an
air burst. You don't have to invoke an
impact. So 61 way half a dozen,
&gt;&gt; right? So what he said, well you could
you can have he said you have a drought.
You can have a drought and then there
was people there and people can start
fires and of course they would be you
know uh paleoindians and you know the
whoever was uh the Aboriginal people at
that time they uh they would definitely
be using fire. So he's saying if there
was a drought you could you could have
this burn layer. But to me it's such a
ubiquitous layer over such a large
region. It's like what is the likelihood
that you would have that? It would
preserve you know to me it looks like an
event.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; So I think the event makes more sense. I
mean he's got a good point but yet I
think it's over too large of a region
for for that to be the case.
&gt;&gt; But I would agree. And certainly an
event followed by a a brief period with
altered equilibrium equilibrium far out
from normal that would constitute to me
that's
&gt;&gt; well and we don't know about the the a
second horizon I've hung clust mentioned
that but most of the time you just see
the one you know but
&gt;&gt; uh so but they have the characteristic
of s charcoal milk glass fused quartz
sponge thicules,
you know, and sometimes uh bright green
vegetation
could be in there with it be preserved
by the silica melt or something. But
it's it's quite interesting
&gt;&gt; and that does make a good case for a
rapid event. How else would the bright
green plant be preserved in that state
to be detected later on?
Well, if you have an anoxic condition,
maybe you can pull that off. So, and I
have seen bright green leaves in at the
bottom of uh lake mud in Michigan. It's
like, huh, you would think this would
decompose, but if there's no oxygen,
maybe it doesn't uh deteriorate and you
know, that could explain its
preservation.
&gt;&gt; Well, thank you for the synopsis of that
research. So taking lake bed sediments
which are better preserved than the
surrounding lands. Stuff lands in the
lake settles to the bottom of the lake
and stays there hopefully untouched
unless the lake dries out. Getting those
cores and analyzing them matching that
up with a chronological dating. And look
there we have proxy evidence for impact
around the younger dus time period.
Thank you Joanne. I I wanted to ask you
a question u ju just from reading your
research gate overview about some of
your work with Tennessee Valley
Authority. Is it all right if I ask
about that a little bit?
&gt;&gt; You can. So that basically was uh they
actually had an archaeology a group of
archaeologists that worked for them and
it's like oh I thought they you know
managed the waterways and the dams and
you know you had hydroelectric and that
kind of thing and uh
but they had an archaeology department
and they had to keep track of where all
the archaeological sites were along the
rivers which there's a huge number of
them but they would number the sites
according to the Smithsonian
Smithsonian's uh tromial convention. So
you might have a site that would be uh
uh there would be like a number for the
state. So let's say 20 is Tennessee. I
forget right now what it is. Let's say
20 is Tennessee. Well, then you have two
letters for the county. So KN for Knox
County. And then you would have a
fourletter uh four number uh number for
for the site name. So 20kn 1234
&gt;&gt; and so all this data had been dumped
into this database and it had to be
whatever you put in there. So people
would write a report about say 20kn 1 2
3 4 and they write it up and say well we
think it's this particular it's an
archaic site we found this that and the
other and you know so in the attribute
it it was linked to a to a map and so in
the attribute table you needed to
reference like the author of the report
and different things the lat latitude
longitude and different things that that
you could capture in the attribute table
but you also linked it to a database, it
could be queried and you could pull up
the information that way. So, that was a
fairly uh it was database work with
mapping involved and it was I liked it.
Some people might think it's a little
dull to sit there and input data and
format data and clean up data, you know,
but I thought seeing it was very nice
company to work for and they do good
work. TVA. Some people don't like TVA
because they use eminent domain in order
to like set all this up. So some of
those dams there is property that is
under the water, you know, that maybe
have been in their families for a long
time. And so some people are have hard
feelings about that, you know,
historically.
But it really helped provide uh a
economically feasible electric to have
that hydroelect electric power. Yes,
&gt;&gt; I appreciate that. I I wanted to ask
about that because I actually took an
introductory GIS class this past spring
and during that same time uh at some
point in February maybe we did an
interview with Dr. Greg Little who is
the the expert in the United States on
native mounds, native mound culture
across many many states. And in that
class, I went into whatever databases we
had access to and I tried to look up,
you know, native mound sites, native
burial sites, find some I couldn't find
anything that was exhaustive. I found
what looked like a few people had a side
project where they tried to upload some
data. I just thought, gee, if I could
clone myself, I would send a copy of
myself up to Dr. Greg Little and try to
get all this encyclopedia into a GIS
database. Um, and I agree with your
point that it is it's kind of repetitive
work. It can get a little bit robotic
when you're entering things, but it's
still a technical skill and we know as
scientists that there's there is a lot
of grunt work that goes in. It's not
glorious. It's not really glamorous,
&gt;&gt; but we get the credit hopefully with the
end product.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, I I think it would be a very very
good spend of time for some folks to
help Dr. Little.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
So yeah, counting all on a petri dish,
you know, that's fairly tedious work
work, but you can put music, you know,
it's very rewarding to see the graph
when you get done of like where are the
high points, you know, and there are
high points at the beginning of the
younger dus in say the Michigan lakes,
but also earlier. So it's like okay well
you know so Tom had said to me before
you do the research come up with some
predictive hypothesis on what you think
you might find. So okay so I'm going to
think okay maybe I won't find any
charcoal peak you know so that would be
maybe the null hypothesis then I'm or I
could say I'm going to find a huge spike
of charcoal at the younger dest or maybe
I'm going to find multiple peaks. So
what what will I find? So then I get
into it and I did find probably the
biggest spike was at the onset of the
younger dus in some of those Michigan
lakes and we cred four different lakes
&gt;&gt; but there was some early so then it's
like well did you have like multiple
terrestrial hits or that's something
else going on. So what I learned through
my work with Sally Corn more on the
biogeography of what's there and what's
burning, it turns out the conifers,
pines and spruces and hemlocks, but
mostly pines and spruces, they need fire
to thrive. So often they're going to
burn. A lightning strike or drought or
something, they're going to burn. They
have the those tarpen in them, those
oils that make them flammable. And they
need that trash. That's the duff layer
they call it underneath the pine trees
that has to be removed before the
seedlings could sprout. So a fire will
take care of that and then uh the cones
will open up with the heat. The
serotonin cones will open up and now the
seeds are released and there's the the
the soil is exposed and and they can
sprout. So, uh, pines have evolved with
fire and so you're going to it's normal
to have big fires with pine forest like
we see in the boreal forest today in
Canada.
So, it's like, okay, so then how would I
differentiate just a regular pine forest
burning from something really much
bigger? So, then you have to look for
other proxies to go with it. Is there
something that distinguishes this
charcoal spike from the others that will
make it stand out? And you also compare
your research that you've got chronology
to with your regular carbon dates to
what's in the highcore record or other
you know Marine Corps records and so
forth. So, uh, Penny of All in 2013
wrote a paper where they found platinum
in the Greenland ice cores at the
beginning of the underest. And they
said, "We think this is a global
signal." Okay, so there's your platinum.
So, where are you going to get platinum
from? An extra transfer impact or it
could be a volcanic eruption. So, you
have to be careful when you're
interpreting that you take into account,
you know, what are the possibilities of
where this came from. So I don't think
they have found a volcano that that
matches that that could have erupted,
you know, maybe Iceland, but they they
haven't found anything like that. So I
think uh those two options are there.
Uh, and and also I think the work of
Charlotte Green, she's been trying to
determine if the platinum came from a
volcanic origin or an extraterrestrial,
but I don't know what she has figured
out yet, but she was working on that.
So, so there you have that platinum
spike. And then you also have the black
mats of the southwest where they're
they're finding u I think it's magnetite
and the the sphererals and you know and
you also have from my work in the the
Netherlands and Belgium that appears to
be a thermal pulse you know because of
the melt glass and the fuse that's
another reason I think it's human caused
because the intensity of the heat in
order to melt the sand grains the quartz
grains and fuse them together or even
create milk glass. So those are the the
you know that kind of encourages me to
think that yes I do think this is
extraterrestrial
in nature rather than uh volcanic or uh
people starting fires and that kind of
thing.
&gt;&gt; That make sense?
&gt;&gt; Can you tell us about getting the ice
the cores from the lakes? So, you're
going out on the frozen lakes. You had
talked about this in one of your
presentations, maybe had a picture. Uh
what what is the experience like going
out on the lake? It's frozen. How do you
get it back safely?
&gt;&gt; Right. So, in Michigan, you can go out
in a frozen lake, and this is
advantageous because it it's flat, it's
level, and if you know it's six inches
thick of ice, you know, you can even
drive a vehicle out on there. But we
took sleds. So we have plastic sleds,
loaded all the equipment and took it out
there. And so uh of the four lakes that
we cord, one was like a at a state park,
one was uh at a county park and two were
on private land. And so Don Simons, a
local archaeologist,
uh he helped us get access to those two
private lakes, which is excellent
because nobody else had data on those
lakes and so they had not been bothered
or anything. and slack lake was quite
large you know so uh and swift lake was
smaller so slack and swift the key thing
about those is when the when the paper
came out Rick Firestone's paper had just
come out in 2007 here I am at University
of Cincinnati in 2008 and it's like well
you know if we're going to test their
hypothesis we should go near the Gany
site in Michigan so those two lakes were
the closest lakes to the Gany site where
Don Simons had found all these these uh
arrow heads and stone tools and so forth
and it's like well we know people were
there and so why don't we uh go there
and core those lakes. So that was uh the
point of doing that and uh so I think we
started at a slack lake and because
they're on private land it was not the
easiest to get to. So, we had to park up
near the person's house and then go down
a big hill with all our equipment. We
used a Livingston cing device. So, we
all had to pull those sleds out and you
take an augur and you make a hole. You
know, you you're trying to figure out
where is the um the deepest part of the
lake. And so, for some of the commercial
the public lakes, you can access
bometric maps of all those. And and so
that's helpful. But for these two, I'm
not sure had that. But anyway, we
augured some holes and figured out where
we wanted to core. Then we set up the
Livingston cer, which is a 2-in
diameter, and it had pneumatic assist.
The one that Toml has has pneumatic
assist, which helps
&gt;&gt; pull it back up.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; You know, so uh you're going to um put
your cing device down into the mud. And
we don't care about the, you know, the
the lake hollene. We're mo we were
interested in uh the the uh lake
glacial.
&gt;&gt; So we went down until we hit like sand
and gravel. We just you keep going. So
you go through the squishy stuff and
then you start collecting the cores. And
you when you push them out of uh that
that uh tube, you have to make sure that
it's on this little platform you've got
made of like sand or plexiglass that
sits up about 2 in. And you put down um
uh uh saran wrap and you extrude out
mud. And you better make sure that you
know which end is down and which end is
up or you're going to have a real mess
when you get back to the lab. So
whatever the the cing device it it's
pointing away. So whatever is pointing
away is down because it came up out of
the lake and then onto that little
platform. So the person wraps up that uh
uh the saran wrap on in the mud and then
you have like PVC pipe which has been
cut to meter length and then cut split
lengthwise. So now you have two shells,
two half shells of the PVC pipe and you
put your sausage or mud that's been
wrapped up real nice in the saran wrap
and then you put the the lid on it and
you tape it up and then you label it
slack lake and whatever depth which Tom
l would know how many rods he put down
how deep we are you would tell let's say
it's 1,200 to,300 meters below the ice
platform you also have to like figure
the depth So the water and all that
&gt;&gt; of course
&gt;&gt; and then and then you set that aside and
then you go down another meter and you
get another one
&gt;&gt; and then you label that. This is 13
to400
uh uh centimeter centimeter depth. I may
have said meter before but centimeters
uh and you continue until you uh hit
resistance which would be the sand or
the gravel at the bottom of that kettle
lake. And then typically we we offset
maybe a meter away. We we uh augur
another hole and we go back down in and
we get uh another set of cores that's
offset by uh half uh meter. That way
where the break in the core is, you
typically lose some of that material. So
now if you get a second set, you'll
still be able to get all the data all
the way down.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So there's your two sets of core.
If if everything goes well, which it did
not at Swift Lake, which was the next
one. So we got our cores at Slack Lake,
that's great. And so in the afternoon,
we went to Swift Lake, but something
went wrong with the equipment. And so we
had issues. We had to leave and go to
Home Depot or something and get parts
and come back. And so that one we had uh
confusion on. We went back at the same
depth, I think. And so once we got back
to the the lab, it's like, okay, you're
looking at the data and you know,
because we went back in the same hole, I
think the sediment was kind of disturbed
and we have to sort that out.
&gt;&gt; That's exactly what I was about to bring
up. So the first thought that I had when
you were describing that process is you
better get the drill back down there
quick because yeah, it's frozen, but if
you wait too long, things are going to
start to squeeze in and you'll be
influencing that very next layer. Now,
if you can pull it out, label it, and go
right back in when we're frozen, I don't
think you have to worry. But if you had
to get off the lake and go to Home
Depot,
I think the data would be off.
&gt;&gt; No, actually, the mud's not frozen.
&gt;&gt; The mud's not frozen because it's just
just the top layer. You've got that
platform of mud. Then underneath that,
you've got the water column. So maybe
the water column is, you know, uh 10
mters deep. And then and then you've got
the water the mud water interface and
that's what you're going to go down into
so it's not frozen.
So you don't have to worry about that.
And we have
&gt;&gt; in that case
&gt;&gt; we had a kind of a channel or something
to help guide so that you would try and
get back in the same hole so you could
go deeper and
&gt;&gt; you know but you also had a rod to
measure. You'd add a rod if you want to
go a meter deeper and then you you put
that down back down hopefully in the
same hole, but you know, so that's how
it's done. So no, you don't have to
worry about the freezing, but then it's
like you've lost track. You go rhythm
when you're in the field of what you're
and now we had to stop everything and go
do that. Come back and okay, where were
we? And that kind of thing and start
over.
&gt;&gt; I know the feeling. Going uh back to
your
&gt;&gt; Sorry. Yes. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I was just to your mound builder
thing and Greg Little and so was he
trying to do a map of mounds? Someone's
probably done that, right?
&gt;&gt; He's got an encyclopedia.
&gt;&gt; GIS. You were trying.
&gt;&gt; As far as I know, he's got
&gt;&gt; Yes. Not GIS. That's right. Not
electronic.
So that's where you were going to try
and that as a project maybe.
&gt;&gt; Sorry to bounce around, but I'm
following with the ice scores. And
you're right. That's that was foolish of
me to think that the water is obviously
liquid once you punch through the top of
the lake. Well, you
if you haven't done it, it's all it's
all like quite an experience to figure
out like these important things like
which end is up and it's like oh if if
this was my first time and I had like a
novice with me I would like be
on them about and and then you better
label that little platform which end is
up so that you know if if you're looking
doing something else that person has a
guideline to kind of minimize it you you
know, because it's a lot of work and
expense to be out in the field. So, you
want to try and minimize the errors that
can happen.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
So, we've got a set of sediment samples
from the lake beds and we're taking them
back. We've got them back to the lab and
we kept them all upright. How do you
start finding the point? Hopefully, the
two cores match.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, no, they're not they're
not upright. They're laying horizontal
and we loaded them in the truck.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Probably in boxes or something because
they're they're fairly thick. They're
they're not squishy. You know, once you
get down below meter of mud, it's not
squishy. If you want to do historical uh
analysis of uh events or something and
and you want the more recent mud method
like a Bolivian core or something or a
freeze fall kind of a freezection
where you use liquid nitrogen
to try and collect it intact because
otherwise you'd have a keeping all that
relative. So anyway, we consolidated
sediment. So it's okay to lay that
sideways. It's not going to move around
or anything. So they transport all of
these PVC pipes with the in them back to
the uh lab. Get them in order like okay
depthwise you off and you're looking and
you them lengthwise. You split split
them mud core lengthwise. And so now you
have two and one of them you're going to
archive and one of them you're going to
sample. And so you're going to do that
for each of them. So then you get your
second parallel core and you're also
going to split them and and you're going
to look for features that you can match
up. So maybe maybe there's this light
lamination in this particular depth that
you'll be able to match up. You know
when uh you're comparing the two sets of
cores, you can say, "Oh yeah, that goes
with that."
you know, there other features typically
and and so I think at uh Swift Lake
there was some floating var
that's great because that's a annual uh
winter summer layer and then you could
also count as well as getting a
radiocarbon date you could also count
the years and then that would help you
have reassurance that your radiocarbon
date was good.
So, but they weren't continuous bars, so
that didn't help. But nevertheless, it's
it was a feature that you could look at
and and you might see it in both sets of
cores, and that helps guide you to
matching things up.
&gt;&gt; So, that's what we do. And then you're
going to put those back in the the
cooler. You keep them in the cooler to
preserve them and so they don't dry out
and everything. And then when you're
working on them, you take out your half
that you're going to work on. And so
let's say I'm going to work on a meter
and I'm going to do charcoal analysis.
For that I was I used two different
analyses. At the beginning I was uh not
really sure what I was doing. So I would
take uh 4 cm long strips, put that in a
beaker with some peroxide.
Well, now I know that that represents
probably a couple of hundred years. So
that's not an ideal way to do it, but
that was a way to start out and and
learn.
And uh so you would put that with the
hydrogen peroxide, put that in uh uh the
the oven so that to accelerate the
reaction of bubbling and everything. And
then you would rinse it through the sie
and uh 125 micron sie is what I used.
And then hopefully you're going to be
able to count the charcoal. There's many
things that look like charcoal. You
might have little black grains that are
minerals. You might have insect parts.
You might have organic parts. You could
have pyite
uh or or gregite, different things that
so you would use a probe when you're
checking. You'd use a a metal probe to
kind of like, oh, you know, that looks
like charcoal. And then you touch it and
if it's hard as a rock and you can't
crunch it, it's not. And then charcoal
has a certain luster, you know, that
helps you in some cases. In other cases,
it's just more opaque, you know, like
it's a burned piece of grass or
something that might be a little
different. So, uh, then later I I went
to Kathy Whitlock's lab to kind of vet
my process of my methodology, like,
okay, what does she do? And and so,
because Tom Law is a glaciologist, he's
not, you know, a charcoal expert, he's a
sedimentologist. So this was also new
for him. So he said, "Well, you could go
uh uh spend a week with Kathy Whitlock
and see how she does it." Well, she used
uh household bleach. So she would take
two cc's at one depth, you know, so a
centimeter. She'd take two cc's, put
that in a beaker with 50 milliliters of
household bleach, 50 milliliters of this
sudsing agent called sodium
hexamephosphate.
leave that sie for 24 hours and then
rinse it through the sieve. So, it was
interesting to do those two processes
because the bleach pretty much dissolves
anything organic and uh even even fish
vertebra. You'd see a part of a fish
fish vertebra and it's like, oh, you
know, so it was much easier to count the
charcoal. However,
in the other method with the hydrogen
peroxide, I was seeing all kinds of
interesting things like uh Daphnneia,
the water flea, we'd see the egg cases.
I would see uh uh mites and different
things that you wouldn't get to see
using the bleach method, but I guess
that could be considered a distraction.
But those would be other clues that
could help you like do interpretations
as you learn more about uh the the other
creatures and instead of just charcoal,
you're looking at a multi-roxy approach
if if you know enough about those
things. And I would often reach out to
experts like um Eric Grim. I asked Eric
Grim for help on some of the
interpretations like do you know what
this is? this weird thing and I'm seeing
a lot of them and he said that's
Daphnneia the water flea they're egg
cases so it's like okay so you know the
they must that must tell us something
about the environment you know but at
that time I was mostly focused on the on
the charcoal and and getting that
information
&gt;&gt; you were focused on that data
&gt;&gt; you did not limit yourself to the people
that were immediately within arms reach
you were reaching out to people that
were experts in that so you were far
reaching in in spite of that.
&gt;&gt; Right.
Right. Because I was curious. It's like,
"Oh, I have a feeling this could be a
clue and it could help us, you know, but
but still I have to Tom LOL is like
Joanne focus focus, you know, but but
still it's like how does the water flee
live and what what are they, you know,
what do they need to be happy and you
know that could like help us interpret
more about, you know, so I got that
opportunity when I went to Sally's lab
because she's a palinologist and a
charcoal person. She was more about what
are those other things we're seeing, you
know, in in the sample, you know, and
and also data from Hazel Delort. She not
only looked at the pollen, she was also
looking at macro fossils, maybe she
found a piece of she found pine needles,
and she found other things, seeds and
whatnot, and she would report those in
with her uh uh pollen diagrams.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So we were talking about the
sampling, you know, the sampling
techniques and whatnot. So
&gt;&gt; uh okay, so the um two samples one meter
apart, hopefully those match. If they
don't match up reasonably well, then
there was some tumultuous things going
on in that lake. But let's say that the
two samples do match. How do we go about
finding at which point in these two
samples does that match up with the ice
like the Greenland ice score? How do we
match the lake sediment up to the larger
paleoclimate record? That was the next
step.
So that's where you have to find
something to raid your carbon date. And
so in a lake, uh maybe you can find if
you're lucky, you can find a le if you
know there was a lot of Daphnneia the
waterflea egg cases. Well, okay, if I
accumulate enough of those, maybe I have
enough mass to get a radioarbonate.
However, that is an aquatic uh creature
and so they're getting their CO2 from
the water. And so that could include
limestone that's dissolved in the water
and then you'd get a falsely old date.
So we would prefer to have something
that is terrestrial. And for instance, I
found a cottonwood leaf in in one of the
um
uh cores. And so that was perfect
because that's a terrestrial, that's a
tree, and you know, but oftentimes you
don't get that. So, in a worst case
scenario, um I think it was Lake 16,
which was the county lake in Michigan
that we went to,
&gt;&gt; uh uh there was something really good I
found to radioarbon date, and I sent it
to get the date and starting out you you
try and get a a something to date that's
a little higher up and something that's
lower. So now you have a span of time
and you can interpolate and it won't be
perfect but it gives you a span of time
between those two points. So for one of
those upper or lower points I have found
something in lake 16 that was like
really exciting. Maybe it was a leaf or
something. Send it off to the radioarbon
uh lab and they wrote back and said oh
sorry uh you know because they combust
whatever it is and they capture the CO2
and they measure it somehow. And so they
said, "Oh, sorry. The glass broke and
the CO2 was lost to the atmosphere."
So, too bad you don't get the radioarbon
day cuz there was an accident.
So, it's like, my gosh, it's not, you
know, it's hard to find a terrestrial
some something terrestrial to
radiocarbon date. Is if there's nothing
else there, you do a bulk date.
And people uh some scientists kind of
look down their noses at bulk dates, but
it depends on what is the level of
calcium carbonate in the lake. And we do
a loss on ignition test uh to gather
that data. How much what percent is
organic? What percent is limestone or
calcium carbonate? What percent is
everything else? You know, silica and
whatnot.
&gt;&gt; So we can have some idea.
When you say bulk, how far are we going?
Like bulk the entire meter, multiple
meters, like how far
&gt;&gt; bulk just means bulk just means you
don't have a leaf, you don't have a
twig. You're just taking the sediment.
So maybe you're going to take a 1 cc
just just the sediment and that's what
we're going to analyze for the organics
that might be within that,
&gt;&gt; but you also could be getting the
calcium carbonate. So sometimes you
might be a thousand years off but it
gives you some idea. So it's not ideal
but the nothing.
So that's once you get those dates now
you can compare that. That's how we
would know if if we let's see let's say
we have the leaf and we get a date of uh
12,800 for the leaf. Well, then we can
say at that point or close to that point
that's going to match up with that
platinum spike in the Greenland ice core
that Petty has found.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; So, it's the the how you link to other
records.
So, in the Greenland ice cores, those
are varss and so they actually count
those and they figure they're they're
not off by that much. Maybe they're off
by 25 years over thousands of years.
So they they're pretty confident that
there's not big that big of an error
rate with that.
&gt;&gt; That makes sense. Well, I appreciate
that because it highlights some of the
challenges in paleo dating, getting
local samples. We think going back
10,000 years. Yeah, that's a lot. But
you need to match the 10,000 year record
to the 100,000year record if at all
possible. Um it's not a simple task.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Right. And some of those lakes in
Michigan went back to maybe 16,000
kettle lakes. We
dates it went back as you know about 16.
&gt;&gt; So that means that that cattle lake was
exposed and forming and the lower tide
ice sheet had withdrew from that area
which was close to Flint, Michigan
around, you know, 16,000 years ago.
&gt;&gt; That makes sense.
Very cool. Well, thank you. We're we're
coming up on the hour mark, so we've got
a few questions left. We couldn't we
couldn't end the interview without a
little bit of discussion on Atlantis. Of
course, Atlantis was the big topic at
Cosmic Summit. There was the panel.
What's the latest on your on your
Atlantis endeavors?
&gt;&gt; Okay. So Atlantis and that was uh that
field trip was organized by Holden Zang
at the univers of Tulsa and he's a
petroleum engineer but he also you know
is a a side interest he's very
interested in the the green Sahara and
he's got that book the green Sahara now
and we know that the Sahara used to be
green some 5,000 to maybe 13,000 years
ago it was the African humid period and
you know it's quite remarkable that you
know it was green and now it's a desert.
I mean it's just absolute desert. So it
was quite a interesting uh experience to
go there. So we had drilled down about
uh 25 ft using these concrete collars
that were about 5t high and 10 ft by 10
ft. And you would set them on the sand
and they would dig out with a back hoe
and then the thing would sink down in
the sand and then they put another one
on top and they keep to hold the sand
back as you're trying to get down there
and dig. This is the method they used.
So there is um there is a map online
where you can look at the depth of the
sand, how how high it is above sea
level, and I can send that to you if you
want. So in the area that we went to
which is Nefta uh and Tuzure those two
towns are close to where we were in with
our field site. We were at a date palm
plantation doing this dig. And the sand
there is about 60 66 or so feet above
sea level. So if Atlantis is there, it
has to the the artifacts of it have to
be down there 60ome feet below where we
were. 25 ft. Well, that's not far enough
necessarily unless they had something,
you know, sting up. Uh,
and they could, but so, uh, we found
like an artifact of a a toebone of a
like a antelope or a sheep or
something. And that's about all we found
because enough.
And so Holden plans to go back that he
go a little I mean if Atlantis is a huge
metropolis, why don't you go a little
further to the northwest where you're
already below sea level and set up a dig
there and then maybe it will be less,
you know, less effort to get through all
that sand. And that sand moves around
incredibly. you know, I think over in
Morocco, they that the sand dunes can be
200 feet high
and uh they have signs on the road there
in Tunisia warning you that you know uh
Sable, which is the sand can move across
the road if you're not if it's that
since you the last time, you know, and
you go, you could like hit that with
your car and roll over or something.
So, so at the moment Holden plans to go
back, but uh you know I presented a lot
of different evidence on why Atlantis
could be there. One of them was the um
clonachnik's work that the chess he had
taken satellite data and there looks
like some something you know he was
investigating
what looks like it could be the fairest
plane of Plato to the south of where we
were and it looks like there's
particular channels in there you know
like the irrigation channels if you go
to Plato and look at that distance and
compare that with latitude, longitude,
you can get the distance and it's it's
close to what Plato says. So, it's like,
huh, is that a coincidence or is there
something there? So, we had hoped to
ground truth that and uh see what's
underneath the sand. And so Greletka and
Marian Tak uh his student came and they
wanted to use uh drones to get more data
closer to the surface but drones are not
allowed in Tunisia. So they were not
able to do that. So they collected some
other data with kind of a lawn mower
type thing, a push a push device.
&gt;&gt; Y,
&gt;&gt; you know, but we were kind of the drone
data collecting.
&gt;&gt; That's unfortunate. And I mean, here on
the show, I can't advocate for standing
close to the border of Tunisia and
flying drones over the border. We're not
going to advocate for that on the show.
&gt;&gt; But this was not
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It was not that far from the
border with Algeria actually.
So maybe that's why. But I think in
general you just couldn't bring a drone
into the country and fly it any place.
Probably because what you know what's
going on in in Israel and Palest
weaponized the the drones. So, so
there's many reasons, you know,
including the fact that um
uh in in history, Greek history, they
talk about uh um Athena being the
daughter of Poseidon. So, Poseidon
founded Atlantis and he had five sets of
twin boys with wife and then apparently
later he had uh he had Athena and her
birthplace is Lake Trtonis which is in
Libya and Libya back then was all of
Africa. They weren't sure how big Libya
was. So Lake Trtononus was in Libya
which actually could be you know the the
Chop Jared where we were that could be
Lake Trtonis I'm not sure or you know
but she is linked to
uh you know even though we think of
Athena or if it's Roman mythology it
would be Manurva we think of that as
Greek and Roman but maybe also uh it's
linked to the Egyptian history and the
history of Africa.
So, you know, it's it's really
interesting how all of this is kind of
tied together. You think, "Oh, that's
Roman and Greek." Well, then you get
into the Egyptian and you see some
overlap. So, maybe they had different
names for the same uh gods.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And deities. And so
&gt;&gt; well, and let's not even think that
learning mythology is too far from
getting samples from lake like lake
sediment samples and carbon dating them
because we don't have to go very far
back to be in the exact time period that
these authors were writing things. So we
can it's right we all just need to reach
out and we can start connecting these
things. So
um we're excited to stay tuned for
upgrades.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Right. So yes, we we hope to make more
progress with this, but you know, it
takes time and and you know, that's kind
of a a a
one avenue of research that Holden does.
And then he has other collaborators that
come in and help him. And you know like
Gunter, Marian and I met up with him and
traveled to the SAR with him and looked
at the course that he had taken
and uh and weighed in on the seeing and
made suggestions and uh just
collaborated in scientists. It it was a
a great trip to work together and you
know try try and make progress on
something but it's like gosh this is a
lot of sand and so we were near a date
pond plantation and as we went down
maybe six or eight feet there was water
that was seeping in so that you know
once they had got done with the backhoe
it wouldn't reach after a certain depth.
So they lowered men down in in the
buckets and they would like dig down by
hand and they would take the buckets of
sand out and this is how they continued
going deeper and deeper. So it was
fairly laborious
to to do this. You know that you just
have to overcome different things like
that water seeping in. And so I didn't
expect that there would be water that
close to the surface. And I'm not sure
if it was coming from the plantation
because they irrigate that.
&gt;&gt; But they also have hot springs, you
know. So so there's cold springs and hot
springs that were mentioned about
Atlantis. And so we went and saw uh one
of these hot springs and those come from
much deeper. And they pump that water up
because it's going to be less
mineralized than the shallow water. And
they uh pump it out onto kind of like a
fountain with all these baffles. So
because they need to cool it because
it's boiling hot and then they have like
a labyrinth that they funnel the water.
The water goes through to help further
cool it. and then they can mix it with
the the cold water that's closer to the
surface and use that.
So, it's a thing, you know.
So, it would be good to like network
with
uh engineers over there and petroleum
people who have well logs and have you
ever found like an artifact as you're
digging and you know, have you come
across anything like that? Because
before they like look for petroleum or
water or whatever, if they're going to
drill a well, they're going to want to
like bore down and you know, whatever
they bring bring up, you know, they're
they're going to annotate like, oh, it's
sand so far and then there was a clay
layer and then there was silt and then,
you know, they're going to record all
that and that could be very helpful to
us uh archaeologicalminded
researchers,
but I just don't Oh, and they speak
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; right. You know, somebody may already
know something. We just got to network
with them, but they speak French and
Arabic over there. So, that's a bit of a
handicap for English speakaking people,
you know. So, there were um there there
there were some archaeologists in the
group that could speak English, like
native you Tunisians speak English. So,
I try to appeal to them. Can you like
net these petroleum engineers? See if
you can find anything out which they may
not share their information because they
paid money to to drill those cores and
you know why should they share that
where a competitor could put that to use
you know rather than well you know we're
we're scientists that that want to find
Atlantis you know other cultures
&gt;&gt; so I don't know got to be friends.
&gt;&gt; Yes, befriending. The trick has got to
be finding some friends in there because
you just opened an entire rabbit hole in
my mind of realizing that Big Oil is
sitting on probably a lot of hidden
archaeological discoveries that are just
in the stacks and reams and gigabytes of
survey data that it was just like, well,
that's noise is there's no oil there, so
we're not going to look there. And they
filtered it out. So behind the layers of
trade secrets and and all that stuff,
there's a lot of data someone needs to
get into and then look at it,
&gt;&gt; right? And I mentioned in that
presentation of cosmic summit that there
is a a Roman town that got buried for
like a thousand years, you know, it it
uh was established I think by Emperor
Hadrien maybe and and then it was
abandoned or whatever and it got buried
by the sand and then later somebody
found it and they excavated and it's
like gosh, you know, the whole town was
hidden for thousand years. So that's
just the power of sand, hiding things
and, you know, then maybe exposing them
later or somebody sees something
sticking up out of the sand and it's
like, "Oh, what's that?" And they find
there's a a whole city underneath there.
I wish there was an easier way to like
look underneath the sand and see what's
what's down there.
You know, we have ground penetrating
radar, but it's not going to go down 60
feet, you know.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
Well, I I wasn't planning on doing a
whole S discussion. Obviously, the
synthetic aperture radar was another big
feature, big news in the scientific
community this summer. We don't have to
go all the way down there today, but
there's a lot of places that we want to
scan with S for sure.
&gt;&gt; Well, there was some archaeologist uh
that was using satellite data to look
underneath the ground. And so, I
thought, I don't know, we could use that
uh method. Maybe that would help. I just
don't know how deep that works. Maybe I
think it was like jungle sites, but also
desert sites she was looking at, but
they probably weren't buried that
deeply.
&gt;&gt; That's a good point. They've had good
success with lidar getting through
canopy tree growth. I don't know how far
liar would go with sand, though.
Probably not very far.
&gt;&gt; Probably not.
&gt;&gt; Winding things down. I wanted to ask
about one contemporary subject uh so we
can maybe get a clip and talk about it
because we talked with everybody about
the threeey atlas comet is an
interstellar object. It's in the solar
system. What have you heard? What do you
think? Do you have anything to pour into
the uh into the pot here while we stir
it up on three Atlas?
&gt;&gt; No, not a whole lot. I did see on
redacted that uh there was a story that
I think is it the US there's some
concerted effort up some kind of a
shield or something because they're
afraid this it's an alienate like uh we
don't know their intentions or whatnot.
So, and the pictures I've seen of it, I
don't know if it's like AI generated,
but they make it look like it's a a ship
and they uh so apparently Abby Lobe is
the one who's done a lot of research on
it and he said it's on the other side of
the sun, but when it comes back back it
could trigger uh some solar fl or
something that could be detrimental,
you know, to the earth, such things like
the Carrington event. So that's about
all I know about the threei Atlas.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; that's about as much.
&gt;&gt; What do you know about it?
&gt;&gt; That's all that's about all we all know.
The hype
&gt;&gt; the hype level of it is different
depending on what source you look at.
The hype is either way up or way down.
So it's it's here. It's with us. We're
taking a look at it. It doesn't sound
like Planet Nibberu coming back with,
you know, Zack Sitchin flying at the
helm. I don't I think we can rule that
out at this point.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Right. All right. And when is it
supposed to get close to Earth? Like is
it a year or less than a year?
&gt;&gt; I think within a month I don't know off.
&gt;&gt; Sorry. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Beginning of December is when it's
supposed to be the closest for us to be
able to see is what I've heard.
&gt;&gt; So just
just a month or so. Well, we'll find out
soon enough, won't we?
&gt;&gt; It's getting close. Well, we really
enjoyed this chat with you uh today,
Joanne. Um sorry I wasn't better
prepared, but we had fun. We're into all
this stuff. So,
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, thank you for having me.
This has been interesting for me, too,
to relive all of those uh the field the
field work back then. So,
&gt;&gt; last thing, where can people find your
work? We'll put a link to your research
gate in the description of this video.
What else would you like to show off?
Um there's the link to the cosmic sum
depending you can go back and maybe see
the talk. Uh so my first time the cosmic
summit has been running for three years
so far and George Howard organizes that
has a great team of scientists come in
and give very interesting talks about
all kinds of things related to ancient
history ancient mysteries and so on. And
so my first time there uh he had me come
up on stage to answer questions about
the younger dus and the black mats
younger dus onset
and the black mat with him and Mark
Young. That was a great experience. Then
the second year I was there I I talked
about how we how we detect fire in the
in the geological record in the
sediments. how what not just sediments
but uh trees tree rings
hears and archaeology where is the fire
general and then showing how we collect
and that kind of thing and then as you
know this most recent June of this year
I because I been on this expedition
this year it's like well you know I talk
about which is lands in the Sahara who
would who would have expected I mean
what a great place for Poseidon and Zeus
to hide Atlantis
underneath the desert. If it was an
aquatic city, I think to look in the
desert to find an aquatic city.
So, uh, you know, as I compiled
information
defending that position because some
people think think it's off the coast of
Spain, it's close to Gibralar, but it
could be that there's more than one
stalter, you know, and more set of
pillars of Hercules and and so it it
leaves it open to other places than just
Spain.
So, um,
&gt;&gt; yes,
&gt;&gt; it's just an intriguing concept to think
that, you know, it's an aquatic city and
you wouldn't think it would be in the
desert, but if Zeus and Poseidon had had
it
with all the descendants of Poseidon,
they have become so bad, you know, I've
just felt like it's my responsibility. I
have to take care of them. I have to
like remove this problem. And so he's
the god of the sea as well as the god of
earthquakes as well as the god of
horses. So it was destroyed in an
earthquake and then it was inundated
with water. So that sounds like Poseidon
took care of the problem. Uh cosmic
summit and research gate and then I've
sent you the links if people want to
look at my dissertations. that's fairly
dry, but there's there's graphs and
pictures and maps and stuff in there
that, you know, people could skim
through that and maybe, you know, read
the abstracts and the conclusions and
get some idea of what's going on with
the research I did on those lakes.
&gt;&gt; We are going to link all of those things
in the description of this video. It may
be dry, but it's not every day that we
get to feature a PhD dissertation on our
channel. So, we're proud to do so and
you should be proud of your hard work.
So, we appreciate that.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you very much.