[Music]
Oh yeah. Yeah.
[Music]
Hello, this is John Anthony West
welcoming you to Magical Egypt, a
symbolist tour.
[Music]
So far, we've seen example after example
of the puzzling fact that the further
back in time we look, the higher and
higher was the wisdom and ability of the
ancients. This trend continues when we
look even further back to the shadowy
prehistoric time predating dynastic
Egypt.
[Music]
Perhaps we have misread the entire
process of history and we have not gone
in a straight linear line from ancient
primitive beginnings to our
sophisticated progressive selves with
our hydrogen bombs and striped
toothpaste, our pollution and our nerve
gas. Ancient Egypt unquestionably was at
its height at its beginning and went on
a downhill path through the long 3,000
years of its history. That decline
certainly extended through the Roman
Empire and arguably down to our present
day.
[Music]
When we return, what was the mysterious
relationship between the ancients and
the stones? A new discovery from the
earliest known archaeological site in
Egypt may prove once and for all the
ancient and high source for mankind.
A lost tale hidden in the stones.
Blueprints of lost art from a lost
world.
Behind the veil lies another Egypt
hidden in Egypt.
[Music]
The reader may want to know why the
ancients thought they could go to heaven
only on the two solstitial days. Because
in order to change trains comfortably,
the constellations that serve as gates
to the Milky Way must stand upon the
Earth. meaning that they must rise
helically either at the equinoxes or at
the solstesses.
The galaxy is a very broad highway, but
even so, there must have been some
bitter millennia when neither gate was
directly available any longer. The one
hanging in midair, the other having
turned into a submarine entrance.
The ancients no doubt would have
considered the troubles of these our
times, the overpopulation, the working
iniquity and secret as an inevitable
prelude to a new tilting, a new world
age.
[Music]
Perhaps the most startling of the recent
discoveries in Egypt has been made at
Nabtaplier.
The Nabtiplier stone circle lies in the
middle of a particularly harsh and
forboding part of the Sahara Desert.
Although it had been thoroughly
cataloged and meticulously measured, it
would be many years later before the
complex astrophysical function of this
mysterious site would be discovered.
Astrophysicist Thomas Brophy discusses
this revolutionary discovery in his
book, The Origin Map, Discovery of a
Prehistoric Megalithic astrophysical Map
and Sculpture of the Universe. It's
becoming clear in the new subscience or
subd discipline of archoastronomy
that sophisticated astronomical
knowledge existed in very very ancient
times beginning with a book called
Hamlet's Mill published in 1968 by MIT
historians of science Giorgio de
Santiana and Hera Vand Deckand.
It was found that extremely
sophisticated astronomy was coded into
the mythologies and legends of very
ancient peoples. Perhaps most
significant is that the ancients
recognized and employed what is called
the procession of the equinoxes in their
myths, in their legends and in their
constructions.
In the hands of Thomas Broofphy,
physicist and archoastronomer,
we see that Nabtiplier is not just
oriented to the solstesses, which would
already tell us that there was a fairly
sophisticated astronomy in place, but
rather that it encodes astronomical
information so sophisticated that it's
only in the past couple of decades that
our own astronomy has been able to
provide us with this kind of
information. These crude stones, some of
them in the form of a circle and others
in outlying megaliths, other stones
buried in the silts, still other pieces
of carved bedrock. In Broofphy's
analysis, become a kind of living
planetarium, a stone observatory in
which these ancient Egyptians could keep
track of the movements of the heavens
over periods of thousands of years.
We met Mr. Broofphy near his home in
Encanus, California to demonstrate his
findings.
&gt;&gt; Okay, we're looking at a mockup of the
calendar circle at Napa.
The the mockup is to the correct size.
It's about 12 ft across and the these
standing stones are very roughly to the
the size of the stones that were found
there. Uh the real circle, the stones
are all a little bit different size, but
they're roughly like this. and they're
in the positions that we've laid them
out here. And we've we've marked the the
circular edge stones with these uh uh
beach cobblestones.
First, the obvious thing are these two
gates or windows or sight lines on the
edges of the circle. One, I'm standing
on the north south sighteline window.
I'm standing on the north end looking
south. The other sighteline window is
the uh uh northeast to southwest window.
So you got these two windows and it
turns out that that one points very well
to the summer solstice sunrise. So on
summer solstice you would see the
sunrise. You could see through the uh
gate if you were actually watching it or
you could stand and watch the uh shadows
marking it like a a sun diagram perhaps.
uh uh showing the summer solstice sun
rising through that gate.
And this one you could call a meridian
sight line window. The meridian being
the north south line.
So what I wanted to determine was what's
the meaning of those six standing stones
in the center of the circle.
And
it turns out since we're thinking
astronomically, if you just think of a
possible star viewing diagram, there's
something that fits really nicely with
what those those stones could mean at
the time that the calendar circle was
used
about 6,000 BC
at the day of the year identified by the
the the circle being the summer solstice
sunrise, the summer solstice day before
sunrise. eyes when when the sky is still
dark. If you're standing here looking
south on the Meridian sight line window,
you would have seen in the sky the three
stars of Orion's belt in the location
with the configuration and the angle
designated by the star viewing diagram
by those three stones right there.
And they match very well. They're at the
right angle. there at the right as mute
in the sky and it's at the right time
just before summer solstice sunrise.
So that's my uh hypothesis is that
that's what those those meaning of those
three uh stones is. And so you've got a
window of applicability for when the
circle applied to uh uh the the meaning
of of those central stones. And that
window of applicability is about 6,400
BC to about 4,900 BC.
And that window uh uh matches very well
with the radio carbon dates that were
found uh for the campfires and things in
this location. So that's a very very
good match. Now I wanted to consider
what the other three stones were and
they're in a configuration that makes
you want to think of Orion's uh head and
shoulders. There aren't that many three
sets of three bright stars in a
configuration like that in the sky. And
there's Orion's shoulder stars, the very
bright Beetlejuice and Batricx and uh
the head star Mesa that that that makes
you want to think that maybe that's what
those are. But if you look on a star
chart or if you look in the sky, you see
that when the Orion's belt stars were at
this angle, at the correct angle
matching the diagram, the shoulder stars
of Orion were angled way off. they're
angled way the other way like that. So
it doesn't match. That's not what you
see would have seen on on the meridian.
But considering further uh whether that
could be them, the the second point is
that the Orion's belt stars match not
only during the radioarbon b date of the
calendar circle and during the right
time of of year and the right time of
day as designated by the sighteline
windows, but they're actually at an
extremum. They're when the angle of
their their angle on the meridian is at
its minimum throughout the whole
25,000year procession cycle. Okay? So,
the angle at which you see a
constellation in the sky on the meridian
changes over the years due to the
procession and it goes they go through a
whole tilting cycle every 25,000 years
roughly. And so the Orion's belt stars
match the viewing diagram very perfectly
uh in the window 6400 to 4900 BC when
they're at their minimum tilt.
So if we look at the in the sky as you
would have seen the the shoulder stars
of Orion
when the constellation was as its
maximum tilt the other way they would
have matched this configuration in the
star viewing diagram. So that's a
hypothesis is that's what all six of
those central stones mean. The Orion's
belt stars at uh one extremum in the
window of time 6,400 to 4900 BC and the
shoulder and head star of Orion at the
other extremum of the procession tilt uh
around 16,500 BC. You would have gone
through a similar viewing sequence where
you would have seen the shoulder and
head star of horizon with that
configuration on the meridian at the
right place as seen in the in the
diagram and at the right time this time
as marking the winter solstice sunset
rather than the summer solstice sunrise.
So that's the hypothesis. Now we've got
the meaning of all six center stones of
the calendar circle. uh uh a good
hypothesis for that. And there's other
interesting things about this circle. If
you plot overplot the uh constellation
as it is in the sky with the map on of
the stones on the ground, they the the
feet of Orion when the head and
shoulders match are on the circle and
the Orion's upstretched uh uh bow arm is
also on the circle. And when the belt
stars match, you get another set of
matching roughly the right size except a
bigger a bigger man figure.
So there are many correspondences
uh corroborating that that this could be
the meaning of these six central stones.
Now the further corroboration
for the hypothesis that these six stones
are the belt and shoulders and head
stars of Orion uh at the times indicated
by the rest of the calendar circle comes
from the rest of the napia site where
you have these long baseline megalith
alignments. So like we're here north
looking south. The calendar circle is
actually in a complex of large
megalithic stones that are on astronaut
actually stellar aligned uh a sequence
of stellar aligned uh megalithic
alignments south of the calendar circle
and you had six lines of megaliths.
Three northerly lines and three
southerntherly lines.
The distance from the center of those
megaliths was roughly around uh a
thousand meters varying from a few
hundred to about 1100 m and the calendar
circle is essentially in that complex at
Navlia
and those uh long baseline megaliths it
turns out point to the same six stars at
the same time in a repeated way and very
specific specific way that corroborates
that this is probably the meaning of of
these these stars here.
Okay, you see the guy with the reflector
light down the beach about 800 m. That
demonstrates the distances involved in
the long baseline megalith alignments
that point to stars right next to uh the
calendar circle at Nava Playa.
&gt;&gt; Okay. on a beach. We demonstrated the
distances involved in the megalith lines
of megalysis near the calendar circle at
Nabla.
And uh I noted that they
point to stars and the stars they point
to are these six same six stars that are
uh designated in the diagram, the star
viewing diagram in the center of the
calendar circle. And these six lines, I
first looked at them uh in comparison to
the six stars in a star viewing diagram
at 6,300 BC, just after the start of
applicability of the star viewing
diagram. And I found that they're rather
close. Some of them uh uh align at that
time and all six
of the lines are are close.
Um
but they're they're a little bit off. So
when I saw that they were close, I I uh
I thought, "Oh, that that could uh
verify that my my uh interpretation of
the star viewing diagram of the calendar
circle was right, that those are the six
stars uh designated. Uh if only they had
all aligned at exactly the same time, I
thought they would have proved in my
case that those six uh uh stones in the
diagram were were those stars." Uh so I
thought, "Oh, too bad. They're not all
at exactly the same date. Then I looked
a little bit closer though at uh what
was going on astronomically because they
were fairly close to the six lines. And
uh I found that they are uh
uh all around that time close to what's
called
uh helilical rising vernal equinox
helical rising. uh what what vernal
equinox helilical rising is it just
means that on the first day of spring a
star rises together over the horizon
with the sun.
So I found that those six stars were all
somewhere you know not too far from
vernal equinox helical rising uh at that
time. So then I looked at I considered
that that might be uh uh the the meaning
of the long baseline alignments. So I
looked at each one in sequence. its uh
actual date of vernal equinox helical
rising and found that each one of the
six stars designated in the calendar
circle diagram align with one of the
megalith alignments on its vernal
equinoxilica rising date
[Music]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Music]
So that given finding out that that is
the meaning of those uh uh this
megalithic complex with such uh with
such high likelihood uh led me to keep
uh uh studying what else might be meant
by the d the the megalithic uh uh
structures and The next obvious thing to
look at is well if you look at a diagram
of the of the layout of the megalith you
first note that well there are these
very clear lines of megaliths but they
aren't all at a uniform or even a
uniformly patterned distance from the
central radiating hub. They they appear
uh uh not very elegantly placed in that
regard as far as distance even though
they're very precisely in lines. So the
next obvious question is well why why
would these uh designers of the site
have have made these distances kind of
unattractive when they were so elegantly
uh placing the alignments in the other
aspects and it occurred to me to look
for for other meaning for the the
distances to go along with the alignment
meanings and the distances from the
central hub. I first looked for the
possibility that they might represent
the brightness of the stars. Uh maybe
the brightest star, Beetlejuice, would
be the closest one or the farthest one
as far as represented by the megalith.
But uh they weren't. It didn't work out
that way. Uh that didn't seem to be the
pattern. And I I considered some other
things. And finally, uh just for fun, I
looked up the actual astrophysical
distances to those stars. You can find
it on the Hipparos uh satellite
observatory website.
They're they're re very recently
measured very accurately and uh I was
surprised to find that the actual
astrophysical distances uh are
represented by the distances on the
ground of the stones in in each line for
its star that it represents.
And that is a perhaps the first really
astonishing aspect of the nap naplia
megalith.
[Music]
They match up uh very well.
In fact, our knowledge of uh some of
these six stars distances, especially
the further ones, the Orion belt stars,
is is not that good. We have a sizably
quoted uh uh standard error deviation in
the in the in the locations of those
within the standard error deviation of
our knowledge of those. The the fit is
in fact very good.
Brophie follows the clues to a greater
and greater realization of a profoundly
advanced knowledge of our universe from
a time when traditional dating shows
human civilization had yet to begin.
[Music]
If Prophy's interpretation is correct,
it may signal a radical paradigm shift
in our understanding of our ancient
past.
So the uh megalithic complex keeps
begging analysis.
The ancient obsession with the stars
takes its place among the many other
misunderstood practices of these
mysterious ancients.
Initially misunderstood as acts and
works of primitive superstition.
In almost every case, when advances in
our own science raised our understanding
to a sufficient level, we were forced
into reclassification of these ancient
practices not as acts and works of
primitive superstition, but instead as
evidence of an extremely high degree of
sophistication, development, and a deep
knowledge of the innermost secrets of
our universe.
[Music]
As evidence of a high civilization from
pre-antiquity begins to mount, the
question arises,
if there was a distant golden age,
What happened to it?
&gt;&gt; There can be no doubt about the
catastrophic event or events that put an
end to the last ice age. It's thought
that it might have been an asteroid or a
comet, something of that sort, but that
the event happened that there is no
doubt. Almost overnight, the woolly
mammoth, the giant rhinoceroses, the
saber-tooth tigers went extinct. All
paleoclimatologists,
paleontologists who study these matters
are agreed on that point. The big issue,
was there a sophisticated civilization
that went down with that catastrophe?
Paleontologist Robert Dunlap discusses
this catastrophic events and the
conditions around it that may have led
to the demise of that lost civilization.
[Music]
Hi, Robert Dunlap. We're here at the uh
world famous Labraa tarpits. What's
really unique about this area is the way
that everything was so perfectly
preserved at the end of the pleaene era.
Now the pleaene was between 10,800 years
and 12,000 years. What you find here is
just a great collection. A whole slew of
very unique creatures that all went
extinct about 10,000 to 12,000 years
ago. It's a very unique site. the
preservation of the fossils and all of
the other types of evidence that are
necessary to put together and to
assemble uh a framework for a a specific
period of time known as the pleaene. The
evidence is perfectly preserved right
here.
There's evidence of homminids or
prehistoric people that go back as far
as 10,000 years uh and they've been
perfectly preserved because of the tar
or the asphalt that is uh common around
this particular area. So along with that
uh they have been able to determine what
these people ate uh because there's the
evidence of uh the plant life uh from
the seeds all the way to little insects
and oddly enough one of the most common
uh fossils here is a beetle and a very
large beetle. So this is the perfect
place to go and get evidence about the
pleaene period and why different uh
species from plants, animals to humans
became extinct. Behind me is one of the
most famous extinct creatures. It's a
glossythereum which is actually just a
giant sloth. Now along with
glossythetherum there was woolly
mammoth, Jefferson mammoth, imperial
mammoth and these really enormous
creatures of 12,000 years ago that went
extinct people believe from a type of gl
uh glacial period or ice age.
In the geologic record there is evidence
for eight major ice ages. eight major
periods of glaciation within the last
700,000
years.
One of the compelling theories about
mass extinction for the pleaene and in
this area in particular is glaciation.
There definitely is uh evidence for
glaciers as well as a ice age that
affected all of this area.
There's very strong and compelling
evidence for the uh growth and the
spread of these ice sheets. Glaciers
have a very powerful way in the way they
uh move the boulders and the rocks that
are left behind. You'll see the evidence
of them being very rounded. And when you
go out, you see this and it's very
pronounced uh in any area that has had
uh glaciation. It's a very common site
to see rounded boulders and that kind of
evidence close by. Along with part of
this theory that I find really
compelling uh is the evidence always
that we read around the the whole world.
There's always a story about a great
flood. There's always about a great
deluge.
uh where I was recently in uh New
Zealand as well as in Australia, the
Aborigines
uh have a very unusual story that they
talk about during their dream time when
they had a huge a huge uh flood and you
go out into the outback, you see the
evidence. You see the way rocks and
things have just been like washed and
stripped clean clear. you go to uh South
America and you read about the when the
Incas uh talk about a great flood and
how was that created? What caused this
this type of uh condition? Well, there
is another theory about what could cause
that. Now, a lot of scientists call
uh not asteroids but comets dirty
snowballs.
And it's been theorized and speculated
that maybe most of the water content on
our own planet was brought here by the
bombardment of comets. And we have
cometary impact evidence all over the
planet.
We were just discussing asteroidal
extinction and asteroidal impact and how
it caused a mass extinction on this
planet. The most famous extinction event
is the dinosaur extinction 64.7 million
years ago in June. The compelling
evidence is right there at what is
called the KT boundary. At the KT
boundary you find the fossils of
dinosaur. You find iridium which is a
very rare element on the planet. And you
find microactites.
You find shock quartz crystals. And all
of this has been uh validated through
Dr. Walter Alvarez, Dr. Walter Alvarez
at the University of California,
Berkeley, Dr. Frank Assaro at the
Lawrence Liverour Laboratories in Menllo
Park uh along with Jack Dr. Jack Wolf
who was able to pinpoint it to the month
of June. He pinpointed it to the month
of June by finding the fossil evidence
of plants.
64.7 million years ago in June, there
was evidence of lotus and water lily
plants being uh hit and struck by this
large bolide that left the evidence of
not only shockwarts crystals but
microcttites embedded in the flowers of
these uh waterlies. So these waterlies
as well as lotus plants will only flower
in the month of June and that's how they
were able to determine that particular
date. But aside from that, uh there have
been other mass extinction events going
back that have been caused absolutely by
the same signature evidence of iridium,
microcttites,
tectites, shock quartz crystals and some
of the other noble uh iridium elements,
palladium, gold, platinum. Those all uh
are part of the signature evidence of
these boundary events. Going back, we
had the Jurassic triacic boundary. Then
another very famous one which is the
Perian Triacic boundary. Now what's
phenomenal about the Perian Triacic
boundary is 96%
of all species became extinct within a
one day period of time. That's an
amazing find. 96% of all species, which
means obviously only 4% survived. When
we were sitting on the boundary there in
New Zealand, the Perian Triacic, how
could they disappear?
They literally disappear at a knife's
edge. Imagine this scenario, an ice age
that holds much of the northern
hemisphere in its grip for thousands of
years. Yet there is in place, perhaps
globally, certainly in Egypt, an
advanced and sophisticated civilization.
It is this that will give rise to
Plato's story of Atlantis and to the
similar accounts in the legends and
mythologies of peoples around the world.
And then catastrophe strikes. Perhaps it
is a comet or an asteroid that hits the
earth. Chaos follows.
In Siberia and North America, millions
of large land animals, woolly mammoths,
rhinoceroses, saber-tooth tigers, die
instantly and become extinct. Siberia,
formerly temperate, becomes tundra.
North America and Canada, frozen in the
ice age, go into meltdown. Glaciers
miles thick on freeze, raising sea
levels 300 f feet, drowning everything
that was formerly at the seashore or at
sea level. But a few human beings
managed to survive and make their way to
safe ground, carrying with them as much
of their knowledge as they possess. They
managed to pass this knowledge on down
perhaps for thousands of years, even
though they live in what we might call
primitive conditions. Though even these
societies are currently being
reconsidered and systematically upgraded
by today's archaeologists, the dates of
civilization keep being pushed backward
even in academic circles. An
appreciation of the knowledge available
to these ancient cultures goes through
an equally systematic transformation.
Then around the same time when
conditions permit around 3000 to 4,000
BC sophisticated civilizations arise
simultaneously in India, China,
Mesopotamia, Egypt, Meso America. In
Egypt, it takes but a few generations
for the relatively crude artwork, the
simple mud brick buildings and
hieroglyphs to rise to a level of
perfection of execution that will never
be surpassed and seldom equaled anywhere
on Earth in the centuries to come.
The catastrophic effects were felt by
all, and the few survivors kept the
story alive for their descendants,
passing it on with the other remnants of
the once mighty civilization of the
Golden Age.
Its most esoteric and fundamental
secrets protected in a shroud of myth
and legend. A cocoon or time capsule
that would survive the ages and many
twists and turns in language and
understanding that would ensue.
Heat.
[Music]
The apparent reverse evolution seen in
ancient Egypt is a contradiction of the
traditional western model of linear
progress culminating in modern man.
However, when compared to another
alternative model of human history, the
yugas, the decline from a distant golden
age through dynastic Egypt and into our
troubled modern times begins to make
sense.
The Indian system of the Yugas explains
a vast cosmic cycle which like the
changing of the seasons on a grand
metaphysical scale causes mankind to
periodically bloom and flourish and then
drift back into sleep until the
awakening and return of the next grand
cycle.
Walter discusses these vast
celestial cycles and their relationship
with the eb and flow of human
consciousness, ability and evolution.
The yugas are a long-term chronology
system that's accredited to the ancient
Indian culture, the indus people of the
indis valley
and it is a uh mechanism which enables
civilization man to uh time
man's patterns here on Earth over very
long periods of time.
And just as we have a a day which
determines uh man's activities in any
given 24-hour period with its periods of
light and darkness. And this is based on
a celestial phenomena of the earth
turning on its axis. And just as we have
a year,
this the four seasons caused by another
celestial phenomena, the tilted earth
going around the sun. So too do the
ancients say that we have a very very
long cycle that has its seasons of
mankind, if you will, when there is a
rise and fall in civilization.
And they break this into two periods.
And that's an ascending cycle of 12,000
years and a descending cycle of 12,000
years.
And these two cycles themselves are
broken into four periods.
The four periods in the uh Greek
civilization are iron, bronze, silver,
and golden age. with the iron being uh
the very darkest period and the uh
golden age being the age of
enlightenment. Plato spoke about this
cycle. He actually called it the great
year. The Indians called these uh four
periods the kaliuga,
the dwapara yuga, the trata yuga and the
sachi.
The yugas have specific characteristics.
The iron age or the kali yuga is a time
in the cycle of man when he is only
aware of material objects uh that which
he can feel and touch and uh perceive
through his five senses.
And obviously it's a very brutal age
when man isn't really aware of finer
forces.
uh doesn't have very good spiritual
concepts
and uh just sort of pillagages and
plunders if you will. And that is of
course what happened uh after the great
civilizations of the last golden age
fell.
And we all know that uh there's
wonderful uh traces of that civilization
in the ancient Egyptian culture
uh in the ancient Indian culture, the
ancient Chinese, the uh whole megalithic
uh ruins uh speak of a of a vast
civilization.
And all these ancient cultures,
Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Meso America,
all declined in the last uh descending
age down through the golden age, the uh
the silver age, the bronze age into this
dark caluga period.
And the bottom point was about 500 AD,
which coincided roughly with the final
collapse of the of the last civilization
in the Western world. And that was the
Roman uh culture.
And we muddled around in the very
darkest age for about another 1,200
years
until we hit the dwara yoga. And the
depart the dwapara or bronze age is a
time when man becomes aware of finer
forces. He becomes aware of molecules
and uh principles that that uh govern
motions. He becomes aware of
electricity. It's a matter of fact the
dwara
is often called the electrical age. And
you can see uh just over the last h
100red years or so how many electrical
uh types of inventions have been
developed from radio, television,
semiconductors, computers. Uh they're
almost an intrusion in our lives
nowadays. the
this time uh between the Cali and the
Dupari Yuga uh was
was uh typified by a lot of rapid
advancements in knowledge of finer
forces and we tend to call that the
Renaissance period, the age of
exploration or the age of discovery.
And now we've pretty much transferred
from this dark dark material age to the
electrical age. But there are still many
dark uh material tendencies that tend to
influence our society nowadays as as I'm
sure everyone is aware.
But things are getting better and though
we may be still very close to the Cali
Yuga influence
uh we are rising uh fairly rapidly and
the trea will take place in about
another 2100 years and then that'll last
about 3600 years until we're in the
golden age
and the cycle will repeat itself.
People often ask, "What are the higher
ages like, you know, and why don't we
find more evidence of the higher age?"
Well, I have to think that man is uh
much more intelligent in the higher ages
than he is in the lower ages. As a
matter of fact, the the ancient reishes
say that a man only uses a very small
percentage of his intellectual capacity
in the the dark period of Caliuga. Maybe
25% towards the end of that yuga whereas
he would use maybe 50% by the end of the
electrical cycle the dupar yuga 75% by
the end of the the trea and man is using
all of his intellectual capability in
the golden ages. The question is often
asked, why don't we see evidence of of a
much higher civilization?
And I think it's because as we gain
intelligence, we realize that the world
we're building right now in this heavy
part of the dwapara yuga when we're
still very materially oriented but just
starting to harness the finer forces
is a very stressful one. uh if we just
keep building buildings and machines and
and more freeways and uh raise the level
of uh stress in the world, uh it's not
not a pretty picture for the future.
I I intuitively feel that the golden age
is one that's typified by a return to an
aggrabased society where man realizes
the beauties and benefits of nature and
lives more in tune with nature and and
so perhaps man doesn't build as many
large structures as he needs to
particularly probably not out of metals
that carry certain vibration. ations and
oriented in halfhazard ways the way
cities are built nowadays. If we do find
things, we might find them uh out of
stone
and have a different vibration. They'll
often be aligned uh with stars or
certain celestial events. And I think
that is more typical of the golden age
structures that we'll find
&gt;&gt; in the legends and law of each of these
civilizations and in the legends of
tribal and traditional societies around
the globe. There are similar accounts of
a global catastrophe, a worldwide
deluge, a former golden age.
It seems perverse of historians and
archaeologists to simply dismiss all
these as romance, fantasy, fabrication.
Modernday academics discuss Egypt in
terms of their beliefs. The Egyptians
believe this, the Egyptians believed
that. Supposing in their arrogance that
we know better, they believed we know.
But suppose it's the other way around.
Suppose the Egyptians actually knew
about immortality and it is our academic
community lost in their rationalist
beliefs who believed the the Kalyuga
hits its ner or low point around the
time of the break up of the Roman Empire
initiating in in the in the western
world anyway the so-called dark ages
which were indeed pretty dark and over
the Middle East and Northern Africa um
pretty much a similar sort dark age uh
less recognizable in India and China
although the scholars of those periods
themselves reference back to much higher
stages of civilization of the very
distant past and um if if this way of
looking at history is correct we are
we're on an we're on an ascending curb
at the moment we're we're climbing out
of an Iron Age and moving into the lower
levels of an ascending bronze age. An
interesting way of looking at modern
society because on the one hand we see
obviously we see very much a mad house
um devoted millions and millions of
people believing in little or nothing
beyond economics and monetary gain and
consumerism and so on. Um on the
positive side of that um what we do see
is a tremendous creative and
intellectual ferment much of it from the
spiritual point of view very wrongly and
destructively directed. But the ferment
itself and the intelligence and the
creativity that go into producing
idiotic merchandise is nevertheless um
real creativity, real intelligence, real
industry, a real ferment. And uh on the
on the optimistic side uh if suddenly a
there is something like a worldwide
recognition of the validity of this
ancient doctrine of of immortality of
the ancient realization or understanding
that we are on this earth for a purpose.
all of that or much of that or some of
that um ferment creativity industry
could be turned toward toward or
directed toward uh beneficial rather
than frivolous and destructive purposes.
It's a possibility. It's a reason at any
rate for a kind of cautious optimism.
Whereas reading the headlines of any
daily newspaper anywhere in the world
would give us reason for nothing beyond
the blackest and deepest despair.
Even though
we have these yoga cycles, we have these
periods that affect the earth and
mankind, it doesn't mean that every man
exactly corresponds to that particular
yuga cycle. It doesn't mean that our
free will is lost. We're we're just
locked into these cycles.
This cycle is just the context uh for
mankind's
life just as a sunny day or rainy day is
the context for us to live a particular
day.
So in this period of time you will see
most people are becoming aware of finer
forces uh starting to understand uh
electrical phenomena
but you still have some stone age people
around uh and you still have some uh
very bright people around.
And I was asked the question, is there a
way to to perhaps buck the trend, if you
will, and live above the yuga? And I
think there's always that opportunity to
improve our circumstances because we do
have free will.
And just as we can reduce our awareness,
our capability to operate in the world
by
taking drugs or eating bad foods or
participating in uh things that are not
conducive to our well-being and you do
this over a prolonged period of time,
you start to hurt your your intelligence
and and your ability to operate. So too
can man improve his ability to
uh operate in the world and to
experience a good life if you will. And
that's done by eating right. Uh living
in tune with natural laws.
Meditating is a is a wonderful way to
accelerate the evolution. And there's
some uh techniques of meditation such as
ka yoga which have been found to provide
tremendous uh evolutionary benefits.
So man is not trapped to any particular
yoga that he finds himself in at any
particular time.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]