Hello there. Welcome to Nibiru the
movie. What you're about to see is a
fusion of the first three parts of the
Sumerian Epic with a few extra minutes
of never-before-seen footage as well.
While the Sumerian Epic is not finished,
this collection here serves as a
foundation for everything that follows.
And we felt that putting it together in
this movie would make it easier to take
in the story and theories without having
to go through multiple videos. In order
to talk about the nature of the universe
[music] and to discuss questions such as
whether it has a beginning or an end,
you have to be clear about what a
scientific theory is. I shall take the
simple-minded view that a theory is just
a model of the universe or a restricted
part of it and a set of rules that
relate quantities in the model to
observations that we make. It exists
only in our minds and does not have any
other reality, whatever that might mean.
A theory is a good theory if it
satisfies two requirements. It must
accurately describe a large class of
observations on the basis of a model
that contains only a few arbitrary
[music]
elements and it must make definite
predictions about the results of future
observations.
When the late professor Steven Hawking
wrote that of course he is referring to
a scientific theory which pertains to
the laws of physics, chemistry, biology
or any other natural process of the
universe. A historical theory on the
other hand is defined as a concept with
several uses. Often researchers will
provide a theory about historical events
and connections. An orderly preconceived
impression of the phenomenon to be
studied. Used in this way, theory means
the same as hypothesis. So what you are
about to witness is just that, a
historical theory, a hypothesis about
the way in which human history may have
unfolded. It's a theory about where
we've come from and even where we might
go. This information does not just come
unjustified and out of nowhere, but is
based on countless hours of research,
translation, interpretation, and
discussion among historians,
archaeologists, linguists,
anthropologists, and even [music]
planetary scientists. We'll be
referencing scientific articles and
discoveries throughout this feature,
which will be sourced on screen at the
moment of the claim with a little one of
these.
We've also put a link to all of our
sources in the author comments as well
as in the end credits just in case you
missed them. As Professor Hawking wrote,
"This theory we are presenting
ultimately exists entirely within our
minds. What we do with this theory, with
these ideas, the information, the story
is entirely up to each of us
individually. Take it with a grain of
Himalayan rock salt or a dash of pepper
if you prefer. Just remember, have your
own experience and make it a great one.
The year is 1847.
A young archaeologist named Austin Henry
Leard was Indiana Jonesing his way
around ancient Mesopotamian ruins where
he properly identified and henceforth
discovered the ancient Assyrian
citystate of Nineveh in an area now
known as Iraq.
In an absolutely incredible discovery,
he found 22,000 clay [music] tablets
hidden in the depths of the city. These
tablets contained cunia form, which
today is one of, if not the earliest
known writing systems known to man,
created by the Sumerians 6,000 years
ago.
Over the years, more ancient historical
[music] cities were found and excavated.
Many of the world's museums now count
among their prize exhibits the
ceremonial gates, winged bulls,
chariots, tools, utensils, jewelry,
statues, [music]
and other objects that have been dug out
of the mounds that are Assyria and
[music] Babylon. But the true treasures
of these kingdoms were their written
records.
Since the time of that discovery, we
have believed that the [music] first
true civilization in all of humanity
arose in Mesopotamian Sumer located in
present-day Iraq around 6,000 years ago.
This is now being challenged by the
discovery of Gobeclet, a far older site
dating back nearly 11,000 years.
However, this is a conversation we're
going to save for a little later on.
Now, Sumer translates to land of the
civilized kings, [music] and their
culture exploded onto the scene
virtually overnight, becoming the cradle
of human civilization.
Allow me a moment to be clear that while
the general consensus is that Sumer is
the oldest civilization, this is not to
suggest that we don't see signs of
civilization popping up in other places
across the world in and around the same
time period. And really, it all depends
on how we want to define the word
civilization. We see signs of
agriculture across Mesopotamia, Egypt,
India, [music] and even Meso America
thousands of years prior to the rise of
the Sumerian and adjacent civilizations.
So the reason that we're focusing on the
Sumerians today [music] is because of
the vast amount of information we have
available about these people and further
because most of their religious stories
have played a [music] rather substantial
role in establishing some of the world's
largest religions today. Going through
our research has led us to find a wealth
of connections between many of the
ancient cultures of the world. So, while
our focus is primarily on the Sumerians,
at least at first, we will also
naturally branch out and explore other
ancient civilizations throughout this
presentation when they become relevant
to the conversation.
Looking into the artifacts of Sumer is
quite interesting as they host a long
list of archaeological firsts for the
human race. Among these finds are the
first schools, the first historians, the
first methods of writing, [music] the
first library, the first doctors and
pharmarmacapia, the first agriculture
and farmers almanac, the first musical
notation, the first bicamal legislature,
and the first taxes. The Sumerian legal
code, also a first, included protection
for divorced women, as well as price
controls on food [music] stuffs and
wagon rentals. We also see the invention
of the wheel, the chariot, the sailboat,
and the plow. They also invented our
standard measurement of time. The
concept of 60 seconds in a minute and 60
minutes in an hour and the 12 to 24-hour
clock all started with the Sumerians.
[music] They also developed the first
astronomical and astrological systems,
the first maps and cgraphy, and the
first mathematics. Oh, they also [music]
seemed to have invented beer with
archaeologists finding a 3,900year-old
Sumerian poem honoring Ningasi, the
goddess of brewing, [music] which also
contains the oldest surviving beer
recipe. Ultimately, you put all of this
together [music] and you get the first
urban civilization in history.
The most significant discovery out of
all of this, however, was finding that
their religion and belief system
influenced all of those that followed.
Where even today we find the Sumerian
creation epic filtered through the ages
and into the Old Testament, making the
Sumerian legends appear to be the source
code of many of the world's religions
today. One example [music] of this can
be found with the epics of Gilgamesh,
Zeosudra, and Atraasis. each of them
ancient poetic stories [music]
essentially describing the flood of the
Old Testament yet transcribed long
before Noah was ever written down.
The cuniform tablets of Sumer contain
inscriptions of a tremendous magnitude
[music]
encompassing cosmological tales, epic
poems, histories of kings, temple
records, commercial contracts, [music]
marriage and divorce records,
astronomical tables, astrological
forecasts, mathematical formulas,
geographic lists, grammar and vocabulary
school texts, and not least of all texts
dealing with the names, genealogies,
epithets, deeds, powers, and duties of
the gods.
Now, it's important to know that if
we're discussing these Sumerian records,
the truth is there's [music] a lot of
different writings and tellings
available from a number of generations
in time. You had the Sumerians, the
original civilization, which then spread
and developed into the Acadians, the
Assyrians, the Babylonians, and
eventually the Chaldans.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; These tablets that we are referencing
were generally written between 2700 and
1600 B.CEE and it appears many were
translated down or cultural retellings
from older stories. Among all of the
tablets of Sumer that have been dug up,
there are a wide number of variations
and tellings of these ancient stories
which describe the mythological deities
who created the world and the people who
live upon it. It can actually be very
confusing to learn about these deities
because there are a number of
contradictions between the tellings due
to how many cultures adopted the stories
and [music] fit them to their needs.
Ancient History Encyclopedia writes,
"All of these seeming contradictions
stem from Mesopotamia's long history and
the different cultures which adopted the
Sumerian gods and made them their own
with additions and alterations to their
stories. Sometimes these changes expand
upon or continue older stories, but
often different scribes in various eras
simply rewrote the tales to suit their
purposes.
Now, in our recently published book, The
Book of Spirit, we spend some time
discussing the variations of what these
ancient cultures could have meant by
their description of the gods.
Generally, they're interpreted in one of
several ways. The most socially
acceptable interpretation today is
generally that these gods are forces of
nature or aspects of life like night and
day, birth and death or the sun and the
moon. Often there are also specific
times when the Sumerians reference
planets or constellations such as
Jupiter or Mercury or even the Plleades
which for the record was one of the most
significant and woripped star clusters
across all of Sumer. However, and
generally the least accepted theory in
modern academia is that these gods
represented actual physical beings
called the Anunnaki, supposedly from the
planet Nibiru, who were far more
technologically advanced than we were,
and who were involved in the creation of
the human race. This idea has become
very popular since the story first came
out in the 1970s, and especially in the
last 10 years or so, thanks to the
internet and a growing interest in these
subjects.
In order to identify if there's any
substantiated evidence to these claims,
we're going to begin by looking at the
Sumerian creation epic. Now, this
rendition of the story is very simple
because we don't actually have a lot of
information to work with. [music] This
is because many of the tablets were
broken with time and also since the
stories changed across generations as we
looked at before. But with that said,
let's have a look and see what we can
discover about what the Sumerianss
believed regarding the creation of
everything as interpreted and pieced
[music] together by various historians
and scholars throughout history.
The Sumerian creation epic begins with
the primordial mother goddess named
Namu, who many suggest represents the
creative force behind the entire
universe itself.
She was the goddess sea who gives birth
to the first actual gods. These are on
and key the sky [music] and the earth
who are generally interpreted as being
one being an key. Though some
interpretations say they began as two.
[music] At any rate an key or an give
birth to a child named Enlil, the god of
the air. Enlil [music] cleaves An and
key in two implying they were singular
separating the heavens and the earth.
Finally, Namu and Anne create Enki, who
is the god of water and also the god of
wisdom, mischief, crafts, and creation.
At this moment, I'd like to express
there's some discrepancy regarding the
order of this family tree. While Enlil
is considered in most traditions to be
the firstborn son of Anne, we also see
versions where Enki is the firstborn.
Ultimately, it doesn't affect the story
too much, but I felt it was relevant to
express that here. This pantheon then
goes on to create a number of other gods
and goddesses, such as Utu and Nana, the
[music] sun and the moon, and Inana, the
great goddess of heaven and earth. Inana
is a particularly interesting character
in these ancient stories, at one point
becoming the most venerated deity in the
Sumerian pantheon. One of her parables,
the descent of Inana, is considered a
5,500year-old [music]
literary masterpiece. And we'll come
back around to this story later on in
the Sumerian epic. Now, while there are
a number of parables involving
interactions between all of these
deities and so many more gods who we're
not even going to mention today, a great
deal of the Sumerian creation epic
revolves [music] around these three
original characters, An Enlil and Enki,
who sort of form their own holy trinity
in a sense. In these stories, eventually
Namu has an idea [music] and speaks with
Enki, having him create human beings to
assist the gods in their work. And other
perhaps even more common tellings
[music] of the story. It was Enlil's
idea who told Namu about it who then
gave Enki the task.
This in essence is the basic idea of the
original Sumerian creation epic. [music]
Due to the passing along of stories over
time and that many tablets are damaged,
a lot of the details of this creation
story we looked at remains a mystery.
Now, you might be thinking, G Patch, I'm
not sure I see the parallel between what
you just shared and the Bible. Are you
sure that these are related? And the
answer is absolutely. However, in order
to see how we get from this to this, we
have to look at the stories in the
middle and see how this chain develops
from here to here. The middle of the
story between these [music] two is found
in the Babylonian creation epic of which
a far more complete telling exists
today. In this story, it relates Namu
with the mother goddess [music] named
Tiiamat and Enlil with a being named
Marduk. However, as you will soon see,
there are significant differences
[music] in the way that these goddesses
are portrayed in the literature. Things
are about to get very interesting.
The Babylonian epic of creation begins
with the primordial god and goddess
Abpsu and Tiiamat. These two are
described as the god of fresh water and
the goddess of saltwater which is
commonly interpreted to be not as
physical water but primordial substance
in the early universe. However, Absu is
sometimes seen as the freshwater
aquifers underneath Mesopotamia and
Tiiamat being the saltwater sea. In the
story, Absu also has a vazier whose name
is Mumu. Together, Absu and Tiamat
mingle their waters and they create two
deities, Lamu and Lahamu. As they're
growing, two more deities are created,
Anar and Kishar, who excel beyond the
first two. Anar and Kishar form Anu, who
is quite powerful himself, who then
begets Ia. Both Anu and Ia are the same
beings as An and Enki from the previous
story.
All of these newly created children make
a ton of noise and problems, surging
back and forth and disturbing Tiiamat's
belly. Even Absu believes their behavior
is loathome. Absu declares that he's
going to destroy these children and end
their annoying ways. Tiiamat says, "No,
don't do that. Be patient with our
children." [music] And is very upset
that Absu wants to kill them. Mumu, on
the other hand, is very supportive and
encouraging of Absu's plan. These
children find out about Absu's intent.
With fear of imminent death, the
children go to one of their own, [music]
the resourceful Ia, who performs some
magic so that Absu drops into an eternal
sleep, subduing all of his power and
effectively killing him. Ia then chains
Mumu up as a prisoner and takes the
throne of Apsu. He names his new king's
chamber after Appsu. And it is here that
he and his wife Damkina who is often
related with Ki from the original
Sumerian story give birth to a new god
called Marduk. [music]
Marduk is a very interesting character
for it says that he was very manly with
remarkable divinity. It also says that
he had four eyes and four ears and that
he breathed fire when he moved his lips.
&gt;&gt; Howdy.
&gt;&gt; Anu gives Marduk something called the
four winds as well. And by the power of
the four winds, a wave of intention is
sent towards Tiiamat to cause her upset
and frustration.
Soon after this, Tiiamat is told by the
gods that when her husband was slain,
she did nothing [music] and now she too
will be punished. The result of this is
that Tiiamat summons a small army of 11
monsters and dragons around her who all
had very curious names. There was
venomous snake, the big weathered beast,
exalted serpent, furious snake, the
hairy one, great dragon, mad lion,
scorpion man, violent storms, fish man,
and bullman. In addition to these 11,
there was also her consort, Kingu, who
becomes the lead general of her army.
Tiiamat gives him something called the
tablet of destinies, which is an object
that confers upon the bearer the supreme
authority as the ruler of the universe.
Kingu advises that she destroy her
children who seem to be clearly plotting
against her. And in her sorrow for the
loss of her husband and anger towards
her children, she then becomes the
antagonist in the story. In many
interpretations of the tablets, Tiiamat
herself transforms into a great sea
dragon.
Ia speaks with Anchar and asks for
advice. [music] And Anshar basically
says, "Ea, you started it. You killed
her husband and you made her really mad.
Take responsibility for your actions.
Talk to her. Try to help her calm down."
Ia responds by explaining that he didn't
feel like he had much of a choice
because all of them would be destroyed
otherwise. [music] But he takes Anchar's
advice. Ia then attempts to speak with
Tiiamat but retreats quickly for her
strength is too mighty and she is filled
with dread. Unable to hear Ia's plea,
Anchar then sends Anu to do the same.
Anu does what his father asks but finds
Tiamat's magic too much for him and
retreats as well. It is soon realized
that only one person can save the day
and so I summons Marduk to his chambers
and asks him to go and see Anchar. When
Marduk sees Anchar, Marduk understands
what is needed of him and agrees to put
an end to Tiiamat's rampage. But in
exchange, he asks that he be named the
king of the gods when it is done. Anchar
sends his vazier, whose name is Gaga,
off to inform Lamu and Lahamu of this
development, who summon a council of
gods. And over beer and pastries, they
discuss and agree to Marduk's request.
And so Marduk prepares for war.
Marduk arms [music] himself with a
number of weapons. A net, a bow with
some arrows, a club, and in addition to
his four winds, also creates three more,
the evil wind, the dust storm, and the
tempest. He also brings with him the
storm flood, his mightiest weapon, and
he rode a chariot of irresistible storm,
which were pulled by forced deeds, the
destroyer, the merciless, the trampler,
and the fleet. As he approached Tiiamat,
Marduk observed Kingu and [music] his
shining tablet of destinies. As Marduk
looked, his determination fell and he
faltered. Many of his divine aids who
were marching at his side saw the
warrior and their vision went dim. How
could they even stand a chance?
Summoning his courage, Marduk hurls the
storm flood at Tiiamat and yells
something to the effect of, "Tiiamat,
why are you aggressive and arrogant and
strive to provoke battle? Against all of
the gods you have stirred up and
established trouble, deploy your troops,
secure your weapons. You and I will take
our stand and do battle." When Tiiamat
heard this, she went insane.
A great celestial battle commenced.
When Marduk gets close enough to Tiamat,
he first traps her in his net. Then he
shoots the evil wind at her [music]
face, who opens her mouth to swallow it,
but she is unable to, and it holds her
mouth open. He then shoots an arrow into
her belly, which cuts through her
insides and extinguishes her life.
Marduk then binds up her small army who
are now cowering in fear and retrieves
the tablet of destinies from Kingu. Then
he returns to Tiiamat and with his
merciless club crushes her head and then
cuts her in two. Half of her body is
used to create the earth and the other
half is used to create the heavens.
Following this, Marduk is crowned the
king of the gods. He positions 600
[music] gods on the earth and 300 in the
heavens. And the city of Babylon is
created in his honor and [music] the
other gods praise him. Marduk conceives
a desire to accomplish clever things.
And he announces that using divine
blood, he will create a new being called
man who will continue the work of the
gods so that they may all rest and be
peaceful. Ia proposes that one of
Tiiamat's defeated warrior gods be used
for the blood. And so Marduk asks the
gods who caused Tiiamat to rebel and
instigate warfare. The gods respond that
it was Kingu. And so they bring him
forth, bound it up, and slay him.
Kingu's blood is then mixed with clay
from the earth. And with this mixture,
Ia and his wife, the birth goddess,
created humans.
Ia doesn't want to make them exactly as
the gods, but gives them many abilities
and traits, but withholds immortality on
them. Marduk imposes labor commanding
that they serve the gods by their work
in the fields and cities and provide
offerings and worship [music] regularly.
Our story comes to a grand finale and
ends with Marduk being given 50 names by
which he can be worshiped and reminding
people that against Marduk no one
[music] else can face him for he is the
supreme ruler of the universe.
Now, the story we just looked at is
written down in exceptional detail in a
series of tablets called the Anuma
Elish, of which several main
translations are available online for
anyone out there who is curious to read
them. The story begins in a very similar
way to the Sumerian edition that we
discussed prior [music] with Namu.
However, the Anuma Elish expands upon it
further, taking the story into one of a
terrifying battle and the rise of a new
very strong masculine power. Throughout
history, this story gained prominence in
Babylon and as we heard in the story
itself is used to explain how Babylon
came to be. Eventually, this story even
influenced the creation of the Bible.
Now, you might be thinking, "Hold up,
there is no way that there's this epic
battle in the Bible." However, in Psalm
74, in the midst of God ordering the sea
and the dry land, [music] establishing
the sun, the moon, the stars, and the
seasons, he's also destroying sea
monsters.
Yet, God, my king, is from old, working
salvation in the midst of the earth. You
divided the sea by your might. You broke
the heads of the sea monsters on the
waters. You crushed the heads of the
Leviathan and you gave him as food for
the creatures of the [music] wilderness.
Ta.
Sure enough, fighting sea dragons right
there in the Bible.
We can also see a rather curious
correlation to the Bible by the fact
that Marduk is given 50 holy names, many
of which follow a similar naming
convention by the names of God found in
the Bible. For example, where in Hebrew
it goes Yahweh and then Yahweh Jire,
Yahweh Rafa, Yahweh Ni, and so on,
Marduk's 50 names also give him a title
and then continue to expand upon it
several times before repeating this
pattern with another title such as Tutu,
Tutu Zokina, Tutu Ziku, Tutu Aaku, and
so on. Ultimately, the question remains,
what does it all mean? And what does it
have to do with us? Why do we care?
Now, previously we looked at the various
possible interpretations of the title
gods as either planets, people, or
forces of nature. When looking into the
ancient Sumerian and Babylonian records,
the honest truth is that today we don't
really understand exactly what they were
referring to, although there are some
popular theories about it. To most in
the academic world, this story is an
allegory for the formation of the
universe from the primordial substance
of creation. It is seen as a triumph of
order over chaos and light over
darkness. It has been observed as a
parable of the rise of Babylon in
Babylonian culture over the older
Sumerian model of civilization. Further,
this tale can be understood as an
illustration of the concept of life as
perpetual change. In this myth, the old
static gods in the story are replaced by
the younger, more dynamic gods who then
introduce the concept of change and
mutability to the universe through the
creation of mortal beings who are
subject to death. These creatures are
tasked with helping the gods maintain
their creation. And so, although they
themselves are not eternal, they play an
integral role in the work of the gods.
Other scholars who interpret these
stories in a more metaphorical way
suggest that the great celestial battle
is actually explaining original sin in a
different form than we're familiar with.
Because humans are created from the
blood of the slain Kingu, who was the
chief warrior for Tiiamat, representing
primordial chaos and a force of powerful
evil. [music] Because of this, humans
have the capacity for evil. And this
story was one of the ways that early
humanity made sense of [music] this. And
personally we also see a huge
correlation between this story and the
coalistic tree of life. In the beginning
there was Absu and Tiiamat who if we
correlate the stories together emerged
from Namu. Then we have the creation of
six deities in pairs of two which
creates these paired opposites along the
left and right side of the tree bringing
us to the bottom. In the resulting
struggle for the rulership and
harmonization of the entire tree or the
totality of creation, Marduk wins,
creating the center of Tifered.
Further, there are a number of other
ways we could position these characters
in relationship to the tree, such as
putting Absu at the top and Tiiamat at
the bottom since she is the Earth after
all and all of the other gods being
created between them. This is of course
just a curious musing of ours, but a
very interesting correlation
nonetheless.
Now, this may very well be the end of
the story that these ancient myths are
steeped in metaphors [music] and ideas
which reflect human consciousness and
that's that. However, [music] in the
last 50 years or so, a different idea
about what the story meant came to
light. This new telling suggested that
in fact the story was a bit of a secret
code, a story with clues alluding to
something that really happened in
history. This story has planetary
collisions, aliens, spacemen, and so
much more. When this telling came out,
it became one of the first times that
the world truly took an interest in
these tablets. And this story only came
about because a young boy became
obsessed with a burning question.
In the early 1920s, a young boy named
Zechariah Sitchin found himself in
school listening to his teacher reading
from the Bible. It was in Genesis 6 that
he heard his teacher say, "There were
giants on the earth in those days." To
which Zechariah raised his hand and
asked, "Um, why do you say giants? The
older Hebrew says Nephilim. Who are the
Nephilim?" His teacher replied, "Sit
down, Zechariah. You do not question the
Bible."
And so it began. Who are the Nephilim?
became this burning obsessive question
in the mind of this young inspired boy.
Following his experience with his
teacher, Zechariah realized that he had
full faith in the Bible all along. What
he was questioning was the translation
of the Bible and the individual
interpretations of that translation.
Not being [music] able to ask his
teachers for help, he decided to take
matters into his own hands. Growing up,
he searched for answers and soon learned
about the discovery of the Sumerian
tablets. It was here that Zechariah
[music] found the origins of the Old
Testament along with a large volume of
supporting works that had never made it
into the official release of the Bible.
He realized [music] in order to
understand the answer to this question
of the Nephilim, he would have to learn
Sumerian Cunia form. This began
Zechariah's lifelong journey of
dedication to reading and deciphering
the meaning within the texts and the
answer to the question, who are the
Nephilim?
In 1976, Sitchin released his first
book, The 12th Planet, which shocked the
world with what he had found in his
years with the tablets [music] and began
bringing people together around a new
idea of Earth's history. By 1998, he had
completed the Earth Chronicles with the
Cosmic Code [music] and then released
numerous other books all the way up to
his passing away in 2010. To him, he was
overcome with an interpretation of the
tablets that he believed was attempting
to explain a series of actual physical
events that took place in our history
and explain the reason that things are
the way they are in our solar system and
on our planet today. Of course, many
critics have put forth that Sitchin,
while he may have laid a lot of
groundwork here for the discussion of
the tablets, also added and embellished
the story quite a bit with his own
theories and ideas, sometimes drawing
conclusions that others were not able to
find written in the ancient tablets.
Nevertheless, [music]
following Sitchin's interpretations, we
find several remarkable correlations
both within our solar system, on our
planet, and even in our very own DNA,
which simply cannot be ignored. As
always, please have your own experience
as we go through this story. Even if you
don't believe this to be historical
fact, you may enjoy it for the
fascinating tale that it is. Now,
[music] let us explore one of the most
unique interpretations of this great
celestial battle and truly see if it
stands up to scientific [music] scrutiny
today.
In order to discuss this theory, we
begin by exploring how a solar system is
formed. There are still a lot of
mysteries in science as to how solar
systems come to be. And today, there are
two primary models we're going to look
at. The first that we'll be going over
is the current [music] standard model,
which is the general consensus in most
scientific circles today. After that,
we'll be looking at the electric
universe theory, which puts forth a
different interpretation about how solar
systems form, and a very interesting one
at that. Starting with the standard
model, today it's believed that a star
is born in the vastness of the arms of a
galaxy. When a large collection of
cosmic dust and gas becomes compressed
by gravity into a singular point made of
increasingly compressed dust and gas, it
begins to emit a massive amount of light
and heat and ends up creating a large
disc spiraling all around it.
Deep inside the cloudy disc, clumps of
dust are flash heated into droplets of
molten rock, the building blocks of the
solar system. As they spiral around the
forming star, these clumps of matter
begin to merge together and grow into
larger and larger bodies, which form the
basis of asteroids and planets. Sometime
during this development, the protostar
under goes fusion and ignites itself
into a baby star which emits a
tremendous amount of something called
solar wind, blasting away the dusty
cloud, leaving behind only the solid and
denser matter which continues to merge
and form together into planets until
they become the celestial bodies of a
solar system.
One curious thing we should mention is
that there is a great mystery about how
our watery planet got here. Because in
the early formation of the solar system,
it is believed it would be too hot for
water to not evaporate and get blasted
out with the dust by the solar wind. One
of the leading theories about how we
could have got all of this water is by
flying space rocks called carbonatous
condrites which can carry water on them
and crash down to the planet. This
however still leaves many questions for
us to answer because if this is the
case, why don't we see the same amount
of water anywhere else in the solar
system? except of course in the asteroid
[music] belt. At any rate, the reason
why this conversation is important is
because in Sitchin's theory of the
Sumerian tablets, the story begins in
the very early days of our solar system.
The opening lines of the Enuma ilish
begin when the heavens above did not
exist and earth beneath had not come
into being. There was Absu, the first in
order, their begetter.
Most [music] commonly, Absu is
interpreted by scholars as the god of
fresh water, believing him to relate
with underwater aquifers under the
surface of Mesopotamia. Sitchin, on the
other hand, believed this line to be
describing the sun, the first in order,
begetter of them all. Mumu Absu's vazier
was Mercury, [music]
a small body of matter orbiting very
close to the bright star. And of course,
there was the beautiful goddess called
Tiiamat, [music] the glistening one. the
maiden of life, which was the planet
that eventually became the Earth.
However, in the beginning, it was not
the same as we know our Earth to be
[music] today. Tiiamat was a
particularly special planet, for it was
entirely covered with water, the only
planet like it in the solar system.
[music] It was also quite a bit larger
than the Earth is today, approximately
the size of Neptune, and it had a
different orbit as well. It was a little
bit further from the sun in an orbit
that we would locate where the asteroid
belt is today between Mars and Jupiter.
Regarding the formation of Tiiamat,
observations of interstellar clouds and
other basic sciences, show that hydrogen
and oxygen, the building blocks of
water, are some of the most abundant
elements in the universe. And so it
would make sense that as the solar
system was forming, there was likely
tons of water ice, or at least hydrogen
and oxygen that was getting pulled in
from all directions, colliding together,
and forming into what was likely a
rather [music] large field of water,
ice, and other debris, which may have
even been partially liquid, solid, and
gaseous all at the same time, spinning
around in a fury of deadly [music] winds
and storm. In a document titled origin
of water ice in the solar system, a
scientist of the lunar and planetary
laboratory explains that the origin of
water ice during [music] planetary
formation comes from at least two
sources. It condenses beyond a certain
distance from the proto sun, no more
than five astronomical units, but
perhaps as close as two, and it falls in
from the surrounding molecular cloud.
This is especially interesting to us as
it relates with our theory because the
asteroid belt is 2.2 to 3.2 to AU away
from the sun which is where Tiiamat was
said to be according to this story. This
will also make more sense by the time we
conclude our exploration of this theory.
Returning to the Babylonian epic,
Sitchin goes on to explain that the
formation of the following six deities
in pairs of two describe the formation
of the other planets in our solar system
out of the early debris that spiraled
around the sun. [music] The first, for
example, Lamu and Lahamu are believed to
describe Mars and Venus. Curiously, the
names Lamu and Lahamu etmologically
derive from the Sumerian word for war.
Sitchin explains that the Mesopotamians
knew Mars to be the god of war and Venus
was the god of love and war. And so the
concept that Lamu and Lahamu were Mars
and Venus fit both mythologically and
etmologically. [music]
Then Kishar and Anchar form who are said
to surpass or excel beyond Lamu and
Lahamu. These were of course Jupiter and
Saturn. The Babylonians make a special
note to describe that Anchar had a
firstborn emissary or vizier named Gaga
which is believed to be a particular
moon of Saturn which would one day
become Pluto [music] and we'll look at
how that happens momentarily. After that
we have our final two deities coming
into being Anu and Ia. [music] Anu is
said to represent Uranus and Ia Neptune.
These two are also known by other names,
An and Anki, from the original Sumerian
telling of the story. I find it
extremely curious that Neptune is also a
name for the god of the sea in Roman
mythology, synonymous with the Greek
Poseidon. It's curious because Ia or
Anki in Mesopotamia was firstly called
the god of water. It's also curious that
the planet Neptune wasn't actually even
discovered until 1846.
H. Now, the way that Sitchin interpreted
this story is that in those early days
of the solar system, the orbits of the
planets were not established or
harmonious yet. [music] As the tablets
tell us, they surged back and forth and
disturbed Tiiamat's belly. Sitchin
writes, "The newly created family
[music] of planets was far from being
stable. The planets were gravitating
towards each other. They were converging
on Tiiamat, disturbing and endangering
the primordial [music] bodies. We have
here obvious references to erratic
orbits. The new planets surged back and
forth. They got close to each other.
They interfered with Tiiamat's orbit.
While it was Tiiamat that was
principally [music] endangered, Absu too
found the planet's ways loathsome.
The tablets describe that Absu, [music]
caring for Tiiamat, expresses the idea
of destroying the children. This part is
curious when relating it with planets.
Perhaps it refers to the young star
emitting blasts of radiation which could
potentially destroy these young planets
completely or at least send them flying
off into space. During this part of the
story and what follows next with the
death of Absu, Sigin theorized several
ideas with the basic premise being that
something whether relating with Ia the
planet Neptune emitting waves of
radiation or even just time itself
caused the sun to settle its turbulent
energy. Nevertheless, it's interesting
that after this point, Absu is no longer
referred to as a deity, but rather a
location. Ia is said to claim Absu's
throne and as he lay in his quarters, he
names them Absu. This act in the story
could be referring to the sun's
radiation and cosmic wind which had now
finally settled. It's not entirely
clear, but generally the interpretations
of this scene describe a shift in the
early solar system where now any new
planets to come into the system had to
come from the outside of which Neptune
was sort of like a gatekeeper for being
at the outermost edge of the solar
system. Therefore, Ia took over the role
of Absu.
As far as the story goes, this is where
we see the older deities beginning to be
taken over by the younger ones. And
that's exactly what happens because
shortly after this, Ia gives birth to
Marduk [music] and Tiiamat grows angry
towards her children. Marduk, as you
might have guessed, was interpreted to
be a new planet that entered into our
solar system from the outside. To avoid
confusion, let me briefly mention that
in Sitchin's interpretations, Marduk,
especially when referring to it as a
planet, is commonly known by the name
Nibiru, which has become a rather
popular name in recent years for a
supposed missing planet, which is said
to exist in the far reaches of our solar
system. However, the word Nibiru in the
ancient [music] tablets is written about
in a number of ways. It's a word used to
sometimes describe a planet, usually
Jupiter, and one time Mercury. It's used
to describe a god, specifically Marduk,
which could be a planet. It's also used
to describe a star in the sky,
specifically Marduk's star. In
Babylonian astronomy, Nibiru also seems
to refer to the equinox [music] and the
astronomical objects associated with it.
Finally, Nibiru is referred to as a
location, a place in which the gods, who
are called the Anunnaki come from. It's
for this reason that scholars of Cunia
astronomy have not been able to
determine with certainty what Nibiru is.
But it's because of Sitchin's work that
Nibiru is often regarded as a name for
this additional planet that's in our
outer solar system, of which Marduk is
seemingly a more appropriate name. Then
again, there are interpretations out
there that account for both Marduk and
Nibiru as their own individual
characters or things, but
interpretations get very complex when we
go there. So, for now, let's return to
our story. As we've discussed, Marduk
was said to be born of Ia and his wife
Damkina, who is sometimes referred to as
a great queen or goddess of nature. This
is another confusing part of the
Babylonian epic because nowhere in the
Anuma Illish does it describe where she
comes from. [music] She's just kind of
there, but you do get more of an origin
story when referencing other tablets
from ancient Mesopotamia. If we're
looking at the story from the planetary
perspective, [music] it's very possible
that she could be representing the
vacuum of space and that Marduk was
pulled through the womb of space by the
gravity of our solar system and entered
into our system passing by Neptune
essentially becoming Ia's son. Sitchin
proposed that based on what was written
about Marduk that it was a large planet
approximately the size of Neptune that
entered into our solar system in the
opposite direction compared to the other
planets. He said that it had a long
elliptical orbit going way out into the
far reaches of our solar system and
returned back in a time frame of
approximately 3600 years. When this
planet passed through, it was always a
great event in the solar system as it
affected the gravity of the other
planets causing earthquakes and tidal
waves. Then it would go way out past the
distant planets and disappear from
sight.
Some theories suggest that this planet
could have come to our solar system in
the first place when its own local star
exploded [music] and it careened off
into space on its own.
Nevertheless, Sigin believed that Marduk
must have been a very young planet for
[music] the tablet said that he was
belching fire which could have been a
sign of tremendous volcanic activity and
radiation. The drama of this great
celestial battle begins when Marduk
first entered into our solar system. And
as it passed by Uranus, something
intense happens. The tablets write. Anu
formed and gave birth to the four winds.
He delivered them to Marduk. My son, let
them whirl.
These lines were interpreted as
depicting several large chunks of planet
matter beginning to tear away from
Uranus's body [music] and pulled towards
the passing Marduk, which resulted in
the formation of four satellites. These
were the four winds which were thrust
into a fast orbit around the planet,
swirling as a whirlwind.
This would have been the theorized event
causing numerous anomalies with Uranus,
including its sideways tilt and warped
magnetic field.
Continuing to move into our solar
system, the planet was soon seized by
the tremendous gravitational forces of
Saturn and Jupiter and its path was bent
inwards towards the center of our solar
system and Tiiamat. In the story, when
Marduk comes to visit Anchar, who is
supposedly Saturn, Anchar sends his
vizier Gaga off to see Lamu and Lahamu,
Mars and Venus. This, Sitchin believed,
was that Marduk's gravity pulled one of
Saturn's small moons away from it,
loosening its orbit and sent it off into
space past Venus and Mars, eventually
establishing a rather curious orbit of
its own, which today we [music] know as
Pluto. It's possible that along its
path, Marduk may also have influenced
the creation of Chiron, the small
planettoid between Saturn and Uranus. As
it drew closer, Marduk's gravity soon
began to disturb all of the inner
planets, most of all Tiiamat, whose
water and rocks began to break apart and
tear from her body, creating 11
satellites that spiraled around the
planet as if acting as a shield. These
were the 11 dragons and monsters that
Tiiamat summoned in the story. Sitchin
wrote that the tablets described Marduk
and Tiiamat to have been crowned with
[music] halos giving the appearance of
gods. Of particular importance in the
Mesopotamian cosmogyny was the largest
of Tiiamat satellites, Kingu, the first
born among the gods who formed her
assembly. It is significant because as
Marduk approached, Kingu was pulled
closer to Marduk and away from Tiiamat's
orbit. Sitchin believed [music] that
Kingu being pulled away like this was
Tiiamat giving Kingu the tablet of
destinies. [music] In this
interpretation, the tablet itself was
actually a planetary orbit of its own of
which Kingu almost adopted. [music]
Nevertheless, soon Marduk was set on an
unalterable collision course with
Tiiamat. Tiiamat [music] and Marduk, the
wisest of the gods, advanced against one
another. They pressed on to single
combat. They approached for battle.
When it passed by, it was not Marduk
itself, but one of the swirling winds
around it that crashed into Tiiamat and
severed a phenomenal chunk, [music]
splicing her in half. All of Tiiamat's
satellites, with the exception of Kingu,
were instantly shattered, and their
remains continued to spiral around the
sun in Tiiamat's orbit. Her body became
distended. Her mouth had opened wide. He
shot there through an arrow. [music] It
tore her belly. It cut through her
insides, tore into her womb. Having thus
subdued her, her life breath he
extinguished.
Tiiamat was left fissured and lifeless.
But her fate had future encounters
between the two planets in store. Marjuk
went sailing off into space, [music] yet
now gravitationally bound to return to
the scene of this event.
It was on the second pass through our
solar system that Marduk satellites once
again crashed with the Tiamat's remains,
cleaving her in two. This heavy blow
sent one massive chunk destined [music]
to become the Earth into an orbit where
no planet had been orbiting before. The
fragments of Tiiamat that were shattered
formed what we now call the asteroid
belt, which the Sumerian tablets called
the hammered bracelet. With the passage
of time and a lot of extreme tectonic
activity, the remains of Tiiamat
eventually returned to a spherical
shape. This time with more land on its
surface than it had before. Kenu, which
hovered in the region of Tiiamat since
their first encounter with Marduk,
followed Tiiamat to her new location
between Mars and Venus and became the
moon.
Marduk once again shot out into space
and continued to orbit around the sun
from a long distance away.
This, according to Sitchin's
interpretations of the tablets, is how
the earth got to be where it is today.
What we've covered here was closer to
the original interpretation from
Sitchin's first book, The 12th Planet.
And both Sitchin and a wide array of
other authors have discussed and played
with variations of the story. For
example, there is a version where the
smashed Tiiamat had to be repaired and
realigned by the beings called the
Anunnaki and receded the planet with
life afterwards. Ultimately, today what
we've covered is the basic story and
encourage everyone to explore this as
you see fit. Now the reason that Marduk
or Nibiru was called the 12th planet was
because Titchin's understanding of the
ancient Sumerians they observed the moon
and the sun as planets when counting
them all which in addition to Pluto
gives us 11 and Marduk then is the 12th.
Further we would be remiss if we didn't
share that this is contested by skeptics
who put forth that the Sumerians didn't
actually know of any planets beyond the
ones that are visible. This would then
imply that the story was not one about
planets. End of story. However, one
possible explanation for this is that if
the stories historically are true and
that the legend was handed down to the
Sumerians and Babylonians by another
species beyond our own, then they could
have encoded the story of the origin of
our solar system inside the myth of
Tiiamat and Marjuk. Even if these
ancient people didn't fully understand
what the story was truly saying, we'll
revisit this idea as we continue on, for
this is only the beginning of our
exploration with these tablets. After
this, we get to [music] hear the story
of the creation of humanity on the newly
created Earth.
But before we go further into that,
let's investigate this whole planet
Marduk thing further. The topic of
Marduk or Nibiru is not a new one and
has received attention and thought from
around the world over and over since
Sitchin's first book came out in the
1970s. There are also plenty of
conspiracy theories on the internet that
respond to these ideas. And not to
mention, it's received a fair share of
debunkings as well. Remarkably,
Sitchin's version of the story does a
fairly decent job at explaining a number
of anomalies in our solar system, such
as the formation of the asteroid belt
and why there's so much water in it, the
tilt of Uranus and its warped magnetic
field. It also describes how the moon
was formed, and Pluto's crazy orbit,
among other things. Of course, the
theory is not without its holes and
challenges, and a lot of critics have
pointed out inconsistencies and other
aspects of Sitchin's theories that don't
always seem to stand up well to
scrutiny. But I mean, look, the skeptics
have a point, too. In the story written
in the Anuma Elish, it describes that at
one point, all of the gods gathered
together to discuss the situation with
Tiiamat. [music]
They sat at a big table drinking beer,
eating grain, and agreed that Mardik
would be their avenger. There are so
many ways we could interpret those
lines. Perhaps they're not planets, but
actual beings in a cosmic space battle.
Or perhaps it's just [music] an
embellishment of the Babylonians to make
the gods seem more human. Or just maybe
the entire story is the result of a
bunch of ancient people discovering
psychedelic [music]
mushrooms in the wild and then
describing to each other what they saw
on their journey and it became their
religion. Ultimately, our goal shouldn't
be fighting each other over which theory
is correct, [music] but openly
investigating all of the possibilities
until we arrive together at the truth.
With all of this in mind, there's one
way we might just be able to prove that
this story is true. And that would be if
we could actually find this missing
planet that according to the story
should be lurking in our outer solar
system.
Opening up the research on Nibiru, well,
there's literally a mountain of
information available. And digging into
it, you'll find everything from, "Of
course Nibiru is real," all the way to,
"Ah, did you just use the word Nibiru in
a sentence? Are you serious?"
Now, we feel that an openhearted
exploration is always the best practice.
And so, we're going to do our best to
cover as much information as we can.
[music] Take a deep breath because it's
a lot. And one final thing before we get
started regarding the name between
Nibiru and Marduk. From now on, we're
just going to use the name Nibiru for
this possible distant planet. And the
reason for this is because there's
another theory we'll look at that
explores [music] a different version of
the Marduk and Tiamat battle, of which
associates Marduk with the planet Mars.
As always, we encourage you to practice
critical thinking and discernment with
[music] everything we discuss as we open
our minds and explore this together.
Now, the search for a larger planet
beyond Neptune has been going on since
the discovery of Neptune in 1846 when
observed anomalies in the orbit of
Uranus suggested another large planet
lay farther out. In 1906, the term
Planet X was coined by Peral Lel, the
founder of the Lowel Observatory in
Flagstaff, Arizona, when he began his
search for this distant planet. In 1930,
Clyde Tomba discovered Pluto at the
Lowel Observatory, but it was not big
enough to be what they were looking for.
In 1984, scientists [music] thought that
our sun could actually have a companion,
a theoretical small dwarf star, which
they called Nemesis, which could explain
and cause the gravitational anomalies
they were witnessing. However, to this
day, no dwarf star has been found. In
1992, refined calculations showed that
the mass of Neptune was.5% smaller than
assumed and thus the discrepancies in
Uranus's orbit were dismissed [music] as
incorrect and the need for a planet X
went away. Then in 1999, astronomers
observed curious anomalies in the
gravity and movement of certain comets
in the outer solar system and they
theorized that a Jupiter sized planet
which they called Tyiki lurked in the
far reaches of our solar system. Later
in 2003, Sedna was discovered, a small
exoplanet whose strange 12,000-year
orbit indicated [music] that something
massive well beyond Pluto was altering
Sedna's path.
Jumping to 2014, an all sky survey from
WISE, the wide field infrared survey
explorer satellite, ruled out the
existence of any [music] planets larger
than Saturn orbiting our sun at a
distance of about 10,000 astronomical
units, or AU. This is a ridiculously far
distance considering that 1 AU is the
distance [music] between the Earth and
the Sun. This put an end to the theory
of Tiki. However, since Saturn is larger
than Neptune and Nibiru is said to be
about the size of Neptune, the Wise
satellite would not have registered a
planet smaller than Saturn if it had
scanned one.
In January of 2016, two well-respected
planetary scientists, Constantine
Batigan and Mike Brown of the California
Institute of Technology, discovered what
they believe to be a large, roughly
Neptune- sized planet in the outer
reaches of our solar system. This planet
[music] is well beyond Pluto, and many
are now calling it Planet X or Planet 9.
This planet has not yet been seen, but
advanced technology shows that without a
doubt, something is out there. The
planetary body is fully detectable
through observations of six other
previously discovered objects that orbit
beyond Neptune. All of which appear to
cluster around a singular larger body
with only a .007%
chance that this clustering is just a
coincidence.
What astronomers currently believe is
that this [music] planet-sized object
has a rather interesting elliptical
orbit ranging anywhere from between
600,200
AU to as close as 200 AU with the
exception that researchers don't
currently calculate this planet
traveling anywhere near Jupiter or the
asteroid belt. The rest of the evidence
appears to match what we've heard about
Nibiru's path and influence. To that
end, however, we theorize that if this
planet is actually Nibiru and it's been
orbiting our solar system for millions
or billions of years, then it's possible
that its orbit has rounded out over
time, becoming less sharp and
stabilizing into a more centered and
wide curved orbit farther and farther
out.
Regardless of whether this planet is
Nibiru or not, these two amazing
planetary scientists, Mike and
Constantine, have acknowledged that no
one will believe in this planet until it
actually appears in the telescopic
viewfinder. And they are working hard to
make viewing this [music] planet a
reality. At this moment, however,
current telescopic technology such as
the Hubble Space [music] Telescope or
the 10 m KEK telescopes in Hawaii have
extremely tiny fields of view. Looking
for this planet X manually would be like
looking for a needle in a field of hay
stacks by peering through a drinking
straw. Curiously though, when we compare
the story of the great celestial battle
to what currently exists in our solar
system, we find a number of anomalies
that may point to Nibiru's existence.
While we've touched on these briefly
before, let's go over them more
thoroughly now.
The first anomaly, the asteroid belt.
Towards the end of the 18th century,
even before Neptune had been discovered,
several astronomers demonstrated that
the planets were placed at certain
distances from the sun according to some
definite law. The suggestion, which came
to be known as Bod's law, convinced
astronomers that a planet ought to be
revolving in a place where hitherto no
planet had been known to exist, that is
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
In the position where Tiiamat was said
to have been in our solar system, today
we find a large belt of floating rocks
that we call the asteroid belt. Upon
closer inspection, the asteroid belt is
a mashup of a variety of rocky minerals
and water. There's actually a ton of
frozen water in this belt, including a
small dwarf planet named [music]
seriesiri, which is at least in part a
giant ball of frozen water. In fact,
there's so much water on series that
astronomers believe it has even more
water than the Earth does. Is it
possible that the asteroid belt itself
is the remnants of an ancient planetary
cataclysm?
However, taking account of the mass of
the asteroid belt itself, it doesn't
seem like there's quite enough matter in
it to fill 3/4 of a Neptune- sized
planet. The amount of mass in the belt
is only about 4% of the mass of the
moon. And so that leaves a lot of matter
missing. There are two main things we
can think of that could account for
this. First, that a rather large
majority of planet matter from Tiiamat
was blasted off into space free of any
planetary orbit. And only a small amount
of the remnants of Tiiamat actually
survived to form the asteroid belt.
Second, and perhaps even more likely, is
that if Nibiru kept coming back through
the solar system for a long time, every
time [music] it passed through the
asteroid belt, it would probably throw a
ton of asteroids out as it passed
through, leaving much less there than
there originally was.
The second anomaly, the moon. The moon
is a huge piece in this puzzle. The most
popular theory about the origins of the
moon today is that it was created in
some sort of massive collision. This
leading [music] theory is called the
giant impact hypothesis, which suggests
that the moon was formed out of the
debris left over from a collision
between Earth and an astronomical body
the size of Mars approximately 4.5
[music]
billion years ago. This theory goes on
to state that the moon is likely made up
of matter from both the Earth and the
body that crashed into it, causing a
thorough mixing of material [music] from
both parent bodies. This theory is
favored by scientists regarding the
creation of the moon because of a body
of evidence, [music] including that the
Earth's spin and moon's orbit have
similar orientations and that moon
samples indicate the surface was once
molten. Further and coinciding with the
first anomaly, there is the discovery of
water on the moon. But not just on it,
in it also. Lunar astronauts from the
1970s [music] had collected these tiny
glass beads left over from ancient
volcanic eruptions. And recent
investigations into these [music] beads
found that little bits of water were
actually hiding inside them. Researching
this further has given rise to the idea
that these volcanic deposits are indeed
widespread and that the material inside
the moon is significantly wetter than
previously thought. Together, both the
cataclysm and [music] the water on the
moon supports the theory that the moon
began as a fragment of Tiiamat. Perhaps
one day we'll know for sure.
The third anomaly, Pluto.
Scientists today [music] have no solid
explanation for why Pluto's orbit is so
irregular. Where most of the planets
travel along the same plane in a near
circular ellipse, Pluto's orbit is
significantly wider. On top of that,
Pluto doesn't travel on the same plane
as the other planets, but moves at an
angle, dipping significantly above and
below the celestial plane. There are
theories that suggest Pluto was once a
moon of our other planets or a part of
the Kyper belt, but nothing has ever
been definitively proven on the subject.
That said, this interpretation of the
Sumerian [music] tablets suggests that
it was once a moon of Saturn and that a
rogue planet caused it to carine out
into a distant orbit. Perhaps this idea
actually has some merit, considering it
mirrors what modern theorists put forth
today.
The fourth anomaly, Uranus. [music]
A recent surge of articles online
inspired global curiosity by announcing
research and simulations indicating that
Uranus was most likely smashed in a
[music] giant collision in the
development of our early solar system.
You see, Uranus is especially strange
compared to all of the other planets.
While all of the planets [music] are
tilted in some way or another, Uranus
appears to be on its side with a
whopping 98° tilt. The researchers
responsible for this recent
investigation [music]
said, "Our findings confirmed that the
most likely outcome was that the young
Uranus was involved in a cataclysmic
collision with an object twice the mass
of Earth, if not larger, knocking it to
its side and setting in process the
events that helped create the planet we
[music] see today. In addition to its
tilt, the collision is said to be
responsible for Uranus's unique rotation
rate, atmosphere, internal structure,
and warped magnetic field. If we look at
their simulation, it shows what the
collision actually could have looked
like. Now, of course, this isn't
directly what has been interpreted from
the stories, which suggested that
Nibiru's gravity pulled matter away from
Uranus. That is, unless Nibiru actually
crashed through Uranus [music] on its
way through the solar system. I would
also love to know if it's possible for a
strong gravitational force acting upon
Uranus to have a similar resulting
effect on the blue planet. Of course, at
this point, we really only have theories
and [music] simulations, but one thing
is for certain. Uranus is a distinct
planet with a whole lot of mystery
around it.
I'd like to conclude this exploration of
our anomalies simply by saying that
while we've just covered these today,
there is certainly an abundance of
information out there that would lend
itself to this conversation. And I would
love to extend this investigation
[music] to everyone watching. Together,
there's no mystery we can't solve. And
in the spirit of scrutiny, it's time we
took a hard look at the person
responsible for these stories, Zechariah
Sitchin himself.
Perhaps one of the most important topics
when opening the box on Nibiru is the
question of the translation of the
tablets and the accuracy of Zechariah
Sitchin's interpretations. To some,
Sitchin was a brilliant scholar with
revolutionary ideas about the ancient
Sumerian and Babylonian gods. To others,
he was a pseudocientist and
pseudoistorian with delusional thinking.
Sometimes people even claim he was a
Freemason or sent by the Illuminati
specifically to mess with us.
Regardless, it's clear that his ideas
have changed the way that many people
view human life, human nature, and our
role in the cosmos.
When Sitchin first began his work, there
were very few people in the world who
actually read or understood Sumerian
Cunia form. [music] And this still
remains true today. To say it's not a
common dialect today is a massive
understatement. In 2006, a book titled
Sumerian Lexicon was published which
helped provide guidance for those
seeking to decipher the Sumerian texts.
Since then, a number of academics have
spotted inaccuracies in Sitchin's
translations. Some of these inaccuracies
are perhaps interpretive as well as
Sitchin tends towards literalism both in
how he perceives images and words.
Certain scholars also contend through
literal interpretation that Sitchin
ignores known historical and
mythological contexts in favor of his
own views. For example, Sitchin is very
famous for pointing to a seal called
cylinder seal VA243
which depicts an image of a circle
surrounded by 11 smaller circles.
This according to Sitchin is an image of
our solar system as the story is told in
the tablets.
Critics however point out that the image
of the sun in the center is not the sun
because when compared to hundreds of
other tablets that depict the sun, the
image is different, usually depicting a
star with either six or eight points.
Although in this first tablet we looked
at there is a six-sided star around the
central circle. Further, critics point
out that there is nowhere in any other
text in Sumerian or Mesopotamian tablets
that suggest the Sumerians knew that
there were more than five planets. A man
named Michael Heiser, one of the leading
debunkers for Sitchin's work and the
author of sitchinis.com,
describes that the circles may represent
some star cluster or relate with some
deity connected with fertility due to
the other information on the same
tablet. He also suggests that it could
describe the 12 member council of the
Mesopotamian gods called the Anunnaki,
but he insists that it's absolutely not
a solar system. What do you think? Do
you believe this could be a solar
system? Please share your thoughts about
it in the comments. Now, Michael Heiser
has presented a great deal of
information on his numerous websites
explaining his theories of the Sumerian
tablets, how Sitchin is wrong, and what
he believes the tablets actually say.
But of course, with every debunker,
there is a debunker for that debunker.
[music]
And a man named Eric Vondenberg
published a document titled Heiser is
wrong in response and explains that due
to Michael being a fundamentalist
Christian, [music]
his perspectives on the tablets usually
attempts to place the stories inside a
worldview that fits with his own
Christian perspective.
Eric breaks down a number of ways that
Sitchin was actually correct despite
Michael Heiser saying he wasn't. One
example is that according to Heiser,
there is not a single Sumerian text that
associates the Anunnaki with Nibiru.
[music] And he then challenges ancient
astronaut theorists to show him such a
text. He encourages investigators to use
the online electronic text corpus of
Sumerian literature or ETCSL to do the
research. However, according to the
ETCSL, not only are the Anunnaki found
in or associated with Nibiru, but they
are found there quite frequently.
Though, this is not to suggest that
Nibiru is explicitly a planet. The
discussion about what Nibiru is is
[music] definitely still up in the air.
We'll post links in the comments so that
you can read the work of both of these
men and decide for yourself what you
choose to believe. Again, we always want
to remind everyone to practice healthy
skepticism and discernment when looking
over the information. Of course, it's
obvious that no ancient translation is
going to be 100% accurate about
everything, especially when there are so
many renditions of the various stories
across history. Not to mention, [music]
if the ETCSL or Sumerian lexicon book
got even a small number of translations
incorrect, it could lead to huge amounts
of information being interpreted wrong
or at least very different [music] from
its original intention.
Speaking of interpretations, it's
important that we recognize the version
we have been exploring of the [music]
Tiiamat and Marduk battle as these
planets is only one interpretation. And
there are others out there just as
compelling. [music]
I'd love to take a moment now to explore
another version that is extremely
interesting which is found within the
electric universe theory.
Spearheaded by the Thunderbolts project.
This theory has been rapidly growing in
popularity lately which describes the
entire universe as electrically
connected. It explains that the sun
isn't actually a nuclear fusion reactor
as we've believed for so long, but is
essentially a massive electric ball of
plasma powered by these galactic
electrical currents that spiral out
through the arms of the galaxy in a
pattern that looks very much like
Fibonacci. It's very relatable if we
consider stars to street lights drawing
energy from power lines [music] where
the power plant is the galactic center.
Further, these electrical currents
create not only stars but all forms of
material bodies from small hard
asteroids and planets to giant balls of
gas like Jupiter and Saturn. The theory
describes that these gas giants are far
more connected to stars than we realize
though because if they are in alignment
with the cosmic electrical lines, they
can ignite into a star just like a light
bulb filament which becomes red hot and
glowy when you run power through it.
This theory explains some other things
too. Take lightning for example. Despite
the modern belief that lightning is
formed in the clouds, scientifically
speaking, this is still a mystery that
is not well understood. The Thunderbolts
project has put forth a new model,
suggesting that clouds are a conductor
for the planetary and galactic
electricity all around us. The theory
also explains gravity, which today is
one of the biggest mysteries in science,
and yet which a great deal of physics is
based on. and they've suggested it's
simply a phenomenon caused by the
electrical charge of an object.
The fundamentals of the electric
universe theory wildly transforms our
perspective of the entire cosmos. And in
many ways, the model makes a lot of
sense. It's likely that this was the
understanding that Tesla had when he
designed and constructed his amazing
technologies.
But what's especially interesting about
the electric universe theory [music] is
that it's a multifaceted approach to
cosmology. On one hand, we see these
theoretical physics explaining natural
phenomenon with electricity, which is
its own distinct exploration. On the
other hand, it attempts to take into
account the mythos of the world and
hypothesize how the electric universe
theory fits into our ancient history.
They make special note that there are a
number of ancient stories around the
world describing [music] the battle of
the dragon, which of course includes
Tiiamat and Marduk. To them, it all
begins with our Earth, Mars, and a brown
dwarf star. Please keep in mind that
there are a lot of variations available
out there, [music] and today we're
simply going to cover the basic idea.
The theory begins by suggesting that not
long ago in Earth's history, we had an
entirely different sun altogether. It
was a brown dwarf star which was a free
floating activated gas giant moving
through space on its own. Along with
Mars, we traveled with it, held to its
orbit by a strong electromagnetic field,
most likely held underneath it in a
fixed position. Diagrams have been
produced to explain how this works using
Birkeland currents. We were at the
perfect distance for life to grow
naturally, and both Mars and Earth were
bathed in a perpetual warm glow. It's
possible that even Mars had life at this
stage in its history.
As our star traveled through space,
[music] eventually it came into the
vicinity of a different solar system
with a much larger star approaching at
about 24° to the ecliptic. When our
small star came close enough into the
field of this new star, it caused the
brown dwarf to shortcircuit and released
its electrical and thus gravitational
hold on the Earth and Mars. As this was
happening, the little dwarf star went
through some extreme changes. Its
electricity was going haywire, turning
off and on, losing its energy, and it
began discharging a tremendous amount of
matter. The largest of all was a massive
body of fiery material, which would
become the planet Venus. When it
discharged, it came out with sort of a
backwards kick, explaining why it has a
reverse rotation spin than all of the
other planets. It is believed that it
would have emerged out as a fireball
with a greenish hue, but was destined to
cool and solidify into the Venus we know
today. Much of the other matter that it
discharged may have even stayed in the
orbit of the gas giant, giving it
several large rings.
What happens next is quite dramatic.
[music] Imagine being on the Earth as it
topples through space into a new solar
system looking for a sustainable orbit
[music] with the inhabitants not knowing
if they were going to survive or not as
the universe whirled around them and
only really seeing stars for the first
time once free of the warm glow of the
previous star. Wallace Thornnehill, the
chief science adviser for the
Thunderbolts project, estimated that the
transition from one sun to another would
have taken about 300 years. As for
Venus, it began acting as a comet,
hurtling through the solar system at a
phenomenal rate. And then something
catastrophic happened as Mars and Venus
gravitated dangerously close to each
other. A massive discharge of
electricity exploded between them. These
planets were also fairly close to the
Earth in proximity, and [music] this
event rained lightning and massive rocks
down to our blue planet. This relates
with a few things mythologically. First,
it's theorized maybe this is why the
goddess or feminine was often associated
with green and the masculine and warrior
deities with red due to the color of the
stones crashing down from each planet.
[music]
Further, there are a number of ancient
myths describing a goddess raining fire
or destruction down from the sky such as
Inana in Sumeriia, Hatheror in Egypt,
Kali in India, and more. We also
speculate that if Mars did have life at
this period in history, this could have
been the event that blew away Mars'
atmosphere, [music] as opposed to the
ideas we first put forth in the original
Human History movie. As for the small
dwarf star, having shortcircuited and
lost its radiant red glow, it settled
down to become a gas giant, [music]
which also found a new orbit behind
Jupiter, and thus Saturn was born.
The proponents of the electric universe
theory suggest that this event was
actually the terrifying battle of the
dragon which is a legend appearing
around the world including the story
we've been exploring Tiiamat and Marduk
where in this version Marduk was Mars
and Tiiamat was Venus in Greece it was
Zeus fighting Typhon and in the Rigveda
it was Indra fighting Gitra it is
suggested that this event happened while
there were humans on the planet and
those who survived this event were
changed forever. Myths and religions
were established which described a story
of creation and a battle of the gods
which we see the roots of in many world
religions today. All over the world we
find this symbol and just look at all of
the versions of this. This image is
believed to have been the polar
configuration of these planets in
alignment with each other. Mars, [music]
Venus, and Saturn, marking a shift for
our planet forever.
And now Venus, as terrifying as she
would have been, would also have been
magnificently beautiful to watch, dance
through the sky. It's possible that
there are some connections here between
her and several familiar characters in
modern religious mythology. Venus is
commonly known as the bright morning and
evening star due to her appearance in
the sky in the mornings and evenings
[music] just after the sun rises and
sets. It's interesting because in
Christianity, the morning star is a name
given to both Jesus and [music] Lucifer.
And relating this to Venus, it could
imply that she represents both
beneficial and destructive qualities.
In ancient Sumerian, the goddess [music]
Inana plays this role perfectly as well.
She is the goddess of love, sensuality,
fertility, procreation, and [music] war.
She's also called the bright star of the
morning and the evening and was
identified with Venus. But this isn't
the only aspect of this theory which has
an interesting relationship to the
mythologies of our ancient past. In the
Mayan popal vu, it indicates a time when
the sun was unmoving, fixed in the sky
like a mirror. Similar descriptions are
also found in ancient Egypt [music] and
India. The Egyptian coffin texts report
that the ancient sun god stood fixed in
the middle of the sky. And the Chandogia
[music] upanishads say, "Now after
having risen then upwards, it the sun
rises and sets no more. It remains alone
in the center." In ancient Greek and
Roman times, we see the mythology of
Cronis, who was the leader of the first
generation of Titans. Cronis was said to
have ruled during the mythological
golden age [music] until he was
overthrown by his son Zeus and a new sun
god was established who was called
Helios. Could this be describing the
shift from one sun to another? [music]
And perhaps Cronis being banished to
Tartarus was symbolized by the rings
around Saturn appearing as sort of a
prison.
What's more interesting, Cronis was
later interpreted to be connected with
Kronos, a deity of a similar name who is
the god of time, which may also indicate
the passage of time and the shifting of
aons from one sun to another. And
eventually, these gods came to be
identified with the Roman [music] god
called Saturn. This was celebrated with
the ancient holiday of Saturnelia which
was seen as a restoration of the ancient
golden age when the world was ruled by
the god named Saturn.
Just as we observed anomalies in our
solar system related to the Nibiru
theory, there are also curious anomalies
that support this theory as well. For
example, the electric universe theory
explains why the Earth, Mars, and Saturn
all share a very similar tilt degree
when compared to the other planets,
which might imply that Neptune was also
along for the ride, for it also shares a
fairly similar tilt degree. Another very
big piece of this puzzle is the scar on
Mars, an absolutely massive gash cutting
across the face of the planet. And it's
believed that this was caused by the
electrical discharge between Venus and
Mars cutting across its surface. It's
also speculated that a smaller yet still
powerful discharge reached the Earth and
cut into its surface, giving us the
Grand Canyon. Despite the modern theory
that it was produced over millions of
years of erosion, independent studies
have shown that you can in fact use
electricity to create [music] the same
effect on rock. Adding to the anomalies
here, we once again take a look at the
asteroid [music] belt. In the previous
theory, we saw the asteroid belt formed
after Tiiamat was mostly destroyed. But
in the electric universe theory, [music]
it suggests that the asteroid belt
mostly comes from pieces of Mars and are
remnants of this great cataclysm.
[music] And because Mars did have water
on it at one point, this accounts for
the frozen water ice in the asteroid
belt. The theory also accounts for why
there's so little matter in the belt as
well because less of Mars exploded out
during the electrical impact. However,
there is still a lot of mystery around
the whole thing because we don't yet
have a definitive explanation of the
other gods in the Babylonian story. For
example, Lamu and Lahamu would no longer
be Mars and Venus as they take on the
role of Tiiamat and Marduk. It also
doesn't account for that large body way
out in deep space, the thing we're
calling Nibiru. What is that thing? The
electric universe theory is a wildly
interesting subject with a great deal of
merit and potential to evolve the way we
look at the universe. We'll likely
continue to revisit these ideas
throughout the series and more so in
future episodes to come. For now, if you
want to dive in, we highly recommend the
brand new series called Electric
Universe on Gaia, which features Wallace
Thornnehill, the chief science adviser
of the Thunderbolts Project, [music] as
they present the entire theory in a
brilliant series of episodes, and you
can find links to watch the entire thing
in the comments below.
Further, we would absolutely love to
hear what you think about this entire
theory. Between Sitchins and the
Electric Universe versions, which one do
you like better? [music] And do you
think there's some way the two stories
fit together? If you have some thoughts
on these interpretations or additional
research you'd like to share, please
post them in the comments below. You
see, at the end of the day, there are so
many distinct renditions of this story,
and I personally find so much joy and
fascination in discussing them all.
There's one version where Nibiru was
believed to be in the place of the
asteroid belt and then it exploded for
some reason or another and another
version where way out in deep space is
not just a singular planet but another
small dwarf star that we are in a binary
system with of which that rogue Nibiru
planet is just one of the planets
orbiting that star. Since the tablets
say that Nibiru was Marduk's star, maybe
Marduk is the planet and Nibiru is the
star. It's for this reason that we
really want to encourage compassionate
collaboration and discussion regarding
all of these ideas. [music] If we
explore our history together with open
minds and open hearts, not only will we
make it significantly easier to make
sense of our ancient past, but will also
set us on a course for a more harmonious
future for all of us.
Before we bring this conversation to a
close, I'd like to return to the idea of
this exoplanet Nibiru for a moment
because there's a very important aspect
of this that needs to be discussed.
[music] You see, whenever you start
reading about all of these conspiracy
theories on Nibiru, you'll find a lot of
stuff like [music] Nibiru is coming next
year. It will collide with the Earth and
kill us all.
Or at the very least, equal [music] to
doom and gloom kind of stuff.
Personally, I wanted to take a moment to
dispel these rumors and say that Nibiru
colliding with [music] the planet is not
something we need to be worried about.
Even if the stories are true and this
rogue planet really does come into our
solar system every 3600 years, [music]
it wouldn't actually ever come close
enough to our planet to cause a
collision. It would only come as close
as the asteroid belt. And sure, we'd
probably see a lot of earthquakes and
such from the gravity or electrical
charge of Nibiru impressing itself upon
the Earth, but it wouldn't kill us all
if we weren't prepared. That said, the
astronomers currently don't see Planet X
coming anywhere near us. And so, I don't
believe that's our most pressing concern
at the moment. In fact, there's a much
bigger concern we should all be focused
on together. But before we can discuss
that, we have to provide some more
context first. At any rate, we have
found that after reading Sitchin's work,
the interpretations of other scholars,
and observing the anomalies in history
and in our solar system, we've come to
the conclusion that there is enough
information here that this story
deserves a big open discussion. We trust
that as humanity evolves, we will
continue to discover the true nature of
our origins.
The truth is, this story is only just
getting started. Everything we've looked
at so far is just the jumping off point
for so much more. As we move forward, we
begin to see these ancient gods
interpreted in new ways. No longer as if
they were planets, but actual beings who
played a part in our history.