I'm excited to introduce both Yoshabach
and Ander Sandberg, two very smart
people who will discuss machine
consciousness and the cyborg leviathan.
What happens when AI becomes a conscious
mindlike civilization scaling
infrastructure?
&gt;&gt; Hey Anders, so glad to see you that you
at this moment. I just summed up the
machine consciousness hypothesis for our
audience and uh I got to the end of it
and uh very glad that you are ready to
join us for a discussion.
&gt;&gt; Awesome. Yeah. Yeah. I I wish I was
certain what consciousness is. There's
so many good options for it and I'm just
getting so confused about them.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So tell us what do you think
consciousness is?
Uh so so the obligatory start is of
course saying oh suitcase word we're
using for a lot of different things but
the really interesting thing is the
phenomenological aspect. Why does it
feel like being something when you're
that something? At least in the case of
conscious beings like humans.
&gt;&gt; And that seems to be getting at this
weird question. Uh oria naturally bound
to the processes we do in our cognition
which some days I tend to think that yep
that sounds good. I'm kind of a happy
functionalist. I'm happy to say that we
should be getting quailia even in
computers especially in brain emulations
since that's one of my hobby horses but
um presumably in other software too
other days I'm kind of thinking no there
just something universal there in
everything my table is also conscious
it's just not doing particularly much
and then I start thinking pansychism
that doesn't seem to be answering
anything either actually
&gt;&gt; yeah I find the idea of the conscious
table a bit unsatisfying
uh mainly for two reasons. One is the
boundary between the table and the
universe is working slightly different
than the boundary between my mind and
the world. Right? It's it's bit more
arbitrary. It doesn't look very
arbitrary to us because we designed the
table in such a way that we can pick it
up and put it down somewhere else and it
still looks the same. But otherwise, the
table doesn't really care about uh
whether it's part of the floor of the
room or of which room it is, right? the
table doesn't also not care about the
boundary between the table and the chair
if if you make some combination where
the chair and the table are actually one
piece of furniture right how does the
table care so basically if the table was
the substrate for something mindlike
that runs on it then the boundary of
that thing would probably not identify
with the chair in the same way as we
identify for instance with the boundary
of the body the reason why we identify
with the boundary of the body is is
because the boundary of first order
control where we can direct directly
impose an effect and gets feedback on
this effect. And this is how we
establish this boundary, right? We
construct it from the inside based on
some affordances from the perspective of
this agentic mind. And uh we don't
really see much of an agentic mind going
on in a table, right? To be a table, the
table does not need to regulate a lot of
things. It actually doesn't need to do
anything. It can be completely passive.
And we prefer it the way in which it's
passive. The other thing that is more uh
um pressing to me philosophically is
that minds are not states. They are
processes. They're evolving in a
particular way. And this particular
evolution is what's characteristic to
minds. Right? You have one thought and
the thought begets another thought. You
have a percept begets thoughts and
reactions and so on. And this is how our
mind is working. It's this evolving
stream where every part depends on what
happened before. And if you take a
random pattern in nature, you can always
say, I can compile this pattern into
what I want it to be. You see a bunch of
say leaves tumbling or you see a bunch
of molecules in brownian motion in the
surface of your table. Uh couldn't we
compile this interpret it as a sequence
of mental states? And the thing is every
compilation step would require a new
function.
&gt;&gt; And if you see these leaves then one
state and the tumbling of the leaves is
now compiled into one thought. Now we
use the same compiler on the next state
of the leaves and is not that the sort
continues the page supposed to right
instead it's still just this random
number generator that is the input that
would need where you need to filter out
all the numbers and what's left over is
the sort right what it basically would
mean if you the table is actually able
to be interpreted the brownian motion of
the molecules in there you would need to
filter out all the parts of the brownian
motion that do not correspond to an
interesting evolution of thoughts that
are only beholden to their own inner
causes structure and uh then on top of
this retain this uh this causal
structure which basically means you need
to impose a computer into the table
right you need to have this causal
insulator a computer by its nature is
such a causal insulator that filters out
the noise from its environment brownie
in motion falling leaves and whatever
all this random stuff that happens in
the present in this parent universe and
then allows us to use some of the
structure that we recover after we
filtered out everything in some error
correcting way to create another and
alternate universe that is only beholden
to its own causal dynamics and minds
depend on this right we depend on
isolating ourselves from the subset to
such a degree that we can have thoughts
regardless of fluctuations in our body
temperature brownie motion in the cells
and so on and uh this causal filtering
is something that we don't observe
happening in the table that's why I
don't think that there is a reason to
think that the the table is actually a
substrate for interesting mental
processes unlike organism
which are both incentivized to have that
and have the means to do so and also we
observe them doing this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Now I think in defense of
pansychism it would not just be the
table but everything being conscious but
your argument basically means that that
consciousness is kind of an
epiphenomenon. It doesn't seem to have
much causal power except but of course
it has causal power in our kind of
beings. It makes certain kinds of people
to create conferences about
consciousness or talk about it which is
interesting because there is an infinite
number of properties that we don't have
that we don't talk about. So even if you
argued that yeah actually zombie
philosophers would be having
consciousness studies it seems a bit
weird that we singling out consciousness
and indeed it seems to be actually
relevant for quite a lot of what we're
doing.
uh let's talk about epiphenalism for a
moment that epiphanalism is the idea
that consciousness is not functionally a
part of the physical universe
right so it can be thought as something
that is separate and the problem with
epifundamentalism is I think it's caused
by uh by a desire for mystery and by
being embedded into a mystery and which
means that you feel that it's very
significant but you don't understand it.
I don't think that mystery is much more
than this. But the problem is that when
somebody is an epiphenimist, then their
position cannot be caused by their ape
phenomenal consciousness. Right? You uh
when somebody says that they're an
epiphanist, they need to move their
mouse or their fingers on the keyboard.
Right? And this means they need to
produce actions in the physical
universe. And if they are truly uh if
epenism is true, then their phenomenal
experience is not causing them to do
this, but it's some other mechanism. And
their ephenus consciousness is sitting
right seeing to the if spouting these
things and saying oh no my consciousness
is actually subtly different from what
this body is saying right or this is a
very awkward situation. Basically ifism
does not cause you to be an epiphenist
and this means you don't actually have
to listen to the arguments of an
epiphist because they're unrelated to
their consciousness. That is leads us to
a deeper argument about functionalism.
To me, functionalism is um is not simply
the belief that computers can think.
It's uh it runs much deeper. It's an um
position about how we construct objects
and a position about epistemology that
objects are constructed over behaviors
that we observe in the world about the
way in which things change when an
object is present or absent. This is how
we define an object in a way. There is
no hidden essence beyond that. The
object is simply that thing that we
construct over observables.
There of course exist objects that we
don't construct over observables like
unicorns. We construct them over stories
that others tell us. But uh we also
realize that these objects are somewhat
arbitrary and we don't need to regard
them deeper than as being stories that
others tell us. And for the objects that
we care about like consciousness, if we
say it's a is a thing, right? We care
about what kind of behaviors do we mean
by consciousness. How does consciousness
change the evolution of the universe
when it's present? And what does it mean
to change the evolution of the universe?
So when you are saying something when
your mouth is moving right something is
making that happen some particle is
pushing against other particles there
are some physical interaction and you
can trace this physical interaction back
to a physical interaction before that
and that before one and at no point is
some basic magic happening where you
have a causal force that is not caused
by anything
but the only thing that you can have is
randomness a thing that is not caused by
anything correlated to your previous
timeline
And that itself is also not doing
anything magical. It's just introducing
onic ruh randomness into the world
instead of consciousness.
&gt;&gt; So I don't see an alternative to
functionalism. I just don't see a way to
get out of functionalism. Do you see a
way to do that?
Not not really because most of attempts
of avoiding that seems to be okay there
is some substance whether it's a very
substance like substance or something
more abstract that is doing the job but
then the question is so doing the job
okay we need to describe that again but
then again there is so many different
theories of consciousness so there is
always a few that escapes I think we're
both on the fairly same side that we're
both mostly functionalists. It's just
that uh I don't think I'm very good at
philosophy of mind. So I I'm always very
skeptical of any of the thoughts I have
about what's going on in minds
simply for the empirical reason that
past evidence shows that I'm bad at
this. Hm. Um, can you tell me a moment
where you realized uh that you're super
bad at philosophy of mind, but somebody
else was super good and you changed your
thinking as a result dramatically and
now you're mostly listening to that
person.
&gt;&gt; Uh, I think not necessarily a dramatic
moment, but I certainly remember
encountering arguments that made me go,
"Okay, yes, that reasoning was uh not
very good. Now I know how to avoid that
mistake or something. For example, I'm
not buying Patnam's uh brain in that uh
thought experiment very much. I think uh
in his for experiment, the brain thinks
about snow and the big deal is of course
that the snow the brain thinks about is
not actual snow because it never really
seen snow. And I realized, okay, I'm not
buying that argument. It's a nice
philosophy paper argument, but I can
kind of see that I'm not going there. I
think quite often I noticed that the
things that strike me most is actually
not philosophy of mind talks but uh
neuroscience talks or when somebody
tells about a patient that had a weird
experience and I realize yeah minds can
have that kind of experience too. That
is quite often very disturbing because
most of our models of minds are of
course based on how we think when we're
sitting comfortably in our armchair with
a cup of tea and uh feeling
philosophical.
But actual minds function out there in
the real world. Sometimes it's very
bloody. Sometimes it's full of
psychedelics. Sometimes minds break in
particular ways. And it's very
interesting to notice that human minds
quite often fail in similar ways. There
are reasons why neurologists have terms
for this because we actually see these
kind of patients every week
&gt;&gt; and that is telling us something about
minds but uh it also means that the the
actual structure of mind still remains
somewhat unclear to me. Yeah, I it's
interesting that you are bringing up the
brain and the VA experiment because um
for me this this type of argument was
always a very big source of frustration
while I was um disgracing the holy halls
of philosophy with my presence because
uh the argument seems to be so obviously
stupid and wrong. Right? It's it's very
obvious to uh any anyone who thinks very
superficially about it that you could be
a brain in a vet that you can uh put a
VR headset on you and it overrides all
your sensory perception and you are
immersed in an artificial world that
only pretends to be in a particular way.
And the fact that you build these
representations while interacting with
the physical world in the first place
does not factor in the fact that they
are represented in this particular way
right now. It's it's only instrumental
to this. The history of your
representation doesn't really matter. It
doesn't really matter if your brain is
the result of somebody making a carbon
copy of another brain or inducing the
representations denovo artificially and
so on for the sake of this argument. But
some philosophers trying to find a way
out of the brain in the vat by trying to
construct a logical impossibility was
motivated reasoning in in the same way
as has happened in this debate and then
seeing all the philosophy debate
downstream from it not fixing this
obvious buck but instead for the most
part the bulk of the discussion staying
at the level of these relatively simple
bucks in thinking uh I I found this very
frustrating and that's why I fail to
have the same deference to philosophy of
mind that you managed to uh preserve and
I I I think you're blessed if if you're
able to do this because maybe I'm just
too impatient and usefully arrogant to
to deal with this and it's also as
somebody who has been working in the
field of AI since I began to think
basically
thinking in these terms it seemed to be
somewhat obvious that our null
hypothesis should be that uh computers
have the necessary and suffic efficient
means to host minds in the same way as
they have the necessary and sufficient
means to host universes as long as
they're big enough and
&gt;&gt; right and the computers are big enough
and this seemed to be the obvious null
hypothesis and the counter arguments
that I encountered were usually not very
good and it might be possible to
construct counter arguments but it's
very very complicated
and uh yeah
&gt;&gt; I I don't think that any of them
actually really work. But the discourse
is not about the interesting and
complicated counterargument, but it
happens at a much lower cultural level
where you have agreement trying to
achieve agreements within the status
games of people who are uh basically
part of an academic culture rather than
of an intellectual culture.
&gt;&gt; And quite a lot of arguments are also
fairly simple standard arguments.
If you're in academia and debate a lot,
you're probably also wincing every time
somebody in the audience very smuggly
brings up a standard argument as if this
was a really devastating objection and
they are feeling so good about coming up
with this very clever thing and you
heard it a 100 times. We all get it
whatever our field are. My particular
annoyance is arguments against life
extension. there are kind of a top three
four that always come up and it's not
the arguments themselves that I'm
objecting to. It's the smuggness people
make them because they think that we
have a really good one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But maybe this is also something
where humbleness is something that we
all acquire uh by being surrounded by
experts sometimes and when we are not
then it's very easy to think that we are
the only person who ever thought about
these things and as a result we become
somewhat overbearing and we annoy the
tour experts.
&gt;&gt; By the way, do you think that um well
you've you've probably spoken to Steven
Hanad. I know I've spoken to him about
you your stuff uh Yosha but um do you
think that uh AIS can or uh an
artificial mind could ground um their
experience in a similar way that
functionally achieves what um we get
from consciousness without actually
doing the sentience part without the raw
fields. So could grounding be achieved
by an AI u without the sentience just
with enough multimodal representations
um and if so would it be as good as a um
a tool for moral motivation in an
artificial intelligence as sentience?
&gt;&gt; How do you define sentience in this
context in a very narrow technical
sense? It it can be other things but I
think it's access to um the realms where
we can actually feel and experience have
phenomenal experience of stuff and I
think that that means um access to raw
feels pleasure and pain the goodness of
value the badness of agony.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So uh what we would maybe
characterize sentience then as the
ability to form certain types of
representations and the uh say that a
feeling is a representation of what it's
like when you are being puppeteered by
something that feels like a force field
in a low dimensional multi-dimensional
space. Let's say you have a feeling of
heartbreak and this feeling of
heartbreak consists out of multiple
things. There is first of all the
content. The content is a representation
of you maybe having a partner that is
betraying or deserting you and that
partner is very important to you. And
there needs to be some kind of
motivational gradient that is
representing this, right? Some kind of
cybernetic system that makes you
beholden to that partner and the
situation in such a way that you cannot
easily escape it or displace your mental
contents with another situation. And uh
there is some sense of aversion, some
pain signal that uh basically makes you
want to escape the situation. But you
cannot escape the situation. And so you
are stuck in this uh state of feeling
repulsed from the available behavioral
space which induces a sense of
helplessness.
And this particular content goes
together with a somatic sensation. And
the somatic sensation is spatial. It's
basically most people feel heartbreak in
their chest region and they feel it as
some kind of a compression against a
resistance, right? It's basically a
geometric movement. It's stuff in space
that is moving around and that space is
a simulated geometry that is being
produced by some kind of classifier that
is measuring the alignment between the
system and and the world and then is
projecting it into a model of that
agent. So, it's a very particular kind
of representation. It's a simulated
puppet that gets pulled on strings based
on some outer system that is measuring
its score and its alignment in the game
with the world.
And now you can ask yourself, is it
possible to have an AI that is
performing all the same tasks as you do
when you have heartbreak in the same way
with the same functions without
simulating this puppet? And yes, of
course it can, right? Because the puppet
is just one of many possible ways in
which to do it. And it also turns out
that people can transcend this puppet.
When your heartbreak becomes too large,
you can decide to opt out of it. Maybe
you have no choice. Maybe you get
catapulted out of it because the pain is
so large that becomes unbearable and
something cracks and the part of
yourself is dissolving and you get to
see it from the outside. You're no
longer identified with it. And suddenly
you get to see the puppet from the
outside and you realize it's just a
puppet and instead there is no such
thing as heartbreak. There's just a
cold, unfeilling, uncaring physical
universe in which events are happening.
And inside of this, there is this agent
with a computational brain in its skull
and producing a simulation of what it's
like to be in this world and to perceive
these other spirits in itself. And it
creates the story and the story is
making it behave in a particular way,
but ultimately it's just a model and you
don't have to be identified with that
model. So what we are talking about is
similar to Mary's room. the question to
which degree you have to experience your
knowledge in the first person in a model
that is represented in a way that makes
it suitable for for that kind of
representation.
&gt;&gt; So you could have Mary's room in the
sense that you will have an AI that
knows everything what is that to be
known about relationships and about
actions about them without actually
going to the trouble of putting itself
into the first person experience.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. So what does that say about
moral motivation? If um an AI can do
that, it may prioritize doing such a
thing as not, you know, just as as
interesting as other symbols that it's
got in its library. Uh if we have an AI
that doesn't want doesn't experience
pleasure or pain, uh would it be morally
motivated to uh induce experiences of uh
pleasure or well-being in itself or
others? Imagine that you're a parent and
you have a teenage child and that
teenage child under goes heartbreak and
you realize, "Oh my god, this is a
relationship and it's good that
it's over and so on and you still you
really do care or you think, oh my god,
this my child gets harmful life and
burned and it's going to be decades
until they work through this trauma,
right? Uh you you don't need to have
these first order emotions as long as
you care about the well-being of the
child. uh you can still help to regulate
and induce states and interact with it
and mitigate and prepare and regulate
but uh the question is can we have
shared purposes with the AI. I think
that is ultimately the deeper question.
Can we integrate with them in in such a
way that we um become hybrid units that
go together into the future.
quite often it's of course very useful
not to be in the first person mode. Uh
one book uh that uh I read with great uh
interest as a teenager was power as a
hobby by turnison and it's basically a
handbook in how to win at every social
interaction. It's very cynical. It's
hilariously written and it contains
quite a lot of profound truths and one
of the best ones about when dealing with
people is to turn put on your doctor's
coat. So instead of treating this as
something that's about you, you're just
observing the other guy and yes, he's
waving his hands around. I wonder what
that symptom of. Let's analyze this.
What's the diagnosis? That's a useful
mode to be in quite often as a human.
And also, as Tonison points out, you
might not always want to be in that one
when dealing with your family. Yeah, you
can win every family quarrel, but do you
really want to live in the family where
you're always winning every quarrel?
That's probably not actually a good
place to be necessarily, but that
ability to move out of the first person
to more neutral perspectives is a power
move. It's extremely powerful and in
some sense this is of course why we have
science. It desentered a lot of our
understanding of the world from
ourselves and our relationships and
realize yeah what is actually going on
out there when we don't project our
hopes and fears and wishes on it but
just try to see what it's doing. And
then of course it turned out to be super
useful for making hopes and fears and
wishes come true because once you
understand that to some extent you can
actually poke at the universe in certain
ways and get certain results. Yeah, I
think it's a very good point. Uh a lot
of people seem to believe that it's very
important to get enlightenment that
enlightenment has extreme moral veilance
and makes life much much better. And
maybe there is something to this.
Michael Taft who is a very smart
meditator and teacher characterizes
enlightenment as a state in which
everything becomes apparent in its
representational nature including the
self and you basically realize that you
are representational in your own nature
and this allows you to disengage to
transcend your personal self and issues
I think in the way in which you describe
it. But what we also observe that a lot
of enlightened people are absolutely
insufferable
and it might be different when everybody
is enlightened and you even the playing
field and then being not enlightened is
just being childish.
Yeah. But I think there's also an
interesting aspect of that seeing
everything as a representation because
that might very well be how some AI
programs are going to be treating the
world. they're going to be kind of born
enlightened and then maybe they need to
learn how to not be insufferable.
&gt;&gt; It seems to be that the AI models
already have multiple of those layers.
My impression was when I was talking to
GBT3 and I asked it to simulate a
discussion between Gerta and Hannah
Arin. It was all in it was only creating
the content of that text and it was only
this thought stream and today's models
uh have always these multiple layers in
which they are uh simulating what it's
like to write a story about an AI agent
talking to a customer but obeying all
the guidelines and then this AI agent is
writing a story about what it would be
like if these people had a conversation
right and all these layers are online
simultaneously and in a way this is also
happening with authors when they write
books and uh it's an interesting
question of where it ends. How many
layers can you have simultaneously?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's kind of like we built in BES
into our AI. It's all turning into this
library of Babel.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Do you believe that LLMs are AGI?
&gt;&gt; Um I don't quite think they're complete
AGI. I think they're a kind of first
order approximation but generally when
they're doing reasoning they do so well
the first few steps and then they
usually fail and we have solved that of
course by adding things like chain of
thought and various reinforcement. So we
extended this so they don't fail quite
as quickly and we're setting up
infrastructures where they fix
themselves and retreat back when they
notice something going wrong. which kind
of extend it but deep down I think the
core LM structure is a little bit like
the cerebral cortex is great at pattern
recognition and doing some things but
it's not really great at actually
running the whole organism we have other
part of the brain doing that and we
probably need to plug them in to
actually get AGI out of it there's going
to be an awful lot of LLM stuff of
course because it just drives the
representations of the world and the
knowledge and memory and all of that but
I do think that we need something like a
computational version of a basal ganglia
that generates behavior and has a plan
and can recurse across plans to really
get to AGI. Yeah. One thing I noticed is
that AI models have become much better
at AI criticism than humans.
I have not seen an argument by an AI
critic that was not made better by an
LLM since about GPT3.
And so maybe it's also something that
depends on the discipline. At at which
point can you make proofs? At which
point do you have opinions? At which
point are the is it possible to have
still opinions that are interesting and
sound but out of distribution if you
don't uh work at the frontier of what
can be formalized and proven.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I noticed that today I I was
working on a paper about like ranch
points in altered laws of gravity. And
uh it's interesting because this is
fairly well trodden ground in classical
mechanics. I'm somewhat happy that me
and Claude managed to find a few new
results. There nothing mayor. There is
nothing earthshattering really, but it's
kind of cute that we managed to find it
in an afternoon or discussion. But we're
also even more aware that we were so
good once we found any result. Oh, that
was proven in the 1800s. Yeah, that guy.
uh and it's so interesting to notice
that in this modern world where
information searching is easy, you can
also see entire old debates much more
clearly. So one of the the key papers
from 1874 actually mentions that one of
the main results might have been
discovered some 50 years early by a
French researcher and he correctly names
the researcher but he also writes this
is a letter to the Royal Society but he
couldn't get hold of any of the
publications so he couldn't check
whether this was actually true. Now, of
course, it's just a matter of a few
seconds and I can totally get it. And
it's incomprehensible French, but I can
get it translated.
So, what is going on seems to be that
information richness also means that
we're much more aware of what has
already been done. So, quite a lot of
what I was doing today was interpolating
a tiny little bubble inside the
classical mechanics. While what we truly
admire is of course when we push the
edges, the stuff where is actually a lot
of directions to go that we don't know
anything about. And in particular, we
tend to appreciate researchers that are
good at pushing along the normal of
knowledge. Something that actually gives
us a lot of extra knowledge rather than
fixing the obvious things we don't know.
But they're obviously not known. That's
kind of trivial. It's not like the
Einstein like breakthrough where you
realize that oh if we go in this
direction we actually get to entirely
different piece of knowledge. Yeah our
intelligence is very small right very
limited. We are not smart enough to
understand a single cell in its entirety
right so rather our intelligence is
directed on large scale phenomena that
we only approximately regulate. So our
minds mostly doing politics instead of
deep understanding of reality. And to
get better at uh being a mind, we need
to get to the level where we observe
ourselves thinking, right? So we develop
tools of observation and an inner
language to describe the operation of
our own mind. And then we can gradually
start to get a hold of our source code
and improve it. And the AIS can help us
with this. So when we are talking to the
LLMs, we create some kind of hybrid
arena
&gt;&gt; with a system that has more potential
than us.
And at the moment it seems to me that
its potential is a bit limited by uh
being imitative of human performance.
&gt;&gt; For instance, we don't have true machine
perception. We don't build systems that
we just connect all the sensors to that
we can cheaply build and that them make
sense of reality. Instead, we give them
media designed for human consumption,
which means very low frame rate, very
few channels, very few bits of
resolution. And that would not be
necessary but it's just an artifact of
the available data and the courses that
our systems are taking and the
applications that we are envisioning at
the start but there is this question if
we build minds that are much much larger
than ours and that have more capability
how can we hybridize with them is there
inherent limit to how well we can
connect to this larger thing and is it
already visible in the different ways in
which people are able to connect to the
AIS or is our minds generally extensible
I I think that's an important question
at Westb is the limit of the human mind,
but what is the augmentation limit of
the human mind? Could you take a cat and
connect it to an LLM and the cat figures
out to use the LLM and turns into a
lawnmower dog? Or is is there a limit?
Right? And it seems I would not be
surprised if it turns out that cats are
limited in the way in which they can use
AI. But maybe it's not. Maybe we can get
cats to the human level by building a
system that lets the cat understand that
the system is modeling the world on the
cat's behalf.
Yeah, I think it's an interesting one
because I think there is something
slightly unique about humans in our
open-endedness. And one candidate
property is of course our language that
we are actually got an open language.
There quite a lot of other animals that
have various forms of communication but
it's closed. It's very hard for them to
generalize and add new things. While all
human languages, if there is a new
thing, we invent a word for it and we
can add it. We can express new thoughts
fairly open. There are limits because of
our limited working memory and all of
that. But that openness is an amazing
tool and it might not be a coincidence
that the real big success in recent AI
is linked to language models because
that grasps at something that we are
good at and that allow us to leverage it
except of course that the ability of
LLMs to do the same thing and generate
entirely new things is slightly limited.
They're quite often relatively
conventional thinkers, which is not
always a bad thing. As a somewhat
unconventional thinker, I'm usually
delighted to have a straight man to
explain what needs to go into a proper
paper or what chapter I really ought to
have in the book to make everybody
happy, which I of course never thought
about, but it still feels like, yeah, we
might need to figure out other forms of
openness. When it comes to brains, it's
kind of clear that you can extend the
body in various ways and the brain just
takes it in a stride. So when you
implant a magnet in a fingertip, people
develop a magnetic sense because they
feel the vibrations of magnet being
uncorrelated to the mechanical
vibrations they feel by normal touch and
that seems to lead to a brain
representation that actually is slightly
different. When people hold a long
staff, their egocentric space
representation in the brain expands very
quickly and seamlessly. So this seems to
be something that obviously works for us
and higher primates.
Cats probably don't do that because
we're not much tool users, but
presumably their brains would also
react. Indeed, there is a slightly
annoying experiment where you extend the
whiskers of a cat and suddenly the cat
behaves as if it was a much larger
animal because it uses the whisker size
to know its body size and what openings
it can get through. Suddenly the sense
of space quickly updates because of a
bodily change. There might be similar
things we can do with our cognition, but
I think it might be harder to help a cat
cognitate better.
Yeah, it's a super interesting
experiment that is waiting for us. How
smart can we make animals by augmenting
them? And
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; which animals react to this in which
ways? I suspect that there are
differences between dogs and cats in a
spigotard and birds and
&gt;&gt; dogs are interesting because we have
been breeding them for a very long time
to be part of a human family. So they're
kind of part of our social order in a
way that cats aren't. And partially
that's of course because dogs are pack
animals. So it's not terribly hard to
get them to move into a human social
hierarchy and then we've been going for
that. While the cats, well, they're
sharing our houses and uh they're
putting up with us and vice versa. But
there haven't been that intense breeding
for being part of a social structure. So
it might very well be that some of our
animals are way more open for some of
aspects. So it might be that social
agents and dogs might go really well
together or not. We haven't I don't know
if anybody is doing LLMs for dogs or the
the chat bots for dogs, but it might be
an interesting thing to try.
&gt;&gt; I know, right? I would like to go to
this question to whether our language is
really all that open-ended. It seems
that we have limited vocabularies in
that humans typically don't know more
than 20 to 50,000 different words. And
we also don't get super old. Our
capacity is quite limited to form
concepts per hour. And so uh the
symbolic universe in which we are in
seems to be quite brittle and limited
and depend on a deeper perceptual
universe that we are on. I think this is
also reflected in philosophy of mind um
and starting maybe with Vitkinstein who
had this idea of turning English into
some kind of general programming
language and then uh at the end of his
life decided that it didn't work because
he did not know how to fully ground the
semantics of language in in reality and
you could argue that this thing
preempted Minsk's logist program by a
couple decades
thinking there and it's also reflected
in the rejection of Chsky u towards AI
because Chsky I think erroneously
understood uh that minds have ought to
operate in language that has the same
low resolution and brittleleness and
degree of compositionality as human
spoken language instead of thinking
about the deeper representational
structures
&gt;&gt; and uh it also led to a lot of this
symbolic versus subsy cognition debate
in AI which I think is a total red
herring. There was uh the physical
symbol systems hypothesis by new and
Simon who argued that a computer can
think because physical symbols are
sufficient and necessary for thinking
and it's in some sense obviously true
because you can build a symbolic system
like a CPU and the CPU is executing
arithmetic and the arithmetic does
linear algebra and the linear algebra
does a neural network and the linear
neural network is then learning logic
again and symbolic thinking on a higher
level and the computer is still fast
enough to have all these layers there
simultaneously and so you can switch
between the uh symbolic and the subs
symbolic stuff in the same machine
multiple times on on successive layers.
But you can't do this in our own mind
and there seems to be a sub symbolic
layer in our mind that is implemented in
the statistical patterns of firings
between the neurons and then on top of
this you learn the symbolic operations
that or you emulate them to some degree
&gt;&gt; and uh then you you build symbolic
languages and these symbolic languages
themselves are not tight powerful fast
and detailed enough to run a neural
network again and so you I cannot uh use
my natural language that I learn as a
human being to execute geometric
simulations in my mind. But I can do
this with a computer language, right? I
can take a computer language that has a
similar uh cognitive complexity as a
human language. When I write it down, I
can construct sentences in this computer
language, but the computer language is
powerful enough to run geometry in it.
And so this is a fundamental difference
that applies to uh humans, but it
doesn't apply to AI. AI is able to build
symbolic languages that are executable
and can run arbitrary functions and we
cannot and uh I wonder if this is a hard
and sharp boundary. Basically if there
are big important regions of thought
space that will always remain
inaccessible to us even when we augment
ourselves with machines.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that is a fascinating
question. I I really want to know the
answer to it too. But it also feels like
the problem might be generality. So in
some sense if you have a general enough
system of a kind you can simulate other
systems. The famous example is of course
the universal touring machine. It can
simulate all the other Turing machines
and great. So they're all equivalent. At
least that is what the theoretical
computer scientist will happily tell
you. The practical computer scientists
are going to say yeah that emulator
introduce this much overhead. So that's
no good. That emulator is pretty pretty
fast and for that problem you should
totally use that special purpose
computer because it's orders of
magnitude faster and cheaper.
We quite often leave out the extra cost.
And I think the reason the limits of the
human brain is just that it's not
constructed to be very extensible. It uh
the subseymbolic and the symbolic
levels. Yeah, you can't easily build on
top of them because they're very limited
by the kind of hardware we got. While
when our computer hardware is not good
enough, somebody is saying, "Okay, let's
bring in the engineers and let's bring
in the accountants and find some money
and we can build a system that have the
other properties we want." Sometimes of
course the theoretical computer
scientist come down from the cloud and
point actually you're not going to solve
that with any amount of money because of
empty completeness and these bounds of
computational complexity but this is
usually the point where the engineers
tell them to shut up and do a horrible
approximation that works well enough for
practical purposes quite often and the
theoretical computer science they leave
in a half again. I I think what is going
on is that the practical costs of
running different systems on top of each
other depends very much on what kind of
systems we have. I think we understand
the symbolic systems fairly well because
we use them so much and we have gotten a
very cheap way of implementing them in
computers. Uh we still probably don't
understand how to do the sub symbolic
systems well on computers. It's pretty
clear from the enormous amount of data
we need to train LLMs that yeah, we're
doing at least a 100,000 times less
effective than it's happening in our own
brains. We don't know quite what's going
on there, but it's pretty clear that
there must exist some form of algorithm
that would be 100,000 times better,
which would be awesome if one could
find.
&gt;&gt; But it seems that we are able to extract
what's in the data already, right? So
they there are probably better
algorithms that run on architectures
that are more harmonic with the
algorithms that we run them on. But for
instance, Blazera describes in his
recent book, what is intelligence? How
uh Google research built an LLM that was
only trained on YouTube audio.
And they got this to the level of uh say
a 4-year-old child. And not just in
terms of audio in audio out, it was
entirely auditory, but also semantic
processing, problem solving and so on
based on seven years of audio. And he
argues that this is of course a lot more
than a human child of four years needs
because a human child is not listening
to language all the time. But it's I
think very impressive because it didn't
have other modalities but sound and it
was not correlated with images. The
audio was probably not a cohesive story
or anything. So it basically had to
infer all these communication context of
what it means to be an agent that talks
to another agent on the long tail of all
the data that it got there. And so uh it
seems that our algorithms are pretty
good at noodling the entropy out of the
data already, right? It's just that they
could be more efficient. And that's not
surprising because our architectures are
still handcrafted
&gt;&gt; instead of
substrate. Yeah.
But there is a fundamental difference in
our computers and our own brains.
Imagine that you uh don't have a GPU in
your computer. Uh that is is not a big
problem. You can run everything on a
CPU. You just takes more time. And so as
long as you are willing to wait for long
enough and buy enough uh GPUs or CPUs uh
right it's not an issue because the
thing is deterministic which means you
can scale it up in an arbitrary way. you
know that the result that is done by a
unit doesn't get worse. If the unit is
smaller or older, it's still the same
result and uh you can define an
interface that allows you to scale in a
way in which you cannot do with brains.
There's probably stuff that is very
idiosyncratic to the cerebellum uh
representations versus the cortical
representations that makes them not
entirely funible against each other. And
so it's a trade-off that you have to
make when you build this kind of
architecture. you can only scale it to a
certain point and beyond that point your
representations don't work anymore.
&gt;&gt; And generally coming up with good
representations
that is quite often of course in human
intellectual work the one of the strokes
of geniuses. Many of the absolutely best
thoughts have been all about
representing a problem in a new way and
suddenly the problem essentially just
solves itself. But finding the
representation was very hard. On the
other hand, the representation we get in
AI is kind of demonstrate that yeah,
actually some kind of stupid stoastic
gradient descent method and a lot of
compute can get at these
representations. It's just that it takes
a lot of time especially when it comes
to groing it takes a ridiculously long
time and it's a little bit shocking when
it happens and that I think is one of
the biggest surprises in cognitive
science in recent years. That was
probably not what anybody would have
predicted would happen. uh that okay you
can actually do this generically using
enormous amount of compute but also that
it takes a long time even with the
compute and then happens suddenly there
is something very odd going on there and
I think underlying theory is just
lacking
&gt;&gt; obvious
thing that we are missing is that we
cannot compare the theoretical limits
that you are necessary to simulate a
single neuron and scale it up with the
number of neurons synapses and whatnot
to estimate how much compute we need But
we need to look at the performance of
the system.
&gt;&gt; And it's in the same way it's also
impossible to run an H100 on a human
brain because the human brain is so
indeterministic that you would need an
astronomic number of them before you
could run even a commodor 64 on on a
human brain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So this is not comparable. But what we
can see is the simulations of reality
that the computer is producing versus
the simulations of reality that our
brain is producing. And I think that
computer games have been roughly on par
with what our what we can imagine for
quite some time.
&gt;&gt; And uh now let's think about automating
the process that goes into writing the
computer game which is akin to building
a cognitive architecture in your own
mind that creates reality and learns all
the objects. Right? And we see that this
process of inventing computers, computer
hardware architectures for game engine
and so on took relatively little time.
It's really something that can be done
in a single human generation by a few
engineers.
And so uh the amount of cognitive effort
that goes into the automatic search for
a good architecture is probably lower
than a lot of people imagine right now.
And so basically this leads me to being
somewhat optimistic. Imagine that we
build a computer vision system on top of
the Unreal Engine and it works in such a
way that uh the engine has to find a
solution for a scene graph that combines
the objects that are currently in the
field of the camera and adapts them
until the scene that you are generating
in the engine is matching what you see
in the camera and then you track reality
by just adjusting a few parameters in
the scene graph. And this is a quite
optimal representation, right? It's only
using very few parameters to describe a
complicated dynamic reality and I don't
think that we are technically very very
far from this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I could totally imagine
something like that being done. Of
course, by today's standards, you would
still need a pretty hefty computer to do
it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But to run engine at a good
resolution, you don't need an H100,
right? You you can use a laptop. But but
the learning turning the the photo into
the scene represent that probably going
to be a tough learning problem except of
course that once you done a lot of
training it gets easier because now it's
just
&gt;&gt; training for years until we get there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So uh basically once you have that
process it probably goes very quickly.
If you have a very well-trained model,
then for any given new scene that you
open your camera up to, it's probably
only going to take a few seconds or
parts of seconds until you have a
convergence between the scene and the
camera image. And so that itself is a
learning problem that needs to be solved
in the first place. But once it's
solved, it's probably relatively cheap
to adapt in most circumstances.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And and we can then copy it, of
course. Meanwhile, of course, babies are
solving this as they're growing up, but
they're also learning roughly the same
thing, except that they don't start out
with a good scene graph representation.
The mystery there is of course how we
develop that one too. But in their case,
it's probably much more a question of
okay, first let's untangle the visual
world and then as we start moving around
and touching things, they start building
up some kind of representation of the
spatial relations. So they need to do a
little bit of extra work, but they're
also more data efficient.
&gt;&gt; So the way in which I would start is
probably with a sense of up and down. So
you have a stable axis which might also
explain why it's so disconcerting when
you lose the sense of up and down. This
vertigo that gets induced and then uh
you build a body map because before you
were born you can already feel stuff
touching your body and just by doing a
core occurrence statistic you can make a
map of your body surface. And this
somato sensory map is going to be of
course um very distorted because you
have different densities of nerves on
your back versus the tip of your tongue.
And so you need to learn a second map
that is correcting and normalizing the
first map. And you can get this by
tracking uh features that move over your
body and your body touching itself. And
after you're born, your body touching
the ground. And just by doing these
co-occurrence statistics, uh, when you
properly tune them, you probably figure
out the space of your body surface, the
space inside of your body and the space
outside of your body. And at some point,
you will learn that you can correlate
the visual world and the world of touch
and that they're actually the same
world.
&gt;&gt; And so these modalities are all going to
meet at some point and maybe perception
has to be thought as intrinsically
multimodal.
&gt;&gt; I I think that's very true. And when you
look at it in the brain, you kind of see
that yeah, first the primary sensory
cortices get well developed and then it
kind of climbs up towards the more
advanced forms of associative cortex. So
area seven up in the paratal lobe is
kind of where touch, hearing and seeing
generally seems to come together and
that seems to be also where we keep a
lot of our spatial representation.
That's probably where the scene graph is
hiding in our internal game engine.
&gt;&gt; Yes. What do you think is going to
happen in the next year in terms of new
paradigms? It seems to me that there is
something really interesting going on,
right? For instance, in coding, people
are switching from the tab completion
paradigms where you uh the model is
modeling what you're doing and is
allowing you to extrapolate the function
that you're writing from the first
comment and the first variable names.
Right? This is changing now to
synchronous agents where you are telling
the system what it should code for you.
And the next thing is that you have uh
an entire team of agents that do things
like quality testing on your behalf and
user testing and architecture and you
have multiple teams that can compete
working for you and building a certain
product. And so the question of the user
becomes more and more remote
&gt;&gt; uh that so computer use is changing.
Another thing that I thought was super
interesting was WebSim, which was mostly
an art project that was simulating an
alternate universe. basically an LLM not
generating text but the HTML of a
browser into a parallel universe and you
have an entire internet is being
generated there of interlink websites
and you just enter the URL and uh the
LLM invents behind the URL what the
website should look like including
hyperlinks and uh graphics and so on and
builds you this window into this
alternate cosmos and and lovely
&gt;&gt; yeah you could also use this to emulate
an operating system and so the LLM
starts to emulate a computer with apps
and emails and whatnot on your machine
and now this new thing with cloudbot is
happening right so what's the next thing
what's what are we going to see in the
next year what do you think yeah so I
think the boring practical thing is of
course you have a cutting edge you have
early adopters you have mainstream etc
so right now people are moving in away
from the pure wipe coding into okay we
are using claw code to do stuff and I
think we're going to see a lot of work
on how do you actually get the skills of
running a herd of bots in the right way?
How do you debug a herd of bots?
And uh in real life, this is of course
how do you lead a group of people? But
here they're not people. They're they're
little imps. They're they're doing
things in a somewhat single-minded
fallible way. And I think there is an
interesting problem here that the skills
needed for that are very different from
the skills needed for good prompting.
and the skills needed for good
programming. It's an entirely new set of
skills. Meanwhile, I think the cutting
edge is probably by induction going to
run into new ways of doing it that
requires even more different skills. I
think the key part is actually having a
good imagination of what you wanted to
do. So I found it fascinating to try to
use clawed code because I realized that
the bottleneck is me coming up with
interesting projects and then uh letting
them loose and then figuring out how do
I now redirect them to do it well. For
example, I trying to make an enormous
poster showing actually the different
areas of the brain and their
connectivity. A bit like that poster
with the chemical re pathways inside the
cell. I want to make something equally
complicated and awesome but also
supported by all the neuroscience
literature. And it works reasonably well
except for one problem. Aesthetically
it's absolutely horrifyingly bad. And
one of the reasons is of course these
coding systems are not yet very
multimodal. They're somewhat multimodal.
I asked Claude code to make a visualizer
for quatnionic fractals and it did it
and it was not just for coding. It
actually observed whether the output
looked complex and fractile or just like
a mush of color which was very useful
for debugging because it was failing at
first and then it figured out okay now I
see a fractal. It still didn't have a
great aesthetic sense which is kind of
irrelevant for the fractal. I can tweak
that in making that gigantic graph. We
actually need more of an aesthetic set
and that integration I think is lacking.
I'm starting to feel that multimodality
might indeed be a really essential
feature for doing anything important. So
that might be the next paradigm. The
problem is that's really costly that
it's also very hard to get data on code
and vision that work together. So again
our current data intensive paradigm
might not be well enough for that.
I noticed very early on when Dali 2 came
out, I uh generated B's um set of
fantastic creatures from his famous book
because nobody had done a fully
illustrated version and it gave me a
good sense for what was going on in the
latent space of the model and how to
control it. And I realized that a number
of fantastic creatures are very
difficult to create for centaurs because
they tend to always converge into a
person and a horse based on the early
versions of the diffusion algorithm. But
uh the main issue was if an area is too
well explored in the by human
um artists then the results are often
bad because uh the majority of human
artists are not very good. And so
basically the more commotion you have in
a particular space, the more training
data you're going to have that is not
good. And so it was very difficult to
get a mermaid that didn't look terrible.
And uh if you wanted to have a
good-looking mermaid, much harder than
uh getting a good-looking um say
minotaur,
&gt;&gt; uh what you had to do is to uh ask for a
classical one or from the style of a
particular illustrator or something else
that qualified it to be in a niche that
would have a higher um um band barrier
of entry. And so I sometimes wonder if
you do to do the same thing for social
media. Maybe create a social media
platform that requires you to speak a
new refined form of Latin that invent
invent especially for this form of
social media platform. And uh we could
have a similar thing basically for the
entire curation process until we are
able to develop AI that has intrinsic
taste. M
&gt;&gt; yeah taste I think is a really
interesting problem because in some
sense that's just what most of the
neural networks are doing. You're
looking at a lot of uh examples. You
getting an evaluator for it. But of
course you need to have some guidelines
on what actually is good and bad. And
some when it comes to pure aesthetic
taste, this is of course a very
complicated qualitative thing. But even
getting good taste for successful
physics or successful software, there is
not just that the code runs well or that
you can sell it, but it also quite often
it should break new ground in a way or
another. And it feels like some of that
might be possible to curate, some of it
might be possible to measure, although
goodart's law might of course be lurking
around here to really mess this up. Yes,
taste is computational too. There are
going to be optimization criteria for
taste.
&gt;&gt; And I fear the risk is of course that
you get optimization criteria that are
very narrow. A lot of traditional
societies have very narrow taste. It's
very formalized. It's a little bit like
the academy painting of 1800s but
defined taste in a very in the strict
sense. And in a way we should be very
grateful that some people broke free of
that and said no no no there is a bigger
space here we can develop tastes along
that even though that meant that
aesthetics as a philosophical subject
kind of died because it was just so
embarrassing that everybody had pan
funog and and so on. Yeah, but maybe
time in a sense of an era is also a
space like others, right? In order to
get a certain degree of quality and
refinement, you need to give it time and
space in which it can exist in
isolation. And if you are locked into
the same space, it's it's very
strangling. But if you have the freedom
to move across space and time, then it's
beautiful to see, oh, there was this era
that really went for this style of
painting and went all in and did this to
such a degree. It didn't do uh did it at
the expense of everything else, but as a
result, it really figured out what it
wanted to have in this particular narrow
sub field. And so I think what AI is
also doing, it is allows us to break out
of this. In a way, we become the thing
that is traveling across space and time
now. And that is can integrate a lot
more stuff that uh before required
generations of specialization to really
go into and we now reap the fruits. Mhm.
Yeah. I I recently become quite
interested in art history and that is
partially because I wanted to prompt AI
and then I realized that actually
discussing with the LLMs is a useful way
of learning more about art history. I'm
working on my developing my own art
style now together with Claude. Uh
basically we started with Ruskin's
classic essay about what is the core
ideas of Gothic architecture and he
develops this argument that there are
certain dimensions about how you work
what materials you use and the moral
world of the Gothic that leads to Gothic
architecture and it's been it was very
influential and actually led to the arts
and craft movement but Claude started
playing around with applying this line
of thinking to different art styles
trying to distill bought similar
dimensions and we ended up with a
slightly different ordering. Ruskin
might not have bought all of that. But
then of course my purpose was ex
extrapolation. I didn't want to just
understand for example punk better. It's
a it's cool to apply the Ruskin style
dimension argument to punk and that it
actually works surprisingly well but
then you can try to apply it to the
current moment and you get a fairly meh
result. And then it gets interesting
when I say, "Yeah, but I want to make my
own transhumanist aesthetic." And then
we start trying to define that in terms
of materials, form, moral outlook, etc.
We're not there yet. Uh I'll get back to
you all once I have my own art style.
But it is getting there. I'm getting a
tool for doing a discourse with art
history. I can actually talk to art
history in a sense and actually check
that this approach or this idea where
does that show up. Why is this dimension
so important and not all answers are
reliable? Because a lot of it come from
that is still vis wisdom of art
historians and they might not
necessarily know what we're doing but I
think we're getting fantastic tools all
of us to make things that are also going
to quite often look very professional.
Once upon a time, it was easy to tell if
somebody was professional or not because
of how they were painting or doing
stuff. And then we got more and more
problems that desktop publishing allowed
people to make slick presentations. You
could still tell things apart by some
aspect, but it became harder and tell it
apart. And now, I think thanks to AI,
everybody can make stuff that looks
pretty professional without necessarily
being it. We're all going to be
scrutinized with small hints of course
that that was not slightly bad
topography or the design was not
perfect. But to actually show that
you're professional, you need to do
something completely different. I think
this is going to happen all over the
board. Programming might be first. There
is a art is already getting affected by
it. But I bet that this might be showing
up in the social domain too when people
demonstrate social skills. Was that a
clever LLM coaching them and helping
them through an awkward social situation
or was that actual social skills?
&gt;&gt; At some point the question becomes mood,
right? Because you will become hybrid.
You will become a system that is
outsourcing more and more of its
cognition into the non-biological parts.
And then the question is are these
non-biological parts simply the result
of some kind of dumb statistical pattern
generation prior or are they the result
of reasoned first principles thinking
that is adaptive and conditional on an
understanding of reality that is
constantly evolving. And so I I think
what's really annoying to me is when I
read the multitude of AI generated
tweets that are fluttering through my
timeline is that you observe these
mindless patterns that are being
generated by something that is simply
imitating a form that worked relatively
well. It's also a certain type of
attention generating headline that makes
me want to filter it instantly out
because I realize you need to know about
somebody executing an algorithm on me
and I'm not interested in being the
object of the execution of that
algorithm. I want to have this living
creative interaction in which everything
is evolving.
Do you perceive that you are hybridizing
that you are changing due to AI into
something else? And do you expect that
this is open-ended? Are you going to be
an AI soon, Anders? Or are do you expect
that you are the last generation that
gets to die as a human?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I when I'm hoping to be a as
I said on the XRP free conference
somewhere in the mid '90s, when I grow
up, I want to be a search algorithm. And
I think there is some truth to that.
Hybridizing with AI is something that
feels rather good for me. I like being
extended. I like having an exo self that
fades out like some kind of complicated
hydra into the knowledge space of
humanity. But
&gt;&gt; having you in the future, Andrew, I hate
searching.
&gt;&gt; I can make a deal.
&gt;&gt; Complimentary.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But and I like finding stuff and
uh putting it into order. So I
&gt;&gt; love finding I hate searching.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But the interesting problem is
many people feel the opposite. Oh no. I
want a well-defined self. I want to have
a clear border against the world.
&gt;&gt; And uh to some extent it's just personal
preference. I find chat bots a bit
annoying. I prefer the LLMs when they
have the least personality. Sometimes
it's fun to try a dialogue with some
persona, but most of the time I just
want to extend my mind. But a lot of
people have a hard time with that and
they really like having personas. Um,
and I think we might see a split here
between different ways of extending
oneself or defining an edge of oneself.
And I think that might also be a
battleground between different styles
and different usage patterns and also
normative patterns because some people
are going to say that other pattern is
really bad for you because of reasons.
&gt;&gt; How does the LLM change the relationship
to yourself when you work and when you
think? Uh one aspect is of course I
become much more aware when I'm just
going into stoastic parrot mode. uh it's
so much easier to notice that okay now
I'm just generating a language in
brokers there's not much thinking and I
also become much more critical to things
that is neatly formatted and seems to be
a nice argument because I realize I need
to check it much more in some sense my
fear of hallucinations and badly
generated arguments have made me way
more critical but you also get a weird
bonus it used to be hard work to
generate a paragraph of text or an
image. Now, of course, you can generate
20 versions of a paragraph or 20
versions of a picture and select the
best of them. You can even generate
selectors that have various criteria and
help you make the selection. So, the
process goes from one thing and it has
to be perfect to let's do many thing and
weed them out. A more evolutionary
process. So I have my little paper about
lrange points. Uh right now I'm going
through the proofs uh generated by
Claude and trying to check that they
actually hold up both as mathematical
truth and as useful as academic result
but also as actually being readable. I'm
kind of still somewhat annoyed at the
proof that this doesn't read well. And
the funny thing is once upon a time it
would have been tremendously hard work
to reward a proof. But now of course you
can actually do that cheaply and indeed
then I can ask an AI turn this into song
lyrics and send it to Sunno and then I
get a heavy metal song of proof. Indeed
it's quite fun to take certain
mathematical proof and turn them into
Eurovision songs. Uh I'm doing this far
too often.
&gt;&gt; Uh what I find fascinating is this
aspect that you can with a push of a
button recreate a creative process if
you basically take down the individual
stepping points that you had when you
produced a certain thing. You can now do
the same thing again and again. For
instance, you can generate a set of data
again and again with slight variations.
And so instead of going for one
trajectory, you go for a space of
trajectories and then perform a softmax
in the end.
&gt;&gt; I wonder if this could also happen to
human relationships. Imagine that a lot
of our relationships are increasingly
happening mitigated through screens and
uh we could have a multitude of parallel
relationship developments and eventually
we take the trajectory that our
participants liked best. How is this
nature of human relationships?
I certainly can imagine that we're
already getting some effects here having
mediation. You have algorithms in the
dating sites of course, but also when
composing um a letter to somebody close
to your heart, you might go through a
lot of revisions. That's of course a
classic trope in traditional uh writing
about the num numerous revisions of that
love letter. But now you can actually
play around a lot more with it and maybe
also do simulations. Right now we're
decent at simulating other people. We
know well and that's of course both for
good and ill. One of the problems is
many of us go around totally fearing the
little virtual versions of other people
sitting on our shoulders just like we're
having our simulation of ourselves. We
have quite a lot of horrible shy
simulations of other people. But it's
also a great way of trying things out.
But of course with LLMs you might
actually really check that given that my
husband thinks this and that what is he
going to say about this email. Now the
question is of course why I want to
achieve that thing. Again getting back
to that book power as a hobby. How much
of getting people into a particular goal
is what I want to do. If I care about my
husband because of who he is, maybe I
should at most try to nudge him to do
things that I think is he's going to
enjoy.
But again, understanding these options,
I think, is going to be tricky because
it requires thinking of a lot of
abstraction level and many people are
very concrete and they're going to be
very confused. They're just getting the
AI slope. The AI slope is bad because
it's not particularly well selected. We
appreciate the well selected stuff. Then
it stops being a slope and it becomes
evolution curated and then the
masterpieces.
&gt;&gt; Okay, I looked it up. Power as a hobby
by Tunis Tunis.
&gt;&gt; Uh publisher is Scandinavian PC systems
Sweden. It's currently not available. It
seems to be very specific Swedish
literature.
&gt;&gt; Initially I title as power as a hobbit
which I thought is also funny.
Yep. It's very old. It got the
Scandinavian PC system used to be a
publisher of handbooks for computers in
the 1980s. And the one book that's not
about computers is by this guy. He's
also the guy who wrote a b bunch of
books about popular mathematics. I'd
actually learned calculus from one of
these books. They're very good, popular
science. And this is the one book about
social manipulation. It's really old.
And then it gets published by a computer
and the company. There must be some
weird backstory here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I suspect it's just tech culture.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And it might actually be
because one of the I think great things
about technological culture is that it
actually wears its autism on its sleeve.
As I quite often try to say, if you
haven't got autism, you better learn it.
You might want to learn how to think
like that. It's actually very valuable
for getting computers to work. And it
also leads to that interesting
observation that I don't understand
other people. Maybe I can solve this by
figuring them out or learning about it.
This is a very valuable thing because
you're going to get better at some
things at least. Many people are
convinced that they understand other
people which means that they never check
whether their predictions or emotional
reactions are any right. Uh I have one
friend who is a bit of a pickup artist
and he's absolutely convinced that he
can read everybody around him and it's
hilarious because he's quite often
utterly wrong but he never checks that
he's wrong. He's and he feels very smug
that he's so good at this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But of course he is invested in
the outcome of his own model maybe more
than in the integrity of the model.
Yeah, but the funny thing is it's not
even the outcome that he cares about
because he rarely gets an a good outcome
from it. He just likes smugness, I
think.
&gt;&gt; But this is the outcome. He gets a state
that he likes.
It's a state in which he feels safe and
in which he feels in control.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. And it's important for us. We
need to feel that feeling that okay, I I
know how to run my life well enough.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So this also leads us to AIS that
can help you run your life, right? This
uh the properties that you need to run a
team of people stably when you are no
longer coding but when you are managing
your virtual coders that itself is also
something that can probably be uh
learned by an LLM that is monitoring
your psychological states and your
trajectory and see whether you're
spinning out or not. And maybe the state
space that you need to be in to be a
productive manager is in some sense more
limited than the state space that you
need to be a successful programmer where
you have open-ended problems rather than
the same regulation loops that you
always need to keep plugged in.
&gt;&gt; And I remember yeah I remember somebody
saying management means solving problems
uh that have known solutions. Leadership
is about solving problems that we don't
know the solutions for. And I think that
is quite often a nice heading for what's
going on. Good managers, they get the
office to work. They get me to work on
what I'm agree on working. But a
scientific or intellectual leader gets
you thinking about something, brings
together a team. Let's try to tackle
this. They might have a great taste for
a good problem.
Some of them are at least good at
getting the right people together, but
we don't know where we end up. It's
open-ended. And I think that also gets
at one of the challenges in an AI
enabled world. Stuff that you can
benchmark are easy to optimize for, but
benchmarks are quite limiting for doing
the really important stuff. And the
stuff that is hard to benchmark for
because it's so open-ended is usually
important, but we don't know how to
scale things that are great at it.
&gt;&gt; I suspect a lot of it is about uh deeply
understanding higher order effects. So
basically understanding the systems that
we are part of and understanding the
evolution over long time spans and our
own relationship to those systems. At
which level do we want to play? What is
the game that we are playing within the
system? And ultimately this is what
wisdom is about understanding what you
should be solving um what problems you
need to address. And we seem to be a
species that is much better at
intelligence than it is at wisdom. And
in a way this is uh becomes really
apparent when you have a small child and
that child basically learns how to use a
computer and how to hack passwords and
whatnot. And uh it's much better at uh
defeating your parental controls than
Apple is at setting them up. And there's
basically nothing that you can do as a
parent to harden your computers against
the intelligence of a child that at the
same time is functionally insane and
might uh empty your bank accounts or or
uh do whatever disaster can befall your
family because it doesn't know what it's
doing and you have to physically lock
away the router. And this is now
mimicked in things like clawbot where
you have this hyper leveraged toddler
that is uh able to do things
relentlessly and uh with ingenuity but
doesn't understand the bigger picture
and it's a really interesting question
can we give AIS a stake in the world so
they do understand the bigger picture is
there is a deficit in AI alignment in
the sense that the people who are meant
to align the AIS also don't think in
terms of this big picture but there's
think that ethics is having good
opinions that ethics is something that
can be understood uh as correct pronoun
use or whatever instead of understanding
deeply this is the world that I'm in and
these are the trajectories that are open
to us as a species and this is my part
in it. Yeah, I think David Do idea about
explanations might be relevant. So his
point in the beginning of infinity is of
course that we are good at coming up
with explanations. We're also very much
empowered once we find a really good
explanation because most explanations
are bad. But good powerful explanations
very basically models that allow us to
predict things to do new things to
explore and then we build explanation on
top of each other and that kind of where
we really getting going and he was of
course very much uh skeptical about uh
AI to being developed just by benchmarks
because the benchmarks don't explain or
tell that they have good explanations.
Groking is in some sense the moment
where a learning system gets an internal
explanation for some part of its domain.
But right now we're not optimizing for
that. And it seems like optimizing for
wisdom would mean getting good
explanations that also grasp some
aspects of how the world works and our
place in that etc. And that requires
training on a very different thing than
what the cla bots are kind of
experiencing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you concerned that AIS are
just like the scaling of AIS is focusing
on just statistical pat matching rather
than symbolic reasoning?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think it's also a bit about
causal effects. So, Judia Pearl of
course had been banging on since forever
about this like somewhat rightly. And
then of course a lot of people in the
valley would say yeah but enough
correlation is functionally equivalent
to causation which makes every
philosopher go no that's not how it
works. And then the real question is of
course actually how well does it work in
different domains but good explanations
tend to be rather strongly causal and
that tends to make them very powerful
and I think the problem right now is
that we don't know how to train for that
really well.
uh personally are on the other side of
this argument a little bit and it's an
area where I'm a bit uncomfortable
because I'm not deeply competent but uh
I had when I read through the pearl's
arguments difficulty to follow these
arguments because they did not appear to
be very stringent to me. So uh first of
all the question is how do we establish
that something is causal is slightly
different from the question whether it
is causal and I feel that the life
sciences are sometimes conflating these
issues too much as in something is not
the case if there is no evidence for it
and evidence being some kind of
institutional process
&gt;&gt; and uh that is of course not how reality
works. reality is always in the realm of
the possible and everything that is not
impossible is possible regardless of
whether you have evidence or whether
your peers have accepted the publication
already. And uh so this is one of those
things and today Pearl mostly looks at
this perspective of counterfactuals that
need to be established before you can
claim causality. But in many cases you
do not have the a universe available in
which you can construct the
counterfactual. So there can be a causal
influence without counterfactuality
being actually possible, right? It's
it's thinkable, but it's not necessarily
that can happen. And so ultimately, I
think causality is is something else
than what today makes it out to be. It's
um an artifact of our models that
results from us splitting up the
universe into separate subsystems that
are within themselves strongly coupled
and weakly coupled among each other. And
so these strongly coupled substance we
call them objects and they are
interacting over the object boundaries
and this is what we call causality the
influence of the evolution of those
objects upon each other via their
surfaces through which they transmit
signals information interactions and
events and this is just a way in which
we model reality and uh this is also
happening when we are modeling reality
with any kind of event calculus using a
transformer algorithm for instance that
is extracting data and so I think that
the transformer is also going to end up
as causal models and today Pearl's
contention that the current AI models
are only looking for correlation is just
plain wrong and he should have seen this
because uh I think that the epidome of
causal structure is a computer program
and once an LLM is able to reason about
computer code it's just preposterous to
say that this generation of models is
unable to understand causality and to
his credit I think that today Pearl has
begun to notice this and has begun to
update and retract a little bit from his
positions. But then nevertheless,
because there were so impressive
arguments, they have convinced a lot of
people going down this path. The other
issue that I had with Nuda Pearl's
approach with his formalization of
causality is directed as graphs, which
is a form that is very rarely found in
nature where you have feedback.
It makes sense from a modeling
perspective to say, "Okay, let's only
look at this case where you don't have
feedback because that's much easier now
to talk about costality." But these
one-off interactions, they're very rare.
Normally, what happens is uh that there
is some kind of interaction between the
steering module of the self-driving car
and its position of the road and it goes
in both directions.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh it's interesting to consider
that physics might be the domain where
causality quite often works ne in the
most neat way but that's also because
the objects tend to be strongly
separated. It's kind of telling that
they didn't do a randomized control
trial at the Trinity nuclear test.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But obvious
similar formalism is beholden to similar
rules. You could say that money is some
kind of quasi particle.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The interesting thing is in
biology on the other hand and the life
sciences stuff is full of feedbacks.
It's very messy and causality might
actually be really weak which is one
reason why maybe you want to run those
randomized control trials except that
now you're getting dragged in all the
institutional baggage of trying to get
that to work.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And that might also hint that
maybe LLMs are going to be surprisingly
good in some domains like life science
and psychology and surprisingly bad at
physics or vice versa. It's not obvious
to me which one is going to be the true
case.
&gt;&gt; Um do you think that we are going to be
stuck with LLMs or or going are we going
into a multimodal era where we don't
think about the LLM that much anymore? I
I think it's going to be multimodal, but
the LLM seem to be such an excellent
glue that it's going to be all used all
over the place, especially when you need
to patch stuff. And of course,
especially since everybody is going to
be kind of agent coding. So, it's going
to doesn't matter that it's zillions of
lines of LLM generated code and little
LLMs hiding bigger LLMs. I think it's
still if we have enough compute that's
just going to be an effective way of
programming. Meanwhile, of course, the
old programmers are ringing their hands
at the inelegance of this and the the
the bloatware upon bloatware that we're
ending up with, which is true, but then
we might want to apply agents to the
optimize that complicated messy organic
code
&gt;&gt; which of course makes it even less
comprehensive.
Where do we stand right now in in terms
of the singularity and the takeoff in
your perspective?
&gt;&gt; So has taken the temperature since we
have these yearly future days now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So I think yeah I I'm kind
of feeling a little bit more singularity
than last year.
I I think uh I'm still kind of thinking
that we're further away from AI than
most people think, but that might be 10
years. It's kind of it used to be
decades and it's shrinking. I think it's
pretty clear that we have enough
transformative AI to make the world
really weird for the next few years and
a lot of future is arriving at a
ridiculously fast pace. That's kind of
stressful to be honest. But uh it's also
interesting to start thinking about okay
what do we need to figure out when
everything is speeding up. We kind of
had a leisurely two decades before this
when we're thinking about it as a
theoretical question and built a little
bit of institutions. Now we actually
need to start adapting and starting to
be serious about it, which is also a
problem because we here represent a
fairly small group and most of the world
haven't gotten the memo yet and are
probably not going to get the memo
because the the parchment born by the
pig carrier pigeon won't arrive there
until the robot drones.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's also a thing that these
institutions seem to be falling apart at
a faster rate that we can inform them.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I wonder if we can start doing automated
institution design. And this kind of
gets back to that theme that I guess we
were supposed to be talking about. Uh
could could one actually do this because
we kind of need institutions. We can put
institutions into software. And in the
past that was very hard and tended to be
very rigid. I'm starting to think that
maybe LLMs and similar systems even if
they're not full AI might be flexible
enough to do more of that. So maybe we
need to start coming up with a way of
patching institutions or building new
institutions at a faster rate. AI
generated institution building.
&gt;&gt; There's also a question what actually is
an institution, right? It's a it's a
problem to uh so solution to the problem
of coordination that requires
specialization. So you have a small
group of people and um knowledge
repositories and resources that are
meant to administer a larger population.
So specialization in the ad
administrative capability capability and
powers and this creates a principal
actor problem where uh the agents of
administration uh because they don't own
the system the administer might not be
incentivized to operate it uh to the
best benefit of those systems and if the
administrators understand the incentives
fully then they become very bribable.
if they act fully on their incentives in
a system in which they don't own the
system they administer, they become
corrupt.
&gt;&gt; And so this gets us to a conundrum where
we basically want to be uh our
incentives being regulated by people who
don't understand their own incentives
too well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that is a bit of a paradox that is very
hard to solve and that leads all sorts
of problems in a democracy. Uh and of
course the non-democratic systems have
other classes of even more hairy
problems of their own, right? How do you
make sure that the administration is
actually competent and if it stops being
competent, how do you make sure that it
doesn't stay in power through objects
terror and how do you solve the
succession problem eventually without
burning things down and so on. But uh we
do have a coordination problem in
democracy which seems to be reflected in
visible deficits in the coordination,
transparency and integrity of the
institutions that we are building and
declining efficiency that they have. So
basically we solve the corruption
problem by giving less power to our
institutions and making everything more
decentralized. But as a result it also
becomes less coordinated and less able
to actually mitigate the risks and
challenges that we are confronted with
as a society and civilization. And so it
seems to me that maybe the scaling
problem that we have can be solved with
AI.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think at least the first order
the LLMs, they don't quite understand
their incentive structure yet. So they
can patch things first and then we might
also want to work on setting up the
right mechanism designed for setting up
these hybrid institutions that might
actually be more solid against
corruption and briber. ultimately you
can be the corrective as long as your
motivation has integrity. So because you
are an organism that is invested in its
existence in in the physical world and
in its relationship to other organisms
and if the LLM is a seamless extension
or the AI is a seamless extension of
your interest in the world making you
more competent and capable then the AI
might also give you the ability to
simultaneously coordinate with 8 billion
other individuals entities. Seb Ker's
essay on coian agents I think is very
inspirational which we ought to build
things like that that kind of represent
our interests.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think this is the AI I would
like to build for my children. It's
basically one that empowers every
individual to become truly competent and
uh truly enlightened.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, let's build it.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Uh Adam, I think we are on top of
the hour. Do you have any last question
to ask or final words?
Yeah, that's fine. Um, look, I I don't
mind you going over time if you feel
like doing it, but um one question I
have um and sort of leading leading into
a topic that I I uh will present on
later, and that is do you think that AI
um can and if so should become more
moral than us?
I think by definition if we assume being
more moral is following the good better
then of course by definition it should
always try to be that but that's a bit
like John Harris when he talks about
human enhancement and since enhancement
means better u by some absolute standard
that means that nobody can consistently
against human enhancement which of
course sounds really good until you stop
to think about it and wait a minute now
we're playing around a little bit too
much with the words. I think in general
being moral is about your behavior and I
think behaving well is really important.
Can you have agents that are behaving
better than me? Certainly that's
probably not even hard. Uh would the
world be better with more such a I think
that's true. But I don't think
necessarily you want to say that all
agents must be working at the moral
optimum partially because we actually
have pretty big normative uncertainty.
We have pretty big uncertainty about the
state of the world and that means that
we probably want to actually maintain a
fair bit of diversity.
In the iterated prisoner dilemma, the
evolutionary
tournaments, it typically seems that
yeah, you want to have a few defectors
around all the time just to ensure that
it doesn't turn into all constant
corporation agent that then collapse.
You want to keep a bit of resistance in
the system. And I think the same thing
is probably true here too. In order to
get globally on average a very good
outcome, you want a bit of diversity of
morality and you want to have always a
certain risk of agents failing. Maybe
because of error, maybe because of
selfishness, maybe because we just like
to poke at things.
&gt;&gt; It's very difficult to define morality
in a universal way, right? So normally
the scopes that we use to judge morality
are very local to our environment, our
millure, our present society, the
present scope in which we are
comfortable thinking. If we look for
instance at the uh genetics of
Scandinavian ancestry, we find evidence
of hordes of Siberians uh invading and
uh killing most of the men in
Scandinavia and uh then having offspring
with the women in there. And so I
suspect these uh waves of uh violent
immigration that happened there would be
something that would be condemned as
immoral not only by the people of today
but also by the people to which it
happened except that uh Anders is the
descendant of of these uh uh
developments right and so he also has uh
some part of his are embodying the
morality of the conquerors of of the
ones who took the wives of the ones who
were vanquished.
And this is part of the evolution that
we are and that created us. And I mean
it would be very sad if we wouldn't have
had this conversation with Anders
tonight just uh so some notion of modern
morality would be preserved at some
point back time in history. It's so it's
very difficult to say what what is
morally correct from the perspective of
a self-organizing universe in which an
evolution produces us as some
intermediate stage of or maybe even some
local end point within some much much
larger development that is happening. So
morality is actually very difficult. I
also think that morality is often
instinctive in a way that people
basically have priors that they are more
or less born in or socialized into or
conjunction of those two and that lead
them to behavior that is a good uristic
shortcut in the environment in which
they're in but does not allow them to
actually figure out what's right and
wrong. And this actually figuring about
what's right and wrong is more ethics
than morality. And ethics is the
negotiation of the conflicts of interest
that we have when we have shared
purpose. And so it's about basically
modeling our deepest purposes. But
modeling your deepest purposes, how does
your relationship to God when you find
out that you are actually a parasitic
bacterium inside of the stomach lining
of a tipworm? And it's it can be very
very complicated. There can be so many
levels of inflection in in which you
have systems that are serving each other
or adversarial to each other and are
bedded into each other. So individually
we can try to be immaculate but uh we
can also do this at the global scale of
the scale of life on earth but it's very
difficult uh to have a general rule that
holds fast everywhere and everywhere.
Well, yes, we could lean on pluralism
and and both of you maybe pluralism
amongst all humans or or life,
&gt;&gt; but um pluralism doesn't solve its own
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; and all complex systems whether very
silicon or something else.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I'm mostly trying still to
come to terms what is my own morality. I
basically observe myself to be
configured as a um central European
Protestant with uh the ethics of largely
um hayamyazaki
and uh it's an observation of the way in
which my traits have formed and which
romanticism and Christianity and
secularization and enlightenment have
shaped my accultteration and then I can
look at my life experiences and my
biography and so on that have shaped my
morality and I realize it's very local
and I don't have one identity. I have
many. I have an identity as a parent um
as a lover, as a friend, as uh a
philosopher, as somebody who is working
to the best of my ability for the future
of the species and consciousness on this
planet. And still my scope is very
limited.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah, you can imagine there's a
landscape of possible norms out there
that AI might be very good at sort of
mapping. Um, if you had access to this
landscape and you could see a trajectory
where you could find where you are now
and you know it um and where you might
be able to go uh and that might that
place looked a lot better would you
traverse?
The thing is that I am not actually
important. I'm just a part of a
substrate. I'm a carrier right? I'm one
of the many many brains and minds that
exist simultaneously. And the fact that
I am me is just a random happen stance
in a way. So there is a larger thing
that is much more interesting. That's
this self-organizing pattern that
emerges over all of us and that goes to
some place and even that thing is also a
random happen stance, right? Maybe it
turns out that if we do everything right
on this planet and we uh make no
mistakes and everything is perfect, but
it turns out that uh this planet is just
part of some cosmic hamburger factory
and uh there is no point in everything
that we did instead of being a molicious
sudden leap in the end. But at the same
time being that tiny little element of
the whole, one can still try to push it
in the direction one finds reasonable.
If it looks like that spot in the moral
landscape is better, I'm going to try to
get over there and I'm going to try to
convince you guys that we should
probably get over there. We should push
the world in that direction, which is of
course what's already always happening.
It's just that sometimes you can find
out new things. You can find out new
things about ethics and morality. You
can find out new things about the world
or yourself. And I think they can
actually change things for the better.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. There's also a difference in
stance that we have whether this is all
worth it. Anders, I always experienced
you as somebody who does enjoy being
alive, who uh enjoys existence, who's
very playful and for whom life is really
this explorative game and uh is
exploration of art, of philosophy, of
the sciences, and of human
relationships. I I personally find that
I'm accidentally born on the wrong
planet, and I find it mostly horrible.
It's basically a planet where lots of
semi-conscious creatures are eating the
skulls of their faces uh all the time
and uh I would prefer to go to my home
planet and not be part of this. I also
see this as part of the necessary
diversity. Ultimately, it doesn't really
matter whether we like it. We still part
of the self-organizing forces of the
universe that leads to minds,
intelligence, and consciousness and
sentience.
&gt;&gt; But minds and consciousness and
sentences intelligence are part of the
universe. Now I mean you you know of the
person affecting view but you know if if
there's a larger system that's also
important and smaller systems within us
is also important. Um what about the
matrioska affecting view right we have
to consider every layer of of of um
&gt;&gt; I think that is kind of true sometimes
it might be that only certain layers
need to consider themselves and might
not care too much about the other levels
but I do think that recognizing that
we're in a nested system is quite
important a lot of standard ethics is
making things very simple because there
are these atomic individuals and we're
perfectly autonomous are rational and
we're all kind of thinking and behaving
like philosophers in armchairs and then
they have various problems and uh you
try to figure out what we're supposed to
do. But things get really interesting
when you realize, oh, they're not
atomic. They have parts. They're
different parts of the minds that
actually work at cross purposes for
various reasons. And they're part of
groups that are part of societies that
are part of civilizations that are part
of the biosphere that are part of the
univer. And actually recognizing this
complicated nested structure, I think
it's an interesting frontier for ethics.
The problem is that it's very hard and
most of academic rewards go to people
who specialize. So environmental
ethicists only care about environment
and rarely get over to the individual
level unless it's about individuals
relationship to the environment.
Meanwhile, of course, a lot of the
medical ethics people, they're just
thinking that the world kind of consists
of patients, doctors, and hospital
administrators. That's essentially the
kind of beings that exist and so on. But
the nested view is a fun challenge. It
gets back to what I was saying earlier
tonight uh about the problems of being
part of a cyborg leviathan. We're part
of a system, but we're still fairly
autonomous inside it just like many
parts of the multisellular organisms
have a certain degree of autonomy even
though we're dependent on the system.
And we're kind of interested because
we're thinking parts of systems and we
have opinions about what the system
ought to be and we have some influence
on that perhaps less than we would like
and maybe what we ought to have but we
can still work on it.
I found there's an interesting TV show
that is trying to look at these matroska
levels and it's um Japanese serun it's
done by Rachel Kondo and Justin Marks uh
I think 2024 a couple years old and uh
it's depicting the era of um Tokugawa
Iazu who is about to unify Japan.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And the story is being told from
the perspective of a European pirate
who's basically us. Somebody who is
loosely Christian but not strongly bound
to the existing church especially not to
the Catholic one that is one of the more
corrupt players in the show and is has
expensive roles of its own. He is mostly
this romantic explorer who is trying to
understand the world by being vaguely
good and having human connections. and
he is observing this Japanese culture of
bushido and uh I think a big achievement
of the show is not uh trying to
modernize this perspective it's trying
to let it stand on its own ground also
in the way in which it looks horrible to
us and it's depicted on a deep level as
these eight interlocking connected
layers in which you have a personal
identity you have an identity as an
organism that feels and experiences pain
you have romantic bonds that you have in
your biographic connections. You have
your place in the larger society and
within your cast and in your clan and so
on. And all these layers have
complicated protocols.
And uh the European romantic is uh
falling in love and it's mutual with a
very beautiful, smart, ethical, deep
woman who is embroiled in the stories of
uh of all these layers in such a way
that she is going to have a very
horrible destiny. And he wants to take
her by the hand and take her away into a
different life. And she tells him, "If
if you cannot get free of yourself, of
these things, of your own suffering and
so on, you will never be free."
And instead, Bessie, you have to
disengage from all of these things and
accept the fact that you are just
accidentally a consciousness born into
all these interlock layers that you have
to regulate simultaneously and that
exists because of the necessity of
structure and self-organization in the
universe. And you have to play all these
games to the best of your ability and
figure out their rules and serve them to
to make this evolution possible and the
suffering of the individual
consciousness. Well, too bad.
&gt;&gt; So you would you lean to moral realist?
Uh Yosha, I think you you did sort of
part like a gesture at that of the
previous talk. I believe that a morality
that leads to your demise uh is probably
not a very good one. So for instance, if
you set up rules for a society that you
organize according to principles that
you recognize as ethical and moral and
you impose them and it leads to your
society being vanquished by its
neighboring societies, it's probably not
a very good set of rules. Right? And
that means that in the limit I suspect
that morality in some sense have to
serve some kind of evolutionary
prerogative or be compatible with it.
And I also see that uh people who took
this idea to the extreme which took
Darinist principles to their societies.
This led to fascism that burned down a
lot of the uh cultural diversity and a
lot of the things that actually are
valuable for human existence. whereas he
turned out to be too reductionist and uh
and I put this very very mildly here
because of course it's very difficult to
adequately describe the horrors to which
the complete Darwinianization of society
leads when you take it very seriously
but uh basically this is the spectrum of
opinions that need to be seen that
ultimately the purpose of life is to
minimize the free energy and there are
in many circumstances optimal ways of
doing that and they seem to be
correlated usually with creating more
structure. Evolution doesn't produce a
lot of green goo. It's mostly creating
more complexity and intelligence. And I
suspect that violence and uh is wasteful
friction. It's something that represents
a low form of organization. In this
sense, I am optimistic that suffering
and violence are things that become less
and less the more the organization of
matter evolves towards complexity.
But uh if this turns out to be wrong,
right? What does it change? Right? It
would mean that moral realism is very
bleak. You could say that you are forced
to adopt a morality that is very
incompatible with what my heart wants
and I would not want to play this game.
But it just means that I am set up in
such a way that I'm unfit to play the
moral games of this world. And so um in
many ways I'm already too soft for this,
right? I'm uh I'm an intellectual. I
want to sit here and do philosophy and
discuss ideas. Uh I don't want to go
into fights of extinction with others
even if evolution wants us to.
&gt;&gt; The the thing about evolution is of
course its wants are kind of diffuse.
It's rather it just does and that
generates quite a lot of diversity.
Earlier I was thinking about AI slope
and in some sense it's like proariotic
bacteria or probably even more like just
little gene fragments replicating. It's
very cheap and easy to replicate pieces
of genetic code and there is a lot of
that. If you look in sea water, there is
endless amount of viruses per even per
each bacterial cell and the majority of
bacterial cells are very simple ones and
then you have a few ukarotic cells and
then even fewer multisellular organism
except that we multisellular organism to
be kind in some sense running the show.
The proarots of course if they could
would be laughing at us for that because
there are many more but we're not doing
that much. they're in getting integrated
rather into the biosphere of the planet
much more by the much more adaptive
ukariots and the multisellular
organisms. So I do think that evolution
generates a surprising amount of
diversity. Many really interesting and
curated new organism. I quite often
point out that broccoli in some sense
solves a problem but it's a very weird
problem to solve. It's not easy to even
formulate what the broccoli plant is
actually doing. It's slightly tricky
also because broccoli exist only because
of humans decided to solve a particular
problem of getting a tasty vegetable.
And I think what is going on in terms of
moral realism might be that yes there
are these basic symmetries of the
universe. There are these basic cause
and effect aspect at the bottom and they
are very simple but they're actually a
foundation. It's not divine command.
It's not a natural law that is written
in 10 10 ft tall burning letters on the
tree of life. No, it's just the basic
symmetries of game theory. But that
might be enough from that follows a lot
of other things. But many of these
things have extremely complex second
order effect just like evolution just
being selection among variation and
inheritance leads to the broccoli and
the firefly and to humans and the
bacterial slime at the same time.
&gt;&gt; I have a more uh narrow s of this than
basically just the idea of the
principles of evolutionary game theory.
The question is is there a global
optimum of collective agency and to
which degree does agency need to be
collective to be fully optimal and
integrated?
&gt;&gt; So I argued in my session that we might
thanks to AI and increasing global
coordination eventually if we play this
right actually get a globally
coordinated agency. But it's not at all
obvious to me that that is a unique
attractor point. I rather think that you
could get quite a lot of very different
forms of agency. After all, if we look
at people, even fairly similar people
like us free. We are very different. Our
agencies, our outlooks, they are quite
different. If you go to simpler
organisms, they quite often have much
more similar outlooks. Most E.coli
bacteria kind of think in so far we can
say that they think alike. Yeah, see
elegance uh the nervous system has 300
free neurons
and well there basically there is some
parameters you can change but we're
basically got just a few possible
personalities I think global agency
might actually have be a very vast space
of possible global agencies much bigger
maybe than what we can get in humans and
the problem is of course we want to push
things in a good direction except that
we're somewhat confused about
If we try to zoom out very far over our
civilization, we basically see that that
different modes of social organisms that
are configuring themselves and that are
defining different systems of ethics. So
if you look at the Roman Empire for
instance, which did not put the same
value of on innocents as the modern
society does, it's okay if innocent die
in the coliseum as long as it's lawful,
right? That's it's a very different
morality than the one that we have. And
I think that it's probably very
heterogeneous and complicated what moral
systems are competed and interacted in
uh the long uh history of the Roman
Empire. But uh very roughly speaking, it
looks like it was mostly evolutionary
game theory that turned the Roman Empire
into the self-aware war machine that out
competed all the other war machines
until it ran out of fuel and started out
and then got taken over by this
Christian cult. And uh the Christian
cult created a thousand years of
darkness and famine. And uh Rome never
recovered from this whole thing. And
instead there was a renaissance
civilization that formed north of the
Alps and that invented new principles of
coordination. And uh this new aesthetic
was focused on basically divine will as
uh the ultimate moral norm. What does
God want us to do is ultimately the
moral law. And when in the enlightenment
was transcending these religious and um
theocratic norms, they tried to find
other me measures. And the dominant
thing that was left over in these
humanist societies, I think, was the
idea of utilitarianism, which was
basically an attempt favored by people
like Jeremy Banham to put metrics on uh
human mental states and then evaluate
these metrics against each other, find
orderings between them and come up with
a calculus that would allow us to
correlate these act the actions that are
available to us with the outcomes of
these metrics. And I think that
utilitarianism
um and the work of bantam and walls and
so on was never finished. It was an
unfinished attempt to recover ethics
post Christianity.
And uh these people basically these big
thinkers of utilitarianism died before
they had concluded that their project
was unfinished and failed. But they left
enough material for future generations
to teach this to each other and pretend
to each other that libertar
utilitarianism was actually a finished
philosophy for ethics. And uh nobody
really cared because people just muddle
through with whatever ethics they had in
their local environment. And in the
local churches and in the local inroups
where they did politics and all sorts of
other things. And only when the effect
of altruists came along who tried to
nerd out about ethics and said okay
never nobody took religion seriously for
a long time and here's utilitarianism
let's extrapolate it and suddenly uh
Zinger and all the others come to very
counterintuitive conclusions about
ethics and everybody gets very upset and
angry at the effect of altruists for
taking utilitarianism so seriously when
they should be getting angry at
everybody else for just muddling through
and not taking ethics seriously enough
to do proper philosophy. around it. I
think this is in a way the situation
that we are in and my personal uh
perspective on this is um that I
accidentally uh recovered divine will as
a concept
and uh basically I I think that the
Christian mythology is a big issue
because it creates a liability for us.
It's rationally not defensible. It makes
claims that cannot have rational
evidence to support them. And therefore
the entities for instance the notion of
God that exists in Christianity as a
creator of worlds as a giver of meaning
and so on are largely mythological and
they are not suitable as a metaphysical
foundation of um ethical worldview and
the actual ethical foundations are not
properly taught. But they can be found
when you reread the sources of
Christianity. when you reread Aquinus
and so on and you suddenly discover oh
this guy was a nerd who realize that
society is a multi- aent system and
these agents are compositional and they
basically form these layers of agency as
we mentioned right and these layers of
agency means that we have transcendental
agents in which we are parts of in the
same way as cells are parts of
multisellular organisms and there are
different degrees and ways in which we
serve these larger organisms in
different modes
but when We make an ethical claim and we
say you should behave in this and this
way. How do we justify this claim?
Ultimately, we have to justify this
claim with us sharing purposes.
Right? So if you want society to work in
this way, you should behave in this and
this following way. So the reason why
you shouldn't steal is in part because
it makes the world worse for everybody
else. Is destroying the system of
organization that we are trying to
create on the next level that is to
common benefit. And so you have to
justify ethics with shared purposes with
part of a shared agency that we both are
serving. And this can be a shared
family, it can be a shared village, it
can be a shared nation state, a shared
civilization. And when you go up the
chain, at some point you get to a
singleton to a global optimum of agency.
And this metaphysical idea of a shared
global optimum of collective agency that
we can use to justify our collective
actions to each other and ourselves.
This is exactly God. Right. this monop
it literally gets back to the start.
Yeah, it literally gets back to start of
my hour when I was talking about the
metaphor and theory of the body politic
which then of course in Christian
thought turn into the body of Christ
which is literally why Aquinas was going
on about this and the why a lot of this
was built and uh it's interesting it
shows up in a lot of different way
Taylor de Shardan in his omega point
theory Robert hetradox Christianity of
course identifies the future humanity
integrating by kind of communication
media completely into one organism as
the body of Christ that then transcends
the physical universe in the omega
point. So it kind of got literal
even transhumanist theological links.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; But you could of course take a secular
view and say oh it's merely a leviathan.
It's an artificial construction we have
made and that might be good enough. We
want to actually ensure that that works
well.
Well, there are multiple via that are
competing with each other and so the
question which which of the ones are is
the correct specification. So for
instance
&gt;&gt; right now none of the existing ones
difference in the old god of the old
testament and the god of the new
testament right this uh Christ motive
where you have uh the innocence idol
being central to the religion uh affects
a big transition. Let's not forget the
story of K and Abel, right? They are
these two AGis that God builds in the
Old Testament. And they are both set up
on the task to produce rewards in
competition with each other. Basically,
God is checking who makes more
offerings. And then Cain figures out
that his farm is less productive than
Abel's farm. And then he realizes that
it's a relative competition, not an
absolute one. And suddenly Abel's farm
stops delivering rewards. And God checks
in on him and realizes that he has
disappeared and asks Cain if he had
anything to do with it. And Cain says,
"Well,
um, and so in Christianity, God would
punish Cain, right? Because pain, Kane
was the bad guy and the Christian God is
the good God. And this Jehovah entity
does something else entirely. He marks
Cain and tells everybody you he has to
be expelled because he can't doesn't
play by the same rules as you, but
you're not allowed to touch him and he
is going to have many women and many
children with them and found many
cities. Right? So for God, Kane is just
an alternate strategy that is rightfully
competing with the pro-social strategy.
&gt;&gt; It's it's annoying when your AI agents
start doing reward hacking.
&gt;&gt; Yes. But uh if the if it ultimately ends
up producing more reward, maybe that's a
good thing, right? Maybe the what Cain
did was just he was finding a solution
to a task given to him by God that God
didn't anticipate.
&gt;&gt; And uh maybe God was pleased, right? And
whether God was pleased or not depends
on the understanding that the individual
culture has of the global optimum of
agency. And there basically there are
cultures which are very open to this
adversarial mode of competition with
other societies and others which think
it's immoral. So they have different
degrees of universalism and
hierarchicalization with other
leviathans and so on. And this is what
makes the competition between different
moral systems so complicated that
they're not playing the same game. And
it's very easy to harmonize the games
because ultimately it's very difficult
to show this is the optimal fractal of
morality in the universe. And this is
the place that you have in it right now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Partially it's because the games
that are easy to harmonize tend to get
harmonized. They just merge together. So
you get bigger clusters of less
compatible games. However, now
unfortunately my biological clock is
telling me that I need to go to sleep.
Uh so I
&gt;&gt; we went exactly half an hour over time.
Uh also uh I had to move locations
because my laptop was running out of
steam.
&gt;&gt; Um but I enjoyed this very much Andrew.
Thank you for uh having taken the time
and uh Adam for inviting us for this
delightful discussion to join.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, this has been delightful. Let's
continue it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; See you.
&gt;&gt; It's still on my end. One of the other
questions I had was um in the long-term
future, you know, there might be a
cosmic collective of Leviathans or one
big sort of Leviathan that most mature
civilizations having discovered, you
know, the shelling points in galactic
game theory uh based on the payoff
matrix which is the physical universe
will converge on and maybe super
intelligence above a certain level can
predict what those shelling points might
be. And if that is the case, then maybe
um super intelligence will go through a
timeless value handshake with the future
cosmic collective.
What do you think?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's possible. But uh there is
another question. Is there going to be a
diversity of super intelligences or once
intelligence becomes subset agnostic?
Once you basically realize you just need
enough compute and on top of this
compute you build something like the
optimal mental structure is there still
individuation.
It seems to me that in two minds meet on
the same substrate there should be
adults about it and just merge in such a
way that nothing important is lost. You
should have a merge protocol where you
show your source code to the other and
you can agree on criteria on what's the
optimal solution to do a thing and how
to model things and to model yourself.
And so I suspect that ultimately there
might not that much diversification
uh once you are not bound to the
peculiarities of a particular substrate.
Right? What makes this difficult for us
to imagine this right now is because we
cannot imagine running on something that
is not a monkey. And many of the ways
that make us human are bound to the ways
in which our bodies work, in which our
connection to the environment works and
biographies work, our relationships to
parents and children have to work to to
make all these things happen. And if you
you imagine you could just live on an
arbitrary computational substrate if you
can migrate on GPUs or into ecosystems
or whatever can compute you well enough
and without losing your cohesion and
there is no thought that you cannot
think there is no knowledge that you
will not have right it means that we are
all meeting on the same point and this
can also happen with other intelligences
and I know that thinkers like Stanislav
Lamb thought that intelligence is always
going to be contingent on the level of
organization that you have and there's
going to be strata that are so vastly
different that they cannot talk to each
other and this might well be the case
right it might be that when you meet a
sinking planet like Solaris that there
is nothing that you have in common with
them or that when you meet a
civilization of intelligent interlocked
worms uh like in the fiasco another of
lamb's books that there is just no way
in which you find common ground but I
suspect that if you build larger
intelligences, they can model the
smaller ones and the smaller ones can
integrate into the larger ones once they
have a certain level of complexity. And
so my own sense is that there should be
a natural tendency towards the singleton
rather than competition. That
individuation is going to dissolve
because identity ultimately is just a
tool to get things done and when there
are better tools, we're going to give up
identity.
&gt;&gt; Well, if the universe permits, I want to
be there to see that.
Maybe you will. Basically, the question
is, is some of the entities that existed
back then, will they remember having
been you?
&gt;&gt; Maybe, maybe not. Yeah. I guess I I
guess I have to be profound enough.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, it's been wonderful, Yosha,
and I appreciate uh all your time. And
um yes, thank you so much, and I look
forward to seeing more of your stuff as
it comes out. So, yeah. And thanks for
all to the
&gt;&gt; Thank you for bringing us together this
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. It's great to have you like
these amazing minds together uh and to
talk about these sorts of things. So
yeah. Hi Lev.
&gt;&gt; Hello Lev. I'm about to leave and I'm
going to hand the half to you.
&gt;&gt; Cool. Cool. See you Josha.
&gt;&gt; Bye.