Uh there's so much to talk about. You
know, we're not going to get through my
entire program. Probably we won't even
get through half of it. So the whatever
we stop, I'm going to pick up on my
Monday class and then we'll have a
plenty of time to ask questions and do,
you know, explore all the little byways
and so forth. Um
I was initially told I could I needed to
have everything on one program. So, I
was doing that and then I found out that
no, you can do it your normal way where
you have three or four programs open and
you bounce back and forth. And then I
found out from Eric earlier today, no,
we'd rather be much better to have it
all on one. So, I go, okay, so let me
see what I can pull together. And that's
why I'm actually a few minutes late
because I was adding the last slides
literally 10 minutes ago.
So, anyways, let's see. Can we see?
You're seeing what I'm see. Okay. So
this was um the initial part of this was
a program I put together started putting
together last June because uh June 30th
how many of you know have ever heard of
asteroid day? Yeah, asteroid day is uh
celebrated on June 30th and it it's
primarily to commemorate the Tangusa
event of 1908 about which there have
been many unexplained uh anomalies and
mysteries and things surrounding that.
But it is to me one of the most
important cosmic lessons of our time. So
I'm going to start with some stuff. I'm
going to get into the the Tungusa event.
I'm going to talk a little bit about
asteroids and comets and cycles of
change and then I talk a little bit
about the sun. I think it's Robert here.
Robert. Hey buddy. So [applause]
[cheering]
yeah. Um Robert Yeah. Well, Robert is
talking tomorrow, so you you'll get the
full story and all his updates tomorrow.
And it's don't miss it. Whatever you do,
don't miss it. Um, anyways, let's get
started. And, uh, Will Durant, the
famous historian, said this,
civilization exists by geological
consent, subject to change without
notice. And I don't know if you've all
heard of his uh work on the history of
civilization, 11 volumes, will and Ariel
Durant. It's kind of considered one of
the go-to if you want to get the big
picture of the history of civilization
on earth. And after many many years and
literally 11 volumes, this is this is
kind of his concluding statement. Um
and then I like this from roomie. A
watchman be wakeful. It behooves not a
watchman to sleep. And given the nature
of the environment that we inhabit on
planet Earth, that is very good advice.
I like to
I like to invoke the idea of a cosmic
ecosystem that we're we really need to
be thinking about our planet as part of
a much greater system an ecosystem that
includes asteroids, comets, the sun, um
many other factors probably on a
galactic level as well. And I think that
the research is showing that our planet
has been affected profoundly in multi
multiple times, multiple ways, both
through earth history and through human
history. And so, um, one of the things
I'm trying to do is encourage the idea
to think bigger, think that we're part
of a much bigger ecosystem that's not
limited to the surface of the earth.
So, we'll start out by talking about
cycles of global change.
And uh one of the books that I
frequently have referred to is as is
Hamlet's Mill came out in 1969
in which they were a couple of highly
esteemed scholars who actually believed
that there was a sophisticated knowledge
in prehistory and they one of the things
that they uh hypothesized was that
ancient people um had observed and knew
about the processional cycle which is
actually a very slow cycle. cycle. It
works out to about 50 arcseconds per
year of motion. Uh how many of you have
heard of the vernal equinox the the
procession of the equinoxes? You know
that that each year the processional the
position of the sun at the moment of
spring equinox when day and night are
precisely the same length is uh drifting
very slowly to the west the opposite
direction of most all of the planetary
motion. If you look at the sun, the
moon, the planets throughout the course
of their cycles, you'll see they're all
moving from west to east. But the vernal
equinox, as is the fall equinox and the
solstesses are all moving towards the
west. That's why it's preession, not
proession.
But that that increment is very small.
It's 50 arcsec. Now, how do you
visualize that? Well, think about this.
The full moon is about a half a degree
uh displacement. If you look at the
angle from our perspective out to the
full moon or the orbit of the sun are
both going to displace about a half a
degree. So it takes about 72 years to
move one full degree for the uh vernal
equinox to move one full degree. So if
you started you know at a very early age
and begin to observe it for a full
lifetime you would soon realize that it
has moved a little bit with respect to
the stars. Of course the problem is the
vernal equinox you're going to be
looking directly at the sun. So I think
ancient peoples had come up with more
ways to determine that motion than to
actually try to look at the sun and its
position at the vernal equinox.
Anyways here's what the authors of
Hamlet's Mill said. The equinoxial
points and therefore the solstitial ones
too do not for remain forever where they
should in order to make celestial goings
on easier to understand. Namely at the
same spot with respect to the sphere of
the fixed stars. Instead they stubbornly
move along the ecliptic in the opposite
direction to the yearly course of the
sun that is against the right sequence
of the zodiacal signs.
The this phenomena is called procession
of the equinox and it was conceived as
causing the rise in the cataclysmic fall
of the ages of the world. So they saw
this connection in their research. They
saw this connection of ancient people
belief believing that somehow this cycle
which has often been referred to as the
great year was somehow related to a
cycle of catastrophes on earth that
affected the r like they say here or the
rise and fall of civilization.
The Greeks still had the old idea but
they asked themselves questions about
it. What moved was the sky but questions
about the sky posed obstruuse problems.
Uh the greatest was of course the slow
motion of the tilt of the sky described
above which went through a great year of
26,000 years. Now I mentioned 50
arcseconds per year which isn't very
much. It takes 72 years to move through
a full degree. So if you multiply that
by 360 you get the sort of the sacred
number if you will 25,920
years
which is usually rounded off to 26,000.
Now, we don't know if 25,920
years is exact or not because of the
fact, for one thing, we don't know if
the processional rate stays absolutely
constant throughout the full cycle. So,
what we're observing now is actually
slightly more than 50 seconds of arc per
year. So, it's that would mean that uh
it's a little bit shorter than the the
magic number of 25,920.
We just don't know. But typically, most
textbooks that I've seen will round off
the processional cycle to 26,000 years.
25,920
is actually closer to the uh the the
actual period of of rotation um based
upon the the current rate measured rate
of 50 plus a little bit of arcsec.
And I'm just drawing from a few sources
here to convey the idea. the world year
of the Persians. This was um couple of
orientalists highly respected in their
field who wrote in the journal of the
American Oriental Society.
The notion of cyclically recurrent
cosmic disasters, a catastrophe by flood
alternating with one by fire has been
traced from ancient Babylonia and Iran
through Pythagorean and stoic philosophy
and then into the medieval world. So
this is you know whether we go to the
Greeks or the Mayans the Hopi Indians
any number of cultures both still extent
and ancient [clears throat]
we find very similar ideas and usually
involving flood and fire sometimes
alternating sometimes happening
simultaneously.
Um, and we now know though that nature
provides ways to do both on on a very
large scale.
In classical Greek and Henistic
literature, the doctrine of the great
year was already connected with the
myths of deluge and ecarus. Now that's
destruction [clears throat] of the world
by fire is deluge. The Greek term for
that was cataclysmos.
And then ecarus is the destruction of
the world by fire. These catastrophes
were supposed to return periodically
when the planets came together in
certain signs of the zodiac. In the
Persian system, we still find the deluge
connected with the conjunction of the
planets. [clears throat] Now this idea
here is that whether you accept this
literally or not and there's some rather
tanalyzing evidence to show that the
influx of comets from the or from the
Kyper disc may be con connected uh to
conjunctions of the planets. But the
idea here is that they saw that the
astronomical realm was the source of
these catastrophes.
And [clears throat] so here is now
jumping to science. This was actually a
graph oh almost 30 years ago but it's
still relatively accurate. And if you
look at this this is like it says here a
sea surface temperature graph as a proxy
for global climate change. Clearly
displays a regular succession of glacial
and interglacial ages. So what you're
seeing here is the peaks represent an
interglacial such as we are in at the
moment. You know we are in an
interglacial. Sea levels are relatively
stable at at their current uh level. And
we know that 15,000 to 20,000 years ago,
we were the planet was in the midst of a
full glacial cycle. Now, full glacial
cycle, you have to double roughly double
the amount of ice that's on the planet
now. And when you do that, you've
extracted about 400 ft or even more from
the levels of the global oceans. So
during a glacial cycle, you can picture
this if we were to go into a glacial
cycle. Now what would happen is you
think every year water is evaporated
from the oceans primarily. I mean also
from lakes and rivers and and even
groundwater respiration from plants but
primarily it's going to be the ocean. No
water's evaporated. It precipitates out
as rainfall or in northern latitudes as
snowfall. Like where I grew up in
Minnesota, we get about six feet of snow
every year. Um, and then come spring
that snow all melts. It flows back and
becomes part of the hydrosphere, which
uh we would say the cryossphere is the
is the realm of snow and ice. The
hydrosphere is water. So the the the
snow and the ice melts, it goes back
into groundwater, surface water, makes
it way back to the ocean, right? And it
does this cyclically. Now, at the onset
of an ice age, imagine that uh winter
comes on, but spring doesn't come back
for 15,000 years. And essentially, in a
way, in an oversimplified way, that's
what we're talking about. And we now
know that the onset of the late glacial
maximum um which is called the late
Wisconsin for in the in the uh northern
I mean the western hemisphere in North
America came on extremely rapidly and it
may have even been so rapid that it
literally was like a switch that went
off and then spring didn't come back
until
13 to 15,000 years later. We still don't
know the full mechanism of that. I think
it's a I think it's a a dynamic process
of several things occurring
simultaneously that if they occur just
with the right synchronicity, it can
trigger uh the crossing of a threshold.
But anyways, imagine that the snow now
falls each year, but it doesn't melt.
So, it just builds up and builds up over
thousands of years. And then between
roughly 28,000 years ago, say, and about
15,000 years ago, the ice got to be
perhaps as much as a mile and a half
thick over northern North America.
I'll show you a slide in a minute that
kind of displays that. But
[clears throat]
picture all the northern cities in the
US from Boston to Detroit to New York to
Philadelphia,
um Chicago, the Twin Cities, Spokane,
Washington, Seattle, Washington, they
were all buried under thousands of feet
of ice. So it was a very different
world. Sea levels were much lower. So
when you drop sea levels by 400 ft, you
know that the coastlines are going to
migrate seawward, aren't they? And
that's going to expose the continental
shelves that rim uh all of the the
continents of the of the world. Like
here on the east coast, there are places
where the uh the coastline the shoreline
would have been as much as 50 miles
further east than than where they are
now. So it [clears throat] created a
whole new ecosystem in effect um when
the sea levels dropped that really would
have been the prime habitable real
estate to any uh any culture or group of
people at the time living um would have
found probably the uh living on
coastlines during the ice age would have
been the the the least malign uh given
the uh the extremity of the climate at
the time. Now, [clears throat] of
course, when the reverse of that
happens, and this is where the mystery
comes in, because we know that around
15,000, I think most of the research now
would suggest around 14,600
years ago, there was what is called
meltwater pulse 1b. Now, [clears throat]
somewhere around there, the climate
started warming from the late glacial
maximum. Sea levels started coming up,
say around 14 12 to 15,000 years ago.
Slowly they started coming up but at
about 146 there was a massive pulse of
meltwater to the ocean. What was driving
that? I don't know for sure. But then uh
come 12,000 just around 12 a little bit
less than 12,900 years ago is the lower
younger dus boundary. And this is where
the controversy is surrounding uh what
happened there. It was a very sharp and
sudden return to full glacial cold after
several thousand years of gradual
warming. Now I will mention that the
gradual warming
is probably the effect of uh orbital
variations of the earth. The geometric
variations between the earth and the sun
called melanchovich uh cycles. So you
have the tilt of the planet um changes
somewhat. The uh eccentricity of its
ellipse changes somewhat and and the
three factors of the Malankovich cycle
can can work together. So sometimes they
cancel each other out, sometimes they
amplify each other. The result is that
there can be warming and there can be
cooling on a on a relatively gradual
basis. At the younger dest something
very different happened. It was a very
sharp return to full glacial cold after
uh couple of thousand years of warming.
So just for your information the younger
dus younger implies there was an older
drius. So if you go back pre 14,600
years ago there was a cold spell was
called the older dus. Now what is drius?
Well, it's named after a flower, a polar
wild flower, a cold loving flower called
uh Dus Octopatala,
meaning it had eight um eight uh it was
an eight eight pedal plant, eight eight
pedal flower. So they dry octopala loves
cold weather. So if you find pollen from
that particular plant in a in a
sedimentary layer in the soil or
whatever you know that those kind of
plants were growing there. If that
disappears and you have pollen from
warmloving plants it tells you that the
ambient environment in that area
changed. Now so there was a very abrupt
change to uh the dus octtopetala at the
younger dus boundary the lower younger
dus boundary. It lasted for an estimated
about 1300 years and then at about
11,600 years ago it uh there was a spasm
an extreme spasm of unexplained warming
at this time and as a result of that um
it was like the second second jolt that
it took to move the planet out of the
ice age because it the planet was
gradually warming. If you can picture
this model, the planet is gradually
warming, gets the younger, destiny
returns to full glacial cold. Then for
about 1300 years, it's very cold.
Glaciers almost certainly begin to grow
again. And then at 11,600, there's a
second spasm of warming. And this one
carried through and over the next
millennium, um, the planet emerged from
the ice age. And we were then shifted
from a the geological epoch the pleaene
which is now dated to begin like 2 and a
half million years ago. So through all
of this long ages of the pleaene now
we're in a totally new epoch the
holysine which is the the whole of the
recent period that we're in. And it was
the holene where we see civilization the
the the first appearances of what we
think of as civilization. We see the
first urban complexes for example around
8 to 9,000 years ago. We see the
dispersion of languages. We see uh
domestication of animals. We see
transition to sedentary lifestyles and
um the the beginnings of agriculture. I
think that though we're we would be um
justified in uh hypothesizing that
perhaps we might be looking at a reboot
if you will that um you see you have to
understand that that we modern humans
now I think the the the latest skeletal
dating that I've seen that implies the
presence of modern humans just like
ourselves on the planet goes back 180 to
200,000 years. If we take the higher of
that number, we're looking at about
7,000 generations of modern humans. We
don't know when that first modern human
first walked the earth, but you know, we
keep getting they keep getting older and
older and older. And so
we got asked the question, was there how
it would be that during all those long
generations, nothing that we would
define as civilization was able to take
root and grow? Now, I might talk on
Monday about I think I have an idea that
perhaps we could go back as far as
120,000 years ago. And there was a
period called the Emian. It's dated from
116,000 to 129,000 years ago. It is
considered out of the last quarter
million years to be the closest analog
to the modern holy. Now if we go back
into the depths of the ice age, one of
the things we find is that because of
the cold weather, which I think the sun
had to have played the primary role,
there may have been uh periods of
vulcanism that uh contributed as well.
Uh other things perhaps uh even on a
galactic level uh influx of cosmic dust.
There could have been multiple things.
But what we see is that
for a thousand uh years of the younger
dus it's very cold it gets warm again in
that warmth we see the emergence of
modern civilization
but during the late glacial maximum one
of the things that would have been
happening is as the as the oceans cool
the oceans begin to suck carbon dioxide
out of the out of the atmosphere and the
estimates are that the carbon dioxide in
the global atmosphere reached
uh reach [clears throat] levels as low
as 180 parts per million. Now, if you
drop another 30 parts per million, you
get to 150 parts per million CO2 in the
atmosphere.
There's not enough uh carbon dioxide
pressure in the atmosphere to drive
photosynthesis and then the biosphere
begins to die. So, most of Earth
history, carbon dioxide concentrations
in the atmosphere were a thousand parts
per million and higher. But what has
happened recently is that due to the
cold it pulled the carbon dioxide out of
the atmosphere. Then whatever be to
drive the warming when the oceans warm
it this the solubility of carbon dioxide
in the ocean is a function of the
temperature of the ocean water. So when
it if you just think of like if you open
a if you open a soda in a room and it
sits there and it becomes room
temperature all the CO2 that gives the
fizz in there it all bubble it all
evaporates out and your soda gets flat
right well same thing in the ocean it's
the um carbon dioxide is going to come
out of the ocean uh during the warm
periods and it's going to get drawn into
the ocean during the cold periods.
So we saw an immediate rise in carbon
dioxide of about 100 parts per million
and between 250 and 280 parts per
million it pretty much hovered around
that during the holene and then when we
began burning fossil fuels it started
going up. So it's at about 420 parts per
million now but it's still interestingly
lower than far than most of Earth
history.
So here's the thing and the question has
been raised. Is it possible that because
of that low carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere farming was not really
viable?
It's an interesting question. I don't
know the answer but the question has
been raised. Uh maybe it was only with
the holysine that that farming actually
agriculture actually became viable. But
if we go back to the emian which was the
modern analog we find that um it was
actually warmer than now considerably
warmer. Um it means there would have
probably been a lot of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere at that time. It lasted
about 13,000 years. Like I said from 116
to um 129,000 years are the latest dates
I've seen for the emian. It's called
emian. Sometimes it's referred to as uh
marine isotope stage 5e
because it was a I won't get into that
but but sometimes you'll see it referred
to as that but it was the emian is kind
of the the the climate mode that lasted
about 13,000 years. See I've just done a
some interesting studies on sea levels
during the Indian. Uh it looks like they
were between 20 and 30 feet higher than
at present. And you know as
[clears throat] sea levels go up and
down it also changes the the land. you
know in my that Atlantis presentation
that I've done I talked in considerable
depth about isostatic adjustment uh the
two factors used to see and isostasy
used to see is rising and falling of sea
level due to the growth and shrinkage of
glaciers on land that in turn can
trigger isostatic adjustment which means
that if you have a glacial load over say
the continent or even a large body of
water like Lake Bonavville during the
the the uh uh late pleaine it actually
causes the crust to depress and when you
remove that load it it rises up. Just
think of you're sitting on a comfortable
chair and you sit down on the cushion
and as you sit down the cushion
depresses and when you stand up the
cushion comes back. So um you could
think of isostasy in simple terms like
that. And we know for example that
around Hudson Bay there was at least
1,200 feet so far of rising sea level
rising continental land because of the
deglaciation that has occurred. By
looking at the shorelines, you can see
that the that the rise was not steady,
particularly in the it wasn't smooth at
the beginning because you can see that
the it was like jerks because there's
larger
uh differential elevations between the
shorelines around Hudson Bay and they're
bigger in the first phase of the
glaciation and then they get
successively smaller. But then you know
and then my theory was that well or my
hypothesis let's be clear on the
difference there is that um along the
mid-Atlantic ridge there is evidence of
considerable subsidance uh as a result
of the rapid rise of sea level and I say
rapid that's in a geological sense
because overall the full sea level rise
process took about 10,000 years but it
was not uniform within there. there were
pulses of sea level rise. Okay, rapid
sea level rise. So, going back to this
graph you see up on the screen here, the
peaks represent interglacials like we're
in now and the troughs would represent
full glacials. And you can see there is
a kind of a quasi periodicity to this.
Um, and this is taken from um uh like it
says here sea surface temperature graph
as a proxy for global climate change. It
clearly displays the regular succession
of glacial and interglacial ages
throughout the late quturnary. The
quaternary is simply the period of time
that included the plea scene in the
holene that we're in now. So what I've
considered considering is this
the basis of any civilization is going
to be agriculture. You've got to have
people have to be able to eat uh and not
be continuously engaged in hunt for food
because if they're doing that they don't
have the leisure time uh to get into
anything else. They don't have time to
you know think scientifically about the
world around them and how it works. They
don't have time to accumulate you know
that kind of the kind of learning that
we would associate with scientific
advancement for example. So um
so you have to have leisure time, you
have to have a division of labor. Both
of these are going to come about in a
kind of environment such as we're in
now. The holy well if we go back to the
emian
it appears that um you know you had
13,000 years where agriculture would
have been very viable. For example
Greenland, half of Greenland was
delaciated. In fact uh there were two
what is now a single ice cap. It melted
mostly away and there were two domes of
ice. You could travel from the west
coast of Greenland to the east coast and
it was quite verdant actually during the
emium. So when you start thinking about
that I my my thought was this well okay
so you had a period when agriculture
probably would have been viable in
larger large areas of the the world that
was not viable you know after the end of
the emian when we go back into the
what's called the Wisconsin ice age and
the more I begin to think about it the
more I begin to think well
how do maybe the challenge is more like
to explain why civilization
wouldn't have arisen during the emian
period. Um because obviously if everyone
has enough food to eat, it's a warm
relatively benign climate. Well, you're
going to automatically have leisure
time. And that leisure time, assuming
that the people are as intelligent as we
are today, they're going to be curious.
They're going to be making observations
of the world around them. And that to me
would lead to accumulated learning. And
if you think about how quickly we went
from primarily uh you know an
agriculturalbased society feudally based
in terms of our economy to what we're at
now I mean think go back three 300 years
look how much we have advanced
culturally scientifically
technologically industrially in the last
300 years for those of us are there
older generation when my grandparents
were born um you know the primary mode
of transportation
primary mode was horseback, horsedrawn
carriage and by foot. I mean, we had we
had um my grandparents were born in the
1890s. So, I mean, we had trains
obviously, but then my
great-grandparents and their parents,
you know, think think about how far
we've come and how quickly. Now, imagine
300 years. How easily could 300 years of
progress be lost in the noise of 150 or
200,000 years? See, that's why I'm of
the mind that we we need to be open to
the possibility that there have been
civilizations in the past that have
arisen and and succumbed to natural
changes. And when we go on here and you
see some of the stuff that I'm talking
about, I think you'll understand how
some of these events that I'm going to
show you have happened. if they happened
again, um you know, the archaeologists
10,000 years from now would be digging
up the remains and looking and trying to
figure out our civilization. And uh most
of what we've created wouldn't last. If
we wanted to create infrastructure that
would last, how would we do it? Well,
we'd probably turn to megalithic
stonework. We'd have 10 to 50 to 100 ton
stones and we'd create structures on
that scale with the idea in mind well
the kind of catastrophes that we could
expect these structure like this would
survive.
Now we'll go um
[clears throat] so this is from the
early 90s it's it has not become
obsolete. In fact it's been shown uh to
be uh quite accurate still. What you're
seeing here, these are oxygen isotopes
in Greenland. And I'm not going to
necessarily get into try to explain how
it works, but uh the oxygen isotope
content of the ocean changes according
to temperature.
And on this particular graph, we're
looking at uh down the center there,
we're looking at 10,000 years of change.
Um and these are from Greenland ice
sheets, cores that have taken core
samples. picture about four or five
inches in diameter. They drill all the
way to bedrock. They take this out and
they start analyzing these annual layers
and they look at the the oxygen isotopes
in there and that's a proxy for
temperature change uh both warming and
cooling. And if you look at this
particular graph, you see down the right
side it goes from zero down to 10.
That's 10,000 years ago. Um and then
over on the left will be the depth. You
see that 1,500 there. That's 1500 meters
of depth. So, at 1,500 m deep, we're
down 10,000 years ago. Bear in mind,
though, that this this ice is um it's
probably close to a mile and a half
thick right there. So, as it says here,
the graph of the last 10,000 years of
temperature changes preserved in
Greenland ice cores shows temperature
constantly or and repeatedly warming and
cooling two degrees to three degrees
Fahrenheit or more. There's a little
spike. Let's see. I don't do I have a I
don't have a pointer, do I?
Let's see. Do I have a And I don't have
a mouse, so I can't point things out.
But if if you look there down towards
the bottom, you see that there's a
little spike to the left. You see that?
Okay, that's about 8,300 years ago. And
that was a sudden cold snap of about
four degrees and it lasted about a
hundred years. So that would have been a
major disruption um in the post-glacial
world right there. Um and then you'll
see at the very bottom it sort of drifts
to the left, right? Remember uh shifts
to the right are warming, shifts to the
left are cooling.
What you see here, you don't see a
steady state. What you see is the
climate is constantly fluctuating, at
least in the region of Greenland. And
other studies now have have shown that
that the climate was fluctuating on a
planetarywide basis, not just in
Greenland, but the the the planet is
fluctuating a couple of degrees back and
forth, back and forth, back and forth.
And I have another graph which I didn't
include here, but it shows that there
was the the cultural activity that went
on uh as these changes occurred, you
know, from we've just emerged from a
period called the Little Ice Age. Now
the little ice age has been the coldest
roughly 700 years since the end of the
great ice age. Now this is important
context to keep in mind when we start
talking about global warming. The little
ice age like I said coldest period not
quite a millennium. It it really began
in the in the late 1200s and early 1300s
after a period called the medieval warm
period. The medieval warm period
followed a a time called the uh the dark
ages cold period.
Okay, so it has shifted from from the
dark ages cold, the medieval warm
period, and we're talking about a degree
and a half to two and a half degrees
shift. Okay. So during the mid during
that cold period of the dark ages which
began around the five between actually
can be pinpointed to almost one year 536
AD. Uh and over the next decade uh the
planet got very cold very quick and it
took about 300 years to come out of
that. And when it did ocean levels came
up several feet. Uh the northern
hemisphere warmed. That was when the
Scandinavians sailed west and started
farming on the west coast of Greenland.
This was during the medieval warm
period. Um during the dark ages, the
so-called dark ages, the one of the
things that happened was 536 AD was
sometimes referred to as the coldest
year of the last 2,000 years. Okay. As a
result of that, there was agricultural
collapses. So that was followed by
famine. And in about 544 AD, that famine
led to weakened immune systems. And uh
you had what's called the Justinian
plague. And the Justinian plague wiped
out at least a third of the European
population. There were probably other
places around the world as that got
depopulated as well, but this was the
most well documented during that period
of time. And it took literally about 300
years for the planet to emerge from the
the so-called dark ages. And then when
it did, you had a warming of the climate
[clears throat] between 900 and a,000
AD. And as a result, agriculture came
bounding back and the growing season got
longer. The the uh elevation at which
farming could be conducted went up like
400 ft. So it created a whole lot of new
areas for uh crop lands. And then people
[clears throat] because of the um the uh
uh ample food to eat what you see is
that lifespans got longer. Um infant
mortality declined. Uh people actually
got more robust. There was actually
evidence that people's stature increased
during the medieval warm period. And
then as a result of this after about a
hundred years of this uh European
society as an example became quite
wealthy and was able to undertake the
great cathedral building era that lasted
until the early 1300s and then almost as
suddenly as it started it stopped. And
what stopped it? Well, a a a very quick
return to to cold when the medieval warm
period gave way to the uh to the first
phase of the little ice age. And as a
result of that uh you had a couple of
decades where uh of impoverishment. You
had agricultural failures because of
cold and wet and damp uh crops would die
in the field. People's immune systems
got weak. And I think it was uh about
1340 between 1340 and 1344
you had the onset of the bubanic plague
which in some cases wiped out half the
population of Europe. In other places
whole villages were completely
decimated. I think the estimates are
perhaps the uh population of Europe was
was declined by at least 30% or more by
one/ird and that was the end of the
great cathedral building enterprise for
the most part. Um and then we went into
the little ice age and with some some
breaks it wasn't steady but overall it
last there was primarily two phases. the
the the final phase of the little ice
age only ended about between around
eight early 1800s and the early 1900s.
So our baseline for talking about global
warming you have to keep in mind is
based upon the coldest period of time
the coldest centuries since the end of
the great ice age. And during the little
ice age glaciers worldwide grew and
there are this maybe we'll get into this
on the Monday class. There are some
great interesting uh woodcuts and artist
renderings and even then later even
photographs showing how massively the
glaciers grew during the little ice age
completely overrunning farms, villages
and uh and like during the the the witch
burning period. A lot of that was based
upon, you know, these episodes of severe
cold and, you know, uh, religious
fanaticism blamed it upon witches. And
then so you can see there's actually
been studies showing that the burning of
witches and the the suppression of of
women's wisdom uh, was co correlated
almost directly with with um declines in
the climate. Um,
I'm not quite sure how to take that
applause, but
was that a good thing or a bad thing
that they [clears throat] personally I
think it was a bad thing, but
anyhow, and there's sometimes I think we
haven't really progressed that far
beyond that. But, okay, so now here's
where it's going to get interesting. If
you've if you've hung with me this far,
we go back to um 10,000 years ago and
we're right at the very end, the final
tail of the great ice age. And and you
can see we're kind of, you know, it's
drifting from the left, which is the
cold side over to the right. When we go
down deeper than that, we see that the
holene in a relative sense has been
quite stable relative to what happened
before. So, let's go back to 250,000
years. Okay, same graph.
There it is. Okay, now watch this.
Oh, here we go.
Now, how do we explain that?
Look at down there near the bottom. Look
at those spikes to the right. Now, there
is some serious global warming for you.
Now, here's what we're trying to
unravel. What is driving that magnitude
of climate change? Well, I think it's a
correlation of things. I think that
planets get smashed by comets and
asteroids. I think we're learning and I
know Robert is going to I'm certain is
going to talk about this that the sun is
much more variable than we assume.
And I personally think that there's some
evidence that suggests there may
actually be a link between the influx of
of material and mass into the solar
system and that there is a solar
response.
So, you know, looking at uh other star
systems, we're seeing that that sunlike
stars um that we're now observing
uh actually seem to be extremely
variable relative to our sun. So I think
we need to be considering that you know
what since we've been uh making
scientific observations of the sun what
we considered the solar constant may not
be as constant as we have assumed it to
be. Um which to me is kind of sobering
news but it's part of what we need to
take into account as a species living on
this planet. Let's keep going here.
Here
[clears throat] is that transition. If I
Let me see. I suppose I'm supposed to be
able to go back. Yeah. So, if you look
at that last spasm there before it
swings up into the warmth of the holene,
you're going to see some big spikes
there. And you see the lower spike, that
spike from left to right, that's the
14,0006 meltwater pulse 1A.
The uh the second one there is the
11,600.
So they're separated by about 3,000
years. There was a second spike of
warming right there. Also called
meltwater pulse 1B. The extreme uh shift
to the left that you see there, which is
towards the cold. That that that
spike there that you see, that's the
younger dus. And the younger dus is
where the impact proxies are found. But
to my knowledge, no impact proxies are
found at 146 or 116.
So then in my mind, what's driving
the warming at 146 and what's driving
the warming that that spike at 116?
There could be impact proxies that show
up there. I don't know that anybody's
really looked. I think they should, but
absent that, what does that by default
suggest to me? obviously the sun. Okay.
So, I think we're looking here at
something that kind of like almost a
perfect storm of stuff happening here.
And I'm going to show you something when
we get to the end or if we don't have
time, I'll be showing it on Monday. Um,
which is quite impressive. But anyways,
here we go. For measurements of annual
ice layer thickness over the past 15,000
years, the authors find that Greenland's
climate emerging from the last ice age
twice shifted from glacial to
interglacial conditions over an
astonishingly quick 3 to 5 years. Now,
can you imagine glacial to interglacial?
Can you imagine that that our world
shifting from interglacial conditions
now into full glacial mode within three
to five years? What what would that
imply for the stability of our
civilization?
Well, it would imply, I think, that our
our entire civilization would collapse
completely because there's so many
ramifications to to what that means. Um,
and of course, you know, if we shifted
into a full glacial mode now, um, yeah,
I mean, we're going to experience the
same kind of agricultural collapses that
we saw on a lesser scale during the the
little ice age and the the dark ages,
right? I mean, I think we would see a
global collapse of agriculture.
We would see extreme cold that people
wouldn't have been able to adapt. I
mean, it would spell clearly the end of
our civilization.
But this is what the scientific record
is showing. Now, here's uh a graph of
sea level rise showing the two spikes.
The the one on the right is meltwater
pulse 1A, which is now dated to about
14,600.
The one on the left is meltwater pulse
1B. And you see that there's there's
double graphs because when this was
done, the dating hadn't been refined to
the extent that it has now. So there was
this is actually showing the range like
if you look at meltwater pulse 1A you'll
see there's a range it shows there uh
between the earliest estimated time that
it occurred and the the latest and
you'll see that dashed line kind of that
curved line going up coming down. That
would be sort of the previous model of a
smooth melting reach reaching a peak and
then tapering off. And but now once we
have much more accurate information to
go on, we see that it wasn't a smooth
curve. It was a spiked phenomena.
And interestingly, this is a late place
to see mortality graph. Um, for those of
you that want to see this better, you
know, I can provide these the sources
for this, but you can see that
interestingly, you'll see that that
graph of that's the late pleaene mega
mammals that inhabited the earth that
are now gone. And I'll mention something
briefly about them. Um, we've lost
roughly half of the species of animals
over 100 pounds in body weight. Uh,
anything over 100 pounds in body weight
or about 44 kilos is a um considered a
mega mammal. So, we're in a room here
full of mega mammals. Um, so if it's a
new way for you to think about yourself,
unless you're unless you weigh less than
100 pounds, then you are not in the mega
mammal club anymore. So um what you see
here is that these each square here
represents the finding of a fossil of an
extinct mega mammal. And of course what
you see here is that at the end it just
spikes dramatically around the younger
dus. Okay. So we've got the uh so
in effect what you see with with those
the graphs that we just saw is that
there was a period there of highly
unstable climate and how did the the
mega mammals I don't necessarily think
that they all died instantly but you
know it may have actually been
successive stages to me that's kind of
what it looks like with maybe the final
coupra occurring during the younger dus
because to my knowledge coming out of
the younger dus I think the woolly
mammoths and the giant ground sloths and
saber-tooth cats and the Irish elk and
the cave bears and the giant shortfaced
bear and the castasterides and all the
rest were gone, right? So, they didn't
survive. Now, there's evidence that
mammoths did survive even down to maybe
five or 6 thousand years ago, but they
survived on islands and they shrank in
size uh probably because of limitations
on their territory and so on, but
they're called pygmy mammoths and um so
it wasn't a complete extation like in
one fell swoop, but it was it was close
to it when you look in the geological
sense. So we see that this mortality
graph correlates very well with this
graph and with the spikes that we saw
defining the period from 146 to 116.
I'll also mention that interesting Plato
as some of you watched my Atlantis
presentation know that Plato named that
date um for the destruction of Atlantis.
He placed that at 9,000 years prior to
Solon's journey to Egypt where he heard
the tale and interestingly his his uh
journey to Egypt took place around
around 2600 years ago about 600 BC. So
do the math comes right out to 11,600.
So, how interesting. And of course,
generally, if it's even noted by
historians or or archaeologists or
whomever, uh it's just dismissed as a
mere coincidence that he uh places the
the destruction of Atlantis through a an
event of subsidance
uh beneath sinks beneath the waves
during an exact period of time that we
know that sea level was rapidly rising
even to the point where it's been called
meltwater pulse. volts 1B.
Um, so now here is essentially a graph
that shows us the distribution of ice in
the northern hemisphere now. And you can
see that there's sea ice over Antarctica
and then there's continental ice or land
ice over Greenland. Um, and then I'm
going to go back to late glacial maximum
times and it looked more like that. So
there's a whole lot more ice in the
world. And if I go, let's see one more.
Yeah, here we can see on this this now
we're focusing in uh North America and
on the left we actually have two great
ice sheets in North America. The Laurent
tide which is roughly centered over
Hudson Bay and it's about the size of
the Antarctica or south polar ice cap is
now the Cordieran ice sheet. You can see
there's that little division between
them that's uh they're just uh right
it's a pretty much just east of the
Rocky Mountains out on the the the
prairies of Alberta. And that was what
some uh paleontologists and
anthropologists have referred to as the
ice-free corridor which may have been a
migratory route both for animals and
early um human migration into North
America. Cordieran ice sheet was roughly
the mass of the modern Greenland ice
sheet and the c the Laurentide ice sheet
was roughly the mass of the modern um
Antarctica ice sheet and of course
they're both gone now and there was also
if we go back one you can see that there
was also enormous buildup of ice over
northwestern Europe as well
[clears throat] so between all of that
ice there was more than double the
amount of ice than we find on the earth
today and that was the resulted in the
400 possibly even as much as 450 ft uh
decline in sea levels.
And this is a series of images just to
give you an idea. Now, this is what this
is going to do. It's going to it's going
to show the continental shelves and it's
going to show the the coastlines of the
world if you drop sea levels 350 ft. So
keep that in mind that what you're going
to see now is actually very conservative
because sea levels were at least 50 ft
um lower [clears throat] than 350 ft.
But so here's the world and I'm going to
toggle back and forth a little bit here
so you can see the change the geographic
changes.
Then we'll we'll zoom in on a couple of
areas so you can there's [clears throat]
North America. And I want you to look up
there by Alaska and you see the light
blue area. That is the the shelf. And
that is what was called Bangia during
the ice age because it was a whole
intact ecosystem that was heavily
populated by mega mammals. And when I go
to the next slide, watch what happens.
That's a pretty dramatic change. And
look at up look at the islands and
things up there in northern Canada.
uh going back look at the look at the
peninsula of Florida.
So you can see look what happens to the
uh to the Gulf of Mexico. One of the
things that that did was the at present
the the Gulf Stream diverts into the
Gulf of Mexico and because of that
diversion it picks up a lot of extra
heat that is now taking and delivering
to northwestern Europe before it loops
back to the south.
Um but during the late glacial maximum
it bypassed the Gulf of Mexico. So that
would have contributed to the to the
cooling very much so. [clears throat]
Um here is an area that Graham Hancock
has referred to quite frequently in his
work. Um you see this is uh Indonesia
down here you see Australia and you see
the islands. Now if we drop sea levels
350 ft
there's a lot more land mass probably
was actually would have been a a
favorable place to uh settle during the
the late glacial maximum. Remember again
this is still if we drop it another 50
feet some of those islands even become
more connected and this is likely during
these times during one of the full
glacial times I think it's speculated it
would have been most logical time for
Australia [clears throat] to be um
populated
but you know that now we're going back
50 to 60,000 years ago
and here's northwestern Europe so I want
you to notice Scandinavia notice the the
British Isles there. And then you'll
notice the light blue is the is the
shelf. We're going to drop sea levels
350 ft.
No British Isles are part of the
continental mainland. How many of you
realize that that I know some of you did
or do? So I think you can see
[clears throat] I I'm just trying to
give you the idea that there's a very
different world. And not not that long
ago in a geological sense, this is just
a a blink of the eye, right? So
this these this level of change needs to
be factored in. We start trying to
understand the history of our own
species on the planet because our
ancestors lived through all of this. In
fact, they probably lived through four
cycles something like this.
And just another graph of
so which brings us back to asteroid day.
[clears throat]
Asteroid day is a UN sanctioned global
awareness campaign participated annually
on the 30th of June. Our mission is to
inspire, engage and educate the public
about asteroids, opportunities, and
risks. Every year we produce Asteroid
Day Live, a live broadcast with asteroid
content and commentary from astronauts,
experts, and celebrities. Asteroid Day
events are held around the globe thanks
to thousands of independent asteroid day
event organizers. So what is today? It's
15th, right? So Asteroid Day will be
coming up in about two weeks and it will
be commemorating the great uh event in
June 30th of 1908. And how many of you
have heard of the Tungusa event of 1908?
Most of you or at least half of you
anyways. Um I would argue one of the
most important events of the 20th
century right up there with um world
wars, the invention of the atomic bomb
and perhaps even the moon landing right
once we understand contextually what
it's implying.
Okay, so I kind of look at it as the
idea of cosmic forewarning.
And as it says here, the Tangusa uh
perhaps the earliest widely held theory
for the Tangusa explosion was that the
world was about to end. Now, of course,
that's the per that's the people who
experienced it directly. Um, and what we
find is very consistent across the
spectrum of legends and mythology and so
on is these kinds of events are usually
looking at as heralding the end of the
world. The Tungusa impactor exploded
above a part sparsely inhabited region
in central Siberia with the force of 15
megat ton bomb. The blast wave flattened
trees over 2,000 square kilometers,
which is o just over 800 square miles,
and excited a magnitude five earthquake.
Thermal radiation scorched trees and set
fires over much of the range, even 70
kilometers away. An observer removed his
shirt for fear it would ignite. Um,
thermal radiation. So, think of this,
and I'll show you some more graphs in a
minute. 800 square miles. What is that?
Well, if you look at a major
metropolitan area like I you can look at
Washington DC or Atlanta as a good
example. What you're going to find is
that um for example, I' don't know if I
[clears throat] have it in here, but I
have a graph that I've done that shows
285, which is the perimeter highway
around um Atlanta. And in Washington DC,
I've done a graph of that as well,
showing the perimeter highway. Well,
turns out that the area inside the
perimeter highway 285 of Atlanta is
about 800 square miles. So if the
Tangusa event, the the the bolide that
that blew up over over Siberia 1908 blew
up over any major city on the on the
earth, it would destroy most of the
city. And again, 15 megat tons and the
largest bombs in the uh US arsenal
during that peak of the cold war were 15
megat tons. Um, the largest bomb ever
tested by the United States was about 20
megat tons. And the largest bomb ever
tested by the Soviet Union back in 1962
uh was about between 50 and 55 megat
tons. Um, but it was so big and so heavy
they had they didn't have a way to
transport it. Thank God. But anyways, it
gives us an idea of the the magnitude
when we look at the uh the energies
released during cosmic impacts. We kind
of have a gauge here that we can use
which is our own above ground nuclear
testing that went on um in the late 40s,
50s and the 60s which thankfully is not
going on anymore.
Okay. So many other reports referred to
the devastation of the forest and the
felling of the trees in uniform
directions. One to the destruction of
several Tungus families and one to a
forest fire. The Tongus' terror of the
dis district will be understood when I
report that professor Kulik, who was the
first scientist to reach the area, told
me the occurrence had caused the
evolution of a new tribal religion. Uh
they regarded the arrival of the
meteorite as a visitation from a god
named Agdi, meaning fire, to punish the
wicked. The place is believed to be a
cursed.
So in fact they were so superstitious
about it that one of the first guides
that took Kulich to the site. Uh upon
his return he was killed
because it was off limits. They wouldn't
go in there and they didn't want anybody
else to go in there because they felt
that the whole region was a cursed. This
was the first actually one of the first
English uh reports that was uh presented
to the western public back in 1931. So
Kulik didn't even make it to the site
till 1927
um almost um 20 years after the event.
That's how remote it was. And let's see
if you look carefully again. I don't
have my my pointer [clears throat] here.
Um, if you look where it says Eurasian,
look above the just above and to the
right of the A and you'll see a yellow
little kind of exploded icon. That was
where it occurred over Siberia.
And here's a another closeup view. And
then what this is showing is the you
know when they the the Kulick and other
scientists that followed him began to
interview people on the uh you know on
their experience and where they saw it.
What they found was that there was a uh
uh an increase in the number the the
length of the arrows here depicts the
number of
um reported sightings based upon which
direction did you see it come from. you
know, so uh essentially it it's pretty
much I think come now that it was it
came from the southwest. Um
and it came from the direction of the
sun. So it it was not because it came uh
very early in the morning right at
sunrise. Um so
uh one direct one problem there was um
you know people couldn't see it.
There's Kulik, uh, first scientist to
reach the region of the Tangusa
catastrophe.
And, uh, crossing the Ta. Here's Kulik's
intrepid team dragging boats across
rapids on the river Kushmo to reach the
site to the great explosion. It took
them months to reach the site, by the
way. Um, and this is what they found
when they got there. This is a pretty
famous photograph that you see in
virtually every uh every account of the
Tangus explosion. So this is 800 miles
and what they realized was that the
trees were not blown over randomly but
there was an epicenter under which was
about 100 plus square miles where
everything was completely incinerated
and radiating out from there spled out
in every direction the trees so were
laid out. So you can almost picture that
the shock wave came down hit the earth
and then moved laterally and just mowed
down the trees as it moved outwards.
And I don't know if Chris Catrell is
here, but one of the things that did
were observed there was a series of um
elliptical shallow elliptical
depressions, which to me remind me very
much of the Carolina Bays. Um
here's another one. It says here one of
the small oval bogs that uh Kulic had
erroneously
um
I'm having a hard time reading that
because normally I'm working from my
laptop so I've got it right here. Uh uh
to secondary
uh origins. Let me see. I might Can you
read that from out there?
&gt;&gt; Okay, that's the main thing. I want you
guys to read it. Um now was it erroneous
or not? I don't know. But there were a
lot of these shallow elliptical
depressions in the region of the of the
blast zone. So here's a photograph of
crater swamps found in the area beneath
the epicenter of the blast. And you see
that there are shallow elliptical
depressions. Uh and here's one a more
recent photograph of one of the oval
bogs which to me are very mindful of the
Carolina bays. So it was based upon
this. My first visit to the Carolina
bays was in the early
very early 90s or late 80s. I don't
remember the first time. I did a aerial
flight. I hired a plane and flew me over
the bays in must have been I think about
1991.
And took photographs. I don't have them
in here, but when I saw these
photographs, I thought they're they're
so similar. And that's what led me to
think Carolina bays were the byproduct
of some kind of a multi-impact event
like a the fragments of a comet nucleus
or some such thing. Um and I know I
missed uh Chris's presentation earlier
today. I but I do tend to talk to him
because he's been continuing to research
and he stayed up more up to date on what
the latest thinking is about the
formation of the bays.
Um So you can see on this one you've got
that what's called the butterfly shape.
I've got a cross showing the long axis
and the short axis and it's within that
boundary region there that it's about
800 square miles of total devastation.
So here are some of the observed
characteristics of the Tangus event. So
there was a ball of fire brighter than
the sun. There was a multicolored often
rainbow streamers forming a tail when
the thing was seen coming in. Sky opens
up and pours out when in the in my
Monday class we're going to look at some
of the really interesting and compelling
eyewitness testimony. But you'll see
that this is what they're describing.
The sky split in two deafening thunder.
In fact, our case there's examples of
the the the the explosion was so loud
that people it caused deafness in
people. There were people who literally
lost their hearing because the explosion
was so loud. Um, subterranean trembling,
shaking like locomotives passing below.
That was another thing that they
commented on. It's because, you know, it
said it's created a a magnitude 5
earthquake. So, people not only
experienced something happening in the
sky, they felt the earth trembling under
their feet and a roaring, literally a
roaring beneath their feet moving
through the crust of the earth, which to
me is very interesting. And there's
there's an interesting uh possibility
there um which I'm going to get into on
Monday. Um because of the geophysical
conditions uh in the site where this
explosion occurred um there was a sense
of heavy beams or stones striking the
ground. The ground and buildings shaking
uh intense pressure blast wave extreme
heat pulse. Others described a pillar of
fire followed by a pillar of smoke which
somewhat obviously suggestive. Um if you
know read accounts in the Bible um you
know the pillar of fire and the pillar
of smoke and so forth. Um there were
secondary effects associated with the
Tungusa event such as anomalous optical
and atmospheric effects or white nights,
sky glows, knockalucent clouds uh so
bright that in Europe, you know, even
before the era of you know gas lights
and so forth, people could read
newspapers at midnight and still
discussion of what that was the result
of it. If Tungusa was a piece of a
comet, it was likely preceded by an
ionic tail that may have entered the
atmosphere, especially if the thing came
from the southeast. It would have come
to the northwest and that would have um
blanketed Europe with with perhaps part
of the gaseous tail. Um there was
intense and pro prolonged solar halos.
uh subsequent intense precipitation
events over Europe. Uh decrease in
atmospheric transparency detected in the
US, disturbances in the points of
neutral polarization in scattering of
sunlight which is related to atmospheric
turbulence. Uh there were magnetic
microsphererals deposited in regional
soils. Uh there was an enhancement of
carbon 13 and aridium in pete layers now
documented that were associated
uh extremely rapid recovery of the
forest after the catastrophe accelerated
growth of trees surviving the
catastrophe and a sharp increase in
genetic mutations of plants and animals.
I've got a question mark because I
haven't read the latest on that. But I
find that to be one of the most
intriguing possibilities as the result
of this cosmic event that could there be
some kind of a connection with
accelerated genetic mutations and uh
have a have an evolutionary uh
implications to it.
This is um we're going to skip some of
this because I can't for one thing I
can't read it. But uh on on Monday we'll
we'll look at that. Um so there are many
marvelous stories features in the
stories of the Siberian meteor a story
without parallel in historic times. Now
this is from uh Fred Whipple. He wrote a
paper uh 1930 3032 the the great
Siberian meter and the wave seismic and
aerial which it produced. and he says um
it is most remarkable that such an event
should occur in our generation and yet
be so nearly ignored. No civilized man
sought out the falling place of the
meteorite for 20 years and even now no
one has followed up the track of the
pioneer. So this is right writing in
1930.
Now, I will say though that we have
we've learned a lot about it that we
didn't know until the end of the Cold
War because one of the benefits of the
end of the Cold War was that American
scientists and and Russian scientists
begin to communicate with one another
and there was all kinds of Russian
studies that had been inaccessible to
American scientists that now were
accessible and became translated. And to
me, that is one of the really one of the
down serious severe downsides of going
into this new cold war with Russia that
we're doing is because now all the
dialogue is stopping, right? We're not
going to be, you know, doing uh we were
doing joint missions to the uh
International Space Station. They're
they're going to quit doing that. Um, I
will mention, not to get off on this,
but just mention the fact that this is
the first administration since World War
II that has refused to talk to the
Russians.
And one reason I think we're all here,
why we were able to avoid Cold War
becoming a hot war is because we talked.
We had diplomacy. We had regular summit
meetings. Uh, you know, Reagan is well
known for
It's time we start talking again.
&gt;&gt; [applause]
&gt;&gt; I'm glad to hear that response.
There are many more. Okay. So, um let's
keep going here. So, the this paper has
been devoted to incidental effects and
is therefore appropriate to emphasize
two coincidences.
Seismographs were in readiness to
demonstrate that earth waves can be
produced by the impact of a meteor with
the ground. But let's bear in mind here
now. This is 1930. He didn't know that
this thing didn't hit the ground, right?
It detonated about five miles up into
the atmosphere. Now, it's coming in at a
low angle. So, you know that if it's a
low angle rather than a steep vertical
angle, it has to pass through a whole
lot more atmosphere, which means there's
going to be a lot more friction. And
it's likely if it's a low density
object. in the in the uh consensuses now
that the Tangus object was low density
which implies that it was probably a
piece of a comet nucleus. It didn't
reach the ground. It didn't create a big
hole in the ground like how many of you
have been to a meteor crater in Arizona,
right? Very impressive big hole in the
ground. Now, of course, that's a baby,
right? Compared to some of the impact
structures on on Earth, it's about a
kilometer wide and 600 ft deep, right?
Now, that was produced by an iron object
coming into space from a high rate of
speed, hits the ground, right? Tanguska
didn't hit the ground. It hit it hit the
atmosphere and it blew up 5 miles up in
the air. Now, how many of you remember
February 15th, 199
2013, the Chelabinsk meteor that blew up
over that Russian town? Yes. It was only
a fraction the size of the Tangus
object. It blew up about 18 miles up,
but the shock wave of that blast, which
was about equivalent to 500 kilotons,
which is, you know, much larger than the
the the Hiroshima atomic bomb, uh it
caused uh damaged over 7,000 buildings
and injured over 1500 people. Um scared
the hell out of them, too. And there's
some interesting um
interesting uh video footage of it
online. And if you there's one in
particular, if you you see it coming in
across the sky from left to right, um if
you turn the volume all the way up,
you're sitting there, you're watching
the thing, and about 15 seconds later
when the when the uh the blast wave hit
uh pretty darn impressive acoustics. Um,
and it makes you go, okay, I can think
can imagine what how must have scared
the hell out of those poor Tangusi and
Aankeni people up in Siberia when that
thing came in. Anyways, so he says if
the if the impact of a meteor with the
ground uh let's see microaragraphs which
which are what detected um uh it says
here had been invented just in time to
preserve records of the airwaves. So
because of the micro baragraphs, there
was a a pressure pulse that passed over
England twice because there was a
pressure wave that went out from the the
the the blast zone encompassed the the
um the planet twice, right? And uh they
didn't know what it was from. It was
only years later that they were able to
correlate that pressure pulse passing
over England with the event in Siberia
and realized that you know given the
velocity of the pressure wave it it fit
perfectly. So anyways the
microbaragraphs had just been invent had
been invented just in time to preserve
records of the air waves generated in
the atmosphere. If the meteor had fallen
even five years earlier there would have
been no evidence for the spreading of
the airwaves beyond the immediate
locality of the fall. If it had fallen
20 years earlier, we should have known
nothing of the earth waves because the
first seismometers had just been
installed 20 years earlier. So again, if
this had happened 20 years earlier, we
probably would have never even known
about it. But as it was, the timing was
good. Geographically was auspicious,
too, because if it had been just much
further north into the uh into the
tundra, you wouldn't have the tree fall.
But given that it was over the Tyga
forest, we've learned so much about this
event from studying the pattern of the
the forest destruction,
right? So the timing of it was
auspicious, you know. Then it raises a
question like well okay if other events
like this had happened and we had no sc
uh no scientific record of it or seis uh
scientific uh monitoring of it uh then
how would we know about it? Well, how
you would know about it is basically
through stories, through legends,
through mythology that's handed down.
And we see right there with the Tangus
event like one of the things that
resulted of that was the formation of a
new religion, right? And and so we
shouldn't be surprised that ancient
cultures would create stories around
events like this and that's that's how
we would know about it.
Yeah, these are just from the
microbaragraphs showing the the pressure
pulses that passed over uh various
there's London and Cambridge and uh you
can see so the these came showed up on
the baragraphs but nobody knew what was
causing them. It was just an anomalous
pulse and again only years later was two
and two put together.
So here's just a biblical verse. And
there suddenly came a sound from heaven
as of a rushing mighty wind, and it
filled all the house where they were
sitting. And there appeared unto them
cloven tongues like as of fire, and it
sat upon each of them. Now when this was
noised abroad, the multitude came
together and were confounded. In uh in
Monday's thing, I'll I'll have some more
interesting, like I said, just
compellingly interesting eyewitness
accounts, and you'll really see the the
parallels here. Um, one of the things is
this described is how when this
happened, people rushed out of their
houses and were out in the streets. Like
it says they were dumbfounded. Here it
says the word is confounded. But in some
of the eyewitnesses accounts, they're
saying that the people rushed out and
they were absolutely dumbfounded about
what had just happened.
So this is uh an interesting little
aside. I thought um possibly has
implications. I'm not sure what they are
yet, but as it says here from the
geological aspect, the Tunguska event
occurred in a rather remarkable place in
the southern part of the Siberian
platform. It was the place of some of
the most powerful volcanic activity in
Earth's history 250 millions of years
ago. A former hot spot. The area is rich
in various gas and oil and ore deposits
including rare earth elements and plas
plat platenoids mean platinum group.
Yeah, got plasmoids on the brain. Sorry,
there are kimberlites in the region too.
The upper mantle in this region has
anomalous uh speeds of seismic waves.
The Tangusa epicenter is right in the
middle of the Paleo volcanic crater.
Could there be a geophysical connection?
I'm not going to say yes or no. I don't
know. But it's one of those interesting
correlations that you might dismiss as
coincidental firsthand, but then again,
maybe there is a connection. And I don't
know what that would be.
I'm hoping Robert will clear it up for
me.
So,
All right. [clears throat]
So, a little bit about asteroids because
this is now two weeks asteroid day,
right? I want you all to be prepared for
asteroid day. An asteroid is a minor
planet, an object that is neither a true
planet nor a comet that orbits within
the inner solar system. They are rocky,
metallic, or icy bodies with no
atmosphere, sizes, and shapes of
asteroids. very significantly ranging
from 1 meter rocks to a dwarf planet
almost 1,000 kilometers in diameter
which is about 600 miles
and uh we would not survive something on
the upper end of that scale striking us
but this is just some examples Bennu is
an example of a carbonacious asteroid
there's three three uh classes basically
silicious uh carbonatous and metallic
uh and typically ally your metallic ones
are going to be your densest, hardest
ones. The the bolide that struck Arizona
and created the crater by Winslow was
metallic. Um
asteroid Eros long axis dimension
approximately 21 miles. Now this is this
is clearly a planet killer. This is
bigger than the one that took out the
dinosaurs 66 million years ago, which
was about 66 miles in diameter.
Asteroid Ida has its own moon, Dactyl,
discovered in 1884. It's the second
asteroid visited by a spacecraft, the
first to have its own moon. The long
axis equals 59.8 or 37.15 miles. So
that's a planet killer as well, but
there's no danger from any this size,
right? Um asteroida
um it's a,100 or 1100 feet long axis.
Now we're getting into the range of
known asteroid impacts um since the
Phantooic began, which is the beginning
of visible life. Um
there's Vesta. Now that's a 326.4.
That would be a planet killer. That
would something this size hitting the
Earth would sterilize the planet. But
we're not in any danger from anything
this big at all. Um asteroid psyche.
This is an artist depiction. It's a
metalrich asteroid with a mean diameter
of 140 miles.
So the size on the of the Tangus object
of the left compared to 2001 YB5
which was one that actually was quite
dangerous um
that regularly crosses the Earth's
orbit.
Now it's many times bigger than Tungusa.
This would an an object this big
striking let's say North American
continent could obliterate several state
I mean it could easily obliterate a
state the size of Texas or more and it
would have it would have global
consequences and here's the Wamut
meteorite and what's interesting about
this is it was found in a group of
glacial erratics in the Wamut Valley
right these glacial erratics had been
transported via um iceberg uh floating
in on icebergs. So this thing was
actually probably fell over Canada and
was rafted during the great terminal ice
age floods aboard uh aboard uh an
iceberg carried all the way down from
the Cordieran region, British Columbia
across Washington state down to Columbia
Gorge and then back flooded into the
Wamid Valley and then the iceberg
carrying this along with the with the
glacial erratics which were mostly
basaltt um were deposited
uh on the floor of Wamut Valley
and uh this we're going to keep going
here. I've got so this is going to be
really quick. This is um meteor crater
in Arizona. So this is again an iron
asteroid strikes the earth, leaves a big
hole in the ground that we can see and
measure and study 50,000 years later.
Tunguska type events again they're going
to be gone after a few centuries. The
evidence right once the forest regrows.
Now we're just going to do a quick
succession. This would be an astroblene.
So this is uh 1.46
miles. It's astrolame means star wound.
So you have a crater.
This is a crater. This is an astrol.
It's like a scar on the surface of the
earth. Uh but it's not readily apparent
from the ground. See once we get aerial
photography and ground penetrating radar
and geohysical techniques we can we can
study these things. But a lot of times
people didn't know about them. Um,
Steinum Bas and this is 14.8 million
years old, 2 milesi in diameter and it
was about equivalent to an explosion of
125 megat tons or roughly the same as
8,000 Hiroshima bombs all detonating at
once. Um, this is Libya, the BP
structure it's called. And uh, it's
about the same size. It's a 300 125
megat tons. So remember what did I say?
The largest uh hydrogen bomb ever tested
by by humans was between 50 and 55
megatons sar bomba back in 1962. And I
can still remember hearing that on the
news when I was maybe 10 years old and
it scared the crap out of me.
Um
Brent Crater, central Ontario. We're
kind of going to go up in scale as we
see these things. Diameter is two miles.
Explosive energy still in the same
ballpark.
125 megat tons. Chub crater. Now, this
obviously could be seen from the ground.
Um,
uh, age is about 1.4 million years.
Explosive energy again about 125 megat
tons. Um, but as we get up here, you're
going to see 180 megat tons. This is
Flynn Creek. this. You can't see much of
this from the surface, but I have
visited this and there are certain
things that if you know what you're
looking for, diagnostic things that you
can look for that are going to tell you
that you're looking at an astroblene.
Um, goat paddock, Western Australia, 500
megat tons. You see, we're getting up.
This is about equivalent to 40,600
Hiroshima. Um, Saskatchewan.
Um, 38,000 Hiroshimas, diameter three
miles. Um, we're just going to speed
through some of these just I want you to
get the impression more than anything. I
visited this crater with with my my pal
Bradley Young and um, Wells Creek. So,
this was a big one. 7.4 miles, 11,200
megat tons. Now we're getting up into
the range at which the peak of the Cold
War when you look at all of the nuclear
weapons on Earth, we're getting up there
between 10 and maybe 15,000 megat tons
of total total throw weight as they call
it for nuclear weapons. It's not that
much. Now, Arunga and Chad approximately
200 million years old, 10.2 miles
explosive energy, about 36,600
megat tons. So now we're way beyond what
the entire nuclear arsenals of the
superpowers were during the peak of the
cold war which was um between the 60s
and the 70s before interestingly Reagan
and Gorbachev got together and started
um reducing our arsenals. So we got to
give Reagan credit for that. Um
and then they continued doing that right
up until uh well we won't get into
politics but there are political
implications to this obviously. Uh let's
keep going. So Arunga Chad that's the
same one. Let's keep going. Okay.
Visited this one also. I've taken tours
out to this one. Uh upheaval dome in
Utah. It's less than 65 million years.
Diameter is approximately 6 miles. Um,
this is equivalent to about 400,000
Hiroshima atomic bombs exploding at
once. Now, what's interesting about this
is it was long buried, but erosional
events have stripped away the overlying
layers of rock, exposing the astroblene
that's underneath. I think I've got a
No, I don't in this one, but but yeah,
you can there's a hike you can do and
you can get up on the rim of this thing
and look down into it and it's quite
impressive, I must say.
Um
this is Clear Water Lakes. Now this was
a tan. This is two objects coming in
together hitting hitting the ground. Um
and you can see uh the larger of the two
has a ringed structure. It's highly
eroded because of course this area has
been glaciated but it's highly eroded.
And um
so this is probably an object. You know,
sometimes we see these things they they
they go come in pairs or perhaps it came
in uh in into an a near-earth orbit and
one object split into two. I don't know.
Um Kakul and Tajikhstan only 5 million
years old. So there's an interesting
around 5 million years ago there was a
major extinction event and climatic
change that I think was probably could
be associated with this impact right
here. It's called the Hemp Hill, which
somewhere around this very period of
time. I don't know if the dating has
been precise enough to definitively
correlate it, but oftenimes when I talk
about the uh the the terminal pleaene
mass extinction, I say, well, as far as
we can tell, it was the the greatest
mass extinction event in 5 million
years. And the previous one that was of
similar scale was called the Hemp Hill
or Hemp Helian extinction event. and it
seems to correlate real close in time
with this particular impact right here.
Now, we're also finding information data
that suggests that some of the impacts
occur in clusters rather than uniformly
spread out, which I think is important.
Um, 31 miles. So, now we're looking at,
look at there, we're over a million
Hiroshima bombs to produce a an astrol
um 30 over 31 miles in diameter. But
we're going to keep going here. I'm
going to get up to the really big ones.
This one I've often thought, hey, you
know what would be cool? Take about two
weeks, three weeks and do a canoe trip
around this ring here. Um,
&gt;&gt; what?
&gt;&gt; You you're ready for that?
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, we got at least one person
ready to sign up for a canoe trip. Two.
All right.
So, 7 million over 7,000 megat tons. So,
this would be not a planet killer, but
it would certainly be um I think there's
some latest papers I've not read that
might be associating this with a uh with
a Jurassic extinction event.
And then, of course, this is the
Chichalube Astroblame in Yucatan,
Mexico. This is the one that's
correlated with the KT boundary and the
extinction of the dinosaurs. And you can
see it's a multi-rank structure with a
central uplift peak. Once you get beyond
a certain size, simple craters are just
holes in the ground. Then they get more
complex. You'll have multi- ring
structures because the impact of the
crater basically impact of the object
liquefies the ground and it just
radiates outward. Um just like if you
throw a stone into a pond, but as it's
moving outward, it's cooling and then as
it's cooling, it solidifies and it will
it will preserve multiple rings and then
in the middle it'll be an uplift. there
will be a rebound effect and it'll lift
up and can form a peak. Right? So, one
interesting thing is I went and I
explored this area down here and there's
a ring um around the rim of this thing
of cenotes which is um sort of like
carst like or capture
um sorry Karstlike or um collapse
features where after the impact the
depression filled with it was a shallow
sea and so it basically filled up with
limestone. stone rock, but because of
the size the the post impact seismic
activity and the um the erosiveness of
limestone around the ring of the thing,
there's a circular ring of cenotes which
to the Mayans were um considered
oftenimes sacred and in and entrances
into the underworld. And on the Monday
um presentation, I'm going to show some
of the Mayan traditions around that that
are very intriguing. Anyways, to give
you an idea um immediately, so you can
see the central uplift there. Now, that
central uplift is in the center of the
of the Astral right now half of the
Astroblame, the southern half is under
the Yucatan Peninsula and the northern
half is under the Gulf of Mexico. And
right on the coast there's a little town
called Cheek Chalube that sits directly
on top of that horned that uplift right
the uplift pee. And um I inquired as to
the meaning of the town cheek chalube
and learned that it literally translates
as horn of the devil
which I found interesting.
And there's kind of a an artist
depiction of what it would have looked
like immediately after the impact. And
you would see the inner ring and the
outer ring. And interestingly, there's a
there's a geometric spacing ratio that
is found consistently in large impact
structures like this. And it's based
upon the square root of two. And uh I
can show that on Monday's class too
because Monday I will have my laptop in
front of me and we'll be able to ask
questions and I'll be able to navigate
around to to you know if you ask a
question about the Mayans I'll be able
to pull up that and we can look at that.
If you ask questions about well how does
the Holy Grail legend when when the the
the Wolfro vanbach talks about that the
Holy Grail is actually a stone that fell
from heaven which he which is exactly
what he does. What are the implications
of that? Well, we can pull something up
on that. We can look at it. Ah, there it
is. I forgot that I had this in there.
So, there you see the ring, which is the
crater, and then the southern half
there. Um, there's that whole ring of
cenotes around there. And um
[clears throat] yeah, so there's very
interesting traditions about the
cenotes. Again, the idea of their
entrances into the Mayan underworld. And
it turns out that geologically
they are literally entrances into a
labyrinth. I do went diving in one of
them. Not very deep, but there were
there were some professional divers in
one the one that I went to and they
said, "Yeah, they had been exploring
there for years and they had never even
found the bottom of it." and uh because
it just apparently went forever into
this massive labyrinth of underground
subter submarine submarine and
subterranean uh passageways and so on.
Sudbury, Ontario, which is a really old
one and really big one of the biggest on
Earth, which is also one of the richest
sources of ores and metals on Earth.
like the biggest one of the biggest uh
sources of nickel, of platinum, of of
precious metals are now associated with
some of these impact structures like uh
Vera Fort in South Africa,
which is this one right here. Um 630
million megat tons. Now that's uh pretty
darn big. Two billion years old. So you
know this is before fannoic life or
visible life. But it is also a very s
rich source of precious metals. Um
so here is uh meteorite impact sites in
North America which is growing all the
time. Every year or two there are new
ones added. This is confirmed. Now this
is old so it's closer to 200 confirmed
impacts now I believe.
Um considering that when we go back to
the early 20th century, the only one we
really confirmed was Behinger Crater or
the crater in Arizona. So it's grown
from a single crater to almost 200. Now
here's something I need to uh emphasize
is that
the craters that we can count are formed
by either iron objects which are dense
can crash into the earth and create the
scars or much larger objects like the
[clears throat] one takeaway from here
is that like the tungusa object of 1908
we know about it you know because it
happened in recent historical times but
if it had happened three or 4 hund years
ago ago, we'd have no way of knowing
about it, right? Because forests would
have re regrowth. The only way we'd know
about it again is because of traditions.
But here's the thing, the objects that
would detonate in the atmospheres
compared to the objects that would
strike the ground are probably 10 times
more abundant. So for every crater, you
can figure there's probably at least 10.
And of course, when you look at this,
notice they're all confined to the
continental. How many do you see in the
oceans? Not many. A few, a handful,
right? But we're assuming that that the
dispersion of impact sites around the
planet is going to be relatively random.
And so there should be just as many
falling over a given area of ocean as
there is over land. So given that we're
looking at perhaps and then you'll
notice like look down there at South
America, you'll see the area of of
Central Brazil and all where the
rainforest is. You don't see a lot
there. Why? Because just like many of
the cities, they're they're hidden under
the jungle. We don't know what's there,
but there's no reason to assume that
they're not clustered there as well.
Same with Antarctica. Same with
Greenland. We think we know about two
impact structures in Greenland. The
Hayawa crater was originally proposed as
a younger dus impact and I I was kind of
skeptical of that uh for reasons I'm not
going to get into now, but it does
appear to be a crater at some point. So
um anyways, here's the point. What
you're looking at here might be only 15%
of the craters on this scale or impact
events on this scale that have occurred
on the Earth. Then if you consider that
that's only a percentage of the total
number of encounters and the number of
tunguska type encounters could be in the
thousands.
That's not anything too extreme to
assume. And the other part of this is
that the um
the British school of catastrophists
kind of led by Victor Clue and William
Napier and William Asher and and and a
number of others have speculated that
the really that the greatest danger is
not the big you know five mile wide
asteroid but it's the smaller swarms of
uh disintegrated cometary debris or a
broken up asteroid that can create
clusters of Earth crossing material that
Earth might encounter from time to time.
And I think there's some evidence of
that that's pretty compelling. And
again, we can look at that on Monday
because we've got pretty much almost
unlimited time and uh flexibility there.
Just to give you an idea, Romeo, this
was March 26, which happened to be my
birthday. I was my I turned three on the
day that this happened. Um, and I
remember at the time I was quite
critical of the the matter. I thought
this is
uh 11 megat tons. Okay, this was one of
the larger bombs in in our nuclear
arsenal, but it kind of gives you a
sense of the scale. Um, you know,
recently the Department of Defense has
declassified some of the old atmospheric
tests and they're very very interesting
and instructive to watch to get a sense
of the scale of the smaller impact
events. Uh so it says here uh blast was
approximately the same magnitude as the
Tangusa event
and this is just showing some scaling
here. You've got 15 kilotons at the
bottom there. That would be Hiroshima.
You've got 350 kilotons which is
typically the size of the warheads now
deployed
in our missiles, our delivery systems
both in uh in in American arsenals and
in Russian arsenals and in British and
probably Indian arsenals because you
know one of the things that we did was
we went from a single delivery system
like a single missile with a single
warhead to multiplying the number of
warheads on a single missile. So you
have got a delivery system and that was
part of the evolution and during the
cold war of the the the arms race was
this evolution from one warhead on one
missile to up to 10 warheads on one
missile and initially the missile would
fly it would release its warheads and
the warheads would kind of fall at
random over the land. Then the next
evolution was that each warhead could be
uh independently targetable. So that's
kind of where we're at now. And one of
the things that um that the Biden
administration is pushing for is a whole
new uh whole new level of milit of of
nuclear weapons that would be targetable
targetable to um uh with with high
degree of precision. And in the old
models, in the old ideas of of of of um
the co of the arms race, um the idea was
that you would have um mass destruction,
you would have you could have one if you
had a bomb that was 5 megat tons, 10
megat tons. The idea was you're holding
the other country's uh population
hostage because if you attack us, we've
got the means to wipe out every city,
right? Well, the evolution of the
nuclear arms race in the 70s was going
from
mutual assured destruction to
targetable. So in other words, if you're
going to take out a city, it doesn't and
you're doing a 10 megat ton bomb, it
doesn't matter if you drop that bomb
downtown or 10 miles away, that city is
gone. But if you want to take out a
missile silo or a super hardened command
and control center, you have to have
precision targeting. And that is where
the evolution of the arms race in the
70s took place was was was developing
that ability to target with precision.
Now, of course, the idea was, as always
before, in mutual assured destruction,
it was always considered retaliatory,
not a first strike. But the evolution of
of thinking in nuclear doctrine, which
most people are completely oblivious to
and unaware of, was that when we go to
precision targeting, we're going to
first strike capability because
obviously if it's retaliatory, you're
not going to be trying to take out empty
missile silos, are you? And that's where
we're at now is trying to uh take uh
first strike capacity up to the next
level. And people need to know that that
that's what our government is up to. And
um again, there's a whole another
discussion, but there's something I want
to end up with here. Um so this is just
showing some of the scaling and this is
would show this is a an artist depiction
of what a 15 megat ton explosion would
look like over a over a major urban
area.
and there wouldn't be anything left. And
I don't know, maybe some of you are
aware of the fact that Russia's been
holding maneuvers in the Caribbean and
that there's now a nuclearpowered
submarine off the east coast of the
United States, which is not, I
understand, carrying nuclear weapons,
but could be quickly outfitted with
nuclear weapons capable of taking out
the entire east coast of the United
States. And of course, what they're
doing there is in response to the fact
that the Biden administration has now
said that we're going to be giving
hypersonic missiles to um Ukraine that
are long range. In other words, being
able to reach into the Russian homeland.
So, that's happening right now as we
speak. And I think it's important that
that people become aware of that. Um
I think that I'm going to have to I
think I just got the signal. We're just
getting to the good part. And now,
&gt;&gt; okay. Um,
this is Sar Bomba here. This is Let me
see if I can play this. What a Um, let's
see if it'll work. Do
Here we go. Take a couple minutes. We're
just going to do a Q&amp;A. Okay.
This is recently declassified footage.
Now, is this our future or using plasma
energy to transform planet Earth into
the garden paradise of the solar system?
I'm pretty clear on which side I would
come down on.
Um, there was one thing I did want to
show. Uh, and I particularly wanted
Robert probably already knows about this
and I might have to just speed through a
lot of this to get to it, but
it's the it's the sun divers. The sun
divers are new class of comet that we
know
uh ends up falling into the uh into the
sun. And uh
maybe we'll have to save this for
Monday. Look at all this cool stuff I'm
having to pass through here. Damn it.
So, I think we will. But um but what
what it shows is that there's an
extraordinary reaction in the sun to
these commentary masses falling into the
sun. And so I think there's a whole
possible Yeah. Oh gosh, look at
See, now if I had my laptop, I wouldn't
be doing this. I would just jump to
those slides. I'd probably have to fast
forward through another couple of
hundred slides. No, well, not that many.
Maybe another 50 slides. I don't know.
But anyways, do we have qu uh Micah said
questions and answers? If anybody has
questions, I may or may not have
answers. I don't know.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to guide the Q&amp;A.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. Thank you, Micah.
Can we get our secondary stage mic
online
&gt;&gt; two there? Thank you. So, how we're
going to do this, we've got a couple of
the Q&amp;As's that have been coming in
through the Cvent app. But I also want
to invite questions here from the
audience. I'm sure a few of us here
present have some questions for Randall
Carlson, right?
You better. Now, listen. I'll direct
your attention over to these microphones
here and here for that. First, we're
going to take a couple of questions from
online. If you have a question for
Randall here in the audience, you might
begin to make your way toward the
microphone. We've got a few minutes for
this, and we're going to get to as many
as we can. First off, Randall, let me
ask you this.
&gt;&gt; Do you have a map showing, and this is
just a speculative,
&gt;&gt; okay? But do you have a map showing the
geography before and after the younger
dus events and that includes land
rebound? That question from our online
audience.
Uh yeah well the the land rebound has
been going on. It it would have
immediately started with the
deglaciation accelerated once the
glaciers were removed and then would
have slowed down. So the first couple of
millennia after the removal of the
glaciers would have been the rap most
rapid phase of rebound and it's still
going on. I mean they can still measure
the uplift of the uh area around Hudson
Bay, but it's much slower than it was
say 10,000 years ago.
&gt;&gt; That question, by the way, from our
friend Clay Lambert. Hello Clay. You
know, building off of what he's asking,
I got one for you here, too. Let's just
say that there was a hypothetical land
mass out there somewhere in the Atlantic
where there might have been people a
long time ago, some maybe 12,000 or so
years ago. And let's say that that land
mass had a name that started with a.
&gt;&gt; Uh can you talk
&gt;&gt; Okay. Some hypothetical land mass that
started with an A.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Just, you know, out there in
the ocean, maybe beyond the pillars of
Heracles someplace. Now, if such a
hypothetical land mass existed, could
you tell me what the effect of isostatic
rebound would be following deglaciation
on such a land mass along with sea level
rise?
&gt;&gt; Well, okay, I've explained that very
thoroughly in this Atlanta's
presentation. It's a I wanted to cover
all the bases so that you know I knew
that there would be you know mainstream
guys you can't even mention the name the
word Atlantis without you know uh
getting dismissed with a with a wave of
the hand but so I I actually gave a
couple of lectures and a follow-up with
a total of over nine hours so part of
this was explaining how sea level rise
eyes are going to see the the the geoid
which is the attempt of the earth to
maintain equilibrium. So if you look at
like if you take the dispersion of land
mass and crust whether granitic o uh
continental crust or oceanic crust it's
trying to maintain equilibrium with
respect to the uh earth's center of
mass. Think of a beach ball. If you
press it this way it bulges this way.
you know, if you let go of it, it will
shrink back to more or less a sphere.
That's kind of what the Earth is trying
to do. So, if you compress with,
&gt;&gt; you know, several hundred billion
trillion tons of ice over the North
American continent that depresses down,
it actually causes now, according to
geoysicists, a lateral movement of
molten material
uh below the crust. So it creates an
upward pressure on the areas that are
distant from the the the the source of
pressure. Now when you release that
pressure, you're going to have the
opposite effect. And now you're dumping
all that weight back into the ocean
basins, particularly the Atlantic Ocean
basin has the mid-Atlantic ridge. And
there's a triple junction right at the
air at the Azors where there is
empirical evidence of major vertical
movement vertical tectonism associated
with rapid sea level rise at the end of
the last ice age. So I make the argument
there that if there was an atlantis and
I go into great detail, this would have
been the most likely place and the most
consistent with Plato's account.
&gt;&gt; Fascinating as always. I think this next
question might be a physics question or
maybe for information science. How do
you store all that knowledge in that
cranium of yours? No, I'm kidding
actually. But I keep threatening to take
him with me to the Azors one of these
days and I'm serious about that.
&gt;&gt; We're talking about that.
&gt;&gt; Listen, uh let's go to some questions
from the audience here. I want to start
with the gentleman in the coat right
over here. Step up to the microphone,
please, if you will. Question for
Randall Carlson.
&gt;&gt; Uh Randall, thank you for all of your
excellent uh video and podcast
presentations. And not to distract from
this awesome presentation tonight, do
you have a plan to do a presentation on
the moon possibly next year?
&gt;&gt; Say that again.
&gt;&gt; Do you have a plan to do a presentation
on the moon?
&gt;&gt; The moon? What makes you think that I
have any interest in the moon? Actually,
yes. At some point, uh, I am. Yes. And
it's going to be the very near future,
too.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Neither can I, sir. Right over
here. step up to the microphone. Go
ahead.
&gt;&gt; Uh I was I've heard that the genome has
been stabilized for like 200,000 years.
&gt;&gt; That the what?
&gt;&gt; That the human genome has been
stabilized for about 200,000 years.
&gt;&gt; The what?
&gt;&gt; The human genome has been
&gt;&gt; Oh, okay. Got it. Yeah. All right.
&gt;&gt; Do you happen to know or is there a list
of impacts that has occurred since that
like in that time period? You know?
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Yeah. I can I Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Like is it a dozen? Is it a half a
dozen? Is it 50?
&gt;&gt; Well, depends on the size. There
probably been hundreds if you're looking
at Tangusa size.
&gt;&gt; Um, but yeah, I I could provide you with
that information.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. Let's go right over here,
sir. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; So, I was actually going to ask about
the moon as well. Um, so I wanted to
know like just maybe briefly, uh, do you
think there's people from past
civilizations that survived there or do
you think that it's something different?
Is there anything you can give us?
&gt;&gt; What was the question? There are people
or other civilizations that may have
survived on the moon.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I have no comment on that at the
moment.
&gt;&gt; Maybe we'll save that for a future
lecture. Let's go to one of our
&gt;&gt; You want to comment?
&gt;&gt; Uh do I want to comment?
&gt;&gt; You want to comment, but will you?
&gt;&gt; I will, but not now because
&gt;&gt; Okay. Maybe at a later time. Let me get
to a question from our online audience
here. This uh question comes from Llo
Randall. Does the universe contain
straight lines? If so, or if no, rather,
how the platonic solids defined by
straight lines can still be explained as
valid and real geometric forms being the
building blocks of nature.
Oh my gosh. Take it away, Randall. Um, I
tell you what, if you show up Monday,
we'll we'll attempt to tackle that
question, but that would be Yeah, that
would
Yeah, I think that's more than we could
bite off right now.
&gt;&gt; Perhaps for the Monday session. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's why they call it the classroom
day. Right over here, sir. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; Uh, given the bullseye shape of the
Rishot structure, is there any chance
that was a impact location?
&gt;&gt; No. My studies suggest it's purely
volcanic
that it's a that it's was a magma plume
that solidified and then later exposed
by erosion not an impact. When I first
encountered that in the '9s it was
listed as a potential impact site and I
thought probably can add this to this
site but subsequent research showed that
it's um endogenic meaning it's from
within the earth not from without.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; As you can see, of course, dinner is
being served. If if it's okay, we're
going to go ahead and just continue.
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; Fill it.
&gt;&gt; Are you saying then that eating is more
important to these people than
&gt;&gt; Quite the contrary, dear dear friend?
Quite the contrary.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm You know what? We're We're at
something. I'd like to show I I've got
this um about the the Cro Sungrazers and
the Sun Divers and And I've got a I
think I've got a video here. Um, and
it's showing that there seems to be a
interesting connection between activity
on the sun and the the infall of these
they're called sun divers, right? And
just at random there was a a video
happened to be showing at the right a
recording at the right time showing one
of the sun divers diving into the sun.
So now we've got the sun is blocked out
here and we're seeing the normal
radiation. Let me see. Is this the video
or not? Um,
what you're going to see here in this
video is a comet coming in from the
lower right like at roughly say 4:00. It
comes in and hits the sun. It dives into
the sun. It's swallowed up by the sun
there. You can see here it comes.
Boom. Do you see that? Let's do that
again.
&gt;&gt; Okay, here we go. You're going to see
the comet coming in from the lower
right.
Here it comes.
Boom.
Now, if we have a period of time where
the solar system is densely occupied by
a whole bunch of stuff like this falling
in, could it have an effect on the
activity or not of the sun? And it seems
highly suggestive that it could, which
leads me to think that some of the
events we might be talking about are
kind of perfect storm events that
encompass the entire solar system. And
that's where my thinking is now with
respect to the younger dus and that
period from 146 to 116. It seems like
the whole lot of stuff went on during
that period of time. and we're just at
the very beginning stages of thinking it
thinking it through. And um I'm leaning
definitely towards the idea that the 146
and the 116 were most likely solar
related and the 129 was probably
predominantly impact related. But you
know I'm still learning. I think we're
all still learning still asking these
questions. So anyways, I think we'll
stop there
&gt;&gt; and thank you Randall Carlson, sir.