[Music]
The recent history of the Earth and its
human population is far more complex
than many have supposed with ever more
freshly unearthed evidence of
catastrophic upheavalss in our near
past. The question we must ask is, were
our ancestors vulnerable to these
catastrophic events? And if so, are
there implications for the survival of
our modern civilization?
Modern humanity has been around for a
long time. several hundred thousands of
years in fact. How is it that only in
the last few centuries we have built an
advanced civilization?
Are we the first to achieve such a goal?
Is there a reason for what appears to be
an arrested development of our forward
momentum as a culture? We have a vast
body of evidence before us of previous
civilizations arising and vanishing. Now
the question becomes, what happened to
them? Join me for this episode of
Squaring the Circle.
[Music]
Well, hello everyone. I'm Randall
Carlson and thank you for joining me for
another episode of Scaring the Circle
where we're going to be taking a deep
dive as we always do into the great
events in our past and try to unpack the
implications for our own time. Because I
believe that without an authentic
understanding of our own past, we're not
able to decipher the events of our
present and especially are we unable to
uh make any kind of plans for a
long-term sustainable civilization if we
don't understand what has come before
us. So to get into a discussion about
some of these important topics, I am
going to be joined by my producer
John Arthur. Well,
how's it going, sir?
Good. Good to see you again.
Good to be seen, as they say.
Yes. Well, here we are and there's been
a lot of lot of things going on in the
in uh the world of science and research
and discovery.
uh always more than we can talk about,
but I think we should talk about a few
things that um could launch us into an
interesting conversation. I have uh some
ideas that could lead us directly into
uh topics of relevance and interests.
Um,
one of the things uh uh that recently
happened was I was at the cosmic summit
and a big part of what the cosmic summit
uh which was held in Greensboro, North
Carolina uh pertains to uh the ongoing
progress of studies surrounding the
younger dus boundary and those events
that occurred at the end of the last ice
age. Because as we never get tired of
emphasizing and reiterating, there was a
great turning point that happened
somewhere, we'll say roughly roughly
between 15,000 and 14 15,000
and 11,000 years ago. And within that
window of time, several major things
happened. Uh and the reason that is so
important I think is because
in terms of scale, in terms of
magnitude, in terms of intensity, we
have to go back several million years to
find a period of equivalent concentrated
change within a very short period of
time. In fact, if we use as our
barometer, as our yard stick, the loss
of species, which is directly related to
loss of habitat, we find that we have to
perhaps go back as far as 5 million
years to an event called the Hemphilian
extinction uh when there was a major
climate upheaval and global catastrophe.
And there was an extinction event that
uh was looks to have been nearly as
severe as the one that uh accompanied
the termination of the great ice age.
That is the the time of the pleaene
epoch into our modern epoch the holysine
that has seen the arise of modern
civilization.
And of course this was the time when we
go back to that period which I think
many of our listeners now know uh the
LGM the late glacial maximum. When we go
back to the late glacial maximum we find
a very very different world from the one
we inhabit. Strikingly different
dramatically different uh profoundly
different. And part of what I hope we
can accomplish with this series that
we're working on here is to be able to
paint a picture for people of this world
that no longer exists. This world that
preceded our own world right up to just
this in the geological sense just a few
brief moments ago. And to appreciate how
dramatically this planet has shifted
gears and created the conditions that
have been conducive for us to establish
the foundation of agriculture upon which
our modern advanced scientific,
technological, industrial civilization
has been built.
So, there's a lot to unpack there and I
know we've talked about a lot of this,
but because it's a constantly evolving
paradigm, we're never running out of new
updates and new things to talk about.
And as you and I have talked about
before, we are actually long-term, one
of our goals is here is to create a
curriculum where all these kinds of
questions are being addressed. we might
say uh actually creating a degree in
catastrophist history or catastrophism
if you want to put it down to a single
word cuz right now there's no
universities that I know of that
specifically teach catastrophism.
Here's what you need to know about
cosmic impacts. Here's what you need to
know about gigantic vulcanism and its
role in in the history of this planet in
the history of of human civilization.
Here's what you need to know about uh
activity of the sun and the and the uh
various stages and phases that the sun
can go through. Because as we're
learning now, it seems like the sun has
been a much more uh stronger player in
affecting things down here below in our
world, our terrestrial world than
anybody had previously imagined. And
even on a larger scale, the galactic
scale, we've talked, John, about the the
reservoir of comets. There's two great
reservoirs that act are actually part of
a single uh structure of comets, which
is the Kyper disc moving out from the
plane of the planets, the plane of the
ecliptic, and then transitioning
literally into a sphere of comets,
billions of comets, billions of comets.
And these comets are in a very quasi
stable relationship with the rest of the
solar system.
They're very delicately poised in this
slowly moving apparently rotating sphere
and disc conjoined sphere and disc of
comets rotating
but being quasi stable. What that means
is that it doesn't take much of a
perturbation to disrupt them, to
dislodge them from this long slow period
orbit around the sun that that that
they're a part of. Right now, what would
do that? Well, there's a number of
possibilities. For example, a nearby
supernova.
uh the the the shock wave moving out
from a supernova could disrupt dislodge
comets from their position and send a
cascading stream of comets heading
towards the sun. Uh let's say the
passing of a nearby star uh that comes
close um perhaps some type of a galactic
disruption. you know there's some
evidence that there may be uh you know
micronovas from emanating from the g the
galaxy itself. So we don't know yet. We
don't know. These are areas that are
wide open for future research and
exploration. But the point is is that it
certainly does seem like there is a
distinct possibility of there being
comet storms. Even you may have there,
in fact, we've known this since the 80s
that there has been evidence that there
may have been times when there were
multiple comets
uh transiting through the inner solar
system. Well, we know that comets break
up. We know that they their nuclei are
loosely bound. They come in, they break
up, and they can they can spread
enormous amounts of debris throughout
the inner solar system, which then means
that any object like a silicut planet
that's orbiting the sun within that zone
can now encounter those uh that
material, that debris with a variety of
different kinds of consequences all the
way from hypervelocity impacts because
we now know that comets asteroids which
were thought to be two distinct families
of cosmic objects. Well, no, they're
not. They're just end points of a
continuum and there's a lot of degrees
uh gradations between the two. There are
cometlike asteroids and there are
asteroid like comets and everything in
between. So it's very possible that the
fragmentation of a nucleus of a comet
nucleus could actually uh litter the
inner solar system with a variety of
different kinds of material. And I think
this is one of the things when you go
back and you begin to read the
literature of the younger dus uh impact
event some of the early critics were
saying well wait a second hold on you
can't you got to make up your mind. Was
it a comet? Was it an asteroid? Some of
you are saying that it looks like it was
asteroidal. Others say that it looked
more like it was a comet, right? Uh
well, the answer and therefore until you
come into some kind of a clear-cut
definition of what you're talking about,
get out of here. That's that was
basically the attitude amongst the
critics. In fact, in one paper, it was
actually referred to as a Franken the
that the younger dus impact hypothesis
required a Frankenstein monster, right?
Because the idea being a Frankenstein
monster is all these different body
parts sewn together to make one entity.
They were saying really this was like a
Frankenstein monster. But just as
Frankenstein monster had no real
existence, it was just a a literary
fiction. So they were dismissing the
idea of an impact hypothesis. Of course,
we're going back now to uh you know,
we're going back, you know, to like
2010, 2011 because the first paper, as
you will recall that I mentioned over
and over again, it was the Firestone
paper of 2007
uh where they invoked uh a uh an impact
event at the loweras boundary and and
and attributing the mass extinction of
the mamalian megapa
uh to that impact. act event and then
that of course launched a whole
firestorm of controversy. But as you
know, as we've talked about, as I've
talked about with Becket Fusk in the in
the uh uh the recordings I've done with
him, there's all there's new evidence.
We talked about it just got posted the
other day, new evidence coming from
Louisiana and from Siberia
uh for an impact at the younger dus. So
what's interesting with that is is early
on the geographic range of the impact
phenomena was pretty circumscribed.
Well, with new discoveries,
it keeps expanding and expanding, and
we're kind of to the point now where
it's beginning to look like if one knows
where to look at what stratographic
horizon to look, it's likely that it's
going to end up being
global, completely global. I'm going to
pause for just a minute to talk about
our partners over at Shipo, who may save
you a significant amount of headache in
your day-to-day business. We sell a
variety of geometry tools and models
like our beautiful platonic solids here
at Randall Carlson LLC. And when it
comes to managing shipping, e-commerce,
and returns, we've been using Shipo for
over 4 years now, and we're very pleased
with their service. Shipo's interface is
intuitive. The primary order page is
easy to navigate, and we have enjoyed
stellar technical support. If Shipo can
help you with your needs, please use the
code below to partner with a great
company while supporting our work here
at Squaring the Circle. Thanks. And now
back to the show. Um because every these
all these I mean there's even if we go
through the literature on it, which I
think would be an interesting thing to
do, kind of go through the history of
it, go through the back and forth, which
is really interesting. you look at and
that's because it's such a great uh
representation of the way science should
work. An outrageous hypothesis was
proposed at least within the framework
of uh mainstream interpretations, right?
Uh
an outrageous hypothesis is proposed and
then there's a lot of back and forth.
there's, you know, the the guardians of
the old paradigm. They come on and they
try to do everything they can to
discredit this newly proposed outrageous
hypothesis. Then the originators of that
hypothesis have to come back and you see
this back and forth and back and forth.
It is really well exemplified in the
whole controversies around the younger
dus events. Well, at this point I can
say it's pretty much a slam dunk. It's
pretty much now determined that the
evidence for some kind of an impact
event
and probably a multiple impact event is
very robust at this point. Um, and and
it's a very interesting exercise to work
through that. So I would think that
might be something that people would be
interested in if they really want to get
down to the nitty-gritty of
understanding this and be able to
actually think and talk and communicate
intelligably about what is arguably the
most important cluster of events in the
whole of human species on this earth.
Right? I mean that's what we're talking
about here. It's it's the events that
launched the modern age. that has
allowed us to build a civilization that
we now inhabit as we stand on the on the
brink of actually evolving our
civilization into the cosmos if we don't
blow it first
which is a danger and you know we've
we've talked earlier about um the power
of you know human weaponry and and the
the the ability of h like science now to
uh to uh manifest these incredible
levels of energy to uh and we commented
about how well if we go back to 1945 and
we talked about what happened at
Hiroshima
Hiroshima was maximum 15 kilotons that
means 15,000 tons of TNT and then
earlier we were talking about the
largest of nuclear explosions ever
conducted by the human race was October
of 1961
when the Soviet Union tested the SAR
bomba and that was upwards of 50 megat
tons means 50 million tons of TNT
and we also mentioned talked about how
the largest and that was only a one-off
they just wanted to try to scare the
crap out of the US because we'd been
testing ever larger hydrogen bombs. And
of course, the US was the first, not
only the first to develop the atomic
bomb, it was the first to develop and
test a hydrogen bomb. And then the
Soviets wanted to say, "Okay, you want
to go, you want to play this game, we'll
show you. We can." So the largest the
largest hydrogen bomb that the US tested
was about 15 megat tons of TNT. Now,
John, I know you know the answer to this
question. What other infamous explosion
also was about 15 megat tons?
A small little bolide that caused
Tungusa.
You got it. Tangusa. The the estimates
now are that the energy release during
the Tungusa event of 1908 was about 15
megat tons. So it puts it right there at
the maximum megat tonnage, the maximum
power of a hydrogen bomb tested by the
US uh during uh the peak of the arms
race, the nuclear arms race.
800 square miles flattened just
yeah a little more flattened. Flattened
old, you say old growth Taigga forest
that was flattened. There was no
buildings. Well, there may have been
some huts, reindeer herder huts. There
was one there was a whole herd of
reindeer that apparently got incinerated
because no trace of them was ever found
by the the herders who were um on the
outskirts of the of the devastation and
managed to survive. Um but yeah, we have
talked about that, but it's something
that is always worth revisiting. uh
because there's a lot of stuff that you
know with the collapse of the Soviet
Union in the early 90s uh a lot of their
scientific research became available to
Western scientists and we started this
much more scientific exchange and some
of the first westerners Americans were
able to go and visit the site of the
Tungusa event and uh it was a very
fertile time for science and there have
been a lot of very interesting ing uh
Soviet work on the Tunguska van that
still has not been translated into
English. Some of it has and what there's
what what it's showing is very
interesting like um accelerated
evolution for example. Um genetic
anomalies showing up uh a lot of
interesting angles that we've barely
begun to explore yet. Um lot of lessons
from Tunguska. Tagusa I considered that
was like a cosmic teaching event just
like Shoemaker Levy 9 in 94 was a cosmic
teaching event um because the things
we've been able to learn from without
Tungusa
we would be very much deficient in our
knowledge of hypervelocity impacts and
what the possibilities are. Uh
absolutely we would be uh and we had no
idea nobody was thinking before 1994
about multiple sim multiple impacts
but that became a real thing after n
July 1994 when we witnessed 21 impacts
into Jupiter and we don't know for sure
but we do know that each one of those
impacts carried an extraordinary amount
of punch
probably if any one of those 21 pieces.
Let's say for example, it hit the earth,
it probably would have been civilization
ending. 21 pieces would have been a mass
extinction event.
No doubt about it. And we witnessed it.
And we don't know really, you know, the
question is when you when you're your
cohort only consists of one data point,
you how do you extrapolate from that?
you know, you need another two or three
or something to get some I mean, did we
witness uh an event that's once in a
million years?
Did we witness an event that's once in a
thousand years? See, we don't know until
we have multiple examples.
We're taking a little bit of a detour
here to uh tell a story that I think is
going to be valuable. I was coming down
the stairs and I think somebody just
ahead of me had spilled a little bit.
and my foot hit. It slid out from under
me and I tumbled down three or four
stairs to the bottom. I sure banged up
my left knee. It was painful, but uh I
was very relieved to remember that I had
brought I happened to pack my CBD from
the god sav. And I was really grateful
that I had remembered to do that. So, I
that night I put some of the SAV on,
went to bed. Though, I've I've, you
know, being in the construction and
building industry, I've had many falls
and in uh injuries and stuff, and I
figured I'm going to be laid up with
this for a month. We drove home, I think
it was 3 to 4 days later. I continued
applying to SAV, and I would say within
a week, I was getting around pretty
good. I always bring the oil uh when I
travel and I I'm now after this episode
I'm like, "Okay, I'm always going to
have the SAB with me, too." But there is
some tanalyzing evidence that's
suggesting that's maybe not as rare as
we might have assumed.
In fact, multiple impacts may be as
normal as singular impacts.
And of course, a lot of the early
critics of the younger dus boundary were
assuming that it had to be just a single
object and in a single random event,
but that may not be the case at all.
So, um,
you have any thoughts?
Well, absolutely. There's there's a lot
to unpack there, but I actually think we
should we should wind back to the
beginning because you mentioned the
megaponal extinctions, and this is
something that you and I were talking
before we started today. There aren't a
lot of folks who talk about the pre uh
uh younger dus world and and what that
looks like. There were some really
interesting critters running about that
did not seem to survive whatever
occurred at that time in history. We're
talking about mastadons,
large ground sloths.
Oh, yeah.
Can you paint a picture for everyone on
that?
Well, I can see what we can do here. Um
I can refer to some of the interesting
work that has been done over the last
say half century or so where we've begun
to peel back the the curtains the veil
if you will on this world and we know
that for example there were great ice
sheets. We have to more than double the
amount of ice that's present in the
world glacial ice that's present in the
world today. And by doing that, we drop
sea levels by 400, maybe even more,
maybe up to 450 ft. Well, when you drop
sea levels, we're now exposing all of
the shallow coastal plains that surround
all the continents that was now prime
habitable real estate, not only for the
mamalian life that was so prevalent
during the late pleaene, but most likely
for human societies as well, right?
Coastlines would have been a natural
place because number one, you would have
had access to a marine environment.
You could have fished, you could have
collected muscles, you know, you could
have used the shallow marine environment
as a resource base. So it would have
been a natural place for just like when
we look at the rise of modern
civilization.
First thing we see is that villages
and and then towns and eventually cities
show up along river valleys and on
coastlines and quite often where rivers
meet the coastline. And that that
particular geographic framework provided
the foundation for setting up you know
networks of trade which were so
important for the rise of civilization.
Right? But now we've got a situation
where we realize that in the aftermath
of these concentrated events that ended
the ice age the and and that were
particularly focused in that stage that
we called the younger dus. What we find
is that not only
did the half of the great megaponal
species on Earth disappear,
you couldn't have an event of that
severity and not also affect the human
species. And there is evidence now that
there may have been a population
bottleneck
in the human species that coincided with
the extinction of the great megapona.
Then we're going to get back to looking
at some of those megapon as we get this
the picture of the of the I'll call it
the anti- Doluvian world. And I think
I'm I think that's a legitimate phrase
to use, a legitimate title. Why? Because
we know that
those great ice sheets that consisted of
6 million 7 million cubic miles of
glacial ice melted.
Well, you don't melt 6 million cubic
miles of ice without creating un
unimaginably huge floods. So, it's very
it is not um it's not uh weird to use
the term diluvial. And here we're
hearkening back to the early days of
geology because a lot of the first
geologists were diluvialists. Meaning
that before there were theories and
dogmas and doctrines being propagated
through the academic disciplines of
geology and earth history, those early
geologists back in the uh early 1800s up
to the post civil war period, they
looked at the phenomena around them and
what they saw was the the results of
catastrophic events. And it was later
with the rise of Lyelian geology um that
was based upon the work of of James
Hutton and William I believe his name
was Playfair um who developed the
doctrine of uniformity and then that
became the established doctrine that was
incorporated into the curriculums of
geology in the late 1800s when geology
became a recognized scientific
discipline that was now being taught.
taught in universities.
And so they they extract they they took
that dogma of uniformitarianism
and that became entrenched in the in the
disciplines. And the early, you know,
they acknowledged that, you know, yes,
Kovier and Buckland and Sedwick and
Merchesen and Agassy, all of these guys
that were considered the godfathers of
geology and glaciology
and paleontology, etc. Well, they were
all geniuses and and highly intelligent
men, but they had this archaic belief.
They had this quaint belief in
catastrophes, but we're more
scientifically advanced now. We don't
need catastrophes anymore because what's
happening if you start talking about
duvialism? Well, by gosh, you're going
trying to go back to Noah's flood and we
can't have that, right?
Got to dispose of that. And that was
part of the thinking. Anyways, so we now
know just here in North America, there
was a culture. We could not ascribe to
them advanced civilization. But there
was a culture called the Clovis culture
that existed for three to 400 years
right up until the lower younger dus
boundary. And that culture appears to
have gone as extinct as the woolly
mammoths.
Now coming back to the megapa and trying
to get a better picture of this world
that preceded our own. uh I'll draw on a
few uh some of the papers in the
interesting uh milestone papers that
have come out in the last three or four
decades. One of the
one of the paleontologists that really
uh immersed himself into understanding
this phenomena of the the great megapon
and their disappearance from earth was
Anthony J. Stewart and
he wrote a paper that was appeared in
the journal uh biology review and the
paper was entitled uh mamalian
extinctions in the late plea scene of
northern Eurasia and North America.
This is and I'm quoting now in the very
recent geological past shortly before
the end of the pleaene period
uh or about 10,000 radioarbon years
before present. Now this has been uh
recalibrated. It is now closer to 12,000
years. In fact, the the the now
geological definition of the the the
precise transition from plea to scene to
hollene is dated right at 11,600 years.
But anyways, in the very recent
geological past, woolly mammoths, woolly
rhinoceroses, and giant deer were part
of the fauna of Europe and northern
Asia, while mammoths, mastadons, ground
sloths, and saber-tooth cats occurred in
North America. South America was home to
mastadons, ground sloths, light lop
turns, lopturns, which I think are like
of the same uh genes as rabbits and
gipadons which are the same as uh we
find like uh armadillos except these
armadillos, the gipadons were uh five
and 600 lb and maybe even bigger. and
Australia largely isolated from the rest
of the world since the beginning of the
Cenazoic
supported a range of giant marsupials
meaning having pouches. Kangaroos have
pouches they're marsupials.
However, by the place holysine boundary
conventionally placed at 10,000
radioarbon years before the present. Now
remember this is being written in 1991.
So almost a quarter century ago. And
since then, we've refined our dating and
improved our dating. And like I said,
radiocarbon dates have been
re-calibrated. Uh so roughly when you're
back that far, usually what you're going
to do is you're going to add about two
millennia to the radiocarbon date and
then you'll get the calibrated date,
which is often times written CA. And and
a good pneummonic is just to think in
terms of CL. Cal means calibrated, but
it also reminds you that you're talking
now about calendar dates, right? So you
dug 10,000 radiocarbon years. Um but
that would be 12,000 roughly 12,000 uh
calendar years. Okay. So uh at the
pleaene holysine boundary these and many
other terrestrial mammals had
disappeared mostly without replacement
by evolution or immigration leaving the
relatively impoverished fauna that we
see today. Only in Africa, and this is
important, only in Africa and southern
Asia did elephants, rhinoceroses, and
the majority of other large mammals
known from the late plea scene managed
to survive to the present day.
What does that possibly imply? We could
let let's let's look at some percentages
here. North America lost about three
quarters of all species
that were over 100 pounds of adult body
weight. 44 kilograms is about 100
pounds.
South America lost nearly as many. In
fact, close enough to say both North and
South America lost 3/4 of their
uh megapona over 100 pounds body weight.
Eurasia lost about 35%.
Africa lost about 10%.
Now Africa, you know, if you think
Serengeti plane, you're thinking about,
you start picturing megapona, don't you?
You got elephants, you've got rhinos,
you got hippos, you've got giraffes,
you've got lions, you know, even I think
cheetahs are over a 100 pounds, aren't
they? um
water buffalo. I mean the list goes on.
There's many probably double easily that
when you start thinking about the number
of species.
So most of those species if not all of
them are holdovers of Africa's pleaene
species.
So if and I think we can say this with a
high degree of confidence that loss of
species is directly related to loss of
habitat.
In fact, I think most ecologists
would concur with that and that's the
big concern now. If we lose habitat,
we're going to lose species.
Okay. Well, that being the case, what
does that tell us about
about the geographic range of the
intensity of these younger dus
phenomena? Well, it seems like to me
that North and South America were
equally affected. And I think there's
reason to believe even that North
America was likely ground zero for
whatever was the trigger.
Eurasia
lost wasn't rough. Well, at 35% that's
not quite half of the species loss
experienced by North America, but it's
still significant. You know, imagine
that you're going to reduce you're going
to cause the sudden extinction of 35% of
Africa's megapona.
Well, that's going to be that's going to
be profound. That's going to be very
significant, right? Nobody would want
that.
So
what would be your interpretation of
that? How would you trying to frame
this? Like if you were taken back in a
time machine, but you were maybe up in a
in an alien spaceship so you could view
the proceedings below with impunity.
What would you actually be seeing if you
could take a a a a video record of that
3 or 4 thousand-year period? Fast
forward it, what would you be seeing?
Well, we got some pretty usable
information here in terms of the species
loss.
So, I would interpret that as that well,
whatever happened during that younger
dus transition was not as effective in
Africa as it was in other places. And
that's why African elephants were placed
to scene, the rhinos were placed to
seen. That's those are pletoine animals.
Now think about the Serengeti plane with
this high density. Um I think at the
beginning of the 20th century it was
estimated that there were 20 million
elephants in Africa and that's down to 5
million now. It was down to 10 million
uh when the great 1980s droughts hit and
then I think that was about cut in half.
Maybe it's rebounding now. I haven't
looked at the latest, but um yeah, there
was like three or four times more
elephants, you know, 150, 200 years ago.
Um
were there as many mammoths? I think
it's very possible,
you know, I've seen some estimates that
there might have been 10 million woolly
mammoths worldwide.
Um, and I've also seen some estimates
that the human population during this
time during the late plea scene between
5 and 10 million people.
And that seems to me to be a major
problem with
the the the overkill hypothesis that
human hunters cause the the the great
extinctions at the end of the ice age.
Of course, they mostly focus on
mammoths, don't they? Um but even then
uh
if we assume that the human population
was 10 million people worldwide and I'm
not convinced that that that's accurate
but it's in that range uh most of the
estimates that I've seen um well and
that's assuming I guess every man,
woman, and child.
So the children are not out hunting
mammoths. I'm presuming most of the
women are staying back at camp with the
children because if they're not there
taking care of the babies, babies aren't
going to survive and the human race is
going to become extinct. The elderly are
presumably not out hunting the mass. So
what does that leave? Quarter of the
young adult male population.
So you what? You got a couple of million
humans that are somehow able to
exterminate 10 million woolly mammoths
in in a thousand years basically.
Does that make sense? And that doesn't
even include all the rest of the extinct
megapa.
Just doesn't make sense to me. Anyways,
um so if we go back to 12,900 years ago,
uh what would the world look like? Well,
this tremendous uh
uh place to fauna. And when you think
about oh, for example, direwolves,
uh the giant cave bear, Ursus Spalas, uh
the giant shortfaced bear, Artois Symus,
uh we could go on. I mean, these is the
this is the top of the food chain. These
are, you know, tre these are devastating
predators. Um,
if you were alive back then, if you
were, let's say, a member of a Clovis
tribe,
um, you know, survival on a day-to-day
basis may have been not, you know, not
getting eaten by the the the predatory
top of the food chain may have been a
major goal of your day-to-day existence.
Um so right there that suggests to me
that it would have been very very
different. Um although a global
phenomenon and this is the important
point late place extinctions were highly
variable in their severity in different
regions which that's what we were just
talking about in his review of late
place extinction for mammals exceeding
44 kilograms mean adult body weight.
Martin this would have been Paul S.
Martin who was uh no longer with us but
he was um one of the preeminent
paleontologists that helped to revive
interest in the lost mammals of the ice
age. Uh Martin estimates that South
America lost approximately 46 out of 58
genera or 80% Australia 15 out of 16 and
this is genera rather than species
because this is one taxonomic level up
from species. Australia 15 out of 16 or
94%.
Uh, North America including Alaska,
Yukon 33 out of 45, that's 73% and
Africa uh, including North Africa 7 out
of 49 or 14%. Now these numbers have
changed a little bit since this was
written 25 years ago. Um, and of course
we're talking genera here. We're not
talking species. All right, that's
important to keep that in mind. So
there's the numbers won't add up the
same if you know with that difference.
Um so taking Africa south of the Sahara
only the figure only the figure is even
lower perhaps two out of 44 genera or 5%
loss. Uh Europe suffered moderate but
significant losses with the extension of
seven genera uh out of 24 or 29%. In
general, the larger the animal, the more
it was at risk of extinction. And again,
that is going to be consistent with uh
habitat loss because the larger the
animal, the more food that's required,
uh the more gestation time that's
required, the more time to nurture the
young uh to viability before they can
survive on our own, uh and so on. So,
when you destroy habitat, every one of
those factors gets affected. Um so let's
go on with this because he makes some
interesting uh conjectures here. Most of
the plausible cases or causes for late
place to scene extinctions were under
discussion in the first half of the 19th
century. Currently there are only two
serious contending hypotheses hypothesis
man or climate. The possibility of
epidemic disease does not find favor as
it has seemed unlikely that any disease
would be effective both across such a
wide taxonomic range and such a vast
geographical area.
Cosmic accidents such as asteroids,
comets, etc. can be ruled out as
extinctions were not synchronous
globally. The debate is between those
who believe extinctions resulted when
animals were unable to adapt to climate
changes and those who think that they
were exterminated by human hunters. The
hypothesis known as prehistoric
overkill. Okay, so let's jump go back a
few sentences. Cosmic accidents such as
asteroids or comets can be ruled out as
extinctions were not synchronous
globally.
Okay. the fact of asynchron asynchrony
between the uh extinctions around the
globe.
Well, given what we now know about
cosmic accidents, that is impact events,
does that automatically rule it out? I
would argue no, it doesn't. Because
again, what we were talking about
earlier is that this is to me is an
oversimplified model. You know, you're
thinking, well, one big impact randomly
you know, that's probably just a
singular event that's, you know, that's
completely separated from anything that
came before or after. And so, yeah.
Okay. So, again, in this oversimplified
model, you're thinking, well, if it was
a cosmic impact, then all these species
should have been wiped out
simultaneously.
But in my opinion and in the opinion of
quite a few other people who are
studying this that is not the case
because cosmic impacts as we now know
can be a lot more complicated than just
one singular impact. See look this was
1991 so this is three years before
shoemaker Levy 9 even this is what 91
this is 16 years before uh the impact
hypothesis the younger dus uh impact
hypothesis was presented well we've
learned a lot about cosmic accidents
since then
so I would I would disagree with that I
would I would disagree with the
assumption that there's only two
possible models. Either humans hunted
them to extinction or climate change and
of course in this model climate change
would have been a very gradualistic. the
climate changes gradually and again 91
now this is before the really the
results of the Greenland ice core uh h
has been uh determined when we know now
that there were uh you know climate
changes up to 10° within a matter of a
few years right so this is kind of
coming just before a lot of this you can
see that it's still rooted has its roots
in this time uh where it's reflective of
the kinds of thinking and primarily
gradualist thinking. Uh the climate
change scenario here is gradualist and
then of course human hunters is
considered to be catastrophic but the
more catastrophic you make the human
hunters to me the more implausible it
gets. So anyways let's let's look at
some of this. Um,
in the beginning before making people
now this is from the Pawnie Hero stories
and folk tales uh collected in 1881.
In the beginning before making people
Tawa the creator decided to create giant
creatures to live in this world. Terrawa
made them in many shapes but in several
ways they were all alike. They were very
big and very strong. So that's 1881. Now
let's jump forward to 1982. Harold Lan
who was a paleontologist and wrote one
of the uh definitive textbooks of the
time called the earth through time and
he says in his his textbook the earth
through time the pleaene was a time of
splendid diversity among mammals. The
fauna was probably more varied and
impressive than that of Africa a century
ago. The plea scene was an age of giants
in which colossal ground sloths, beavers
over 2 meters tall, giant direwolves,
bison, and tall rangy mammoths and
woolly rhinoceroses ranged far and wide
across the continents.
And then he's kind of reflecting
uh a quote made by Charles Darwin in
1836.
And Charles Darwin said, "It is
impossible to reflect on the state of
the American continent without
astonishment.
Formerly it must have swarmed with great
monsters. Now we find mere pygmies
compared with the antecedent
allied races."
Um so in the next uh in the image here
that I'm about to show you uh this was a
journal of research into geology and
natural history of the various countries
that were visited by the uh hermasters
uh the uh ship the Beagle under the
command of Captain Fitzroy.
uh and this was the uh the book that I
mean the the the the the um the journey
that Charles Darwin was on that's such
so famous in the history of evolutionary
thought. Um so this was titled uh 19th
century explanations of plactoene
extinctions a review and analysis from
caterary extinctions. Uh this was an
illustration from that book.
And here we have the comparison of the
modern African elephant jaw with the
mastadon jaw. And as we were talking
about John, uh at the time this
illustration was made, uh in the
probably pre yeah pre-ivil war, I
believe, if I'm recalling, um it was not
known that the American mastadon was
extinct. They didn't really know what it
was. In fact, back then it was called
the great American incognito
because they didn't know what it was
except they thought it was a monster.
And if you look at the size of the
mullers here compared to the mers of a
modern elephant, it was assumed that
whatever this animal was, it was
carnivorous.
And when Lewis and Clark were about to
embark upon their heroic journey out to
the uh uh to the Pacific, uh George
Rogers Clark conveyed secret messages
from Thomas Jefferson
um instructing them that if at all
possible, if they encountered a great
American incohum
in the in the course of their travels,
if there was any way possible to capture
the thing and bring it back to
Washington, Um unfortunately there were
no more mastadons. Mastadons I will
mention were browsers. They ate tree
branches mostly. So you uh they existed
in tended to live in the forests.
Whereas mammoths were grazers. They like
the grass. They wanted open areas. So
they lived out in the savas and in the
plains. uh and so there was only some
overlap between the the habitats of
mastadons and uh and mammoths.
The next uh is a skeleton that's in the
uh that's in uh what I don't remember
the museum but it was a skeleton that
was unearthed by Charles Wilson Peele in
1801 found in the Hudson Valley.
the great American incognito.
And so, uh, you can see it was quite a
formidable beast and probably could
incite terror in somebody who didn't
really know what it was. Uh, one of the
things that I will mention is that if
you look at the skull, you'll notice
this big nasal aperture up here. Uh some
of the findings of early mastadon
skulls, it was assumed that they were
some kind of giant homminids and that
this was a singular singular eye. And uh
the belief is that it was a very very
probable what gave rise to the uh
stories and legends about giant cyclops,
you know, that were for example
described in the the journeys of Ulisses
and uh uh Aladdin and so on.
And you thought elk were bad. Imagine
running into that on the on the road.
Yeah.
So, here's the Warren Mastadon remounted
in the American Museum circa 1908.
And let's see, I have a human figure in
here that'll give us some scale.
So, yeah, that could have been a rather
disconcerting encounter if one was, you
know, walking through the woods and you
came upon this guy,
a woolly Randall next to a mastadon. Not
to confuse,
right? Woolly
woolly mammoth in the mastadon, but
there's a woolly Randall with a
mastadon.
Yeah, a woolly Randall back in uh Gez,
when was that picture taken? 25 years
ago, maybe about. Um anyhow, then uh
let's see what else we got. Now, once
you see once you add some flesh and skin
and fur on this guy here, he actually
looks kind of cute.
Look at this guy.
I look at this guy and I go I think to
myself, I'd like to have one of those
for a pet.
You already have Otis. He's half that
size.
Well, this is true. I I do have Otis.
He is. Um,
he's not half that size, but he's pretty
dang big.
Yeah.
Now, here's Let's see. Who is this guy?
Oh, this is the other There's two.
Charles Knight and this guy were the two
artists who specialized in painting
extinct ma mammals from the ice age.
when I was a kid uh probably very early
you know kindergarten first second grade
right in there I had a book and it was
about
pleaene mammals and it was illustrated
by Charles Right and I don't think this
is a Charles Knight although it could be
um but yeah so there was uh this book
and it I I just spent endless
fascinating hours looking at this book
and learning about these great beasts.
Um, let's go on here. Let's see. Oh,
yeah.
There's none other than Brad Young
uh who
who um we're using for scale.
And again, you notice how the the the
mastadon is being uh portrayed within
the forest. One of the differences
you'll notice between a mastadon and a
mammoth that makes it easy to
differentiate is the uh the the
configuration of their skull. The
mastadon skull is much flatter and the
mammoth skull uh is much more prominent
as you'll see when we get to some of the
pictures of mammoths. Okay, this is
Charles R. Knight painting right here.
So, this would have been one of the
paintings that were in my my book as a
youth. And then I had I had another one
as well that was a a book where you may
have had one of these where you had it
was like a stamp book and you had
several pages of stamps and you would
cut out the stamps and then you would
glue them into the pages and each stamp
was a a different uh place to mammal. So
scrapbook but
like a scrapbook. Yeah, exactly.
Bradley for size.
Bradley for size about to get eaten by a
saber-tooth cat.
Uh
oh.
And here we go. I like this one. The
megaloseros, the giant Irish elk and
direwolves
both extinct about it says here circa
12,000 years before present. Um, but
yeah, this this guy here, he could have
a antler span of up to 12 feet in some
cases.
Uh, shoulder height 8 feet. Let's see. I
thought maybe I have Bradley I can put
in here for scale.
uh he would not long last long uh if
these direwolves got a hold of him
or if the elk I I don't know if you've
seen some of those videos of Alaskans
encountering elk they are frightening
and then an elk that size.
Yeah,
but of course the direwolves are even
more concerning.
And here we have the panthetherra atrox,
the American plea toene lion. Uh, and we
now know that there were horses
in ice age America that then of course
disappeared, became extinct, and then
North America was without horses until
they were reintroduced by the Spaniards.
But here you can see this American
pleaine lion has just taken down a
horse. And uh, this guy is big. He This
is a lion that's almost as big as a
horse.
And there you go. There's
there's a homminid for scale.
So Woolly Randall sharing in the spoils
with the with the lion. Is that what I'm
saying? Seeing here.
Well, I I was I had been bearback riding
on this horse until it got attacked by
the lion. So, um yeah. So, I was just
posing for a selfie.
And the lion is politely allowing you to
pose.
Yes. Well, he's he's about to take his
first bite of the horse.
So, he's warning me. You can see he's
warning me. You better stay away. This
is my dinner.
And here we go. Mammoth dragon theory.
This is a big animal here. 14 15 feet
tall at the shoulder. No. And notice the
shape of the skull.
See how much more prominent it is than
the mastadon. And let's put a human in
here for scale. Let's see. I should
There we go. Oops. He There's a little
fella wearing a hat. But that gives you
about the scale the size of this this
guy. I mean, he's like twice as tall as
an African elephant.
And the next one,
uh, this is a reconstruction of mammoth
imperator,
which was also one of the huge, huge
mammoths. So, this is a full-size
replica in a museum at Hot Springs,
South Dakota, which was a a mammoth kill
site, uh, where there were multiple
mammoths in tmbed in a matrix. I think
we have some more photographs of this.
That's uh, Graham Hancock there. Uh he's
standing in the picture for scale and we
uh
he's not even quite able to reach the
belly.
Correct. Yeah.
So can you imagine a world with Yeah.
filled with these. Okay. So now here is
the uh
diagram of a grizzly bear modern grizzly
bear skull. You know, grizzly bears are
very large. And uh but when you compare
it to the uh the giant cave bear skull,
let's do that and see.
Can you imagine encountering a giant
cave bear?
It'd ruin your day if he was hungry.
It would ruin your day if he was hungry.
Yes.
And here we go. the modern grizzly
skeleton with that of Ursa Spalius the
giant cave bear.
Giant cave bear.
Bradley for for uh scale.
Bradley could take them.
I don't know.
his his shoulder blades are only about 8
in above uh tip of Bradley's uh cap
there.
Yeah.
So, yeah, the giant cave bear. Again,
incredible beasts.
And then here's another Charles Knight,
his his depiction of the giant cave
bear. So, this was another illustration
that was in my book.
Now, how do you tell the difference
between uh for example the Artois Symus,
the giant cave bear um or the giant
shortfaced bear and Ursus Spalius the
cave bear?
Well, one of the ways is is that um
often times the uh giant cave bear was
seen uh with a club. And that's one how
if it's carrying a club, then you know
that it's not the giant shortfaced bear.
If you're on audio, you you're going to
have to just watch this one.
Oh, that's right. There's some
this this was a holdover. One of the few
surviving examples of the giant cave
bear.
And he's he's happy that he's managed to
somehow survive.
Mhm.
All right. Mammoth Primagenius, the
woolly mammoth, icon of the ice age
and mammoth imperator.
This was the biggest of the or the
imperial mammoth. So this was the uh the
largest of the mammoths of the probo
late ice age probosidians.
And then in the next slide uh I'm
showing for scale
uh the thigh bone or femur of
not a woolly mammoth. I think it's
captioned as a woolly mammoth, but it's
actually the imperial mammoth. And then
next to the femur, I've got three
troglodites to provide for the scale.
Oh,
so yeah,
those are some large troglodites,
but they do provide scale.
No, what's large is this thigh bone of
the mammal of the mammoth.
That is a large thigh bone.
Yes.
Then one of my favorite of the ice age
beasts was a lasmothereum sibericum.
Uh or
the woolly rhino.
And this was a big guy, too.
I'm putting my brother Rowan in there
for scale.
And you can see that that horn on this
guy is probably five feet long.
And then
the celodanta, which was the woolly
rhino,
they had two horns.
And then we have a smileon stalking a
shasta ground sloth,
which was another extinct animal. And
then we had the bison latifons, which
was the super bison. Right.
And for scale, here you go. In fact,
some of the horns of the superb bison
that have been found have been up to
almost 6 feet long. So, you can just try
to imagine what kind of a beast
they belong to.
But yeah, this guy was about double the
mass of a modern bison.
And I thought the Texas Longhorn was
impressive. Six foot per horn. Or is
that the whole span?
No, per horn.
Per horn. 12 foot span.
They have been found that were close to
6 feet. A single horn that was close to
6 ft.
That's enormous. So all of these
critters
lost their habitat.
Correct.
Around the same time you had two
meltwater pulses.
Correct.
There's a Bradley for scale with an
extraordinarily large beaver. How much
did that beaver weigh?
Oh, 500 lb.
That's castasterides, the giant beaver.
Widespread throughout non-glaciated
North America, particularly prevalent in
the southeast,
but they've been found in Texas.
And then going to the southern
continent, we have the procopadon,
the giant kangaroo, which was a
cannivorous car kangaroo. And look at
look at the claws.
You would not want to get hunted by this
guy.
Those look like they're what, six, eight
inches?
Yeah,
at least.
Yep. Uh here's here we go. Here's ourus,
the giant shortfaced bear.
And with the long legs, he was capable
of running really fast.
That's the last thing I want to hear.
Yeah.
And then we get to the Meggathereum
Americanum, which was the giant ground
sloth.
And we'll put Bradley back in there for
scale. So these guys were as massive as
modern elephants.
The question is, did they move very
fast? I mean, they're sloths, so
hopefully they don't move too fast.
I don't know.
I have I have not seen any studies that
discuss how fast they could, how mobile
they were, and what velocities they were
capable of achieving. The next one I
found online, which was uh showing the
gipadons
that were prevalent in South America,
the giant armadillos.
again four or 500 pounds.
And the next one, Dinorous Maximus,
excuse me, the giant moa,
actually lived it to the holene and
became extinct relatively recent uh in
New Zealand.
Let's see. Do I have There we go. You
can see how big these birds were.
And then we have a the uh I just
included the next guy in here because
he's so awesome. The foro, if I can
remember how to pronounce it, for
rockus. He was the giant carnivorous
bird from the meiosene. So this was a
couple of million years ago. So
I don't think people had to worry about
this guy. But for a while, this guy,
next guy was the top of the food chain.
And I see I think I got a There we go.
Bradley's about to get his head bitten
off.
Yeah. So, yeah, this this was a
flightless predatory bird, but
apparently could run really fast.
And next painting shows uh the mammoth
coli or the Colombian mammoth uh facing
off against smileodon or uh
the saber-tooth cats.
Probably the saber-tooth cats are
probably trying to get in there and get
a uh a mammoth baby,
but this mama mammoth ain't going to let
that happen.
as it says here, a scene that could be
typical of the southeastern United
States during the late plea to scene.
So, uh,
then we get to the whole question of the
catastrophic end of the place to see an
epoch, which was the world's last great
mass extinction.
So,
how much do we want to get into that?
Um,
I think we should save that for another
day. But
I think I think so.
So, basically, all these critters
lost their
habitat in a short time.
Yes.
During a point of rapid climatic change,
and we haven't really even talked about
the Clovis culture yet.
No, we haven't.
But,
but we need to. You have this moment
where all of a sudden you have two large
meltwater pulses where the the glaciers
start to melt.
It's measurable. We we we know that
there was a time of some sort of
climatic upheaval.
Mhm.
Radical. We're missing
everything in North America and South
America that's underneath a certain
certain poundage about 100 pounds give
or take.
44 kilogram. all the megapana disappears
out of North and South America. And then
we even see which is congruent with what
we're seeing out of the more recent uh
younger drius impact uh sites in in uh
Eastern Europe.
So
what does that mean? Well, Eurasia, what
I think it means is that it probably
implies that whatever was the trigger,
it was more prominent in the Western
Hemisphere than the opposite side of the
Earth, which in my mind certainly could
be consistent with a multi-impact event.
It seems it seems a lot less like a
climate shift and more like a mechanical
impact,
a cosmic impact. At least that I could
one say that it's reasonable to ask the
question.
Yeah. Well, here here's what we still
need to sort out. Meltwater pulse 1A is
dated at about 14,600 years ago, which
is what about 1300 years before the
younger dus.
But clearly something happened there.
There was a major climate spasm, a major
melting event which requires an enormous
energy input into the terraosphere,
the the the the
environment of the earth. Then the
younger dus
at 12,800 and some between 128 and 129
uh occurs and that's where we have the
impact proxies now prevalent impact
proxies.
We don't have any impact proxies that I
know of from 14,600.
That doesn't rule it out,
but it doesn't Something happened then.
We don't know what it was. Could it have
been an impact? Maybe is it possible
that the events later on of the younger
Dus could have obscured or destroyed a
lot of the evidence of an earlier
impact?
That's a question that I think is
legitimately asked. Or could it have
been something else altogether? Could it
have been a solar event? because we
don't see well actually it looks like we
start seeing species loss around that
time
right but the major pulse of mass
extinction occurred right at the end
so something happened and then something
happened again at the top of the younger
dus which is dated 11,600 years ago
now and that was a clearly if anything
had survived the lower younger dus, it
probably was wiped out at the end of the
younger dus. But again, what happened
there? You know, there's evidence of a
major meltwater pulse at 11,600,
right? We know there was a huge climate
spasm. In fact, now geologists define
the transition from pleaene which lasted
2 and a half million years to the
holysine. They date that transition
right at 11,600. So that's how
significant that transition point was.
But what happened there? Could it have
been impact? I don't know. Has anybody
looked? I don't know.
Maybe we just haven't looked. Maybe if
we look, we'll find something. I don't
know. But there's still a lot of pieces
to this puzzle that need to be worked
out.
So if people listening, if there's any
young people or not so young people that
are interested in really getting into
this, yeah, the the whole question is
not resolved yet. We've gotten amazing
progress that we've made in the last 20
years.
20 years ago, uh we were right on the
cusp 20 years ago. Okay, let's say 20
years ago, we're in 2005.
Well, we're still two years shy of the
Firestone Kennet West paper that
proposes a younger dus impact. So,
virtually nobody is thinking impact,
but it is becoming apparent to
researchers that something did happen.
And it was because of that evidence that
something did happen that this team went
and took a look, a closer look at this
boundary layer that had already been
recognized by paleontologists
that seemed to uh demarcate a major
transition because below that boundary
layer which was defined by this black
mat as it's called
the Clovis culture existed and most of
the megapa
were still extent
above that black mat layer. No Clovis,
they're gone. And it appears that the
majority of species are gone in most
places. Now, there's evidence that
species did survive
uh the young lower younger dus, the
beginning of the younger dus. It could
be that did they survive throughout the
the course of the younger dus. We know
that after 3,000 deg uh years of warming
between the older dryest and the younger
dus, the ice sheets had begun to
contract. They began to shrink back. And
I believe that that's likely when the
first great mega floods occurred in in
North America. I think I think that
there's reason to suspect earlier dates
because some of the published dates are
showing it at 16 to 18,000 years ago. I
think those dates could be questioned uh
which is beyond our conversation today.
Uh but some of the dates are showing up
between 14 and 15,000 years ago for the
mega floods. Now, we do know this that
most of the remains of extinct megapona
are found in deposits that could be
readily attributed to floods, mega
floods, primarily gravel pits. And when
we get into that and we look at the
circumstances in which the great megapa,
how do we know about them? Well, we find
their their fossilized remains. We find
them in perafrost. We find them
mummified. we find their skeletons and
their bones etc. Right? Well, what are
the circumstances? What is the context
the the environmental context in which
their remains are being found? Because
that tells us a whole story. And that
story that it tells is pretty pretty
remarkable. And a lot of those remains
are found in gravel pits and pete bogs
and sink holes, things that would be the
direct consequence of large floods.
But we'll look at some of that. I think
that's would be a very very interesting
topic to to to dive into because and I
have some very interesting stuff uh to
share with people on on those
circumstances
and I would say that some of the
evidence even before
the circumstantial evidence before that
2007 paper we're already pointing
towards something catastrophic.
such as a uh a cosmic impact, but nobody
was actually coming out and saying it.
Although there were there were a few and
we'll talk about who were some of the
precursors, who were some of the
forerunners of that idea. And there they
they existed. There was three or four of
them researchers who uh in the in in the
uh all the way from the 1960s up until
the early 2000s were proposing some
variant of a cosmic impact but they were
completely outside the mainstream
considered to be totally fringe. Um, in
fact, even uh going back to 1883, I
guess it was uh right around there when
Ignatius Donnelly wrote his book on
Atlantis, he's conjecturing that the
extinction was caused by a comet impact.
Interesting. In the 1880s,
and of course that was just considered
complete, complete fringe. Nobody even
considered for a second that there might
be any validity to that idea. It was
just one of these outliers that yeah
well just some prank idea and we don't
even need to address that. But now the
whole scenario has been put front and
center. We have to confront it. And and
I think from that we should now consider
and we'll talk about this. We'll talk
about the models that could explain why
the im why the extinction was not a
singular event
limited in time to a single event but
maybe um
could be actually something that could
take place over several millennia
worthwhile and it's interesting it it
reminds me of Robert JRO
uh For scientists who have lived by
faith in the power of reason, the story
ends like a bad dream. He has scaled the
mountaintop
uh of ignorance. He's about to conquer
its highest peak. As he pulls himself
over the final rock, he is greeted by a
band of theologians and philosophers who
have been sitting there for centuries.
Interesting, huh?
It's interesting that the scientific
consensus might someday reach a point
that uh
Yeah.
Well, how about we'll we'll end with two
fairly short quotes. One is going back
to Harold L1 that I quoted earlier from
his textbook, The Earth through Time.
And then follow that up with a quote by
uh one of the first recognized great
American scientists, Rembrandt Peele. He
was also an artist uh who and what he
said in 1802.
Okay. Harold Levan said this. One might
think an assemblage of beasts that had
proved their stamina against the
difficulties of an ice age would persist
for at least as long as did the
dinosaurs.
Yet widespread extermination and
extinction was the dominant biological
theme at the end of the plea scene. the
cause of the extinctions is unknown.
So the second quote is by Rembrandt
Peele, one of the early naturalists and
sciences scientists uh in America and he
wrote this in 1802 regarding the the
subject we're talking about here. How
long since these animals have existed,
we shall perhaps ever remain in
ignorance.
certain we are that they existed in
great abundance from the number of their
remains which are found in America.
We are likewise sure that they must have
been destroyed by some sudden and
powerful cause.
I think he was on the right track
[Music]
back in 1802.
Um,
anyways, oh, might as well do one more
because this is relevant directly to the
disappearance of the Clovis culture, the
Clovis people that coexisted with these
great mega beasts. Right.
A tease for next time.
Yeah. This is what Rembrandt Peele said
again. It is extremely probable that
whenever and by whatever means the
exterpation
of this tremendous race of animals was
affected,
the same cause must have operated in the
destruction of all those inhabitants
from whom we might have received some
satisfactory account of them.
So there we go. So we'll be picking up
this theme in the next episode. And as
always, John, it's been fun and
enlightening. And every time I do it,
doesn't matter how many times I go
through this material, I always glean
new insights every time I revisit any of
this any of this story. So
it's a privilege to be here and it's a
privilege to produce for you, sir.
Thanks, John. All right, we'll see you
on the next episode.
Yes, sir.