(Instrumental music)
VO: American musical roots have been
dipping into this Pacific aquifer for a long, long time.
VO: No one was really playing guitar as a lead
melodic instrument, at that time,
until Hawaiians came along.
VO: They're singing all of these iconic songs of sovereignty, and
restoration, and resistance and people are awestruck by the band
wherever they go.
(Instrumental music)
(Singing) Ke liolio nei
Ke kauala likini
'Alu'alu 'ole iho
Na pe'a i ka makani...
RAIATEA: My name is Raiatea Mokihana Maile Helm.
I'm a Hawaiian musician from the island of Moloka'i.
For more than 20 years, I have been recording
and performing Hawaiian music, or mele Hawai'i.
And I've always turned to the past for inspiration.
(Singing) Aia I ka u ka
o Pi'ihonua
Ke kihapai pua ulumahiehie
I laila au ia 'ike i ka nani...
RAIATEA: As I've learned about Hawaiian music history
I discovered that my ancestors created more than just songs.
They left a legacy that resonated
far beyond these islands.
The music born in Hawai'i
has left an indelible mark on the world—
shaping and inspiring genres and countless musicians.
(Singing) kuahiwi
Na 'i'iwi ma ka polena...
RAIATEA: This is the story of how early
Hawaiian musicians traveled far and wide influencing the way
music is played, heard, and felt around the world.
(Singing) O Moanike'ala i ka uluwehiwehi
(Drumming)
VO: The Hawaiian people have been
from time immemorial lovers of poetry and music,
and have been apt in improvising historic poems,
songs of love, and chants of worship, so that praises of the
living or wails over the dead were with them but the natural
expression of their feelings. Queen Lili'uokalani, 1898.
KAINANI: Getting to know our mele is one of the easiest ways
to learn a little bit more of our history, learn a little bit
more of the people, the relationships between our people
and our land, the relationships between the elements.
Prior to this new technology of reading and writing,
our language was purely oral.
All of our histories, our genealogies, our stories,
everything was communicated through speaking,
through chanting, through praying, through storytelling,
and definitely through song.
(Chanting) Ke nana iho 'oe i lalo 'o ke kula ea
Me he moena pawehe...
KIMO: People who are who are expert wordsmiths.
These are called haku mele, or composers.
Haku means to assemble or put
something together. And mele is poetry. So these people were
experts in putting words together. The people that
specialized in mele were trained from the time they were born.
It had to be fine-tuned, vocally and also mentally
because there was no there was no written word..
Everything that every Hawaiian did
in pre-contact time depended on your mental capacity
and to memorize chants.
Some of these chants are thousands of lines long.
Mele also carry our genealogies.
This is very important
especially for the royal families
to claim their descent from the gods and goddesses themselves.
(Chanting) Ula no weo la la e ka lae la Ka pua 'ilima la...
KIMO: There's also of the mele that would be historic
recitations. In our mele, is our history.
The late Princess Abigail Kawananakoa told me this,
she said Kimo, if you want to understand the mind
and the heart of our Hawaiian people,
you must understand the mele.
(Chanting) He'e ana i ka lala la Ho'i ana i ka muku
A ka nalu o ho'eu la Eu ho'i a'e kaua...
KIMO: Hawaiians have a saying even today we believe this,
i ka 'olelo ke ola, i ka 'olelo ka make.
In the word is life and in the word is death.
Now in the Hawaiian language we have about 35,000 words.
That's, not a, a whole lot when, when you look at other
languages. So every Hawaiian word has more than one meaning.
PAIGE: Mele and song in and of itself is just the conduit for
preserving our culture and our history. Right, It's the vehicle
that carried the knowledge down for us. I even think about it
like we have mele that we still sing and perform today, but in a
different manner. Right, it's moved from a chant to a song.
It's moved from an oral tradition to a recorded one.
(Singing) la'i la lae lae (Nani Wailua) Nani Wailua I ka ehu O
ke kai I ka holu nape o ka lau on ka ni'u
I kowelo ha'aheo hae Hawai'i Ku kilakila i ka la'i la lae lae...
RAIATEA: Captain Cook landed in the Hawaiian archipelago in 1778
He and his crew were the first documented people
of European descent to come into contact
with Kanaka Maoli, or the Hawaiian people.
From that date forward many Westerners have arrived on
Hawaiian shores bringing with them their languages,
technologies, cultures, and of course
their music and instruments.
(Instrumental music)
KIMO: When ships are gonna be calling to Hawai'i's ports
in the 19th century,
the missionaries are going to come not as frequently
as whalers or as merchant ships
where they're going to bring their own kinds of folk songs
from their countries.
They're going to have their own ways of singing
and their own instruments.
And so the Hawaiians that live closer to the ports
are going to be exposed more to these kinds of mele.
And of course when the missionaries came here,
they're going to be exposed to
the himene haipule, or those religious songs that have to do
with Christian devotion.
(Singing) E ko makou Makua
i loko o ka lani...
CHARLES: Not only were many of the Hawaiian songs
taken from early hymn tunes,
Hawai'i had its own hymns,
such as, Hawai'i Aloha composed by Reverend Lorenzo Lyons
—a man who clearly helped establish Hawaiian as a written
language—coming second only to those earlier missionaries who
translated the scriptures.
Hawai'i Aloha is truly Hawai'i's own hymn.
(Pipe organ music)
(Singing) E Hawai'i e ku'u one hanau e
Ku'u home kulaiwi nei...
KIMO: Hawaiians are also going to be exposed to
a whole bunch of sheet music that is not sacred, but secular.
And so they're going to pick up
different melodic shapes and tempos.
They're going to adapt their Hawaiian words to these
kinds of musical forms too.
(Instrumental music)
(Singing) Pupue iho au i mehana
Hone ana o uese i ku'u poli...
ALICE: The style that I am playing was played in the 1800s.
Soon after the Spanish people left Hawai'i
after King Kamehameha's invitation.
(Singing) Hone ana o uese i ku'u poli...
ALICE: So my brother picked it up.
So, I have been playing it ever since.
BOB: Uh huh. Did you pick it up on your brother's guitar,
was that it?
ALICE: Yes. Every time when he put it down I had the tune in
my mind and I'd pick it up and he was happy that I was
interested in it.
(Singing) Malihini 'oe, malihini au...
KAUWILA: As early as foreigners come into Hawai'i a lot of
Kanaka are leaving. Looking for new opportunities, not just
financially, but really looking at
what's out there in the world,
especially kanaka who are
really good in the water,
already attuned to life at sea. Some of the earliest
immigrations are in the whaling industry.
So kanaka leave and
depart Hawai'i on whaling ships. About the 1840s the Gold Rush is
starting to occur in San Francisco and a lot of kanaka
also leave and depart Hawai'i in that same time span.
KILIN: The extent that Hawaiian traveled and
located stringed instruments
that they fell in love with and wanted to bring home,
it's remarkable.
It's a big piece of the story. Often times the story
is about what foreigners or haole brought to, you know,
Hawai'i and we've really seen that the story is more about
what Hawaiians went out and gathered and then brought home,
mastered, and then changed.
And then made into something entirely different.
KIMO: During the Kalakaua period we're going
to see an infusion of outside influences of music coming and
blending with our Hawaiian traditions and outside
influences in dance blending in with our Hawaiian traditions.
And so what people commonly call today, hula 'auana
actually is called hula ku'i.
Ku'i meaning the joining of the old
and the joining of the new.
(Singing) Koni au i ka wai hu'ihu'i
I ka wai ali'i 'o ke kini la
'Olu ai ka nohona o ka la'i
Ho'ohihi kahi mana'o
I ka 'ehu kai o Pua'ena
Kai hawanawana i ka la'i la...
RAIATEA: Ali'i or Hawaiian Royalty were quick to adopt and
adapt Western learning and technology. The kings and queens
of the kingdom of Hawai'i had a grand vision for their nation
and through education, industry,
and forward-thinking they
endeavored to make Hawai'i a place of excellence.
That vision of excellence extended to the musical arts.
(Singing) 'Olu ai ka nohona o ka la (ku!)
PAIGE: I think in that time we just had such a global mindset.
We thought big,
we didn't think small, just because we were
physically a small area.
We thought on a very grand scale
Our government, our monarchy, our ali'i were very much
holding the same status as other larger countries.
So I think it's that mindset that helps to
carry Hawaiian thoughts and Hawaiian music across the globe.
(Instrumental Music)
KILIN: In the 19th century what get refered to as European
instruments—stringed instruments, brass instruments,
the reed instruments—
under this vision of the Hawaiian royalty,
all of these are put into use in the Royal Hawaiian Band, which,
we can trace to about 1836
in one of its earliest incarnations.
And Kamehameha V in 1869 decided that his royal
Hawaiian military brass band was gonna be the best in the world.
He resolved to make that a reality. And he reached out to
the Prussian czar and said we'd like one of your bandmasters to
come and share Prussian/German brass band culture and brass
band repertoire with our band.
A man named Henri Berger was
brought by King Kamehameha V to lead the Royal Hawaiian Band.
Berger's story is fascinating (laughs). He came from Coswig,
Germany and he had been orphaned as a young boy and was
apprenticed to the resident music director of Coswig. And
music changed his life. It was his salvation from possibly a
life of being a little truant. And so I think when Berger came
and King Kamehameha V tasked him with recruiting and expanding
the membership of the Royal Hawaiian Band from about 11
members to a full-sized 40-member military brass band,
it was in Berger's own history to turn to professional
musicians from the boy's reform school—
the Keone'ula Boys Reform School.
And that reform school was a place where orphaned,
abandoned, or convicted young men aged 7 to 17 were being
sent. And that concept of putting music
at the forefront of those young people's education is something
that really changed Hawaiian history
and in turn changed the world's music story.
And those musicians who graduated the reform school
playing trombone, cornet, saxophone and all the array of
brass instruments, as well as clarinet, the reed family
instruments; they were also playing stringed instruments.
And stringed instruments in the Hawaiian kingdom, at that time,
were hugely popular.
(Instrumental Music)
(Singing) Ku'u ipo i ka he'e pu'e one
Me ke kai nehe i ka 'ili'ili...
RAIATEA: Hawaiian music expanded
during the time of Na Lani 'Eha or the Heavenly Four;
siblings and last ruling monarchs
of the Hawaiian Kingdom:
King David Kalakaua,
Prince William Pitt Leleiohoku, Princess Miriam Likelike and
Queen Lili'uokalani.
Not only was the royal family instructed
and taught by the best tutors from around the world, they were
all expert musicians—skilled composers and instrumetalists.
They penned hundreds of songs
that are still sung today in Hawai'i.
HA'ALILIO: These ali'i were so well trained and
educated in not just the composition, but also the
musical side, notation.
And they're also running the country.
So their influence is immeasurable.
KIMO: Kalakaua and his family
they were very prolific composers.
Well, they learned music, you know, from their early childhood
at the Royal School.
That was part of the curriculum.
So they knew how to read music,
write music, and perform music.
And Kalakaua was a pretty good composer himself.
Queen Lili'uokalani, wow!
I mean, she has a lot of beautiful stuff too.
And then their sister, Princess Miriam Likelike,
she has some pretty nice decent things.
Oh, but their brother
Leleiohoku. Now that's the one. I mean, had he have lived longer
wow he would have left us so much more music, but he knew he
knew how to compose in all different kinds of moods. And he
was a real good wordsmith, too.
(Singing) Ka wahine hele la o Kaiona
Alualu wai li'ula o ke kaha pua 'ohai
O ka ua lanipo lua...
KILIN: What's interesting, if we look at the location of
Keone'ula Boys Reform school. It's right across the street
from where Miss Dominus soon to be Queen Lili'uokalani,
her home.
It also turns out that Princess Ruth Ke'elikolani's
home was across the street from that boy's reform school and
that was where William Pitt Leleiohoku was likely rehearsing
his Kawaihau Glee Club, his String Band.
I often wondered
were those reform school boys, in the 1870s, were they hearing
these, you know, stringed instruments and these songs and
these rehearsals of the Kawaihau Glee Club
and Queen Lili'uokalani playing her piano, or her autoharp?
It was a quieter time,
you know, there was not a din of city generators
and trucks and that rolling by.
(Singing) Ku'u ipo
i ka he'e pu'e one...
KILIN: This emphasis on music education
empowered those young
reform school graduates,
as well as the graduates of Kamehameha Schools.
They were both learning from the
same mentors, whether it was the ali'i of Na Lani 'Eha or Henri
Berger. And there's a long list of really significant Hawaiian
musicians that came through that program.
Mekia Kealakai, of course,
graduated 1882 from that school. David Nape, another really
brilliant multi-instrumentalist, composer was leading the
Keone'ula Boys Reform School brass band at age 13,
and Charles and David Kaleikoa.
There's a whole list of really profound
musicians who would become life-long professional touring
musicians and composers.
DUANE PADILLA: So when was this song written?
Can you give us an idea?
KILIN: This is about 1904, '05.
And it was actually written just a few
blocks from where we're all sitting right now playing.
Mary Jane Montano had gone to Charles E. King
and said I need music
for these lyrics. And Charles E. King had said well you need to
go find David Nape. I think he's down at Mekia's, you know,
watering hole.
It was called, it was called the Wai Nui Nui Saloon.
RAIATEA: Oh, what?!
KILIN: And Mekia, had put the
challenge to David Nape, if you can compose music to these
lyrics I'll give you all the beer you want to drink the rest
of the day. And apparently, David Nape walked out on the
back stoop and composed this.
(Instrumental music)
(Singing) Pua wale
mai no ke aloha
Ka paia puia i ke'ala
I ka wai hu'ihu'i aniani...
KILIN: This generation of Royal Hawaiian Band
members—some had come out of the reform school others had come
out of Kamehameha Schools—they're
multi-instrumentalists. They're playing their brass instruments
but they're also playing all of these really popular stringed
instruments, in the Hawaiian Kingdom. And there's a critical
moment where King Kalakaua's Royal Hawaiian Band is invited
to compete in San Francisco in a brass band contest organized by
the Masons: The Triennial Conclave of the Knights Templar
brass band contest, August of 1883. They make the journey from
Honolulu to San Francisco in about a week and as they started
to march through the streets of San Francisco they were doing
something that no one else was doing, and that was singing.
(Singing) Koni au, koni au i ka wai,
Koni au i ka wai hu'ihu'i
I ka wai ali'i, 'o ke kini la
'Olu ai ka nohona o ka la'i...
KILIN: That's where they sang the compositions of Hawai'i,
that's really where the songs that were had been composed by
their kings and queens were shared with
audiences really, possibly for the first time.
And the response was tremendous. Thousands of people
would gather then 10,000 then 20,000 people are crowding the
streets of San Francisco to hear this Royal Hawaiian band.
(Singing) Koni au i ka wai hu'ihu'i I ka wai ali'i,
'o ke kini la 'Olu ai ka nohona o ka la'i
KILIN: And out of all the
brass bands, that had come to compete from Chicago, New York,
you know, Philadelphia, all the best brass bands, this Hawaiian
band was crowned victorious first place.
VO: The Hawaiian Band have done themselves great credit.
Not only are they skillful as musicians
but their deportment is excellent, and it
is conceded that they are the best musicians
that ever visited this state.
Correspondent for the Daily Pacific Commercial
Advertiser, San Francisco, September 3rd, 1883.
JOHN: As people in Hawai'i know,
Hawaiians have always been
travelers, they've always navigated the region of the
Pacific and beyond.
And, in that context the musicians were
really following suit in terms of these kind of voyages of
discovery, and these these journeys, of knowledge building.
And beginning really in the 1880s, although there were some
Hawaiian people who were traveling, you know, to parts of
South America and Central America decades before that,
playing music. By the 1880s or so you see entertainment
circuits really developing where there are vaudeville houses that
are beginning to populate towns
all across the continent and beyond.
And there are railroads that are connecting a lot of
these towns that are then facilitating the travel of
entertainers, from night to night to different locations.
There are also kind of the advent of circus performances of
Wild West shows of native people performing in shows that are
traveling all across the continent and beyond. And in the
1880s, and 1890s, we see Hawaiian dancers, musicians,
Hawaiian troupes, really beginning to lock into these
circuits where they were finding ways to make a living, sometimes
very successful living, as musical artists traveling first
in the rim surrounding the Pacific Ocean, but very quickly
then moving into continents, all progressing outward from the
center from the Hawaiian Kingdom. And so they are also
being recognized by the 1890s as bringing a music making and
dance traditions that are, as they were totally unique,
totally unlike anything that people living in different parts
of the world had encountered before. And they thrilled the
folks that they were playing in front of thrilled over the
sounds and the motions that they were witnessing and
hearing in this moment.
VO: Not in many a day has a musical act created so
favorable an impression among local vaudeville patrons as has
that of the Royal Hawaiian troupe of singers, dancers, and
instrumentalists in the Miles theater this week. The guitar
playing of two of the Hawaiian young men after the fashion
peculiar to the islands seems to hold audiences spellbound.
The Detroit Times, Detroit, Michigan, March 1st, 1911.
VO: Of all the instrumental music ever listened to
by a Wellington audience,
we do not believe any ever exceeded, and we doubt if
any ever equaled in quality, the grand concert given yesterday
afternoon at the opera house
by the Royal Hawaiian Band and Glee Club.
People's Voice, Wellington Kansas, November 14th, 1895.
(Singing) Mana'o healoha 'ea
No ka ipo lei manu
Mana'o healoha 'ea
No ka ipo lei manu...
RAIATEA: As Hawaiian music and musicians
were spreading across the globe trouble was brewing at home.
In 1893 American businessmen, backed by the presence of the
US Marines, demanded that Queen Lili'uokalani
relinquish control of the government.
Fearing the military of the United States
and wanting to avoid the shedding of blood of her people
Lili'uokalani yielded up her power under duress.
A provisional government
controlled by these American businessmen
would enact many policies that led
to the disenfranchisement of the native Hawaiian people.
(Singing) He manu ku'u hoa
JOHN: A lot of Hawaiian people are really
weighing their options. It's an it's a time of dramatic
upheaval, of anxiety, of fear. It's a time of course, when the
overwhelming majority, vast majority, 95% of Hawaiian people
are publicly stating their wishes to resist annexation of
the kingdom by the US government.
And so everything is up in the air in that moment politically,
for the Hawaiian people.
And it's at that moment also, where so many Hawaiian
entertainers begin making decisions to take their families
with them, to fan out into what becomes a diaspora of Hawaiian
music makers, who then began traveling all over the world.
By the 19 teens, we find their music, becoming some of the most
captivating and popular music
in regions all over the world.
It's at that moment in the mid 19 teens where
commercial recordings of Hawaiian guitar music
seem to be outselling all other genres of
music in the United States.
And it's because of the efforts of
hundreds of Hawaiian guitarists
and other music makers and performers who
see opportunity with these circuits of entertainment to
continue their traditions,
to continue to sing their songs, their mele,
in the Hawaiian language, to continue to honor
their queen in these performances, and the queen's
compositions and her family's compositions. We see them taking
advantage of these opportunities for commerce and for making a
living as a means to perpetuate customs traditions that were
under immediate threat and real threat in the Hawaiian Islands
themselves. And so, it's a remarkable period of time for so
many reasons for Hawai'i and for Hawaiian people.
(Singing) Ka Makua mana loa
Maliu mai ia makou
E haliu aku nei
Me ka na'au ha'aha'a...
JOHN: Not knowing much of this history at all, when I began
learning more about it and
working on research around the origins of the Hawaiian guitar,
it was just stunning. It was breathtaking.
The expanse to which Hawaiian musicians were
traveling their customs, their traditions,
their stories and their families
all over the world
in this, this kind of foundational period for
transformation and change for Hawaiian music making and
transformation of so many other vernacular genres of music and
popular genres of music that followed in their wake from
other parts of the world.
(Singing) kou pono mau
A ma kou
KAUWILA: After the overthrow, there's so many songs
that are composed for Lili'uokalani that it's almost
pointless to try to enumerate them. Within the first couple
months, newspapers are publishing so many mele, so many
songs, that there's almost no way for you to document and read
all of them, let alone hear what they sound like today.
But there are songs that have stuck out
that a lot of people know like
Kaulana Na Pua, which was composed by Keko'aohiwaikalani
Prendergast Wright and actually has a different name before it
becomes Kaulana Na Pua, which is Mele Aloha 'Aina,
or Patriotic Song.
(Singing)
KAUWILA: After this time period, one of the first
things that happens is the Royal Hawaiian band is being asked by
Henri Berger to sign over their allegiance to the American
settler governement. And almost every single band member refuses
and leaves the official government Royal Hawaiian Band,
and they start their own band.
The person who was the first
chair clarinetist becomes one of the conductors and his name is
Jose Libornio. And he's a Philippine National, who came to
Hawai'i to learn and celebrate music.
That Royal Hawaiian Band
is one of the first troupes to leave Hawai'i and start to play
music as a Hawaiian
national band all throughout the United States.
One of the messages that becomes very clear for that
band, Bana Lahui Hawai'i, the Royal Hawaiian Band, is
every place they go,
they're singing these songs
like Kaulana Na Pua,
like Aloha 'Oe, like Hawai'i Pono'i,
all of these iconic songs of sovereignty,
and restoration, and resistance
for Kanaka Maoli.
And these are the songs that they carry with them
wherever they go.
And it's not just that
they're carrying these mele with them.
People are awestruck by the band wherever they go.
(Singing) Ma hope makou o Lili'ulani
A loa'a e ka pono o ka 'aina...
HA'ALILIO: There's a direct relationship between
political strife and creativity in the arts. And I think towards
the end of the 19th century, in Hawai'i, which is the most
volatile period of our history even until today, we have these
mounting political pressures and foreign interests arriving on
Hawai'i shores, and at the same time, we see this blossoming or
skyrocketing of poetic composition and musical
performance and there's a definitive function that it
takes on which is a vehicle for political resistance and for
Hawaiians, and by that I mean ethnic Hawaiians
and national Hawaiians,
to pledge their loyalty to the crown and show
their allegiance and really support their nation.
So much of that resistance, or loyalty, or both,
is accomplished through
composition and performance, musical, mele Hawai'i.
So by the time we get to 1893,
when Queen Lili'uokalani is overthrown there are
I mean, just dozens, hundreds, we've made books about
all of the Mele Lahui, National Songs that pledge loyalty to the
aupuni, the kingdom, the nation, at that time it was a queendom,
and the queen herself. And e ola mau Hawai'i, e ola mau komo
i—all of those long live the queen, long live the king, long
live Hawai'i, may the Hawaiian flag wave forever. You see those
sentiments really driving a whole lot of musical performance
and composition and such a robust corpus of mele Hawai'i to
emerge at that time around that theme.
(Instrumental music)
KILIN: So the 1880s we see increasing travel of these Royal
Hawaiian glee clubs, these string bands. The Kawaihau Glee
Club, becomes a really popular performing band in Honolulu,
they're playing for dances, dances that would go on till
four o'clock in the morning, often. And what had happened in
Honolulu, politically, circumstances for these Hawaiian
musicians who knew Queen Lili'uokalani that, you know,
they were mentored by her. They were loyal to her.
And they refused to denounce
their monarchs and their tradition and
their Hawaiian royalty.
So there starts to be a really big exodus
under the Provisional Government era of Sanford Dole
and the architects of the overthrow of the
Hawaiian Kingdom. And these musicians,
I think really grasped that
through their music, through their singing, through their
compositions, and through their new Hawaiian string band style
could really get a message out there.
(Singing) Ha'aheo ka ua i
na pali...
KILIN: They were blasting out what was happening
in Hawai'i, the injustice.
And also the joy, the revelry
of their musical tradition landed like fireworks and bombs
in small, rural American towns, you know, throughout the
Midwest, the North, the South, the East, everywhere they
traveled people going, what is this, this sound, what is this
energy, and these rhythms, these melodies?
It was monumental.
HA'ALILIO: Act 57, passed by the Republic of Hawai'i in 1896. And
really went into effect in 1897, which essentially erased
Hawaiian language from the school system, the educational
domain of society. But it still survives in the newspapers, in
the churches, Hawaiian churches, and the arts.
Hula had recently made a comeback at that time
and mele Hawai'i never really faded out.
In fact, it was booming. Hawaiian music took Hawaiian
musicians internationally abroad into into very prestigious
venues, and arenas, and on tours around the world.
Even though Hawaiian essentially ceased to exist as a mode of
communication, it was certainly a mode of musical expression,
and kind of took off in spite of that legislation.
(Singing) Lihi Lau Onaona
Waianuhea i ka pili poli Aheahe...
PAIGE: I think in those times like when we think about
when the language was not
supported, and oppressed. You couldn't speak Hawaiian,
but we'd like you to sing.
We don't want you to speak your language.
But please come sing at our party and our lu'au. Right?
So it was acceptable in music,
right, because it became a decorative piece.
And within that decorative piece though that's where things
still survive.
While they were performing for consumption, at
the end of the day if you didn't know what the song was about or
you didn't speak the language then actually it wasn't for you.
It was for us.
It was for the people in the audience who knew.
It was for the practitioners who are carrying down a legacy but
also these traditions that are hundreds of years old.
And so while being commodified
and while society was picking and choosing
when it was appropriate for us to be Hawaiian,
underneath all of that, as we continue to practice things then
we still carry the torch.
(Singing) I ali'i no 'oe
i kanaka au la
Malalo aku au a'o ko leo la
oo oo oo oo oo oo...
PAIGE: Kaona's an integral tool for Hawaiian music.
It's the way that we're able to convey multiple messages
in one verse,
in one sentence, in one line.
That's, I think, at the core of
what makes Hawaiian music, Hawaiian. From traditional to
modern and contemporary,
is the way that we're able to weave
multiple meanings into just a few words.
KAINANI: Hawaiian musicians,
Hawaiian singers, storytellers, they all play a
significant role in the continuation of our
legacy of Hawaiian music.
Mele is integral to the lifeline of Hawai'i.
That's one of the ways that we continue our tradition.
Ha'ina 'ia mai ana ka puana la I ali'i no oe...
RAIATEA: When I first started playing and performing
Hawaiian music,
I was not very familiar with names such as
Mekia Kealakai, Joseph Kekuku, and the Kawaihau Glee Club.
Yet these Hawaiian musicians and their contemporaries
envisioned a revolutionary way
of playing the guitar—
one that would go on to shape blues, country, bluegrass,
and other popular music genres.
KILIN: So these Hawaiian string bands—the Kawaihau Glee Club,
that was under the directorship of Mekia Kealakai,
Joseph Kekuku, the inventor of the Hawaiian steel guitar method
—they all left about 1904, 1905.
And they landed in San Francisco,
which was a return trip for most of these
musicians, many of whom had been members of the Royal Hawaiian
band on those earlier tours.
And they land in San Francisco.
Joseph Kekuku, the first thing he does he starts teaching. He
starts educating people about his new, radical new technique
of playing the guitar, not held in the Spanish style, but rather
placed on the lap and played with a steel bar that he had
actually crafted himself.
That is just a revelation for people.
VO: Mr. Kekuku is conceded to be the
world's greatest solo guitarist.
He is the genius of that seductive slurring of the
notes as they softly swirl like incense from the strings.
Even after the notes have departed from the instrument
with taste and delicacy of a sweet thought,
they form an echo chorus that
seems to sing the racial poetry of the Hawaiians—
a people whose very language is a song.
Williston Graphic, Williston, North Dakota, August 24th, 1916.
KILIN: These musicians who were
touring across the West Coast, really from Mexico all the way
to Alaska, most of them were veterans of troupes that had
toured to the continental United States,
in 1899, the Omaha World's Fair
in 1901, the Buffalo World's Fair.
And they had become really well traveled,
worldly musicians at that point,
that could play classical, or they could play Bach and Verdi
and Strauss and all these kind of European traditions they
could do, a lot of Mexican influence
was to be had in that music.
And they're able to sight read from their experience in
the Royal Hawaiian band, but they're also able to improvise.
And that's something that the public really seems to start to
respond to, as we've looked through these newspaper
accounts. There's an energy and spontaneity in these Hawaiian
troupes that people have never heard before.
(Instrumental music)
KILIN: One really critical moment in the story is
1915. The San Francisco Panama Pacific International Exposition
happens. So along the waterfront, where Golden Gate
Park is, was a huge second city fabricated out of stucco and the
most grand architectural styles that you can imagine—
fountains, electric lights, and at this fair,
the Hawaiian musicians kind of stole the show.
And 200 different Hawaiian
musicians and ensembles performed at that exhibition
over the course of 1915.
And it's been said that 19 million people
passed through those fairgrounds and most of them
stopped and heard this Hawaiian string band style featuring the
'ukulele, featuring the Hawaiian steel guitar. And that set this
profound infatuation or interest in, what is this Hawaiian music.
And industry, of course, stringed instrument
manufacturers, picked up on this and so within a few months you
have Sears and Roebuck in Chicago, you have all these
American string instrument manufacturers jumping on the
bandwagon and building copies of these Hawaiian instruments.
Building copies of the 'ukulele, of the steel stringed
Hawaiian guitar.
And these Hawaiian musicians become celebrated.
And people like Henry Ford all of the sudden,
won't travel without his Hawaiian quartet.
VO: Listening to your boys sing and play the sweet
Hawaiian music has made me desirous of enabling our people
in Detroit the same pleasure.
Formal offer letter to Kailimai Quintet from Henry Ford, 1915.
HARRY: So everybody was playing 'ukulele
and the steel guitar caught on and so did the hula.
So then you had all these traveling shows, some of them
authentic from Hawai'i and many of them not so authentic,
vaudevillian type. And this was going on and all of a sudden all
kinds of things were happening and Hawaiian music was really
going through an incredible period of growth.
(Instrumental music)
JOHN: Joseph Kekuku's story is really interesting
because there has been a longstanding folklore in Hawai'i
that attributes Joseph Kekuku to the origination of the idea of,
of steel guitar. But there were also always competing theories
involving other individuals as well, or even involving how
Joseph Kekuku came to the idea itself of using a steel bar to
run along the strings of his guitar. Some of those stories
have been resolved, but they're also family stories that in some
cases contradict a bit of the folklore. I mean there's,
there's a story of Joseph Kekuku, walking along a railroad
tracks, and he comes across a railroad spike or a bolt, and
starts kind of running the bolt on the strings. Kaiwa Meyer
disagreed with that. The story that was shared with her by her
family was that he was spending time with his cousin,
Sam Nainoa, a really accomplished violinist.
One day they were sitting at the store
in La'ie, on the front porch,
and Sam Nainoa had his violin, as he always did, and and Jospeh
was strumming his guitar and leaned over and this metal comb
fell out of his pocket and hit the strings and then he began
kind of looking at ways in which to create sound with that
metal comb. And some of the stories gravitate towards his
inspiration from Sam Nainoa's violin playing.
And it's an interesting relationship
because when you think about the sound
of violin strings that are not hindered by frets that are
really fluid that form these kind of micro tonal
relationships that are severed otherwise by frets on a fretted
instrument that really mimic the vocal stylings of a singer.
Then that connection between
the violin playing and steel guitar
playing with kind of that similarly fluid sound that moves
across even the narrow dimensions separating the frets
on a fretted instrument, that all kind of becomes clear. And
then when you begin to look at hula ku'i music that was
becoming all the rage in Hawaii in the 1880s, the vocal
acrobatics that singers would go through in terms of the
falsetto work of kind of leaping across the notes, and these
really extraordinary vocal exercises.
(Vocalizing in Hawaiian)
JOHN: Then you begin to hear that in the sound of
steel playing in the chiming harmonic techniques that really
take off in immediate association
with the origins of steel guitar
And it all points to this extraordinary moment
in Hawaiian music making when
it seemed like everything was possible
and so much innovation was taking place
in that moment.
(Yoddling) (Singing) It's that Hawaiian
cowboy!  Give 'em Barney
(Instrumental music)
(Singing) Oh I'm headed for that last round up
'Auhea wale 'oe te wahine holo lio
E like kou holo 'ana me ka 'o'io la
Ke kolo, ke kuli, ke ku'i kolo iho 'oe
'Auhea wale 'oe te wahine holo lio
San Francisco by the Golden Gate
Aloha it's that Hawaiian cowboy.
Ulu lei lei lehua 'o na lei lei u'i e...
KILIN: I was doing research at the Library of Congress
and struck up a conversation with
the librarian at the American Folklife Center
and he said, you know, we have these old Hawaiian recordings,
these old 78s,
made by this small record company,
the American Record Company,
and he said, would you like to hear 'em,
you know, we can pull them out.
(Recording) Moani Ke 'Ala,
by the Royal Hawaiian Troubadours
for American Records.
(Instrumental music)
(Singing) 'Auhea 'o moani ke 'ala
Hoapili o mi nei...
KILIN: When I heard it, I just, kind of
fell out of my chair because to my ear, having played bluegrass
and roots American folk music, it sounded like what I would
call an Appalachian string band, where you have multiple
conversations happening between the instruments in real time
all together.
But the fellow told me that me that this was from 1904.
1904 in the recorded catalogue of any style of music is
extremely early. Possibly, you could say, it's the first
recording of a indigenous ensemble style. And the fact
that it was so similar to what I thought of as bluegrass but it
was recorded about a quarter century before anything
resembling bluegrass or country had been captured
really blew me away.
(Singing) he pono keia
Au e ho'apa'apa mai nei
E wiki mai 'oe i pono kaua I 'olu ho'i au e ke hoa
JOHN: What also emerges when you
dig into that research is the fact that
guitars with steel strings
really had not become available
to any significant extent in the US or in the Deep South until
really the first decade of the 20th century.
Prior to that,
guitars, if they were available, were strung with gut strings.
Now, steel strings are fundamental to the origination
of the Hawaiian steel guitar. And interestingly, steel strings
are adopted by Hawaiian musicians decades earlier than
this, going back to the 1860s. And you find advertisements for
guitar strings in the 1870s that are steel in the islands.
And so it became a preference
of Hawaiian players long before we really
see that preference emerging in other parts of the world.
And what Joseph Kekuku and that first generation of
players really demonstrated was the fact that you could really
make music by running that steel object along those steel
strings, that you could create a sound of music that is
compatible with multiple genres of music making.
DOM: And you find this sort of proliferation
of this beautiful sounding guitar.
Like I said, one, if you, if you can figure out
(plays guitar)
Before an electric guitar that's the best
way you can get to almost a transcendental note that goes
higher than the western notation scale
says is possible on a guitar.
But, with that bar
(plays guitar)
you can just keep it going.
And I think that that's something that even 'til
this day I think that's one of the reason people love that
style of guitar playing just because you can get those high
notes on it. And then you can also just get a beautiful tone
that's different from any other style of guitar playing.
JOHN: It's not simply that they're creating a sound effect.
It's actually that they're creating
musical technology that really
can provide melody that can provide a replication of the
sound of a vocal melody or a violin playing or what have you.
And it's that technology, that demonstration of what's
possible. That was so significant, when these Hawaiian
musicians and the first generation really began kind of
circulating and performing all over eventually the world.
No one was really playing guitar
as a lead melodic instrument at
that time until Hawaiians came along.
(Instrumental music)
RAIATEA: For decades the stories of these influential musicians
have remained tucked away in the annals of history.
However, in recent years,
efforts in Hawai'i and on the continent have
focused on digitizing newspapers and making them accessible
online, uncovering firsthand accounts that illustrate the
remarkable impact and prolific contributions
of these early Hawaiian pioneers.
KAINANI: Our ali'i knew the importance of literacy,
of reading and writing and being able to document and
use the newspapers as this vessel
of documenting the histories.
We were the most literate nation.
And it came from our people
being innovators and accepting these new
technologies and running with it.
And so we are the most
fortunate island group to have volumes of written histories
from the newspapers. Our resoures are pretty rich.
KAUWILA: Nupepa or Hawaiian language newspapers have quite
literally millions of pages of composition. Almost every single
newspaper publishing has at least one or two mele in it.
Some people believe that we've only scratched maybe 8% of all
the nupepa that have been documented, that still exist
that haven't disintegrated. And so when we look at nupepa
Hawai'i, it isn't just some small rinky dink like, oh,
Hawaiians had newspapers and that's how they wrote songs to
each other. Within this vast resource is 100,000 leagues of
composition that is waiting for us to reconnect with it.
(Singing)
A he leo no pupu kani 'oe
Ua lanakila 'o Kawaihau
KAUWILA: And if you look at newspapers in places
like the South or like New York, or wherever Kanaka Maoli are
going, they also document where Kanaka Maoli were playing music.
JOHN: And this became a real game changer for my research on
Hawaiian guitar because I could track musicians as they began
moving from town to town because advertisments would feature in
these newspapers for coming attractions. There were listings
for tent shows, for vaudeville performances, and it's through
these resources that we can
track folks like Joseph Kekuku
who begins traveling around the U.S. as well as Europe.
It's how we can really understand, as well,
that Hawaiian musicians,
entertainers were not simply playing in the big cities.
They're playing in every little town that was on those
entertainment circuits which was everywhere.
And so this was a really astonishing
discovery for me because it was at this moment
where I could see to the degree to which, for example, Hawaiian
musician were infiltrating entertainment circuits in
not only places like California or the East Coast but
in places like Mississippi and Louisiana and Alabama.
I found additional archival materials
for some of those entertainment circuits
that also revealed itineraries, tour diaries that enabled all of
us to see a much bigger story of the degree to which Hawaiian
music was spreading and Hawaiian entertainers were traveling in
the early 20th century.
KILIN: So our research has really
traced the origins of the world's most famous guitars
to the Hawaiian kingdom.
And this is a guitar that I'm humbled to
be sitting next to. It's a guitar that was owned by Prince
Jonah Kuhio Kalaniana'ole. And it was made specifically for him
by a man named Manuel Nunes.
And Manuel Nunes is a very historic and significant figure
in the history of luthiery. He gets credited
with having invented the 'ukulele.
And he came to Hawai'i in 1879.
And set up shop in the waterfront district of Honolulu,
just a little away from the palace. And before long, he was
building new instruments out of Hawaiian koa wood. And as you
can see, this is some of the most
stunning koa that I've ever seen.
This was made about 1910, custom made for Prince Kuhio.
And for those of you who know Prince Kuhio, he had a very
iconic handlebar mustache. And I think that this might have been
Manuel Nunes's tribute to the mustache.
We know now that
the Hawaiian Kingdom for any musician who had the means,
most of the time would prefer to play Martin guitars.
What this is in its design
is sort of an interpretation or evolution of
what the Martin Company was doing in the 19th century.
And this
guitar features a very deep body, if you can see the
dimensions from front to back,
much deeper than the average
guitar of its of its day.
The other thing is it's built
with a flat saddle
and nut
which means it probably was being played on the lap in the
style of Joseph Kekuku, the Hawaiian lap steel style.
So this guitar, Manuel Nunes, was a famous builder of
instruments that in 1915 when the craze of Hawaiian music hit
the continental United States, the Martin guitar company was
asked to build instruments under the brand name of Manuel Nunes,
and those guitars that they made for the Southern California
Music Company were the first regular production steel string
guitars made by the Martin guitar company.
And there's a shift
that was really directly connected to the Hawaiian string
movement and the technique of playing on one's lap
with a steel bar.
In 1915, the Martin company partner with a musician
named Major Kealakai and
he asks them to build a bigger, louder,
you have the depth of the Kuhio Nunes guitar here.
A little big longer, a little bit wider,
longer scale,
even the sound hole here was bigger.
And he asked them to build this guitar
because he needed a louder instrument to play for the
concert halls, the vaudeville theaters where he was trying to
reach thousands of people with his acoustic guitar.
This guitar ensured
that the person sitting at the back of that concert hall
got their money's worth. And this guitar made in 1916 for
Major Kealakai shortly thereafter was rebranded
the Ditson Dreadnought.
And the Dreadnought acoustic guitar
today is the most famous, widely used, and copied guitar design
in the world. And it was originally meant to be played
on the lap, like this.
Now Joseph Kekuku, who was a childhood
friend of Major Kealakai,
he was a student at Kamehameha Schools in 1892
where he fashioned the first steel bar.
People in Hawai'i, for quite a while,
had been playing either with a comb or a pocket knife
but Kekuku was the first to really perfect the
technique with this steel bar.
And
(strums guitar)
what happens when you play with a steel bar,
in the one hand, you simplify
the ability 'cause you don't have
four fingers to play a multitude of notes,
you only have the one bar.
But the other thing that
happens is you get the ability,
(plays guitar)
like a violin or like a trombone to slide
(plays guitar)
to slide into notes. And that's
what's been described as a more vocal,
a more human quality to the guitar.
Now
what was Joseph Kekuku playing when he first
conceived of this technique? We've done some research into
the early setlists of performances that he did in
1900, 1901 and there's a song that we also found sheet music
in Queen Lili'uokalani's collection—
and it's called the Spanish Fandango. And
I kind of wonder if when Joseph Kekuku
first sat down in 1886 or so,
it might have sounded something like this.
(Instrumental guitar music)
(laughs)
JOHN: One of the big questions that I had,
and I just didn't know the answer to it,
was what is the relationship between Hawaiian steel guitar
and blues slide guitar?
Scholars of blues music, since the 1960s,
had steadfastly argued that the slide guitar idea of moving
bottleneck or a piece of tubing that they would place on their
fingers, that this technology was unique to African American
experiences. That it was embedded in the middle passage.
That it was essentially what they called in the 1960s an
Africanism. The idea that this was a technology that had
migrated with enslaved people from the continent of Africa,
and West Africa in particular, in those locations to North
America and South America and Central America.
So this was
the understood origin of that technology among folklorist and
music researchers. And there is a lot of testimony, for example,
of the development of the diddly bow, which is essentially an
object where you would tie a kind of a wire from a porch
railing to the ground. And you could run a bottle, for example,
along that wire, or you'd even build a little instrument, you
know, where you run a wire across the top of it, tighten it
up with screws, and then run a bottle on top of it producing
kind of the glissando sound
that's associated with Hawaiian music.
And so this was, kind of, the lore and this was the stated
understanding, and it's what I believed 'cause I didn't, I'd
never really taken a close look at this. And no one had really
taken a close look at it, to be honest. And so, um, but what I
discovered was a, was very different. When I, when I
began digging into the historical record, looking at
those newspapers, looking at accounts, testimony from blues
artists, country musicians.
A different story emerged.
One that was contrary to what we had previously
believed and understood about the origins,
for example of the blues slide guitar.
And the difference was that what we find in historical
record is that Hawaiian musicians were everywhere in the
Deep South, and that they were recording music with the slide
guitar and playing slide guitar and having journalists local to
the south reporting on their playing and
how they play their instruments
a couple of decades before we find anyone
from the South who's not Hawaiian
playing slide guitar, or Hawaiian guitar, or otherwise.
And so that sort of upends, a little bit
the narrative of the origins,
or the relationship
between the emergence of Hawaiian steel guitar playing in
the Deep South through these Hawaiian troupes and otherwise,
and with the development of this slide guitar technique.
(Instrumental Music)
KAUWILA: Because our people are people of color
and often times are having to play together
and are traveling in troupes together,
we're probably influencing each other's sound very greatly.
And that's also going to obviously impact
the types of instruments
and rhythms
and feelings that we incorporate into our music.
I think it's completely possible
that African-Americans in the South
had their own instruments that were very similar to
steel guitar, and some historians would argue that
they already had a steel guitar,
but I also think that there's evidence that
we were influencing each other, interweaving our cultures, and
finding new ways celebrate sound and music to share these really
important stories that we knew we had a message
to share with the world
that only we could do in our own sound. But we found
ways to interweave the types of sounds that were so haunting for
each other's cultures and finding ways to bring that and
incorporate that in our own songs.
And sharing that with each other.
(Blues music)
(Singing) Yeah, got a letter
this morning
How you reckon it read?
JOHN: When you look at the accounts of people describing
the music making of the South at
the time, if you look at interviews with Son House, from
1965, when Son House who's revered as one of these
originators of the blues slide guitar style.
When he's asked
where he first heard that style of playing, the slide guitar,
he interjects, oh you mean the Hawaiian way of playing?
(Singing) I said have to change my way of livin'
so I don't have to cry no more.
(Applause)
JOHN: When you're looking at these interviews
of early blues artists
and you're really looking closely
to determine the relationship of
Hawaiian music making to
the origins of the delta blues slide guitar,
that's the story that begins to emerge.
And I hadn't expected that.
TERRI GROSS: And you also loved Hawaiian guitar.
How did you hear Hawaiian guitar and how did it,
why was it so exciting to you?
It was another sound you tried to emulate.
B.B. KING: Well I'd hear it on the radio.
I would hear the Hawaiian sound or
the country music players played
steel and slide guitars, if you will.
And I hear that, to me a steel guitar is one of the
sweetest sounds this side of heaven.
I still like it and that
was one of the things that I tried to do so much, was to
imitate that, that sound.
I could never get it.
I still haven't been able to do it.
And that was the beginning of the trill on my hand.
(Instrumental music)
TAJ: My earliest recollection of Hawaiian music,
my dad had a radio that had some presets on it—
Tokyo, Paris, London,
it also had Honolulu.
And one day, as a kid, I just punched in
and this incredible music came out.
To this day I can still look back and remember
the feeling. It was like every nerve, every molecule,
just every part of existence
was filled with this incredible music.
(Instrumental music)
TAJ: I noticed an awful lot of string
bands back in the early 20th century, particularly, that had
'ukuleles in them.
You know, there'd be a guitar, a fiddle,
and an 'ukulele.
You know, and this was mountain music or, or
some kind of jug band music, or whatever old timey, both black
and, and Anglo bands.
And then the whole slide thing,
how did that get to the Mississippi Delta?
Traveling Hawaiian troupes,
people heard that sound,
saw how it was done,
and tried to do it the best way they knew how.
DOM: We tend to think of a lot of music
in terms of white and black.
And when it comes to black music and the old-time blues.
You have slide guitar.
And then on the other side you have country
music which tends to be synonymous with with the
southern white people of the United States and they created
their own version. But once you begin to start delving deeper
into this history and go between the, the surface layers, you
start to find Hawaiian music has an influence within those two
major styles.
JOHN: Some of the most significant early country
music, musicians, practitioners all learned of steel guitar
by observing Hawaiian players.
(Instrumental Music)
So some of those first and most
critically important steel players in country music
actually in many cases are Hawaiian.
Jimmie Rodgers recorded with
four Native Hawaiian steel players on his
recordings and he's considered to be, essentially a patriarchal
figure of country music as an entire genre.
(Singing) I had longed for you dear
and wanted you near
You are the girl of my dreams.
JOHN: And you keep going, I mean, you look at Jerry
Byrd who was a foundational steel player in country music.
Same for Bob Dunn who played for Milton Brown and his Musical
Brownies, the first non-Hawaiian to record electric guitar.
Before that the first people recording electric guitar were
Hawaiian musicians in the early 1930s.
(Instrumental music)
PHIL KERR: Now before we have some more music,
just a word or two about Sol Ho'opi'i.
He was born in the Hawaiian Islands.
He came to this country
and established a reputation for himself in Hollywood.
In fact, he was universally recognized as
the world's greatest Hawaiian musician.
He was the originator, by the way,
of this electric guitar that he's playing.
(Instrumental music)
JOHN: When you begin digging in to that history
you begin seeing this profound influence of Hawaiian
players on all sorts of vernacular genres,
but certainly in the Deep South.
They demonstrate a competency for applying
an object to a standard six string Spanish guitar
that inspires folks like Son House
and Robert Johnson and others,
to
take up the idea
and to also make something different with it,
to begin to play in a different way to hold it
differently to try different techniques for forming that
slide. But there's far more evidence that demonstrates
Hawaiian influence on all of this vernacular music making in
the South, then you're find going in any other direction.
(Instrumental music)
JERRY: Well my first exposure, I guess you could say, to
steel guitar,
we called it Hawaiian steel guitar
back where I came from in Ohio.
Was in the early 30s when the
tent shows would tour all over the United States, especially in
the middle section of the United States.
And it cost a dollar to get in.
And I'll never forget that because at that time
I had never seen a dollar.
I think I was about 11 years old.
So we went in and it was a troupe of Hawaiians.
And I hadn't been in there
I guess two minutes, and down on the left end was a
gentleman seated playing this shiny
metal instrument,
and making these gorgeous sounds.
And it hypnotized me. I don't know why.
And I don't think I heard anything else that day
except that instrument.
They were about eight in the troupe
and of course the backdrop was a canvas one with volcanoes
erupting and palm trees, you know, and that exotic stuff,
to set the mood.
And uh, so that was the day that changed my life.
Even at that early age
because
I fell in love with that instrument
and it's never washed off.
(Guitar music)
RAIATEA: The more I learned about this profound impact
that Hawaiian musicians had
on the evolution of modern music
the more I wanted to share their stories
and so I partnered with Kilin Reece, Ha'alilio Solomon
and their non-profit,
Kealakai Center for Pacific Strings,
which is named for Major Mekia Kealakai
and recorded an album that pays tribute to those early
Hawaiian musical pioneers.
We tried to capture the spirit and sound of the music
that was born here in the last days of the Hawaiian Kingdom.
(String music)
(Singing) A heaha kou makemake...
HA'ALILIO: It absolutely reaffirms
the vibrancy of Hawaiian music in the 19th century.
How advanced the compositions were,
the arrangements were, the poetry was.
And it's a big, significant statement that Raiatea's making
for having chosen 10 songs, nine of which come from the
19th century and only one is a modern composition.
(Singing) ka la'i
Wehiwehi 'oe e...
HA'ALILIO: And so we're bringing back that standard,
the older the better. 'Cause we have that history that
was so vibrant and rich
and so mainstream at that time.
And at some point,
it faded into obscurity.
And to release that in 2023 sends an important message,
that those songs are still relevant. That style,
musical style, poetic style is still the standard.
(Singing) E moani ke 'ala...
KILIN: For our nonprofit organization,
which is dedicated to the
research, restoration and celebration of Hawaii's enduring
legacy in the musical arts and luthiery. Working with an artist
like Raiatea Helm has been an incredible opportunity for us to
share the research that we've done. The translation work and
gleaning of firsthand accounts from these Hawaiian language
newspapers of these musicians. It's allowed us to take all of
that and combine it with the transcriptions from these early
records, and through Raiatea's, you know, brilliance to bring it
to the forefront and to bring it forward in time.
And we've also been really lucky
to call on some of our friends from
Nashville, that I know through my work in bluegrass music, and
invite them to come with us on this this string journey. We've
shared these early recording with them. We've shared these
newspaper accounts, these photographs, and they're all
discovering their own musical lineage
and their own origin story.
(Singing) We sing one song for my old Kentucky home
for my old Kentucky home...
ROB: We didn't know this.
I mean, we've been playing this music all our lives but I just,
honestly in the last few years, I feel like I've learned these
Hawaiian musicians really helped give birth to
American music as we know it.
(Instrumental music)
ROB: The early Hawaiian string bands
were very similar to the early bluegrass bands.
Just the way they played those open chords
and the rhythm styles
that they played, it sounded like early bluegrass for sure.
Carter family, you know, Jimmie Rodgers, you can tell
that these Hawaiian musicians had an incredible influence
on what became, you know, American music.
JUSTIN BRANUM: I can say, for the fiddle,
you know, without steel guitar,
without that influence,
contemporary fiddle would not be what it is today.
The influence on the fiddle went directly from
Hawai'i, I guess, into bluegrass. Very, very, very
important, you couldn't over- state the importance of that.
KILIN: It's becoming clear that, you know, American musical
roots have been dipping into this
Pacific aquifer for a long, long time.
RAIATEA: Yeehaw!
(Singing) Ha'aheo O'ahu la
lei i ka 'ilima la
Kuahiwi nani la 'o Ka'ala...
JOHN: Studying the steel guitar
deeply unsettles everything that we all thought that we knew
about music making in the world and in the country.
There's a profound connectivity that emerges
in our understanding of music making
that really is fundamentally aligned with the trajectories of
discovery and exploration that
have always been associated with Native Hawaiian people.
And so music making is another instance really of that
circumnavigation
of those journeys of exploration,
and of knowledge finding and discovery.
So for me, you know, music really
helped me to better understand not only the history of Hawaiian
people, but the deep connections that they forged and established
and shaping the modern world as we know it today.
That's the kind of lesson that we all can learn from.
The assumptions that many folks have carried about
influences of music making this case of culture, cultural
traditions, can be very easily unsettled once you start
looking. Once you start paying attention to the historical
record, and seeing that it's, in fact, a far more rich and
complicated story.
And so, there's much that we can learn
from those musicians who very bravely left their homes in a
period of total turmoil and chaos, in some instances in the
1890s. And, and made decisions to actually celebrate their
traditions by traveling the world and sharing them with one
another, with the people that they encountered, sharing their
knowledge, sharing their traditions, and also using their
music making on many occasions to take a stand when they needed
to in defense of the kingdom and defense of their causes. And so
it's a story that can really help us to understand so many
different layers of what's important in life, whether it's
culture, tradition, sovereignty, all these facets of life
that had been so important to the Hawaiian people forever.
(Singing) E mau ka maluhia
O nei pae 'aina
Mai Hawai'i a Ni'ihau
PAIGE: Hawaiian music is the source and the kumu, or it's
the vessel and the conduit
for the things that make us Hawaiian.
They remind us what's important, they remind us
how we can move through the world and still carry tradition
in order to move forward.
(Singing) mau A ma kou mana nui
E ola e ola ka mo'i...
KAUWILA: Mele Hawai'i, it is the rhythm
of sovereignty.
It is the rhythm of genealogy that helps us remember.
Mele is the fulcrum of Hawaiian identity,
and can guide us to many possible ways
of understanding and unearthing the story,
the mo'olelo of our past, but also unearthing the possible
futures we can have for the next hundred generations.
(Singing) Ha'awi mai i ke aloha
RAIATEA: Hawaiians and those
that love Hawaiian music can be proud that in the face of
intense upheaval, oppression, and adversity those early
Hawaiian troubadours reaffirmed their sovereignty and identity
through their songs.
And they did it with aloha and grace
in a voice that was distinctly Hawaiian.
(Singing) Ma lalo o kou aloha nui
Na Li'i o ke Aupuni
Me na maka'ainana
Ka lehulehu no a pau
Kia'i mai ia lakou
Me ke aloha ahonui
E ola no makou
I kou mana mau
E mau ke ea o ka 'aina
Ma kou pono mau
A ma kou mana nui
E ola e ola ka mo'i